portrait of Reverend John Quick Effigies Reverendi Viri IOHANNIS QUICK Sti
Evangely Ministri ano Aetat: 55o.



depiction of a church council SYNODICON in GALLIA REFORMATA


SYNODICON IN Gallia Reformata: OR, THE Acts, Decisions, Decrees, and Canons Of
those Famous National Councils OF THE REFORMED CHURCHES IN FRANCE.

BEING I. A most Faithful and Impartial History of the Rise, Growth,
Perfection, and Decay of the Reformation in that Kingdom, with its fatal
Catastrophe upon the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, in the Year 1685. II.
The Confession of Faith and Discipline of those Churches. III. A Collection of
Speeches, Letters, Sacred Politics, Cases of Conscience, and Controversies in
Divinity, determined and resolved by those grave Assemblies. IV. Many excellent
Expedients for preventing and healing Schisms in the Churches, and for
re-uniting the dismembered Body of divided Protestants. V. The Laws, Government,
and Maintenance of their Colleges, Universities and Ministers, toge^^er with
their Exercise of Discipline upon delinquent Ministers and Church Members. VI.
A Record of very many illustrious Events of Divine Providence relating to those
Churches.


The whole Collected and Composed out of Original Manuscript Acts of those
Renowned SYNODS.

A Work never before Extant in any Language.

In Two VOLUMES.

By JOHN QUICK, Minister of the Gospel in London.

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst and J. Robinson, at the Three Bibles and
Crown in Cheapside, and the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM EARL of BEDFORD, BARON of THORNHAVGH, Lord
Lieutenant of the Counties of Middlesex, Cambridge, and Bedford, Knight of the
Most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of Their Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Lordship,
SEals as Coats of Arms an a kind of Hieroglyphics. Those Mother-Churches in
the Valleys of Piedmont (where our holy Religion has been conserved in its
Power and Purity, during that long black night of Popish Superstition and
Idolatry,) had this for their Common Seal, A Taper burning in a golden
Candlestick, scattering its glorious Beams in a Sable Field of thick darkness.
It is a truth incontestable, that most of the European Nations do stand
indebted to them for that comfortable Knowledge of the blessed Gospel of our
Lord Jesus, which is now shining forth in its Meridian-Glory, in the midst of
them. The Famous Waldo of Lions was their near Neighbor, and received his most
Excellent Instructions, together with that Book of Life the Holy Bible, from
them. And Lollard, that famous Preacher in England (from whom God's Saints and
Martyrs with us four hundred years ago were denominated) was one of their
Barbes.

I have met, my most Noble Lord, with another Seal, as Illustrious an
Hieroglyphick as the former, appertaining unto the National Synods of those
Renowned, and once Flourishing, though now Desolate, Reformed Churches of
France, which was Moses's Miraculous Vision when he fed his Flock under the
Mount of God, viz. A Bramble-Bush in a flaming Fire, having that Essential
incommunicable name of God, Jehovah, engraven in its Center, and this Motto,
Comburo non consumor, in its Circumference, I burn but am not Consumed. With
this those venerable Councils Sealed all their Letters and Dispatches. A sacred
Emblem of their past and present Condition.

Whilst Mystical Babylon, Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, (where our Lord has been
in his most precious Truths and Ordinances, and in his dearest Saints and
Members for many Ages successively Crucified) did swim in the calm Ocean of
Worldly Riches and Grandeurs, in the pacifick Seas of secular Felicities and
Pleasures, Poor Zion in that bloody Kingdom of France, has been in the storms
and flames, has passed from one fiery Trial unto another, from Cauldrons of
boiling Oil into burning Furnaces, heated with fire seven times hotter than
before, she has been driven from populous Cities, and the pleasant Habitations
of Men, unto the cold snowy Lebanon, to the high craggy tops of Amana and
Shenir, to the frightful Dens of Lions, and to the horrid Mountains of Dragons
and Leopards.

Why their Heavenly Father should afflict and exercise so frequently, and so
severely, these his Children and Churches, he himself informs them by that
weeping Prophet. All thy Lovers have forgotten thee, They seek thee not, for I
have wounded thee with the Wound of an Enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel
one for the multitude of thine Iniquities, because thy Sins were increased. Why
criest thou for thy Afflictions? Thy sorrow is incurable, for the multitude of
thine iniquity: because thy Sins were increased, I have done these things unto
thee. And in truth the mournful Relics of these Calamitous Churches do justify
God in all the evil that is befallen them, do condemn themselves, and kiss his
Rod, accepting patiently the punishment of their Iniquity. But this
Bramble-Bush, though always burning, is not consumed. This is a Miracle of
divine Mercy entailed upon them for many Generations. I will mention the loving
kindnesses of Jehovah, and the praises of Jehovah, according to all that
Jehovah has bestowed on them, and his great goodness toward the House of
Israel, which he has bestowed on them, according to his Mercies, and according
to the multitude of his loving kindnesses. In all their affliction he was
afflicted with them, and the Angel of his presence saved them, in his love and
in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days
of old. When they passed through the Waters he has been with them, and through
the Rivers they have not drowned them; and though they have walked through the
fires, yet they have not been burnt up; those Flames have purified and refined,
but not devoured them. And though these last storms, like the Fluctus decumani,
have been the worst and forest, yet they have not been without Illustrious
tokens of God's gracious presence with them, and most merciful providence over
them. He has made the Earth to help the Woman, he has spread a Table for
their sustenance in the Wilderness, and provided for them in their flights,
dispersions and banishments, a most quiet habitation; and in this last and
greatest persecution that ever did befall them, they have found in this Land, as
well as in other Protestant Countries, an inviolable Sanctuary: and which
cannot but be observed, it was in that very juncture when those two smoking
Firebrands, Rezin with Syria, and the Son of Remaliah, were in a joint
Confederacy, totally to extirpate the blessed Gospel, as out of France, so out
of these Fortunate Islands, they met with a safe Harbor in Great Britain. The
pernicious Plot was carried on as vigorously here at home, against the
Reformation, as it was cruelly Executed in Kibroth Hattaavah, that Land of
Graves from whence they fled, and where thousands of God's Saints were buried
alive. When the Bartholomaean Massacre was projected in the last Age, there was
a design to have tricked over some of our most Noble Patriots unto that
unfortunate Marriage (in which more Blood was drunk than Wine) who should have
been Sacrificed together with that Valiant Lord Admiral de Colligni, and the
other Protestant Lords. And the same design was revived, and put again here in
practice an hundred and thirteen years after. For Popery and Antichristian
Tyranny could not be re-established in England but by those old methods, which
Tarquin the Proud suggested to his Son Sextus for his Restoration, viz. The
lopping off the Heads of our Chiefest Noblemen. Then that Noble Lord, the
Honor of his Age, the singular Hope and Darling of his Country, and sincere
Professor of our holy Religion, your Eldest Son, fell a Victim to their Malice,
and was by their mischievous Cabal, as a Stag Royal, hunted down unto
destruction. Our God will sometimes be honored with the Sufferings of great
Personages. But then the Nation loses its best Blood and vital Spirits. So
that all that feared God in the Land, and were true Lovers of their Native
Country, did deeply sympathize with your Lordship in your sore Affliction, for
it was not only a mere Personal one to your Lordship, but common and general to
the whole Church and Nation.

The good Lord preserve us from seeing any more of those black days, and put a
period to the Calamities of his poor Churches, and turn back their Captivity,
and gather his dispersed, and build up Jerusalem's Walls, and make her a praise
once more in the Kingdom of France, and may the glory of the second House of
Reformation there be greater than the first.

Time was when the Reformed Churches of France had many sparkling Stars in
their Firmament, many burning and shining Lights in their Congregations, many
wise and eminently learned Master Builders in their Temples and Synodical
Assemblies; some account of whom, and of their worthy Achievements, for the
edifying of their numerous Auditories in that Faith once delivered unto the
Saints, in Christian Love and Unity, in their Sacred Order and Discipline, I do
now from Authentic Pieces, and Original Papers, in this my poor Labor,
present unto your Lordship. Had those Reverend and accomplished Divines, those
Noble and Prudent Gentlemen, who composed their Holy Councils, been this day
alive, and your Lordships great and generous Bounty, extended to their poor
Exiles, refugeed amongst us, been notified to them, they would have deposited
these their Acts into your Lordships hands, as into the securest Archives. But
what they could not do, I presume to do for them, most humbly tendering this
Synodicon unto your Lordship's Patronage. May your Lordship graciously pardon
the tediousness of this Epistle, and vouchsafe me the Honor, May it please
your Lordship, to be reputed,

London, March 12. 1691/^. Your Lordship's Most humbly devoted, and obedient
Servant, JOHN QVICK.

TO THE READER.
THrough Divine Assistance, I have at last finished this very much desired
Work, and it is now offered unto your view and perusal. I hope it will be not a
little serviceable to the Church of Christ, for whose Edification I have herein
labored. It had been Published before now, had not the exceeding Colds of
January and February hindered the Work, and Workmen.

Notwithstanding all my Cares in overseeing and Correcting the Press, yet upon
my Revisal, I have met in both Volumes, with some Errata's. Litteral ones are
not worthy your displeasure. For those which are more material, and do pervert
the sense, I must beg your Patience, and to amend them with your Pen, according
to the ensuing Table.

ERRATA.
IN the Introduction correct these Errors: Page 1. line 22. dele the. l. 26.
read de. p. 2. l. 18. r. Bearn. l. 24. dele there. l. 29. for and, r. of the.
p. 4. l. 28. r. Fabry. p. 15. l. 34. r. Bearn. p. 16. l. 4. r. Bearn. p. 32. l.
50. after given, add him. p. 61. l. 10. r. Virtue. p. 65. l. 36, and 4^. r.
Seneschalsies. p. 66. l. 3. r. Seneschalsies. p. 81. l. 3. r. Royan. p. 83. l.
24. f. whom, r. whence, p. 101. l. 50. f. we r. who. p. 121. l. 36. insert,
September. 6. 1666. p. 133. l. 20. r. Gallows. p. 145. l. 30. f. them. r. us.

1st Syn. of Paris, p. 5. l. 48. insert Ministers. Syn. of Orleans, p. 25. l.
47. r. any. p. 26. l. 24. r. calls. p. 32. l. 34. r. Officers. p. 44. l. 43.
dele and. p. 46. l. 26. add a. p. 52. l. 46. add, after consented, to. p. 56.
l. 8. f. being, r. were. p. 63. l. 9. r. avoided. p. 66. l. 12. f. are
conformable, r. harmonical. p. 76. l. 27. after dutier, read on and blot out
the Period. l 37. after sent, r. them. p. 91. l. 26. f. receiving, r. reviving.
p. 92. l. 49. r. asserted. p. 109. l. 23. r. Beaujolois. p. 111. l. 41. f. who
should, r. he shall. p. 116. l. 5. f. 21. r. 2d. p. 119. l. 45. f. suffered, r.
sufficient. p. 120. l. ult. r. adhered. p. 137. l. 15. r. appointed. p. 139. in
the Title, f. Vitre, r. Rochel. p. 163. l. 15. f. the, r. their. p. 169. l. 44.
after sooner, r. if it. p. 218. l. 16. r. also. p. 219. l. 38. f. wherein, r.
in which. p. 223. l. 4. dele one. p. 267. l. 18. dele All. p. 271. l. 48. dele
of, after professing. p. 289. l. 12. after homeward, r. unto. p. 301. l. 2.
insert after Rochel, should. p. 315. l. 43. after for, dele the. p. 316. l. 24.
dele to. p. 326. l. 26. put are before ordered. p. 329. l. 6. r. reliquiis. p.
348. r. 346. p. 346. l. 42. r. briguing. p. 377. l. 40. dele one. p. 413. l.
13. f. this, r. that.

VOL. II.

Page 2. l. 29. r. being. p. 3. l. 2. f. Sieur, r. Lord. p. 24. l. 11, 12. r.
aggravating. p. 26. l. 6. r. censure f. counsel. l. 9. r. counsel. p. 26. l.
17. r. and before do. p. 31. l. 49. after shall insert be. p. 42. l. 15. for
due, r. done. p. 4. l. 7. for of, r. at. p. 51. l. 30. f. here, r. how. p. 112.
l. 48. f. they, r. it. p. 114. l. 41. put a Period at Colloquy. p. 123. l. 21.
r. Provinces. p. 129. l. 4. prefix the before Children. p. 137. l. 30. f.
sooner, r. rather. p. 145. l. 11. after of, dele the. p. 147. l. 144. f.
preserving, r. persevering. p. 160. l. 17. f. that, r. the. p. 162. l. 16.
after and, add that. l. 17. after Information, add be. p. 164. l. 17. f. out,
r. our. p. 165. l. 51. r. Sire. p. 170. l. 24. after of, dele the. p. 211. l.
43. f. convenient, r. consonant. p. 212. l. 22, 23. r. that the charges of that
Process may be defrayed. p. 213. l. 52. f. might, r. may. p. 223. l. 4. r.
written, after Letter. p. 241. l. 38. dele at. p. 283. l. 12. r. agree. p. 301.
l. 6. dele so. p. 302. l. 51. f. would, r. should. p. 326. l. 27. f. the, r.
your. p. 363. l. 30. after another, insert, might be paid into her. p. 419. l.
11. r. Commentaries. p. 428. l. 45. r. contain. p. 448. l. 6. r. everlastingly.
p. 455. l. 42. f. might, r. should. p. 462. l. 3. after by, r. the. p. 488. l.
32. f. make paying, r. pay in. p. 489. l. 54. put the Comma after Amyraud. p.
500. dele the last line. p. 511. l. 27. f. those, r. whose. p. 512. l. 26. r.
give. p. 540. l. 22, 23. dele, and if it be possible. p. 545. l. 49. f.
decreeing, r. during. p. 549. l. 46. after taken, insert off. p. 550. l. 32.
dele dare. p. 556. l. 11. f. our, r. their. p. 567. l. 25. for this, r. his. p.
568. l. 3. r. but the next time. p. 569. l. 26. r. for his Family's
subsistence. p. 578. l. 18. r. ninety. p. 585. l. 8. r. there can be. p. 595.
l. 3. r. Religion that neither adds.

AN INTRODUCTION UNTO THESE COUNCILS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE INTRODUCTION.
The State of Religion in France before the Reformation, Section 1. The Dawn of
it in the Preaching of Waldo, 2. And of his Disciples, 3. Persecutions raised
against them, and by whom. 4. The glorious Out-breaking of the Reformation, how
and by what Instruments in that Kingdom, 5. The Growth and Progress of it.
Churches gathered. Pure Worship instituted. Bible translated into the
Mother Tongue, 6. New Persecutions excited. The first National Synod, 7.
Confession of Faith composed, and presented to the King, 8. The Confession it
self, in 40 Articles, 9. Remarks upon the Confession, 10. Discipline designed,
11. The whole Body of the Discipline of those Reformed Churches in fourteen
distinct Chapters, 12. Remarks upon the Discipline. And Apology for those
Churches. Two thousand one hundred and fifty Reformed Churches in France in the
Year 1571. They had more than 200000 Martyrs in ten Years time, 13. The Acme
and Perfection of the Reformation. Religion at a stand for 22 Years, from the
1572, to the Year 1594. When Henry the Fourth last revolted then began the
Reformation to lose ground in France. French Ministers Latitudinarians and
Accommodators, who, and for what; but condemned by their National Synods, 14.
The Edict of Nantes with all its Articles. The secret Articles of that Edict,
15. The President du Thou, and the Lord of Calignon spend three Years in
drawing up this Edict, 16. Observation and Infractions of the Edict. Misery of
the Reformed after the death of Henry the Fourth, 17. The Edict of Nismes
granted to the D. of of Rohan, and the whole Body of the Protestants, 18.
Reflections upon this Edict, and its Non-observation. A Declaration of this
present King Louis the Fourteenth, confirming all the former Edicts of
Pacification, with Acknowledgment of the great Services and Merits of the
Reformed, 19. The true Causes of their Ruin, the great Services they had done
the King in his greatest needs, 20. The various Methods used for the
destruction of the Protestants in France. 21. Law Suits in many Articles and
Cases, 22. Great Oppressions by fiery Zealots, 23. Protestants ruined by
perjured Papists, 24. Encouragements given to Popish Priests and Missioners.
The Cheaters cheated, 25. The miserable condition of sick Protestants, 26. The
cruel Oppressions of a French Gentleman, 27. A General Inundation of Criminal
Processes. False Witnesses against Protestant Ministers, 28. The Reformed
deprived of all Offices. Orders for it, 29. New Converts freed from paying of
Debts. Protestants may not dispose of their Estates, 30. Violations of the
Edict by corrupt Expositions of it, 31. The Schools of the Reformed, their
Colleges and Universities suppressed, 32. New Laws made which were a torment to
them. Those Laws specified and enumerated, 33. Protestants may not receive into
their Temples any revolted unto Popery. Seats in their Temples for the Roman
Catholics, 34. Multitudes foreseeing the approaching Storm, quit the Kingdom,
35. The Protestants ruined by the Verbal Declarations of their King. His Letter
to the Duke of Brandenburg, 36. Juggling Tricks used to mischief the Reformed,
37. Five most notable ones, 38. The Mob stirred up by Decrees to desire their
extirpation, by venomous Libels, 39. The care and endeavors of the Reformed
for their own preservation, yet ineffectual, 40. Persecutions of the
Protestants by Dragoons, 41. In Berne, their horrible Cruelties to fright the
Reformed into Popery, 42. A Specimen of those Cruelties, 43. The barbarous
usage of the Nobles and Commons of the Reformed in France: Several memorable
Relations of it, 44. The Martyrdom of Monsieur Homel, 45. The Intendants,
Bishops, Priests, and Missioners, Ringleaders in persecution. A Form of
Abjuration propounded and to be signed by the Protestants, 46. A Letter from
Metz, giving an account of their sad estate there in that City, 47. A Letter
from Geneva, relating the doleful estate of the poor Refugees in that City, 48.
Consultations at Court for the total extirpation of the Reformed Religion, 49.
The Edict repealing that of Nantes, 50. The wretched estate of the exiled
Pastors, 51. And of the remaining Protestants in that Kingdom, 52. Treacherous
dealing with poor Ministers. A Letter about it, 53. The Pope's Congratulatory
Letter to the King, 54. A Pastoral Letter to the Brethren groaning under
Babylonish Captivity and Tyranny, 55. Remarks upon the Manuscript Copies out of
which this Synodicon was extracted and composed, 56. A Catalogue and Order and
Time of the National Synods, 57.

THE INTRODUCTION.
SECTION I. The State of Religion in France before the Reformation.
EVrope a little before the Reformation was universally overrun with Idolatry,
Superstition, Ignorance, and Profaneness. The greater part of the Priests said
not, Where is the Lord? and they who should have taught the Law of God, knew
him not. The Pastors also transgressed against him, and the Prophets Prophesied
by Baal. There was like People like Priest, sottish, brutish, and debauched.

Sect. 2. In this woeful estate the Sovereign Mercy of God brake forth, as the
Sun out of a dark Cloud in a most illustrious manner upon the Kingdom of
France, visiting it in the first place, and before all the Nations of Europe,
with the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ the Dayspring from on high. The
verity and purity of Christian Doctrine (God's great Ordinance to recover
sinful Nations from their Antichristian pollutions) is Preached and published
unto it. Angels as it were from Heaven, holy Men and Messengers of God, came
flying with the little Book of Life in their hands (not as a Sealed Vision,
dark and unintelligible, but open, plain, clear, and easy to be understood)
into the Cities, and Towns of that Kingdom, and call aloud unto the Inhabitants
thereof to repent of all their abominations, to turn from all their Idols,
Superstitious, and irreligious practices, and to fear and serve God only
through Jesus Christ the alone Mediator betwixt God and Man. This was done at
first by that famous Trumpet of Reformation the blessed Waldo of Lions, who
being a Neighbor to the Vaudois, received the holy Bible, and Doctrine of
Eternal Life and Salvation from them, in the year 1160. It having been
conserved in their Valleys times immemorial, yea, said Friar Reynerius, from
the very days of the Apostles.

Sect. 3. But he was not alone in this Ministry: The Lord raised up, and
Commissionated many other Worthies to labor in his Vineyard, and to gather in
his great Harvest of precious Souls, for the Fields were already white, and
longing for the Harvest, It Is true they had a most unkind usage, and cruel
Entertainment from the Popish Priests and Prelates, and from the greater part
of the Antichristian World. For these wise Men among the People, that had skill
and understanding in the Visions of God, and instructed many, yet, did,
according to the Scripture-Prophecy, fall by the Sword, and by Flame, by
Captivity, and by spoil many days; among whom the most renowned were Joseph a
Disciple of Waldo, who Preached in Dolphiny, Henry and Eperon who Preached in
Languedoc, Arnold Hor who Preached in Albigois, and Lollard (by whose name the
Professors of the Gospel were so called here in England) these as they lived
zealous Preachers, so they died most faithful Martyrs, sealing the Truth of
Christ with their Hearts Blood, as did also many thousands of their Followers.

Sect. 4. For to exterminate these Heretics (as they were then styled) Pope
Innocent the Third published his Croisados, granting plenary remission of sins
to all Persons that would go to this holy War, and destroy them. Great Kings,
potent Princes, and noble Lords, are all invited, commanded and animated to
persecute them; and in case of neglect on their part, they themselves are
reputed Favorers and Upholders of them, and are exposed to the Thunderbolts of
Papal Excommunications, and to be deprived of their Crowns, Kingdoms, Dominions
and Lives. Thus were the King of Arragon, the Counts of Tolouse, Beziers, and
Carcassone served, who were all cut off by those prodigious Armies mustered up
against them. They and many Myriads of their Subjects together with them, are
most horribly butchered and destroyed by the Croisado-Pilgrims.

Sect. 5. But notwithstanding all the Croisado's, Slaughters, Massacres, and
most barbarous Persecutions of the poor Albingenses and Waldenses, there was
not a total extinction of the Truth, it was suppressed but not destroyed, as
Fire buried under much Ashes, it does at length break out with the more
vehement flame. Its Professors were dead, but the Truth lived; it lay concealed
in the hearts of the Children of these Martyrs, who groaned for a Reformation.
There was a very great propensity in all the Nations of Europe, but especially
of France unto it. The Papal Power had been crampt by the Pragmatical Sanction
in that Kingdom. The August Parliament of Paris sixed bounds unto it. The
learned Sorbonists had several of their Divines, who disputed against and
decried it. Jews the Twelfth threatened to destroy Babylon. When Learning was
revived, by Francis the First, in that Kingdom, the Reformation had there its
Resurrection. Pious and good Men passionately desired, and Preached up the
necessity of it. William Brissonnet, Bishop of Meaux, promoted it in his
Diocese. James Fabey born at Estaples in Picardy, a Man of great Learning, and
of an Angelical Life, labored hard in it. And in the dawn of the Reformation
the Doctrine of the Gospel was embraced by several Persons of great Quality.
Margaret of Valois, Queen of Navarre, and Sister to the French King, was
accused for it by the blood-thirsty Prelates unto her Royal Brother. She was
indeed a Sanctuary unto God's Fugitives, a Covert to them from the storm, an
hiding place from the Tempest. In her House Faber, now an hundred years old,
after a most Heavenly Discourse with the Queen at Supper, fell asleep in the
Lord. Luther, a Divine Herald, publishes the Gospel in Germany; Zuinglius one
year before him, and without any knowledge of him, or correspondence with him,
had thundered against Indulgences, and began the Reformation in Switzerland. A
little while after, Mr. Calvin is called forth by God to be a glorious
Instrument of it in France. See the Author of Status Reipubl. and Relig. sab
Henr. 2. p 10. and 11. and sub Carol^ 9. p. 94.
And the Lord owneth him, and his Fellow Servants, notwithstanding all the
storms of Popish rage and fury against them in this great work; Insomuch that
the whole Kingdom is enlightened and ravished with it, and many of the most
eminent Counselors in that Illustrious Senate the Parliament of Paris, do
profess the Gospel openly, and in the very presence of their King Henry the
Second, though to the loss of Honor, Estate and Life. It was now got into the
Court, and among Persons of the highest Quality. Many Nobles, some Princes of
the Blood dare espouse its Cause. The Blood of the Martyrs proving the Seed of
the Church, and as Israel of old, so now, the more the Professors of the Gospel
are oppressed, and persecuted, the more are they increased and multiplied.

Sect. 6. The Reformed form themselves into regular Church Assemblies,
separating themselves, as the Primitive Christians did from the unbelieving
Jews, and their Synagogues, so from the unbelieving Papists and their
idolatrous Worship. It was the great care of the first Reformers to preach up
sound Doctrine, to institute and celebrate pure Evangelical Worship, and to
restore the ancient Primitive Discipline. They set up purity of Worship,
according to the Scripture Rule. The Holy Bible was translated by Olivetan
(Uncle unto Mr. Calvin, and a Minister in the Valleys of Piedmont) from the
Original Hebrew and Greek into the French Language. He had not any assistance
nor encouragement unto this work from any great Prince, or State, and yet
finished it in one Year. The Lord blessed him in his undertaking wonderfully,
that he should begin and finish it in so short a time. This Star scatters
bright Beams of Heavenly Light and Truth into the dark Corners of the Land, to
the inlivening and comforting of many thousands of Souls. Now the Fountain of
Life is opened, and the Waters thereof flow down in plenteous streams from the
Throne of God, and the Lamb, to the cleansing, quickening, and refreshing of the
City of God. This Holy Bible is read in their solemn Meetings, in the great
Congregations. This divinely inspired Scripture is perused and studied by
Nobles and Peasants, by the Learned and Idiots, by Merchants and Tradesmen, by
Women and Children, in their Houses and Families; by this they be made wiser
than their Popish Priests, than their most subtle Adversaries. By this they
stop the mouths of Gainsayers, and put them to silence and confusion. Clement
Marot a Courtier, and a great Wit, was advised by Mr. Vatablus, Regius
Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of Paris, to consecrate his
Muse unto God; which Counsel he embraces, and translateth fifty of David's
Psalms into French Meeter. Mr. Beza did the other hundred, and all the
Scripture-Songs. Lewis Guadimel, another Asaph, or Jeduthun, a most Skillful
Master of Music, set those sweet and melodious Tunes unto which they are sung
even unto this day. This holy Ordinance charmed the Ears, Hearts and Affections
of Court and City, Town and Country. They were sung in the Louvre, as well as
in the Pres des Clerks, by the Ladies, Princes, yea and by Henry the Second
himself. This one Ordinance only contributed mightily to the downfall of Popery,
and the propagation of the Gospel. It took so much with the genius of the
Nation, That all ranks and degrees of Men practiced it in the Temples and in
their Families. No Gentleman professing the Reformed Religion, would sit down
at his Table without praising God by singing. Yea it was a special part of
their Morning and Evening Worship, in their several Houses, to sing God's
Praises. The Popish Clergy raged, and to prevent the growth and spreading of
the Gospel by it, that mischievous Cardinal of Lorrain, another Elymas the
Sorcerer, got the Odes of Horace, and the filthy obscene Poems of Tibullus and
Catullus to be turned into French, and sung in the Court. Ribaldry was his
Piety, and the means used by him to expel and banish the singing of divine
Psalms out of the profane Court of France, The Holy Word of God is duly,
truly, and powerfully Preached in Churches and Fields, in Ships and Houses, in
Vaults and Cellars, in all places where the Gospel Ministers can have admission
and convenience, and with singular success. Multitudes are Convinced and
Converted, established and edified. Christ rides out upon the white Horse of
the Ministry, with the Sword and Bow of the Gospel Preached, Conquering and to
Conquer. His Enemies fall under him, and submit themselves unto him. O! the
unparalleled success of the plain and zealous Sermons of the first Reformers.
Multitudes flock in like Doves into the Windows of God's Ark. As innumerable
drops of dew fall from the Womb of the Morning, so has the Lord Christ the dew
of his Youth. The Popish Churches are drained, the Protestant Temples are
filled. The Priests complain that their Altars are neglected, their Masses are
now indeed solitary. Dagon cannot stand before God's Ark. Children and Persons
of riper years, are Catechized in the Rudiments and Principles of Christian
Religion, and can give a comfortable account of their Faith, a reason of that
hope that is in them. By this Ordinance do their pious Pastors prepare them for
Communion with the Lord at his holy Table. Here they communicate in both kinds,
according to the Primitive Institution of this Sacrament, by Jesus Christ
himself.

Sect. 7. Though the Churches of God walked in the Comforts of the Holy Ghost,
and were multiplied throughout the whole Kingdom, yet were they exercised with
Fiery Trials, and underwent most cruel and inhumane Sufferings. Satan stormed
that his Kingdom was assaulted, weakened, and subverted: this boileth up his
Revenge, and causes him to throw out Floods of Wrath against the Church
traveling under the pangs of Reformation. Hence the Saints of God are
imprisoned, arraigned for their Lives, and condemned by merciless, unrighteous
Judges, for their Profession of the Truth, unto the Flames. Others are murdered
in cold Blood, and massacred without any legal forms of Justice in the least.
And yet in the sight of those cruel Deaths, and most barbarous Executions, the
first National Synod is called, and celebrated in the Metropolis of the
Kingdom, at the very Doors of the Court. God inspiring with Zeal and Courage
the Pastors of several Churches to meet and consult together about the arduous
and most important Businesses of the Reformed Religion.

Sect. 8. Two things among others were dispatched in this Council, 1. They
publish the Confession of their Faith: and tell the King and Kingdom what they
believe and practice. This was put into the Hands of their Young King, lately
come to the Crown, upon the Death of his Father, who though he had sworn to see
that famous Martyr of Christ Annas du Bourg, Counselor in the Parliament of
Paris, burnt; yet was, at a Tilt by Count de Montgomery a Protestant, wounded
with a Lance in the Eye, and died before he could perform his Oath. How
Francis the Second entertained this Confession when it was tendered him, is not
my Business to relate: I shall only give my Reader the Confession itself: and I
do the rather lay it before him, because it is a brief System of the Protestant
Religion, constantly read at the opening of all their Synods, and because of
the frequent References unto it in and by all those National Synods which I now
publish.

Sect. 9. The Confession of Faith, held and professed by the Reformed Churches
of France, received and enacted by their first National Synod, Celebrated in
the City of Paris, and Year of our Lord, 1559.
ARTICLE I. WE believe and confess, That there is but one God only, whose Being
only is simple, spiritual, eternal, invisible, immutable, infinite,
incomprehensible, ineffable, who can do all things, who is all-wise, all-good,
most just, and most merciful. ARTICLE II. This one God has revealed himself to
be such a one unto Men, first in the Creation, preservation, and governing of
his works: secondly, far more plainly in his word, which from the beginning he
revealed to the Fathers by certain Visions and Oracles, and then caused it to
be put in writing in those Books, which we call the Holy Scripture. ARTICLE
III. All this holy Scipture is contained in the Canonical Books of the Old and
New Testament, the Catalogue whereof follows. The five Books of Moses, namely
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy. Item Joshua, Judges, Ruth,
the first and second Book of Samuel, the first and second Book of Kings, the
first and second Book of Chronicles, otherwise called the Paralipomena, one
Book of Esdras, Nehemiah, Hester, Job, the Psalms, Solomon's Proverbs or
Sentences, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, Esaiah, Jeremiah, with the
Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonas, Micah, Nahum,
Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zachariah, Malachi. Item, the Holy Gospel
according to St. Matthew, according to St. Mark, according to St. Luke, and
according to St. John, as also the second Book of St. Luke, otherwise called
The Acts of the Apostles. Item, the Epistles of St. Paul the Apostle, to the
Romans one, to the Corinthians two, to the Galatians one, to the Ephesians one,
to the Philippians one, to the Colossians one, to the Thessalonians two, to
Timothy two, to Titus one, to Philemon one. Item, the Epistle to the Hebrews,
the Epistle of St. James, the first and second Epistle of St. Peter, the first,
second, and third Epistle of St. John, the Epistle of St. Jude, and the
Apocalypse or Revelations of St. John. ARTICLE IV. We acknowledge these Books
to be Canonical, that is, we account them as the most certain Rule of our
Faith, and that not so much because of the common consent of the Church, but
because of the Testimony and Persuasion of the Holy Ghost, by which we are
taught to distinguish betwixt them, and other Ecclesiastical Books, upon which,
although they may be useful, yet we cannot ground any Article of Faith. ARTICLE
V. We believe, That the Doctrine contained in these Books is proceeded from
God, from whom only and not from men it deriveth its authority. And forasmuch
as it is the Rule of all Truth, containing all Matters necessarily required for
the Worship of God, and our Salvation, it is in no wise lawful for Men nor
Angels to add unto, or to take from this Doctrine, or to change it. And
hereupon it follows, That it is not lawful to oppose either Antiquity, or
Custom, or Multitude, or Humane Wisdom, Judgments, Edicts, or any Decrees, or
Councils, or Visions, or Miracles unto this Holy Scripture; but rather, that
all things ought to be examined and tried by the Rule and Square thereof.
Wherefore we do for this cause also allow of those three Creeds, namely, the
Apostles, the Nicene, and Athanasius his Creed, because they be agreeable to
the Word of God. ARTICLE VI. The Holy Scripture teaches us, That in that one
and simple Divine Being there be three Persons subsisting, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. The Father, to wit, the first Cause in order, and the
Beginning of all things; The Son, his Wisdom and Everlasting Word; The Holy
Ghost, his Virtue, Power, and Efficacy: The Son begotten of the Father from
everlasting, the Holy Ghost from everlasting proceeding from the Father and the
Son; these three Persons are not confounded, but distinct, and yet not divided,
but of one and the same Essence, Eternity, Power, and Equality. And to conclude
in this Mystery, we allow of that which those four ancient Councils have
determined; and we detest all Sects and Heresies condemned by those holy
ancient Doctors, St. Athanasius, St. Hilary, St. Cyril, and St. Ambrose.
ARTICLE VII. We believe that God in Three Persons working together by his
Power, Wisdom and incomprehensible Goodness has made all things, not only
Heaven and Earth, and all things in them contained, but also the invisible
Spirits, of which some fell headlong into Destruction, and some continued in
Obedience. That the fallen Angels, being corrupted by their Malice, are become
Enemies of all good, and consequently of the whole Church. That the holy Angels
having persevered by the Grace of God, are Ministers to glorify his Name, and
serve his Elect in order to Salvation. ARTICLE VIII. We believe that God has
not only made all things, but also rules and governs them, as he who
according to his will disposes and ordains whatsoever comes to pass in the
World. Yet we deny that he is the Author of Sin, or that the blame of things
done amiss can be laid upon him, seeing his Will is the sovereign and
infallible Rule of all Righteousness and Equity; but this we confess, That he
has those admirable Means, as whereby he makes the Devils and the Ungodly, as
his Instruments, to serve him, and to turn the Evil which they do, and whereof
they are guilty, into good. So that when we acknowledge that nothing can be
done without the Providence of God, we do most humbly adore his Secrets, which
he has hidden from us, nor do we enquire into those which are above our reach
and Capacity. Nay, rather we apply unto our own use that which the Holy
Scripture teaches us for our Peace and Comfort; to wit, that God, to whom all
things are subject, does watch over us with a Fatherly Care; so that not so
much as an Hair of our Head falls to the ground without his Will, and that he
has the Devils and all our Adversaries fast bound in Chains, that they cannot,
without leave first given them, do us any harm. ARTICLE IX. We believe that Man
being created pure and upright, and conformable to the Image of God, through
his own fault fell from that Grace, which he had received, and thereby did so
estrange himself from God the Fountain of all Righteousness and of all good
things, that his Nature is become altogether defiled; and being blind in his
Understanding, and corrupt in his Heart, he has utterly lost that Integrity:
and although he can somewhat discern between Good and Evil, yet we do affirm,
That whatsoever Light he has, it straightway becomes Darkness, when the
Question is of seeking after God; so that by his Understanding and Reason he
can never come to God. And although he be endued with Will, whereby he is moved
to do this or that, yet forasmuch as that also is in bondage to Sin, that he
has no freedom to desire that which is good; but if he have any, it is the
gracious Gift of God. ARTICLE X. We believe that all the Offspring of Adam are
infected with the Contagion of Original Sin; which is a Vice hereditary to us
by Propagation, and not only by Imitation, as the Pelagians asserted, whose
Errors are detested by us. Nor do we think it necessary to inquire how this Sin
comes to be derived from one unto another: For it is sufficient that those
things which God gave to Adam were not given to him alone, but also to all his
Posterity; and therefore we, in his Person, being deprived of all those good
Gifts, are fallen into this Poverty and Malediction. ARTICLE XI. We believe
that this stain of Original Sin, is Sin indeed; for it has that mischievous
Power in it as to condemn all Mankind, even Infants that are unborn, as yet in
their Mothers Womb, and God himself does account it such; yea, and that even
after Baptism, as to the Filth thereof, it is always Sin. Howbeit, they who are
the Children of God shall never be condemned for it, because that God, of his
rich Grace and sovereign Mercy, does not impute it to them. Moreover, we say,
that it is such a Depravedness as does continually produce the Fruits of Malice
and Rebellion against God; so that even the choicest of God's Saints, although
they do resist it, yet are they defiled with very many Infirmities and
Offenses, so long as they live in this World. ARTICLE XII. We believe, That out
of this general Corruption and Condemnation, in which all Men are plunged, God
does deliver them, whom he has in his eternal and unchangeable Counsel chosen,
of his mere Goodness and Mercy, through our Lord Jesus Christ, without any
consideration of their Works, leaving the rest in their Sins and damnable
Estate, that he may show forth in them his Justice, as in the elect he does
most illustriously declare the Riches of his Mercy. For One is not better than
another, until such time as God does make the difference, according to his
unchangeable purpose, which he has determined in Jesus Christ before the
Creation of the World. Nor can any one, by his own power, procure unto himself
so great a Blessing; because we cannot, by Nature nor of our selves, excite in
our selves any one good Motion, Thought or Affection, until such time as God
does prevent, and incline us to it by his Grace. ARTICLE XIII. We believe, That
whatsoever is requisite to our Salvation, is offered and communicated to us now
in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is made of God unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption; so that whosoever leaves Christ, does renounce
all interest in, and title to the Mercy of God the Father, to which, as to our
only Sanctuary, we are bound to have Recourse. ARTICLE XIV. We believe, That
Jesus Christ, being the Wisdom and eternal Son of the Father, took upon him our
Nature, so that he is one Person God and Man. Man, that he might be able to
suffer both in Soul and Body, made like unto us in all things, Sin only
excepted; so that as to his Humane Nature, he was in truth the very Seed of
Abraham and of David, conceived in due time in the Womb of the most Blessed
Virgin, by the secret and incomprehensible Power of the Holy God. And therefore
we detest, as contrary to that Truth, all those Heresies with which the
Churches were troubled in times past, and particularly we detest those
diabolical Imaginations of Servetus, who ascribed to our Lord Jesus Christ an
imaginary Deity, whom he asserted to be the Idea and Pattern of all things, and
the counterfeit or figurative Son of God. In short, he framed him a Body,
compacted of three Elements uncreated, and so did mingle and overthrow his
Nature. ARTICLE XV. We believe, That in one and the same Person, to wit, the
Lord Jesus Christ, his two Natures are truly and inseparably conjoined and
united; yet nevertheless in such a manner, that each Nature does retain its
distinct Properties. So that even as in this Divine Conjunction the Divine
Nature retaining its Properties does still abide uncreated, infinite, and
filling all places; so also the Humane Nature remains finite, having its
form, measure, and property. And although the Lord Jesus Christ, when he rose
from the dead, did give Immortality unto his Body, yet he never deprived it of
the Verity of its Nature. Therefore we do so consider Christ in his Deity, that
we do not spoil him of his Humanity. ARTICLE XVI. We do believe, That God, by
sending his Son into the World, did declare his infinite Love and inestimable
Goodness to us; delivering him over unto death, and raising him again from the
dead, that he might fulfill all Righteousness, and purchase Everlasting Life for
us. ARTICLE XVII. We believe, That by that only Sacrifice which Jesus Christ
offered upon the Cross, we are reconciled unto God, that so we may be held and
accounted Righteous in his sight; because we can never please him, nor be
partakers of his Adoption, but so far only as he forgiveth us our sins, and
burieth them in his grave. Therefore we affirm, That Jesus Christ is our entire
and perfect Washing, and that by his Death we obtain full satisfaction, whereby
we are delivered from all those sins of which we are guilty, and from which we
could never be absolved by any other means or remedy. ARTICLE XVIII. We
believe, That our whole Righteousness is founded in the Remission of our Sins,
which is, as David calls it, our only Happiness. Wherefore we do utterly
reject all other means by which men do think they may be justified before God,
and casting away all conceits of our own Virtues and Merits, we do altogether
rest upon the sole Obedience of Jesus Christ, which is imputed to us, as well
for the covering of our Offenses, as that we may find Grace and Favor with
God. And indeed, we believe, that should we in the least forsake this
Foundation, we could not find elsewhere any repose, but must needs be agitated
with Inquietudes in our Consciences, because we are never at peace with God,
till we be persuaded upon good grounds, that we are beloved in Jesus Christ.
For that in our selves we have deserved to be hated by him. ARTICLE XIX. We
believe, That by this means we have liberty and privilege of calling upon God,
with full confidence, that he will show himself a Father to us, for we have no
access unto the Father, but in and through Christ the Mediator; And that we may
be heard in his Name, it is meet, that we should hold and derive our Life from
him as from our Head. ARTICLE XX. We believe, That we are made partakers of
this Righteousness by Faith only; as it is written, He suffered to purchase
Salvation for us, That whosoever believes in him should not perish. And this
is therefore done, because the Promises of Life offered to us in him are then
applied to our use, and made effectual to us, when we do accept of them, and in
no wise doubt, but that we shall enjoy those things, which the Lord by his own
mouth has assured us of. So that the Righteousness which we obtain by Faith,
depends upon the free gracious Promises of God, by which God does declare and
testify unto us, that we are beloved of him. ARTICLE XXI. We do believe, That
by the secret Grace of the Holy Ghost, the light of Faith is ^inded up in us,
so that it is a gracious and special Gift, which God bestows upon whom he
pleases; and the Faithful have nothing whereof they may boast, because they
are doubly obliged unto God, for having preferred them before others, and for
that he never gave Faith unto the Elect once only to bring them into the good
way, but also to cause them to continue in it unto the end. For as God does
begin Faith, so does he also finish and perfect it. ARTICLE XXII. We believe,
That by this Faith we are regenerated unto newness of Life, we being naturally
imbondaged under Sin. And we do by Faith receive that Grace to live holily, and
in the fear of God, in our receiving of the Promise which is given us through
the Gospel, to wit, that God will give us his Holy Spirit. So that Faith is so
far from freezing our Affections to Godliness and Holy Living, that
contrariwise it does engender and excite it in us, necessarily producing all
manner of good Works. Finally, Although God, to accomplish our salvation, does
regenerate, and reform us, that we may do those things which are well-pleasing;
yet notwithstanding we do confess, that the good Works which we do by his
Spirit, are never accounted to us for Righteousness, nor can we merit by them,
that God should take us for his Children, because we should be always tossed
with doubts and disquiets, if our Consciences did not repose themselves upon
that satisfaction, by which Jesus Christ has purchased us for himself. ARTICLE
XXIII. We believe, That all the Types of the Law ended when as Christ came in
the flesh. But although the Ceremonies are no longer in use, yet nevertheless the
Substance and Truth of them abides always in his Person, who fulfilled them.
Moreover, we must be helped by the Law and the Prophets for the right ordering
of our Lives, and that the Promises of the Gospel may be confirmed to us.
ARTICLE XXIV. We believe, That forasmuch as Jesus Christ is conferred upon us
to be our alone Advocate, and that he commands us even in our private Prayers
to present our selves before the Father in his Name; and that it is in no wise
lawful for us to call upon God in any other way than he has taught us by his
Word; that therefore all those Imaginations of Men about the Intercession of
Saints departed, is none other than an abuse and imposture of Satan, whereby he
may turn Men aside from the right method of Prayer. We do also reject those
Means, which Men presumed they had, whereby they might be redeemed before God;
for they derogate from the Satisfaction of the Death and Passion of Jesus
Christ. Finally, We hold Purgatory to be none other than a Cheat, which came
out of the same Shop: from which also proceeded Monastical Vows, Pilgrimages,
Prohibitions of Marriage, and the Use of Meats, a Ceremonious Observation of
Days, Auricular Confession, Indulgences, and all other such like Matters, by
which Grace and Salvation may be supposed to be deserved. Which things we
reject, not only for the false Opinion of Merit, which was affixed to them, but
also because they are the Inventions of Men, and are a Yoke laid by their sole
Authority upon Conscience. ARTICLE XXV. And forasmuch as we are not made
partakers of Christ, but by the Gospel, we believe that that good order in the
Church, which was established by his Authority, ought to be kept sacred and
inviolable: and therefore that the Church cannot subsist unless there be
Pastors, whose office it is to instruct their Flocks, and who having been duly
called, and discharging their office faithfully are to be honored and heard
with reverence. Not as if God were tied unto such Ordinances, or inferior
means, but because it is his good pleasure in this sort to govern us. So that
for these reasons we detest all those Fanatical Persons, who as much as in them
lies, would totally abolish the preaching of the word, and administration of
the Sacraments. ARTICLE XXVI. Therefore we believe that it is not lawful for
any Man to withdraw himself from the Congregations of God's Saints, and to
content himself with his private Devotions, but all of us jointly are bound to
keep and maintain the Unity of the Church, submitting themselves unto the
common instruction, and to the Yoke of Jesus Christ, and this in all places
wheresoever he shall have established the true Discipline, although the Edicts
of earthly Magistrates be contrary thereunto: and whosoever do separate from
this Order, do resist the Ordinance of God, and in case they draw others aside
with them, they do act very perversely, and are to be accounted as mortal
plagues. ARTICLE XXVII. However we do believe that we ought to distinguish
carefully and prudently betwixt the true and false Church, because the Word
Church is very much abused. We say then, according to the word of God, That the
Church is an Assembly of Believers who agree among themselves to follow God's
word, and the pure Religion which depends on it, and who profit by it during
their whole Life, increasing and confirming themselves in the fear of God, as
being persons who do daily need a farther progress and advancement in
godliness. Yet notwithstanding all their endeavors, they must have continual
recourse to the grace of God for the forgiveness of their sins. Nor do we deny
but that among the Faithful there be some Hypocrites, or despisers of God, or
Ill-Livers: whose wickedness however cannot blot out the name of the Church.
ARTICLE XXVIII. In this Belief we protest that where the word of God is not
received, and where there is no professed subjection to it, and where there is
no use of the Sacraments, if we will speak properly, we cannot judge that there
is any Church. Wherefore we condemn those Assemblies in the Papacy, because the
pure word of God is banished out of them, and for that in them the Sacraments
are corrupted, counterfeited, falsified, or utterly abolished, and for that
among them all kinds of Superstitions and Idolatries are in full vogue. We hold
then that all those who meddle with such actions, and Communicate with them, do
separate and cut themselves off from the Body of Christ Jesus. Yet
nevertheless, because there is yet some small track of a Church in the Papacy,
and that Baptism, as to its substance, has been still continued, and because
the efficacy of Baptism does not depend upon him who does administer it, we
confess, that they which are there baptized do not need a second Baptism. In
the mean while because of those corruptions which are mingled with the
administration of that Sacrament, no Man can present his Children to be
baptized in that Church without polluting of his Conscience. ARTICLE XXIX. We
believe that this true Church ought to be governed by that Discipline which our
Lord Jesus has established; so that there should be in the Church Pastors,
Elders, and Deacons, that the pure Doctrine may have its course, and Vices may
be reformed and suppressed, that the poor and other afflicted Persons may be
succored in their necessities, and that in the name of God there may be holy
Assemblies, in which both great and small may be edified. ARTICLE XXX. We
believe that all true Pastors in whatever places they may be disposed, have all
the same authority, and equal power among themselves under Jesus Christ the
only Head, the only Sovereign, and only Universal Bishop; and that therefore it
is unlawful for any Church to challenge unto it self Dominion or Sovereignty
over another, however it is requisite that all care should be taken for the
keeping up of mutual Concord and Brotherly Love. ARTICLE XXXI. We believe that
it is not lawful for any Man of his own authority to take upon himself the
Government of the Church, but that every one ought to be admitted thereunto by
a lawful Election, if it may possibly be done, and that the Lord do so permit
it. Which exception we have expressly added, because that sometime (as it has
fallen out in our days) the state of the Church being interrupted, God has
raised up some persons in an extraordinary manner for to repair the ruins of
the decayed Church. But let it be what it will, we believe that this Rule is
always to be followed, that all Pastors, Elders and Deacons, should have a
Testimony of their being called unto their respective Offices. ARTICLE XXXII.
We believe that it is expedient, that they who be chosen Superintendents in the
Church, should wisely consult among themselves, by what means the whole Body
may conveniently be ruled, yet so as they do not swerve from that which our
Lord Jesus Christ has instituted. And this does not hinder but that in some
Churches there may be those particular Constitutions, which will be more
convenient for them than for others. ARTICLE XXXIII. But we exclude all humane
Inventions, and all those Laws which are introduced to bind the Conscience
under pretense of God's service. And we do only receive such as serve to keep
up Concord, and to retain every one from the highest unto the lowest in due
obedience. In which we conceive that we are to observe that which our Lord
Jesus Christ appointed concerning Excommunication, which we do very well
approve, and acknowledge the necessity thereof, and of its Appendages. ARTICLE
XXXIV. We believe that the Sacraments are adjoined unto the word for its more
ample confirmation, to wit, that they may be pledges and tokens of the grace of
God, and that by these means our Faith, which is very weak and ignorant, may be
supported and comforted. For we confess that these outward signs be such, that
God by the power of his holy Spirit, does work by them, that nothing may be
there represented to us in vain. Yet nevertheless we hold, that all their
substance and virtue is in Jesus Christ, from whom if they be separated, they
be nothing else but shadows and smoke. ARTICLE XXXV. We acknowledge, That there
be two Sacraments only, which are common to the whole Church; whereof Baptism
is the first, which is administered to us to testify our Adoption, because we
are by it ingraffed into the Body of Christ, that we may be washed and cleansed
by his Blood, and afterward renewed in Holiness of Life by his Spirit. We hold
also, That although we be baptized but once, yet the Benefits which are signified
to us therein, do extend themselves during the whole course of our life, even
unto death; that so we may have a lasting Signature with us, that Jesus Christ
will always be our Righteousness and Sanctification. And although Baptism be a
Sacrament of Faith and Repentance, yet forasmuch as God does, together with the
Parents, account their Children and Posterity to be Church Members, we affirm,
That Infants born of believing Parents, are by the Authority of Christ to be
baptized. ARTICLE XXXVI. We affirm, That the Holy Supper of our Lord, to wit,
the other Sacrament, is a witness to us of our Union with the Lord Jesus
Christ: because that he is not only once dead, and raised up again from the
dead for us, but also he does indeed seed us, and nourish us with his Flesh and
Blood, that we being made one with him, may have our life in common with him.
And although he be now in Heaven, and shall remain there, till he come to judge
the World; yet we believe, that by the secret and incomprehensible virtue of
his Spirit, he does nourish and quicken us with the substance of his Body and
Blood. But we say, that this is done in a spiritual manner; nor do we hereby
substitute in the place of the effect and truth an idle fancy and conceit of
our own; but rather, because this Mystery of our Union with Christ is so high a
thing, that it surmounteth all our Senses, yea and the whole order of Nature,
and in short, because it is celestial, therefore it cannot be apprehended but
by Faith. ARTICLE XXXVII. We believe, as was said before, That both in Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, God does indeed truly and effectually give whatsoever he
does there sacramentally exhibit; and therefore we conjoyn with the Signs the
true possession and enjoyment of what is offered to us in them. Therefore we
affirm, That they which do bring pure Faith, as a clean Vessel, unto the Holy
Supper of the Lord, they do indeed receive that which the Signs do there
witness, that is, That the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are no less the Meat
and Drink of the Soul, than Bread and Wine are the Meat of the Body. ARTICLE
XXXVIII. We say therefore, That let the Element of Water be never so
despicable, yet notwithstanding it does truly witness unto us the inward
washing of our Souls with the Blood of Jesus Christ, by the virtue and efficacy
of his Spirit, and that the Bread and Wine being given us in the Lord's Supper,
do serve in very deed unto our spiritual nourishment, because they do as it
were point out unto us with the finger, that the Flesh of Jesus Christ is our
Meat, and his Blood our Drink. And we reject those Fanatics who will not
receive such Signs and Marks, although Jesus Christ does speak plainly, This is
my Body, and this Cup is my Blood. ARTICLE XXXIX. We believe, That God will
have the World to be ruled by Laws, and Civil Government, that there may be
some sort of Bridles by which the unruly Lusts of the World may be restrained;
and that therefore he appointed Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and other kinds of
Principalities, whether hereditary or otherwise. And not that alone, but also
whatsoever pertains to the Ministration of Justice, whereof he avoucheth
himself the Author: therefore has he even delivered the Sword into the
Magistrates hand, that so Sins committed against both the Tables of God's Law,
not only against the Second but the First also, may be suppressed. And
therefore, because God is the Author of this Order, we must not only suffer
Magistrates, whom he has set over us, but we must also give them all Honor
and Reverence, as unto his Officers and Lieutenants, which have received their
Commission from him to exercise so lawful and Sacred a Function. ARTICLE XL.
Therefore we affirm that Obedience must be yielded unto their Laws and
Statutes, that Tribute must be paid them, Taxes and all other Duties, and that
we must bear the Yoke of Subjection with a free and willing mind, although the
Magistrates be Infidels; so that the sovereign Government of God be preserved
entire. Wherefore we detest all those who do reject the Higher Powers, and
would bring in a Community and Confusion of Goods, and subvert the Course of
Justice.
Sect. 10. This was the Confession which was owned in their First National
Synod hold at Paris in the Year 1559. and presented unto Francis the Second
King of France, first at Amboise, in behalf of all the Professors of the
Reformed Religion in that Kingdom, afterward to Charles the Ninth, at the
Conference of Poissy. It was a second time presented to the said King; and at
length published by the Pastors of the French Churches, with a Preface to all
other Evangelical Pastors, in the Year 1566. It was also most solemnly signed
and ratified in the National Synod held the first time at Rochell, 1571. the
Year before the Bartholomean Massacre, by Jane Queen of Navarre, Henry Prince
of Berne, Henry de Bourbon Prince of Conde, Lowis Count of Nassaw, and Sir
Gaspard de Colligni Lord High Admiral of France. Monsieur Chamier writ that
Apologetical Preface which begins with these words Combien que nos sachions,
etc. for that other which is prefixed to it in the Bible-Confession, and begins
with these words, au Roy, and Sire, was done by the Reverend Mr. Calvin, who
first drew up the Confession it self

One thing I must advise the Reader of, that there is a very great difference
in the Number and Matter of these Articles, which came not only in at first by
the Printers, but by the various Copies which were transcribed with
Emendations, Additions and Alterations, from the respective National Synods.
The best Copy that I have met with, is that in the Harmony of Confessions,
translated into English and Printed by Thomas at Cambridge, in the Year 1586.
The Confession which is commonly added to the End of the Bible, and bound up
with it, and with the French Psalm-Books, consists of Forty distinct Articles.
Yet there is an Edition of it by Justus Livius a Printer of Leyden, and
dedicated to the States General of the Netherlands, which has Monsieur
Chamier's Preface, and is distinguished into Thirty five Articles, in the Year
1616. I have consulted and compared several Printed Editions of the Confession,
as that of Hawtyn of Rochell, in the Year 1616. (and he was Printer to the
National Synods) which exactly agreed with several others printed since, and
with the Latin Edition in the Corpus and Syntagma Confessionum, printed by
Chouet at Geneva in the Year 1654. And at Geneva was kept one of the three
Parchment Originals of this Confession, as the other two were reserved, one at
Paw in Berne, and the third in the Archives of the City of Rochell: and, unless
my Memory fail me, there is one of these Originals in the City of Leyden in
Holland, and in the Custody of the French Church there. But I will not be
peremptory.

Sect. 11. The next thing which was done by this first National Synod was a
Draught of their Church Discipline. The Canons of which at first were but a
few; yet they did in three and twenty Synods alter, add, amend, augment and
meliorate their first Platform, 'till they had brought it to that complete
Form and System of Articles, which was the established Order for the Conduct
and Government of all their Churches. I have heard very many of their most
grave, learned and judicious Divines magnify it as a Masterpiece. In truth
their pious Reformers saw a great necessity of reviving and restoring the
ancient Discipline; and therefore at the same time that sound Doctrine, and
pure Scripture-Worship was introduced into their Churches, they did also set up
Discipline; and that it might be effectually practiced, they did, in the Synod
of Orleans (the sixteenth Article of General Matters) ordain, That the Canons
of Church Discipline should be read in the Consistories of the Reformed
Churches in France. on those Days when as the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
was administered; and all Pastors, Elders and Deacons, all Moderators,
Assessors, Scribes and Deputies of their Synods National and Provincial, and
all Members of Colloquies, were expressly injoined, according to their solemn
Promises when they were first received into their respective Offices, to see
that it was diligently, faithfully and vigorously executed. And O! that the
Generation which succeeded the first Reformers had not lax'd the Reins, how
happy might they have been! In the Morning of the Reformation, they were fair
as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners. The
greatest Princes of France submitted their necks to this golden Yoke of Christ.
A National Synod was formidable to the most daring Sinner. Their Discipline
duly and prudently managed, preserved the Purity of Doctrine, Worship and
Morals among them. And now I shall present it to me Reader.

SECT. XII. The Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France.
CHAP. I. Of Ministers.
CANON I. THAT such Persons may be chosen into the Ministry as are meet for so
sacred an Employment, Chap. I. Of Ministers.
let the standing Canon of the Apostle be observed, That inquiry be made into
their Doctrine, whether they be apt to teach; and also into their Conversation,
with all possible Diligence. CANON II. Novices lately received into the Church,
especially Priests and Monks, shall not be admitted unto the Sacred Ministry,
without a long and diligent inquiry, and experience had both of their Life and
Doctrine, approved, at least, by the space of two Years since their Conversion,
and confirmed by good Testimonials from the places of their abode; nor shall
they be ordained, no more than unknown Persons, without the Advice of
Provincial and National Synods. CANON III. If any Bishop or Curate should
desire to be employed in the Ministry of the Gospel, he cannot be admitted till
he be first a true Member of the Church, and renounce all his Benefices, and
all other Dependencies on the Sea of Rome, and make acknowledgment of all his
Offenses formerly committed by him, according as he shall be advised by the
Consistory, and after long proof and experience had of his Repentance and
godly* Conversation. CAN. IV. A Minister of the Gospel (unless in times of
Difficulty, and Cases of very great necessity, in which he may be chosen by
three Pastors, together with the Consistory of the Place) shall not be admitted
into this Holy Office, but by the Provincial Synod, or by the Colloquy,
provided that it be at least composed of seven Pastors; which number being
found in a Colloquy, some of the Neighbor Ministers shall be called in to
concur with it, and the Minister elect shall be presented with good and valid
Testimonials, not only from the Universities, and particular Churches, but also
from the Colloquy of that Church, in which he had been most conversant. CAN. V.
The Minister presented shall be examined in this manner, First, by Propositions
from the Word of God, upon such Texts as shall be given him; the one
necessarily in French, the other in the Latin Tongue, if the Colloquy or Synod
shall judge it expedient. One whole day shall be granted him to prepare himself
for each of these Exercises. If by them he give satisfaction unto the Assembly,
there shall be tendered him a Chapter of the New Testament, by which his skill
in the Greek Language shall be known; and as to the Hebrew, they shall be
careful to see that at the least he can serve himself of good Books for the
understanding of the Scripture in that Original. Unto these there shall be
added an Essay of his skill in the most needful parts of Philosophy; let the
whole Examen be managed with singular Charity, and without Affectation of any
thorny or unprofitable Questions. Finally, he shall compose a brief Confession
of his Faith in Latin, on which he shall be opposed by way of Disputation. And
if, after this Examination, he be found capable, then the Assembly
remonstrating to him the Duty of that Office whereunto he is called, shall
further declare that Power which is given him in the Name of Jesus Christ, See
Obs. 1. upon the Discipline in the Synod of Tonneins.
to minister both in the Word and Sacraments; and he shall be fully and
solemnly ordained in that Church unto which he is sent; and the said Church
shall be informed of his Election by the Act or Letters of that Synod or
Colloquy, which shall be delivered and read unto them by a Pastor or Elder.
CAN. VI. He whose Election shall be declared unto the Church, shall Preach
publicity the Word of God on three several Sabbaths (but without power of
administering the Holy Sacraments, or of solemnizing Marriages) in the audience
of the whole Congregation, that so they may know his manner of Teaching, and
the said Auditory shall be expressly charged. That if any one of them do know
any impediment, for which his Ordination, who shall be then mentioned by his
Name, may not be completed, or why he may not be accepted, that they do then
come and give notice of it unto the Consistory, which shall patiently hear the
Reasons of both Parties, that so they may proceed to Judgment. The Peoples
silence shall be taken for a full consent. But in case contention should arise,
and the aforementioned Elect be pleasing to the Consistory, but not unto the
People, or to the major part of them, his reception shall be deferred, and the
whole shall be remitted unto the Colloquy or Provincial Synod, which shall take
cognizance both of the justification of the before-named elect Minister, and of
his reception. And although the said Elect should be then and there justified,
yet shall he not be given as Pastor unto that People against their will, nor to
the coffeehouse of the greatest part of them; nor shall the Pastor be
imposed against his will upon that Church; and the difference shall be
terminated by order as above, at the Costs and Charges of the Church that shall
have demanded him. CAN. VII. Who so consents to be chosen unto the Sacred
Ministry, ought to accept of the Office, with which he shall be invested; and
in case of his refusal, he shall be solicited thereunto by fitting
Exhortations, but he shall in no wise be constrained. CAN. VIII. The Election
of Ministers shall be confirmed by Prayers and Imposition of Hands; always
avoiding all Superstition, and according to this ensuing form: The Form of
Ordination usually observed in the Churches of France at the Reception of their
Ministers.

All things beforementioned having been observed, two Pastors deputed by the
Synod or Colloquy to lay their Hands upon the Minister elect, being come into
that Church, one of them, who preaches the Sermon, shall discourse briefly of
the Institution and Excellency of the Ministry, alleging Testimonies pertinent
to this occasion from holy Writ; such as Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Luke 10.16. John
20.21, 22. 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 3.8. or others of the
like nature, admonishing every one to see to it, that both Minister and People
do perform their respective Duties. The Minister to acquit himself of his
Charge the more carefully, because he knows it to be precious and excellent
in the sight of God; and the People with all humility and reverence to receive
the Word of God, which shall be declared by him, who is now sent unto them.
Then shall be read in the hearing of the whole Congregation what is written in
1 Timothy 3. and 1 Tit. where the Apostle teaches what kind of Man a Minister
should be. And that it may please God to vouchsafe Grace unto this elect person
to acquit himself worthily and faithfully of his holy Calling, a short Prayer
shall be conceived to this purpose, in which the said Pastor shall insert these
or the like words: O Lord God, we beseech thee to endow with the Gifts and
Graces of thy holy Spirit this thy Servant lawfully chosen according to that
Order established in thy Church, and abundantly to enrich him with all
Abilities needful for his acceptable performance of the Duties of his Office,
to the Glory of thy holy Name, the Edification of thy Church, and his own
Salvation, whom we now dedicate and consecrate unto thee by this our Ministry.
And then the Minister that prays, standing upright below the Pulpit, shall
lay his Hands upon his Head, for whom Prayer is now made, he being humbly on
his knees. And the new Pastor arising, the two Deputies sent from the Colloquy
or Synod shall give him before the People the right hand of fellowship. And
this Form and the abovementioned Canon shall be unanimously observed in all
the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom.

CAN. IX. Our Confession of Faith and Church Discipline shall be subscribed by
such as are chosen in the Ministry, both into the Churches in which they shall
be ordained, and in those unto which they shall be sent. CAN. X. No Ministers
shall be ordained without appointing them unto a particular Flock; and they
shall be the peculiar Pastors of those Churches unto which they be assigned.
And no Church shall pretend right unto any Minister, by virtue of a particular
promise made by him, without the authority of the Colloquy or Provincial Synod.
CAN. XI. Such as shall be chosen unto the Ministry of the Gospel must know,
that they be in that Office for term of life, unless they be lawfully
discharged upon good and certain considerations, and that by the Provincial
Synod. CAN. XII. The principal Duty of Ministers is to Preach the Gospel, and
to declare the Will of God unto their People, and they shall be exhorted to
forbear all strange ways of teaching, which have no tendency to edification;
and they shall conform themselves to the simplicity and common style of God's
Spirit, taking heed that there be nothing in their Sermons prejudicial to the
Authority of holy Scripture; and they shall never Preach without having for
foundation of their discourse a Text of holy Scripture, which they shall
ordinarily follow, and they shall handle and expound as much of that Text as
they can, forbearing all needless Enlargements, all tedious and unseasonable
Digressions, all superfluous heapings up of Scripture-Quotations, and vain
recitals of various and different Expositions. They shall very rarely allege
the Writings of the Fathers, nor at any time profane Histories and Authors;
that so they may reserve unto the Scripture entirely its own Authority.
Moreover, they shall not handle any Doctrine in a scholastic way of
Disputation, nor with a mixture of Languages. In one word, they shall avoid
whatsoever may serve for ostentation, or in any wise occasion doubts or
scruples. And that this Canon may be more carefully observed and practiced,
Consistories, Colloquies, and Synods shall put to their helping hand. CAN.
XIII. Churches are admonished to use more frequently the Ordinance of
Catechizing, and Ministers are to treat and expound it by short, plain, and
familiar Questions and Answers, accommodating themselves unto the capacity of
the meanest People, without expatiating themselves into common places. Yea, all
Ministers shall endeavor to catechize every one in their Flocks once or twice
a Year, and shall exhort them to conform themselves thereunto very carefully.
CAN. XIV. Ministers and their Families shall actually reside on their Churches,
on pain of being deposed from their Sacred Ministerial Office. CAN. XV. Those
Persons to whom God has given Talents and Abilities for Writing, are advised
to use them in a modest manner, suitable to the Majesty of God's Word; and
therefore consequently they shall not write after a ridiculous or injurious
rate, and in their ordinary Sermons they shall express this self-same modesty
and gravity. And they who are endowed with gifts for writing, shall he chosen
by the Provinces; and if it happen that any Books be published against the true
Religion, they shall be sent unto them, that they may be answered. And there
shall be a Colloquy in each Province appointed unto this peculiar business
carefully to peruse all Manuscripts before they be Printed, and what is
published, and to disperse the Copies. CAN. XVI. No Minister shall claim or
exercise any Primacy or Jurisdiction over another. CAN. XVII. Ministers shall
preside by turns in their Consistories, that so none may claim a Superiority
over his Fellow, and none of them shall give any Testimony in matters of
importance, without having first Communicated unto his Brethren and Colleagues
in the Ministry. CAN. XVIII. That Custom used in some places of deputing
certain Ministers from the Provincial Synods to visit the Churches, shall be
for time to come totally suppressed and abolished. That order which has been
used until now being sufficient enough for taking cognizance of Scandals. And
this manner of erecting new Offices and Employments is condemned because of its
dangerous consequence, as also all names of superiority are rejected, such as
Elders of Synods, Super-intendents, and the like. And all Advertisements for
assembling Colloquies, or Synods, or concerning any businesses which depend
upon them, shall be directed unto the Church, and not to any particular
Minister in it. And if accidentally they have been so superscribed, and for
some certain Considerations addressed unto any one of the Ministers or Elders,
they who have received them shall present them unto the Consistory, that so
advice and deliberation may be taken of them. CAN. XIX. No Minister, together
with the holy Ministry, shall be a Practitioner in Law or Physic; yet out of
Charity he may give Counsel and assistance to the poor of his Flock, and of his
Neighborhood: provided always that he be not thereby diverted from his
Calling, nor derive any gain from his practice, unless in times of trouble and
persecution, and when he cannot exercise his Calling in his Church, and cannot
be maintained by it. And those who shall thus employ themselves in Law or
Physic, or in any other Worldly distracting business, shall be exhorted wholly
to forbear it, and totally to devote themselves unto the duties of their
Calling as Ministers, and to the study of the Scriptures. And all Colloquies
and Synods are admonished to proceed according to the Canons of our Discipline
against the refractory, and such as be wilfully disobedient, as also against
those who spend so much of their time in teaching youth, that it is an
hinderance to them in the principal duties of their Ministerial Office. And all
Consistories, Colloquies, and Provincial Synods, shall have a most especial
care and regard that this Canon be punctually observed, and to suspend such as
do transgress it from their exercise of the Ministry. CAN. XX. Ministers shall
exhort their People to be modest in their Apparel, they themselves also giving
in this particular a good example unto the World, by their own, their Wives,
and their Children's forbearing all bravery in their Habits. CAN. XXI. Princes,
and great Lords following the Court, that would have a Church erected in their
Houses, shall be desired to choose their Ministers out of those Churches which
be duly reformed, and can spare them a Pastor, and of whose lawful Call unto
the sacred Ministry they may be well assured, and this with the good will and
consent of the Colloquies or Synods. These shall in the first place subscribe
the Confession of Faith of the Churches in this Kingdom, and our Ecclesiastical
Discipline. And that the Preaching of the Gospel may be the more successful,
they shall be every one of them desired to constitute in their Families a
Consistory, composed of the Minister, and of the best approved persons for
Godliness in their said Family, who shall be chosen Elders and Deacons: by
which Consistory all Vices and Scandals in that Family shall be suppressed, and
the common Discipline of our Churches shall be maintained. Moreover if it be
possible for them, they shall personally appear at Provincial Synods. To which
purpose Powers shall be given unto the Church, that convocates the Synod of
that Province, to call them to it. And the said Ministers by name, or some one
or other of them, according as they shall be deputed by the rest, shall make
their personal Appearance at the National Synods, in company with their Elders,
who may inform the Synod of their Lives and Conversations; And if several of
them meet together, none shall claim any preheminency or jurisdiction over his
Brethren, according to that Canon of our Discipline made on this behalf. And
when as the said Princes and Lords shall sojourn in their Houses, or other
places in which a Church is already constituted, that all divisions may be
avoided, they shall be desired to conjoin the Church of their Families,
together with the Church of that place, to make but one Church, as shall be
advised in an amicable Conference with the Ministers of both Churches, that so
what may be most expedient may be followed. CAN. XXII. It shall not be lawful
for the Pastor to desert his Flock without leave first had and obtained from
the Colloquy, and Provincial Synod of that Church to which he was first given.
CAN. XXIII. Deserters of the Sacred Ministry shall be finally Excommunicated by
the Provincial Synod, unless they do repent, and return again unto their Charge
which God had committed to them. CAN. XXIV. Ministers shall not be Vagrants,
nor have liberty to intrude themselves of their own Authority into any place
which best pleases them. CAN. XXV. The Minister of one Church shall not preach
in another without the consent of its Minister, unless he were absent: in which
case the Consistory shall authorize him; and if through persecution, or any
troubles, the Flock should be dissipated, the strange Minister shall endeavor
to assemble the Elders and Deacons: which if it cannot be done, yet
nevertheless he may warrantably preach, that so the dispersed Flock may be
reunited. CAN. XXVI. That Minister who intrudeth himself into a Church,
although he get the People's Approbation, yet shall he not be approved of by
the Neighbor Ministers, or any others; but the cognizance of his Case shall be
devolved upon the Colloquy, or Provincial Synod. CAN. XXVII. Ministers shall
not be sent unto other Churches without authentic Letters, or some other
sufficient Testimonials from those places from whence they last came, which
shall be put into the Consistories hands of that Church whereunto they be sent,
and there carefully to be preserved. CAN. XXVIII. No Minister, who reports
himself forsaken of his Church of persecuted, shall thereupon be received by
another Church, until he have first produced valid Certificates of his holy and
unblameable Conversation unto the Colloquy or Synod, and the whole Affair shall
be remitted to the prudence and discretion of the Colloquy or Provincial Synod.
CAN. XXIX. When as a Minister, who has orderly obtained his License of
departure from that Church in which he last served, shall be destitute of
employment, the Colloquy or Provincial Synod are of duty bound to provide him
of another Church within one Month. And if within that term the Colloquy or
Synod have not provided for him, he shall be then at liberty to get himself a
Church out of that Province in any place where God shall open a door unto him
according to the Canons of our Discipline. CAN. XXX. Authority is granted unto
Provincial Synods for diverse considerations to remove Ministers from their
Churches, their Churches having been first heard, and their Reasons well and
sufficiently weighed. But in case of discord, the whole shall be determined by
a National Synod; and till the sitting of which nothing shall be innovated.
CAN. XXXI. When as a Minister is persecuted, or for some other reason cannot
exercise his Ministry in that Church unto which he was appointed, he may by the
said Church be sent elsewhere, or they may exchange him with another for a
certain time, by the good will and consent of both the Churches. But and if the
Minister shall not submit unto the judgment of those two Churches, he shall
give the Reasons of his refusal unto the Consistory, and in it their equity
shall be debated and determined: and in case they be not esteemed valid, and
the Minister shall notwithstanding persist in his resolution of not accepting
the said Employment, the difference shall be referred unto the next Provincial
Synod, or else unto the Colloquy, if both those Churches do belong unto the
same Colloquy. CAN. XXXII. Ministers may with their own consent be lent by the
Consistory, according as the Edification of the Church shall require: but the
loan shall not be done without the advice of two or three Ministers, or of the
same Colloquy, if it be for any longer term than six Months. CAN. XXXIII.
Ministers, that have been lent, when as the time of their loan is expired,
shall be restored again unto their Churches, from which they had departed. CAN.
XXXIV. If a Church do not redemand its Pastor within one Year after the time
for which he was lent is expired, he shall then appertain unto that Church unto
which he was lent, provided always, that the said Pastor do yield his consent
unto it; but and if he do not give his consent, he shall dispose of himself
according to the advice of the Colloquy or Synod of that Church to which he had
been lent. And this Canon shall be of force with reference to those Ministers,
who because of persecution have betook themselves unto the service of other
Churches, and the persecution ceasing they be not redemanded by their former
Churches within one Year, which shall begin from that time in which those
Ministers gave notice of it unto those aforesaid Churches. CAN. XXXV. A
Minister destitute of a Church and unimployed in his Province, and lent by the
Colloquy to a Church out of the bounds of the Province till the next Session of
his Provincial Synod, if he be not employed by that Synod within their
Province, he shall remain appropriate unto that Church to which he was lent,
provided that he and the Church do mutually consent thereunto. CAN. XXXVI. That
Churches may perform their Duties to their Pastors, according to those
Obligations on them by the Word of God, and that Pastors may have no just
ground of offense given them, nor to abandon their said Flocks, they shall be
admonished to minister unto their Pastors all things necessary for their
comfortable subsistence. CAN. XXXVII. And to prevent their ingratitude, who by
experience are known to have dealt unworthily with their painful Ministers,
this order shall be observed; one quarter of the yearly Pension which was
promised them shall be paid in unto them by way of advance beforehand. CAN.
XXXVIII. And for the future, lest through any ill management of this matter,
the Churches should happen to be dissipated, those who are chosen Moderators in
Colloquies, shall enquire of the Elders in every Church about the Maintenance
afforded by them unto their Ministers, and of their Care in supplying their
Wants, according to the Canon before ordained; that so by the Authority of
Colloquies provision may be made for them. CAN. XXXIX. When as necessary
Maintenance shall have been detained from a Pastor, and three Months be lapsed
since his Complaints and Remonstrances, it shall be then lawful for the said
Pastor to join himself unto any other Church by consent of his Colloquy or
Provincial Synod: And the Colloquy or Synod may shorten the term of three
Months if there be urgent necessity for it; yea, if that the necessity be
pressing, and three Months are expired, and the Pastor is not supplied, though
he had entered in his Petition to be discharged, it shall suffice if he call
into his Consistory two neighbor Ministers, and he shall not be bound to wait
for the sitting of the Colloquy or Synod to obtain their advice and consent,
unless that one of the said Assemblies were convocated and to meet in that very
self-same Month in which he was to have departed. CAN. XL. In that trial and
judgment which shall be passed upon a Peoples ingratitude at the complaint of a
Minister, all circumstances shall be prudently considered, and special regard
shall be had unto the poverty of the Church, and of the Plaintiff's estate,
that so they may use those means which will be most likely to promote the Glory
of God, the Edification of his Church, and the Honor of the Ministry. CAN.
XLI. A Church being found ungrateful shall not be provided of a Pastor till
such time as they have given entire satisfaction according to their ability
unto him of whom they be deprived. And this Pastor shall in the mean while
remember always to keep himself disingaged from the Church of any other
Province but his own, unless by a Decree of the said Province it may have been
otherwise determined. N.B. The last Clause of this Canon is not in four Copies
of different Editions, as that of the Year 1653. that of Geneva, 1666. that of
Quevilly, 1678. and an English Translation of the Discipline, printed for Bourn
in the Year 1642. But yet I find it in the Paris Edition by Vandome in the Year
1663. and in another Impression of it at Quevilly, I think in the same Year
1663 for I have not the Original now by me, (which I returned twenty Years ago
to my Friend) but the Translation I made of it.

CAN. XLII. Ministers, though they have Estates and Lands of their own, may yet
nevertheless take Wages from their Flocks, yea and it is expedient that they
should so do, in regard of its consequence, lest other Ministers and Churches
be prejudiced by this their example. Yet shall they be advised so to manage
this liberty as the Churches necessity, and their quality shall require it.
CAN. XLIII. No Pastor, under the title of a Pastor, shall be permitted to
possess an Inheritance: but in case his Stipend or any part thereof were
assigned upon some particular Tenement, Rent, or Revenue, the whole shall be
administered by the Deacons, or other persons commissionated and ordained
thereunto by the Churches; through whose hands the Minister shall receive his
Pension, that so all suspicion of covetousness may be removed, and lest by such
worldly cares he should be diverted from the weightier Duties of his Calling.
CAN. XLIV. That Church, in whose Service a Minister dies, shall take care of
his Widow and Orphans, and if the Church cannot do it through want of ability,
the Province shall maintain them. CAN. XLV. Ministers shall be subject unto
Censures. CAN. XLVI. The Duty of Ministers is to govern both themselves and
their Flocks, and all their Members small and great, of whatsoever quality and
degree, according to the Word of God and the Church Discipline. But it
belongs properly unto the Magistrate to oversee all Orders and Degrees of
Men, yea and Ministers also, and to take heed that they walk uprightly in their
calling: wherefore if they offend, the Magistrate shall admonish them of their
Duty (and that power is ascribed to him by our Church Discipline) in
Consistories, Colloquies, and Synods, unless their Offenses be punishable by
Law, the knowledge of which appertains unto the Civil Magistrate. CAN. XLVII.
If Ministers should teach evil Doctrine, and after sufficient admonition given
them do not desist, they shall be deposed. Item, Such as reject those holy
Counsels made them out of God's Word, by their Consistories. Item, Such also as
are of Scandalous Lives, and those who shall be convicted of Heresy, Schism,
Rebellion against the Discipline of the Church, and open Blasphemies, deserving
punishment by the Civil Magistrate, Simony, all Bribery by gifts, briguings,
and underhand dealings to get into another Man's place, desertion of their
Flocks without lawful leave, and just occasion, falsehood, perjury, whoredom,
theft, drunkenness, battery, meriting punishment by the Laws, Usuries,
scandalous Plays, and others forbidden by the Laws, Dances and such like
dissolutions, Crimes branded with Infamy, and which in any other Person would
merit Exclusion from the Church, and all persons incapable of discharging the
duties of their Calling. CAN. XLVIII. These shall not be deposed, who by reason
of Sickness, old Age, or any other such infirmities, are rendered incapable of
discharging the Duties of their Ministry, in which case their honor shall be
conserved them, and they shall be recommended unto their Churches for
maintenance, and other Ministers shall be provided to perform the duties of
their Calling. CAN. XLIX. Scandalous Crimes punishable by the Civil Magistrate,
such as Murder, High Treason, and other Vices redounding to the great dishonor
and scandal of the Church, do deserve that the Minister, guilty of them, should
be deposed, although he had committed them not only before his Ordination, but
also before his Conversion. And this shall be the rather done, lest the
Continuance of such a Wretch in the Ministry should draw greater scandal upon,
than edifying unto the Church. Of which all Synods shall take Cognizance. CAN.
L. In Case a Minister be convicted of enormous and notorious Crimes, he shall
be deposed out of hand by the Consistory, they inviting unto that action their
Colloquy, or through default thereof two or three disinteressed Ministers. And
if the Delinquent Minister should complain of the Accusation and Calumny, the
business shall be reported unto the Provincial Synod. If he has Preached
Heretical Doctrine (contrary to the Scriptures) he shall be suspended by the
Consistory, Colloquy, or two or three Ministers, invited thereunto as before,
till the final decision of his Case by the Provincial Synod; and all Sentences
of Suspension, for what cause or account soever, shall stand good, and be of
force, notwithstanding his Appeal, until the definitive Judgment of the next
Synod. N.B. That Parenthesis in this Canon is not to be found in the four last
Editions of the Discipline, but yet it is in two others that I have both
Printed since the last National Synod.

CAN. LI. Unless necessity so require it, the Causes of a Ministers Deposal
shall not be published unto the People; of which those who were his Judges, and
decreed his Deposal, shall take cognizance. CAN. LII. The National Synods shall
be informed by the Provinces of all Deposed Ministers, that they may not be by
them admitted into the Ministry any more. CAN. LIII. Ministers. Deposed for
Crimes deserving Capital punishment, or bearing mark of Infamy, shall never be
restored unto their Office, whatever satisfactions may be given by them. But as
for slighter faults, upon Confession of them, they may be restored by the
Provincial Synod, but with this condition, to serve in another Province, and
not in their own. CAN. LIVE. Vagrants, that is to say, such as having no Call,
do thrust themselves into the Ministry, shall be restrained. And whatever
Ordinance shall be Decreed and Executed about the Interdiction of any Persons
from the Ministry, shall be of equal virtue, with the Acts of the National
Synod, and as if it had been done by it. CAN. LV. They who have been once
denounced Vagrants, Apostates, Heretics, and Schismatics, shall be denounced
such in all the Churches, that so they may be aware of them. And a List of
these Wretches names shall be brought from the several Provincial Synods to be
hung up in the National. CAN. LVI. Such as by the judgment of a National Synod
have been once enrolled among the Vagrants, shall never be razed out of that
black Catalogue but by the authority of another. CAN. LVII. Such as intrude
into the Ministry in those places and Provinces where the pure worship of God
is already established, shall be severely admonished to desist; and in case of
their obstinate persisting in this their intrusion, they shall be declared
Schismatics, and their Followers also, if after the like admonitions given,
they do not leave them.
CHAP. II. Of Schools.
CANON I. THE Churches shall do their utmost endeavor to erect Schools, and to
take care of the instruction of their Youth. CAN. II. Regents and Masters of
Schools shall subscribe the Confession of Faith and Church Discipline, and the
Towns and Churches shall nor admit any one into this Office without the consent
of the Consistory of that place. CAN. III. Doctors and Professors in Divinity
shall be chosen by the Synod of that Province in which our Universities do lie,
and they shall be Examined, not only in Lectures made by them upon the
authentic Edition of the Greek and Hebrew Texts of the Old and New Testament,
which shall be given them, but also by a disputation of one or more days, as
upon advice taken shall be judged best; and being found. Persons of sufficient
abilities, if they are not Pastors, the right hand of Fellowship shall be given
them, they having first promised, that they will with all faithfulness and
diligence discharge their duty, and handle the holy Scriptures with all purity,
according to the Analogy of Faith, and the Confession of our Churches, Chap.
II. Of Schooh.
which together with our Church Discipline shall be subscribed by them. CAN.
IV. That our Churches may be always furnished with a sufficient number of
Pastors, and of other Persons fit to govern them, and to preach the Word of God
unto them, they shall be advised to choose those Scholars who be already well
advanced in good Learning, and be of the most promising hopeful Parts, and to
maintain such in the Universities, that they may be there prepared and fitted
for the Work of the Ministry, ever preferring the Children of poor Ministers,
if ingenious, before all others; of which the Colloquies shall take a most
especial care. Kings, Princes, and Lords shall be exhorted and petitioned
particularly to mind this important Affair, and to lay by some part and portion
of their Revenues toward their maintenance, and the richer Churches shall do
the like. Colloquies and Provincial Synods shall as they see meet notify and
solicit this Affair, and take the best courses that matters of so great
necessity may be successful; and if single Churches cannot do it, their
Neighbors shall join with them, that one poor Scholar at the least may be
maintained in every Colloquy; and rather than this design should miscarry, the
fifth Penny of all our Charities shall be set apart, if it may conveniently be
done to be employed in this service. CAN. V. A Proposition out of the Word of
God shall be made by the Scholars of every Church, as time and place may
conveniently bear it; at which Exercises Pastors shall be present to preside
and order the said Proposans. N. B. There were general Statutes made for the
Universities of the Reformed Churches of France, in the National Synod of Alez.
By whom they were drawn up, is now out of my mind: but those for the University
of Montauban were composed by Monsieur Beraud the Father, who was the first
Divinity-Professor in it. Those for the University of Die in Dolphiny were
composed by the great Chamier; which I have lying by me, written with his own
hand, and which I shall publish, if the Lord lend me life, in his Icon.


CHAP. III. Of Elders and Deacons.
CANON I. IN those places where the Order of our Discipline is not yet set up,
Elders and Deacons shall be chosen by the joint Suffrages of Pastors and
People; but where it has been already established, the power of choosing them,
and that with pertinent Prayers unto the occasion, shall reside in the
Consistory together with the Pastors, and they shall be nominated with an
audible Voice in the said Consistory, that they may know in what businesses
they are to be employed. If they consent, they shall on two Lord's days
following be declared to the People, that so their consent also may be
obtained; and if on the third Sabbath there be no opposition made, they shall
be then publicly received with solemn Prayers, standing upright before the
Pulpit, and be thus ordained unto their Offices, they subscribing our
Confession of Faith and Church Discipline; but if there fall out any
opposition, it shall be determined in the Consistory, and in case it cannot be
there composed, Chap III. Of Elders and Deacons.
it shall be wholly remitted to the Colloquy, or Provincial Synod. CAN. II.
Henceforward, if it may be possibly avoided, none shall be chosen Elders or
Deacons of the Church, whose Wives are not of the true Religion, according to
the Apostles Canon. Yet notwithstanding, that the Church may not be deprived of
the Labors of several worthy persons, who in the days of their ignorance
espoused Women of a contrary Religion, they shall be tolerated, because of the
present necessity: provided that they do produce good evidence of their serious
endeavors for instructing of their Wives in that Faith and true Worship of God
practiced in our Churches. CAN. III. The Elder's Office is together with the
Pastors, to oversee the Church, to gather and keep up the solemn Assemblies,
and to take care that the Members in communion do personally appear at those
holy Congregations, to make report of Scandals and Offenses in Consistory, and
with the Pastors to take cognizance, and pass censures on them. In general, it
is to have the same care with them in all concerns about the Order,
Maintenance, and Government of the Church. Moreover, in every Church there
shall be reserved in Writing a Breviate of the particulars belonging unto their
Office, according as the circumstances of time and place may call for it. CAN.
IV. The Deacon's Office is to collect and distribute, by the advice of the
Consistory, Moneys unto the Poor, Sick, and Prisoners, and to visit, and take
care of them. CAN. V. It does not belong unto the Deacon's Office to Preach the
Word of God, nor to Administer the Sacraments; yet because of our present
distress, the Consistory may choose certain Elders and Deacons to catechize the
respective Families of the Church, as also in the Pastor's absence, Elders are
permitted on Weekdays, if chosen thereunto by the Consistory, to Pray
publicly with the Church, and therein they shall use the ordinary form, and in
reading of the Scriptures, none other but the Canonical Books of the Old and
New Testament shall be read. And whereas in diverse Provinces it has been a
custom for Deacons to catechize in public, the Inconveniences which have
already, and may hereafter happen from it, being well considered, the Churches
are exhorted, where this custom is not introduced, not at all to admit it, and
those in which it has took place to forsake it, and to endeavor, that the
said Deacons, if of competent abilities, do enter as soon as may be into the
Ministry. CAN. VI. Elders and Deacons may be present at Propositions of the
Word of God, which are made by Ministers, besides their ordinary Sermons, or by
Scholars that are Proposans, and at those Censures which shall be past upon
them, and shall give their judgment of these Exercises: but the decisive
judgment in point of Doctrine is principally reserved unto Pastors, Ministers,
and Doctors of Divinity, who be duly called into that Office. CAN. VII. The
Office of Elders and Deacons, as it is now in use among us, is not perpetual;
yet because changes are not incommodious, they shall be exhorted to continue in
their Offices as long as they can, and they shall not lay them down without
having first obtained leave from their Churches. CAN. VIII. Neither Elders nor
Deacons shall claim any primacy or jurisdiction over one another, whether in
nomination unto the People, or in precedence, Chap IV. Of The Office of a
Deacon.
or in order of voting, or in any matters depending upon their Offices. CAN.
IX. Elders and Deacons shall be deposed for those very crimes and causes for
which the Ministers of God's Word are: and if being condemned by the
Consistory, they should make an Appeal, they shall yet notwithstanding continue
suspended from their Offices, until such times as the Colloquy or Provincial
Synod shall have decided their affair. CAN. X. Elders and Deacons being
deposed, shall not be restored in any other manner or form than is used in the
readmission of deposed Ministers.
CHAP. IV. Of the Deaconship, or Office of dispensing the Churches Charities
unto the Poor.
CANON I. MOneys belonging unto the Poor shall not be dispensed by any other
hands than those of the Deacons, by and with the advice and consent of the
Consistory. CAN. II. It is very requisite, that one or two Ministers be always
present at the ordinary distributions, but most especially at passing of
accounts. CAN. III. The People shall be informed of the days of Account, that
so they may have liberty all of them, if they please to see the making of them
up, as well for their discharge, who have the handling of those Moneys, as for
notifying unto all the Necessities of the Church and Poor, and also that
thereby they may be excited to more liberal Contributions. CAN. IV. To prevent
those Disorders which daily fall out by reason of Certificates given unto the
Poor, every Church shall endeavor to maintain its own: and in case any one be
constrained through the urgency of his affairs to travel, Ministers shall
examine with the greatest care in their Consistories the just causes of his
Journey, and thereupon shall give him Letters directed unto the next Church,
lying in the straight way by which he must go, specifying his Name, Age,
Stature, Hair, and the Place whither, and the Cause of his Travel, and the
Assistance which was given him; nor shall the Date of the Day and Year be
omitted; which Letters the Church he is directed to, shall keep by it, and give
him others unto the next; and all Certificates formerly given shall be torn in
pieces.
CHAP. V. Of the Consistory. Chap V. Of Consistories.

CANON I. IN every Church there shall be a Consistory made up of those who
govern it, to-wit of its Pastors and Elders, and in this Assembly as well as in
all other Church Assemblies, the Pastors are of right to be Presidents. CAN.
II. Whereas our Churches, by reason of the present distress, have hitherto most
happily employed Deacons in their Government, and that they have discharged at
the same time the Elder's Office; such as for the future shall be so elected or
continued, shall have together with the Pastors and Elders, the Government of
the Church, and therefore shall commonly appear with them at the Consistory,
and at Colloquies and Synods, provided they be sent by their Consistory. CAN.
III. In those places where the exercise of our Religion is not yet established,
the faithful shall be exhorted by the Colloquies to choose unto themselves
Elders and Deacons, and to embrace our Church Discipline. And in the said
Colloquies it shall be advised to what Church they may most conveniently join
themselves, and for the better maintenance of their Minister, from which they
shall not depart, without having first communicated it unto the said
Colloquies. CAN. IV. There shall be but one Consistory in a Church, nor shall
any other Council be allowed or established for Church Affairs as distinct from
the Consistory, and if there be any such it shall be immediately suppressed.
Nevertheless the Consistory may call at certain times unto it self such Members
of the Church as it shall think fit, when affairs so require it: But yet
Ecclesiastical business shall not be handled any where else but in those places
where the Consistories do usually meet and assemble. CAN. V. A Consistory is at
liberty to receive into it the Father and Son, or two Brothers, unless there
should arise an inconvenience by it; of which the Colloquy or Provincial Synod
shall take cognizance. CAN. VI. It is left unto the prudence of Consistories to
call their Proposans into it, although they have no office in the Church, but
not without very great causes and considerations, and upon good experience had
of their prudence. And the said Proposans shall be present, not to give their
Suffrages when as affairs are debated, but to prepare and fit them for the
Government of the Church against such time as God shall call them to it.
Moreover it is left to the discretion of Pastors to make trial of their
sufficiency by demanding their advice, which yet shall not be done but with
much prudence and judgment, and upon their promise of concealing all matters,
which they had heard discussed. CAN. VII. The Civil Magistrate may be called
unto the Office of an Elder in the Consistory, provided that his Exercise of
one Office do not hinder the discharge of the other, and that it be not in any
wise prejudicial to the Church. CAN. VIII. The Churches Government shall be
regulated according to the Discipline, made and decreed by our National Synods,
nor shall any Church or Province make any Ordinance, which shall not be for
substance conformable to the general Canons of our Discipline. To this end the
Canons of our Church Discipline shall be read in Consistory, at least before
the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, and all Elders and Deacons shall be
exhorted to keep a Copy of it by them for their private reading and meditation
at their leisure. CAN. IX. The Cognizance of Scandals, and power of passing
Sentence on them belongs unto the Assembly of Pastors and Elders, and there
shall be no Exceptions made against full Consistories, no nor against the
greater part of them. Nevertheless Exceptions made against the minor part of
the said Consistories, whether they be particular Pastors or Elders shall be
valid, and admitted by the Consistory, which being once judged, they shall
proceed farther notwithstanding an Appeal be interposed upon the admission or
rejection of those Exceptions aforesaid. CAN. X. That Custom used in diverse
places of inquiring into, and passing a general Censure upon offenses in
popular Assemblies before Men and Women, forasmuch as it is condemned by the
word of God, the Churches are exhorted to disuse it, and in point of Censure to
acquiesce in that order established by the Discipline. CAN. XI. Elders shall be
advised not to report the faults of any unto the Consistory, unless they have
good Evidence and proof of them, and when they do it, it shall be done with
singular Charity; and no Person shall be called into the Consistory without a
sufficient cause or occasion for so doing. CAN. XII. All possible care shall be
taken, that those formalities and terms which are used in Courts of Law, may be
avoided in the exercise of Church Discipline. CAN. XIII. The faithful may be
exhorted, yea and charged in the name of God by the Consistories to tell the
Truth, forasmuch as it does not in the least derogate from the authority of the
Civil Magistrate: nor shall they use any of those accustomed formalities in the
taking of Oaths before the Magistrate. CAN. XIV. When differences arise, the
contending Parties shall be exhorted by the Consistories to agree among
themselves in a friendly manner. Yet Consistories shall not appoint them any
Arbitrators, nor deport themselves as if they were Arbitrators. But and if any
Members of the said Consistories shall be chosen Arbitrators, it shall be as
they are private Persons, and only in their own names. CAN. XV. Besides those
Admonitions given by the Consistories, if there be a necessity of inflicting
greater punishment or censures upon Offenders, it shall be either Suspension or
Privation for a time from the Lords Table, or else Excommunication or cutting
off from the Church. And Consistories shall be advised to manage both the one
and other with singular Prudence, and to distinguish well betwixt them, as also
to weigh and examine very prudently those faults and scandals with their
circumstances, that are brought before them, that so Censures and Judgment may
be given according as is meet and requisite. CAN. XVI. Suspension from the
Lords Table shall be used for the greater humbling of Offenders, and for
quickening them to a most lively sense of their offenses. This Suspension shall
not be published unto the People, nor its Cause, nor also the readmission of
the Delinquent, unless they had been Heretics, Despisers of God, Rebels
against the Consistory, or Traitors to the Church. These also shall be
suspended who have been attainted of Crimes deserving Corporal punishment, and
causing grievous scandal to the Church; Item, those who contrary to the
Remonstrances made them were married by a Popish Priest, and Fathers and
Mothers that so marry their Children, and Tutors, Guardians, and others in the
stead of Parents, that do in the same manner marry their Orphan-Pupils, and
those also who shall carry them to a Popish Priest, by him to be baptized, or
represent another at such a Baptism. It being needful that such persons,
although they begin visibly to repent, should be immediately suspended, and for
a time deprived of the Lord's Supper, and that their suspension be declared
unto the people, that so they may be more deeply humbled, and induced unto
Repentance, as also that the Church may be discharged of all shame and blame,
and to terrify others, and learn them by this example not to be guilty of such
sinful miscarriages. CAN. XVII. If by such suspensions Sinners be not reformed,
but abide obstinate and impenitent, after long forbearance, and frequent
admonitions and earnest solicitations of them to it, they shall then be
proceeded against with public Admonitions, made before the Congregation by the
Pastor, on three Lord's days following, and for their greater shame, if it be
thought needful, they shall be mentioned by name, and the whole Church shall be
desired to entreat God for them, and to endeavor by all means to bring them
unto Repentance, and an acknowledgment of their sins, to prevent their being
cut off by Excommunication, unto which we cannot proceed without a World of
regret and grief. And if after all this there be no Conversion on the Sinners
part, but that they persist in their hardness and obstinacy, on the fourth
Sabbath, the Pastor shall publicly declare to the whole Congregation, that the
said scandalous and obdurate Sinners, nameing them particularly, are no longer
owned by us for Church Members, but in the name, and by the authority of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Church, are cut off from it. And this shall be
the Form of Excommunication. See the Acts of the second National Synod of Paris
in the year 1565. Canon the Second.
The Form of Excommunication to be used in the Reformed Churches of France,
decreed by the Synod of Alez, 1620. and incorporated with the Canons of Church
Discipline, by the National Synod of Charenton, Observation the 11. upon the
Synod of Alez.
Dear Brethren,
THis is the fourth time that we declare unto you, that N. N. for sundry Sins
and Scandals committed in the Church of God, and for his Impenitency, and
contempt of all Admonitions which have been given from the word of God, was
suspended the holy Supper of the Lord, which Suspension and its Causes have
been notified to you, that you might join your Prayers with ours, that the
Great God would be entreated to mollify his hard heart, and touch him with
sincere Repentance, and draw him out of the way of Perdition. But although we
have so long born with him, prayed, exhorted, and adjured him to return unto
God, and have essayed all means to bring him unto Repentance, yet nevertheless
he persisteth in his impenitency, and with a most hardened obstinacy rebelleth
against God, and trampleth under foot his Word, and the Discipline established
in his House; and boasting of his Sin, has caused a great deal of trouble for
a long time unto his Church, and the most holy name of our God to be
blasphemed. Wherefore we Ministers of the Word and Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whom God has armed with spiritual Weapons, mighty through God to throw
down the strong holds which do oppose themselves against him; to whom the
Eternal Son of God has given power of binding and loosing upon Earth,
declaring, that what we shall bind in Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and being
willing thoroughly to purge the House of God, and to free his Church of Scandal,
and by pronouncing Anathema against the wicked one, to glorify the name of our
God: In the Name, and by the Authority of our Lord Jesus, by the advice and
authority of the Pastors and Elders assembled in Colloquy, and of the
Consistory of this Church, we have cut off, and do cut off the said N. N. from
the Communion of the Church of God, We do Excommunicate and deprive him of the
Fellowship of Saints, that so he may be unto you as a Pagan or Publican, and
that among true Believers he may be an Anathema and Execration. Let his Company
be reputed Contagious! and let his Example possess your Souls with
astonishment, and cause you to tremble under the mighty hand of God! And this
Sentence the Son of God will ratify and make effectual, until such time as the
Sinner being confounded and abased before God, shall glorify him by his
Conversion, and being delivered from the Bonds of Satan, to whom he is
inslaved, he may mourn for his Sin with Repentance unto Life. Let Us pray God,
most dearly Beloved Brethren, that he would daign to compassionate this most
miserable Sinner, and that this dreadful Sentence which with very great regret,
and sorrow of heart we have pronounced against him by the authority of the Son
of God, may contribute unto his humiliation, and bring back into the way of
Life and Salvation a Soul which is wandered and strayed from it! Amen!

Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently. Amen! If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha! Amen
CAN. XVIII. Henceforward all Sentences of Excommunication, confirmed by the
Provincial Synod, shall be of full power and valid; as also all Sentences of
Suspension from the Lord's Supper made by the Consistory, which were not
declared unto the People, shall hold good, although the Person suspended had
entered his Appeal unto the Colloquy or Provincial Synod. CAN. XIX. Such as
have abandoned the profession of our holy Religion, and adhere unto Idolatry,
if they persevere in this their Apostasy, after serious endeavors used to
bring them back again unto the Church, they shall be publicly denounced
Apostates, to wit, those who have of late times revolted; unless the Consistory
do judge, that by such a nomination, some great and considerable danger may
redound unto the Church, in which case nothing shall be done without consulting
the Provincial Synod. And as for those, who have long since revolted, the
Execution of this denunciation is remitted to the prudence of the Colloquy.
CAN. XX. In public Sins, that is to say, such as are really committed, and
known to a great number of People, this Delinquent shall be restored by a
public acknowledgment of his offense, although he had been punished by the
Sentence of the Civil Magistrate. CAN. XXI. Forasmuch as Whoredom carries with
it a brand of Infamy, especially upon Women, the Confession and Penance for
such Scandals is wholly left unto the prudence of Consistories. CAN. XXII.
Public Penance shall be undergone in Person, and the Delinquent shall give an
open testimony of his Repentance. CAN. XXIII. The Delinquent who was suspended
the Lord's Table by the Consistory, although that suspension was concealed from
the People, shall demand his restoration from the Consistory, and he giving
evident tokens of his Repentance, he shall be restored without undergoing any
public Penance. CAN. XXIV. But he whose Suspension had been declared unto the
People, producing Evidences of his Repentance before the Consistory by the
fruits of good works, and sufficient Testimonies, shall be publicly reconciled
unto the Church, upon the acknowledgment of his offense. CAN. XXV. Those who
for their obstinacy and hardness in their sins shall have been out off from the
Church, may not suddenly be restored unto their state, and reconciled unto the
Church, but upon good and long trial had of their Repentance they shall be
heard in Consistory, and if they Petition to be received unto the Churches
Peace, they doing Penance for their offenses, there shall be notice given of it
unto the Congregation to stir them up to seek and praise God, and after some
time they shall be presented unto the whole Church to confess their former
Trespasses and Rebellions, and begging pardon of God and his Church, they shall
be in this manner reconciled with joy, public Prayers and Thanksgiving. CAN.
XXVI. If the Members of a Church have fallen into Idolatry, and thereupon
removed their Habitation unto another place, in which their offense is not
known, they shall only make acknowledgment of their Fall before the Consistory,
but with this Proviso, that if they return unto the said Church where they had
offended, they shall do public Penance for it. However it is left unto the
discretion of the Consistory to deal otherwise with them, if they judge it to
be more expedient for the Churches edifying. The same judgment shall be made of
all other sins deserving public Penance. CAN. XXVII. All Sins acknowledged and
repaired shall be razed out of the Consistorial Books, excepting those which
drawing Rebellion with them had been censured by Suspension from the Lord's
Table, or Excommunication out of the Church. CAN. XXVIII. Consistories shall
not give in evidence unto the Civil Magistrate, neither by instrument in
writing, nor any other way; nor shall particular Members of the Consistories
reveal unto any Person the Confessions of Penitents, who voluntarily, and of
their own accord, or by admonitions made them, shall have confessed their
offenses to them, unless it be in case of High Treason. CAN. XXIX. Such Persons
shall be prosecuted with all Church Censures, yea and Excommunicated, who
professing the Reformed Religion, do appeal the Pastors, Elders, or the whole
Consistory before the Civil Magistrate, by that means to enforce them to give
in Evidence against Delinquents, who confessed their faults unto them. CAN.
XXX. Crimes secretly declared unto Ministers by Persons demanding their advice
and comfort, Ministers are forbidden to discover them unto the Civil
Magistrate, lest reproach should thereby redound upon the Ministry, and Sinners
be hindered from coming unto Repentance, and making a free Confession of their
Sins. And this shall be a standing Rule for all Crimes revealed to them, unless
in Case of High Treason. CAN. XXXI. If one or more of the People stir up
Contention, and do thereby break the Churches Union in any point of Doctrine,
or of Discipline, or about the form of Catechizing, or Administration of the
Sacraments, or of public Prayers, or the Celebration of Marriage, and that
private admonitions have not been effectual remedies to appease them; the
Consistory of that place shall immediately endeavor to compose and pacify the
whole affair without noise, and with all sweetness from the word of God; and in
case the Dissenters do not acquiesce therein, the Consistory of that Church
shall entreat the Colloquy to assemble at such a time and place as will be most
convenient, they having first engaged the said Dissenters in express terms, and
upon record to promise, that they will not spread their Opinions in any manner
or way till the meeting of the said Colloquy, upon pain of being Censured as
Schismatics, excepting always freedom of Conference with Pastors and Elders,
in case they have not been instructed. And if the said Dissenters shall refuse
to give the said Promises, they shall be censured for Rebels according to our
Discipline. And the Colloquy being met shall proceed as was before appointed
them. And if the said Dissenters, having been patiently heard and confuted, be
fully satisfied, the whole shall be registered, unless the Provincial Synod be
requested to assemble, extraordinary necessity so requiring it, at such time
and place as the said Colloquy shall judge most convenient, after that the
Promises beforementioned shall have been again repeated by the said
Dissenters: The Synod being assembled shall first advise and consider with
great and mature deliberation of the matter, places, time and persons, whether
it will be expedient that a Conference should be held with the said Dissenters
publicly before the People, and with open Doors, and that Audience be given
unto any there present to speak or not: However the Decision of the Points in
Controversy shall not be left unto any other Judges besides the Delegates of
the Provinces, according to the known Canon of our Discipline. And if the said
Dissenters refuse to conform, they shall then engage in the same Promises as
before, and be dismissed over to the ordinary National Synod; or if necessity
so require, that it must be extraordinarily assembled, they shall be heard in
it with all holy freedom, Chap. VI. Of the Union of Churches.
and there it shall be finally and entirely determined by the word of God; unto
which if they refuse to yield full obedience, and in express terms to disclaim
their recorded Errors, they shall be cut off by Excommunication from the Body
of our Church. CAN. XXXII. A Pastor or Elder breaking the Churches Union, or
stirring up Contention about any point of Doctrine, or of the Discipline, which
he had subscribed, or about the Form of Catechizing, or Administration of the
Sacraments, or of our Common Prayers, and Celebration of Marriage, and not
conforming to the determination of the Colloquy, he shall be then suspended
from his Office, and be farther prosecuted by the Provincial, or National
Synod. CAN. XXXIII. In every Church there shall be kept Memorials of all
notable and remarkable passages relating to Religion, and in every Colloquy a
Minister shall be appointed to receive them, who shall carry them unto the
Provincial, and thence unto the National Synod.
CHAP. VI Of the Union of Churches.
CANON I. NO Church shall claim any Primacy or Jurisdiction over another, nor
one Province over another. CAN. II. No Church shall assume unto it self a power
of undertaking business of great consequence, in which the interest or damage
of other Churches shall be comprised, without the advice and consent of the
Provincial Synod, if it may possibly be Convened. And in case the affair be
urgent, it shall at least be Communicated by Letters unto some other Churches
in the Province, and they shall receive and take their advice about it. CAN.
III. Churches and particular Members shall be advised, that, whatever
persecution may happen, to procure for themselves a private peace and liberty,
they do not depart from the Sacred Union of the whole Body of our Churches. And
whoever acts contrary to this Canon, shall have such a Censure inflicted on
him, as Colloquies and Synods shall judge expedient. CAN. IV. Disputes about
Religion shall be so managed, that none of ours may be the Aggressors; and if
they are engaged in a verbal disputation, they shall in no wise undertake it
without laying down this for a Foundation-Rule, That the Holy Scripture is the
sole Judge of Controversies, nor shall they yield the power of judgment and
decision in points of Doctrine unto the writings of the Ancients; nor shall
they enter upon any Disputation, unless the conditions of it be first agreed on
by Writings mutually and respectively signed and executed: Nor shall they
attempt a public Disputation but with the advice of their Consistory, and of a
select number of Pastors, who for this purpose shall be chosen by the
Colloquies or Provincial Synods. They shall not adventure upon any dispute or
general Conference, Chap. VII. Of Colloquies.
without the advice of all the Churches assembled in a National Synod, upon
pain, if Ministers act otherwise, of being declared Apostates, and Deserters of
the Churches Union. CAN. V. Churches shall be informed that our Ecclesiastical
Assemblies of Colloquies and Synods, whether Provincial or National, are the
Bands and Buttresses of their Concord and Union against Schisms, Heresies, and
all other inconveniences; that so they may discharge their duty in the use of
means for the continuance and upholding of those Ecclesiastical Assemblies. And
in case any Churches, or particular Person, should refuse to contribute unto
their expenses who were obliged to be present in those Assemblies, they shall
be grievously censured, as Deserters of that Holy Union, which ought to be kept
up among us for our mutual preservation. And all Ministers who shall neglect
the observation of this Canon, shall be most severely censured by National and
Provincial Synods. N.B. That the Editions of the Discipline at Paris and Ronan,
in the Year 1663. have in the last line of this Canon [National] inserted; but
two other Editions of the Years 1666. at Geneva, and 1676. at Quevilly, do omit
it, and have only [Provincial Synods.]


CHAP. VII. Of Colloquies.
CANON I. IN every Province the Churches shall be divided according to their
number and convenience of neighbor places into Colloquies or Classes. And this
Division shall be made by authority of the Provincial Synod. And the next
adjoining Churches shall meet in Colloquies twice or four times a year, if it
may be done, as of ancient times it has been ordained. The appointment of time
is left wholly to the prudence of Provinces, and unto these Colloquies the
Ministers accompanied each of them with an Elder from every Church, shall give
their personal attendance. CAN. II. And the proper business of such Colloquies
and Assemblies, shall be to consult about composing differences and
difficulties emerging in their Churches, according to the Canons of our
Discipline; and in general to provide for whatsoever may be thought expedient
and necessary to the weal and maintenance of our Churches. CAN. III. And in
these Colloquies Ministers in their turns shall make a Proposition from the
Word of God, that so their care and diligence in the study of the Scripture,
and their method and form of handling it, may be known. CAN. IV. As
Consistories are subject and subordinate unto Colloquies, so are Colloquies
unto the authority of Provincial Synods. CAN. V. Chap. VIII. Of Provincial
Synods.
Colloquies and Synods shall consult about the extent and bounds of those places
in which each Minister shall exercise his Ministry. CAN. VI. In the close of
Colloquies there shall pass a friendly and fraternal Censure upon Pastors and
Elders there present, in all matters of which it may be thought fit to admonish
them.
CHAP. VIII. Of Provincial Synods.
CANON I. IN all Provinces the Pastors and Elders of every Church shall meet
together once or twice a year, if it can be done; which is left unto the
prudence and discretion of the Synod. CAN. II. Ministers shall bring with them
one or two Elders at the most, chosen out of their Consistory: And the said
Ministers shall bring with them their Commissions. But if a Pastor come alone
without an Elder, or an Elder without a Pastor, there shall be no regard had of
their Memoirs. And this Canon shall be observed in all Ecclesiastical
Assemblies. If they cannot appear, they shall excuse themselves by Letters (on
which the Brethren then and there present shall pass judgment,) and send their
Memoirs subscribed by one Pastor and Elder. Such as having no lawful excuse
shall yet forbear their appearance at Colloquies and Provincial Synods, shall
be censured, and the said Colloquies and Provincial Synods may judge
definitively of their fact, and dispose of their persons. CAN. III. Churches
which have many Pastors shall depute them by turns unto Colloquies and Synods.
CAN. IV. Ministers and Elders, which are deputed unto Colloquies and Provincial
Synods, shall have their expenses defrayed out of the common stock of their
Churches. CAN. V. Those Churches which refuse means unto their Ministers for
their appearance at Colloquies and Synods, shall be admonished of this their
duty, that they exhibit to them; and in case of failure in it, so that
Ministers are enforced to come unto them upon their own charges, after two or
three admonitions, they shall be deprived of their Ministry, and the charges of
those Ministers shall be defrayed by those Churches unto which they are sent,
and in which they now serve; saving always their power of prosecuting that
ungrateful Church; which prosecution shall be managed according to the judgment
and direction of the Provincial Synod. CAN. VI. If a difference fall out
betwixt a Church, and its Pastor, and in order to its composing the said Church
has been twice advised of the day when, and place where the Synod and Colloquy
do meet, and refuses to appear, notwithstanding the absence of one Party, yet
the Synod or Colloquy shall have power to proceed to judgment. CAN. VII. In all
Synods Provincial and National, one of the Pastors by common consent, and a low
voice, shall be chosen President, and one or two Scribes. His Office shall be
to guide and moderate the whole action, to give notice of the places, days and
hours at which the Assemblies shall meet, to begin the Synodical Sessions, to
propose and offer matters that are to be deliberated, to gather the particular
Suffrages of all the Members, to declare the greatest number, and to pronounce
the Conclusion. Item, He shall see that every one do speak in due order, and
without Confusion; He shall silence the Contentious, and in case of
Disobedience, he shall command them out of the Synod, that Consultation may be
held about their Censure. He shall make all the Remonstrances, and Answers unto
them who demand Counsel, or send Letters unto the Synod. Moreover he shall
preside at those Censures which shall be made in the close of the whole Action,
and all by the advice of the whole Assembly, and not otherwise. His Office
shall expire together with the Synod, and the next Synod has full Liberty to
choose him again or another. And all Moderators of Colloquy shall be governed by
this self-same Canon. CAN. VIII. Elders that are Deputies of Churches shall
have an equal power of Voting with the Pastors, and the Elders of that place
where the Synod shall assemble may be present, and propound matters in their
turn. Yet notwithstanding two only of them shall have power of Voting, to avoid
all Confusion. CAN. IX. Whatever has been decreed by Provincial Synods for the
Government of the Churches in their Province, shall be brought up unto the
National Synod. CAN. X. Forasmuch as diverse Persons, who that they may decline
or delay the effect of Church Censures, passed on them for their offenses, do
appeal from one Ecclesiastical Assembly unto another, yea and unto the National
Synod also, which is by this means more encumbered about the decision of their
matters than of any thing else; It is now ordered, that for time to come,
whatsoever differences may fall out within the Precincts of any Province, shall
be definitively judged, and without Appeal, by the Synod of that Province,
unless it be the Case of Suspension, or Deposing of Pastors, Elders and
Deacons, or the removal of Pastors from one Province unto another; Item, The
changing of a Church in one Colloquy, and joining it unto another; as also
whatsoever may concern the Doctrine of the Sacraments, or the whole Body of our
Discipline. In all which Cases there shall be a gradual process observed, till
they come from the Colloquy to the Provincial, and from the Provincial to the
National Synod, that then and there it may receive its last and final judgment.
CAN. XI. If a difference fall out betwixt the Synods of two Provinces, they
shall pitch upon a third to reconcile them. CAN. XII. The Synods in every
Province shall keep a Register of the Widows and Children of those Ministers,
who died in the service of their Churches, that so they may be helped and
maintained by the common stock and joint charges of all the Provinces, if their
necessities do so require it. And in case a Province prove ungrateful, its
Deputy shall make report thereof unto the National Synod, that provision may be
made for them by its authority. CAN. XIII. The Deputies of Churches shall not
depart from the Synod without leave, and they shall carry home with them the
Synodical Decrees. CAN. XIV. The authority of a Provincial is subordinate unto
that of National Synods. According to the Governments shall the Orders which
refer unto Colloquies and Provincial Synods, be regulated, without exalting one
above another. CAN. XV. At present the Provincial Synods shall be thus
distributed. 1. The Isle of France, the Land of Chartres, Picardy, Champagne
and Brie. 2. Normandy. 3. Britain. 4. Orleans, Blesois, Dunois, Nivernois,
Berry, Bourbonnois, and la March. 5. Touraine, Anjou, Loudunois, Le Maine,
Vandome, and the Perch. 6. The Higher and Lower Poictou. 7. Xaintonge, Aunix,
the City and Government of Rochel, and Augoulmois. 8. The Lower Guienne,
Perigord, Gascony, and Limousin. 9. The Higher and Lower Vivaretz, together
with Vellay, and Forest. 10. Lower Languedoc, to wit, Nismes, Vsez,
Montpellier, and as far as Beziers inclusively. 11. The rest of Languedoc, the
Higher Guienne, Toulouse, Carcassonne, Quercy, Rovergue, Armagnac, and the
Upper Avergne. 12. Burgundy, Lyonnois, Beaujolois, Bresse, the neither Avergne,
and Gex. 13. Provence. 14. Dolphiny, and Principality of Orange. 15. The
Churches in the Sovereignty of Bearn. 16. The Sevennes and Guevaudan.

CAN. XVI. If it should so fall out, that for the convenience of a Church it
should be divided into two or more, or that more Churches should be united into
one, this shall be done by a Provincial Synod, of which also the National shall
be advised. CAN. XVII. If a Minister be deputed by his Provincial Synod to go
unto the Synod or Colloquy of another Province, about some common affairs, he
shall have his Consultive Vote in it, and not only for that particular business
about which he came, but also in all matters transacted during that Sessions,
excepting always matters of his own private concern. N.B. The two last Editions
of the Discipline do make but 16. Canons in this Chapter, and add the 16th unto
the 15th Canon of the distribution of the Provinces, as if it were a branch or
member of it. But the matter being diverse from it, and my Editions of Quevilly
and Paris, in the Year 1663. making 17. I have therefore kept unto them.


CHAP. IX. Chap. IX. Of National Synods.
Of National Synods.
CANON I. NAtional Synods shall be held once every year, if it can possibly be
done; and this Order shall be observed for its assembling, That in the closing
up of every National Synod a Province shall be chosen, which shall be entrusted
with the power of calling the next, and shall be charged to acquaint all the
other Provinces with the day and place of its meeting. CAN. II. If difficult
cases should be moved in any one of the Provinces, it shall give notice of it
unto that Province, which is charged to assemble the National Synod, and having
ordered the time and place of its meeting, the other Provinces shall be
acquainted with it, that so they may come unto the Synod ready and
well-prepared for a Decision. CAN. III. And forasmuch as at this time it is
very difficult and dangerous to assemble the National Synod in a great number
of Ministers and Elders: It is thought good for the present, and till such
difficulties can be removed, that the Brethren assembled in every Provincial
Synod, shall choose out only two Ministers and Elders, who are Persons of great
experience in Church Affairs, to be sent in the name of the whole Province, and
these Deputies shall come with ample and sufficient powers, and furnished with
good memorials, subscribed by the Moderator and Scribes of the Provincial
Synod; and lest any of the Deputies should fail, three or four Pastors more,
and as many Elders shall be nominated by the Provincial Synods: that so if the
first named Persons should be by any accident hindered from taking their
journey, yet others may be at hand to supply their places in the National
Synod. N.B. That in all Letters of Commission signed by the Provinces to their
Deputies unto the National Synods, there was this Clause of submission to be
inserted, viz. We promise before God to submit our selves unto all that shall
be concluded and resolved on in your holy Assembly, and to obey, and perform it
to the best of our power; being well persuaded, that God presideth in the midst
of you, and guides you by his holy Spirit into all truth and equity by the
Rule of his Word, for the weal and benefit of his Church, and the glory of his
great Name. Which also we beg of him most ardently in our daily Prayers. See
the Acts of the National Synod of Vitre, 1617. in that Canon next after the
Catalogue of the Deputies.

CAN. IV. Provincial Synods shall not limit any certain time for the return of
the Ministers and Elders whom they had deputed unto the National Synod: but
they shall suffer them to tarry at the said Synod so long as there shall be
need of their presence and attendance in it, and these Deputies shall have all
their expenses born and defrayed out of the common stock of the whole Province.
CAN. V. The Articles of our Confession of Faith, and the Canons of our
Church Discipline, shall be all read at the opening of every National Synod.
CAN. VI. And that the National Synod may not be busied about Questions already
determined in the Acts of former National Synods, The Provincial Deputies shall
be advised to peruse the Acts of former National Synods before they prepare
their Memoirs, and they shall see that nothing be transmitted but what is of
common and general concern to all the Churches, and which meriteth the decision
of a National Synod. CAN. VII. All Ecclesiastical matters may be finally
decided and resolved by the National Synod, the Provinces having been in the
first place informed of them, if possible, by that Province which had the
charge of assembling the National Synod. CAN. VIII. The Decisions shall be only
made by the Provincial Deputies; but and if there be in the National Synod
other Ministers besides the Deputies, they may propound their judgments as to
what may be done, but they shall neither have consultive nor decisive Votes.
N.B. This Canon is in three Editions, in that of 1653. in that of 1666. and in
that 1676. but in those of Paris, and Quevilly, 1663. it is omitted.

CAN. IX. Those that appeal from Provincial Synods unto the National, shall be
bound to be present in Person at it, or else they shall send unto it most ample
Memoirs, with a lawful excuse for their absence: And on default hereof the
Sentence of the Provincial Synod shall be ratified. The same course shall be
taken with Appeals from Consistories unto Colloquies, and from Colloquies unto
the Provincial Synods. CAN. X. The Provincial Deputies shall not depart from
the National Synod without carrying home with them the Synodical Decrees,
subscribed by the President and Scribe: and a month after their return they
shall give notice thereof unto the Colloquies of their Province, that so they
may send for the Acts of the said Synod, and this at the sole charge of the
said Colloquies. CAN. XI. And that Synodical Acts may be preserved, and that
they may be of use and service in after times for the determining of
Controversies which may be propounded for resolution unto our National Synods;
The said Acts both for the time past and to come, and all others which concern
those Synods, as also the Canons of Church Discipline, and the Confession of
Faith of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom, shall be left in custody with
the Provincial Deputies, who are appointed to call the next National Synod, and
that Province shall be obliged to bring them unto the Synod. CAN. XII. Before
the breaking up of National Synods there shall be an amicable and fraternal
Censure of all the Deputies, Ministers and Elders, about those matters only
which had been managed during its Sessions, and whatever did in general respect
their Provinces. And the Holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be
Celebrated and partaken by them in testimony of their Cordial Union. Provided
always that this holy Sacrament shall be Communicated in with that very Church
in which they held their Synodical Assembly, and for this purpose the said
Church shall be admonished to prepare themselves for it.
CHAP. X. Chap. X. Of Religious Exercises.
Of Religious Exercises performed in the Assemblies of the Faithful
CANON I. THat great irreverence, which is found in diverse Persons, who at
public and private Prayers do neither uncover their Heads, nor bow their
Knees, shall be reformed, which is a matter repugnant unto Piety, and gives
suspicion of Pride, and does scandalize them that fear God. Wherefore all
Pastors shall be advised, as also Elders and Heads of Families, carefully to
oversee, that in time of Prayer, all Persons without exception or acceptance,
do evidence by those exterior signs the inward humility of their hearts, and
of that homage yielded by them unto God, unless any one be hindered from so
doing by sickness or otherwise; the judgment of which shall be remitted to the
testimony of their own particular Consciences. CAN. II. Singing of God's
praises being a divine Ordinance, and to be performed in the Congregations of
the Faithful, and for that by the use of Psalms their hearts be comforted and
strengthened; Every one shall be advertised to bring with them their Psalm-Books
unto those Assemblies; and such as through contempt of this holy Ordinance do
forbear the having of them, shall be censured, as also those, who in time of
singing, both before and after Sermon, are not uncovered, as also when the Holy
Sacraments are Celebrated. CAN. III. In times of sore Persection, and of War,
Pestilence, or Famine, or any other grievous affliction; Item, when as
Ministers of the Gospel are to be Ordained, and when as question is moved about
calling a National Synod, one day or more may be set a part for public and
extraordinary Prayers, and Fasting; yet without any scruple or superstition,
and all this shall be done upon mature consideration of the grounds and causes
of these Providence. And the Churches shall be advised to celebrate the Fast,
as much as possible they can, unanimously at the same time, provided they have
convenience of times and places for it. CAN. IV. Whereas diverse Churches have
been accustomed to use public Prayers on some particular day, they may, if
they like it, retain this their practice, which for many years they have so
happily observed, and others also may conform to it according to those means
which God may graciously afford them, and which their edification may require.
And all Pastors in the careful and faithful discharge of the duties of their
Function, shall by their most serious Remonstrances and Exhortations, remove
that contempt, of which too many are guilty, who disdain to frequent Sermons,
and neglect that Ordinance of Family-Prayers, which ought daily to be performed
in private Houses by the respective Heads of Houses, with their Families and
Domestics. And all Churches in which over and besides Preaching of God's holy
Word, there has been usually performed Morning and Evening Prayers on those
days in which they had Sermons, or in the Evenings of every day are exhorted to
conform herein unto those Churches which have no such Custom; that so
Superstition may be nipt in the bud, and that common carelessness, and notorious
neglect of Sermons and Family Prayers, may be quite banished. Because the usage
of common public Prayers should only be reserved for times of distress and
affliction, as the general public Fast is an Ordinance only to be used upon
extraordinary occasions, and therefore ought not to be brought into ordinary
common practice. For which causes those of our people who have had this Custom,
shall be advertised by their Pastors to lay them down quietly, that no scandal
may be taken at them. And all Heads of Families shall be carefully admonished
to pray ordinarily twice a day in the Morning and Evening with their Households.
N.B. That this part of the Canon, which is in a different Character from the
former, is not to be found in my Copies and Editions of 1653, 1666, and 1676.
But it is in express words in the Editions of Paris and Quevilly, in the Year
1663. What were the grounds of the omission, I know not, guess I do. Those of
Geneva might not have a perfect Copy of the Synodical Acts, and so Printed it
according to what they had. The Reverend Pastors of Paris and Rouen, were
obliged, at least their Consistories, to oversee all the Impressions and
Editions of the Confession and Discipline, and they having in their Archives
the best and most authentic Acts of their National Synods, might therefore see
that this Canon should be Printed in its fullest and most comprehensive
expressions. Sure I am this Canon was made and ratified in the Synod of St.
Foy, 1578. Canon 12. and in the Synod of Montpellier, 1598. Canon the 18th of
General Matters, and in the Synod of Tonneins, 1614. Canon the 4th of General
Matters.

CAN. V. At Funerals there shall be neither Prayers, nor Sermons, nor any dole
of public Alms; that so all Superstitions, and other inconveniences may be
avoided; and those who attend the dead Corpse unto its Sepulcher, shall be
exhorted to behave themselves modestly whilst they follow it, meditating
according to the object presented to them, upon the miseries and brevity of
this Life, and the hopes of one more happy in the World to come. CAN. VI.
Forasmuch as Mourning consists not in habits but in heart, the Godly shall be
admonished to demean themselves with a modest decency, and to reject all
Ambition, Hypocrisy, Vanity and Superstition.
CHAP. XI. Of Baptism.
CANON I. BAptism administered by an Unordained Person is wholly void and null.
CAN. II. A Doctor in a Church may not preach nor administer the Sacraments,
unless that he be at the same time both Doctor and Minister. CAN. III. A Jew or
Pagan of what age soever he be, shall not be baptized till he have been first
instructed in the Christian Faith, and that he give evident proof thereof by
his Confession. N.B. You may see the Form of Baptizing Jews and Infidels, Chap.
XI. Of Baptism.
in the Acts and Canons of the National Synod of Charenton, in the Year 1644.
where it is at large inserted; and I must crave my Readers Pardon for not
transcribing it.

CAN. IV. Children, both whose Parents are Members of the Church of Rome, and
those of Excommunicated Persons, shall not be baptized in our Reformed
Churches, although they were presented by Godly Sureties, unless the Father, or
Mother, when there is no Father, shall consent and require it, and shall have
resigned up their Authority unto the Sureties, by giving and granting them
their right of Education, with Promise of suffering their Children to be
educated and instructed in the true Religion. CAN. V. The Children also of
Sarazins and Gypsies may be admitted unto Baptism in our Reformed Churches upon
those conditions before mentioned; provided that there be not any presumption
of their having been already baptized, and the Sureties being first seriously
admonished to consider how they can acquit themselves of their obligation and
promise made unto the Church; and moreover, that those very Sureties will
undertake for the Religious Education and instruction of those Children. CAN.
VI. No Baptism shall be administered but in Church Assemblies, or where there is
a formed public Church. But where there is no public Church, and the Parents
through infirmity are afraid to carry them unto public Baptism in the
Congregation, Ministers shall consult how far in prudence they ought to yield
unto them. Yet nevertheless there shall be some face of a Church, and both
Exhortation and Prayer; but if there be no Church, and a Congregation cannot be
assembled, the Minister shall not make any difficulty to baptize the Infants of
believing Parents tendered to him, with Exhortation and Prayer. CAN. VII.
Forasmuch as we have no Commandment from the Lord to take Godfathers, or
Godmothers, who may present our Children unto Baptism, there cannot be any
particular Canon made which shall bind Persons to do it. But since it is a very
ancient Custom, and introduced for a good end, to wit, to testify the Sureties
Faith, and the Baptism of the Infant, and also for that they charge themselves
with the care of educating the Child, in case it should be deprived of its
Parents by death; and for that it does maintain a sweet Communion among the
Faithful by a Conjunction of Friendship, they who will not observe it, but will
by themselves present their own Children, shall be earnestly entreated not to
be Contentious, but to conform unto the ancient and accustomed Order, it being
very good and profitable. N.B. The Clause inserted in the middle of this Canon
is in my two best Editions of Paris and Rouen, though it be left out in the
three others, and therefore I have caused it to be put into another Character.

CAN. VIII. Women shall not be admitted to present Children unto Baptism unless
they be accompanied with a Godfather, and that they have made profession of our
holy Christian Reformed Religion. CAN. IX. A Surety coming from another Church
shall not be admitted to present a Child unto Baptism, unless he bring with him
a Certificate from his own Church. CAN. X. Such as present Children unto
Baptism shall be of sufficient Age, in their fourteenth year at least, and
shall have Communicated at the Lord's Table; or if they be well stricken in
years, and have not as yet received the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
they shall protest seriously that they will do it, and in order to it, that
they will suffer themselves duly to be Catechized. CAN. XI. Persons suspended
from the Lords Supper may not in the quality of Sureties present Children unto
Baptism, so long as their Suspension shall stand in force against them. CAN.
XII. Pastors shall diligently exhort all Godfathers and Godmothers to weigh and
consider their Promises made at the Celebration of Baptism, and Parents also to
choose such Sureties for their Children as are well-instructed in Religion, and
of a Godly Life and Conversation, and that are as much as may be of their
Acquaintance, and by whose means, if there should be a necessity for it in the
course of God's Providence, it is most likely that their Children will have a
Religious Education. CAN. XIII. Such as by their Proxies present Children to be
baptized in the Church of Rome, shall be severely censured, because they
consent thereby unto Idolatry. CAN. XIV. As for Names which are given Children
in Baptism, Ministers shall reject, if it can possibly be done, and without any
inconvenience, those which yet remain of old Paganism, nor shall they impose on
the said Children the Names ascribed unto God in Scripture, as Immanuel, and
others of like nature. Moreover Parents and Sureties shall be admonished to
take Names approved in the holy Scriptures; or if they fancy any other, they
may be accepted; excepting always those before mentioned, and those which
signify a matter which is unseemly. CAN. XV. Ministers shall admonish their
Flocks to demean themselves most reverently at the Administration of Baptism;
And that the contempt of Baptism, which is expressed by too many, even the far
greater part of our People by going out of the Assembly, or carrying themselves
irreverently at its Administration, may be avoided for the future, it has been
judged meet that this holy Sacrament shall be administered before the singing of
the last Psalm, or at least before the giving of the Pastoral Blessing: And the
People shall be carefully admonished to behave themselves with the self same
Reverence in the administration of Baptism, as in that Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper: forasmuch as Jesus Christ and all his benefits are alike equally
exhibited and offered to us in both the Sacraments. CAN. XVI. Consistories
shall have an eye over such persons, as do without any great and urgent cause
defer for a long time together the Baptism of their Children. CAN. XVII. Chap.
XII. Of The Lord's Supper.
Although the Wife of a Believing Husband be of a contrary Religion, yet is he
in no wise to be excused, if that his Child be presented unto Baptism in the
Church of Rome; and therefore he shall not be received unto the Lord's Supper,
unless he have to the utmost of his power labored to prevent it. CAN. XVIII.
All Baptisms shall be Registered, and carefully kept in the Church-Books,
together with the Names of both the Parents, Sureties, and of the Children
baptized, which shall be subscribed by the Minister's own hand, who did baptize
them. And when as Children shall be presented unto baptism, The Parents and
Sureties shall be obliged to bring with them a Note, in which shall be inserted
the Name of the Child, of its Parents and Sureties, and the day of its
Nativity. CAN. XIX. The Parents Names of Bastards, Children born of an
Illegitimate Conjunction, if they be known, shall be Recorded in the Book of
Baptisms, unless of those Children who are born in Incest. That so the very
Remembrance of such an enormous Wickedness may be for ever buried in the Grave
of Forgetfulness. In which case it shall be sufficient only to have nominated
the Mother, together with the Sureties who shall present the Child to Baptism.
And in the Baptising of all Illegitimate Children express mention shall be made
that they were born out of holy Wedlock.
CHAP. XII. Of the Lord's Supper.
CANON I. WHere there is no Form of a Church, the Lord's Supper shall not be
administered. CAN. II. Children under twelve years of Age shall not be admitted
unto the Lord's Table; but as for others who are above that Age, it is left
unto the Minister's discretion to judge whether they have sufficient knowledge
to qualify them for their admission to it. CAN. III. Priests, Monks, and other
Ecclesiastics belonging to the Church of Rome, shall not be admitted to the
Lord's Supper, till they have first made a public acknowledgment of their
former Life and profession. CAN. IV. Incumbents, who retain the name and title
of their Benefices, and all other persons, who do either directly or indirectly
participate in Idolatry, whether they receive the Income of their Benefices
with their own hands, or the hands of others, shall not be admitted to
Communion with us at the Lord's Table. CAN. V. Ministers shall have notice
given them not to receive unto the Lord's Supper the Members of other Churches,
without having a sufficient Testimonial from their Pastor, or in default
thereof from an Elder, if it may be had. CAN. VI. A Man dumb and deaf
demonstrating his sense of Piety and Religion by evident signs, tokens and
gestures, may be received unto the Lord's Table, in case the Church has
experience of his holy Life, and can perceive that he has Faith, and the true
Knowledge of God. CAN. VII. The Bread in the Lord's Supper shall be administered
unto them, who cannot drink Wine; they protesting seriously, that it is not out
of contempt that they do forbear it; besides they doing their utmost endeavor
for it, yea bringing the Cup as near unto their Mouth as they can, and taking
and touching it with their Lips, all occasions of offense will be by this means
in this case avoided. CAN. VIII. Pastors are left at liberty in giving the
Bread and Wine, to use the accustomed words, it being a thing purely
indifferent, provided that they use such words as tend to edifying. CAN. IX.
The Churches shall be informed that it belongs only unto Ministers to give
the Cup. CAN. X. Forasmuch as when the Lord's Supper is administered, sundry
diseased Persons come unto it, which causes many that are in health to be shy
of taking the Cup after them, Pastors and Elders shall be admonished to use
their greatest prudence, that godly order may be kept up and observed in this
Case. CAN. XI. Such as having been a long while Members of the Church, and
refuse Communion with it at the Lord's Table, if it be done out of contempt,
and through fear of being obliged to renounce all Idolatry, after diverse
admonitions given them, and they not reforming, they shall be cut off from the
Body of the Church; but if it be through infirmity, they shall be born withal
for some space of time till they be more established in the Faith. CAN. XII.
Such as care not to come unto our public Christian Congregations, but only
upon those days when the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is Celebrated, shall be
reproved and admonished of their duty, and to this purpose they shall join
themselves unto one certain particular Church. N. B. This last Clause is only
in my Edition of Paris and Rouen, 1663.

CAN. XIII. The Faithful, who make a trade of hearing the Word of God in one
Church, and of receiving the Sacraments in another, shall be censured, and by
the advice of the Colloquy, or Provincial Synod, they shall be appointed to
join themselves unto that Church, which is nearest, and most convenient for
them. N. B. Provincial Synod is only in my Parisian, and Quevilly Edition.

CAN. XIV. Chap. XIII. Of Marriages.
Although it has not been the Custom to administer the Lord's Supper in the
greatest part of our Churches more than four times a year, yet it were to be
desired that it might be oftener, so that the Reverence which is needful for
this holy Sacrament could be kept up and observed. Because it is most
profitable for the Children of God to be exercised and grow in Faith by the
frequent use of the Sacraments; and the Example of the Primitive Church does
invite us to it. And therefore our National Synods shall take that care and
order in this matter as is requisite for the weal and happiness of our
Churches.
CHAP. XIII. Of Marriages.
CANON I. SUch as are under Age shall not Contract Marriage without the Consent
of their Parents, or of those other Persons under whose power they be: Howbeit
if their said Parents should be so unreasonable as not to yield unto so sacred
and needful an Ordinance, yea and refuse their consent merely out of hatred to
Religion, the Consistory shall advise the Parties to apply themselves unto the
Civil Magistrate. CAN. II. Such as are of Years, and in possession of their
Estates, shall be admonished by the Minister in the public Church Assemblies,
not to make any Promise of Marriage but in the presence of their Parents,
Friends, Neighbors, and Persons in reputation for Godliness. And such as do
otherwise, shall be censured for their lightness and contempt of the said
admonition. And it were very meet that those Promises of Marriage were
performed with solemn Prayers. CAN. III. The Faithful that are of Age, although
they have been Married, shall notwithstanding so far honor their Parents, as
not to Contract Marriage without having first acquainted them therewith, and in
case of failure herein, they shall be censured by the Consistory. CAN. IV.
Fathers and Mothers professing the Reformed Religion, whose Children being
Idolaters, would marry themselves unto Idolatrous Women, shall be advised, if
possibly they can do it, to hinder their said Children from Contracting such
Marriages, especially if they be not as yet emancipated from under their
Authority: and Fathers shall employ their Paternal Power to prevent and hinder
them; but and if they cannot so far prevail, yet at passing the Marriage
Contracts, they shall protest their abhorrency of that Idolatry into which
their Children will deeper plunge themselves. And this being done, the Parents
may consent unto the Promises and Conditions about the Dowry and other such
like matters, and they shall give in evidence unto their Consistory of those
endeavors they have used to hinder such Marriages. CAN. V. For time to come
all Promises of Marriages, and Espousals, shall be performed by words de
futuro, which shall not be counted as indissolvible as words de praesenti.
Because words de praesenti do not so much promise Marriage, as in effect
consummate it. Yet nevertheless those promises by words de futuro, shall not be
dissolved without very great and lawful causes. Wherefore the Custom of those
Churches is condemned, which celebrateth Espousals (betrothings) by the
Ministry and Benediction of their Pastors, with gift of Body, and words de
praesenti. For by such Solemnity the Parties are truly and actually conjoined
in Marriage, so that the Banes are preposterous, and published after the
Marriage is Consummated, and a second Benediction is rendered needless and
superfluous. True indeed it is not thought evil, that Pastors should assist at
Espousals, and pray and exhort the Parties unto mutual love, faithfulness, and
the fear of God, provided that they forbear all other formalities, which are of
none other use than to make a Bond indissolvible, which oftentimes we are
constrained to break again upon oppositions made when the Banes are published,
and because of other accidental hindrances. For these reasons also those
Churches which solemnize Espousals in their Temples with the same public
Benediction as at Marriage, are exhorted to lay down this their Custom, and to
conform themselves unto our Churches in all the other Provinces of this
Kingdom. N. B. The addition unto this Canon, which is Printed in another
Character, is only found in my Parisian and Quevilly Editions of the
Discipline, yet grounded upon very many Acts of several National Synods. See
Syn. of Poictiers Art. 2. of Partic. Matters, 1560. The Syn. of Saumur, 1597.
Art. 25. concerning Observations upon the Discipline. The Synod of Privas,
1612. Art. 9. of Observations upon the Discipline. The Syn. of Alez, 1620. Art.
14. of Observations upon the Discipline.

CAN. VI. In Consanguinities and Affinities the faithful may not Contract
Marriage, but with the Kings License, according to the Edict. CAN. VII. It is
utterly unlawful to Petition the Pope for a Dispensation of the Impediments of
Marriage, which is already, or may be hereafter accomplished; because in so
doing there would be an owning of his Tyranny: Yet we may warrantably address
our selves unto the King for a Dispensation in degrees not prohibited by God,
nor by the Civil Government. CAN. VIII. Spiritual Kindred, as they be called,
are not at all comprehended nor understood by those words of Consanguinity and
Affinity in the Kings Edict, nor do they hinder any Marriage-Contracts. CAN.
IX. It is not lawful for any Man to Marry the Sister of his Deceased Wife; for
such Marriages are prohibited, not only by the Laws of the Land, but by the
word of God. And although by the Law of Moses it was ordained, that when the
Brother died without Children, his Brother should raise up Seed unto him, yet
that Law enacted for the Children of Israel was temporary, relating only to the
preservation of the Tribes of that People. But the Marriage of a Sister of a
Betrothed and Deceased Wife, is of another Nature; because that Alliance was
not Contracted by a Commixture of Blood: therefore such a Marriage may be
admitted and approved. Yet notwithstanding all possible care shall be taken,
that neither the Civil Magistrate, nor weak Christians may be offended. CAN. X.
A Man may not marry the Mother of his Deceased Spouse, to whom he was
betrothed, without an Order from the Civil Magistrate, which shall be waited
for both by the Pastor, and the Parties Contracting that Marriage. N. B. This
last Clause of the Canon is only in my Parisian and Quevilly Editions.

CAN. XI. Likewise a Man may not marry his Wife's Aunt, such a Marriage being
Incestuous; and although the Magistrate should permit it, yet shall it not be
Solemnized in our Assemblies. And therefore all Pastors are carefully to keep
themselves from it. And by parity of reason the Marriage of an Uncle with his
Niece, or with the grand Niece of his deceased Wife, is also Incestuous. CAN.
XII. Although Civility and Decency may oppose the Marriage of a Man with the
Widow of his Wife's Brother, yet in case the Civil Magistrate do authorize the
Contract, the Churches shall not make any difficulty to bless such a Marriage.
Provided, that there be good evidence that the said Contract has been first
allowed and approved by the authority of the Civil Magistrate. N. B. These last
Clauses of this Canon Printed in another Character, are only in my Editions of
Paris and Rouen.

CAN. XIII. No Man after his Wife's Death shall marry her with whom he had
committed Adultery during her Life; unless that such a Marriage were authorized
by the Civil Magistrate. CAN. XIV. Forasmuch as the principal end of Marriage
is to procreate Children, and to avoid Fornication, the Marriage of an Eunuch,
that is so known, shall not be admitted nor solemnized in any of our Reformed
Churches. CAN. XV. All Marriages shall be propounded unto the Consistories with
a sufficient Certificate of the Promises. CAN. XVI. The Banes of Matrimony
shall be published in those places where the Parties dwell: and if they have a
mind to celebrate their Marriage elsewhere, they shall carry with them a
sufficient Certificate, that the Banes have been thrice published. CAN. XVII.
The Banes shall be published on three Sabbath Days following in those places
where the Word of God is Preached, and in other places when as Common Prayers
are read. However it be, yet there shall be the space of fifteen days between
the Publication of the Banes, and the Solemnizal of the Marriage in the
Congregation, which may be performed on the third Sabbath. CAN. XVIII. Such as
live in those places, where the public Exercise of Religion is not
established, may cause their Banes to be published in the Popish Churches,
because it is a matter purely Political. CAN. XIX. The Churches shall not
suffer any Persons to be Married without an ample knowledge and approbation of
them. CAN. XX. If one of the Parties be of a contrary Religion, the
Marriage-Promises shall not be received nor published in the Church, unless
that Party of the contrary Religion have been sufficiently instructed, and have
publicity protested in the Church of that place where the said Party shall be
known, that from a good Conscience he does renounce all Superstition and
Idolatry, and particularly the Mass, and that he will through Divine Grace
persevere the residue of his days in the pure worship of God: of which
instruction the Consistory of that Church shall take Cognizance, in which that
Protestation shall be made. And it shall not be lawful for any Pastor or
Consistories to do otherwise, on pain of being Suspended, yea, and deposed from
their Offices. CAN. XXI. If one of the Parties, who would Marry, be
Excommunicate, the Marriage shall not be permitted to be Solemnized in any one
of our Churches, unless that the Excommunicate Person shall have acknowledged
and done Penance for his Offenses. But as for suspended Persons from the Lords
Table, the Consistories may permit them to marry, notwithstanding their
Suspension, but yet not without taking Cognizance of their Cause. CAN. XXII.
The Banes of Widows who desire to marry again, shall not be published in the
Church, till at least seven Months and an half be expired after their Husbands
Death; that so all Scandals and Inconveniences, which might afterward fall
out, may be prevented, unless in such a Case in which the Civil Magistrate has
interposed his Judicial Sentence to the contrary. CAN. XXIII. All Marriages
shall be publicly Solemnized in the Religious Assemblies of the Faithful,
according to the word of God, and by the Ministry of the Pastors, and not of
any others. N. B. That middle Clause in another Character, is only in my
Parisian and Quevilly Editions of the Discipline.

CAN. XXIV. For the good order of our Churches no Marriage shall be Solemnized
on those days in which the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is Administered. And
this Canon shall not be broken but upon very great Considerations, of which the
Consistory shall take Cognizance. Moreover no Marriages shall be Solemnized on
Days of public Prayer and Fasting. CAN. XXV. Such as being betrothed shall
cohabit together as Man and Wife, before they be lawfully and solemnly Married,
whether their offense do come to light before or after the Solemnizal of the
Marriage, they shall do public Penance for this their Offense, or at least
they shall acknowledge it before the Consistory, either way as the discretion
of the Consistory shall appoint. And if it be discovered before Marriage, then
shall there upon the Wedding day, before they do proceed to complete the
Marriage, be such Ceremonies and Censures used as the Consistory shall judge
fitting; unless those Persons had cohabited together in the days of their
Ignorance, without despising or contempt of our Church Government. And those
also who cohabited as Man and Wife, when as there was no Church erected in the
places of their Habitation, or in the Province, and all these shall only be
called into the Consistory, that so their Marriage may be ratified and
Celebrated in the Church of God, if the Consistory shall judge it to be
expedient. CAN. XXVI. That those inconveniences may be avoided which fall out
through overlong delays of Solemnizing Marriages, the Parties, and those
Persons under whose power they are, shall be advised not to defer the
Consummation thereof any longer than six Weeks after publication of the Banes,
if it be possible. CAN. XXVII. All Marriages shall be Registered, and carefully
kept in the Church-Books. CAN. XXVIII. The Faithful, whose Partners are
convicted of Adultery, may be admonished to a reconcilement with them: but in
case they will not do it, that Liberty, which God in his holy Word has granted
them, shall be declared to them. But if it be the hap of a Church Officer, he
shall not take his Wife again, or if he do, he shall lay down his Office. CAN.
XXIX. This course shall be taken about Divorces for Adultery. The Innocent
wronged Party shall prosecute at Law, before the Civil Magistrate, the
Delinquent so long, till that by his definitive Sentence, and final Judgment,
she be duly Convicted; which Sentence the wronged Party shall produce before
the Consistory, and then the Consistory shall declare unto him that Liberty,
which God in his holy Word has given him. But in regard of our present
difficulties, the Ministers of this Kingdom are advised not to re-marry the
said Parties, to whom this Liberty of providing themselves elsewhere has been
granted. And as for the Delinquent Party, there shall be very great and mature
Deliberation used, before she have any Liberty at all allowed Her. CAN. XXX. If
it should fall out that after Marriage-Promises have past, and before its
accomplishment, a betrothed Woman be found to have played the Whore, either
before or after the said Promises, and that it was unknown to him, who had
promised her Marriage, a definitive Sentence being given by the Magistrate upon
it, the Consistory may proceed to bless a new Marriage. And the betrothed Woman
shall have the same Liberty, if it be found that her betrothed Husband had
committed Fornication after he had made her Promises of Marriage. CAN. XXXI.
Women whose Husbands are gone away, and have absented themselves a long time
about Mercantile affairs, or for other Causes, if they demand License to be
Married again, they shall have recourse unto the Civil Magistrate. CAN. XXXII.
As for the Wives of Priests and Monks, who turn Apostates, and return unto
their old Idolatry, chanting Masses, or re-entring into their Cells, from which
they had formerly departed, they shall be admonished not to cohabit with their
said Husbands during their Apostasy, that God's Ordinance of Marriage may not
be laden with reproach and infamy, nor may they marry any other, until such
time as their first Marriage shall be dissolved by the Civil Magistrate.
CHAP. XIV. Chap. XIV. Of Particular Orders.
Of particular Orders and Advertisements.
CANON I. NO Person shall be received into Communion with the Church, till such
time as be have first publicly renounced all the Superstitions and Idolatries
of the Romish Church, and in particular the Mass. CAN. II. No godly Man shall
be allowed to intermeddle with any matters conjoined with Idolatry, such as
those they call the Baisemains, or Le Dedans de Leglise, nor to cause Masses
and Vigils to be said, nor to ordain Monks* who be solely ordained to this
purpose. But to hold Priories, Revenues, Rents, Chanteries, and Tithes, and to
pay the profits of them unto the Popish Ecclesiastics, for as much as they be
Temporal Lords, it is a thing indifferent, and they that will do it may take
their Liberty. Nevertheless the Faithful shall be advised not to intermeddle
with these matters if they find any abuses in them, or an appearance of evil
Consequences, of all which Consistories and Colloquies shall pass a prudent
judgment. CAN. III. Such as by unlawful means, as by Papal Bulls, or a sum of
money, shall buy or hold Benefices, or such as in like manner shall directly or
indirectly maintain Idolatry, shall be denounced Persons utterly unworthy of
Communion with our Churches in the holy Supper of the Lord, nor shall they be
admitted to it. And as for Benefices, of which any one may have an Advowsonage,
whether by Presentation from the Lord of the Manor, a Lay-Patron, or by the
Bishops Gift, the Faithful are advised not to accept of them, though tendered
to them, if there be a tacit or express condition of any service to be
performed unto the Idol. CAN. IV. Printers, Booksellers, Painters, and other
Artificers, and in general all the Faithful, and particularly such as bear
Office in the Church, shall be admonished that they do not in the least act any
thing in their Calling that tends directly to countenance the Superstitions of
the Church of Rome; and as for secret Acts, and the Censure incurred by them,
their judgment is left unto the Consistory. CAN. V. Notaries, Scrivenors, and
others, who by the Duty of their Callings are obliged to sign and seal
indifferently all matters which are brought unto them, they shall not be
censured for receiving Testaments, passing Contracts, and expediting Letters,
which concern Idolatry, nor Judges for their judging Causes concerning
Ecclesiastical Estates, and the Execution of the Edict. CAN. VI. Arbitrators
shall not in any manner of way intermeddle with things, which concern Idolatry,
either directly or indirectly. CAN. VII. Neither Counselors nor Attorneys at
Law shall plead in those Causes which tend to the suppression of the Ministry
of the Gospel, or to the setting up of Mass, nor shall they in any manner of
way whatsoever be allowed to give their advice or assistance unto the Romish
Churchmen, in those Causes which do either directly or indirectly tend unto the
oppression of a Reformed Church. CAN. VIII. Neither Bishops, nor Officials, nor
Archdeacons, as they be now Constituted, have of right any Civil or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. However because the Faithful are sometimes
constrained to appear before them for obtaining their own just dues, which
otherwise would be detained from them, in case they he turned over to them by
the Civil Magistrate (to whom they shall first make their applications) they
may warrantably enough have recourse unto them. CAN. IX. Godly Advocates ought
not in any wise to plead in the Officials-Court; unless in those Cases in which
they be necessitated to prosecute the right of their Clients before them,
according to the last foregoing Canon. CAN. X. It is not in it self unlawful to
exercise civil Jurisdictions, as to act as Attorneys for and under
Ecclesiastical Persons, unless in such Cases, which they call spiritual. CAN.
XI. The Faithful may not take out, or cause to be Executed, any Monitory or
Writ of Excommunication from the Church of Rome. CAN. XII. Forasmuch as it is
neither lawful not expedient to heat the Popish Preachers, nor any others who
have intruded themselves without a lawful Call, the Flocks shall be hindered by
their Pastors from going to them, and such as shall go, they shall be called
into the Consistory, and Censured according to the nature of their offense.
CAN. XIII. Lords, Gentlemen and others, shall be admonished according to the
Discipline of our Church, not to entertain in their Houses, any scandalous or
incorrigible Persons, and above all, that they do not suffer any Priests to
sing Mass, or to dogmatize and debauch their Domestics, nor shall they admit
of any such again into their service, if they have once discarded them. CAN.
XIV. Fathers and Mothers shall be exhorted to be very careful of their
Childrens Education, which are the Seed-Plot, and promising hopes of God's
Church. And therefore such as send them to School to be taught by Priests,
Monks, Jesuits and Nuns, they shall be prosecuted with all Church Censures.
Those also shall be Censured who dispose of their Children to be Pages, or
Servant unto Lords and Gentlemen of the contrary Religion. CAN. XV. They whose
Brethren, Sisters, or other Kindred, have quitted their Monasteries to serve
God in liberty of Conscience, shall be exhorted to relieve them, and to provide
for them according to the duties of humanity and Consanguinity. CAN. XVI.
Neither Ministers nor other Members of the Church may print any Books composed
by themselves or others concerning Religion, nor may they at all publish them,
until they have first Communicated them unto the Colloquy, or if need be, unto
the Provincial Synod. And in case the matter be urgent (requiring speedy
dispatch) unto the Universities, or to two Pastors appointed by the Synod, who
shall attest under their own hands, that they have perused and examined the
said Writings. CAN. XVII. They that handle the Histories of holy Scripture in
Poems, are admonished not to blend or intermingle Poetic Fables with them, nor
to give unto God the names of a false God, nor to add unto, nor take any thing
from the Sacred Scriptures; but they shall confine themselves as near as they
can unto the words of it. CAN. XVIII. Neither the Canonical nor other Books of
the Bible shall be transformed into Comedies or Tragedies. CAN. XIX. Churches,
which have Printers belonging to them, shall advise them not to print any Books
concerning Religion, or the Discipline of the Church, without having first
Communicated them unto the Consistory, because of those manifold
Inconveniences, which have formerly happened upon this account. And neither
Printers, nor Booksellers, nor Hawkers, shall sell any Books of Idolatry, or
that be Scandalous, stuffed with Ribauldry, or Impiety, which tend to the
corrupting of good Manners. CAN. XX. Although Priests cannot lay any just claim
or title unto Tyths in regard of their Ministry: yet nevertheless they must be
paid, because of the King's Command, and for the avoidance of Scandal and
Sedition. CAN. XXI. According to his Majesty's Edict the Faithful shall be
exhorted to give none offense by working upon Holy Days. CAN. XXII. All Usuries
shall be most strictly forbidden and suppressed, and matters of Loan shall be
regulated according to the Kings Ordinance, and the Rule of Charity. CAN.
XXIII. All violence and injurious words against the Members of the Church of
Rome, as also against Priests and Monks, shall not only be forborne, but also as
much as may be shall be totally suppressed. CAN. XXIV. Swearers, who in passion
or levity do take God's holy Name in vain, and others who blaspheme the Divine
Majesty, shall be most severely censured; and if after the second admonition
they be not reclaimed, they shall be then suspended from the Lord's Table. And
all Outrageous Blasphemers, Forswearers, and such like Persons, shall in no
wise be tolerated in Church Communion: But immediately for their first offense
shall be suspended the Lord's Supper: and if they continue in their
Ungodliness, they shall be publicly Excommunicated. CAN. XXV. The Churches
shall admonish the Faithful of both Sexes to retain Modesty, and that most
especially in their Habits, and shall take care, that all Superfluities,
heretofore committed in them, may be retrenched. But yet our Churches shall not
make any Decree about it, because it is an affair properly belonging unto the
Civil Magistrate; yet may they endeavor by their Remonstrances, that his
Majesty's Edict concerning these matters be more diligently observed. CAN.
XXVI. No Person shall be deprived of Communion at the Lord's Table for wearing
any fashion of Apparel, which is ordinarily and usually worn in this Kingdom.
But under this head those ought not to be comprised which carry with them a
notorious Badge of Lasciviousness, dissolution, or overcurious novelty, such
as naked Breasts, Painting, and the like, with which Men and Women cloth and
abuse themselves. And Consistories shall do their utmost to suppress these
Impieties, and shall proceed against the Refractory by Suspension from the
Lord's Table. N. B. That Clause in the middle of this Canon, Printed in another
Letter, is found in my Parisian and Quevilly Editions of the Discipline, yet
injoined by the National Synods held at St. Foy, 1578. Canon 21. of General
Matters. The second of Rochel, 1581. Art. 41. Explaining the 26 Canon in the
last Chapter of the Discipline, and the Synod of Montauban, 1594. Canon 45. of
General Matters.

CAN. XXVII. All Dances shall be suppressed, and such as make a Trade of Dancing,
or make Custom of being present at Dances, having been sundry times admonished,
in case they prove contumacious and Rebellious, they shall be Excommunicated,
and all Consistories are charged to see that this Canon be most heedfully kept
and observed, and in the name of God, and by the Authority of this Synod, that
it be read publicly in their Churches. And Colloquies and Provincial Synods
are exhorted to have an observing eye on those Consistories, which shall not
perform their duty in this particular, that they may be censured. N.B.
Provincial Synods is left out by pure omission from my other Editions but those
of Paris and Quevilly.

CAN. XXVIII. Mummings and Juglings shall not be suffered, nor Wassail-days,
nor keeping of Shrovetide, nor Players at Heypass, nor Tumblers, nor Tricks of
Goblets, nor Puppet-Plays; and Christian Magistrates are exhorted not to permit
them, because they do feed curiosity, and cause a great deal of waste and loss
of time. Moreover it shall not be lawful for the Faithful to go to Comedies,
Tragedies, Interludes, Farces, or other Stage Plays, acted in public or
private, because in all Ages these have been forbidden among Christians, as
bringing in a corruption of good Manners, but then most of all when as the
Sacred Scriptures come to be profaned. Yet nevertheless when as in a College
it shall be found profitable for Youth to represent any History, it may be
tolerated; (provided always, that the subject matter thereof be not comprised
in the holy Scripture: which was never given us for matter of sport, but purely
to be Preached for our Instruction and Comfort.) And this also shall be done
very rarely, and with advice of the Colloquy, which shall first have the sight
and perusal of the Composition. CAN. XXIX. All Plays forbidden by the Kings
Edicts, as Cards, Dice, and other Games of hazard, avarice, lasciviousness,
notorious loss of time, or scandal, shall be suppressed, and the Persons
reproved, and admonished in the Consistories, and censured according to
Circumstances. No Lotteries can be approved, although they were or were not
allowed by the Civil Magistrate: and the godly Magistrates professing the
Reformed Religion, are exhorted to restrain them. N. B. This last Clause of the
Canon is only in my two Editions of Paris and Quevilly.

CAN. XXX. It is a thing purely indifferent to be present at those Feasts and
Banquets which are made by those of the Popish Religion, when as they are
Espoused, Married, or their Children are born. However the Faithful are
admonished to use them for edification, and seriously to ponder with themselves
whether they be Masters of so much strength as to resist the dissolutions and
other evils committed at them, and especially whether they can reprove them.
And under these Feasts those are not to be comprised, which Priests make at the
Celebration of their first Mass; for it is utterly unlawful for any one who
fears God to countenance them with his presence. CAN. XXXi. None of the
Faithful shall be present at their Marriages and Banquets, who, that they may
espouse a Party of the contrary Religion, do revolt from the profession of the
Gospel. But as for them, who have a long time ago Apostatized, or have been
always Papists, it is left unto the Prudence of the Faithful to consider with
themselves whether it may be expedient for them or no. CAN. XXXII. They that
Challenge, or cause others to be challenged unto a Duel, or being challenged do
accept of it, and kill their Parties, although they may have afterward obtained
their Pardon, or may be otherwise justified, shall yet notwithstanding have the
censure of Suspension from the Lord's Table, inflicted on them, and their
Suspension shall be published without delay, and in case they would be received
unto the Churches Peace, they shall first undergo public Penance, making
acknowledgment of their great offense. CAN. XXXIII. These Articles contained in
this Book of Discipline, are not established among us in such a manner, but
that if the Churches benefit do require it, they may be changed: Yet shall not
any Ministers, Consistories, Colloquies, or Provincial Synods have power to
add, change or diminish, without the advice or consent of a National Synod.
SECT. XIII.
THis is the Discipline of those famous Churches. This was their Canon Law by
which their Ministers, Church Officers, and Church Members were ordered and
conduced. As to their Ministers in the worst times it was strictly exercised
upon them. If any of them proved Scandalous in Doctrine, in Conversation, they
were not spared. The Church and House of God was soon rid of them. Their
Colloquies and Synods threw away the unsavory Salt unto the Dunghill, and it
was very rare if the Deposed and ejected Ministers did not take up for good and
all in the Dunghill of the Romish Synagogue. There has been a great Complaint
of much looseness among their Members. Certainly they had, and still have, as
holy and truly gracious Souls in Communion with them as any Churches of Christ
under Heaven; and a vast multitude of most zealous and faithful Martyrs, far
more in number and quality of Sufferers for the Gospel, than in any one of the
Reformed Christian Nations in Europe. When the Ceremonious Lutherans of
Stutgard, in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg, Brentius, Jacob Andreas, etc. cited
Monsieur Toussaint (who had been Pastor of the Church of Orleans, which then
lay desolate, one part groaning in Prisons and Dungeons, another burning in
Fires and Flames, and the poor remainders pining away in their Dispersions and
Exiles) to appear before them, and give an account of his Preaching within
their Jurisdiction, and spreading his Zuinglian, and Calvinistical Heresies, as
they were pleased to style them (for he assisted his Aged Father in the
Ministry in the County of Montpelgart) He returned an Apologetical Letter to
them, in which he wondered at their quarrels with him, and the Frenth Churches,
who abhorred those fierce digladiations with which the German Churches and
Universities had abounded, and told them, that the poor Churches of Christ in
France breathed after Peace with them, and with all the Churches of the
Augustane Confession, and had written for it, prayed for it, and these last ten
years had spilt no other Ink than that of their own blood in defense of the
truth. This silenced the pragmatical Lutherans at that time. And the Argument
is as good and valid now. See Monsieur Amyraut's Apology pour ceux de la
Religion, p. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, which is too long to be here inserted.
It is none of my business, (nor do those poor afflicted Churches of France
need it) to write Apologies for them. The Staff under water seems crooked, but
is not so. Those Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices
were not the worst of the Galileans: Nor those Jews upon whom the Tower of
Siloam fell, and crushed to pieces, were they the greatest Sinners in
Jerusalem? Should we thus argue, we should offend against the Generation of the
righteous; who from the infancy of the World to this very day, from their youth
upward until now, have been perpetually afflicted; they have passed out of one
Furnace into another, oftentimes from lesser into sorer and greater fiery
Trials. An infinitely wise and gracious God taking this course with them to
refine and preserve them. For by these means they have lived, and by them has
the Life of their Souls been preserved. Yea God seems himself to justify them.
Because their most grievous Sufferings have wonderfully contributed unto his
Glory. The blood of the Martyrs having proved the Seed of the Church; and the
more they have been oppressed, the more have they increased. A Vine grows the
more and better for being pruned and soaked with blood. And notwithstanding the
Seas of blood drawn from this poor Vineyard of Christ, yet has it proved the
more fruitful, grown and spread exceedingly, insomuch, that after all the
storms of Persecution, which had made a most fearful havoc of God's Saints in
that Kingdom, their Faith and Patience has tired out and overcome their
Persecutors: So that in the National Synod of Rochel in the year 1571. Mr. Beza
Presiding in it, the Reformed could count then above two thousand one hundred
and fifty Churches; and in many of these above ten thousand Members, and in
most of these two Ministers, in some they had five, as in the year 1561. there
served the Church of Orleans (which at that time had seven thousand
Communicants) Antony Chanoriet Lord of Merangeau, Robert Macon Lord des
Fontaines, Hugh Sureau, Nicholas Fillon Lord of Valls, and Daniel Tossane, who
afterward died at Heydelberg in the Palatinate. When the Colloquy of Poissy
was held, they had in the one only Province of Normandy three hundred and five
Pastors of Churches, and in the Province of Provence threescore. And I remember
the Author of Le Cabinet du Roy de France, a Book Printed in the year 1581. and
dedicated to Henry the Third, makes a Computation of their Martyrs to have been
in a very few years at least above two hundred thousand cut off for the Gospel,
and he makes up his account thus, Allow, says he, but an hundred Martyrs to
every Church, and you have the sum; and yet it is as clear as the Sun at
Noonday, that the sum is vastly more. For it is a truth incontestable, that
there have been cut off by the Sword and Massacres for Religion, from the
Church of Caen above 15000, or 16000. from the Church of Alancon five thousand,
from the Church of Paris thirteen thousand, from the Church of Rheims twelve
thousand, from the Church of Troy twelve thousand, from the Church of Sens
nine thousand, from the Church of Orleans eight thousand, from the Church of
Angiers seven thousand five hundred, from the Church of Poictiers twelve
thousand Persons, etc. See Le Cabinet du Roy. Livre premier, page 274, 275,
276, 277.

SECT. XIV.
THE Churches after the Parisian Massacre were at a stand. That Deluge of
Protestant Blood, which was then shed had exhausted their best Spirits.
Multitudes were frighted out of their Native Land, which like another Akeldama
devoured Men, ate up its Inhabitants; and others were frighted out of their
Religion. In such a dreadful Hurricane as that was, no wonder if some leaves,
unripe fruit, and rotten withered Branches fell to the Earth, and were lost
irrecoverably. However, a Remnant escaped, and, which was no less than a
Miracle, generally the Ministers, God Reserving them to gather in another
Harvest. And the Churches in many places revived. God staying the rough Wind in
the day of his East Wind, and giving them a breathing time, a little reviving
under their hard Bondage. They declined not much in number for two and twenty
years after. But Henry the Fourth having been exalted to the Throne of France
by the Reformed Party, and revolting from them unto the Popish, and embracing
that Religion that he might be secured in the Throne, the Interest of the
Churches did from that day decline visibly. Many of the Nobility imitated their
King in his Apostasy. And the united Example of King and Nobility had a most
pernicious influence upon the Populace. All the Arts and Tricks of the Court
were set on foot to palliate the King's Prevarication, and to divide and weaken
the Reformed. See Histoire Universelle D' Aubigny, live. 3. p. 305, 306, 307,
308, 309, 310.
There arose a Combination of Men, such as Morlas, Rotan, de Serres, etc. who
were for accommoding and reconciling the two Religions. And these were put upon
it by the Bribes and Pensions of the Romish Clergy, and Promises of great
Preferments. They declaim against the nakedness and simplicity of the Reformed
Religion, and cry up the necessity and beauty of Pomp and Ceremony, See Syn. of
Saumur, 3^. Art. of Genesis Mar. Syn. of Montauban, 23. Art. of Genesis Mar. Syn. of
Montpellier 2. Art. of Genesis Matters. Synod of Privas, 1612. Act of the Oath of
Union. Second Synod of Charenton, Art. of Genesis Matters 3.
which made the Roman Religion so august and venerable in their Eyes, blinded
with Ambition and Covetousness. The National Synods of Saumur, Montauban,
Montpellier and Privas, did what they could to stem the Current, and to prevent
these avaritious Spirits from doing mischief unto their Churches. They threaten
and order all Accommodators of the two Religions to be actually deposed, as
being the Servants of Mammon, not of God. This did something, and it stopped
the Gap for the present. And when the Court saw they could not break the Union
of the Reformed, and that they were yet a very considerable Party for Wisdom,
Strength, Resolution, Union, Courage and Conduct: Things being also unsettled in
the State, and the Spaniard sitting close upon the Skirts of the King, and
possibly he retaining yet some love and sparks of Gratitude for his old Friends
of the Reformed Religion, and not counting it safe to exasperate them any more,
he granted them a Fundamental and Irrevocable Edict at Nantes in Britain,
April 1598. for their Liberty and Security.

SECT. XV. The King's Edict for pacifying the Troubles of the Kingdom, made at
Nantes in the Month of April, 1598. and published in Parliament, February 15.
1599. As also those particular Articles about it which were afterward verified
in Parliament.
HEnry by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre.
To all present and to come, Greeting.
Among those infinite Favors which God has been pleased graciously to
vouchsafe unto us, this must be confessed by all to be one of the most
remarkable and illustrious, that he has endowed us with that Courage and
Vritue, as not to be overborn with those dreadful Troubles, Disorders, and
Confusions, which we encountered with at our first coming unto the Crown. For
the Kingdom was then divided into so many Parts and Factions, that that which
was the most just and lawful was become the least and weakest; and yet
notwithstanding we were so supported against the assaults of those storms, that
we have at length surmounted them, and are now safely arrived at the Port of
Peace, and have settled the state in repose and tranquillity. For which let God
only have the Praise and Glory, to whom it is most peculiarly due, and let our
Subjects also be sensible of his Grace, and their obligation to us, that he
has honored us to be his Servant in the Production of so good a Work, which,
as all of them may see, is not only the fruit and effect of our Duty and
Authority, but of something else, which possibly at another time might not have
been so fit and convenient for our Royal Dignity, exposed by us without fear
unto the greatest Dangers, as we have very frequently and freely hazarded our
Life also. And for as much as there was a great concourse of arduous and
perilous Affairs, which could not possibly be composed all at once, we were
necessitated to use this method, First, to undertake them, which could not be
terminated by any other way or means than those of Force and Arms, and to defer
and suspend for some time the executing and dispatch of others, which ought and
might have been finished by Reason and Justice; such were those general
differences between our Subjects, and those particular Diseases, which had
seized on the sounder parts of the State, which we conceived might be more
easily cured, when as the principal cause was removed, which was the
continuance of the Civil War. And now having (through the grace of God) well
and happily succeeded in it, and all Arms and Hostilities being wholly ceased
within the Kingdom, we have great hopes, that we shall be as successful in
those other Affairs, which are yet to be decided, and that by this means we
shall be enabled to establish a good, firm, and durable Peace and Tranquillity,
at which we have ever levelled and aimed in our Vows and Intentions, and which
has been the designed prize of all our painful Labors and Travails, undergone
by us during the whole course of our Life. Among those Affairs which have most
exercised our Patience, the principal and chiefest were the Complaints brought
in unto us from our Catholic Towns and Provinces, That the exercise of the
Catholic Religion was not universally restored, as had been imported by the
former Edicts made for pacifying the Troubles occasioned by Religion: And also
the Petitions and Remonstrances tendered to us by our Subjects of the pretended
Reformed Religion, for that those Edicts granted them were not at all executed,
and for that they desired some further Concessions to be accorded to them about
the exercise of their said Religion, the Liberty of their Consciences, and the
security of their Persons, Lives, and Fortunes: They presuming, that they had
too just grounds to fear and apprehend new and greater dangers, because of the
last Troubles and Commotions, of which the first and main pretext and
foundation was their utter ruin. Wherefore, that we might not overburden our
selves with too great a load of businesses all at once, and for that the fury
of War is incompatible with the Constitution of good and wholesome Laws, we did
prudently defer and delay their full and particular satisfaction, till such
time as we might make the best provision for them that could be desired. And
now at last, through the divine goodness, enjoying a greater quiet than ever,
we believed, that we could not better employ our selves, than in those concerns
of the glory of his holy name and service, and that he may he religiously
adored, invocated, and worshipped by all our Subjects, and although it be not
his good pleasure to permit at this time, that it should be in one and the
self-same form and mode of Religion, yet at least that it may be with one and
the self-same mind and intention, and in such an order and manner, as there may
not be any trouble or tumult among them for it, that so both we our selves, and
this Kingdom, may always merit and preserve that glorious Title entailed upon
us by the noble Achievements of our Progenitors, of being the Most Christian:
and so by this means to remove the cause of all those evils and troubles, which
might fall out upon the score and account of Religion, they being of all others
the most spreading, taking, and influential. For these reasons, we knowing that
this was an affair of the greatest importance, and meriting our best thoughts
and deepest consideration, after we had taken in hand the Bills of Grievances
presented us by our Roman Catholic Subjects, and had permitted our other
Subjects of the aforesaid pretended Reformed Religion, to assemble themselves
by their Deputies to prepare their Bills also, and to bring them in together
with their Remonstrances unto us, and had several Conferences with them about
those very matters at sundry and diverse times, and revised all former Edicts,
we have judged needful now upon the whole to give unto all our said Subjects
one, and that a general, clear, plain, and absolute Law, by which they may be
ruled and governed in and about all those differences, which have heretofore
fallen out, or may hereafter happen and fall out among them, which, it is our
hope, will most effectually contribute to their mutual and full contentment
upon all occasions and emergencies whatsoever. Since, that we never deliberated
nor advised with our Privy Council about it, upon any other ground or respect,
than that great zeal which we have for God's Service and Glory, and that he may
be more religiously obeyed and worshipped by all our said Subjects, and that
there might be settled and established among them, a good, and firm, and durable
Peace; For the obtaining of which, we do most devoutly implore and wait upon
his Divine Goodness, hoping and expecting the continuance thereof, and of that
wonderful Protection and Favor he has always most illustriously vouchsafed
unto this Kingdom, from its first Foundations laid many hundred years ago unto
this very day, and that he will be so merciful unto our said Subjects, as to
give them to understand, that in the observation of this our Law, consists
(next and after their duty unto God and us) the principal basis and groundwork
of their Union, Concord, Tranquillity and Peace, and the settling and
restoration of the whole state in its primitive splendor, opulency, and power:
As we for our part do purpose, resolve and promise, to see that it be exactly
observed, without suffering it in any manner to be transgressed or violated.
For these Causes, We with the Advice of the Princes of our Blood, and other
Princes and Officers of the Crown, and other great and Honorable Persons in
our Council of State, who are near about us, and attend upon us, having well
and diligently pondered and considered this whole affair, we have by this
perpetual and irrevocable Edict, said, declared, and Ordained, and we do say,
declare, and Ordain,

I. In the first place, That the sense and remembrance of all matters passed
both on the one side and the other, from the beginning of March in the year
1585. unto the day of our coming unto the Crown, and during all the preceding
Troubles, and all causes and occasions of them, shall be for ever suppressed
and forgotten, as if they had never been. Nor shall it be lawful for our
Attorney-Generals, or any other Persons whatsoever, whether public or private,
at any time, or on any occasions that may be, to mention, sue, implead, or
prosecute for them in any of our Courts or Jurisdictions whatsoever.

II. We forbid all our Subjects, whatsoever their Estate or Quality may be, to
revive the memory of past matters, or to assault, incense, injure, provoke, or
reproach one the other upon those accounts, or upon any cause or pretext
whatsoever, to dispute, contend, or quarrel with, or to wrong and offend any
one, either in word or deed; but that they contain themselves within bounds,
and live together peaceably as Brethren, Friends, and Fellow-Citizens, on pain
of punishing the Transgressors as Breakers of the Peace, and Disturbers of the
quiet and settlement of the Commonwealth.

III. We Ordain, That the Roman, Catholic, and Apostolic Religion shall be
restored and set up again in all places and quarters of this our Kingdom, and
in all other our Dominions subject to us, where the exercise thereof has been
intermitted, that it may be peaceably and freely exercised without any trouble,
let, or hinderance. And we do most straightly forbid all Persons, whatsoever
their quality, estate, or condition may be, upon the Penalties
beforementioned, to trouble, molest, or disquiet the Ecclesiastics in the
Celebration of Divine Service, or in the receiving or enjoyment of their
Tithes, Emoluments and Revenues of their Benefices, and of all other rights and
duties appertaining to them. And that all persons, who in the late troubles,
have seized upon Churches, Houses, Goods and Revenues belonging to the said
Ecclesiastics, and who do possess and occupy them, do entirely relinquish the
same, and do peaceably resign and yield up their possession and enjoyment of
them, and of all rights, privileges and securities unto those Churchmen who
are disseized of them. Moreover we do most straightly forbid all those of the
said pretended Reformed Religion, to have any Sermons preached, or any other
exercise of their Religion aforesaid in any Churches, Houses, or other
Habitations of those the said Ecclesiastics.

IV. And the said Ecclesiastics shall have full liberty to buy those Houses
and Edifices which have been built, not upon holy but profane grounds, taken
from them in the late troubles, or to compel the Possessors of the said
Buildings to purchase the land of them, at a certain rate and price, which
shall be estimated and set upon it by persons of judgment and experience in
such matters, and for which both the Parties shall agree. And in case of
non-agreement between them, the Judges of those places shall determine, saving
always to the said Possessors, that they may have recourse at Law against the
Proprietors. And in those places in which the said Ecclesiastics shall compel
the said Possessors to buy the Land, the Moneys accruing from the said purchase
shall not be paid into their hands, but the said Possessors shall be
accountable for them, and shall pay interest for them at the rate of five per
Cent. until such time as the Principal may be better disposed for the profit of
the Church. All which shall be done within the term and space of one year. And
when as that time shall be lapsed, if the said Purchaser shall refuse to pay
any longer the said rent of Interest, he shall be acquitted, by delivering up
the purchace-moneys into the hands of a sufficient responsible Person, by the
authority of a Judge. And as for places Consecrated, there shall be an especial
care taken by those Commissioners, who shall be appointed to put this present
Edict in Execution, according to particular Orders and Instructions, which they
shall receive from us.

V. However no grounds nor places occupied in the repairing and fortifying of
the Cities and Garrisons of our Kingdom, nor any of the materials employed
therein shall be claimed or redemanded by those Ecclesiastics, nor by any
other public or private Persons, unless the said Reparations and
Fortifications shall be demolished by express Orders from us.

VI. And that we may leave no occasion of troubles and differences among our
Subjects, we have permitted, and do permit all those who profess the said
pretended Reformed Religion, to live and dwell in all Towns, Cities, and places
whatsoever of this our Kingdom, without ever being sued, vexed, molested, or
constrained to do any thing upon the account of their Religion against their
Conscience, nor shall they by reason thereof be examined or searched for in
those Houses and places in which they would inhabit, they always behaving
themselves in all things according to the import of this present Edict.

VII. We have also permitted unto all Lords, Gentlemen, and other Persons, as
well Natives of the Kingdom as others, who make profession of the said Reformed
Religion, and have in this our Kingdom, and the Land of our Obedience, the
privilege of High Justice, i. e. Authority to judge and determine in Criminal
and Capital matters, or a whole Fief of Haubert, i. e. to serve us completely
armed in our Wars ( as there be many such in our Dukedom of Normandy) whether
they hold it as Proprietors, or as Usufructuaries, in the whole, or by the
moiety, or by a third part, to have in any one of their Houses of High Justice
aforesaid, or Fiefs aforesaid, which they shall be bound to nominate before
every one of our Bailiffs and Seneschals, in his or their respective districts,
for their principal dwelling House, the exercise of the said Religion, as long
as they shall reside in it, and in their absence, whilst their Wives, or their
Family, or else any part of it is there. And although the right of Justice, or
the Fief of Haubert should be controverted, yet nevertheless the exercise of
the said Religion may be there performed, provided that those persons aforesaid
who profess the said Religion, be in actual possession of the said High
Justice; yea, and although our Attorney General himself were the Party against
them. We do also permit them to have the said exercise in all their other
Houses of High Justice, or Fiefs of Haubert aforesaid, at all times when as
they are present in them, but not otherwise. The whole as well for themselves,
their Family, their Tenants, and all other persons whatsoever who shall please
to go unto the said Houses for Religious Worship.

VIII. But in those Houses of Fiefs, where those of the said Religion have not
the privilege of high Justice, or Fief of Haubert, they shall enjoy the
exercise of their Religion for their Families only. Yet nevertheless, if other
persons, even to the number of thirty over and above the Family should come
thither, whether it be upon the occasion of Baptisms, or Friendly Visits, or
otherwise, it is not our intention that they shall be sought after for this;
provided always those Houses aforesaid be not in any Cities, Towns, or
Villages, belonging unto Catholic Lords, who have the right and privilege of
high Justice, as we our self have, and in which the said Catholic Lords have
their Houses: In which case those of the said Religion may not exercise it in
the said Cities, Towns, or Villages, unless it be by Permission and License
from the said Lords High Justicers, and not otherwise.

IX. We do also permit unto those of the said Religion to have and continue the
exercise thereof in all Cities and Places under our Obedience, in which it had
been established and publicly solemnized for sundry and diverse times in the
year one thousand, five hundred, ninety and six, and in the year one thousand,
five hundred, ninety and seven, until the end of August last, notwithstanding
any Decrees or Judgments to the contrary.

X. Moreover the exercise of the said Religion may be established and restored
in all Cities and places in which it was established, or ought to have been
established by the Edict of Pacification made in the year 1577. and according
to the secret Articles and Conferences made and held at Nerac and Fleix: nor
shall the said establishment be in the least hindered in the Lands of those
Towns and places given by the said Edict, Articles, and Conferences for the
places of Bailywicks, or which may be hereafter, although they may have been
since alienated unto Persons of the Roman Catholic Religion, or may be
hereafter alienated unto such. But yet nevertheless it is not our mind nor
meaning, that the exercise of the Religion aforesaid, should be restored in
those places and dwellings of the said Demeans, which were formerly possessed
by those of the pretended Reformed Religion, in which it had been set up out of
pure respect unto their persons, or because of the privileges of those Fiefs,
if now those Fiefs aforesaid be at present possessed by persons professing the
said Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion.

XI. Moreover in every one of those ancient Bailywicks, Seneschallies, and
Governments, and reputed Bailywicks, clearly and immediately depending upon our
Courts of Parliament, We do Ordain, That in the Suburbs of one Town, over and
besides those other Towns, which have been accorded to them by the said Edict,
secret Articles, and Conferences, and in such Bailywicks where there be no
Towns, there shall be a certain determined place in a Borough or Village of
the said Bailywicks, in which the exercise of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, shall be publicly performed by all persons whatsoever, who will go
unto it; although that in the said Bailywicks, Seneschallies, and Governments,
there be already several other places in which the exercise of the said
Religion is established, excepting always by the said place of Bailywick newly
granted by this present Edict, those Cities in which there is a Bishopric, or
Archbishopric: but yet this shall not in the least prejudice those of the said
pretended Reformed Religion, so as to disable them from demanding or
nominating, for the said place of Worship, the Buroughs and Villages near unto
the said Cities; excepting also the places and Lordships belonging unto the
Ecclesiastics, in which it is not our Intention that the said second place of
Bailywick should he established: We having out of our special Grace and Favor
excepted and reserved them. And we will and understand, that by and under the
name of ancient Bailywicks, be meant those which were in being during the Reign
of our Honored Lord and Father-in-Law, the late King Henry the Second, and
were reputed for Bailywicks, Seneschallies, and Governments depending
immediately on the Jurisdiction of our Courts aforesaid.

XII. Nor do we intend by this present Edict to derogate from those Edicts and
Grants, which we have formerly made for the reducing of diverse Princes, Lords,
Gentlemen, and Catholic Towns unto our obedience by any thing which concerns
the exercise of the said Religion; which Edicts and Grants shall be maintained
and observed in this particular, according to the import of those Instructions,
which shall be given by us unto those Commissioners, who shall be appointed for
the executing of this present Edict.

XIII. We do most strictly forbid all those of the said Religion to exercise
any part thereof, whether as to the Ministry, or Order, or Discipline, or
public Instruction of Children, and any others in this our Kingdom, or any
Lands under our Dominion, in what concerns the said Religion, unless in those
places permitted and granted by this present Edict.

XIV. As also there shall be no exercise of the said Religion in our Court or
Retinue, nor in our Territories or Countries on the other side of the Alps, nor
also in our City of Paris, nor within five Leagues of the said City. Yet
notwithstanding the Professors of the said Religion, who live in the
Territories and Countries on the other side of the Alps, and in our said City,
and within five Leagues thereof, shall not be sought after in their Houses, nor
be obliged to do any thing upon the account of the Religion aforesaid against
their Consciences, provided that they do in all other things demean themselves
according to the import of this present Edict.

XV. Nor may the public exercise of the said Religion be performed in our
Armies, unless in the Quarters of the Chieftains professing the said Religion;
excepting always the place where our Royal Person shall be Lodged.

XVI. In pursuance of the second Article of the Conference at Nerac, we do not
permit those of the said Religion to build places for its exercise in those
Towns and places, where we have granted it unto them; and those which they have
already built shall be restored to them, or the Landlord of them, in that
condition in which it is at present, and that in those places, where the said
exercise is not permitted them, unless they have been since converted into some
other kind of Buildings. In which case, they, who now possess the said
Edifices, and Buildings, Lands and places of equal price and value, according
as they were rated, before they had built them, or their just price, as they
shall be estimated by persons of skill and judgment in such matters. Saving
always to the said Proprietors and Possessors their recourse against all to
whom they may belong.

XVII. We forbid all Preachers, Readers, and other Persons, who speak in
public, to use any words, discourses, or talk, which tends to stir up the
People unto Sedition. Yea, we have enjoined, and do enjoin and Command them to
contain and deport themselves soberly, and to speak nothing but what may be for
the instruction and edification of their Hearers, and that they maintain the
repose and tranquillity established by us in our said Kingdom under those
penalties expressed in our former Edicts. Enjoining most strictly our Attorneys
General, and their Substitutes, that according to the duties of their Office
they do make information against those who shall break and transgress this our
Law, upon pain of answering for it in their own private and particular
Capacities, and of forfeiting their Offices.

XVIII. We do also forbid all our Subjects of whatever quality or condition
they may be, to take away by force, or by inticements, against the will of
their Parents, the Children of those of the said Religion, and to cause them to
be baptized or confirmed in the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church; as
also the same Prohibitions are made by us against those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, and all this on pain of exemplary punishment.

XIX. The Professors of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall not be in
any manner constrained, nor stand obliged by reason of Abjurations, Promises,
and Oaths, which they have made heretofore, or for any securities given by
them, upon the account of the said Religion, nor shall they be molested nor
troubled in any manner whatsoever.

XX. They shall be bound also to keep and observe the Holy Days Commanded by
the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, nor may they work, sell, nor keep
open Shops on those Days, nor may Artificers work out of their Shops, unless it
be in their Chambers, and Houses close shut upon those Holy Days, and other
days prohibited, in any Trade, so that the noise thereof should be heard
without by the Passengers or Neighbors. However none but the Officers of
Justice shall make inquiry after it.

XXI. Nor may any Books of the said pretended Reformed Religion be Printed or
sold publicly, unless in those Towns and Places where the public Exercise of
the said Religion is allowed. And as for other Books, which shall be imprinted
in other Towns, they shall be seen and perused, as well by our Officers as by
Divines; according to the import of our Decrees. And we do most strictly forbid
the Imprinting, Publishing, and Sale of all Books, Libels, and defamatory
Writings, under the Penalties contained in our Decrees; and we enjoin all our
Judges and other Officers to look carefully unto it.

XXII. We do Ordain, That there shall be no difference nor distinction made
upon the account of Religion, in the receiving of Scholars for their Education
in Universities, Colleges, and Schools, and of sick and poor Persons into
Hospitals, and Spittles, or to the participation of public Alms.

XXIII. Those of the said pretended Reformed Religion shall be obliged to keep
the Laws of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, received in this our
Kingdom about Marriages Contracted, or to be Contracted within the degrees of
Consanguinity and Affinity.

XXIV. In like manner those of the said Religion shall pay according to the
usual Custom, the Fees for entrance into those Offices and Charges, which are
bestowed upon them, without ever being compelled to assist at any Ceremonies
contrary to their said Religion: and when ever they be called to take an Oath,
they shall not be obliged to do it in any other manner than by listing up of
their Hand, Swearing and promising by God, that they will speak the truth, nor
shall they be bound to take out a Dispensation for that Oath given by them in
passing of Contracts and Obligations.

XXV. We Will and Ordain, That all those of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, and all others who have followed their Party, of whatsoever estate,
quality or condition they may be, shall be bound and constrained by all due and
reasonable ways, and under the penalties contained in our Edicts, to pay and
deliver unto Curates, and other Ecclesiastics, and to any other Persons to
whom they do belong, the Tithes, according to the use and custom of the places
in which they be.

XXVI. All disinheritings or privations, made either by disposition of the
Living, or Testamentary of the dying out of hatred, or upon the account of
Religion only, shall no more take place, either for time past, or for the
future, among our said Subjects.

XXVII. And that we may use our best skill for reuniting the hearts of our
Subjects, as it is our Intention, and that we may take out of the way all
Complaints for the future, We do declare, that all those who do or shall make
profession of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall be capable of holding
and exercising all public, Royal, or Seignoral Estates, Dignities, Offices,
and Charges whatsoever, or in and belonging to the Cities of our Kingdom, the
Countries, Territories, and Lordships under our Obedience, notwithstanding all
Oaths to the contrary; and they shall be indifferently admitted and received
into them, and our Courts of Parliament shall content themselves and all other
Judges with an Information and Enquiry, into the Life, Manners, Religion, and
civil Conversation of those, who shall be provided unto those Offices, as well
of the one Religion as of the other, without exacting from them any other Oath
than to serve the King well and faithfully in the exercise of their Charges,
and to keep the Laws, as has been in all times observed. And when as ever
those said Estates, Charges, and Offices shall become vacant, which are in our
gift and disposal, we will bestow them indifferently, and without distinction
of persons, upon those who are capable of them, as being a matter tending very
much to the Union of our Subjects. And it is our mind and meaning, that those of
the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall be admitted and received into all
Councils, Deliberations, Assemblies, and Functions which depend upon those
matters aforesaid; so that upon the account of the said Religion they may not
be excluded, nor hindered from the enjoyment of them.

XXVIII. And we do Ordain, That in all Cities and places of this Kingdom, there
shall be speedily provided in every one of them, by our Officers and
Magistrates, and by those Commissioners, whom we shall Constitute for the
executing of this our present Edict, a place as commodious as may be for the
Interrment of the dead of the said Religion. And those Burying places, which
they have had heretofore, and of which they have been deprived by reason of the
late troubles, whatever their quality was, shall be restored to them, unless
that it appear, that they be now at present occupied by Edifices and Buildings,
in which case they shall be provided of some others freely.

XXIX. We most straightly injoin our said Officers to put to their hand, that
there be no scandal committed at the said Interrments; and they shall be bound
within a fortnight after it shall be required of them, to provide for those of
the said Religion a commodious place for the said Burials, without using any
protractions or delays, on pain of being fined in their own private Capacities
the sum of five hundred Crowns. And the said Officers and all other persons
are forbidden to exact any thing for the convoying of the dead Corpse, upon pain
of being guilty of Extorsion.

XXX. That Justice may be rendered and administered unto our Subjects without any
suspicion of hatred or favor, which is one of the chiefest means to preserve
them in Peace and Concord, we have Ordained, and do Ordain, that there shall be
established in our Court of Parliament at Paris a Chamber composed of a
President and sixteen Counselors of the said Parliament, which shall be called
and entitled the Chamber of the Edict, and it shall not only take cognizance of
the causes and processes of those who profess the said pretended Reformed
Religion, and live within the Jurisdiction of the said Court, but also in the
Districts and Jurisdiction of our Parliaments of Normandy and Britain,
according to that Authority which shall be attributed to it by this present
Edict, and this until such time as in every one of those Parliaments there
shall be a Chamber established to distribute Justice upon the Places. We do
also farther Ordain, that of four Offices of Counselors in our Parliament
aforesaid remaining of our last Erection, four Persons professing the said
pretended Reformed Religion, being qualified and capable of them, and the said
Offices be vacant and to be distributed, shall be invested with them, and
received into the said Parliament; to wit, the first shall be received in the
said Chamber of the Edict, and the other three in order shall be received into
the three Chambers of Inquests. Moreover that of the two first Offices of
Lay-Counsellors, which become vacant by death, two persons professing the said
pretended Reformed Religion, shall be provided of them, and these being
received shall also be distributed into the two other Chambers of Inquests.

XXXI. Besides that Chamber heretofore established at Castres, for the Extent
and Jurisdiction of our Court of Parliament of Thoulouse, which shall be
continued in the state in which it is; We have for the self-same Considerations
Ordained, and do Ordain, that in every one of our Courts of Parliament of
Grenoble and Bourdeaux, there shall be in like manner a Chamber established
composed of two Presidents, the one a Catholic, and the other of the pretended
Reformed Religion, and of twelve Counselors, six of whom shall be Catholics,
and the other six of the said Religion, which Catholic Presidents and
Counselors shall be taken and chosen by us out of the Bodies of our Courts
aforesaid. And as for those of the said Religion, there shall be a new Creation
of a President and six Counselors for the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and of a
President and three Counselors for that of Grenoble, who together with those
three Counselors of the said Religion, who are now in the said Parliament,
shall be employed in the said Chamber of Dolphiny. And the said Offices of the
new Creation shall be Created to the same Wages, Honors, Authorities, and
Preheminencies as those others in the said Courts. And the said Chamber of
Bourdeaux, shall sit either at Bourdeaux, or at Nerac, and that of Dolphiny at
Grenoble.

XXXII. The said Chamber of Dolphiny shall take cognizance of the Causes of
those of the said pretended Reformed Religion within the Jurisdiction of our
Parliament of Provence, they not needing to take out Letters of Evocation, or
other Provisions, but in our Chancery of Dolphiny: As also those of the said
Religion in Normandy and Britain, shall not be obliged to take out Letters of
Evocation, nor other Provisions but from our Court of Chancery in Paris.

XXXIII. Our Subjects of the Reformed Religion in the Jurisdiction of the
Parliament of Burgundy, shall according to their will and choice, plead in the
Chamber ordained for that purpose, either in the Parliament of Paris, or in
that of Dolphiny. And they also shall not be bound to take out Letters of
Evocation, nor any other provisions, unless from out of the said Chanceries of
Paris or Dolphiny, at their choice and pleasure.

XXXIV. All these said Chambers composed as aforesaid shall take cognizance,
try and judge Soveraignly, and without Appeal, by Decree, privatively of all
others, of all Suits and Differences moved or to be moved, in which those of
the said pretended Reformed Religion shall be the principal Parties, or
Defendants, in demanding or defending, in all matters, as well Civil as
Criminal, whether the said Suits and Processes be by writing, or by verbal
Appeals, and if it seem good unto the said Parties, and one of them do require
it before the Cause come to be contested, with respect unto the Processes which
may be moved; excepting always all matters beneficiary, and the Possessors of
Tithes not impropriated, Patronages of Churches, and those Causes in which the
rights and duties, and Demean of the Church shall be debated, all which shall
be tried and judged in the Courts of Parliament, without granting any power
unto the said Chambers of the Edict to take Cognizance of them. As also we
will, that when as Criminal Processes shall fall out between the said
Ecclesiastics, and those of the said pretended Reformed Religion: if the
Ecclesiastical Person be Defendant, in this Case the Cognizance and Judgments
of the Criminal Process shall belong unto our Sovereign Courts, privatively of
the said Chambers: or if the said Ecclesiastical Person be Plaintiff, and he of
the said Religion Defendant, the Cognizance and Judgment of the said Criminal
Process shall belong by Appeal, and finally without Appeal unto those Chambers
beforesaid established. Moreover those said Chambers shall take Cognizance in
times of Vacations of matters attributed by the Edicts and Ordinances unto the
Chambers established in time of Vacation, every one of them in their
Jurisdiction.

XXXV. The said Chamber of Grenoble shall be from this instant united and
incorporated with the Body of the said Court of Parliament, and the Presidents
and Counselors of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall be accounted and
called the Presidents and Counselors of the said Court, and shall be reckoned
and taken in the rank, quality, and number of them. And for these ends they
shall be first distributed by the other Chambers, and then extracted and drawn
out from among them to be employed and serve in that which we ordain anew; but
always on this condition, that they shall assist, and have Voice and Sessions
in all Deliberations that shall be made, when as the Chambers are Assembled:
and they shall enjoy the same Sallaries, Authorities and Preheminencies, which
the other Presidents and Counselors of the said Court do.

XXXVI. We will, and it is our mind and intention, that the said Chambers of
Castres and Bourdeaux, shall be reunited and incorporated in those Parliaments
in the same form as others, when as there shall be need of it, and that the
Causes which have moved us to make the establishment shall cease, and there
shall be no place left for them among our Subjects: And to this purpose the
Presidents and Counselors in them of the said Religion, shall be accounted and
held for Presidents and Counselors of the said Courts.

XXXVII. There shall be also a new Creation and Erection in the Chamber
Ordained for the Parliament of Bourdeaux, of two Substitutes of our Attorney
and Advocate-Generals, one of which said Proctors shall be a Catholic, and
another of the said Religion, who shall be possessed of the said Offices with
competent Sallaries.

XXXVIII. And the said Substitutes shall not take unto themselves any other
quality than that of Substitutes, and when as the Chambers ordained for the
Parliaments of Toulouse and Bourdeaux shall be united and incorporated with the
said Parliaments, the said Substitutes shall be provided of Offices of
Counselors in them.

XXXIX. The Dispatches of the Chancery of Bourdeaux shall be made in presence
of two Counselors of that Chamber, one of which shall be a Catholic, and the
other of the said pretended Reformed Religion, in the absence of one of the
Masters of Requests of our Household. And one of the Notaries and Secretaries of
the said Court of Parliament of Bourdeaux, shall make his Residence in the
place where the said Chamber shall be established, or else one of the ordinary
Secretaries of the Chancery, to sign the Dispatches of the said Chancery.

XL. We Will and Ordain, That in the said Chamber of Bourdeaux there shall be
two of the Register of the said Parliament, the one for Civil, the other for
Criminal Causes, who shall discharge their Offices by our Commissions, and
shall be called the Deputies or Commissioners in the Civil and Criminal Office
of the Register, who notwithstanding may not be abandoned nor revoked by the
said Registers in Parliament: Yet nevertheless they shall be bound to bring in
the Emoluments of the said Registers Office unto the said Registers, and the
said Deputies shall be paid their Sallaries by the said Registers, as it shall
be advised and arbitrated by the said Chamber. Moreover it shall be ordained,
that the Catholic Ushers shall be taken out of the said Court, or from
elsewhere, according to, our pleasure; over and besides which there shall be
two new ones erected of the said Reformed Religion, and who shall be put into
those places without payment of Fine or Fees. And all those said Ushers shall
be regulated by the said Chamber, as well for the exercise and division of
their offices, as for the Emoluments, which they are to receive. There shall be
also set up by Commission, a Payer of Wages, and Receiver of Fines in the said
Chamber, which office shall be given by us to whom we please, in case the said
Chamber be established any where else than in the said City. And that
Commission formerly granted unto the Payer of Wages in the Chamber of Castres,
shall be in full power and effect, and the Commission of the Receipt of the
Fines in the said Chamber shall be joined unto the said Office.

XLI. There shall be good and sufficient Assignments made for the Officers
Wages in the Chambers ordained by this Edict.

XLII. The Presidents, Counselors, and other Catholic Officers of the said
Chambers, shall be continued as long as may be, and as we shall see meet for
our service, and the benefit of our Subjects; and when any one shall be
dismissed, others shall be provided and put into their places before their
departure, without ever being able, during the time of their service, to
depart, or absent themselves from the said Chambers without leave, of which a
judgment shall be made according to the Causes of that Ordinance.

XLIII. The said Chambers shall be established within six Months; till which
time, (if the said Establishment should be so long delayed) the Processes
moved, or that may be moved, in which those of the said Religion shall be
Parties, within the Jurisdictions of our Parliaments of Paris, Rouen, Dijon,
and Rennes, shall be called out unto the Chamber which is now established at
Paris, by virtue of the Edict made in the year 1577. or else unto the great
Council, at the choice and will of those of the said Religion, in case they
shall require it. Those which shall be of the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of
Bourdeaux unto the Chamber established in Castres, or unto the great Council,
at their choice; and those which shall be of Provence, unto the Parliament of
Grenoble. And if the said Chambers be not established within three Months after
this our present Edict shall have been tendered to those our Parliaments, that
Parliament which shall refuse so to do, shall be interdicted the Cognizance and
Judgment of their Causes who profess the said Reformed Religion.

XLIV. The Processes which are not as yet judged, hanging in the said Courts of
Parliament and great Council, of the quality beforesaid, in whatsoever estate
they may be, shall be dismissed over unto the said Chambers, and to their
respective Jurisdictions, if one of the Parties being of the said Religion do
so require it, within four Months after their Establishment: and as for those
which shall be discontinued, and are not yet in a condition to be judged, those
of the said Religion shall be bound to make Declaration at the first intimation
and signification that shall be made them of their being prosecuted, and the
said time being lapsed, they shall not be any more admitted to require such
Dismissions.

XLV. The said Chambers of Grenoble, and Bourdeaux, as also that of Castres,
shall keep to the Forms, and Style of the Parliaments, in whose Jurisdiction
they shall be established, and shall give judgment in an equal number, both of
the one and other Religion, unless the Parties do consent that it should be
otherwise.

XLVI. All Judges to whom the Executions of Decrees, Commissions of the said
Chambers, and the Letters obtained out of their Chanceries shall be directed,
as also all Ushers and Sergeants shall be bound to put them in Execution, and
the said Ushers and Sergeants shall execute all Warrants throughout our
Kingdom, without demanding a Placet, or a Visa ne pareatis, on pain of being
suspended from their Offices, and of paying the expenses, damages, and
Interests of the Parties, the Cognizance of which shall appertain unto those
Parties aforesaid.

XLVII. There shall be no Evocations of Causes granted, the Cognizance of which
belongs unto the said Chambers, unless in the Case of Ordinances, which shall
be dismissed unto the next Chamber established according to our Edict, and the
Division of the Processes of the said Chambers shall be judged of in the next,
observing the proportion and forms of the said Chambers, from which the
Processes shall be issued out; excepting for the Chamber of the Edict to our
Parliament of Paris, where the several Processes shall be divided in the
self-same Chamber by those Judges, which shall be appointed by us, and by our
particular Letters to this very purpose; unless the said Parties would rather
wait for the Renovation of the said Chamber. And if it so fall out that one and
the same Process should be divided among all those mixed Chambers, then the
Division shall be dismissed over to the said Chamber of Paris.

XLVIII. When as there be exceptions made against the Presidents and
Counselors of the mixed Chambers, they shall be only made against six of them,
to which number the excepting Parties shall be bound to confine themselves; but
if they will not, then there shall be a proceeding unto Trial, without any
regard had of the said Exceptions.

XLIX. The Examen of the Presidents and Counselors newly erected, in the said
mixed Chambers, shall be made in our Privy Council, or by the said Chambers,
every one in his District, when as there shall be a sufficient number of them:
and yet nevertheless the Oath accustomed shall be taken by them in the Courts
where those said Chambers shall be established; and if they refuse it in our
Privy Council; those of Languedoc always excepted, who shall make Oath before
our Chancellor, or in that Chamber.

L. We Will and Ordain, that the Reception of our Officers of the said Religion
shall be adjudged in the said mixed Chambers by plurality of Voices, as it has
been accustomed to be done in other Judgments, without any need of having more
than two thirds of the Suffrages, according to that Ordinance, from which in
this respect only there is a derogation.

LI. In the said mixed Chambers shall be handled the Propositions,
Deliberations, and Resolutions which belong unto the public Peace, and the
particular Estate and Government of the Towns in which those Chambers shall be.

LII. That Article of the Jurisdiction of the said Chambers, Ordained by this
present Edict, shall be followed and observed according to its form and tenor,
yea, and as to all concerns about the Execution, or Unexecution, or Infraction
of our Edicts, when as those of the said Religion shall be Parties.

LIII. The Subalternate Royal Officers, or others, whose Reception appertains
to our Courts of Parliament, if they be of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, may be examined and received in the said Chambers: To wit, those of
the Jurisdictions of the Parliaments of Paris, Normandy, and Britain, in the
said Chamber of Paris; those of Dolphiny and Provence, in the Chamber of
Grenoble; those of Burgundy in the Chamber of Paris, or of Dolphiny, at their
own choice; those of the Jurisdiction of Toulouse in the Chamber of Castres,
and those of the Parliament of Bourdeaux in the Chamber of Guienne, nor may any
other Persons oppose their Reception, or become Parties against them, unless
our Attorneys-General, or their Substitutes, and those who be provided unto the
said Offices. Yet nevertheless the accustomed Oath shall be taken by them in
the Courts of Parliament, which has no power to take any Cognizance of their
said Receptions; and in case those said Parliaments should refuse, the said
Officers shall take their Oaths in the said Chambers, and after they have so
took it, they shall be bound to present by an Usher or Notary the Act of their
Receptions unto the Registers of the said Courts of Parliament, and to leave a
Copy thereof collationed with the said Registers, who are injoined to Register
those said Acts, upon pain of the expenses, damages, and interests of the
Parties; and in case the said Registers shall refuse so to do, it shall be
enough for the said Officers to make report of the said Citation expedited by
the said Ushers or Notary, and to cause it to be recorded in the Register of
their own Jurisdiction, that so they may have recourse unto it when ever they
shall need it, on pain of a nullity in all proceedings and judgments
whatsoever. And as for those Officers who were never used to be received in
those said Parliaments, in case those to whom it does belong, should refuse to
proceed unto the said Examen and Reception, the said Officers shall betake
themselves unto the said Chambers, to be provided for as in that case it
behooves.

LIVE. The Officers of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who shall be
hereafter appointed to serve in the body of our Courts of Parliament aforesaid,
in the great Council, Chamber of Accounts, Courts of Aid, Courts of the
General-Treasurers of France, and other Officers of the Exchequer, shall be
examined and received in those places where they have been accustomed to be,
and in case of refusal, or denial of Justice, they shall be provided for by our
Privy Council.

LV. The Reception of our Officers made in the Chamber formerly established at
Castres, shall remain in force, notwithstanding all Decrees, and Orders to the
contrary. And the Reception of Judges, Counselors, Comptrollers, and other
Officers of the said Religion made in our Privy Council, or by Commissioners
ordained by us upon the refusal made by our Courts of Parliament, of Aids, and
Chambers of Accounts, shall be valid as if they had been done in the said
Courts and Chambers, and by those other Judges to whom the Reception does
belong: And their Salaries shall be allowed by the Chambers of Accounts,
without any difficulty. And in case any of them has been rased, they shall be
restored, without needing any other Command than this present Edict, and
without binding the said Officers to cause any other Reception to appear;
notwithstanding all Decrees given unto the contrary, which shall abide null,
and void, and of none effect.

LVI. And till that there be some way and means found out for defraying the
charges of Justice in the said Chambers out of the Fines and Mulcts, that may
be levied, we shall take care to provide some valuable and sufficient
Assignments for the paying of those Charges, excepting always our redemanding
the said sums out of the Goods and Estates of Condemned Persons.

LVII. Presidents and Counselors of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who
were formerly received in our Court of Parliament of Dolphiny, and in the
Chamber of the Edict incorporated with it, shall continue, and have their
Sessions, and Orders in it, that is to say, The Presidents as they have
enjoyed, and do enjoy them at present, and the Counselors according to the
Decrees and Provisions which they have obtained in our Privy Council.

LVIII. We declare all Sentences, Judgments, Arrests, Proceedings, Seizures,
Sales, and Decrees made and given against those of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, as well living as dead, since the Death of the late King Henry the
Second, our Most Honored Lord and Father-in-Law, upon account of the said
Religion, the tumults and troubles since happened, together with the execution
of those Judgments and Decrees from this present to be broken, revoked, and
disannulled, and we do break, revoke, and disannul them. We ordain also; that
they shall be rased and taken out of the Registers Office, and the Courts, as
well Sovereign as Inferior. As it is also our will, that all Marks, Prints,
and Monuments of these Executions aforesaid, Books, and defamatory Acts against
their Persons, Memories, and Posterity, shall be removed and blotted out: And
that the places in which upon this occasion there have been demolitions and
ruins, shall be restored in that Estate in which they are at present unto their
Proprietors, who may enjoy and dispose of them as best pleases them. And in
general we have broken, revoked, and disannulled all proceedings and
Informations done upon the account of any Enterprises, pretended Crimes of High
Treason, and others; notwithstanding that such Procedures, Decrees and
Judgments, do contain Reunion, Incorporation, and Confiscation. And we will
that those of the said Religion, and others who have followed their Party, and
their Heirs do re-enter into the real and actual possession of all their goods
and estates.

LIX. All Proceedings made, Judgments, and Decrees given in the late troubles
against those of the said Religion, who have born Arms, or have departed the
Kingdom, or are in it, in the Towns and Lands held by them, or for any other
matter than that of Religion, and troubles; as also all non-suiting of Causes,
and Legal, Conventional and Customary Prescriptions, and Foedal Seizures
happened during the late troubles, or by lawful Impediments proceeding from
them, the cognizance of which shall abide with our Judges, shall be all
esteemed as if not done, given, or happened; and we have declared, and do
declare them to be such, and we have put, and do put them to naught, so that
the Parties cannot be in the least helped or benefitted by them; so that they
shall be remitted into that estate in which they were before, notwithstanding
the said Decrees, and their Execution, and they shall be restored in this
respect unto the possession of them. And all this as abovesaid shall in like
manner take place for them, who have followed the Party of them of the said
Religion, or who have been absent from our Kingdom upon the account of the
Troubles. And as for the Children Minors of those Persons of the quality
abovesaid, who are dead in the late troubles, we leave those Parties in the
same estate in which they were before, without refunding of the Expenses, or
being bound to make any amends. Yet nevertheless it is not our mind nor
intention that those Judgments given by Presidial Judges, or other inferior
Judges against those of the said Religion, or who have followed their Party,
should be null, in case they were given by Judges sitting on the Bench in those
Towns which were held by them, and whereunto they had free access.

LX. The Decrees given in our Courts of Parliament in matters whose Cognizance
belong unto the Chambers ordained by the Edict of the year 1577. and the
Articles of Nerac and Flex, in which Courts the Parties have not proceeded
voluntarily, that is to say, they have alleged and proposed declinatory ends,
or which have been given for default, or by fore-clusion, whether in Civil or
Criminal matters, notwithstanding which ends the said Parties have been
constrained to go on farther, they shall be in like manner null, and of no
value. And as for those Decrees given against them of the said Religion who
have proceeded voluntarily, and without proposing Declinatory Ends, those
Decrees shall stand: Yet nevertheless, and without prejudice unto their
Execution, they may, if it seem good unto them, provide against them by a Civil
Request to the Chambers ordained by this present Edict, without suffering the
time imported by those Ordinances to be ran out to their prejudice: And till
such times as the said Chambers, and their Chanceries shall be established,
Appeals either by word of mouth, or tendered in by writing by those of the said
Religion before the Judges, Registers, or Deputies, Executors of the Decrees
and Judgments, shall have the same effect, as if they had been uplifted by
Royal Letters.

LXI. In all Inquests which shall be for any cause whatsoever in civil matters,
If the Inquisitor be a Catholic, the Parties shall be bound to agree among
themselves of another to be in Conjunction with him: and in case they cannot
agree, the said Inquisitor or Commissioner, shall by virtue of his Office, take
one unto himself who shall be of the said pretended Reformed Religion: And the
same also shall be practiced when as the Commissioner or Examiner shall be of
the said Religion, he shall take an Assessor to himself, who shall be a Roman
Catholic.

LXII. We Will and Ordain, that our Judges may take knowledge of the validity
of Testaments, in which those of the said Religion are concerned, in case they
do require it; and Appeals from those Judgments may be taken out from the said
Chambers ordained for the Processes of those of the said Religion,
notwithstanding all Customs to the contrary, yea and those of Britain also.

LXIII. To prevent all differences which may fall out in our Courts of
Parliament, and the Chambers of those Courts ordained by our present Edict, we
shall make a good and ample Regulation betwixt the said Courts and Chambers,
and such an one as that those of the said pretended Reformed Religion may
entirely enjoy the benefit of the said Edict, which regulation shall be
verified in our Courts of Parliament, and shall be kept and observed, without
any respect had unto the former.

LXIV. We do prohibit and forbid all our Sovereign Courts, and others of this
Kingdom to take Cognizance of, or judge in the Civil or Criminal Processes of
those of the said Religion, the Cognizance of which by our Edict is attributed
unto the said Chambers; provided that they demand the dismission of them
thither; according to what was said before in the 40. Article.

LXV. We will also by way of provision, and till we have taken some further
course, and shall have otherwise ordained, that in all Processes moved, or to
be moved, in which those of the said Religion shall be in the quality of
Plaintiffs or Defendants, principal Parties, or Securities in civil matters, in
which our Officers and Presidial Courts have full power of judging finally
without Appeal, that they shall be permitted to require, that two of the
Chamber where the Processes ought to be judged, shall abstain from giving
judgment on them; who without any cause shown, shall be bound to abstain,
notwithstanding that Ordinance, that the Judges may not be held for persons
excepted at without cause offered; they retaining over and above this those
exceptions of right against the rest. And in criminal matters in which also the
said Presidial, and other Subalternate Royal Judges do judge without Appeal,
the accused also of that Religion may require that three of the said Judges do
abstain from judging of their Processes, without showing of any Cause. And the
Provosts of the Mareschals of France, the Vice-Bailiffs, the Vice-Seneschals,
the Lieutenants of short Robe, and other Officers of the like quality, shall
judge according to the Ordinances and Regulations formerly given upon the
account of Vagabonds. And as for the Inhabitants in the Jurisdiction of those
Provosts, charged and accused, if they be of the said Religion, they may
require that three of those Judges aforesaid, who may take cognizance of their
cause, do abstain from judging of their Processes, and they shall be bound to
abstain, without any cause showed by them, unless in that Company where the
said Processes shall be judged, there be no more than two in Civil matters, and
three in Criminal matters of the said Religion; in which case they shall not be
permitted to except against, or refuse those Judges without showing of a cause
why: And this shall be common and reciprocal with the Catholics in that form
as above, as to their refusing of Judges, where those of the pretended Reformed
Religion shall be the greatest number. And it is not our meaning nor intention
that the said Presidial Courts, Provosts of Mareschals, Vice-Bailiffs,
Vice-Seneschals, and others who judge Soveraignly and without Appeal, should in
virtue of what has been said, take Cognizance of the palled troubles. And as
for Crimes and Riots which have fallen out upon other accounts than those of
the late Troubles, since the beginning of March in the year 1585. unto the end
of the year 1597. In case they should take Cognizance of them, we will that
they may take out their Appeals from those judgments, and bring them before the
Chambers Ordained by this present Edict. And the same shall be likewise
practiced by the Catholic Accomplices, and where those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion shall be Parties.

LXVI. We Will also and Ordain, that from henceforward in all Instructions,
besides the Informations of Criminal Processes in the Seneschallies of
Toulouse, Carcassonne, Rouergue, Loragais, Beziers, Montpellier, and Nismes,
the Magistrate, or Commissioner deputed for the said Instruction, if he be a
Catholic shall be bound to take an Assessor who shall be of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, of which the Parties shall agree, and in case they cannot
agree, there shall be chosen by virtue of his office one of the said Religion
by the Magistrate or Commissioner aforesaid. As also in like manner, if the
said Magistrate or Commissioner is of the said Religion, he shall be bound in
the same form as was said before, to take unto himself a Catholic Assessor.

LXVII. When as the Provosts of the Mareschals of France, or their Lieutenants
shall be demanded to issue out a Criminal Process against an Inhabitant within
their Jurisdictions who is of the said Religion, and is charged and accused of
a Crime, which is triable in their Provost's Courts, the said Provosts or their
Lieutenants, if they be Catholics, shall be bound to call in to the drawing up
of the said Processes an Assessor of the said Religion: which said Assessor
shall be present at the Judgment of the Competency, and at the definitive
Judgment of the said Process. Which Competency may not be judged but in the
next Presidial Court, in an Assembly of the principal Officers of the said
Court, who shall be present upon those very places, upon pain of nullity,
unless that the Accused should require that the Competency should be judged in
the said Chambers, ordained by this present Edict. In which Case as to what
concerns the Inhabitants in the Province of Guienne, Languedoc, Provence, and
Dolphiny, the Substitutes of our General-Attorneys in the said Chambers shall
cause, at the request of the said Inhabitants, to be brought in to them those
Accusations and Informations which are made against them, that it may be known
and judged whether those Actions be triable in the Provosts Courts, or not,
that so afterward, according to the quality of the Crimes, they may be by those
Chambers remanded back unto the ordinary, or judged by the Provosts, according
to law and reason, they observing the Contents of this our present Edict. And
those Presidial Judges, Provosts of Mareschals, Vice-Bailiffs, Vice-Seneschals,
and others, who judge Soveraignly and without Appeal, shall be bound
respectively to obey and satisfy those Commands which shall be made them by the
said Chambers, and all even as they have been accustomed to be done in the said
Parliaments, upon pain of being deprived of their Offices.

LXVIII. The Proclamations, Bills of Siquis, and Outropes of Inheritances, by
which a Decree is prosecuted, shall be made in those places, and at the hours
accustomed, if it may be done, according to our Ordinances, or else in the
public Markets, provided that there be a Market in that place in which the
said Inheritances do lie; but where there is none, they shall be made in the
nearest Market Town of the Jurisdiction of that Court where a Delivery by
Judgment is to be made. And the Bills shall be set up and affixed upon the
Posts in the said Market, and at the entrance of the Auditory of the said
place; and by this means the said Proclamations shall be good and valid, and
they may proceed to the interposal of a Decree without stopping at the
Nullities which may be alleged on this account.

LXIX. All Deeds, Papers, Writings, Evidences, which have been taken away shall
be restored and returned back on both sides unto their rightful Owners and
Proprietors, although the said Papers, or the Castles and Houses, in which they
were kept, had been taken and possessed by special Commissions from the late
King now dead, our most Honored Lord and Brother-in-Law, or by Commissions
from our selves, or by Command of the Governors, and Lieutenants-General of
our Provinces, or by the Authority of the heads of either Party, or by any
other means and pretext whatsoever.

LXX. The Children of those persons who had departed the Kingdom since the late
King Henry the Second, our most Honored Lord and Father-in-Law, upon the
account of Religion, and the troublesome times ensuing, although the said
Children were born out of the Kingdom, shall be reputed True Frenchmen, and
Natives of the Kingdom, and we have declared and declare them to be such, nor
have they any farther need of Letters of Naturalization, or other provisions
from us besides this present Edict: notwithstanding all Ordinances to the
contrary, from which we have derogated, and do derogate, upon Condition that
the said Children born in Foreign Countries shall be obliged within the term of
ten years after the publication of this present to come and dwell in the
Kingdom.

LXXI. Those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and others who have
followed their Party, and had farmed before the troubles any Office, or Demesne,
or Gabell, or Foreign Imposition, or other Rights appertaining to us, which
they could not enjoy because of those troubles, shall be acquitted and
discharged, even as we do now acquit and discharge them of all receipts
whatsoever of the Income of the said Offices, or which they may have paid any
where else than into the Receipt of our Treasury, notwithstanding all
Obligations made and passed by them on this occasion.

LXXII. All Places, Towns and Provinces of our Kingdom, the Countries,
Territories, and Lordships under our Jurisdiction, shall use and enjoy the same
Privileges, Immunities, Liberties, Franchises, Fairs, Markets, Jurisdictions,
and Assizes, Seats of Justice, as they did before the troubles began in the
Month of March one thousand five hundred and eighty five, and in the preceding
years, notwithstanding all Letters to the contrary, and the Disposals of the
said Lordships to other Persons, provided that this was done merely and solely
upon the account of the said Troubles. Which Assizes and Seats of Justice shall
be revived and restored in those Towns and Places in which they were before.

LXXIII. All Prisoners formerly detained by the Authority of Justice, or by any
other means, yea, and the Slaves in the Galleys, for and upon the account of
the said Religion, shall be enlarged, and set at full Liberty.

LXXIV. Those of the said Religion may not be hereafter surcharged nor
oppressed by any ordinary or extraordinary Taxes more than the Catholics, nor
above the proportion of their estates and abilities. And the Parties which
shall complain of their being over-burdened, shall appear before the Judges to
whom the Cognizance of these matters does appertain: And all our Subjects, both
of the Catholic and pretended Reformed Religion, shall be indifferently
discharged of all Taxes which had been imposed both upon the one and other,
during the troubles, by them who were of the contrary Party, and not
consenting, as also the Debts contracted and not paid, and expenses made
without their consent; however they shall not be able to redemand the moneys
which had been employed in payment of the said Taxes.

LXXV. Nor is it our intention that those of the said Religion, nor others who
have followed their Party, nor the Catholics who were remaining in the Towns
and Places possessed and held by them, and which stood up for them, shall be
prosecuted for the payment of Taxes, Aids, Grants, Increase, and the little Tax
(imposed by Henry the Second) Utensils, Reparations, and other Impositions and
Subsidies, fallen and imposed during the Troubles fallen out before, and till
our coming unto the Crown, whether by the Edicts, Commands, of the late Kings
our Predecessors, or by the Advice and deliberation of the Governors and
States of the Provinces, Courts of Parliaments and others, from which we have
discharged, and do discharge them, by forbidding the General-Treasurers of
France, and of our Revenue, the Receivers-general and particular, their Agents
and Dealers, and other Intendants and Commissioners of our Revenues, to search
after, molest, or disturb them any manner of way whatsoever, whether directly
or indirectly.

LXXVI. All Chieftains, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Officers, Corporations, and
Communalties, and all others which have aided and succored them, their Widows,
Heirs, and Successors, shall be quitted and discharged of all moneys, which
were taken up, and levied by them and their Orders, whether they were moneys
Royal, how great soever the sum might be, or the moneys of those Cities and
Communalties, and of particular Persons, their Rents, Revenues, Plate, Sale of
Household Goods, of Ecclesiastical Persons or others, Trees, Timber, whether of
and belonging to the Crown, or to other Persons, Fines, Booties, Ransoms, or
moneys of another nature taken by them, upon the account of the troubles began
in March 1585. and the other troubles foregoing until our Arrival to the Crown,
without that either they, or their Agents employed by them in the levying of
the said moneys, or who ever gave them any, or supplied them by virtue of their
Orders, shall be hereafter, or at present sued for; and they shall be
acquitted, both they and their Agents, from all management and administration
of the said moneys, they producing for their discharge, within four Months
after the publication of this present Edict, made in our Court of Parliament in
Paris, Acquittances duly expedited by the Chief Commanders in the said
Religion, or of those, who were Commissionated by them to audit and finish
those Accounts, or of those who bore Office and Command in those said
Corporations and Towns, during the said troubles. Moreover they shall be
acquitted and discharged of all Acts of Hostility, raising and leading of
Soldiers, coining and valuing of money, done in Obedience to the Orders of the
said Chief Commanders, melting up and taking of Artillery, and Ammunition,
making of Gunpowder, and Saltpeter, Surprizals of Fortifications,
Dismantlings and demolishing of Towns, Castles, Boroughs and Villages, Attempts
upon them, burnings and demolishments of Churches and Houses, Establishment of
Justice, Judgments and their Executions, whether in matters Civil or Criminal,
Policy and Reglements made about them, Voyages and Intelligences, Negotiations,
Treaties and Contracts made with all Foreign Princes and Communalties, and
Introduction of the said Strangers into the Cities and other parts of our
Kingdom, and generally of all that has been done, acted, and negotiated during
the said troubles (since the Death of the late King Henry the Second, our most
Honored Lord, and Father-in-Law) by them of the said Religion, and others who
have followed their Party, as if it had been particularly expressed and specified.

LXXVII. Those also of the said Religion shall be discharged of all general and
provincial Assemblies made and held by them, whether at Mantes, or since that
time at any other place until now, as also of Councils by them Ordained and
established for the Provinces, of Ordinances and Reglements made in the said
Assemblies and Councils, placing and increase of Garrison, Assemblies of Men of
War, levy and raking of moneys, whether in the hands of general or particular
Receivers, Collectors of the Parishes, or otherwise in whatsoever way and
manner it might be done, Decrees about Salt, Continuance or new erection of
Tolls, Customs, and their receipts at Royal, and upon the Rivers of Charante,
Garonne, the Rhone, and Dordonne, Armings and Fights at Sea, and all accidents,
and excesses fallen out about paying the said Tolls, and Customs, and other
moneys, Fortifying of Towns, Castles, and Places, Impositions of moneys, and
services, receipts of those moneys, rejection of our Receivers and Farmers, and
other Officers, setting up of others in their Places, and of all Unions,
Dispatches, and Negotiations made both within and without the Kingdom: And
generally of all that has been done, deliberated, written and ordained by the
said Assemblies and Council, without suffering those who have given their
advice, Signed, Executed, caused to be Signed and Executed the said Orders,
Reglements and Deliberations, to be sued, nor their Widows, Heirs and
Successors, neither now, nor for the future, although the particularities be
not here amply declared. And our General-Attorneys, and their Substitutes, and
all those who may claim any Interests in whatsoever fashion or manner it might
be, shall for ever forbear all Prosecutions, notwithstanding all Decrees,
Sentences, Judgments, Informations, and Proceedings done to the contrary.

LXXVIII. Moreover we do approve, strengthen, and authorize those Accounts
which have been heard, examined and shut up by the Deputies in the said
Assembly. We will that they, and their Acquittances which were brought in by
those Accountants, shall go and be carried into our Chamber of Accounts in
Paris, three Months after the Publication of this Edict, and shall be put into
the hands of our Attorney General to be delivered in, and kept in the Books and
Registers of our Chamber, that upon all needful occasions there may be recourse
had unto them; nor shall those Accounts be ever revised, nor those Accomptants
be bound to appear, nor shall there be any Correction of them, unless in Case
of omitting the receipt, or of false Acquittances. And our Attorney General
shall not at all act or proceed, although there be very many defects, and the
formalities have not been duly kept nor observed. And we forbid our Officers in
the Chamber of Accounts in Paris, and in all the other Provinces in which they
be established, to take any manner of Cognizance whatsoever of them.

LXXIX. And as for those Accounts which have not been yet brought in, we will
that they be Audited, Examined, and shut up by our Commissioners, who shall be
deputed by us, who shall, without any difficulty, pass and allow all the parts
paid by the said Accomptants, by virtue of the Orders made by the said
Assembly, or others that were in Power.

LXXX. All Collectors, Receivers, Farmers, and all others, shall be duly and
legally discharged of all sums of money, which they have paid in to the said
Agents of the said Assembly, of whatsoever nature they may be, until the last
day of this Month. And it is our Will and Pleasure, that all their Accounts
which shall be brought into our Chamber of Accounts, shall be passed and
allowed purely and simply by virtue of the Acquittances, which shall be
produced by them. And if any shall be hereafter expedited and delivered, they
shall be all null; and those who shall accept or deliver them shall be
condemned in a Mulct and Fine for mis-employment of them. And if in some
Accounts already rendered there shall be found rasures and charges, we have upon
this respect removed and taken them away; we have restored, and do restore the
said parts entirely, by virtue of these Presents, without any need for all
abovementioned of particular Letters, or other matters except the Extracts of
this present Article.

LXXXI. The Governors, Captains, Consuls, and Persons Commissionated to
recover moneys to pay the Garrisons of the places held by those of the said
Religion, to whom our Receivers and Collectors of the Parishes may have lent
moneys upon their Bills and Obligations, whether it were by Compulsion, or out
of obedience to the Commands which were given them by the General Treasurers of
all these necessary sums for the maintenance of the said Garrisons until that
time when we agreed about the state of that Account, which we dispatched in the
beginning of the year 1596. and the augmentation we have since granted, they
shall be acquitted and discharged, and for what is already paid to the purpose
above mentioned, although and for what is already paid to the purpose above
mentioned, although that the said Schedules and Obligations do not expressly
mention them, which shall be yielded up unto them as if they had been null. And
that they may be satisfied, the General-Treasurers in every Generality, shall
furnish the said Collectors by their particular Receivors of our Taxes with
Acquittances, and by the Receivers-General their Acquittances for the Receivers
particular, and for the discharge of the said General-Receivers the said sums,
of which they have brought in the Accounts as was said, shall be endorsed upon
the Commands issued out by the Treasurer of the Exchequer, in the names of the
extraordinary General-Treasurers of our Wars, for the payment of the said
Garrisons. And in case the said Commands should not amount to as much as our
said Account for the year sisteen hundred ninety and six, and the augmentation,
we ordain, that to make it up there shall be expedited new Commands for what is
wanting to discharge the said Accomptants, and for restitution of the said
Promises and Obligations, so that nothing shall be demanded for the future from
them who shall have thus acted, and all Letters of Confirmation, which may be
needful for the discharge of the said Accomptants, shall be expedited by venue
of this present Article.

LXXXII. Moreover those of the said Religion shall quit and abandon from this
day forward all Correspondencies, Negotiations, and Intelligencies, as well
within as without our Kingdom; and the said Assemblies and Councils,
established in the Provinces, shall break up speedily; and all Leagues and
Associations done or to be done, under what pretext soever it be, in prejudice
of this our present Edict, shall be broken and disannulled, as we do now break
and disannul them: We most expressly forbidding all our Subjects, that for the
future they do not make any Assessments, or Levies of money without our
Permission, Fortifications, Enrollments of men, Gatherings or Assemblies,
besides these which are permitted by this our present Edict, and these to be
unarmed; which we do prohibit and forbid them upon pain of being punished most
rigorously, and as Contemners and Transgressors of our Commands and Ordinances.

LXXXIII. All Prizes taken upon the Sea during these troubles by virtue of
Grants, and Warrants then given, and those which have been done ashore upon
those of the contrary Party, and which have been judged by the Judges and
Commissioners of the Admiralty, or by the Commanders in Chief of those of the
said Religion, or their Council, shall be all suppressed by the benefit of this
our present Edict, so that upon those accounts, there shall never be made any
Prosecution: Nor shall the Captains, nor any others who made the said Prizes,
nor their Sureties, nor the said Judges, Officers, their Widows and Heirs be
sought after, nor molested in whatsoever manner it may be, notwithstanding all
Decrees of our Privy Council, and of Parliament, and Letters of mark and
seizures, yet depending and not judged, all which we will shall be fully and
entirely released and discharged.

LXXXIV. Moreover those of the said Religion shall not be prosecuted for those
oppositions and hindrances, which they have made before or since the troubles,
about the Decrees and Judgments given for the establishment of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Religion, in diverse places of this Kingdom were Executed.

LXXXV. And as for what was done or taken during the troubles, not in ways of
Hostility, or by Hostility, against the public or private Reglements of the
Heads or Communalties of the Provinces, who then had Command, such matters may
be prosecuted according to due Form of Law.

LXXXVI. Yet nevertheless since that what was done on the one side and other
against their Reglements is indifferently excepted, and reserved in that
General Abolition granted by this our present Edict, and is subject unto
prosecution, and that there is no Soldier but is thereupon liable unto
Impeachments, from whom new troubles may arise: for this Cause, We will and
ordain, that only Execrable matters shall stand excepted, in and by the said
Act of Indemnity, such as Rapes, and forcings of Women and Maids, Burnings,
Murders, and Robberies committed treacherously, wittingly, and of set purpose,
not in ways of Hostilities, but to exercise particular revenges, against the
Laws of War, Infractions of Passports and Safeguards, with Murders and
Plunderings, without Authority, of those of the said Religion, or of any who
have followed the Party of the Commanders who had Authority over them, grounded
upon special occasions, which moved them to command and order it.

LXXXVII. We Ordain also, that those Crimes and Offenses committed among
Persons of the same Party, unless it be in acts commanded by the Chiefs of both
sides, according to the necessity, Law, and order of War, shall be punished.
And as for all Levies and Exactions of moneys, bearing of Arms, and other
exploits of War done by private Authority, and unavowed, shall be prosecuted
according to due course of Law.

LXXXVIII. The Towns which were dismantled in the late troubles, their ruins,
License being first had and obtained from us, may be reedified and repaired by
the Inhabitants, and their charges and expenses, and provisions formerly
granted to this purpose shall be allowed.

LXXXIX. We Ordain, and it is our Will and Pleasure, that all Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen and others, of whatsoever quality and condition of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, and others, who have followed their Party, may re-enter, and
shall be effectually conserved in the enjoyment of all and singular their
Rights, Titles, Privileges, and actions, notwithstanding the Judgments issued
out against them during the late troubles, or by reason of them: which Decrees,
Seizures, Judgments, and all that has ensued upon them, we have to this end
declared, and do declare to be null and void, and of none effect and value.

XC. Those Purchaces made by the Professors of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, and of others who have followed their Party, by other Authority than
that of the late Kings our Predecessors, of the immoveables belonging unto the
Church shall not be allowed, nor take effect; but we do Ordain, and it is our
Will and Pleasure, that the Ecclesiastics shall re-enter immediately, and
without delay, and shall be conserved in the real possession and actual
enjoyment of the said alienated goods, without ever being bound to restore the
price for which they were sold, and this notwithstanding the said Contracts of
sale, all which we have to this purpose broken and revoked as null, without
suffering the said Purchasers to recover it from their Chief Commanders, by
whose Authority the said goods were sold. And yet nevertheless, that the moneys
which they had truly, and without fraud paid down, may be reimbursed to them,
we will Expedite our Letters Patents to those of the said Religion, with
License, that they shall impose upon themselves, and equalize the sums unto
which the said Sales did amount, without enabling the said Purchasers to take
forth any action for their damages and interests through want of enjoyment,
but they shall rest contented with the reimbursement of the moneys paid in to
them for the price of the said purchaces; they first deducting out of the said
price the profits received by them, in case it should appear that the said Sale
was made at a very low and unjust price.

XCI. And that our Justices, Officers, and other our Subjects, may be clearly
and certainly informed of our will and intention, and that we may take away all
ambiguities and doubts, which may be made because of former Edicts, about that
difference that is found in them, we have declared, and do declare all other
preceding Edicts, secret Articles, Letters, Declarations, Modifications,
Restrictions, Interpretations, Decrees, and Registers, as well secret as other
Deliberations done formerly by the Kings our Predecessors, in our Courts of
Parliament or elsewhere, concerning matters relating to the said Religion, and
to the troubles happened in our said Kingdom, to be of no effect nor force:
From which, and those derogations in them contained, we have by this our Edict
derogated, and do derogate from this very instant, as we do now break, revoke,
and disannul it. Expressly declaring, that we will that this our Edict shall be
firmly and inviolably kept, as well by our said Justices, Officers, as by all
other our Subjects, without standing upon, or having any regard unto all that,
which may be contrary to, or derogate from it.

XCII. And for greater assurance of the maintaining and observing of this our
Edict, which is so very much desired by us, We Will and Ordain, and it is our
Pleasure, that all Governors and Lieutenant-Generals of our Provinces,
Bailiffs, Seneschals, and other ordinary Judges of the Towns of our said
Kingdom, incontinently after their reception of this our Edict, do swear, that
they will cause it to be kept and observed every one of them in their District:
As also all Mayors, Sheriffs, Head boroughs, Consuls, and Magistrates of Towns,
whether annual or perpetual, shall swear it also. And we do also enjoin that
our said Bailiffs, Seneschals, or their Lieutenants, and other Judges, shall
cause the principal Inhabitants of the said Towns, both of the one and other
Religion, to swear immediately after the Publication of this our Edict, that
they will keep and maintain it. We taking all the Inhabitants of the said Towns
into our Protection and Safeguard, the one to keep the others, charging them
respectively, and by public Acts to answer in a Court Civil for the
transgressions that shall be made of this our present Edict in the said Towns,
by their Inhabitants, or to bring them before, and to yield them up into the
hands of Justice, who shall have broken it.

We do Command our Beloved and Faithful Officers in our Courts of Parliament,
Chambers of Accounts, and Court of Aids, that as soon as they shall have
received this our present Edict, that, leaving all other businesses, on pain of
nullity for those Acts, which they shall do otherwise, they do take the like
Oath as above, and that they do cause this our Edict to be published, and
registered in our said Courts, according to its form and tenor purely and
simply, without using of any Modifications, Restrictions, Declarations, or
secret Registers, or without waiting for any farther Command or Warrant from
us: And our Attorneys-General shall incontinently, and without delay, require
and pursue the said Publication.

And we Command the said Officers in our said Courts of Parliament, Chambers of
Accounts, and Courts of Aids, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts, and other our
Justices, and other Officers to whom it shall appertain, and to their
Lieutenants to keep and observe punctually, and to cause the Contents and
Articles of this said Edict to be used and enjoyed fully and peaceably, by all
those to whom it shall appertain, ceasing and causing to cease all troubles and
impediments to the contrary. For such is our Pleasure. In testimony whereof we
have Signed these Presents with our own Hand, and that this matter may be firm
and stable for ever, we have caused to be put unto it, and backed it with our
Seal.

Given at Nantes in the Month of April, in the Year of Grace, one thousand,
five hundred, ninety and eight, and of our Reign the Ninth. Signed HENRY. And
below, by the King sitting in his Council. Forget. And at the side. Visa.
And Sealed with the Great Seal in green Wax, on threads of red and green silk.
Read, Published and Registered, the Kings Attorney General hearing and
consenting to it at Paris in Parliament,

this 25 th of February, 1599. Signed Voysin.


Read, Published and Registered in the Chamber of Accounts, the Kings
Attorney General hearing and consenting to it at

Paris in Parliament the last of March, 1599. Signed De la Fontaine.


Read, Published and Registered, the Kings Attorney General hearing and
consenting to it at

Paris in the Court of Aids the 30 th being the last day of April, 1599. Signed
Bernard.



Particular Articles extracted out of the general ones, which the King has
granted unto those of the pretended Reformed Religion, which his Majesty would
not have to be comprised in the said Generals, nor in the Edict which was made
and framed for them, given at Nantes the last April: and yet nevertheless his
said Majesty has accorded, that they shall be entirely fullfilled and
observed, as if they had been contained in the said Edict. And therefore they
shall be registered in his Courts of Parliament, and elsewhere, as there shall
be need, and all Declarations, Provisions, and necessary Letters shall be
expedited about them.
ARTICLE I. THE sixth Article of the said Edict, concerning Liberty of
Conscience, and Permission to all his Majesty's Subjects to live and dwell in
his Kingdom, and the Countries under his Jurisdiction shall hold good, and be
observed according to its form and tenor; as well for Ministers,
Schoolmasters, and all others who are or shall be of the said Religion, whether
Natives of the Kingdom or others, they as to all other things deporting
themselves according to the Edict. ARTICLE II. Those of the said Religion shall
not be constrained to contribute any thing to the Repairings or Buildings of
Churches, Channels, or Priests Houses, nor to the buying of Priests Ornaments,
Lights, founding of Bells, holy Bread, rights of Confraternities, hire of
Houses in which Priests and Religious Persons do dwell, and other such like
matters, unless they be obliged to it by Foundations, Dotations, or other
Disposals made by them, or their Authors and Predecessors. ARTICLE III. They
shall not be constrained to hang or cloth the forepart of their Houses on
those Festivals and Holy Days, in which it is ordered to be done: but only to
suffer that they be hung, and clad by the Authority of the Local Officers; nor
shall the Professors of the said Religion contribute any thing on this account.
ARTICLE IV. Moreover those of the said Religion shall not be bound to receive
Exhortation when as they be sick, and near unto Death, whether Condemned to it
by Justice, or otherwise, from any others than those of the same Religion, and
they may be visited and comforted by their Ministers, without ever being
troubled: And as for such who are Condemned by Justice, the said Ministers may
in like manner visit and comfort them, without praying in public, unless in
those places, where the said public worship is allowed them by the said Edict.
ARTICLE V. Those of the said Religion may lawfully enjoy the public exercise
thereof at Pimpoul, and for Diepe in the Suburbs of Paulet: and the said places
of Pimpoul and Paulet shall be ordained to be places of Bailywicks. As for
Sancerre, the said exercise shall be continued as it is at present, saving that
it shall not be set up again in the said Town; the Inhabitants there making it
appear, that the Lord of the place consents to it; and care shall be taken
herein by those Commissioners which his Majesty shall depute for the executing
of the said Edict. And also the said exercise shall be established free and
public in the Town of Montagnac in Languedoc. ARTICLE VI. Upon that Article
which makes mention of Bailywicks, it was declared and granted as follows:
First, For the establishing the exercise of the said Religion in two places
granted in every Bailywick, Seneschalsy, and Government, Those of the said
Religion shall name two Towns, in the Suburbs of which the said Exercise shall
be established by those Commissioners whom his Majesty shall depute for
executing the said Edict. And in case they should not judge it to be meet for
them, those of the said Religion shall name two or three Boroughs or Villages
near unto the said Towns: and for every one of them the said Commissioners
shall choose one. And if by reason of Hostility, Contagion, or other lawful
impediment, it may not be continued in those said places, others shall be given
them for that time, that the said Impediment shall last. Secondly as to the
Government of Picardy, there shall be but two Towns provided for, in whose
Suburbs those of the said Religion may have the exercise thereof for all the
Bailywicks, Seneschalsies, and Governments which depend upon it. And in case it
shall not be judged meet to establish it in those said Towns, there shall be
given them two commodious Boroughs or Villages. Thirdly because of the great
extent of the Seneschalsy of Provence, and Bailywick of Viennois, his Majesty
grants, That in every one of the said Bailywicks and Seneschalsies, a third
place, which shall be chosen and named as above, in which the said exercise of
the said Religion shall be established, over and besides those other places in
which it is already established. ARTICLE VII. That which is accorded by the
said Article for exercise of the said Religion shall have place for those
Lands, which belonged unto the late Queen Mother-in-Law of his Majesty, and for
the Bailywick of Beaujolois. ARTICLE VIII. Over and above the two places
accorded for the exercise of the said Religion, by the secret Articles in the
year 1577. in the Islands of Marennes and of Olleron, there shall be given them
two others, which may be most commodious for the said Inhabitants, to wit one
for all the Islands of Marennes and another for the Isle of Olleron. ARTICLE
IX. The Provisions granted by his Majesty for the exercise of the said Religion
in the City of Mets, shall obtain their full and entire effect. ARTICLE X. It Is
his Majesty's will and intention that the 27. Article of his Edict concerning
the admission of them of the said pretended Reformed Religion unto Offices and
Dignities, shall be observed and maintained according to its form and tenor,
notwithstanding the Edicts and Grants formerly made for the Reduction of some
Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Catholic Cities unto his Obedience, which shall
have no place to the prejudice of those of the said Religion, as to their
exercise of it. And the said exercise shall be regulated according to what is
imported in the ensuing Articles, according to which shall the Instructions be
prepared for those Commissioners whom his Majesty shall depute for execution of
his Edict, according to its import. ARTICLE XI. According to the Edict made by
his Majesty for reduction of the Lord Duke of Guise, the exercise of the said
pretended Reformed Religion sh^^^ not be, nor set up in the Cities and Suburbs
of Rheims, Rocroy, Saint Disier, Guise, Joinville, Fismes, and Moncornet in the
Ardennes. ARTICLE XII. Nor may it be exercised in other plates near adjoining
to those Towns and Places forbidden by the Edict in the year 1577. ARTICLE
XIII. And to remove all ambiguity which may arise out of these words, near
adjoining, his Majesty declares, that he would be understood to speak of those
places within a league of the Precincts of those said Towns, in which places
the exercise of the said Religion may not be established, unless it were
permitted by the Edict of 1577. ARTICLE XIV. And forasmuch as by that Article
the Exercise of the said Religion was permitted generally in all Fiefs
possessed by those of the said Religion, without exceptions made of the
Banlieue beforementioned (the space of a League beyond the Precincts of those
Towns) his said Majesty declares, that the same Permission shall hold good as
to those Fiefs, which shall be held within the said Banlieue by those of the
said Religion, even according to the sense and import of the Edict given at
Nantes. ARTICLE XV. And in pursuance of the Edict made for Reduction of the
Lord Marshall de la Chastre, in every one of the Bailywicks of Orleans and
Bourges, there shall be but one place of Bailywick ordained for exercise of the
said Religion; which yet nevertheless may be continued in those places in which
it is permitted to be continued by the Edict of Nantes. ARTICLE XVI. That grant
of Preaching in Fiefs shall likewise take place in the said Bailywicks,
according to the form prescribed by the Edict of Nantes. ARTICLE XVII. That
Edict likewise for reducing the Lord Marshall of Boisdauphin shall be
observed, and the said Exercise may not be made in the Towns, Suburbs, and
places brought by him unto his Majesty's Service; and as for those Lands near
adjoining to their Bandlieue, the Edict of 1577. shall be observed, yea and in
the Houses of Fiefs, according to the sense and import of the Edict of Nantes.
ARTICLE XVIII. The said Religion shall not be exercised in the Towns, Suburbs,
and Castles of Morlais, according to the Edict made for the Reduction of the
said Town, and the Edict of 77. shall be observed throughout its whole
Jurisdiction, yea and as to the Fiefs, according to the Edict of Nantes.
ARTICLE XIX. In consequence of that Edict for the Reduction of
Quinper-Corantin, there shall be no exercise at all of the said Religion in the
whole Bishopric of Cor^wall. ARTICLE XX. In pursuance also of the Edict for
Reduction of Beauvais, there shall be no exercise of the said Religion in the
said City of Beauvais, nor within three Leagues thereof round. Yet nevertheless
it may be exercised and es^ablished beyond the bounds of the Bailywick in those
places permitted by the Edict of 1577. yea and in the Houses of Fiefs, even as
it was intended and imported by the Edict of Nantes. ARTICLE XXI. And whereas
the Edict made for reducing the Lord Admiral of Villars is only provisional,
and till such time as his Majesty should give some further order, now his
Majesty wills and intends, that notwithstanding it, his said Edict of
Nantes shall take place in all the Towns and Jurisdictions brought under his
obedience by the said Lord Admiral, as for all other places of his Kingdom.
ARTICLE XXII. In pursuance of the Edict for reducing the Lord Duke of Joyeuse,
the said Religion may not be at all exercised in the City of Toulouse, nor in
the Suburbs thereof, nor within four Leagues round, nor nearer to it than the
Towns of Villemur, Carmain, and the Isle of Jordain. ARTICLE XXIII. Nor may it
be restored and set up again in the Towns of Alet, Fiac, Auriac, and
Montesquiou: but yet and if any of the said Religion should petition for a
place where it might be exercised, the Commissioners which shall be deputed by
his Majesty to execute his Edict, or other Officers shall out of the places
assigned for every one of those Towns assign a commodious place, and of safe
access to them, and which shall not be in distance removed from the said Towns
above one League. ARTICLE XXIV. The Exercise of the said Religion may be
restored, even as it was granted by the Edict of Nantes, within the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Parliament of Toulouse, excepting always in the
Bailywicks, Seneschalsies, and their Precincts, whose principal Seat was
reduced under his Majesty's obedience by the said Lord Duke of Joyeuse, for
which the Edict of 1577. shall stand good and be observed. Yet notwithstanding
it is his Majesty's intention and purpose, that the said Exercise shall be
continued in the borders of the said Bailywicks and Seneschalsies, where it was
in the time of the said reduction, and that the privilege of Fiefs shall take
place in the said Bailywicks and Seneschalsies, according to the intendment and
import of the said Edict. ARTICLE XXV. The Edict made for the Reduction of
Dijon shall be observed, and according to it there shall be no other Exercise
of Religion than that of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church in the City
and Suburbs thereof, nor in four Leagues round. ARTICLE XXVI. The Edict
likewise for Reduction of the Lord Duke of Mayenne shall be observed, according
unto which the said pretended Reformed Religion may be exercised in the Towns
of Chaalon, Seure, and Soissons, in the Bailywick of the said Chaalons, and in
two Leagues of the borders of Soissons, for the term of six Years, to begin
from the first day of January, 1596, which being expired, the Edict of Nantes
shall be observed, as in all other parts of the Kingdom. ARTICLE XXVII. Those
of the said Religion, of whatsoever quality, shall be permitted to come and go
freely unto and from the City of Lions, and unto the other Cities and places of
the Government of Lyonnois, notwithstanding any Prohibitions to the contrary
made by the Syndicks and Sheriffs of the said City of Lion, and confirmed by
his Majesty. ARTICLE XXVIII. There shall be but one place of Bailywick ordained
for the Exercise of the said Religion in the whole Seneschalsie of Poictiers
over and besides those which are at present established; and as for the Fiefs,
the Edict of Nantes shall be followed. The said Exercise also shall be
continued in the Town of Chauvigny. But the said Exercise may not be restored
in the Towns of Again and Perigueux, although that by the Edict of 1577. it
might have been. ARTICLE XXIX. There shall be but two places of Bailywicks for
the Exercise of the said Religion in the whole Government of Picardy, as it
has been before declared, and the said two places may not be given within the
Bailywicks and Governments reserved by the Edicts made for the Reduction of
Amiens, Peronne, and Abbeville. Yet notwithstanding the said Religion may be
exercised in the Houses of Fiefs throughout the whole Government of Picardy,
according as it was decreed in and by the Edict of Nantes. ARTICLE XXX. There
shall be no Exercise at all of the said Religion in the City and Suburbs of
Sens, and there shall be ordained but one place of Bailywick for the said
Exercise in the whole Circuit of the said Bailywick; however this shall not in
the least prejudice the privilege of Houses of Fiefs, which shall hold good,
according to the Edict of Nantes. ARTICLE XXXI. In like manner the said
Exercise may not be in the City nor Suburbs of Nantes, nor shall there be any
one place of Bailywick ordained for the exercise of the said Religion within
three Leagues round of the said City; yet notwithstanding it may be done in the
Houses of Fiefs according to the Edict of Nantes. ARTICLE XXXII. It Is his
Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that his said Edict of Nantes shall be observed
from this very instant as to what concerns the Exercise of the said Religion in
those places, where by the Edicts and Grants made for the reduction of some
Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Catholic Cities, it was prohibited only for a
time, and till further order. And as for those places where the said
Prohibition was limited to a fixed certain time, the said time being passed,
the Prohibition shall cease and be of no force. ARTICLE XXXIII. There shall be
given unto those of the said Religion a place for the City, Provostship, and
Viscounty of Paris within five Leagues at farthest of the said City, in which
they may enjoy the public exercise thereof. ARTICLE XXXIV. In all those places
where the said Religion shall be exercised publicly, the People may be
assembled and called together even by found of Bells, and they may do all Acts
and Duties of the said Religion, as the exercise of Discipline, the holding of
Consistories, Colloquies, National and Provincial Synods by his Majesty's
permission. ARTICLE XXXV. Ministers, Elders, and Deacons of the said Religion
shall not be constrained to answer before a Court of Justice in quality of
Witnesses about matters which were revealed to them in their Consistories, when
as Censures were to be inflicted, unless it were for any matter concerning the
King's Person, or the preservation of the State and Government. ARTICLE XXXVI.
The Professors of the said Religion who live in the Country may lawfully go
unto the exercise thereof in the Cities, and Suburbs, and other places where it
shall be publicly established. ARTICLE XXXVII. Those of the said Religion may
not keep any Public Schools, unless in those Cities and places in which the
public exercise thereof is permitted them, and those provisions which were
formerly granted them for the erection and maintaining of Colleges, shall, if
need so require, be verified, and obtain their full and entire effect. ARTICLE
XXXVIII. It shall be lawful for Parents professing the said Religion to provide
for their Childrens Education in such a manner as best pleases them, and to
substitute one or more Tutors and Guardians to them by their last Will and
Testament, or by a Codicil, or any other Declaration passed before a Notary, or
written and signed with their own Hands, the Laws, Ordinances and Customs of
those places in which they live, and received in this Kingdom, abiding in force
and virtue as to all gifts and provisions of Tutors and Guardians. ARTICLE
XXXIX. And whereas several Priests and Nuns have formerly contracted Marriage,
it is his Majesty's Will and Pleasure for very many and good Considerations,
that they shall not be prosecuted nor molested, and to this purpose our
Attorneys General are enjoined silence, as also are all other our Officers. Yet
nevertheless his said Majesty declares, that it is his intention that the
Children issued of the said Marriages shall succeed only unto their
Houshold-goods, acquired and purchased Lands, and Immoveables of their Fathers
and Mothers, and in default of such Children, the nearest of Kin shall inherit
them; and the last Wills, Gifts and other Legacies made or to be made by
persons of the said quality, of their said Estates, Houshold-goods, acquired
and purchased Lands and Immoveables, are declared good and valid. However his
said Majesty will not that the said religious Persons, Priests and Nuns, who
were professed, shall succeed directly or collaterally unto any Inheritance,
but only they may enjoy those Goods which are or may be left unto them by
Testament, Gifts, or otherwise bequeathed to them, excepting always those said
direct or collateral successions; and as for those who made profession before
that Age required by the Decrees of Orleance and Blois, the tenor of the said
Decrees shall be followed and observed in all cases relating unto the said
successions, every one for that time, in which they take place. ARTICLE XL. His
said Majesty will not, that those of the said Religion, who have formerly, or
may hereafter contract Marriages in the third and fourth degrees, should be
molested, nor that the validity of the said Marriages should be called in
question, nor in like manner, that the Children born or to be born of them
should be quarrelled with or deprived of their succession. And as for Marriages
which have been already contracted in the second degree, or of the second and
third degree betwixt those of the said Religion, they applying themselves unto
his Majesty who are of that quality, and have contracted Marriage in such a
degree, all needful Licenses shall be granted them, that so they may not be
prosecuted nor molested, and that their Childrens right of Inheritance may
never be cavilled nor disputed. ARTICLE XLI. That the validity of those
Marriages made and contracted by those of the said Religion may be judged, and
decided as to their legality; if the Professor of the said Religion be
defendant, in that Case a Royal Judge shall take cognizance of the fact of the
said Marriage; but in case he be plaintiff, and the defendant a Catholic, the
cognizance thereof shall belong to the Official or Ecclesiastical Judge: and if
the two parties be of the said Religion, the cognizance thereof shall appertain
unto the Royal Judges. It being his Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that as to
what concerns the said Marriages, and differences which may happen about
them, that the Ecclesiastical and Royal Judges, as also the Chambers
established by his Edict shall take cognizance of them respectively. ARTICLE
XLII. All Gifts and Legacies given and already bequeathed, or which may be so
hereafter given and bequeathed, whether by the last Will and Testament at their
death, or whilst they are alive, toward the maintenance of Ministers,
Doctors, Scholars, and the Poor of the said pretended Reformed Religion, or to
other Pious Uses shall be valid, and obtain their full and entire effect,
notwithstanding all Judgments, Decrees, and other Matters contrary thereunto,
and provided they do not in any wise prejudice his Majesty's Rights, or those
of any other person, in case the said Legacies and Gifts should fall under a
Mortmain. And all Actions and necessary Prosecutions for the enjoyment of the
said Legacies and Pious Uses, and other Rights, as well for Judgments as
without them, shall be done by an Attorney, in the Name of the Body and
Commonalty of those of the said Religion who shall be concerned, and in case it
shall appear, that the said Gifts and Legacies shall have been otherwise
disposed than was intended by the said Article, they shall not be able to claim
any restitution of what is past, but only of what is now in being. ARTICLE
XLIII. His said Majesty permits those of the said Religion to assemble
themselves before a Royal Judge, and by his Authority to equalize and levy upon
themselves such a Sum of Money as they shall conceive needful to defray the
Charges of their Synods, and their Maintenance who are employed in the Exercise
of the said Religion, of which an account shall be given in unto a Royal Judge,
to be kept by him, the Copy of which Account shall be sent by the said Royal
Judge every six Months unto his Majesty, or to his Chanceler, and the Taxes and
Impositions of the said Moneys shall be raised and gathered, notwithstanding
any Oppositions or Appeals whatsoever. ARTICLE XLIV. The Ministers of the said
Religion shall be exempted from all Guards and Rounds and Billetting of
Soldiers, Assessings and Gatherings of Taxes, as also of being Overseers, and
Guardians, and Commissioners for Goods seized by Authority of Justice. ARTICLE
XLV. Whereas those of the said Religion have heretofore buried their Dead in
the Churchyards of the said Catholics, or in any Place or Town whatsoever,
it is his Majesty's Will that they shall not be sued or prosecuted for it, and
his Officers shall be enjoined to see that there be nothing as to this matter
done unto them. And as for the City of Paris, over and above the two
Churchyards which are at present possessed by those of the said Religion, to
wit, that of the Trinity, and that of St. Germain, there shall be given them a
third commodious place for the enterment of their Dead in the Suburbs of St.
Honorius, or of St. Denis. ARTICLE XLVI. The Catholic Presidents and
Counselors, who shall serve in that Chamber ordained in the Parliament of
Paris shall be chosen by his Majesty out of the written Roll of the Officers in
Parliament. ARTICLE XLVII. The Counselors of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, who shall serve in the said Chamber, shall assist, if they think
good, at those Processes which shall be determined by Commissioners, and shall
have their Consultive Vote, but without participating in the moneys consigned,
unless it be that they be bound by the Order and Prerogative of their reception
to assist at them. ARTICLE XLVIII. The most ancient President of the mixed
Chambers shall preside at the Hearing, and in his absence the Second, and the
Processes shall be distributed by the two Presidents, conjunctly or
alternatively, by Month, or by Week. ARTICLE XLIX. The vacant Offices, of which
those of the said Religion are or shall be provided in the said Chambers of the
Edict, shall be supplied with Persons capable, who shall bring a Certificate
from the Synod or Colloquy unto which they do belong, that they are of the said
Religion, and honest Men. ARTICLE L. That Act of Indemnity granted unto those
of the said pretended Reformed Religion by the 74. Article of this said Edict,
shall be of force, as to all taking away of Royal Moneys, whether by breaking
up of Coffers, or otherwise, yea, and as for those which were levied upon the
River of Charante, although they had been affected and applied unto private
uses. ARTICLE LI. The 49. Article in the secret Articles made in the year 1577.
touching the City and Archbishopric of Avinion, and County of Venise, as also
the Treaty made at Nismes, shall be observed according to their form and
tenor, and there shall be no Letters of Mark given by virtue of those Articles
and Treaties, but only by the Kings Letters Patents Sealed with his Great Seal.
Yet nevertheless such as would obtain them may get them by virtue of this
present Article, and without any other Commission from the Royal Judges, who
shall take informations of the contrary actings, denial of Justice, and
iniquity of Judgments, propounded by those, who shall desire to obtain the said
Letters, and shall send them, together with their advice, closed and sealed up
unto his Majesty, that he may Ordain therein according as he shall see reason.
ARTICLE LII. His Majesty accords and wills, that Master Nicholas Grimoul be
restored and maintained in his Title and Possession of the Offices of ancient
Lieutenant General Civil, and of Lieutenant General Criminal in the Bailywick
of Alanson, notwithstanding that Resignation by him made unto Mr. John
Marguerit, and his admission into it, and the Provision obtained by Mr. William
Bernard, of the Office of Lieutenant General Civil and Criminal in the Court of
Eximes, and the Decrees given against the said Marguerit, resigning it during
the Troubles, unto the Privy Council, in the years 1586, 1587, and 1588. by
which Mr. Nicholas Barbier is maintained in the Rights and Prerogatives of the
ancient Lieutenant General in the said Bailywick, and the said Bernard in the
said Office of Lieutenant at Eximes, whom his Majesty has cashiered, and all
others contrary to this Article of the Edict. Moreover his said Majesty for
certain and good Considerations, has granted and Ordained, that the Grimoult
shall reimburse, within the space of three Months, the said Barbier, of that
Revenue which he paid in unto the Casual Parties, for the Office of
Lieutenant General Civil and Criminal, in the Viscounty of Alanson, and of
fifty Crowns for charges, and he shall order the Bailiff of Perch, or his
Lieutenant Mortaigne, to do it. And the money being reimburst, or if the said
Barbier shall refuse or delay to receive it, his Majesty has forbidden the
said Barbier, as also the said Bernard, after the signification of this present
Article, to intrude themselves into the exercise of the said Offices upon pain
of being guilty of Cheating; and he the said Grimoult is put into the
possession of his Offices and Rights unto them appertaining; and thus doing,
those Suits which were depending in his Majesty's Privy Council, betwixt the
said Grimoult, Barbier, and Bernard, shall be terminated and suppressed; his
Majesty forbiding the Parliaments, and all others, from taking Cognizance, and
the said Parties from all Prosecutions for them. Moreover his said Majesty has
undertook himself to reimburse the said Bernard of a thousand Crowns furnished
unto the Casual Parties for his Office, and of the sixty Crowns for the mark of
gold and costs, having to this purpose now ordained a good and sufficient
assignment, which the said Grimoult shall diligently get in, and at his sole
Charges. ARTICLE LIII. His said Majesty shall write unto his Ambassadors, that
they do importunately desire, on behalf of all his Subjects, yea, and for those
of the said pretended Reformed Religion, that they be not prosecuted for their
Consciences, nor subjected unto the Inquisition, going, coming, sojourning,
trading, and trafficking in all Foreign Countries, Allies and Confederates of
this Crown, provided that they commit no offense against the Government of
those Countries in which they shall be. ARTICLE LIVE. It is his Majesty's
Pleasure, that there shall be no inquiry made after the receipt of those
Impositions which were levied at Royan, by virtue of the Contract made with the
Sieur de Candelay, and others who succeeded him; and he confirms and
approves of the said Contract for that time in which it took place in the
whole Contents thereof, until the 18th day of May now coming. ARTICLE LV. Those
Riots which were occasioned about Armand Courtines in the Town of Millaud in
the year 1587. and of John Reins, and Peter Seigneuret, together with the
proceedings against them by the Consuls of the said Millaud, shall by virtue of
this Edict be abolished and suppressed; nor shall it be lawful for their Widows
and Heirs, nor for the Attorneys-General of his Majesty, their Substitutes, or
other Persons whatsoever, to make any mention, Inquiry, or Prosecution,
notwithstanding, and without any respect had unto the Decree given in the
Chamber of Castres the tenth day of March last, which shall be null and without
effect, as also shall be all Informations and Proceedings, both of the one and
other side. ARTICLE LVI. All Prosecutions, Proceedings, Sentences, Judgments
and Decrees, given as well against the late Lord of La Noue, and against the
Lord Odet of La Noue, his Son, since their detention and Imprisonment in
Flanders, which happened in May 1580. and in November 1584. and during their
continual employment in the Wars, and for the service of his Majesty, shall be
void, null, and of none effect, and whatsoever has ensued in consequence
thereof. And both the said Lords De la Noue, shall be admitted to defend
themselves, and be restored unto that Condition and State in which they were
before the said Judgments and Decrees, they not being obliged to refund the
expenses, nor to pay the Fines, if they had incurred any, nor shall there be
alleged against them any nonsuit or prescription during the said time.
Done by the King in his Council at Nantes, the second day of May, 1598. Signed
HENRY. And a little lower. Forget.
Sealed with the Great Seal upon yellow Wax.
HEnry by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre,
To our Beloved and Faithful Officers holding our Court of Parliament at Paris,
Greeting.
We did the last April cause to be expedited our Letters of Edict for the
establishment of a good order and peace between our Catholic Subjects and
those of the said pretended Reformed Religion. Moreover we have granted unto
those of the said Religion, certain secret and particular Articles, which we
will to be of the self-same force and virtue, and to be observed and
accomplished in like manner as our Edict. For these Causes, We Will, We
Command, and do most expressly injoin you by these presents, That the said
Articles, Signed with our Hand, and attacked unto this, under the Counter-Seal
of our Chancery, you do cause to be Recorded in the Register of our said Court,
and that in every point and particular, you keep, maintain, and observe their
Contents, even as this our said Edict, Ceasing and causing to cease, all
troubles and impediments to the contrary. For such is our Pleasure.

Given at Nantes this second day of May, in the Year of Grace 1598. And of our
Reign the Ninth. Signed by the King, Forget. And Sealed on a single Label of
yellow Wax.

SECT. XVI.
N. B. A Learned Advocate of Nismes, relates from the Press, how that Monsieur
de Thou, President in the Parliament of Taris, and the Lord de Calignon (a most
Zealous Protestant) Chancellor of Navarre, drew up this Edict, and spent three
years about it. If De Calignon would but have followed his Master Henry the
Fourth in his Apostasy from the Reformed Religion unto Popery, he had been made
Lord High Chancellor of France. But that most Pious Lord refused the Greatest
Honor that a Person of the Long-Robe was capable of in France, that he might
not lose the Eternal Glories of the Kingdom of Heaven.

SECT. XVII.
This Edict was kept tolerably well for twelve years, during the Life of Henry
the Great (as they called him after his Death.) And yet there were many
infractions of it, of which the National Synods held at Gap, 1603. and at
Rochell, 1607. Complained in their Bills of Grievances. But no sooner was he
sent out of the World by the Parricidal Hand of a Disciple of the Jesuits, but
the Reformed immediately found their want of him. And though they had some
sprinklings of Court Holy Water now and then, yet the old implacable Malice of
the Popish Clergy against them brake out upon all occasions, and Louis the
Thirteenth, who succeeded his Father, as another Antiochus, at their
instigation, made War with God's Saints in his Kingdom, seized upon their
Cautionary Towns, took away from them their Franchises, deprived their
Ministers of those Sallaries, for which the Churches, parting with their Tithes
in lieu of that Money which was to be paid by Tallies out of the Exchequer unto
their Pastors, had compounded with his Father: He devoured, brake in pieces,
and stamped the residue of them with his feet; so that their strength was quite
gone, and they lay at his mercy. He could do with them as he pleased. But the
time of their total ruin was not yet come; And God gives the Churches some
mercy in the midst of judgment. Hence, the French King having other designs in
his head, and looking beyond the bounds of his native Kingdom, he leaves
persecuting his Reformed Subjects, and that there might be a Calm at home, and
these oppressed lulled asleep, he issues out his Edict of Grace and Pardon to
them from Nismes in the Lower Languedoc, dated July, 1629. Which is offered to
the Reader's eye.

SECT. XVIII. The King's Edict of Grace and Pardon, granted by his Majesty unto
the Duke of Rohan and the Lord of Soubize, and to all other his Rebellious
Subjects, of the Towns, Champain Country, Castles, and places in the Provinces
of Higher and Lower Languedoc, Sevennes, Gevaudan, Guienne, Foix, and
elsewhere, together with the Articles.
Done at Nismes in July 1629. and verified in the Parliament of Toulouse the
27th of August, the same Year.
LOUIS by the grace of God King of France and Navarre, to all present and to
come, greeting. That Love we bear unto our Subjects, and that Compassion we
have for the Miseries brought upon them by the Wars and Divisions with which
this poor Kingdom has been a long time afflicted, have touched us so sensibly,
that laying by all Considerations of our Health, and the Inconveniences of the
Seasons of the Year, we have used all means possible to reduce under our
obedience those who had departed from it, and had been the cause of all these
Calamities. We hoped that the example of those Cities which returned under our
Authority in the Years 1620, 1621, and 1622, would have affected them with a
sense of gratitude; but seeing they were hindered from so doing by their
obstinacy, or by the violence and artifice of those Factions in which they were
engaged, We have invited them by our Declarations to return unto their Duty,
and by all the most favorable Persuasions that our Subjects could receive. We
have also prepared great and puissant Armies, that by force we might reduce
them, who being obstinate in their Rebellions were become deaf and blind, and
not moved with any Arguments and Occasions offered them for their Duty. And God
has been pleased to bless us with success, and to let us reap and enjoy the
fruit of our Arms, which the City of Rochel has first of all experienced, as
is evident by the Edict, that We caused to be made and published upon its
reduction. The City of Privas in Vivaretz, which consided in its situation,
difficult, (and as they believed) inaccessible in its Fortifications, and in
the abundance of its Provisions and Ammunitions with which it was replenished,
priding it self in a long continued Prosperity, was so bold as to resist Us,
and to attend the Battery of our Cannons, and the Effort of our Arms; and
despising the sweet Summons of our Goodness, the hatred of the Inhabitants was
so great, that losing all hopes of maintaining themselves in their Rebellion,
they had rather abandon their Houses and Estates than seek their preservation
in our Mercy, of which they might have been assured, so that they have lost the
very hopes of ever enjoying it, and could in no wise avoid their destruction by
Fire and Sword which the Divine Vengeance has excited against them: for which
reason we have provided by our Letters of Declaration separately expedited,
that they should not be comprised in this present Edict. But this Chastisement
having rendered others wiser, has caused, that not only the High and Lower
Vivaretz, but also diverse other Towns and Forts have returned unto their Duty,
and have sworn Fidelity unto Us, for which cause We have pardoned them their
Rebellion, and granted them an Act of Oblivion, causing their Fortifications
and Walls to be demolished, which feeding the foolish confidence of others had
occasioned all those Miseries they have since suffered. Diverse Gentlemen also
being touched with the Felicity which they had found in our Favor, have had
recourse unto it, and received it, and have quitted the Rebels Party. The City
of Alez, extremely strong in its situation, fortified with Ramparts and
Bulworks, and of all that the Wit of Man could invent for troubling the Land,
made semblance as if it would resist and stop the Course and Progress of our
Victories; but when it saw it self encompassed with our Army, our Cannons of
Battery ready to make a breach, it durst not stand out the first shot, lest it
should be forced to submission, as is ever practiced in such like cases, by the
Laws of War; so that the Inhabitants came and prostrated themselves at Our
feet, and implored Our Favor and Pardon, which We graciously bestowed upon
them. And when as We were pursuing Our Victories, the Duke of Rohan, the
Citizens of Anduze, those of Sauve, Gange, Le Vigan, Florac, Meruez, and all
other places of the Sevennes, Nismes, Aymargues, Vsez, Milhaud, Cornus, St.
Affrique, St. Felix, St. Rome of Taon, the Pont de Camarez, Viane, Castres,
Rogve Courbe, Revel, Montauban, Caussde, Mazeres, Saverdun, Carlat, Le Mas d'
Azil, and generally all Fortresses and places in the Higher and Lower
Languedoc, Sevennes, Gevaudan, Guyenne, and Foix, the Gentlemen and others who
were in Arms yet against Us and Our Service, did send their Deputies unto Us,
to testify their Repentance for having fallen into Rebellion, and promising to
yield unto Us in the face of the whole World all that Obedience and Fidelity
which good and loyal Subjects owe unto their King, they petitioning Us, that We
would pardon them, and grant them an Act of Oblivion for their said Rebellion,
and for all Matters passed and done by occasion thereof; and they offered of
their own accord, to raze the Fortifications of the said Towns, that so there
might be no cause given us to distrust their Fidelity, or that might minister
an occasion unto any one of departing from it; and farther to assure Us, they
would put into our Hands such Hostages out of those Towns, and such a number of
them as We should demand; unto which We did the more readily incline, because
We would by so rare an Example of Clemency, after so many Relapses, gain the
greater Interests upon the Hearts and Affections of Our Subjects, and spare the
estusion of their Blood, the desolating of the Province, and all those
Confusions and Calamities which be the inseparable attendants of War; We being
solely moved hereunto by our mere compassion of their Miseries, and desire of
their Welfare. And this causes Us to hope, that Our said Subjects, having such
manifest Tokens of that Goodness which is treasured up in our Heart for them,
will return the more sincerely unto their Duty, and that it will serve as an
everlasting Cement to keep them inseparably united unto our obedience; We
waiting for that Grace and Mercy of God in Heaven to touch and illuminate their
Minds, that they may be reunited unto the Catholic Church, and so dry up the
Fountain of these most lamentable Divisions; For these Causes, after that the
Hostages of the said Towns were delivered to Us, and that We had put them into
safe places appointed by Us to this purpose, where all and every one of them
respectively should dwell, until the said Fortifications were perfectly rased
and demolished, We desirous to take some course about the past Disorders, and
to prevent the like for the future, We do give you to know and understand, that
after We had maturely debated this Affair with our Council, took their advice,
from Our certain Knowledge, full Power, special Grace, and Royal Authority, by
this Our present, perpetual and irrevocable Edict, signed with Our Hand, We
have declared, enacted, and ordained, We do declare, enact, and ordain, We
will, and it is Our pleasure,

I. That the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion shall be set up again and
restored in all Towns and places of the said Countrey^, from whence it had been
removed or diverted; And all Churches, Goods, and Ecclesiastical Houses in
those said places and Provinces shall be restored unto them to whom they do
belong, without any suing for the Profits past and received. In which Churches
and in all those said places the said Religion shall be exercised freely and
peaceably without any trouble or obstruction whatsoever. But nevertheless we
ordain, that in all the Monasteries which are in those Towns returned unto
their obedience to our Authority, that there shall not be placed any other
Religious Persons than those who live in a most exact observation of the Rule
of their Order, according to those Letters, which they shall obtain from us.

II. And whereas we desire above all things to see for the future a perpetual
Union among our Subjects, though we will and intend to maintain them who profess
the said pretended Reformed Religion in the free and peaceable exercise
thereof, and without any trouble, yet we cannot but desire their conversion,
which we beg heartily of God in our daily Prayers. Wherefore we exhort all our
said Subjects of the said pretended Reformed Religion to divest themselves of
all passion, that so they may be the more capable of receiving the Light of
Heaven, and of returning into the Bosom of the Church, in which for above
eleven hundred Years continuance the Kings our Predecessors have lived without
any interruption or change. For we cannot any other or better way express unto
them our paternal affection, than by desiring that they would walk with us in
the same Pathway unto Eternal Salvation in which we our selves are going.

III. We do farther ordain, that all Patrons, to whom of right it appertains,
shall provide for all the vacant Parishes in those Countries, good, sufficient,
and able Curates: and that they so order it, that they have a sufficient Income
for their Maintenance, that so they may acquit themselves worthily of their
Functions, according to the tenor of those Ordinances made by us the last
January, or by some other means more commodious, according to that Report which
shall be made by those Commissioners, who shall be deputed by us to this
purpose.

IV. We have remitted, pardoned, and indemnified, we do remit, pardon, and
indemnify, unto the said Duke of Rohan, and Lord of Soubize, and all the
Inhabitants of the said Towns and Places, and those of the Champain Country,
which adhered to them, all matters passed since the 21. of July, 1627. unto the
day of the Publication made in every Seneschalsy, of these Articles of Grace,
which we accorded them the 27. day of June last. We have discharged, and do
discharge them of all acts of Hostility, raising of Armies, leading of Warlike
Soldiers, Enterprises by Sea and Land, of general or particular Assemblies,
yea, and of that Assembly at Nismes, seizing of Ecclesiastical, or of the Royal
Moneys, or of Moneys belonging unto private Persons, Coining of Money under
whatsoever title or value, Imprinted Libels, Insurrections and popular
Commotions, Riots, Violences, Attempts made upon the two Towns of St. Amand,
and the Castles of that Lord, the taking of the Castles of St. Stevens, of
Valfrancesquez, and Florac, and the rasing of it; as also the Murder and other
Accidents fallen out in that Enterprise upon St. Germier and Castres the last
January; as also the Inhabitants of Vsez for the Murder of the Sieur du Flos:
and the Consuls of the said place, the Decrees denounced against them in the
Parliament of Toulouse, and in the Court of the Edict of Beziers, and the
Sieurs D'aubais, James Genoier, Paul Saussier, and Andrew Pelissier, for their
being named and chosen to be Consuls of Nismes in the year 1627. and their
exercise of the said Offices for the said year, as also all the Political
Consuls and Counselors, and the Consular Town-Clark, and all those mentioned
by name in that Decree past in the Court of the Edict at Beziers about the
proceedings of the Sieurs de Suc, and Maussac, who were Counselors there, and
of their prosecution by reason of the said Consulship of Nismes, and the
Decrees thereupon made, both in our Privy Council, and said Court of
Parliament, Court of the Edict, and Court of Aids sitting at Montpellier. And
the Inhabitants of Anduze of their Murder of the Sieur de Mantaille, and the
Sentences of Condemnation issued out against the Consuls and particular
Inhabitants of the said Town during those Commotions. The Inhabitants of
Milhaud, their fact against the Sieur de la Roquesavas, and the restitution of
the sum of 4000. Livers unto the Jacobine Friars. The Sieur de Gasque for his
Imprisoning of sundry the Inhabitants of Alez, the violations of safe conduct,
Impositions and raisings of money, erecting of Courts of Justice, of Officers
and Councils, by the Provinces, and Executions of Judgments ordered by them in
Civil or Criminal matters, Government and Regulations made among themselves,
and their exercising those Offices in the said Towns whilst they were in
Rebellion against us, and the Attorneys demanding Justice, when as they
exercised their Offices before the said Judges, Officers and Counselors
established in the said Towns, yea, and those who had License from us to
sojourn and act during the said time in those Towns aforesaid: Journeys,
Intelligences, Negotiations, Treaties, and Contracts made with the English by
the said Towns and Inhabitants, and by the said Dukes of Rohan, and Lord of
Soubize, as well with the said English, as with the King of Spain, and Duke of
Savoy, and the Letters written unto the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, and
the Sieurs Clausell and Du Cross, who have been employed. All Sales of Goods,
Church Furniture, or other things, felling of Timber on other Men's Lands,
Fines, carrying away of Plunder, Ransoms, or Moneys of any other nature taken
away by reason of the said Commotions, melting down, and seisings of Artillery
and Ammunitions, making of Powder and Saltpetre, Takings, Fortifyings,
Dismantlings or demolishing of Towns, Castles, Boroughs and Villages; yea, the
taking of Meruez, Aymargues, and other burnings and demolishings of Churches,
and Ecclesiastical Houses, and others, by order and authority of the said Duke
of Rohan, and all Criminal Prosecutions thereupon, without prejudice unto the
Civil Interest of the said Religious Ecclesiastics, for which they shall have
recourse unto the Chamber of the Edict. We discharge them also of all Farmings
of Benefices, and Church Lands, Goods, of which they were spoiled by those who
Commanded under their General. We will likewise, that they enjoy the benefit of
the whole Contents of all former Acts of Indemnity, and for whatsoever has
been done or negotiated since the time aforesaid, notwithstanding all
Proceedings, Decrees, and Condemnatory Sentences had and passed against them,
yea, those very Decrees in the Parliaments of Tholouze and Bourdeaux, against
the said Duke of Rohan, who shall be preserved in all his Honors and
Dignities, which he formerly enjoyed, nor shall he for those aforesaid matters
be in the least sued or prosecuted, for which we do impose a perpetual silence
on all our Attorneys-General and their Substitutes, excepting always all Cases
execrable which were reserved in the Edict of Nantes, and others depending on
the Civil Interest, about matter of fact happened at Vezenobre and Tournac, and
for Houshold-goods which are found to be the very same, and were taken away
from those, who were in Obedience to the King.

V. And in pursuance of our Intention to maintain all our Subjects, professing
the said pretended Reformed Religion, in the free exercise of the said
Religion, and enjoyment of the Edicts accorded to them: We Will that all those
aforesaid shall entirely enjoy the said Edict of Nantes, and other Edicts,
Articles, and Declarations Registered in our Parliaments, and that in pursuance
hereof, they shall have the free Exercise of the said Religion in all those
places in which it has been granted to them.

VI. And all those Temples and burying places, which were either taken away
from them, or demolished, shall be restored to them with License to rebuild
them, if they think it needful.

VII. We Will that all Fortifications of the said Towns and places, shall be
entirely rased and demolished (except it be the whole compass of those Walls)
within three Months, and this to be diligently dispatched by the said
Inhabitants; and because of our confidence in them for so doing, we do not
place any Garrisons, nor any Cittadels among them. And the said demolitions
shall be made according to the Orders and Directions of those Commissioners
which shall be appointed by us, and according to those Orders and Instructions,
which they shall have received from us. And in the mean while for greater
assurance that this our Will shall be performed, Hostages shall be given by the
said Towns, who shall be kept in those places ordained by us, until the said
Demolishments be fully accomplished.

VIII. We Will that these aforesaid have their Estates, Moveable and
Immovable, their Privileges, Titles, Rights, and Suits, Ordered and restored
to them, notwithstanding all Condemnations, Gifts, Confiscations, and
Reprizals, which may have been made and granted, excepting only the Profits and
Revenues of their said Estates, and those Houshold-Goods which are not now in
being, the Woods which are cut down, the Debts which have been received unto
this present day, actually and without fraud, after judicial Prosecution and
Compulsion. Yet nevertheless, we will, that the precedent Declarations given
upon the fact of the said Reprisals, until these present Commotions, Decrees
given forth contradictorily, and matters transacted in and upon them shall take
place, and be Executed, notwithstanding all Decrees to the contrary. We will
also, that the Heirs of the Sieur de Mormoirac, shall be restored unto their
Estates.

IX. We do permit these aforesaid to return again unto their Houses, and if
there be need to rebuild them, yea, and we do permit them as to our good and
faithful Subjects to dwell in such Towns and Places of our Kingdom as shall
best please them, excepting in the Isles of Olleron, and Re, and Rochell, and
Privas. We do also permit those Inhabitants of Pamiers, who were not in that
City at the time of its taking to re-enter into it, and to enjoy all their
Estates, they yielding all obedience to us, and taking the Oath of Fidelity to
us before our Commissioners, whom we have appointed to receive it.

X. Our Officers dwelling in those Cities, who have not paid their annual Fee,
shall be admitted to pay it within two Months, both for the time passed, and
the year now current. And as for those who are dead, in case they have paid the
said Annual Fee, those Offices of which they were provided, shall be conserved
for their Widows and Children. And as for those whose Offices we have filled up
with other Persons, by reason of the present Commotions, they shall be
conserved in their said Offices, notwithstanding we had set in others into them
for a time, yea, and that they had been received and installed in them. We will
also, that the Officers of particular Lords, provided of chargeable Offices,
and who were deprived of them during these last Commotions, shall be restored
unto their Offices.

XI. All these aforesaid shall be discharged, and we do discharge them of all
Contributions and Quarterings of Soldiers, both in the former and these
present Commotions. And likewise the said Commonalties, and the particular
Members of them, of the Indemnities and Securities that may be pretended
against them upon the account of Imprisonments, Executions, or Expulsions out
of Towns, done by Order of the said Duke of Rohan, or of the Council of the
Towns, or of others established by him, either in the present or former
Commotions. And as for the Taxes, and other Moneys imposed upon the Country, in
case any of them should be of no value, through default of payment by those
aforesaid of the moneys imposed on them, whatever those sums might be, the
Receivers of the said Provinces may not prosecute these aforesaid for them,
saving that the Syndic of the Country may be prosecuted till such time as he
shall have brought those moneys in upon the general account of the Country.

XII. We do likewise discharge the Consuls and particular Persons, who are
obliged during the Commotions of the Years 1621, 1622, and 1626. and those who
do now manage the affairs of the said Towns from payment of the said
Obligations, notwithstanding all Clauses inserted into Contracts, excepting
that Creditors shall have power to prosecute those Consuls of the pretended
Reformed Religion, we shall be found in actual Office, to cause those of the
said pretended Reformed Religion to be Condemned to divide the said Debt among
themselves, and to make payment of it.

XIII. They shall also be discharged from all prosecution and exaction done
upon the Catholics and other Inhabitants for the remainders of the Assessments
of the former years owing by them, although they may have obtained discharges,
either by our Letters Patents, or by the Decrees of the Court of Aids of
Montpellier; and likewise of what remains to be paid of the Impositions and
Contributions put upon any of them, (excepting the Catholics who be exempted,)
by Orders from the Governors of the Provinces, or others, who Commanded for us
in the War, during the present or preceding Commotions.

XIV. The Inhabitants also of Castres shall be discharged from making any
restitution for their having taken up Arms against our Service.

XV. The Burdens which shall be imposed upon the said Towns shall be equally
born by all their Inhabitants, according to the ancient Custom; excepting that
the Debts Contracted by the Catholic Inhabitants, shall be born by them only,
and those Contracted by them of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall be
acquitted also by themselves only.

XVI. All judgments given by the Judges of those Towns, whether in Civil or
Criminal matters shall be valid, excepting an Appeal unto the said Chambers, in
Cases which have not been decided by Martial Law, or a Council of War.

XVII. That Order anciently kept in the said Towns for the Consulship,
Government, and Assembling of the said Consuls, and Town-Councils, shall be
kept and observed in the same manner as it was before these Troubles.

XVIII. The States of the County of Foix shall meet according to the usual
manner, and all those Towns which had privilege of sitting in those Assemblies
shall be called to them.

XIX. The Consuls, Collectors, Receivers and Commissioners, who have handled
the public moneys, during these present, or former Troubles, shall be
acquitted and discharged, they bringing in an Account unto the Chamber of
Accounts, of moneys received and paid by them; nor shall the said Chamber claim
any Fees from them, nor revise those said Accounts. And whereas the Inhabitants
of Nismes do claim a privilege, that they be not obliged to carry their
accounts unto the said Chamber, We will that they shall enjoy their ancient
usage and custom.

XX. The Tribunals of Justice, and Offices of Receipt, and others transferred
because of the present Troubles, shall be returned and restored unto those
Places in which they were before, yea, the Comptroler's Office newly created
for the City of Montauban, but established in that of Moissac, shall be set up
in the said City of Montauban, as soon as the Fortifications of those Towns
shall be demolished.

XXI. We will that the Court of the Edict, now sitting at Beziers, shall be
again set up in the City of Castres, after that its Fortifications shall be
rased and demolished, and shall be fixed in the said Town of Castres according
to the Edict of Nantes, notwithstanding our Order made in January last, and the
Decree published by the Parliament of Tholouze upon the 102 Article thereof.
Which said Court of the Edict his Majesty will have maintained in all its
Powers given it by the Edicts and other Ordinances.

XXII. And it is our will and pleasure, that those aforesaid who were in Arms
against us the 27th day of June last shall enjoy all these Favors and Grants.
And as for those Towns and Persons who subjected themselves before that day to
our Authority, they shall enjoy more especially the Matters contained in those
Letters which we have granted them.

And we command our beloved and faithful Officers in our Court of Parliament of
Tholouze, that they cause this our present Edict to be read, published, and
registered, and its Contents to be kept, observed, and maintained, according to
its form and tenor, without transgressing, or suffering it to be transgressed.
For such is our pleasure. And that this Matter may be firm and stable for ever,
we have caused our Seal to be affixed and set unto these Presents.

Given at Nismes in the Month of July, and the Year of Grace 1629. And of our
Reign the Twentieth. Signed, LOVIS.
And a little lower, By the KING. Phelippeaux.
And sealed on threads of Silk with the great Seal on green Wax. At the side,
Visa.
And there was farther witten, Read, Published, and Registered, the King's
Attorney General having heard and required it. At Tholouze in Parliament the
27th of August, 1629. Signed, De Malenfant.

SECT. XIX.
This Edict was observed even as all others which had been given by the former
Kings, no farther than it pleased them. Many Complaints were brought in by
their Deputies of its Nonperformance and Violations. Some small Redresses of
their many Grievances, to stop their mouths, were now and then given them. But
Jews dying in the Year 1642, and this present King succeeding his deceased
Father, there was a Declaration in their favor published by the Queen Regent
and Council in his Name, July 8. 1643.

And the Reformed having stood by him in those difficult times, (when the late
Prince of Conde designed for the Crown) and secured it upon his head, this
important Service drew from him the ensuing Edict, given at St. Germans en
Lay, May 21. 165^.

The Declaration of Louis the Fourteenth confirming the Edicts of Pacification,
Given at St. Germans in Lay, May 21. 1652.
LOUIS, by the grace of God King of France and Navarre,
To all Persons who shall see these Presents, Greeting.
The late King, our most honored Lord and Father, whom God absolve, having
acknowledged, that it was most needful for preserving the Kingdoms peace, that
his Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion should be maintained in the
full and entire enjoyment of those Edicts made in their favor, and that they
should enjoy the free exercise of their Religion; did therefore take a most
especial care by all convenient means to hinder their being troubled in the
enjoyment of those Liberties, Prerogatives and Privileges granted them by
those said Edicts; and having to this purpose immediately upon his coming unto
the Crown by his Letters Patents, dated May 22. 1610. and since his Majority by
his Declaration of the 20th of November, 1615. declared, that he would that
those said Edicts should be executed, that so he might thereby engage his said
Subjects to continue in their Duty. Now we following the example of so great a
Prince, and imitating him in his goodness, we are willing to do the like:
Having for those very same Motives and Considerations by our Declaration of the
Eighth of July, 1643. willed and ordained, that our said Subjects of the
pretended Reformed Religion shall enjoy all Grants, Privileges and Advantages,
especially the free and full exercise of their said Religion, according to the
Edicts, Declarations and Orders made on this account for them. And for as much
as our said Subjects of the said pretended Reformed Religion have given us
certain proofs of their affection and fidelity, particularly on those occasions
which occurred unto them, to our very great satisfaction, Be it known, that we
for these Causes, and at the most humble Petition presented to us by those our
said Subjects professing the said pretended Reformed Religion; and after that
we had caused it to be debated in our presence, and with our Council, We, by
their advice, and from our certain knowledge, and Royal Authority, have
commanded, declared and ordained, and we do command, declare and ordain, and
it is our will and pleasure, that our said Subjects of the pretended Reformed
Religion shall be maintained and preserved, as indeed we do now maintain and
preserve them in the full and entire enjoyment of the Edict of Nantes, other
Edicts, Declarations, Decrees, Articles, and Warrants, done and dispatched in
their favor, registered in Parliaments, and Chambers of the Edict, particularly
in the free and public exercise of the said Religion in all those places in
which it was accorded them, notwithstanding all Letters and Decrees either of
our Council, or of the Sovereign Courts, or other Judgments to the contrary. We
willing that the transgressors of those our Edicts shall be punished and
chastised as disturbers of the public peace. And we command our beloved and
faithful Officers in our Courts of Parliament, Chambers of the Edict, Bailiffs,
Seneschals, their Lieutenants, and other our Officers to whom it shall
appertain, every one in his place, that they do cause these Presents to be
registered, read, and if need be, published; and that the Contents of them be
kept, observed and maintained according to their form and tenor. And because
there will be need of this present Declaration in many and diverse places, we
will, that unto Copies duly collationed by one of our beloved and faithful
Counselors and Secretaries there shall be as much faith given as to this
present Original. For such is our pleasure. In testimony whereof we have caused
our great Seal to be put unto these Presents.

Given at St. Germain in Lay, the 21 st day of May, and in the Year of Grace
1652. And of our Reign the Tenth. Signed, LOVIS. And a little lower, By the
KING. Phelippeaux. And sealed with the great Seal.

SECT. XX.
Now as well at Court as in the Field each strove to proclaim loudest the
Deserts of the Reformed. The Queen Mother herself ingenuously acknowledged,
that they had preserved the Government for herself and the young King. This is
a Truth that cannot be contested, and yet as true as it is, what I shall add
will seem incredible; But the Enemies of the Reformed have told it them an
hundred times over, and the sequel has perfectly verified it, That this Great
Service of theirs in Saving the King and Kingdom was the precise, the
principal, and proper Cause of their Ruin, and of all those Evils which have
since befallen them. For their restless Adversaries, the Popish Clergy, used
all endeavors to envenom the sense of that Important Service of theirs in the
Minds of the King and his chief Ministers; for they never left suggesting to
them, That if upon occasion the Reformed could save the State from ruin, they
might likewise upon another, and siding with its Enemies utterly overthrow it.
That therefore in prudence this Party must be suppressed, and what good they
had done, must be no longer regarded, but as an Indication of that Mischief
which some time or other they were capable of effecting. This diabolical
Policy, which hinders Subjects from serving their Prince, to avoid the pulling
down upon themselves and children Chastisements instead of Recompenses, took
immediately with the ungrateful Court. For as soon as the Kingdom was settled in
Peace, the Design was put on foot of destroying the Reformed; and that they
might clearly understand, that it was their Zeal and Loyalty for their King
which had ruined them, Those Cities, which had given the noblest Instances of
it, were first assaulted. Immediately, on very slight pretenses, they fell foul
on Rochel, Montauban, and Milhaud, three Towns where the Professors of the
Reformed Religion had most signalized themselves for the Court's Interests.
Rochel was plagued with an infinite number of Proscriptions, her best Ministers
and Citizens being driven out and exiled. Montauban and Milhaud are sacked by
Soldiers. These were but particular Strokes, and the beginning of those
dreadful Woes, which followed after.

SECT. XXI.
'Twill be a difficult matter to give in an exact account of those various
methods used for their destruction. For the malice of their Enemies was
exceeding fruitful in plotting and contriving of mischiefs. Every day produced
a superfetation of them for twenty Years together. I will instance but in a
few, for it would be an endless work to enumerate all. These were some of the
chiefest.

First, Lawsuits in Courts of Justice. Secondly, Deprivations of all kinds of
Offices and Employments, and in general of all manner of ways for subsistence.
Thirdly, The Infractions of the Edicts, under the plausible gloss of explaining
them. Fourthly, New Laws and Orders. Fifthly, Juggles and amusing Tricks.
Sixthly, The animating and exasperating of the Rabble with Hatred and Rage
against them, and barbarous Cruelties and Torments.

These were some of the most considerable Machins which the Persecutors
employed for the attaining their ends several Years together. It being no easy
matter presently to accomplish their designs, they needed time for the
sharpning of their Tools, and the better ordering of their Engines; to pass by
the many Traverses and Interruptions they had by foreign Wars, yet that great
success they had in them did mightily inflame their courage and hopes, and
confirm them in their grand design of a total extirpation of the Reformed.

SECT. XXII.
Their first method of Lawsuits in Courts of Justice had an infinite extent.
By the Tricks and Quirks of Law a multitude of Churches were condemned, and the
crafty wicked Commissioners totally suppressed all Exercise of Religion in
them. This Trap was cunningly laid as soon as the Treaty of Peace and the
King's Marriage with the Infanta of Spain were concluded. For under the
specious pretense of repairing the Infractions of the Edict of Nantes,
Commissioners were dispatched into the Provinces. The Roman Catholic
Commissioner was always the Intendant of the Province, a proper Tool to do the
Court's business, armed with Royal Authority, and privy to the secret of the
Plot. The other, a Protestant in profession, some needy, hungry Officer, a
devoted Slave unto the Court, who had neither Intelligence necessary for the
Affairs, nor Liberty to declare his Sense and Sentiments about them. The Clergy
set them both up, and their Agents were received as formal Parties in all
Matters relating to the Reformed, yea and the very Citations and Prosecutions
went all in their Names. And in case of different Opinions betwixt the
Commissioners, all Appeals from their Ordinances must be finally decided by the
King and Council.

Thus in general, all the Rights of the Reformed Churches for Exercise of
Religion, and for those places in which they buried their Dead, and all their
Dependencies were ordered to be reviewed, and thereby exposed to the fresh
Suits and Prosecutions of the Clergy, and the mischievous Intentions of their
Judges. And in all this transaction you should rarely meet with one dram of
Equity. For the Edict having been once executed, according to the intention of
Henry the Fourth, it needed no revisal. Besides, how improbable a thing was it,
that the Reformed, who had always been the suffering Party in the Kingdom,
should usurp any thing in it, or extend their bounds beyond what of right
belonged to them? But there were other designs in hand than to provide against
the Violations of the Edict, and therefore by those Orders given unto the
Commissioners, the greatest part of the Churches cited before them to prove
their Rights, saw themselves condemned immediately one after another by the
Decrees of the Privy Council, though their Titles were never so clear and
evident, and their defense managed with as much strength and reason as
possible. Scarcely a Week passed in which some of these Decrees were not made
and pronounced. And if it fell out, that the Judges for mere shame could not
condemn them, as it sometimes so happened, though their number was very small in
comparison of those which were condemned, yet the Judges receive peremptory
Orders from above to do it, and do it they must, though against their
Consciences. At this rate, before the Year 1673, they had desolated hundreds of
Churches. A Monk of the Barnabite Order, and Deputy for the Clergy of Bearn,
gloried, that of One hundred and twenty three places which the Protestants had
to worship God in, and those upon the most legal and unquestionable Titles,
there remained but twenty, all the rest having been demolished. The Temple of
Vitre in Britain was destroyed, because they could not produce their Titles
to it, when as they were irrecoverably lost by Fire, War, or the perfidious
hands of Revolters. If a Church was near the Sea, that was reason enough why it
must be demolished. So was the Temple of Carantan in Normandy served, although a
Bailywick. One while they pretend, the Town, in which it is, was taken in the
Civil Wars, and therefore their Temple must be returned either to the Papists,
or else be utterly ruinated. This was the fate of that of Negrepelisse, though it
had been in the possession of the Reformed ever since the Year 1561. Nay, a
Church expressly mentioned in the Edict, and that they had not impudence enough
to call in question its Title, yet they had the malice to demolish, viz. the
Church of Chauvigny in Poictou; this was done Aug. 6. 1665. Of threescore and
one Churches in Poictou in the Year 1674. there remained but one uncondemned,
viz. that of Niort. So that above 80000 Souls were obliged to live without any
Public Worship of God at all. In the Country of Gex they reduced three and
twenty Churches to but two. In Guienne, of fourscore Churches there were but
three left uncondemned by the Catholic Commissioner, who was wholly governed
by the Jesuit Meisnier. In Normandy their fury had brought all their Churches
unto those three of Caen, Rouen, and Diep. In Provence, of their sixteen
Churches there remained but three. If there be any Churches standing, and not
converted into ruinous heaps, they be such as are most inconveniently situated,
in Marshes or low Grounds, which were often overflown with Waters, or
unpassable in Winter; so that these poor Christians were deprived of all
possibility of hearing God's Word, and necessitated to travel forty Miles and
more to worship God publicly, and to get their Children baptized; for they may
not do any exercise of Religion, as Preaching, Marrying, or Administering of the
Sacraments, but in those places which by the Edict of Nantes were appointed for
Divine Worship.

Besides, the Papists were very barbarous and inhumane in the cruel execution
of their Decrees, for they would oblige the Protestants themselves to demolish
their Temples with their own hands. And because many of them, out of Honor and
Conscience, would not contract the guilt of so great a Sacrilege upon their
Souls, as to ruinate those holy Places which were dedicated to the Service and
Glory of God, nor have any thing to do in that Diabolical Work, their own
Houses have been plundered, and levelled with the ground, and unconscionable
Fines laid upon them. This has been the case of diverse Persons of eminent
quality in Poictou.

I could here have exhibited a Catalogue of Churches demolished in France by
the King's order, and that of the Council, in several Provinces and Dioceses of
that Kingdom, in the Years 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664, 1665, 1672, and 1673. But
because by the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes they are now all a heap of
Ruins, I shall spare my self the labor of transcribing, and my Reader the
pains and time of reading them. The Zeba's and Zalmunna's of that Kingdom have
either burnt up all the Synagogues of God in it, or else they have took those
Houses of God into their possession.

SECT. XXIII.
But the Oppressions of this kind did not terminate in the bare condemnation of
Churches, but particular Persons also had a very large share and part in them.
In common civil matters, as about a piece of Land, an House, a Debt between a
Roman Catholic and a Protestant: Religion must be one of the chief Heads of
Accusation against the Protestants. The Monks, the Missioners, the Confessors,
and that whole Crew of malicious fiery Zealots, interessed themselves
immediately in the affair. They bawl out in Courts of Justice, I plead against
an Heretic. I have to do with a Man of a Religion odious to the State, and
which the King will have extirpated. By this means there was not any Justice to
be expected. Few Judges were proof against this false Zeal, for fear of drawing
down the fury of the whole Cabal upon themselves, or passing for Favorers of
Heretics. It Is not to be imagined, how many unjust Sentences these prejudices
procured in all the Courts of the Kingdom; and how many Innocent Families were
ruined by them. If any one complained of the wrong done them, they were
presently twitted in the Teeth, You have the remedy in your own hands. Why do
you not become Catholics? Thus the Consciences, Goods, Honor, and Lives of
these poor Servants of God lie at the mercy of unrighteous Judges, and of their
merciless perfidious Enemies. A Roman Catholic may at his pleasure destroy a
Protestant: Witnesses are never wanting, the Kings Attorneys-General, or their
Deputies, or the Agents and Syndicks of Bishops, or Judges for Convents, and
Collegiate Churches, will never fail to prosecute. Some have been Condemned to
the Pillory, others to the Chain in the Galleys, others to exorbitant Mulcts
and Fines, for but relating a story out of known Authors, how a Priest cheated
the World with a false Miracle, by passing a Vine through the Head of an Image,
which being pierced in that Season of the Year, when the sap ascends upward,
the sap would drop out of the Eyes, whereat the deluded People believed that
the Image did weep of it self. Another Protestant was forced to stand in the
Pillory, and severely Fined for saying, That God had buried the Body of a dead
Saint lest his Bones should be adored, and that when the Devil offered to take
them up again, an Angel from God opposed him, with, The Lord rebuke thee,
Satan! Another was cast into Prison, because he had said, that the Roman
Priests did hide their Lights under a Bushel. Another had an Unconscionable
Fine put upon him for saying, That the Cross which they worshipped, was but a
piece of Wood.

SECT. XXIV.
Let the Protestants prove the Witnesses which swear against them to be
suborned, to have sworn falsely, yea, though they proved Perjury upon them, they
are either not punished at all, or else their punishments be so slight and
trifling, that instead of terrifying, they do embolden these malicious Villains
to do the more mischief. I shall produce a few Instances.

The Priest of Eymet in Guienne accused very many of the Inhabitants of that
place for profaning the holy Mysteries of the Church of Rome. The Judges
examining this matter found his Accusation to be false, a most malicious and
mischievous Calumny; which though it tended to the destruction of so many
Innocent Persons, of their Lives, and Estates, yet he escaped without
punishment.

The Priest of Chastelheraut accused a poor harmless Damsel for speaking
disrespectfully of the King. For this she was in danger of having her Tongue
cut out, and being whipped by the Common Hangman. But though the Judges
discovered this Priest to be a Villain, an impudent, bloody, false Accuser, yet
no punishment was inflicted on him.

Monsieur de la Touch was accused by the Abbot of La Chappelle before the
Parliament at Rennes, to have taken a Chalice out of a Church; for this
supposed Crime he was, by Order of that Parliament, burnt alive. But though
since this horrible Execution his Innocence has appeared, and he was found
guiltless of the fact, the real Offender having confessed, when and how he
stole it, for which he suffered condign punishment; yet they have done nothing
to repair the injury done unto the name and memory of the Innocent Sieur de la
Touch, but declared, That because he was an Heretic, he deserved to be burnt
to ashes, as he was.

Monsieur Robineau, Pastor of the Church in Pausange, was also falsely accused
by an Augustinian Friar, and a base Curate, to have Preached Sedition, and for
this pretended Crime only, he was kept many Months in the Prison at Poictiers:
and though at last his Accusers were convicted of Falsehood* Calumny, and
Perjury, yet he could never get any satisfaction for his great Sufferings.

Monsieur Borie, Pastor of the Church in Turenne, for Preaching that none but
Jesus Christ was born without sin, was accused of blaspheming the blessed
Virgin, and yet this very Doctrine is that of the Dominican Friars. However
this Godly Minister is handled most unmercifully, he is thrown into a deep
Dungeon, bound with Iron Chains, menaced with Death, and treated after a most
inhumane manner for a whole year, and at last by an Order of the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, he was banished for ever the Land of his Nativity.

A Priest of Niort was Convicted before the King and Council for falsifying an
Order to demolish the Protestant Church in that Town, which was intended
against the Church of Mer: Never was there a more bold attempt before his
Majesty and the Privy Council: Yet instead of punishing him according to his
Deserts, they turned the whole fact into a piece of Raillery and Laughter.

SECT. XXV.
They gave all manner of freedom to the Priests and Monks, whose Carriage was
most insolent, to insult over the poor Protestants, and to execute the severest
and most unrighteous Decrees and Orders of the King against them, as in
Poictou, where the Priests of any were the most furious and industrious in
demolishing of Temples, and rasing their Foundations, and over-throwing several
private Houses, plundering the Castles of Persons of Quality, who professed the
Reformed Religion. If unhappily any Division were in private Families between
Man and Wife, or other Relations, these Fomenters of strife, these Firebrands
of Hell, would come and offer them the Protection of the Church against their
adverse Party. If a Man were poor and brought to Beggary, they promise him the
Protection of the Church against his Creditors, and Mountains of gold, if he
will but change his Religion. They will provide for his Children, put his
Daughters into Nunneries, his Boys into Abbeys, or good Employments: but no
sooner are they debauched, but as the Priests said to Judas, after he had
betrayed his Lord, See thou to it, so they chouse and slight him, leave him in
the lurch, never perform their Promises; so that through despair, some of them
have ended their days as Judas did, by laying violent hands upon themselves. If
a debauched Son would shake off his Father's Yoke, they shall flock to him with
the greatest profession of kindness imaginable, pitying him, and wheedling him
with the deceitful Promises of what great matters they will do for him,
provided he will but relinquish his Religion (who had none) and become of
theirs, a Catholic. If a Daughter be unruly and undutiful to her Parents, they
will seduce her away from them and God, flattering her with the false hopes of
a good Match, or entice her into their Nunneries (those sinks of Uncleanness)
and oblige her Father to maintain her, to give her an yearly Pension, far above
what his Estate can possibly allow or bear.

If a Man be prosecuted for any Crime, let him but change his Religion, he gets
a Pardon, and gets into a Sanctuary from Justice. By this means the old Count
de L'orge saved his life, when he was clapped into the Bastile for coining Money.
But these Cheaters have been cheated themselves. It Is a diverting story for my
Reader, out of Les derniers efforts de l' Innocence affligee, p. 176, and 177.

Conversions are now adays in fashion. Every one will be in the mode.
Cavaliers, Soldiers, and Ladies, as well as our Bigots, must be Converters. One
told me lately a pleasant passage of a common Soldier in the Garrison of
Fribourg, who for a considerable Robbery was clapped up in Prison. This Fellow
was a subtle shaver, and very well perceived there was no hopes of Life or
Mercy for him. As soon as he was brought into Gaol, the first Question put to
him was about his Religion. And you may be sure a Thief has enough of that and
to spare. But without any hesitation, he professes himself an Hugonot, that
is, a Protestant. Immediately all the devout persons in Town bestir themselves
to save the Soul of this poor Heretic, and who more zealous with him and for
him than my Lady Chamilly, the Governor's Wife. This Heretic stands out
against all their assaults, and resolves to die a Martyr for his Religion.
Never did a Martyr defend his Cause better than he. Nay Monsieur de Chamilly
has a pang of zeal for the perishing Soul of this wretched Hugonot, and out of
pure compassion to him visits him in his Dungeon, tells him he is a dead man,
as well as damned, if he don't turn Catholic. Eternal damnation does not
fright him, only the dread of the Wheel and Halter put him into an Ague-fit. He
begins to relent; the Piety and Charity of my Lord-Governor and his Lady work a
Miracle upon him: He is willing, provided he may have good Terms, to relinquish
his Heresy, and go to Heaven. But it must be upon sure Grounds; He will have
his Pardon first, in due form of Law, under the King's Hand and Seal, that he
may not be cheated nor surprised, nor hung up after he is converted. And they
deal (which is a wonder indeed) honestly and honorably with him; They get him
his Pardon, he pleads it in Court, where it is accepted, and he is discharged by
open Proclamation. No sooner is this Convert at large, but he declares to all
the World what a precious Convert he was, who had never been an Heretic but a
Roman Catholic all his days. This Trick was a little mortification to the
Bigots of Fribourg. But let us pass from raillery unto something more sad and
serious.

SECT. XXVI.
If a man be sick, and by reason of poverty is carried to the Hospital, his
Entertainment will be very harsh and cruel; unless he renounceth his Religion,
he shall have no attendance, but die miserably. A Danish Gentleman was carried
to the Hospital at Paris, called l' Hostel Dieu, being mortally wounded; The
Papists earnestly press him to renounce his Heresy, but finding him fixed and
immovable in it, they make use of false Apparitions of supposed Devils,
appearing with a Death's Head, in which they had put lighted Candles, telling
this poor young Gentleman, that he should be damned, if he did not change his
Religion, and of a Lutheran become a Catholic. They follow him so often and
closely with these Mormo's, that being worn out with terrors, he died in
despair. This happened Jan. 24. 1666.

The Liberty of Conscience formerly granted is miserably abridged, and the
Inquisition in effect set up; no Protestant daring to discover his Faith before
the Papists, lest he should be prosecuted for Blasphemy.

The Sick cannot lie quiet in their Beds, in their own Houses, no more than in
Hospitals, without being persecuted with the continual Solicitations of
Priests and Monks to change their Religion, they having got liberty to enter
their Houses at pleasure, which to dying men, though never so well settled in
their Religion, must needs be a very grievous torment.

The Priests with this License do frequently and falsely pretend, that the
deceased party by signs or otherwise discovered a desire, that their Children
should be bred up in the Popish Religion. Thus did they deal with Monsieur
Rossell, a Minister in Xaintonge.

If a man in a violent Fever, though under a delirium, do but let fall the least
expression, the Priest snatcheth at it immediately, and pretends there is a
real Conversion, and then all the Friends and Relations of this delirious
person are driven out of the Chamber, even his own Wife and his Children are
taken into custody. And if he chance to recover, they will force him to go to
Mass, or else put the Decree against Apostates in execution against him.

If a sick man be in his right senses, they will then by subtle insnaring
Questions interrogate him, whether he would not embrace a true Faith, a good,
sound and orthodox Doctrine, and whether he desires not to die in the bosom of
the true Church. If he answer, that he does, or not, it is all as one, he is
persecuted to death. Take an instance or two out of Les derniers Efforts de l'
Innocence affligee, p. 62, 63, 64.

In the Suburbs of St. Marcel in Paris, a poor Woman lay delirious, The
Commissary and Priests of the Parish enter into her Chamber, drive out all her
Relations and Friends that attended her, and made her speak what they pleased;
then they go and fetch the consecrated Host and holy Oils for her viaticum: and
lest any one in their absence should get into the Chamber, they lock it, and
carry away the Key with them. In the mean while this sick Woman returns to her
right senses, but is affrighted at the sight of a Cross at her Bed's foot,
which they had left behind them. She immediately conjectures what had befallen
her during her delirium; and thereupon arises, goes to the door to save
herself; but finding it shut, she resolves to escape by the window. This was
too bold an Enterprise for so feeble a creature; and as she was sliding down
from the third story, she falls upon the Pavement, and with the violence of the
fall, dies in the place.

There was another sorrowful Accident at Ville Dieu, a Village in Poictou. The
Curate and Sexton of the Parish visit an aged person upon his sick bed. They
drive away from him all his Children, terribly threatening them, that if ever
they came near him any more they should be hanged. These poor Creatures
terrified with these and other Persecutions, which they had already suffered,
fled into the Woods, not daring to return to assist their afflicted Father. In
their absence the old man stands his ground stoutly, against all the Assaults,
Temptations and Vexations of this Irreligious Curate and Sexton; and finding
they could not prevail upon him, they at last forsake him. This poor man was
now left succourless, and dies of famine. For when he was found dead, he had
eaten the flesh off his Hands for hunger.

SECT. XXVII.
I should never have done, if I should set down all the Histories of their
Sufferings by the Tricks and Quirks of Law, but I will add one more: Monsieur
Mandeville de Fanue, a Gentleman of an ancient Family, was kept in the Common
Gaol of Normandy three Years, and was there in the Year 1674. He married a
Gentlewoman bred up in the Popish Religion. By her he had several Children; the
first was a Daughter, and his Wife's Kindred intended to carry her away by
force to be baptized according to the Romish Superstition. To that end his
Mother-in-Law procured from the Judges of Caen, an express Command to the
Ministers of the Protestant Church, not to baptize the Child on pain of five
hundred Livers. This is directly contrary to the King's Declaration, Anno 1669.
Article 39. expressed in these very terms, We Order and Command, That the
Children whose Father is a Protestant, shall remain in their Parents Custody,
and those that shall take them away and detain them, shall he constrained to
restore them. Hereupon he was constrained by night, to avoid the insolency and
fury of the common People, to carry the Child as far as Bayeux, five French
Leagues distant from Caen, there to be baptized after the manner of the
Reformed Churches.

As he was going to baptize his third Child at the Protestant Temple near Caen,
the Vicar of St. John's Church stopped him, and took him by the Throat
suddenly, in so violent a manner, that he almost choked him, and to avoid the
fury of the common People, who began to stock about, he returned to his House.

The last Child, being a Daughter, was carried away by stealth by the
forementioned Vicar, and was Baptized in the Romish way. The Mother of these
Children dying a short time after, although by the Custom of the Country the
Father has the right of being Guardian and Tutor of his Children, yet most
unjustly, and contrary to the 39th Article of the Edict, The Relations of the
deceased Gentlewoman, who were all Papists, chose her Brother (who being a
Minor needed a Guardian himself,) to take the care of these Children. And
thereupon he was Condemned to give up his Children into the care and custody of
this young Guardian: from this Sentence he made his Appeal to the Parliament of
Rouen. But his Adversaries by their false Witnesses, and a Counterfeited
Contract before Marriage, allowing the Education of his Children in the
Superstitions of the Romish Church (which he proved forged) got two Judgments
passed against him, and executed, enjoining him to deliver up his Children,
under the penalty of eight hundred Livers French money. Upon this he Petitioned
the Privy Council, and obtained a Letter under the Kings Seal, to Monsieur
Chamilla Intendant of Caen, Commanding him to put a period unto this Affair.
But he being wholly governed by the Bishop of Bayeux, and other of the Clergy
and rigid Papists: This poor Gentleman was made a Prisoner; and at the taking
of him, they miserably abused him, beating him, tearing his Clothes, breaking
his Sword, dragging him in a brutish manner through the streets, and in all
probability, had not a Gentleman, named the Viscount of Caen, come by, and took
him into his Coach, and conducted him, with his Guard, to the Prison, he had
been Massacred by the bloody Rabble. Over and above all this bad usage, some
Debtors to him have obtained an injunction upon any proceeding at Law against
them, until he shall have delivered up his Children. His Estate is all seized,
and he kept at the Kings allowance, that he may thereby be compelled, not
having wherewithal to buy Bread for his Children, to deliver them up. This
Order was Confirmed, and given forth by six Ecclesiastical Counselors.

All that these inhumane Wretches have to allege for this barbarous usage, is
this, That they hold it just and equitable to deprive a Man of all the goods
and comforts he enjoys, provided it be for the advancement of their Religion,
which ought to be preferred before all private Interests whatsoever, according
to their Maxim, Summa enim est ratio quae pro Religione facit. And by this
goodly Maxim of theirs, was this worthy Gentleman, for not prostituting his
poor Children to their Diabolical Idolatries and Superstitions, more than three
years Imprisoned, and placed among the most notorious Rogues, who for their
Villainies are under Restraint, without any hope of deliverance unless by Death.

SECT. XXVIII.
We shall add but one method more under this first head, and that is a general
Inundation of Criminal Processes against the Reformed. Writings were Printed at
Paris, and sent down from thence to all Cities and Parishes in the Kingdom,
Impowering Curates, Churchwardens, and others, to make an exact inquiry into
whatsoever those of the Reformed Religion had either said or done for twenty
years past, as well upon the occasion of Religion as otherwise, and to give
information of it unto the Local Magistrates, that they might be prosecuted
without delay, and punished without remission. So that for diverse years
together, in the execution of these Orders, the Prisons were every where filled
with new kind of Criminals, with the most Innocent Persons in all France. Nor
were false Witnesses wanting, and which was most horrible, though the Judges
were convinced in their Consciences, that they were Knights of the Post, yet
they maintained and abetted them in their horrid Wickedness. Thus they
Condemned innocent and godly Persons to be scourged, to be Chained in the
Galleys, to Banishment and public Penances. And this kind of Persecution fell
chiefly upon Ministers, Pastors of Churches. For a long time they might not
Preach without having for their Auditors, and Observators, a swarm of Priests,
Monks, and Missioners, and such kind of Cattle, who made no scruple to charge
them with things which never entered into their thoughts, and to turn others
into a contrary meaning. Yea they went so far as to divine thoughts, and to
make Crimes out of their own imaginations. For as soon as ever any Minister
spoke of Egypt, Pharaoh, the Israelites, of good or bad People, These Spies had
their forced Innuendo's, and accused these poor Ministers for slandering the
Catholics, and that they meant by the Israelites the Reformed. The Judges
concerned themselves in this, and which is most strange, The Ministers of State
construed these Interpretations of thoughts as real, evident, and undeniable
proofs. On these grounds the Magistrates filled the Prisons with many worthy
Ministers, detaining them many Months, and whole Years together, yea, and often
inflicted upon them severer punishments.

SECT. XXIX.
But they did not stop here, they proceed farther, To deprive the Reformed of
all Offices and Employments, and in general of all means of gaining a
Livelihood. An infinite number of Protestants being dispersed in all parts of
the Kingdom, it could not be but that many Families of them must subsist by
serving the public, either in Offices, Arts, Trades, or one Faculty or other,
according to their Education and Callings. Henry the Fourth was so much
convinced of the necessity and justice of this very thing, that he made it an
express Article, and perhaps the most distinct and formal one of all the rest,
which are contained in his Edict: and therefore the Persecutors thought
themselves obliged to use their utmost endeavors to elude and evacuate it.
Here then they began with Arts, and Trades; which under several pretenses, they
rendered almost inaccessible unto the Protestants, by the many difficulties they
met with in attaining to their Mastership in them, and by the excessive
expenses they must be at to be received therein. For every Candidate (who would
set up his Trade) was forced to this effect, to commence and carry on tedious
Lawsuits, under the weight of which they sunk, and were overwhelmed, they
being in no wise able to hold out the prosecution of them. But this not being
sufficient enough to ruin them, out comes a Declaration in the Year 1669. by
which they be reduced to one third in those Towns where the Protestants were
the greatest number of Inhabitants; and they were forbidden to receive any of
the Religion into their company till this diminution was made. Thus at one
stroke, one dash of the King's Pen, all Pretenders are totally excluded.

Some time after they drive all the Reformed from the Consulships; and other
municipal Offices in Cities. Which was in effect to deprive them of all
knowledge of their proper Affairs and Interests, and wholly to invest the
Catholics with them.

In 1680. The King issued out an Order, depriving them in general of all kind
of Offices and Employs whatsoever from the greatest to the meanest. They were
rendered incapable of serving in the Custom houses, in the Guards, Treasury, or
Post Office, of being Messengers, Coach-men, or Waggoners, or any thing of this
nature.

In the Year 1681. By a Decree of Council, all Notaries, Attorneys, Solicitors
and Sergeants professing the Reformed Religion were rendered utterly incapable
of these Employments in any part of the Kingdom.

In the Year 1682. All Lords, Gentlemen of the Reformed Religion, were ordered
to discharge their Officers and Servants of the said Religion, and not to make
use of them in any case; and this upon no other reason than this, because they
were Protestants.

In the Year 1683. All Officers belonging to the King's Household, and those of
the Princes of the Blood, were also rendered incapable of holding their Places.
The Counselors, and other Officers in the Courts of Aids, and Chambers of
Accounts; and those in County Courts, Bailywicks, in the Courts Royal, of the
Admiralty, in the Provost's and Marshals Court, in the Treasury, Excise, and
all Offices of the Toll, and such like businesses, were ordered to leave their
Places, that the Catholics might enjoy them.

In the Year 1684. All Secretaries belonging to the King, and great Officers of
France, whether Real or Honorary ones, yea, and their very Widows, were
deprived by a Revocation of all their Privileges of what nature soever they
were. They also deprived all those that had purchased any Privileges for
exercising any Professions, as Merchants, Surgeons, Apothecaries, Vintners, and
all others without exception.

Yea, they proceeded to this excess, that they would not suffer any Midwives of
the Reformed Religion to do their Office, and expressly ordained for the future,
That the Protestant Women when they were in Travel should receive assistance
from none but Roman Catholics. It cannot be expressed how many particular
Persons and Families they reduced every where by these strange and unheard of
methods to ruin and misery.

SECT. XXX.
But because there were yet many which could sustain themselves, other Methods
of Oppression must be invented. To this end they issued out an Edict from the
Council by which the New Converts, as they call them, were discharged from
paying any of their Debts for three Years.

This for the most part fell sore and heavy upon the Reformed; who having had a
more particular tie of interest and business with these pretended Converts,
because of their Communion in Religion, were reckoned their chiefest Creditors.
By this Order they had found the Secret to recompense those that changed, at
the charge of those who continued firm; and this they did likewise by another
way. For they discharged the New Converts of all Debts, which those of the
Religion had contracted in Fellowship with them. So that the poor Protestants
must pay all. Horrible Injustice! Cruel, hellish Oppression!

Add to this, The Protestants are prohibited to sell, or alienate their
Estates, on any pretense whatsoever, the King disannulling and vacating all
Contracts and other Acts relating to that Matter; if it did not appear, that
after these Acts, they had stayed in the Kingdom a whole Year: so that the last
Remedy of helping themselves with their Estates in extreme necessity was now
wholly taken from them.

There remained yet a Sheet-Anchor for the poor Protestants, and that was all
which was left them to save themselves in this storm, to retire into other
Countries, where they might get their living by their labors, since it was not
permitted them in France. But the King by repeated Edicts forbad them to leave
the Kingdom upon very severe Penalties. This rendered their case desperate; for
they saw themselves reduced to that horrible necessity of being starved to
death, to die of famine.

And yet the cruelty of their Enemies did not stop here. For there remaining
some gleanings in the Provinces, though very few, and those as thin, lean and
blasted as the Ears of Corn in Pharaoh's Dream. The Intendants in their
respective Districts had express order to load the Reformed with Taxes, which
they did in this manner: Either by laying upon them the Tax of the new
Catholics, who were discharged thereof on favor of their conversion, or by
laying exorbitant Taxes, which they call Duties; that is to say, He, who in the
ordinary Roll was assessed at forty or fifty Livers, was charged by this
Imposition with seven or eight hundred. Thus had they nothing more left, for
all was a Prey to the griping Covetousness and brutish Cruelty of Inhumane
Intendants. They levied their Taxes from them by the effectual quartering of
Dragoons upon them, or by close Imprisonment; from whence they were never
freed, till such time as they had paid down the utmost farthing.

SECT. XXXI.
These were the two first Engines which the Popish Clergy used against the poor
Reformed in that Realm. But now follows a third; which we have termed
Infractions of the Edict of Nantes, under pretense of Explication. Those who
would know their Number and Quality need only cast their eyes upon the Books
written and published on this occasion by Father Meisnier the Jesuit, an Author
famous for his Illusions, and by one Baanard, a pitiful Officer in the
Presidial Court of Beziers in Languedoc. There you will meet with all the
Windings and Turnings, the Shifts and Evasions, which the silliest and most
unworthy Sophisters could invent, whereby to elude the clearest Text of the
Edict, and to corrupt and pervert its very heart, sense, and sincerest meaning.
And that I may avoid prolixity, I shall only produce a brief Account of some
few particular Instances of their Troubles. As for example, Was there any thing
more clear, evident, and unquestionable in the Edict than this, viz. That it
was given with an intention to maintain those of the Reformed Religion in all
the Rights that Nature and Civil Society give to Men? Yet in 1681. there came
out an Edict, that Children might at the age of seven Years abjure the Reformed
Religion, and embrace the Catholic, under pretense forsooth, That the Edict
did not precisely mark, that at this age they should continue at their Parents
disposal. Who sees not, but that this was a mere Trick, seeing that at one hand
the Edict forbad to take away Children by force from their Parents, or by
Flatteries: and on the other hand, the Edict supposed and confirmed all the
natural Rights, of which, without controversy, this is one of the most
inviolable. Was there ever a more notorious Infraction of the Edict than that,
which forbad those of the Reformed Religion, who had passed over to the Romish,
to return unto that which they had quitted? because forsooth, That the Edict
did not, in express formal terms, give them this Liberty. For when the Edict
permits generally all the King's Subjects Liberty of Conscience, and
forbids to perplex and trouble them, or to act and offer any thing contrary
to this Liberty; who sees not this exception touching the Pretended Relapsers,
is so far from being an explication of the Edict, that it is a most notable
Violation of it.

Unto this we may add the Charge given unto the Roman Catholics not to change
their Religion, and embrace the Reformed. For when the Edict gives Liberty of
Conscience, it does in plain terms grant it unto all Persons whatsoever, who
are, or shall be of the said Religion. Yet if we believe the Clergy, this was
not Harry the Fourth's meaning; for he intended that Grant only to those who
then, at that time when the Edict was made, professed the said Religion.

SECT. XXXII.
This Edict of Nantes also gave unto the Reformed the Privilege of keeping
small Schools in all places where they had the Exercise of their Religion, and
by common acceptance those were always understood Lesser Schools in which
Children were taught Latin and Humanity. This was the known received sense of
these words throughout the Kingdom, and it is thus taken when it does concern
the Roman Catholics: Yet, by a new Interpretation, this permission was
restrained to the bare liberty of Teaching to read and write; as if the
Reformed were unworthy to learn any more. And this on purpose to tire out the
Parents, and drive them to this extremity, either not to know what to do with
their Children, or be forced to send them to the Roman Catholics for Education.

The Edict gave them Liberty in all places where they had Churches, to instruct
publicly their Children, and others in what concerns Religion: and this did
visibly establish them in the right of teaching them Philosophy and Theology,
especially Theology, because this is nothing else but Religion.

Moreover, the Edict of Harry the Fourth had promised unto the Protestants
Letters Patents to be expedited in due form of Law for the Erection of
Colleges, in which their Youth might be educated and instructed in the Liberal
Sciences. For whence should their Churches be supplied with Ministers, if they
had no Seminaries, nor Colleges? And yet the Clergy supposed that the Edict
gave no right to the Reformed to instruct them in Philosophy or Theology; nor
were they upon this supposition to have any Colleges. Hence their Universities
and Colleges were all condemned and suppressed, that so the Ministry might be
destroyed. This was the very self same course that Julian the Apostate took of
old to extirpate Christianity.

They had Colleges almost in every Province. All these are suppressed: They had
six Academies, one at Die in Dolphiny, another at Nismes in Languedoc, a third
at Pau ill Bearne, a fourth at Montauban in Quercy, a fifth at Saumur in Anjou,
and a sixth at Sedan. This last, though grounded on a particular Edict, was
suppressed as well as all the others; yea, and had the Honor to be first
ruinated. It led the Van to the other Universities, and preached to them, in
its Rubbish, what kindnesses they must expect from the Jesuitical Councils at
Court. They had been very fuitful Nurseries of many excellent Scholars,
furnished the Churches with some thousands of able, godly and painful
Ministers. This was the great eyesore of the Jesuits, and cause enough for
their bigoted Disciples at Court to procure their Ruin. The Professors in
these Academies were Men of most eminent Learning and Piety, exceeding studious
and laborious in their Calling. They read four Lectures every Week publicly,
besides the private Colleges they had in their own Houses daily: for a number
of young Students would combine together to prosecute one body of
Controversies, and the Professor reads to them at home, and they draw up their
Theses and dispute upon it. We have a world of these Exercises in the Foreign
Universities. Their Professors exercise their Scholars with public
Disputations, and strictly examine their Proficiency once a quarter. Their
stipends were but mean, never amounted to Seventy pound a year; yet they were
generally Men as of great parts, so of great reputation, and highly esteemed by
their Churches, Synods and the Nobility. I shall insert here a Catalogue of the
Prefessors in Divinity in the University of Montauban, from its first
foundation in the sixteenth Century unto the year 84. of the seventeenth, when
the University was suppressed, and all the Professors clapped up in the Prisons
of Toulouse, by a Decree of that Parliament; where they were kept in duress
till the month of October, in the year 1685. and were then banished the Realm,
with all the other Ministers.

1. Dr. Michael Berault was the Founder of, and first Professor in the
University of Montalban in the year 1590.

2. Monsieur Peter Sohuis was his Colleague in the same Office, and at the same
time.

3. Monsieur Daniel Chamier, that great Man, and invincible Champion of the
Truth. The Jesuits could never stand before him. He was killed upon the Lord's
day, when the City was besieged, with a Cannon Bullet, in the year 1621.

4. Monsieur John Cameron, that most pious Bishop of Norwich: Dr. Joseph Hall
gave this Character of him, That he was one of the most learned Men that
Scotland ever bred. He had been formerly Minister of Bourdeaux, thence
translated to the Professor's Chair of Divinity at Saumur, and lastly unto
Montauban, where he died in the year 1625. But more of him in my Icones.

5. Peter Berault, the Son of Michael, a Son not unworthy his Father, who
founded the University.

6. Anthony Garrissoles, who died in the Lord, Anno 1651.

7. Paul Charles, though he was called to the Professorship in Divinity after
Monsieur Garrissoles, yet entered he into his rest two years before his
Reverend Colleague, viz. 1649.

8. John Verdier, he died in the year 1668.

9. Andrew Martell, he went into exile, with his Brethren, in the year 1685,
and was called to be Professor of Divinity in the University of Berne in
Switzerland, where he is yet living. In his time the University was removed
from Montauban to Puy-Laurens in Languedoc, in the year 1660.

10. Anthony Peers was called in to succeed Monsieur Verdier immediately upon
his death. This very learned and godly Divine died in my Neighborhood in the
year 1686. here in King Street near Bunhil fields, London.

This University of Montauban (the first and eldest Protestant University of
France) had subsisted the just age of a Man; and then, purely out of a design
to facilitate its Ruin, it was removed, in the year 1660. to Puy-Laurens.

The University of Saumur had its foundations shaken in the year 1675. though
it had a quiet and uninterrupted possession of threescore and ten years, and
was grounded upon the Edict of Nantes, and confirmed by other Edicts of Henry
the Fourth, and of his Son and Successor Lewis the Thirteenth. Henry the Fourth
comprehended them both in the Gift he made them Anno 1599. And in the Articles
of Peace granted by Lewis the Thirteenth to the City of Montauban they were
again ratified, and he formally promised to continue his Bounty (which in truth
was no bounty but a Debt, for the Reformed compounded with his Father to pay
their Tithes to the Popish Parish Priests (which they did honestly and justly)
provided the King would allow such a sum of 135000 l. in good money) unto them
for their Ministers, Schools, Colleges and Universities.

And in his Answer to their Bill of Grievances, in the second year of his
Reign, and of our Lord, 1611. Article 19. He granted to the Universities of
Saumur and Montauban, the same Privileges, Immunities, and Prerogatives, as
the other Universities in the Kingdom enjoyed, according to the will and
intention of King Henry the Fourth, expressed in his Answer to the Bill of
Grievances presented him by the Reformed, Article the Fourth. Yet all these
Engagements and Obligations, both of Honor and Conscience, could not contain
the present King, nor his Council, within any Bounds; But that all the Schools,
Colleges, and Universities of the Reformed, must be dissolved, dissipated, and
they be utterly ruined.

SECT. XXXIII.
But we shall proceed one step farther, and discover in this short Abridgment
how the Faith and Patience of God's Saints was farther tried and exercised in
France, before the last deluge of Popish Fury was poured out upon them. There
were new Laws and Orders as so many new Engines and Racks invented to torment
them. This is the fourth method devised by them.

The first of these Orders which appeared was touching the manner of Burial,
and Interring the dead. In those places where the exercise of our Religion was
actually established, the number of Attendants was reduced to thirty Persons,
and to ten where it was not.

Orders were also issued out to hinder the Communication of one Province with
another, by Circular Letters, or any other way whatsoever; though it were about
matters of Alms, and the distributions of Charity.

There were likewise Prohibitions made of holding Colloquies in the Interval of
Synods, excepting in two Cases, viz. to provide Ministers for Churches
destitute upon the Death of their Pastors, and the censuring of greater
Scandals.

They despoiled also those places, which they called Exercises de Fief, of all
the Characters and Privileges of a Temple, as the Bell, Pulpit, and other
things of that nature.

They forbad also the Reception and Ordination of Ministers in any Synods, or
to have their Decisive Vote in them, or to Register them in the Catalogue of
those Churches to which they appertained.

One Decree forbids the singing of Psalms in their private Houses, yea, and
another to forbear singing in their Temples, when as their Consecrated Host was
carried by in Procession.

One Decree forbids all Marriages at such times as they be prohibited by the
Church of Rome, viz. Lent, and the Ember Weeks, etc.

By another Decree their Ministers are not suffered to Preach at any
considerable distance from their Residence, lest they should have the sorry
privilege of an annexed Congregation, a poor plurality. For one Church being
of it self utterly unable to maintain a Minister, sometimes two or three would
join together to make up a Competency for his subsistence.

Other Decrees forbid their settling in any places, unless sent unto them by
their Synod, though the Consistories had given them a solemn Call, according to
their usual Forms.

Another Decree comes forth to hinder Synods from sending to any Churches more
Ministers than were there in the preceding Synod.

Another Decree prohibits all Proposans, Students in Divinity, to study in
Foreign Universities.

Other Decrees banish all Foreign Ministers, not born in the Kingdom, though
they had been Ordained in France, and spent the greatest part of their Lives in
it, out of it.

Another Decree forbad all Ministers, and Candidates for the Ministry, to
reside in those places where Preaching was forbidden, or nearer to them than
six Miles.

Another Decree forbad the People to assemble in the Temples, under pretense of
praying, reading, or singing of Psalms, except in the presence of a Minister,
placed there by the Synod.

There was one Decree, and that a most ridiculous one, Enacted, That all the
backs of the Seats in their Temples must be removed, that so they might be
reduced to most accurate and decent Uniformity.

Another Decree to hinder richer Churches from assisting the weaker, in
maintaining of their Ministers, and other necessities.

Another Decree obliges Parents to give their Children, who had changed their
Religion, great Pensions.

Another forbids Marriages betwixt Persons of different Religions,
notwithstanding their Scandalous Cohabitation.

Another prohibiteth those of the Reformed Religion from that time to entertain
in their Houses any Domestic Servants, who were Roman Catholics.

Another makes them incapable of being Tutors or Guardians, and consequently
did put all Minors, whose Fathers died in the Profession of the Protestant
Religion, under the Power and Education of Roman Catholics.

Another forbids Ministers and Elders to hinder any of their Flock, either
directly or indirectly, to embrace the Roman Religion, or to dissuade them from
it.

Another forbids Jews and Mahometans to embrace the Reformed Religion, and
the Ministers, either to instruct or receive them into it.

Another injoineth Synods to receive such Roman Catholic Commissioners as
should be sent them from the King, with an express Order to do nothing, but in
their presence.

Another forbids Consistories to assemble oftener than once a fortnight, and
that too only in the presence of the Roman Catholic Commissioner.

Another forbids Consistories, on pretense of Charity, to assist poor sick
Persons of their Religion, and ordains, that our sick shall be carried into
the Popish Hospitals, most strictly forbidding all Persons to entertain them in
their Houses.

Another Decree does in favor of the Popish Hospitals, confiscate all the
Lands, Rents, and other Profits of what nature soever, which might have
appertained to a condemned Church.

Another forbids Ministers to come nearer than three Leagues to that place,
where the privilege of Preaching was under debate or question.

Another Decree confiscated to the Popish Hospitals all Rents and Revenues set
apart for maintaining the Poor, even in those Churches which were yet standing.

Another subjecteth sick and dying Persons to the necessity of receiving visits
sometimes from Judges, Commissioners, Churchwardens, sometimes of Curates,
Monks, Missionaries, or other Popish Ecclesiastics, thereby to induce them to
change their Religion, or to require of them an express Declaration concerning
it.

Another forbids Parents to send their Children before sixteen years of age,
on any pretense whatsoever, to travel in Foreign Countries.

Another does prohibit Lords and Gentlemen to continue the Exercise of Religion
in their Houses, unless they had first produced their Titles before the
Commissioners, and obtained from them a License for Preaching in those their
Houses.

Another Decree restrains the right of entertaining a Minister, to those only
who were in possession of their Lands ever since the Edict of Nantes in a
direct or collateral Line.

Another forbids the Churches of one Bailywick to receive into their Temples
the Members of another Bailywick.

Another does enjoin all Physicians, Apothecaries, and Chirurgions, to notify
unto Curates and Magistrates the condition of sick Protestants, that so those
dying persons may be visited by them.

SECT. XXXIV.
But among all these New Laws none did more effectually promote the designs of
the Romish Clergy than that perfidious Prohibition unto the Reformed, of
Receiving into their Temples any of those who had changed their Religion, no
nor their Children, nor any Roman Catholic, of what Age, Sex, or Condition
soever, on pain of forfeiting their Temples, and upon the Ministers of
undergoing l'Amende Honorable, (a punishment far more ignominious than that of
the Stool of Repentance in the Church of Scotland, or the most rigid public
Penance in the Church of England) together with banishment, and confiscation of
their Goods and Estates. Moreover, the Reformed were enjoined to set up in all
their Temples a particular Seat for the Roman Catholics to sit on. For by this
means, no sooner had any one a design and resolution of changing his Religion,
but they would make him do it in private, and the next Morning find him in the
Temple; who being there observed by the Roman Catholics, who were in their
Seat, immediately Informations were given unto the Magistrates, and then
without delay ensues a Condemnation of the Temple, which was put in execution
you cannot tell whether with greater speed and diligence than rigor and
severity. The Roman Catholics needed only to enter into the Temple upon
pretense that they had places there, and then they slipped in among the Crowd,
and this is made a Violation of the King's Laws and Declaration, which is
immediately followed with an unavoidable Decree of Condemnation. By this Engine
they destroyed a vast number of Temples, and clapped into Chains and Irons a
multitude of innocent and godly Ministers. For wicked Informers and false
Witnesses were never wanting on this occasion.

SECT. XXXV.
Such violent Proceedings as these must needs make a strong impression upon the
minds of the poor Reformed, and tell them plainly unto what mark they tended.
And therefore very many of them, whose prudence foresaw the Evil approaching,
did in time provide for their safety, by leaving their Native Country. Some
transported themselves, their Families, and their Effects into one Kingdom,
others into another, according as their Interests, Necessities, Conveniences,
and Inclinations led them. And I very well remember, that in the Year 1681. in
May and June, whilst I was Pastor of the English Church of Middleburgh, it was
then credibly reported, that 500 Families of French Merchants had quitted
France, and settled themselves at Amsterdam, and 50 Merchants more with their
Households had in those very Months also retired unto Hamburgh. But this was
what the Court never intended, for more reasons than one. And therefore to
prevent and hinder them, they renewed from time to time that Decree which we
have formerly mentioned, that strictly prohibited under the severest Penalties,
any Persons to depart the Kingdom without leave; and to this end they guarded
all Passages on the Frontiers. But these Precautions could never fully answer
their Expectations. And that they might blind the poor Reformed with some hopes
that their rigorous Usage would be abated at home, in the Year 1669. the French
King revoketh several violent Decrees, which indeed produced Effects for the
present answerable to their Designs. For these wise and judicious Men saw well
enough, that this Moderation sprang not from a good Principle, and that in the
sequel, the same Decrees would be again put in execution some other time, yet
the greater part conceived and hoped, that they would contain themselves within
some bounds, with respect unto the general Body of the Reformed, and not pass
on to a total extirpation and destruction of them.

SECT. XXXVI.
And these very self-same Conclusions have been often drawn from the several
verbal Declarations, which did many times drop from the King's own Mouth, That
He would indulge the Reformed, and do them perfect Justice, and let them enjoy
the benefit of his Edicts in their full and most comprehensive extent. That
though he should be very glad to see all his Subjects reunited to the Catholic
Religion, and would for the effecting thereof contribute all his Power, yet
should there no Blood be shed for Religion during his Reign, nor upon this
account any Violence exercised. Those very Declarations having been frequently
repeated, reiterated over and over, gave the poor Reformed some ground of
hopes, that his Majesty would not forget them, and especially that in essential
matters He would let them enjoy the effects of his Goodness and Equity. And
this was the rather expected by a Letter he wrote to that most serene and
excellent Prince his Electoral Highness the Duke of Brandenburgh; Copies of
which the Ministers of State took care to disperse throughout the whole
Kingdom. In this Letter the King assures him, that he was well satisfied with
the behavior of his Protestant Subjects: And for the Reader's satisfaction I
have here inserted it.

A Letter of the French King to the Prince Elector Duke of Brandenburgh.
BROTHER,
I Would not have discoursed the Matter you write to me about, on the behalf of
my Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, with any other Prince, besides
your self. But to show you that particular esteem I have for you, I shall begin
with telling you, that some persons disaffected to my Service, have spread
seditious Pamphlets among strangers; as if the Acts and Edicts that were passed
in favor of my said Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion by the Kings
my Predecessors, and confirmed by my self, were not kept and executed in my
Dominions; which would have been contrary to my Intentions: for I take care,
that they be maintained in all the Privileges, which have been granted them,
and be as kindly used as my other Subjects. To this I am engaged both by my
Royal Word, and in acknowledgment of the Proofs they have given of their
unspotted Loyalty during the late Troubles, in which they took up Arms for my
Service, and did vigorously oppose, and successfully overthrow those ill
Designs which a rebellious Party were contriving within my own Dominions
against my Royal Authority. I pray God to take you, Brother, into his
Protection.

LOUIS.
N.B. That Rebellious Party, which the French King stigmatizeth so hainously in
this Letter, were the Roman Catholics adhering to the late Prince of Conde,
who having some Evidences of the Illegitimacy of the present French King, began
with the Sword in his hand to publish his own Banes unto the Crown of France.
And the Loyal Protestants opposing this Rebellious Prince, and his Rebellious
Army, and in the Providence of God having been the unhappy Instruments of his
and their overthrow, are applauded by the King himself: from whence they drew
this natural Conclusion, that he then, when he writ this Letter to the Duke of
Brandenburgh, had no intentions to destroy them. But that they were mistaken,
and that Prince Elector abused, is notorious to the whole World.




SECT. XXXVII.
Another, and the fifth method used by the Council for their ruin, were those
juggling Tricks with which they were frequently amused. As for Example. At the
same time that some Churches were Condemned, and accordingly demolished, others
were conserved and confirmed: To make the World believe they were very
Conscientious Observers of the Rules and Measures of Justice; and that those
Temples condemned by them were such, as were not grounded upon any good Titles.
Sometimes they would mollify over-rigorous Orders and Decrees: At other times
they seemed not to approve of those violences which were offered by the
Intendants and other Magistrates; and would therefore grant out new Orders to
restrain and moderate them. After this manner did they hinder the Execution of
a Decree made in the Parliament of Rouen, which injoined those of the Reformed
Religion to fall on their Knees when they met the Sacrament. Thus they also
granted a Noli prosequi against the actings of a puny Judge of Charanton, who
had ordered that Prayer in the Protestant Liturgy, who groaned under the
Tyranny of Antichrist, to be struck out of it. And thus also they seemed not to
favor another Persecution which began to spread and become general in the
Kingdom against the Ministers, under pretense of obliging them to take an Oath
of Allegiance, in which other Clauses were inserted contrary to what Ministers
do owe unto their Callings and Religion. And 'twas thus also that they
suspended the Execution of some Edicts, which they themselves had procured, as
well to tax the Ministers as to oblige them to a precise Residence upon those
places where they exercised their Ministry. With the same design the Syndicks
of the Clergy had the art to let the principal Churches of the Kingdom to be at
rest for many years together, without any disturbance in their religious
Assemblies, whilst at the same time they desolated all others in the Country.
They suspended also the Condemnation of the Universities to the very last.

The Court seemed at first unable to believe, and at last in no wise to approve
the horrible excesses of Marillac, the Intendant of Poictou, which he committed
in his Province; though yet that poor and bloody Fellow did nothing but by
their express Order.

SECT. XXXVIII.
But amongst all those illusions there be five or six which are most
remarkable. The first was that at the very time when the Court issued out all
those Decrees, Declarations, and Edicts, which we have before recited, and
which they caused to be put in execution with the greatest severity, yea at the
very same time that they interdicted Church Assemblies demolished the Temples,
deprived particular Persons of their Offices and Employments, reduced People to
Poverty and Famine, flung them into nasty Jails, loaded them with grievous
Fines, banished them from their Houses and Estates, and in a word, had almost
ravaged all: The Intendants, Governors, Magistrates, and other Officers in
Paris, and generally over all the Kingdom, did very coolly and gravely give
out, That the King had not the least intention to touch the Edict of Nantes,
but would most religiously observe it.

The second was, that in the same Edict, which the King published in the year
1682. to forbid Roman Catholics to embrace the Reformed Religion, that is to
say at a time when they had made considerable progress in their grand work of
the Protestants destruction, they caused a formal Clause to be inserted in
these terms, That he confirmed the Edict of Nantes, as much as it was or should
be needful.

The third remarkable is, That in the Circular Letters which the King wrote to
the Bishops and Intendants, obliging them to signify the Pastoral Advertisement
of the Clergy to the Consistories of the Reformed, He tells them in express
terms, That his intention was not that they should do any thing against those
Grants, which had been formerly made by Edicts and Declarations in favor of
those of the Reformed Religion.

The fourth, That by an express Declaration published about the latter end of
the year 1684, the King ordained, That Ministers should not remain in the same
Church above the space of three years, nor return to the first within the space
of twelve. And that they should be thus translated from Church to Church, at
least twenty Leagues distant from the other. Supposing by a most evident
consequence, that his design was yet to permit the exercise of Religion to the
Ministers in the Kingdom, for at least twelve years. Though at that very moment
they had fully resolved in Council upon the Edict of Revocation.

A fifth Remark is, a Request presented to the King by the Assembly of the
Clergy, at the same time that they were drawing up an Edict to repeal and
abrogate that of Nantes, and giving instructions unto the Attorney General how
to frame it. And in that Decree which was granted on this Request of theirs,
the Clergy complained of the mis-representations which Ministers are wont to
make of the Roman Church, unto which they attribute Doctrines which are none of
hers, and beseech his Majesty to make some provision against it. And farther
they expressly declared, that they did not desire the Revocation of the Edict.
Whereupon his Majesty did straightly forbid all Ministers to speak either good or
hurt, directly or indirectly, of the Church of Rome in their Sermons; supposing
as every one may see, that 'twas his intention still to let them continue in
the exercise of their Ministry.

But were there ever such illusions known? or was there ever any greater than
this which they have put into the Revocatory Edict we are now speaking of? The
King after having Cancelled and Disannulled the Edict of Nantes, and all its
Members, Articles, and Dependencies, after that he had for ever interdicted all
public Religious Exercises of the Reformed Religion, and had for ever banished
all the Ministers from his Kingdom, yet notwithstanding he does peremptorily
declare, That it is his will, that his other Subjects, who are not willing to
change their Religion, may remain where they are in all liberty, enjoy their
Estates, and live with the same freedom as formerly, without any trouble or
molestation upon pretense of their Religion, 'till it shall please God to
enlighten and convert them. These were the amusements and gins laid to entrap
the poor Reformed, as has since appeared, and is daily more and more notorious
by those barbarous usages they suffer, of which we shall give some few
instances by and by, leaving the larger and fuller account of them unto that
Reverend and Learned Exiled Pastor Monsieur B. who will publish to the World
very shortly his laborious Martyrology of the French Churches under this
present Reign and Persecution.

SECT. XXXIX.
But I shall add, the sixth preparatory Machin used by the Persecutors for the
ruin of the poor Reformed in that Kingdom, which was an insensible and gradual
disposing of the People by Declarations and Decrees to desire their utter
extirpation, or to approve of it when once done, and to mitigate in their minds
that Horror which common Humanity has of unjust and cruel Persecutions. For
this purpose they turned a great many Stones, used various Means, but the most
common were the Sermons and Preachments of their Missionaries, and of other
controversial Predicators, with which they had stocked the Kingdom of late
Years, under the specious Title of Royal Missions. These were choice Youths,
culled out for the nonce, whose Education had nothing of moderation, but were
all fire and flame. There was no difficulty to judge what kind of Actors these
would be upon the Stage of the World, when they were not only excited, but knew
themselves supported by Authority to blow the flames. And these Incendiaries
did acquit themselves so zealously of their Employ, that it was not long of
them if Tumults and Seditions have not arisen in the greatest and most populous
Cities of the Realm, yea and in Paris itself: for which the prudence of the
Magistrate is to be thanked and commended. Together with these Predicators we
must yoke the Directors of Men's Consciences, Confessors, Monks, Parish Priests,
and all Churchmen from the highest Dignitary to the meanest Curate. For being
acquainted with the Court's Intention, they contended one with another to
manifest the greatest zeal and aversion against the Reformed Religion, because
it was their interest so to do, and the only Ladder by which to mount up unto
Ecclesiastical Preferments, and to acquire the fattest Benefices and most
advantageous Fortunes in the Church. Hence the Streets in most Towns rang every
day with the publication of new Decrees, Orders, Edicts, and Declarations,
against the Protestants, as also of Satirical Lampoons and Seditious Libels,
which hit the humor of the French, and was most acceptable to them.

But this Engine gratified only the little People, and the Persecutors had that
mortification to see that the most sober persons, who were a degree above the
Mobile, disallowed these Acts and Practices. Wherefore they set the Pens of
some Authors a work who had acquired by their Writings a reputation in the
World, and amongst others the Writer of the History of Theodosius the Great,
and of Maimbourg, who was once a Jesuit. He writ the History of Calvinism. But
has done Penance for it ever since, Monsieur Jurieu in his Parallel of Papism
and Calvinism, and in his Apology for the Reformation, having exposed his
Ignorance, Falsehoods, and Malice to the learned World. Monsieur Arnaud the
Jansenist would make his Court also by venting his Choler against the
Calvinists. But though his Apology for the Catholics was writ with as much gall,
fire, and passion as the Bigots themselves could desire, yet it did not take,
because his person was not acceptable. The Old Man complained of it in a Letter
to the Archbishop of Rheims, (Copies of which were dispersed through all Paris)
and aggravates his own Misfortunes, for that another who had done far less
Services was gratified with 20000 Livers from the King, but He, good Soul, though
he had deserved much more, could not meet with so much as one Liart.

But we must not pass by another of their famous Authors, Father Soulier, who
was bred a Tailor, and had the wit to stitch and patch up An History of the
Edicts of Pacification. And Monsieur Nicole once a great Jansenist, but now a
Convert of his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Paris, he sends forth a Child of
his own begetting with this fine Name, Protestants convinced of Schism. Nor may
we overlook the Author of the Journal des Scavans, who in his ordinary Gazetts
stoutly affirms, that the Catholic Faith must be planted as Mahomet's Alcoran
by Fire and Sword, alleging this most unanswerable Argument, That a King of
Norway converted all the Nobles of his Country by threatening to kill their
Children before their faces, if they would not consent to have them baptized,
and to be baptized themselves. For a long time in Paris, and other Towns and
Cities of the Kingdom we rencountred none but these kind of Writings, to so
high a pitch was their passion flown.

SECT. XL.
But though by these steps the Court advanced greatly in their Designs, yet they
had not attained their end. For the Reformed were not wanting to their common
Interest, nor did they neglect their just and lawful Defense. They sent
frequently from the farthest and most distant Provinces their Deputies to the
Court. They asserted their Rights before the Privy Council. They bring their
Complaints and Bills of Grievances from all parts of the Kingdom to that
Honorable Board to be redressed. They employ their Deputy-General to solicit
their Interests both with the Judges and chief Ministers of State, and the King
himself. Sometimes they presented their General Addresses, in which they
exposed their Grievances with that profound humility and deference, which
Subjects owe their Sovereigns.

I do here tender to the Reader but one Instance among many, viz.

The Humble Address of the distressed Protestants in France, as it was
delivered to the French King in the Year 1681.
SIR,
YOur Majesty's Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, do with all
humility represent to your Majesty, that your Declaration of the 17th of June
last, does so overwhelm them with grief, that they are almost out of
themselves; but nevertheless, they are so bold as once more to have recourse to
your Majesty, hoping, that being still your most faithful Subjects, they shall
not be denied access for Justice; and that rather, like God Almighty, your
Majesty will be tender to hearken to the Voice of the afflicted.

Upon this confidence they throw themselves at your Majesty's Feet, and desire
you to consider, that this Declaration is directly contrary to all the Edicts
granted to those of that Religion, and particularly to the Edict of Nantes,
which has been given to them as a perpetual and irrevocable Law, and which your
Majesty has frequently confirmed; for besides, that this does all along
suppose, that your Subjects of that Religion shall enjoy in this your Kingdom
all rights as well natural as civil, which are common to any of your Subjects;
and that among those Rights, that of the Power of Parents over their Children
to the Age of Puberty is one of the most general; the 18th Article of that
Edict does expressly provide, That none shall by force take away any Children
from their Parents, to baptize, or give them the Sacrament of Confirmation,
against the will of their Parents.

It Is well known that Confirmation is never given to Children till they are
past Seven years old; and if the Edict forbids to give them Confirmation at
that Age, sure much less will it allow them to be at liberty to choose their
Religion, and to make abjuration, at that age, of a Religion in which they were
born and educated.

It Is with the same Intention that the 38th Article of the same Edict does in
express words say, That the Parents making profession of that Religion, may
provide their Children of such Tutors and Guardians as they shall think fit,
nay, that they may name one or more either by Will or Codicil, before a Notary,
or written with their own Hand.

Your Majesty, Sir, is most humbly supplicated to weigh the force of the word
Education, even after the Death of the Parents; for it evidently demonstrates,
that the Edict had a regard to the paternal Right of Parents over their
Children, not only as inviolable during their Life; but extending it self even
after their Death; so as no zeal of Religion, nor any other Pretext could take
it away; nay, it was so far from being limited to the age of Seven years, that
it was to be preserved during the whole Course of the Education, which scarce
begins at that Age, and is very narrowly limited when it ends at that of
Fourteen.

Besides, Sir, The Edict of Nantes is not either the only or the first Law,
that speaks in favor of this Power, which, being a Law of Nature, is as
ancient as the World, (and it is a Maxim, that natural Rights are immutable) but
it is found also in an Answer given to the Protestants in the year 1571. under
the Reign of Charles the Ninth; which was the severest reign against those of
that Religion.

The Power of Fathers over their Children was thought so sacred, that it was
said upon the 24th Article, that Fathers should not be hindered in the Education
of their Children according to the Principles of their Religion, and the
Motives of their Conscience, and that even after the Death of the Parents,
their Children should be Educated in the same Religion, till they had attained
the full Age of Fourteen years, and then should be left to their Choice and
Liberty.

But, Sir, none of your Royal Ancestors have more authentically acknowledged
this right of Parents than your Majesty. For besides diverse Judgments given in
your Council of State in the years 63 and 65 which are expressly in favor of
this Power, your Majesty's Declaration in the year 69. has it in express words,
That it is prohibited to all Persons whatsoever, not only to take away from
their Parents the Children of those of the pretended Reformed Religion, or to
allure them; but they shall not also make any Change or declaration of Change
of their Religion, before they have attained the complete Age of Fourteen years
for the Males, and Twelve for the Females; and that till they have respectively
attained the same age, they, the said Children, shall, after the decease of
their Parents, remain in the hands of their nearest Relations of the same
Religion; and that any that shall detain them shall be obliged to restore them
back to their Relations. All this has been put in execution and confirmed by
diverse Precedents, and particularly by a Judgment given by the Archbishop of
Rheims in the Month of August 76. by which it is ordained, that none of the
Female Sex shall be received into the House of the Propagation of the Faith at
Sedan, till they have attained the Age of Twelve years complete.

Your Majesty's Suppliants beg leave to represent to your Princely
Consideration the Difference that will be found between the Declaration of
1669. and this last of 1681. the first leaves to Nature its Rights and
Privileges, to Conscience its Motives and Impulses, to the civil and common
Laws their Principles and Maxims, to your Parliaments their Rules and constant
Methods of proceeding, to foreign Nations an Example worthy their Imitation,
and lastly to the Roman Catholic Religion the honor of keeping within some
bounds of Equity, in Conformity to Reason and the Practice of the Primitive
Church: whereas, under this new Law Nature suffers, and groans to see Children
torn from the Bosom of their Parents to whom she had given them, and who ought
to be more theirs at the Age of Seven years, than before; since it is properly
at that time, that their Education begins, and that Parents do as it were take
possession of their right.

The Conscience of your Petitioners will be troubled, and disquieted in the
most cruel manner imaginable, since the Paternal care of Children, for their
Education, is one of the most important and indispensable duties of Conscience;
every Parent being responsible to God Almighty for his Childrens actions, while
nature has deposited them in his hands.

The Civil and Canon Laws will both speak in favor of your Suppliants; for if
Children before the age of puberty, which is at fourteen, can neither make a
Will, nor be Witnesses at Law, nor make Vows, nor do any Act of their own will;
how can it be thought reasonable, that they should before that age make choice
of their Religion, which is the most important Act of their whole Life. Your
Parliaments, Sir, who following the common Principles of Reason and Equity, did
never yet subject Children to capital Punishments, before the age of Puberty,
must now violate that Custom of all Nations, and practiced in all Ages: for by
making Children of seven years old, capable of choosing their Religion, they are
at the same time exposed to contract the crime of those that are called
relapse, and by consequence do undergo the capital Punishment, ordained by your
Majesty's Laws, in that case.

Foreigners, and Infidels themselves, will think themselves well Authorized by
this Example, to take the Children of those, who profess a Religion contrary to
theirs.

And lastly, the Roman Catholic Religion will hardly avoid the reproach of all
good Christians, when it shall appear, that it not only receives, but forces
Conversions from Children of seven years old, that is in an age, when they have
but the first appearances of reason, and when their Judgments scarce begin to
act; and where by consequence any change of their Religion cannot proceed from
a determinate choice, but from a blind obedience, or yielding to the threat or
allurements that can move them. That it is contrary to the Practice of the
Primitive Church is so visible, that even admitting your Suppliants to be
Heretics; it is most certain, that in ancient times, the Church never took away
Children under age from those that lived under the same ties of civil society
with them, though at the same time they thought them Infidels. In a word, Sir,
it is an unheard of practice to this day, in all the Nations of the World, that
the Power of Fathers should be restrained to seven years over their own
Children, particularly in Cases of Religion.

Thomas Aquinas, one of the greatest Doctors of the Roman Catholics, decides
positively, that it is not lawful to baptize the Children of the Jews against
the will of their Parents, and that for two Reasons, one, that it was never the
practice of the Church, and the other, that it is against the course of natural
Justice, and when the Kings of Spain and Portugal, Sisebuth and Emanuel,
carried on by a Zeal of Religion, went about to practice something like it, the
fourth Council of Toledo opposed the action of the King of Spain; and all the
World has blamed the proceeding of Emanuel, when he took away from the Jews
their Children under fourteen years of Age. The famous Bishop Osorius, who
speaks of it, says, that it was an action neither founded in Justice nor in
Religion; though it proceeded from a good Intention, and aimed at a good End,
because God Almighty requires from Mankind a voluntary not a forced Sacrifice.
It being against his Laws, that any violence should be offered to Conscience,
to which he adds this terrible Circumstance, that diverse of those unfortunate
Fathers threw their Children headlong into deep Wells, and precipitated
themselves after them.

It cannot be alleged, Sir, that the Declaration of your Majesty does not
order the taking away of Children from their Parents, and that it only gives
them the liberty of choosing their Religion. For in the first place, the
Violence is not so much to be looked upon as offered to the Children, but to
the Parents whose Children they are by the Gift of God and Nature; it is the
sense of the same Thomas Aquinas, who speaking of the Jews says, that it were
injustice to baptize their Children against their will, because it were the
taking away from them that paternal Power, with which they are invested by
nature, which, says he, the Church never did, even in the most Christian
Princes times, as Constantine, and Theodosius, who without doubt would have
permitted it, had it not been against all Reason. And the Edict of Nantes it
self in the 18th Article, forbids equally Force and Persuasion, and calls them
both Violence, and all Laws have as severely punished the Rape of Seduction, as
that of force in Children under Age.

Secondly, The Age of seven years fully attained does not hinder, but that as
to the Parents the Violence is as great, as if their Children were torn from
their Mothers Breasts; because that all Laws, both natural and civil, do submit
Children to their Parents till the Age of Puberty, and therefore it is equally
unjust to take them away at seven years old, as in the Cradle.

If it be alleged that Children at seven years old are capable of sinning
mortally, and so may be admitted to the choice of their Religion. We Answer,
that besides that, that Principle is not generally allowed, and that it would
be very hard to judge your Petitioners by Maxims which they do not receive;
it is easy to see, that it is a very unjust and unequal Inference, and that
there is a great deal of difference between the first Idea's of good and evil,
which Children may begin to have at seven years old, and the discerning or
examining of two Religions, with a determination to leave that in which they
have been brought up, to follow another, which must of necessity be less known
to them, if they are not altogether ignorant of it, and which the World knows
to be a choice of so difficult a nature, that it is the earnest endeavor of
human Mind animated with the most diligent inquiry of its way to Heaven.

Your Petitioners shall not here touch upon the fatal and sad Consequences
which are like to attend the Execution of so severe a Law; the despair of
Fathers and Mothers, the inevitable Discord between Parents and Children; the
change of Education from the tender hands of Parents into those of Strangers:
the liberty it gives to ill-dispos'd Children who will scorn the Correction of
their Parents, having means ready to shake off their Authority, the exaction of
unreasonable Pensions from Parents for the keeping of their Children out of
their own Families; the forced retreat of many thousands out of your Majesty's
Dominions; the apprehension that those who remain will be in to have any
Children born to 'em, and a thousand other Inconveniences, and Interruptions
of the Bonds of civil Society.

Your Petitioners, Sir, are convinced as well as all the World, that nothing
here can resist your Power; but they know likewise, that your Majesty loves to
temper that Power with Sweetness and Justice, after the Imitation of God
Almighty, who never displays the Infinity of his Power upon his poor Creatures,
but that he does at the same time look upon 'em with Eyes of Compassion.

It Is your Justice, Sir, that your Petitioners implore in the Excess of their
Grief, and it is to you, Sir, alone, that they direct, their sighs and tears,
taking the confidence to say, as it is true, that they had rather endure all
things, and death it self, rather than be separated from their Children in so
tender an Age, and so be hindered from Educating them in their own Religion,
according to the obligation of their Consciences.

Therefore your Petitioners humbly beg, that it may be your Royal Pleasure to
revoke and annul the Declaration of the 17th of June last, and to order, that
that of February 1669. be in full force, and your Petitioners shall continue to
offer up their Vows and Prayers, for your Majesty's most prosperous and
glorious Reign.

But they were so far from being heard, that their Troubles became greater, and
their repeated Petitions render their Condition still worse and worse. When as
Deputies from Cities and Provinces have come to the Louvre, in the most dutiful
manner, with the most humble Supplications of the sorely distressed
Protestants, for Relief under their heavy pressures, they have received an
express Order from the King to be gone home again immediately. Thus was
Monsieur de Vignolles, Deputy for the Province of Languedoc, used: No sooner
was he arrived at Paris, but one of the Kings Pursuivants is dispatched to him,
with a peremptory Command, to depart the City in eight days, upon pain of close
Imprisonment. And Monsieur Faisse, deputed by the Inhabitants of Privas, did no
sooner appear at Court with their Complaints, but the Captain of the Kings
Guards commands him, in his Majesty's Name, to depart the Court instantly, upon
the like peril of being clapped up in Prison. And when the Province of Lower
Guienne had sent Monsieur Sarrau to lay at his Majesty's Feet an humble
Representation of their many Grievances, he received a private Letter, under
the Kings Seal, forbidding him to come to Court. A multitude of such Precedents
might be produced. And if at any time, and after many difficulties they have
been successful, and weathered out the storms of affronts and injuries they
have met withal, yet when their businesses has come to an hearing, oftentimes
no Advocate could be got to plead their Cause; or if they have been heard,
although their Arguments were never so strong, yet they have been at last
slighted and rejected, and no right done them. They have some times spent whole
years in pursuit of their Causes, and in hope of Audience; but have been worn
out with delays, whereas Sentences against them have been obtained, by the
Clergy, in twenty four hours. Yea many times after long waiting, and great
Charges, the Protestant Agents and Deputies have been forced to return home
with the sad tidings of the loss of their most righteous Causes.

The last Petition presented to the King himself by the Lord Marquess of
Rouvigny, the General-Deputy, in March 1684. was couched in the most submissive
terms, that would have moved and melted into pity the hardest heart (thousands
having seen and read it, for it was afterward Printed,) yet they got nothing by
it, but the hastening of their ruin and destruction.

SECT. XLI.
This was effectually accomplished some few Months following, and in such a
terrible and violent manner has it been Executed, that the darkest and most
distant Corners of Europe, yea, and of Asia and America, have heard and rung of
it. But the circumstances are not known to all, and therefore I shall give an
account of them in a few words; that the mouth of Impudence may be stopped, who
publish abroad, That no Violences have been offered in France unto the
Reformed, and that the Conversions there have been voluntary, and of their free
consent.

At first they took these measures, to Quarter Soldiers in all the Provinces,
almost at the same time, and chiefly Dragoons, which are the most resolute
Troops of the Kingdom. Terror and dread marched before them, and as it were by
one common Intelligence, all France was alarmed and filled with this News,
that the King would no longer suffer any Hugonots in his Kingdom, and that they
must resolve to change their Religion. For there was no human Power could
preserve them in it.

SECT. XLII.
They began with Bearne, in this Province the Dragoons first exercised their
skill in Persecuting. Soon after the storm breaks out in the High and Lower
Guienne; from thence it rides post unto Xaintongue, Aunix, Poictou, the Upper
Languedoc, Vivaretz, and Dolphiny. Then they roar and ravage in Lionnois,
Sevennes, and the Lower Languedoc, Provence, and in the Valleys of Piedmont,
and the little Country of Gex. Afterward they fall with a most horrid rage
upon the rest of the Kingdom, upon Normandy, Burgundy, Nivernois and Berry, the
Provinces of Orleans, Tourain, Anjou, Britain, Champagne, Piccardy and the
Isle of France, not excluding Paris it self, which underwent the same Fate with
the other Protestants.

The first thing the Intendants were to do, according to their Orders and
Instructions, was to summon the Cities and Commonalties before them; and when
those Inhabitants which professed the Reformed Religion were assembled, they
then very gravely acquaint them, That it was his Majesty's pleasure they should
without delay become Roman Catholics, and if they would not do it freely, they
would make them do it by force. These poor People, surpised with such a
proposition, answer, That they were ready to sacrifice their Lives and Estates
to the King, but their Consciences and Souls being not their own but Gods, they
could not in any wise dispose of them.

There needed no more to bring in the Dragoons upon them: these armed and
booted Apostles are at hand; they seize immediately on the Gates and Avenues of
the Cities, they place their Guards in all the Passages, and brandishing their
naked Swords, the Cry is, Kill! Kill! or else turn Catholics! They be
quartered on the Protestants at discretion, and are strictly charged by their
Officers to let none go out of their houses, nor to hide and conceal their
goods or effects, on great penalties. The Catholics also are threatened in like
manner, in case they should receive, harbor, or assist them. The first days
are spent in consuming those Provisions the house afforded, and plundering them
of Moneys, Rings, Jewels, and whatever was of any esteem or value. Then they
set to sale all the goods of the Family, and invite the Papists not only of
that place, but also those of the neighbor Towns and Cities to come and buy
them. And be sure they could sell them cheap pennyworths, and give them a very
good Title.

SECT. XLIII.
A Sp^^^^ of Popish Cruelties.
Afterward they fall upon the Persons of the Protestants, and there was no
Wickedness, though never so horrid, which they did not put in practice, that
they might enforce them to change their Religion. Amidst a thousand hideous
Cries and Blasphemies they hang up Men and Women by the Hair or Feet upon the
roofs of the Chambers, or hooks of Chimneys, and smoakt them with wisps of wet
Hay, till they were no longer able to bear it; and when they had taken them
down, if they would not sign an abjuration of their pretended Heresies, they
then truss them up again immediately. Some they threw into great Fires, kindled
on purpose, and would not take them out till they were half roasted. They tied
ropes under their Arms, and plunged them to and again into deep Wells, from
whence they would not draw them till they had promised to change their
Religion. They bound them as Criminals are when they be put to the Rack, and in
that posture putting a Funnel into their Mouths, they poured Wine down their
throats till its fumes had deprived them of their reason, and they had in that
condition made them consent to become Catholics. Some they stripped stark
naked, and after they had offered them a thousand Indignities, they stuck them
with Pins from Head to Foot: They cut them with Penknifes, tear them by the
Noses with red hot Pincers, and dragged them about the Rooms, 'till they
promised to become Roman Catholics, or that the doleful outcries of these poor
tormented Creatures, calling upon God for Mercy, constrained them to let them
go. They beat them with Staves, and dragged them, all bruised, to the Popish
Churches, where their enforced presence is reputed for an Abjuration. They keep
them waking seven or eight days together, relieving one another by turns, that
they might not get a wink of sleep or rest. In case they began to nod, they
threw Buckets of Water in their Faces, or holding Kettles over their Heads,
they beat on them with such a continual noise, that those poor Wretches lost
their Senses.

If they found any sick, who kept their Beds, Men or Women, be it of Fevers or
other Diseases, they were so cruel, as to beat up an alarm with twelve Drums
about their Beds, for a whole Week together without Intermission, till they had
promised to change.

In some places they tied Fathers and Husbands to the Bed-Posts, and ravished
their Wives and Daughters before their Eyes. And in another place Rapes were
publicly and generally permitted for many hours together.

From others they pluck off the Nails of their Hands and Toes, which must needs
cause an intolerable pain. They burnt the Feet of others. They blew up Men and
Women with Bellows, 'till they were ready to burst in pieces.

If these horrid usages could not prevail upon them to violate their
Consciences, and abandon their Religion, they did then Imprison them in close
and noisome Dungeons, in which they exercised all kind of Inhumanities upon
them. They demolish their Houses, desolate their Hereditary Lands, cut down
their Woods, seize upon their Wives and Children, and mew them up in
Monasteries.

When the Soldiers had devoured all the goods of a House, then the Farmers and
Tenants of these poor persecuted Wretches must supply them with new Fewels for
their Lusts, and bring in more subsistence to them; and that they might be
reimbursed, they did, by Authority of Justice, sell unto them the Fee-simple
Estate of their Landlords, and put them into possession of it.

If any, to secure their Consciences, and to escape the Tyranny of these
enraged Cannibals, endeavored to flee away, they were pursued and hunted in
the Fields and Woods, and shot at as so many wild Beasts.

The Provosts, with their Archers, course it up and down the high ways after
these poor Fugitives; and Magistrates in all places have strict Orders to stop
and detain them without exception; and being taken, they are brought back, like
Prisoners of War, unto those places from whence they fled.

SECT. XLIV.
But this Storm did not fall only upon the Commons, but Noblemen, and Gentlemen
of the best Quality are exposed to it. They also have Soldiers Quartered upon
them, who do rage and spoil them every way as much as the Citizens and
Peasants. Their Houses are pillaged and plundered, their Goods dissipated and
wasted, their Castles rased, their Woods felled, and their very Persons
affronted with the Insolences and Barbarity of the Dragoons. They spare
neither Sex, nor Age, nor Quality. They practice their Violences upon all
Persons, who are non-compliant with their Commands of changing their Religion.
Several Officers and Members of Parliament underwent the very self-same Fate.
For they were first deprived of their Offices, and then the Military Officers,
who were actually in service, are ordered to quit their Posts, and to come and
Quarter upon them, that they may by these new Apostles be necessitated to turn
Catholics.

Many Gentlemen, and Persons of great Quality, and many aged Ladies of ancient
and noble Families, seeing all these Outrages, retired unto Paris, and hoped,
that in that Forest of Houses, and so near the Court, they might find a safe
retreat. But this hope soon vanishes. For a Decree of Council is Published,
Commanding them to leave Paris in fifteen days, and to return back again
without tarrying, unto their own homes. And whereas some presumed to Petition
his Majesty to stop the current of this violent Storm and Injustice, they were
immediately sent Prisoners to the Bastile.

The French King about the 6th of October 1685. was heard to say, That he hoped
by that time his Grandson, the Duke of Burgundy, came to years of
Understanding, he should never know what an Hugonot was in France, but by
History.

In Sedan (a Principality by the Kings Edict annexed but of late unto the
Crown) the Desolation by the Dragoons is unspeakable. The Families of
Protestants being enforced to pay unto these Guests Quartered upon them, from
ten to fifty and sixty Crowns a day, till they were totally beggared.

There have been rare and great Examples of Patience and Constancy among these
Suffering Protestants. I shall produce a few Instances.

In Guyenne, Monsieur de Bergues Lord of Feus, ever since the Dragoons came
into the Province, has had seventy of them continually lodged upon him at Free
Quarters, where they made a total Consumption, devouring all that he had, even
to the very Stones and Walls, and not content with ruining him, they compelled
his poor Tenants to contribute also to their Livelyhoods. After they had by
main force dragged his Lady and Children to the Popish Church, they Imprisoned
them in several Nunneries: and as for that Pious Lord, having by their
Cruelties and ill usages confined him to his Bed, yet they continued their
Torments of him in his Sickness, four Soldiers guarding him night and day, as
if he had been some Notorious Traitor, and those brutal Wretches treating him
with excessive Indignities. However they could not shake the Constancy of this
Noble and Religious Gentleman.

Five Citizens of Sedan, after these Missionaries had tried their skill upon
them, by destroying and eating up all their Substance and Estate, and other
Hellish ill usage in Prison, to induce them to renounce their Religion, and not
prevailing, they at last Condemned them to the Galleys. Unto which they went
most Courageously, Rejoicing at their great Afflictions for the Gospel.

Two ancient Gentlewomen of Sedan, one being the Widow of Monsieur Dreall
Seneschal of the City, and the other the Relict of Monsieur de Beaulieu, who in
his Life time had been Pastor and Professor in that Church and Academy, they
both yielding up their Houses and Estates (which were very considerable) to be
spoiled and plundered by these Dragoons, did for some weeks hide themselves
from their Violence, by climbing from the Tops of Houses, from one House unto
another, and endured those hardships, which would have been the bane of others
younger and stronger than themselves; but hereby being worn out and quite spent
with the labors and fatigues of their frequent removes, they fell sick, and
were both seized on by their Persecutors, who banished them unto Rheims, and
are now doing penance for their Heresy (as the Papists call it,) and you may
be sure a severe Penance it is, that will be inflicted on them by the bigoted
Nuns in their Convents.

The Lady Vielle Vigne, ne^r Nantes in Brittany, being accused of holding a
Conventicle in her house, that is, for keeping a day of Prayer, was immediately
arrested, and all that had been found at that Religious Meeting were carried to
prison, where this Excellent Pious Lady abides in Duress.

Monsieur de Rosemont, formerly Pastor of Giens, having through humane
Infirmity fallen with the Multitude, fell sick in danger of death; the Priest
of his Parish comes to visit him, and offers to administer the Popish
Sacraments, Extreme Unction, and the Eucharist unto him; but the poor Man
refuses them, and declares his mind boldly against them, and in particular
against their Sacrilege in robbing the People of the Cup. Finally, it pleased
God that he recovered of his distemper; and being in perfect health, he was
demanded whether the words he had spoken, and the discourse he had held in his
Sickness were the effects of his Fever and Delirium, or of his fixed and
settled Judgment. He answered courageously, that what he had spoken in his
Sickness he would stand to in his Health, that they were his present Thoughts
and Faith; and expressing a great deal of Remorse and Sorrow for his Fall, he
begged pardon of God for it: whereupon he was brought before a Judge, who
condemned him forth-right unto the Galleys, there to be hung till he was dead.

Monsieur Bayley, Minister of Carla in the County of Foix, and who was in June
1685. seized on by the Provost of Montauban, and thrown into a Dungeon in the
Castle of Trumpet at Bordeaux, not one of his Friends or Relations being ever
permitted to visit him, or to know the cause of his Imprisonment; died the 12th
of November following, but with that Constancy as became a Martyr of Jesus
Christ, praising and blessing God for his Sufferings. These Sufferings of his
had been very great and exceeding grievous: He lay a long while together sick
without any relief or assistance; yea, they were so barbarously cruel to him as
to deny him a Cup of cold Water to quench his burning Thirst; his merciless
Guards treating him in his very malady with all manner of Barbarities, that by
those Torments he might be enforced to apostatize from the Truth; but this
excellent man of God held steadfastly to the last, and by his Faith and Patience
conquered the Cruelties of his Tormentors, and died triumphantly. He was a
Person of great Worth and Learning, all which was communicated by him to the
Edification of his Flock. His Brother, one of the rarest Scholars of this Age,
is that famous Author of the Republique des Lettres.

The Widow of Monsieur Fremont, that rich famous Banker of Paris, together with
her two Sons, left above 200000 Liveres in their House and escapt most
fortunately their Persecutors. Monsieur Fremont putting himself and six more
into the Habits and Arms of the Lifeguard, and himself as an Officer in the
head of them, coming upon the Frontiers to the Guards, demands whether none had
passed them lately? To which they replied Yes, some had done it a little before
with Pass-ports. But this new Officer tells them they were counterfeited, and
he was ordered to pursue these Counterfeits, and so saved himself and Company.

In Poictou the Houses of the Gentry are demolished, and excessive Cruelties by
the Mission to make them renounce their Religion. The Lady of a Person of
Quality, who for his Constancy was imprisoned, after that his House had been
pulled down, was clapped up between four Walls, where, though she was big with
child and very near her time, yet she was starved to death with Cold and Famine.

In the Borough of Torique three Leagues from Niort, Frances Aubin, a Country
Woman, declaring her resolution to persist unchangeably in the Protestant
Religion; they first squeezed her Fingers to pieces with Iron Skrews, and then
hung her up by her Armpits, smoking and forcing her to suck in with her
Nostrils Tobacco and Brimstone: afterward these bloody Villains tied her Legs
unto a Horse, who drew her upon burning Faggots. Her own Brother, of the same
name, was an Eyewitness of all her Sufferings, who also was tortured by them,
but in another manner. And forasmuch as none of these Cruelties could make them
either loose their Resolutions or their Lives, they flung them both into a low
Ditch, whence they were taken out almost knee deep in Mud and Water.

Another Inhabitant of the same place called Fountain, was hung up also by the
Arms, smoakt with Tobacco, her Fingers burnt by a light fire, and then thrust
into a Dungeon to die of Cold and Hunger, as a Man of S. Maixant had done
before her.

A Gentleman of Augumois they tormented to death, by pouring into his Mouth
boiling Aqua Vitae, and Wines, and Water.

They gagged two Gentlewomen of the same Province, and had almost killed them
by a great quantity of Wine which they forced down their Throats.

Another Lady of Quality, whilst they consumed her Goods before her face, they,
watching her by day and night, forced her to turn the Spit without any Rest or
Intermission: and this has been an ordinary practice to keep people so long
waking, 7, 8, 9. days and nights together, the Dragoons watching by turns, till
these poor Creatures having lost their Senses, and not knowing what Questions
are put them, or Answers they make unto them, are entangled, carried to a
Popish Church, and two Witnesses swearing they saw this (though a delirious)
Person at Mass, if afterward, by Sleep or Food they came to themselves again,
and declare that they be Protestants, they are condemned for Relapse, and burnt
to death without Mercy.

An Eminent French Minister gave the Writer hereof this Relation, That Jan. 23.
1685. a Woman had her sucking Child snatched from her Breasts; and put into the
next Room, which was only parted by a few Boards from hers. These Devils
incarnate would not let the poor Mother come to her Child, unless she would
renounce her Religion and become a Roman Catholic. Her Chiled cries and she
cries; her Bowels yearn upon her poor miserable Infant; but the Fear of God, and
of hell, and losing her Soul, keep her from Apostasy: however she suffers a
double Martyrdom, one in her own person, the other in that of her sweet Babe,
who dies, in her hearing, with Crying and Famine before its poor Mother.

Monsieur Elias Boutonnet, a Merchant of Marans near Rochell, was martyred by
these bloody Miscreants, after this manner, They hung him up by the Heels to a
Post of his own House, and smoked him to death with wet Straw set on fire.

SECT. XLV. The Martyrdom of Monsieur Homel, Pastor of the Church of Vivaretz,
in the Province of Sevennes, in the Kingdom of France; who was, with most
Hellish Cruelty, broken upon the Wheel at Tournon, a City in the same Province,
October, 1683.
THE Professors of the Reformed Religion in France having for these last Twenty
Years seen the Infraction and Seizure of their Privileges, the Violation and
Abrogation of those Royal Edicts that had been formerly granted to them, the
suppression of their Assemblies for Religious Worship, the demolition of their
Temples, and their poor Children (whose Souls could not but be dear unto them)
taken away from them by Violence, and hurried into Monasteries, to be trained
up in Idolatry, and groaning under a world of other Miseries; diverse of them in
the Provinces of Poictou, Xaintonge, Guyenne, the Higher and Lower Languedoc,
Sevennes, Dolphiny and Vivaretz, consulting together, laid a general Project:
about restoring their ruinated Churches. One of the Articles concluded by them
was, That the 18th day of July, in the Year 1683. their Pastors should jointly
set upon the Exercise of their Public Ministry, in preaching of the Word, etc.
in all those Places where for some time before it had been interdicted. Yet
before they undertook it they presented their most humble Address unto their
King, in which, with the profoundest Submssiions, they protested unto his
Majesty their inviolable Loyalty and Fidelity, and only craved this favor of
him their Sovereign, that under his gracious protection they might serve their
God according to his appointment in the Sacred Scriptures (to which they were
obliged by all Bonds imaginable) and that they might enjoy the Liberty of their
Consciences according to the former Concessions of his Royal Predecessors.

It Is not certain whether this their Petition ever came unto the King's hands.
The malicious Popish Clergy having blockt up all ways of Access for the poor
Protestants at Court.

Immediately after this there was a particular Assembly held in Vivaretz, in
which they came to the same Resolutions of setting up the public Worship of
God according to the Gospel. It Is true, neither of these, not the former nor
this latter, were to any effect executed at all, unless in the Province of
Vivaretz, and some certain places of Sevennes and Dolphiny. Yet this their
Declaration of their purposes cost them dear; for it brought upon those poor
people a Royal Army, who put to fire and sword whatever, of the Protestants
they met with, sparing neither Sex nor Age, butchering them after a most
barbarous manner, and with extreme Inhumanity and Cruelty. Now the Dragoons
live at discretion, eat up and devour the whole substance of these miserable
Protestants. All sorts of Torments are lawful, scarce any unpractised; but the
greatest and most especial subjects of their rage were the Ministers of the
Gospel. None of these that fell into their hands could believe them Men, they
found them by woeful Experience to be incarnate Devils. The Stories are too many
and too large to be here recorded. Yet, Reader, you shall have a taste of one
or two.

At a Village in Dolphiny called Bourdeaux, there was a solemn day of Prayer
and Fasting observed by these poor Christians, Monsieur St. Ruth, St. Ruth paid
the Reckoning at last for all his Hellish Cruelties, at the Siege of Limerick
in Ireland, in the Year, 1691. where God's Sword of Justice cut him off from
doing further Mischief.
Maschal de Camp, brings in 6000. Dragoons upon them: his Dragoons were three
to one of these Protestants. They are now surprised, and commanded every Man to
lay down their Arms; but knowing that if they did, both they and their
Ministers should be hanged outright, they refused. Hereupon St. Ruth commands
his Dragoons to give sire, and at this first discharge kills a Multitude of
these Meeters. However seeing no other way but Death before them, such as had
escaped this first Volley, resolve to sell their Lives at the dearest rate, and
in their own defense killed some of the Dragoons, who fell dead at the feet of
their murdered Companions. About Fifty or sixty broke through the Army,
designing to save themselves in an adjoining Barn, who all, excepting some few,
were burnt alive. Those few that endeavored their Escape were taken, who were
every Man of them hanged without delay by one of their own Party, whom they
constrained to become their Executioner, and whom also they executed afterward
themselves.

There was among the Prisoners Monsieur Daniel Chamier, great Grandson to that
famous Divine of the same name, Pastor and Professor at Montauban, This Young
man was executed after a most horrible manner. He was carried to Montelimar,
and there broken upon the Wheel. He received fifty Blows of the Iron Bar upon
the Scaffold, before they gave him the mortal Blow, and was left alive under
those exquisite torments three days together ever he died. He endured these
Cruelties with an exemplary Constancy and Fortitude.

Some one had interceded with the Duke of Nouailles for a young Gentleman, not
twenty years of age, who had an Estate of 30000 Livers; the Duke promised him
his life, provided he would turn Roman Catholic. This heroic, religious Youth
rejects the Conditions, he will not buy Repentance so dear, he scorneth life
with sin, a life bought with the loss of God, of Heaven, and Glory: He chooses
therefore death, because he believed and hoped for a better Resurrection; And,
having with his own hands fitted the Halter to his Neck, he suffers death
joyfully.

But among all the instances of these Martyrs, this which I am about to relate
of Monsieur Homel is the most remarkable.

Monsieur Homel was sometime Minister of the Church of Soyon, but when he was
executed he was Pastor of the Church of Vivaretz; He was a Venerable Divine,
aged some sixty five Years, whose whole Life has been unblameable. He was
deputed by his Church and Province unto the last National Synod held at Loudun
in the Year 1659. This eminent Servant of God was broken alive upon the Wheel
at Tournon (where, by the way, Reader, the Jesuits have a College.) He
received forty Blows of the Iron Bar upon the Scaffold. He languished under
this Hellish Cruelty two days together. The very thoughts thereof strike an
horror into the hearts of them that hear it. My Author tells me, he trembled,
his Hair stood an end, at the remembrance of it. Certainly this Minister must
have been guilty you will say of some very horrid Crime, of some unheard of
piece of Treason against his King and Country, for which he suffered a death
far worse than drawing in pieces by wild Horses. But he was no Trumpet of
Sedition or Rebellion, he was no James Clement, nor John Chatel, nor Francis
Ravaillack, to assassinate his Prince. This holy Man of God abhorred such
abominable practices. All the crime laid unto his charge, that could be proved
against him, was matter of Duty to God, of Duty to his Church, over which the
Holy Ghost had made him Overseer. He faithfully and zealously exhorted his
Brethren in the Ministry to preach the Gospel even upon the Ruins of their
Temples, yet without quitting their All^giance and Obedience to the King their
Sovereign. This was all his offense, but his Function was the greatest. For
this he must die. But he suffers death triumphantly. Died Abner as a Fool?
Monsieur Hommel lived a Saint, died a Martyr. Some Passages of his Martyrdom
are fallen into my hands, written by an eye and ear Witness of them, which for
the Reader's satisfaction are here communicated, without addition or alteration.

I count my self happy, said this dying Saint, that I can die in my Master's
quarrel. What! would my gracious Redeemer descend from Heaven unto Earth, that
I might be lilted up from Earth to Heaven? would he undergo an ignominious
Death, that I might be possessed of a most blessed Life? Verily, if after all
this, to prolong a frail and miserable life, I should lose that which is
everlasting, should I not be a most ungrateful wretch unto my God, and a most
cruel Enemy to my own Happiness? No! no! the Dye is cast. I am immovable in my
resolution. I breath after that Hour. O! when will that good Hour come, which
will period my present miserable life, and give me the enjoyment of one which
is infinitely more blessed! Farewell, my dear Wife. I know your Tears, your
continual Sighs hinder your bidding me Adieu. Don't be troubled at this Gibbet
upon which I must expire; it is to me a triumphal Chariot, which will carry me
into Heaven. I see Heaven opened, ^^d my sweet Jesus with his outstretched
Arms ready to receive me; yea, he will receive me, who is the Divine Spouse of
my Soul. I am leaving the World, in which is nothing but adversity, that I may
get to Heaven, and enjoy everlasting felicity. You shall come unto me, I shall
never any more come back to you. All that I recommend unto you is, Educate our
dear Children in the fear of God, and be careful that they swerve not from that
way prescribed them in the Holy Scriptures. I have bequeathed them a little
Formulary for their Instruction, that if ever they be brought into the like
condition with my self, they may undergo it courageously: And be confident in
the goodness of our God, who will send them the Divine Comforter to strengthen
them in all their Straits and Distresses. Prepare them for Suffering betimes,
that so in that great day, when we shall appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, we may be able to bespeak him, Lord! Here we are, and the Children
which thou have graciously given us! Ah! I shall never have done. Ah! why am I
hindered from my departure? why am I kept so long in this my earthly Tabernacle?
Farewell my dear People, it is the last Farewell I shall ever give you. Be ye
steadfast, be ye fixed! And know, that I never preached to you any thing but the
pure Truth of the Gospel, the true way which leads unto Heaven.

Some one then told him, He spoke too much. How, said he, do I speak too much?
I speak nothing but the very truth. I have neither spoken nor done any thing
that was in the least offensive to the Sacred Majesty of our August Monarch.
But on the contrary, I have always exhorted the People, committed by the Lord
unto my charge, to render those Honors which are due unto our King, and have
informed them, that our Lives and Fortunes are at his disposal, and that we are
bound to employ them in the defense of his Estate and Crown. But as for our
Consciences, we hold them of our God, and must keep them for him.

Then his Judges leaving him, ordered the Executioner to do his office, which
he did, breaking his Arms and his Legs. And being then demanded whether he
would die a Roman Catholic? He answered, How, my Lords! Had it been my design
to have changed my Religion, I would have done it before my Bones had been thus
broken to pieces. I wait only for the hour of my dissolution. Courage! Courage!
O my Soul! Thou shall presently enjoy the delights of Heaven. And as for thee,
O my poor Body, thou shall be reduced to dust, but it is that thou may be
raised again a Spiritual Body. Thou shall see things that never entered into
the heart of man, and which are in this life impossible to be conceived.

He again addressed himself unto his Wife. Farewell once more, my well-beloved
Spouse! I am waiting for you. But know though you see my Bones broken to
shivers, yet my Soul is replenished with unexpressible Joys.

He uttered many excellent Matters, which are now slipped my memory. Only I shall
not omit, that he kissed his very Judges, who poured out a shower of Tears,
being astonished at so great a constancy. His eyes were always lifted up to
Heaven. He never gave one Cry for all the Blows that were laid upon him after
the first. His Life was had in singular veneration, and as long as this Earth
shall continue, his Death will be in admiration.

Let Us imitate this Great Man of God, and persevere unto the end (though with the
loss of our Lives) in the true Religion, which is that only that will conduct
us to the Heavenly Paradise. Amen.

I intended ^^od willing, to write his Life at large, and to publish it shortly
in my Icones.

N. B. Every Limb, every Member, and every Bone in his Body were broken with
the Iron Bar forty Hours before the Executioner was permitted to strike him
upon the Breast, which gave him, as they call it, Le Coup de Grace, the Blow of
Mercy, that Death-stroke which put an end unto all his Miseries.

Before we proceed any farther, I shall desire the Reader to remark,

SECT. XLVI.
1. That in the Head of these booted and armed Apostles, besides their own
Military Officers and Commanders, there marched the Intendants of every
Province and District, together with the Bishops of the Diocese accompanied
with a Troop of fiery Zealots, Missionaries, Monks, and other Romish Churchmen.
The Intendants gave out such Orders as they conceived would most effectually
promote and facilitate the conversion of the Heretics, and suppress natural
Bowels and Pity, in case any such arise and move in the Dragoons or their
Officers. The Prelates kept open House to receive Abjurations, and to have a
strict and careful eye, that nothing might be done contrary to the Intentions
of the Clergy.

2. When the Dragoons had made some to relent and yield by their inhumane
Cruelties, they presently change their Quarters, and are sent to plague those
of the Reformed who do yet persevere in their fidelity to Christ and the
Gospel. So that often times these had at once all the Dragoons quartered upon
them, which were before dispersed among all the Inhabitants of that place. This
was a burden insupportable.

3. That in the most eminent Cities and Towns of the Province they were careful
by the Intendants or some other means to procure some persons to change their
Religion, before they sent their Troops thither, and these new Converts must be
aiding and assisting in perverting others. So that when the Dragoons had done
their part as effectually as they could, the Intendant, with the Bishops and
the Military Commander do once again assemble these miserable Inhabitants
totally ruined, and exhort them to obey the King, and become Catholics;
adding, in case of obstinacy, most terrible Threats. And the new Converts never
failed in this juncture to execute what they had promised, to entice and seduce
them from the true Religion. This they could do the more successfully, because
the Reformed had yet some kindness for, and confidence in them.

4. When the Master of a Family, thinking to get rid of the Dragoons, had
obeyed and signed an Abjuration, yet, for all this, he was not freed from his
Tormentors, unless that his Wife, Children, and the meanest of his Servants did
not also follow his example. And if Wife, or Children, or any of his Domestics
escaped their hands, and fled for their Lives, they renewed their Persecutions
upon him till such time as he had brought them back again; which being
sometimes utterly impossible, their change of Religion did not in the lead
benefit or avail them.

The Form of Abjuration imposed upon the Protestants when they turned Papists,
and which they styled, The Mark of the Beast, I here offer to my Reader's
perusal.

THE Mark of the Beast: OR, The Profession of the Catholic, Apostolic, and
Romish Faith, which the Protestants in France were enforced to make and
subscribe, through the Violence of Persecution in France.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.
I (...) do believe, and profess with a firm Faith, all and every thing and
things contained in that Creed which is used by the holy Church of Rome, to wit:

I believe in one God the Father Almighty, who has made Heaven and Earth, and
all things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, and born of the
Father before all Ages, God of God, Light of Light, True God of the True God,
Begotten not made, of one substance with the Father, by whom all things were
made; who for us Men and our Salvation, came down from Heaven and was Incarnate
by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made Man, and was Crucified also
for us under Pontius Pilate, he suffered and was buried, and the third day he
rose again, according to the Scriptures, and ascended into Heaven, and sits
on the right hand of the Father, and he shall come again with Glory, to judge
both the quick and the dead: whose Kingdom shall have no end.

And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds
from the Father, and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is
Worshipped and Glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one
Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of
Sins, and I look for the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to
come. Amen.

I receive and embrace most firmly the Apostolic, and Ecclesiastical
Traditions, and the other Observations and Constitutions of the same Church.

In like manner I receive the holy Scripture, but with that sense which the
holy Mother Church has, and does now understand it, to whom it does, belong to
judge of the true sense, and interpretation of the Sacred Scriptures, and I
shall never take it, nor interpret it otherwise than according to the unanimous
Consent of the Fathers.

I profess also, that there be truly and properly seven Sacraments of the new
Law, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and needful for the Salvation of
Mankind, although not alike needful to every one, to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and Marriage,
and that they do confer Grace. And that Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders,
cannot be reiterated without Sacrilege.

I receive and admit also the Ceremonies received and approved by the Catholic
Church, in the solemn Administration of all these for-mentioned Sacraments.

I receive and embrace all and every thing and things, which have been
determined and declared concerning original Sin and Justification by the holy
Council of Trent.

I likewise profess, that in the Mass there is offered unto God a true, proper,
and propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead, and that in the most
holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is truly, really, and substantially, the
Body and Blood, tog^^her with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and that in it there is made a Change of the whole substance of the Bread into
his Body, and of the whole substance of the Wine into his Blood, which Change
the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation.

I confess also, that under one only of those two Elements, whole Christ and a
true Sacrament is received.

I constantly affirm, that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there
detained are relieved by the Suffrages of the Faithful.

In like manner the Saints reigning with Jesus Christ are to be Worshipped, and
Invocated, and that they offer up Prayers unto God for us, and that their
Relics are to be honored.

I do most steadfastly avow, that the Images of Jesus Christ, and of the
Ever-Virgin Mother of God, and also of the other Saints, ought to be had and
retained, and that due honor and veneration must be yielded to them.

Moreover I affirm, that the power of Indulgences was left unto the Church by
Jesus Christ, and that their usage is very beneficial unto Christians.

I acknowledge the Holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, to be the
Mother and Mistress of all other Churches.

And I promise and swear true Obedience to the Pope of Rome, Successor of
Blessed St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

In like manner, I receive and profess, without doubting all other things left,
defined, and declared by the holy Canons, and General Councils, and especially
by the most holy Council of Trent.

And withal, I do condemn, reject, and accurse all things which are contrary,
and whatever Heresies have ken condemned, rejected, and accursed by the Church.

And swearing upon the Book of the Gospels, he must say,

I promise, vow, and swear, and most constantly to confess (God aiding me) and
to keep entirely and inviolably unto the death, this self-same Catholic Faith,
out of which no Person can be saved, which I do now most willingly and truly
profess, and that I will endeavor, to the utmost of my Power, that it shall be
held, taught and preached by my Vassals, or by those who shall belong unto my
charge. So help me God, and these holy Gospels. So be it.

I (...) of the Parish of (...) do Certify unto all whom it may concern, that
having acknowledged the falseness of the Pretended Reformed, and the truth of
the Catholic Religion, of my own free will, and without any Compulsion, I have
made Profession of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion in the Church
of (...) in the hands of (...) In Testimony of the Truth hereof, I have signed
this Act in presence of these Witnesses, whose names are hereunto subscribed
this (...) day of the Month of (...) and in the year of our Lord ^

SECT. XLVII.
When these poor Wretches had signed this Abjuration, and hoped thereby to be
at rest, they were far enough from it; for their Consciences flew in their
Faces, and many of them were driven unto despair. Yet their Persecutors never
ceased tormenting them; they must own and attest it before the World, that they
embraced the Roman Religion freely, voluntarily, and of their own accord, and
that no Violence was offered them to move or induce them to turn from the
Reformed Religion. And if after this they scrupled to go to Mass, to
communicate after the Popish way, to tell over their Chaplet of Beads, or if a
Sigh escaped from them, indicating their Grief and Sorrow for their great Sin
in forsaking the Truth, immediately there were great Fines laid upon them, and
their old Guests the Dragoons are sent back again to beat up their quarters,
and they must entertain afresh those old Guests, who had wearied them out of
their Faith and Life.

I have by me a Letter from Mets, giving an account of the state of the poor
Protestants upon their Abjuration; which may not be unacceptable to the Reader.

My Dear F.
Yours of the Thirteenth of September is come to my hands, by which I perceive
you are well informed of all things relating to those Holy Missionaries, our
Dragoons. You cannot for all that imagine what it is to fall into the hands of
such Apostles. Of all the Families of There were in that Church 10000
Communicants.
Mets, there are left but two Persons which have not subscribed, viz.
Mademoiselle Goffin, who is a Prisoner in the Nunnery of the Female Preachers,
and Mademoiselle Ferry, Sister to Monsieur Le Bachelier the Counselor, who is
also clapped up in the Nunnery of St. Clare. These are the only two Persons who
have refused Subscription; yet do not persuade your self into that Opinion,
that because they have subscribed, therefore they must needs be of the Roman
Religion: nay the very contrary is true, for we were never more estranged from
it. I shall deal plainly with you, we ought not to be blamed for our weakness
in subscribing; for had all the Ministers of France, now exiled the Kingdom,
been resident in it, and lain, as we have, at the cruel mercy of Dragoons; I am
certainly persuaded, that not five in an hundred could have stood it out, but
must have subscribed as well as we. Do not then believe that such as have
subscribed have changed their Religion, I can give you full evidence that they
were never more zealous for the Reformed Religion than now. I know we have too
too much neglected your Advices; but the most eminent among us were too secure,
even our Ministers themselves, who, because of the profound peace in which we
lived, had made Purchaces, and richly furnished their houses with the best of
Goods. And if, after all this, we have had the Misfortune to expect that ill
Hour and Lot of Subscription, 'twas because there was no means left of saving
our selves; and whereas we be condemned for our foolish confidence in those
golden Promises, That neither by word or deed we should be in the least hurt
upon the score of Conscience; I must reply, it was because, the Passages on the
Frontiers being so strictly guarded, we could not possibly escape; for on this
side of the Kingdom all were so narrowly watched, that a poor Cat could not
meet with an Hole, by which to creep out.

You writ to me concerning Monsieur N. pray when you see him, tell him that
Madam N. his Sister-in-law lodges at my house, with her Family, and that
already three of her Sons are departed the Kingdom. She is one of the sweetest
Gentlewomen that may be, the Lord bless and assist her in all her designs. She
ran the same risk with the rest, but is little concerned for it. There be daily
brought into the Prisons of this City, Persons of Vitry, Chalons, and Sedan,
who are Condemned unto the Galleys, or to perpetual Duress. Finally on our side
we have no means left us of escaping, so that we must absolutely resign our
selves to the will of our God, 'till he open a Door for us. Yet I beseech you,
do not believe, that Worldly considerations, as of goods and estates, do detain
us here; No, no, could we but have had liberty of departure, we had long ever
this gone away, though only with our Shifts about us, yea, though we had left our
Children behind us. But it is not God's will that we should yet quit this
place, nay, it is his will that we be patient, and that we hinder our Childrens
falling into such hands as would educate them in Idolatry, in a false Religion,
and in an aversion for our selves also. I must add, that we had no preservative
from subscribing, it was wholly impossible to avoid that Subscription against
the Protestant Reformed Religion, though as yet we are not obliged to go to Mass;
but expect once more the Dragoons with their Swords in their hands to drive us
to it. We know we have subscribed, but we know also we have not changed our
Religion, and through Grace we shall never change it. I may assure you, that so
great were our Oppressions, that they might have obliged us to have been Turks
as well as Papists, and to have wore a Turban, had it been as high again as the
Triple Crown. Our wisest Catholics for these last six Months have told us,
That we should shortly be of one Religion, but never be of one belief. And they
had reason for what they said. For we were never more fixed in our Religion
than now. Sometimes, for fashions sake, we go unto their Sermons, but return
extremely dissatisfied with those Discourses, and more confirmed in our first
Faith than before. Poor Monsieur de Chevenix lies very ill, the Curate of his
Parish was with him to oblige him to Confession; but he positively told him, he
would not confess himself to any but God, who alone could forgive him his sins;
and not to any mortal creature, who was as much a sinner as himself. Afterward
he was visited by the Archbishop, who would have obliged him to communicate
before death, which he also as stiffly refused. The Archbishop acquainted him
with the King's Orders, concerning such who being sick refuse to communicate
ever they die. He replied, that he cared not a Rush for them, and that he would
never communicate after the Popish manner. I know not what may happen
hereafter, but at present he is mending, and I believe he will perfectly
recover. But the Ordinances of the King, or rather of the Clergy, are, That the
sick shall communicate before death; and in case they do not, their dead
Carcasses shall be drawn upon the Hurdle, and then thrown into the Common
Jakes, and all their Goods confiscated; and if they recover, they shall however
be condemned unto the Galleys, and all their Goods confiscated. You may see by
this to what a woeful pass we are reduced, till the Lord our good God shall be
pleased to turn the Wheel better for our advantage.

Our whole Family here salutes you: We are wholly busied in gathering in the
Vintage, but never with less pleasure, inasmuch as we know not for whom we toil
our selves. Monsieur Ancillon has left Hannaw for Berlin, whither he is called
to be their fourth Minister. Mademoiselle Morgue with two of her Sisters are
gotten safely out of the Kingdom, after that they had been hid from the
Dragoons. Farewell.

October. 2. 1686. I am Yours, E. --
N. B. Monsieur Chevenis, who is mentioned in this Letter, was a venerable and
ancient Gentleman, a person of eminent Prudence, illustrious for Learning and
Godliness, and Counselor to the King in the Court of Metz. He persisted
faithful to death; and when dead they dragged most inhumanly his dead Carcass
upon a Hurdle, and buried it in a Dunghill. He has a Brother, a very Reverend
Minister of the Gospel, refugied in this City of London.




SECT. XLVIII.
Whilst the Dragoons do thus ravage and ruinate the Provinces, causing Terrors
and Desolations where ever they come, Orders are dispatched to all the Frontier
Countries and Seaport Towns, strictly to guard the Passages, and to stop all
persons who are departing the Kingdom. So that there was no hope lest of saving
themselves by flight. None could pass unless he brought with him a Certificate
from the Priest of his Parish, or the Bishop of the Diocese in which he lived,
that he was a Roman Catholic. Others are put in Prison, and treated like
Traitors to their King and Country. All Ships of Foreigners lying in the Ports
and Havens of the Kingdom are diligently searched for Passengers; the Coasts,
Bridges, Passages unto Rivers, and the Highways are all strictly guarded night
and day; and the neighboring States are imperiously required not to harbor
any more Fugitives, and to dismiss or send back again such as they had already
received, and Attempts were also made to seize and carry away some who had
escaped into foreign Countries.

I have lying by me a Letter from Geneva, giving a doleful Account of the poor
Refugees, who had fled thither. Possibly the Reader will not be displeased at
the reading of it.

From Geneva, Nov. 1685. SIR,
It Is a good while ago that the French Protestants began to secure themselves
both here and in Switzerland, yet it was but very slowly ever they retired
hither, there being not on this side of France those conveniences for them as
in England and Holland. However their number increased with their Persecutions;
and this Honor is due unto Geneva, that though at first (whilst we supposed
there was not an indispensable necessity upon our Protestant Brethren for their
flight) we seemed somewhat cold as to their reception; yet having at last too
great cause to believe it, I may speak it without vanity, that Geneva exercised
a charity toward these Fugitives which will recommend her to posterity. I
shall give you an undeniable proof hereof, and that presently. Ever since the
first Troubles at Montauban, and the great consternation of the other
Provinces, Geneva never failed to receive and relieve with Moneys and other
Supplies all that had recourse unto her, and for more than two Months together
there passed not a day over our heads in which Geneva did not daily receive and
supply 30, 50, 80, 90 Person^ of all Ages, of both Sexes, and of all
Conditions. But as we had an occasion of satisfaction from the Charity of
Geneva, so we must also avow, that it was utterly impossible not to be affected
with such a multitude of pitiful Objects as daily presented themselves unto us,
and especially since the passages were guarded, some arriving disguised, on
foot, in a deplorable condition, who would they have left their God might have
been as to this World very happy. Women and Maids came to us in the Habits of
Men, Children in Coffers packt up as Clothes, others without any other
precaution at all than in their Cradles tied about their Parents necks, some
passing this, others that way, all stopping either at the Gates or Churches of
the City, with Cries and Tears of Joy and Sorrow mingled together: some
demanding, where are our Fathers and Mothers? others, where are our Wives and
Children? not knowing where to find them, nor having learnt any News of them
from the time they departed from their Houses. In short, every one was so
affected with these miserable Objects, that it was impossible to refrain from
weeping. Some had no sooner passed the first Barricado, but prostrating
themselves upon their Knees, sung a Psalm of Thanksgiving for their happy
deliverance, though, poor Creatures, they had not wherewithal to get themselves a
Meal's meat, and might have gone to Bed that Night supperless, had not the Lord
of his great goodness extraordinarily provided for them. Thus we spent two
Months, every day affording us new Adventures, fresh and eminent Examples of
Self-denial, and that divers-ways. I shall give you a few Instances. Among
others a Lady of great quality, the Mother of ten Children, whose Husband,
Monsieur d' Arbaud, had revolted from the truth at Nismes; this Lady, I say,
forsook eighteen thousand Livers of yearly Revenue, without ever having been
able to make a Purse to defray her Journey; and, maugre all the Cares and
Endeavors of her Husband and the Bishop, brought with her nine of her
Children, and the youngest of them about seven Years of age; yet when she came
here she had but two Crowns left her to maintain herself and them. It was but
two days since that I bad Adieu to my Lord the Baron of Aubaye, who forsook
above five and twenty thousand Livers of yearly Revenue, for the Gospel, and
all his Stock was but thirty Pistols. I gave Letters of Recommendation to the
Baron of Temelac, who is banished for eight and twenty Years. This Nobleman
forsook eight thousand Livers of good Rents, and departed hence with a very
small Supply to seek some Employment where ever he can meet it, for his
subsistence. My Lord de One of the mostillustrious Noblemen of Languedoc.
Bougi departed hence some few days ago with eight or ten Gentlemen for
Germany. I cannot reckon unto you an infinite number of other persons, whose
Names are unknown to me. Six or seven came hither about five days since, who
seemed to be the Servants of a Commander of Malta, bearing upon his Breast the
great Cross. There came also a far greater Troop, who met at the Passes a
multitude of poor People with their Wives and Children that had been stopped by
the Guards, these force a passage for them with themselves, and conveyed them
with their Baggage hither in safety. The City of Lions has given illustrious
Examples of remorse of Conscience; in particular, no longer than yesterday, we
had one, and that a very sensible one. A Woman and her Son, to secure an Estate
of an hundred thousand Crowns, had sunk under the temptation, and revolted unto
Popery; but they were so tormented in their Consciences night and day after
their Apostasy, that they could have no peace nor rest till they had quitted
both their Estate and Habitation. Some others who had miscarried in the same
manner, durst not tarry (through the stings of their enraged Consciences) any
longer than for the first opportunity of escaping, and brought with them to
this City their Abjuration. This Abjuration of theirs is a certain Paper in
which is written the Name of this new Popish Convert, together with the Seal of
the Bishop and that of the Magistrate of the place; by virtue of which they be
freed from quartering of Dragoons, and are permitted to go and come and
traffic when and wheresoever they please. And among our new Converts this
Paper is called, The Mark of the Beast. I have seen several Copies of them.

But you must not imagine, that all are come unto Geneva. Switzerland has
entertained a vaster multitude than we, who have come unto them, and are daily
coming from all quarters, some one way, some another, some as if they dropped
down from the Clouds, that is from the tops of the Mountains, either of the
Franche County, or from those of Chablays; in short, no man can tell how or
which way they are come unto them. No longer than yesterday, in despite of all
Guards at the several Passes, and dangers of the Galleys, there arrived hither
no less than fifty Persons. A tall Chairman, who had been a Lacquey, as he was
coming from his House, espying Monsieur de Cambiaquet passing over the Bridge,
immediately stopped, and embraced him in his Livery Coat. Four young Ladies of
Grenoble disguised in Men's. Apparel, after they had lodged four or five days in
the Forests and Mountains, without any other Provision than a little Bread, and
their Arms, having traveled only by night, came hither but a few hours ago in
this their gallant Equipage. Should I write you all the stories I know, we
should never have done.

About a Fortnight since a panick fear of the Dragoons coming into the Land of
Gex (where yet are reckoned about 17000. Protestants, though most of them very
poor People) had so seized upon their Spirits, that one Morning, we saw at our
Gates, five hundred Carts laden with Household Goods, and followed with an
innumerable multitude of Persons, who went and came from all Quarters. On that
side of Switzerland, and of the Mountains, there was yet a far greater power of
them, in so much that it affrighted all the Country. The Governor came and
complained of it unto our Magistrates; but they replied, they could not shut
the Gates of their City upon his Majesty's Subjects, and had they done it,
there had been an unavoidable uproar among the People. However these poor
People were desired to depart elsewhere, and not to expose our Commonwealth. To
which they readily obeyed.

And in as much as the Governor, a notorious bitter Enemy of the Magistrates
and City of Geneva, though without cause, would not fail to make a foul brabble
of this business, and because our Resident was expected in three or four days,
we entreated generally, but with a great deal of sweetness, the greatest part
of the French to withdraw themselves, as soon as possible, which they did, and
of their own accord, without delay; but with a great deal of grief on our part,
who lost at this first bout abundance of very godly People, with whose Company
we were very much comforted. The Resident being arrived told us he had no order
to speak about these matters, yea contrariwise, that he was only to treat with
them as with particular Friends. But three days after a Letter comes, by which,
the King, all in Choler, commands his Resident to be instant with our
Magistrates, that immediately they drive out of the City, all his Rebellious
Subjects, and charge them to return unto their respective dwellings. But mark
the stinging consequence hereof.

Hereupon the Council is assembled, and after diverse Debates they resolved,
though to the great heartbreaking and general sorrow of the Citizens, to make
Proclamation, that all the French should immediately be gone. Which was no
sooner ordered but observed, yet not without a redoubled grief on their hearts,
who had not departed the first time, and would willingly have continued.

This Proclamation being published just as we were coming forth from Evening
Prayers, it perfectly astonished and overwhelmed those poor People, who
reckoned this expulsion as a second banishment from their Native Country.

In the mean while our Resident informed the King of the submission of Geneva
unto his Orders, and that in the fairest manner, and dispatched also our
Magistrates Memorial with reference to the particular Complaints and
Accusations of the Governor of Gex, our Magistrates intending a sincere
performance of his Majesty's Order, sent the Tithing-men to entreat every one
to depart with the first convenience. This Order Executed with too much
severity by the Underofficers, caused a new uproar among the People. However
every one took Boat without delay, dreading worse News and Orders that might
enforce them to return to their own Houses. In three days time there departed
from us above a thousand Persons. Yet this wrought a very bad effect among the
Commonalty of Switzerland, who were not able to penetrate into the Causes
moving our Commonwealth to yield this obedience at this time unto his Majesty.
But these is yet something more Cruel. For the King sends us a thundering
Letter, by which he approves the whole procedure of the Governor of Gex, in
hindering all Commerce between Gex and Geneva; so that not only no Provisions
can from thence be imported into the City, but also none of the Inhabitants of
Geneva dare fetch in Herbs or Corn from their Gardens and Barns; yea, over and
above, he commands them immediately to expel, out of the City, all Ministers
that had been settled in it within three years last past, as a Company of
Seditious Fellows, that held private Cabals in Geneva to embroil his Kingdom.
And he requires also of them an account what they had done with his Subjects
whom he had ordered them to dispatch back again to their own homes, and that if
he had not a satisfaction in full to all his Commands, he would make them
repent that ever they had offended him.

In a word, never had we a Letter, a Letter of this Nature, in such a daring,
menacing style. Truly had it not been for our Magistrates the People, who were
exceedingly concerned at it, had quite broken out. The Switzers have a General
Assembly this Week. And thus you have a faithful account of our present
Condition.

We wait impatiently for the King's Answer to those Letters which informed him
of our ready Obedience unto his Orders. But we fear every thing, because he
having once begun to make his demands, sets no bounds to them. The Switzers are
hastening to their Assembly, and the People seems very resolute to stand up in
defense of their Liberties and Religion. Every one is ready to march at the
first Signal. In the mean while the Switzers have been wonderful in their
Charity. The Country of Vaux is filled in every Corner with French Fugitives.
Within these three Weeks there have been reckoned above 17500. Persons that
have passed unto Lausanne. Zurich writ admirable Letters to Berne and Geneva,
desiring them to send of those poor People to them, and that they would receive
them as their own natural Brethren into their Country, into their Houses, yea,
and into their very Hearts.

We long to know, whether the King will not make the same demand unto the
Switzers as unto Geneva. But it is hoped they will not bate his Majesty an ace,
but assert their own Rights and Sovereignty. Yet there being a Spirit of
Bigottry crept in among the Popish Cantons, even in the very face of the
Protestants, this troubles a World of People.

Yours, N. N.


SECT. XLIX.
Whilst all this was acting abroad, and other mischiefs done unto the Reformed
at home; The French Court sat close in Consultation about giving the last blow
at the Roots of the Religion in that Kingdom, and how, and in what manner to
repeal the Edict of Nantes. Very much time was spent in drawing up the matter
and form of this new Edict. Some in the Council would have the King detain all
the Ministers, and compel them, as he had done the Laity, to change their
Religion, or in case of stubbornness and refusal, he should condemn them to
perpetual Imprisonment.

The reasons alleged for this were, that in case he did it not, they would be
so many dangerous Enemies against him in Foreign Nations, and Trumpets of his
Cruelty and Tyranny; others on the contrary affirmed, that as long as the
Ministers continued in France, their presence would encourage the People to
abide in their Religion, whatsoever care might be taken to hinder them; and
that supposing they should change, they would be but so many secret Adversaries
nourished in the bosom of the Romish Church, and the more dangerous because of
their great knowledge and skill in controversial Matters. This last Argument
prevailed. And thereupon they came to a final conclusion of banishing all the
Ministers, and to give them no more than fifteen days time to depart the
Kingdom.

The Edict is now given unto the Attorney General of the Parliament of Paris,
to draw it up in such a Form as he should judge most fitting. But before the
publishing thereof, two things were thought necessary to be done. The first
was, to oblige the Assembly of the Clergy to present by themselves unto the
King a Petition about this Matter before mentioned; in which also they told his
Majesty, that they desired not at present the Repealing of the Edict of Nantes.
The second was, to suppress universally all Books made by those of the Reformed
Religion, and that an Order should be issued out to that purpose. By the first
of these the Clergy supposed they might shelter themselves from those
Reproaches which would otherwise be flung upon them, for being the sole Authors
of those many Miseries, Injustices, and Oppressions, which would infallibly be
occasioned by the Repeal of that Edict. And by the other they designed to make
the Conversions of the Heretics more easy and feasible, and to confirm those
which had been already made. For Ministers and Books being all removed, they
could not possibly be instructed, nor confirmed, nor reduced back again to
their old Religion.

SECT. L.
In fine, this Edict, revoking and repealing the Edict of Nantes, was signed
and published on Thursday, October the 8th, in the Year 1685. It Is said the
High Chancellor of France, Le Tellier, expressed an extreme joy when he put
the Seal to it. But his joy was but as the crackling of Thorns under a Pot. It
was the last act of his life. For no sooner did he return from Fountainbleau to
his own House, but he fell sick, and died in a few days. It Is certain, that the
Policy of this old Man, rather than any Cruelty in his Nature, induced him in
his declining Years to join himself unto the Persecutors of the Reformed.

This Revocatory Edict was registered in the Parliament of Paris, and
immediately after in all other the Parliaments of this Kingdom.

This great Instrument of the ruin and desolation of the Reformed Religion, of
all its Ministers and Professors in that Kingdom, was couched in these Terms.

SECT. LI. The King's Edict, forbidding all Public Exercise of the Pretended
Reformed Religion in this Kingdom.
JEWS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, To all present and to
come, Greeting. Whereas King Henry the Great, our Grandfather, of glorious
Memory, having procured a Peace for his Subjects, after those great Losses they
had sustained during the Civil and Foreign Wars, endeavored that it might not
be disturbed upon the account of the Pretended Reformed Religion, as it had
fallen out in the Reigns of the Kings his Predecessors, had therefore by his
Edict, given at Nantes in the Month of April, in the Year one thousand five
hundred and eighty eight, established such Measures as should be observed with
reference to those of the said Religion, the Places in which they might
exercise it, and ordained extraordinary Judges for the ministering of Justice to
them, and finally, had provided also by special Articles whatsoever he
conceived needful to maintain Tranquillity in his Kingdom, and to diminish that
Aversion which had arisen between persons of the one and other Religion, that
so he might be the better enabled to carry on his design of reuniting them unto
the Church, who had been too easily estranged from it. And forasmuch as this
Intention of the aforesaid King, our Grandfather, could not by reason of his
sudden death be accomplished, and the Execution of the said Edict was also
interrupted; during the Minority of the late King our most honored Lord and
Father of glorious Memory, by reason of the new Enterprises of those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, so that occasion was taken to deprive them of
diverse Privileges which had been granted them by the said Edict. Nevertheless,
the said King, our late Lord and Father, using his ordinary Clemency did yet
vouchsafe them a new Edict at Nismes, in the Month of July one thousand six
hundred and twenty nine, by means whereof Peace being again restored, the said
late King, animated with the same Spirit and Zeal for Religion, as the King our
Grandfather, had resolved to improve to the utmost this Peace, by endeavoring
to bring his godly design into practice: but the Foreign Wars falling out a few
Years after, in such a manner, that from the Year 1635. until the Truce
concluded with the Princes of Europe in the Year 1684. the Kingdom having but
little rest, it was scarce possible to do any thing for the advancement of
Religion, unless it were to diminish the numbers of the Churches belonging to
those of the Pretended Reformed Religion, by interdicting such as had been
built contrary to the Orders of the said Edict, and by suppression of the Mixed
Chambers, which were erected only provisionally.

God having at last granted to our People the enjoyment of a perfect Peace, and
we also not being occupied with those cares to protect them against our
Enemies, and being able to improve this Truce, which we effected for this very
end, that we might wholly apply our selves to seek out such means whereby we
might accomplish successfully the design of the said Kings our Father, and
Grandfather, upon which also we entered as soon as we came unto the Crown, we
now see, and, according to our Duty, thank God for it, that our Cares have at
last obtained that end we had propounded to our selves, inasmuch as the far
greater and better part of our Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion
have embraced the Catholic. And inasmuch as hereby the Execution of the Edict
of Nantes, and of whatsoever else has been ordained in favor of the said
Pretended Reformed Religion is become useless, we have judged, that we could do
nothing better toward the total blotting out of the remembrance of those
Troubles, Confusions and Mischiefs which the progress of that false Religion
had caused in our Kingdom, and which occasioned that Edict, and several other
Edicts and Declarations which had preceded it, or had been in consequence
thereof Enacted, than totally to revoke the said Edict of Nantes, and the
special Articles which in pursuance of it had been conceded, and whatsoever
else had been done in favor of that said Religion.

I. We therefore make known, that for these Causes, and others thereunto us
moving, and of our certain knowledge, full power, and Royal Authority, we have
by this present perpetual and irrevocable Edict, suppressed and revoked, we do
suppress and revoke the Edict of the King our said Grandfather, given at Nantes
in the Month of April, one thousand five hundred eighty and two, in its whole
extent, together with those special Articles ordained the second day of May
following, and the Letters Patents expedited thereupon, and the Edict given at
Nismes in the Month of July, one thousand six hundred and twenty nine, we
declare them void, and as if they had never been, together with all Grants made
as well by them, as by other Edicts, Declarations and Decrees, to those of the
said Pretended Reformed Religion, of what kind soever they may be, which shall
in like manner be reputed as if they had never been: And in consequence hereof
we will, and it is our pleasure, that all the Temples of those of the said
Religion, situated within our Kingdom, Countries, Lands and Lordships of our
subjection shall be immediately demolished.

II. We forbid our said Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion any
more to assemble themselves, for exercise of their said Religion, in any Place
or Private House, under any pretense whatsoever, yea, and all real Exercises,
or such as were in Lordships, although the said Exercises had been maintained
by the Decrees of our Council.

III. In like manner we forbid all Lords of every degree the Exercise of their
Religion in their Houses and Manors, whatsoever may be the Quality of their
said Manors, and that upon pain of Confiscation of Bodies and Goods for those
of our said Subjects, who shall so exercise their said Religion.

IV. We command all Ministers of the Pretended Reformed, who will not turn from
it and embrace the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Religion, to depart our
Kingdom and the Lands of our Dominion, within a Fortnight after the publication
of this our present Edict, and not to tarry beyond that time, or during that
said Fortnight to Preach, Exhort, or perform any Function of their Ministry,
upon pain of being sent to the Galleys.

V. Our will is, that such of the said Ministers, who shall change their
Religion, shall, during their whole life, continually enjoy, and their Widows
also after them, as long as they remain unmarried, the same Exemption from
Taxes and Lodging of Soldiers, which they enjoyed during the time of their
Ministry; and farther, we will pay also unto the said Ministers, as long as
they live, a Stipend, which shall exceed by one third the Wages they received
for their Ministry, and their Wives also, as long as they abide Widows, shall
enjoy the one half of their said Stipend.

VI. If any of the said Ministers desire to become Advocates, or would proceed
Doctors of the Laws, it is our will, and we declare it, That they shall be
dispensed as to three Years studying, prescribed by our Declarations, and
having undergone the usual Examination, and thereby judged capable, that they
be promoted Doctors, paying one half only of those Fees, customarily paid to
this purpose in every University.

VII. We forbid all Private Schools for the Instruction of the Children of
those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, and generally all other things
whatsoever, that may bear the sign of Privilege or Favor to that said
Religion.

VIII. And touching the Children that shall be born of those of the said
Pretended Reformed Religion. Our Will is, that for time to come they be
baptized by the Curates of their Parishes. Commanding their Fathers and Mothers
for that purpose to send them to their Churches, on penalty of being fined five
hundred Livers, or a greater sum; and those Children shall henceforth be
brought up in the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion: And we most
strictly Command all the Judges of those respective places to see that this be
Executed.

IX. And that we may express our Clemency toward those our Subjects of the
said Pretended Reformed Religion, who are withdrawn from out of our Kingdom,
Countries, and Lands of our Dominion before Publication of this our present
Edict, we will and give them to understand, that in case they return within the
space of four Months, from the day of its Publication, they may, and it shall
be lawful for them to enter into the possession of their Estates, and to enjoy
them even as they might have done, if they had been always at home; whereas
contrarily, such as within that time of four Months shall not return into our
Kingdom, or Countries, or Lands of our Dominion, their Estates abandoned by
them shall be and remain Confiscated, according to our Declarations of the
twentieth day of August last past.

X. And we do most straightly again repeat our Prohibitions unto all our Subjects
of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, that neither they, nor their Wives nor
Children do depart our said Kingdom, Countries, or Lands of our Dominion, nor
transport their Goods and Effects, on pain, for Men so offending, of their
being sent to the Galleys, and of Confiscation of Bodies and Goods for the
Women.

XI. We will and give them to know, that all Declarations published against the
Relapst, shall be Executed according to their form and tenor.

XII. And furthermore, Those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, till such
time as it shall please God to illuminate them as others have been, may abide
in the Towns and Places of our Kingdom, Countries, and Lands of our Dominion,
and continue their Traffic, and enjoy their Goods, without being troubled or
hindered, because of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, Provided as before,
That they do not exercise it, nor assemble themselves on pretense of Prayers,
or of any manner of worship, according to that said Religion, on the Penalties
beforementioned, of Confiscation of Bodies and Goods. We Command all our Trusty
and Well-beloved Counselors in our Court of Parliament, of Accounts, and Court
of Aids at Paris, Bailiffs, Seneschalls, Provosts, and other our Justices and
Officers to whom it shall belong, and to their Deputies, that they cause this
present Edict to be read, published, and registered in their Courts, and
Jurisdictions, yea, and in Vacations, and to entertain it, and cause it to be
entertained, kept and observed in every particular, without swerving, and that
in no manner of wise they permit the least swerving from it. For such is our
Will and Pleasure. And that this may be for ever firm and stable, we have
caused these Presents to be Sealed with our Seal.

Given at Fountainbleau in the Month of October, in the Year of Grace one
thousand six hundred eighty and five, and in our Reign the Forty Third. Signed,
LOVIS.
Visa, Le Tellier. And a little lower, By the KING, Colbert.
And Sealed with the Great Seal of Green Wax, upon threads of red and green
silk. Registered, heard, and at the Request of the Kings Attorney General, that
they might be Executed according to their form and tenor, and Copies
collationed, sent unto the Courts, Bailiwicks, and respective Jurisdictions,
that they might be in like manner Registered. And the Deputies of the King's
said Attorney General are Commanded to see its Execution, and to Certify the
Court thereof. At Paris in the Chamber of Vacations the two and twentieth day
of October, in the Year one thousand six hundred fourscore and five. Signed, De
la Baune.

SECT. LII.
The same day that this Edict was Registered, which was the 23d of October, they
began to throw down the Temple of Charenton, and at the same time little notes
were dispersed abroad to the heads of Families, for their Appearance before Mr.
Attorney General, to give in their Answer, whether in three days they would
embrace the Roman Catholic Religion or not.

The Eldest Minister of this Church was Commanded to leave Paris in four and
twenty hours, and immediately to depart the Kingdom, (this was that excellent
Man of God, Monsieur Claude, who afterward died at the Hague. Of whom I shall
say more in my Icones.) One of the Kings Footmen was ordered to see him safe
out of the Kings Dominions. His Colleagues met with a little better treatment,
for they had forty eight hours given them to quit Paris, and upon their parole
for so doing, they were left to shift for themselves. Accordingly Monsieur
Maynard, Allix, and Bertau, come for England, and are here exercising their
Ministry.

The rest of the Ministers were allowed fifteen days for their departure: but
it can hardly be believed to what Cruelties and Vexations they were exposed.
They were not permitted to dispose of their Estates, nor to carry away any of
their movables, or effects; yea, they disputed them their very Books, and
private Papers, upon this pretense, that they must prove and justify their
Books and Papers did not belong to their Consistories. A task impossible, for
there were no Consistories then in being. Moreover they would not give them
leave to take along with them, either Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, or
any of their Relations or Kindred, though they were many of them infirm,
diseased, and impoverished, and could not in any wise subsist without their
help. Yea, and they went so far as to deny them their own Children, if they
were above seven years old, yea, and some that were under that age, and were as
yet hanging upon their Mothers Breasts. They refused them Nurses for their
newborn Infants, although their own Mothers could not suckle them. In some
Frontier places they stopped and imprisoned them upon trifling and ridiculous
pretenses. They must immediately prove, that they were really the same Persons
which their Certificates mentioned. And they would know, whether there were no
Criminal Process or Informations out against them. They must presently justify,
that they carried away nothing with them that belonged unto any one of their
respective Churches. Sometimes having thus amused and detained them, they would
tell them, the space of fifteen days, allotted them by the Edict for their
Departure, was now expired, and that therefore they should have no liberty to
leave the Kingdom, but must be sent unto the Galleys. There was hardly any kind
of deceit, and injustice and troubles, in which these worthy Ministers of
Christ were not involved. And yet through rich mercy, very few revolted, the
far greatest number of them escaped, either into England, Holland, Germany, or
Switzerland; yea, and some are now settled in New England.

SECT. LIII.
As for the residue of the Protestants, whom the Violence of Persecution, and
the Cruel Usages they endured, had necessitated to abandon their Estates,
Families, Relations, and native Country, it is hardly to be imagined to what
dangers they were exposed. Never were Orders more rigorous and severe, nor more
strictly Executed than those which were given out against them. They doubled
the Guards at every Post, in all Cities, Towns, Highways, Fords and Ferries.
They covered the Country with Soldiers, they armed the very Peasants, that
they might stop the Reformed in their Travel, or kill them upon the spot. They
forbad all Officers of the Customs to suffer any Goods, Movables,
Merchandises, or other Effects of theirs to pass out of the Kingdom. They
forgot nothing that might hinder the flight of these poor Persecuted Creatures;
insomuch, that they interrupted all Commerce with the Neighboring Nations. By
this means they quickly filled all the Prisons in the Kingdom. For the terror
of the Dragoons, the horror of seeing their Consciences forced, and their
Children to be taken away from them, and to be Educated in Antichristian
Superstition, and damnable Idolatry, and of living for the future in a Land
where there was neither Justice nor Humanity for them, obliged every one to
think with himself, and consult with others in whom they could confide, how to
get out of France, and so they could but escape without polluting their
Consciences, many thousands of them were ready to, and did actually leave their
Worldly All behind them. As for the poor Prisoners, they have been since
treated with unheard of Barbarities, shut up in Dungeons, laden with Iron
Chains, almost starved with Hunger, and deprived of all Converse, but that of
their inhumane Persecutors. Many were thrust into their Monasteries, where they
were most cruelly disciplined. A Lady of eminent Quality gave this Relator this
Account, That when they had seized all her Estate, clapped her up in Prison,
Arraigned and Condemned her to Death for Murdering five of her Children
(because she had conveyed them away that they might not be trained up in
Popery) they took her two youngest, one of five, and the other of two years,
and put them into Nunneries. They could never get that of five to kiss a
Crucifix, or bow to their breaden God, though they kept her from meat and drink
eight and forty hours, and having scourged the poor young Heretic
unmercifully, they returned her, with her young Sister, whom they had also
tormented with Famine and Whipping, to the poor Mother, in whose Arms one of
these Innocent Lambs died a few hours after.

That very day the Edict was published, the Attorney General and some other
Magistrates send for the Protestant Heads of Families (who lived in Paris) to
appear before them: and when they came, they declared to them, That it was the
King's absolute Will and Pleasure, that they should change their Religion; that
they were no better than the rest of his Subjects; and that if they would not
do it willingly, his Majesty was resolved to compel them to it.

At the same time, by Letters under the Privy Seal, they banished all the
Elders of that Consistory, together with some others, in whom they found more
constancy and resolution; and they dispersed them into those places which were
remotest from all Commerce and Business, and have since used them with
unparalled Cruelties.

When as the diligence of Mr. Attorney General, and the City Magistrates
succeeded not answerably to their desires and expectations, Monsieur Seignelay,
Secretary of State, would try what influence he had in his division at Paris.
Wherefore he gets together about an hundred or sixscore Merchants with some
others, unto his House, and having shut the doors, he forthwith presents them a
Form of Abjuration, commanding them in the King's Name to sign it; declaring,
that they should not stir out of the doors till they had yielded a full
obedience. The Contents of this Form were, That they did not only renounce the
Heresy of Calvin, and enter into the Catholic Church, but also, that they did
it voluntarily, without any force or compulsion. This was done after a most
imperious manner, and with the tone of authority: Yet notwithstanding some had
the courage to speak, though they were soon cut short with this reply, They were
not called to dispute, but to obey. So that they all signed before they went
out.

SECT. LIVE.
With some of the Ministers they dealt very treacherously, fawning upon them
with kind words and counterfeit civilities, wheedling them into a good opinion
of those respects and loves they never had nor intended for them. This proved a
great and dangerous Snare to two worthy Ministers, among others, as will appear
from this following Letter, written to an eminent French Minister in London,
from Paris, October 19. 1685.

From Paris, October. 19. 1685. Monsieur, my most honored Brother,
SInce you are owner of so much goodness as to interest your self like a kind
Brother in those Affairs which particularly concern us, and forasmuch as we can
avow our Affections for you, to be great and sincere, and our fellow-feeling of
all your Sufferings to be real and very sensible, it is but just, that when our
Brother Du -- gives you an Account of the state of our Family, we should also
at the same time acquaint you with that of our Consciences.

You may then understand, my most dear Brother, that no sooner was the King's
Declaration published, which abolishing the Edict of Nants, obliged all the
Ministers within a Fortnight's time to depart the Kingdom, but Monsieur -- and
my self went immediately to seek and take places for our selves and Families in
the Brussel's Coach, as my Brother -- went to that of Calais. But two or three
days after, being informed, that neither our Wives nor Children should have the
liberty of leaving the Kingdom with us, and that we should meet with an hundred
difficulties in our departure, and that we must needs have Certificates from
our Intendants, which was utterly impossible for us to procure in that short
time was now left us, we, together with diverse others, went and waited upon
Monsieur de la Renie, who is the Judge and Civil Magistrate of this City, who
gave us a Certificate according to the King's Edict, which yet in the issue was
useless and unprofitable.

Monsieur de la Renie, being particularly acquainted with Monsieur -- treated
us with a great deal of civility, and desired us seriously to reflect upon that
perplexed condition into which we and our Families were plunged, and that we
would examine our selves whether with a good Conscience we might not tarry in
the Kingdom, and whether our presence would not also contribute to the
consolation of a multitude of gracious Souls groaning under the pressures of
their Afflictions, who had been abandoned by their fugitive Pastors, according
to the general Complaints brought in against them from all quarters.

Hereupon we drew up several Projects. I formed mine, Monsieur -- framed his,
and they were both so contrived, that any one might easily judge we should
never be suffered on those terms to live in the Kingdom. And, to speak the
truth, they were not approved by my Brother Du -- who drew up another, the Copy
whereof we now send you; but we must confess, most dear Brother, that we have
found it to be of dreadful consequence, and most dangerously insnaring to us.
But Du -- having resolutely maintained, that we had no other way left us of
abiding in the Kingdom than by signing this Writing, and if we would not, yet
he himself would alone in his own person present it to my Lord Bishop of Meaux,
we did at length sign it, Monsieur -- and my self, though with extreme
repugnancy, and with this very restriction, that Du -- should retrieve it out
of the hands of the Bishop of Meaux, as soon as he had read it, which Du --
solemnly promised us he would do.

My Lord Bishop perused our Writing, and having told Du -- that he conceived
the King would never grant us what we desired in it, we believed our selves
obliged all three jointly to take our leaves of the Bishop, and of Monsieur de
la Renie, because we were two days after to avoid the Kingdom. My Lord Bishop
of Meaux dismissed us very civilly. But Monsieur de la Renie made us a long
discourse about our Writing given in to the Bishop of Meaux, and that
Conference which our Brother had with him, telling us, among other passages,
that the King took notice of our Measures; that he had approved and praised
them; that he had a better opinion of us by far, than of a great many others
who had yet gone beyond us; but that the King desired us to continue our
Conferences with the Bishop of Meaux, and that the King having learnt our
intention of going to Fountainbleau, that we might wait upon the Bishop of
Meaux, (which was a truth) had the kindness for us as to order him to come to
Paris; and if after our Conferences ended with my Lord Bishop of Meaux, we
could not with a good Conscience hold Communion with the Church of Rome, he
would then give us, when ever we should desire it, a License for our selves and
Families to depart the Kingdom, and that finally my Lord of Meaux would charily
preserve our Writing, which had been presented unto his Majesty.

We all three accepted the Proposals. And had several Conferences with the
Bishop of Meaux. But this very day we are urged to come to a Resolution, and
upon our refusal of signing the new Formulary, we are plainly told, That it is
ill done of us to recoil after that of our own accord we had advanced so far;
and they farther tell us, That our own Writing obliges us to far greater
matters than the new Formulary; and that we declare in the very beginning of
it, That, of all Evils, Disunion is the greatest, and that by this our
Confession, neither Transubstantiation, nor any of those other Points debated
by us, could be a bar to our Reunion, and that in effect we do formally
reunite ourselves by our very Writing, and that by submitting our selves to
the Conduct of Bishops, and of their pitiful Curates, we do subject our selves
to the whole Ecclesiastical Discipline; and that we entreating the Higher
Powers, who went unto Mass, to believe our Sentiments to be the same with
theirs, who desired the Cup, we were engaged at the same time to do as they
did, even to wait for that Reformation which was universally desired, and which
the King incessantly pursued, as having resolved, that the Cup should be
delivered unto the People in the Sacrament. And thus they boast we are caught
by our own Writing, which was left imprudently enough in the hands of my Lord
Bishop of Meaux, and which they say also at the same time is in the King's.
This is the truth of our present Estate, and for which, we conjure you, most
dear Brother, to send us as soon as possible your advice, lest, etc.


WE, whose Names are here-under written, being fully persuaded, that among
Christians there cannot be a greater mischief than to be divided one from
another, especially when as the providence of God has made us all Subjects to
our King, who is the most glorious Monarch in the whole World, and being
unmeasurably grieved, that we are bound to depart his Kingdom, and to subject
our selves unto the authority of strangers, whom we can never own for our
Sovereign Lawful Princes, Do declare, That from this very day we can promise my
Lord, the Bishop of Meaux, that we will subject our selves to the Sermons and
Even-Songs used in the Catholic Church, thereby giving a sensible
demonstration of our Union with the Archbishops, Bishops and Curates of France;
We also entreat, That we may be absolutely believed to be in the same
Sentiments with the Higher Powers, who, in conformity to the Liberties of the
Gallican Church, gave in diverse Articles (as our Historians relate) to my Lord
Cardinal de Joyeuse, concerning the Council of Trent; and until such time as
they may be established by the King's Authority, and signed by the most
Reverend Clergy of France, in the sense of the second Article of the last
Edict, verified in Parliament the 22d of this instant October, we most humbly
beseech his Majesty to grant us the liberty of abiding within his Kingdom, in
quality of poor private persons, we calling God to witness, by our Oaths, That
we will do nothing against his Majesty's Declarations, but contrariwise, we
shall endeavor by our example to keep the People within those bounds of
Fidelity and Obedience, which we all owe unto the King and our Superiors.

I suppose those Articles were the same, which had been demanded by the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and the other French Ambassadors in the Council of Trent,
as they be mentioned by De Mezeray, in his 3d Tome, p. 1470. viz.

That an Ecclesiastic Person should hold but one Benefice; That the Mass being
finished, Prayers might be celebrated in the Vulgar Tongue; That the People
might Communicate in both kinds; That all Pastors should be capable; and
obliged to Preach and Catechize; That the abuse crept in among the Common
People in the Worshipping of Images might be removed.

SECT. LV.
Now the Ministers have left the Kingdom, and vast multitudes of their People
steal away after them as well as they can. But the King and Haman, the French
King and his Cabal sit down and drink, whilst that Paris, as Shushan of old,
and all other places, in which the Reformed remain, are in great perplexities.
In every Province, whithersoever the King's Commandment and his Decree came,
there was great Mourning among the Protestants, Fasting, Weeping, and Wailing,
and many lay in Sackcloth and Ashes.

Yet among the Sighs and Groans or God's poor Saints, who mourn for the
Desolations of Zion, the Ruins of their Temples and Sanctuary, the loss and
reproach of their Solemn Assemblies, the Prophanations of their Holy Sabbaths,
their deprival of Religious Ordinances, the banishment of their Pastors, the
dissipations of their Churches, and the total extirpation of the pure
Evangelical Religion, and cannot be comforted; the Popish Clergy, the Monks and
Jesuits have their Jubilees and Triumphs; and the Pope sends, a Letter to the
King, congratulating him for his Zeal against the Heretics in his Kingdom, and
for repealing the Edict of Nantes. It spoke this Language.

The Pope's Letter to the French King, congratulating him for Abolishing the
Edict of Nantes.
Innocent the XIth,
to our dearest Son in Christ, Jews the XIVth, the most Christian King of
France.
SInce above all the rest of those illustrious Proofs which do abundantly
declare the natural inbred Piety of your Majesty, that Noble Zeal (and worthy
the most Christian King) is most conspicuous, with which, being ardently
inflamed, you have wholly abrogated all those Constitutions that were
favorable to the Heretics of your Kingdom, and by most wise Decrees set
forth, have excellently provided for the Propagation of the Orthodox Belief, as
our beloved Son, and your Ambassador with us, the Noble Duke de Estrees, has
declared to us. We thought it was incumbent on us most largely to commend that
excellent Piety of yours, by the remarkable and lasting Testimony of these our
Letters, And to congratulate your Majesty that Accession of immortal
Commendation which you have added to all your other great Exploits by so
illustrious an Act of this kind. The Catholic Church shall most assuredly
record in her Sacred Annals a Work of such Devotion toward her, and celebrate
your Name with never-dying Praises. But above all, you may most deservedly
promise to your self an ample Retribution from the Divine Goodness for this
most excellent Undertaking, and may rest assured, that we shall never cease to
pour forth our most earnest Prayers to that Divine Goodness for this intent and
purpose. The rest you shall understand from our venerable Brother, Angelo,
Archbishop of Genua: In the mean time we greet you most kindly with our
Apostolical Benediction.

Given at Rome, the 13 th of November, in the 10 th Year of our Pontificate.

SECT. LVI.
Whilst the Ministers are in exile, their Eyes and Hearts are toward France.
There is many a Loadstone that draws their Affections thitherward. They left
behind them many dear Relations, many Christian Friends under great
Temptations, and very sore Trials. And though they cannot visit them in person,
and converse with them mouth to mouth for their edification and mutual comfort,
yet they do it by Ink and Paper. Many Pastoral Letters have been transmitted:
But, if I am not mistaken, this was either the first, or one of the first which
was written, though a multitude of them have since followed.

An Epistle to our Brethren groaning under the Captivity of Babylon. For whom
we wish the Mercy and Peace of our God.
WE have heard with extreme Grief, most Dear Brethren in our Lord, that great
temptation to which you have been exposed, and those grievous Calamities it
has pleased God you should undergo. We have also understood, but to our far
greater Grief, the sad news of your Weakness in yielding to the Temptation. We
beseech you seriously to reflect upon your selves, and to consider what you
have to answer unto him, who has commanded that you should confess him before
Men, if you would obtain that honor of his Confessing and owning you before
God and Angels.

How will you be able to stand before his Judgment Seat, who has injoined you
to forsake Goods, Possessions, Wives, Parents and Children for his Names sake;
promising you an hundred fold recompense?

Can you tell him, that you have resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin?
Pray what are your Sufferings if compared with those of our Savior Christ
Jesus? Did he start back when he saw Death stare him in the Face, when he was
to be Scourged with Rods, to be Crowned with Thorns, to be affronted with
Spittle, to be pierced with Nails, and to be hanged upon the Cross? What think
you at your reading those words, Blessed are those who are persecuted for
Righteousness sake? You have no share in that Blessedness. For to avoid
Persecution, you have renounced that Righteousness. What answer will you make
those holy Apostles, who with Tears Preached the Gospel of the Cross unto the
World, and who all Suffered Martyrdom by the hands of Hangmen, and who prepared
all their Disciples for Persecution, by telling them, Whosoever will embrace
the truth, and live godly in Christ Jesus, must cast up his accounts of
suffering Persecution.

What answer will you make our Reformers, who spared neither Watches, nor
Sweats, nor Blood, to draw us out of Idolatry and Superstition? What will you
say unto those blessed Martyrs, whose Children you are, and who for this very
Cause, abandoned by you, endured Fires, Prisons, Racks, and the most cruel
Torments? They were for diverse years together buried alive in deep Dungeons,
full of Ordures, Toads, and Serpents: and drawn thence, they were driven into
the Fire, their Hands and Feet burnt, and being half dead, they were yet plucked
out of those Flames, but it was to increase their Tortures. Whilst they were
alive, they saw their Bellies burning, and their own Bowels gushing out. In the
midst of those Torments instead of renouncing the Truth of God, they blessed
his holy Name, and sang his Praises.

What will you say unto those great Workmen who with such great travel have
erected this glorious Fabric of Reformation, and which in a moments time you
have suffered totally to be ruined? How can you endure the Reproaches of your
glorified Ancestors, whose goods were plundered, who were outragiously
persecuted, and who notwithstanding have handed down unto you their Children
the purity and verity of the Gospel? For God's sake, Dear Brethren, Consider
sadly your offense with all its aggravations, and cry out in the bitterness of
the Spirit, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?

Undoubtedly your Consciences, under this hard Bondage, crave our advice, and
we freely give it you.

And first of all, Beware of that great danger in which your are, you have
denied God with your Mouth, do not forsalte him with your Heart. For it
oft-times so happens, that God delivers them up to a Reprobate sense, who had
perfidiously betrayed their own Consciences. And they are such as once seemed
to love the Truth, but afterward proceeded to hate it, yea, and at last to
persecute it. Two things may produce this Cursed effect.

The first is Despair. For the Mercy of God being despaired of by any Person,
he does incontinently hate the truth, yea, and at last abhors it. Do not
precipitate yourselves into this Condition. Seriously consider your Sin, but
never despair of the pardoning grace of God. Your Sin indeed is great. But the
Mercy of our Savior is Infinite. The Lord preserves his Elect every where.
Yea sometimes there be such as belong to Zion, even in Babylon, provided they
do their endeavor to come out of it, and not to participate in her Sins and
Idolatries, lest they participate in her Plagues.

Bestir your selves then to get out of this Sodom, where your Salvation is in
so great Jeopardy, and till you can do it, have nothing to do with her
Idolatries. How these may be avoided we shall anon direct you.

A second thing which will render your condition irrecoverable, is a customary
contempt of the Truth. At first it may seem difficult to you to be present at a
worship so contrary unto yours. To see brutish and Superstitious Wretches
prostrate themselves before Images, will create trouble to you. You will scarce
brook that barbarous Language in which you shall hear Litanies sung to the
honor of Creatures, and the great dishonor of your Creator. You will yet
suffer more when you must be prefent at that which they call the Sacrifice of
the Mass, and where they will force you to give religious adoration to a piece
of Bread. However its to be feared, that by degrees you may be inured unto all
this, though at present you may say, For my part I believe nothing of all this,
and that is enough. Yet in process of time you may come to find this not very
evil, and may count gross Idolatries but harmless Superstitions, which do
neither good nor evil. This way will infallibly lead you to a despising and
hatred of the Truth, and thence infallibly to Hell. And this is that Sin
against the Holy Ghost, which is not pardoned in this, nor shall be in the
World to come.

Our advice upon the whole is this. Maintain in your Souls, as it well
deserves, a due horror of Popery. The methods used by them to bring you back
again unto it, do abundantly contribute hereunto. It must needs be the Devils
own Religion, that serves it self of such kind of tools to build his House.
It Is the very Character of Hell to force Men to Mass, by Fire and Sword, by
Dragoons, Plunder and Tortures. And none but the Devil would spirit Men unto
such actions, and they who use them, are undoubtedly his proper Imps and Agents.

And that you may keep up your abhorrency of Popery, never forget this,
Continually set before your Eyes all its Deformities, and never look on them or
it through those false Glasses which the Doctors of Lies do now adays represent
them to you. You see their Temples full of Images, before which they bow down
and worship, contrary to the express Commandment of God, Thou shall not make
unto thy self any graven Image, thou shall not bow down thy self before them.
And flatter not your selves with this, that possibly you may not be obliged
thereunto, for the people, with whom you are, do it, and you partake in this
their Sin of Idolatry, at leastwise, if you do not abhor it both with heart and
mouth.

Set before you that Idolatrous Worship performed unto Creatures, and in
particular that Honor, which being due only unto God, is yet nevertheless
given unto the Mother of our Savior Jesus Christ, and unto Saints, and then
remember those dreadful words, As I live, says the Lord, I will not give my
glory unto another. And remember also, that Idolaters are in the Van of those
that shall never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

Consider that Sacrifice ordained by their Church, and wherein you must adore a
bit of Bread. Do not think you shall escape by this foolish suggestion, We only
adore Jesus Christ who is in Heaven. For the Pagan Idolaters might have used
the same plea, That when they kneeled before their Idols, they lifted up their
Hearts to the true God.

Never be reconciled with them for that great wrong they do your Souls in
robbing you of the Cup, which is but one half of the Sacrament, when as Jesus
Christ has given you the whole of it.

Never accustom your selves to that barbarous Language which keeps you from
understanding your Religion, and leaves it only to be gazed at with your eyes.
Keep up a perpetual aversion for that vain heap of Pagan and Jewish Ceremonies,
which are in a direct line of opposition to the purity and simplicity of
Christianity.

But know, it is not enough that you detest all these things with your Heart,
you must also condemn them with your Mouths. Your Judgments herein must not be
concealed; you must be ever and every where ready to confess the Truth.

And therefore, as often as you shall have occasion, declare openly, without
guile or reservation, that you abhor that Worship unto which you are compelled
to be present.

Never go to Mass, unless they drag you to it by main force, and whilst they
force you to it, declare publicly, that you do not in the least with your
heart consent thereunto; and if by the same violence wherewith they brought you
to it they keep you at it, yet manifest by your Actions, that you have not any
belief nor respect for those false Mysteries.

Keep carefully your Books of Piety, of Devotion, and of Controversy, and read
them with singular diligence and attention. Preserve them by hiding and
conveying them from the reach and search of your Persecutors. Above all, keep
as your most precious Jewels, the most Holy Bible, and suffer every thing
rather than suffer your Bibles to be snatched away from you. Read them daily and
with the greatest devotion.

Concerning your poor Children: It Is true, they will be ravished out of your
Arms, and led to the Catechistical Exercises of the Priests, and it is to be
seared this will be done with so great violence, that 'twill be impossible for
you to hinder it; yet as soon as they shall be returned from them, never fail
to destroy what those Priests have built up.

Instruct them in the Truth, and infuse into their Souls a sacred abhorrency of
the Romish Religion: And this you may do by causing them to read carefully
those places of Holy Scripture which are contrary to it.

Never forget, nor spare any pains or expense in procuring from foreign
Countries, Books capable of instructing and strengthening you, and when as the
Priests shall have robbed you or your own, cause others to be brought you,
whatever rates you pay for them.

The poor Country Peasants, and Mechanics in Towns and Cities, by reason of
their ignorance, are exposed to greatest dangers. But the strong ought to
support the weak, and you must earnestly endeavor each others edification:
This you may do as you travel into your Country-houses, as you walk in the
Streets, yea, when as you meet one another in your Shops, there being none by
you of the contrary Religion. Supply these poor People with Books for their
Instruction, and exhort them without ceasing to bear up against all
discouragements, and never to let loose their hearts unto Idolatry, but
contrariwise to detest and oppose it by their discourses.

Maintain a continual Correspodence among your selves, and perfectly know one
another, principally those who love the Truth, and mutually encourage one
another in your Resolutions never to forsake it. If you can at any time meet
together secretly by Night in the Retirements of your Houses, let it be for the
reading of God's Word, and of good Books capable of instructing you, but above
all for Prayer. Proper Prayers for your condition shall be sent you from
foreign Countries.

By reason of that commerce and communion you are necessitated to hold with the
Papists endeavor also after their Conversion. Who knows but that God may have
ordained this sore Persecution for this very end, that you should carry the
light of the Gospel into the very bosom of Popery, in order to its destruction?
But take heed unto your selves. For should you be dumb dogs, and dissemblers,
and counterfeit the Papists before the Papists, God will give you up to a
reprobate sense. So then forbear not speaking unto the Papists when you meet
them, but entertain them with Discourses of Religion. And speaking to them of
the violence offered unto your Consciences, give them a lively pourtraict of
the Deformities of their Religion, and Purity of your own; show them the
Vanities and Impurities of their Worship, of their Idolatry, and sottish
Opinions. And labor powerfully by all means their conversion. And that this
may be successful, order your Lives with the greatest accuracy and
circumspection. It Is visible, that the sinful disorders and miscarriages of
your Conversations have brought upon you those fearful Judgments from God under
which you are now groaning. There was no kind of worldliness in which you were
not engaged, such as rich Houshold-Goods, Vessels of Silver, Tapistry, Feasts,
Gluttonies, Idle Days, Plays, Pastimes, Cloth of Silk and Gold, Rings, Pearls
and Jewels.

If you be wise, your first Reformation must begin here, all these must be
rejected, sell your Tapistries, your Silver Vessels, wear the plainest
Woolsteds, have nothing to do with Silk or Gold at your Feasts or Repasts.
Every day should be unto us a day of Prayers and Tears, not a feasting but a
fasting day.

Your Indevotion is another source of your Afflictions. You have despised God's
holy Word. Family Duties, Family Prayer has been either neglected or very
negligently performed. That you may turn away God's Wrath from you, set upon
the Religious Performance of these Religious Duties; Let them be frequent,
prolonged, and with greater fervency.

Let your outward demeanor be exemplary for its great mortification, and this
too in the very eyes of your adversaries; and that you may be known publicly
who you are by the modesty, humility and plainness of your Garb, and
principally by your Charity and the excellency of your Faith.

Take a special care of your poor persecuted Brethren; give liberally toward
the charges of their Escapeal. All things should now be in common among you,
and no person should count any thing his own whilst his poor Brother needs it.
This is the very soul of Christianity, and if you thus bestow it, God may
restore again unto you his Gospel, whereof he has deprived you.

Thus ordering your Conversations you will be admired by your own Countrymen
and Enemies of your Religion; it will prevail with them to hear you favorably,
and incline them either to become Converts themselves, or else to favor your
Escapeal.

These Adviso's are only Expedients for the present, till such time as it shall
please God to open you a door of deliverance from the Tyranny you now groan
under. And you must take the first opportunity you can of departing. For don't
fool your selves with this imagination, that you shall be able for any long
space of time to keep the Truth of God in the Land of Meshek. Your Piety will
gradually decay. Your Children having never known any other Religion than the
Romish, will accustom themselves unto it, and never desire to leave their
Country. Wherefore spare neither pains, diligence nor costs, that you may be
transported into a Land of Liberty. And look not back behind you to carry away
what is in your Houses. Whosoever looks back again is not meet for the Kingdom
of Heaven. And though you were stripped of all in your flight, yet you would be
rich enough in having your Souls given you for a Prey. The worst that can befall
you is to die of famine. But is that kind of death more terrible than any
other? Can any Death be dreadful to us when the Life of our Souls lies at
stake; and the Glory of God is concerned?

And yet possibly it may never be so bad with you. It Is our Duty in no wise to
doubt of God's mercy. Such a thought should never be harbored by us. In the
very worst of times God has been gracious to his People, and they have been
relieved in their necessities. So that all the hazard you run is but the
renouncing the Vanities of this World, or being reduced to work with our hands
for our living, or to receive an Alms. The pride of Man's heart cannot brook
this thought. But it is this Pride that must be subdued; it is this Monster that
must be brained; it is it that has undone us. We should reckon it our great
honor to be debased, scorned, impoverished and stripped of all for Christ Jesus.
Our Life is very short. No matter how we suffer in it. Our great concern should
be for Eternity. We live and work for Eternity. My brethren, count it great joy
when you fall into diverse temptations. And be persuaded, that you cannot make
any other satisfaction for your great crime in renouncing with your mouths the
Truth of our holy Religion, than by sacrificing unto God your Estate, Ease and
Comforts, than by offering up your selves at last for his sake unto the
Sufferings and Miseries of this Cruel World.

As for those among you who yet stand your ground. My dearly beloved Brethren,
in the Name of God, look unto the Recompense of Reward promised you for your
Perseverance. Look unto the Glory you shall receive for having overcome all
Difficulties, and retained your Integrity. Let Us look unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith, lift up your hands that hang down, and strengthen your
feeble knees. Remember, that he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and
that he exposed himself to the contradiction of sinners, that he might sit down
at the right hand of God his Father. Consider, that great cloud of Witnesses,
and persist constantly in that Race which is set before you. Look unto those
Martyrs who live now glorified in Heaven, and in the memory of Men. Remember,
that God chastises all he loves, and that he owns them for his children; be not
therefore displeased with the correction of the Lord. Remember he bestows a
very great honor upon you in calling you out to suffer for his Name's sake.
Take patiently the loss and spoiling of your Goods, your Prisons, and Sorrows.
The Lord will recompense you for all your hard Labors, and will give a
glorious issue to all your Conflicts. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

If you have any charity for your Brethren, you will communicate this Letter
among them.



SECT. LVII.
I have done with my Preface, adding, Courteous Reader, but one Advertisement
about my Manuscript Copies, out of which I have extracted and compiled my
Synodicon.

It is more than twenty Years ago that I met with some Collections out of the
Manuscript Acts of these National Synods. That great Learning, deep Wisdom, and
sound Godliness I observed in them, inflamed my desires and affections after
the Originals. Accordingly, when as the Ministers were banished France, and
about 150 of them came unto London, I made it my business to learn of them some
News of these Acts. But I may speak it truly, that the far greater part of
these Reverend Confessors did with much regret inform me, that they feared they
were lost irrecoverably. For the first thing the Intendants did, when they
visited their Churches, was to seize upon all Papers, Writings, Acts, Deeds,
Books, and whatsoever belonged unto their Consistories, Colloquies, and Synods;
yea, and this they did also unto particular Ministers; thus robbing them of
their well-furnish'd Libraries, and of all their Manuscripts. I mingled my
Griefs with theirs for this Peculate. But yet did not give over my search. No
sooner did I hear of any new Minister arrived, but I insinuated my self into
his Acquaintance, and renewed my Inquiry, though frequently to my sore
dissatisfaction. And having given over all hopes of ever seeing this Jewel, one
day, about two years and a half since, as I was in company with about six or
seven of these worthy and reverend Refugees, bemoaning the great loss their
Churches had sustained in this cruel Persecution, and particularly in the loss
of those Acts of their famous National Synods, Monsieur Foren, Pastor of the
Church of Sion in the Province of Britain.
A Minister, who was a mere stranger to me, and whom I had never seen before,
being but then newly arrived, told me he could give me some intelligence of
them, and demanding my Name and House, he did the next day honor me with a
visit, and presented me with what I had longed for many Years so ardently, and
sought for far and near exceeding diligently. This Copy was very large, and
contained near a Ream of Paper, tolerably well written; yet it had suffered by
the wet in some places, and Letters and some Sentences were defaced, so that I
have been five hours together to spell out the sense of five lines; which I am
confident I have hit upon at last: being exceeding careful not to corrupt or
pervert the sense of these venerable Councils. The Grandfather of this worthy
Minister had been deputed once and again by his Province as their
Representative unto their National Synods, and his godly Father had took the
care to examine and collation this Copy by and with several other Copies; and
this Copy was attested by several of the Deputies unto several of these
National Synods, as by Mr. Quinson, Mr. Launay, Mr. Blondell, Mr. Grauvier, Mr.
Bollenat, Mr. de Bordage, Mr. de la Musse, Mr. Bernard the Bailiff of
Chastillion upon the Loign, and Mr. Guillemot. So that I reckon it is as good
as an Original.

When I had proceeded in my Work as far as the Synod of Alez, I was at a great
loss for one Act, which was quoted in my Copy, and must of necessity be
inserted to make the sense perfect, and to prevent a sad chasm; this put me
upon a new Inquiry. The Book to which I was referred was rare, it could not be
easily got in London, though I had consulted some scores of Booksellers, nor in
the Bodleian Library. Whilst I was again regretting my loss, one of the
Ministers of the ancient French Church of London tells me they had in their
Consistory a Manuscript Copy of the National Synods, and accordingly gives me
the sight of five Folios, four very fairly written, well bound in Vellom, but
wretchedly spelled, and ill pointed; these four were a complete Body of these
Acts, and had some more Acts than my first Copy, and yet wanted a great many
more which were in mine. The fifth was only an imperfect Copy of the twenty
first Synods. I borrowed these five Manuscripts of that Consistory, and
compared them with my first, and supplied my defects out of them, though it put
me upon a new travail. But my labor was a pleasure to me.

When I had proceeded as far as the Synod of Alanson, and so had but two more
to finish, that reverend and ancient Minister of Christ, Monsieur Misson, who
had been Pastor of the Church of Niort, sends unto me another Manuscript in
Folio fairly written, (though impaired much by the Rain, or Salt Water) of the
Acts of these Synods. But it was imperfect, ending at the first Synod of
Charenton, so that it contained only the History of the twenty four first
National Synods. However, this I examined and compared with my first and best
Copy, and found that in the order of the Acts it did harmoniously agree with
it, though it fell wonderfully short in the materials, as being exceeding
defective and lame in number, quantity, and quality of the Acts, and I found it
exactly to agree with that fifth Volume, which contained the twenty first
Synods. So that I had no help nor assistance by it, but only satisfaction to my
Curiosity, and labor for my pains.

About the same time my Honored Friend Monsieur Baignoux, Pastor of the Church
of Poictiers, sends me two Originals, one of the second National Synod of
Charenton, Anno 1631. the other of the Synod of Alanson, 1637. And that ancient
and learned Minister of St. Quentin, Monsieur Meslayer, I think the same Week
brought me a very fair Manuscript exactly agreeing with my two best Copies of
the last National Synod of Loudun. These were the principal materials out of
which I have composed my Synodicon.

One thing I observed, that these Copies did differ much in the order and
placing of their Acts. This has much perplexed me, especially when I revised
what I had done, and compared it with the other Copies. But I have lest out
nothing.

I have been extremely puzzled to adjust their Accounts. It has been the most
laborious toil to me. But I found by comparing one Copy with another, that I
was rolling Sisyphus's his Stone, for the difficulties always occurred, and the
differences and disagreements among my Manuscripts, through the negligence of
the Transcribers, were implacable and irreconcilable; whereupon I even left
them as I found them, lamenting my expense of time to so little, indeed to no
purpose at all. The National Synods may not be blamed for this. For nothing was
more accurate and exact, nothing more regular and orderly than their Synodical
Acts. But, as I said, the Copyists, were guilty of a most supine negligence.

I have observed a most strict and Cordial Union between the French and Dutch
Churches, in Faith and Discipline: this was first signed in the first National
Synod of Vitre. See Canons the 1, 2, 3, 4. And they sent their Deputies
reciprocally to their National Synods for some time. And when as Monsieur
Chamier, Du Moulin, Chauve, and Rivet, were on their way to the Synod of Dort,
in the year 1618. they were frighted back again by a Prohibition issued out
against them by the King then Reigning, Louis XIII.

These National Synods paid a very great deference unto the Church, Pastors and
Professors of Geneva, and embraced their Councils. See that Letter which they
sent unto the National Synod of Tonneins, which was most kindly accepted, and
all their advice practiced.

The first Appeal that was ever brought before them was by the Prince of Conde,
a Prince of the Blood, and of a very great and haughty Spirit, but not above
that grave Assembly of St. Foy. See Synod of St. Foy. Appeal the first.

When I had finished my Work, and delivered it into the Booksellers hands, who
undertook the Printing of it, They earnestly desired me, for the ease and
benefit of the Readers, to divide it into Chapters, and to prefix the Contents
of each Synod to it. This was a new trouble created to me by my two Friends;
but to satisfy their importunity, I have divided it accordingly, and I hope it
may answer, in some measure, your expectation.

The Fathers in these Councils were not willing that the body of their National
Synodical Acts should be published; see the Synod of St. Maixant, Particular
Matters, 26. And when as Monsieur Piotet had collected them into due order, yet
they cared not to have them divulged. The time was not come as then, but now it
is. I have detained thee, good Reader, too long in the Porch: the Door is now
open, and both Leaves are unfolded, you may go in and read them, there is none
to hinder you.

SECT. LVIII.
There were nine and twenty National Synods celebrated by these Churches within
the space of one hundred Years; they met in this order, and at the times and
places mentioned in this ensuing Catalogue.

1. At Paris, May 25. 1559. 2. At Poictiers, March 20. 1560. 3. At Orleans,
April 25. 1562. 4. At Lions, Aug. 10. 1563. 5. The 2d at Paris, October. 21.
1565. 6. At Vertuil, September. 1. 1567. 7. At Rochel, April 2. 1571. 8. At
Nismes, May 8. 1572. 9. At St. Foy, Feb. 2. 1578. 10. At Figeac, Aug. 2. 1579.
11. The 2d at Rochel, June 28. 1581. 12. At Vitre, May 26. 1583. 13. At
Montauban, June 15. 1594. 14. At Saumur, May 13. 1596. 15. At Montpellier, May
26. 1598. 16. At Gergeau, May 9. 1601. 17. At Gap, May 18. 1603. 18. The 3d of
Rochel, March 1. 1607. 19. At St. Maixant, May 26. 1609. 20. At Privas, May 23.
1612. 21. At Tonneins, May 2. 1614. 22. The 2d of Vitre, May 18. 1617. 23. At
Alez, October. 1. 1620. 24. At Charenton, September. 1. 1623. 25. At Castres,
September. 15. 1626. 26. The 2d of Charenton, 1631. 27. At Alanson, May 27. 1637.
28. The 3d of Charenton, 1654. 29. At Loudun, November. 10. 1659.
The next National Synod was appointed to be held in the City of Nismes; but
when that will be, Peloni Palmoni, the wonderful Numberer, can only and most
certainly inform us.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE First National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At PARIS, in the Year of our
LORD, 1559.

The Contents of the Acts in this Synod.
Chap. I. The Lord of Callonges, Minister in the Church of Paris, Moderator.
Eleven Churches send their Deputies to the Synod. Chap. II. General Matters.
The first Draught of the Church Discipline, in Forty Canons. Chap. III.
Particular Matters. Twenty Five Cases of Conscience resolved.


1559. First Synod.
THE First National Synod. Henry the Second died the tenth of July, 1559.

SYNOD I.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
The Decrees of the National Synod, celebrated in Paris the Five and Twentieth
Day of May, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand five hundred fifty and nine,
and in the Sixteenth Year of Henry the Second King of France.

CHAP. I.
Monsieur De Morell, Lord of Callonges, was at that time Minister of the Church
of Paris. Public Matters.
FRancis de Morell, otherwise called De Callonges, presided, and there assisted
at it, on behalf of the Reformed Churches of France, the Pastors of Diep, and
St. Lo in Normandy, of Paris, of Angiers, of Orleans, of Tours, of
Chastelherand, of Poitiers, of Xaintes, of St. John d' Angeli, and Marennes.

CHAP. II. The First CANON.
I. NO Church, Discipline, Cap. 6. Art. 1.
nor Church Officer, be he Minister, Elder, or Deacon, shall Claim or Exercise
any Jurisdiction, or Authority over another.

In every Synod there must be a President chosen His Office in the Synods.
II. A Moderator shall be chosen by general Consent in every Synod, who shall
give Notice of the Days and Places of Meeting, and of the Sessions of the
Synod: And he shall gather the Suffrages, and declare which is the greater
Number, and pronounce the Synodical Decisions. Moreover, he shall see that
Order be observed in Speaking, without confusion, and impose Silence on such as
are eager and contentious; and in case of Disobedience, he shall cause them to
withdraw, that Advice may be taken how to Censure them. Moreover, he shall
preside at the Censure of every Person, and make the Remonstrances. As also to
give Answers in case of Counsel demanded; or unto Letters sent unto the Synod,
yet therein always observing the Advice of the Assembly; And he himself also
shall be subject unto Censures. The Office of the Moderator shall expire with
the Synod; and the next Synod is at liberty to choose him, or any other.

A Pastor may bring with him an Elder unto the Synod.
III. Ministers that are sent unto the National Synod, may bring with them one
or two Elders or Deacons, but not more; and those chosen by the Body of their
Consistory, who also shall have their Votes in the Synod. As for the Elders and
Deacons of that Church where the Synod shall be assembled, they may be present
also, and speak in their Order; yet to avoid confusion, two of them only shall
have Power of Voting in it. And no Person shall depart from the Assembly,
without leave first had, and obtained.

IV. National Synods shall meet according to the Necessities of the Churches,
and in them there shall be an amicable and brotherly Censure of all its
Members; The Lord's Supper to be administered at the end of every National Synod.
and at the closing up of the Synod, the Lord's Supper shall be celebrated, to
testify their Union, not only by the Ministers and Elders of the Synod, but in
general with that whole Church.

V. The Ministers, with one Elder and Deacon at the least, from every Church in
all the Provinces of this Kingdom, shall meet together once a Year, and choose
such a Time and Place, as shall be most convenient for their Synodical Assembly.

The manner of Receiving a Minister.
VI. No Minister for the present shall be chosen by one only Minister, or by his
Consistory, but by two or three Ministers and their Consistories, or by the
Provincial Synod, or by the Colloquy, which in those Places (where they be
already established) shall be, if possible, called together for this purpose.
And the Elect-Minister shall be presented unto the People for their
Approbation: but in case there be opposition, the Consistory shall judge
thereof; and if neither part do consent, the whole shall be Reported to the
Provincial Synod, which shall take Cognizance thereof, as well for Justifying
of the Minister, as for his Reception; provided the major part of the
Consistory and People do consent thereunto.

No Minister may be sent unto the Synod w^^hout sufficient ^owers.
VII. Ministers shall not be sent from the Churches without Authentic Letters,
or some other sufficient Testimonials from those Places whence they come; and
if having no such Commission, they should offer themselves to be Received, they
shall not be Admitted, unless their Conversation be fully known, and upon what
Account they have quitted their Church. And in case of opposition, they shall
be dealt with as was before determined.

The Elect Deputy must subscribe the Confession of Faith.
VIII. The Deputies Elect shall subscribe our Confession of Faith, both in their
own Churches in which they were chosen, as in those also from which they be
sent, and their Election shall be confirmed by Prayers and Imposition of Hands
by the Ministers; yet without Superstition, or Opinion of Necessity.

How Intruders into the Ministry are to be proceeded against.
IX. Such as shall intrude themselves into the Ministry, in those Places where
the Ministry of the Word of God is already established, shall be sufficiently
admonished to forbear; and in case of their persistency, they shall be declared
Schismatics; and the same Admonition shall be given unto their Followers, who
also abiding contumacious and obstinate, shall be denounced Schismatics.

X. If A People, not having the Ministry of the Word of GOD fixed and settled
among them, should choose unto themselves a Pastor: The Neighbour-Church shall
amicably and earnestly entreat him to confer with them, and exhort him to
subscribe the Confession of Faith, and Church Discipline established among us:
And in case of refusing such Subscription, three or four Ministers of the next
Churches shall assemble together with their Elders, and shall then declare him
a Schismatic, and the People shall be advised to avoid such a Person. But in
case of Nonconforming to our Discipline, he may not be declared Schismatic,
until such time as the Provincial Synod shall have ordained some other course
to be taken with him.

None may Preach in another Church, without the Past^r or Consistory^s leave.
XI. The Minister of one Church may not preach in another without the consent of
its Pastor; but in his absence the Consistory may give Leave and Authority unto
that Stranger. And in case the Flock be scattered by Persecution, or any other
Trouble, he shall endeavor to assemble the Elders and Deacons; but if that
cannot be effected, he may notwithstanding Preach for the Re-uniting of the
Flock.

A Minister may be entreated, but not enforced to accept of the Call.
XII. He that being called to the Holy Ministry, and has once accepted of that
Call, shall betake himself wholly to this Employment: but in case he should
afterward change his mind, and refuse it, he shall be solicited by fitting
Exhortations, to embrace it: but he may not by any other means be enforced
thereunto.

XIII. Ministers that cannot discharge their Office in those Places whereunto
they have been appointed, if being sent elsewhere, by the Advice of their
Churches they do refuse it, they shall then declare the Causes of such their
refusal unto the Consistory, who shall judge whether they may be admitted; and
if they may not be, and they still persist in their not accepting the said
Employment, the Provincial Synod shall determine of it.

No Intruder into the ministry may be approved.
XIV. Whosoever intrudes himself into the Ministry of the Gospel, although he may be
approved by the People, yet shall he not be approved by the
Neighbour-Ministers, nor others, in case another Church excepts against him:
Wherefore e're they proceed farther, the Provincial Synod shall be assembled,
as soon as conveniently it may, for to determine about it. And in case that
Synod cannot be called, if there be a Colloquy of six Ministers at the least
established there, the said Colloquy shall have Power to take Cognizance of
this matter.

Ministers are such for their Life.
XV. Such as are once chosen unto the Ministry of the Word must know, that their
Call is during Life. And as for those who were sent for a certain time, and to
whom for some special Reasons we gave admittance, it is advised, That the
Church in which they are do make provision of a fixed Minister, that so the
others may intend their own Affairs. But if the Churches cannot provide a
Pastor for this Flock, these shall not be permitted to abandon the Church for
which Jesus Christ died.

An Exchange of Ministers for a time.
XVI. If a Minister be personally persecuted, so that he cannot without great
danger unto himself discharge his Office in the Church whereunto he was
ordained, he may exchange for a time with another Church, and this with Advice
and Consent of both Churches. And in case of the Minister's Disobedience to the
Judgment of their Churches, the Cause shall be referred unto the next
Provincial Synod. There may be other Causes of changing, which shall be
proposed and judged in the Provincial Synod.

No Pastor shall forsake his Church without leave.
XVII. No Pastor shall quit his Flock without leave first had and obtained from
his Consistory, and the Neighbour-Churches also shall approve the cause of his
departure. Yet on such occasions it will be fitting to admonish Churches to
relieve their Pastors, and to minister unto their Necessities. And if necessary
Relief be refused them, when they have been advised to it, in this case it
shall be lawful for the Minister to engage himself unto some other Church.

This is the Second Article in the First Chapter of the Discipline. It is not
lawful to ^^car the Popish Preachers.
XVIII. Novices received of late into the Church, especially Monks and Priests,
shall not be chosen unto the Ministry, without a long and diligent enquiry
into, and approbation had of their Lives and Doctrine.

XIX. Forasmuch as it is not lawful nor expedient to hear the Sermons of Popish
Preachers, or of others introduced without a lawful Call, in those Places where
the Ministry of the Word is established. Therefore the true Pastors are obliged
as much as in them lies, to hinder their Flocks from going to them.

Causes for the Deposing of a Minister.
XX. Ministers teaching Evil Doctrine, and not desisting upon sufficient
Admonition; and such as are disobedient to the Holy Orders and Counsels of
God's Word, given them by their Consistory; as also they who lead a scandalous
Life, deserving Punishment by the Magistrates, or Excommunication; and they who
are totally insufficient for their Office, shall be deposed: But those who be
rendered incapable by Age, Sickness, or any other Affliction, or hindered by the
Providence of God from the Exercise of their Ministry, shall not; yea, their
double Honor shall be continued to them, and the Churches are required to
maintain them, and to provide another Minister to execute their Office.

Crimes for Deposing.
XXI. Scandalous Crimes punishable by the Judges, as Murder, Sodomy, and
High Treason, or any other Sins, which would redound to the great Dishonor and
Scandal of the Church, although they had been committed not only before his
Call unto the Ministry, but even in the time of his Ignorance, merit the
Deposing of such a Minister. As for other Sins less scandalous, the Judgment of
them is left to the Prudence of the Provincial Synod.

XXII. A Minister Convict of enormous and notorious Crimes, shall be
immediately deposed by the Consistory, two or three Pastors of unstained
Reputation being called into Counsel with them. And in case the Delinquent
Minister complain against his Accuser, and of the Calumny laid upon him,
Presently by the Consistory.
the whole Matter of Fact shall be reported to the Provincial Synod.

If he has taught any Heresy or False Doctrine, he shall be out of hand
suspended by the Consistory, two or three Ministers, as before, being called
in, until such time as the Provincial Synod shall have Decreed about it. The
Causes of Deposing, unless necessity so require, of which the Consistory shall
judge, may not be published unto the People.

The Elder's Office.
XXIII. The Elders and Deacons are the Counsel of the Church, in which the
Ministers of the Word ought to preside. The Office of Elders is to assemble the
People, to make Report of Scandals unto the Consistory, and such other like
Matters, according as in every Church it is couched in Writing, together with
the proper Customs of those Places and Times. Yet is not their Office for Life.

The Deacon's Office.
XXIV. The Deacon's Office, as now used by us, is not perpetual; yet this
belongs unto them, to Collect the Moneys for the Poor, the Prisoners, and the
Sick, and by the Advice of the Consistory to distribute those collected
Charities among them; to Visit them, and in their respective Houses to
Catechize them; and in case any Deacon shall be found fit, and he promise to
devote and consecrate himself during Life unto the Service of God in the
Ministry, he may be chosen by the Ministry and Consistory to Catechize
publicly, according to the Form received in our Churches; and this in order to
their Trial, without permitting them to administer the Sacraments.

The manner of Electing Elders and Deacons.
XXV. The Office of Elders and Deacons is not to Catechize publicly, nor is
their Office perpetual: However, neither the one nor the other, shall quit it
without leave first obtained from the Church. In the Minister's absence, or
sickness, or in any other necessity of the Church, the Deacon may read Prayers,
and the Holy Scriptures, but he shall not take upon him the Office of Preaching.

XXVI. In those Places in which Church Order is not yet established, both
Elders and Deacons shall be chosen by the common Suffrage of Pastor and People;
but where Discipline is already constituted, it shall be done by the Minister
and Church-Councel, who shall give them their Charge, and they shall subscribe
the Confession of Faith professed and avowed by us, then they shall be
presented unto the People; and in case any one should oppose their Election, it
shall be debated and determined in the Consistory; but if they cannot agree, it
shall be referred unto the Provincial Synod.

Causes of Deposing Elders and Deacons.
XXVII. The Deacons and Elders shall be deposed for those very self-same
Reasons, that the Ministers of the Word were, according to their quality; and
if being condemned by their Consistory, they should make their Appeal, they
shall be suspended, until such time as the Provincial Synod shall have ordained
otherwise.

Books forbidden to be Printed, till first communicated.
XXVIII. Ministers, nor any Other Members of the Church, may not Print their
own, or others Works concerning Religion, nor in any wise Publish them, till
they have first communicated them unto two, or more, of the Gospel, of
unspotted Reputation.

Who are to be Excommunicated.
XXIX. Heretics, Contentious Persons, Despisers of God, Rebels against the
Consistory, Traitors to the Church, such as be impeached and convicted of
Crimes worthy of Corporal Punishment, such as scandalize the whole Church,
shall be utterly excommunicated and cut off, not only from the Sacrament, but
from all Communion with the whole Church. And as for Delinquents suspended from
the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and guilty of other Vices, it is left
to the Church's prudence, whether they shall be admitted to hear the Word
preached or no.

XXX. Such as are Excommunicate for Heresy, Contempt of God, Schism, Treason
and Rebellion against the Church, or other grievous Offenses, scandalous to the
whole Church, shall be denounced Excommunicate Persons before the People, Who
are by Name to be declared Excommunicate, and who not, unto the People.
together with the Causes of their Excommunication. And as for those who were
Excommunicate for lesser Offenses, it is left to the Church's Prudence, to
consider whether they shall be published by Name unto the Congregation or not.
And this Order shall hold, till it be otherwise determined in a National Synod.

Manner of Receiving Excommunicate Persons.
XXXI. These having been Excommunicated, shall address themselves unto their
Consistory, for Readmission into Church Fellowship; who shall judge of their
Repentance. And if they have been publicly Excommunicate, they shall testify
their Repentance publicly; but if they have not been publicly Excommunicate,
they shall only in private, before the Consistory, express their Repentance.

Denial of the Faith demands a Public Acknowledgment. When Fasts are to be
proclaimed.
XXXII. Such as through force of Persecution have abjured the Gospel, shall not
be received into the Church, till such time as they have expressed their
Repentance publicly before all the People.

XXXIII. Public Prayers, and extraordinary Fastings, yet without any scruple
or superstition, shall be enjoined in times of severe Persecution, of War,
Pestilence, Famine, and other grievous Affliction; as also, whenas a Minister
is to be chosen, or a National Synod to be convened.

Of the Publication of Marriage.
XXXIV. Marriages shall be propounded unto the Consistory, in which the Contract
of Marriage shall be produced, signed by the Public Notary, or proved by some
other sufficient Attestation, in such places where there is not a Notary: Or if
the Persons will not produce their Contracts, they shall however bring a
sufficient Attestation under the Notary's hand, or some other way; and a
Fortnight after the Banes shall be published on three Lord's Days following, in
those Places where the Word is ordinarily preached, and in other Places where
is Exhortation and Public Prayers, provided that this Publication be continued
a full Fortnight; and then the Marriage may be solemnized in the Church. This
Order shall not be infringed, unless there be very great Causes for it: whereof
the Consistory shall take Cognizance.

Marriages and Baptisms are to be Registered.
XXXV. Both Marriages and Baptisms shall be Registered, and the Register
preserved carefully by the Church, together with the Names of the Fathers and
Mothers, and Sureties for the baptized Infants.

XXXVI. The Faithful may not contract Marriage within the prohibited Degrees of
Affinity and Consanguinity, and the Church is to take heed that all scandal in
this particular be avoided.

The Church may not dissolve a Marriage.
XXXVII. The Faithful whose Yoke-fellows are convict of Adultery, shall be
advised to reconcile themselves with them; but in case of refusal, that liberty
they have by the Word of God shall be declared to them. However, none of the
Churches shall dissolve the Marriage, least they should entrench upon the
Authority of the Civil Magistrate.

The Consistory, in case Parents refuse their Consent, shall order about it.
XXXVIII. No Person may contract Marriage without the Consent of Parents. But in
case Parents should be so unreasonable, as to refuse their Consent to such an
holy and needful Ordinance, the Consistory shall advise what is to be done
herein.

XXXIX. Promises of Marriage once made, cannot be dissolved, no not by mutual
consent of the Parties, who have past those Promises each to other: And the
Consistory of that Church where these Persons are Members, shall judge of the
lawfulness of those Promises.

In a particular Affair the Common Cause is not to be concerned.
XL. No Church shall undertake any Matter of great consequence, wherein the
Interest or Damage of other Churches is of right to be comprised, without
consulting the Provincial Synod, if it may be conveniently assembled. But if
the business be urgent, they shall communicate it to other Churches of the
Province, and obtain, at least by Letters, their Advice and Consent.

XLI. These present Articles of Discipline are not so ordained by us, but that
if the Churches Profit do require, they may be changed. But it shall not be in
the Power of any one particular Church to change them, without having first
Advised with, and got the Consent of a National Synod.

CHAP. III. Particular Matters Propounded and Decided in the aforesaid National
Synod held in PARIS.
Such as have Popish Licenses to Marry, shall not be married without having
first confessed their Sin.
1. AS to that Case of Conscience propounded by the Minister of Diep, it was
answered, That such as had Licenses from Popish Vicars or Curates to Marry
where they pleased, should not be married in the Church of God, unless they do
confess this their Offense before the Congregation wherein they be married: And
the Minister of the Gospel shall be instant with them to evidence their
Repentance by Tearing of the License. But whether the Tearing of it in pieces
be done in the Church or Consistory, that is left unto the Church's Prudence,
where this Matter may fall out.

None can be discharged of their Marriage-Promise upon pretext of Religion.
II. As to the Question propounded by the Minister of Angers, it was answered,
That he who had espoused a Maid of the Popish Religion, but is himself since
converted, although the said Maiden refuses to be married in the Church of
God, is nevertheless bound by his Promise; wherefore he ought solicit her to
accomplish it; but if she will not consent unto it, he must contain himself
until such time as the Bond be broken, either by her Marriage or Whoredom. The
same Advice was given in the like case by Mr. Calvin.

Whether the Children of Papists are to be received into the Church.
III. The Minister of Castelherand having moved this case: A Papist displeased
with the Creasme, and Spittle, and other Ceremonies added unto Baptism by the
Popish Church, desires him to Baptize his Child: It was queried, Whether he
should do it. But because there was another Question first to be debated, viz.
Whether the Children of Papists ought to be received into the Church of Christ?
Diverse Arguments having been banded on both sides, the Decision thereof was
remanded to a more full Assembly.

What Course is to be taken with the Broachers of Heresies.
IV. As to what was related by the Minister of Poictiers, concerning Lavan, who
for a long time has publicly Taught and printed strange Doctrines, Schisms
and notorious Heresies: The Brethren may, if they judge meet, cite him to
appear before the next Provincial Synod, or privately Commune with him; and if
he be found Obstinate, there being made a diligent and faithful Collection of
his Heresies, they shall be brought into the Provincial Synod, that so they may
be, according to the Rule of GOD's Word, condemned. However, out of hand the
People shall be admonished to avoid so great a Plague.

V. And whereas our Brother of Poictiers has declared in private Conference,
That an Heretic is not to be punished as an Heretic, but as a Disturber of
the Civil Government; we say, That were there no other Fault but this, yet he
should be admonished not to create Troubles unto the Church; but there being
other Circumstances reported unto this Assembly, and these in particular, That
he has very proudly scorned Counsel given him; and basely Calumniated the
Minister his Tutor, and the whole Consistory, calling him, A blind Leader of
the Blind; and notwithstanding the many Remonstrances made him, not to frequent
a certain Schismatical Heretic, nevertheless he continues to keep him company:
Therefore for these causes we advise, that he be cut off by Excommunication
from the Fellowship of the Faithful.

VI. The Minister of Poictiers having demanded, Whether it be well done to take
their Oaths, who are newly received into the Church not to discover their
Brethren. Whether an Oath may be take from such as are received into the Church.
Again, these Novices being made Prisoners for the Gospel's sake, and the
Magistrate tendering them an Oath to declare the Truth, whether notwithstanding
their first Oath they should discover their Brethren? As to the former it was
answered, That respect must be had unto the circumstance of Places, that so
they may obviate the Levity and Malice of those Persons, who otherwise by their
Imprudence and Malice would endanger an whole Church. Whether a Man
notwithstanding his former Oath, may yet afterward declare his Brethren.
And as to the second Question, It is most certain that the end of that Oath
being to glorify God, and preserve Charity, the latter Oath does not oblige to
speak or do any thing contrary unto these: But it were better that they did
Protest at first never to speak any thing that might redound to the Dishonor
of GOD, or the Damage of their Neighbors.

Whether Children may be baptized without a Sermon, and where no Church is.
VII. Is it necessary that Infants should be baptized in a Public
Church-Assembly? Or may it be done without such a Congregation, as in a private
Family, where there be very few People? We answer, That where a Church is
already constituted publicly, there the Children shall be baptized publicly:
But where there is none gathered, nor publicly established, and Parents
through Infirmity are afraid to carry them to a public Assembly far distant
from them there to be baptized, Ministers may yield what in Prudence they may
judge convenient for them.

Whether the Faithful may write their Childrens Names in the Registers of
Popish Priests.
VIII. Our Brother of St. John d' Angely demanding, Whether the Faithful might
lawfully suffer their Childrens Names to be recorded in the Registers of Popish
Priests? It was answered, That because it was a Civil Ordinance of his Majesty,
the Ministers and Consistories should specially observe the Design and End of
him that it, and admonish him that he be very careful lest thereby he be taken
for a Papist.

Whether the Faithful may Rent Ecclesiastical Revenues.
IX. Advice has been taken upon what was proposed by the Minister of St. John
d' Angely, viz. Whether the Faithful might lawfully Farm the Ecclesiastical
Revenues of Monks and Priests, etc? And it is our Judgment, That it is in no
wise lawful for the Faithful to intermeddle with any Matter that has Idolatry
conjoined with it, as the Patten, or the Baise-mains, or to cause Masses or
Vigils to be said or sung, or to maintain Monks, who were appointed to no other
Service: But to Farm a Field, Rents, or Lordship, and to pay the Profits
accrewing from them unto those Ecclesiastics, for as much as they be Temporal
Lords of them, the Faithful are left unto their liberty therein to do as they
please.

Civil Jurisdiction may be ^x^^^^^d under Popish Churchmen. Whether an
insufficient Elder may be deposed, and a Banker chosen.
X. It was also determined, That the exercising of Civil Jurisdictions or
Procurations under the aforesaid Ecclesiastics, is not in itself unlawful,
provided it he not in Spiritual Matters, as they call them.

XI. Moreover, whereas our said Brother of St. John d' Angely has demanded,
Whether Elders incapable of discharging their Office, who had ^een admitted
when the Church was first gathered, might lawfully be deposed, that other
better qualified may be elected into their Places? And whether a Banker might
be chosen into the Eldership? As to the First Article we answer, That if those
Elders be utterly incapable of discharging their Duties, they shall be deposed;
according to what has been determined already in the Articles of our
Discipline. But if they can tollerably perform them, they ought not without
their Consent to be laid by. And touching Bankers, in case they meddle with
those Diabolical Dispatches of Pardon and Dispensations, and other suchlike
Popish Abominations, they shall be so far from being received into Office in
the Churches, that if after Admonition given them to desist from such Actions,
they do not refrain them, they shall be forthwith Excommunicated.

XII. Our Brother of Orleans propounded the case of a Woman, who was resolved
to serve God with a pure Continence, but could not agree with her Husband, a
Time-server, to commit Idolatry; and whereas fearing trouble that may betide
him and his Wife, he gives leave, yea sollicites his Wife to withdraw into a
Place of Liberty: Is it lawful for her to follow this Counsel? We answer, That
as long as this Woman can possibly subsist with her Husband, she ought to live
with him, that so many Inconveniences may be avoided, which would otherwise
fall out through her absence: But in case she cannot without imminent Danger to
herself abide with him, let her embrace our Lord's Counsel, If they persecute
you in one city, fly ye unto another. Yet always earnestly importuning her
Husband, as in Conscience he is bound, to come unto her.

Whether Pirates ought to be received unto the Lord's Supper.
XIII. Our Brother of Marennes having craved our Advice concerning Pirates and
Tradesmen, who, before they were admitted into the Communion of our Churches,
had ill-gotten their Estates, Whether they ought to be received unto the Lord's
Supper? We answer, That not only these, but all other Persons who shall
unjustly detain the Goods of other Men; however, that Injustice may be
modified, are yet bound in Conscience to make Restitution of those Goods, if
they be able, unto their right Owners. And Ministers and Consistories shall
take especially care herein: and in case they find them eminently penitent, and
mourning for their Sin, having exhorted them unto Charity, they may admit them
unto the Lord's Table.

XIV. He also proposing this Case, Whether Goods sold by Pirates, might be
bought? We answer, That those Merchandises are either sold publicly by the
Permission and Approbation of the Magistrate or not: If the Magistrate consent
unto their Sale, they may with a safe Conscience; but if the Sale be
Clandestine, they ought not, because they in buying should be Parties with the
Pirates.

Such as serve themselves of Papal Excommunications pollute their Consciences.
Tithes must be paid in Obedience to the King's Laws. Children of excommunicate
Persons are not to be paptized but conditionally.
XV. As to the Proposition of our Brother of Xaintes, we answer, That such as
use Papal Excommunications do defile their Consciences.

XVI. As to what was proposed by our Brother of St. Lo, we answer, That
notwithstanding the Popish Priests do unjustly claim a Right to Tithes upon the
account of their Ministry, yet they must be paid, because of the King's
Commandment, as a matter in itself indifferent, and that Sedition and Scandal
may be avoided.

XVII. To another Proposal of our Brother, was given this answer, That where
both Father and Mother were Excommunicate, their Children should not be
received unto Baptism, until such time as the aforesaid Parents, or one of them
had reconciled himself unto the Church; unless the Grandfather or Grandmother
of the said Child should present it, in which case it might be baptized, it
being their Blood, and descended from them.

One may be present at Popish Marriage-Feasts without wounding Conscience.
XVIII. He also propounded this Matter of Fact, The Church of St. Lo had been
informed, and thereupon maintained, that to be present at Marriage Feasts
celebrated by Popish Priests, although there was no Idolatry in it, at least
none consented to by those Guests, yet upon this account only, that the
Marriage was contracted and performed after the Popish Way, they were defiled.
For which cause, before the Lord's Supper was administered to them, they swear,
that they were not present at those Feasts as aforesaid. Yet afterward having
come to a right understanding of the Truth in this matter, they demand, Whether
they be absolved of their Oath, made by them through false Information that had
been given them. It was answered, They were discharged from the Bond of such an
Oath.

XIX. Another Fact was also propounded by the same Brother, A Man of S. Lo,
being ignorant of the evil Conversation of a Woman, marries her, about five
Months after she is delivered of Child, whereupon he would forsake her; but the
Parents of his Wife telling him, That a Child might be born, and that honestly
too in that time, for twelve Months; this Year his Wife carried herself
exceeding chastely, or at least he had no occasion to suspect her. But afterward
the Husband possibly being weary of his Wife, separates himself from her, and
publishes how much he was abused by her Parents; though he declares with his
own mouth, that he had accompanied with her as an Husband with his Wife. It is
demanded, After what manner he is to be dealt with, since he will neither take
his said Wife, nor hearken to the Remonstrances of the Consistory. This
Assembly advises, That repeated Admonitions be Ministered to him, in which if
he do not acquiesce, he shall be rejected by the Church.

XX. That Woman who refuses or delays to join herself unto her Husband
infected with some contagious Disease, may not however be suspended the Lord's
Table: yet shall she be admonished conscienciously to perform that Duty which a
Wife owes unto her Husband. And at the same time the Husband shall be
acquainted with the Danger to which he does expose his Wife.

XXI. And in answer to the Question of the Minister of Tours, it was said, That
the Wives of infected Persons should not be rejected by the Assembly, provided
they may come without danger of infecting it. The other Copies read it thus:
That the Wives of Unbelievers may be admitted unto our Church-Meetings,
provided the Church be not endangered by them.

That Man who suffers his Child to be baptized by a Popish Priest is not to be
received to the Lord's Supper but conditionally. It Is not lawful to Appeal unto
Ecclesiastic Judges.
XXII. And to another Case propounded by the same Brother, this answer was
given, That the Husband of an Unbelieving Wife was not excusable, unless that
to the utmost of his power, he had hindered his Child's being baptized by a
Popish Priest; and therefore inasmuch as he was wanting unto his Duty, he shall
not be received into Communion with the Church at the Lord's Table.

XXIII. Neither the present Bishops, nor their Officials, nor Archdeacons have
of right any Jurisdiction Civil or Ecclesiastical: Wherefore it is not lawful
for Believers to cite any one in any Case to Judgment before them, or to appear
in Person to answer unto their Citations without a Protestation against their
Power of Judging in Matters belonging unto Conscience: But as to Civil Causes,
because we be compelled oftentimes to appear before them that we may recover
our Right, which otherwise could never be obtained, we may Address ourselves
unto them, as we would unto a Thief that Robs upon the Highway, to obtain some
Kindness from him. However, it is more desirable, that every one would totally
forbear in such Matters.

XXIV. Such as will have their Banes published by the Parish Priests may do it,
because it is a thing merely Civil.

XXV. As for such who waiting upon their Masters, enter with them into the
Popish Churches, though they do not in the least bend their Knee; yet because
the Weak are scandalized, they shall be reproved: And whereas they do commonly
allege the Examples of Naaman and the Duke of Saxony, they shall be born
withal when they give as public Testimony and Evidence not to defile
themselves with, or consent unto that Idolatry which is committed in those
Temples whereinto they enter, as the Duke and Naaman did.

The End of the First Synod, May 28th, 1559.
Thus Subscribed in the Original, By Francis Morell, Moderator Elect, for and
in the Name of all the Deputies unto this Synod.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE II. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At POICTIERS, in the Year of
our LORD, 1560.

Contents of the Synod of Poictiers.
Chap. I. Synodical Officers chosen. Chap. II. A Memorial for the States of
France. Chap. III. Observations upon, and Emendations of the Church Discipline
in Nine Articles. Chap. IV. Sixteen new Canons added to the Discipline. Chap.
V. General Matters. Chap. VI. Particular Matters, in which Two and Thirty Cases
of Conscience are Resolved.


THE Synod of Poictiers. 1560. Synod II.

SYNOD II. General Matters.

Articles of the Second Synod held at Poictiers, the tenth Day of March, in the
Year of our Lord One thousand five hundred and sixty, The first Year of Charles
the Ninth.
a little before Easter, and in the first Year of the Reign of Charles the
Ninth.

CHAP. I.
Monsieur Le Bailleur Moderator. Monsieur Reland Scribe.
LE Bailleur chosen President.

Roland Scribe.

CHAP. II. A Memorial to be presented unto the States of FRANCE.
MEMORANDUM,
Extract out of the C. of the Fr. Chapter of L.
WHenas the States of France shall be assembled at the Day appointed, there
shall be this propounded unto the King's Majesty, to the Queen Mother, and to
the Princes of the Blood, That they cannot be in a Capacity to satisfy the
Requests tendered by the King of Navar at Orleance, till such time as there be
a lawful Counsel established for his Majesty: Because there will otherwise be
no Security for the performance of any Contracts and Ordinances that may pass
between the King and his Subjects, or between the Subjects themselves, as has
been at all times done, and by those of the last Assembly, who declared, That
none could be his Majesty's Privy-Counsellors, nor in his Council of State for
any of his Affairs, unless they had been appointed and approved according to
Law. For the Powers of those in being expired at the Death of the late King, so
that they are now only in the nature of a Committee, nor can they be reckoned
among those Counselors, whose Commission is irrevocable, as is theirs who are
Counselors in Sovereign Courts, and such like invested with ordinary
Jurisdiction: And at present his Majesty has no Will in Law, being a Minor,
nor has his Majesty constituted them of his Council; nor has the Queen Mother
any Power to make them such. Wherefore none other but the States of the Kingdom
can nominate unto the Princes of the Blood, those Persons whom they judge sit
to be Counselors of State: nor do the said States hereby in the least design
or intend to revoke the Power and Authority of their Highnesses the Princes of
the Blood; but only they desire this, That they would be pleased to take their
Advice in providing fit and worthy Persons, Persons of Quality and Honor, to
take upon them, as Privy-Counsellors, the Management of the Affairs of this
Kingdom, who shall be recommended to them, and chosen from among the Nobility
and Lawyers. Nor do the said Estates intend to propose or answer any thing till
such time as the said Council be thus constituted by the Wisdom of their
Highnesses the Princes of the Blood, and be confirmed according to Law. And
they do protest, That if any thing be attempted, or ordained by any others,
that they will Appeal from them unto the next Assembly of the States, which
shall be lawfully called, of the Nullity of their Powers and Actings. And
farther, they do require, That the Lord High Chancellor, L'Hospital, do forbear
acting in his Office as Chancellor, because he has not been nominated and
recommended by the Estates, nor thereupon chosen and appointed by their
Highnesses the Princes of the Blood.

CHAP. III. Observations, Corrections, and Additions to the Church Discipline,
couched and comprised in the Acts of the first National Synod of the Reformed
Churches of France, held at Paris, May 25th, 1659.
ARTICLE I. WHereas the Third Article of our Church Discipline began with these
words: [Every Minister shall come accompanied unto the Synods Provincial or
National, with one Elder or Deacon of their Churches or more; and they shall
all have their Votes in those Synods.] There shall be this added as is now
decreed, That Ministers who come unto the National Synod, may bring with them
one or two Elders or Deacons, but not more, chosen by their Consistory, who
shall have their, Votes in the said Synod: And the Elders and Deacons, or
others of that Church, where the Assembly shall be held, may be present at the
Debates, and in their order they may give in their Opinions, and Arguments upon
the Question debated, but two of them only shall have power of Voting to avoid
Confusion, nor shall any Deputy depart the Synod without leave first had from
the Moderator. ART. II. To the Fifth Article, which ran thus: A Minister
accompanied with one Elder or Deacon at least from every Church, shall meet
together at least once a Year in every Province; there shall be this added, And
they shall choose the most commodious Time and Place that may be for their
Meeting. ART. III. The Sixth Article was thus altered and amended: No Minister
shall be now elected by one only Minister or his Consistory, but with two or
three Ministers together with the Consistory of the vacant Church, or if it may
be the Provincial Synod, or by the Colloquy, which shall be called to sit as
much as may be in those places where Consistories be already instituted, and
unto this the Minister who is to be ordained, shall make his Addresses, and
from the Colloquy he shall be presented unto the People to be accepted by them;
but in case any one oppose his Admission, the Consistory shall judge hereof,
and if neither part consents, senteth, the whole shall be referred to the
Provincial Synod, which shall take cognizance as well of the Minister's
Justification as of his Reception, provided the Consistory and the greater part
of the People do approve and consent unto it. ART. IV. There shall be this
added to the Close of the Twelfth Article, Unless in in which
those places where the Colloquy is made up of six Ministers at least, case the
Colloquy may take cognizance of this Intruding Minister. ART. V. Forasmuch as
it is in no wise expedient that our People should bear Popish Preachers, or any
others who are not lawfully called to preach the Gospel in those Churches which
have a settled and standing Ministry; therefore all true Pastors are to hinder
as much as in them lies, the wandering of their People after them. ART. VI. And
whereas the Sixteenth Article begins thus: Such as teach unsound Doctrine, and
being admonished will not forbear; there shall be this Addition to it, And
those who shall disobey the godly Counsels of God's holy Word given them by the
Consistory. ART. VII. The Twenty Second and Twenty Third Articles of the said
National Synod of Paris speaking of Elders and Deacons, and of their Office,
were thus explained: The Elders Office as now used by us is not perpetual. And
the Deacons Office is to Collect and Distribute the Poors Moneys unto them, and
to the Prisoners, and to the Sick, and to Visit them in their Afflictions, and
to go from House to House, and to Catechize the Members of those Families: and
in case any one of these Deacons be fit and qualified, and promise to devote
himself for life to the Service of God in the Ministry of the Gospel, then he
may be chosen by the Pastor and Consistory to Catechize publicly according to
the Form received in our Churches, and this by way of Trial of their Gifts
only, without giving them any power of Administering the Holy Sacraments. ART.
VIII. Upon the Twenty Fourth Article it was said, That it did not belong to the
Office of Elders and Deacons to Catechize in public, and that their Office was
not perpetual; yet notwithstanding, neither the one nor other may depart from
it, without leave first had and obtained from the Church. ART. IX. Whereas the
Thirty Third Article begins thus: Marriages shall le propounded, after those
words Notary Public, shall be added, Or sufficient Attestation where there is
no Public Notary.
CHAP. IV. New Articles added unto the Church Discipline, framed in the First
Synod of PARIS, May 1559.
ART. X. IT is now unanimously concluded, That in the Close of every National
Synod, one certain particular Church shall be invested with full Power to call
within the Year a General Council of all the Provinces; in which there shall
meet one Minister, and one Elder or Deacon at least, for every Province; and
other Ministers have liberty to come if they please, and obtain leave from
their Churches for so doing: And this General Council shall determine of all
Church Matters, nor shall there be any Appeal admitted from it, excepting in
such Points as itself shall judge needful to be turned over to the next General
Council of all the Churches of this Kingdom, and of other Persons who may think
fit to come unto it. And it is left wholly to the Prudence of the General
Council in being, to ascertain the time when the next General Council shall be
Assembled, which shall be according as the necessity of our Churches Affairs
may require it. ART. XI. And all Consistories shall be admonished by their
Ministers, that they do strictly forbid all Dancing, Mummeries, and Tricks of
Jugglers. ART. XII. And whosoever is once denounced an Heretic or Schismatic,
shall also be declared such unto the other Churches, that they may be aware of
him. ART. XIII. Item, The Doctor in a Church may not Baptize, nor Administer
the Lord's Supper, unless he be ordained a Minister as well as Doctor at the
same time. ART. XIV. In every Church the Candidates for the Ministry shall
Preach upon Trial, and their Text shall be some certain Portion of God's holy
Word, and this as time and place may conveniently bear. ART. XV. Item, Whatever
shall be decreed by the Provincial Synods concerning the Suspension of Vagrant
Ministers, who intrude themselves into Churches, it shall be as valid and
effectual as if it had been ordained by the National Synod. ART. XVI. All the
Churches shall be admonished to Maintain and Relieve their Ministers in their
Necessities. And in case they should refuse a Competency unto their Pastors for
their Subsistence, and having been warned of this their Duty, it may be lawful
for those Pastors to remove from them, and to engage themselves unto the
Service of some other Church.
CHAP. V. General MATTERS.
ARTICLE I. IT is thought needful that in every Church there be a Consistory,
consisting of Ministers, Deacons and Elders, exercising their Offices, who when
Affairs so require may call in whom they think good to consult withal. ART. II.
The Consistories of the respective Churches shall be advised, that for time to
come they do better discharge their Duty toward their Ministers, by succouring
them in their Necessities, and raising Maintenance for them and their Families;
because Foreign Countries have been exceedingly scandalized at the Neglect and
Ingratitude of diverse Churches even in this particular. ART. III. No Matters
shall be propounded unto the National Synods, but such only as could not be
resolved in the Provincial, nor shall any Cases be brought unto them, but what
are of general concernment to all the Churches. ART. IV. When as Contention or
Debate may arise about Articles of Faith, In Articles of Faith, Doctrine or
Heresy, the Votes of Ministers, Deacons and Elders equal. But in Matters of
Government the Votes of all shall be vallid notwithstanding the inequality of
Numbers.
Doctrine or Heresy, which cannot be decided by Disputes either in the
National or Provincial Synods, the Deacons and Elders shall be reduced to an
equal number in voting with the Ministers. And in other Matters relating to the
Government of the Churches, although the Elders and Deacons exceed in number
the Ministers, yet their Suffrages shall be collected. ART. V. In the first
Constitution of a Church, he may be chosen for an Elder, who has formerly, or
does as yet hold Communion with the Idolatry of Rome, provided always that he
promise never to return more unto it. Art. VI. A Minister newly chosen shall
bring with him a Testimonial to be delivered into the hands of the Consistory
unto whom he is sent, which shall be kept by them very carefully. ART. VII.
This Order shall be observed by him who begins to Preach in Public, and to
gather a Church, viz. That as soon as possible he can, he shall take their
Names and Number who will submit unto Discipline, and who are to be owned as
Sheep of that Flock, that so all may not be received higly-pigly without
distinction unto the Lord's Table; and over these there shall be had a most
diligen^ Inspection. ART. VIII. All Violences and Injurious Words against the
Papists, No Injuries shall be offered unto the Popish Church Men.
as also against their Chaplains, Priests, and Monks shall not only be forborne,
but to the utmost of the Church's Power shall be suppressed. ART. IX. The
Church of Orleance is deputed to call the next National Synod within an Year,
or thereabout, and to give notice thereof unto all the Churches three Months
before of the Place, Day, and of all those difficult Questions which are to be
handled in it: And in order hereunto the other Churches shall within nine
Months send unto them those Difficulties which they would have debated and
decided by them.
CHAP. VI. Particular MATTERS.
An Abjuration before the Magistrate must be repaired publicly.
I. OUr Brother of Poictiers propounded this Case, Whether a Person having
Abjured the Gospel before a Judge and his Clerk, he be not bound to public
Penance? To which it was answered, That inasmuch as the Magistrate is a
public Person, the Abjuration done before him was public, and therefore it
must be repaired by a public Repentance.

Promises of Marriage by words de praesenti or de fufuturo, ought to be kept
inviolate.
II. Whether plain and sincere Promises of Marriage made by word de futuro, may
by consent of the Parties be dissolved? We answer, That such Promises whether
by words de proesenti or futuro, ought inviolably to be performed: for although
by those words de futuro, the Accomplishment be delaid, yet the Parties are
nevertheless bound and obliged before God to fulfill them.

Touching the Baptising of Papists Children, see Party. Matters, c. 3. of the
first Synod at Paris.
III. The Children of Popish Parents shall not be admitted unto Baptism in our
Reformed Churches, although they were presented by a believing Surety, unless
the Father or Mother will divest themselves of their Authority, and devolve it
upon the Surety, yiedling up and releasing to him their Right, and solemnly
engage that they will allow their Child to be Educated in the true Religion.

IV. Whether for Warning unto others such Persons may not be debarred the
Lord's Supper, whose Repentance is only Exterior? That may be ordered
according to the Grievousness of the Fact.

Whether we may lawfully serve ourselves of Papal Dispensations.
V. Whether a Monk who has quitted his Monastery, may make use of the Pope's
Dispensation, that so he may enter again upon his Estate? We answer, That the
Monk has done very ill in using such unjust Means whereby to recover his
Estate.

Whosoever makes a Trade of Dancing, after diverse Admonitions, shall be
excommunicated.
VI. Upon mature Deliberation it is decreed, That whosoever professes a Trade of
Dancing, and has been diverse times admonished, and does not quit it, shall be
excommunicated, and principally because of his Obstinacy and Rebellion.

VII. It being demanded, What Course should be taken with such who having been
a long time Members of the Church, yet do not Communicate at the Lord's Table,
lest they should be obliged to a total Renunciation of Idolatry. We answer,
That if after some convenient Time and Admonitions given them, they do not
reform this their neglect, they shall be ^nt off from all Communion with the
Church. They are to be Excommunicate who refuse to partake with the Church at
the Lord's Table. Whether a dying Child may be baptized.


VIII. As to that Question, Whether Baptism may be lawfully administered
extraordinarily where the Child is ready to die? It was resolved, That in those
places where the Word of God is ordinarily preached, the established Order
shall be observed; but in such places where Sermons are had only
extraordinarily, at an undue Hour, it is left to the Minister's Discretion to
accommodate themselves to the Infirmities of Parents, yet to be very careful
that they do not nourish them up in Superstition.

I^s not lawful to marry the Sister of the deceased Wise.
IX. May a Man lawfully Espouse the Sister of his deceased Wife, who has left
him Children begotten on her Body by him? To which was answered, That this is
in no wise lawful nor expedient, and the Church must see to it, that no such
Marriages be solemnized in it.

X. May a Woman kept by a Priest as his Concubine, although she protest he is
her Husband, and the Priest also secretly owns her for his Wife, yet before
Witnesses denies it, may she be continued in, or cut off from the Communion of
the Church? We answer, That she ought to use all Diligence in summoning the
Priest to get their Marriage celebrated, and blessed in the face of the Church;
and in case of refusal by the Priest, she shall separate herself from him; and
having given satisfactory Proofs of her Repentance, she shall be received into
the Fellowship of the Church.

Baptism by a private Person is null.
XI. What is to be done in case a Child has been baptized by a private Person?
It Is answered, That to avoid the Scandal given and taken, there shall be
Sermons preached for the better Information of the People, who shall also be
acquainted with the Nullity of such Baptism; and that this may be imprinted
upon their Hearts, the Child shall be brought publicly into the Church there
to receive the true Baptism.

XII. In a Church already constituted, may he be chosen for an Elder, who
through weakness has defiled himself with Idolatry, since his Admission into
Church Fellowship? It Is answered, In case his Fall has been lately committed,
and is fresh in memory, he ought not to be chosen.

May a Popish Priest administer the Lord's Supper, since we do not disannul his
Baptism.
XIII. May the Lord's Supper be received from a learned Popish Priest, since the
Baptism administered by him is not repeated? It Is answered, The Case is greatly
differing; for he that Communicates is of Age, come to Years of Discretion, and
capable of rejecting all the Impurities of his Ministration; whereas this
cannot be done by the baptized Infant: wherefore it is in nowise lawful to
receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper from the Hands of such a Man.

Whether they ought be rebaptized who had been baptized by a Monk.
XIV. Ought they to be rebaptized who were baptized by Monks? We answer, That
Baptism administered by one destitute of Commission and Calling is altogether
Null: wherefore inasmuch as Monks have no Call, neither from the Reformed
Churches nor elsewhere, such as have been baptized by them ought to be
rebaptized, unless the Monk have been received by a People to preach the Gospel
to them, in which case there is the appearance of a Call.

XV. Should a Minister pay so much Deference to his Consistory as to refuse
Preaching the Gospel to another People, when he can do it without prejudicing
his own Church? We answer, He ought to consider what is most expedient for the
Glory of God, and apply himself thereunto, and endeavor with his utmost power
to keep Peace and good Understanding with his Consistory. Whether they may be
informed against who have been guilty of a Crime punishable by the Laws.


XVI. May the Faithful turn Informers against such Church Members as are guilty
of Crimes punishable by the Laws? We answer, That as for scandalous Sins, and
dangerous to the Commonwealth, the Faithful ought to assist the Magistrate in
his Proceedings against the Impenitent, that persist in their Wickedness: but w
reiterated, the Censure of the Church shall be sufficient.

XVII. May Priests and beneficed Persons, yet now become Members of the Church,
and serving in the Ministry, receive the Revenue of their Cures? Priests though
Converts, and in the Ministry, may not receive a Penny of Revenue from their
Benefices. Whether a Man having espoused a Maid, and absents himself from her
three Years, upon his return her finds married, ought re-demand her.
We answer, No; by no means.

XVIII. A Man having made promise of Marriage to a certain Maid; upon
Discontent given him by her Parents, and to despite them, utters these words,
You shall not see me in three Years time; and accordingly he leaves the Country
for that time: Being returned at three Years end, he finds her married, Is he
bound in Conscience to re-demand her, or may he marry himself unto another? It
was answered, That if it appear unto the Consistory, that she had re-married
herself lightly, without having just and sufficient cause to believe her
Husband dead, because she has falsified her Faith plighted to him by joining
herself unto another, he is not bound to re-demand her: But it shall be
sufficient for him to desire the Magistrate, that he would declare him
Discharged of his Promise. But if through false Reports she had occasion to
believe him dead, and she would not have played the Harlot, nor have violated
her Faith given him, he must demand her, and be importunate that she be
restored to him.

May a Judge together with his Office exercise the Ministry.
XIX. As to that Case, whether a Judge may together with his Judicial Office
exercise the Ministry; it is answered, This is tolerated for a time, but not
approved, because the Ministry requires the whole Man, and therefore he ought
to lay down his Judicial Office.

Advocates may not plead in the Officials Court.
XX. Advocates of the Reformed Religion shall neither postulate nor plead in the
Officials Court, unless it be in such Cases where Right only is to be had and
obtained from them.

A Priest having sold his Cure, cannot be admitted to the Lord's Supper without
a Recognition. Proceedings against an Elder for Uncleanness.
XXI. A Priest having sold his Benefice, though he has not received the Moneys,
shall not be received unto the Lord's Table, unless he will protest never to
touch or take a Farthing of that Sum, and for the Fault committed by him in
selling his Benefice, he shall do Penance before the Consistory.

XXII. An Elder is accused of Adultery, which yet is denied by him: and
although there be no sufficient proof of his Crimes, yet because of the great
noise about it, and that the Woman protests the truth of it, that he has had
carnal Knowledge of her, and a Child by her, it is demanded, What Course is to
be taken with him? It was answered, That he should be suspended his Office, and
the Cognizance of the Fact should be referred to the Provincial Synod, to whose
Jurisdiction this Business does properly belong, and from whence there shall be
no Appeal.

How he is to be dealt with, who has had a Child by his Cousin-German.
XXIII. A Man having promised Marriage to the Cousin-Geman of his deceased Wife,
before his Marriage with her has carnally known her, and had a Child by her;
but now ho desires to be received into Communion with, and married in the
Church. It was answered, That forasmuch as the Marriage of Cousin-Germans is
not prohibited by the Word of God, although it be by our Magistrates, it is
advised, That they shall separate for some time, and make public Confession of
their Fault before the Church; and then the Minister reproving it, and
admonishing that none offend for the future in this manner, they shall be then
married.

Whether Women may present Children to Baptism.
XXIV. The Question being started, Whether Women might present Children unto
Baptism? It was answered, That this Custom should not be introduced. Yet
nothing hindered but that for some considerable Reasons it might be upon times
admitted.

XXV. It was thought meet to Advise the Churches, that in Matters of general
concern to them, they should send from every Province, upon a common Purse,
some particular Person, who follows the Court, to solicit the Affars of the
Churches in that Province, at Court: and all these Soliciters are to
communicate their Counsels together, that so they may be found unanimously
agreeing in those Suits which they prosecute. They shall also carry with them
the Confession of Faith, and consult of some means how to Present it unto the
King in the Name of all the Churches. Yet none of them shall pretend unto any
Superiority over another: Moreover, every of them shall be admonished by the
Province, who dispatched him with its Memoirs and Instructions, that in Matters
of importance they decline not in the least from them, without first imparting
it unto their Province, or in case of great and urgent Necessity, without
having took Advice from such Ministers as are then in Court, and the nearest
Church: Yet all these together shall have no Command nor Power over any Church,
but only send their Advice unto their respective Provinces; and the Provinces
upon those Advices shall take that care and course which they shall judge most
expedient.

XXVI. An Elder having collected Moneys to be given unto Priests or others,
that may sing Masses for the Dead, is he to be deposed from his Office? We
answer, Let him be first heard in the Consistory speak for himself, before they
proceed unto his Deposal.

XXVII. It was demanded, Whether the Word of God might be preached publicly,
without Authority from the Civil Magistrate? Answer was given, That there
should be special care had of the Time, and Public Peace, and above all that
there be no Tumults nor Sedition.

XXVIII. The Churches of Paris, Orleance, and Rouan are deputed by this present
Synod, to Protest against the Popish Council now held at Trent, and of the
Nullity of all its Decisions and Decrees; and their Protestation shall be done
either by Printed Books, or Oral Remonstrances unto the King's Majesty, or by
any other way, as they shall judge needful.

XXIX. It is now Decreed, That the Deputies of the Provinces when they go to
Court, shall take with them our Confession of Faith; and consult among
themselves how to present it unto His Majesty, together with the Petitions of
our Churches; and to this purpose they shall make Application unto those Lords,
who they know to be Favorers of our Cause and Religion.

XXX. Whereas diverse Persons do solicit this National Synod to supply the
Congregations, who have sent them hither, with Pastors; they are all answered,
That at present we are utterly unable to gratify them; and that therefore they
be advised to set up Propositions of the Word of God, and to take special care
of Educating hopeful young Men in Learning, in the Arts, Languages, and
Divinity, who may hereafter be employed in the Sacred Ministry; and they are
most humbly to Petition the Lord of the Harvest to send Laborers who may get
it in.

XXXI. May he be admitted to communicate in the Bread only at the Lord's Table,
who has an Antipathy against Wine? Yes, he may, provided that he do his utmost
to drink of the Cup; but in case he cannot, he shall make a Protestation of his
Antipathy.

The End of the Synod of Poictiers.
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE III. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ. IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At ORLEANCE, in the Year of
our LORD, 1562.

The Contents of this Synod.
Chap. I. A Moderator, and two Scribes chosen. Chap. II. General Matters. The
Synod to be called the General or National Church-Council of the Kingdom. Chap.
III. Discipline exercised upon Delinquents. Chap. IV. Various Matters; Cases of
Conscience, etc.


THE Synod of Orleance. 1562. Synod III.

SYNOD III.
Articles of the National Synod held at Orleance, the Twenty fifth Day of
April, in the Year One thousand five hundred sixty and two, after Easter, in
the Second Year of K. Charles IX.

CHAP. I.
Monsieur De Chandieu, was a very learned French Divine: His Works are, 1. The
Marks of the True Church. 2. De L'Vnique Sacrifice. 3. Contra les Traditions,
etc. in Follo. He was Lord of Chandieu, and Baron of Chabot, chosen by the
Church of Paris to be their Pastor at Twenty Years of Age, and Moderator of
this National Synod at Twenty three: A Gentleman of eminent Piety and Gravity.
He was desired by the King of Navary to be his Pastor; and upon his Death
removed to Geneva, where he was called to the Pastoral Office in that City, and
discharged it with very great fidelity. He never took any Wages for his Work in
the Ministry. He wrote himself, Sadeel; which is the Hebrew of Chandieu, The
Field of GOD. He died of an Hectic Fever, in the 57th Year of his Age, says
Mr. Du Thou; but he was mistaken, for it was in the 63d, Anno 1591. Melchior
Adams has writ his Life, among his Theolog. Exteri.
ANthony de Chandieu, Minister in the Church of Paris, chosen President. Robert
le Macon, Lord La Fountain, Minister in the Church of Orleance, and Peter
Sevin Deacon of the Church of Paris, chosen Scribes by General Consent of the
Deputies.

CHAP. II. General MATTERS.
This Synod bears the Name, and has the Authority of a General Council, by the
Advice of the Assembly.
I. THE Ministers and Elders Convocated in this Assembly of Orleance, for the
General Council of France, following the Determination of the last Synod held
at Poictiers, are of Opinion, That the present Assembly should have, and bear
the Name and Authority of the Council General of the Deputies of this Kingdom,
notwithstanding that several Deputies are absent, who shall be sufficiently
informed of Matters debated and resolved in this Council, together with the
Reasons for which, notwithstanding their absence, we were constrained to
proceed without them; all which shall be more largely declared in the next
General Council; where also shall be heard the Reasons of those absent
Deputies, for their Non-attendance, and their Arguments, if need be, against
the Decisions of the present Council.

Ministers of Princes and great Lords shall sign the Confession of Faith.
II. The Princes, and other great Lords following the Court, in case they would
have Churches instituted in their Houses, shall be desired to take such for
their Pastors, as are Ministers in Churches truly Reformed, bringing with them
sufficient Testimonials of their Lawful Call unto the Ministry; who shall
before their Admission, subscribe the Confession of Faith of the Churches in
this Kingdom, and our Church Discipline. And that the Preaching of the Gospel
may be more successful, the said Protestant Lords shall be requested, every one
of them, to erect a Consistory, There shall be a Consistory in their Houses.
composed of the Ministers and other Persons most eminent for Piety in their
said Family; by which Consistory all Scandals and Vices shall be suppressed, and
the Rules of Discipline observed. Moreover, those Ministers shall be present at
Provincial Synods, if it may possibly consist with their occasions: And that
this may be effected, the Council has ordained, That the Province in which the
Synod shall be assembled, shall be obliged to call them to it: And those
Ministers especially, or a part of them shall be there present, being deputed
by the rest unto the General Synods together with their Elders, who may inform
the said General or Provincial Synods, of their Lives and Conversation. And in
case the said Lords and Princes have diverse Houses, they shall be advertised,
None to have pre-eminence over another.
that none of their Ministers may pretend domination or pre-eminence over
another; according to that Article of our Church Discipline in this case
expressly provided. And when as the said Lords and Princes shall reside in those
Houses of theirs, where there is a Church already formed, we desire for the
preventing of all Divisions, that the Church in their Family would join itself
unto the Church of that place, and for that time to make but one Assembly.

III. Whenas the Lord's Supper shall be celebrated in the close of every Synod,
according to the Fourth Article of our Church Discipline, in the Acts of the
First National Synod: The said Sacrament shall not be administered privately to
the Ministers and Elders only deputed unto these Synods, but in public, and to
the whole Church, in which they be assembled.

A Bishop or Curate may not be received into the Ministry, till they have first
renounced all their Benefices, and long trial had of them.
IV. If it happen that a Bishop or Curate, desire to be promoted unto the
Ministry of the Gospel, they may not be received, till such time as they are
first admitted Members of the Church, renouncing all their Benefices, and other
Rights depending on the Church of Rome, professing also publicly Repentance
for their past sins, as they shall be ordered by the Consistory; and after long
trial and proof had of their Repentance, and Godly Conversation, they may be
chosen into the Ministry of the Gospel, according to the Canons of our
Church Discipline, 6 and 8. of the Synod of Paris, and 3. of Poictiers.

A Minister must be ordained to a particular Flock. Ministers may not quit
their Churches, nor join themselves unto any other, without the Authority of
the Provincial Synod, or without the Consent of the Neighbour-Ministers, or of
that Church unto which they were sent. Ministers preside by Turns. Provinces
may not be divided without the Advice of Synods.
V. Ministers shall not be ordained without assigning them to some particular
Flock. If they be sent any where for a certain time, that time being expired,
they shall return unto the Church from whence they parted, and be under her
power: And in case they were not accepted by the Church, unto which they were
sent, they shall be at liberty to return unto the Church from which they
parted, or else to wait the Determination of a Provincial Synod concerning
them; during which time they may not Preach, but by the Advice of two or three
Neighbour-Ministers. And this also shall be observed by them, who having leave
do depart their Churches, without ever being sent elsewhere, that so no
Ministers may be Vagrants, nor by their own Authority intrude themselves where
best likes them.

VI. Ministers shall preside by Turns in their Consistories and Synods, that so
none may presume to any superiority over another.

VII. The Division of Provinces, as they relate unto Provincial Synods, shall
remain in their first Estate: And in case the said Provinces have too great a
number of Churches, they may be divided according to the Advice of those
Provincial Synods, which shall consider the convenience of those Churches,
complaining of their too great distance, and recommend them to another Province
nearer to them, and more commodious for them; and giving them to this purpose
Letters of Dismission unto that Province, into which they shall be
incorporated. And as for Churches erected since the last Provincial Synods, and
others that may be hereafter constituted, they shall be obliged to join
themselves unto the nearest Province.

VIII. The Faithful shall be exhorted not to Scandalize the Papists by working
upon Holy Days. Works may not be done on Festivas. Spiritual Kindred not
comprised in the words of Affinity and Consanguinity. Rule for Marriages
dissolved by Adultery.
And as concerning that which they call Spiritual Kindred, this Council is of
Opinion, That it is not comprised nor understood by the words of Affinity and
Consanguinity in the last Edict of January: However, it advises, That the
Deputies of the Churches do, upon the first occasion presented to them,
endeavor to obtain the King's Declaration as to this and other matters.

IX. And as for Marriages dissolved for Adultery, it is now Ordained, That the
Churches may not marry those Persons without observing this Order: The wronged
Person, who has not offended, shall be bound to Prosecute at Law before the
Magistrate its offending Party, so long till that by his final Sentence he be
convicted; See the 53d Article of the Synod at Vert^til.
which said Sentence he shall produce before the Consistory, demanding leave
and permission to marry. Which Consistory having called the Parties concerned
before them, may grant them License to marry. But the offending Party shall not
be permitted Marriage till such time as the Offended be first married; and then
this Offender having done public Penance according to the Prudence of the
Consistory, may have License to marry. And this Canon shall be in force till
the Churches have greater Liberty. This shall hold also in the case of
Fornication after Promises of Marriage, where the Whoredom was not known unto
the espoused Party.

Such as cohabit before Marriage shall do public Penance, or before the
Consistory.
X. Whosoever shall have cohabited together as Man and Wife without having been
first lawfully and solemnly married, and now demand to be married, shall do
public Penance, or at least before the Consistory, according to its
Discretion: and then the Marriage may be celebrated, all requisite Solemnities
being first observed; excepting such Persons who shall have cohabited together
during the time of their Ignorance, and not despised contemptuously the Orders
of our Churches. And it shall hold also in their Case who have cohabited
together, where there was no Church constituted in the places of their abode:
These shall only be called into the Consistory, that their Marriage may be
ratified.

None may with a good Conscience advise the buying of an Office Judicial. Care
must be had about Modesty in Garments.
XI. It being expressly forbidden us by the Kings to purchase any Estate or
Office of Judicature; no Church shall advise the doing of it.

XII. The Churches shall admonish the Faithful of both Sexes to be very Modest
in their Apparel, and to retrench all Excesses and Superfluities, which are
originally committed in and about it: However, the Churches shall make no
Decrees concerning it, because it is a matter belonging to the Civil Magistrate;
but they shall cause the King's Ordinances relating hereunto diligently to be
observed. Nor may the Churches excommunicate any Man or Woman for using such
Habits and Fashions as are common and customary in this Kingdom.

Benefices may not be purchased for fear of countenancing Idolatry. No Pastor
may be deputed to Visit the Churches.
XIII. The Faisthful cannot with a good Conscience purchase any Benefices, nor
part of their Revenue, least by this means they should be entangled with some
kind of Idolatry, or in the least sort be Favorers of it.

XIV. Whereas some Ministers have been deputed by certain Provincial Synods to
visit the Churches; this Council does advise, That the Order formerly used to
discover Scandals, arising in the Churches being sufficient for that purpose,
is now again ratified and approved by this Council, and this newfound Office
is condemned, because of its dangerous Consequence.

No Prayers at the Grave.
XV. That all Superstition may be avoided, Ministers shall not use any Prayers
at the Interment of our Dead.

When the Discipline is to be read in the Consistories.
XVI. The Articles of our Ecclesiastical Discipline shall be read in the
Consistories of the Reformed Churches, at such times at least when as the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is administered.

XVII. The Churches shall suppress Usuries, and all manner of Extortions, as
much as lies in their Power: yet they may not condemn those who receive a
moderate Profit for the Loan of their Moneys, provided it be conformable to the
King's Ordinance, and the Rule of Charity. All Usury is sharply to be reproved.
See the Synod of Lions, p. 9.


XVIII. Priests, Monks, and other Ecclesiastics of the Romish Church, before
they be received unto Communion with us at the Lord's Supper, shall manifest
their Repentance before the Consistory, and for some particular causes, if the
Consistory do judge it requisite, they shall testify it before the whole
Assembly.

Concerning Monitories. See the Synod of Montpeillier, Observations on the
Discipline, Art. 24. The Faithful may do nothing that may favor Idolatry.
XIX. The Faithful may not take out Admonitions, or execute Excommunications
from the Church of Rome, nor obtain a Dispensation for Swearing from the
Official, or any other belonging unto that Church; and though there has been a
Recompense given, the Oath cannot hinder the Rescission of the Contract.

XX. Printers, Booksellers, Painters, and in general all the Faithful,
especially such as bear Office in the Church, shall be admonished, not to
exercise their Arts, Office, or Calling in or about the Superstitions of the
Romish Church, or their Dependencies, nor in the least to savor them: and the
Cognizance of particular Matters, that may happen hereupon, and their
Correction and Reformation shall belong unto the Consistories.

What Names may be given or rejected in Baptism.
XXI. Concerning Names, imposed upon Children, Ministers shall reject those
which yet remain of old Paganism; nor shall they give unto Infants such as are
attributed unto God in Holy Scripture; nor Names of Office, as Baptist, Angel,
Archangel: moreover, Parents and Sureties shall be admonished, as much as in
them lies, to take those which are approved by God's sacred Word.

XXII. Although a Church having lent a Minister for a time, and that expired,
may re-demand him back unto its Service; yet ought it to have respect unto the
Necessities of that Church where the said Minister has been sent, and shall
ordain herein what will make most for the Glory of God, and the Edification of
his Church.

XXIII. No Church shall marry any Persons without having first received ample
Information and Approbation of and about them.

XXIV. The Inconveniences which have already risen, and may in time to come
arise from the usual public Catechisings by Deacons having been heard and
considered, the Council has remitted the entire Decision of this Matter unto
the next National Synod; and in the mean while Exhorts those Churches which
have not received that Custom, never to admit it; and in other places where it
is practiced, the Churches are likewise exhorted to deal with their Deacons in
case they be fitted for it, to enter into the Ministry as soon as possible they
can.

One may be adjured in Consistory to declare the Truth. Booksellers may not
print any thing against Religion, nor may the Hawkers vent any scandalous ones.
XXV. The Faithful may by their Consistories be adjured to declare the Truth,
because this does not in the least derogate from the Authority of the Civil
Magistrate.

XXVI. Churches having Printers and Booksellers, shall carefully advise them to
print no Books concerning Religion, or the Discipline of the Church, before
they have communicated them unto their Consistories, because of the
Inconveniences that have arrived: Nor may many Booksellers or Hawkers sell
scandalous Books, nor may they in the sale of their Books take unto themselves
immoderate Gains.

CHAP. III. Discipline exercised upon Delinquents.
Particular Matters.
THe Council having heard and considered the Proceedings against James le
Fevre, his Excommunication, and the public Penance imposed on him by the
Authority of the last Provincial Synod held at Gien, and the Deportment of the
said Le Fevre in undergoing public Penance, together with its Consequences;
and having understood the whole of that Affair partly from the Relation of the
Brethren, and partly from his own Confession; the Council is of Opinion, That
the said James le Fevre has not well nor duly made that public Confession
which was enjoined him, nor given Testimony of his Repentance; and for this
cause the Excommunication denounced against him, shall abide in its full power
and vigor: and therefore the Council has declared, and does now again declare
him a Man incapable of serving the Church of God until such time as he shall
have first undergone public Penance in the Church of Bourges; in which Penance
shall be declared the Facts contained in the Article of the said Synod of Gien
touching this matter: And moreover, this shall be added, That by his Replies
and Murmurings he had shown himself Refractory and Disobedient to the Displine
of the Church: And whenas there shall be good Evidences of his Repentance, he
may be received into the Communion of the Lord's Supper.

II. As to those matters concerning David de Brosses, who calling himself
Minister of the Church of Melun; after hearing the Charge brought in against
him by the Deputies of the Church of Paris, who had opposed his Election,
because of the wicked Doctrine formerly broached by the said David, and because
of the Troubles and Schisms excited by him, particularly in the Church of
Melun, and because of his wicked and debauched Life, which has occasioned a
Process of Enormous Crimes to be commenced against him, and from which he has
not purged himself before the Consistory; the proofs of all these matters
having been laid down in Writing, read and diligently considered, diverse
Brethren, Ministers of God's Holy Word, having been heard also, both as to the
Doctrine published by the said David, and his Life and Conversation: The
Council judges the Opposition founded by the Church of Paris against him, to
be good and valid; the Election of the said David made by the Church of Melun
to be null, void, and of no force nor effect: And farthermore, the said Council
has declared, and does delare the said David incapable of the Ministry of the
Gospel, until such time as he shall have manifested his Innocence before a
National Synod of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom: Yea, moreover, the
said Council has excommunicated him out of the Church, until such time as he
shall have testified publicly his Repentance, by confessing publicly his Sin,
and that in the Church of Melun, which he has troubled by his Schism, in case
he return unto it, or in any Church unto which he would hereafter join himself;
and that Church having good Evidences and Testimonials of his Repentance, may
receive him unto Communion with it in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. But
and if the said David despising the present Decree of this Council, shall
hereafter intrude himself into any Church, and cause new Troubles and Divisions
in it; then this Council commands that Province, in which the said David shall
be, and reside, to Formalize itself against him: and upon this account the
Church of Paris shall be obliged to furnish the said Province with Proofs which
it has now, or may have had heretofore lying by against the said David; that
so he may be proceeded against in such a manner as shall be thought most
advisable for the Repose of the Church.

III. Touching the matter propounded by the Minister of Paris, the Council is
of Opinion, That the Marriage pretended to be broken by reason of Spiritual
Kindred, does remain firm, and in its full power: and therefore the second
Marriage which has since intervened is null, and these second married Persons
are excommunicated because of their Adulteries, until such time as they have
done public Penance, and shall have duly evidenced their Repentance.

IV. Whereas our Brother the Minister of Varennes, in Picardy, does usually
administer the Lord's Supper every Month, the Council does advise, That our
Brother of Mont-mejor do admonish him in the Council's Name, to follow the
general Practice of our Churches, that so there may be no Diversity among us,
and our Uniformity may be preserved.

V. The Churches are advertised, to take notice of a Fellow called Frederick
Thierry, formerly an Augustine Friar; as also of another called Marmande, as
being Vagrants.

VI. It Is the Judgment of this Council, That a Minister being employed in the
Church, may not ordinarily exercise any other Calling, nor receive Wages for
it. Our Brother of Britain moved this Question.

VII. As to that Book entitled, A Treatise of Christian Discipline and Polity;
composed and published by John Morelly, the Council judges, That as to the
Points concerning the Discipline of the Church, by which he pretends to condemn
and subvert the Order received in our Churches, sounded upon the Word of God,
that the said Book contains wicked Doctrine, and tends to the Confusion and
Dissipation of the Church; and therefore the said Council cautions the Faithful
to take heed of the aforesaid Doctrine.

VIII. A Remonstrance being made by the Church of Poictiers, about an Appeal
brought by the People of the City of Loudun, from a Decree of the Provincial
Synod of Poictou, held at Niort, concerning the Fact of Maturin Sibileau, the
said Appeal having been signified to the Church of Poictiers, on behalf of the
said People of Loudun; the Decrees both of the Provincial Synod held at
Partinay, and of the Synod of Niort, were read and considered. Whereupon this
present Council has, and does send back the Knowledge of the said Cause unto
the next Provincial Synod of Touraine, which by the Authority of this Council,
shall pass a Definitive Judgment upon these Persons, although they were absent,
provided their Absence be not out of Contumacy, and they had been duly
informed of the meeting of that Synod. And in the mean while it is ordained,
That both the said Sibileau, and the said People of Loudun, shall yield
Obedience to the Synod of Niort: And to this purpose the Church of Poictiers is
required to signify this present Sentence; and the Church of Tours is to
Assemble the said Provincial Synod.

IX. A Petition being presented by Madam Margaret de la Voirie, concerning a
Marriage pretended to have been contracted between her and the Noble William de
Schilhant: The Council has approved, and does approve of that Sentence given by
the Provincial Synod of Touraine, held at Man's the last October, by which the
said Marriage was declared Incestuous, because the said De Schilhant had
formerly espoused the Sister of the said Petitioner, whereunto it does enjoin
the said Lady quietly to submit, and to observe it with Repose and Tranquillity
of Conscience; moreover, the Council exhorts her to return unto her own Church,
there to make such Acknowledgment of her Fault, as the Consistory shall think
meet.

X. Having heard the Remonstrance made by our Brother the Deputy of Poictou,
concerning Peter Boulay, who had intruded himself into the Ministry of the
Church of Niort: The Council ratifies and approves the Determination of the
Provincial Synod held at Niort, by which the said Boulay was declared incapable
and insufficient to be chosen into the Ministry of the Gospel, until such time
as he had given proofs of his Sufficiency before the Provincial Synod of
Poictou. Moreover, this present Council has ordained, That this very Advice
shall be signified both unto the said Boulay, and to all those who do abett
him, by our Brethren La Forest and De Thire, who making report unto the next
approaching Synod of Poictou, of the Obedience or Rebellion of the said Boulay,
and his Abettors; a final Period shall be put unto this Affair according to the
Rules of our Church Discipline. And the Council leaves it to the Wisdom of the
next ^ynod, whether it be expedient for the common Edification, of the Church,
that our brother De la Fayole be not also removed from Niort.

XII. There shall be no Alteration made in that Article of our Discipline
touching the Choice of Ministers: and the Council has ordained, That In the
Book of Niort he is called M John Vi^ier.
Mr. John Rebitt do sign the Confession of Faith, and Articles of Discipline;
and moreover, does expressly forbid him so Teach in his Lectures Doctrine
contrary unto them; that so there may be no Disunion in the Church: and if he
should refuse Submission to this Advise of the Council, he shall be sent back
to the Consistory of that City, to be dealt withal according to the Canons of
our Church Discipline.

XII. As to that Question moved by our Brother of Orleance, the Council has,
and does leave it to the liberty of the respective Consistories, to judge of
those who may be sit to assist at the Examination of Candidates for the
Ministry, as may be most expedient for their Edification, yet so as they shall
not suffer any besides the Members of the said Consistory to examine them.

XIII. The Council judges it inconvenient to publish from the Pulpit, the
Articles of our Discipline; yet they may be given unto such as desire them by
the Consistories.

XIV. Whereas the Letters sent unto this present General Council of the
Reformed Churches of France, assembled at Orleance, by The Book of Niort calls
him Jod^^.
Maurice Joequin, are fraught with heavy Complaints against David Vivian,
Minister of Bourges, and diverse others of the Consistory of the said Church;
and because both Parties are absent, the said Council remands them unto the
next approaching Provincial Synod Berry, that there the said Vivian, and the
other Members of the Consistory may be dealt withal as is just and sitting. In
the mean while, considering the outrageous and profane Words mentioned in the
said Letters, and the Contumacy of the said Joequin, disdaining to come unto
this present Council, after he had been lawfully summoned, and the Threatenings
contained in his Answer; diverse of our Brethren having been heard on this
Affair, reporting his continual Rebellions against the Consistory of the said
Church, for near six Months together: The Council does enjoin the Consistory to
call the said Joequin before them, and to give him a very severe Reproof for
the sorementioned Crimes; and in case of his Contempt and continued Rebellion,
to depose him from his Office of Deacon without delay, as also to cut him off
from the Communion of the Church, and to denounce him publicly Excommunicate,
until such time as he shall have given public satisfactory Evidences of his
Repentance.

The End of the Synod of Orleance.
Thus Subscribed in the Original, Chandieu, Lord of La Roche, President of the
Council. Le Masson, Lord of La Fountain, Scribe of the Council.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE IV. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ. IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At LIONS, in the Year of our
LORD, 1563.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Moderator chosen. Chap. II. Of Synods, in Five Canons. Chap. III. Of
Consistories, in Five Canons. Chap. IV. Of Censures. Two Canons. Chap. V. Of
Ministers. Three Canons. Chap. VI. Of Baptism. Three Canons. Chap. VII. Of
Marriage. Four Canons. Chap. VIII. Of Interest for Money. Chap. IX. Of
Heretics, and Schismatics, and Vagrants. Chap. X. Of the Lord's Supper. Chap.
XI. General Matters. Chap. XII. A Case of Conscience about the Marriage of
Cousin-Germans. Chap. XIII. A Book Censured. See also Cap. 9. Chap. XIV.
Particular Matters. A Delinquent Minister Censured. Chap. XV. Advice to the
States of Languedoc. Chap. XVI. Very many curious Cases of Conscience resolved.
Chap. XVII. Memorials for the Service of the Churches. Chap. XVIII. Distinction
of the Provinces; Nine at first. Chap. XIX. Books Censured. Chap. XX. Vagrants
and Deposed Ministers Registered. Chap. XXI. Cases of Conscience, 1. About
Marriage. 2. Consistories. 3. Baptism. 4. And the Lord Supper, Resolved by Mr.
Calvin, and sent unto the National Synod of Lions, at their desire.
THE Synod of Lions. 1563. Synod IV.

SYNOD IV.
Articles concluded on in the National Synod held at Lions the tenth of August,
1563; in the third Year of the Reign of King Charles the Ninth.

CHAP. I.
Mr. Virett was a most Eloquent Preacher, and Calvin's Colleague at Geneva. See
the Catalogue of his Works in Du Verdier's Bibliotheque.
MR. Peter Virett, Minister in the Church of Lions, was chosen Modederator and
Scribe.

CHAP. II. Observations, Additions, and Annotations upon the Church Discipline.
Of SYNODS.
ARTICLE. I. AT the Opening of all National and Provincial Synods, the Canons
of our Church Discipline shall be read; and for the future, Provincial Synods
shall send unto the National, those Articles and Canons composed by them for
the Government of their respective Provinces, and all the Churches in their
District. ARTICLE. II. The Canons of the three former National Synods held at
Paris, Poictiers, and Orleance, shall be reduced into a Body: and this Order
shall constantly be observed at the end of every National Synod. ARTICLE. III.
Every Sentence of Excommunication confirmed by the Provincial Synod shall be
for the future stable and valid. IV. None other Articles of Discipline shall be
divulged, but those which were composed by common Consent of all the Deputies.
ARTICLE. V. The Deputies of the Provinces shall not depart from the National
Synod, without carrying home with them the Resolutions and Decrees of the
Synod, signed and attested by the Moderator and Scribe.
CHAP. III. Of CONSISTORIES.
ARTICLE. VI. Although it may be convenient in weighty and important Business of
the Church, to call into gether with the Consistory, some of the most discreet
and judicious Members of the Church, though they be not in actual Office in the
Consistory; yet nevertheless there ought not to be any other ordinary Assembly,
or Form of Council for Church Matters, excepting the Body of the Consistory,
which has been chosen and settled by the Church to these very ends and
purposes, who be Persons in public Offices, which the others are not. ARTICLE.
VII. A Civil Magistrate may be a Member of the Consistory, provided it do not
hinder him in the Exercise of his public Office, nor be prejudicial to the
Church. VIII. Professors of Divinity may be admitted Members of Consistories,
and deputed unto Synods. ARTICLE. IX. Consistories are left at liberty to
receive as Members into them, both Father and Son, and two Brothers at the same
time, unless there be something which may hinder it; of which the Provincial
Synod shall take Cognizance. ARTICLE. X. Although the Body of the Consistory
may advise, and admonish disagreeing Persons to terminate their Controversies
and Suits at Law; yet that very Consistory shall never consent to be the Judge
or Arbitrator of those Controversies betwixt Persons at Variance about worldly
Goods and Estates: but in case any Members of the Church, not of the
Consistory, shall be employed as Arbitrators in those Differences, then the
Members of the Consistory may assist them with their particular Advice, but
always in their private Capacities.
CHAP. IV. Concerning CENSVRES.
ARTICLE. XI. IF any Officer of our Reformed Churches shall have committed
Idolatry in times of Persecution, they shall be deposed from their Office, and
before they be admitted to communicate at the Lord's Table, they shall do
public Penance. And as for private Persons, who have offended in the same
manner, they also shall undergo such a Penance as the Consistory shall judge
meet. The whole to be managed with Christian Moderation according to the
Discipline. ARTICLE. XII. Ministers who scandalize the World by marrying basely
and unworthily, the Brethren in this Synod are all of one Mind and Advice, That
Consistories shall proceed against these Delinquents in such a manner, as may
prevent all Scandals for the future.
CHAP. V. Of MINISTERS.
ARTICLE. XIV. MInisters, though settled in one Church, may be lent unto other
Churches for some time for their Instruction and Comfort. And whenas our
Proposans are called unto the Ministry, they shall be settled in some one
particular Church, there constantly to remain; yet Synods shall have Power to
remove Ministers from one Place to another, for some certain Reasons and
Considerations, provided their Churches do consent unto it, according to the
Discipline. ARTICLE. XV. Here must be inserted the Fifth Canon of the National
Synod of Orleance, viz. Ministers shall not quit their Churches, nor join
themselves unto any other without the Authority of the Provincial Synod, or
consent of the Neighbour-Ministers, or that Church unto which they were sent.
XVI. Whenas a Minister is to be chosen, not only the Consistories of that
Church, but the Neighbour-Ministers also shall, with the Colloquy pursue that
Election.
CHAP. VI. Of BAPTISM.
ARTICLE. XVII. MInisters shall admonish their Flocks to compose themselves
withal possible Reverence at the Administration of both the Sacraments.
ARTICLE. XVIII. Women alone shall not be admitted to present Children unto
Baptism. ARTICLE. XIX. If a Person come to Years of Discretion was never
baptized, and shall desire that he may be admitted into the Church of God by
that Initial Sacrament, he shall not be baptized till he have made a public
Confession of his Faith, and evidence that he has a competent measure of
Understanding and Knowledge in the Articles of our Christian Religion.
CHAP. VII. Of MARRIAGES.
ARTICLE. XX. MInisters neither may nor shall marry such as are professed
Papists, till they have first renounced their Popish Religion, Superstition,
the Mass, and do make profession of our Faith, although the Husband himself
should be a Believer. ARTICLE. XXI. The Churches shall be informed not to
celebrate any Marriages of Strangers out of the places of their abode, without
sufficient Attestation from that Church unto which they do belong. ARTICLE.
XXII. The Banes shall be published on two Lord's Days in those places where
there be Weekly Sermons, and if in other places, then at such times as there is
Exhortation made, and common Prayers; yea, also they shall there be published
thrice within the Fortnight. It may be lawful, but not necessary, to publish
the Banes of Marriage in the Popish Temples. ARTICLE. XXIII. It Is the Judgment
of this Synod, That a Man having left his Wife because of Leprosy, and married
another, his first being yet alive, that this his Marriage is null before God;
and that therefore he may not be admitted to the Lord's Table, till he have
first separated from this second Wife, and repaired the Scandal he has given
the Church by public Penance.
CHAP. VIII. About Interests of Money.
ARTICLE. XXIV. ALL Persons shall carefully observe the King's Edicts, and the
Rules of Charity about Interest of Money.
CHAP. IX. About Vagrants, Heretics, and Schismatics.
ARTICLE. XXV. VAgrants, Heretics, and Schismatics shall be notified unto all
Churches, that they may be aware of them.
CHAP. X. Of the LORD's SVPPER.
THe Churches shall be informed, that it belongs only unto Ministers to give
the Cup in the Lord's Supper, if possible they can do it, and that all evil
Consequences may be avoided.

CHAP. XI. General MATTERS.
I. MInisters shall exhort their Churches to demean themselves with all
Reverence, during the Administration of Baptism.

II. Women only shall not be admitted to present Children unto Baptism.

III. This Synod explaining the Article of the foregoing Synod concerning
Baptism, says, That no Baptism shall be administered unless in public
Church-Meetings.

The Cup at the Lord's Supper must be given by the Ministers.
IV. The Churches shall be informed, That it belongs only unto Ministers to give
the Cup at the Lord's Table, and to obviate all evil Consequences, it be
possible none else shall deliver it.

V. All Vagrants, Heretics, and Schismatics shall be denounced such by Name
unto the Churches, that they may beware of them.

VI. Consistories shall be directed to call none before them, unless there be
good and sufficient ground for it.

VII. Professors that are Ministers, may be Members of Consistories and Synods.

To remove and change Ministers, the Power is vested in the Synods.
VIII. Ministers, though already fixed in one Church, may yet be lent unto another
for its Edification for some time. And when as our Candidates shall be called
into the Ministry, they shall have a certain Flock assigned to them, among whom
they shall have their constant abode. The Power of removing Ministers for
certain considerations remaining in the Synods, with the consent of their
Churches, according to the Discipline.

Excommunication (...) Synod (...) of (...) Appeal. Whole Consistories ^^y not
be Arbitrators.
All Sentences of Excommunication ratified by Provincial Synods, shall for the
future be confirmed, and no Appeal from them.

X. The Bodies of Consistories shall never be chosen Arbiters, but only some
particular Members from among them instead of the whole.

XI. None other Articles of the Church Discipline shall be divulged, but such
as have been resolved on unanimously by all the Deputies in the National Synod.

CHAP. XII. A Case of CONSCIENCE.
XII. MAy a Man marry his Cousin-German, or she that is one degree removed?
This Synod is of Opinion, That care be taken of giving Scandal in such a case,
and the Offense being removed, we know nothing to the contrary but that such
Persons may marry, for they do not sin against any Prohibition of God.

XIII. At the openings of all Synods Provincial or National, all the Articles
of the Discipline shall be read: And for time to come, Provincial Synods shall
s^^d unto the General Assemblies the Articles decreed by them, as well such a^
concern the Government of their own Province, The Book of Discipline to be read
at the beginning of all Synods.
as those others which concern the generality of the Churches.

XIV. Consistories have full liberty to receive Father and Son, or two Brothers
at the same time into Office among them, unless there be some just cause which
may hinder it, whereof the Provincial Synod shall take Cognizance.

CHAP. XIII. A BOOK Censured.
XV. HAving seen and read a certain Book entitled, A Declaration of the
Mystery and Secret of God, demonstrated by two Pictures; as also another Book
in Manuscript, entitled, The Mirror of Antichrist; This Assembly declares the
said Books to be full of Blasphemies, Heresies, and of vain and scandalous
Discourses, and therefore advises the Faithful to beware of them; and their
Author is declared unworthy of the Ministry, and of any other Office in the
Church; and the Books shall be put into the hands of the Ministers of the
Classis of Nismes, who shall tender them unto their suspected Author, and if he
avow them for his own, then to depose him from all Office, if he bear any in
the Church, and to proceed farther against him, as they shall judge meet.

CHAP. XIV. Particular MATTERS.
James Pinus deposed from the Ministry for being a Vagrant, etc.
JAmes Pinus is declared unworthy of the Ministry, and the Sentence of the
Synod of Niort, condemning him for diverse Crimes from which he has never
purged himself, is confirmed; in particular, 1. That he intruded himself into
the Ministry without a Call. 2. For that since he has continued in it
notwithstanding the Remonstrances made him, and his Promises to desist, which
he made unto the National Synod of Poictiers: Moreover, he shall be bound to
reconcile himself unto the Churches of Geneva and Lausanna.

And for what concerns our Brother De Resse, he shall be exhorted by Letters to
continue in his Ministry, and to renounce Pleading at the Bar, and other
Businesses which take him off from his Calling: and in case of his Rebellion he
shall be forthwith deposed, and cut off from Communion with the Church. And the
Church of Talmont is admonished to live in Concord with the other Churches.

CHAP. XV.
UPon those Remonstrances presented by the States of Languedoc unto this Synod,
there was this Advice given: As to the first and second Articles concerning
Ministers, Letters shall be written unto the Provincial Synod of Languedoc,
exhorting the Ministers of that Province to watch mutually over one another: as
also other Letters unto the States, acquainting them, That because we cannot
learn neither by Letter nor word of Mouth from their Deputy, who those
Ministers accused of Negligence be, we will write in general concerning it unto
the Provincial Synod of Languedoc. And as to the third and fourth Articles,
this shall be inserted in the Letters to our Brethren of Languedoc, That they
do their endeavor to advance the Kingdom of God, as much as in them lies, not
only at home in their own Churches, but if it may be done without incommoding
their own Flocks, abroad also. And in the Letters to the Estates, it shall be
remonstrated, That it is the Minister's Office to regulate them and their
Flocks according to the Word of God, and the Church's Discipline; and that it
is the Duty of Magistrates to watch over all Orders and Degrees of Men, and in
particular over Ministers, that they walk uprightly in their Calling, and in
case Ministers be deficient and faulty, that they cause them to be admonished
and censured according to the Discipline by Classes and Synods: Not hereby
understanding such Crimes as are punishable by the Laws, the Cognizance whereof
does properly appertain unto the Civil Magistrate.

As to the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth Articles, the Ministers of
Languedoc shall be informed by our Letters to them, that in case of lesser,
slighter, private and domestic Injuries, it shall be sufficient if a Member of
the Consistory do secretly admonish the Offender: But in case of public and
scandalous Offenses, as circumstances may be, those who implead others at Law
may be called into the Consistory, unless besides their Lawsuit they had
committed some other and more scandalous Crime: nevertheless, they shall by
Exhortations and other means endeavor to compromise and reconcile the litigant
Parties. And in our Letter to the States, this Clause shall be insertted, That
though in Law-sence a Crime is then called public when it merits exemplary
Punishment, yet we account that a public Crime, which coming to the knowledge
of the World, or of many does beget Scandal or evil Example; so, that all
circumstances considered, nothing hinders but that these public Crimes may be
censured and corrected.

As to the ninth, tenth and eleventh Articles, by which the Estates demand
Obedience to be yielded unto Magistrates, and in particular that they be called
into Consistories, Classes, and Synods, provided this be communicated unto both
the Parties Plaintiff and Defendant, this Council does freely grant it.

As to the twelfth and thirteenth Articles, we answer, That in the Civil
Government the Magistrates Ordinances ought to be obeyed: And in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, Ministers shall have the ordering of them in conjunction with Synods.
And when a Common concern does offer itself to be discussed, as for instance,
if this Question shall be propounded, How many Ministers ought to be
established in a City? they shall consult together, and ordain about it by
joint Suffrages.

Lastly, as to the fourteenth Article, it is answered, That Ministers may be
removed from one Church unto another; which shall be debated and resolved on by
the Provincial Synods, according to the Tenor of the sixteenth Article of our
Discipline.

CHAP. XVI. Cases of CONSCIENCE.
III. THe Brethren of Normandy requesting, that the eighteenth Article of the
Synod of Paris might be altered, where it was ordained, That no beneficed
Persons, or other suchlike, should be received into the Ministry without long
Experience had both of their Life and Doctrine; this present Assembly decrees,
That the Article shall remain entire and in its full power, without any
Relaxation or Alteration, and therefore that it be more diligently observed.

Beneficed Persons employing them to good and pious Uses, and not partaking in
Idolatry, shall not be kept off from the LORD's Table.
IV. Such as hold Church Lands, provided they do not pollute themselves in any
manner with Idolatry, and do their endeavor to root out all Superstition, at
least that there be none committed by their consent and authority; and also
protesting that they disclaim all Right that they might have from the Pope, if
also those Lands and Goods be visibly employed in holy and lawful Uses,
forasmuch as the King grants Liberty of Conscience to enjoy them; these Persons
shall not be refused Communion at the Lord's Table.

V. It having been proposed, Whether Maids above ten Years old, should answer
the public Catechism. This matter is left to the Prudence of the respective
Consistories, who shall act herein as will make most for Edification.

No other Council in the Church but the Consistory.
VI. The Church of Issoudun demanding. Whether besides the Consistory, it were
not needful that the Church should have a Council to determinate all matters of
difference arising in it. After diligent consideration, this Synod judges,
That it is the Duty of Consistories to determine all Church Affairs, and that
it is needless on this account to have an other standing Council besides those
who are Officers in it.

VII. The Brethren of Nismes having desired our Advice about Morning and
Evening Prayers; this Assembly dismisseth it over unto the Provincial Synods.

Magistrates may b^^r office in the ^onsistory.
VIII. Our Brethren of Normandy having propounded this case, Whether a
Magistrate might be called into Office by the Consistory? This Assembly
resolves, it may be done, provided that the exercise of the one does not
hinder the other.

In Usuries the Rule of Charity, See the Synod of Or^^^^^^, Art. 6.
(...)-Germ^ns r^m^ved, pr^^^ded there ^e (...) Sea (...) may ma^ry. (...)
m^^^^^ the ^e^^^d time, and (...) fi^^^ Wif^ ^e^^^se o^ her (...), this
M^^^^^^e is (...) the (...) of the M^nister (...) ^^v^al or not Crimes
dis^^ve^ed to him in Confess^^n.
IX. Concerning Interest of Money, it is advised, That the King's Edicts herein
shall be universally observed, as also the Rule of Charity.

X. The Minister of Normandy demanding, Whether a Cousin-German removed, might
be married? The Synod answers, That if there be no Scandal taken by such a
Marriage, it may be done.

XI. It Is the joint Opinion of all the Brethren, That a second Marriage
contracted by him who had forsook his Wife because of Leprosy, is null; and
therefore till he be separated from his second Wife, and the Scandal given by
him be repaired, he shall not be admitted unto the LORD's Table.

XII. It Is lawful, though not necessary for Protestants to publish their Banes
of Marriage in Popish Temples.

XIII. A Minister demanding our Advice, Whether a Person begging his advice and
comfort under inward Perplexities, and confessing to him secretly great Crimes,
he ought to discover them unto the Magistrate? We answer, That it is left
wholly to the conscience of the Minister, who must prudently consider all
circumstances.

XIV. Ministers contracting unfitting Marriages which beget Scandal, the
Brethren in this Synod do judge, that Consistories shall proceed in such a
manner against these Delinquents by Church Censures, that all occasion of
Scandal for the future be prevented.

XV. To the case, Whether a Promise made by a Maid at the Age of eleven, with
the consent of her Parents, to which before twelve she had renounced, Ministers
contracting unfitting Marriages to be severely censured. Promises of Marriage
made by Minors, though with the consent of Parents, are null. A Papist maynot
be married unless he or she do renounce the Mass. Renters of Benefices where
Idolatry is shall within a limited time be excommucate. He that continues and
hardens himself in his sins shall be excommunicate.
might be dissolved? This answer was given, That such a Promise was Null.

XVI. It being moved, Whether Ministers might marry them who were downright
Papists? The Synod answers, That it may not be done, unless they do positively
renounce the Mass.

XVII. Gentlemen or other renting Benefices from Priests, where Idolatry is not
as yet purged, shall be seriously admonished to abstain from so doing within a
certain fixed time; and in case of final Disobedience to this Admonition, they
shall be cut off from Communion at the Lord's Table.

XVIII. As to the difficulty propounded by our Brethren of Nismes, Whether a
Minister may with a good Conscience leave his Church, when his Wife, after that
he has done his Duty in order to her Conversion, will not live with him? It is
answered, That all circumstances considered, he shall renew his Endeavors for
the Conversion of his Wife, and in the mean while he shall have his liberty to
resume again his Charge, as soon as he shall have reduced his Wife unto her
Duty.

XIX. Our Brother of Xaintes having demanded what is to be done in this case, A
Man having done public Penance in the Church for diverse Faults committed by
him, yet again and again returns unto the same Sins, ought he to be
excommunicated or not? Our Judgment is, because he has not truly hearkened
unto the Church, that he be excommunicate.

XX. As to that Question, Whether the Promises of Marriage may be given before
a Priest, because the Mother will have her Daughter contracted by a Priest? It
is answered, Forasmuch as the presence of the Priest is only required that the
Espousals should be performed by him, it is our Advice, that it ought not to be
done.

XXI. A young Man promises Marriage unto a Maid, with this express Condition
inserted in the Contract, That he promises Marriage, provided the Maid
consents to be married in the Reformed Church; the Maid promises and consents
for a time; afterward seeing the Troubles arising for Religion, she will not
yield unto it, and says farther, That she will never have this young Man. It Is
demanded, Whether he is hereby freed from his Promise? We answer, The young Man
shall endeavor by his diligent Solicitations to persuade her; and it is left
to the prudence of the Consistory to judge of the Diligences used by him, and
accordingly to proceed to a Declaration of the Nullity of the Marriage, if need
be.

XXII. Such as bearing Office in the Reformed Church having in times of
Persecution fallen into Idolatry shall be deposed from their said Office, and
before they be again received unto the Lord's Table shall undergo public
Penance. And if private Persons are guilty of the same Crime, they shall do the
same Penance enjoined them by the Consistory; all which shall be performed with
Christian Charity and due Moderation, according to the Rules of our
Ecclesiastical Discipline.

XXIII. The case being moved, Whether it be sufficient that the Fornication of
a Man be proved by his Harlot, and the Testimony of some worthy Person, who
shall depose that he heard the Fornicator acknowledge his Crime, and that those
belonging to the House do testify of theit frequenting each others company?
It Is our Counsel, That the Consistory of the Church would exhort the Accused to
confess the Truth, confronting him, the Harlot, and Witnesses together, and to
examine well all Circumstances: And if he persist in his Denial, yet to suspend
him from the Lord's Supper, provided the Witness be an honest Person, and
without reproach.

XXIV. The Churches shall be advertised, not to celebrate the Marriage of
strange Persons, who dwell not in the places where those Marriages are to be
solemnized, unless they bring Certificates from those Churches whereunto they
do belong. A Pagan Maid must not be baptized till she have been well instructed
in the Christian Religion.


XXV. A Maid brought from among Salvages, and not instructed in the Principles
of Christian Religion, ought not to be baptized before she can give a rational
account of her Faith, and that by a public Confession.

XXVI. In the Province of Berry, whenas over and above the Synodical Assemblies
and Propositions, (to exercise the Gifts of young unordained Preachers in order
to their Approbation for the Ministry) there shall be other Assemblies
specially convened to consult about necessary and emergent Affairs, they shall
be held by the common Agreement of the Churches Consistories, and not by any
other Authority, that so that Article of our Discipline may not be thwarted,
which expressly ordains, that no Church shall usurp any Authority over another.

XXVII. The Minister of Memiot desiring our Judgment in this case, A Gentleman
caused his Child to be baptized by a Priest, who continues practicing his
Idolatry: Shall this Child be rebaptized or not? It Is answered in the Negative.

XXVIII. The Minister of Chasteneauef and Mazon desired Resolution unto this
case, Whether he may with a good Conscience lend another his Name, that under
the covert thereof he might enjoy the Profits of a certain Benefice? We answer,
That he ought not to do it in any wise.

XXIX. Forasmuch as the Minister of New castle, in Normandy, has of his own
accord forsaken his Ministry, induced thereunto by the persuasions of his Wife,
as he protested before the Colloquy at Diep, it is resolved, that the Brethren
Ministers of that Colloquy shall censure him according to his Deservings, and
put him in the Catalogue of Desertors.

A Man may not marry his Brother's Widow.
XXX. It being demanded, Whether it were only a Prohibition of Humane Laws, That
the Widow of the deceased Brother might not be married to his surviving
Brother? The Council answered, That such Marriages were also forbidden by the
Word of God: And though under the Law of Moses it was ordained, That when the
elder Brother died childless, the younger Brother should raise up Seed unto
him; yet this was only a temporary Law to God's Ancient Israel, and intended
only for the preservation and distinction of their Tribes.

XXXI. One having renounced his Benefices, demands advice, What he shall do
with his Writings, Deeds, and other Evidences belonging unto the Lands and
Revenues of those his said Benefices. We advise him to discharge himself by due
course of Law, according to the Ordinance of the Magistrate: and he shall
cancel his Letters of Presentation.

XXXII. A certain Lady craves our Advice, Whether she may claim her Right and
Interests in a Gentleman, who had promised her Marriage by words de praesenti,
all usual Solemnities halving been observed, who yet notwithstanding now
refuses to accomplish the said Marriage, pretending Inequality of Fortune, and
Difference of Religion, and that for these reasons he cannot comply with her.
We advise that before she insist on those things which are consecutive to the
interruption and separation of the Marriage, as the demanding of her Rights,
and other matters of that nature from him, that she procure the accomplishment
of the Marriage according to his Promise.

XXXIII. In some Places and Temples where the Word of God is preached, the
Bells being rung to give notice of it, is it expedient, that Men and Women
meeting together for that purpose in a certain Chamber of those Temples, should
answer Questions propounded to them from the Books, Chapters, and Verses of the
Holy Bible by the Minister, and give each of them their Scence and
Interpretation of those Texts of Scripture? It was answered, That this course
was evil and of dangerous consequence, and that the Minister of Croissil did
very well to oppose himself against it. And the Churches are advised not to
bring in any such Practice.

Candidates must not be sent up and down, to uncertain places there to preach.
XXXIV. Those of Caen send their Candidates abroad to preach the Word, whence
diverse Scandals have ensued, because some of them have been Persons of ill
Life, and it was contrary to what had been ordained at Rouen: However, the
Reasons urged by them are these, That by the Council of Poictiers, Deacons were
permitted to Catechize; and they could not suddenly lay hands on any, being as
yet Novices, and also because they sent them unto such places as had not
ability to maintain a Minister: Is this Action of theirs worthy of
Reprehension? We answer, That in the National Synod of Poictiers Deacons were
indeed permitted Catechizing, but it was when they were fully resolved to serve
in the Ministry of the Gospel; and also by reason of the difference of Opinions
hereabout this very matter had been remitted unto this present Council: But
because there was not at that time any thing spoken about Propositions, and
that they had been warned of this by the Provincial Synod of Rouen, not to
indulge unto this practice any more, they shall therefore be censured.

An enforced Promise of Marriage is null.
XXXV. A Minister of Caen did so very much importune a Maid that she gave him
promise of Marriage, and promises to espouse him on this Condition, When the
Mass shall be no more used in the City of Caen; whereupon the Minister gives
her certain Rings, and a while after demands the accomplishment of their
Marriage. But the Maid will not consent, and says, That her Father did by
Threatenings constrain her to make those Promises; which is also acknowledged by
the Father. The Provincial Synod of Caen declared the Nullity of that Promise,
because it had been extorted by force, and had it been performed, there would
have arisen great Scandal: For sometime he acquiesceth in the Sentence of that
Synod, and receives again his Rings: But now, as he says, being pressed to it
by his conscience, he believes himself bound unto her, and therefore makes his
Appeal unto this present Synod, who having seen the causes of this Appeal,
orders, That he submit himself to the Direction of the Provincial Synod of
Caen, which they judge to be most equitable. And the Provincial Synod of Caen
also is enjoined to inquire into the Call and Life of this Minister, and in
special to discover the means used by him for the obtaining this pretended
Promise, and to take knowledge of it, that he may be suspended and deposed if
so be necessity do require it.

XXXVI. A Gentleman troubles the Church, and wills that his Wife come up
immediately after him unto the Lord's Table before any of the Men: And although
it had been ordained by the Synod of Caen, That he should follow the general
practice of the Churches; yet nevertheless he will not conform thereunto. This
Assembly orders, a Letter in their Name to be sent him, advising him to walk
with more Humility.

XXXVII. It Is demanded, Whether those words, You neither need me nor my Goods;
uttered upon speech of Marriage, do imply a Promise? This Synod answers
negatively.

XXXVIII. A Minister of Limonsin, whose Conversation was otherwise blameless,
by the Threats of Enemies, writ to the Queen Mother, That he never consented to
the taking up of Arms, although he had consented and contributed thereunto:
Item, That he promised to preach no more until such time as the King should
License him, and that he had promise made him to enjoy his Conscience, living
quietly in his own House. Since being convinced of his Sin, he did freely of
his own accord, without having been solicited thereunto, make public
Confession of it before the whole Congregation, has lived very holily, yea,
with the rare Testimony of a Very great Repentance; and in particular he did
acknowledge his Offense upon a solemn Sacrament-day in the presence of all the
Ministers of the Country, insomuch that all the Faithful departed exceedingly
edified by his Example: He has also for a long time together forborne the
exercise of his Office. It Is demanded, Whether this be a sufficient Penance,
and he may enter again upon his Charge, the People earnestly desiring it? We
are of Opinion that this is sufficient: However, he shall once again write unto
D'Escars, who was the cause of his Fall, to give him to understand his
Repentance* if so be the Consistory and Neighbour-Ministers think it fitting;
and he is entreated, if he can, to acquaint the Queen with it. And in case of
Scandal taken against his Church for this Action, it is left to the Prudence of
the Provincial Synod of Lymousin to remove him unto some other place.

The Lord's Supper m y nor be given to an Abbess who retains the Revenues of
her Abbey.
XXXIX. The Church of Vivaretz demand, Whether they may without wronging their
consciences give the Sacrament unto an Abbess, who having quitted all Idolatry,
does notwithstanding retain the Revenues of her Abbey, and not employ them to
their right uses? It Is answered, That they may not admit her to the Lord's
Table.

XL. A Minister being sound insufficient, who was put into the Ministry without
Examination, what is to be done with him, especially since a Multitude do
desire to have him? It Is advised, That he go and follow his Studies elsewhere
for some time.

XLI. Unto the Question, Whether Marriage may be performed in his private
House, who is sick of a Disease, which hinders him from going abroad? It is
answered, That it is not lawful, because though he cannot go, yet he may be
carried unto the Church.

XLII. A young Man promises Marriage unto a Maid, but oftentimes protests
before her Parents and diverse others, That he will not take her in Marriage, if
she be not a Virgin. They do all give him assurances of the Virginity of their
Daughter, and she also herself avows it: yet it comes to light, that eight
Years before she had a Child. It Is demanded, Whether he be freed from his
Promises, because he says he is cheated by them. We answer, That in case the
Whoredom is manifest, and he never had carnal Knowledge of her, we are of
Opinion that he is free, according to our former Decision on the same Article.

XLIII. A certain Abbot in Lymousin professes himself a Doctor and Preacher:
the People hear him gladly; nevertheless he maintains his Monks, goes in Person
unto the Mass, and does not join himself unto a Reformed Church. It Is queried,
Whether the People may be permitted to hear him; and whether those Ministers
who exhorted him to read his Lectures, have done well, and those also who have
assisted at his French Sermons? It Is answered, That those Ministers who have
been present at his Sermons, or exhorted the People to become his Hearers, or
him to Teach, among whom there is one called Provost, ought all of them to be
grievously censured: And the People shall be admonished, according to the Rules
of our Discipline, to content themselves with their own Pastors; and that my
Lord Abbot be desired to forbear his Lectures, and to subject himself unto the
Order of God's Church, and tarry till he be called unto such an Office.

XLIV. Monsieur Pelot craved advice in this weighty Case: A Marriage had been
contracted between a Youth of sufficient Age, and a Maid of Thirteen, with
mutual content of the Parties and their Parents: The Banes were published in
the Church; and just as the Minister would have married them, the Maid sat
down, and would neither rise nor stand up. But after Sermon, having been
admonished of her Duty, she yields unto it, and they were married in the
Church, and lay together, yet without any carnal Cohabitation. She upon second
thoughts says, the Marriage is null; and separating from her Husband, protests
she is not bound to own him for hers in that relation, nor to cleave unto him;
and requires to be divorced from him; whereunto the Man would freely and
willingly consent, provided it might be done with a good conscience. This
Assembly declares, That it is a good Marriage, true and indissolvable; and the
Parties must be exhorted in the Name of God, to carry themselves as true
married Persons. And Monsieur du Verges, and the Consistory of Montlimart,
where the Mother which hinders the Marriage dwells, are desired to do their
endeavor, that it may be perfected.

XLV. Monsieur Vaisse propounds, That Promises of Marriage had been made by two
Persons at Marnejoux, both of sufficient Age, and with consent of Parties; the
Promises were ratified and confirmed the second time, and that by Contract
passed through the hands of a Public Notary: The young Woman refuses to
accomplish the Marriage, urging for herself, that she was compelled by her
Parents to make such Promises; though the contrary is evident from the very
words of her Parents: she further alleges, That her Party's Breath is very
stinking. The Marriage is declared indissolvable.

XLVI. A Man having contracted Marriage with a Maid by consent of Parents,
makes other Promises unto another Maid, and passes Contract of this also, of
which he is afterward very penitent, and persisteth in his first Promise. By
consent of the Consistory and Magistrate of the Place, it is concluded the first
Promise shall hold. Nevertheless when the Banes are published, the Father of
the second Maid forbids them. May the Minister proceed to celebrate and bless
this Marriage notwithstanding the old Man's Prohibition? It is concluded, that
forasmuch as the Father of the second Maid opposes it only out of Interest,
and for a sum of Money, which he claims due unto him, the Minister may do his
Office in marrying them.

XLVII. Monsieur de Lestany proposes, Whether a Minister who was formerly a
Popish Priest, and has none other Estate nor Income but what belongs unto his
Cure, which may amount to about threescore and five Livres yearly, and yet he
cannot recover that sorry Pittance, but by compelling his Debtors to pay him
before the Magistrate; and the Magistrate also will not condemn them to
Satisfaction, unless he plead in the Name of Priest and Curate. Is it lawful
for him so to do? No; by no means.

XLVIII. An Abbot come to the knowledge of the Gospel, who has suppressed all
Idolatry, burnt his Deeds and Evidences, provided for his Monks, and not
suffered for six Years last past Mass to be sung in his Abbey, nor done any
other Exercise of the Popish Worship, but ever carried himself faithfully, and
born Arms in Defense of the Gospel; ought such an one to be admitted to the
Lord's Table? Yes, undoubtedly.

XLIX. A Man by the consent of her Father, and of his betrothed Wife, has
carnal Knowledge of her before Marriage: He is afterward by false Witnesses
accused of Fornication, and condemned for falsifying the King's Coin, and
executed in Effigy: He demands that his Marriage may be celebrated in the
Church. The Brethren are of Opinion, That provided he submit to public Penance
for his Fornication and other Crimes, it may be lawful to marry him, and to
admit him to the Lord's Table.

L. The Deputies of Vivaretz propounded this Case: An Abbess, though she has
forsaken the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, does yet notwithstanding retain
her Nuns, and employeth not the Revenues to their right use; may she with a
safe conscience be admitted to Communion at the Lord's Table? No; in no wise.

LI. The Brethren in the Church of Rochell are desired to leave off Prosecuting
their Minister Monsieur de L'Isle, and other of their Fellow Members, because
they want sufficient Evidence against them; and they are to remit the whole
matter unto our Brethren of Xaintonge, who will take an exact cognizance
thereof, and judge in it according to truth.

And whereas the Church of Rochell have petitioned that they might have
Monsieur Oded du Nort conferred upon them for their Minister; answer was given
them, That he should serve them till such time as the Provincial Synod of
Gascony do sit, who properly can dispose of him; and the said Church of Rochell
shall apply themselves to the said Synod to gain their consent; and in case
they cannot obtain it, then may they redemand the Moneys, if they please, which
they paid down for his Ransom.

LII. The Brethren of Paris are entreated to give way that Monsieur de La
Forest may be sent unto Bourges, instead of Monsieur de St. Germain: And this
Article shall be communicated to our Brethren of Geneva, and to their Church,
and they be entreated to write unto the Church of Paris about it, that so
Monsieur de St. Germain may be Minister unto the Family of the Lord de la
Rochfoucaud.

LIII. Our Brother de St. Fariol does of right belong to the Church of
Montignac; yet that Church is entreated to accept of our Brother Bordier, who
is now sent unto them, that so the Church of Chasteauneuf may not be left
destitute. And in case this be granted, Monsieur de St. Fariol shall reimburse
their Expenses in procuring of him to be their Minister.

LIVE. Whereas the Church of Die in Dolphiny, have requested that Monsieur Figon
might be sent unto them, in case he were at liberty: and for that our Brethren
the Sieurs Tempeste and Moranges, have yielded to it, the Assembly dismisseth
this Affair unto the Consistory of Lions, which shall do in it as they see good.

LV. Monsieur Matthew D'Anche offering himself voluntarily to be Professor of
Divinity, was refused till such time as he produced his Attestations and
Testimonials from those Churches in which he has lived, and particularly from
Geneva, where he says he has lived a very long time: and in case he refuse to
do this, the Ministers are bound to hinder him.

LVI. Monsieur Vaisse reported how that he was sent to serve the Church of
Ville Franche, which is now dissipated by the Enemies of the Gospel; and in the
time of Perfection he withdrew himself unto the Lord of Pieure, waiting for the
Restoration of his Church, which is not yet returned: what shall he do? Some
were of opinion, that he should continue with the said Lord of Pieure, and that
the Church of Ville Franche should be provided of another Minister. But the
major part of the Deputies judged that he ought upon the first Invitations
given him by his Church to return unto them, in case he could live among them
in safety, and that in the mean while he should continue the exercise of his
Ministry in the House of the said Lord of Pieure, who shall by the Classis or
Colloquy be supplied with another Pastor, whenever the said Vaisse shall be
called back unto Ville Franche.

LVII. Master Damian Joubert, complaining that his Church of Domles neglected
to maintain him: The Church of Issoyre upon examination of this matter, and
finding it true, is ordered to set and declare him free from their Service.

LVIII. The Church and Brethren of Aubusson yielded that Monsieur Du Pont their
Minister, should be Pastor in the Church of Creuen, but with this Condition,
That whenas the said Church of Aubusson should be restored, that they help them
to another. This their mutual Agreemant was approved.

LIX. The Province of Berry has the privilege granted it by this Assembly, to
call the next National Synod within one Year, and to give notice thereof unto
all the Provinces three Months before the time, and Place of meeting.

CHAP. XVII. Memorials drawn up in the present Synod, for the Service of the
CHVRCH.
ARTICLE. I. THe Churches shall be admonished to make a faithful Collection of
all notable and remarkable Passages of Divine Providence, which have happened
in their Precincts, and to send those Narratives unto our Reverend Brethren the
Pastors of Geneva, with all possible speed and diligence. ARTICLE. II. Monsieur
Beza shall be entreated to draw up in Writing the Causes and Protestations of
Nullity against the Council of Trent, both in the Latin and French Tongues;
and he shall send them unto the Ministers at Court, that they may present them
unto his Majesty. ARTICLE. III. A most Humble Petition shall be presented unto
his Majesty, that we be not hindered nor debarred of our Synodical Assemblies;
which yet shall not be delivered without the express Consent of the chiefest
Lords, who are at Court, and professing the Reformed Religion. ARTICLE. IV. The
Articles of the three former National Synods shall be compiled into a Body,
unto which these of this present Synod shall be added; and the Church of Lions
shall give forth Copies of them. ARTICLE. V. Our Brethren the Pastors of
Geneva, shall be entreated to write us their Judgment about some principal
Points of Church Discipline, as about Elections of Church Officers, and the
Sentence of Excommunication, and to send Copies of this their Judgment unto the
Church of Lions, which is ordered to distribute them among the Provinces of
this Kingdom, that so the Deputies may come prepared with well-digested
Thoughts about those Articles unto the next National Synod; and in the mean
while all the Churches are required to conform themselves unanimously unto
those Canons of Church Discipline, which have been already composed for them by
the Decrees of our three former National Synods. ARTICLE. VI. The Provinces
shall be advised to send their respective Proctors unto Court, who may be
charged to solicit the Affairs of their Provinces; and they shall not act any
thing but according to the Instructions put into their hands by their
Principals, nor shall they undertake any matter of great importance, without
having first communicated it unto their Province, and they shall conclude on
such courses as shall be jointly concerted between them and the Ministers, who
may be then about the Court.
CHAP. XVIII. The Provinces, if they themselves approve of it shall be thus
divided.
Distinction of the Provinces of France.
1. THE Isle of France, Picardy, Brie, and Champagne. 2. Burgundy, Lyonnois,
Forest, and Auvergne. 3. Dolphiny, Languedoc, and Provence. 4. Poictou and
Xaintongs. 5. Gascony, Limousin, and Agenois. 6. Britain, Turenne, Anjou, and
Le Maine. 7. Normandy. 8. Berry, Orleance, and the County of Chartres.
VIII. The Canons decreed in this Assembly shall be communicated unto our
Brethren the Pastors of Geneva, who having perused them, shall return them back
again unto the Church of Lions, and by them sent unto our three first
Provincial Synods, and from them to be distributed among the other Provinces of
this Kingdom.

CHAP. XIX. BOOKS Censured.
IX. THe Churches shall be advised of a Book lately published with this Title,
Conseil a la Pauvre France; whereof Castalio is the reputed Author: It Is a
wicked Piece, and therefore they must be aware of it.

X. And they shall also reject a little Pamphlet added unto a Catechize,
styled, Les Demandes, que font les Ministres de Geneve a ceux quil veulent
recevoir la Cene.

CHAP. XX. The Vagrants and Deposed Ministers.
1. MArmande, who was in the Ministry near Chartres. 2. James de Vernueil, or
Berneil, employed in Normandy. 3. Beaujean, Beraud, or Bergard, for he goes by
all these Names, he was an Augustinian Friar, and Prior of their Convent at
Poictiers. 4. Christopher de la Place. 5. Louis Tudett. 6. A great lubberly
Franciscan Friar, who quitted his Frock in the House of the Lord de la
Martiniere; he is called La Motte. 7. William Tortereau de Foussay. 8. William
Coistereau, or Bretereau du Bois. 9. Peter Vrede, or Boulay of Niort, an
Apostate. 10. Ma^turin Pennin, or Pelling, or Pilin, for he goes by all these
Names. 11. Simeon, Regent of the College at Surgeres. 12. John de la
Tourniere. 13. John Guerin. 14. James Pinus. 15. Jews Matthew, or Maton. 16.
Peter le Brun. 17. Calix Baptiste, formerly a Carrier of Rogations, he was a
Monk at Thoulouse, and Secretary to the Cardinal of Armagnac. 18. Roberty,
heretofore a Cordelier Friar, living in the same House with the Bishop of St.
Prins. 19. Hermes de la Faye, he was a Jacobin Friar. 20. James Courtain de
Calaux, a Fellow boasting himself to be a Prophet, and to be endowed with a
Prophetical Spirit. 21. Francis Porcelin, an Italian. 22. Hierom Bolsec, a most
Infamous Liar and Apostate. 23. Matthew D' Ancbe. 24. Hierom Rolse.
All these Decrees were done and made in the National Synod of Lions, held in
August, 1563; And thus Signed in the Original,

VIRETT, Moderator. The End of the Synod of LIONS.

CHAP. XXI. Three ANSWERS of the Pastors and Professors of Geneva, and of some
of the Ministers who were deputed unto the National Synod of Lions, 1563, and
empowered by it* to make these following Returns unto the Questions propounded
to them.
The first Question was about Marriage, viz. Whether Promise of Marriage might
be dissolved by the mutual Consent of the engaged Parties?

The Brethren of Geneva's ANSWER.
Article. I. WE cannot judge otherwise, but that the Reverence which all ought
to have for Marriage, should keep the Parties, who have pledged their Troth to
each other, from breaking it: For since it is as Solomon styles it, The
Covenant of GOD, it is not of the same nature with other Bargains and
Agreements, which depend upon the wills of Men: and we cannot but believe, that
this was the Mind and Intendment of our Lord, when lie spoke these words, Whom
God has joined together, let not man put asunder; though as yet there had been
no carnal knowledge of each other. Therefore the Promise is Sacred, and must be
held Irrevocable: For, God having punished the Fornication of a Man with a
betrothed Maid, as if it were the very Crime of Adultery, he does thereby
sufficiently demonstrate, that the Maid was obliged as if she were married; for
Adultery presupposes Marriage. Article. II. And whereas some Inconveniences
are alleged, we answer, That they will as well hold against them that are in
Age as against Minors: for it oftentimes falls out that they do as badly agree
as Cats and Dogs; and yet they cannot be suffered to quit one another, because
neither of them are now at liberty for so doing. Article. III. The Opinions of
Lawyers in this case is of no force; because they do allow of Divorces between
Husbands and Wives: Which yet is directly contrary to the Ordinance of God.
Article. IV. And that Gloss put upon those words, To be joined together; i. e.
to have accomplished Marriage, ought not to be admitted: And the Judgment of
St. Paul is urged to no purpose, 1 Cor. 6. 16. for when the Apostle says, that
the Fornicator is one Body with the Harlot, he uses only a Comparison, from
which there cannot be deduced any true Definition. For it is otherwise certain,
that this Sentence cannot be properly avouched of Fornication, because God has
honored Marriage only with this Privilege, to make two Bodies lawfully
conjoined to be but one. But as we said, St. Paul, that he might aggravate the
sin of Fornication, alleges this Passage of Moses's to conclude, That a man
is separated from Jesus Christ, whenas he defiles and polutes his body in
coition with an harlot. Article. V. And although the betrothed Maid be under
the power of her Parents till such time as her Husband is entrusted with her;
yet this must admit of an Exception, viz. That it do not derogate from the
Rights of the espoused Husband, and that the Father be not compelled against
his will to resign up his Daughter to him, and so to bring no prejudice unto
Marriage. Article. VI. Moses does not distinguish at all between the Crimes of
a married and espoused Wife, when they commit Whoredom, Deuteronomy. 22.22, 24. but
accounts them both Adulteresses. Article. VII. Nor do the Laws determine
against these Promises of Marriage mutually past between the Parties, as if
they were not indissolvable: For although a Father may oppose the Marriage, and
endeavor the Dissolution of the Promises, yet the Parties themselves are not
suffered to do it. Article. VIII. Moreover, there is a very great difference
between the Consent of the Parties, and the cognizance of their Cause: For we
do not deny, but that a Man having been deceived, may declare the Trick put
upon him, that he may be relieved. But we say plainly, that the Parties being
reciprocally obliged are not acquitted, nor freed one from the other, nor will
they be allowed to discharge and acquit each other. And it is in this Point, and
none other, that we count Espousals to be the same with Marriage. Article. IX.
It is not said, That because the holy Apostle does not particularly declare
that a Man may not give a Bill of Divorce unto his betrothed Wife, that
therefore he may dismiss and leave her to her former liberty. But rather we may
say, that the Law for both the betrothed and married is one and the same,
because there is the same reason for it. Article. X. Besides there is one thing
more to be observed, that he does not of set purpose handle this matter, but he
touches at it by the by, and upon occasion: The sin which he then mentioned
calling alowd upon him for Reproof: yea, and it is certain that he suffered
Polygamy both in public and private Persons, because at that time it could not
be remedied. For this may be gathered from those words of his, A Bishop ought
not to be the Husband of two Wives, both living at the same time. Article. XI.
Although the Church requires a public Declaration on the Wedding Day, it
cannot be thence inferred, that the Parties may retract their Promises: but
this is rather done to prevent those Inconveniences of clandestine Marriages
only, and so the Parties do but ratify their Promise before the People, that
they may be Witnesses unto it. Article. XII. That Passage in the 22d of Deuteronomy.
is very clear and express to prove, that she who had pledged her Faith unto a
Man is his Wife; so that it is not in her power, nor can she at her pleasure
leave her Husband. We know also that Tamer having been reserved as a Wife for
the youngest Son of Judah, and playing the Harlot, was condemned to the Fire
for Adultery. And a Widow in Israel could not marry out of her Husband's
Family; if she had no Issue by him, she being the reputed Wife of his surviving
Brother. And when as Joseph neither durst nor would Defame the Blessed Virgin,
does therefore declare, That if she had prostituted her Body, it was a Crime of
Adultery. Wherefore let the Parties look before they leap, and be curiously
inquisitive about each other, before they do mutually oblige themselves; for
they must know, that this is a Contract without Repentance: Unless they be
after informed of an Error, Cheat, or some suchlike Mistake in the Person. Nor
will this Consideration be at their pleasure, when the Judge shall come to give
Sentence upon the cause.
ANSWER II.
ABout Consistories there was this Question, How may we carry ourselves toward
those Delinquents who are guilty of Crimes deserving Civil or Corporal
Punishments? for if you call them into the Consistory their Crime will be
published, for the Magistrate is usually present in the Consistory.

The Brethren of Geneva's ANSWER.
Article. I. It Is very difficult in this case to shut the Doors against those
Persons who delight in Sin; for one Inconveniency draws on another. It is a
most mischievous things, that the King's Officers, being of another Religion,
are brought by an absolute Power, into the Consistory: but so it is, and there
is no Remedy. They have more power than could be wished them; so that since we
cannot hinder it, if they have just cause of punishing Delinquents, even let
them do it. Article. II. If it be alleged, That this will hinder poor Sinners
from a free Confession and Acknowledgment of their Offenses, and that we shall
be utterly disabled to bring them unto Repentance; and that there will be a
world of Hypocrisy, and Ostentation, and Dissembling in our Churches. But what
cannot be helped must be endured, till such time as God shall have blessed us
with a better Remedy: However, there may be some course found out whereby poor
Wretches who are fallen into scandalous Offenses, may be saved from Peril: Let
two or three Members of the Consistory remonstrate to them in private their
Miscarriages; and though they may palliate and dissemble the matter, yet we may
be contented to have dealt thus with them: In short, we must use our best
Endeavors to divert the bad Affections of the Church's Enemies from it, and to
keep them from hurting and doing that mischief to it they would. But in case
the Crimes be scandalous, rather then nourish them, let Discipline be
exercised. In those Towns where the Magistrates are godly Persons, and
Professors of our Religion, there may be means of communicating the matter to
them, that so they may punish and chastise these Offenders gently, and after a
Christian-manner, who deserve to be punished by Law. And so the Consistory
shall be exempted of blame; and the Confession shall not be made to it, but to
the Civil Magistrate.
ANSWER III.
Concerning Baptism, this is the Contents and Answer of a Letter to certain
Arguments urged for the Validity of Baptism administered by private Persons.
Article. I. WE Ministers and Doctors in the Church of Geneva, accompanied with
our Brethren come from the National Synod of Lions, being met together in the
Name of God, after that we had heard that Case of Conscience propounded to us,
Whether Baptism administered by private Persons, without Office in the Church of
God, ought to be reiterated or not; did unanimously declare this our Judgment,
That such a Baptism did not in any wise agree with the Institution of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and therefore consequently is of no force, power, validity or
effect; and that the Child ought to be brought into the Church of God there to
be baptized: For to separate the Ministration of the Sacraments from the
Pastor's Office; it is as if one should tear out a Seal to make use of it
without the Commission or Letters Pattents to which it was affixed. And in this
case we must practice that Rule of our Lord, What God has joined together, let
no man put asunder. This for, and in the Name of all the Assembly, JOHN CALVIN.
Article. II. And whereas in that Letter there were Reasons to the contrary, and
that we were desired by the Synod to answer them in Writing, we shall do it,
though we found them very feeble and Impertinent. Article. III. The first
Argument of that Scribler was, We must distinguish betwixt the Virtue of the
Sacrament, which belongs only unto God to vouchsafe, and the outward Sign, of
which Man is the Minister. But this confirms our Assertion; because God has
told us by his Son's own Word, who the Persons are that shall administer
Baptism. Article. IV. His second Reason, which depends upon the former, and to
speak properly, is but an Accessory to it, is nothing to the purpose: For though
Christ only do baptize with his Spirit, yet it will not follow that he will not
have the Sign and Figure to be annexed unto his Grace. Article. V. And this
self-same Answer will suffice to refute his third Argument: For when we reform
what has been done amiss in this Ordinance, we do not confine God's Virtue
unto the Water; for we hold that this is a Counterfeit Baptism, a mere Mockery,
a Profanation of the Sacrament; to whose first Institution we must keep
strictly. Besides, such Language as this is very improper, we do not reiterate
Baptism, for the pretended Baptism is utterly unlawful, yea, wholly null. As
for Example: If you give a Child a Draught of salt or puddled Water, you do not
give him again Drink immediately upon it: But if you give him an empty Bottle,
and he suck nothing out of it but Wind, you will repair this Fault by giving
him Drink in earnest. Moreover, those Expressions of his, Of throwing Water, or
Plunging, are affected, and made use of by him to degrade the Usage and Utility
of Baptism. And we could wish, that in handling of such Questions Men were more
serious and sober. In short, either Baptism is unprofitable and appointed to no
purpose, or else it must be observed according to its Primitive Institution, to
be a Seal of the Remission of our Sins. Article. VI. His fourth Argument is
altogether frivolous: We know, God be-thanked, that our Spiritual Washing is in
the Blood of Jesus, and not from the Baptismal Water. And he might have spared
his pains in mustring up such a number of Texts of Scripture to prove that,
which none of us ever doubted of: for Water in Baptism signifies the Blood of
Christ, and the Effects and Fruits thereof accomplished in us by the Holy
Ghost. And though the Lord Jesus is no Respecter of Persons, nor does the
Validity of Baptism depend upon the Worthiness or Unworthiness of the Minister,
yet it will not thence follow, that we must not keep to that Order which he
has instituted: yea, and this also is alleged out of Ignorance. For, inasmuch
as all our Dependence is upon the Word of God, the Rule and Standard of our
Duty, given us by Christ himself, if you neglect and slight it in Baptism, and
let one administer it who has no Call from God to do it, it is all one as if an
Ape, as he that has no Commission to preach the Gospel, did administer it.
Article. VII. His fifth Argument takes that for granted, which will never be
yielded to him, viz. That even Baptism administered by an Heretic, who has no
Office in the Church, is yet held for true Baptism. For were this so, Baptism
would not belong unto the Church, but also to Turks and Pagans: So that whilst
he labors by such sorry trifling Arguments as these to build up Baptism, it is
certain that he turns the sprinkling of Water into a Charm or Enchantment.
Article. VIII. The Principle in his sixth Reason is ill applied, for although
the Virtue and Verity of Baptism be not always conjoined with the Sign, yet we
may not therefore say, that Baptism may be quitted and totally forborne: We do
sincerely confess, that a Man may be Partaker of the Grace promised in Baptism,
who did never partake of the Water of Baptism; but must we thence infer, that
Baptism may be lawfully omitted? God forbid! What he adds about the evil
Administration of Baptism, especially as to the Gospel Form and Manner of it,
contains a double Error; for we never did confess that the bare sprinkling
of Water by one without a Call or Office in the Church of God was Baptism, or
that it had its Evangelical Form there, where there was no Evangelical
Minister. Article. IX. He has couched his seventh Argument somewhat rudely,
and discovers a bitter Spirit. But let him make the most of it: we absolutely
deny, that the recalling of Men to the observation of the Primitive Rule of
Baptism is Rebaptising: We repute as null and void this spurious Baptism by
private and uncommissionated Persons. And although we do not tie up the Grace of
God to the hand of a poor Man; yet notwithstanding that Baptism administered by
Man must be annexed unto his Quality, or else the Authority of Jesus Christ
must be trampled under foot. Article. X. He corrupts by his eight Argument that
Text of St. John, marreth and perverts the sense thereof; for the Question is
not about the External Sign, but the Internal Virtue, the true spiritual
Washing. Article. XI. The Similitude urged by him in his ninth Reason, is null;
for the Lord Jesus has not rejected this Sacrament, nor wholly abandoned it to
be dispensed by all sort of Persons whatsoever; but he has deposited a
Commision with his Ministers who are to to dispense it. Article. XII. The
Comparison of Circumcision with Baptism in his tenth Reason might be admitted,
provided that Circumcision had been only administered by Priests: but whenas a
private Person pours Water we deny that this is that formal Baptism, which
was by our Lord Jesus. Moreover, let this be noted by the way, that when the
Israelites and Edomites cut themselves off from the Church, though they
retained Circumcision, yet they did but profane it, and 'twas none other than
a piece of Juggling, for God accounted those Nations as Uncircumcised. Article.
XIII. His eleventh Reason is far wide of the Mark: For though we confess that we
be but once regenerated, but once spiritually newborn; yet we must needs say,
that this imaginary Baptism does not in the least signify or seal our new
Birth. Article. XIV. As to his twelfth Reason, we very well know that was the
Opinion of St Augustine upon this Point; but he is not to be assented and
consented in all his Assertions. We ourselves do own, that he who was ill
baptized ought not to be again rebaptized; and we add this also, That if a
private Person, who has no Call from God, shall of his own will and fancy
usurp that Office, which does not belong unto him, his Baptism is but a mere
Piece of Farcery, and therefore null. And this Answer may also suffice for his
thirteenth Argument. Article. XV. In his fourteenth Argument he has made Mr.
Calvin, in the Passage quoted from him, to speak contrary to his known and
printed Judgment, and perverted the very sense of his Words; for he does not in
that place treat of the Ministry, but of the Virtues and Merits of the
Ministry: for it is as if he had said, That all the Vices of the most debauched
Minister could not derogate at all from the Virtue of Baptism. Article. XVI. We
deny his fifteenth Argument, which is, That the Hand and Sign of our Lord Jesus
Christ will be owned in the sprinkling of Water by a Person uncalled and
uncommissioned by him. Article. XVII. What Calvin had said as to his sixteenth
Argument, was enough to prove the Nullity of such a Baptism: But if any one
should be dissatisfied, he declares, that this was his meaning; and that it
was an absurd, simple, and foolish action to go and persuade any one that he
would not have Baptism by Women to be reiterated. Article. XVIII. His
sevententh Argument is a mere Paralogism; for he wants the Judgment to
distinguish betwixt the ^orgiveness of Sins given by Jesus Christ, and the
Token thereof, which he committed unto his Apostles. Article. XIX. To his
eighteenth Argument, we say* That Popish Baptism is grounded upon the
Institution of Christ* because the Priests as perverse as they are, and totally
corrupt, are yet the ordinary Ministers of that Church, in which they so
tyrannically demean themselves. Article. XX. His nineteeth Argument needs no
answer, unless it be, That the word Rebaptize is ^^isapp^^ed, ^^th i^ was never
questioned but that such an Apish Trick as this Mock-baptism might be reformed.
Article. XXI. His twentieth Argument proves just nothing, and therefore we let
it pass. And if it be said, that we have handled this Brother too roughly, who
moved this Question; let him but bethink himself how Magisterial he was in his
Dictates, as if it was his Province only to oppose Superstitions and Abuses,
and especially for his audacious condeming of St. Cyprian, with the whole
Council of Carthage: And had he but better considered the whole, he would have
been more moderate; And because we love and honor him, we wish that he would
exercise his Parts and Wits upon Questions more profitable, and less curious.


Concerning the LORD's SVPPER.
THe Brethren of Geneva being demanded, Whether Pastors at the Lord's Table
should only distribute the Bread and Wine unto the People, do give this Answer,
That it were certainly best, if it might be conveniently done at all times, but
it seems for the present impossible, and for the future wholly impracticable:
For in case God should multiply the number of his People, of Believers, and
Churches, and there being so great a scarcity of Pastors, we see no
Inconveniency in it, that Deacons and Elders being the Arms and Hands of the
Pastor, after that he has consecrated the Sacramental Elements, and
distributed the Bread and Cup to them that are nearest to him, may come into
his relief and assistance, and distribute them also unto those who are more
remote from him.

An End of these Answers, and of this National Synod of Lions.
Signed in the Original, P. VIRETT, President of the Council.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE V. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ. IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD The second time in the City
of Paris, and Year of our Lord, 1565.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Election of Moderator and Scribes. Chap. II. General Matters.
Morellius his Works Examined. Chap. III. Manner of Proceeding in Ecclesiastical
Censures. Chap. IV. A Case of Conscience; Whether beneficed Persons may be
admitted to the Lord's Table. Chap. V. Of Vagrants, Debauched Persons, and
Councils. Chap. VI. Of Imposition of Hands; Sureties in Baptism, etc. Chap.
VII. Uniformity in Common Prayers: No Marriages without Certificates: Loan of
Ministers: Synods and Colloquies. Chap. VIII. An Abjuration made by a Socinian.
Chap. IX. Secret Promises of Marriage, and several Cases of Conscience, about
Absolution, Churches Ingratitude, Age of Communicants, of Marrying the Sister
of a deceased Spouse, Accounts of the Poors Money, Divorces. Chap. X. Method in
Calling of National Synods. Chap. XI. General Advertisements unto the Churches
about Printers, Elders, Books, Scholars, Lord's Supper, Ministers in Noble
Men's Houses, Censures on Lords, Censure upon a certain Book.
The Second Synod of PARIS. 1565. Synod V.

SYNOD V.
Articles Decreed in the National Synod held the second time at Paris, the
twenty fifth of December 1565; and in the fifth Year of the Reign of King
Charles the Ninth.

CHAP. I.
NIcholas de Galars, Minister of the Church of Orleance, being chosen
President; and Lewis Capel, Minister of Meaux, and Peter Le Clear, Elder of the
Church of Paris, Scribes; after the Invocation of the Name of GOD.

CHAP. II. An Explication of the Canons of the CHVRCH-Discipline, and an
Addition of several others. General MATTERS.
I. FOrasmuch as the Church of God ought to be governed by a good and holy
Discipline, and that no other may be introduced but what is grounded upon the
Word of God; the Ministers and Elders deputed from the Provinces of this
Kingdom, to confer about Ecclesiastical Affairs, and met together in the Name
of the Lord, after diligent Perusal of the Book, and other Writings of M. J.
Morelly, concerning the Polity and Discipline of the Church, and sufficient
Conferences had with him from the Holy Scriptures about it, do by this present
Act condem his said Books and Writings, as containing evil and dangerous
Opinions, subverting that Discipline which is conformable unto the Word of God,
and at this day received in the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom: and whereas
delivering up the Government of the Church unto the People, he would bring in a
new tumultuary Conduct, and full of Confusions, upon it, from whence would
follow many great and dangerous Inconveniences, which have been remonstrated
unto him, and he once and again admonished to abandon these Matters, which yet
he will not do, but persists in his Assertions, saying, That he is persuaded
those his Opinions are built upon God's Holy Word. We having diverse times
exhorted him to approve and consent unto that Order which is received and
conserved in these our Churches, as appointed by our Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, and proved to him from their Sacred Writings; because we hope that
the Lord will be gracious to him, and also because he does not differ from the
Church in any of the fundamental principal Articles of our Faith, the Brethren
of this Assembly supporting him with Christian Charity, are of Opinion, that he
be received to the Peace and Communion of the Church, provided that as he has
formerly promised by Writing, and now again protested to ratify and sign with
his own Hand this his Promise, so that for time to come he do carry himself
peaceably, and subject himself to the Order and Discipline established in the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, without ever any manner of ways publishing
those his said Opinions neither by Word of Mouth nor Writing, contrary to the
said Discipline, or to a Treatise in confirmation of it, which may shortly be
printed; provided also that according to his former Promises, and at the
request of the Lords of the City and Church of Geneva, to whom he has not yet
given sufficient Satisfaction, though he is bound in Duty to reconcile himself
unto them, which is evident from his own Letters, that he do once more by new
Letters of his own Writing, confess and acknowledge to have offended them, and
do beg their Pardon, because that being an Inhabitant of their said City, he
did contrary to the Orders of the Seignory print and publish his said Book,
without having first demanded and obtained their License, and being called both
by them and the Consistory of that Church to give an account of that his
Contempt, he did not appear at the day assigned him. These conditions being
performed by him, and the Consistory of that Church whereunto he shall join
himself, must take knowledge whether he has fulfilled them or no, and they
accordingly may receive him as a Member of the Church, and admit him into
Communion with them, or else proceed against him by Ecclesiastical Censures.

CHAP. III.
The manner of Proceeding in Ecclesiastical Censures.
II. FOrasmuch as Sins committed in the Church ought to be corrected by the Word
of God, and according to the Rule of Charity, and all Sins are not alike
grievous and scandalous, some being more enormous, others of a lesser nature,
some secret and others public, we must therefore according to their quality
and aggravations accommodate the Censure and Reprehension: so then secret Sins,
whereof the Sinner by means of Brotherly Admonitions shall be brought unto
Repentance, and has reformed them, shall not be brought into the Consistory;
but those only which these first means cannot reform nor amend, or Sins
publicly known, the cognizance of which belongs unto the said Consistory, who
must proceed to the Reformation of them by proper and convenient Censures,
considering these sins with all their circumstances, that so according as the
case requires, they may apply either a severe and rigorous Reprehension, or a
more moderate one in the Spirit of Meekness, as may be most expedient to bring
the Sinner to Repentance; who to this end shall by the Authority of the
Consistory be for some time deprived of the Lord's Supper, if it be needful,
that so he may be humbled, Excommunication must not be used but in extreme
necessity.
or finally excommunicated, and totally cut off from the Body of the Church,
according to that Order hereafter declared, if so be he show himself rebellious
to the Holy Admonitions and Censures inflicted on him, and continue obstinate
and impenitent. But inasmuch as this is the last and most rigorous of all
Remedies, it shall never be used but in case of extremity, when all fair and
gentle Means have proved ineffectual. And whereas even unto this day in diverse
places this distinction between this last Excommunication, and temporary
Suspension, or simple Privation of the Lord's Supper, has not been observed as
it ought; that both the one and the other may be duly used, the Ministers and
Elders interpreting these words of Excommunication and Suspension from the
Lord's Table, The words Excommunication and Suspension explained. No Minister
of his private Authority can deprive a Man of the Lord s Supper.
do give it as their Opinion, That no Person should be deprived or suspended
the Lord's Table by the single Authority of the Pastors, or of any other, but
only by the Consistory, which shall prudently consider and judge, whether the
Crime related to them, and whereof the Sinner has been first of all
admonished, deserve for its heinousness Suspension or no: and if it do, then he
who shall have committed such a sin shall for some time be deprived of the
Lord's Supper, in order to his Humiliation, and the Trial of his Repentance:
But if the sin be known only to a few Persons, this Suspension, nor its cause
may not be signified unto the People, least the Sinner be the more defamed, See
the Synod of Nismes, Art. 5.
and his sin made more scandalous and notorious than it was; and it shall be
sufficient if in this case, he do only acknowledge his sin unto the Consistory,
that so he may be received unto the Table of our Lord Jesus. But as for those,
who having been oftentimes admonished of their sins, shall ever show themselves
Disobedient to the Consistory, and those also who being guilty of great and
enormous Crimes, punishable by the Civil Magistrate, and which bring public
Scandal upon the Church, although there may be observed some beginnings of
Repentance in them, shall nevertheless be out of hand suspended the Lord's
Table, and the said Suspension shall be published unto the People, that so the
Church of God may be discharged of all Blame and Reproach, and that such
Sinners may be the more deeply humbled in the exercise and proof of their
Repentance, and an Holy Terror struck into the hearts of others: and if after
some good space of time, there appearing solid proofs and evidences of their
Conversion and Repentance, attested to by sufficient Witnesses, the Judgment
whereof belongs unto the Consistory; they shall be publicly reconciled unto
the Church by Confession of their Offenses, and Expressions of true Repentance,
that so they may purge away and repair the Scandal they had given unto the
whole Church, and then they shall be admitted unto the Lord's Table. But and if
it should happen, Degrees of proceeding to the last Excommunication.
that after along and patient waiting, and diverse Admonitions made by the
Consistory, and the aforesaid Proceedings observed and practiced, and all
charitable Endeavors used for the regaining of the Sinner, he nevertheless
abide obstinate and impenitent, then the Pastor in the Name of the whole Church
shall proceed against him by public Admonitions, declaring unto the whole
Church his Offenses, protesting also of their due and religious Care for him,
and Carriage toward him, though without any fruit or benefit, exhorting the
whole Church to seek God earnestly on his behalf, and to use all means that may
bring him to a sight and sense of his sin, that so that dreadful Sentence of
Excommunication and Cutting off from the Church of God (whereunto she cannot
proceed but with the greatest Regret and Grief,) may be prevented. And the said
Pastor shall in his Sermon from the Word of God declare the true, right and
lawful Use of this Censure, that every one may be instructed in his Duty both
toward God and his Neighbor; and that all may understand that this last
Remedy is used with this Sinner for the Glory of God, the Honor and Reputation
of the Church, and the Salvation of his Soul in particular: And these public
Admonitions and Denunciations shall be prosecuted and continued three several
times, on three several Lord's Days; on the first of which the Sinner shall not
be mentioned by Name, that so in some sort he may be spared, though he be
already too well known unto the People; but on the two succeeding Sundays he
shall be particularly named. And if after all this he does not repent, nor
become a Convert, but persisteth obstinately in his sinful Courses, then on the
fourth Lord's Day, in the face and presence of the whole Congregation, such a
one, mentioning him by Name, shall be declared and pronounced Excommunicate and
cut off as a rotten Member, from the Body of the Church; the Pastor declaring
it authoritatively from the Word of God, in the Name, and with the Consent of
the whole Church.

Those who are thus excommunicate and cut off, shall be deprived of all
Communion with the Church, and of all it is Privileges; and the Faithful shall
be admonished neither to converse familiarly with them, nor to frequent their
Company, that so they may be ashamed, humbled, and brought unto Repentance; the
truth whereof shall be demonstrated by good Fruits, and unexceptionable
Evidences, known unto the Consistory, who shall judge whether they ought to be
received again into the Church; and having called, seen, and heard them, and
found them truly penitent, it shall be published by the Pastor unto the whole
Congregation, that so they may be stirred up to praise God for touching their
hearts with Remorse, and recovering them unto Repentance. And then these
Penitents shall come before the whole Church to give satisfaction for their
past Scandal, confessing and detesting their former Sins and Rebellions,
begging humbly Pardon of God and the Church for them; and thus shall they be
received unto the Church's Peace and Fellowship with Joy and Public
Thanksgiving.

CHAP. IV.
III. FOrasmuch as the Holy Apostle has ordained, That such as approach unto
the Lord's Table, should examine themselves; and this being a principal Point
of that Examination, that we search into ourselves diligently to see and
discover whether we have truly renounced all sins, and those sins especially
which are most contrary to God's pure and holy Worship, as Idolatry, and its
Appurtenances are; and because such as are beneficed by Papal Provisions, though
of different degrees, notwithstanding their Knowledge and Profession of the
Gospel Truth, and retaining the quality of Incumbents, or enjoying the Fruits
of their Benefices, no matter how it be, they do seem to us not to have
discharged this their Duty: The Question having been put in general, Whether
they should be received unto the Lord's Supper? Wheeher beneficed Persons ought
to be received to the Lord's Table, they professing the Truth of the Gospel.
The Brethren are of Opinion, That we must here distinguish, there being some
who having divested themselves of all Title to their Benefices, do yet reserve
unto themselves Pensions out of them, which they enjoy either by Provision from
Rome, or by private Compact between themselves and those to whom they have
resigned, or some other way, be it what it will; these shall be told, That they
cannot use this Traffic without greatly offending GOD. Because one of these
Parties grounding this Reservation upon the Pope's Grants, and maintaing
himself in it by his Authority, does as much as in him lies, own and avow his
Supremacy: And the other Party, because he receives Wages from the Evil he
has done his Neighbor, and receives an yearly Tribute from him; who by this
means is subjected unto Conditions full of Impiety and Idolatry; by which Fact
they approve of that Evil they have already done, and continue in it; and
therefore they shall from the Word of God be admonished not to approach the
Table of the Lord Jesus, nor shall they be admitted to it, because they would
wound their own consciences not only by their adherance to, but participation
in Sin.

Such as hold Benefices under a feigned Name, may not be admitted to the Lord's
Table.
Much less can they do it, who using a false Name, or borrowing one from their
Servants or familiar Friend, do in the mean while keep entirely to themselves
the Revenue of those Benefices either in whole or part, and vacate, change,
sell and dispose of them at their pleasure: For it is such a Dissembling as is
utterly inconsistent with Christian Truth and Simplicity; thus a Man under the
Mask of another in his own Name and Person he durst not, without exposing
himself to a just Reproof and Scorn. But as for them, who retaining the Name
and Title of their Benefices together with their Fruits and Profits, if they
can in their Enjoyment of them, use them piously, abstaining from all
Superstitions, nor participate in Idolatries adhearing to them, these be the
more excuseable: However, it were better that they did totally divest
themselves of them, especially Bishops and Curates, because of their
Insufficiency for their Office, and by reason that in these evil Times they
cannot be suffered to perform the true Duties of their Charge and Calling. But
where this may not be obtained, they shall be at least exhorted that by a
well-ordered Life, utterly estranged from all Idolatry and Scandal, and by a
sincere and apparent Profession of the Gospel, they give every one fully to
understand, That they do totally renounce the Pope and all his Superstitions,
and that they have nothing to do with him, nor hold any thing by or from him;
and in case of being troubled in the Possession of their said Benefices, they
will rather quit them all, than relieve themselves by his Bulls and Provisions,
which also it were fitting they committed unto the Flames; thereby
demonstrating that they would never make any advantage of them. In the mean
while as much as in them lies, and as the Times and Places will bear they
shall do their utmost endeavor by all lawful means to purge their Benefices,
and; their Houses, and their Dependancies from all Idolatry and Superstition,
and to establish the pure Worship of God by the Ministry of his Holy Gospel:
And where they cannot wholly hinder those Exercises which are customarily done
and practiced contrary to the true Service of God; they shall neither, by their
personal Presence, nor by their Consent, nor by their Name, nor in the least
manner of ways intervene to approve or authorize them, nor shall another be by
them substituted in their stead to do it for them. Beneficed Persons not
admitted to the Lord's Table unless they employ the third part of their Profits
to holy and pious Uses.
And we do advise them to employ the Revenues of their Benefices to holy Uses,
whereunto at first they were designed, to wit, the relieving of the Poor, the
Maintenance of God's Holy Worship, the Erecting of Colleges, the Education of
Scholars in Learning for the Service of the Church and Ministry, and other
suchlike Uses, and that at least they expend the third part of the said
Revenue to these Purposes according to the ancient Constitutions, and as they
are bound in conscience so to do. And on these Conditions, and not otherwise
may they be admitted to the Lord's Table.

CHAP. V.
Care taken that Vagrants by feigned Certificates may not rob the Churches
Charity.
IV. THat Abuses committed by diverse Vagrants may be prevented, who wander up
and down with Attestations from Ministers whereof they serve themselves at all
times and places, shamelesly begging from the Churches, and thereby robbing
God's true Poor of their necessary Relief: This Assembly advises Ministers for
time to come, rarely to give such Attestations, and when they do, to none but
those who upon their particular knowledge they are assured to be Persons of
true Godliness, and of an upright Conscience, and groaning under pressing
Necessities, specifying in their Attestations the Name, Quality and Abode of
those to whom they give them, and what Relief has been administered to them,
mentioning also the Day and Place from whence they parted, and whether they go,
and upon what occasion: And such as bear them shall bring them forth, and get
them renewed in every Church through which they pass by the Ministers, who
shall always specify what has been given them, and the Day when, until such
time as they be come unto their Journey's end. And before May next all the
Churches shall be advertised of this present Canon, that so all former
Certificates given in any other Form than this abovementioned, may be accounted
null and void, and torn in pieces.

V. Forasmuch as diverse debauched Persons of very wicked Lives, Such as will
not submit to Church Discipline are not to be reckoned Church Members.
do mingle themselves with us in our public Meetings, to the great Dishonor
of God, and great Scandal of the Church; and because Discipline cannot be
exercised against these, who will not subject themselves unto it, yet
nevertheless they shall be frequently and personally admonished of their sins,
and solicited to submit unto the Churches Order: which if they refuse, and
continue in their Wickedness, that so the Crimes and Scandals committed by them
may not be imputed to the Church, nor redound to its Dishonor, and that the
Enemies of the Gospel may not take occasion thence to Calumniate it, the
Minister shall from the Pulpit signify unto the Faithful that such vicious
Persons (without naming any) are not to be accounted true Members of the
Church; which also shall be done by the Elders in their particular Charges, and
respective Quarters, informing every one particularly, that such and such,
naming them by their Names, belong not unto the Church. And this Assembly does
farther judge it meet and expedient, that the Order observed in some Churches
be observed in all; Such as would be received into the Church, must first
acquaint the Eider of their Quarter with it.
that the Novices who desire to be received into the Church, and listed among
her Members, do intimate this their desire unto the Elder of their Division,
who shall inform himself of their Life, and make report of it unto the
Consistory; which being unexceptionable, he shall at the close of his Sermon or
Catechizing, present them unto the Pastor, who shall cause them make the
Promises and Protestations that are usual, viz. To embrace the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which shall be taught them, and to submit themselves to the Order and
Discipline of the Church, and by this means they shall be counted Members of
the Church: Further, they must be admonished to give their Attendance
ordinarily at Sermons and Catechisings, that being instructed in the Faith,
they may be judged capable and fit to participate of the Lord's Supper. And if
after having been instructed, they shall too long time defer their
Communicating, and it be known that their refraining is from Contempt of that
Holy Sacrament, they shall be proceeded against according to the Discipline:
but if their forbearance spring from infirmity, they shall be born withal for
some time, till they have gotten more Soul-strength. As for those who conform
not to the Rules of our Church, and yet frequent Sermons, and be not of an ill
Life, nor scandalous, they shall be admonished and enticed by all means to
conform to them.

Whether another Counceil besides the Consistory may be established in the
Church.
VI. Whereas some certain Churches, and in particular that of Sens, earnestly
demand, that it may be permitted them to establish a Council in their City,
composed of wise and experienced Persons, not being Officers of the Church;
urging for it, the multitude of their Enemies necessitating them to stand upon
their Guard, and that hourly diverse Affairs of great importance do occur,
calling for prompt and speedy Succors to the Conservation of the Church; that
their Pastors and Elders dwell not in Town, who might prevent those Discontents
brought upon them by Monsieur de la Croix, their Pastor, who would neither
countenance nor authorize any such Council. This Assembly in pursuance of the
Article of the Discipline relating to this matter, and expounding it, is of
Opinion, That for time to come no such Council be established, excepting that
composed of Ministers, Elders and Deacons, being confident, that God will ever
bless their Labors and Councils, whom he has called to Office in the Church,
and better serve himself by their Simplicity, than by the Prudence of Worldly
Politicians: Besides, it shall be always lawful for the Pastors and Elders on
any great and difficult Affair, to call unto them, such Persons as by whose
Counsel they may be any ways aided: Not hereby debarring particular Persons the
benefit of mutual Counsel which they may one afford another upon emergent
occasions, for their better Preservation. But we do not hereby intend to
authorize any company of Men, besides the Consistory, to be styled the Council
of the Church.

CHAP. VI.
Imposition of Hands shall be practiced in those places where it has not as
yet been observed.
VII. BEcause that in the ninth Article of the Discipline, it is said, That when
Ministers are to be confirmed, there shall be Imposition of Hands upon them,
yet not as of pure necessity: It is demanded, whether the Churches that have no
such Custom should for time to come submit unto the Usage of it? The reply was,
That there being neither Precept nor Promise touching this matter, therefore no
necessary Obligation shall be established about it: However, this Ceremony
being of ancient Usage in the Church, practiced by the Apostles, and tending to
Edification, the Churches shall do their endeavor to promote Conformity unto
it, as far as possible they may. It Is left to the Prudence of the Consistory to
call in their Proposans at their Debates.


VIII. The Churches Council consisting of Ministers, Elders and Deacons, it is
demanded, Whether unordained Preachers, not having any particular Charge, may
be called in to assist the Consistory, without ever granting them power of
Suffrage, that so they may be molded and prepared for the better managing of
Church Affairs, when God shall call them thereunto? We answer, There being no
Inconveniency in it, it is left to the prudence and discretion of the Pastors,
who may to try their Abilities, demand also their Opinions.

Parents are exhorted to bring Sureties for their Children at Baptism.
IX. There being no Commandment from the Lord, that we should take Godfathers
and Godmothers to present our Infants unto Baptism, we cannot therefore impose
an express Necessity on any one to use them: nevertheless, this Custom being
very ancient, and brought into the Church on a good Intent, viz. To testify
the Parents Faith, and Baptism of their Child, and to take upon them its
Education in case of their death, and for that it maintains Christian Society
with a Bond of Love and Alliance. Such as will not follow this practice, but
will in their own Persons present their Children unto Baptism, are earnestly
desired not to be conceited, but to conform to this ancient and accustomed
Order, which we find both good and very beneficial. However, Women shall not be
suffered to present Children. And this is the true sense of the second Article
of the Synod of Lions. Counselors and Advocares of the Reformed Religion must
not plead in beneficiary Matters.


X. Judges, Notaries, Scriveners, and others who by the Duty of their Callings
are bound to Judge, Sign, and Seal all matters indifferently brought to them,
shall not be censured for giving Judgment, or receiving a last Will, or passing
a Contract, or dispatching Writings about Idolatrous Concerns. But Advocates,
Arbitrators, and all others, whose Offices are free, shall be admonished, that
they ought wholly to forbear Pleading for, or any other ways to treat of
beneficiary Causes, or suchlike Matters.

CHAP. VII.
All the Churches must be conformable in point of Common, Public Prayers.
XI. CHurches which besides their ordinary Sermons are accustomed to Morning and
Evening Common Prayers, on such Days whenas there is no Preaching, or once a
day toward night, when there has been a Sermon, are entreated to conform
themselves unto those Churches which have no such Custom, that so Superstition
which is like to follow hereupon may be prevented, and that visible Neglect and
Contempt of Sermons may be avoid, and Family-Prayers, which every Householder is
bound to perform, may be no more neglected: Moreover, Public Extraordinary
Common Prayers ought to be reserved for Times of Necessity and Afflictions,
because it is an extraordinary Remedy, as Public Fasting whose usage ought not
to be common. And Ministers shall inform their Churches, which have daily
Common Prayer, why they are laid down; that so all Scandal and Muttering at
their Suppression may be removed, and they shall admonish the Heads of Families
ordinarily to call upon God in their Hoses by Morning and Evening-Prayers.

No Person to be married without a sufficient Certificate.
XII. Such as come from one Church unto another to be married, shall not be
suffered without a sufficient Attestation from that Church whence they
departed; and the Banes shall be called in those very places where both the
Parties have their residence, and are known.

XIII. Forasmuch as diverse Churches having borrowed a Minister from another, do
trust unto it, and use no diligence elsewhere to gain one for themselves, yea,
and will not permit him when re-called by his own Church, to return again unto
it, whereby they would seem to claim him for their own by Prescription, who was
only a Loan unto them; so that hereby many and great Troubles may every day
grow upon us: and though Consistories ought to be advised not to prefer their
own particular Profit to the common Benefit and Edification of the Churches of
Christ, nor to leave a Church unprovided, when they can conveniently spare a
Minister, or send another: Yet if this may not be done, that the aforementioned
Inconveniences may be obviated, and that Churches living upon borrowed
Ministers may be spurred up to a diligent discharge of their Duty in getting
one for themselves; This Assembly advises, That in case a Church which had
borrowed a Minister has been for six Months, warned and required to provide
itself, the lent Minister shall be obliged to return unto his own Church, in
Obedience to the Summons of his Consistory, whatever Interposals there may be
to the contrary by Provincial Synods.

Synods and Colloquies shall be established according to the extent of the
Governments in the State.
XIV. It Is ordained for time to come, That Provincial Synods and Colloquies
shall be established according to the Provincial Gorvernments of the Kingdom,
without any one's usurping Authority upon the other; excepting that if one
Government be too great, and the number of Ministers in it too many, they may
divide themselves into two Provinces, and as many Synods.

CHAP. VIII.
XV. THis Synod having heard Monsieur Another Copy calls him du Gar, a third du
Gast.
John du Bard retracting and abjuring those Errors he had formerly vented and
defended at Poictiers, concerning the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ,
and the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, which Retractation of his specified with
all Plainness, and its Particulars he had given in Writing, and the Deputies of
this Assembly to whom it was committed for their Perusal, making Report that it
was solid, pertinent and satisfactory, as proceeding from a composed and
well-resolved Mind; It is ordained, That this Retractation shall be sent unto
Monsieur de L'estrang, and other Ministers of the Churches in Poistou, with
Letters from this Assembly, that they may consider whether it will be a
sufficient Reparation of the Scandal and Trouble caused by him in those Parts,
and to know whether they have any other Matters to object against him, or
whether they would have him in Person there upon the place to recognize his
Offense: And in case they desire it, the said Monsieur John du Bard shall be
exhorted to appear personally before them; in the mean while the Ministers of
Picardy are advised not to proceed to a sudden Election of him, till such time
as he has given full Satisfaction unto the Churches of Poictou.

CHAP. IX.
All secret Promises of Marriage null.
XVI. FOrasmuch as Controversies arise daily about Marriage-Promises, we do
Decree, That for time to come, all clandestine Promises made even by Persons of
full Age, and at their own disposal shall be null; and those be clandestine
Promises which are not made in the presence of three or two Witnesses at the
least; and it is fitting they be made after solemn seeking of God by Prayer, and
in presence of Parents, provided they live in those places where the Promises
are made.

XVII. Churches which are accustomed upon Sacrament-days, or other Sabbaths,
after the Confession of Sins, to pronounce a general Absolution, may if they
please continue in it; but where this Custom is not introduced, this Synod
advises the Churches not in the least to admit it, because of the dangerous
Consequences which may ensue.

What Course shall be taken with Ministers complaining of their Peoples
Unkindness to them.
XVIII. A Minister complaining of his Church's Ingratitude, the Provincial Synod
shall take cognizance thereof, weighing diligently the Poverty of that Church,
and the Temporal Estate of the Minister: and in case that Church be guilty of
very great and notorious Ingratitude, the Synod shall have full power to remove
him for his better Accommodation elsewhere. And all the Churches shall be
desired to shun Ingratitude to their Ministers, (a Sin too rife among us) and
to take special care that they be more respected, and their Labors better
rewarded; not to enrich or fatten them, but to give them a becoming and
sufficient Maintenance.

Persons under Twelve not to be admitted to the Lord's Table.
XIX. It Is the Judgment of this Synod, that Children under twelve Years of Age
ought not to be received to the Lord's Supper; and as for those which are above
it, Ministers shall judge of their fitness for it. And having been once
Communicants, they may be admitted also Sureties for Children at Baptism.

The Sister of a dead Spouse may be married.
XXI. It being demanded, whether a Man might marry the Sister of her to whom he
was betrothed, because some conceived, he might as well marry his Wife's
Sister, and that the Rights of the Spouse are as great as those of the married
Woman. This Assembly answers, That there is between these two Facts a very wide
difference; because Affinity is only contracted by mixture of Blood and Seed:
Yet nevertheless care must be taken that neither the Magistrate nor the weak
Christian be offended.

The Accounts of the Poor's Money shall be given up before the Ministers and
all the People.
XXI. Ministers shall be present, is possible, at the distributing of Moneys
unto the Elders for the Poor; but at the Inbringing of their Accounts they
shall in no wise be absent: And their Custom is approved, who advise the People
beforehand to be present at the Audit, that so the Elders who have managed
those matters may be discharged with more Honor, and also that they themselves
knowing the necessities of the Church and Poor, may be the more enlarged in
their Contributions to them.

Consistories shall not execute Divorces.
XXII. Whereas great Difficulties are raised about Divorces for Adultery
verified before the Magistrates, we judge, that Consistories may lawfully
declare unto the innocent Party, its liberty according to God's Word; but they
shall not in the least intermeddle with the Execution of that Divorce and
Dissolution of the Marriage, to enable the wronged Party to proceed unto a new
Marriage; because it of right belongs unto the Civil Magistrate.

CHAP. X
XXIII. THis following Order shall be observed in the calling of our National
Synods for the future:

The Method to be kept in convocating National Synods.
In the first place, as was usual, there shall be one certain Church chosen
which shall have power of signifying unto the Provinces the Day and Place of
Meeting. Whatever Matters are to be debated in this Assembly, shall be sent by
the several Provinces unto that Church. The said Church shall call the National
Synod within the Year, in convenient Time and Place, and give notice thereof
three Months before to all the Provinces; and shall send a Duplicate of the
difficult Matters which are to be debated, unto the said Provinces, to be
considered by them. And that such as are charged with the Power of calling the
said Assembly, may know how to direct their Letters, it is fitting that one
particular Church be nominated in every Province to receive those Letters, and
according to their Tenor to Assemble the Provincial Synod within three Months,
where the transmitted Difficulties shall be maturely examined, and the
Arguments on both sides urged being fair and carefully written down, shall be
sent unto the National Synod. And forasmuch as our present Circumstances will
not admit any great Number of Ministers and Elders in this National Synod, we
are of Opinion, that for this time only, and during these Difficulties, that
the Brethren assembled in each Provincial Synod should choose from among them
one or two Ministers, and as many Elders, of the ablest and most expert in
Church Affairs, to be sent in the Name of the whole Province, who shall come
furnished with good Memorials and premeditated Thoughts upon those Difficulties
which had been communicated to them. The Provinces shall not prescribe any set
time or term unto these their Deputies for returning, but shall let them tarry
in the said Synod as long as there may be need of them; and the Charges of the
said Deputies shall be defrayed by their respective Provinces. And that the
National Synod may be no more employed in Matters already decided by former
Synods, the Provinces shall be advised to read over carefully the Acts of the
past Synods before they prepare their Memorials, and to send nothing but what
is general ^n^ of common concern to all the Churches, or else that which merits
the Resolution of the said National Synod. And the Churches of Poictiers which
is charged with the calling of the next National Synod, shall be informed of
all this, that they may intend their Duty.

CHAP. XI. General Advertisements unto the Churches.
XXIV. THE Printers in every Province shall be advised, That whereas at the end
of Psalm-Books and Catechisms, they do add the Confession of Faith of our
French Churches, that they do especially this which begins with these words, We
believe and confess, that there is but One GOD, etc. and which has an Epistle
pr^fixed to it, dedicated to the King; and not that other Confession which
begins thus, Forasmuch as the Foundation of Faith, etc. not but that both are
conformable in Doctrine. And hereof also Notice shall be given to the Printers
of Geneva.

Elders not to be displaced without great cause.
XXV. Although the Elders Office as now used by us be not perpetual, as is
expressed in the 35th Article of the Discipline, nevertheless the Churches shall
be admonished, not to discharge their Elders but for great Causes, whereof the
Consistories shall take Cognizance, that so the Church may be be conducted
after the bed manner, by Persons well verst in her Government.

XXVI. Ministers in places appointed by the King, and in all others, are
advised not to receive the Members of any other Churches unto the Lord's
Supper, without a sufficient Attestation produced by them under the hand of
their Pastors or Elders, if it may be had.

No Books must be written ridiculously; but Modesty is to be observed in them.
XXVII. Ministers and others whom God has endowed with Gifts and Abilities to
write in Defense of the Truth, are requested not to publish their Thoughts in a
ridiculous or injurious manner; but to keep to that Modesty and Gravity which
becomes the Majesty of God's Word; and to observe that self-same Modesty and
Majesty in their Sermons, and in their ordinary Style to use the Language of
God's Spirit in the Holy Scripture.

Scholars to be maintained by the Churches in the Universities.
XXVIII. Because there is everywhere a visible decay, and a great want of
Ministers, and that some provision may be made for a Succession, the Churches
shall be admonished by our Brethren the Provincial Deputies, that such as are
rich would maintain some hopeful Scholars at the Universities, who being
educated in the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and other good Learning, may be
fitted for, and employed in the Sacred Ministry.

XXIX. Although in our Churches, for the most part, the Lord's Supper is
administered only sour times a Year; yet the more frequent Celebration of it is
very desirable (due Reverence in approaching to it being always observed)
because it is most beneficial for God's Children to be exercised, and grow in
Faith, which is done by the frequent usage of the Sacraments; as also because
this was the Practice of the Primitive Church.

N^^^e m^n may not carry with them in their Journeys the Ministers of the
Churches, leaving, them ^^^upplied.
XXX. Ministers being given to the Service of the Church, and not to the Persons
and Palaces of Great Lords, although their Families may equallize in Numbers some
Churches; yet their Lordships shall be desired not to carry away with them in
their Removals, or Travels abroad, with their Families, the Churches Ministers,
least thereby they be left unprovided.

XXXI. Lords and Gentlemen shall be censured according to the Discipline of our
Churches, if after frequent Admonitions, they entertain in their Houses
scandalous and incorrigible Persons, especially if they suffer Priests to sing
Mass, or by Dogmatizing to debauch their Domestics, or if having cashiered
them, they shall again receive them into their Service.

XXXII. The Churches shall be admonished to beware of a Book written by Mr.
Charles Du Moulin, Entitled, Vnio quatuor Evangelistarum: because in it there
be diverse Errors, as about Limbus, Free Will, and the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, and the Lord's Supper, and in particular about the Calling of Ministers,
and Church Discipline, which he treats with scorn, and would totally subvert.
The Faithful also are warned not to assist at any of his Sermons or Sacraments,
it being against the Discipline of our Church.

Modesty to be kept in Attire. See the Synod of St. Foy, General Matters, Art.
2. The Faithful must use Charity toward their Brethren or Sisters that have
forsook their Monastries.
XXXIII. Ministers shall exhort their People to be modest in their Habits, and
that they themselves do in this and all other Matters, give them the best
Example, forbearing all Gaudery in their own Persons, and in their Wives and
Children.

XXXIV. They whose Brethren and Sisters have quitted their Monastery, that they
might serve God in freedom of Conscience, shall be exhorted to admit them unto
a part of their Estate, at least they shall be compelled by all Censures to
afford them Maintenance, and a competent Pension according to their ability:
For they would otherwise show themselves void of Natural Affection.

The End of the Second National Synod of Paris.
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE VI. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ. IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, Held in the Town of VERTVEIL, and
Province of AVGOVLMOIS, the First Day of September, 1567.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Moderator, Alterations, and Annotations upon the Church Discipline.
Chap. II. Marriage of Excommunicated Persons and Infidels, Provincial Synods,
Reading of the Holy Scriptures, Bread in the Lord's Supper to be taken by them
who cannot the Cup, Church Government, Loan of Ministers, Pastors deserting
their Churches, Rejection of Church Officers. Chap. III. A Case of Conscience
about a Deaf and Dumb Man's communicating at the Lord's Table, and a Woman's
cohabiting with her Leprous Husband, Elders and Deacons subscribe the
Confession and Discipline. Chap. IV. Of Vagrants, Care of the Widows and
Children of deceased Ministers. Chap. V. Particular Matters, Appeals by
Ministers, a Minister restored to his Reputation, Clopet an accused Minister
highly censured, Monks and Priests revolting. Chap. VI. Notes about a Book
seller, Poverty of the Church of Pamiers, and care for it, Restoration of
Roberty a censured Minister, Reflections upon an Intruder into the Ministry.
Chap. VII. Roll of Vagrants. Chap. VIII. General Advertisements unto the
Reformed Churches of France, in eighteen Articles. Chap. IX. Fifteen Cases of
Conscience resolved by Mr. Calvin. Chap. X. Twelve Orders and Decrees
concerning Marriages.
THE Synod of Vertueil. 1567. Synod VI.
General Matters.

SYNOD VI.
Articles of the National Synod held at Vertueil in Augoumois, the first day of
September, One thousand five hundred sixty and seven, and in the Seventh year
of the Reign of King Charles the Ninth, Monsieur de L'Estre was chosen
Moderator.

Chap. I. Alterations, Additions, and Annotations upon the Church Discipline.
General MATTERS.
IT is Enacted by the Authority of this present National Synod, that none shall
be put into the List of Vagrants, until such time as the Neighbor Churches
have first proceeded against them according to the Canons of our Discipline and
that they have clone their best endeavor to reclaim and reform them, and there
shall be kept a particular Roll of those Vagrants distinct from the Articles of
the National Synod.

II. In Churches where there be several Ministers, none of them shall give a
Certificate concerning any matter of Importance, without having first
Communicated it with his other Brethren.

III. Elders may be present at Propositions of the Word of God, made by young
Ministers, and at their Censures, and may freely, if it please them, pass their
Judgment on them.

IV. Such who according to the custom of the Country do falsify, disguise or
corrupt their Merchandises, as Stretchers, Drawers of Cloth in Poictou, shall
be admonished by the Consistory to forbear those Cheats, and in case they
should not desist, they shall be laid under Censures.

V. Pastors, who have obtained leave to follow their Studies for some time,
shall apply themselves to their Colloquy or Synod for its confirmation, without
which they may not depart their Churches, lest by their departure the Churches
be left unprovided.

VI. The determination of time and age capacitating persons to contract
Marriage, does properly belong to the Civil Magistrate.

CHAP. II.
Excommunicates and Infidels shall not be permitted Marriage without public
penance.
VII. WHere one Party is an Infidel or Excommunicate, the Marriage shall not be
celebrated in our Churches, unless the Unbeliever do first make a Protestation
to renounce all Idolatry, and to live in the Church of God as becomes a
Christian, and the Excommunicate Person in like manner shall have given by
public Penance, full satisfaction for his offense to the Church.

VIII. If there be a sufficient number of Ministers to make a Synod the
Provincial Synods shall be modeled according to the Governments. But and if a
Church shall complain of its being thereby incommoded, and that there arise any
strife about it between the Provinces, a third shall be chosen to reconcile
them.

Nothing besides the Holy Scripture to be read in the Church.
IX. None other Writings besides the Holy Scriptures, shall be read in the
Public Assemblies.

X. The Synod judges it not advisable, that they should receive the Bread at
the Lords Table, who cannot the Cup.

The Bread shall not be given in the Lords Supper to them who refuse the Cup.
XI. This Assembly understanding that some private persons had either spoken or
written against the Discipline exercised in the Churches of this Kingdom,
demanded of the Deputies severally and distinctly, whether their respective
Churches had any scruple about the Discipline which has been hitherto observed
by us. Whereunto the Deputies did all unanimously answer, that their Churches
did fully consent unto the Discipline, and required its inviolable observation,
and that such who opposed this our Established Order might be censured. And the
absent Provinces which were but few in number, have by Letters under their own
hands, testified their consent unto it.

XII. If hereafter any difference should arise between two Provinces about
their Redemanding of Ministers, they shall choose a third to accord and
arbitrate the matter between them.

A Pastor accused of leaving his Church shall purge himself before the Synod.
XIII. Ministers accused for leaving their Churches without their consent first
had, shall be bound to make their personal Appearance before the next
Provincial Synod, unto which they did belong upon the first Summons, that so
they may clear themselves publicly: And their innocence being vindicated, the
Church which had impeached them of unjust desertion, shall be obliged to
reimburse them all charges of their journey.

No Officer in the Church shall be said by till the Consistory have first
determined it.
XIV. Until the whole body of the Consistory have first maturely considered the
causes why they should be rejected, no Minister, Deacon, nor Elder, shall
reckon themselves to be rejected.

CHAP. III.
XV. AS to the case propounded, whether a Dumb and Deaf man giving Evidence by
signs and gestures of his Faith and Godliness may be admitted to Communion at
the Lords Table, this Assembly judges that he may be received, especially if
they have had long experience of his holy Life, and the Church do testify of
his Faith and Knowledge in the things of God.

A woman may not be compelled to live with her Lepours Husband.
XVI. A Woman may if she please, and do consent unto it live sequestered with her
Leprous Husband. But in case of her refusal, it is the judgment of this
Assembly, that she ought not to be enforced, because the Commonwealth is
concerned in this matter. Only she must not be wanting in her duty otherways.

XVII. Whenever Elders and Deacons are received into Office, they shall
subscribe our Confession of Faith and Church Discipline, or else make a public
protestation to observe it.

XVIII. It is ordained that those words (of the twenty ninth Article of our
Discipline) Where the Ministry is established, and those also, As much as
possible, shall be razed out of the said Article.

XIX. Difficulties that cannot be determined by the Consistory, shall be
remitted to the Colloquy or Classis, and from thence to the Provincial Synod.

XX. When any differences arise between Gentlemen professing the true Religion,
they shall be admonished to refer them unto their Friends and Kindred, that so
they may be amicably composed.

CHAP. IV.
The Church or Province shall take care of Ministers Widows and Orphans, see
the Synod of St. Foy Genesis Mat. art. 5.
XXI. SUch as being once enrolled by order of a National Synod among the
Vagrants, they shall never be taken off the file but by another.

XXII. If a Minister die in the service of his Church, it shall take care about
the Maintenance of his Widow and Children, and in case of the Churches
inability, the Province shall be obliged.

CHAP. V. Of Particular MATTERS.
I. IT is resolved, That Ministers Appealing unto this Synod shall withdraw,
when their Matters are to be debated, unless their Matters be such as may bring
them damage; and they also who Appeal or be Appealed, upon the account of
their sinful miscarriages, shall not at all be admitted into it, but when they
are to be heard in their own defense.

II. This Assembly does judge, that Monsieur de la Rogevay was justly enrolled
in the Catalogue of Vagrants, and yet no person shall be obliged to tell him
who delated him. But because the Church of Bergerack has since that time given
an honorable Testimonial of his Godly conversation, it is ordained, that his
name be now razed out of that Catalogue. Only let him carefully mind the
Protestation now made by him, of containing himself within due bounds, and
living holily according to Gods blessed word and the Discipline of our Church.

III. It Is decreed, That John Clopet, alias Child, shall not be tolerated nor
reputed for a Minister, until such time as he shall have purged himself from
those Crimes and Heresies charged on him. And four Months time having been
assigned him to justify himself, both in Bearn and Montauban, if within that
space appointed him he neglect to do it, he shall be totally deposed from the
Ministry.

IV. The Brethren of Dolphiny make report, how that certain Priests and Monks
professing the Christian Reformed Religion, after they had been Married in the
Church, revolted from it, and entering again into their Monast^^ies did sing
Mass, and polluted themselves with Idolatry, and desired our thoughts about
these Marriages, whether they were lawful and valid, or no. This Assembly
defers the Decision of this Case, until the next General Conference, that after
mature deliberation and debate about it, they may definitively determine
thereof: Yet in the mean while, Whether the Marriage of a Monk when converted,
and after revolted, and returning to his Vomit of Idolatry be valid.
they advise these Women to refrain their Company; because considering the
present Juncture of Affairs in this Kingdom, they cannot converse with them
honorably, as married Wives with their Husbands.

V. When Fasts are to be celebrated, let all the Churches be uniform, if
possible, in the manner of its Observation, and keep themselves free and pure
from all Superstition.

VI. If Women, whose Husbands upon the account of Trade are a long time absent
from them, do desire to be married, they shall apply themselves unto the
Magistrate.

Windows shall not be permieted Marriage, but according to the time prefixed by
Law.
VII. Let Ministers of the Gospel take heed, that they do not marry Widows
within the times forbidden by the Civil Laws.

VIII. Information being given us, That in certain Towns there be other
Councels besides those of the Consistory, which assume unto themselves the
management of Church Affairs; we expressly order, That the Sixth Article about
Consistories, unanimously approved in the Synod of Poictiers, Orleans, Lions,
and Paris, be signified unto them, and that it be most exactly and punctually
observed; and in case of Disobedience they shall be accordingly censured.

IX. Notice shall be given unto the Churches, that in Certificates given unto
Travelers, that Article be strictly observed, and they shall be dated not in
Ciphers, but in Words at length.

X. The Canon made to the National Synod of Orleans, concerning our Deputies at
Court, shall be punctually observed by the Provincial Synods.

CHAP. VI.
XI. OUR Brother He is called in another Copy John de la Traissel Deacon of the
Church of Rochel.
de la Chaise having complained to us, That he was branded by the Deacons of
Geneva, because in his Impression of Mr. Calvin's Sermons upon Deuteronomy, he
had left out the Preface to them: This Assembly being well satisfied of his
Innocence, and that he did not of his own head leave out the Preface, neither
in that Book, nor in Calvin's Sermons upon Daniel, but by the Advice of our
Brethren the Ministers of Rochel; nor that from the hopes of Gain he did
thereby rob the Poor; we order that the Provincial Synods shall be informed of
his Innocence, and that Letters be sent unto the Brethren of Geneva, not only
to purge him, but that in their next Impression of Mr. Calvin's Sermons, they
would be pleased to give him an honorable Testimony of his Innocence.

XII. The Churches shall be acquainted with the extreme Affliction of our poor
Brethren at Pamiers, that so their Christian Bowels of Charity may be enlarged
to them.

XIII. As also, that one called Roberty, who was formerly on the List of
Vagrants, is now took off the File.

XIV. And also that they would beware of a certain Fellow going by the Name of
Fontaines du Baut of Vellay in Languedoc, a lean Man, who has been often taxed
for having no Call unto the Ministry, and being unordained yet preaches.

CHAP. VIII. The Roll of Vagrants.
I. ONE Chartir, or Charles, who says of himself, that he was a Counselor of
Grenoble, and that he solicited at Court for the Profits of his Office, a Man
of mean Stature, his Beard waxing gray, deposed from the Ministry at Vsanchez
by the Brethren of Limoges, for Lying, Cheating, Forgeries, Roguish Tricks,
Drunkenness, unchaste Kissings, and at Pamier for Dancing and Contumacy against
the Church. This Fellow intrudes himself into all places where he can get
admittance to Preach.

II. Simon du Plessis, going by the Names of Mr. Peter Grueill, La Mulle,
Nevill, Grand-champ, La Jauniere, formerly a Franciscan Friar, deposed at Orbec
by the Classis of Eureux, because that without any Call or Ordination he had
usurped the Ministry of the Gospel, quitting and retaking at pleasure his
Fryer's Weeds; convicted of, and condemned for Adultery by the Provincial Synod
of Normandy; accused also of being Confederate with Robbers, he came into
Xaintonge, but is now at Auranches, a Fellow of great stature, yellow Beard,
and has lost two of his Fore-teeth.

III. It is ordered, that the Neighbor Brethren shall have their eyes upon
Monsieur Sylvester's Conversation, whether it be conform to the Discipline of
our Churches; and the Brethren of Normandy shall do their utmost to discover
the Crimes whereof he is accused, and send the whole Charge against him to the
Brethren of the Province. However, in the mean while he may continue in the
Exercise of his Function.

IV. The business of Mathou is referred to the Inhabitants of Jarnac, and to
our Brethren Du Moulin, and San-Germain.

V. John Clopet, alias Child, a Wretch full of Heresies, a Champion for the
Mass, asserting its goodness; in two Points only excepted, viz. Prayers unto
the Saints, and for the Dead; maintaining that the good and bad have equal
Privilege to communicate in the Body of Christ, as also Celibacy, and Praying
toward the East; and that Commentaries upon the Scriptures are needless; and
that Calvin did very ill in writing of Predestination; and that Man may keep
perfectly all the Commands of God. He is a Fellow of mean stature, a yellowish
Beard, and speaks somewhat thick, plain in his looks, and tawny face, aged Five
and twenty, a Savoyard, born in the Country of Bresse.

VI. One called Chevalier, now Vicar at Chassaux, near Janet, aged Fifty Years,
having a great Red Nose; he is a mercenary and most abusive Fellow.

VII. One called Stephen Jenicot, otherwise du Brevil, says, he was born at
Talmond upon Jard in Poictou, and ordained Minister of the Word of God by the
Classis of Neuf Chastel, and shows a Certificate under the hand of Monsieur
Christopher's, which yet since he avows to have been made in Paris; a little
dwarfish Fellow.

CHAP. VIII. General Advertisements given unto the Churches of France.
I. THere being different Copies of our Discipline, the Church of Paris,
Orleans, and Meaux, are required diligently to revise and Examine whatever has
been ordained by us to this purpose, and to reduce those Canons into an orderly
and complete System, and that within four Months they deliver a Copy hereof
unto all the Provinces.

II. Explaining the Second Article of the Discipline under that Head of
Particular Orders, it is resolved, That all Carpenters, Masons, Glaziers, and
other Artisans shall abstain from all manner of Work in their respective
Trades, that may in the least favor Idolatry; and if after Admonition they
continue in such Practices, they shall be subjected unto Censures.

III. Although it be in itself a thing purely indifferent, to assist at the
Feasts and Banquets celebrated by Papists at their Marriages, or Birth of their
Children, yet the Faithful shall be advertised, to do herein what will make
best for Edification, and to weigh well with themselves, whether they be strong
enough to resist those Dissolutions, and other Sins ordinarily committed at
such Meetings, as also to reprove them.

IV. Such as being demanded for the Ministry of the Gospel, and the Service of
any particular Church, shall be sent forth with a Testimonial of their Life and
Doctrine unto the Colloquy or Provincial Synod of that place which requested
them: which Colloquy, or Synod may, if they think it fitting, examine them, and
shall Commissionate three or four Ministers to present them unto the Church
that sued for them; which Church shall hear them two or three times, if need
be, that so they may know, whether they can well profit by them. This being
done, the Ministers, together with the Consistory of the Plaee, shall lay their
hands upon them, and establish them in their Pastoral Office; and in case of
difficulty arising about their Admission, those Commissioners and the
Consistory shall take Cognizance of it, and the Churches which demanded these
Ministers are ordered to defray the Charges of their whole Proceedings.

V. Diverse Persons complaining of that Article, concerning public Prayers, in
those places where the Word of God is constantly Preached, and urging the
Impossibility of it is being practiced, and that it cannot be observed without a
world of Inconvenience; This Assembly does judge, that the Article is grounded
upon very holy and sollid Reasons. Yet nevertheless, where it cannot be
observed without apparent danger and damage unto the Churches, the Business may
be tolerated. Yet all Ministers of the Gospel shall be obliged to do their
best, that the Article may be observed.

VI. There shall be no Alteration in that Third Article of the Second Synod of
Paris, concerning Farmers of Church Lands. And for the better Understanding of
it, this present Assembly does take in all kinds of Farming, by which in any
manner whatsoever Idolatry may be maintained; and therefore, if any be
perceived in taking the said Farms to use and help themselves by Quiddities and
Subtilties, that so they may escape the Censures of the Church, the Consistory
shall prudently consider what Abuses may have been committed.

VII. Forasmuch as several of the Deputies do scruple the Tenth Article,
relating to Judges and Public Notaries, we will leave the Debate hereof unto
the next National Synod, that so it may be maturely deliberated, and their
Opinions together with the Grounds and Reasons of them maybe then produced.
Till which time that Article shall abide in it is full Power.

No Promises of Marriage to be made, but in the presence of Parents, etc.
VIII. This Assembly judges, that the Sixteenth Article of the Second Synod of
Paris, concerning Marriages, beginning with these Words, That all Promises,
etc. shall be changed, and couched in these Words. The Faithful shall be
Informed by the Ministers in Public Church-Meetings; not to make any Promises
of Marriage, but in the Presence of Parents, Friends, Neighbors, or other
Persons of good Repute. And if any do otherwise, they shall be censured for
their Levity and Contempt of this Godly Counsel. And it were very convenient,
that the said Promises of Marriage were made with solemn Prayers unto God.

None but Ministers, if possible, shall give the Cup.
IX. A doubt being moved by some of the Brethren, whether any other beside a
Minister of the Gospel might deliver the Cup in the Sacrament unto the People.
This Synod having duly pondered the Arguments on both sides, does determine,
that the Fourteenth Article decreed in the Synod of Lions shall stand firm,
which was this, That none but Ministers, if possible, shall give the Cup.

X. To the Case propounded, Whether the wronged party may be permitted to marry
again, after that the Adultery has been verified by sentence of the
Magistrate. This Assembly answers, that the Ninth Article of the Synod of
Orleans under the Title of Marriages, See Articl. 29. of the 13. Chapter of the
Discipline, concerning Marriages.
shall be in force, unless there be apparent danger unto the Church. And
whatever is couched in other terms, shall be razed out of that Article of the
Discipline.

XI. Rich and Monied persons shall be exhorted by the most cogent Arguments to
do their duty in contributing to the maintenance of the Ministry, and in case
of neglect, the Consistory shall deal with them more effectually.

XII. The Churches shall be advised strictly to observe the Fourth Canon of our
Fifth National Synod, held the second time at Paris, about Certificates given
unto poor Travelers, and that their names shall be written in them at length
and not in Ciphers.

XIII. This Assembly being informed, that the Member for some Churches being
disgusted at their Consistories, declare that they would not subject themselves
unto their Censures, and therefore to calm and pacify them, they thought good
to leave the Election of the new Consistory unto the body of the people. But
this National Synod does not approve in the least of this their action, as
being a very evil matter, and of dangerous consequence: And judges that the
said Church shall be advised to conform it self with the other Churches of this
Kingdom unto that Canon of the Discipline, viz. That Elders and Deacons shall
be chosen by the Consistory, and then presented unto the People.

XIV. The Deputies in the last Synod of Paris acquainted this present Assembly,
that they had given order to our Brethren in the Church of Lions, to Print the
Book of Discipline.

XV. The Churches shall have notice given them, that they do not admit unto any
Ministerial Duties. A certain Spaniard going by the Name of Anthony de la Rodit
Bellariva, till such time as he have first cleared himself of those Crimes for
which he stands Impeached by the Church of Loudun.

XVI. Whereas there is a very great difference in the Body of our Discipline
which now passes from hand to hand: The Churches of Paris, Orleans and Meaux,
were appointed diligently, to revise and examine all those Canons that have
been made in former Synods, and to send Attested Copies of them unto all the
Provinces.

XVII. And the Churches of Paris, Lion, Orleans, and others shall not for the
future dispose of any Scholars and Students, without their Consent, who had
sent to the Universities.

XVIII. The Churches are advised to take heed of a certain Old, Grave and
Bald-headed Fellow, going by the Names of Fontaires and Duzau, of Valleyse in
Languedoc, who tho he was never Called or Ordained, does yet notwithstanding
take upon him to exercise the Office of a Minister.

CHAP. IX. A Resolution of several Cases of Conscience, and of other Weighty,
Points of the Christian Reformed Religion, by the R. Mr. John Calvin, Pastor
and Professor at Geneva.
THese Cases and their Solution were all annexed unto the Canons of the National
Synod of Vertueil in Augoumois, held there the Seven first days of September,
1567.

1. Quest. Whether Children may lawfully detain and possess those Lands and
Foundations, which were given by their Parents for Singing of Masses?

Answ. Although those poor Founders (as they be called in the Papacy) were grossly
cheated and abused; yet inasmuch as these very Persons to whom those Goods and
Lands once belonged, did alienate them in a legal Manner; Their Heirs and
Successors are deprived of them, and cannot pretend nor claim any Right unto
them. So that they must sit down patiently with the Loss; unless that public
Authority should find out some Relief for them by a Reformation.

2. Quest. Whether a Man being forced to abandon his Native Country for
Religion and Conscience, may also lawfully forsake his Wife?

Answ. The married Man would do much better to take his Wife with him, if it be
possible for him so to do, rather than to live separate from her; that so he
may give a good Example unto others, and avoid those Temptations unto which he
is obnoxious, as also that he may prevent very many Inconveniences, which are
likely in such cases to befall him. And unless he be enforced to it by
necessity, he ought not to leave her. By necessity, I mean this, when he cannot
serve God with a safe Conscience. But if it should so fall out, that a Man
cannot live as becomes a Christian, although his Wife will live at a distance
from him, yet is it lawful for him to go before her, waiting for her to follow
him, and he is to solicit her to come unto him, even then when he is
separated from her.

3. Quest. Whether a Father flying for Idolatry may leave his Children behind
him?

Answ. If a Father should leave his Children with this Condition, That a
Padagogue might if he would lead them unto Idolatry, he would than be guilty of
Sin against God. For our Children are God's peculiar Treasure, an holy and
separate Seed for him, and which must be kept with the greatest Care for God.
And although he cannot always have his eye upon them, yet it is neither meet nor
profitable, that he should leave them in such a place, from which he cannot
recover them without a World of difficulty. Yea, did he conscientiously
endeavor to get his Children with him, it would be an effectual Means to draw
his Unbelieving Wife after him.

4. Quest. Whether a Man may forsake his Country, when he is not persecuted?

Answ. If a Man should live among Idolaters unpolluted with their Abominations,
we would not condemn but praise him for his Constancy. And, in truth, we cannot
warrantably impose a Law upon him, who would depart his Country, as if it were
unlawful for him so to do, whether it proceed from his fear of what is likely
to come to pass, or upon any other account; as suppose, he distrusting his own
weakness to stand out in a fiery Trial, or ardently seeking after the means of
Grace, and heavenly Knowledge, should thereupon leave his Native Country, such
a Zeal as this cannot but be approved, and applauded.

5. Quest. Whether it be our Duty to reprove those Sins, and sinful Discourses
we hear in wicked Company?

Answ. There cannot be any stated Rule, or Canon in this Case, of reproving
Errors, or ungodly Talk, but this, that we should not dissemble, nor conceal
our dissent from them, when as opportunity is offered us of reproving them. For
suppose, we should be in some Company, where they discourse wickedly, we are
not bound necessarily to reply upon them. There is a time when the prudent Man
may keep silence. But in case we meet them privately, and have no Witness, we
may do as Righteous Lot, testify and express our Displeasure at their Sin, and
that we are unwillingly, through Grief at Heart, put upon the Reprehending of
them. But yet, the best Course we could take, would be this, to observe and
take by the' Forelock, that Opportunity which God presents us of Opposing Sin,
of edifying our Company, and hindering the Name of God from being blasphemed, or
that the weak and well-meaning Christian should be seduced through default of
timely warning.

6. Quest. Whether we may correct, or expel out of our Service an Infidel, or
Popish Servant?

Answ. Forasmuch as the Holy Apostles of our Lord did not constrain the
Brethren of their Times, to drive away their Servants, tho no better than
Slaves, when they would not embrace the Christian Faith: Therefore, Masters
should now adays observe these two Things. First, That Since he is at liberty to
give Covenant-Servants, that he taken one but such as fear God, and are of the
Household of Faith, if possibly they may be Good; or that he take a most
especial Care, if that they be ignorant, to instruct them, and rid his hands of
them. Secondly, That he do not suffer nor permit the Name of God to be
blasphemed within his House and Family, wherein God will be honored. But above
all, that he never prefer his own private Profit and Advantage above the Glory
of God.

7. Quest. Whether a Reformed Christian Gentleman is bound in Conscience, to
hinder the Committing of Idolatry, in the Chapel of his Castle?

Answ. Forasmuch as we are permitted to suffer that which we cannot alter nor
reform; provided, that he give not any Sign or Token of his Approbation, a
Gentleman may not hinder People from entering into the Chapel of his Castle,
when as Idolatry is Established by Public Authority.

8. Quest. Whether we may feign to perform the abusive (Sinful) Will of a
Testator, that so we may remove the Abuse?

Answ. Although there would be no Sin in it to frustrate the abusive (Sinful)
Intention of the Testator, by detaining the Revenues ordained by him, for
chanting Masses; yet notwithstanding this feigning and dissembling will be
always evil, and must be condemned, when a Man does make Semblance of paying
Service unto Devils.

9. Quest. Whether we may limit or keep back those Gifts and Alms bequeathed by
a Testator?

Answ. We are not forbidden to bequeath any part of our Estate unto pious Uses
after our decease, no more than to give it away during our Lives; provided we
do it not out of Ambition to get a Name, and renown by so doing. For it cannot
be said, that a Man is in quest of Glory, when as he shall oblige his Heir to
do well according to that Estate he shall leave him, as he himself would have
done, if he had lived longer. To allege, that he never used to do thus in his
life time; it is a Bar put upon a Man's Liberty, that he should have no Power
freely to dispose of his own Goods. If the Heir be dissatisfied, woe unto him.

10. Quest. Whether we are bound to approve of that Minister, who has been
examined by Persons of Judgment and Experience?

Answ. As a Church is free to prove and try the Life and Doctrine of a
Minister, before they accept and receive him: So neither is there any Tie, nor
Obligation upon them to the contrary, but that they may confide and acquiesce
in those who are qualified to examine him, and have had a long time knowledge
of him, and so can best judge who and what he is. Otherwise the Faithful in
Foreign parts would be destitute of all means, whereby to be supplied with able
Pastors, if this Door were shut up.

11. Quest. Whether a Pastor may forsake his Church, and a Church their Pastor?

Answ. A Pastor may not of his own head forsake his Flock; but in case they
will not make use of him, he is free, and may warrantably leave them, because
ho cannot be a Pastor without a People, nor hold and exercise his Office among
them against their Wills and Consent by mere force. Or in case the Church
should not count his Labors among them profitable, or if he should have a Call
unto another Church, which has greater need of him, he may with the general
Consent of his Flock freely go thither, and serve it. And look as every Pastor
is bound to serve the Church of God, especially his own; so likewise is One
Church bound to help another. And would to God this mutual Assistance were
better practiced; for then we should be more enlargedly useful and beneficial
one unto another.

12. Quest. Whether a private Christian may exercise the Office of a Minister
unto his own Family?

Answ. A Godly Man being the Head and Master of his Family, ought to serve,
guide and instruct it, according to the Measure of his Gifts and Graces, and
may so far supply the Pastor's Office, and perform his Duty in it, as to teach
sound Doctrine, and inculcate wholesome Counsels to it. But forasmuch as also
Persons indifferently are not allowed to Preach the Word, and Administer the
Sacrament, it is but just and reasonable, that a Man should first try and
examine himself, and be well assured, that he is called of God before he
attempt or take upon him so great and weighty an Office. Yet nevertheless,
every particular Family ought to be a Little Church of Christ.

13. Quest. Whether it be lawful to hold a Commander's Place (in any of the
Popish Guilds and Fraternities?)

Answ. The immoderate Desire of Gain from all Quarters, has caused a multitude
of Cases to be started by Conscience; As this in particular, which now lies
before me. Whether it be lawful to hold a Commander's Place or Office (in any
of the Popish Guilds and Fraternities?) To which I answer, That because there
is a Foundation of Masses annexed unto such Offices and Commanderships, and for
that such Places are not in the King's gift, but settled upon the Members of
such and such a Guild and Fraternity, who are recommended to it, and for that
they do all take an Oath repugnant to the true Reformed Religion, they cannot
with a safe Conscience hold it. For were there no other Evil in it, yet there
is this, that Since they do not apply the Profits and Emoluments of the
Commandership unto those very uses to which they were designed, they be but
Thieves and Robbers.

14. Quest. Whether it be lawful to antedate a Contract?

Answ. Provided there be no falsehood in it contrary to the Agreement in the
Policy or Instrument, private Persons are no more forbidden to antidate a Deed
of Sale, in which there is no Fraud, than to change their Names, or to date a
Letter from Paris, which was written at Lions. In case it should be alleged,
that this would be a cheating the King of his Gabel and Impost, I answer, this
is nothing to the Purpose: because the Question is not moved about the
Detention of Tribute, but only how to avoid without Fraud, a most violent
Extortion, and tyrannical Pillage. But in case an Oath should be tendered unto
the Parties, then I must tell them, that the Name and Honor of God should be
more precious to them than all the Riches of the World.

15. Quest. Whether it be lawful, and when I may put out my Money unto Interest?

Answ. I would never advise any Man, to put out his Money to Interest, if he
can employ it any ways else. Yet when as a Man's whole Estate does lie in ready
Money, he may very well contract with such and such Persons, that upon such and
such terms it may be lawful for him to receive benefit and profit thereby. But
he must be very careful, that he do not let loose the Reins to demand, and take
excessive Gains, as is the Custom and Practice of too too many, nor should he
grieve or grind the Face of that poor Man with whom he has contracted, nor
endammage the public Interest by his own private Benefit. Wherefore upon the
whole, I dare not approve of any Interest, till I do first know how, and upon
what Terms, Articles and Conditions, and with what Persons you do transact
herein.

CHAP. X. Orders and Decrees concerning Marriages.
Made by the Authority of the National Synod of Vertueil, held in the Year,
l567. But drawn up at the Desire of the Fathers in this Synod, by the R. Mr.
Calvin, Minister of God's Holy Word, Pastor and Professor in the Church and
University of Geneva.

These Orders were tacked together with Mr. Calvin's Answer to the
forementioned fifteen Cases of Conscience, and joined to the Acts of the
aforesaid Synod.

DECREE the First.
THE Question moved is, Who are those Persons, that cannot Marry without Leave
first had and obtained?

ANSWER.
Article I. All young Persons, who were never Married, be they Sons or
Daughters, and whose Parents are yet alive cannot dispose of themselves, nor
contract Marriage without the Consent of their said Parents, unless they have
attained their due Age in Law, to wit, the Son that of Twenty Years, and the
Daughter Eighteen, and then they are dutifully to demand it in their own
Persons, or by others, that they may be Married: But, and if their Parents
should slight, and make no account of their Request, they may lawfully Marry
without their Authority. Article II. And this Self-same Rule shall be observed,
with Reference to Pupils and Orphans, who are under the Authority of their
Trustees and Guardians. Nor may Mothers, nor the Guardians themselves of their
own heads dispose of their Children or Pupils (committed to their Charge and
Trust) in Marriage, without calling in some of their Parents or Kindred, in
case they have any. Article III. In case two young Persons should foolishly and
rashly of their own Wills, without consulting Parents, or Guardians contract
Marriage together, let them be punished or chastised, and let this Marriage at
the Request of Parents or Guardians be rescinded. Article IV. And in case they
have been enticed and decoyed by any Man or Woman into this Marriage, let these
Cheats be prosecuted by the nearest Parents or Guardians of these
Orphan-Pupils, and forced to confess their Crime publicly in a Court of
Justice, and to ask pardon of the Judge, and be punished by fasting three whole
Days, having given them but a little Bread and Water. Article V. And let those
Witnesses who were present at the making of such a Marriage, be punished
likewise with fasting one whole Day, and nothing allowed them for their
Nourishment. Article VI. Let no Promises be made by young Persons that were
never Married but Conditionally, and let there be Two Witnesses present at
them, or else they shall be null and void. Article VII. In case that Children
should Marry without their Parents Consent, when they be come to Age allowed
them by Law, as in the first Article, let the Magistrate take Cognizance of the
Matter, and if it was lawfully done by them, by reason of the Supine
negligence, or over rigorous Severity of their Parents, then let those very
Parents be compelled to give them a Portion or to settle them in such a Way and
Condition to live in the World, as if they had given their plenary Consent unto
the Marriage of their Children. Article VIII. Let not Parents constrain their
Children to Marry against their Wills and Consent: And in case either a Son or
Daughter should refuse the Party offered them by their Father, let their
refusal be expressed with all modesty and filial Reverence. And let them not be
punished for this their Refusal. And the same Course shall be observed as to
Minors under Guardians. Article IX. Let not Parents or Guardians be allowed to
contract their Children, or Orphans in Marriage till such time as they become
in Age, and capable to confirm it. Nevertheless if it so fall out, that a Child
having refused to Marry a Person chosen by his Father, should a while after
Marry another, who is not so much to his Profit and Advantage, let not the
Father, for such a Rebellion against, and Contempt of him, be obliged during
Life to give or allow him one Farthing.
The Second DECREE.
IT is Queried, Who are the Persons that may Marry without leave?

ANSWER.
Article I. Such as having been once married, be they Men or Women, though their
Parents be living, shall nevertheless have full power and liberty to remarry
themselves, provided they be in Age, as was declared in the first Article of
the first Order, viz. The Son if he have his Twentieth, and the Daughter her
Eighteenth Year, provided that they were emancipated as from under their
Fathers Authority, so from his House and Family, and kept House by themselves
apart. Yet it would be always a most decent thing if those Children would be
advised by their Fathers in their second Marriages. Article II. Let all
Promises of Marriage be made decently, and in the fear of God, not in
Dissolution, nor lightly over a Glass of Wine, as if they were only to drink
together, but with all possible seriousness, after they have well considered of
it, and are perfectly agreed about it: and in case any should do otherwise let
them be chastised. And in case the Minister declares that he was surprised,
let the Marriage be dissolved. Article III. If a Man should Sue a Woman at Law,
alleging, that she promised to Marry him, unless there were two Witnesses,
Persons of Credit and Godliness to attest it, let the Oath of God be tendered
to the Defendant, and in case she deny it, let her be absolved.
The Third DECREE.
IT is Queried, For what Causes a Marriage-promise may and ought to be
rescinded?

ANSWER.
Article I. There be two Cases in which Promises of Marriage may be rescinded
when made bewixt Persons capable of them. 1. If upon good Evidence it should
appear that the Party married were not a Virgin, tho before Marriage she was
taken for granted, and she avowed herself to be one. 2. When one of the Parties
is utterly unfit for Generation. Article II. The Non-payment of Dowry, or of
Portion, or Wedding-Cloaths ought not to hinder the effectual Performance of
Marriage-promises, because those things are not of the Essence, but Accidents,
and Accessories unto Marriage. Article III. Although in a Treaty of Marriage and
Discourse about it, its lawful enough to add Conditions, or to make a Salvo,
that such a one Consents. Yet nevertheless, when as the Promises come to be
made they shall be pure and plain, nor shall those be reputed
Marriage-promises, which are Conditional.
The Fourth DECREE.
IT is Queried, What distance of time is there to be observed between the
Promise of Marriage and its Performance?

ANSWER.
Article I. The Accomplishment of Marriage shall not be deferred above six
Weeks after the Promise of it. And in case the Parties shall delay beyond that
time, they shall be called into the Consistory, and be admonished to fulfill the
Marriage, and if they be disobedient to these Counsels, they shall be dismissed
over to the Civil Magistrate, who may, if he please compel them to celebrate
it. Article II. In case the Marriage should be opposed, the Minister shall
refer the Party opposing unto the Consistory, and require him to appear at the
next Consistorial Sessions. However let no Person be admitted to make any
Opposition, unless he live in Town, or be very well known, or that he bring
with him a known Person of his Acquaintance, that so an honest Maid may not be
blemished in her Reputation. Article III. And if the Oponent should not appear
at the Day appointed, the Banes of Marriage may then be published, as if there
had been no Impediment at all: That so all Frauds, which might otherwise be
committed in this Matter may be prevented and avoided. Article IV. Let no
Stranger coming from a Foreign Land be admitted unto Marriage, unless he bring
with him good and vallid Certificates, or undoubted Letters of Credit, or that
he have a Testimony from Godly Persons here upon the Place, who will attest for
him, that he has not a Wife elsewhere.
The Fifth DECREE.
THE next Query is about Bonds of Marriage and their Dependencies.

ANSWER.
Article I. Let the Banes be published on three several Sundays in the the
Church before that the Marriage be Solemnized, and let the first Syndick give
it under his hand, that he knows both the Parties, so that immediately after
the third Publication, the Marriage may be then celebrated. If one of the
Parties belong to another Parish, let him bring his Certificate from that
Parish with him. Article II. Let not the betrothed Persons cohabit together as
Man and Wife till such time as they be solemnly married in the Church, in that
manner which is constantly practiced among Christians. If any shall have done
otherwise, let them be imprisoned for three days, and fed only with Bread and
Water, and be called into the Consistory, and convinced of their Sin, that they
may be ashamed and humbled before God.
The Sixth DECREE.
THE next Query is about the Celebration of Marriage.

ANSWER.
Article I. Let the Parties to be married come upon their Wedding Day modestly
unto the Church, without Drums or Minstrels, demeaning themselves orderly and
gravely as becomes Christians, and let them come before the Bell has done
Tolling, that so the Marriage may be solemnly blessed before Sermon. And if
they be negligent, and should come too late, let them be turned away unmarried.
Article II. Let it be lawful to celebrate Marriages on any day, yea upon any
Working-day, which shall seem good unto the Parties themselves, provided there
be a Sermon, or upon the Lord's Day by Nine in the Morning, or on any other day
of the Week, at the same hour, when as the Word of God is Preached, excepting
only that day when the Lord's Supper shall be Administered, that so there may be
no distraction in the Worship of God, and that all may be the better prepared
for Communion with Christ, at his holy Table.
The Seventh DECREE.
About the Man's dwelling with his Wife.

ARTICLE.
LET the Man and his Wife cohabit together in one and the same House, having
all things in common between them. And if either of them separate from the
other to live apart, let them be called into the Consistory, and convinced of
their Sin, and in case of differences betwixt them, let them be made up, and
return home reconciled each with the other.

The Eighth DECREE.
IT is Queried, What are the Degrees of Consanguinity which hinder Marriage?

ANSWER.
Article I. No Marriage may be contracted in the direct Line between the Father
and his Daughter, or the Mother and her Son, and so consequentially between
none other of their Descendants; because this is destructive of natural Modesty
and Piety, and is expressly forbidden by the Law of God, and the Civil Laws.
Article II. In like manner no Uncle can marry his Neice, or Grand-niece, nor
the Aunt her Nephews or Grand-nephews, because an Uncle represents a Father,
and an Aunt the Mother. Article III. Nor may a Brother marry his Sister either
of the whole, or half Blood. As for those other Degrees, tho they be not
forbidden neither by the Law of God, nor by the Civil Law of the Romans; yet
nevertheless, because such Marriages have not for many years been practiced,
and that we may shun all Scandals, and that ignorant Persons may not blaspheme
God and his Word. Let not Cousin Germans contract Marriage together, till that
time h^th gotten a better Opinion of such Marriages among us. As for
Intermarriages in other degrees, let them not be hindered.
The Ninth DECREE.
IT is Queried, What are those Degrees of Affinity which hinder Marriage?

ANSWER.
Article I. Let no Father marry his Son's Widow, nor let any Woman marry her
deceased Daughter's Husband so consequently in those degrees, which descends in
a direct Line. Article II. Let no Man marry his Wife's Daughter, nor her
Grandchild, nor any in this Line downward. Article III. Let not the Woman
marry her Husband's Son, nor Grandson, nor any in this Line downward. Article
IV. In like manner let none marry the Widow of his Nephew, or of his great
Nephew. Article V. Let no Man marry his Brother's Widow, nor any Woman him, who
was her Sister's Husband. Article VI. A Man having committed Adultery with his
Neighbor's Wife, if it be afterward discovered, he shall not marry the
Adulteress, because of the Scandals and Dangers that will ensue upon such a
Marriage.
The Tenth DECREE.
THE next Query is about the Discords, Variance, and Contentions between
married Persons.

ANSWER.
Article I. In case a Man does not live peaceably with his Wife, but that there
be Strifes and Quarrels betwixt them let them be called into the Consistory,
and be admonished to live in Godly Concord, and Union, and Love together, and
let each of them be reproved for their Faults according as the Exigency of
their case shall require. Article II. If a Man shall evil entreat his Wife,
abusing, beating and tormenting her, or if he threaten outrageous Mischief to
her, and it be known that he is a very disorderly and choleric Fellow, he
shall be turned over to the Council, who are humbly entreated by their
Authority expressly to require him not to beat his Wife and that under some
certain Penalty.
The Eleventh DECREE.
IT is Queried, For what Causes may and ought a Marriage to be declared null?

ANSWER.
Article I. In case a Woman should complain that her Husband is bewitched, and
naturally impotent for any Congress with his Wife, and this shall by
Confession, or Visitation be found true, let the Marriage be then declared
null, and the Woman also set at liberty from her Husband, and the Man strictly
forbidden not to abuse any other Woman in this manner. Article II. If a Man
should make the same Complaint of his Wife, that he cannot have carnal
Knowledge of her, because of some defect in her Body, and that she will not
suffer it to be remedied, and the Truth hereof being well known, let the
Marriage be declared null.
The Twelfth DECREE.
IT is Queried, For what Causes may and ought a Marriage to be dissolved?

ANSWER.
Article I. In case a Man accuse his Wife of Adultery, and prove it by
Witnesses, and clear Evidence, and demand hereupon to be separated from her,
let him be divorced, and also have leave to marry again with whom he best
pleases. Yet may he be exhorted to forgive his said Wife; but he may not be
urged importunately, nor compelled against his will to keep her. Article II.
Although in ancient times the Wifes privilege was not equal to that of her
Husband, in case of Divorce; yet forasmuch as the Apostle testifies, that the
Obligation is mutual and reciprocal as to Bed and Board, and that in neither of
these the Woman is more subject to her Husband, than he is to her, if therefore
a Man be convicted of Adultery, and his Wife demand to be separated from him,
let a Divorce be granted her, unless she can be prevailed on by Godly Counsels
to be reconciled with him. Yet nevertheless, in case the Wife be found to have
committed Adultery through the mere apparent fault of her Husband, or the
Husband through the fault of* his Wife, so that both were culpable, or in case
there is notorious fraudulent dealings in this business that a Divorce may be
procured, they shall not in neither of these cases be admitted to demand a
Separation. Article III. If that a Man shall be gone a long Voyage about Trade,
Traffic, or any other business, and he be not debauched, nor alienated in his
Affections from his Wife, and that he be absent a very long time, and it is not
known what is become of him, but by probable Conjectures that he is dead; yet
may not his Wife be permitted to remarry till the Term of Ten Years be expired
from the day of his departure, unless there be certain Evidences of his death;
which being produced in open Court, she may have a License given her. And yet
notwithstanding this Permission at the End of Ten Years be granted her, in case
there be any Suspicion, or News, or other Indications, that this Man was
detained a Prisoner, or that he was hindered by some other inconvenience from
returning home, the said Woman shall abide as a Widow unmarried. Article IV. In
case a Man through Debauchery, or some other evil Affection should abandon the
place of his abode; let his Wife make diligent inquiry after him, and learn
where he resideth, and then she may come and demand a Warrant from the Civil
Magistrate to recall him, or else to constrain him to return, or at least to
give him notice, that unless he return home again unto his Family, that he will
be proceeded against in his absence. And this being done, although there be no
possible means to compel him to return, yet shall he be prosecuted, according
as he was threat'ned, and Proclamation shall be made on three Sundays (a
Fortnight intervening betwixt each Proclamation, six Weeks the whole) and these
self-same Proclamations shall be also made in the Lieutenants-Court, and
notified unto two or three of his nearest Friends and Relations, (if he has
any) that in case he do not appear, his Wife may come to the next Sessions of
the Consistory, and sue out a Separation, which may be granted her, by sending
her unto the Lords of the City, who may pass a juridical Decree about it. And
this Person, who shall have rebelled in this manner, let him be banished
forever out of the Territories of this Republic. But, and if he should return,
let them be reconciled, and agree together to live in the Fear of God. Article
V. If any Man should make it his common practice to abandon his Wife, and roave
and wander up and down the Country, for the second Offense of this kind, let
him be Imprisoned, and fed only with Bread and Water, and let him be threatened
most severely, that he never take the like Courses; for upon his third Offense,
he shall be dealt withal most rigorously; and in case no Amendment nor
Reformation follow hereupon, let his Wise have License given her to be no
longer yoked with such a Wretch, who neither keeps ^er Faith nor Company.
Article VI. If a Man being debauched, as was said above in the fourth Article
shall have lest his Wife, without any cause given him on her part, or any fault
of hers, and this be duly known by the Testimony of Neighbors and familiar
Friends, and that this poor Woman comes and complains of her Affliction, and
craveth remedy; she shall be admonished to make diligent inquiry, and find out
what is become of him, and his nearest Friends and Relations, if he have any,
shall be called in to inform what News and Intelligence they have of him. In
the mean while his Wife shall wait for him a full Year; And in case she can
hear neither Tale nor Tidings of him, she shall recommend him and herself unto
God. And the Year being expired, she shall come before the Consistory, and if
it be known, that there is good reason why she should Marry, after Exortation
given her, she shall be dismissed over unto the Council, who shall take an Oath
of her, that she does not know where he is gone, nor what is become of him, and
the same Oath shall be tendered to his nearest Friends and Relations concerning
him; and then they shall proceed to make those three Proclamations, as was
beforementioned in the fifth Article of this twelfth Decree, that so this said
Woman may have License to remarry; and in case the absent Person should return,
let him be punished according to his just demerit. Article VII. If a Woman
depart from her Husband, and live elsewhere from him, and her Husband come and
demand to be separated from her, and to be set at liberty, that he may marry
another, let it be first considered, whether she be in such a place where a
Summons may be served on her, or at least notice may be given her to appear and
answer to her Husband's Suit, and Letters and Citations shall be put into her
Husband's hands to this purpose. This being done, let those Proclamations
before ordered be now made, her Friends and nearest Relations having been first
called and charged to admonish her to return. In case of her Appearance within
the term, and her Husband refuse to accept of her, as being jealous that she
has played the Harlot during this absence, and for that it is a most
scandalous thing for a Man thus to leave his Wife; yet let Endeavors be used
to reconcile and unite them, and the Husband shall be exhorted to pardon her
Folly: But if he stand out peremptorily against all Entreaties, then inquiries
shall be made in the places where she has haunted, and how she has carried
her self; and if there be no proof nor evidence of her ill Conduct, and that
she has not violated her Marriage-Covenant, then let the Husband be
constrained to retake her, and to be reconciled with her. But, and if there be
shrewd presumptions, and vehement evidence that she has played the Whore, as
that she was found in wicked and suspected Company, and that her Conversation
was not civil as became an honest Woman, then let the Husband's Suit be
granted, as is but just and reasonable. And in case she do not appear at the
time determined, then let her be proceeded against in the same manner, as the
delinquent Husband was in the fourth, fifth and sixth foregoing Articles.
Article VIII. If a Man having made or sworn a Promise of Marriage unto a Maid
or Woman, shall depart unto another Country, and the Maid or Woman shall make
her Complaints of it, craving to be discharged from her Promise because of his
disloyalty: Let inquiry be made upon what occasion he left the City, whether it
be lawful, and with the Consent of his Partner, who is now the Plaintiff, or
whether it was not for Debauchery, and because he was unwilling to accomplish
the Marriage: And if it appear, that he had no sufficient reason for so doing,
and that he did it out of a wicked Intent; let inquiry be made into what place
he is withdrawn, and how notice may be given him to return within a prefixed
day, and to perform his promise of Marriage unto his Partner; and if upon
notice given he do not appear, then let Proclamation be made on three Sundays
(a Fortnight's distance intervening betwixt each Proclamation, the last being
made on the sixth Lord's Day) and if he do not appear at the time assigned,
then let the Maid or Woman be declared free, and set at liberty from him, and
let the delinquent Man be banished for his disloyalty. In case he do appear,
let him be compelled to accomplish the Marriage out of hand. But, and if it
cannot be known into what Country he is gone, and that the Maid, or Woman, and
his Friends and nearest Relations shall swear that they are all ignorant where
he is, then let the same Proclamations be made, as if he had notice given him,
that the Maid or Woman is discharged, acquitted, and liberated from him. But in
case there was a just cause for his absence, and that he had advised and
acquainted his Partner with it, then let the Maid or Woman use all possible
diligence by her self, and his Friends to recall and induce him to return; and
if he do not return within the Year, then let Proclamations be made as was
before directed in the fourth Article. Article IX. And let the same Course be
taken with a Maid or Woman that shall offend as the Man; excepting always, that
the Husband shall not be obliged to wait a full Year, although his Wife had lest
him with his Knowledge and Consent, unless he had given her leave for to be
absent a longer time. Article X. If a Maid, being duly tied by promise of
Marriage, is frauduiently transported out of the Territory of this Republic,
that she might not accomplish the Marriage; let inquiry be made, whether some
one or other in the City has not aided nor assisted in this rape, that so they
may be compelled to return her, under such a Penalty as shall be judged meet;
and if she be under Guardians and Trustees, they also shall be enjoined to see
her forth coming if possible. Article XI. If a married Woman have abandoned her
Husband, and he be silent, and make no complaint of it; or if the Wife thus
forsaken of her Husband shall dissemble it without a word's speaking, and this
afterward come to light, let them be cited both into the Consistory, there to
inform how matters have gone, that so all scandals may be prevented, and that
no deceit nor collusion may be tolerated, nor what is worse winked at; and the
true state of the Matter being come to light, an effectual course may be taken
to prevent all voluntary Divorces, which Men and Women of their own headstrong
Wills, and without Authority of the Civil Magistrate would give unto one
another. Yet nevertheless, the Wife at the request of her Husband shall be
compelled to follow him, when and wheresoever he pleases to remove his
habitation, whether it be out of choice or necessity; provided he be not a
debauched Person, who will carry her God knows whether into some strange and
unknown Country: but if it be into a Land at some reasonable distance, where he
will make his residence, and in some convenient place to follow his Calling,
and to live as an honest Man, she must follow him. Let all matrimonial Matters
concerning personal Conjunction be first transacted in the Consistory, but not
Matters concerning Estate or Dower. And here let there be a most friendly
Agreement and Correspondency in God's Name. But if there should need any
judicial Sentence to be pronounced, then let them go unto the Council, and
acquaint their Lordships with the Sense of the Consistory, who may after judge
finally in the Case.
The End of the Synod of Vertueil.
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE VII. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ. IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, Held At Rochel, in the Province
of Aulnix, and Year of our Lord, 1571.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Moderator and Scribes. Chap. II. General Matters. Observations upon
the Confession of Faith. Heretics in Poland, and Transylvania opposed.
Cozain's Works condemned; and the Bishops of England desired to suppress his,
and the Books of some other Heretics. Erastus condemned; Three Originals of
the Confession kept, one at Rochel, another in Bearn, and the third at Geneva.
Chap. III. Observations upon the Discipline. Form of Ordination. Alterations
and Emendations of several Canons of the Discipline. Chap. IV. Continuation of
those Observations. A Motion for answering the Books of our Adversaries,
approved by the Synod. Chap. V. Catalogue of Vagrant. Chap. VI. A particular
Matter about Elders and Deacons. A Motion of the Lord High-Admiral made unto
the Synod. Chap. VII. General Matters. Of the Consistory. Of Delinquents. Of
Provincial Synods, and Baptism. Chap. VIII. Four Observations upon the
Discipline. Of the Lord's Supper. Marriages. More Observations upon the
Discipline. Chap IX. Canons about Marriage. Particular Orders. Chap. X. Orders
about Publishing of Books, etc. Chap. XI. Particular Matters. Chap. XII.
Matters relating to Monsieur Mercure. The Church of Taillebourg. A Case of
Conscience from the Province of Poictou. The Churches of Languedoc not
conforming exactly to the Discipline.
THE First Synod of Rochel. 1571. Synod VII.

SYNOD VII.
In the Name of GOD, Amen.
CHAP. I.
Canons ordained in the National Synod held at Rochel, the second Day of April,
One thousand five hundred seventy and one, in the Eleventh Year of the Reign of
Charles the Ninth, Theodore de Beza, Minister of Geneva, was chosen Moderator,
N. des Gallars, and de la Rougeraye Scribes.

CHAP. II. General MATTERS. Observations upon the Confession of Faith.
I. FOrasmuch as the kind Acceptance and Entertainment of Christian Doctrine is
the true Foundation of Church Discipline, we have decreed to open this Synod by
Reading the Confession of Faith Received in the Churches of France.

II. Forasmuch as our Confession of Faith is Printed diverse ways, The Synod
declares this to be the true Confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches in
France, which begins with these words, We believe that there is but one God;
which Confession was drawn up in the first National Synod, held at Paris, May
the 25th. 1559.

These Heretics were Davidis, Gentilis, Blandrata, Socinus, etc.
III. The Confession being read, Monsieur de Beza acquainted the Assembly of
those Heresies dispersed abroad in Poland and Transylvania, by diverse Persons,
against the Unity, Divinity and humane Nature of our Lord Jesus Christ,
receiving the Errors of ancient Heretics, particularly of Samosatenus, Arrius,
Photinus, Nestorius, Eutyches, and many others, yea, and of Mahomet himself
also: Whereupon the Synod unanimously voted their Detestation of all those
abominable Errors and Heresies, and advises all Pastors, Elders and Deacons,
and generally all the Faithful vigourosly to oppose their Admission into the
Churches of France.

IV. Information was also given concerning the Errors of Cozain, by the
Minister of Normandy, and Monsieur de Chandieu, and Monsieur de L'estang were
ordered to examine the Table of the said Cozain, and to bring in a Report of
it, and finally it was condemned, rejected and detested; And the English
Bishops shall be desired to suppress the Books of the said Heretics, which
began to be in vogue among them.

V. The Nine and twenty Articles of the Confession of our Faith, and the others
concerning Church Discipline, being read and propounded by the Minister of
Bourdeaux, notice was given concerning a certain Physician, who maintained the
Supremacy of the Magistrate as Head of the Church, and had published certain
Writings under his own Hand and Name containing the Reasons of his Opinion.
Whereupon the whole Assembly ratified the said Articles of it is Confession, and
rejected the Error of the said Physician, and of all others who would abolish
Church Discipline, confounding it with the Civil Government of the Magistrate.
It condemns also those Errors proceeding from the aforementioned Tenent.

VI. Moreover, the Synod ordered Monsieur de Beza to answer them, who impugned
the aforesaid Articles of our Faith, and the Discipline of our Church, and in
special the abovementioned Physician; and our Brother the Minister of
Bourdeaux shall deliver unto Monsieur de Beza, the Points Collected by him,
that must be answered; and the whole shall be communicated to the Brethren of
Geneva.

Union must be placed instead of Unity in the Art. concerning these two words,
in the 26. Art. see Synod of Nismes, g. m. Art. 20. And the 3d. Synod of
Rochel, Art. 8. concerning diverse Obsenric in the Confession of Faith.
VII. Instead of Unity there shall be replaced the Word Union in the six and
thirtieth Article of our Confession of Faith. And whereas the Deputies of the
Isle of France and Brie do conceive it needful, that the said Article be
explained in that Clause of it, which treats of the Participation of Christ's
Substance in the Sacrament of his Supper; After a long Conference, it was at
last resolved, That the Synod approving the said Article, rejects their
Opinion, who will not receive the Word Substance: By which word the Synod does
not understand any Confusion, Commixture or Conjunction after a carnal Manner,
nor in any wise Natural, but a most true and intimate Conjunction after a
spiritual Manner, by which Jesus Christ is so far made ours, and we his, that
there is no Conjunction of Bodies, either Natural or Artificial, which can be
so close and intimate: nor is this our fence and meaning, as if by the
Conjunction of Christ's Person and Substance with ours there did result a kind
of third Person and Substance: No, but this only, That by his Virtue, all that
is in him needful for our Salvation is hereby most freely and intimately given
and communicated to us: Nor do we consent with them, who say, that we
communicate in his Merits, Gifts and Spirit, without his being at all made
ours; But with the Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians, admiring this
Supernatural, and to our reason incomprehensible Mystery, we do believe, that
we are made Partakers of his Body delivered to the death for us, and of his
Blood shed for us, so that we are Bone of his bones, and Flesh of his flesh,
and that we receive him together with all his Gifts by faith wrought in us,
through the incomprehensible Virtue and Efficacy of his Holy Spirit; and thus
do we in this Sense understand these Words of our Lord, speaking, Who so eats
the Flesh and drinks the Blood of the Son of Man has everlasting Life, Item,
I am the Vine, you art the Branches; and we must abide in him, that we may
bring forth much Fruit; and that we are Members of his Body, and of his Flesh,
and of his Bones. And as we derive our death from the first Adam, because we
participate of his Substance; so must we as truly partake of the second Adam
Christ Jesus, that we may derive life from him. And therefore all Pastors, and
the Faithful in general are required not to yield unto the contrary Opinions,
because what is now asseretd by us has firm footing in the express Word of God.

Three Original Copies of the Confess (...) of Faith, the (...) at Rochel,
(...) 2d. (...) and the (...)
VIII. Finally, when as the Confession of Faith was read and ended, the whole
Synod decreed, that without any Additions there should be three Copies fairly
written in Parchmin, whereof one should be kept in this City of Rochel, another
in Bearn, and the third at Geneva, and all three should be subscribed by the
Ministers and Elders Deputies of the Provinces of this Kingdom, in the Name of
all the Churches; Moreover her Majesty the Queen of Navarre, and my Lords the
Princes of Navarre and Conde, and the other Lords here present in this Synod
are also requested to subscribe it with their own hands.

CHAP. III. Observations upon the Church Discipline; Tuesday the Third of the
same Month.
I. THE Discipline being read, it was judged needful, that under the Head of
Ministers, there should be made this following Addition, viz. The most
diligently that may be.

II. Under the fourth Head, to these words, It shall be granted because of our
present Circumstances, shall be added the Ninth Article of the Synod of
Vertueil.

III. Under the Eight shall be added, Although the Usage of Imposition of Hands
be good and holy, yet it shall not be reputed necessary as if it were of the
Substance of Ordination.

The Form of Ordination.
IV. The Form of Ordination was drawn up by Monsieur de Chandieu, in these
following Words. The Minister who presents to the People the Person to be
Ordained, shall briefly treat of the Institution and Excellency of the
Ministry, alleging for this purpose, these or the like Texts of Holy
Scripture, viz. 4. Ephesians. 11. Luke 10.16. John 20.22. 2 Cor. 5.19, 120. 1 Cor.
4.1. Exhorting every one to take special heed that both Minister and People
discharge their proper Duties. The Minister shall acquit himself with the
greater care and diligence in his Calling, because he knows of what high price
and excellent account it is with God: And the People shall with all Reverence
receive the Message of God brought unto them by this his Ambassador. The Form
of Prayer at Ordination was first framed in the Synod of Mai^ant 1609. 4th.
Article of Observations upon the Discipline.
Then shall be read in the hearing of the whole Assembly, 1. Tim. 3. and 1.
Titus. Where the Apostle delivers the Characters and Qualifications of a true
Minister, and that the Elect Person may be enabled by divine Grace faithfully
and conscientiously to perform the Duties of this holy and honorable Office, a
pithy and fervent Prayer suitable to the occasion shall be powered out before
the Lord for him, in the close of which he shall Impose his hands on the Head
of the Elect Person, beseeching God that as he is consecrated unto his Service,
So that from the year 1559. to the year 1609. there was no stated Form of
Prayer to whose words the Minister in Ordination was tied up necessarily and
invariably.
so he may be replenished with the Graces of his Holy Spirit, and that he would
vouchsafe to bless his Ministry and pious Labors unto the Glory of his great
Name, the Edification of his Church, and the Salvation of this elected Minister.

V. Under the Ninth shall be added, And the Church Discipline and Confession of
Faith shall be signed and subscribed by the Minister Elect.

VI. The Tenth and Eleventh Articles shall be explained and conjoined in one,
and after these Words, They shall be Ministers during life, there shall he this
Addition, If they be not lawfully discharged upon good and sufficient Grounds,
and those approved by the Provincial Synod. Moreover, there shall be added, And
deserters of the Ministry shall be excommunicate by the Provincial Synod in
case they repent not. And after these Words, And as for those who be sent unto
any Church, shall be added, for a time.

VII. The Twelfth which was the Thirteenth shall be thus corrected, Although a
Minister do tell it publicly, that he was forsaken of his Church, or
persecuted, yet shall he not be received by another Church, without evidencing
unto the Colloquy or Synod his conduct in this Matter, and the said Colloquy or
Synod shall act therein according to their best judgment and discretion.

VIII. Under the Fourteenth after these words, Such who intrude themselves into
the Ministry, in lieu of Places shall be inserted Provinces.

IX. Under the Seventeenth after these words, or expecting the Determination
instead of the Council, there shall be put in of the Colloquy or Provincial
Synod, and before instead of Sent there shall be Lent.

X. To the Eighteenth shall be added, with the good Will and Consent of the
said Minister.

XI. The Two and twentieth Article shall abide unchanged; only with this
Addition, And all Advises and Letters shall be sent unto one particular Church,
and not unto any one particular Person.

This Article i^ the 37th. of the Chapter of Ministers in the Book of
Discipline.
XII. Under the Twenty Seventh, in lieu of those words, After he was summoned,
there shall be put, Three Months being past the first Summons. Also after those
words, It may be lawful for him to join himself unto some other Church, shall
be added, by the Advice of the Colloquy or Provincial Synod, which shall
consider both the Poverty of the Church, and the Estate of the Minister; And in
case of urgent necessity, the said Colloquy, or Synod may shorten the said Term
of Three Months, and it shall be lawful for them to censure those ungrateful
People even with Excommunication.

CHAP. IV. Acts passed on Wednesday, the Fourth day of the said Month.
This Article is the 19th. in the Chapter of Ministers, in the Book of
Discipline.
I. UNder the 11th. Article of Ministers, which had been lain by whilst the
Princes sat among us there shall be these Alterations, for General shall be
put Provincial and National, and at the end there shall be added, As shall be
Advised on in an amicable Conference of Ministers of both sides, that so what
is most expedient may be followed. And this Article was approved by the Queen
of Navar, and by the Princes of Navar and Conde, and by my Lords Count Lodwick
and the Admiral.

II. Under the 31st. there shall be this Addition, The Provinces shall be
informed by each other of the deposed Minister, that so the Deposed may not be
received into other Churches.

III. Under the 32th. after those words, During the time of his Ignorance,
shall be added, And this in case the said Minister abiding in his Ministry do
bring greater scandal than Edification unto the Church, whereof the Synods
shall take Cognizance.

IV. On Article the 38th. Monsieur Beza having propounded according to the
Commission given him by our Brethren of Geneva, that there might be some
certain Person chosen to answer those many Books published against our
Doctrine, and that those Answers might be brought into the Provincial Synods,
and there perused by them, and so to be Printed either with, or without the
Author's Name, as the Synod should judge most convenient. This Motion was well
approved by the whole Assembly. And it was also ordered, That in whatsoever
Churches there were sound Books Printed against our Doctrine, they should be
sent unto the said Deputies.

CHAP. V.
V. THE Catalogue of Vagrants being read, the Names of these following Persons
were rased out of it, Torteveau, P. Bouleu, La Tornevie, Roberty, and there
were inserted into it Le Breuil of Lazan, together with Merillo, Paul de Hay,
Rouseau, John Bougayott, Bavillardy an Albigensis. And the Churches were warned
by Monsieur Beza to beware of them, and of John Tevignon, a Burgundian, etc.
Claudius Alexius, who bore about him a Certificate under the Hand of Mr.
Melancthon deceased, and yet both deposed by the Classis of Monbelliard.

VI. Ministers must use no other Calling but their Ministry.
This Article was added unto the former, concerning Ministers. Ministers shall
be forbidden to practice Physic, or any other Calling Trade or Vocation
whatsoever.

VII. Another Article was also subjoined, That Ministers who had Estates of
their own might nevertheless receive Wages from their Churches, but in so
doing, they ought to consider the Necessities of the Church, and the Rules of
Charity.

CHAP. VI. A particular Matter about Elders and Deacons.
VIII. MOnsieur He is called in two other Copies Vires, and in a fourth Virel.
Vercelle Deputy of Brie declares unto this Synod, that the Elders and People
of Meaux are dissatisfied with the first Article of particular Matters; and
complain, that they be deprived of their Freedom and Privilege in Elections.
Whereupon it was advised, that inasmuch as they had been diverse times heard,
and particularly that by the Synod of La Ferte under Joarre they had been
largely instructed in the Will of God from his Holy Word in this Article,
Letters should be dispatched unto them from this Assembly, exhorting them to
acquiesce in the Order of Discipline received in our Churches of France, and in
case they will yet have the Business heard over once again, they shall apply
themselves unto their own Provincial Synod about it.

IX. Under the Second, toward the End, this shall be added, And the said
Elders shall be admonished not to declare unto the Consistory their faults
without just Cause, and in much Charity, according to the Rule of God's Word.
No Person at the first Report of his Miscarriage shall be mentioned by name in
the Consistory.
On this Article the Lord-Admiral propounded, That Persons upon the first
Report should not be mentioned by Name unto the Consistory, until they had
first resolved whether they should be called into it or no. And there was
added, That no Person for the first Report ought to be named, unless the
Consistory for good and vallid causes should think fitting so to do.

X. Under the Third, toward the End shall be this Addition, If they be fit and
in case of want, and hindered by Ministers.

CHAP. VII. General Matters, Thursday the Fifth of the same Month.
I. THere shall be added to the Third Article of Elders and Deacons, That none
others besides the said Deacons shall intermeddle with the Administration of
the Poors Money.

II. This Article shall be added, The Elders and Deacons may be present at
Propositions of the Word of God, made by Ministers, besides their ordinary
Sermons, as also at Censures, and shall have their Privilege of Voting in all
Matters, Doctrine only excepted.

Of the CONSISTORY.
III. THE Fourth Article shall be thus formed, Ministers and Elders compose the
Consistory, in which Ministers shall always preside, and the Deacons may be
present, if so be the Consistory do judge it fitting.

IV. On the Seventh Article after these Words, For trial of their Ability shall
be added, which yet shall not be done without great Prudence and Discretion,
with promise of Secrecy.

V. There shall be this Addition made to the Close of the Eighth Article, And
if there be any other Counsels they shall be suppressed.

VI. After these words in the Ninth, But principally at the Auditing of
Accounts, there shall be this Addition, of which the People shall have notice
given them.

VII. The Tenth Article was thus Explained, If there should arise any
Contention concerning Doctrine, it shall be out of hand notified unto the
Colloquy subordinate unto the Synods, where also the Elders and Professors in
Divinity may be present, to give their Judgment on the Points, but the Decision
of these Controversies shall especially belong unto the Ministers and
Professors of Divinity.

VIII. In the Twelfth, instead of Adjured to speak the Truth, there shall be,
Exhorted and Summoned in the Name of God to speak the Truth.

IX. On the Sixteenth, after these words, Propositions of the Word of God,
shall be added, Among Scholars.

Of Delinquents, and Censured Persons, and what are these Offenses which render
them obnoxious unto Censures.
No copy of Excommunication or Church Censures to be given.
X. THE Question being moved, whether a Copy may be given of the
Excommunication, or of any other Censure; It was answered, That because the
whole Process was a Matter of Conscience, it ought not to be given; And as for
the public Act, it is subject properly to the Magistrates Jurisdiction.

XI. The first Article was approved of, but after those words, And if
notwithstanding all this they do not convert, but persist in their Stubbornness
and Obstinacy, there shall be added, On the fourth Lord's Day, the scandalous
Persons shall be Excommunicated, either in this or such like form as shall be
advised on by the Consistory, we do declare unto the whole Congregation, that
we do not own him for one of the Members of our Church, and in the Name, and by
the Authority of our Lord Jesus we cut him off from it.

XII. On the third, unto those words, After they shall have continued firm,
shall be added, without expecting the Advice of a National Synod.

Of Provincial SYNODS.
XIII. ON the first: Article, instead of once a Year, shall be inserted, at
least twice.

XIV. In the second after the first; Period, shall be added, And the said
Ministers and Elders shall produce their Orders of Deputation.

XV To the sixth, This Article is the 11th. in the Chapter of Provincial Synods
in the Book of Discipline.
this Article of the Synod of Vertueil shall be added, If there arise any
difference between two Synods, they shall choose a third to reconcile them.

Of BAPTISM. 1571. Synod VIII.

XVI. AFter these words, in the second Article, This is the 4th. Article in the
Chapter and Book of Discipline.
Quit and resign their Right unto the Sureties, shall be added, As to
Instruction. And a little before shall be added, If the Parents do consent. The
second and third Article shall make but one, Papists and excommunicate Persons
being joined together.

XVII. And the fourth after these words, And is wholly null, shall be abridg'd
and cut short, and shall be thus expressed, Baptism administered by a Person who
has neither Call nor Commission, is wholly null and void.

CHAP. VIII. Acts passed upon Friday the Sixth of the said Month.
I. IN the sixth Article, the word Alliance shall be removed, and it shall
suffice to say thus much, That fellowship among the Faithful may be maintained
by Conjunction of Friendship, and instead of Conceited shall be put Contentious.

II. Instead of these words, in the Eighth, Although the Husband have an
unbelieving Wife, yet he is not excusable, shall be put these words, Although the
believing Husband have a Wife of contrary Religion, yet is he not excusable.

III. After these words, in the Ninth, The Ministers shall reject, shall be
added, as much as is fitting.

IV. This Article shall be added, The Consistories shall have an eye over them,
who detain their Children from Baptism too long a time.

Of the LORD's SVPPER.
Beneficed persons not to be admitted to the Lord's Supper.
V. THis Article shall be added, Beneficed Persons retaining the Name and Title
of their Benefices, and those also who dabble with Idolatry in their said
Benefices, shall not be admitted to the Lord's Table, but such as hold those
Benefices by the King's Gift, and make a true and public Profession of the
Reformed Religion, owning and avowing it with sufficient Considence, may be
received unto the Lord's Supper, only they shall be exhorted to apply the
yearly Profits of those their Benefices to pious Uses. This is the 7th. Article
in the Chapter of the Lord's Supper and Book of Discipline.


VI. After these words, in the sixth Article, And striving as much as in them
lies, shall be added, yea also they shall put the Cup unto their Mouths, that
so they may prevent all Offense, which might otherwise be taken.

VII. At the End of the tenth Article, there shall be this Addition, And
therefore the National Synods shall take care about it as the Good of the
Church shall require. This Article is the 14th. in the Chapter of the Lord's
Supper and Book of Disline.


Of MARRIAGES.
VIII. THere shall be this Addition made unto the first Article, This is the
2d. Article in the Chapter of Marriages, and Book of Discipline.
That all Persons young or old, though they have been formerly married, if they
refuse to pay that Honor and Duty unto their Parents of Acquainting them with
their intended purpose of Marriage, shall be sharply reproved by the
Consistory. This is the 6th Article in the Chapter of Marriage and Book of
Displine.


IX. After these words, in the third, Touching Consanguinities and Affinities,
the Faithful may not contract Marriage with Persons. And in lieu of what
follows, 1571. Synod VIII.
Forasmuch as great scandal may proceed from it, whereof the Church shall take
Cognizance, there shall be put, unless it be permitted them by the King's Edict.

X. This Addition shall be made unto the seventh, This is the 16th. Chapter of
Marriage and Book of Discipline.
And if the Parties resolve to solemnize their Marriages in any other place
than that where their Banes were published, they shall take with them a
sufficient Certificate of their Banes having been thrice published.

XI. And farther Additions shall be made unto this Article, It Is a part of the
21st. Article in the Chapter of Marriages and Book of Discipline.
in these words, As for Persons suspended the Lord's Table, they shall
notwithstanding this their Suspension be permitted Marriage, but with this
Proviso, That they confess their Faults with true Repentance.

XII This also shall be added, That notice be given unto the Faithful, That
diverse Difficulties arising about Marriage-promises may be prevented, Promises
of Marriage shall be made in words, de praesenti.
they shall ^or time to come make the said Promises, in pure and plain words de
praesenti, nor shall the Consistories admit the Banes of any others to be
published in the Church; From which promises according to God's Word the said
Parties can never be discharged.

XIII. Instead of they shall be admonished, This is the 23th. Article in the
Chapter of Marriage and Book of Discipline
in the 19th. Article shall be put, they may be admonished, and at the end
shall be added, But if it should be the Case of any Church Officers, though they
Received again their Wives, yet shall they be displaced from that Office they
held and exercised in the Church.

XIV. After those words in the twentieth, who shall acquaint him with his
Liberty according to the Word of God, This is the 29th Article in the Chapter
of Marriage and Book of Discipline.
there shall be inserted, yet nevertheless, because of the many Difficulties,
we advise the Ministers of this Kingdom not to marry those Parties though they be
at Liberty to provide themselves elsewhere. And after these words, And as for
what concerns the offending Party, the Remainder shall be thus abridged. This
Liberty after great and mature deliberation shall be declared to him. And a
definitive Sentence having been obtained from the Civil Magistrate, the
Consistories may proceed unto the Celebration of that Marriage.

XV. Touching the fourth Article of particular Matters treated in the Synod of
Vertueil, and dismissed over to this Synod, We have advised, That the Wives of
Priests and Monks which had been married unto those of them who have since
revolted, should not cohabit with them as Women with their Husbands, least
God's Holy Ordinance of Marriage should be laden with Reproach and Infamy,
although the Marriage be not dissolved. But, illae vocatae sunt ad caelibatum,
they be called out by God's Providence unto a single Life.

CHAP. IX. Acts passed on Saturday the seventh Day of the same Month.
I. To the Head of Marriages the Canon decreed at Vertueil shall be added, This
is the 21st. Article in the Chapter of Marriage and Book of Discipline.
The Banes of Widows shall not be published till four Months and an half after
the decease of their first Husband, that the Evil and Scandal which otherwise
would fall out may be avoided.

II. And this also, It Is convenient for the keeping up of Discipline in the
Church, These two Articles make up the 24th. in the Chapter of Marriages and
Book of Discipline.
that no Marriage be solemnized on Communion-days. And this Canon shall not be
dispensed with but for very weighty Causes, and those also approved by the
Consistory.

III. Item, Marriages shall not be solemnized on days of Fasting.

Concerning Particular ORDERS.
IV. THere shall be added after the Word, This Article is the 2d. in the
Chapter of particular Orders.
Lands belonging unto Castles, this word, And the Titles in the first Article.

V. To the third Article, there shall be this Addition, Judges shall not be
reproved for giving Sentences in Causes concerning Ecclesiastical Goods, and
the Execution of the King's Edict. This Article is divided into the 5.6. and 7.
Articles of particular Orders, in the Book of Discipline.
And Arbitrators shall in no wise intermeddle with any of those Matters, which
either directly or indirectly do concern Idolatry. Advocates shall be
admonished neither to demand nor give Council in Causes belonging to the
Execution of the said Edict.

VI. On the 4th. Article, the Queen of Navar demanded our Advice, whether
through want of others she might with a good Conscience Receive and Establish
Roman Catholic Officers in her Dominions, This is the 13. Article in this
Chapter and Book of Discipline.
as also in her Conrt and Family. To which the Synod humbly replied, That her
Majesty should take special heed about her Domestic Officers, and as much as
possible only to employ Persons fearing God, and of the Reformed Religion; And
that she should cause the Papists that are peaceable, and of unblameable Lives
to be instructed, and that she should utterly discard those Traitors, who
forsook her in her Necessities, and cruelly persecuted God's Saints in these
last Troubles.

VII. After those words in the 6th. They may address themselves, This is the
8th. Article in this Chapter and Book of Discipline.
shall be added, in case they be sent by the Magistrate.

VIII. After Brethren and Sisters, in the Eighth Article shall be put, and
other Parents. And the last Clause shall be thus couched, This is the 16th.
Article in the Chapter and Book of Discipline.
And they shall be exhorted to assist and provide for them according to the
Laws of Humanity and Book.

This present Body of Church Discipline having been diligently examined
according to God's Word, by all the Ministers and Elders of the Reformed
Churches of France, was in all its Heads and Articles approved by the said
Deputies, who in their own Names and for their Churches did Promise and protest
to keep and observe it, for the Edification of the Church, the Conservation of
Order, and their mutual Union, that God might be the better glorified by them.

N. B. The Discipline was kept most strictly forty Years after this Synod; and
then they began to lax the Reigns, yiedling too much to the Iniquity of the
Time.

CHAP. X. Particular Orders about publishing of Books.
The Catalogue of their Names who must refute the Books of our Adversaries.
IX. ACcording to the 12th. Article, The Colloquy of Beauvosin is ordered to
receive Books from all parts of the Kingdom, and all other Ministers shall send
Controversial Books, written by our Adversaries, unto them, that they may be
answered. To this purpose are named Messieurs de Saulete, de Chandieu, de
L'estre, des Bordes, Houlbeac, Despina, Daneau, Daniel Touslain, de Villfort,
de St. Paul and Merlin: And these Books shall be sent from all the Provinces
unto the said Monsieur d'Estre: And the said Colloquy of Beauvosin shall
determine which of the Eleven Deputies is to undertake an Answer, and what may
be needful or convenient for them.

X. At the close of the 4th. there shall be this Addition, And they shall be
exhorted to be moderate and reasonable in selling their Books, and to rest
contented with indifferent gain.

XI. The 13th. was thus contracted, No other Confession shall be printed but
what begins thus, We believe, for this is properly our own, having been read in
this Synod, after that it had been formed by that of Paris, the 19th. day of
May, 1559.

XII. Under the if 15th. Advice was given, the Queen of Navar not to sell her
vacant Offices, especially those of Judicature, nor to bestow them upon
another's Recommendation, without her Personal knowledge of their
Qualifications and Abilities who are to discharge them.

XIII. In lieu of those words, in the 17th. Article, the King's Ordinances
shall be observed, let there be inserted these, They shall be exhorted to
observe.

Scandalons Plays are prohibited.
XIV. There shall be this Article added, All Plays forbiddaen by the King's
Edicts, and those which notoriously waste time, or evidence Avarice, or give
Offense, shall be reproved, and the Actors censured in the Consistory,
according to the Circumstances.

CHAP. XI. Particular MATTERS.
I. TO the Deputies of Lionois, demanding what course we should take in
censuring of Revolters in times of Persecution. What course is to be taken with
Revolters by reason of perscution.
It was answered in he Words of St. Augustine, concerning a numerous Church of
Drunkards, That it were much better to have a vicious Church than none at all.
And it seems necessary, that we should heed the Quality and Condition of the
Persons than the Aggravations of their Faults. For there be somes who have
greatly and grievously offended, and do repent most bitterly; others have
failed more highly, or but in appearance, who yet are indifferent whether they
should return unto the Church, and settle in it or no. Wherefore all
Circumstances should be well poized, and above all we ought to be most
especially sollicitous how to reunite and cement together such as are strayed
and wander from the Church, that so the House of God may be replenished and
re-established.

II. As for those who call themselves Papists, and have cut themselves off from
our Churches, partly because of the King's Edicts, and partly because they
could not meet with any Edification; whereunto all things done in the Church
should have their Tendency, and because we are not to judge of them who are
without: Some are of opinion, that we should quite abandon such Persons; and
acquiesce in that Judgment the Lord himself will execute upon them. And
therefore it were good in this Case, if after some time of patience and
forbearance, and having done our Duty in reminding them of theirs, to inform
the People, that such Persons are no longer Members of the Church, and that
they would entreat God for them, that if they belong to him, he would be
pleased to convert them. Otherwise we have good cause to bless God he has
purged them out from among us, and further we should declare, that inasmuch as
these do not any longer relate unto us, we leave them unto the Judgment of God.

Lord's Day, the Eighth of the same Month. them, in those places where there is
evident appearance of danger to the Church. In short, this was advised by the
whose Assembly, to remit the whole Business unto the Consistories, who shall
act herein, in such a manner as will best contribute to the Weal and Edifying
of the Church.

CHAP. XII. Acts passed on Tuesday the Tenth day of the Month.
I. THE R. Mr. Beza craving our thoughts about M. Mercure, a Brother of ours in
the Ministry, this Assembly is of opinion, that the next Synod of Lower
Languedoc do take Cognizance of that Matter, and how he was restored unto the
Ministry, and they shall also take notice of the Calumnies imposed by him, as
is said, upon the Church of Geneva.

II. As to that Fact related by the Elder of Taillebourg, we advise, that the
Minister of that Church ought to solemnize the Marriage, and to censure him who
got the Pope's Dispensation because of Consanguinity.

Acts passed on Wednesday the Eleventh of the same Month.

I. Our Brother He is called in another Copy Guillemin. The knowledge of some
Crimes must be first notified unto the Magistrate. Elders shall be chosen,
Ministers sent without any other formalities than what is provided for by the
Discipline.
Guillemet, Deputy for Poictou demanding Counsel of us, what ought to be done
in a particular Case mentioned by him; we answered, That the Knowledge of some
Crimes must be first given in unto the Magistrate; and the Consistory shall
wait till such time as the Facts have been verified before him, and then shall
they proceed to inflict Censures upon the Delinquent according to his domerits:
unless the Circumstances prove such as can not admit of any delays.

II. The Synod being informed that certain Churches in Languedoc do practice
diverse things contrary to our Discipline, as that in the Election of Elders,
and in the Mission and Loan of Ministers they gather the Peoples Votes one
after another: It does disapprove and condemn all those Usages and Customs, and
admonishes the said Churches to conform themselves unto that Order established
and observed by us, according to the Discipline, and in case of default those
Churches shall be censured.

III. This Article shall be inserted into the Discipline, That Ministers or
Elders deposed from their Office for Crimes deserving capital Punishment, or
bearing Marks of Infamy, whatever their Repentance may be, they shall never be
restored unto their Churches. But in case of lesser miscarriages after public
Satisfaction given by them unto the Congregation, they may be restored by the
Provincial Synod, but to serve in another Province, and not otherwise.

There were present at this Synod of Rochel, Joane by the Grace of God Queen of
Navar, the high and mighty Prince Henry, Prince of Navar, the high and mighty
Prince Henry de Bourbon. Prince of Conde, and the most illustrious Prince
Lewis, Count of Nassau, and Sir Gaspar, Count de Colligny, Admiral of France,
and diverse other Lords and Gentlemen, besides the Deputies, who were Members of
the Church of God.

At Rochel in the Month of April, 1571. in the 12th. Year of the Reign of
Charles the 9th. King of France, Subscribed thus, Theodore de Beza, Moderator
of the Synod. Nicholas de Galars, and Scribes Elected. John de la Rogeraye.
Scribes Elected.


The End of the Synod of Rochel.
Mr. Beza's Life is written by Melchior Adamus, where you have a Catalogue of
his Works.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE VIII. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD IN The City of Nismes in
Languedock, the Sixth Day of May, and in the Year of our Lord 1572.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Monsieur de la Place Moderator and Scribe. Chap. II. Observations
upon the Discipline, Confession of Faith, and last Synod of Rochel. Chap. III.
A Case about Apostates turned Persecutors. More Observations upon the
Disciplines and Canons made. Chap. IV. Method of dealing with Contentious
Persons quarrelling with Doctrine, Discipline, Worship, Catechizing, and
Marriage. Chap. V. Manner of Electing Ministers. Chap. VI. General Matters.
Various Cases of Conscience, about Elders, Colloquies Rights to a Minister,
Marriages, restoring of Apostates, Magistrates, etc. to the Churches Peace. Of
Marriage-Promises, a great Case, Art. 8. Incest. Creating of Doctors of
Divinity. Banes opposed by those of the Romish Religion. A Father's Composition
with the Murderers of his Son. Whether Dignities and Knight-hoods may be
counted among Beneficed Persons, and such admitted to the Lord's Supper. Chap.
VII. Particular Matters about the Province of Normandy. Cozain's Books, Ramus,
du Rozier, Bergeron, and Morellius. History of the Albigenses to be translated
by Monsieur D'Alier. Chap. VIII. Catalogue of Vagrants.
THE Synod of NISMES. 1572. Synod VIII.

SYNOD VIII.
CHAP. I. Canons Ordained in the National Synod held at Nismes the Sixth of
May, One thousand five hundred seventy two, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of
Charles IX.
John de la Place President and Scribe.
AFter Invocation of the Name of GOD, John de la Place was elected President and
Scribe.

CHAP. II. Observations upon the Discipline, the Confession of Faith, and the
last National Synod of Rochel.
I. It Is unanimously resolved, That the Seventh Article of the Discipline shall
abide in its full Power.

II. Instead of those words extracted from the Acts of the National Synod of
Rochel in the Year 1571. We reject their Opinion, who will not receive the word
Substance, See Synod of Rochel, Genesis Mat. art. 6.
shall be put, Without prejudicing those Foreign Churches, who for reasons
best known to themselves, do not use the word Substance, we retain the word
Substance in that sense expressed in the Article. And then toward the close,
in lieu of those words, That we may derive Life from him, shall be inserted,
That by Mystical and Spiritual Communication with him, we may derive that true
eternal life: And the Lord's Supper is principally ordained for the
Communication of it; although the same Lord Jesus be offered to us both in his
Substance and Gifts in the Ministry of his Word and Baptism, and received by
Believers.

It Is the Fourteenth Article in the Chapter of Baptism, and Book of Discipline.
III. It was resolved, that the Ninth Article concerning Baptism shall abide in
its full power. And the Ministers of Province shall be admonished to carry
themselves with more condescension, and not to raise so many Difficulties about
Names.

IV. It Is also resolved, That the Fourth Article concerning the Lord's Supper,
shall remain unchanged.

CHAP. III.
See the First Synod of Rochel, Particular Matters, Art. 1.
V. THE Churches of Poictou upon reading the Canon concerning Delinquents,
demanded, What course should be taken with those who in times of Persecution
having revolted, had been censured by the Church, but could never be regained;
yea, and were become Enemies and Persecutors; so that if they should be
mentioned by Name in the Public Congregation in order to Excommunication, How
we are to use Excommunication. See the Second Synod of Paris, Art. 2. of
Particular Matters.
they would certainly grow worse, and would rage more bitterly against the
Church, and do her more and greater mischief, as was manifest by woeful
experience. The Synod upon Advice answered, That Excommunication was ordained
for them who are Members of the Church, and not for those who are not, and that
its natural design and tendency is for her edification, and not for her
destruction, that so the Flock of Christ may not be infested by scabbed Sheep,
and that the Person thus cut off, being humbled and confounded for his sin, may
be finally recovered and received, and that others terrified by his example may
be preserved. And that when Apostates are mentioned by Name in the Church, it is
not properly an Excommunication of them, for they have already abandoned her
Communion, but it is to declare their Rebellion and Apostasy, that so the whole
Church may beware of them as of incorrigible Offenders; yet nevertheless the
best endeavors shall be used for their reduction and reformation, and God
shall be entreated, whilst there is any hope, to give them Repentance unto
Life. And if any such are found, who instead of humbling and repenting, do
harden themselves in their sins, and growing worse and more furious, do plot
and conspire the destruction of the Church, or of its Pastors, especially
understanding that they are to be mentioned by their Names in the Public
Congregation, it were far better to forbear all Naming of them, it being but a
mere formality, and our End may as well be obtained by some other means, which
is by Notifying unto the People those desperate Apostates, that every one may
shun and avoid their Conversation. And this may be done with ease and safety by
the Elders and Deacons, who shall inform their several Quarters of it, that so
none may pretend ignorance. And whosoever converse familiarly with these
contumacious Rebels shall be censured, according to the Canons of our
Discipline. Moreover, this may be confirmed by the General Doctrine of the
Ministers, who without naming any Person may give sufficient Notice of them;
and those prudent Intimations may be advantagiously improved. And Ministers and
Consistories are warned in Proceedurs of this nature to use all moderation and
prudence; because that Church Censures and Canons of Discipline are only used
for edification, and not for destruction, remembering often that saying of St.
Augustine, That Medicines which are more hurtful than profitable should be
wholly forborne. And since in particular Facts many Circumstances occur,
concerning which a Special Law cannot be enacted, we ought therefore to be the
more discreet, wary, and considerate. And the whole is left to the Wisdom of
the Consistory.

VI. There shall be added to the Twenty Eighth Article, concerning Ministers,
these words, Nevertheless it were expedient that Ministers took Wages, because
of its consequence, and that others may not be prejudiced.

VII. The Sixteenth Article concerning Ministers shall begin thus: The Minister
who shall have intruded himself, etc.

VIII. After these words in the Thirty fourth Article, concerning Ministers.
That have preached Heretical Doctrine: there shall be added, And does
obstinately maintain it.

IX. In the first Article of Provincial Synods, instead of those words, At
least: there shell be put in, As much as possible.

X. In the first Article of National Synods, after those words, Within a Year;
shall be added, If it be possible.

XI. Before the Title of Provincial Synods shall be put, Titles with Articles
of Classes.
Colloquies. And the first Article shall be this: The Neighbour-Churches shall
assemble themselves in Colloquies four times a Year, if possibly they can, and
each Minister shall come accompanied with one Elder, not only for this end,
that Ministers in their respective turns may handle a common place in Divinity
from the Scriptures; but that by mutual common Counsel they may compose those
emergent Difficulties which trouble their Churches: For it is thus ordained by
the Discipline, and generally to provide whatever they conceive expedient and
necessary for the Conservation of the Churches.

XII. The second Article concerning Elders shall be thus enlarged; to wit,
after these words, The Elders Office is to convene the People unto Public
Assemblies; there shall be this addition, And in general to watch, but most
especially over the Church. And after these words, To make Reports of Scandals;
there shall be added, And in conjunction with the Ministers to judge and
decide. And after those words, And other suchlike Matters; shall be added,
Which concern the Order, Preservation, and Government of the Church.

XIII. At the end of the Title of National Synods this following Article shall
be added: That the Acts and Articles of Synods may be preserved, and that they
may be of use in time to come for the deciding Controversies, resolving Cases
that may be propounded in the Synods; the said Articles of things past or to
come, and others concerning Synods, as also the Articles of our Discipline,
together with the Confession of Faith of our Reformed Churches, shall be all
deposited with the Deputies of that Province, which is empowered to call the
next National Synod, and is charged to bring them forth at their first meeting.

XIV. At the end of the Twenty second Article of Marriages there shall be this
added: And the betrothed Woman shall have the same liberty with the betrothed
Man, in case the said Man shall have fornicated after the aforesaid Promises

XV. The Article concerning Professors of Divinity shall be thus enlarged,
Doctor and Professors of Divinity shall be chosen by a Synod or Coll^ay.
Classis, after good proof, and sufficient trial had of their Life and
Doctrine. And they shall be acquainted, that they be wholly dedicated for their
Lives unto the Service of God and his Church, and to be employed according to
the appointment of the Classis or Synods, to whose Authority they shall yield
Obedience. Moreover, they shall subscribe the Confession of our Faith, and
Church Discipline. And whenever any difficulty in Doctrinal Points does occur
they shall be called forth, if they be upon the place, to assist at its
decision. The Regents also shall make the same Subscription.

XVI. Toward the close of the Fifth Article concerning Elders, there shall be
this addition: And Professors of Divinity lawfully and duly called unto their
Offices.

XVII. The Fourth Article concerning Consistories shall be couched in these
words: Deacons may and ought to be Mem^^^s of Consistories
The Ministers of God's Word, together with the Eldership, do constitute the
Churches Consistory, in which the Ministers ought to preside; and Deacons may
and should be present in the Consistory, that so by their Advice the Church may
be served, as hitherto in these difficult times we have happily employed them
in the Government of the Churches, and called them forth into the Eldership.
And for time to come all Deacons thus chosen or continued, shall jointly
together with the Pastors and Elders have the Rule and Conduct of the Churches.

CHAP. IV.
This Article is the ^ast in the Chapter of Consistories
XVIII. THis following Article shall be placed next in order to the 10th of
Consistories: If one or more of the People stir up strife, and thereby break
the Churches Union in any Point of Doctrine, Discipline, or the Form of
Catechizing, Administration of Sacraments, How such are to be dealt with who
raise Contentions in the Church about our Doctrine, Discipline or Worship,
Catechizing and Marriage.
or of Public Prayers and Celebration of Marriage, and that private
Admonitions prove ineffectual to suppress them, then the Consistory of that
Church shall presently endeavor to compose and appease the whole without any
noise, and with all sweetness by the Word of God. And in case the Dissenters
should not acquiesce in their determination, that Consistory shall entreat the
Colloquy to meet at such time and place as may be most convenient, having first
of all obliged the Dissenters in express terms, and those on Record not in any
manner of way to spread abroad their Opinions until the meeting of the said
Colloquy, on pain of being dealt with as Schismatics; excepting always freedom
of Conference with Pastors and Elders, in case they have not been sufficiently
instructed. But and if the said Dissenters refuse to give those forementioned
Promises, then shall they be censured as Rebellious Persons, according to the
Discipline. And the Colloquy being met shall proceed as was above directed. And
in case the said Dissenters after a patient Hearing and Refutation rest fully
satisfied, the whole business shall be Registered: But if not, and extraordinary
necessity so require, the Provincial Synod shall be entreated to meet at such a
time and place as the said Colloquy shall judge most convenient, the former
Promises having been once again repeated by the Dissenters. And the Synod being
assembled, they shall with very great and mature deliberation advise and
consider of the Matter, Places, Times, and Persons, whether it be expedient
that another Conference be held with these Dissenters, and publicly with open
doors before the People, and whether liberty of speaking may be granted unto
any of the Assistants; which if it be, yet the determination of the Point in
Controversy shall not be left unto them, but to the Provincial Deputies,
according to the known Rules of our Discipline. And then if the said Dissenters
refuse conformity, they shall, promising as before, be dismissed over to the
ordinary National Synod; or if there be one at that time extraordinarily
assembled, they shall be heard in it with all holy freedom. And here shall be
the final and absolute Decision made of this Controversy from the Word of God;
whereunto if they refuse a full and entire Obedience, and in plain and express
terms do not renounce their recorded Errors, they shall be cut off by the Sword
of Excommunication from the Body of their Churches. A Pastor or Elder breaking
the Churches Union, or stirring up contention about any Point of Doctrine or
Discipline which he had subscribed, or about the Form of Catechizing,
Administration of Sacraments, Public Prayers, or Celebration of Marriage, and
not conforming to the determination of the Colloquy, shall be then suspended
from his Office, and either the Provincial or National Synod shall finally
proceed against him.

CHAP. V.
The manner of Electing Ministers.
XIX. THE Fourth Article concerning Ministers shall be couched in these terms:
A Minister shall not be chosen by one only Minister with his Consistory, but by
two or three Ministers called into the said Consistory, and if there be one in
being by the Colloquy, or if it may be by the Provincial Synod. Afterward he
shall be recommended to the People, who shall hear him two or three weeks
following, or for some longer time, if it be conceived fitting, that he may be
known to them, and his Method in Teaching; the Congregation also shall be
expressly informed, that if any one of them know a just cause or reason why the
called Minister should not be chosen, or if they be dissatisfied with them,
that they would declare it unto the Consistory, who will readily receive, and
patiently and freely hear their Exceptions against him: And in case there arise
contention on one side or other, the Election shall be suspended, and the whole
Affair shall be brought before the Provincial Synod, who shall take knowledge
both of the Justification and Reception of the said Ministers, who though
justified, shall not however be imposed upon that People against their will, or
to the coffeehouse of the major part of them. And on the contrary, the
Peoples Silence shall be taken for their full consent. Finally, the said Pastor
shall be presented unto the People, and be ordained by laying on of hands. And
if any Ministers be desired by particular Churches to be employed in their
Service, they shall be sent with good Testimonials of their Life and Doctrine,
unto the Colloquy or Synod of the Province whereunto the Churches that demanded
them do belong; and that Colloquyor Synod shall first hear them; and in case
the Ministers thus sent have never before exercised the Pastoral Office, they
may examine them, and afterward depute three or four Ministers to nominate and
present them unto the Churches which desired them, who having heard them
preach, shall finally receive them; or if the People do oppose it, the whole
Affair shall be determined according to the Order before appointed, and all at
the Costs and Charges of the Churches which demanded them.

XX. At the close of that Article concerning Excommunication, under the Head of
Delinquents, these words shall be added: And during the Publication, as well of
the said Excommunication, as of the Reconciliation, it shall be lawful for
those of the People who never consented, to give Notice of it unto the
Consistory, and they have all holy liberty for so doing; and the Consistory
shall consider of it; whereas the silence of others shall be taken for consent.
And in case of opposition or discontent, they shall not proceed unto
Excommunication without advising with the Colloquy, yet nevertheless the said
Suspension shall stand and remain in its full vigor and effect.

XXI. To the first Article of Particular Orders there shall be made this short
addition, And to nourish Monks.

XXII. In the 27th Article concerning Ministers after these words, To shorten
the Term of Three Months; there shall be added, And the said Colloquy shall
consider how those ungrateful Persons shall be dealt with, weighing maturely
and considering seriously all Circumstances, and above all, having in their
eyes the Glory of God, the Edification of his Church, and the Honor of the
Ministry. And what remains of that Article shall be razed out.

XXIII. After the 18th Article, concerning Consistories, this present shall be
subjoyned: In those places where the Exercise of the Reformed Religion is not
established, the Faithful shall be exhorted by the Neighbor Colloquies to
choose unto themselves Elders and Deacons, and to observe the Discipline of the
Church, and the Colloquy shall advise unto what Church most commodiously both
for Minister and People, they may be annexed; and this shall be done by consent
of all, or the major part of them; and they shall not depart from that Church,
without having first consulted the said Colloquy.

Provincial Synods have Power of changing Ministers.
XXIV. The 16th Article, concerning Ministers, shall be couched in these
following words: Authority is granted unto Provincial Synods for certain Causes
to remove Ministers, their Churches being first heard, and their Reasons duly
pondered; but in case of difference the Cause shall be finally decided by the
National Synod, and till that Sentence be obtained, Ministers shall abide where
they were.

XXV. There shall be this addition made unto the Article of Provincial Synods:
And the said Deputies shall come at the common Charges and Expenses of their
Churches.

XXVI. To the sixth Article of Baptism, this Clause shall be added, And after
they have made Profession of Religion.

XXVII. To the third Article of Elders, after these words, As also the
Sentences of Suspension shall be done; there shall be this addition, Without
any mentioning of Name.

XXVIII. Unto the end of the 7th Article of Elders shall be this added, And
they shall be diligently exhorted to continue in their Offices as long as may
be, because frequent changes brings damage unto the Church.

The Faithful may not be present at any Stage Plays.
XXIX. There shall be this addition at the end of the 18th Article concerning
particular Orders: It shall not be lawful for the Faithful to be present at
Stage Plays, Comedies, Tragedies, or Farces, whether they be acted publicly or
privately; because they have been ever condemned by God's ancient Churches for
corrupting of good Manners, especially when as the Holy Scripture shall be
profaned by them. But if a College judge it meet for their Youth to represent
any History, not comprised in the Sacred Scriptures (which was never given us
for our sport and pastime, but to be preached for our conversion and comfort)
and provided this be done but very seldom, and by the Advice of the Colloquy,
which shall first peruse the Composition, it may be tolerated.

XXX. The fifteenth Province shall be divided into two, Forest, Auvergna and La
March shall make one, Burgundy, Lyonnois, and Benujolois another, and Orange
shall be joined to the Province of Dolphiny.

XXXI. This Clause shall be added to the end of the 8th Article of Marriages:
After which time the Marriage shall be publicly blessed in the Church
according to the Word of God.

CHAP. VI. General MATTERS.
I. THis Case was moved about the Elders, viz. Whether they ought to be
presented to the whole Church, and in the face of the Assembly to receive their
Charge, and the Church itself to be reminded of its Duty to them, or that they
should be presented to the Consistory only. The Synod judging it a matter
merely indifferent, leaves the Churches to their liberty herein.

II. Has not a Colloquy the same Right to redemand a Minister as his Church?
It was answered in the Negative: for the Colloquy has not the Churches Right
in its Power, as was determined by the last National Synod.

III. A Query was made about Marriages, Whether Doctors and Professors of
Divinity, were not bound by the 18th Canon of our Discipline, to put away their
Wives, if guilty of Adultery, or else to be deprived of their Professorship in
our Schools and Churches? Unto which there was this Answer returned: That that
Canon did purely relate unto Pastors, not unto Professors; nor is there a
parity of reason for the one as for the other. Ministers being Public Officers
in the whole Church, are to be exemplary in their Persons and Families for
holiness, and therefore must not receive again an Adulterous Wife into their
Bosoms, which would be a Scandal to the Church. Moreover, Professors of
Divinity are not to correct and reprove as Pastors are; so that they may, if
they please, pass by the wickedness of their Wives, and notwithstanding their
Adultery, enjoy their Professor's place among us, and not be deposed from it.

IV. This Advice was given to the Deputy of Poictou, That such as revolted in
the times of War from the Profession of the Gospel, in case they bore no Office
in the Church, shall not make any public reparation, nor shall the Civil
Magistrates, but only in the Consistory, and that too without mentioning them
by Name, nor shall they stand up. But as for others who were public
Church Officers, they shall give public satisfaction, and repair the Scandal
given by their Fall in a public manner before the whole Church, and then
without any farther severity, and with all possible sweetness shall be
readmitted to the Peace and Fellowship of the Church.

V. Is it necessary, that the Confession of Faith should be read before Sermon,
and upon Sacrament-days before we go up unto the Lord's Table? We answer, The
thing is merely indifferent, and therefore no Canon shall be made about it, but
the Church shall be left unto its liberty.

VI. The word Senate of the Church, shall be changed into that of Consistory.

VII. In case the Children of Believers will contract Marriage with Unbelievers
against their Parents will, their Parents shall not at all consent unto such
Marriages, nor by public Instrument assign them any Dowry, nor any other way
or manner approve of such a Marriage.

VIII. This Case was propounded: After Promises of Marriage had passed
reciprocally by words de proesenti, one of the betrothed Persons falls sick
of the Leprosy, and contracts a most loathsome stinking savor, and a Disease
utterly incurable, may these Espousals be broken and dissolved? Unto which
there was this Answer returned: That in case one of these betrothed Persons had
not been informed of the said Sickness when the Promises were made, she may not
be compelled to accomplish them; for there being Error and Deceit in the Case,
there can be no Consent, so that she may be set at liberty. And in this
business we must have a double respect, 1. To the Public; and then, 2. To the
Interest of that private Person. As to the Public, Special Care must be taken,
that incurable Vices and Diseases be not multiplied, and that their
Contagiousness be not propagated, nor run in the Blood. And if there were no
particular, private Interest in the Case, yet before that this Marriage be
consummated, its against all Prudence and Godliness, to suffer Persons, who
have begun ill, to be conjoined together, and that they should all their Life
after live in a perpetual hatred and abhorrency of each other, because of the
said loathsome Stench and Distemper.

IX. A Man has abused his deceased Wife's Sister, and got her with Child, may
he now marry her? No: for this commixture is incestuous, nor may she become his
Wife, and both of them are to be censured most severely. Yet he may marry
another.

X. If a Man has married a Wife out of his own Church, and there be no
Evidence of the Marriage, he shall be called into the Consistory, and prove his
Marriage; and in case he cannot do it, because it was done during the Civil
Wars, the Consistory shall advise prudently how to censure him, whether
publicly, or only privately within the Consistory for the Churches edification.

XI. May Doctors of Divinity be created and admitted unto their Dignity and
Office by Doctors of Law, assisted with a Minister of God's Word in the
University of Orange, or elsewhere? It Is answered, That Lawyers and Physicians
may be thus admitted, but not Divines; for our Discipline has expressly
provided against such an abuse as this is.

XII. How may Consistories demean themselves about Banes of Marriage, whenas
those of the Romish Religion do make opposition, and will not appear before the
Consistory, but before the Civil Magistrate? We answer, That if the Civil
Magistrate will take Cognizance of the Fact, the Consistory shall not proceed
any farther, least the Magistrate should thence take occasion of Offense, and
complain of the Consistory for intermedling with his business, and intrenching
upon his Authority. And this will be direction enough as to that particular
Case of Monsieur Cyprian.

XIII. If any of our Brethren in the Ministry have lying by them any Relations
of memorable Events, relating to the History and State of God's Church in these
times, they be desired to send them to the Pastors of the Church of Lions, who
will model them into good order, and publish them to the World.

XIV. A Father having his Son murdered, compounds with the Murderer for a Sum
of Money, what course is to be taken with this Father? We answer, That the
Father is bound to prosecute the Murderer in a Court of Justice, and to file a
Bill of Indictment against him. But in case he cannot do it, and it so fall
out, that he and the Murderer do agree the Matter between themselves to his own
private advantage, he shall only be admonished by the Consistory, and that
prudently too, according as they find Circumstances.

XV. May those Commanders Places, and Dignities of Knighthood in the Orders of
St. John of Jerusalem, be counted among Benefices; and whether these Knights
may be kept off from the Lord's Supper? We answer, That if they hold their
Benefices and Commanderships from the King, and without any mixture of
Superstition or Idolatry, they may do it lawfully enough. But and if they hold
them with Idolatry or Superstition, be it either from the King's Gift or the
Pope, they cannot do it, there is sin and guilt in the case; nor shall they be
admitted to Communion with us at the Lord's Table: For this would be a
professed owning of the Pope's Tyranny, who has no rightful Dominion nor
Authority in these matters, but Kings and Princes only, who are robbed by the
Pope's Usurpation of their just Rights, Power, Privileges, and Authority.

CHAP. VII. Particular MATTERS.
Art. I. IT is now concluded, that the Province of Normandy may be divided into
two Provinces, in case they cannot conveniently meet in one, and all the
Ministers shall come unto them accompanied with their Elders, according to the
Canon of our Discipline, and not by deputies from the Colloquies. Art. II. As
for Cozain, upon reading those Letters sent us from our Brethren the English
Ministers, it was ordered, That the two Books written by the said Cozain, and
dedicated to some particular Members in the Church of Bourdeaux, and brought
unto this present Synod by Monsieur de la Saul's, should be put into Monsieur
Beza's hands for his perusal, and who should make report of their Contents unto
us, and an Answer shall be returned to our Brethren of England. Art. III. The
Deputies of the Isle of France craved our Advice, about those Points of
Church Discipline now controverted by Monsieur Ramus, du Rosier, Bergeron, and
some others. Whereupon an Order was made, That Monsieur de Chambrun should read
in this Assembly, that Abridgement made by our Brethren of the Isle of France,
and extracted out of Morellius's Answer to that Book, De la Confirmation de la
Discipline; and sent by them unto this Synod, together with the Book of the
said Morellius in answer to it, and for decision of those Points and Arguments
therein contained, as also Ramus, and De Rosier's Books, which shall be
delivered unto Monsieur Cappel to be examined by him. And in case there be any
other Arguments found in them, besides those formerly urged by Morellius, these
shall be also answered. And Messieurs de Beza, De Roche Chandieu, and De
Beaulieu, are chosen to reply unto them. And as for the Decisions and Decrees
they shall be made only by the Provinces. Yet liberty is given unto the By
standers, in case they think good to make opposition, and to this purpose the
Doors of the Synod shall be le^t wide open, and silence shall not be imposed
upon any Man in this matter for this time. Only it shall not be made a
Precedent. Art. IV. But this Affair having been since considered, examined,
disputed, debated, and put to the Vote, as it was ordered in the last mentioned
Canon, a Decree passed, That our Church Discipline, as it has been all along
to this very day observed end practiced among us, so also shall it be for the
future, without any change or innovation in it, as being grounded upon God's
Word. And as for those Positions asserted by Monsieur Ramus, Morellius,
Bergeron, and others, 1. About the Decision of Points of Doctrine. 2. About the
Election and Deposal of Ministers. 3. About Excommunication out of the Church,
and Reconciliation with, and Readmission into it. 4. And lastly about
Prophesying, None of these shall be received among us, because they have no
Foundation in the Word of God, and are of very dangerous consequence unto the
Church, as the whole has been verified and made appear in the presence of this
Synod, in which all the Arguments of those Books of Ramus, Morellius, and Du
Rozier were most narrowly sifted and discussed, and this was unanimously
assented to by the Declaration of all the Provincial Deputies, who affirmed,
That they had maturely and duly considered of those Points of Discipline
controverted by those Gentlemen beforementioned. And Monsieur De la Roche
Chandieu was ordered to reduce and set down in writing all the Answers and
Resolutions made by this Assembly unto the said Treatises and Arguments, and to
communicate them with the Colloquy of Lionnois, that they may be printed and
published. Only the Relation of these Synod^cal Answers and Resolutions shall
be writ with the greatest moderation, and without mentioning the Names of any
Person. Art. V. The Colloquy of Limmigny shall be advised to get the Memoirs of
their Synod to be razed, nor may they make any particular Canons of their own,
but shall be governed by those of our Discipline. Art. VI. Monsieur Berauld,
and his Colleagues in the Church of Montauban, are charged to recover from
Monsieur Comerard of Toulouse, the History of the Albigenses, written in their
Language, and Monsieur D' Acier shall translate it into French, and having done
it, shall communicate it unto their Colloquy, according to the Canons of our
Church Discipline, and then cause it to be printed. And Letters shall be
written to this purpose unto the said Sieurs de Comerard and D' Acier, from
this Assembly. Art. VII. The County of Messin, and City of Metz shall be joined
to the Province of Champagne, according to the particular Canon of our
Discipline, and Letters concerning it shall be sent unto them from this Synod.
Art. VIII. The Lord Admiral de Chastillon having writ a Letter unto this Synod,
the Churches were all admonished of their Duty to his Majesty; and an Answer
should be returned to this effect unto his Lordship. Art. IX. A Vote passed,
but without any prejudice to the liberty of Monsieur de Saules, and without
debating the Merits of his Cause, that a Letter should be written unto the
Magistrates of Geneva, thanking them for their Love and Good Will, and they
shall be desired to continue it unto all the Churches of France in general, and
particularly to those of Bearn; and we do grant Monsieur de Saules tor one Year
more unto the Queen of Navarre, and Letters also shall be written unto her
Majesty, and to his Highness the Prince her Son. Art. X. The Churches shall be
excited to assist with their Charity the poor Members of the County and Church
of Orange, who are in extreme poverty, there being no less than Twelve hundred
Families of these Refugees in the single Province of Dolphiny. Art. XI. Before
that Mr. John le Gagneur shall be admitted Pastor into any one of our Churches,
he shall give good Evidence of his Repentance, and of his Reconciliation with
the Church of Geneva, and we will have some considerable space of time for
proving the truth of his Repentance. Art. XII. Upon the Censure of Ramus,
Morellius and their Companions, it was voted, That Letters should be writ in
the Name and Authority of this Assembly unto the said Ramus, Morelly, Du
Rozier, and Bergeron, and to give them all severally to understand what was
concluded by this Assembly against their Books, and to re-mind them of their
Duty according to God's Holy Word; and a Letter shall be written unto die
Provincial Synod of the Isle of France, that they summon these aforesaid
Gentlemen before the Colloquy of Beauvoisin, and remonstrate to them their
Offenses, but to deal gently and sweetly with them: And in case upon their
appearance they should reject their Admonitions, they shall be proceeded
against as Rebels and Schismatics, according to the Canons of our Discipline.
Art. XIII. As to the business of Cozin's beforementioned, Monsieur de Saul
shall be entreated by the Assembly to answer our English Brethren, and to send
them Cozin's Book, and the Remarks which have been made upon it. Art. XIV.
Monsieu de Beze is ordered to answer in the Name of this Synod the Letters of
our Brethren of Zurich, and to acquaint them with our Synodical Decrees. Art.
XV. The Province of Berry is charged to call the next National Synod two Years
hence, or before in case of necessity.
CHAP. VIII. The Vagrants, styling themselves Ministers, but deposed.
1. BEauguyot. 2. Arbaud. 3. John Garambois, alias Baremboin. 4. Denis Lambert.
5. Simon Savin, or Savineau, calling himself, Monsieur. De la March^. 6.
Monsieur Peter Granade, going also by other Names, as Sacalay, Mercure,
Salcadry, or Secudry.

All these beforementioned Articles were Decreed and Verified in the National
Synod of the Deputies from all the Provinces of this Kingdom at Nismes, May 8.
1572. Signed in the Original, John de la Place, Moderator.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE IX. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of, FRANCE, HELD At St. Foy the Great, in
the Province of Perigord, the 2d. Day of February, and ended the 14th. day of
the same Month, in the Year of our Lord, 1578. being the 4th. Year of the Reign
of Henry the Third King of France and of Poland.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Synodical Officers chosen. The Duke of Bouillon sits in it
representing the King of Navarre. Chap. II. General Matters. Care of the
Religions Education of the Youth. Of Catechizing. Publicly Penance. No
Church Officers who have Popish Wives. Of Attestations. Chap. III. An Act for a
National Fast. About Common Prayers. Ministers Expenses to Synods and
Colloquies. Of Godmothers. Chap. IV. Several Cases of Conscience, as about
Marrying the Aunt of a dead Wife, and a very strange Case about Marriage.
Holding the Temporalities of Benefices. Fashions and Habits. Ministers way not
together with their Ministry Practice Physic, etc. Chap. V. An Act for
calling the next National Synod. Canon about Beneficed Persons. Chap. VI. A
Commission given to several Divines, to assist at a Treaty of Union between all
the Reformed Churches in Europe. Chap. VII. The Prince of Conde brings the
first Appeal unto the National Synods. Chap. VIII. Discipline exercised upon a
scandalous Minister Ap. 5.8.9. Censure upon an ungrateful Church-Ap. 10.
Fregeville censured. Chap. IX. A Roll of Ministers provided for and disposed
unto Vacant Churches. Remarks upon Monsieur Merlin the Moderator.
THE Synod of St. Foy. 1578 Synod IX.

SYNOD IX.
Of the Ninth National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, held at St.
Foy the Great, in Perigord, on the 21st. day of February, and ended the 14th.
day of the same Month, in the Year of our Lord, 1578. being the 4th. Year of
the Reign of Henry the Third King of France and of Poland.

CHAP. I.
Art. I. AFter Prayers made by the Pastor of that Church, Master Peter Merlin,
Minister of the Word of God, and Pastor of the Church gathered in the House of
the Right Honorable Guy Earl of Laval, was by general Suffrages chosen
Moderator, and Mr. Francois Oyseau, Minister of the Church of Nantes, and Mr.
William de la Jaille, Minister of the Church of Saujon were chosen Scribes of
the Synod. Art. II. There was present and voted in it the most Noble and
Illustrious Lord Henry de la Tour (afterward Duke of Bouillon and Marshall of
France) Viscount of Turenne, Earl of Montfort, Baron, of Mountague, etc.
representing as Lieutenant General, His Majesty the King of Navarre, in the
Province of Guyenne. Art. III. There fate also in this Synod the Judges,
Magistrates and Consuls of the said City of St. Foy.
CHAP. II. General MATTERS.
I. NO Province shall claim any Primacy or Pre-eminence over another.

II. The Deputies of every Province are charged to ad^ise and press their
respective Provinces, to look carefully to the Education of their Youth, and to
see to it, that Schools of Learning be erected, and Scholastic Exercises, as
Propositions and Declamations be performed, that so their Youth may be trained
up and prepared for the Service of God and of his Church in the holy Ministry.

III. Synods and Colloquies shall proceed against ungrateful Persons, to their
Ministers by all consures, according to the 27th. Article of our Discipline,
under the Title of Ministers.

IV. Colloquies and Synods shall use their best and utmost diligence that the
Tenth Article in the Chapter of Ministers be most punctually observed,
concerning Forsakers of their Ministry, who upon slight and trivial Grounds do
abandon it, and their Churches.

For the Widows and Orphans of Ministers, see the Synod of Vertueil, General
Matters, 22.
V. The Provincial Synods shall keep a Memorial of the Widows and Children of
deceased Ministers, especially of those who died in their Churches Service,
that so they may be relieved, and maintenance may be given them out of the
common Stock of the Churches in their respective Provinces, according as their
necessities shall require.

VI. The Synod of Upper Languedoc shall ordain two or three of their Assembly,
and such as they esteem best fitting for that Service, to answer the public
Writings of our Adversaries, and in their Replies and Refutations they shall
deport themselves according to the Canons of our Discipline in that case,
provided with all Gravity, Piety, Civility and Moderation.

Concerning public and private Catechisings.
VII. Churches shall be admonished more frequently to practice Catechisings, and
Ministers shall Catechize by short, plain and familiar Questions and Answers,
accommodating themselves to the Weakness and Capacity of their People, without
Enlargements, or handling of common Places. And such Churches as have not used
this Ordinance of Catechizing, are hereby exhorted to take it up. Yea, and all
Ministers shall be obliged to Catechize their several Flocks at least once or
twice a Year, and shall exhort their Youth to submit themselves unto it
conscientiously. And as for their Method in preaching and handling the
Scriptures, the said Ministers shall be exhorted not to dwell long upon a Text,
but to expound and treat of as many in their Ministry as they can, fleeing all
Ostentation and long Digressions, and heaping up of parallel Places and
Quotations; nor ought they to propound diverse Senses and Expositions, nor to
allege, unless very rarely and prudently, any passages of the Fathers, nor
shall they cite profane Authors and Stories; that so the Scriptures may be
left in their full and sovereign Authority.

In public Penance the Cause and Sin must he confessed.
VIII. There shall be no public Penance done in the Church without express
Confession of the Cause, and Crime committed by this public Penitent.

They shall not be chosen Elders nor Deacons who have Popish Wives.
IX. For the future none shall be chosen, if possible, into the Eldership or
Deaconry, whose Wives are of a contrary Religion, according as the Apostle Paul
has ordained. Nevertheless, that the Church may not be deprived of the Service
of diverse godly and well-deserving Persons, who by reason of past ignorance
have Wives of another Religion, they may for this present necessity be
tolerated, provided they do their endeavor by Instructions and Counsels to
convert their Wives, and to bring them into Communion with the Church.

X. Neither Ministers nor Elders may give Attestations without an express and
punctual Declaration of the Places and Persons Names, and the way which they
intend to travel, who obtained these Certificates at their hands. And if any
Attestations are presented to them without these Circumstances, they are
required to vacate and tear them in pieces, and those who granted them shall be
censured in the next ensuing Colloquy or Synod.

CHAP. III. An Act for a National FAST.
IX. FOrasmuch as the Times are very Calamitous, and that our poor Churches as
are daily menaced with many and sore Tribulations, and for that Sins and Vices
of all sorts are risen up, and growing in upon us in a very fearful manner, a
general Day of Prayer and Fasting shall be published, that our People may
humble themselves before the Lord, and all the Churches of this Kingdom shall
observe it on one and the self-same Day, which shall be Tuesday the 25th. of
March next following, and if it may be done, the Lord's Supper shall also be
administered in all the Churches on the ensuing Sabbath.

XII. According to the 2d. Article in the Chapter of Consistories and Book of
Discipline, about Common Prayers, The Churches shall be exhorted, where Morning
and Evening Common Prayers are publicly used, to conform themselves unto those
others which have none, and where this Custom was never introduced; And
Ministers shall advise all Governors of Families to Worship God by Morning and
Evening Prayers, in and together with their respective Households and Families.

XIII. Churches refusing to defray the Expenses of their Ministers in going to
Classes and Synods, Churches shall defray their Ministers expenses at
Coll^quies and Synods.
shall be admonished of their Duty, and in case of nonperformance, and that
their Ministers be enforced to travel to those Sessions at their own Costs and
Charges, they shall be deprived of their Ministers, unless they remind
themselves of their Duty, and reimburse them those Sums they had so expended.
Moreover, Colloquies shall reassume their disused Exercise of Propositions on
the Word of God, as they were formerly handled to their very great Profit and
Edification. That so Ministers may better know their Duty, and grow in the
Study and Understanding of the Holy Scripture, and be more Methodical in their
Sermons and Divinity Discourses.

XIV. Godmothers shall be equally bound to the Religious Education of those
Children, for whom they be Sureties as their Godfathers. And Ministers shall
charge them to see that they conscientiously fulfill their Promises.

XV. The Synod having been acquainted, that in diverse Places during the
Celebration of the Lord's Supper, Ministers do vary in their Expressions, it
judges that nothing shall be innovated in particular Churches, but that herein
they be left unto their Liberty for the present, only the Provinces shall be
advertised to come prepared about this Matter unto the next National Synod.

XVI. His Majesty shall be Petitioned to approve of those Marriages which have
been celebrated among us during the last Civil Wars, according to the Tenor of
the former Edict against the Laws of the Romish Church, in that particular
Article of Consanguinities and Affinities.

CHAP. IV. Cases of CONSCIENCE.
A Man may not marry his dead Wife's Aunt.
XVII. IT being Queried, Whether any one might Marry the Aunt of his deceased
Wife. Answer was given, That such a Marriage was altogether Incestuous, and in
case any Church had permitted it, the said Church deserved Censure. See the
Synod of Bergera^, Art. 2.


XVIII. This Case being propounded, A Maid was betrothed unto a Man by words de
presentl, and with the usual requisite Solemnities; The Resolution of this Case
was to be given by the Magistrate.
but afterward this Man happens to be condemned unto the Galleys during Life,
yet by some how or other he escapes out of them, and returning home does
demand and summon his betrothed Spouse to marry him according to her Promise.
What shall be done herein? The Synod does advise, That because Marriage is a
mixed Alliance, the Parties concerned shall apply themselves unto the
Magistrate, according to whose Decree the Church shall be governed?

XIX. Although the holding Temporalities of Benefices in France be an
indifferent Matter, yet the Faithful are admonished to intermeddle as little as
may be with such Purchases, because of their evil and dangerous Consequences,
and Consistories and Colloquies shall use a great deal of Prudence in their
Opinions and Actings in and about them.

Scripture-stories must be handled with modesty by Poets.
XX. Such as shall put into Verse or Poems Scripture-stories, are admonished not
to blend nor mingle Poetical Fables with them, nor to ascribe unto God the
Names of false Gods, nor to add or diminish from the Sacred Scriptures, but to
confine themselves strictly to the Scripture-Terms.

Modesty in Apparel. See the Synod of Paris, Genesis Mat. Art. 33.
XXI. That Article concerning the immodest Habits and Fashions of Men and Women,
shall be observed with the greatest Care imaginable. And both Sexes are
required to keep Modesty in their Hair, and every thing else, that no Scandal
may be given to our Neighbor.

See the Synod of Bergerac, Art. 9. upon reading the Discipline.
XXII. A Minister may not together with his Ministry practice Physic: But yet
out of Charity he may give his Advice and Assistance unto the sick Members of
his Church, and to the Neighborhood, without diverting himself from his
Function, nor shall he draw Advantage from it, unless in time only of Trouble
and Persecution, when as he cannot exercise his Ministry in his own Church.

XXIII. Fathers and Mothers are exhorted to be exceeding careful in Instructing
their Children, which are the Seed and Nursery of the Church, and they shall be
most bitterly censured, who send them to the Schools of Priests, Jesuits and
Nuns: As also the Gentry shall be reproved, who place them Pages or Domestics
in the Houses of Lords and Noblemen of the contrary Religion.

XXIV. Such as commit enormous Crimes, as Incests, Murders, or the like, shall
be without any more ado cut off from Communion at the Lord's Table, and their
Suspension shall be published in the Church.

XXV. If there arise any difference between a Church and its Minister, and that
Church having been twice informed (which is suffered) of the Day and Place when
the Colloquy and Synod shall meet, refuses to appear, The said Colloquy or
Synod may proceed farther, and determine finally about that difference,
notwithstanding the Absence of one of the Parties.

The Union of the Church must not be quitted for any Persecution.
XXVI. The Churches and particular Persons shall be admonished never to depart
from the Sacred Union of the Church, whatever Persecutions may befall them, nor
shall they procure for themselves a separate Peace and Liberty distinct from
the whole Body of our Churches. And in case of failure ^^^^in, they shall be
censured as the Colloquy or Synod shall judge expedient.

XXVII. Appellants from Provincial Synods unto the National shall be bound
personally to appear at those very National Synods, ^^^^as App^^al un^^ Synods
must ^^ther appear in Person or send their most ^^^le Me^^^rs.
or to send thither their most ample Memoirs; and in case of default, the
Sentence of the National Synod shall he ratified. And this Rule shall hold good
in all Appeals from Consistories unto Colloquies, and from Colloquies unto the
Provincial Synods.

XXVIII. Ministers shall be bound to Assist personally at Colloquies and
Provincial Synods, If P^^stors do not attend on Colloquies and Provincial
Synods, they may be deposed by them.
or to send their Memoirs and lawful Excuses; and in case of disobedience to
this Order, the said Colloquy or Synod may judge difinitively of their neglect,
and dispose of their Persons.

CHAP. V.
XXIX. THE Province of higher Languedoc is ordered to call the next National
Synod, in the beginning of May, 1579. However the said Province is entreated,
if the Lord be pleased to grant the Churches any further liberty, to have
respect unto the Conveniences of the far distant Provinces. Which also their
Deputies have promised shall be done.

XXX. The fourth Canon in the Chapter of the Lord's Supper shall be couched in
these words, Beneficed Persons who bear the Name and title of their Benefices,
and do either directly or indirectly communicate with Idolatry, and receive the
Revenues of their Benefices either immediately with their own hands, or
mediately by the hands of others, shall not be admitted to communion with us at
the Lord's fable. But such as enjoy those Benefices by his Majesty's Gift or
Toleration, and are downright Professors of the true Religion, and do visibly
own and maintain it, they shall have the same privilege with all other Members
of our Churches, to sit down with us at the Lord's Table: Only they shall be
exhorted to apply the Revenue of their aforesaid Benefices unto pious Uses. And
the Management of this Exhortation is left wholly to the Prudence of the
Colloquies and Consistories.

CHAP. VI.
XXXI. UPon perusal of the Memoirs and Instructions produced in a late Assembly
of many Deputies from sundry famous Reformed Churches, Kingdoms and Provinces
who met at Francfort, and were invited thither by the most Serene and
Illustrious Prince Elector John Casimir, Prince Palatine and Duke of Bavaria)
in which were laid down several Means, Expedients, and most proper and
effectual Remedies for uniting all the Reformed Churches of Christendom in one
common bond of Union, as also for suppressing and terminating the Differences
which are risen up and fomented by their common Adversaries, among them, and
for hindering some hotheaded and bigoted Divines from condemning, and as they
had menaced and protested they would condemn and pronounce an Anathema against
the greatest, and soundest part by far of the Christian Reformed Churches. Now
that such imprudent and wicked Designs might be obviated and prevented, they
did after mature Advice and Consultation had among themselves, unanimously
resolve and agree to draw up a Petition unto their most Illustrious Highnesses,
the Princes of the Empire, who adhering to the Confession of Ausbourg;
Moreover, they had given an express charge, that one uniform Confession of
Faith should be framed, which was to be taken and accounted as the general and
common Confession of all Protestants, and to send several Copies of it unto all
those Kingdoms and Provinces, in which those Churches were gathered, to be
examined and approved by them, and to be crowned with their joint, common and
unanimous Consent, and Approbation. And they had also agreed upon the time
when, and place where the Deputies of those Kingdoms and Provinces might be
convocated, and particularly they had invited the Churches of this Kingdom to
send thither some prudent Persons of great Experience, well approved for their
Piety and and Integrity, and empowered by all the Churches with ample Authority
to treat, agree, and decide all Points of Doctrine, and other Matters
concerning the Union, Peace, and Conservation of the Churches, and of the pure
Worship of God.

This present National Synod of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, blessing
God for so good a Motion, for such an excellent Proposal, and applauding the
Care, Diligence, and good Counsel of those worthy Deputies in the
forementioned Assemblies and approving the Remedies and Expedients propounded
and prescribed by them, does now ordain, that if the Copy. of the said
Confession be sent timely enough unto us, it shall be examined in each of our
Provincial Synods, or in some other place and manner as will best consist with
the Conveniences of our respective Provinces, and in the mean while four
Ministers most verst in all Ecclesiastical Affairs are constituted a Committee
to intend this business, to-wit, Mr. Anthony de Chandieu, Mr. John de Estre,
Ministers of the Word of God in the Church of Paris, and Mr. Peter Merlin,
Minister of the Church of Vitre in Britain, and Monsieur Gabert, late Minister
of the French Church at Francfort, and they be expressly charged and commanded
to meet at the day and place appointed with their Letters of Deputation, and
with a most full and ample Commission from all the Ministers and Elders deputed
by the Provinces of this Kingdom, and there will accompany them the most
illustrious Lord Viscount of Turenne, that so they may do all Matters as were
above designed.

But in case the Provinces should neither have opportunity, nor convenience to
examine the said Confession in their respective Synods, it is lest unto their
Prudence and soundest Judgment to agree and come to a conclusion about all
those Matters which shall be debated by them, whether they be Points of
Doctrine, or any other Articles relating to the Peace, Union, Weal and
Happiness of all the Churches.

XXXII. These same Commissioners deputed (as in the immediately foregoing
Article) unto the Conference in Germany, are ordered to peruse that Treatise of
Monsieur de Chandieu, Entitled, La Confirmation de la Discipline des Eglises
Francoises, and to prefix their manual Approbation of it, and to dedicate it
with a Preface unto the Church of Christ, and to hasten, with as much
Expedition as they can, its Publication.

XXXIII. Monsieur Esnard having according to the Commission given him in the
Month of June, the last Year, 1577. by diverse Churches of this Kingdom,
rendered an account of his said Commission unto this Assembly, produced and
read the Acts, and made an ample Relation of what was done and transacted in
that general Synodical Meeting at Frankford, in Germany, the last September,
1577. in which were gathered the Deputies of the Reformed Churches of
Christendom, and in which he assisted also as a Deputy from our Churches: This
Assembly was very well pleased with his whole Negotiation, accepted and
approved of it, and does now discharge him of his said Commission, and all
Instructions, and Blanks signed and given him by our Churches, relating to his
said Commission, were vacated and disannulled, as being altogether needless for
the future, and all Duplicates of the said Commissions and Instructions, which
he was bound under his own Hand and Seal to observe and follow, were in like
manner cancelled and disannulled; that so he might be entirely acquitted,
freedand discharged, and we do also now discharge him, without ever demanding
any Matter, or farther account from him for the future.

Given at St. Foy, this 13 th. Day of February, 1578.
The first Appeals mentioned in any of their Synods.

CHAP. VII. Appeals and Particular Matters.
Art. [N. B. One Book calls this the 34th. or 36th. Article of General Matters.]
HIS Excellency the Prince of Conde appealed from the Consistory of Rochel, for
dissuading him from communicating at the Lord's Table because of a Prize taken
at Sea by his Commission after publishing the last Edict of Pacification,
embraced by the said Prince. Unto which his Excellency made this Answer, That
the said Prize was taken before the forty Days for divulging the said Peace
were expired, and it was from the sworn Enemies of the King of Navar, and of
himself also. That it being a mere Civil State-Matter, the Consistory had
nothing to do with it. To which the Consistory replied, That the whole Church
and City of Rochel were greatly Scandalized hereat, because they were accounted
Infractors and Violators of the public Peace of the Kingdom, and that they
were commonly taxed and reproached for such Prizes as Harborers and Concealers
of Pirates and piratical Goods, and that for their parts they could not foresee
any thing else, but that divine Vengeance would light down upon them, if they
did not oppose such unlawful Practices, proceeding from certain Persons, who
maliciously abused the Name and Authority of his Excellency the Prince. So that
they could not do less in Duty and Conscience (considering their Office in the
Church) than to endeavor by all good means to extinguish the Fire of such a
blazing Scandal; and they most humbly beseech his Excellency the Prince to take
kindly this their Admonition, as done net out of any ill will or bad design
against him, and that he would be pleased to exert hit Authority in such like
Matters, so that the Peace sworn by him may be kept and observed. This Assembly
having maturely considered the whole Affair, does own, acknowledge, and approve
of the Zeal and good Affection of the Church and Consistory of Rochel,
especially in opposing it self against scandalous Sins, and that herein they
have not acted beyond the Line of their Duty, for they be supported and
maintained in it by the holy Word of God, which ought to be the Rule of all our
Actions, whereby they are either to be approved or rejected, and that
denounces a Curse upon all those, who shall offend but the least of Men, and
unto this divine Word all of us must yield Obedience, if we intend to have and
hold communion with the Lord Jesus. Yet notwithstanding, this Assembly could
have wished that the said Consistory had suspended and deferred their Judgment
in an Affair of so great Importance, and had not been so hasty and precipitant
about it, that so all suspicion of Animosities on either side might have been
avoided. And as for his Excellency the Prince, this Assembly does earnestly
beseech him not to misconstrue those Remonstrances made him in the Name of God,
which we, judge were but just and needful, and grounded upon the Word of God,
and therefore we desire his Excellency that he would be pleased to remove the
occasion of the said Scandal, and take in good part the Admonitions of the
Church, and that he would be reconciled to it, and he shall be particularly
entreated so to do by our Brethren Messieurs Merlin, Bouguet, De la Tour, and
St. Martin, who are charged by this Assembly to acquaint his Excellency with
this our Request unto his Excellency, and to the said Consistory, and that we
have none other end, nor design in it than the perfect Union of our Members, to
serve God in Holiness and Righteousness, not giving any offense to those that
are within or without; and this being done, we decree that his Excellency the
said Prince shall be received into Communion at the Lord's Table.

Given at St. Foy the Great this 14 th. Day of February, 1578. And thus Signed
Francois Loiseau, Scribe of the said Synod.

II. His Grace the Duke of Rohan requesting by Letters, that this Assembly
would grant Monsieur de Claville, Minister of the Church of Loudun, to be
Pastor of the Church in his House and Family, or at least to serve it in course
four Months every Year, and that the Sieur de la Tousche, Minister of St.
Fulgent may take up his Residence at Monchamp. The Ministers of those Churches
being now absent, it was thought good to dismiss this Affair unto the
Provincial Synods, to which those Churches do appertain, that they may judge of
it, that his said Grace the Duke of Rohan may be gratified in his demands by
those Synods.

III. Monsieur De Spina, Minister of the Gospel shall be sent Pastor unto the
Church of Angers, only the Churches of Paris and Saumur have still their Right
in him reserved to them. And in case that through the difficulties of the Times
he should not be able to subsist at Angers, the Neighbor Classis, or Colloquy
to that City shall take care of his maintenance, and provide it for him, and
they may also lend him, as they shall see good for the Glory of God.

IV. Monsieur du Lygne shall be lent six Months longer unto the Church of Again,
in which time the Province of Anjou shall do their Duty to redemand him, and
there shall be a Church given him, wherein to exercise his Ministry, and to
make provision for his Subsistence. And in case the said Provincial Synod
should not recall him within the term prefixed, he shall be fully settled in the
said Church of Again.

CHAP.VIII.
V. JOhn Bonniot, or Bouquier, styling himself Gaultier, exercising the
Ministry at present at San Bouchard, near unto Great St. Foy, because that he
has temerariously intruded himself into the Ministry, without any Call, for
that he has forged diverse Letters, clipped his Majesty's Coin, melted down his
Clippings into base Silver Lingots, and vended them to several Goldsmiths in
the City of Sedan, for which the Civil Magistrate inflicted corporal Punishment
upon him in the said City, all which he could not but acknowledge and confess
to be true before this Assembly; For these Causes the said Bonniot, or Bouquier
is deposed from the Sacred Ministry, as a Person incapable, and utterly
unworthy of it, and shall be continued on the Roll of Vagrants, and shall do
public Penance in the said Church of San Bouchard. However because of his deep
Poverty, and great and numerous Family of Children, we do License him to keep
School, and to instruct Youth, but with this Proviso, that the Ministers of the
Places, where he shall live, do watch over him and his Deportments with a very
strict and careful Eye.

VI. An Appeal was brought by Monsieur De la Jaille, and the Church of Saujon,
who complained of the Wrongs done them by the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge
held at Saujon, which had adjudged him Pastor unto the said Church of Saujon,
without obliging it to defray his Expenses in coming to it. This Assembly
orders, that the Colloquy or Synod of that Province shall censure the said
Church, and Monsieur Royan the Minister, for their pragmatical intermeddling in
a Business not appertaining to them.

VII. Monsieur Boucquet shall write unto the Colloquy of Aunix, that Monsieur
Baron may be returned unto the Church of La Guerche, in the Province of Anjon,
there to exercise his Ministry, in Obedience to the Call given him.

VIII. The Synod of the Isle of France shall make an exact Enquiry into the
Life, Writings, and Conversation of Monsieur Gibbon, sometime Minister of
Deippe, that Judgment may pass upon him accordingly.

IX. Forasmuch as Mr. Bernard Giraud has been diverse times recalled by his
Church of Marceoill, in Poictou, and by the Synod of Poictou, he shall be
censured for his disobedience to this Summons, and also for that he quitted his
Church at first, and this according to the Canons of our Discipline: And the
Colloquy of Annix shall in like manner be censured for admitting him among them
without any testimonial Letters of Dismission. For which cause this Assembly
will remove the said Giraud elsewhere.

X. This Assembly will take special care of Monsieur Christian for his
Subsistence. But in the mean while, the Church of Poictiers shall be severely
censured for their default of Duty, baseness and ingratitude to this Reverend
Man of God, who was one of their first and most ancient Pastors, and who laid
the very Foundations of their flourshing Church. And the said Church shall be
summoned to the next Synod, and enjoined to give him full Contentment and
Satisfaction, and to pay him all Arrerages owing to him for time past, and to
relieve him now in his old Age.

XI. The Province of Anjou shall be obliged to provide for the Safety of
Monsieur Daniel, a Minister of the Gospel, who was formerly sent unto them, and
is now remanded back unto them by this present Assembly, and that Church which
shall call him unto their Service, shall reimburse him those Expenses he was
at, during the last Persecution.

XII. Monsieur Daniel shall exercise his Ministry in the House and Court of
his Excellency the Prince of Conde, but only for some Months in the Year; which
being expired, he may be redemanded by his own Church and Province. And the
Church of Bergerac shall likewise lend Monsieur de Borda their Minister unto
the said Prince for four Months more of the same Year; And this shall hold till
such time as some other course be taken. And Monsieur Martin shall be the
ordinary Minister of his Excellency's House and Family.

XIII. Monsieur de Malescot, who was the first Minister of the Church of
Montagu, in the County of Perch, shall be summoned by the Province of Poictou,
unto which he does belong, to return unto the said Province according to the
Canons of our Discipline, however without any prejudice unto the said Church of
Montagu; and the said Province of Poictou is ordered to receive those
Informations of the Province of the Isle of France, concerning the Deportments
of the said Malescot, his Writing, and his Way, and Manner of Preaching.

XIV. The Brethren of the French Church of London, in the Kingdom of England,
sent Letters unto this Assembly, petitioning that Messieurs de Villiers,
Minister of the Church of Rouan, and de la Fontayne, Ministers of the Church of
Orleans might be given to them for their Pastors. Their Request was granted,
and these worthy Ministers of the Gospel were lent unto the said Church, till
such time as their own dissipated Flocks might be recollected; and then they
should return, and be restored unto their former Churches respectively.

XV. On sight and perusal of the Writings of Mr. Anthony Fregeville, of the
Town Realmont, this Assembly judges them utterly unworthy of any Answer,
because they are stufft with Errors, Lies and Calumnies; and farther, the
Sentence past upon him by the Provincial Synod was ratified, and whereas he was
only suspended from the Lord's Table, it is now ordered, that his said
Suspension shall be publicly notified unto the whole Church: And in case he
continue to sow and spread abroad his Errors and Follies either by Word or
Writing, he shall be cut off from the Body of the Church by the Sword of
Excommunication, as a notorious Disturber of the Repose and Union of the Church.

XVI. Monsieur Giraud is sent unto the Town of Mas, in Agenois, to exercise his
Ministry in the Church of Calonges, which is now annexed to that of Mas
according to the Letters and Request of my Lady of Calonges, and of the said
Church of Mas, in Agenois.

CHAP. IX. The Roll of MINISTERS provided for, and disposed by this present
SYNOD.
I. MOnsieur Christian is sent unto the Town of Sancerre, in the Viscounty of
Turenne. 2. Monsieur Quesnel unto Lectoure. 3. Monsieur Chaffepied to St, Foy,
yet his Church may recall him at the Years end. 4. Monsieur de la Valle at
Abbeville, in Agenois. 5. Monsieur Giraud to the Town of Mas, in Agenois. 6.
Monsieur Du Puy to Le Laigne, and Bas de Fon, with their Annexes. 7. Monsieur
Anisse to St. Aulaye.
This present National Synod was finished the fourteenth Day of February, in
the Year of our Lord, 1578. Thus Signed in the Original, Peter Merlin,
Moderator. Francis L'Oyseau, Scribe. William de la Jaille, Scribe.


Mr. Merlin the Moderator of this Synod, was Minister in the Family of that
famous Nobleman the Lord De Coligni, High Admiral of France, who miraculously
escaped with his Life in that horrible Massacre at Paris, on St. Bartholomew's
Day, 1572. He leapt out of a Window, and hid himself in an Haylofft, where an
Hen came and lay an Egg by him three days successively, with which he was
sustained, till the Lord opened a Door for him to get out of this bloody City.
He was afterward Minister of the Church of Vitre. He was dim-sighted, a very
pious and prudent Man. He has commented upon Job and Esther in Latin. He was
a very dear Friend of Mr. Snape and Mr. Cartwright, two Eminent English N. C.
Ministers, and who read his Exposition on Job, and made some Animadversions on
it, in the Isle of Jersey. He presided also in the National Synod of Vitre,
1583.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE X. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At FIGEAC, the Second Day of
August, 1579.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. The Deputies Names, Monsieur La Faye Moderator, Covel and La Nouaille
Scribes. Chap. II. General Matters, Impotent Persons may not marry, The Aunt of
a dead Wife may not be married, Apostates censured, Of Names given Children in
Baptism, Care taken for a Succession of able and worthy Ministers, General
Matters 5. Synods to be held annually, Pastors must come with an Elder to them.
Sureties must consider their Engagements at Baptism, Some Crimes to be always
Registered, Scruples about communicating with sickly Persons. Chap. III. Several
Cases of Conscience, as about a Monk's Wife who returned to his Vomit,
Ministers Words at the Lord's Table. Of Benefices, Of Farmers of the Clergies
Temporal Estate, Of Godly Parents having Idolatrous Children, who will marry
Idolaters. How Public Penance is to be inflicted. No Scripture the Subject of
Plays, The Orders of particular Churches and Provinces must be for substance
the same with the Canons of the Discipline. Ministers cannot promise themselves
to any Church. Canon for Ministers out of Employment. Tithes possessed by
Protestants must be devoted to pious Uses, Art. 24. Of Burials. Dances
forbidden, Suspended Persons cannot be Sureties for Children at Baptism.
Reading of Psalms line by line before Singing condemned. Bare Head and Kneeling
in Prayer. Legal Terms and Formalities banished out of all Acts of
Church Discipline. A kind of Censure forbidden 3. Care taken for their
Ministers Stipend, Canon of Marriage explained 35. A Vagrant Minister deposed
and notified to the Churches 36. The Confession of the Dutch Churches approved.
Call of the next National Synod. Chap. IV. Remarks.
THE Synod of FIGEAC. 1579 Synod X.

SYNOD X.
Of the Tenth National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, held at Figeac
the Second Day of August, and ended the Eighth Day of the same Month, in the
Year of Grace 1579, being the Sixth Year of the Reign of Henry the third, King
of France and Poland.

CHAP. I. The Names of the Deputies unto this Synod.
THere appeared as Deputies from the Provinces unto this Synod, the Pastors and
Elders, whose Names arc hereunder written.

1. For the Province of the Isle of France, Monsieur de la Maison Neuv Minister
in the Church of Paris, and his Commission bore date the 28th of June, 1579.

2. For the Province of Burgundy Mr. James Covet, Minister in the Church of
Villarmont, and Monsieur du Chasteuverd, Elder of the Church of Dijon, Their
Commission was dated May the 15th, 1579.

3. For Champagne Monsieur Teuans, Minister of the Gospel in the Church of
Recours, without an Elder. His Letters of Deputation bore date the 28th of May,
of this self-same Year.

4. For Xaintonge Monsieur John Cochois, Minister at Jonzac, and Guy Filleul
Esquire Lord or La Cousture, Elder of St. Fort. His Commission was signed the 22d
day of July, 1579.

5. For Britain Monsieur du Gricq, Minister of Morlais. His Commission was
dated the 2d day of April of the same Year.

6. For Gascegny and Perigord Monsieur Trumpols, Minister of La Motte, and
Monsieur Francois de la Novoeille, Elder in the Church of Jersac. Their
Commission was dated the 29th of July.

7. For Anjou, the Maine, Loudunois, and Touraine, Monsieur de Clairville,
Minister of Loudun. And his Letters of Deputation were dated the 26th day of
June.

8. For Normandy Monsieur Echeron, Minister of God's Holy Word and Sacraments
in the Church of Ponteau de Mer, and his Commission was dated the 23d of March.

9. For the Upper Languedoc and Guienne Monsieur de Raisse, Minister of Figeac,
and Monsieur Rousset Minister of the Church in Mazamet. Their Commissions were
dated the 24th of April, and the 19th of June.

10. For the Lower Languedoc, Monsieur Perron Minister of Merues, and his
Commission bore date the 22d day of April.

11. For Augoumois Monsieur de la Billitierre, Minister of Aubeterne, and his
Commission was dated the 23d of July.

12. For the Province of Poictou Monsieur Cayer. Minister of Poitiers, and
Monsieur de St. Eustache, Elder in the Church of Niort. Their Commission was
dated July the 6th.

13. For Provence Monsieur de Poussilles, Elder in the Church of Forceilinis.
His Letters of Deputation were dated the 22d day of July.

14. For the Principality of Bearn Monsieur de la Pierre, Minister in the
Church of Navarrins. And his Commission bore Date the 21st day of July; which
was also ratified and authorized by the Letters of the King of Navarre, dated
the thirtieth of the same Month.

15. The Province of Picardy excused its absence by Letters of the 8th of June.

16. For the Churches of Berry, Beauce, and the adjacent Countries, Monsieur
John Miner, born at Orleans, and Elder -- his Commission was dated the 25th of
July.

17. The Province of Dolphiny excused its absence by Letters of the 23d of July.

18. The Province of Vivaretz was absent, but sent no Letters of Excuse.

19. The Province of Lower Anvergne and Forest absent.

20. There sat also in this Synod the Noble Anthony de Paramelle, Lord of St.
Colombe, Viguier, and Governor of the said Town of Figeac.

21. After Prayers were ended, the Assembly chose Monsieur de la Faye, Pastor
of the Church of Paris, Moderator, and Monsieur Couit Assessor, and Monsieur
Francois de la Nouaille, Scribe.

CHAP. II. General MATTERS.
ARTRTICLES.
Eunuchs may not be married.
I. FOrasmuch as the first and principal End of Marriage was the Procreation of
Children, and to be a Preservative from Fornication; he then that is a known
Eunuch, shall not be married in any of our Reformed Churches. The Aunt of a
dead Wife may not be married. See St. Foy. G. M. art. 5.
II. No Man shall marry the Aunt of his deceased Wife: For such Commixtures are
incestuous; and although the Civil Magistrate may permit it, yet such a Marriage
shall not be solemnized in any of our Churches. And all Pastors are warned
carefully to observe this Canon. See the Synod of Rochel, art. 22.
III. Such as Apostatize from the Reformed Religion unto Popery, and embrace the
Idolatries of the Romish Church, and all Endeavors used to reclaim them
proving useless and unsuccessful in case they persist in their Apostasy, they
shall be declared Apostates publicly before the Congregation, unto which they
did belong. IV. In giving Names unto Children, let all Preciseness on the one
hand, and Superstition and Scandal on the other be avoided: Because Matters of
this nature should have a perpetual tendency to the Churches edifying. So that
when Parents or Sureties do offer Children unto Baptism, and desire their own
Names to be put upon them, this their Request shall be granted; provided they
be not Names prohibited in the close of the Ninth Canon of Baptism, as the
Names of God, Angel, or Office, or such as be notoriously ridiculous. V.
Colloquies and Provincial Synods shall most humbly entreat and exhort Kings,
Princes, Great Lords, and all Impropriators of Church Lands, and all our
opulent and wealthy Churches,, to lay by and dedicate some considerable Portion
of their yearly Incomes, Estates, and Revenues toward the maintenance of
Students in Divinity, and of poor Scholars of excellent and hopeful Parts, who
may be hereafter employed in the Sacred Ministry. And that this Canon may be
observed, this Assembly will give the first Example, and does now order that
Letters shall be written unto those most Illustrious and Noble Personages, and
to our richest Churches, inviting them unto this most needful Contribution; and
these Letters shall be signed in the Name of this National Synod, by the
Moderator, Assessor, and Scribe. VI. National and Provincial Synods shall be
held once every Year for time coming, and Colloquies twice a Year; but by this
Canon we do not intend to abridge the Provinces (who can better do it) of their
Privilege in observing the first established Order. Pastors must come
accompanied with one Elder unto Synods or Classes.
VII. Pastors shall ever come unto these Ecclesiastical Assemblies accompanied
with an Elder; and in case they be sent alone, there shall be no regard had
unto Memoirs, as in like manner it shall be with the Elders, if they come
singly. Sureties must ponder seriously their Engagements at Baptism.
VIII. Pastors shall diligently exhort all Sureties of both Sexes seriously to
weigh and consider their Promises engaged at Baptism; and Parents shall be
advised to choose such Sureties for their Children, as are well instructed in
Religion, and of exemplary Life and Conversation; or at least such, as if need
be, may be able to educate their Children in the knowledge and fear of God.
Some Crimes shall not be blotted out the Books of Consistory.
IX. Upon Repentance and Satisfaction given unto the Church, all Crimes and
Offenses shall be razed out of the Books of Consistories, except such who for
their Contumacy and Rebellion had been censured with Suspension from the Lord's
Supper, or Excommunication. None of the Consistory may declare the Sins of
ingenuous Penitents.
X. Consistories shall not give in Evidence against any Person, by Act, or any
other way unto the Magistrate: And the Members of those Consistories shall not
reveal any Person the Confessions of Penitents, who voluntarily, and of their
own accord, or by Admonitions given them, shall have confessed and acknowledged
their Offenses. XI. Forasmuch as diverse sickly Persons are Communicants at the
Lord's Table, and some for fear of Infection scruple to take the Cup after
them, Pastors and Elders are advised to use their best prudence and discretion
in this case.
CHAP. III.
XII. A Woman having been joined in Marriage unto one who was formerly a Monk
or Priest, and since returned unto his former Profession, may not marry another
Man, until such time as her first Marriage be dissolved, and the Sentence of
Dissolution shall be pronounced, as of Right it ought, by the Magistrate.

XIII. Pastors are left unto their liberty to use either the accustomed words,
or any other words in the Administration of the Lord's Supper; it being a
matter indifferent, The Faithful may not hold any Benefices where there is
peril of Idolatry. See the Second Synod of Rochel, art. 34.37.
provided they be such as tend unto edification.

XIV. In the case of Benefices, to which there is a Right of Patronage, by
presentation from the Lord of the Manor, or by the interposal of the Bishop of
the Diocese, the Faithful must be advised not in the least to retain them, tho
they were freely given them without any Condition express or implicit of
Service unto the Idol.

XV. Farmers of the Temporalities of the Clergy, of their Rents, Tithes, and
suchlike Matters, shall observe the Nineteenth Article of the last National
Synod held at St. Foy, which was to intermeddle as little as may be with such
Concerns, because of diverse Abuses and Inconveniences that might happen about
them. Which ceasing, those of the Reformed Religion may lawfully farm them. And
all Consistories are desired to take Notice of it.

XVI. See the Second Synod of Rochel, Art. 50. How Parents ought to behave
themselves, when they marry their Children to one of a contrary Religion.
Parents professing the Reformed Religion, having Idolatrous Children of a
Religion contrary to their own, who would take them Wives Idolaters like
themselves, shall be advised to use their utmost endeavor to turn away their
Children from such a Marriage, especially if as yet they be Minors, and not
emancipated from under their Paternal Authority. But in case they cannot
prevail upon them, whenas the Marriage-Articles shall be signed, they shall
openly protest their abhorrency of that Idolatry into which their Children do
so wickedly plunge themselves, and afterward may give their Consent to the
Promises and Conditions concerning the Portion, and other suchlike Matters.

XVII. Public Penances to be used prudently. See the Second Synod of Rochel,
Art. 26.
Consistories are advised to take care, that Public Penances be used very
seldom, and with a great deal of prudence, and only for public notorious
Crimes, really committed, which are come to the knowledge of the far greater
part of the Church, and in this case the scandalous sin itself shall be
particularly confessed.

No Book of the Holy Scripture shall be turned into Plays.
XVIII. Neither the Canonical nor Apocryphal Books of the Holy Bible shall be
transformed into Comedies of Tragedies.

XIX. No Church, nor Province shall make any Ordinance, unless for Substance it
be conformable to the General Articles of our Church Discipline.

Ministers by their Personal Promises shall not be obliged to any Church.
XX. No Church shall pretend Title or Right unto any Minister, because of his
particular Promise given them, without the Authority of the Colloquy of
Provincial Synod.

XXI. In case a Minister be destitute of a Church in his own Province and
Colloquy, and shall lend his Service unto another Church out of his Province,
which has desired him so to do till the next Synod; and if that Synod when
convened, cannot employ him in its own Province, he shall then be the peculiar
Minister of that Church, which had demanded him, provided it be done with the
full content of the Church. And this Canon shall bind for the future, but
without any prejudice to the time past.

XXII. In the first Article concerning Elders and Deacons, after these words,
The Duties of their Office shall be read, there shall be this addition, And a
particular Prayer shall be expressed, conceived, and offered up to God for them.

XXIII. In the first Article concerning Delinquents, after these words, Cutting
him off in the Name; and by the Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be
added, And of his Church.

Protestants possessing Tithes, must wholly employ them in pious Uses on pain
of being censured.
XXIV. Whereas diverse Persons professing the Reformed Religion, do by their own
Authority and Right possess Tithes, which formerly were appropriated unto
Churchmen in Holy Orders, they shall be advised to employ them wholly to pious
Uses, such as the Maintenance of the Ministry, Relief of the Poor, Education of
Scholars, who be the Seminary of the Church, and in no wise unto their private
Profits, on pain of being suspended the Lord's Supper, in case of non-observing
this holy, just, and reasonable Counsel.

XXV. That Article concerning Burials, without Exhortations and Prayers at the
Graves, shall be punctually observed; and such as act contrary to it shall be
severely censured.

XXVI. Against Dances. See the Second Synod of Rochel, Art. 33.
Ministers and Consistories are hereby admonished to see that Canon concerning
Dances to be most strictly observed, which is the 20th under the Title of
Particular Orders, forbidding expressly all Dances; and also they shall
prudently distinguish between such as be contumacious Rebels against this holy
Advice, and those who by their discontinuance of Dancing do manifest their
having profited by it.

XXVII. No suspended Person from the Lord's Supper may be Sureties for a Child
at Baptism.
Suspended Persons from the Lord's Table shall not be admitted to present
Children unto Baptism in quality of Sureties, during the time of their
Suspension.

XXVIII. There shall be no change made in the present Division of the
Provinces, with reference to their particular Synods. Yet are they advised, all
of them, so to assign the Places of their Synodical Assemblies, as will be most
commodious for them.

XXIX. Churches that in singing Psalms do first cause each Verse to be read,
shall be advised to forbear that childish Custom, and such as have used
themselves unto it shall be censured.

XXX. Whereas diverse Persons during Public and Family Prayers, do neither
uncover their Heads, Humility must be testified in Prayer.
nor bow their Knees, expressing thereby the great pride of their Hearts, and
scandalizing such as fear the Lord, that this their Irreverence may be amended
and reformed, all Pastors, Elders, and Governors of Families are advised and
required to see carefully unto it, that during the time of Prayer, every one in
their Churches and Families without exception, be they high or low, noble or
base, do testify the humbleness of their Heart, by those forementioned
outward marks of humility, unless they be hindered by unavoidable necessity or
malady, in which cases we leave them to the direction of their particular and
respective Consciences.

No Legal Formalities to be used in the Exercise of Church Discipline.
XXXI. In the Exercise of of Church Discipline, all Formalities and Terms of Law
commonly used by the Civilians shall be forborne. And forasmuch as diverse
Persons, that they may avoid the Censure of their Crimes, do ordinarily appeal
from one Ecclesiastical Assembly unto another, and then at last to the National
Synod, which is thereby more encumbred in the deciding their businesses than of
any other: Differences arising in any Province are to be definitively
determined in that particular Province.
This Synod does ordain, That for time to come, whatever Differences arise in
any Province, shall be definitively determined by that very Provincial Synod,
and no Appeal from it to be admitted; excepting what concerns the Suspensions
and Deposings of Ministers, Elders, and Deacons, and the removal of a Minister
from one Province unto another, and Points of Doctrine; in which cases they may
be brought by degrees at last to the National Synod, where they shall be
finally judged and determined.

XXXII. The Holy Word of God condemning that Custom introduced into certain
Reformed Churches, of enquiring into, and generally censuring of Faults in the
Public Congregation both of Men and Women before the Lord's Supper; those
Churches that have used it are exhorted to forbear it for the future, and in
Point of Censures to acquiesce in the observation of that Order established in
our Discipline, and practiced by all other the Reformed Churches of France. And
such Churches as shall refuse so to do, shall be censured.

That the Complaints of Ministers and the dissipation of Churches may be
avoided, the Churches must advance a Quarter's Pay beforehand unto their
Ministers.
XXXIII. That the Ingratitude of diverse Churches toward their Ministers (who
therefore deserve justly to be deprived of them) may be hereafter prevented:
This Assembly does ordain, That every Church shall advance a Quarter's Stipend
beforehand unto their Pastors, of that Annual Maintenance they had engaged to
pay them. And in case three Months be lapsed, and his Quarteridge unpaid, after
Complaints made unto the Consistory, or the more eminent Members of that
Church, the said Pastor may withdraw himself from the Service of his said
Church, appealing from its Consistory unto the two nearest Ministers, before
whom he shall declare the causes of his departure, that so he may be discharged
from all Calumny; and the Pastor thus ungratefully dealt withal, shall not be
obliged to tarry for the Judgment of any Colloquy or Synod, unless one of those
Assemblies do meet in the same Month of his departure. And that ungrateful
Church shall not be provided of any other Pastor, till it shall have first
given plenary satisfaction unto its former Minister. And he must in the mean
while remember not to engage himself to any Church out of his Province, unless
he have first obtained License from his own Provincial Synod.

XXXIV. The Censure incurred and merited by the ungrateful Members of
particular Churches shall be inflicted on them by their own Consistories
according to our Discipline.

XXXV. The 11th Canon in the Chapter of Marriages shall be thus explained: That
whenas one of the Parties is of a contrary Religion, the Marriage shall not be
admitted in a Reformed Church, until such time as that Party of the contrary
Religion be sufficiently instructed, and is enabled with a good Conscience to
make a public Protestation of his Renouncing all Idolatry and Superstition,
and that by the Grace of God helping him, he will continue the rest of his Days
in the purity of his Worship. And the Consistory of that Church in which he is
to make this Protestation, shall take Cognizance or the sufficiency of his
knowledge.

XXXVI. All the Provinces are desired to take Notice, that a certain Minister
called German has been deposed from his Ministry, and declared a Vagrant for
good and just Cause, by the Provincial Synod of Orleans and Berry, whose
Sentence shall abide valid. Saving always to the said German power to justify
himself before the National Synod, if he think fitting.

The Confession of the Low Countries approved.
XXXVII. The Confession of Faith presented by the Churches of both Languages,
Dutch and French, in the Low Countries, has been approved by this Synod, and
the Provincial Deputies have promised in the Name of their Churches to
subscribe it, if need be. And it was consulted on by this Assembly, A Project
of Universal Confession of Faith for all the Protestant Churches.
what means would be most proper to reunite the several Confessions of all
those Nations which agree in Doctrine, into one common Confession, and which
may be hereafter approved by all these Nations. And this pursuant to the
Project laid down in the late Conference at Neustadt, September 1577.

XXXVIII. The next National Synod shall be called by the Province of Anjou,
about one year hence; and the said Province shall give Notice thereof unto the
Counties of Maine, Loudunois, and Touraine, they being all incorporated into
one with itself, as also to all other the Provinces, three Months before the
Day and Place of Meeting.

Done at Figeac, this 8th of August, 1579.
The End of the Synod of FIGEAC.
CHAP. IV. Remarks upon the DEPVTIES.
1. MR. James Covet; he in the Civil Wars retired into Switzerland, and there
writ against Socinus, one of the first Books that was writ against his Heresy.
He was sometime Minister of the Church of Paris.

2. Cayer; he afterward apostatized.

3. Monsieur de la Faye the Moderator. There was one of his Name, but whether
it were he, I am not certain, that was Pastor in the Church of Geneva, a very
learned Man.

THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE XI. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD For the second time in the
City of ROCHEL, and Year of our Lord, 1581.

This Synod should have been Assembled at Loudun in the Province of Anjou; but
for some other Reasons was transferred unto Rochel.

The CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. 1. Names of the Deputies. Synodical Officers chosen. Chap. 2. Of General
Matters. The Deputies promise perseverance in the Unity of Faith. One Minister
enough to ordain another. Roll of Apostate Ministers. Ministers practicing
Physic condemned. Great Lords to observe the Discipline. Canons about
Ministers. 7. to 11. Elders may read Prayers in the Church. Parity of Elders
and Deacons. Of Certificates. 16. The King of Navar, Prince of Conde, and all
Lords desired to contribute to the Educating of Youth for the Ministry. Acts,
Sufferings, and memorable Events about the Churches to be Collected and
Registered. Gadding Professors censured. Chap. 3. A Case about Censuring of
Apostates resolved. The Case of Lapsed Members inhabiting in another Church.
Public Penance for Fornication how to be inflicted. 25. Subordination of
Synodical Meetings. 28. A Book called the History of France censured. 29.
Brocard's Book upon Geness condemned. Canons about the just Number of Deputies
unto Synods, 30.31. Dancings and other Dissolutions condemned. Holding of
Benefices by Bulls from Rome censured. Impropriaters censured. Care about
Ministers Maintenance. 36. Ministers out of the Kingdom to be called home. 39.
Psalm. Books to be brought by all unto the Temples that all may Sing. An
Explication of the Canon about Habits. The 14th. Canon of Marriages explained.
42. Vsuries condemned. Printers to take care what Books they sell. A Case
resolved, about Marrying the Widow of his Wife's Brother. Licenses to Marry may
be taken from the King, though not from the Pope. Baptism not to be deferred. 47.
Protestants must not be present at Apostates Marriages. 48. Call of the next
National Synod.
1581. Synod XI.
THE II. Synod of Rochel.
SYNOD XI.
The Eleventh National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, held at Rochel
the second time (instead of the City of Loudun, in Anjou) on Wednesday the
21th. of June, and ended the 10th. of July, in the Year, 1581. In the 8th. Year
of the Reign of Henry the Third King of France and Poland.

CHAP. I. The Catalogue and Names of the Deputies.
THere appeared as Deputies of the Provinces unto this Synod the Pastors and
Elders, whose Names are hereafter registered, Videlicet.

I. For the Province of Anjou, Touraine, the Maine, Perch, Vandomois, and
Loudumois, Monsieur de la Plant, Minister of the blessed Gospel of our Lord
Jesus in the Church of Pringay, and Mathurin Peju his Elder in company with him.

II. For the Province of Poictou, Monsieur Alexander de L'estang-Godion,
Minister of God's holy Word in the Church of Coue or Codue, and Monsieur de
Faux, Minister of the Gospel at Chastel-herauld, accompanied with Monsieur
Colin, Doctor of Physic, and Elder of the Church in Fontenay.

III. For the Isle of France, Monsieur de Beaulieu, Minister of the Gospel in
the Church of -- [ N. B. neither of my four Copies do note his Church; yet
there was a Gentleman of this Name, Pastor of the Church of Senlis in this very
Province, in the Year, 1603. which I suppose to be the same.] without an Elder.

IV. For the Province of Normandy, Monsieur de la Four, Minister of the Gospel,
and Pastor of the Church of Christ in the City of Rouan. He came unto the Synod
alone, without an Elder.

Mr. Beraud was also the first Professor of Divinity in that University,
according to my Catalogue of its Professors.
V. For Xaintonge, Monsieur dec Monstier, Minister of God's Holy Word in the
Town of St. John de Angely, in company with the Sieur Paboul, Elder of the
Church of Pons.

VI. For the Province of Higher Languedoc, and Higher Guienne Monsieur Michael
Beraud, Minister of the Gospel in the Church and City of Montauban, accompanied
with Monsieur Bais, Elder in the said Church.

VII. For the Province of Perigord, Gascony, and Limousin, Monsieur Berjat, or
Debordat, Minister of God's Holy Word in the Church of Bergerac, and Janicon
Dedon, Elder of the Church of Duras.

VIII. For the Province of Britain, Monsieur Nicholas Bernier, Minister of the
blessed Gospel of Christ Jesus in the Church of Vitre, accompanied with
Monsieur de Roussiere, Elder of the Church in Vielle Vigne.

IX. For the Province of Augolmois, Monsieur La Croix, Minister of the Word of
God in the Church of Jarnac, without an Elder.

X. For the Province of Champagne, Monsieur Capell, Minister of God's Holy Word
in the Church of Sedan, and Monsieur Pasquier, Elder of the Church at Troys in
Champagne.

XI. The Province of Burgundy and Berry were absent, but excused their absence
by Letters.

XII. For the Lower Languedoc, Monsieur Brunier, Minister in the Church of
Vsez, accompanied with Monsieur Fortin, an Elder.

XIII. The Provinces of Dolphiny, Provence, Forest, and Auvergne were all of
them absent, and which was very much admired, they had not the Civility to
excuse their absence by any Letters written and sent from their respective
Synods unto this National Assembly.

XIV. Prayer being ended, Monsieur de Nort, Minister of the Gospel in the
Church of Rochel was voted Moderator, and Monsieur de la Place, Minister of
Pringey Assessor, and Monsieur de Lestang-Godion, Minister of Coue, in Poictou,
and Monsieur de Chauveton, Lord of Beauvois and Minister of the Church of St.
Martins in the Isle of Re, were also voted to be Scribes.

CHAP. II. General MATTERS.
I. ALL the Deputies protested in the Name of the Churches of their respective
Provinces, that they would persevere in the Union of that Doctrine, and
Confession of Faith, which was formerly subscribed in the National Synod held
in this City, in the Year, 1571. and now exhibited, read and recognized in this
Assembly. Moreover, the said Deputies certifyed and declared, that they had not
the least notice given them of any manner of opposition to it, but a general
Acquiescency in the said Doctrine and Confession of Faith in all their
Churches. For which they did unanimously praise God.

One Minister enough to ordain another.
II. The Book of Discipline being read, It was ordained that the fourth Article
in the Chapter of Ministers should remain entire as it was, excepting that
instead of three or four Ministers required to present the new elected Minister
unto the Ministry, one only should be sufficient.

III. In the Margent of the 5th. Article, this shall be inserted, That the said
Article was only appointed for such a time, when as a Province had no Churches
constituted in it, and not for the present Day, when as, blessed be God, every
Province in the Kingdom has diverse of them.

IV. These were declared Apostates by the Isle of France, and their Declaration
approved of by this National Synod, Toussainct le Gibou in Normandy, Launay in
Brie: And Panctier in Picardy, a Deserter, Grenet, a Minister of La Garnache,
in Lower Poictou, a Vagrant; and Quenet in the Colloquy of Vsez, and Monsieur
Beazer, was ordered to make inquiry about one called du Plessis.

V. The 22d. Article of the Synod of St. Foy, concerning Ministers who Practice
Physic, having been read, was Approved, as being consonant to the Word of God.
And this Assembly being informed that diverse Ministers do more employ
themselves in Physic, than in the Duties of their Ministry, The Deputies of
the Province in which they live, were ordered to exhort them to intend and mind
their Ministry, and to yield plenary Obedience unto God's Word in this
Article, or otherwise the Colloquies and Synods shall proceed against them
according to the Rules of our Discipline.

VI. Princes and great Lords shall be advised to observe the Articles of our
Discipline, and to send their Ministers to our National and Provincial Synods
and Colloquies.

VII. The 12th. Article of our Discipline, and the 21th. and 33d. of the Synod
of Figeac were thus confirmed. It Is the Judgment of this Assembly, that a
Pastor being duly discharged from his Church, if the Colloquy or Provincial
Synod in which he served do not within a Month provide him another
Congregation, he may accept of the first Call given him by any other Province;
and this according to the Canons of our Discipline.

VIII. The 15th. Article of our Discipline, concerning Ministers was confirmed,
but with this Proviso, That these words, Composed of six at the least, shall be
left out.

IX. And that the said Article may be the better understood, After these words,
Who shall have intruded into a Church, this shall be added, Although he had been
afterward chosen by the People.

X. And whereas in the 16th. Article, it was thus written, The Reasons, it
shall be added, And the Reasons being well examined.

XI. And to that of Professors shall be added, Regents and Schoolmasters.

XII. Elders in the Pastor's absence, may warrantably perform that Duty of
public Common Prayer, especially if they have been thereunto appointby the
Consistory.

XIII. Whereas in the 6th. Article concerning Elders and Deacons, it is said
that no Elders shall pretend to Primacy, Let this be added, neither in
Election, nor Precedence, nor in order of Suffrages, nor in any other thing
belonging to their Office of Elders.

XIV. The 7th. Article concerning Elders and Deacons shall be most diligently
observed.

XV. Ministers and Elders are required to use their utmost Endeavor, that the
Twelfth Article in the Chapter of Consistories be punctually observed.

XVI. Advise was taken on the Third Article of Consistories, which treats of
Certificates given unto Passengers, That for time coming good and vallid Causes
moving us hereunto, The first Certificates shall neither be kept nor broken,
until such time as they be come unto their journies end mentioned in them, and
then and there the said Certificates shall be detained and cancelled, and
Certificates shall be given very rarely unto any Persons.

XVII. The Tenth Article of Figeac shall be closed up with this Addition, If it
be not with Consent of the Consistories, no Offenses shall be discovered to the
Civil Magistrate.

The 5th. Penny of all Charities shall be applied toward the Maintenance of
Proposans.
XVIII. His Majesty the King of Navar, and his Higness the Prince of Conde, and
other Lords professing our Holy Reformed Religion shall be most humbly desired
to contribute liberally toward the Maintenance of poor Scholars and Proposans
designed for the Ministry. And all Churches are exhorted to press this Duty
vigorously upon their richer and more substantial Members, that so every
Colloquy may be able at least to give Subsistence unto one Proposan, and if it
can be conveniently, the fifth Penny of all Charity-monies shall be allotted to
this very purpose.

XIX. That the 13th. Article of Consistories may be executed, concerning a
Collection of all memorable Acts relating to the Church's Sufferings, it is
thought meet that every Colloquy do depute a Minister, to whom all the Churches
shall send their Memoirs, that they may be brought unto the Provincial Synod,
and thence unto the National.

XX. Such Professors as range abroad to hear the Word in one Church and receive
the Sacrament in another, shall be admonished of their Duty to fix themselves
to some particular Church of Christ, and in case of neglect, they shall be
censured.

XXI. In the first Article concerning Delinquents, next after these words, Nor
the Cause of it, shall be added this, nor in like manner the Restitution, and
these words shall be razed out, Lest they be defamed.

CHAP. III.
XXII. IT being desired that the 3d Article of the Synod of Figeac might be
explained; the Assembly voted, that toward the close of it, there should be
this Addition, viz. That it was left wholly to the Prudence of the Consistory,
whether they would mention by name or not, those who had a long time since
revolted; but as for them who were but of late Apostates, Censures shall be
pronounced against them according to the Tenor of that Canon, unless that by
such a Personal Denunciation of those Sinners the Consistory might foresee some
great and notable Danger like to betide the Church: In which case nothing shall
be done without the Advice of the Provincial Synod.

XXIII. If the Members of one Church fallen into Idolatry happen to take up
their abode in another, where their Crime is not known, they shall only testify
their Repentance privately before the Consistory, but with this Condition, that
in case they return to that former Church, whereunto they belonged, they shall
then and there also make a public Acknowledgment of their Offense.

XXIV. Public Penances shall be undergone personally, and by those only who
have publicly offended; the Sinner openly and sincerely with his Mouth from
his Heart testifying his Repentance.

XXV. Whoredoms when committed, and come to public ^^owledge shall by their
Actors be publicly acknowledged with evident Tokens of Repentance.

XXVI. This Clause, by the greater part, shall be razed out from the end of the
17th. Article of Figeac, and there shall be this only inserted, known by the
greater part.

XXVII. Both those Canons of the Tenth National Synod, and of our ancient
Discipline concerning the time of meeting for Colloquies and Provincial Synods
shall remain in full force, so that they be wholly left unto their Liberty to
do therein as they may most conveniently.

XXVIII. Forasmuch as Provincial Synods depend upon the National, Colloquies
also shall for the same Reasons be subject unto the Provincial Synods, and
Consistories unto Colloquies.

XXIX. The National Synod of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom assembled in
this City of Rochel, under the Authority of the King's Edicts, having seen a
certain Book Entitled, The History of France, printed in this City, upon
diverse complaints made unto us from all parts of the Kingdom against it, and
having took Cognizance of the proceedings of the Consistory of this Church
against the find Book, has found that in many places the Author speaks
exceeding irreverently and irreligiously of divine Things, and that it is a
heap of idle, vain and profane Matters, full of Falsehoods, Lies and Calumnies,
to the great prejudice of God's glorious Power, to the disadvantage and
dishonor of our Holy Doctrine and Reformed Religion, to the Dissamation of
diverse godly Persons dead and living. And therefore has thought good to
advertise all the Churches, that they beware of the said Book, and inasmuch as
in them lies to disapprove it. And this Synod does judicially declare the
Author of the said Book (if he own himself a Protestant) unworthy of our Holy
Communion, and not to be admitted to the participation of the Sacraments, until
such time as he shall have acknowledged his offense, and by convenient means,
such as the Suppression of his History, shall have repaired the Scandal that he
has given unto the Churches.

XXX. The Synod also having seen and examined another Book written in Latin
upon Genesis, by a certain Fellow, called. James Brocan of Piedmont, printed in
this City, has declared, and does declare it to be fraught with Impieties, and
horrible Profanations of the Sacred Scriptures, and pernicious Errors,
especially in Matters of Revelation of Revelation Prophecy, and therefore
exhorts all the Faithful to keep themselves carefully from being seduced by it.

XXXI. The first Article of Provincial Synods being read, it was decreed, That
all Ministers should attend in Person at their Provincial Synods, or should
excuse themselves by Letters in case of absence, the causes whereof should be
judged valid, or otherwise, by those Assemblies.

XXXII. The third Article concerning National Synods shall abide in its full
power. But for the benefit of all our Churches, there shall be this clause
added: That for time to come, if possible it may be done, there shall be two
Ministers, and two Elders deputed from every Province unto them.

XXXIII. Forasmuch as Dancings and other Dissolutions do sprout up and increase
every where, yea, and in these our Reformed Churches, it was thought good to
exhort the Consistories, that for God's sake they would conscientiously observe
the Six and twentieth Article of particular Orders decreed in the Synod of
Figeac, and in the Name of God, and by the Authority of this present Assembly,
that it be read publicly in the Churches, and all Colloquies and Synods are
hereby expressly charged to censure those Consistories that neglect their Duty
in this particular.

XXXIV. All those who by unlawful means, as by Papal Bulls, or ready Money
shall purchase or hold Benefices, and such as cause Idolatry to be upheld and
maintained, either directly or indirectly, shall be excluded Communion at the
Lord's Table.

XXXV. As to what concerns Impropriators and Farmers of Benefices, the ancient
Canons of our Discipline shall hold good, and be in full force, power, and
virtue against them. Yet nevertheless the Deputies shall bring with them from
their respective Provinces, whatever Difficulties have occurred about those
matters, that so they may be debated in the next National Synod. And whereas
our Brethren of Languedoc, Gascony and Perigord, have desired have for the
welfare of their Churches to censure such Farmers, the business is left unto
the prudence of their Provincial Synods.

XXXVI. That Churches may not hereafter upon the death or removal of their
Pastors be dissolved, the Ministers who preside in the Colloquy for a new
Election, shall first of all enquire of every Elder in other Churches of the
Colloquy, what, and how much Maintenance they exhibit unto their Pastors, and
what care they take for paying in unto them their promised Stipends, that so
provision may be made for them by the Authority of the Colloquies.

XXXVII. These words, The most eminent, shall be blotted out from the 33d
Article of Figeac.

XXXVIII. Synods and Colloquies shall consult how to six the Limits and Extent
of that Church, wherein a Minister shall exercise his ordinary Calling.

XXXIX. Ministers belonging to the Churches of France, and now living abroad
without the Kingdom, shall be recalled by their respective Provinces.

XL. Forasmuch as there is a notorious contempt of Religion visible in all
places, yea also in our Religious Meetings, we advise that Notice be given unto
all Persons, to bring with them their Psalm-Books into the Churches, and that
such as contemptuously neglect the doing of it, shall be severely censured; and
all Protestant Printers are advised not to sunder in their Impressions the
Prayers and Catechism from the Psalm-Books.

XLI. The 17th Article of particular Orders concerning Habits was thus
explained: This Synod declares, That such Habits are not to be allowed in
common wearing, which carry with them evident marks of lasciviousness,
dissolution, and excessive newfangled Fashions, such as painting, slashing,
cutting in pieces, trimming with Locks and Tassels, or any other that may
discover our Nakedness, or naked Breasts, or Fardingales, or the like sort of
Garments, with which both Men and Women do wickedly cloth and adorn
themselves. And Consistories shall do their utmost endeavor to suppress such
Dissolutions by their Censures, and in case the Delinquents are contumacious
and rebellious, they shall proceed against them even to Excommunication.

XLII. As to the 14th Canon concerning Marriages, this Synod does not judge it
contrary to the 24th Article enacted by the Assembly of Estates at Blois; for
in that Orders only were given unto Notaries and Scriveners, how they should
carry and behave themselves; wherefore leaving unto Notaries to follow their
ordinary business in the way and manner prescribed to them, nothing hinders but
that the Church may make Espousals by words de proesenti.

XLIII. All excessive and scandalous Usuries shall be severely forbidden and
condemned. Usuries forbidden.


XLIV. After these words, The Superstition of the Romish Church, in the second
Article of particular Orders, there shall be these added: And the said Printers
and Booksellers are exhorted not to sell any scandalous Books relating to
Idolatry, or Impudicity, or such at have a tendency to corrupt good manners.

Not lawful to marry the Widow of the Wise's Brother.
XLV. As to that Case propounded, Whether a Man might lawfully marry the Widow
of his Wife's Brother? we judge, That over and above what has been determined
by others formerly in this matter, that there is a secret affinity between such
Parties, because in the sight of God, the Man and Wife are accounted but one
flesh, and therefore decency and civility will not permit it.

Licenses to marry may be taken from the King, tho not from the Pope.
XLVI. It is in no wise lawful for any Member of our Churches to address
themselves unto the Pope for Dispensations to marry within the degrees
prohibited, and to remove any present or after Impediments, which may or do
occur in that holy Estate; because in so doing there is an owning and
subjection to his Tyrannical Authority. But yet in degrees not forbidden by the
Word of God, which are now forbidden by our Civil Magistrate, we may lawfully
address ourselves unto the King tor his License.

XLVII. The Faithful shall be admonished both in Sermons and private
Conferences not to defer Baptizing their Children, unless there be some very
great cause inducing them thereunto.

XLVIII. None of our Members in Communion with us, shall assist at their
Weddings or Wedding-Feasts, who that they may marry a Popish Wife, do revolt
from the Reformed Religion. But as for those who have a long while ago left the
Profession of our Religion, or have been ever Papists, it is left to the
prudence of the Faithful to consider what will be most expedient for them; and
if they go, let them take heed of approving the Evil in those Meetings, and
that they bear no part in the Dances, and other Dissolutions which are commonly
found and committed at them.

XLIX. For time to come, neither Ministers, nor any other of the Faithful shall
print or publish any of their Writings, or private Works, without having first
obtained the express leave and approbation of their respective Colloquies.

L. There shall be this clause added to the 12th Article of Figeac: And the
said Fathers shall make it appear unto the Consistory, that they have been
diligent in their Duty, to hinder as much as in them lay the said Marriages.

LI. The Province of Brittany is ordered to convoke the next National Synod,
and shall give Notice thereof three Months before unto all the Provinces, as
also to the Ministers of Bearn, Metz, and Sedan, and to the Ministers of
Princes, professing the Reformed Religion.

The Original of the Acts of this Synod was lodged up in the Archives of the
City of Rochel, out of which this present Copy was extracted, and it was thus
signed, De Nort, Moderator. De L'Estang, and Scribes, chosen and deputed,
thereunto by the Synod. Chauveton Scribes, chosen and deputed, thereunto by the
Synod.


The End of the Second Synod of Rochel.
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, 1583. Synod XII.
and DECREES OF THE XII. National Synod OF THE Reformed Churches of Christ, IN
The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At Vitre, in the Castle of the Right Honorable GVY
Earl of Laval, on the 15th Day of May, and ended the 27th of the same Month, in
the Year 1583, being the Ninth Year or the Reign of Henry the Third, King of
France and Poland.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Deputies Names. Deputies from the Churches in the Netherlands 18.
Synodical Officers chosen. Chap. II. General Matters. Deputies to be sent from
the Reformed Churches of France, unto the Dutch Synods, and from theirs unto
the French Synods 1. Their Confession and Discipline mutually signed. Ministers
to be lent reciprocally. Assessments of Members to be in Churches, not
Provinces. A Case of Conscience. 6. Another about Prayer, to be used at the
Baptisms of Children born in Incest 8. Promises of Marriage by words de
praesenti indissolvable. Notorious Sinners cast out of the Church 12. A weighty
Case of Conscience 13. Baptism to be administered before the last Psalm 14. A
Case about Patronage. 15. All the Deputies to communicate in the end of the
National Synod 16. Whether a Popish Bride may be accompanied to her Church 17.
A Case about Women's Habits. 18. A Case about Prohibitions against Church
Censures 19. Acts for a Synodical Seal, and a National Fast 21, 22. A Case
about ungraceful Church Members, about Ministers delegated out of their
Colloquy or Provinces, about visiting of the sick 24, 25, 26. Chap. III. Canons
removed from, changed in, and added to the Discipline. Chap. IV. Of particular
Matters. A deposed Minister petitioning to be restored unto his Office is
rejected. A Case of Conscience 2. A whole Church deprived of the Ministry for
not maintaining their Pastor 4. A Case of Conscience 5. An Apostate Minister
exposed and excommunicated 6. Censures upon two other such Delinquents 7. A
Minister practicing Physic censured 10. the Harmony of Confessions approved
14. A Case about confronting Witnesses 15. A Case about a dissolved Marriage
17. A scandalous Minister deposed 18. A Case about a Pension upon a Benefice
21. King of Navarr's Message unto the Synod 26. A motion for Union between the
German and French Churches. The Appeal of a scandalous Minister rejected 31. A
Case about a Man's Marriage with his Wife's Niece 32. Broccard's Book on
Genesis again condemned 33. Bellefleur for writing against the Discipline
censured. An Act for calling the next National Synod.
THE First Synod of Vitre.
SYNOD XII.
CHAP. I. The DEPVTIES.
There appeared in this Synod on behalf of the Provinces, and as their
Representatives the Pastors and Elders hereafter named, viz.

1. FOR the Province of the Isle of France, the Land of Chartres, Picardy, and
Brie, Monsieur Matthew Virell, Minister in the Church of Marchais in Beavoisis,
within the said Isle of France, accompanied with Claudius de Hames, Lord of
Felnoy, Elder of the Church at Dieppe.

2. For Champagne, and the Land of Messin, there should have served Mr.
Fleuret, Minister of the Church of Esparnon in Champagne, but he fell sick by
the way, and sent Letters of excuse unto the Synod, which were accepted. But
the Province was censured for not sending an Elder with the said Minister.

3. Fox Normandy M. William Feuguero, Minister of Basqueville, and John de
Lamare Deacon of the Church of Veinieres.

4. For Britain M. Peter Merlin, Minister of the Church gathered in the House
of the Earl of Laval and Vitre; and M. Mathurin L' Hommeau, Lord of Gravier,
Minister in the Church of Rennes, and William le Moine, Elder in the Church of
Vitre.

For Orleans and Berry M. William Sauvage, Minister of the Church, of Mer upon
the Loire; and Christopher -- Elder of the Church at Chastelnaudun.

6. For Anjou, Tourain, Le Main, Vandomois, Loudunois, and the lower Perch
John Malesousse, and De la Durelleric, Ministers of Chasteau-Gontier, Rene,
Pineau, Minister in the Church of Craon in Anjou, and Mathurin Peju, Elder of
the Church at Augers.

7. For the upper and neither Poictou M. Nicholas Gorre Minister of Flontenay
le Conte, and Peter Guittaud, Elder in the Church of Chastel-heraud.

8. For Xaintonge, Aunix, the City and Government of Rochel, Andrew de
Mazieres, called also Peter de la Place, Minister at Thoire in Aunix aforesaid,
and Hierom Faureau, Elder in the Church of Rochel.

9. For Augoumois, M. Guy du Pou, Minister of Vertueil, without an Elder.

10. The Deputies of Gascogny, Perigort, and Limousin were absent, but excused
themselves by Letters, because they wanted timely Notice of the sitting of the
Synod, and there was no Money gathered to defray the charge of their Journey.

11. The higher and lower Vivaretz and Vellay were absent without excuse.

12. For the lower Languedoc, Nismes, Montpellier, Vsez, Basques, Beziars, and
Givaudan inclusively, M. John de Grores, Minister of Nismes, and Andrew
D'Alguillonnet Elder of the same Church.

13. For the higher Languedoc And Guienne, M. John Gardesi, Minister of St.
Antonin ill Quercy, and M. Amand le Gros, Elder in the Church of Castres M.
Gardesi was a severe Nathan to Henry the Fourth.

14. For Bourbonnois and lower Auvergne, Lyonnois, Forest, La March, and and
Beaujolois there were no Deputies, they being absent, nor did they send any
excuse.

15. The Deputies of Provence were indeed absent, but sent their Reasons for
it, which were not accepted.

16. The Deputies of Burgundy were absent, and inexcusable.

17. The Deputies of Dolphiny and Orange were absent, but excused themselves by
their Letters.

18. There appeared also, and sat and voted in this Synod the Deputies of the
Churches in the Low Countries, who brought with them their Letters of
Commission, viz. Michael Forest, Minister of the French Church at Machlin, and
Doctor Joannes Boulins, Minister of the Church of Gant, and John Charan
Minister of the Church of Bruges.

19. After Invocation of the Name of God, M. Peter Merlin Minister of the
Gospel, and Pastor of the Church at Vitre and Laval, was chosen Moderator, and
Master Matthew Virel Minister in the Church of Marchais in Beauvoisis Assessor,
and M. Renatus Pineau Minister in the Church of Craon, and Mr. Jerome Faureau
Elder in the Church of Rochel, were appointed Scribes unto the Synod, to
Collect and Register all its Acts.

CHAP. II. Canons made and decreed in the National Synod held at Vitre in
Brittany, at the Castle of the Lord De la Vall, on Monday the 16th Day of May,
in the Year of our Lord One thousand five hundred eighty and three; Monsieur
Merlin being President, and Monsieur Pineau Scribe.
General MATTERS.
The means of uniting our Churches with those of the Nitherlands.
I. OUR Brethren of the Low Countries having requested that some good course
might be taken, and means used that the Deputies of their Churches might for
time to come be present at our National Synods, and ours at theirs. This
Assembly does now ordain, That as often as the Synods of the said Low Countries
shall be convened, two Provinces of this Kingdom shall be obliged to send their
Deputies; to wit, two Ministers and one Elder, who shall be expressly named by
those two Provinces in every National Synod, and their Charges born by all the
Provinces of this Kingdom, and for this present approaching Synod of the Low
Countries, the Provinces of the Isle of France and Normandy are appointed to
send the Deputies. II. And whereas the Brethren their Deputies have tendered
unto this Synod the Confession of Faith, and Body of Church Discipline owned
and embraced by the said Churches of the Low Countries; this Assembly having
humbly and heartily blessed God for that sweet Union and Agreement both in
Doctrine and Discipline, between the Churches of this Kingdom and of that
Republic, did judge meet to subscribe them both; and it did also request those
our Brethren their Deputies reciprocally to subscribe our Confession of Faith,
and Body of Church Discipline; which in obedience to the Commission given them
by their Principals, they did accordingly; thereby testifying that mutual
harmony and concord in the Doctrine and Discipline of all the Churches in both
Nations. III. Moreover, this Assembly having to its great grief understood the
miserable Condition of the greater part of the Churches in the Low Countries,
how that they be exceedingly pestered with diverse Sects and Heresies, as of
David George, Anabaptists, Libertines, and other Errors contrary to the purity
of God's Word, and against which they cannot use those Remedies that are most
desired: And yet on the other hand, this Synod did exceedingly rejoice at the
glad Tidings of their care and diligence in opposing and refuting those
Anti-scriptural Heresies, subversive of Divine Doctrine, Order and Discipline,
and it did most earnestly entreat them to persevere in the confutation and
condemnation of them, as it would also on its part cordially join with them in
so doing, and would give, as it does now give an unquestionable proof thereof,
by subscribing unto their Confession of Faith, and Church-Dilcipline. As a
Pledge of their Union the Churches of both Nation; shall communicate to one
another their Ministers.
IV. And forasmuch as this holy Union and Concord established between the
Churches of France and those of the Low Countries seems necessarily to demand
their mutual Loves and Assistance: This Assembly does judge meet, that the
Churches of both the Nations shall lend and borrow their Ministers
reciprocally, according as their respective Necessities shall require. V. That
all Contentions may be avoided, this Assembly does ordain, That every one shall
be assessed in that Church of which he is a Member, toward all Charges
ordinary and extraordinary, without any respect had to the distinction of
Provinces. A Man may not marry another Woman his Wife being yet alive tho
leprous.
VI. A Case was propounded, Whether a Man might lawfully marry another Woman,
his Wife being alive, but infected with Leprosy? This Synod judges according
to the Rule given us by our Lord Jesus, That no Man may marry another Woman his
Wife as yet living, unless she were an Adulteress. And therefore he that
demands this License to re-marry, must give himself to Prayer and Fasting, and
contain himself during his Wife's Life, and he must conscientiously give all
possible assistance and relief unto her necessities. VII. The observation of
the 33d Article of the 5th Chapter of the Discipline shall be carefully
recommended to all the Churches in every Province. That Article begins thus: In
every Church their shall be Memoirs conserved of. The Form of Prayer ordinarily
used at Baptism, shall not be forborne at the at the Baptism of Infants born in
Adultery, Fornication or Incest.
VIII. It being demanded, Whether the usual Form of Prayer should be recited at
the Baptism of Infants born out of Matrimony, and in Adultery or Incest,
because there are in it those words, Begotten of Father and Mother whom thou
have called into thy Church. This Synod judges, that there should be no
difficulty nor dispute had or made about it; because, that under the Name of
Father and Mother, are not only comprised the more immediate and next Parents
that begat them, but also their Ancestors to a thousand Generations. And this
also should be considered, that though the Parents be faulty, yet they are not
therefore totally excluded God's Covenant. IX. The 4th Article in the Chapter
of Marriages, asserting that Promises of Marriage made by words de praesenti
are indissolvable, Promises of Marriage by Words de praesenti are indissolvable.
shall not be changed. And in case of any Offense taken by one of the Parties
thus espoused, and that he or she refuse to perform the said Marriage, the
refuting Person shall be urged unto it by Ecclesiastical Censures, yea even by
Excommunication itself, unless the offending and deserting Party have never
communicated at the Lord's Table; in which case all Admonitions having been
given duly in the Consistory, his or her obstinacy shall be on three several
Lord's Days publicly denounced and signified unto the People. And on the
fourth, they shall be publicly informed, that we do repute such a Person by
name no Member of our Church. And this being done, if the deserting Person do
still persist in his obstinacy, the innocent Party shall be dismissed unto the
Magistrate, that he may be set at liberty; who having obtained it by his
Authority he may marry whom he pleases, provided it be in the Lord, and his
Marriage shall be publicly blessed and solemnized in the Church. And the
deserting Party shall not be received into Communion with us, nor be suffered
to marry any other, until we have had by a long space of time a sufficient
proof of his Repentance, and that he has given due satisfaction to the Church.
X. It being queried, Whether the Names of Children born out of Marriage should
be recorded in our Baptismal Register. Bastards may be entered into the Register
of Marriage, except such as are born in Incest.
The Answer was, Yes, that they might be owned; except such as are born of
incestuous Parents; that so the memory of so foul a Crime may be forever buried
in the Grave of Oblivion. And in this particular case the Mother only shall be
named, and the Person that presents the Child unto Baptism; and whenever
illegitimate Births are registered, it shall be expressly mentioned, that they
were born out of Marriage. XI. A Father, though suspended from the Lord's Table,
yea, and excommunicated, may and ought to be present at the Baptizing of his
Child. XII. No Thieves, nor Murderers, nor any others guilty of notorious
wickedness punishable by the Civil Magistrate, shall be received into
Church Fellowship with us, least the Church should incur blame by it, as if it
were a Receptacle and Sanctuary of impious Persons. XIII. What is to be done in
this case: Whenas a most heinous Crime is committed, which deserves exemplary
punishment, yea, Death itself, and it be known unto the Consistory, or some one
particular Member of it, but the Criminal has not been called before the
Consistory, nor has privately demanded their Advice or Counsel, shall he to
discovered unto the Magistrate or no? This Synod is of Opinion, That he ought
not to be impeached, unless before a Magistrate of our Religion, and it shall
be done by way of Intelligence, and not by that of a Delator or Accuser. XIV.
Whereas the greater part of our People do very much offend God by their
contempt of Baptism, either forsaking the Assembly, Baptism to be administered
before the last Psalm be sung.
or carrying themselves exceeding irreverently during the Administration of
that holy Sacrament, it has upon mature Advice been judged fitting, that for
the future Baptism be administered before the singing of the last Psalm, or at
least before the last Blessing be given; and the whole Congregation shall be
solemnly admonished to give equal Honor to both the Sacraments, the same unto
Baptism that they do unto the Lord's Supper. Because Jesus Christ is offered
with all his Benefits both in the one and other Sacrament. XV. Gentlemen, and
others enjoying Right of Patronage, shall not be urged to forsake their just
Titles; only they shall be admonished, that whatever profit accrues unto them
thereby, that it be employed to pious Uses, as for the maintenance of God's
holy Service in his Church, to help defray the Charges of Colloquies, and of
the Poor. XVI. Henceforward that Church in which the National Synod is
celebrated, shall be obliged so to order their Affairs, that their appointed
time of celebrating the Lord's Supper may fall in with the closing up of the
Synod, that so the Deputies may testify that holy Union between all the
Churches of this Nation, by their mutual Communion then, and at that time, and
in that Church at the Lord's Table. XVII. Whether it be lawful to accompany a
Popish Bride unto her Church.
The Deputies of Anjou proposed this Case: Whether it were lawful to accompany
a Popish Bride unto their Church. Advice was hereupon given, that this should
be done as seldom as possible, and provided there were not in that Company any
Dissolutions, by Minstrels, or other Vanities and Disorders which are customary
in such Processions. See the Synod of Saumur* art. 4. of Genesis Matters.
And the same Resolution was given in the Case of accompanying the Corpse of
deceased Papists at Funerals unto their Graves, that it was in no wise lawful
to be present at them, if there were any kind of Idolatry or Superstition
committed in them. XVIII. The Deputy of higher Languedoc propounded this Case:
A Godly Woman is married to a Man of the contrary Religion, who will have her
wear that Apparel which is unbecoming Christian Modesty, and in case, of
Noncompliance with her Husband's Commands, there arise Quarrels and great
Disserences between them, may she be tolerated in the usage of those Habits?
This Assembly is of Opinion, that to avoid the abovementioned Inconveniences
she may be born withal, excepting on those Days when the Lord's Supper is
celebrated, or she presents a Child to be baptized, in which she shall cloth
herself modestly, and so testify her Humility and Christian Modesty. XIX. Our
Brother, the Deputy of Lower Languedoc, presented to us this Case, that certain
Persons professing the Reformed Religion, having been according to the Order of
our Discipline censured for their Miscarriages, obtained a Prohibition from the
Civil Magistrate, forbidding all farther Proceedings. This Synod has advised
hereupon, That a Public Declaration shall be made of the Incompetency of this
Judge who granted the Prohibition; and if notwithstanding this, they will yet
proceed in their Contentions, an Appeal shall be then made unto the Chamber of
the Edict, and the Church shall prosecute the Censure they have commenced; and
in case the Minister be troubled for it, we judge it necessary that the whole
Body of the Consistory do unanimously defend him. And this self-same Resolution
shall serve as an Answer to what was propounded by our Brethren of Anjou, that
some Magistrates would compel them to give in Writing an Account of Matters
debated and resolved on in their Consistories. XX. That Church in which the
National Synod did last meet, is ordered to send the Acts of the said Synod
unto the Province which is obliged to convocate the next Synod. XXI. There is
engraven on the Seal a Burning Bush, in the midst whereof is written (...), and
round the Circle, Flagror, non Consamor, a true Emblem of the Christian Church.
It was resolved, That a Seal should be made for the use of the National Synod,
that all Letters of Importance written in its Name may be sealed by it; and
this Seal shall constantly be sent unto that Province in which the next is to
be celebrated. XXII. This Assembly seriously considering the many Judgments
with which we be threatened, as of War, Pestilence, and Famine, the foul
Apostasies of diverse Professors, the little Zeal and Reformation in the
generality of our People, It does Ordain a Public Fast to be celebrated most
solemnly in all the Churches of France, on the last Week in July, according to
the conveniences or our Churches. XXIII. The Observation of the 28th Article
of the fifth Chapter of the Discipline, is lest to the prudence of the
respective Consistories. XXIV. The Deputies of the Isle of France demanding
what course is to be taken with ungrateful Persons to their Ministers, and such
as refuse to contribute to the defraying of Ecclesiastical Expenses. This
Assembly advises, That because of the Calumnies and Reproaches unto which the
Churches are exposed, the Duty of such Persons shall be pressed upon them by
lively Remonstrances and Exhortations, and if it be thought needful, it shall
be done in the Assembly of the principal Heads of the Families belonging to the
Church. However they shall not for this be kept back from the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper. A Minister deputed to another Provincial Synod has his
deliberative Voice
XXV. Our Brethren, the Deputies of Anjou, craved Advice in this Matter, Whether
a Minister delegated by his Provincial Synod, unto the Synod Colloquy of
another Province upon business common to them both, ought to have his
deliberative Voice? This Assembly answers, Yes, and not only as to that
particular Affair upon which he came, but also in all others, excepting what
may concern himself only, during the whole Sessions. Whether a Minister be
bound to visit the sick of the Mag^e.
XXVI. The Deputies of Poictou demanded, Whether it were expedient that
Ministers should visit Persons sick of the Plague. This Assembly leaves the
decision of this Case unto the Prudence of the respective Consistories; only
judging, that if it be done at all, it must be upon a very urgent cause, that
so a whole Church be not exposed to danger for the sake of a single Person:
Unless Visit may be so managed as to be without danger of Infection, he
speaking at a distance to the diseased Party. However, we give it as our
Counsel unto the Minister, who foreseeth the approaching danger, that in the
ordinary course of his Preaching he do prepare his Church to a patient
submission unto this terrible Providence, and that by proper and pertinent
Texts of Scripture he do in his Sermons comfort and revive their drooping and
desponding Spirits. XXVII. The Articles of Discipline ordained for the Conduct
of our People shall be read publicly, and Colloquies may make an Extract of
such Articles as they shall judge needful to be known by all, which shall be
read publicly at some extraordinary season, as the prudence of the Consistory
shall determine.
CHAP. III. Containing the Canons which were removed, Observations changed in,
and added to those in the Body of our Church Discipline.
CHap. I. 4. At the Fourth Article of the first Chapter, the Second Section,
after those words, The whole shall be related, you must add, Unto the Colloquy
or Synod. CHap. VII. At the end of the Seventh Article, instead of saying,
According to the Form which has been ordained, it shall be said, As follows.
And there shall be brought and inserted here all the said Form, which is at the
end of the Articles of our Discipline. CHap. XIII. The 13th Article shall be
removed unto the Chapter of the Colloquies. CHap. XXI. The One and twentieth
Article was wholly razed, and instead of it, there was this placed: Lords and
Princes demanding of a Church a Minister to serve theirs for some certain time,
shall be careful not to demand him of that which has but one. And he shall not
be granted them without leave first had from his Church and Colloquy. The
Twenty third Article is wholly razed.

CHap. XXVI. The Sixth, and Twenty third Article shall be totally razed; and
instead of it there shall be this substituted: If that a Minister intrude into
a Church, although he were approved by the People, yet shall he not be approved
by the Neighbour-Ministers or others, but the Cognizance of this Matter shall
be referred unto the Colloquy or Provincial Synod. It Is now the 29th Article of
the Discipline.
CHap. XXXI. The One and thirtieth Article shall be wholly razed out, and to
the end of the Thirty third Article there shall be this Addition made, Or to
the Colloquy, in case the Churches be of one and the same Colloquy. This is now
the 30th Article of the Discipline.
CHap. XXXIV. The Four and thirtieth Article shall be wholly razed out and
formed a new after this manner: Ministers may with their own consent be lent by
the Consistory, if it make for the Churches edifying; and yet this Loan shall
not be without consulting two or three Ministers, or the Colloquy, if it be for
any longer time than six Months. CHap. XXXVI. and XLV. The Six and thirtieth,
and the Five and fortieth Articles shall be wholly razed out. This is now the
41st Article of the Discipline.
CHap. XLVII. Toward the close the Seven and fortieth Article, instead of
these words, That so by those worldly Cares he may not he diverted from his
Work, there shall be this inserted, That so he may be freed from all suspicion
of Covetousness. This (...) ^ow the 4^^^ Article of the Discipline.
CHap. LV. Toward the end of the Fifty fifth Article, in lieu of those words.
The Consistory shall judge, this shall be inserted, Those who ordered the
Deposition shall take Cognizance of it. This is now the 50th Article of our
Disicipline.
CHap. LVI. The Fifty sixth Article shall be thus worded: National Synods shall
be informed by the Provinces of their deposed Ministers, that so they may not
be entertained by them. CHap. LVII. This is now the 57th Article of our
Discipline.
In the Fifty seventh Article, instead of National, read Provincial Synod.
CHap. LIX. After Vagrants in the Fifty ninth Article, there shall be inserted,
Apostates, and in the end of that Article there shall be this clause, And a
Catalogue of these shall he brought from the Provinces unto the National
Synods. Chap. II. 4. After these words in the Fourth Article, To be employed in
the Ministry, This is now the 53d Article of our Discipline.
this shall be added, Ever preferring the Children of poor Ministers, if
ingenious, whereof the Colloquies shall take special care. Chap. III. 6. The
Sixth Article of the Third Chapter shall be thus read, but the decision of
Points of Doctrine is principally reserved unto Ministers and Pastors of
Churches. Chap. V. 20. The twentieth Article of the Fifth Chapter shall be
wholly razed; because it is included in the One and twentieth, and Two and
twenty foregoing Articles, the Four and twentieth shall be also blotted out.
Chap. VIII. 6. In the Sixth Article of the Eighth Chapter, next after these
words, And one of the Pastors shall be President, there must be added, Together
with one or more Scribes. This is now the 11th Article, and instead of the
Provincial it is the National Synod, that is to provide for those Widows and
Orphans of deceased Ministers.
CHap. XII. Artie. To th of the Twelfth Article there shall be this added, And
where the Province becomes ungrateful, the Deputy thereof shall make report of
it unto the Provincial Synod, which shall provide for them. Chap. IX. 6. To the
sixth Article of the Ninth Chapter there must be added, And Ecclesiastical.
CHap. VIII. In the Eighth Article after these words, Ample Memoirs, shall be
added, With lawful excuses for their absence. CHap. XI. To the last clause of
the Eleventh Article these words shall be added, Which shall beforehand be
advised to prepare for it. Chap. X. 3. To the third Article of the Tenth
Chapter, in the close of it, shall be this added, As much as may be done,
considering the convenience of Times and Places. CHap. V. And to the Fifth
Article these words shall be added, And such as accompany the Dead unto their
Graves, are exhorted to demean themselves with all Christian Modesty,
meditating according to the Nature of the present Object, upon the Misery and
Brevity of this present Life, and that blessed Hope of Immortality in the World
to come. And the Tenth Chapter shall be closed up with this Article, Forasmuch
as Mourning lies not in the Habit but Heart, the Faithful shall be advised to
comport themselves with all Modesty, shunning all Ambition, Hypocrisy and
Superstition.

Chap. XI. 11. In the Eleventh Article of the Eleventh Chapter, instead of
these words, Attributed unto God in the Scripture, shall be added, As Emanuel
and all others. Chap. XIII. 7. In the Seventh Article of the Thirteenth Chapter
instead of those words, The Synods do esteem, shall be inserted, They do
declare. CHap. VIII, IX. Between the Eighth and Ninth Articles this shall be
placed, The betrothed Person may not marry the Mother of his deceased Spouse.
CHap. X, XI. Between the Tenth and Eleventh Articles this shall be inserted, A
Man shall not after the death of his Wife marry her with whom he had committed
Adultery whilst she was living, unless the Consistory have first had Cognizance
of the same, and maturely considered thereof. CHap. XXII. After these words in
the Two and twentieth Article, Solemnly married, there shall be this addition,
(...)
Whether that their Offense were known before or after the solemnizing of the
Marriage. And those words shall be razed, If they demand to be. And in the same
Article this word also shall be blotted out, And forasmuch, and these shall be
inserted, Although this had been avoided before the Celebration of the
Marriage, yet he shall proceed to, etc. CHap. XXII. XXIII. This Article shall
be placed between the Two and twentieth, and the Twenty third, That those
Inconveniences may be avoided, which ensue upon a long delay of solemnizing
Marriage, all Pastors of Churches, and others in whose Power the espoused
Persons are shall he advertised not to defer the celebrating of their Marriage
above six weeks after their Espousals. Chap. XIV. 1. This word Much shall be
left out, and the last clause of the first Article. And to the Fourth Article
these shall be added, Unless in case it be for suppressing the Preaching of
God's Word, and the setting up of Mass. CHap. XIX. These words excessive and
scandalous shall be left out of the Nineteenth Article. CHap. XXI. The word
Excommunication shall be left out in the close of the One and twentieth
Article, and instead of it this shall be inserted, Suspension from the Lord's
Supper. CHap. XXIV. XXV. This ensuing Article shall be placed betwixt the
Twenty fourth and Twenty fifth: Swearers and Blasphemers of the Name of God
shall in no wise be tolerated in the Church, but they shall be admonished with
the greatest seriousness to desist from those sins; and in case of
non-forbearance, they shall be prosecuted with all Church Censures, as the
Consistories in their Wisdoms may judge most fit.
CHAP. IV. Particular MATTERS.
I. WHereas Monsieur de Tourfillant formerly denosed from the Ministry, has
most humbly petitioned, that he may be restored to it; this Assembly having
seriously considered the enormity of his Crime of which he had been accused and
convicted before the Civil Magistrate, and that as yet he retains his old
Inclinations to the self-same sin; yea, and that his supplicatory Letters do
rather justify him, than exprese his Contrition and Repentance, as is evident
to any one who does but cursorily read and peruse them, therefore it is
ordained, that he shall not be readmitted to the Exercise of the
Gospel Ministry.

II. The Brethren Deputies of Normandy desired our Resolution in this difficult
Case: A Widow of the Church in -- was contracted to a Man by words de
praesenti, and duly informed by the Ministers of that Church to which she
belonged of the importance of such Promises; yet nevertheless a while after to
his very great grief, she separates herself front this her Spouse by Sentence
of the Official, pleading for herself, That she was ignorant of the meaning of
those words de praesenti and futuro, and afterward marries another Person,
according to the manner of the Romish Church, not at all regarding the
Remonstrances given her either by Ministers, or by him to whom she was first
contracted, before and after her last Espousals. This Assembly judges, That
the first Promise in itself, and of right is indissolvable; and that therefore
the Second Marriage is of right null and void. So that the Man first contracted
to her, according to the liberty given us by our Lord Jesus should declare,
that he does repudiate and reject the said Wise, because the had violated her
Faith given to him, and is joined unto another. And after such a declaration
(if so be the Delinquent Parties return unto their Duty according to our
Discipline) the Consistory may approve and confirm the Second Marriage, and the
rather because a Child begotten in the said Marriage has been baptized in our
Church, the Father having devolved his Right in it upon the Surety who
presented it.

III. The Differences fallen out on the Promises of Marriage between Monsieur
John Herisson and Mary the Daughter of Monsieur Moutier Minister of Orbec, are
dismissed to the Colloquy of Beauvoysie, where they shall be fully and smally
determined, and the Brethren of Feugeray and Paris, because they well
understand the Matters of Fact relating to it, shall be present thereat. This
present Synod having given no Judgment in the Case, because the'fore-mentioned
Parties were never summoned to, nor appeared before this Synod, and for diverse
other particularities and circumstances relating to this Affair, which merit a
longer and more diligent enquiry, than the time allotted for our Sessions would
admit of.

IV. As touching the matter proposed by our Brethren the Deputies of Augoumois,
What is to be done with the Church of Angoulesme, who for refusing Maintenance
unto their Pastor, had together with all the Haeads of its respective Families
been deprived of their Minister, and of Communion at the Lord's Table, by the
sole Authority of their Provincial Synod, until such time as they had given
full satisfaction unto their said Minister. It is decreed by the Authority of
this Assembly, That this whole Affair shall be dismissed unto the Synod of
Xaintonge, which shall duly summon both Parties to appear before them; and
having heard them, shall put a final period, by their Sentence, unto all their
Differences.

V. Our Brother, the Deputy of Picardy, demanding Advice on this difficulty: A
Woman refuses to cohabit with her Husband, pretending that he was a Monk, tho
she was well acquainted with it long before she married him, and adds
scoffingly, when she is exhorted to reunite herself to him, That they must be
married; as if they had never been. It is the Judgment of this Synod, That for
this deserting of her Husband she shall be proceeded against by all
Church Censures; and the Husband is advised, if he think it fitting, to summon
her before the Civil Magistrate.

VI. Master Julian de Land an Apostate, who being formerly displaced, with
Reputation to himself, from the Sacred Ministry, has since revolted from the
true Religion, and wallows in Debauchery and Idolatry, refusing to hearken to
the Advice and Orders of his Consistory, and has drawn also a Nephew of his
into Apostasy, this Assembly ordains, That the Sentence of Excommunication
be publicly denounced against him, and that without delay.

VII. This Synod having understood of the Revolt and Apostasy of one Cross,
formerly a Minister in the Province of Normandy, and that he is plunged Head
and Ears in Idolatry, persisting obstinately therein: As also the defection of
one Saint Martin from the Truth, who was a Minister of the Gospel in the same
Province: This Synod remits these Matters of Fact relating to both these
Revolters unto their own Provincial Synod, with full Power to proceed against
them both, according as it shall judge most expedient for the good and
edification of the Church.

VIII. The Deputy of Higher Languedoc having formed a Complaint against the
Colloquy of Armagnac, for separating itself from the Province of Higher
Languedoc, and joining itself unto the Condonnois, thereby to make up one
entire Province a part from the other. This Assembly ordains, That it shall
be remonstrated to the Colloquy of Armagnac, that by this their separation they
act contrary to the Distinction of Provinces established by the former National
Synods, and that they ought to return unto their first condition, and become,
as heretofore, One Synod with that of Languedoc; and this Order shall be
observed until tho meeting of the next National Synod, whereunto the Colloquy
of Armagnac shall be summoned to exhibit their Reasons for this their
separation; and if upon mature deliberation it be found necessary, the said
Distinction shall be then ordained.

IX. Monsieur Le Sage, Minister of Mimbre in Maine, being re-demanded by the
Province of Normandy, this Assembly defers the Judgment of this Affair till the
next National Synod; because the Province of Anjou had no Notice given it of
the Difficulties propounded by the Deputies of Normandy; as also, that the said
Le Sage may have warning given him to prepare his Answer to them.

X. The Remonstrance of the Deputy of Augoumois, being heard upon an Appeal
from their Synod, by our Brother Monsieur De la Croix, Minister of Jarnac;
which Synod forbad the said De la Croix the Practice of Physic together with
his Ministry, and having also heard the Reasons urged by the said De la Croix
for his said Practice, as his Abilities for it, the Public benefit by it, and
the great Charge lying on him by his numerous Family: This Synod ratifies the
Sentence given against him, according to our Discipline, by his own Provincial
Synod. And the Consistory or Jarnac are to procure another able Physician to
dwell there; and the said De la Croix shall be admonished wholly to addict
himself unto his Ministry, and as for his Practice of Physic, that he do fully
conform himself unto the Articles of our Discipline.

XI. The Lady De la Blanchardaye, has liberty granted her, to get a Minister
that may set up the true Worship of God, and Exercise of the true Religion in
her House, called, The Wood of Main, provided that the Neighboring Colloquy
do allow and approve of the said Minister; and in the mean while our Brother Le
Fresne shall continue to discharge his Office in the Church of Lacay; and in
case he cannot do it, because of the aforesaid Establishment, the Colloquy or
Provincial Synod shall provide another Church for him.

XII. All the Provinces are desired to take Notice in what place Monsieur Du
Croy, formerly Minister of Perigueux, may be now residing, and whether he does
exercise his Ministry or not, and that Province wherein he is found, shall be
entreated to exhort him instantly to return unto his own Church.

XIII. Forasmuch as those of Higher Languedoc have permitted some of their
Members, to Farm Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical Goods upon this Condition,
that they give them a certain Sum of Money. This Assembly ordains, That for
time coming, this rigorous manner of dealing shall be wholly disused; only that
the said Farmers be exhorted according to their Duty, to contribute some
considerable Portion of their Gain, toward the Relief of the poor Churches,
whereunto the said Revenue was originally designed.

XIV. This Assembly gives its Approbation to that excellent Work of our dear
Brother Monsieur One Copy calls him Halnar, and in two other Coples Saluart.
Salnar, Minister in the Church of Castres, styled, Hamonia Confessionum; as
being most useful and needful for these our times; judging also, that it would
do singular good Service, if it were rendered into our French Tongue; and
therefore the Province of Higher Languedoc is charged by this Synod, to get it
translated, and to prefix an Epistle Commendatory to the said Book, in the Name
of their faid Province.

XV. The Church of Vitre requesting our Advice in this case, Whether Witnesses
should be confronted, deposing a Crime committed by the Delinquent, who does
obstinately, and upon his Oath deny the very Matter of Fact? This Assembly
judges, That all occasions of new Quarrels may be avoided, which may probably
arise from such Confrontations, the Witnesses shall not be confronted, unless
of their own accord they do freely consent unto it, or unless that the last and
greatest Censures must of neccessity be used, which indeed cannot be executed
till such time as the Delinquents shall have been well and duly convicted, and
this cannot be done, unless that he confess and own his Offense, or that the
Witnesses do avow it constantly to his face.

XVI. The Article about our Catechism shall remain in its full power till the
next National Synod, whereunto the Provinces shall come well instructed, that
so we may advise whether Mr. Calvin's Catechism may be retained, or that a
shorter one consisting only of the Apostles Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the
Ten Commandments shall be taken up, and used in the Ordinance of Catechizing.

XVII. The Deputies of Poictou propounded this Case: A certain Marriage was
dissolved by Authority of the Official, because of the Husband's Impotency:
sometime after the Woman being publicly married in the Church, it fell out the
Man also was re-married, but in the Romish Church; he being now touched with
Repentance, demands to be received unto the Peace and Communion of our
Church. This Assembly advises, that before his readmission, his Wife shall be
interrogated, whether she be well satisfied with him, that so it may be known
whether he has not abused God's holy Ordinance of Marriage, because he had
been once before judged impotent; and if he be now found such, we advise the
deferring of his Reception, till we have had more ample proof of his
Repentance. But if it be otherwise, he having according to our Discipline
repaired his fault of being married in the Church of Row, shall be restored to
the Peace and Communion of the Church. Nevertheless, this Assembly judges,
that the Consistory should be censured, not only for not using its Authority to
hinder the Woman to suddenly after her Marriage contracted and solemnized, from
running to the Official, who presently ordered her a Separation; but also for
not persisting in their Admonitions to the Husband, that he should not so
easily and readily consent as he did, unto a dissolution of the said Marriage;
because such a Separation ought not to have been, till after three
Ecclesiastical Sentences had thrice gradually intervened, as is usual even in
the Church of Rome.

XVIII. Claudius Merchant, formerly Minister in the Church of Beauriers, and
Civray, in the Province of Berry, having been accused and convicted of Adultery
before this Assembly, we do depose him from his Charge and Ministry, for being
a scandalous Person utterly unworthy of it. Moreover, we do ordain, That this
his said Deposition shall be published in those places where he exercised his
Ministry; but without mentioning the Woman, only in general this shall be
declared, that it is for a very gross and heavy Sin, for a most grievous
Scandal. Finally, he shall not be admitted in any place of his Residence, unto
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, till he have first done Public Penance for
this notorious Scandal given by him unto the Church, although the particular
Crime committed by him shall not be specified in the Church. And the Consistory
of the Church De la Roche pose, shall be censured for putting him into Office
among them, before they had sufficient Attestations concerning him.

XIX. Diverse Gentlemen complaining by the Deputies of Augoumois, that in those
places where there is but one Sermon in the Week, their Ministers do resufe
coming on the Weekdays to Preach and Baptize their Children which are then
born, unless they bring them at the appointed Times for Religious Worship. This
Assembly advises, That to prevent all Clamours and Complaints for the future,
the Consistory shall appoint one Day in the midst of the Week for an
extraordinary Assembly, and so provide for all emergent necessary Duties.

XX. The Churches shall be informed, that by the Ninth Article of the Secret
Articles, the King promises to dispense with the Degrees of Consanguinity and
Assinity between Persons of the Reformed Religion; so that we need not have
recourse unto the Pope for Dispensations. Wherefore in such Cases they may
apply themselves unto His Majesty by our Agent at Court.

XXI. Our Brother the Deputy of Poictou propounded this Case: That a certain
Person having quitted his Benefice, did yet notwithstanding receive a Pension
from his Curate that enjoys it. This Assembly advises, that he be admonished,
either to relinquish such a Pension, or else wholly to employ it unto Pious
Uses.

XXII. Whereas the Deputy of Anjou has demanded that the Church of La Gravelle
may be declared a Member of the said Province, because it is enclosed within its
bounds; the Assembly judges, That inasmuch as our Brother De Cherpon, Minister
of it, had been mostly encouraged in his Studies by the Liberality of the Lord
De la Val, and that the far greater part of the Members of that Church are
Britains, it being distant from Brittany but one small League, that therefore
the said Church shall be reputed to belong to the Province of Brittany, and the
rather because of the paucity of Ministers in it. And this Order shall be in
force no longer than the time of Monsieur Cherpon's Residence at, and Relation
to the 'foresaid Church of La Gravelle.

In my Copy it wrs Noturi^, which I looked upon as an Error of the French
Scribe, for Norwich.
XXIII. Our Brother Monsieur Mary, Minister of the Church of Norwich in England,
but living at present in Normandy, shall be obliged to return unto his Church
upon its first Summons, yet because of the great Success of his Ministry in
these parts, his Church may be entreated to continue for some longer time his
absence from it.

XXIV. Monsieur De Feugeray, Pastor in the Church of Rouen, having informed
this Assembly of the great importance of that Church, and how necessary it is
that it should be provided of able Ministers, we being at present destitute of
all help for them, do advise the Province of Normandy to enquire in their
respective Classis, whether they may not find two Churches so nigh one unto the
other, that they may be combined into one, and by this means gain a Minister
for the Church of Rouen; or if this don't like them, they may contrive some
better expedient. And this course also shall be taken by the Province of
Xaintonge, for the supply of the Church of Xaintes.

XXV. This Assembly prays and entreats the Province of Brittany to lend
Monsieur De la Melluniere unto the Church of Vitre, and at the same time to
make provision for the Church of Cuisit, where he is at present.

XXVI. The Lord Du Plessis presented himself in the Name of the King of Navarre
unto this Assembly, proposing from His Majesty, That there might be sent unto
him, being now on the other fide of the Loire, certain Deputies, Persons of
Quality and Understanding, who might be near His Majesty, to acquaint him with
the true State of our Churches, and that he also might reciprocally communicate
unto the Churches all Matters of Importance tending to their welfare and
preservation. This Assembly is of Opinion, That all the Churches be exhorted
effectually to comply with His Majesty's Demands, and in order thereunto, to
name one or two Deputies to be dispatched unto him in the Name of the Churches,
and this to be done out of hand; and the Province of the Isle of France is to
see it done without delay.

Means for uniting the German and French Churches. Synod of Gap, Genesis Mat. art.
11. Synod of Rochel, art. 4. after the choice of Moderator and Assessor.
XXVII. A motion being made for an Union and Agreement betwixt the Churches of
Germany and ours, this Assembly advises, That Monsieur De Chandieu be
solicited to undertake a Journey for the effecting of it; and in case the said
Monsieur De Chandieu have just Excuses for not accepting the Employ, Monsieur
De Seire shall be entreated to supply his place.

XXVIII. Monsieur Salnar is entreated to write in the Name, and by the
Authority of this Synod, unto the Princes and Divines of Germany, and he shall
confer with the Lord Du Plessis about the subject matter of his Letters and the
said Letters shall be sent to Monsier De Chandieu, to be represented by him.

XXIX. Monsieur De Chassincour is entreated by this Assembly, to continue his
Office at Court, and the Churches are exhorted to perform their Duties to him,
whereof the Brethren of the Isle of France are ordered to give him notice.

XXX. The Deputy of Lower Languedoc demanding, that our Brother Vilette,
Minister in the Church of La Sala, may be removed thence, and translated unto
Montpellier, because of that great Service he may do there, and that his Church
may be some otherways provided. This Assembly leaves the decision of this
matter unto his Provincial Synod, which after due consideration had of all
Circumstances, shall determine of it.

XXXI. Monsieur Laurence Bouchart, formerly Minister of Privas in Lower
Languedoc, deposed for his scandalous Crimes, having appealed unto this
Assembly, it examined the Causes of his Deposition, and all the Proceedings in
and about it, and now judges that he cannot be restored unto the Minstry,
whatever Testimonials of Repentance may be produced by him.

XXII. To the Case propounded by the Deputies of Berry, Whether his Marriage
should be tolerated, who had espoused his Wife's Niece, and that had some Years
after his said Marriage joined himself unto our Religion, and communicated with
us at the Lord's Table, and has had several Children by this Wife? This
Assembly answers, That by the 14th Verse of the 18th Chapter of Leviticus,
such a Marriage is incestuous, and that therefore in no wise can it be
tolerated, and that they provoke not the Wrath of God more heavily against
them, they ought to separate one from the other. And whereas these Persons
committed this sin in the time of their Ignorance, we advise, that they
privately confess it unto the Consistory, where they shall be admonished,
counseled, and comforted from the Word of God.

XXXIII. Complaint being made by diverse Persons of the Censure passed on
Brocard's Exposition of the Book of Genesis, in the last. Synod of Rochel,
where he was condemned for Impiety and Prosanation of God's Holy Word, and
blaming it as too strict and rigorous, though some would acquit him of Impiety,
because he agrees with us thoroughly in all the Articles of Faith. This
Assembly does confirm the aforementioned Censure, judging that that Doctrine
is not only impious which is contrary to the Articles of Faith, but that also
which perverts the true sense and meaning, as his does, of the Holy Scriptures;
because they be the true Foundation of the Christian Doctrine. Yet that
satisfaction may be given them, who are displeased at the Censure past on this
Book of Brocard's, there shall be extracted out of it a Catalogue of his
grossest Errors, and communicated abroad for their perusal and information.

XXXIV. Monsieur De Bellefleur appealing from the Sentence given against him in
the Synod of Higher Languedoc, by which his Treatise against the Discipline of
our Churches was condemned, this Assembly having read his Treatise, and the
Answers made unto it, does confirm the said Saentence past against the said
Bellefleur: To whom notwithstanding a Letter shall be dispatched in the Name of
this Assembly, and the Answer of our Brother, Monsieur Berault, shall be
communicated to him; in which, if he do not acquiesce, the next Colloquy or
Synod shall denounce him Schismatic.

XXXV. The Deputy of Higher Languedoc related the Affair of Arias and Bourgade,
complaining, that they were too severely censured by their Pastors Berault and
Gironnin; whereupon the Synod came unto this Resolution, That the Piovince
shall be informed, that they have full Power, and it is their Duty to judge
definitively of it, and that the Censures given by the Consistory of Montauban,
and the Provincial Synod against them shall be in force; and if the said
Plaintisss be not quiet, nor demean themselves peaceably and modestly according
to their Duty: The Colloquy of Lower Quercy calling in two other Ministers from
the Neighbour-Colloquy, shall in the Name and Authority of this Synod judge
definitively of this Fact.

XXXVI. The Province of Higher
Lower Languedoc is appointed by this Assembly to convoke and assign the Time
of Meeting for the next National Synod; which is once for all ordained two
Years hence in the Month of May.

May 16. 1583. Thus Signed by Peter Merlin, Moderator, And Rene Pineau, Scribe.


The End of the Synod of VITRE.
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE XIII. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At Montauban in the Year of
our Lord 1594.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Deputies unto the Synod. Synodical Officers chosen. The Lord's Supper
to he received by all the Deputies in the conclusion of the Synod. Chap. II. 7.
Observations upon the Confession of Faith, and its Approbation. Chap. III. 21.
Observations upon the Discipline, being so many Additions and Emendations.
Chap. IV. General Matters. One chosen in every Province to answer the
Adversaries of the Truth 1. Care taken about Poor Scholars destined to the
Ministry 2. The last Translation of the Bible to be used 3. Mr. Calvin's
Catechism to be used in the Churches 4. No particular Set-Form of Prayer
necessary to Ordination 5. The Complaints of Pastor and People one against
another not to be regarded 7, 8. Ministers must be resident on their Churches
10. Apocrypha not to be read in the Churches 11. Deacons may put the Poor's
Stock out to Interest 12. A Canon about publishing of Apo^^ates Na^es 14.
Prayers for the King's Cont^e^sio^^ 15. Madam's Perseverance congratulated by
the Synod 16. A Case of Conscience about Public Penance 17. No Consistory
shall be compelled to witness in Criminal Matters before the Judge 18. No
alteration shall be made in the Liturgy 19. The Provinces to bring in their
Quota's, to which they were assessed for the Assemblies of ^^a^tes and S^ Foy
^2. The (...) of Ma^tes to be s^or^ ^3, Advice about Circular Letters 24.
Ministers not coming to Colloquies and Synods censured 26. Infants, though
brought late unto the Church, yet to be baptized 28. Unscriptural Names may be
given in Baptism 31. The Revenue of a Sine Cura to be given to Pious Uses 32.
Elders communicate with the Pastors 34. Children may marry if they have the
Magistrates, tho they have not their Parents Consent 35. The Case of
Nicodemites 36. The Rise and Remedy of Marriage-Impotency 38. Public Notaries
to sanctify the Lord's Day 41. A Case about taking Leases from Popish
Landlords 43. The Case of Patronage 44. Painting and Naked Breasts'censured 45.
The Names of all Church Members to be Registered 46. A Case about Proposans
diverting from the Ministry 48. The Ministers nominated for a general public
Disputation 49. Canon about deposed Ministers 50. Holy Days 51. Orders about
Mr. Daneau and De Serre's Works 51, 52. About Moneys collected 53. Case of
public Penance 55. Chap. V. Of Appeals. A full Year of Vacation granted to
Monsieur Beraud 5. Chap. VI. Particular Matters. The Isle of France censured
for proposing a politic Union with the Romanists 4. Two Delinquent Ministers
censured 6. Corneille an Heretical Minister deposed 12. The Ministry
interdicted by this Synod in the whole Colloquy of Rovargne 14. The Case of
Duellers 16. Chap. 7. The Roll of Vagrants and deposed Ministers. An Act for
calling the two next National Synods.
THE Synod of Montauban. 1594. Synod XIII.

SYNOD XIII.
Acts of the National Synod held at Montauban, the Fifteenth Day of June, in
the Year of our Lord One thousand five hundred ninety and four, in the Fifth
Year of the Reign of Henry IV. King of France and Navarre.

Master Michael Berault, chosen Moderator. Master John Baptiste Rotan,
Assessor.
Scribes.
Master John Gardesy, and James Thomas,

CHAP. I Of the DEPVTIES.
High Languedoc and Guyenne.
THere appeared for the Higher Languedoc, and the Higher Guyenne, Master Michael
Berault, Minister of the Church of Montauban; and Master John Gardesy, Minister
in the Church of St. Antonin; and Master Bernard Lovis, Minister of Lectoure;
and Master Anthony D'Arroles, Elder of the Church of Figedo; James Thomas,
Elder of the Church of Montauban; and John Bertrand, Elder in the Church of
Renel and Lauragais.

Xaintonge Aunis and Augoumois.
For Xaintonges, Aulnis, Augoulmois, Master John Baptiste Rotan, Pastor and
Doctor in the Church of Rochel; Master German Chauvetan, Lord of Beauvais,
Minister in the Church of St. Martin's in the Isle of Ree, chosen
extraordinarily by the Colloquy of Aunis, and approved by the Synod; and Elijah
Festineau, Elder in the Church of St. John D'Angely.

Lower Guyenne
For Lower Guyenne, Gascony, Perigord, and Limousin; Master James Lamqert,
Minister of St. Foy; and Amanien de Beaupuy, Elder in the Church of Toneins.

Poictou and Brittany.
For Poictou, Master Francis Loyseau, Minister of Thouars; and the Lord De la
Cheuratiere, Elder in the Church of Lusson, who also by Procuration appeared
for the Province of Brittany.

Berry, Orleans, Dunois, and Nivernois.
For Berry, Orleans, Dunois, and Nivernois, Master John Berger, Minister of
Chasteaudun, without an Elder, for which they excused themselves; and their
Excuses were admitted, though they were exhorted to come better assisted next.

Lower Languedoc.
For Lower Languedoc, Master William Andrew de Villette, Minister of Vallerague;
and John Chalais, Elder in the Church of Nismes.

Anjou, Touraine, Maine, and Vendomois.
For Anjou, Touraine, Le Maine, Vendosmois, M Felix du Tronchay, Minister of
Beaufort in Valee, and Monsieur Peter Coignee de la Plant, Elder of the Church
in Saumur.

For Provence there appeared no one. Provence.
And the exiled Members of the Churches there, which had refug'd themselves in
the Lower Languedoc, excusing themselves by the Deputies of that Province,
1594. Synod XIII.
the Synod resolved, that Letters of Consolation from it should be written to
them.

Forasmuch as the Deputies of Vivaretz and Vellay were absent and without
excuse on their part, Vivaretz and Vellay.
the Synod ordained Censures against them; as also that they be advertised by
the same hand, to send their Messengers unto the General Assembly convened at
St. Foy.

Notwithstanding their Excuses, Dauphine.
the Deputies of Dolphiny shall be most severely censured because of their
absence, as also of the Isle of France.

Those of Normandy did not appear, Normandy.
but only excused their absence by Letters, for which they shall be grievously
censured.

Lyonnois and Auvergne.
Those of Lyonnois and Lower Auvergne, did earnestly crave excuse by their
Letters, and their Excuses were received and approved.

The Deputies of Burgundy being absent, Burgundy.
and no Letters of Excuse on their behalf, shall be severely censured.

After Prayers Master Michael Berault was chosen Moderator, and Master John
Baptist Rotan Assessor, and Mr. John Gardesy and James Thomas Scribes, to
Collect and Register the Acts of this Synod.

It was also decreed, That the Lord's Supper should be celebrated in this
Church before the breaking up of the Synod, to testify our Union in Doctrine
and Church Discipline.

CHAR II. OBSERVATIONS made upon reading the Confession of Faith of our
Churches.
1. THE Printers shall be informed, that instead of Invincible, they do place
Invisible in the first Article, because the Text of Scripture from whence it is
quoted does require it.

2. In the 18th Article the word peaceably, shall be changed into that of
Peaceable, according to the Original, and because the Adjective is more full
and significant than the Adverb.

3. In the 24th Article, instead of this, That there is, there shall be altered
according to the Original these words, Whereby Men are turned out of the true
way of calling on God.

4. The word Unity in the 26th Article shall be left out, and that of Union
placed in its stead, as better explaining the Antithesis; which is, Those that
keep themselves secret, and worship God alone by themselves.

5. To the 28th Article, as it is in some other, so in all Copies for the
future, the word Virtue shall be added to that of Efficacy, for the better
explaining of the sense, and in imitation of the Apostle, who joyneth both
those words together in the close of the first Chapter to the Ephesians.

6. The Printers shall be informed for the future, never to forget or omit
those words in the 38th Article, they being the express words of Institution by
our Lord himself, Take and eat, and drink ye all of it.

7. That their Insolency may be restrained, who reject this word Substance both
in our Confession of Faith, and Form of Celebrating the Lord's Supper, the
Churches shall be informed, that this present Synod does ratify the
Resolutions formerly decreed on this Point in the Synods of Rochel and Nismes.

The aforesaid Confession of Faith having been read in its several Articles
orderly and distinctly, was confirmed and approved by all the Deputies of
France, in the Name and behalf of all the Churches.

CHAP. III. Observartions made in reading of our Church Discipline.
1. THis following addition shall conclude the 2d Article of the Chapter of
Ministers, And Imposition of Hands shall not be given them, no more than unto
Persons of whom we have not the least knowledge, unless it were in a Provincial
Synod.

2. The 18th Article shall be closed up with this addition, As against them
also whosoever much employ themselves in the teaching of Youth, that they are
thereby hindered from performing the principal Duties of their Office.

3. After the 21st Article there shall be this ensuing addition made,
Consistories erected in the Palaces of Princes, and other great Lords, shall be
distinct from the Consistories of the Churches of those places where for a time
they make their abode, unless it be in a matter of common concern unto both the
Consistories, or in case of some very great and notorious scandal given unto
the whole Church by a Domestic relating to the said Prince or Lord; or in any
other Affair in which the two Consistories shall see meet, that there should be
a mutual concurrence and conjunction.

4. After those words, with special Prayers, in the first Article of the third
Chapter there shall be this added, And their Names shall be by an audible clear
Voice mentioned in the Consistory. And after these words, If there be no
opposition, you must add, They shall be publicly received on the third Sunday
standing before the Pulpit with solemn Prayers.

5. There shall be added to the end of the first Article of the fifth Chapter,
these words, As also in all other Church-Meetings.

6. This following addition shall be made to the end of the 16th Article, And
in case of an Appeal, the said Appeal shall be notified without naming of the
Person, or declaring the Censure inflicted by the Consistory.

7. Instead of those words publicly known, in the 21st Article, shall be
inserted Notoriously.

8. Toward the close of the 27th Article these words shall be added, However,
it is left unto the prudence of the Consistories to use otherwise, if they shall
judge it more expedient for the Churches edification.

9. This shall be added to the 28th Article, If any Persons professing the
Reformed Religion shall Appeal their Pastors, Elders, or the whole Body of the
Consistory before the Civil Magistrates, to force them to give in evidence
against those Delinquents, who have confessed their sins to them, they shall be
proceeded against by all Church Censures, yea even to excommunication itself.

10. There shall be this ensuing clause added to the end of the 4th Article of
the 6th Chapter: And if any particular Church or Churches refuse Payment of
their Contributions to the defraying of those Expenses, which are unavoidably
contracted by Journies and Attendance in Synodical and other Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, kept and held up for the common good and service of all the
Churches, they shall be deprived of the Ministry of the Gospel, and be reputed,
and accounted Deserters of that holy Union, which ought to be maintained among
us for our general preservation. Only Notice shall be given them hereof, some
competent space of time before, that they may not complain of being not warned,
nor duly admonished of their Duty, and that they are surprised. And all
Ministers in such Churches are interdicted the Exercise of their Ministry upon
pain of being denounced Schismatics.

11. After the word Memoire in the second Article of the ninth Chapter, you
must add these, signed by one Pastor and one Elder.

12. Alter these words, And the removing of Ministers from one place unto
another in the 10th Article of the 8th Chap. these shall be added, And from one
Church unto another.

13. After these words in the 3d Article of the 9th Chapter, With a sufficient
Testimonial, these shall be added, Signed by the Moderator and Scribe of the
Provincial Synod.

14. After these words, Both Ministers and Elders, in the third Line of the
11th and last Article of the same Chapter, you must add these, Of Matters
only, which have happened during that Action.

15. After those last words in the 2d Article of the 10th Chapter, Who shall
cease to have, shall be censured, add these following, As those also who do not
uncover their Heads during the time of singing, from the beginning of that
Ordinance to the end.

16. After these words, Instructed in the true Religion, the 4th Article of the
11th Chapter shall be thus concluded, The Children also of Gypsies, (the French
call them Bohemians) and Saracens may be baptized in our Reformed Churches upon
the Terms beforementioned, and provided there be no ground to believe they
have been already baptized; and after that the Sureties have been previously
and seriously admonished to bethink themselves how they may discharge that
Obligation and Promise which they make unto the Church.

17. This ensuing Article shall be the 8th in the 11th Chapter of our
Discipline, No Member of another Church shall be admitted a Surety for any
Child at Baptism, unless he bring with him an Attestation from his own Church.

18. After those words in the 15th Article, Being signed by the Child's
Godfather, and by the Minister who baptized him, these shall be added, And
whenever Children shall be presented unto Baptism, the Parents or Sureties
shall bring with them a Paper in which are writ down the Names of those
Children, and of their Fathers and Mothers, and of their Godfathers and
Godmothers, and of the day of their Birth.

19. The 20th Article of the 13th Chapter of Marriages shall be thus concluded,
And the Marriage shall be publicly solemnized and blessed in the Congregation
of the Faithful by the Ministry of the Pastors, and not of any Elder or Deacon.

20. The 31st Article of the 14th Chapter shall be placed in order before the
21st, and thus couched, All Swearers, who in passion or hastiness do take the
Name of God in vain, and others who affront the Divine Majesty shall be most
sharply reproved, and if after one or two Admonitions they do not refrain, they
shall be suspended the Lord's Table. And all outrageous Blasphemers,
Forswearers, and suck-like Persons shall in no wise be tolerated in the Church,
but upon the first Offense shall be punished with Suspension from the Lord's
Supper, and if they continue in this their Ungodliness, they shall be publicly
excommunicated. And this Assembly voted unanimously, That when the Deputies of
the Provinces shall be returned to their several respective homes, they shall
cause this Article to be read in all the Churches, in the Audience of all the
People.

21. The Articles of our Discipline having been all read over one by one, they
were all approved and ratified by the joint and common Consent and Suffrages of
all the Provincial Deputies in the Name of all our Churches, and in this self
same Form in which they are couched by the former and this present National
Synod. And this Synod declares farther. That the Copies of it corrected and
amended by the Commissioners authorized thereunto, shall be hereafter followed
and observed, both as to Number of Articles, and Terms and Words by which they
be expressed; that so such as shall take the pains to transcribe it may conform
themselves exactly to those said Copies of our Discipline.

CHAP. IV. Of General MATTERS. 1594. Synod XIII.

I. IN every Province there shall be chosen some sit Person to answer the
Writings of our Adversaries; (not that by this Canon we intend to abridge any
other of our Brethren of their liberty to use those Gifts and Abilities which
God has given them for his Churches Service): And this shall be done at the
sole Charges of that Province in which the Answer is made. And if any Person
shall presume to print his Book before he has first communicated it unto his
Colloquy, or Synod, according to our Discipline, he shall be most severely
censured, and his Work shall be suppressed.

II. The Colloquies shall be exceeding careful, that that Article of our
Discipline concerning the Maintenance of poor Scholars designed for the
Ministry be diligently observed, and that they make Report of it unto their
Provincial Synods, and the Provincial Synods shall give account thereof unto
the National, that so it may be manifested how they have performed their Duty
in this particular. But forasmuch as the Expedients contained in that Article
arc not sufficient for this end, and the Churches Stock is very mean and low,
the farther Consideration hereof is referred unto the General Assembly at St.
Foy.

The last Translation of the Holy Bible by the Pastors and Doctors in the
Church of Geneva is to be received in ours.
III. Reserving liberty unto the Church for a more exact Translation of the Holy
Bible, our Churches imitating the Primitive Church, are exhorted to receive and
use in their Public Assemblies the last Translation revised by the Pastors and
Professors of the Church of Geneva. And Thanks shall be presently given unto
Monsieur Rotan, and by Letters unto our Brethren of Geneva, who have at the
desire of our Churches so happily undertook and accomplished this great and
good Work: and they be further entreated to amplify their Notes for the
clearer and better understanding of the remaining dark places in the Sacred
Text: and Ministers in the respective Provinces are ordered to collect those
difficult passages, and to make Report of them unto the next National Synod,
who shall consider which most needs explication.

Mr. Calvin's Catechism to be used in our Churches.
IV. A Resolution being took in the last National Synod of Vitre, at the desire
of the Deputies of Xaintonge, that they should consider, whether Mr. Calvin's
Catechism ought to be changed; it is now decreed, that it shall be retained,
and Ministers shall not be permitted to expound any other; yet this Explication
shall be done by familiar Questions and Answers: And as for general
Catechisings, which are usually done before the Lord's Supper, all People
without exception shall be catechized in such a manner as every Church judges
best sitting for their instruction.

V. To the Case propounded by the Deputies of Anjou and Tourain, this Assembly
replies, That there is no need of an express particular Form of Prayer at the
Ordination of Ministers. However, that Article concerning their Ordination
shall abide in its full force, and be carefully observed.

VI. There shall be nothing changed in the 4th Article of the 10th Chapter of
our Discipline. Nevertheless, that all Abuses may be prevented either by
Pastors or Churches, the Colloquies may appoint two or three Ministers, No
regard is to be had unto the reciprocal Complaints of Pastors and People one
against the other, unless in such Cases as merit Suspension and Deposition.
who shall transport themselves upon the place, to remedy and redress them, and
in case of failure by the Colloquies, the Provincial Synods shall provide
against such neglects and omissions.

7. Whenas a Minister complains of his Churches Ingratitude, and the Church on
the other hand shall lay the blame on its Pastor, there shall be no Notice
taken of either of them, unless it be in a case of very great and enormous
wickedness, for which the Pastor meriteth Suspension or Deposition from his
Office, and that Sentence shall be pronounced by the Provincial Synod. And then
also some effectual course shall be taken to provide against the
aforementioned Ingratitude: And the Churches shall be censured for concealing
so long a time what ought to be more early discovered.

Ungrateful refractory Persons shall be deprived of the Lord's Supper.
VIII. Forasmuch as the Ingratitude of diverse Persons, in not contributing to
their Minister's Subsistence, is more notorious than ever, and that this crying
sin threatens the Churches with a total dissipation, after mature deliberation
we do decree, That in case these ungrateful Wretches having been several times
admonished by their Consistory do persist obstinately in this their sin, their
Consistory shall deprive them of Communion with the Church in the Sacraments.

IX. Colloquies shall be exhorted to observe carefully the 38th Article in the
first Chapter of our Discipline.

Pastors must be resident. The Apocryph^ not to be read in the Churches.
X. Colloquies and Synods shall take special heed, that Pastors reside as much
as possible on their Churches.

XI. The Churches are advised to see to it, that their Deacons or Readers do
not read publicly the Apocrypha, but the Canonical Books of Holy Scripture.

This Article was repealed by the Synod of Saumur, art. 5. Genesis Mat.
XII. Whenas there shall be any considerable Sum of the Churches Money given to
their Poor, lying by in Stock, and there be no present urgent occasion for its
distribution, the Deacons may put it out to Interest upon good security, and
receive such profit for its Loan as is allowed by his Majesty Laws, and those
of Charity, but with this Proviso, that both the Deacons and Consistory do
immediately call it in, whenas there is special need of it.

XIII. The 13th Article of the fifth Chapter of the Discipline shall abide in
full force, and none shall use the Formalities or Ceremonies commonly observed
in taking Oaths before the Magistrate.

A Rule about publishing of Apostates.
XIV. The Deputies of Xaintonge demanding, Whether the Names of Apostates should
be publicly declared, because of that danger we are thereby exposed to? we
advise, that the 19th Article of the fifth Chapter of our Discipline be kept up
in its full power, and that all Consistories look carefully, and prudently to
its better observation.

Public Prayers shall be offered up to God, for reducing the King unto the
Protestant Religion.
XV. All Ministers are exhorted to be earnest with God in their public Prayers
for the Conversion, Preservation, and Prosperity of the King; and whenever they
be at Court, and have access unto His Majesty, they shall do their Duty in
reminding him seriously of the great Concerns of his Soul's Salvation. And the
Pastors ordinarily residing at Court, or in its Neighborhood, shall be writ
unto by this Synod, more especially, to put this our Counsel into Practice.

XVI. Letters shall be sent from this Synod unto Madam the King's Sister,
congratulating her Perseverance, and advising her Highness to continue faithful
unto the last.

17. The Deputies of Xaintonge propounded this Case, Whether we should rest
satisfied with a general Confession published in the open Church by the
Penitent, he not specifying his particular Offense. This Assembly advises,
That there be nothing altered at present in the 22d Article of the Discipline,
but that it be conformed to as much as may be. Only the Provinces are required
to bring their better thoughts on this Subject, unto the next National Synod.

XVIII. Whereas diverse Persons would compel Consistories to depose before the
Civil Magistrate Matters told in Consistory; a Memorial shall be prepared and
presented by the General Assembly of Saint Foy, to take this Matter into their
most serious Consideration, and to procure a Grant from His Majesty, for the
conservation of the Liberties of Consistories.

XIX. There shall be no alteration made in the Forms of Public Prayers and
Administration of the Sacraments, the whole having been prudently and piously
ordained, and for the most part in plain and express Terms of holy Scripture.

XX. The Provinces are all reproved for neglecting their Duty, in preserving
the Memoirs of remarkable Events which have fallen out in this Kingdom, and
their Deputies are charged upon their return, to advertize their Colloquies
hereof, that so a better account may be given of this Article unto the next
National Synod.

XXI. A Breviate shall be prepared and presented to the Assembly of Saint Foy,
complaining against those of the Isle of France, and diverse others, who in the
Name of all our Churches have prosecuted the Verification of the Edict of 1577;
whenas it was expressly contrary to the Resolution took in the last Assembly
held at Mantes in December 1593.

XXII. Churches that have neglected their Duty of paying the Quota toward the
last Assembly held at Mantes, and other Assemblies elsewhere, and to this also,
which is now shortly to be held at Saint Foy, shall be summoned once more by
the Deputies of their Provinces to bring in out of hand their respective
Proportions, and in default hereof, their said Deputies shall immediately upon
their return, by the Authority of this Synod, deprive them of the Ministry of
God's Holy Word and Sacraments, with an Interdiction unto all Ministers from
officiating among them.

The Union of Mantes to be sworn. See the Synod of Saumur, G. M. and Art. 6 and
30.
XXIII. The Union made in the Assembly at Mantes shall be sworn by all Churches,
either in the Guild-halls of their respective Towns, or in their Temples, as
shall be judged most convenient.

XXIV. The Deputies of Xaintonge requiring Advice about the Circular Letters
written from one Church unto another, and from one Colloquy and Synod unto
another, it was ordained, That no Letters shall be of any Credit, unless signed
jointly by one Pastor and Elder, or by two Elders where there is no Pastor. And
they shall be directed in their Superscription either to the Consistory, or
particularly unto the Pastors, that they may be prudently communicated unto the
Consistory, or to any part of the Elders, according to the occurrence of
Affairs.

XXV. The Deputies of Higher Languedoc demanding, Whether over and above the
Propositions made of course by Ministers in Colloquies, it were convenient,
that there should be a Theological Disputation held by the said Ministers in
one of the Sessions of that Colloquy? It is ordered, That the Provinces do come
prepared against the next National Synod, with their thoughts about it, that
so, if it be judged meet, a General Decree may be established for it.

Ministers and Churches not coming unto Colloquies and Synods censured.
XXVI. If Churches sail a second time to defray their Pastors Charges in
traveling unto Colloquies and Synods, they shall be deprived of their
Ministers. And in case Ministers neglect twice following to come unto those
Meetings, they shall be suspended from their Ministry, unless they have lawful
excuse for their absence, and their respective Colloquies or Synods shall judge
of it.

XXVII. The Churches are all exhorted diligently to observe the Fifth and Sixth
Articles of the Tenth Chapter of our Discipline, and particularly those of
Lower Languedoc, where many such abuses are committed contrary to the aforesaid
Articles. And the Churches of the said Province are required to be more exact
in their observation of them than formerly.

XXVIII. However, Parents and Sureties may bring Infants late into the Church,
yet their Baptism shall not be delayed, unless the Assembly shall be departed;
because Children ought not to be punished for their Parents sins, who yet
together with their Sureties shall be severely censured for their slothfulness,
and neglect of Sermons, to which they have not vouchsafed their presence.

XXIX. All the Churches shall be exhorted to see, that the Article decreed in
the Synod of Vitre, concerning the Administration of Baptism before singing the
last Psalm, or at lead before the Blessing, be carefully and inviolably
observed.

The first part of this Article included within the Parenthesis was razed by
the Synod of Saumur art. 8. of Genesis Mat.
XXX. (No Sureries shall present Children unto Baptism by their Proxies, unless
it be Kings and great Princes, who by reason of their weighty Occupations
cannot always be upon the place, when Baptism is administered.) And the last
Clause marked with the Obelisk, is the 13th art. in the chap. of Baptism See
the Synod of Figiac, art. 4.
And Protestants who by their Proxies present Children unto Baptism in the
Popish Churches shall be most sharply reproved, as being Persons who consent
unto Idolatry.

XXXI. Ministers are advised to make no difficulty at those Names given
Children in Baptism, though not mentioned in the Holy Scripture, provided always
that there be nothing indecent in them.

XXXII. Such as receive from His Majesty's Royal Bounty a Sine Cura, a Benefice
without Cure of Souls, shall be exhorted to dispose of a considerable part of
its Revenue to pious and charitable Uses, as toward the Maintenance of God's
own holy instituted Worship and Relief of the Poor; otherwise, we will proceed
against them by Suspension from the Lord's Table.

XXXIII. The 9th Canon in the 12th Chapter of our Discipline, binding Pastors
as much as possible to distribute the Cup at the Lord's Table, shall be in full
force.

Pastors and Elders must communicate at the same Time and Table.
XXXIV. Elders of the Church shall communicate together with the Pastors at the
Lord's Supper in the first place, and the residue of the People in such order
as the Consistory judges most expedient for the Churches edification.

In Case of Appeal from an Inferior to a Superior Judge. Marriage may not be
celebrated. Nicodemites are in the same Classis with Infidels.
XXXV. Although the Parties cannot obtain the Consent of Parties, yet if they that
have that of the Magistrate unto their Marriage, by his Judicial Sentence, the
Pastors in our Churches may celebrate such Marriage, unless there lie an Appeal
in the Case.

XXXVI. To the Case propounded by the Deputy of Berry and Orleans, this Synod
returns its Answer, That the Churches shall declare it publicly, that
whosoever whispereth in private, that he is a Protestant, and of the Reformed
Religion, although he do not make an open profession thereof, that this Person is
to be accounted no better than an Infidel, until such time as he he have
totally renounced the Superstitions and Idolatries of the Romish Church.

XXXVII. The Deputies of Xaintonge having declared the Inconveniences arising
in several Churches, from Promises of Marriage expressed by words de praesenti,
and that it were better that for time coming, all such Promises should be
uttered in words de futuro: The Decision of this difficulty is remitted over to
the next National Synod, whereunto the Provinces are required to come with due
preparation.

XXXVIII. The 12th Article of the 13th Chapter of the Discipline is remitted
over to the consideration of the next National Synod, and in the mean while Mr.
Beza and Mr. Daueau are entreated to couch in Writing their Arguments about it,
that they may be perused and examined by that Synod, that so we may know,
Whether it be lawful for a Brother to marry the Widow of his Wife's Brother.

Whence proceeds Impotency and tying of the Point, and its proper Remedy.
XXXIX. When diverse Persons in our Churches are afflicted with that Plague of
Impotency by those who tie the Point; the Pastors shall remonstrate to them in
their Sermons, that the cause of this Evil is Unbelief in some, and weakness of
Faith in others; and that Charms used to untie them are detestable, as also the
means used by others in consulting Witches, the Devils Ministers; this Remedy
being worse than their Disease: whenas Fasting, Prayer, and Reformation of Life
thorough the Blessing of God would effect the Cure.

XL. In the Form of Excommunication pronounced publicly at the Lord's Table,
next after the word Idolaters, there shall be added, All Sorcerers, Charmers,
and Inchanters; as also upon another account, after the word Mutinous, there
shall be added Murderers.

XLI. Whereas Public Notaries in diverse Churches, keep open Doors on the
Lord's Day, and pass all manner of Contracts and Transactions, whereby very
many Souls are taken off together with themselves from the Religious
Sanctification of the Lord's holy Sabbath. It is decreed by this Synod, That
for time to come, the said Notaries shall pass no manner of Contracts on the
Lord's Day, unless it be Contracts of Marriage, Last Wills and Testaments,
Articles of Agreement between dissenting Parties, and the amicable terminating
of vexatious Lawsuits, and such other business as cannot possibly be delayed;
under which head fall in Matters of Necessity and Mercy, and such Contracts may
be dispatched on the most Holy Days, provided always, that such Writings be not
drawn up, nor executed during the time of Divine Service, and of the Public
Worship of God, and their Offices shall be shut, if possible, whilst they be
thus employed.

XLII. Nothing shall be changed in the first Article of the 14th Chapter of our
Discipline: but all endeavors shall be used to prevent those Abuses which are
usually committed.

XLIII. The Deputies of Gascony demanded, Whether it were lawful to take a new
Lease of the Lands and Demeans belonging to the Popish Churchmen, upon
condition of bringing them their Rent home unto their Convents, and other
Houses of those Ecclesiastics? To which it was answered, That there was no
inconvenience in it, provided, that it were not in any matters relating unto
Idolatry, as the carrying of Incense, Wax to make Torches, and other suchlike
things.

XLIV. The second Article in the 14th Chapter of our Discipline, concerning
Patronages, shall not be altered. Yet notwithstanding Lay-Patrons may enjoy
their Privilege of laying claim by Protestation unto their Rights and
Emoluments, that so their Title to them may be preserved, grounding their
Protestation upon this, that the present Collation is contrary to our Religion,
against which they dare not in Conscience act. And this is according to the
Edicts of Pacification: And this Affair shall be further debated in the
Assembly of St. Foy.

XLV. The 26th Article of the same Chapter shall remain entire, only the word
Poincons, a Houpe, shall be left out, and because now that Habit is wholly out
of Fashion among us, and such as paint and show their naked Breasts, shall be
dealt with more severely than heretofore, and weaker Persons shall be born
withal as much as possibly we can for their edification, or in case they be
censured, it shall only be by a simple suspension from the Sacrament, that so
they may be reduced unto Christian Modesty.

XLVI. The Deputies of Xaintonge moved well, and this Synod decrees upon it,
that whosoever are received hereafter Members into Communion with our Churches
shall subscribe, if they can write, the Act of their Reception, and a Register
shall be kept in all the Churches of their Names, and of the time of their
Deaths.

XLVII. Upon another motion of those Deputies it was decreed; That exiled
Members from their Churches refug'd in another, shall yet notwithstanding
contribute to the subsistence of their ancient Pastors, if so be they are fled
only with an intention of returning to their former Habitations, but in case
they resolve to remove elsewhere, it is not reasonable they should be compelled
thereunto.

XLVIII. Upon another motion of the same Deputies, concerning Proposans
(Candidates for the Ministry) who having been for some time maintained at the
Churches Charges, in order to their future Service in the Ministry, not meeting
with a Call unto it, or having since upon other grounds altered their minds,
and took up another Vocation: the Synod made this Decree, That if through want
of will on their side, they were not employed in the sacred Ministry, they
shall be bound to make restitution unto those Churches, which had furnished
them with necessary Supplies toward their Education, as soon as God shall
enable them.

XLIX. The present Synod returns Thanks unto Monsieur Beraud, Rotan, and the
other Pastors, for their pious endeavors in maintaining the Truth, at the
Conference held at Mants, with Monsieur De Perron, and other Popish Theologers,
and ratifies their whole proceeding; and that offer made by them to continue
the said Conference at the pleasure and commandment of His Majesty. In
pursuance whereof the Synod has nominated twenty Pastors, out of whom twelve
shall be chosen to confer with those of the Romish Church, that so the
Provinces may have notice, and come prepared for the said Conference: And in
case the Provinces would recommend any other, they are required to do it
speedily, and shall acquaint the said Beraud and Rotan with it. Catalogue of
those nominated for the General Conference.
The twenty Persons nominated, are, Monsieur Rotan of Xaintonge, Monsieur Ceovt
of Bourgogne, Mr Chauve. See the Synod of Saumur, Genesis Mar. 12.
Monsieur De L'Estang Godion of Poictou, Monsieur D'aneau of Higher Languedoc,
Monsieur Pacard of Xaintonge, Monsieur De la Noue of Anjou, Monsieur Constans
of Lyonnois, Monsieur Cazenave of Bearn, Monsieur De la Banserie of Normandy,
Monsieur De la Faye of Geneva, Monsieur De Beaulieu of France, Monsieur Des
Al^ues of Tourain, Another Copy has Monsieur De Serres.
Monsieur Chamier of Dauphine, Monsieur De Chambrise of Brittany, Monsieur
Ricotier the Son of Gascony, Monsieur Gigord of Lower Languedoc, Monsieur
Berault of the Higher Guyenne, Monsieur But Baron's Name was razed out.
Baron of England, Monsieur Melanez of Gascony, and Monsieur Junius of Leyden
in Holland.

L. The Province of Lower Languedoc demanding our Advice, What course should be
taken with those Ministers, who having been deposed, did afterward live
soberly and religiously, without giving any the least offense, though a long time
had past since their Deposition; whether it were lawful to employ them again,
in the Dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, in that self-same Province
where they had been deposed, or not? This Synod answers, That it is in no wise
expedient, because contrary to the very Letter of the Canons of our Discipline.

LI. The same Deputies having moved, That there might be nothing innovated as
to the Observation of Holy Days, such as Christmas, and the rest; the Synod
does accord unto it.

LII. This Assembly having seen Monsieur Daneau's Answer unto the first part of
Bellarmin's Works, does judge them worthy to be made public, whereof Notice
shall be given our said Brother by Letters from this Synod; and he is entreated
to intimate in his Preface, that he designed brevity in his Answer, because
others had been more large and ample.

LIII. Monsieur De Serres having requested by his Letters written to this
Synod, See Synod of Saumur, Part. Mat. 3.
that some learned Men might be, appointed to revise his Collection out of the
Fathers, a Work undertaken by him, to prove our Religion to be the most Ancient
Catholic Religion, and the Romish to be New and Particular. This Synod has
ordained, That the said De Serres shall cause three Copies of his Collection to
be fairly transcribed, whereof one shall be sent into the Lower Languedoc, and
from thence into the Higher Languedoc, Guyenne, and Gascogny; another into
Xaintonge, and from thence into Poictou, and the Churches beyond the River of
Loire; and the third shall be sent unto Geneva, that care may be taken about
its Impression. And till it be thus revised, the said Monsieur De Serres is
expressly ordered neither to print nor publish any thing of the said Collection.

LIVE. The Synod being informed, that several Sums of Money were collected in
the Churches for their Service, whereof no account has been rendered. This
Synod orders, That all Receivers of those Collections made in the said
Churches, do bring in their Accounts of those Moneys unto the next National
Synod, notwithstanding any Agreement past between these Receivers, and
particular Churches to the contrary. And the Province of Lower Languedoc shall
give Notice to Monsieur De Serres, and John Chalais, that they come and yield
up their Accounts, and pay in the remaining Moneys in their hands, at the time
appointed them before the six Ministers, and six Elders, or other Persons well
skilled in matters of Account, which shall be deputed by the Synod of Lower
Languedoc; and these Accounts shall be audited in the City of Monpellier. And
in case the said Monsieur De Serres refuse so to do, he shall be suspended from
the Ministry, and the said John Chalais from the Sacrament: And both of them
are required to appear in Person before the next National Synod. But De Serres
died the very day before it sat.

LV. The Deputies of Higher Languedoc demanding, Whether Sinners who had
committed certain Crimes, for which by Sentence of the Magistrate they were
punished with Brands of public Infamy, ought also to be censured by the
Church, so far as to do public Penance in the face of the whole Congregation.
The Synod resolved affirmatively, because they be two distinct Matters, the
Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate, and the Ecclesiastical Cognizance taken
by Consistories, this relating to the Conscience, and the interior concerns of
the Soul, and that only to the Body and outward Man.

CHAP. V. Of APPEALS.
I. WHereas the Church of Rochel has brought an Appeal from the Province of
Poictou, about Monsieur Esnard, whom the said Church claims for its Minister,
by Virtue of an Order granted it by the National Synod, celebrated in the Year
1581. It is now decreed, That because the. said Church has not produced the
Grant of that Synod, Monsieur Esnard shall remain where he is at present in the
Province of Poictou; and moreover, the said Church shall be censured for having
used Terms of Law in the said Appeal.

II. An Appeal being brought by the Colloquy of Angoulesme against the Church
of St. Mesme, about a Judgment past in the Synod of Xaintonge: This Article was
razed out in the Synod of Saumur, Part. Mat. 4.
this Assembly does confirm that Judgment in the whole, and in every part of it
denounced by the said Synod; which is also charged by the Authority of this
Assembly, to censure Monsieur De Bargemont, and his Associates, for troubling
us with their Impertinencies.

III. The Church of Cognac, and Monsieur De Bargemont having appealed from a
Judgment given in the Synod of Xaintonge held at Pons. This Assembly decrees,
That the said Monsieur De Bargemont shall be appropriated to the Church of
Segonsac with this Proviso, that he serve alternatively the Church of Coignac,
and Segonsac, and that the Church of Segonsac do give him full satisfaction for
all his Arrerages within the prefixed Term of Six Months from the first of July
next. And if the Church of Coignac refuse their Consent unto this Condition,
then the said De Bargemont shall appertain solely to the Church of Segonsac:
And if it so fall out, that the said Church of Segonsac be wanting unto their
Duty, and which is now reinforced upon them, 1594. Synod XIII.
the said de Bargemont shall be at liberty to be conferred on any other Church,
excepting that of Cognac.

IV. An Appeal being brought by Monsieur Cazaux, and the Consistory of
Mauvoisin, from an Order made in the Provincial Synod of the Higher Guyenne:
After that Monsieur de Fontenailles, and the Church of Castillon were heard,
this National Synod did confirm that Order of the Provincial Synod hold this
present Year at Lectoure, and in case the said Church of Castillon cannot
thoroughly effect the purport of that Order, then the said Sieur de Cazaux shall
be at liberty to serve the Church of Mauvoisin.

V. Appeals being brought by Monsieur Beraut, Minister of God's Holy Word, of
the one part, and by Messieurs, the Consuls and Elders of the Church of
Montauban on the other part, from an Order of the Synod of Higher Languedoc,
about the space of time granted unto the said Berault, for attending his
private domestic Concerns, and the looking after his Estate lying at a
distance from the City of Montauban. This National Synod confirms that Order
of the aforesaid Provincial Synod, for the full term of One Year, to be granted
the said Monsieur Beraut, for attending his necessary private Businesses, which
shall begin from the Day of his Departure. And he is desired as a Testimony of
his Respect and Love unto his Church, to leave his Family in the said City, or
at least within the Province; as also his Church is admonished to pay in unto
him during his absence his Salary, as a Token and Pledge of their great and
unfeigned Respects unto their Pastor the said Monsieur Beraut; and both the
said Monsieur Beraut, his Church and the Colloquy shall carefully and
unanimously endeavor that his place be supplied, and all the requisite Duties
of his Pastoral Office be acceptably discharged by some other worthy Minister
in his Church, during that Year of his absence.

VI. An Appeal being brought by the Churches of Montauban and Venez, for that
by the Synod of Higher Languedoc held at Montauban and Lectoure, Monsieur de
Castlefranc, Minister of the Gospel, was consigned to the Church of Realmont,
and yet the Isle of France does pretend a Right unto the said Monsieur de
Chastlefranc; This Synod declares, That the Province of the Isle of France, had
nothing to do with the said Monsieur De Chastlefranc; and whereas Monsieur de
Chastlefranc does also make his Appeal unto this Synod: we decree, That the
Churches of Montredon and Venez have a Right to claim him as their own peculiar
Minister, nevertheless the said de Chastlefranc shall officiate in the Churches
of Montredon, Venez, and Realmont, conjointly at each of them six Months
together, during which time this Synod does order, that the Church of Realmont
shall provide themselves of an able Pastor, otherwise they shall be proceeded
against by the sharpest Censures, as is usually done in such Cases by their
Colloquy. And if it so fall out, that the said Church of Realmont do need the
Labors of the said Monsieur de Chastlefranc, he is entreated to assist them as
far as his strength will suffer him.

VII. The Church of Monpellier having brought an Appeal from the Provincial
Synods of Lower Languedoc, who had disposed of Monsieur de Villette to the
Church of Valleragne. This Assembly does confirm the Judgment of the said
Provincial Synod, and declares, That the said Church of Monpellier cannot of
Right lay any Claim to the said Monsieur de Villette.

CHAP. VI. Particular MATTERS. 1594. Synod XIII.

I. THE Deputies of the Province of Gascony, Perigord, and Limousin, desiring
that the Churches of Coudonnois and Landers might be joined to the Provincial
Synod of Agenois, Perigord and Limousin; and being opposed herein by the
Remonstrances of the Deputies from the Province of Higher Guyenne, and most
especially by the Pastor of the Church of Lectoure, Mr. Bernard Ennis, in the
name and behalf of the Colloquy of Armagnac: After mature consultation, it was
resolved, That the Synods of the Higher Guyenne and Gascogny should remain as
they are in their present establishment; not but that in time coming, and in
case necessity so require it, there may be made an alteration, and the Churches
of Armagnac which are now divided from their Colloquy, shall reader an Account
unto the next National Synod of their separation from it, till which they shall
remain incorporated with it.

II. The Churches of Augoumois shall be joined to the Provincial Synod of
Xaintonge and Aunix, for the perfecting a sixth Colloquy, according to the
equal division of those said Churches.

III. The Church of Bergerac shall be sharply censured by Letters from this
Assembly; for that by theirs to us they professed a Resolution not to subject
themselves to the fourth Article of the tenth Chapter pf our Discipline.

IV. Those of the Isle of France shall be severely censured, for proposing to
this Assembly, a politic Union with those of the Romish Gallican Church, in
defense of the Liberties of the Gallican Church against the Pope: And Letters
shall be dispatched unto those forementioned Persons, to acquaint them, that
their Proposition was judged utterly unworthy our consultation, and they shall
be farther censured for demanding competent Judges both of the one and other
Religion, to decide the Points in controversy between us; as also for
demanding, that neither National nor Provincial Synods be convened, unless on
very great and weighty occasions, and that very rarely.

5. The Church of Aymet complaining, That Monsieur Balarand their Pastor
absented himself from them, and was settled in the Church of Castres, without
any lawful dismission from them. After that the Provincial Deputies of Gascony
had been heard, as also the said Monsieur Balarand, and the Petition of the
ancient Deputy from the City and Church of Castres, and after reading the Act
of Dismission given unto the said Balarand by those of the Church of Aymet,
subscribed by those self-same Persons, who have now written to those of the
City of Castres, and yet some of them have since signed a Revocation of that
Grant; this Synod does assign the said Monsieur Balarand unto the Church of
Castres, to be their ordinary Pastor, but on these conditions, First, That the
Church of Aymet be provided of an able Pastor within six Months, or sooner, it
may be, by the Colloquy of Perigord, or Synod of Gascony, at the sole Charges
of the aforesaid Church of Castres, according to the offers made by Monsieur
Bassol their Deputy. Secondly, That the Judge of Castres do cause all
Prosecutions to cease against Monsieur de la Garime, and Monsieur de la Grange
for having deposed Master Gaspar Olaxa, who was ejected by Authority of the
Colloquy of Albigeois, and the Provincial Synod held at Montaban. And in case
our Advice concerning the said de la Garime, and la Grange, be not entirely
observed, this National Synod does declare, That those of the Church of Castres
on whom it was incumbent to effect it, shall be censured, even with suspension
from the Lord's Table; and farther, that they be utterly unworthy of ever
enjoying the Ministry of their Pastor Monsieur Balarand, and the Colloquy of
Albigeois are ordered from us to meet in any other place than the City of
Castres, and to see to it, that this our present Decree be effectually
observed, and that the said Monsieur Balarand be transferred from the City of
Castres, and to see to it, that this our present Decree be effectually
observed, and that the said Monsieur Balarand be transferred from the City of
Castres to serve in some other Church elsewhere.

VI. The Province of Higher Guyenne having complained of the wicked
Conversations, and scandalous Lives of Master Gravel, and Vieux Banque, it was
decreed, That the Ministers of Upper Quercy shall summon the said Graver, and
Vieuxbanque, to appear without delay, in two Months time personally in this
City of Montauban, where the Minister of the Upper Quercy producing sufficient
Evidence, that they had summoned the said Graver and Vieuxbanque to appear,
together with the Information of the Crimes charged on them, which if clearly
proved on them, the Ministers of this City and Colloquy, by the Authority of
this National Synod shall suspend or depose them, as they see cause from the
Ministry, and in case of their nonappearance, they shall be immediately
suspended, and this their Suspension published in the Churches.

VII. The Province of Tourain, Anjou, and Main, craving Advice how to dispose
of Monsieur Le Bloy, Minister of St. Aignan, this Synod does ordain, That the
said Le Bloy shall continue in the said Church, provided that within six Months
the said Church do give him full satisfaction in paying him the Salary they had
promised him, and in cause of failure therein, he shall be consigned unto the
Church of Preuilly, according to the Order of the Provincial Synod of Touraine.

VIII. Whereas the Church of Two other Copies read Bracqu^t.
Bourinquet does inform us, That their Pastor Monsieur De la Finer is removed
from them by the Pastors of the Province commissionated by this present Synod
to inspect that Affair, who have thereby left them totally destitute without a
Minister, this Assembly does ordain, That the said Sieur de la Finer shall
abide with his Church, exercising all the Duties of his Office, until such time
as they be provided of another, and the Colloquy of Lower Quercy shall take
that Task upon them, and the said Sieur de la Finer shall be presently paid all
his Arrears, and that said Church of Bourinquet shall supply all his Wants for
the future, and in case of nonperformance on their part, then the said Sieur
de la Finer shall be free and fully discharged from them.

IX. This Assembly, at the Request of the Deputies of Lower Languedoc, does
think meet, That our Brother Monsieur Boulet do stand related unto Condoignac
and Vergessers, but with this Condition, that he exercise his Ministry in his
former Church, until such time as they be provided of another.

X. At the desire of the Magistrates of the City and Church of Rochel, as also
of the whole Province of Xaintonge, this Assembly ordains, That Letters be
sent forthwith to the Syndics and Church of Geneva, earnestly entreating, that
the Seignory and Consistory of that famous Church and City would be pleased to
give up their Right in our honored Brother Monsieur Rotan, for the Service of
the Church of Rochel, because of his singular usefulness and fruitful Labors
in that Church, and his great serviceableness in that Province, yea, and to all
the Reformed Churches of France. Yet Rotan was afterward deeply suspected for
prevaricating in Religion.

XI. Complaints being made by the Province of Xaintonge, against Master
Esperient and Cahier, this Assembly orders, That the Province of Xaintonge do
inform the Synod of Bearn about the said Esperient, because he belongs to it,
that he may give satisfaction to them; and that the Sieur Cahier shall be
written to in the Name of this Assembly, that he personally appear before the
Synod of Xaintonge, which is empowered with full Authority by this present
Synod, to hear and judge of the whole Fact.

XII. The Province of Lower Languedoc demanding Advice about Mr. John
Corneille, it is decreed, That the Province shall be sharply reproved for their
so long suffering and sparing the said Corneille in his Errors and wicked
Actions, and in particular the Magistrates and other Persons in the Church of
Orange, who prosecuted so vigorously his Restoration unto the Ministry. For
which cause this Synod confirms the Deposition of the said Corneille, and
ordains that he be silenced for ever, and that the Magistrate and Consistory of
Orange be reproved for permitting him to pray publicly during his Suspension,
as also we give warning that it is dangerous to employ him in the teaching of
Youth.

XIII. Sharp and Comminatory Letters shall be written unto the Colloquy of
Auvergne, and to Monsieur De Montcassin, that if they do not satisfy and
reimburse Monsieur Lambert his Expenses, in getting the King's Orders for the
maintenance of the aforementioned Ministers, this Synod on their refusal will
proceed against them as Delinquents, and particularly against Monsieur
Montcassin, because he became bound for the Payment of that Money, as appears
by the very Act of the Provincial Synod held in this City of Montauban in the
Year 1593: And in case they do not give satisfaction before the breaking up of
this Assembly, Process shall be issued out against them, as we have written
them.

XIV. Forasmuch as in the conclusion of this Synod the Colloquy of Higher
Rouargue have returned no Answer to it, therefore in pursuance of the
Resolution before taken it is decreed, That Monsieur de Villette and Chalais,
when they return into their Province of Lower Languedoc, shall interdict the
Exercise of the Ministry in all the Churches of that Colloquy, and particularly
Monsieur de Montcassin shall be suspended and silenced for not performing his
Promise.

XV. Mr. William Benet acquainting this Assembly, That he had discharged his
Duty in educating his Son Mark Antony in good Learning, in order to his being
employed in the Ministry of the Gospel to his great comfort, and yet without
his privity and consent his said Son had accepted of a Call unto the Church of
Marvejoles in the Province of Lower Languedoc: After hearing what could be
alleged for themselves by the Deputies of that Province, as also the Plea of
the said Mark Antony for himself, that he only accepted of that Call for a
time, and with this express condition, That his Father were contented with it;
this Assembly does assign the said Mark Antony unto the Church of Villemure, in
the Colloquy of Lower Quercy, to serve them as their own peculiar Pastor; yet
on these Terms, that he shall assist the said Church of Maruejoles by the space
of three Months, during which time the Colloquy of Givaudan, and the Province
of Lower Languedoc, shall use their best endeavor to provide another Pastor
for the Church of Maruejoles, which Church also is ordered to satisfy the said
Mark Antony Bennet, within six Weeks of his Return, all his Arrerages, and the
whole Stipend of the Quarter now current; and in case of failure herein by
them, the said Bennet is left in full liberty to leave them immediately, and to
betake himself to the Service of his own Church of Villemure, he advising with
his Colloquy, and they approving it, according to the Discipline.

XVI. Diverse Provinces having consulted this Assembly what course they should
take with those who challenge, and with those who accept the Challenge to fight
a Duel, as also how to deal with the challenged, who killing their adverse
Party, have since obtained His Majesty's Pardon, or have been afterward legally
justified and discharged, the Synod made this Decree, That every such Person
should be suspended the Lord's Table, and this their Suspension shall be out of
hand published to the Congregation, and before ever they be readmitted to the
Churches Peace and Communion, they shall undergo Public Penance for those
their Offenses.

XVII. The Consuls and Elders in the Church of Montauban petitioned this
Assembly, that during Monsieur Berault's absence, their Church might be
supplied for that Year by Monsieur De la Nove, Minister of Beaufort in Anjou:
Answer was given them, that according to our Discipline it could not be done,
'till such time as both the Church and Province to which he stood related, had
been first acquainted with it. And therefore they should send Letters unto that
Church and Province, and to the Lady Vaux, and to the Lord Du Plessis,
entreating them, because of the great importance of the Church of Montauban,
that they would be pleased either to grant, or at least to lend their Pastor
Monsieur De Nove unto the Church of Montauban, during Monsieur Beraud's
absence. And till that the Synod of Anjou have gratified the said Petitioners,
the Colloquy of Lower Quercy shall take care, that the said Church of Montauban
be not left destitute without a Pastor, but that they do from time to time send
able Ministers unto them.

CHAP. VII. The Roll of the Vagrants, Deserters, and Deposed Ministers.
1. THE Vagrants are Isaac and Moses Bouchars, who wander up and down sowing
false Doctrines, they were of Poitiers, the Elder of them is a little dapper
Fellow, red Face and Beard, roaving Eye; the younger is much of the same
stature, but blackish Beard, pale and sad, and roaving Eyes as his Brother.

2. Costa, or La Costa of Bearn, who preaches here, and there without any
Ordination. He is a Fellow of low Stature, a black Beard, a swarthy
Countenance, a notorious Liar, Impudent, and a Thief.

3. Commission is given to Master Villette and Master Chalais, Deputies of
Lower Languedoc, to make speedy enquiry about Monsieur Du Croix, late Minister
of Perigueux, who has forsook his Ministry for the Practice of Physic.

Vincentius Cordatus, being sixty Years of Age, a tall lubberly Fellow.

The DEPOSED:

4. In the Province of Higher Languedoc, and Higher Guyenne, Master Bernard
Vaissy for preaching false Doctrine.

5. Master Gaspar Olaxa a Spaniard, for raising Troubles and Seditions in the
Church of Castres.

6. Master Peter Beaupoil, otherwise going by the Name of Dumont or Damont.

7. Master James Caza of Normandy, Master Gabriel Roll, otherwise La Sales; De
Coucher in Rouargue.

A Schism having fallen out in the Church of Saint Foy, upon the score of the
said Roll, the Ministers of this Synod who are to meet in the Assembly of St.
Foy, are empowered with full Authority from it, 1594. Synod XIII.
to hear and judge fully and finally of that business.

Because of the Necessities and Dispersions of the Churches on the other side
of Loire, the Province of Anjou is appointed to call the next National Synod
unto the City of Saumur, in the Month of May, two Years hence. And forasmuch as
the Province of Lower Languedoc, to whom by Order of the last Synod held at
Vitre, it belonged to convocate this next ensuing Synod, has parted with its
Right in favor to, and for the benefit of that Province, these things
considered, the next Synod shall be entreated to appoint, that the National
Synod which shall succeed it, may be assembled and held within the Bounds of
the Lower Languedoc.

Given at Montauban the 28th of June, in the Year of our Lord 1594. The
Original Acts of this Synod are kept in the Archives of the City Rochel, and
are thus signed, Beraud, Moderator. Gardesy and Scribes of the Synod. Rotan,
Scribes of the Synod.


The End of the Synod of Montauban.
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE XIV. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At Saumur the 15th Day of
June in the Year of our Lord 1596.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Deputies Names. An observation past on Monsieur Rotan a Deputy.
Moderator and Scribes chosen. The Lords Supper to be celebrated June 16. Chap.
II. Observations and Approbation of the Confession. Chap. III. 26. Observations
upon the Discipline. Provinces to take care of Proposans 4. Colleges and
Universities to be erected 5. Crimes which may expose Penitents to Public
Infamy or Death, not to be confessed by them in their Public Penance 8.
Pastors to be sent alternatively unto Synods 11. Ministers not deputed unto
Synods shall have no Votes 13. Gypfies Children may be baptized 15. Baptism
must be administered in a Church 16. Two Names unto a Child indifferent 17.
Marriage Promises de futuro indissolvable 18. The Discipline approved and
sworn. Chap. IV. General Matters. A Caveat against a Scot, who would reconcile
both Religions 1. Latin Disputations better for Universities than Colloquies 3.
Church Members Names to be Registered 11. Ministers may preach on Holydays 13.
Duellers 14. The Union betwixt the Churches of France and the Netherlands to be
maintained 15. None admitted to the Lord's Table living among the Papists,
without a Certificate from the Elders 16. The King and Constable's Letters to
the Synod 18. Frauds of a Geneva Bookseller 19. A Case about Ministers being
Deputies unto Politic Assemblies 20. Whether Contracts of Marriage should be
seen before Publication of Banes 21. Idolatry to be abjured before Persons be
admitted to Communion with us 22. The Local Magistrates of the Reformed
Religion may assist at Colloquies and Synods 23. May a Protestant Judge swear a
Papist upon his crucifix? 24. Hautyn to print the Bible 25. Such as marry
within the Degrees prohibited by God's Word, shall not be admitted to the
Lord's Table 26. The Revelation not to be expounded without leave from the
Colloquy or Synod 27. Such as marry their Children to Papists shall be
suspended 28. Cousin-Germans may marry 32. Ministers to be in the Armies 33.
Vmpires among Protestants to compose Differences 35. Chap. V. Of Appeals. The
Case of Monsieur D'Amours a Minister 3. Ou Puy an Erroneous Minister deposed,
restored again unto his Office 6. Chap. VI. Of Particular Matters. De L'Escale
an Heretic censured 1. A censured Minister restored 4. The Case of two deposed
Ministers revised 5, 6. Letters from the Synod to the Church of Metz 8. Letters
from Sedan unto the Synod 9. The Petition of a deposed Minister for his
Restoration rejected 13. Letters from the Countess of Laval to the Synod 18.
Letters from the Synod to the Duke De la Force, and Parliament of Pau 19.
Cahier to be declared publicly an Apostate Minister 21. M. De Lessars, a poor
Minister, freed from a Bond of Ten Crowns 22. Monsieur De L'Espine Emeritus 23.
A deposed Minister not restored 25. A penitent deposed Minister restored 26.
Olaxa a deposed Minister, how to be dealt with 28. The Case of Monsieur
D'Espoir a Minister 30. Chap. VII. Roll of Deposed Ministers. A Remark upon
Cahier the Apostate.
THE Synod of Saumur. 1596. Synod XIV.

SYNOD XIV.
Acts of the National Synod held at SAUMUR, the Fifth Day of June, in the Year
of our Lord One Thousand five hundred ninety and six.

CHAP. I. Of the DEPVTIES. Monsieur De la Touch, chosen President. Monsieur
Pacard, Assessor. And Messieurs Vincent, and Chalmot, Scribes.

At this Synod there appeared these Pastors and Elders hereafter named:
FOR Brittany Master Peter Merlin, Minister of the Church and Family of the
Lady of Laval, and Monsieur de Landauran, Elder of the said Church.

Mr. Rotan was born at Geneva, Minister first at Rochel, and then at Castres,
and there he died.
For the Higher Languedoc, and the Higher Guyenne, Master John Baptista Rotan,
sub-delegated by Monsieur Balarand, who was deputed by the Provincial Synod
held at Figeac in May last, 1596. But because of his Sickness he could not be
present in the Assembly; and the said Monsieur Rotan was accepted in that
Quality, but with this Proviso, That it should not be made a Precedent; and the
Provinces are charged to acquaint their respective Deputies with it, that they
ought not to delegate another in their slead.

I cannot pass by Monsieur Rotan, without a Remark, which may be read at large
in Monsieur D' Aubigny's Histoire Univers. live. 4. cap. 11. and live. 5. cap. 2.

He, and one Marlas, who afterward revolted, with de Serres, Cayer, the
Apostates, and de Vaux Ministers, finding no Gains nor Preferments to be had in
the Reformed Churches of France, projected for their own Advancement, the
Reunion of the two Religions, Protestant and Popish: they communicate their
Design to the Lord of Sansy (who afterward turned Papist) to du Fay, Grandson
of the Chancellor L' Hospital, to Benoist Parson of St. Eustache, to Perron
Bishop of Eureux, to Dr. Chauveau, and to Berange a Dominiean Friar, and to the
Archbishop of Bourges. Rotan got himself deputed with some others to the King
at Mantes, in the Year 1595; and there promised, that in a Public Dispute, he
would subtly betray the Cause of the Reformed unto the Romanists. But when it
come to the push, whether it were that out of vanity he would not yield, or
through remorse of Conscience, he drew back, and feigned himself sick. Monsieur
Beraud Pastor of the Church of Montauban, entered the Lists in his stead, and
stoutly maintained the Truth against the Adversaries, about the sufficiency of
the Scriptures. Monsieur de Vaux, who was brought off with three Bills, one of
Two thousand five hundred Crowns, and the other two of lesser Sums, falls into
terror and horror of mind, has no rest night nor day, and under this great
anguish discovers the whole Plot for their Prevarication unto several Persons
of Note and Quality, but with dreadful Cries and Groans, yet withal assures
them, that God will have mercy upon his poor Soul, notwithstanding the
greatness of his sin, for he should die very suddenly, which he did the next
Lord's Day: For having preached to his Congregation, and supped with some
Friends, he took a solemn leave of them, and leading his Wife into his
Bedchamber, he pronounced this Stave of the Fifty first Psalm. Lo, also, Lord,
thou love Truth within,
Within the Heart, within the Soul sincerity,
Therefore to me so gracious thou have been,
To make me know thy inward Wisdom's verity.


And immediately died in the very place.

Monsieur D' Aubigni relates, how that he unbosom'd himself unto him with many
sighs, and having confessed his heinous Offense, he delivered to him the three
Bills; which, after his Death, he gave back again unto his Heirs.

For Poitou, Master Dominick de Loss, Lord de la Touch, Minister of the
Church of Mouchant, and St. Fulgent, Master Francis, L'Oystau, Minister of the
Church and Family of the Lord Duke la Tremouille, and Mons de Fontaines Elder
of the said Church. Their Temple in which they worshipped God was at Melle.

For the Lower Guyenne, Monsieur de St. Hilary, Minister of the Church of
Nerac, without an Elder, Monsieur de Chastelet was excused upon the account of
his sickness; and the Provinces shall be informed, that in case of sickness,
they ought to substitute another, as also to depute unto these Synods one or
two Elders.

For Orleans, Berry, etc. Master John Vian Minister of the Church of Angeau,
Master Adam D' Orival Minister of the Church of Sancerre, and Master Giles d'
Albert Junior, Citizen of Blois, deputed by the said Province.

For Dolphiny, Provence, and the Principality of Orange, Master Daniel Chamier
Minister of the Church of Montlimart, Master John de Serres Minister of the
Church of Aurenges, and there was joined with him Monsieur Hulson an Elder of
that Church; but tho he was chosen by the said Province, yet he was not present
at this Synod.

For Lower Languedoc Master Laurence Brunier Minister of the Church of Vsez,
and Theodorick de Combez Baron of Fons, Elder of that Church.

For Normandy Master Giles Gautier Lord of la Bansenie, Minister of the Church
of Caen, and Master Robert du Perron, Elder in the Church of Rouan.

For Lyonnois, Forest, and Beaujolois, Master Lewis Tourquet, Elder in the
Church of Lions.

For Anjou, Touraine, etc. Master Felix du Tronchay Lord of la Noue, Minister
in the Church of Beaufort, Master Francis Greliere Lord of Macefer, Minister in
the Church of Saumur, and Master Briant Niotte, and Master Peter Coignet Lord
of la Plant, Elders in the said Church of Sanmur:

For Xaintonge, Augoulmois and Aunix, Master George Pacart Minister of
Rochefoucald, and Monsieur Chalmot Elder in the Church of Rochel.

The Provinces of Higher and Lower Vivaretz, and their Synod shall be censured
for neglecting to send their Deputies unto this Assembly; and Masters Brunier
and Chamier, are appointed to declare in their next Synodical Meeting, this
very Censure by word of mouth unto them.

Bourbonnois, Auvergne, and the Province of Burgundy, having at present but one
constituted Church in it, are excused for this time, and Monsieur de Serres is
ordered to write unto the scattered Churches of those Dukedoms, that they rally
and reunite again together, and encourage the Faithful which are among them to
re-assemble.

Monsieur de la Touch was chosen by common Suffrages Moderator, and Monsieur
Pacart Assessor, and Master Vincent and Chalmot Scribes, to Collect and
Register the Acts of this Synod.

The Assembly ordered, That the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper should be
celebrated in this Church on the Lord's Day, June the 16th of this present Year
1596.

CHAP. II. Observations upon the Confession of Faith.
THE Confession of Faith was Read, Approved, and Sworn to by all the Deputies
of this present Synod.

Once again the Printers shall be required to put the word Union, instead of
that of Unity, in the 26th Article.

As also, Synod of Montauban. Observat. upon the Confess. art. 4. (...) 6.
That in the close of the Eight and thirtieth Article, these words of
Institution in the Lord's Supper, Take, eat, and drink ye all of it; shall be
added, according as it had been decreed by the last National Synod of Montauban.

CHAP. III. Observations upon the Church Discipline.
The Discipline of our Church was read, and all the Deputies approved it, and
swear to see it carefully observed.
I. THE Provinces are advised to see that the Sixth, Eleventh, and Twelfth
Articles of the first Chapter, especially the Twelfth, be punctually observed,
according to the Decree of the Synod of Montauban.

II. The One and twentieth Article in the Second Chapter, beginning with these
words, Forasmuch as, shall be wholly removed from the Body of our Discipline.

III. The First Article in the Third Chapter of Elders shall be strictly
observed. And the word Especially in the Sixth Article of this same Chapter
shall remain.

IV. The Provinces are exhorted to maintain as great a number of Proposans as
possibly they can, and Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Corporations, and such as to
whom God has given fair Estates in the World, and especially such as enjoy
Impropriations, are bound in Conscience to employ a considerable part of their
Revenues in so pious a work.

V. In reading the Chapter of Schools, it was decreed, That the Provinces
should be advised to do their utmost, that a College be erected in each of
them, and that by them all jointly, at least two Academies, the places of the
Colleges and Academies shall be named by the Provinces. And the present Synod
judges this City of Saumur a most convenient place for a College, and
whenever God shall bless us with ability, for an Academy also; and entreats
the Lord du Plessis Governor of this place, to continue the Tokens of his
good will and kindness to this Noble and most Godly Design, which he has so
much affected, and the Deputies of this Assembly are entreated to excite their
respective Provinces to promote it vigorously.

VI. The 8th Article in the Chapter of Elders and Deacons shall remain as it
is, leaving the Consistories at liberty to make what changes they in their
prudence may judge to be most expedient.

VII. The 8th Article in the Chapter of Consistories, recommending the reading
of the Discipline, shall be better observed.

VIII. On the 22d Article of the same Chapter it was decreed, That in Public
Confessions made by Penitents before the whole Church, those Crimes which would
expose them unto Death, or brand them with Infamy, shall not be specified.

IX. The Provinces are advised to see that the last Article of the same Chapter
be most exactly observed.

X. The Fifth and Last Article of the Sixth Chapter. The Provincial Deputies of
Guyenne, Xaintonge, and Normandy craved, That this Article might be moderated,
because of its very great rigor. Whereupon it was advised, that after those
words, Continued and maintained, there shall be these added, And in case any
Churches or particular Persons refuse to contribute to the defraying of their
Expenses, who are to meet in those Ecclesiastical Assemblies, they shall be
severely censured, as Deserters of that holy Union, which ought to be upheld
among us, for our mutual preservation. And Ministers neglecting this Ordinance
shall be liable unto the sharpest Censures.

XI. On reading the first Article of the Eighth Chapter, those Churches which
have diverse Pastors, are advised to send as many of them as they can
alternatively unto their Provincial Synods.

XII. The Second Article of the same Chapter shall be most strictly observed.
In the last Article of the said Chapter, the Deputy of Champagne declared unto
the Synod, That the Church of Chaloons is the only one in that Province.
Wherefore it was decreed, That the Church of Chaloons for the present shall be
annexed unto the Isle of France, and there being left in the Province of
Brittany, none other than the Church of Vitre, that also shall be joined unto
Normandy.

XIII. The Deputy of Higher Languedoc demanding, That other Ministers present
in our National Synods, though not deputed, might have their Votes in
Consultations, unless in those Matters wherein they were personally concerned;
it was decreed, that the third Article of this eighth Chapter should not be
changed in the least tittle.

XIV. The fifth Article of the tenth Chapter. The Deputy of Normandy read the
Memoirs of the Colloquy of Constantine, moving, that Exhortations might be
permitted at the Interring of the Dead. The Synod past this Decree, That there
should be nothing innovated in that Article.

XV. On reading the fifth Article of the eleventh Chapter, about baptizing of
Gypsies Children, it was decreed, That the said Article should remain in its
full force, only with the addition of these words, That the Surety do bind
himself to maintain and educate the said Child in the fear of God.

XVI. It was decreed, That the sixth Article of the same Chapter shall abide
unaltered, to wit, That no Baptisms shall be performed but in those places, and
at those hours, when and where the Churches do ordinarily meet together for
God's Public Worship. However, in Churches where there is no Sermon, this
Sacrament may be administered according to their convenience, but yet not
without some kind of Exhortation. And in case a Parent should through infirmity
urge the baptizing of his Child before Sermon, the Pastors shall advise what
will make most for the edification of the People, and inform the Parent of it.
And where Churches have their Meetings only on the Lord's Day, they are
exhorted also to appoint some other Day of the Week for Public Christenings.
On the eighth Article of the same Chapter, Parents shall be advised to choose
such Sureties for their Children, as are Persons of Understanding, and capable
of making good their Promises.

XVII. On the 13th Article of the same Chapter, the Deputies of Poictou
demanded, Whether two Names might be given a Child at Baptism? To which it was
replied, The thing was indifferent; however, Parents were advised to observe
herein Christian simplicity.

XVIII. On the 5th Article of the 13th Chapter, it was decreed, That in all
Espousals the Promises of Marriage shall be made in words de futuro, according
to His Majesty's Ordinance; and that of Right they be indissolvable, unless
some lawful impediment do interpose; and thus that Article shall be amended.

XIX. On the 6th and 7th Articles of the same Chapter, about degrees of
Consanguinity, it was demanded, Whether in degrees not forbidden of God, and
for which the King's. Grant may be obtained (as is promised us by the secret
Articles of the Edict) in the third and fourth degree only, Pastors may proceed
to the Celebration of such Marriages, without demanding a view of His Majesty's
License? To which this Synod made answer, That they ought to solemnize the said
Marriages without any scruple or difficulty, provided they met with no
opposition at the time of their Celebration.

XX. On the 12th Article of the same Chapter, it was resolved, That the said
Article should remain, See the 2d Synod o^ Raccel. arc. 4^.
only those words were to be left out of it, Because there is a secret affinity
between the Parties, for that the Husband and Wife are reckoned but one Body.

XXI. From the 13th Article of the same Chapter, these words shall be removed,
Not without cognizance had of the cause, and mature deliberation of the
Consistory.

XXII. The 22d Article of the same Chapter. The Provinces are appointed to come
prepared unto the next National Synod, that this Case may be then resolved,
Whether it be not expedient that Widows should abide longer in their
Widow-hood, before they be admitted unto a Second Marriage.

XXIII. The Twenty third Article of the same Chapter shall remain as it is.

XXIV. The Second Article of the Fourteenth Chapter shall be left as it is, and
the Additions by the Synod of Montauban shall be observed.

XXV. These words, Nevertheless such shall not be condemned; and those which
follow to the end of that Article, shall be cut off from the Twenty third
Article, and instead of them these shall be inserted, And all of them shall be
governed by the King's Law, and that of Charity.

XXVI. The Twenty fourth Article concerning the Sale of Offices shall be
totally razed, and removed from the Body of our Discipline.

The abovementioned Articles of Discipline having been read, and examined by
all the Deputies of the respective Provinces were approved and confirmed by
unanimous consent.

CHAP. IV. Of General MATTERS.
I. THE Deputy of Champagne shall advise the Church of Paris to beware of a
certain Scot, going by the Name of Ottoman, or Homan, who would make an
Hodge-podge of both Religions.

II. Monsieur Merlin demanding, Whether Mr. Calvin's Catechism hitherto
received in our Churches should be still retained, Mr. Calvin's Catechism to be
retained and expounded publicly in our Churches.
and publicly expounded? It was ordered, That there should not be the least
alteration in this matter; but the Provincial Deputies are appointed to make
Report hereof unto their respective Synods, that in the next National Assembly
it may be more maturely debated and determined.

III. The Latin Disputations and Propositions desired by certain Provinces, are
judged more convenient for Colleges and Universities than for Colloquies.

IV. The Deputies of Higher Languedoc demanded, Whether it were lawful to
accompany the Papists at their Marriages and Baptism, as far as their
Church-doors? Answer was given them, That it could not be done without sin, and
therefore such as did, would be liable unto Censures.

V. The Article of the National Synod of Montauban, concerning the Loan of the
Poor's Money shall be razed out.

VI. These words shall be added, As much as may be, to the Three and twentieth
Article of the said Synod, concerning the Union proposed at Mants.

VII. The Nine and twentieth Article of the same Synod shall be incorporated
with our Discipline.

VIII. The former part of the Thirtieth Article of the same Synod, concerning
Presentations by Proctors shall be razed, but the last clause thereof shall
abide in force.

IX. The One and thirtieth Article of the same Synod shall abide in its full
power.

X. It Is dismissed over to the next National Synod, to consider, whether the
Scripture-songs, lately put in Meter by Monsieur Beza, shall be sung in our
Churches; and the Provinces are requested to study the matter in the interval,
that so it may be the more solidly debated.

XI. The Article of the same Synod about Registring the Names of Persons newly
admitted into Church Fellowship with us, shall be observed; and as touching the
subscribing their own Names, this shall be added, If it may be done.

XII. That Article about nominating Pastors for the Dispute, in case there be
one, was approved: But, 1. That the Name of Monsieur Baron be razed out. And,
2. That instead of Monsieur de Serres, that of Monsieur Chamier be inserted,
according as it was ordered by their Province. However, it is left unto the
prudence of the Provinces to recommend any other, if they shall think fitting.

XIII. The Deputy of Lower Languedoc moved, That nothing might be innovated in
that Article of the same Synod, concerning the Annual Holy Days. The Synod
orders, That in those places where they be compelled to refrain working on such
Festivals, that it is lawful for the Pastors to preach unto their people,
provided their Consistories content unto it, and on such Days whenas the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper comes to be celebrated, they shall take such
Texts of Scripture to treat on, which they believe will best contribute to the
edification of their respective Churches.

XIV. That Article concerning Duellers shall be punctually observed, and
inserted into the Body of our Discipline.

XV. The Union between the Churches of this Kingdom, The Union betwixt our
Churches, and those of the Low Countries
and those of the Netherlands shall be carefully maintained; and Monsieur Rotan
shall write unto them in the Name of this Synod, expressing our earnest desire
to conserve this Union by all lawful means: And this Assembly appoints the
Province of Normandy to receive and answer their Letters, and also, if it be
convenient to send a Deputy unto their National Synod, who shall receive his
Instructions from those Persons who have assisted at our Ecclesiastical
Assemblies.

XVI. The Churches are admonished not to receive any Persons into Communion at
the Lord's Table, who inhabit those places in which there is no Public
Exercise of the True Religion, unless they have Certificates from their Elders.

XVII. The Province of Normandy demanded Advice about that omission in the Form
of Marriage; it was resolved, That Notice be given unto the Printers to insert
again those words, Forasmuch as there is none that does oppose.

Letters from the King and High-Constable of the Kingdom, unto the Synod.
XVIII. Letters written by the King unto this Assembly, and sent by Monsieur de
Serres the 14th of May last, were read, wherein His Majesty gives us assurance
of his good Affection to us, and to maintain his Edict of the Year 1577, and
that we should give credence unto the said Monsieur de Serres; as also Letters
from the Lord High-Constable unto this Assembly, dated the 18th of May last,
assuring us of the like kindnesses, and demanding the like Credence from us, to
what should be declared by the said de Serres. It was decreed, That Answers
should be returned unto His Majesty with the profoundest Reverence and
Thankfulness, and His Majesty should be most humbly and earnestly entreated, to
grant us the Gracious Effects of his Royal Favor. And in like manner shall
there be Answer returned in Writing unto the Constable.

XIX. Monsieur D' Orival shall write from this Assembly unto the Church of
Geneva, to acquaint them with the Frauds committed by their Booksellers, who
vend in these parts a number of Psalm-Books, and New Testaments of the old
Translation, only prefixing a new Title, as if it were a new Impression and
Translation; as also, to return our Thanks unto Monsieur de Beza, for Printing
and Dedicating his Sermons upon the Passion, unto the Pastors and Elders of the
Churches in this Kingdom.

XX. Monsieur D' Orival propounded, Whether it were, convenient, that our
Ministers should be dispatched as Deputies unto those Assemblies, where Matters
relating to the preservation of our Churches are debated? It was resolved, That
because the present Juncture of Affairs did necessarily require it, they might
be sent unto them.

XXI. The Deputies of Orleans craved Advice, Whether it were needful that the
Contracts of Marriage should be seen before the Banes are published; because in
their Province, the Contracts are not published till the Eve of the Marriage?
This Assembly determines; That it shall be sufficient to see the Articles
subscribed by the Principals concerned, or attested by the Public Notary.

XXII. The Province of Gascogny demanded farther, Whether such as made public
profession of our Religion, before their admission into Church Fellowship with
us, ought particularly in the face of the whole Congregation to abjure the
Mass? The Synod declared, That it was a matter of indispensable necessity.

XXIII. The same Province demanded farther, Whether Consuls and Magistrates
professing the Reformed Religion, and living in those places where Colloquies
and Provincial Synods are held, ought to be admitted into them? It was
answered, They have no Right to be there; but in case they be Persons of
eminent Piety, and such as may be useful unto the Assembly, Synods have full
Power, if they desire it, to call them in unto them.

XXIV. It was again demanded by the Deputy of the same Province, Whether a
Judge or Magistrate of the Reformed Religion might take a Papists Oath upon the
Crucifix, Relics, Altar, Pixes, and suchlike Appurtenances of Idolatry, they
demanding it? This Assembly advises, That no Protestant Judges do give them
their Oaths in such a manner; but that he exhort those Persons to swear only by
the true God; but if they will not do it, and are obstinately resolved to swear
after their own way, the Judge may admit them, provided that they contain
themselves within the bounds of His Majesty's Laws.

XXV. The Province of Xaintonge craving leave for Monsieur Hautyn of Rochel to
print our French Bibles, he engaging his Word, to do it better for Paper, and
fairer for Character, and at a cheaper Rate than those of Geneva, which are now
become very rare and dear. This Synod does permit the said Hautyn to print the
Bible, and advises him to have a singular care that it be done most accurately
and correctly.

XXVI. The Deputies of the Isle of France demanded, What course should be taken
with those Persons, who having contracted Marriage within the Degrees forbidden
by the Word of God, without any Dispensation, and being married according to
the Romish Mass Book, did notwithstanding earnestly desire to be admitted, by
doing Public Penance, into Communion with our Churches? It was resolved, That
such should not be received to the Peace and Fellowship of the Church, till
they were first separated one from the other.

XXVII. The Province of Lower Languedoc moving, That no Minister might expound
the Apocalypse, without the Advice of his Colloquy: it was granted, that no
such Exposition should be undertook without the Counsel and Consent of the
Colloquy or Provincial Synod.

XXVIII. The same Province demanding, What Censure ought to be inflicted on
them, who marry their Children unto Papists? It was resolved, That both they
and their Children should be deprived of the Lord's Supper, and do public
Penance for this their Offense.

XXIX. The desire of the Province of Higher Languedoc is very well approved of,
That Churches blessed by God with ability should be, and they be now exhorted
to erect public Libraries for the Service of the Ministers and Proposans of
their Churches.

XXX. The Churches are exhorted most carefully to observe in every point that
Union which was made at Mantes, by the Deputies of the Churches of this
Kingdom, for their mutual help and benefit, and they shall be informed by their
Deputies of its necessity, and those Churches which will not conform unto the
rest shall be most grievously censured.

XXXI. The Church of Paris is entreated to note and collect the passages in the
Sacred Canonical Scriptures and Writings of the Fathers, which have been
falsified and maimed by them of the Romish Church. And the Provinces are
charged to send their Observations also to it, that so this desirable Work may
be printed and published without any delay.

XXXII. The Deputy of Berry demanding, Whether it be lawful for Cousin Germans
to marry, whenas the King has given his License; it was resolved affirmatively.

XXXIII. The Lord du Plessis moving how expedient it would be, that in the
King's Army there should be ordinarily some Ministers, toward whose
subsistence, the Governors, Commissaries, and other Officers professing the
Reformed Religion, should be exhorted liberally to contribute. This Assembly
decrees, That the Provinces, beginning with the Isle of France and Normandy,
and following the Order prescribed by the 15th Canon of the Eighth Chapter of
our Discipline, shall make choice of two of their Pastors to be sent into the
Army, who shall each of them serve six Months, which term expired, the two next
Provinces in order shall send two others to succeed them, and so consequently
all the rest. And all Governors and Officers professing our Reformed Religion,
are entreated to take particular care of their Maintenance and Encouragement.

XXXIV. Letters were presented unto this Synod by Monsieur Vulson, from the
Gentlemen assembled at Loudun, which being read, and after hearing what he was
charged to deliver us by word of mouth, viz. The Order established among the
Churches for the preservation of their mutual Union, and to obtain a commodious
Peace; it was very well accepted and approved by this Synod, who farther
declared the necessity of a punctual and general Observation of it, at least
until such times as it shall please God to incline the Heart of our King to
grant us the Free Exercise of our Religion by a Royal and Favorable Edict,
which may be embraced and approved by all the Reformed Churches of this
Kingdom. And that the said Union and Order may be carefully preserved, all
Pastors, Colloquies, and Provincial Synods, are earnestly entreated to put to
their helping hand.

XXXV. Professors of our holy Religion having Lawsuits, or Differences among
themselves, be it either in Matters Civil or Criminal, shall be seriously
exhorted by their Pastors to compose their Quarrels by Arbitrators of our own
Religion, without impleading one another at the Bars of Popish Judges.

CHAP. V. Of APPEALS.
I. AN Appeal being brought by the Deputy of the Church of Dangeau,
re-demanding Monsieur Vian, who by certain Colloquies was Licensed and sent
unto the Church of Marchenoir, and whereunto the Provincial Synod had also
consented. Upon hearing the Deputies of both Churches, and the said Monsieur
Vian, this Assembly ordered, That the said Vian should be appropriated unto the
Church of D'angeau, and that as he returned homeward, he should preach some
Sermons at D'angeau aforesaid, and then return unto Machenoir, where he shall
remain by the space of one Month: and if within that time the Church of
D'angeau do not pay him all the Arrerages of his Stipend which they owe him, he
shall be affixed wholly unto the foresaid Church of Marchenior; and if he be
satisfied, and return to D'angeau, he shall be paid hereafter duly every
Quarter his Salary; and in case the said Church should again fail in her Duty,
as formerly, in not satisfying the said Vian within three Months, that Order of
the Provincial Synod shall be confirmed, and the said Monsieur Vian shall be
appropriated unto the Church of Marchenior.

II. An Appeal being brought by the Church of Fescamp, concerning the Person of
Monsieur Lazarus Robert their Pastor, who by the Provincial Synod of Normandy
was lent unto the Church of Pont-dorson; it is ordained, That the said Monsieur
Lazarus shall remain with his Church of Fescamp, provided they take care for
his better maintenance.

III. The Church of St. John d' Angely brought an Appeal, by the Advice of the
Synod of Xaintonge, wherein they declare, That Monsieur D'amours was a mighty
Man in Prayer, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Henry IV. before his last Apostasy.
The very Papists in the Army, and the greatest Lords and Commanders in it, were
melted by him in that Duty, and would call upon the King, That before they went
to fight, that the Minister who prayed yesterday, might pray again.
Monsieur D'amours was sent unto the Church of Barbezieux; the Letters and
Memoirs of the Consistory, and other Writings having been read, this Assembly
determined, That the Synod of Xaintonge had very good and sufficient grounds
for their disposal of Monsieur D'amours; but Madam, the King's only Sister,
having requested of this National Synod by her Letter, That the said Monsieur
D'amours might be Pastor to the Church in her Family, this Assembly grants
unto her Royal Highness the said Monsieur D'amours, for the Service of her
Church and Family; and forasmuch as the said D'amours does ordinarily reside at
St. John, the said Church is entreated to help that of Barbezieux; and in case
they do not, the Provincial Synod are ordered to make provision for them.
Monsieur Turquet, Deputy for the Church of Lion, entered his Protest against
this Ordinance, concerning Monsieur D'amours, as prejudicial to the Church of
Lions, which claimed him of Right as their own.

IV. An Appeal was brought by the Church of Marianges, from the Provincial
Synod of Languedoc, which had adjudged Monsieur Moinier to the Church of
Nismes; the Church of Nismes requesting, That in regard of her great Needs,
Monsieur Moinier might be left unto her. This Synod de creeth, That forasmuch
as the said Church of Marianges has not appeared to defend its Appeal, the
Order of the Provincial Synod of Languedoc shall stand in force.

V. Complaint being made by the Church of Aymet, against a Decree passed in the
National Synod of Montauban, which adjudged Monsieur Balarand unto the Church
of Castres, the Deputy of Aymet requiring, that the said Decree might be
reversed, and the said Balarand restored unto the Church of Aymet, for the
Reasons assigned by them, and Monsieur Rotan being heard on the behalf of the
Church of Castres; it is ordained by this present Synod, That Monsieur Balarand
does of Right belong unto the Church of Aymet, and that he shall be restored
again unto the said Church, which may recall him within three Months, counting
from this 14th of June, 1596; and in case of his Disobedience unto this Order,
he shall be interdicted the Exercise of his Ministry.

VI. An Appeal was brought by Monsieur Simon L'hermite, Lord of Puy, deposed
from the holy Ministry by the Colloquy and Classis of Fontenay, held at St.
Germain in March last, the causes and grounds of his Appeal having been
reported to us, and the motives inducing the said Colloquy to depose him; to
wit, his pertinacious asserting, That the Humane Nature of our Lord Jesus
Christ was destroyed in his Death: This Synod appointed Master Merlin, Rotan,
de Serres, and the Lord du Plessis, to confer with the said du Puy, and to
convince him of his Error; who relating to us, That the said du Puy does own
and approve our Confession of Faith, and that he had offended, and fallen into
an Error as abovementioned, which also the said du Puy confessed openly before
this Assembly, That he had held that erroneous Opinion; but does now
acknowledge the Humanity of our Lord Jesus to have been ever conjoined to his
Divinity in Life and Death, yea, whilst his Body lay in the Grave: and he does
abjure all other Errors contrary unto this Truth now subscribed by him. The
Deputies also of the Province of Poictou, having been heard upon the whole
matter, this Assembly approves the Proceedings of the said Colloquy as just
and equitable. But because the said du Puy has abjured that his Error, and
earnestly desires to serve the Church of God, and promises for the future, to
carry himself with greater modesty and humility; this Assembly does restore the
said du Puy unto his Office of the Ministry; yet ordains, That for three
Months he shall be silent, and not exercise any of the Public Duties thereof;
which time expired, he getting a Certificate of his pious Conversation from
that Church wherein he lives, he may be, by the approbation of the Colloquies
sent unto any Congregation which shall give him a Call.

CHAP. VI. Particular MATTERS.
I. THE Theses of Anthony de L' Escale being presented unto this Synod, and
diligently perused by it, they were found to contain diverse erroneous Points of
Doctrine, contrary to the analogy of Faith; yea, and contrary to the point of
Justisication. Whereupon the said de L'Escale was interrogated, Whether he
would receive Instruction in those Points which are contrary to the Confession
of Faith of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom; but he answered in the
Negative, and that he would not submit himself to the Judgment of this Synod,
nor be instructed by it, but boldly demanded, that we would either approve or
reject his Theses. And although our Brother Mr Rotan, who was first deputed to
confer with him before the Lord du Plessis, Governor of this City, and two
Elders of the Church, had non-plust and silenced him, so that he knew not what
to answer, yet nevertheless he did obstinately persist in his Errors and
Self-conceitedness; Whereupon this Assembty having remonstrated to him his
gross spiritual Pride, and wicked pernicious Errors, does now ordain, That this
Act shall be inserted into the Articles of the present Synod, that so the
Reformed Churches of France may be cautioned against his false Doctrine, which
has been condemned by the Churches of Suitzerland; and Intelligence of this
shall be given unto Monsieur Beza in Geneva, and to the French Church of Basil.

II. The Deputies of the Isle of France and Normandy, declaring, That they had
only prosecuted the Verification of the Edict in 1577, for themselves; this
Assembly was satisfied therewith.

III. Whereas Monsieur de Serres has informed this Synod, See Synod of
Montauban, G. M. art. 52.
concerning the Printing of his Harmony, and how impossible it is for him to
transcribe three Copies, as he was ordered by the last National Synod held at
Montauban: This Assembly has therefore thought fitting, that this present Work
be Printed either at Geneva or Rochel, or any other place where they may be
conveniently communicated unto the Pastors deputed by the Synod of that
Province in which it shall be printed.

IV. The Censure denounced in the second Article of the National Synod of
Montauban, against Monsieur Bargemont, shall be revoked, See the Synod of
Montaub. Appeals, art. 2.
and struck off the File, because he has given satisfaction unto his Province.

V. The Fact of Monsieur de Croix, heretofore Minister in the Church of
Perigneux, shall be examined by the Provincial Synod of Dolphiny.

VI. Monsieur de Two other Copies call him Villenave.
Vielbancque complaining by Letters unto this Assembly, that he was deposed
from the Ministry by the Colloquy of Berry, who were empowered to it by
Authority of the last National Synod held at Montauban, and requiring that a
Committee might be appointed to hear what he had to say in his own defense; a
Vote passed, that his Cause should be dismissed over to the Provincial Synod of
Gascoigny.

VII. The French Church in London, by their Letters to this Synod, earnestly
requested, That Monsieur de la Fontaine might be continued among them; and the
said Minister moved also by his own Letters to the same purpose: Whereupon
Monsieur D'Orival, Deputy from the Province of Orleans entreated, That in case
Monsieur de la Fontaine were yielded up unto the Walloon Church of London, that
then Monsieur du Moulin might be given, during life, unto the Church of
Orleans, and his Mission to it ratified by the Authority of this Assembly. The
Deputy of the Isle of France also did consent, that on those Terms Monsieur du
Moulin should be perpetually affixed to the Church of Orleans. This Assembly
decrees, That Monsieur de la Fontaine may remain in the Service of the Church
of London, always that Right reserved which our Churches of France have unto
him, and that Monsieur du Moulin be given for ever unto the Church of Orleans.

VIII. Our Brethren, Pastors in the Church of Metz, excusing themselves for not
sending a Deputy unto this Synod, by reason of their present Circumstances, and
craving Advice about the dissoluteness of Habits: Monsieur de Serres is ordered
from this Assembly to write unto them, That they do their endeavor to come
unto the Synods of this Kingdom, and that they conform themselves unto that
Article of the Discipline concerning Habits, without any the least difficulty:
And this self-same Order shall serve also for the Provinces of Gascogny and
Orleans, which demanded a larger liberty as to that Article.

IX. Letters were read from the Pastors of Sedan excusing their inability of
deputing one from their Body unto this Synod, and craving Advice about the
Marriages of such as were lately received into Fellowship with our Churches,
whether their Nuptials might be solemnly blessed in our Assemblies before they
had communicated at the Lord's Table, and claiming Monsieur Capel Lord of
Tilloy, and some others, as their own Ministers, requesting also, that they
might be assisted by a Collection in this their extreme necessity. After mature
deliberation, it was resolved, That they should conform exactly as to their
first demand unto the Articles of our Discipline without any the least
repugnancy; and for the Second, they were dismissed over to the Synod of
Champagne; and for the Third, we will endeavor to gratify their desires, and
the Provinces shall be exhorted liberally to contribute to them, and the Moneys
of the said Collection shall be remitted unto Monsieur de Menilles, and de la
Gourmandiere, Elders in the Church of Paris.

X. The Lord du Plessis Governor of this City, desiring that the Lords going
into the Army, might be exhorted to take with them a Minister; demanding also
from this Assembly, that Monsieur de la Noue might be provided of a Pastor by
our Authority. It was resolved, That the Lords now going, and those who are
already gone into the Army, should be advised so to do; and Letters shall be
written unto the Church of Sedan, that they would be pleased to lend one of
their Pastors unto Monsieur de la Noue, who may be sit for such an Employment;
and in case of failure herein on their part, then the Colloquies of the Isle of
France shall endeavor to get him one.

XII. Monsieur Manthois, according to the desire of Monsieur de la Banseric is
granted unto the Church of Pont-dorson.

XII. The Lord Baron of Courtomer demanding by Monsieur de la Banseric, a
Pastor for his Church of Courtomer, the Church of Paris was appointed to use
all possible means to procure him one.

XIII. Master Gabriel Raoul formerly a Minister, requesting by his Letters to
be restored unto his Office; this Assembly judges, That the Deposition of the
sai^ Raoul ought to be continued, whereof Notice shall be given him by Monsieur
de St. Hilary.

De S^^res was suspected to be an Accommodater with the Papists, but prevented
by Death.
XIV. Monsieur de Serres complaining of that Order past against him in the last
National Synod of Montauban: This Assembly having with much patience for a long
time together heard both him and the Deputy of Languedoc, finds that the Moneys
for which he is questioned are not Ecclesiastical but Royal; as also, that in
auditing his Accounts, he produces not such Acquittances as will be sufficient
for his discharge; it is therefore ordained, That he produce his Receipts
within the Term prescribed him by His Majesty's Commissioner, and that having
perfected his said Accounts, Notice thereof shall be given by the Pastors and
Elders hereafter nominated to the Synod of Lower ^anguedoc. And the Pastors
named are Monsieur de la Noue, and Monsieur de Maceser, the Elders are
Messieurs de Niotte, and Lestang.

XV. At the desire of Monsieur Turquet, Deputy for the Church of Lions, Letters
shall be written unto that Church, to reduce themselves into Order, and to
re-establish their Consistory.

XVI. The Letters from Mensieurs Merlin, Rouleau, and other Pastors and Elders
of the Colloquy or Aunix, as also from the Judges in the Presidial Court of
Rochel being read, importing their unanimous desire that Monsieur Rotan may be
detained at Rochel, though contrary to the Ordinance of the Provincial Synod of
Xaintonge, and having heard the oppositions made by Monsieur Chalmot, an Elder
of the Church against that Ordinance, as also Monsieur Rotan, who submitted
himself unto the Judgment of this Assembly, it was decreed, That the said
Monsieur Rotan from hence-forward, should be Pastor to the Church of Castres,
according to the Resolution of the said Provincial Synod.

XVII. The Ministers, Elders, and Deacons of the Church of Rochel, sadly
complaining unto this Synod, Messieurs de la Touch, and L'Oseau Ministers, and
Messieurs de Fontaines, and de la Plant Elders are deputed in the Name of this
Assembly unto Rochel, and there to execute the Powers given them by this
present Decree.

XVIII. There being Letters from the Lady of Laval, and the young Earl her Son,
presented unto this Assembly by Monsieur Tilenus, certifying their great
affection to the true and holy Worship of God, an Answer was ordered to be
written to them, and the said Master Tilenus was exhorted to continue his
careful instruction of the said young Lord, and Thanks also was given him for
his Learned Writings in defense of the Truth.

XIX. The Churches of Higher Languedoc requesting it, Letters shall be written
to the Lord Duke de la Force, Governor of Bearn, and to the Lords of the
Parliament of Pau, to do their utmost endeavor, that Mass be not again set up
in Bearn, and the Churches of that Province shall be exhorted to send their
Deputies unto our National Synods, in testimony of their Union with our
Churches.

XX. The Letters of Monsieur Parent at present Minister in the Church of
Jarzay, were read, craving his Dismission unto the Church of Bayeux, in the
Province of Normandy; and complaining, That the Judgment given on his behalf,
by the Synod of that Province, was never executed; it was decreed, That the
approaching Synod of the said Province should either provide him of a Church,
or declare him to be at full liberty to embrace any other Call.

XXI. The Deputies of the Isle of France moved, Whether Monsieur Cahier, a
revolted Minister, ought not to be Excommunicated? and whether some Person
should not be appointed to answer his Writings? And also, Whether Monsieur de
la Planche should not be entreated to send the Writings of the said Cahier,
unto the Church of Paris? It was resolved, That his Apostasy shall be published
in the Church and Family of Madam, and that the Church of Paris, and in
particular Monsieur de Serres, are to answer his Writings, in case he make any
Reply; and Monsieur Clemeucear, shall entreat Monsieur de la Planche to
deposite Cahier's Manuscripts with the Church of Paris.

XXII. A Petition being presented on behalf of Monsieur de L'Essars late
Minister of Loudun, this Assembly re-viewing the Sentence given by the Colloquy
held at Nogent, binding the Churches of Vandome and Montoire, to discharge the
said Essars of a Debt of Ten Crowns, which he stood obliged for unto Monsieur
Tore, it ratifieth the said Sentence, and advises the said Churches to see it
executed; and in case of their poverty and inability, the Churches of the
Province shall contribute toward the freeing of the said Essars from the
aforesaid Debt, and Madam Tore is entreated to forbear it a little longer.

XXIII. The Elders of the Church of Saumur requesting, That Monsieur de
L'Espine might be entreated to lay down his Ministry, because of his
indisposition, they offering also to continue to him, as they have ever done,
his present Salary; the Synod concurred with them, and order that he be
persuaded to become Emeritus, especially since this Church will continue to him
his double Honor, Reverence and Maintenance.

XXIV. Monsieur du Fresne, Minister of the Church of Laissay, complaining by
his Letters unto this Assembly, very bitterly against his Church, and humbly
entreating that he may be freed from them, his Case was remanded unto the Synod
of that Province, who are exhorted to suppress those great disorders sprung up
in that Church.

XXV. Monsieur Bergam, formerly a Minister, petitioning, That he might be
restored to the Exercise of his Ministerial Office, he was advised, to betake
himself wholly to the Profession of the Tongues.

XXVI. The Deputies of Dolphiny requesting, That the Sentence given by the
Provincial Synod of Die, for re-instating into his Ministry Monsieur Mercure de
Salans, because of his exemplary Repentance, and the singular effects it has
wrought among his People, might be confirmed, this Assembly does ratify the
said Sentence, and approves of his restoration unto the Church of Valence;
only with this proviso, That it shall not be made a Precedent, nor be drawn
into Practice for time to come.

XXVII. The Deputy of Gascogny desiring, That the Church of Bergerac might be
provided of a Pastor, this Synod ordains, That the Province do take special
care of that matter.

XXVIII. The Province of Gascogny craving Advice, how to demean themselves
toward Gaspar Olaxa, formerly a Minister, who presented his Petition, that he
might be admitted unto Communion with us at the Lord's Table. This Assembly
directs the Church in which he resides, to exhort him to fix his Habitation in
some certain and known place; moreover, they shall prescribe him a pretty long
time of Probation, and that expired, order him in Person to present himself
unto the next National Synod, where he shall receive a full and final Answer.

XXIX. The business of Beaupoil, motion'd also by the same Deputies, is
re-manded back unto their Provincial Synod.

XXX. A Petition was presented by the Church of Boslebec, That Monsieur
D'Espoir, who is in truth their Minister, might be restored to them, or that
another in his stead might be given to them, or that they might be reimburst of
the Sum of Four hundred Livres, which they had contributed toward his
maintenance. The Synod orders Monsieur Rotan, Deputy of Higher Languedoc, to
tender unto the said D'Espoir, a Copy of his Churches Petition, that so he may
return them an Answer within two Months time, by the way of Paris; and the
Province of Higher Languedoc are charged in their next Synod, to know of the
said D'Espoir, whether the matters contained in that said Petition be true or
not; and if true, they shall enjoin him out of hand to perform one of those
Conditions proposed by the said Church in their Petition; and the Province
shall give an Account of the whole Affair to the next National Synod.

XXXI. The Decree of the National Synod of Montauban, shall be observed in that
matter concerning Monsieur Berault, Minister of the Gospel, and the Deputies of
Lower Languedoc are to acquiesce in it.

XXXII. The Deputies of the Province of Poictou requesting, That the Church of
Lunere in Normandy, might be exhorted to pay Monsieur Vatble, who was formerly
their Minister, his Arrerages owing to him. This Synod has given in charge to
the Deputies of Normandy, that pursuant to the Memoirs, deposited in their
hands by the said Vatble, they endeavor to procure him all satisfaction
possible.

XXXIII. The Memoirs of Limoges, presented by the Deputies of Gascony, are sent
back again unto the Assembly of Loudun. And the Case propounded in those
Papers, about Marriages contracted with a party of contrary Religion, is fully
determined by our Discipline, which forbids the Blessing of those Marriages in
our Churches, where one of the Persons refuses to quit its Idolatry.

CHAP. VII. The Catalogue of the Deposed.
THE Deposed were Monsieur Cahier was wheedled off from the Reformed Religion,
with the never-performed Promises of being made an Abbot: He was deposed for
writing two Books, in which he asserted the Necessity and Lawfulness of Public
Stews and Brothel-Houses, and that Fornication and Adultery were not forbidden
in the Seventh Commandment, but only the Sin of Onan. 2. For Magic, which he
had practiced. This Wretch had one Virtue, he never loved, nor was beloved by
the Jesuits: He was once favored, but after slighted and neglected by the
Sorbonists: A most slovenly, nasty Fellow in his Apparel, and way of Living.
Peter Cahier of the Isle of France, Vielbancque in Languedoc, Peter le Roy,
otherwise Boilem in Normandy, Godfrey de Vaux in Dolphiny, and John Cornille.

The Provinces shall be advised to beware of a certain pernicious Heretic,
called Anthony de L'Escale, who roves up and down scattering his Errors, both
by Writings and Discourses.

The Province of Lower Languedoc is charged to convene the next National Synod
in the City of Montpellier, the First of May, in the Year 1598.

The Acts were thus Signed, by Dominick de Loss, Moderator of the Synod.
Vincent, chosen to Collect the Acts of the said Synod.


The End of the Synod of Saumur.
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE XV. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ, IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At Montpellier, the 26th of
May in the Year of our Lord 1598.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. Names of Deputies. Synodical Officers chosen. A Decree that every
Province should choose four Deputies, who in case of sickness of the first
Deputies, might supply their places in the National Synod. An Exception for the
Deputy of Provence. Chap. II. Observations upon the Confession. Advertisement
unto Printers. Chap. III. Observations upon the Discipline. Distinction between
the inability and Ingratitude of a People to their Minister 4. Case of the
Emeriti, and their Widows 5. Certificates given to the Poor 9. A Case of
Conscience moved by the Church of Castres 11. National Synods to be Triennial
12. No Funeral Doles 13. Marriage-Promises to be made either by words de
futuro, or de praesenti 15. A Case about one who married the Widow of him, who
in his first Marriage had married his Sister 16. A Case about Certificates to
be married in another Church, for fear of Witchcraft 17. Widows not to marry
till Seven Months after their Husbands death 18. The Marriage of Madam, the
King's Sister 19. A Case about Incest 20. Whether a Man convicted and condemned
by the Civil Magistrate for a Capital Crime, which yet he stiffly denies, may
be admitted to the Lord's Table? 21. A Case about purchasing Lands to keep up
the Popish Worship 23. A Case about Advocates and Proctors 24. About Printers
25. And Lotteries 28. Penance for Harlots 30. Chap. IV. Appeals. Judgment in
Points of Doctrine appropriate unto the Ministry 4. Chap. V. General Matters. A
Committee of Ministers to revise the Copies of the Discipline. Reconcilers of
both Religions to be rejected 2. The Liturgy not to be altered. Mr. Beza's
Scripture Songs to be sung in the Churches 3. Censure of Books. Apparatus ad
fidem Catholicam, Avis pour la Paix de L'Eglise, and Elenchus Novae Doctrinae
4. A Case sent by a Sovereign Prince unto the Synod for resolution 5. Another
Case depending on it 6. Another about Wounds 7. Another about Marriage-Promises
8. Monsieur Chamier's Advice to the Synod, when he brought the Edict of Nants
unto it 14. A distribution of the King's Money given the Churches 16. Ministers
abroad cited home unto the Kingdom by the National Synod 17. Chap. VI.
Particular Matters. Letters to the Dutch Churches. Monsieur Berand to answer
Perron, and Monsieur de Montigni Cahier 3. Franc a deposed Minister,
petitioning to be restored, is rejected 6. Ministers for Madam 7. Cassegrain's
Answer to Perron slighted by the Synod 10. Peyrol not duly qualified for the
Ministry 11. Poor Ministers 14, 15, 16. Complaint of the Town of Aubenas 23.
Ministers in one Church quarrelling, are both removed 26. The Court of Castres
has the Thanks of the Synod 31. Chap. VII. Private Acts. Chap. VIII. Extracts
from the Acts of the mixed Assembly of Chastel-heraut. An Act for calling the
next National Synod.
THE Synod of Montpellier. 1598. Synod XV.

SYNOD XV. Acts and Articles of the National Synod held at Montpellier, the Six
and Twentieth Day of May, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand five hundred
ninety and eight.
CHAP. I. Deputies and Officers of the Synod.
Monsieur Berault was chosen President. Monsieur De Montigny, Assessor. And
Scribes.
Monsieur De Macifer, and Monsieur Cartau



There assembled at it the Pastors and Elders whose Names are underwritten. FOR
the Isle of France, Picardy, and Champagne, Monsieur Francis de Lauberan, Lord
of Montigny, Minister in the Church of Paris; and Moses Cartau, Elder of the
said Church. For Orleans, Berry, Blezou, and Dunois, Master Michael le Noir,
Minister of Chastillon on Loire, and Esaias Fleureau, Elder in the Church of
Orleans. For Dolphiny, and the Principality of Orange, Master Andrew Caille,
Minister of Grenoble, and Master William Vallier Minister of Die, and Master
Sebastian Julian Minister of Aurange, and Master Felix Elder in the Church of
Montlimart. For Normandy and Brittany Master William Claud Picheron, Minister
at Ponteau de Mer, without an Elder. For the Higher Languedoc, and the Higher
Guyenne, Master Michael Beraut Minister of Montauban, Master John Baptist Botan
Minister of Castres, Master Gabriel Turonier Doctor of the Civil Law, and
Master John Lisandre Doctor of the Civil Law, both Elders. For the Lower
Languedoc Master Christopher Barjac, Lord of Gasquetz, Minister of Vigan,
Master John Gigord Minister of Montpellier, together with Daniel Darnand, Lord
de la Cassagne, and John de Boyere Lord of Camion, Elders. For Vivaretz Master
Anthony Mercier, Minister of Chasteuneuf, and of Chalencon, and Master John
Valeton, without Elders. For the Lower Guyenne, Master Moses de Ricotier,
Minister of Clerac, Master Signeron du Fon, His Majesty's Advocate in the Court
of Casteljaloux. For Xaintonge, Aunix, and Augoumois, Master Fresnon du Vigier,
alias du Vergier Lord of Moustier, Minister of St. John (d' Angely), and Master
Michael Texier Elder. For Poictou Master Jonas Chesneau, Minister of St.
Maixant, and John Renoy, Esquire Lord of Braconnier, Elder in the Church of Poire
and Belleville. For Anjou, Tourain, and Maine, Master Francis Grelier, Lord of
Macefer, Minister of Saumur, without an Elder. For Provence, Balthazar de
Villeneuve, Esquire Lord of Tortonne, Syndick of the Churches in the said Province.
No person appeared at this Synod for Burgundy, Lyonnois, and Forest.


The Synod being opened by solemn Invocation of the Name of God, Monsieur
Berault was chosen President, and Monsieur de Montigny Assessor, and Monsieur
Macifer, and Monsieur Cartaub Scribes.

Monsieur Du Moulin, Deputy for Orleans, being sick, diverse Churches of that
Province, together with the Deputies of Normandy, and the Isle of France,
substituted in his stead Monsieur le Noir, which was well approved by the
Synod, and a Decree passed in it, that the Provinces should nominate three or
four Persons for the future, to represent them in these National Assemblies,
that in case of sickness, or any other accident which might hinder their
attendance, there might be some others to supply that default.

The Provinces of Normandy, Anjou, and Vivaretz, were censured for not sending
Elders together with their Ministers.

Because of the great Desolations and Dispersions of the Churches in Provence,
the Synod grants unto their Deputy his Vote in all Debates, controverted
Cases between the Provinces only excepted, and this for that he wanted his
Letters of Deputation.

CHAP. II. Observations upon the Confession of Faith.
OUR Confession of Faith being read, was universally approved in all its
Articles, by the whole Assembly.

Printers are admonished to prefix no other Title than what is usual, unto this
Confession; and for time to come, they shall not add these words, Revised and
Approved, in such and such a Synod.

CHAP. III. Observations upon the Church Discipline.
I. THE Second Article in the First Chapter, concerning Ministers, being read,
That instead of these words, In a Provincial Synod, these shall be inserted, By
and with Advice of the Provincial or National Synods.

II. The Churches shall be exhorted to observe exactly the 4, 5, 11, and 13
Articles of this First Chapter, together with that Ceremony of Imposing Hands
in Ordination, and the Refractory shall be censured.

III. The last clause of the Article concerning Printers shall be struck out,
because it is comprised in the fifteenth Article of Particular Orders.

IV. The Churches of the Isle of France desiring an Explanation of the 38th
Article of the first Chapter of the Discipline, the Synod advises, That
difference be made between Ingratitude and Inability, and that where the
Ingratitude on the Churches part is visible, the Article shall be observed, but
not otherwise.

V. And that the 45th Article of the first Chapter, and the eleventh Article in
that of Provincial Synods may be more carefully observed, this Assembly
injoyneth the Provincial Synods to bring with them unto the National, an
Attestation of their Duty performed unto their Pastors, who through Sickness
are disabled from Exercising their Ministry, as also of what has been done by
them for the Widows and Orphans of such as are deceased, that in case a
Church-Colloquy or Province have not wherewithal to relieve them, Provision may
be made for them by the National Synod.

VI. After these words in the It is now the 44th.
43d Article, Great and small, there shall be these subjoyned, Of whatsoever
Condition or Quality they may be.

VII. For the better keeping of the fourth Article in the second Chapter, and
that all Obstructions may be removed* the Synod enjoyneth all Deacons to bring
unto their Colloquy or Provincial Synod, the Accounts given by them of the
Poors Money, that we may know whether the Fifth Penny has been defaulked, and
laid by for tho maintenance of our Proposans.

VIII. Instead of these words in the fourth Article of the second Chapter, It
were good, shall be inserted, It is necessary.

IX. To prevent those Disorders which daily happen from Attestations given unto
the Poor, the Synod decrees, That all Churches do their endeavor to maintain
their own Poor, and in case any one through necessity be obliged to travel from
home, the Ministers shall carefully examine the grounds thereof, whether just
and valid, and so shall give them Letters Recommendatory unto the next Church,
leading directly unto that place whether their Affairs call them, specifying
the Name, Age, Stature, and Hair of the Dearer, and the Place whereunto they be
going, and the Cause of their Travel, and the Relief that has been given them,
which said Certificate the Ministers to whom they apply themselves shall keep
by them, and give them another directed also unto the next Church; and whatever
Attestations have been given formerly, or may be in time to come any otherwise
than as now prescribed, shall be null, and torn in pieces.

X. To those words in the 16th Article of the fifth Chapter, And which gives
great scandal to the whole Church, there shall be subjoyned, And those also who
contrary to the godly Counsels given them, do marry according to the Popish
manner, and Parents who consent unto such Marriages of their Children, and they
likewise who carry their Children unto Popish Priests to be baptized by them,
or become Sureties for those Children so baptized.

XI. The Church of Castres moved this Case, Whether an Extract of some few, or
more Articles of our Discipline might lawfully be communicated unto the
Magistrates of both Religions, for their better Conduct in the Exercise of
Justice? This Synod resolves affirmatively; yea, and that the whole Body of
our Discipline may be presented them; there being nothing in it, but what
ministers unto edifying.

XII. Because of the present Distress and Poverty of bur Churches, and till
such times as the Lord shall have blessed us with greater abilities, it is
ordained by this present Synod, That the National Synods shall be convened only
once in three Years, unless it be in case of very great necessity, as of
Heresy and Schism, whereof the Province charged, to convene it, shall take
special Cognizance, and on this Condition, that every Province do send their
full number of Pastors and Elders, as they be obliged by that Article of our
Discipline, otherwise they shall have no power of Voting in that Synod.

XIII. In explaining the fifth Article of the tenth Chapter of our Discipline
concerning Funerals, it was decreed, That Ministers should hinder the
distribution of the Deceased's Alms at their Interrments, that so those
inconveniences, which would otherwise fall out, may be prevented.

XIV. That Article of the Synod of Saumur, concerning the Administration of
Baptism, after Singing the last Psalm, before the Blessing shall be inserted
into the eleventh Chapter of our Discipline.

XV. Having read, and carefully examined the Memoirs sent from the Provinces,
concerning the fifth Article of the thirteenth Chapter of our Discipline, about
the Form in which Promises of Marriage are to be conceived and uttered, this
Assembly orders, That both that Article of the Discipline, and of the last
Synod of Saumur shall be amended, and that the Churches be left to their own
liberty and discretion, either to use the words de praesenti or de futuro.

XVI. In explaining the tenth Article of the same Chapter, this case was
propounded by the Colloquy of Foix: A Man espoused the Widow of the Deceased,
who was married to his own Sister in a former Marriage: The Synod judges, That
such a Marriage is not incestuous, nor comprised in the said Article, forasmuch
as Affinity cease by Death, and proceeds not beyond the Persons conjoined
by that said Affinity.

XVII. A Question was moved upon reading the 16th Article of the 13th Chapter,
Whether it were lawful to give them a Certificate to be married out of their
own Churches, Who desired it for this reason only, that they might avoid
Bewitching and Impotency procured by tying the Point? This Assembly ordains,
That it shall not in the least be granted them, and advises them not to give
way unto such fears, proceeding from their weakness and unbelief, and the
Faithful are exhorted to arm themselves against such Attempts by an entire
confidence in God's Holy Word, and by fervent Prayers to vanquish such
Illusions; and to come unto the Ordinance of Marriage, when blessed in our
Churches, with more Reverence, Attention, and Devotion than is usual.

XVIII. The Assembly decreed about the 23d Article of the same Chapter,
concerning Widows Marriages, That they shall not be admitted to contract
Marriage, till seven Months, and fourteen days be fully expired after their
Husbands Death.

XIX. The 21st It Is the 20th Article.
Article of the same Chapter being examined, the Church in the House of her
Highness the King's Sister, craved Advice for their Conduct in that great
Concern of her Royal Highness's Marriage with the Prince of Lorrain; because,
although she had employed the Authority of the Provincial Synod, and of diverse
famous Persons both within and without the Kingdom, yet she cannot any longer
hinder it. This Synod approving their Duty judges this Marriage utterly
unlawful, nor shall it be permitted in any of our Churches, and Letters to this
purpose shall be written to her, and all Ministers are enjoined carefully to
observe this Article, otherwise they shall be suspended and deposed from their
Ministry. And this Injunction shall be annexed to the Articles of our
Discipline. N.B. She would not be married after the Popish way, and could not
after the Protestants: Henry IV. her Brother, found out a temper, got the
Archbishop of Roven, his Natural Brother, to pronounce only the formal words of
Marriage in his Cabinet, the King himself joining their Hands, and the Duke of
Bar went immediately to Mass, and she to a Sermon at Court.

See the 28th Artic. of Part. Matters of the Nation Synod of G^rg^a^.
XX. A Case was propounded upon the Article of Incests: A Maid was married in
her Nonage to one who in his first Marriage had espoused her Aunt, by Papal
Dispensation, and had Children by her, now she is since come to the knowledge
of the Truth, embraces and makes open profession thereof, but not her Husband,
she also has born him Children; may this Woman be received into Communion with
our Churches. This Assembly distinguishing between Affinity and Consanguinity,
and considering the time wherein the said Marriage was contracted, and that the
Dispensation, such as it was, is reputed a Law in this Kingdom, and because the
Husband is of the contrary Religion, advises, That without approving the said
Marriage, she be received unto Communion with us in the Sacraments. And this
shall be published unto the People.

XXI. On the Article of Public Penance for Scandals, the Province of Higher
Languedoc moved, Whether a Man convicted and condemned by the Civil Magistrate
for a certain Crime, which yet he pertinaciously denies, may be received to
the Peace and Fellowship of the Church, without undergoing Public Penance?
This Assembly judges, That in the first place, the past Life of this condemned
Person be revised and examined, and then the Accusations brought in against
him, the Witnesses attesting them, and the Judges passing Sentence on him, and
then to ponder all Circumstances and Proofs over and above what were produced
before the Magistrate: and if alter the greatest diligence used herein, and
Adjurations made him in the Name of God to confess the Truth, he still persists
in his denyals, he may be received unto the Lord's Table, provided that the
Church be publicly acquainted in his presence, that the Judgment of the whole
Process lies between God and his own Conscience.

XXII. Instead of those words in the beginning of the It is now the 23th Art.
26th Article of the same Chapter, Who shall have dwelt, there shall be
inserted, Who being espoused shall have dwelt together.

XXIII. A Case being moved, Whether Lands might be purchased on these Terms,
That you keep up Divine Service, as it is called in the Church of Rome? This
Assembly is of Opinion, That we should make a difference between those who
purchase upon Terms of paying such and such Suits and Service unto a Bishop,
Abbot, or Curate, and those who in downright Terms scruple the causing Mass to
be said or sung: the former of these be not liable to Church Censures; but the
latter must be informed, that they cannot with a safe Conscience neither
possess nor acquire such Lands or Leases.

XXIV. Proctors and Advocates, i. e. Attorneys and Counselors professing the
Reformed Religion, may not take of their own accord Monitories out of the
Popish Ecclesiastical Courts: But Judges being Public Persons, and having
Authority to declare what is Law, and ought to be done, may order what they
shall do in such Cases.

XXV. The last clause of the 13th Article in the Chapter of Ministers shall be
struck out, because it is comprised in the 15th Article of the last Chapter of
our Discipline, concerning Particular Orders.

XXVI. Diverse Provinces complaining of the Licentiousness of Printers in
publishing all sorts of Books: Cities and Churches having Printers in them, are
advised to suffer no Book to get into the Press, till it has been first of all
seen and approved by the Church.

XXVII. To that Article of Players and Mummers, shall be added Juglets, Players
of Hocus-pocus, Tricks of Goblets, Puppet-playing, Morrice-dances, and all
Christian Magistrates are advised not in the least to suffer them, because it
feeds foolish Curiosity, puts upon unnecessary Expenses, and wastes Time.

XXVIII. A Lottery ordained by the Magistrates Authority for the Relief of
Minors, Debtors, and poor Merchants, shall not be condemned; but others of a
different nature, such as that called The Wheel of Fortune, and the like, are
peremptorily forbidden.

XXIX. The Faithful ought not to Feast at those Banquets made by Priests when
they first sing Mass.

XXX. Forasmuch as Whoredom, especially in Women, brings with it a brand of
Infamy; this Assembly explaining the 21st Article of the fifth Chapter of our
Discipline, does decree, That the Penance of such Persons as have been guilty
of those scandalous Crimes, shall be left unto the discretion of the Consistory.

CHAP. IV. Of APPEALS.
I. THE Appeals of the Church of Rochel from the Synod, of Anjou, about their
pretended Claim to Monsieur de la None, as also that of the Church of
Castle-Gautier, are both evacuated and disannulled.

II. An Appeal being brought by the Colloquy of Higher Rouargue, for that the
Provincial Synod of Figeac and Castres had ordained the Provincial Synods to be
held at this time in the Colloquies of Albigeois, Lauragais, and Lower Quercy
only; this Assembly declares, That for time coming, the Discipline shall be
expressly followed, and that the next Provincial Synod shall be held in the Town
of Millaud; but on this condition, that unless the said Colloquy do send their
Deputies unto the said Provincial Synod, they shall then forfeit their Right.

III. The Appeal of Monsieur Croiseit from the Synod of Guyenne was made void,
because it was against the Discipline, and for that he has not appeared at
this Synod in Person.

IV. This Assembly declares the Appeal of the Church of Metz and Verdun to be
good and valid, and ordains, that they shall be incorporated with the
Colloquy of Montauban.

V. Forasmuch as Monsieur Quentin receives a very small Salary from his
Church, and has been many Years in their Service, this Assembly confirms the
Decree of the Lower Languedoc, granting him a License to Teach Youth for his
better maintenance.

VI. The Differences between the Synods of Higher Languedoc, and the Lower
Guyenne, about the Churches of Nerac, Leirac, and others of the Lower Armagnac,
are dismissed over by this Assembly to be finally decided by the next National
Synod.

VII. Monsieur Galoy shall be returned to his Church of Barjac, provided they
pay him within three Months all his Arrears, and therefore the Sentence past by
his Provincial Synod against him, is declared null and void.

VIII. The Appeal of the Upper Poictou, pretending Right to the Ministry of
Monsieur Caynard was made void, because the Elder of the Church of Figeac
desisted of his own accord from prosecuting of his Appeal, and that this
Assembly had ordained his continuance in the Church of Fontenay.

IX. The Elders of the Church of Montpellier appealing from their Provincial
Synod, because their Judgment was not demanded upon the Proposition made by
Monsieur Peyrol their Proposant; this Assembly declares, That the Elders have
not any Right of appealing in such a Case, till they have first communicated it
with their Pastors in Consistory; and it ordains, that in all Propositions the
Suffrages of the Elders shall be gathered; but whenas the Debate is about
Points of Doctrine, the decision of them is vested by the Discipline wholly in
the Ministers.

X. Those of Florensack bringing their Appeal from the Provincial Synod of
Lower Languedoc, this Assembly judges, That Monsieur De Croy does of Right
appertain unto the Church of Florensac as their own Minister, but by reason of
the great Necessities of the Churches, it is decreed, That he shall serve both
his own, and the Church of Beziers alternatively, so that the Provincial Synod
allow him an Assistant.

1598 Synod XV.
CHAP. V. Of General MATTERS.
I. BY reason of the great Difference in the Copies of our Discipline, of the
Emendations and Additions by the Synods of Montauban, Saumur, and this now
sitting at Montpellier, that it may be reduced into an exact Order, couched in
plain and significant expressions, this Assembly ordains, That two Pastors
out of each Province, whose Names are here mentioned, shall undertake and
finish this Work. Viz.

Messieurs De Beaulieu, and de Montigny for the Isle of France. Messieurs
Picheron, and Cartaut for Normandy. Messieurs D'Orival, and Pountaine.
Fontanez for Orleans. Messieurs Mermett, and St. Hillary for Lower Guyenne.
Messieurs Gardesy, and Olivier for Higher Languedoc. Messieurs Valeton, and du
Croix for Vivaretz. Messieurs Gasquetz, and Villette for Lower Languedoc.
Messieurs Du Mont, and Merlin, for Xaintonge. Messieurs Des Agues, and Macifer
for Anjou. Messieurs Chamier, and Vinay for Dolphiny. Messieurs Eynard, and
Moureau for Poictou.
And having performed this their Task, they shall communicate it unto their
Synods, that so they may come prepared unto the next National Synod to complete
and perfect it.

II. Forasmuch as it is the Duty of all the Faithful, heartily to desire the
Reunion of all the Subjects of this Kingdom in the Unity of Faith, for the
greater Glory of God, the Salvation of Millions of Souls, and the singular
Repose of the Commonweal; yet because of our Sins, this being rather a Matter
of our Prayers, than of our Hopes, and that under this pretext diverse profane
Persons attempt openly to blend and mingle both Religions, all Ministers shall
admonish seriously their Flocks, not in the least to hearken unto any such
motions; it being utterly impossible, that the Temple of God should hold
Communion with Idols; as also, for that such Wretches design only by this Trick
to debauch easy credulous Souls from the belief and profession of the Gospel.
And whoever attempts such a Reconciliation, either by Word or Writing, shall be
most severely censured.

III. This Assembly having read the Letters sent it from the Church of Geneva,
and considered the Arguments contained in them, and others offered to us, does
decree, That nothing shall be innovated in the Liturgy of our Churches, in the
Singing of Psalms, and Form of Catechizing. And whereas Monsieur de Beza did,
at the Request of diverse of. our last Synods, translate into Meter the
Scripture-Songs, they shall be received and sung in Families, thereby to
dispose and fit the People for the Public Usage of them in the Churches, until
the next National Synod.

IV. The Churches of Geneva, Bearn, Basil, the Palatinate, and many others from
diverse parts of this Kingdom, complaining of several Writings published on
design of Re-uniting the two Religions in one Doctrine, to the apparent
prejudice of God's Truth, and in particular, of a certain Book, Entitled,
Apparatus ad fidem Catholicum: and another bearing this Inscription, Avis pour
la paix de L'Eglise and Royaume de France: This Synod having read and examined
those aforesaid Writings, and received the Judgment of the Colloquy of Nismes,
and of the Deputies from the other Colloquies in that Province, as also the
Censures of the abovementioned Churches, does condemn them, as containing
diverse Erroneous Propositions, to wit, That the true Doctrine was kept entire
and sound among all that are called Christians: That those of the Church of
Rome having the self-same Articles of Faith with us, the same Commandments of
God, Forms of Prayer, Baptism, and the same Means and Ordinances to attain
everlasting Salvation as we have, are consequently the true Church, and that
the Difference betwixt us is only verbal, not real: That they would have the
Ancient Councils and Writings of the Fathers to be Judges of the Points in
Controversy between us; and that because they quote the Canons of Gratian
under the Name of the Catholic Church, therefore we are made the Authors of
that Schism, and of those Civil Wars which have happened in this Kingdom; and
several other suchlike Matters: And all the Churches are enjoined to beware of
them. And whereas there is a Manuscript handed up and down with this specious
Title, Elenchus Novae Doctrinae; the Colloquies of Montpellier and Nismes are
charged to peruse it, and in case they find nothing in it contrary to the
Doctrine received and taught in our Churches, they may, giving it a Preface,
give it also a License to be Printed.

V. This Case of Conscience was propounded, Whether a Sovereign Prince for
certain Causes moving him thereunto, may not grant a Pardon unto a Person
guilty of those Crimes which had deserved Death, or change his Punishment into
a less, or delay Execution of the Sentence past upon him. This Assembly having
carefully examined the Circumstances of this Case does judge, That by the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ we be not bound unto the Political Laws of Moses, but
that all Punishments are now arbitrary, and that from Scripture-Instances the
Sovereign Magistrate may very well do it, when the Public Interest is
concerned.

VI. Another Case also was moved, Whether a Parent or Special Friend (whatever
his Condition or Quality be, though it were that of a Minister of the Gospel)
might lawfully petition the Sovereign for his Relation or Friend's Pardon? The
Synod answers, That this Case is decided by the former; for if it be lawful
for the Sovereign to give, it is lawful also for a private Person to take out a
Pardon, provided it be not by any indirect or sinful means.

VII. Whoever has maimed another unjustly, so that he is thereby disabled from
gaining his Livelihood, or that of his poor Family, if so be the Maimer be a
Man of Estate, he shall be urged by Church Censures to allot him a Pension for
his Subsistence, although he be not condemned to it by the Civil Magistrate,
because he cannot better express the sincerity of his Repentance, than by this
Act of Charity.

VIII. Promises of Marriage made by Persons of competent Age to be married, and
those Promises past with consent of Parents, Tutors, and Guardians, and by
words de praesenti, are indissolvable.

IX. It is not contrary to Christian decency, for espoused Persons to lodge
under the same Roof before Marriage.

X. That Obligation laid on Sureties in Baptism does not only import their
Education of the Children in Godliness, but this also, that in case of need,
they provide for their maintenance.

XI. Churches having at their own Charges bred up Scholars to the Ministry,
and do now enjoy their Labors in the Word and Sacraments, if they carry
themselves unworthily toward them, as in not giving them equal Stipends with
their Colleagues shall be censured, and in case they do not reform, the
Colloquy or Provincial Synod may grant a License unto those Ministers to
forsake them, and also to provide them of some other Church, according to the
Discipline.

XII. The Deputies of the National Synods shall within one Month alter their
Return, advertise the Colloquies of their Provinces to take Copies of the Acts
of these National Synods, and this at the sole Expense of the said Colloquies.

XIII. When a Province desires some considerable alteration to be made in the
Articles of our Discipline, it shall give Notice thereof unto that which is
charged to convene the next National Synod, that by it the other Provinces
being informed, their Deputies may come prepared for the Debate. However, we do
not hereby mean, that the National Synods should be overruled by the
Provincial.

XIV. Master Chamier and Brunier having brought Letters from the Assembly of
the Churches at Chastel-heraut, together with the Edict granted us by His
Majesty, and understanding by them, that had it not been for that good Union
and Correspondence which is among us, we had never got the Liberty of our
Consciences in the Public Profession of the Gospel and Service for our God,
nor Justice to be administered to us, nor other needful Securities for our
Lives. This Synod considering former defects in this matter, does now protest
and resolve, That for the future that Union subscribed and sworn at Mants,
shall be better and more strictly kept and observed than ever, that so the
Articles of this Edict may be performed to us, and all other things needful for
our preservation, in our Obedience to his Majesty, and his Edicts: and we will
also take care that the Provinces do the same, and that if any Person should in
the least transgress them, or prove disobedient to our Remonstrances herein,
they shall be prosecuted by all the Censures of the Church.

XV. The Provinces also shall be exhorted to receive and observe the Orders
sent them from the Assembly at Chastelheraut, and to defray the Charges of the
Deputies, they being necessitated to reside there to see to the Execution of
the Edict, unless His Majesty shall of His Royal Bounty provide for them.

XVI. This Synod proceeding to distribute the 43333 Crowns, and of the one
third of them Granted by His Majesty toward the Relief of our Churdies, has
and does ordain that 3333 Crowns, and one third shall be employed in the
erecting of two Universities, In the Copy from which this was translated, the
mark over the Sums was,
one of which shall be at Saumur, and the other at Moutauban, W
and toward the Maintenance of each of them, it does assign 1111 Crowns, 6
Sous, and 8 Deniers, and to the erecting of two Academies in Theology, Which I
have rendered Crowns, because a Livre consisting but of twenty Sous, and the
French reckoning be Crowns as ^^ll as Livres. I have rendered Crowns rat^er than
Livres.
the one at Montpellier, the other at Nismes, for Montpellier 500 Crowns, and
the rest for Nismes. And the remaining 40000 Crowns shall be distributed among
the Churches, as well those which are already, as those which may be hereafter
constituted. And a Catalogue was read of the Churches now in being, whose
Number was found 760, to wit, in the Isle of France, Picardy, Champagne, and
Brie, 88. Normandy 59. Brittany 14. Burgundy 12. Lyonnois 4. Forest, Dolphiny,
and Provence 94. Vivarets 32. Lower Languedoc 116. Higher Languedoc, and Higher
Gnyenne 96. Lower Guyenne 83. Poictou. 50. Xaintonge 51. Anjou. 21. Orleans 39.
Which is for each of them 52 Crowns, 37 Sous, and 10 Deniers.

Cr. s. d. For the Isle of France 4631 34 10 For Normandy 3105 15 09 For
Brittany 0736 50 08 For Burgundy 0538 56 10 For Lyonnois 0210 31 06 For Forest
0105 15 10 For Dolphiny and Provence 4997 22 3
7 For Vivaretz 1664 12 08 For Lower Languedoc 6105 15 09 For Higher Languedoc
5052 37 10
6 For Lower Guyenne 4368 22 25
3 For Poictou 2631 34 08 For Xaintonge 2684 12 07 For Anjou 1105 15 09 For
Orleans 2052 38 00

And all the Churches shall be obliged to send their Accounts of Moneys paid by
them unto their Pastors, who have actually served them, and the said Accounts
shall be then accepted, if the Acquittances be signed by those Ministers ow^n
hands, who received the Moneys, and the overplus of this Money remaining,
shall be returned unto the Synod, to be disposed of according to their Orders,
and by the Ministers to be relieved we understand such also, who through Age or
Sickness are incapable of discharging the Duties of their Calling; and farther,
we leave it to the Prudence of the Provinces what Allowances to make unto their
Proposans, and to the Widow sand Orphans of their deceased Ministers, and to
maintain as many of them as they shall judge expedient, whose Names and Number
also shall be inserted in these Accounts aforesaid, and their Acquittances
subscribed with their own hands, shall be brought unto the National Synod. And
the Provinces shall give a demonstration of their care in erecting Academics,
and yield up their Accounts in like manner as was before ordained. The
Receivers of this Money shall be nominated by the Provinces. And the Assembly
of Chastelheraut shall be entreated to give us their Advice, for the best and
speediest course of getting the said Moneys. And this Order shall hold good
until the next National Synod, which shall be called by the Province of
Normandy in the Month of June three Years hence, and the Synod next after that
shall be held in Dolphiny.

XVII. Letters shall be sent in the Name of this Synod, unto all French
Ministers abroad out of the Kingdom, requiring them to return unto the Service
of their Churches upon the first Summons, who shall furnish them with necessary
Supplies for their Journeys: and whereas diverse have departed without leave
first obtained from their Provinces, because of the Troubles and Persecutions,
the Synod orders, that they return forthwith, as in Duty they are bound, unto
their respective Churches, God having now blessed us with Peace. And hereupon
the Church of Paris, according to this Article, required Monsieur D'amours to
return back unto his Province.

XVIII. As soon as the Edict shall be published, those extraordinary Times of
Prayer ordained in the Churches shall cease; and the Churches are requested,
particularly to remember in their Prayers unto the Throne of Grace, those of
the Low Countries.

1598. Synod XV.
CHAP. VI. Particular MATTERS.
I. LEtters shall be written unto the Churches of the Low Countries, expressing
our Grief, for that their Deputies came not unto this Synod, according to the
Advice that was given them, as also to entreat them to inform us of the time
when their Synod shall be convocated; and the Province of Normandy is ordered
to send the Deputies unto it.

II. Monsieur Chesneau shall write to Monsieur de la Planche, entreating him to
deposit with the Church of Paris those Papers which belonged to that Apostate
Cahier, and are in his Custody, and Monsieur L'Esperient shall make enquiry
what are become of those Manuscripts of his that were in Bearn, and if possibly
they may be retrieved, to send them also unto the Church of Paris.

III. Monsieur Berault is appointed to answer the Writings of du Perron, and
Monsieur de Montigny those of Cahier; and as for other Books published against
us, that Article of the Discipline relating to this head shall be punctually
observed, and the Charges of their Impression shall be defrayed out of the
Moneys granted us by the King, and allowed by producing an Attestation from the
Colloquies.

IV. The Province of Normandy is entreated to mediate with the Church of
Lunere, that their former Pastor Monsieur Vatable be paid his Arrears otherwise
they shall be censured according to the Discipline.

V. Upon hearing the Differences between the Churches of Boislebec, and
Gurville, with Monsieur de Videt d'Espoir, and having pondered all
Circumstances, this Synod determines, That of Right he belongs unto the said
Churches, because he was maintained by them for four Years together, yea, and
when they were driven away one from the other into Foreign Lands, and for that
the Term ordained in such a Case by the Discipline is not yet expired. However,
in consideration of his Age, and numerous Family, and the distance of Places,
and the conveniences he has near Pamiers; as also, that without great damage
unto himself he cannot remove, the Synod declares for his comfort, that he may
live in the City of Pamiers, upon condition, that within six Months the
Province do furnish those said Churches with a Pastor, and the Church of
Pamiers shall bear the one half of his Charges in Travel, which also is
censured for enforcing the said Monsieur de Videt to enter himself into Bonds
to them in the Sum of sixty Crowns, for re-imbursing them the Expenses of his
Journey, in case he should not tarry with them.

VI. Monsieur Franc petitioning to be restored unto the Ministry, was told by
this Assembly, That because of the number and heinousness of his Crimes,
deserving Corporal Punishment, and marked with a brand of Infamy, and for that
he gave in but a very sorry Evidence of his Repentance to us, that therefore he
ought not to be restored. However, he wax advised not to slacken his Studies,
but to take up with some other Calling.

VII. Madam, the King's Sister, requesting, That Monsieur de la Touch might be
given for four Months in the Year to the Church in her Family, this Assembly
consented to it until the next National Synod, and this shall be inserted in
the Letters of this Assembly unto that Princess, that our Synods shall always
carefully provide the most able Ministers for the conduct of her Church, and if
Monsieur de Feugerau's Health will permit him, he shall serve her Highness in
that Quality the whole time, his Province advising and consenting to it. And
the other seven Ministers waiting upon her Royal Highness, shall bear no other
Title than that of ordinary Pastors and Ministers.

VIII. This Synod having perused several Letters written from some particular
Persons in the Presidial Court of Justice, and Sheriffs of the City of Rochel,
demanding the restitution of Monsieur de Rotan to them, it decrees, That there
shall be no Notice at all taken of them, because that none of the Magistrates,
as the Mayor, or Common Council have signed them; and that the Differences
about this Affair may be suppressed, Messieurs de Moutier, and Chesneau are
commanded to go unto that City, and by the most powerful and cogent Arguments
to persuade them unto Peace, and to return them all Letters and Papers that
have been written on both sides, that they may be cancelled and torn in pieces.

IX. Letters shall be written unto Monsieur Covett, who is now at Basil
entreating him to accept of the Pastoral Office in the Church of Rochel.

X. Letters shall be sent to Monsieur Cassegrain, informing him, That his
Writing to the Bishop Perron was unadvised, and to little purpose, done with
too much Complement, Vanity, and Flattery: that however, we require him to
answer Cahier the Apostate, which Answer he shall first communicate, before it
be printed, unto the Synod of Dolphiny, and he is farther entreated to
incorporate himself with that Synod.

XI. This Assembly having heard Monsieur Peirol, declares, That he is not yet
sufficiently qualified for the Sacred Ministry, and exhorts him to a more
careful reading and study of the Holy Scriptures, and other Writings of God's
faithful Servants, which have been published in this last Age, and Orders are
given unto the Colloquies of that Province wherein he dwells, to consider of a
proper time for his Employment in the Service of God's Church.

XII. Master John Seillade is dismissed unto the Colloquy of Agenois, or Synod
of Lower Guyenne to take care about his Call and Ordination.

XIII. Messieurs Tollosain and Villemur are dismissed unto their respective
Colloquies, who shall consider how and where to employ them in the Ministry, as
soon as they be fitted for it.

XIV. Monsieur Roussel, Pastor of the Church in Mazamett requesting, That some
other Person of the Province may be substituted in his place, because of his
great Age and Weakness; this Assembly judges, That his Petition is most just
and reasonable, and Orders therefore are given unto the Synod of Lower
Languedoc, to endeavor an Exchange for him, provided always this be done by
the consent of his Church, and of the Synod of Higher Languedoc.

XV. Monsieur Falquet declaring his mean and low Condition, attested also by
the Deputies of Dolphiny, this Assembly has thereupon judged his Petition but
just and reasonable, and exhorts the Churches of Dolphiny, Provence, and Lower
Languedoc, to assist him in his present Necessities, because he has faithfully
discharged his Ministerial Office in the Churches of Christ.

XVI. Monsieur Caille complaining of the little care taken by the Church of
Grenoble for his Maintenance, and considering the Decree of his Provincial
Synod in his favor, setting him at liberty from that ungrateful People, if
within three Months they do not fully satisfy him all Arrears of Wages due
unto him from them: this Assembly decrees, That Letters shall be dispatched
unto that Church, and to the Lord D'Esdigueres particularly, entreating both
his Lordship, and the Church to provide accordingly for him, and in default
hereof, the Provincial Synod shall assign him unto some other Church.

XVII. Letters also shall be written unto the said Duke D'Esdiguiers about the
17000 Crowns, which the Province of Lower Languedoc had sent unto Guyenne, to
be laid up in stock for the maintenance of their Proposans; there being no
reason at all for his appropriating that Sum of Moneys unto his own private
profit (whatever he may pretend of a Grant from the King for his so doing),
which was dedicated unto so good and pious Uses; and the forementioned Monsieur
Caille shall second the said Letters by word of mouth, remonstrating unto his
Grace the Duty incumbent on him in Honor and Conscience to restore and see it
fixed according to its primitive design and intendment; and in case he refuse
to hearken unto reason, we farther ordain, That he be sued at Law for it before
the Syndic in the Chamber of Castres, and in like manner all others shall be
prosecuted also, who having received the Churches Moneys, do not yield up their
Accounts for it.

XVIII. This Assembly having heard Monsieur Julian, and Monsieur the President
of Orange does earnestly exhort and beseech them to do their utmost endeavors,
that the Church of Orange may be kept in peace and unity; and Orders are given
to Messieurs de Montigny, Picheron, and le Noir, to pass over to them, and to
dispose Monsieur de Blaconis, and the Inhabitants of that City to it.

XIX. The Colloquies and Province of Lower Languedoc shall contribute toward
the Charges which the Church of Bedarrieux have expended in managing the common
Affairs of our Religion.

XX. Monsieur Berault shall write Letters from this Synod unto the Colloquy of
Sauveterre in Bearn, entreating their consent, that Monsieur du Prat may be
continued in bis Ministry in the Church of the Isle of Jourdain, and this
Assembly decrees, That the said du Prat shall remain with the said Church of
the Isle of Jourdain.

XXI. A Petition was read from the Church of Blois, praying, That Monsieur de
la Noue might be given them absolutely, and without Conditions: This Assembly
having heard the Deputy of Anjou, decrees, That he shall belong unto that
Province; as also, that he shall be only lent unto the Church of Blois for six
Months, to begin from the first of June next, during which time they shall do
their endeavor to procure Monsieur Bid, who is now at Heidelburg, for their
Pastor, and this Assembly will join with them, by writing in their own Name
unto him, to effect it.

XXII. The Church of Pamiers craving Counsel in this Case: A Man would espouse
the Cousin-German of his deceased Wife. This Assembly advised them to have
recourse unto the King for a License.

XXIII. The Inhabitants of the Town of Aubenas, complaining, That they were not
comprehended in the number of those Garrisons which were assigned for our
security. This Synod does ordain, That Letters shall be written unto His
Majesty, humbly entreating him, That He would give out His Royal Mandate to
continue it in its present Condition, that so they may be Partakers of the
common Repose and Tranquillity of the Kingdom.

XXIV. Assistance shall be given unto the Churches of Provence, now destitute
of Pastors, by the Provinces of Lower Languedoc and Dolphiny, until such time
as they can be provided.

XXV. The Proceedings against Monsieur Vaissy having been revised, and the
Articles of the Provincial Synod relating to his Deposition from the Ministry,
and a most accurate enquiry being made into his Conversation since his Deposal,
this Assembly has restored, and does restore him unto his Office in the
Ministry, and the Colloquy of Vigan is enjoined to provide a Church for him.

XXVI. This Assembly upon hearing the Difference risen betwixt Monsieur Jarey
and Voisin, Ministers of Millaud, has ordained for the Peace of that Church,
That neither of those Ministers shall continue in it longer than till the
meeting of the next National Synod, and Monsieur Brunier, and Monsieur Gasques
are entreated to take their Turns in serving the said Church, and Monsieur
Brunier is to hasten thither as soon as possible he can; farther, that an
exchange shall be made of the Person of Monsieur Voisin, with that of Monsieur
Remirat, Minister of the Church of St. Afrique, and Monsieur Jarey has leave
given him to join himself unto the Churches of Pamiers, or Merueir, at his own
election, until the next Provincial Synod.

XXVII. This Synod revising the Decree of the National Synod of Montauban, in
which Monsieur Balarand was by their Gift appropriated to the Church of
Castrees, as also that Article of the National Synod of Saumur, ordaining the
said Ballarand to return unto his Church of Aymett, and the Deputies of both
those Churches having been heard on behalf of their Principals, and considering
the great importance of that of Castres, do ordain, That the said Monsieur
Ballarand shall remain appropriated Pastor unto the Church of Castres, which
yet is obliged according to Agreements between them, to re-imburse the said
Church of Aymett the Sum of One hundred Crowns expended by them in their
procuring of another Minister.

XXVIII. A Petition was presented by the Church of Castres, praying, That
Monsieur Rotan might be granted them for their Pastor. This Assembly has
ordained, That he shall remain with the Church of Castres, until the next
Provincial Synod, who may as they think fit dispose of him, respect being first
had to the health of the said Master Rotan, so as will most contribute to the
edification of God's Church.

XXIX. The Church of Castres desiring that Monsieur In another Copy it is de
Sossias, in ath^r Somaltu^.
Souls might be given them, they were sent back to their next Provincial Synod.

XXX. Monsieur Julian is ordered, to recover out of the hands of the Heirs of
Monsieur de Serres deceased all his Manuscript Memoirs, that they may be
produced and perused by the next Provincial Synod.

XXXI. The Advocate-General of the Chamber of Castres having saluted and
assured this Assembly in the Name of the said Chamber professing our Religion,
of their faithful and sincere desires to maintain the Rights of our Churches,
Thanks was given him, and by him to that honorable Court represented by him,
and they were desired not to Complement with us, but in good earnest to pursue
that end for which they were established, and for which each of them
respectively were recommended by the Churches.

XXXII. License is granted to the Churches of Cormis, and St. John of Bruel, to
incorporate themselves with the Colloquy of Vigan, because it lies so very
convenient for them.

XXXIII. The Synod having heard the Deputles of the Church of Loudun, and
Pamiers, concerning the Call of Monsieur Frogets, determines, that of Right he
does belong unto the Church of Loudun, which however must pay unto that of
Pamiers fifty Crowns, disbursed by them in Books for the said Froget, and they
are also ordered to defray his Charges in coming unto this Assembly.

XXXIV. This Synod not having at present a Pastor sufficiently qualified for
the Church of Bourdeaux, and considering the great consequenee of its
Establishment, ordains, That the Colloquies of Albrett, Higher Agenois, and
Perigord, shall each of then in course for four Months supply that Church, and
Monsieur Renault.
Renault is to begin the Exercise there.

XXXV. Letters shall be written to my Lord the Ambassador of England, and to
Monsieur de la Fontaine, Minister of the French Church in London, to inform
them of those injurious Writings published against our Churches by Sutcliffe,
and Saravia, and they be desired to apply themselves to the Queen, that such
Writings may not be printed.

XXXVI. This Synod entreats both the Provinces of Languedoc to bear the
Charges of a Criminal Process, depending in the Chamber, of Castres, about the
Oppressions exercised upon the Arnolds, by the Seneschal of Ville Franche in
Rouergue.

XXXVII. The Church of Nions, in Dolphiny, petitioning for a Pastor, Monsieur
du Jay, alias du Gasleur, was granted to them, till the sitting of the next
Provincial Synod of Vivaretz.

CHAP. VII. Of Private ACTS.
I. Governors are exhorted to improve their Interest, that the Edict be not
executed in their Jurisdictions, till such time as it has been first executed
in those places possessed by them of the contrary Religion.

II. The Churches of Languedoc are required to oppose those Novelties
introduced at the Interment of their Dead, and in particular this, that Maids
be carried to their Graves by Maids wearing Garlands of Flowers.

III. And it being their Duty who govern the Church, by all lawful means to
procure the benefit and advantage of their Poor, this Assembly ordains, That
whenas there shall be any considerable Sum of Moneys belonging to the Poor in
the Deacons hands, they may warrantably put it out to Interest, that so in case
of great necessity the Poor may receive the more and greater Relief and Comfort.

CHAP. VIII. An Extract of the Acts of the General Mixed Assembly of the
Churches of France, held at Chastel-heraut, and approved by their National
Synod held at Montpellier the 26th Day of May, 1598, and the Days following.
Rules for such as bring the King's Orders, granted for any Command or
Government in the Cautionary Towns given us for our Security.
THE Provincial Assemblies which shall be called upon the Return of the
Deputies now at Chastel-heraut, shall out of every Colloquy name some able and
faithful Persons of the Nobility and Cities, (who yet shall be changed or
confirmed by every Provincial Synod, or General Assembly, if need be) to be
present at Colloquies, whenas an Attestation shall be desired by a Gentleman
who has gotten His Majesty's Grant of any Government or Place of Trust.

And in case the Person having the Grant, be a Member of that Colloquy in which
the vacant place lies, the said Colloquy meeting together for signing the said
Attestation, shall invite all those who were named by the Provincial Synod or
Assembly, that they may jointly consult whether they ought to give it, or
inform His Majesty to the contrary. If the time of sitting for the General
Assembly be near, the said Colloquy shall defer, till they have first had their
Judgment about the said Attestation.

And in case the Person who has the Grant, be of another Colloquy than that of
the vacant place, the Person who is charged to convocate the Colloquy,
whereunto the Grantee belongs, shall take some sufficient time to inform the
Assembly or Province, in which the vacant place lies (but at their Charges) of
the Quality, Family, Religion, and Morals of him who has the Grant, and in
case the said Assembly shall meet, it shall give Notice thereof unto the
Colloquy wherein the Vacancy is, and also inform the said Colloquy of the
vacant place, and place of abode of him that has the said Grant.

And when they give their Attestation they shall cause the Union of Mantes to
be signed by him who brings the King's Grant for the vacant Government,
according as it has been ordained in all such Cases.

The Form of Attestation agreed upon in the General Assembly, to be given by
Colloquies or Synods, unto them whom His Majesty shall recommend unto vacant
Governments in our Cautionary Towns.

WE Ministers and Elders met together in Colloquy in the Province of N. do
certify unto His Majesty, That Monsieur N. de N. applied himself unto us,
desiring our Attestation of his sincere Profession of the Reformed Religion, he
being chosen by His Majesty unto the Command of such a Place N. lately vacant
by the Death of N. We therefore do attest and certify, That the said Monsieur
N. does actually profess the Reformed Religion, communicates with us in the
Sacraments, living Religiously, as a Man fearing God, and discharging the
Duties of his said Profession with a good Conscience. For which reasons we give
him this our Certificate by these Presents, which we hope will be of use and
advantage to him according to his desire.

Dated, etc. The Province of Normandy is graced with the Privilege of calling
the next National Synod, which shall be held within Three Years, in the
beginning of June: And the succeeding National Synod shall be held in the
Province of Dolphiny. These Acts and Articles were thus subscribed, De
Montigny, Assessor. Moses Cartaut, Scribe.


The End of the Synod of Montpellier
THE ACTS, DECISIONS, and DECREES OF THE XVI. National Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches of Christ. IN The KINGDOM of FRANCE, HELD At Gergeau, the 9th Day of
May, in the Year of our Lord 1601.

THE CONTENTS of this SYNOD.
CHap. I. The Deputies of the Provinces, We Officers of the Synod. Chap. II. 3.
Observations on the Confession of Faith. Chap. III. Observations on the
Discipline. The fifth Penny of the Poors Money to be laid by for our Proposans
18. Rules for Disputes with our Adversaries 23. The Churches of Sedan
incorporated with the Synod of the Isle of France 31. The Discipline approved
and sworn. Chap. IV. Appeals. Affairs of Monsieur D'amours, a very eminent
Minister 1, 2, 3. Severity of Discipline upon Monsieur Gerard, a Minister 22. A
censured Minister restored 24. The Case of Farmers of Tithes 29. Chap. V.
General Matters. No recompense to them who write without the Authority of the
National Synod 1. Attestation from their Churches when they remove their
Lawsuit s into the Courts of the Edict 2. Vnordained Preachers not allowed 4.
The Sacramental Elements to be given by the Pastor only 7. The Court of Madarn
to be supplied with able Ministers 10. Letters to the Professors of Leyden 14.
Four Books to be perused, Elenchus Novae Doctrinae, Apparatus ad Fidem
Catholicum, Avis pour la paix de L'Eglise, and Veu par le Roy. Chap. VI.
Particular Matters. A Case of Conscience, Whether Lords of Benefices may repair
the Fabrics of the Popish Temples in which Mass is said? 11. The Names of
Romish Ecclesiastics who were inverted, to be conserved. 12. Advice given unto
the Consuls of Montpellier 20. An answer to Monsieur Casaubon 21. A Letter to
the Lord du Plessis 23. Care taken of a worthy Minister 25. An Answer to the
Dukes of Bouillon and Tremouille 27. A Case about an Incestuous Marriage 28.
Passages between the King and the Synod 31, 32. The Synod orders Letters to
the King about Geneva 36. Schools and Colleges to be erected 37. A Dividend of
Moneys 40. Palot, Receiver-General of the Churches Money, dodgeth with them 42.
Chap. VII. The Roll of Vagrants and Deposed Ministers. An Act for calling the
next National Synod, Palot sends 3000 Crowns to the Synod.
1601. Synod XVI.
THE Synod of Gergeau.
SYNOD XVI.
Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, held at
Gergeau, the Ninth Day of May, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand six hundred
and one.

CHAP. I. Of the DEPVTIES.
Monsieur Pacard was chosen Moderator. Monsieur Lieuin, Lord of Beaulieu,
Assessor. Monsieur Chamier, and Scribes. Monsieur Mercier, Scribes.


There assembled in it the Pastors and Elders hereafter named. FOR the Isle of
France, Picardy, and Champagne, Monsieur Antony de la Fay, Minister and Pastor
of the Church of Paris; Monsieur John Lieuin, Lord of Beaulieu, Minister of the
Church of Auverne in Vexin le Francois; and Monsieur Josia Mercier, Lord of
Bordes, Elder of the Church of Paris; and Peter de Alias, De Naudet.
Neuelet, Lord of Doscher, Elder in the Church of Vitry. For the Province of
Orleans, Berry, Blefoiis, and Nivernois, Monsieur Adam D'Orival, Minister of
the Church of Sancerre; and Joachim Du Moulin, Minister of Orleans, together
with Monsieur Samuel de Chambaran, Elder of the Church of Romorantin; and
Claudius Mesland, Elder of the Church at Orleans. For the Province of Normandy,
Monsieur Rene Bouchard, Pastor of the Church of Rouau; and John Eude, Pastor of
Bayeux, together with Monsieur James du Hamel. Lord of Park, Elder of Alencon;
and William de Maintu, Elder of Boislebecque. For the Province of Brittany, at
present united with that of Normandy, there came the Tenth of May Monsieur John
Parent, Pastor of the Church of Vitre. For the Province of Dolphiny, and
Principality of Orange, Monsieur Daniel Chamier, Pastor of Mountlimart; and
John Perryn, Pastor of St. Bonnet, with Monsieur Mark D'Vre, Elder of
Courtaison; and Francis de la Comb, Elder of St. Marcelin. For the Province of
Lower Languedoc, Monsieur John Gigard, Pastor of Montpellier; and Simeon Codur,
Pastor of Vsez; together with Monsieur Isaac Chairon, Elder of Nismes. For
Lower Guyenne, Monsieur John Nodon, Lord of Montbaron, Pastor of Issejac; and
Jeremiah Bauconis, Pastor of Tonius; with Monsieur Christopher Forton, Elder in
the Church of Bourdeaux. For Poictou, Monsieur James Clemeneau, Pastor of
Poictiers; and Andrew Rivet, Pastor of Touars; with Monsieur Isaac Vettors,
Elder of the Church of Poictiers. For the Higher and Lower Vivaretz, Monsieur
John Valeton, Pastor of Privas; and Daniel Mison, Elder of Salenac. For
Xaintonge, Augoumois, and Aunix, Master George Pacard. Pastor of Rochefoucald;
and Monsieur Laurence Polette, Pastor of Ironsac; with Monsieur Peter Bernard,
Lord of Janserac, Elder of the Church of Cognac. For Anjou, Touraine, and
Main, etc. Master Francis Greliere, Lord of Macifer, Pastor of Saumur; and M.
Abel Bid, Pastor of Loudun; together with Monsieur John Doucher, Elder of the
Church of Angers. For Provence, Master Peter Chalier, Pastor of Seines; and
Monsieur Honor Brignoles, Elder of Brignoles. For Burgundy, Forest,
Beaujolois, etc. Master Peter Colinet, Pastor of Paray le Moyneau; and Anthony
Brocard, Elder of the Church of Dijon, and President of the Exchecquer in that
Parliament and Province. And for Lyonnois, Monsieur Levis Turquet, Elder of the
Church at Lion. For the Province of Higher Languedoc, and Higher Guyenne, there
came the Tenth Day of May, Master Michael Beraud, Pastor of the Church of
Montauban; and Master John Gardesy, Pastor of Villemur; with Monsieur John de
Lupe, Lord of Maraval, Elder of the Church of Puy Caskay; and Henry le Renier,
Lieutenant particular in the Seneschalsee of Armagnac, and Elder of the Church
of Lectoure. Moreover, there appeared for Sedan, Master Eusebius Gantois,
Minister of the Church of Sedan; and Anthony Drelincourt, Elder of the said
Church.


Prayers being ended, Master George Pacard, Pastor of Rochefoucauld, was chosen
President of the Synod; and Master John Lieuin, Lord of Beaulieu, Assessor, he
was Pastor of the Church of Auverne; and Master Daniel Chamier, Pastor of
Monlimard, and Josiah Mercier, Lord of Bordes, Elder of the Church of Paris,
were by common Suffrages chosen Scribes.

CHAP. II. Observations on Reading the Confession of our Faith.
I. ON reading the Confession of Faith, the Title of the Epistle to the Hebrews
was noted to have been changed in the last Impressions of the Geneva Bibles;
wherefore Letters were ordered to be written unto our Brethren of Geneva about
it, and about several Annotations affixed on the Sacred Text in those Bibles.

II. The Confession of Faith being read, the Pastors and Elders did all
unanimously protest to live and die in the said Confession, and that it is the
Doctrine taught in the Churches of their Provinces.

III. Monsieur Chamier propounded, That the Jesuits, and other Doctors of the
Romish Religion, having charged our Doctrine, especially among the People, with
diverse Calumnies, it were convenient to justify it from those Slanders, by
printing an Apology together with this Confession, as has been done in England
and Germany: It was decreed, That whosoever of our Brethren would undertake it,
should bring it with them unto the next National Synod.

CHAP. III. Observations made on Reading of our Discipline.
I. BEginning with the first Article after those words, Of their Doctrine,
shall be added, And if they be fit to teach.

II. Instead of those words in the third Article, During the times of their
Ignorance, shall be put, The times past.

III. The fourth Article shall be couched in these words, A Minister of the
Gospel shall be chosen by the Colloquy, or if it may be by the Provincial
Synod, and in Times of Persecution, or other great Calamity, by two or three
Ministers together with the Consistory.

IV. In the same Article, instead of these words, The said Election shall be
suspended, shall be placed, The said Reception shall be delayed.

V. And that Article shall be thus concluded, As also the Pastor shall not be
imposed upon a Church against his will.

VI. After these words in the fifth Article, To another Church, there shall be
put, For to be employed in the Holy Ministry; and a little lower, these shall
be subjoyned, And also they shall examine them, if ever, etc.

VII. There shall be this addition made unto the beginning of the Eighth
Article, The Ceremony of Imposing Hands in Ordination, and receiving Ministers,
shall be always observed.

VIII. Provincial Synods, Colloquies, and Consistories, are all charged to see,
that the 12th Article in every part and tittle of it be most punctually
observed; and there shall be this clause added to it, Nor shall their Doctrine
be handled in the manner of Scholastic Disputation, and they shall carefully
avoid an intermixture of Languages; and also Consistories, Colloquies, and
Provincial Synods shall see to it, that in the ordinary course of their
Ministry, they beginning with a Text or Portion of Scripture, shall not break
off, till they have finished the whole Paragraph.

IX. After these words in the 18th Article, Physic, shall be added in both
places, Nor the Civil Law, and in the end of that Article, Whereunto Provincial
Synods, Colloquies, and Consistories, shall bear a most vigilant and careful
eye, yea, and may suspend them from the Ministry.

X. After these words in the 43d Article, Great and small, these also shall be
added, Of whatsoever rank or degree they are.

XI. The word As shall be left out in those words of the 44th Article, As those
who being convicted of Heresy.

XII. These words shall be razed out of the 4th Article, Even such as enjoy
Ecclesiastical Revenues.

XIII. Touching the execution of that clause of that aforesaid Article, it was
decreed, That Ministers should inform their Churches, that the Fifth Penny of
all Moneys collected for the Poor, is to be laid by for the maintenance of our
Proposans.

XIV. This addition shall be made to the end of the Fifth Article, In which the
Pastors shall be present, both as Judges and Orderers of the said Propositions.

XV. Richer Churches, and great Lords shall be entreated to erect Libraries for
the benefit of their Ministers and Proposans.

XVI. This addition shall be made to the fifth Article of the third Chapter,
According to the appointed Form.

XVII. After the word Ordinary in the sixth Article, these shall be added, By
the Scholars that are Proposans.

XVIII. There shall be this addition to the first Article of the fourth
Chapter, And according to what had been decreed and ordained by the Consistory.

XIX. The word Punishment shall be changed into that of Censure, in the end of
the fifteenth Article of the fifth Chapter.

XX. these words shall be struck out of the sixteenth Article, And in case of
Appeal, that said Appeal shall be notified unto the Church, without mention
made of the Person, or declaration of the Censure ordained by the Consistory.

XXI. This addition shall be affixed to the end of the twentieth Article, Although
he had been punished by the Magistrate.

XXII. This also shall be inserted into the thirty first Article, For
administering of Marriage, and the Sacraments.

XXIII. This following Order shall be the fourth Article of the sixth Chapter,
Disputes about Religion with our Adversaries, shall be so managed on our part,
that we be not the first Aggressors; and in case it be a Verbal Disputation,
they shall only stand to the decision of the Sacred Scriptures, which is our
Rule, and not to the Writings of the Fathers, who are no competent Judges in
Points of Doctrine; nor shall they undertake any regular Dispute without
Articles of Agreement first mutually given and subscribed; nor shall they enter
upon any public Disputations, without advising previously with their
Consistories, and a certain number of Ministers, who shall be thereunto chosen
by the Colloquies and Provincial Synods; nor shall they enter on a general
Conference or Dispute, without the consent of all the Churches assembled in a
National Synod. And in case any Ministers do otherwise, they shall be denounced
Deserters of, and Apostates from the Union of our Churches.

XXIV. This following addition shall be counted the sixth Article of the
seventh Chapter. And a Censure shall be given among themselves by the Pastors
and Elders in the Breaking.
shutting up of every Colloquy.

XXV. These following words shall be added to the second Article of the Eighth
Chapter, Churches having several Ministers, shall send them by turns.

XXVI. These words shall be inserted into the fourth Article, Shall be deprived
of the Ministry.

XXVII. To the sixth there shall be this inserted, The Days, Hours, and Places;
as also, he shall gather the Votes of every Member: And to the close of that
Article these words shall be added, And after this self-same manner the
Moderators of Colloquies shall be governed.

XXVIII. This shall be inserted into the seventh, They shall have like Votes as
the Pastors.

XXIX. The eighth Article shall be struck out, and transferred unto the
following Chapter, where also the word Provincial shall be razed, and That of
Confession of Faith inserted.

XXX. This shall be put into the tenth Article, The change of Pastors from one
Province unto another, and of one Church unto another, and of the Churches of
one Colloquy unto another.

XXXI. In reading the Division of the Provinces, and after hearing Monsieur
Gantois, Minister in the Church of Sedan, who was seconded in his Discourse by
his Elder, it was decreed, That the Churches of the Principality of Sedan and
Rancourt for time coming, shall be united to the Synod of the Isle of France,
Picardy, and Champagne, and be reputed Members of the Colloquy of Champagne.

XXXII. The Province of Orleans and Berry demanding, That Bourbonnois might be
incorporated with their Province; and the Deputies of Burgundy and Lyonnois
opposing this their motion, it was decreed, That the said contending Provinces
should bring with them the Memoirs and Opinion of those of Bourbonnois unto the
next National Synod, that there it may be regulated.

XXXIII. This addition shall close up the third Article of the Ninth Chapter,
And that there may be no default, three or four Pastors, and as many Elders
shall be nominated, that in case the first named Pastors should be hindered from
their Journey, there may be others to supply their places.

XXXIV. This Article shall follow next in order unto the fourth, The first Act
in the first Sessions of our National Synods, shall be the reading our
Confession of Faith, and the Book of Discipline.

XXXV. Toward the close of the fourth Article of the tenth Chapter, in stead
of Abolished, there shall be read Removed.

XXXVI. These words shall be added to the ninth Article of the eleventh
Chapter, Provided that the Sureties undertake for its maintenance, and also
that there be no presumption.

XXXVII. The third Article of the 12th Chapter shall be couched in these words,
Priests, Monks, and other Ecclesiastics of the Romish Religion, shall not be
admitted to the Lord's Supper, till they have, first in the face of the whole
Church acknowledged, and repented of their former Life and Profession.

XXXVIII. The fourth Article shall be thus worded, Incumbents bearing the Style
and Title of their Benefices, and others intermedling with Idolatry directly or
indirectly, whether they receive the Profits thereof with their own, or by the
hands of others, shall in to wise be admittted to communicate with us at the
Lord's Table. And the rest shall be razed out.

XXXIX. The fifth Article of the thirteenth Chapter shall be put into these
words, It Is left to the discretion of the Churches, either to use the words de
praesenti, or de futuro in Marriage-Promises. However, such Promises, be they
de praesenti, or de suturo, are in themselves indissolvable, unless in case of
some lawful Impediment. And the Article next in order unto this, shall be that
which begins thus, As concerning Consanguinities.

XL. The eighth Article shall be conceived in these words, Spiritual Kindreds,
as they be termed, are not comprised under the Titles of Consanguinity and
Assinity in the King's Edict, nor upon these Accounts may the Parties be
hindered from contracting Marriage.

XLI. This clause shall be inserted into the twelfth Article, Promises of
Marriage shall neither be received nor published in the Church, etc. Item, He
shall renounce all Idolatry, Superstition, and particularly the Mass.

XLII. This shall be the first Article of the fourteenth Chapter, in these
words, No one shall be received into the Communion of our Churches, till he
have first renounced all the Superstitions and Idolatries of the Church of
Rome, and particularly the Mass.

XLIII. These words shall be razed out of the close of the fifth Article,
Unless in case of abolishing the Preaching of God's Word, and setting up of Mass

XLIV. To the fourteenth Article this shall be subjoyned, And such as send
their Children to the Schools of Priests, Monks, Jesuits, or Nuns, shall be
prosecute^ ^ith all Censures of the Church.

XLV. These words shall be struck out of the 26th Article, Poinecons de Houpe,
and Fardingals, as has been decreed in former Synods.

XLVI. These words shall be razed out of the 28th Article, Or the setting up of
Maypoles.

XLVII. Because of the great Inconveniences of Lotteries set up in diverse
places of this Kingdom, the 30th Article shall be finished with this clause,
Lotteries also ought in no wise to be approved, whether they be appointed by
the Magistrate or not, and Godly Magistrates are entreated by their Authority
to suppress them. After these words, Notorious Avarice, these following shall
be inserted into the same Article, Obsceneness, or loss of time.

XLVIII. Such as challenge, or put others upon challenging to fight a Duel, and
they also who accept the challenge, etc. These words shall be put into the 33d
Article.

XLIX. It Is left to the liberty and prudence of Consistories, after what manner
to proceed against the ungrateful Members of their Churches, whether by those
compulsory ways allowed us by his Majesty, or by particular Obligations, or by
Church Censures, even by suspension from the Lord's Table, after grave and
solemn Admonitions and Summons have been given these Delinquents by their
Consistories, or any other course they shall judge advisable.

L. The Pastors and Elders deputed from their Provinces unto this Assembly,
have sworn and protested in the Name of their Provinces, to cause the
Discipline ordained by this Synod, to be used and observed to the utmost of
their power.

CHAP. IV. Of APPEALS.
I. AN Appeal being brought by the Town and Consistory of St. John d' Angely,
from the Synod of Xaintonge, who had appointed Monsieur D'amours, (he in no
wise belonging unto the said Church of St. John) to serve the Church of
Chastleheraut, until the meeting of the National: this Assembly declares, That
the Appeal was ill laid, and the Ordinance of that Synod good and valid. And
whereas the said D'amours complains of the Terms couched in that Ordinance,
and of the Letters written in the Name of the said Synod, this Assembly
judges, That the said Monsieur D' Amors was the true and lawful Pastor of the
said Church of St. John, for the time in which he served them, as this was ever
the sense and judgment of the said Synod of Xaintonge.

II. Whereas both the Church of Paris and Lions do lay claim unto the said
Monsieur D'amours, as theirs, and engaged to them: This Assembly having heard
the said D'amours open the whole Affair, and weighed the Arguments on both
sides, does find that he is not obliged either to the one or other, but is at
full liberty to accept of any Church presented to him by the Synod.

III. And forasmuch as the Church of Chastelheraut have presented their
Petition, That the said Monsieur D'amours should be settled among them; after
hearing what was urged to the contrary by the Church of St. John, and the
declaration of the said Sieur D'amours, leaving himself wholly to the disposal
of this Assembly, it is decreed, That the said Sieur D'amours shall be given
unto the Church of Chastelheraut.

IV. The Consistory of Havre de Grace, appealing from an Order of the Synod of
Normandy, which had ordained our Brother Monsieur Another Copy calls him Ma^^.
Dinnis.
de la Mathennie, Pastor of Cricquetot, to be their sole Pastor, he having
served them faithfully in the Ministry, ever since he first gathered their
Church, and and that the two Churches should be united into one, and their
Pastors Joynt-Pastors, and that the Churches should make but one common Purse
for their maintenance: And the demand of those of Cricquetot being heard,
urging, that the said Monsieur de la Mathennie was first of all sent unto them,
and that they always had, and would continue to him his Stipend. It was voted,
That the said Monsieur de Mathennie should continue with the Church of
Cricquetot, and those of the Havre have six Months time given them to provide
themselves of another Pastor; during which time the said de la Mathennie shall
remain as he has done in the Town of Honsleur, and shall serve both the
Churches; and as to the Annexation of the Church of Beauvillier, it shall be
determined by the Colloquy of Caux, and the Church of Hauvre is exhorted
according to their Duty to pay double Honor unto the said Monsieur de la
Mathennie, as they have done heretofore.

V. The Appeal of Master Michael Mercier, from the Synod of the Isle of France,
Picardy, and Champagne, was rejected, because he appeared not in Person to
prosecute it in this Assembly, and that Order of the Church of Paris ratified
by their Provincial Synod, concerning the Exercise of Religion in the place
ordained by His Majesty, is approved also and confirmed by the Consent and
Authority of this present National Synod.

VI. The Sentence past by the Synod of Lower Guyenne, against Messieurs
Chauveton, and Baduel is ratified, and because of the great importance of that
Affair, we do further decree, That he of the two who shall first endeavor his
Restoration unto the Church of Bergerac, shall be totally deposed from the
Ministry.

VII. The Appeal of the Church of Nerac, about the concern of Monsieur John
Renaut is declared null, and the Sentence of the Synod of Lower Guyenne
confirmed, and how the said Monsieur Renaut shall be for time coming disposed
of, is left wholly to the Wisdom of that Synod. But since that, the said Renaut
was yielded up entirely unto the Church of Nerac.

VIII. The Appeal of the Church of Chaume from the Synod, of Poictou was not
admitted, because the matter in debate between them is of the nature of those
things which ought to be determined in their own Province.

IX. The Appeal of the Colloquy of Poictiers from that Order of the Synod of
Poictou is good and valid, and it is decreed, That Monsieur Menestoier Pastor
of the Church of Sancay, Monstreuill, Bonninll, and L' Artillier, shall
incorporate himself with the Colloquy of Poictiers.

X. Monsieur de la Millie reappealing from an Order of the Synod of Poictou,
who had settled Monsieur Favre in the Pastoral Charge of the Church of Vigean,
this Assembly approves that Order, and the Province is exhorted to take care,
that the Church of the said de Melliere be provided for as soon as possible.

XI. That Judgment of the Synod of Lower Languedoc, from which the Church of
Macilargues, and de Nager had appealed is confirmed. And Letters shall be
dispatched unto the said Synod, requesting them out of hand to provide an able
Minister for the Church of Macilargues.

XII. An Appeal was brought by the Church of Nismes, from a Judgment of the
Synod of Lower Languedoc, which had given Monsieur Terond to the Church of St.
Martyn; whereupon this Assembly decreed, That in case the Church of Nismes did
not send the said Monsieur Terond unto his own Colloquy, within the space of
one Year, that then he should be wholly settled in the Church of St. Martyn, nor
shall that Church be provided of any other Minister for a full Year, unless the
said Monsieur Terond be recalled back again, in which case all his Charges
shall be defrayed by those of Nismes.

XIII. The Church of Nismes appealed from the Synod of Dolphiny, because they
refused to grant them Monsieur Chamier, though carnestly desired by them, to be
Professor of Divinity in their University. This Assembly is of Opinion, That
the said Sieur Chamier cannot be removed from the Church of Montlimard, without
the express consent of his Church and Province.

XIV. The Appeal of the Elders in the Church of Chastillon upon the Loire, from
the Censures of the Synod of Orleans and Berry is rejected, and they shall be
again censured by Letters from this Assembly more sharply.

XV. That Order of the Synod of Dolphiny concerning Monsieur Felix, from which
the Church of Niort has appealed, is confirmed.

XVI. The Church of Cognac appealed from an Order of the Synod of Xaintonge
about Monsieur de la Nusse. The Assembly examining the matter, finds that of
Right the said de la Nusse belongs to the Church of Cognac but because of the
Covenants between them, it decrees, That the said Sieur de la Nusse shall at
the sole Charges of the Church of Nerac come and serve one Year in the Church
of Coignac, during which time those of Nerac shall endeavor to procure for the
Church of Coignac, such a Minister as shall be approved by the Colloquy of
Augoumois; and in case of their non-observing this Order, Monsieur la Nusse
shall be wholly appropriated to the Church of Coignac.

XVII. Monsieur Bourguignon appealing from the Synod of the Isle of France,
enjoining his return unto his own Province; this Assembly considering the great
Services done by him unto the Church of God, and his manifold Losses, have, and
do adjudge him absolutely unto the Church of Mets.

XVIII. The Father of Monsieur Olivier appealing from the Synod of Higher
Languedoc, it was ordered, That the said Olivier shall be settled in the Church
of Lectoure; and Letters shall be written unto the Father to this purpose.

XIX. Upon the Appeal of the Church du Pont de Vele from the Synod of Burgundy,
this Assembly found that Monsieur Cassegrain belonged to the Church of Dijon,
but considering the great importance of the said Church du Pont de Vele, the
said Cassegrain shall serve them four Months, within which term that said
Church is to provide itself of a Pastor; and Monsieur Manessier is dismissed
over to the Province, who shall take care of him.

XX. Master Claudius Joubert appealing from the Order of the Synod of Burgundy,
this Assembly ratifieth the Order of that Synod, and leaves the Churches at
liberty to have Public Prayers and Sermons on the Romish Holy Days, if it like
'em.

XXI. The Church of Romorantin having appealed from the Synod of Orleans and
Berry, it was ordained, That Monsieur Chartier should be continued in the said
Church, provided they did fully satisfy him all Arrears of Salary for his past
Labors among them, within four Months; but if that time be lapsed, he shall be
given away from them unto the Church of Aubusson.

XXII. Monsieur Girard formerly Minister of Mauvoisin, and the Consistory of
Montauban appealed from the Synod of Higher Languedoc; now, although upon a
strict enquiry made into the Crimes whereof the said Girard was accused by that
Synod, it does not appear unto this Assembly that he was guilty of them, yet
because that there is too great reason that their Sentence past upon him should
be confirmed, we do order, That he be suspended from the Ministry; and we do
also ratify the Censure given by the Colloquy of Puy Casquay against him; and
whereas those of Montauban did suffer and encourage him to preach among them
since his Suspension, they have thereby incurred Censures themselves. And this
Assembly does further ordain, That the said Girard shall be removed from
Montauban, nor shall he preach at Mauvoisin, upon pain of being deposed: And
till such time as the Church of Mauvoisin can be provided of a Pastor, those of
Montauban are hereby charged to take care for their constant supply, and to
assist and help them till the next Meeting of their Provincial Synod. Since
this Decree, the National Synod gave way, that the Province of Higher Languedoc
should present the said Girard unto the Church of Cageac and Quercy.

XXIII. Upon the Appeal of Monsieur du Faur, Governor of Gergeau, from the
Synod of Orleans and Berry, this Assembly ordains, That Monsieur du Moulin
shall personally reside with his Church in the City of Orleans: But forasmuch
as those of Orleans have been so very much assisted in their Needs by the
Church of Gergeau, therefore the Moneys granted by His Majesty, and which in
the Dividend should have been conferred upon the Church of Orleans, shall for
time coming be employed toward the maintenance of the Minister of Gergeau,
until some further course be taken in it by the next National Synod.

XXIV. This Assembly having considered the Appeal of Monsieur de Bargemont,
judges, That he did well deserve a very sharp Censure, but no Suspension; and
therefore the Colloquy of Aunix is reproved by us, and the said De Bargemont
shall be restored unto his Ministry, and the approaching Synod of Xaintonge is
required to assign him unto some vacant Congregation.

XXV. The Differences between the Colloquies of Xaintonge, and that of Aunix,
are left to the decision of the next Synod of Poictou.

XXVI. The Church of Rochel having appealed from the Synod of Xaintonge,
Letters shall be written to them in the Name of this Assembly, to entreat them,
that since for the present they do not want the Ministry of Monsieur Petit, and
that he is employed elsewhere in the Province, that they would be pleased to
yield up their Right and Interest in him unto the Church of Barbezieux, and
forgive the Moneys they had disburs'd about his maintenance; for which great
favors both the Church of Barbezieux, and Monsieur Petit shall make them their
most thankful Acknowledgments.

XXVII. This Assembly ratifies the Acts of the Synod of Xaintonge in the
business of Monsieur Rossignot.

XXVIII. The Differences between the Synods of Xaintonge and Poictou, about the
Churches of Montignac, Marillac, and Villefagnan, is dismissed over to the
Churches of Loudun and Saumur to be finally decided by them.

XXIX. This Assembly judging of the Appeal of the Lower Guyenne, decrees, That
the Farmers of Church-Tythes, provided they meddle not with any thing of
Idolatry, ought not to be debarred from Communion at the Lord's Table, and the
said Synod is reproved for going beyond the bounds of our Discipline in that
case.

CHAP. V. Of General MATTERS.
I. IT was resolved, That those who had been appointed by the National Synod to
answer the Writings of our Adversaries, should be re-imburst all Charges they
were at in Printing their Works: But such as were appointed by a particular
Province unto such a Task, that Province shall take care to defray their
Expenses. And therefore in pursuance of this Order, the Province of Higher
Languedoc and Guyenne are required to give satisfaction unto Monsieur Sonis,
for his Costs and Trouble in Printing his Books against Spend.

II. Whereas diverse Abuses be committed in giving Attestations for the removing
of Lawsuits from Inferior Courts, to the Courts of the Edict; all the
Faithful are enjoined to take out Attestations, if possible they can, from
their own Churches; and the Pastors of Churches in which the Courts of the
Edict be established, are hereby forbidden to give any Attestations unto
Strangers, unless they be such as are personally known to them or their Elders.

III. Ministers and Elders shall not count that they be appealed from, unless
such Appeals had been allowed of by the whole Consistory.

IV. We judge it an unfitting Practice to be introduced into our Churches,
however, it be common among some other Foreign Churches of Christ, to send out
Proposans into Country Villages, there to preach whole Months upon Trial,
before Ordination.

V. Whenas Imposition of Hands is given Ministers at their Ordination, they
shall be no more sent for one Year only unto a Church; but that Order
prescribed by our Discipline, shall for the future be most strictly observed.

VI. Ministers and Churches are left in full liberty, whether they will or not
appoint, that the Pastors assist in Person at Betrothings and Marriage-Promises.

VII. It is decreed by this Assembly, That the Bread and Cup in the Holy
Eucharist shall be distributed by none but the Ministers and Elders, who shall
with their own hands put them into the respective hands of every individual
Communicant.

VIII. Provincial Synods are ordered to take an especial care, that the Widows
and Orphans of poor Ministers deceased in the Service of their Provinces be
provided for.

IX. Although the Faithful may be ill reported of, yet in case they be not by the
Consistory suspended from the Lord's Table, they shall be admitted Sureties for
Infants at Baptism.

X. The Letters of her Royal Highness the Duchess of Bar, and only Sister of
our King, directed unto this Assembly being read, wherein she demanded a Supply
of Ministers for her Court: it was voted, That the Church in her Royal
Highness's House, should be supplied from the first Day of July next, unto the
first Day of October following, by the Province of Normandy; and from the first
of October, to the first of April next following, by the Church of Sedan, and
from the said first of April 1602, by the other Provinces, who in their turns
should each of them send a Minister, who shall be in actual Service six Months,
according to this Order now declared, viz. The Lower Languedoc, Orleans,
Dolphiny, Anjou, the Higher Languedoc, Poictou, the Lower Guyenne, Xaintange,
Vivaretz, and Burgundy, unless the said Church be not beforehand provided of
two able Pastors, particularly appropriated to it. And her said Royal Highness
shall be by our Letters sent to her expressy to this purpose, advised to get
them; and that the Moneys she bestows upon the Schools of Bearn, may be
employed by her Royal Highness, toward the maintenance of a competent number
of Proposans. And that the Church in her Royal Highness's Court may not at any
time be left unprovided, the Provinces are all obliged to supply her with two
Ministers, that in case one should be detained by some lawful let or
hindrance, the other may be always ready to serve in his stead.

XI. In answer to the Letters of the Churches of the Low Countries, this
Assembly decrees, That the Province of Normandy shall continue to give them
Notice of the Time and Place of our National Synods.

XII. Letters shall be written to Monsieur de la Fontaine, entreating him to
use his endeavors for begetting a right understanding between Dr. Sutcliffe,
Saravia, and our Churches.

XIII. It is decreed, That for time coming, the Province authorized to convene
the National Synod, shall be so empowered to publish the General Fast, which is
to be observed in all our Churches upon emergent Providence.

XIV. Letters shall be written to the Doctors and Professors of Divinity in the
University of Leyden, entreating them not to ordain our French Proposans,
Students in their University; but whenas they have finished their Course of
Theology to send them into France, that here being called unto the Ministry,
they may receive Imposition of Hands in the face of our Churches.

XV. The Book entitled, Elenchus Novoe; Doctrinoe, is dismissed over to the
perusal of the Provincial Synod of Dolphiny, and in case they approve of it,
and prefix a Preface to it, it may be Printed.

XVI. The Church of Paris is required to examine Three Books, the one called
Apparatus ad Fidem Catholicam; the other, Advice for the Peace of the Church;
and the third having this Title, Seen by the King: And in case the Propositions
which some have extracted out of them, be not contained in them, then the Acts
of the Synod of Montpellier, relating thereunto, shall be razed out, and the
Provinces by the Authority of this Assembly, are enjoined to raze them out.

CHAP VI. Particular MATTERS.
I. THE Differences between the Synods of Higher Languedoc, and Lower Guyenne,
concerning the Churches of Nerac, Leyrac, and others of the Lower Armagnac,
which had been sent up to this Assembly by the last Synod of Montpellier, it
being impossible now to determine them, because the Deputies of the Lower
Guyenne had neither Orders nor Instructions about them, are remanded back unto
the next Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, finally to determine them, and that by
the Authority of this Assembly. And the said Synod of Lower Guyenne, for not
sending Instructions unto their Deputies concerning those Affairs is hereby
censured.

II. The Province of Normandy reporting the extreme Poverty of the Church of
Lunere, being utterly disabled from ever satisfying their old Debt unto
Monsieur Vatble, the said Province is exhorted to do their utmost endeavor,
that it may be satisfied by them.

III. That Decree of the Synod of Montpellier, concerning Monsieur de L'
Espoir, having never been put in execution, this Assembly enjoyneth the
Province of Higher Languedoc to see it executed; and in case of their neglect,
that then the said M. de L'Espoir shall return to the Church of Boslebec. Since
this Ordinance, the Deputies of Higher Languedoc agreed with those of Normandy,
to re-imburse the Church of Boslebec, whatever Charges they may be at in
getting a Pastor, one half whereof was to be born by those of Pamiers, and
another half by the said Province of Higher Languedoc; or else to maintain for
them for two Years space a Proposan in the University of Montauban, or if they
pleased to give them an hundred Crowns, to be employed by them to this very
purpose, in ready Money.

IV. The Demand of Monsieur Caille is turned over to the Synod of Dolphiny, to
take care about it.

But this Article was struck out by the following National Synod of Gap.
V. Letters shall be once more written to the Duke de L'Esdigueres, about the
17000 Crowns belonging to the Churches of Lower Languedoc: and the Article of
the Synod of Montpellier declaring those Moneys to have been raised toward the
maintenance of Proposans, shall be corrected and amended.

VI. In pursuance of what was decreed by the same Synod of Montpellier, the
Churches of Cormes, and of St. John du Bruil, shall be incorporated with the
Colloquy of Vigan; and the Synod of Lower Languedoc shall see that this Order
be observed.

VII. The Church of Lions desiring a Pastor, and that one may be given them out
of Dolphiny, which has several of their Ministers residing in the Churches of
that Province; it is ordered, That the said Province of Dolphiny do furnish that
Church of Lions, and if possible, to lend them, at least, for some Months,
Monsieur Chamier.

VIII. The French Translation of The Harmony of Confessions, done by deceased
Monsieur Saluart, is dismissed to the Synod of Higher Languedoc, to be perused
by them, and if they judge it expedient, then to Print it; but with the Latin
Annotations of Monsieur Goulart.

IX. The Province of the Isle of France demanding Messieurs de L'Estang, and de
la Vallee to be restored to them, who are now in Poictou, have a Grant given
them to prosecute their Right in the next Provincial Synod of Poictou.

X. This Assembly judging Monsieur Pellart to belong of Right unto the Isle of
France, ordains the Church of Marans, in which he now serves, to yield up
unto those of the Isle of France, such a Proposan as they shall best like of,
within four Months; otherwise, that time being lapsed, the said Monsieur
Pellart shall be surrendered unto the said Province.

XI. To the Case propounded by the Deputy of Brittany, this Assembly gives it
in as their Judgment, That the Lords and Gentlemen, Patrons of Churches and
Chapels wherein Mass is sung, cannot with a good Conscience repair them; no,
although by not doing it they forfeit their Right of Patronage and Presentation
to them.

XII. The Churches are admonished to Register the Names of those Romish
Churchmen which have been converted since the last National Synod, and are
daily brought over to the Reformed Religion, and to give in an Account of them
unto the Church of Montauban.

XIII. The Church of Jansac is admonished to conform itself unto the rest of
our Churches, about the wearing of Garlands at Espousals.

XIV. To the Petition of the Faithful of Auvergne, this Answer was given, That
the Lower Auvergne should be assisted by the Lower Languedoc, and the Higher
Auvergne by the Higher Languedoc, both as to Pastors, and in the share of His
Majesty's Moneys.

XV. The Church of Villevigne re-demanded by the Province of Brittany, shall
remain united to the Synod of Poictou, until the next National Synod.

XVI. Monsieur Jarry is left in full liberty, either to fix at the Church of
Mesuez, where he now is, or to go unto that of Mauvezin.

XVII. The Petition of Monsieur Lazarus de Robert, Minister of Gauree, and
Briqueville is remanded back unto the Synod of Normandy.

XVIII. Monsieur He has four Copies but five Names viz. Eude, Andre, Hind,
Inde, and Dades.
Eude shall abide where he is at present, in the Church of Bayeux.

XIX. The Provinces of Lower Languedoc and Dolphiny are exhorted to in continue
their assisting of the poor Churches of Provence, with the Loan of Pastors.

XX. Letters shall be written to the Consuls of Montpellier, entreating them,
that those Outrages offered the Spanish Families, which for this last hundred
Years have took up their fixed Habitation in their City, may cease; as also,
unless there be express Laws to the contrary, to receive them into the
honorable Offices of the City, that so the Peace and Union of the Church, and
its Members with them may be conserved. And this self-same Exhortation was
given them by the last Synod of Montpellier.

XXI. The Letters of Monsieur Causabon being read in this Assembly, an Answer
was ordered to be sent him, expressing our Joy for his constancy in the true
Religion, and exhorting him unto perseverance in it.

XXII. Monsieur Colinet, Deputy of Burgundy, informing this Assembly of the
great diligence used by Monsieur Cassegrain, in discharging the Duties of his
Ministry, to the singular advantage of his Church, and that he has wonderfully
profited by the Admonitions of the Synod of Montpellier; this Assembly declares
themselves very well satisfied with the said Monsieur Cassegrain, and advises
him to continue labouriously in his Calling unto the end.

XXIII. In our Answer to the Letter of the Lord du Plessis, this clause shall
be inserted, That we advise him to send his Book unto Geneva, because of the
advantage of Libraries, and Letters shall be sent unto our Brethren the Pastors
there, recommending to them the Examination, and Verifying of all the
Quitations in it.

XXIV. Letters shall be sent to the Church of Metz entreating them to join
themselves unto the Province of the Isle of France, Picardy, and Champagne.

XXV. In consideration of the great Services done for the Church of God by
Monsieur Berger, Minister of the Church of Chasteaudun, and because of his
great Afflictions, worthy of the deepest Compassions, the Synod of that
Province is ordered to provide a Pastor for that Church of Chasteaudun, and
then the said Monsieur Berger shall be discharged from it, yet nevertheless he
shall be maintained by the Contribution of the Provinces, and that of Orleans
is to bear one third of the Charges.

XXVI. This Synod does not count the demand of the Church of Bourdeaux
reasonable, which requires Monsieur Primrose to be given them for their Pastor,
because he cannot be taken from the Church of Mirambeau, whereunto he is
appropriated.

XXVII. Whereas the Lords Marshall de Bouillon, and Duke de la Tremouille, and
those of the Assembly of Saumur have written in favor of Monsieur Pallot,
answer shall be returned them, that we cannot supply him out of the Moneys
belonging to the Churches, and which were assigned for the maintenance of the
Ministers, and that therefore we humbly entreat them to take some other course
for his subsistence.

See the Synod of Montpellier, Observation upon the Discipline, art. 20
XXVIII. The Brethren in the Colloquy of Becausse, having by their Letters
propounded the Case of an Incestuous Marriage, which had been decided in the
Synod of Montpellier: This Assembly for diverse Reasons does ratify the
Judgment of that Synod, provided, that it be made appear, that when the
Marriage was first solemnized, the Woman had not then attained her Five and
twentieth Year, and that she was under the power of her Father and Mother, all
which shall be verified in the next Synod of the Isle of France, whereunto the
said Parties are ordered to for this purpose to make their personal appearance;
and those our Brethren are reproved for speaking so slightly and irreverently,
which did not in the least become them, of that Synodical decision.

XXIX. The demand of Monsieur Vaisse to be removed into the Province of Higher
Languedoc, because of his Wife's Indisposition, is dismissed over to the Synod
of Lower Languedoc, who shall order therein as is most agreeable to the Rules
of Christian Charity.

XXX. Letters shall be written unto Monsieur Covet, desiring his presence in
this Assembly, before its dissolution.

XXXI. The Deputies of the Assembly of Saumur informing us, that they had his
Majesty's Command to break up, this Assembly after mature deliberation had
about it, ordains that Monsieur Chamier, and de Maravat, shall be sent in our
Names unto his Majesty, humbly to entreat his Majesty, That the said Assembly
may, with his good pleasure, be yet continued for some time longer.

XXXII. And these Deputies being returned, and relating his Majesty's
Intention, who declared, That he would be peremptorily obeyed in that his
Command, for the breaking up of their Assembly; but he would, however, permit
them one or two Deputies near his Majesty's Person, who should upon all
occasions tender him their Complaints and Requests, and that they might
nominate and appoint them, he granted them another Assembly: Whereupon it was
resolved, That his Majesty should be most humbly petitioned, That the said
Assembly might be held at St. Foy, the fifth Day of October next, whereunto the
Provinces were charged to send their Deputies, furnished with the Memoirs of
their respective Churches and Divisions. And every Province shall send thither
one Deputy at least, that they may be nominated, the said Provinces are
authorized to anticipate the time of keeping their Synods and Colloquies, and
the Gentry and Corporations shall be all summoned to them. The Church of Paris
is appointed to use all diligence in getting the Writ of Summons promised by
his Majesty from the Court, and to expedite with all speed the Calling of the
said Assembly, together with the Letters Mandatory unto the Lord Marshall d'
Ornano, to allow of their sitting.

XXXIII. This Assembly receiving no Answer from Monsieur Covet, he not being at
Paris, and having heard Monsieur Colinet, Deputy from the Province of Burgundy
declare, That he had no express Order to demand him, but inasmuch as he
belonged unto that said Province, although his Synod could not provide him with a
Church at present, yet he ought not to be taken from it, without the consent of
the Province: It leaves both Parties to agree lovingly among themselves, and
impowers the Church of Paris to endeavor, if they can, the getting the said
Monsieur Covet for their Pastor, they giving also due satisfaction unto the
Province of Burgundy.

XXXIV. This Assembly judges, That three Pastors shall make up the Quorum of a
Colloquy, and that all Acts done by these Three, shall be reputed lawful and
valid, yea, even to the Suspension of Ministers.

XXXV. The Differences risen betwixt the Colloquies of Puy Gasquay, and Lower
Quercy, about the Church of Mets and Verdun, is dismissed over to the next
Synod of Higher Languedoc, finally to be decided by it.

XXXVI. Letters from the Seignory of the City, and Pastors of Geneva being
presented by Monsieur de Sully-Anjou-man. This Assembly orders, That our
Deputies at Court do take the most fitting time to recommend the Churches of
Geneva, and those adjoining unto his Majesty.

XXXVII. Whenas the Provinces shall in their respective Synods make a Dividend
of those Moneys assigned them for his Majesty's Grant unto us, they shall
consult of some course for the erecting of Schools and Colleges, as also how
to maintain those which be already erected, within their Division. And as for
Universities, the Decree of the Synod of Montpellier shall stand good for those
of Saumur, Montauban Nismes, and Montpellier, over and besides which, there
shall be given from the General Funds of the said Moneys, the Sum of Five
hundred Crowns per Annum, for the furtherance and encouragement of that at
Sedan, and the Neighbor-provinces. And the Colloquy of Quercy is charged to
take special Care, that Montauban be furnished with most able Professors, who
may reputably and conscientiously perform their Duties; as also the other
Colloquies are to put too their helping hand, that the like be done for their
Universities. And that the said Universities may not be compelled to dismiss
their Professors for want of maintenance, this Assembly does ordain for the
time past and to come, that they shall be paid their Quota and Proportions by
advance of one Year, not at all to be allowed in the next. And that all Fraud
herein may be prevented, that Decree of the Synod of Montpellier shall be most
exactly observed; to wit, that both the Churches and Universities shall bring
unto the next National Synod an Account of all the Moneys received by them,
together with the Acquittances of the Pastors and Professors in actual Service.

This Article being injurious to the poorer Churches, was corrected in the next
National Synod.
XXXVIII. This Assembly declares, That the Moneys granted by His Majesty, are
granted for the Relief of the Churches, and maintenance of the Ministry:
notwithstanding which Order, the Division for time to come shall be made by
Poll; so that if diverse Churches be served but by one Minister, they shall be
counted but for one Church; and the Church which has diverse Pastors shall have
a Dividend according to the number of its Pastors.

XXXIX. See the Synod of Rochel, G. Man. art. 39.
The richer and more potent Churches are exhorted to have respect in their
Provincial Synods, so to divide and distribute His Majesty's Money, that the
poorer Churches may be comforted and relieved by it.

XL. A new Dividend being made of the Moneys granted us by His Majesty,
deducting the Sums ordained for the Universities of Saumur, Montauban, Nismes,
and Montpellier, by the last Synod of Montpellier, and the Sum of Five hundred
Crowns to that of Sedan, the rest amounting to the Sum of Nine and thirty
thousand five hundred Crowns, was distributed in this manner: To the Province
of Anjon, Tourain, Le Main, Vendomois, Loudunois, and Lower Perch, for 28
Churches there shall be distributed 1468 Crowns, 46 Sols, and 4 Deniers. To the
Province of Normandy, for 51 Churches the Sum of 2675 Crowns, and 14 Sols. To
the Province of the Isle of France, Picardy, and Champagne, for 68 Churches the
Sum of 3566 Crowns, 58 Sols, and 8 Deniers. To the Lower Languedoc, and Lower
Auvergne, for 116 Churches 6084 Crowns, 50 Sols, and 8 Deniers. To the Province
of Orleans, Berry, Blesois, Nivernois, and Bourbonnois, for 40 Churches 2098
Crowns, 15 Sols, and 4 Deniers. To the Province of Dolphiny and Orange, for 92
Churches, 4826 Crowns, 52 Sols, and 8 Deniers. To the Province of Vivaretz, and
Vellay, for 30 Churches 1533 Crown, 40 Sols. To the Province of Higher
Languedoc, Higher Guyenne, and Higher Auvergne, for 95 Churches 4983 Crowns, 16
Sols, and 8 Deniers. To the Province of Burgundy, Lyonnois, and Forest,
Beaujolois, Maconnois, and Bresse, for 28 Churches 1468 Crowns, 45 Sols, 4
Deniers. To the Province of High and Lower Poictou, for 50 Churches 2622
Crowns, 46 Sols, and 8 Deniers. To Provence, for 20 Churches 1049 Crowns, 16
Sols, and 8 Deniers. To the Province of Brittany, for 15 Churches 786 Crowns,
and 40 Sols. To the Province of Lower Guyenne, for 70 Churches 3671 Crowns, 53
Sols, and 4 Deniers. To the Province of Xaintonge, Aunix, and Augoumois, for 50
Churches 2622 Crowns, 46 Sols, and 8 Deniers. The Number of all the Churches is
753. and dividing their whole Sum among their respective Ministers, is 52
Crowns, 32 Sols, and 4 Deniers to each of them.

XLI. Letters were read from the Governor, Mayor, and Consistory of St. John
d' Angely, directed unto this Synod, complaining, That Monsieur D' Amors was
taken from them against their Wills, and sent to the Church of Chastleheraut.
This Assembly decrees, That what had been already ordained in the Affair of
Monsieur D' Amors, should hold good; and Messieurs Gardesy, Banconis, and
Forton were charged to pass over to St. John, and in case that said City did
not treat Monsieur De la Vitamerie, according to his worth; the Synod of
Xaintonge were enjoined to make better Provision for him.

XLII. Monsieur Palot, Commissioner-General for receiving the Moneys granted us
by His Majesty, having not appeared in Person, nor by Letter in this Assembly,
as he was desired, and had promised to inform us of what had been done about
the Receipt and Disbursements of the said Moneys. This Synod gives orders unto
Monsieur Chamier, Pollot, Rivet, Perrin, de Marevat, Le Venier, La Comb, D'
Euvre, to visit and discourse the said Palott, in the Name of this Synod, and
to re-mind him of his Duty, and the Church of Paris is required to take care,
that the said Palott be farther prosecuted, according to Instructions that
shall be given them.

CHAP. VII. The ROLL of Vagrants.
1. THE Vagrants are, one that goes by the Names of Rochempre, alias Darcey,
alias Abraham Cheron, alias Peter de la Roche; this Fellow intruded himself
into the Ministry in Normandy, he is of but mean Stature, has a weeping Tone,
brown Hair.

2. As also one called Mussidan, alias John Bourdirier, who had been deposed in
Vivaretz.

3. Also one named Des Hameux, who had been declared Vagrant by the Provincial
Synod of Anjou.

The Province of Dolphiny is appointed to call the next National Synod three
Years hence, saving that in case of necessity, and that Province do judge it
so, by reason of extraordinary Occurrences, they may convene it sooner.

Revising that Article concerning the maintenance of Monsieur Berger,
beforementioned, it was decreed, That in lieu of a General Contribution
toward it by all the Provinces, that of Orleans shall give him in a double
Portion, from the Moneys granted us by His Majesty, to what is assigned unto
each single Pastor, which Quota of his shall be allowed them in their Accounts,
to be presented by them at the next National Synod.

Those of Vivaretz complaining of Taxes imposed on by the Provinces of Higher
and Lower Languedoc, toward the defraying of Charges spent about Businesses,
whereunto they had never been invited. The Assembly ordains, that for what is
past it shall be valid; but for the future, that the Moneys of His Majesty's
Grant, which were purely Church-Moneys, shall not be diverted from their
primary design, which was the maintenance of our Ministers, and in particular,
that the Provinces shall not usurp upon one another's Right.

Monsieur Palott, before-named, having sent unto this Assembly a little before
its dissolution, the Sum of Three thousand Crowns in ready Money, it was
divided among the Provinces and Universities, defalking one Sol in the Livre,
upon the whole remaining Debt, for the Years 1598, 1599, and 1600, according to
the Accounts sent by the said Monsieur Palott for every Province, and this
without prejudice to the Account of the said Palott, or approbation of it.

Dated at Gergeau the 25th of May, 1601. Signed thus, George Pacard, Moderator,
chosen by the Synod. De Beaulieu, Assessor.
Scribes.
Daniel Chamier, Josias Mercier,



The End of the Synod of GERGEAU.
THE Acts, Decisions and Decrees OF THE XVII. National Synod OF The Reformed
Churches OF FRANCE, Held in The Town of Gap, and Province of Dolphiny, In the
Year of our Lord 1603.

The CONTENTS of the Synod of GAP.
Chap. I. DEputies from the Provinces. The Lords General Deputies. des
Fontaines Agent for Monsieur Palot Receiver of the Churches moneys. Synodical
Officers chosen. The Provinces censured for not sending their full number of
Deputies. Brittany censured for a particular fact. Chap. II. Observations upon
the Confession of Faith, the Original always to be brought unto the National
Synod, the 18, and 20, and 22d. Articles explained, our Righteousness by the
imputation of Christ's Active and Passive Obedience. 2. The Call of our first
Reformers was extraordinary and not from the Church of Rome. 4. The Pope is the
Antichrist. 5. Of the word Super-intendant. 6. The Confession Sworn and
Subscribed. 8. Monsieur Chamier to write an Apology for it, as Bishop Jewel did
for the Church of England. Chap. III. Observations upon the Discipline, no
private Ordination. 1. Uniformity in Ordination. 2. Irregular Preaching. 4.
Canons for Professors of Divinity. 7. Orders for maintaining young Students in
Divinity. 8. Elders shall have no Impositions of Hands. 9. A Canon about
Penitential Confession. 12 A Case propounded by the Deputies of Burgundy. 13.
The Churches of several Provinces Incorporated with those of France. 15, 16,
17. An Inquiry for the Original Acts of these National Synods. 19. Public
Common Prayers laid down, and why? 21. Whether Ministers may attend on
Funerals? 22. The Discipline ratified by the Oath of all the Deputies. Chap. 4
Observations on the Synod of Jergeau. Instructions to a censured Minister how
to justify himself. 2. Letters to the Professors of Geneva about our Proposans.
8. A Canon for the Deacons of Bearne in Switzerland. 9. the Church of Paris
censured. 10. The Petition of a Minister deposed for his insufficiency, and
desiring to be restored is rejected. 15. Thanks given to the Lord of Ple^^^s
for his Book of the Eucharist. 17. The Petition of a deposed Minister for
restoration unto his Work and Office rejected. 18. Chap. V. Appeals. Two
Ministers at Variance reconciled. 9. Chap. VI. General matters. A petition of
the exiled Protestants of the Martquisate of Salluces to the Synod. 1. Pastors
must not be Non-Residents. 2. A Canon about Pastors not Deputed to the National
Synods, and yet sitting in them. 3. An answer to the complaint of the Pastors
of Geneva. 4. That the Pope is Antichrist, shall be inserted into the Articles
of the Confession of Faith. 5. A great case, whether the Faithful may say they
be of the pretended Reformed Religion? 6. Another case of Conscience about a
place of Burial. 7. Form of Certificates. 8. Moneys to begin the University of
Die. 9, 10. A motion and means for reuniting the Lutherans with our Churches.
11. A Case, whether a Child Baptized by a Proposan should be Rebaptized. 12. A
Case about Oaths. 13. About Theological disputations. 14. About a Lord of
misrule. 15. A Committee to draw up a body ^f Laws for our Schools and
Universities. 18. Moneys paid unto the General Deputies. 21. The King of Spains
Bible to be set up in our Universities. 300 Crowns given to the Academy of
Sedan. Chap. VII. Particular matters. A suspected Gentleman cleared. 5. The
History of a Possession. 9. Letters from the Faithful in the Valley of
Barcellona answered. 17. Settling of Religion at Issoire, 18. Letters sent to
the Faithful fallen in Salluces. 19. The Synod of Burgundy censured. 22. The
Poverty of the Church of Aubenas. 28. A Book Entitled Hypotoposes Theologicae
to be revised. 30. the University of Sedan encouraged. 40. Election of General
Deputies. 44. Chap. VIII. A Dividend of 45000 Crowns between the Churches and
Universities. Chap. IX. An Account of Moneys allowed the Sieurs Palot and du
Candal. Chap. X. A Dividend of 135000 Crowns among the Churches and
Universities. Chap. XI. A Catalogue of all the Reformed Churches of France.
Chap. XII. Remarks upon three of the Deputies to this Synod.
1603. The 17th. Synod.
The Synod of GAP.
SYNOD XVII 1603.
In the Name of God. Amen.
Acts of the National Synod held by the Reformed Churches of France at Gap, the
first day of October, and continued to the four and twentieth of the same Month
in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and three.

CHAP. I.
Monsieur Chamier was chosen President. Monsieur Ferrier Assessor.
Scribes.
Monsieur Vignier, and Monsieur Roy



THERE appeared in it as Deputies for their respective Provinces, the Pastors
and Elders, whose names are here under written. For the Isle of France, Picardy
and Champagne.
For the Isle of France, Picardy and Champagne, Monsieur Peter du Moulin
Minister in the Church of Paris, and Gedeon Petau Lord of the Mollette, Elder
of the Church of Houdan. For Brittany Monsieur Francis L'Oyseau Minister of the
Church of Nantes. Brittany.
Orleans and Berry.
For Orleans and Berry Monsieur Nicholas Vignier Minister of the Church of
Blois, and Samuel de Chambaran Minister of the Church of Baugency, Lorges and
Marchenoir. Tourain, Anjou and Maine.
For Touraine, Anjou and the Maine, Monsieur John Eleury Minister of the Church
of Bougay, and Peter de la Primaudaye Lord de la Baree Elder of the Church of
Chasteau du Loir. For the upper and nether Poictou Monsieur John Bonnavet
Minister of the Church of Lusson, Poictou.
and John Chauffepied Minister of the Church of Niort, and Rene de Lumont Lord
of Fiefbrun Elder in the Church of Sansay. Xaintonge, Aunix, etc.
For Xaintonge, Aunix, etc. Monsieur Samuel L'Hommeau Minister in the Church of
Rochell, and Arthur de Partenay Lord of Genouille, and Querray Elder in the
Church of Tonne Boutonne, and Daniel Roy Elder in the Church of Xaintes.
Gascony, Perigord and Limousin.
For Gascony, Perigord and Limousin Monsieur Antony Renaud Minister of
Bourdeaux, Peter Esperian Minister of the Church at St. Foy, James du Brueil
Lord de la Guard Elder of Tonneins, and Peter du Bazats Elder in the Church of
Bourdeaux. For Vivaretz and Vellay.
For the upper and nether Vivaretz and Vellay, Monsieur Peter Labat, Minister in
the Church of Vabon, la Gorce and Salvais, John de la Faye Minister of the
Church D'Aubenac, and James Oliver Elder in the Church of Villeneufve de Berg.
For the Lower Languedoc, Monsieur Jeremiah Ferrier Minister and Professor of
Divinity in the Church of Nismes, Isaiah Bailly Minister, in the Church of St.
Martin, d' Anduze, and John de Barjac Lord of Gasque, Elder in the Church of
St. Martin, Lower Languedoc.
and John d' Aguerre Elder in the Church of Sauve. Higher Languedoc and higher
Guyenne.
For the Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, Monsieur Bernard Sonis Minister and
Professor of Divinity in the Church of Montaubon; John Josion Minister in the
Church of Castres, and the Lord Du Bovry Governor of the Isle of Jourdan, and
Elder of the Church there, and Daniel de Belujon Elder of the Church in
Villemure. Burgundy, Lyonnois, etc.
For Burgundy Lyonnois, etc. Monsieur Peter Collinet, Minister of the Church of
Parrey; Samuel de Trucis Elder of the Church of Bourg in Bresse, and Job James
Bonnet Elder in the Church of Chaalons upon Saone. For Provence, Provence.
Monsieur Anthony the Croase Minister of the Church in Cabiers; and Peter de
Villineufve, Lord d' Espineuse, Elder of the Church. Dolphiny and the
Principality of Orange.
For Dolphiny, and the Principality of Orange Monsieur Claude Perron Minister,
in the Church of Pragelet, Daniel Chamier Minister of the Church of ^ontlimart;
and Jacob Archmart Elder of the same, and Jacob Videl Elder in the Church of
Brianson. For Normandy there was no Deputy, but Monsieur du Moulin was
entrusted with their Memoirs by the Brethren of that Province.


The Lords of St. Germain and des Bordes General Deputies for our Churches at
Court, and Mr. Joseph des Fountains commissionated by Monsieur Palott to give
in his Accounts of the King's Moneys granted our Churches, were personally
present in this Synod.

The Lords of St. Germain and des Bordes appeared in their Quality of General
Deputies, according to the Office conferred upon them by the General Assembly
of St. Foy, and Mr. Joseph des Fontaines was deputed by the same Assembly of
St. Foy, and to audit the Accounts of Monsieur Palott.

Prayers being ended, Monsieur Chamier was chosen Moderator, and Monsieur
Ferrier Assessor, and the Sieurs Vignier and Roy Scribes.

The Provinces which have not sent their full number of Pastors and Elders
ordained by our Discipline, are excused for this time, but for the future they
shall all o^ them conform unto the Canon of the Synod of Montpellier, otherwise
they shall forfeit their right of Sitting and Voting in our National Synods.

The Powers given before Public Notaries unto the Deputies of Brittany, and
attested by secular persons, is tolerated for the present; but that Province is
required to abstain from them for time to come; and are ordered to get their
Letters of Commission signed by the Moderator and Scribes of their Provincial
Synod.

Monsieur In another Copy he is written Givoult.
Gueran Minister of the Church of Dindeveuf, Deputed by the Province o^
Normandy, excused his absence from this Synod, which was accepted; but that
Province shall be censured by Letters from us for their neglect in not sending
other Deputies.

CHAP. II. Observations upon the Confession of Faith.
1. THE Province charged to call our National Synod is charged also to bring
with it the Original Confession of Faith, which shall to this purpose be
subscribed by this Assembly, and sent unto that Province.

2. The Synod reading over the Confession of Faith, and explaining the 18th,
20th, and 22d. Articles of the said Confession concerning our Justification
before God, expresses its detestation of those Errors which are nowadays
broached to the contrary, and in particular their Errors, who deny the
Imputation of Christ's Active and Passive Obedience (by which he has most
perfectly fulfilled the whole Law) unto us for Righteousness. Our Righteousness
by the Imputation of Christ's active and passive Obedience.
And therefore Provincial Synods, Colloquies and Consistories shall have a
careful Eye on those persons who be tainted with that Error, be they Ministers
or private Christians, and by the Authority of this Assembly shall silence
them; and in case of a wilful stubborn persistency in their Errors, to depose
them, if they have a Pastoral Charge in the Church; from the Ministry. And
Letters shall be writ unto Master Piscator to entreat him not to trouble the
Churches with his newfangled Opinions; as also from this Assembly to the
Universities of England, Scotland, Leyden, Geneva, Heydelberg, Basil and In
another Copy Ziguen.
Herborne (in which Piscator is Professor,) requesting them to join with us
also in this Censure. And in case the said Piscator shall pertinaciously adhere
unto his Opinions, Master Sohnius and Ferrier are to prepare an Answer to his
Books, and that it be ready against the Meeting of the next National Synod. And
this Article shall be read, and in all points most exactly observed by the
Provincial Synods.

3. The Provinces are exhorted seriously to debate in their Synods how to word
the five and twentieth Article of our Confession, and to bring with them their
maturest thoughts about it unto the next National Synod, because in expressing
our Faith about the Catholic Church, mentioned in the Creed, we have nothing
in our Confession concerning the Church Militant and Visible. As also they are
entreated to consider whether it would not be fit to subjoyn ths word Pure unto
those of the True Church, which is in the nine and twentieth Article.

The Call of our first Pastors and Reformers was extraordinary, and not from
the Church of Rome.
4. The question being moved, whether in Treating of the Call of our first
Pastors and Reformers, it were expedient that we should lay the stress of their
Authority for Preaching and Reforming, upon that Call and Ordination, they had
in the Church of Rome, or no. This Synod does judge that we ought according to
the one and thirtieth Article, to found it principally upon their extraordinary
Vocation, whereby they were by an inward powerful impulse from God raised up
and commanded to exercise their Ministry, rather than to charge it upon the
sorry Relics of a corrupted Call and Ordination in the Romish Church.

5. That Article treating of Antichrist, shall be the one and thirtieth in
order in our Confession of Faith, and shall be thus worded. Whereas the Bishop
of Rome has erected for himself a temporal Monarchy in the Christian World,
and Usurping a Sovereign Authority, and Lordship over all Churches and Pastors,
does exalt himself to that degree of Insolency, as to be called God, and will
be adored, arrogating unto himself All Power in Heaven and in Earth, and to
dispose of all Ecclesiastical matters, to define Articles of Faith, to
authorize and expound at his pleasure the sacred Scriptures, and to buy and
sell the Souls of men, to dispense with Vows, Oaths and Covenants, and to
institute new Ordinances of Religious Worship.

And in the Civil State, he tramples under foot all Lawful Authority of
Magistrates, setting up and pulling down Kings, disposing of Kings and of their
Kingdoms at his pleasure: We therefore believe and maintain that he is truly
and properly The Antichrist, the Son of Perdition, predicted by the Holy
Prophets, that great Whore clothed with Scarlet, sitting upon seven Mountains
in that great City, which had dominion over the Kings of the Earth; and we hope
and wait that the Lord according to his promise, and as he has already begun
will confound him by the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy him finally by the
brightness of his coming.

6. The word Superintendant in the two and thirtieth Article is not to be
understood of any superiority of one Pastor above another, but only in general
of such as have office and charge in the Church.

7. The words substance and nourish shall remain unchanged in the six and
thirtieth Article, according as it has been decreed by the Synods of Rochel in
the year 1571. and of Nismes in the year 1572.

8. The Confession of Faith being read was sworn and subscribed by all the
Deputies in the names of their respective Provinces, and they did farther most
solemnly engage by their promise never to depart from it, and protested that
this was that very doctrine which was taught in all their Churches.

9. The Provinces are exhorted for the future at the opening of their Synods to
read this Confession of Faith, and our Book of Discipline. And Monsieur Chamier
is appointed to draw up an Apology for this our Confession, and to bring it
with him unto the next National Assembly.

CHAP. III. Observations upon reading of the Discipline.
No private Ordination.
1. THE Province of the Isle of France shall be exhorted to be more careful in
and about the Election and Ordination of their Pastors, and that Imposition of
hands be given them not privately in a clandestine manner by a Consistory or
Colloquy, but solemnly and publicly in the face of the whole Church; and that
the fourth Article in the first Chapter of our Discipline, be more religiously
observed by them and all the Provinces.

Uniformity in Ordination.
2. According to the Tenor of the seventh Article in the same chapter, it is
Decreed that all the Churches shall observe one and the same form in Ordination
of Pastors, by which the Person to be Ordained shall during that action, be
humbly on his knees, and this ordination shall be administered on the Lord's
day, or on some certain day of the week, in which there is held a solemn
Assembly. And these evil customs practiced in some Churches, of suffering the
Person ordained to get into the Pulpit, and of permitting another besides the
Preacher to give Imposition of hands, are justly condemned by this Synod.

3. The eighth Article shall be most carefully observed, and to this purpose,
there shall be deposited a Copy of our Confession and Discipline in every
Provincial Synod, Colloquy and Consistory.

See the 5th Observation upon the Discipline in the Synod of Rochell.
4. All Provincial Synods, Colloquies and Consistories are enjoined as they
would avoid the greatest Censures, to have a strict Eye over such who act
contrary to the eleventh Article of the first Chapter of our Discipline, and to
suspend them from the Ministry, and they also shall be liable to the same
censures who leaving the true and genuine fence of Scripture expounded by it
self, do rather pitch upon the glosses of Fathers and Schoolmen, and launch out
into Allegories, Larding their Sermons with Philosophical Discourses, quoting
the Fathers, and bringing their Books with them into the Pulpit; and they also
who in time of Lent, or on such noted seasons do choose the self same Texts with
the Popish Preachers.

5. The twelfth Article of the same Chapter. The form of Catechizing, according
as now used in most of our Churches, shall not be changed. And whereas some
choose a particular Text, and accommodate it to that particular section of the
Catechism, they would treat of, we desire they would not alter our established
Order, but conform themselves, as the rest do, unto it.

6. Upon the same twelfth Article, Ministers and Consistories are left to their
own discretions, whether in those general Catechisings, which are usually had
both publicly and privately before the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, they
will further examine every individual person or not, and therein to consult
what will most contribute to the Spiritual benefit of their Catechumens.

7. The third Article of the second Chapter shall be couched in these words.
Provincial Synods, in which are our Universities, shall choose their own
Doctors, Pastors, and Professors of Divinity, whose ability, shall be proved by
public Lectures, on some special Text out of the Original Hebrew and Greek
Bible, given to them for that purpose, and by disputations in one or two days
following, as may be most advisable. And being approved, in case they were
never in the Ministry, the right hand of fellowship shall be given them, they
having first of all promised to discharge their Office with faithfulness and
diligence, and to handle the sacred Scriptures with all sincerity according to
the analogy of Faith, and the confession of our Churches, which shall be
subscribed by them.

8. On the fourth Article of the second chapter. The fifth penny in all
collections for the poor shall be laid up for the maintenance of Proposans. And
this shall be an Universal order throughout the Provinces.

9. On the first Article of the third chapter. That custom observed in some
Churches, of ordaining Elders by imposition of hands shall be abolished.

10. On the fourth Article of the fourth Chapter. The Provinces are required to
see that this Article be punctually observed in every part and clause of it,
and in case of transgression, Provincial Synods and Colloquies shall censure
those Elders and Deacons exceeding sharply.

11. On the eight and twentieth Article of the fifth Chapter. These words,
which conclude that article, Unless it be by the advice of the Consistory,
shall be razed out.

12. The thirtieth Article of the fifth Chapter shall run in these words. When
Crimes are privately confessed by Penitents unto their Ministers, that they may
be helped with their Counsel and Comfort, Ministers are forbidden to discover
them unto Magistrates, lest the Ministry should thereby he blamed, and sinners
hindered from Repentance, or making a free confession of their Offenses. [And
this shall be a standing Canon in all Crimes revealed to them, excepting those
of High Treason.]

13 On the third Article of the seventh Chapter. The Brethren of Burgundy
demanding, whether those Propositions made by Pastors in their Colloquies
should be done in a Scholastic or Popular manner? This Assembly judges, that
they ought rather to hold of the Schools, because the design and end for which
they be instituted is, that Ministers should give a satisfactory proof of their
usefulness, and proficiency in their Studies, and Ministerial labors among
their people: So that their Doctrine ought to be well opened and proved, and a
short application only made unto manners. As concerning those additions which
are afterward subjoyned by the Pastors, they shall be managed with all
soberness, and in as much as may be to the edification of the whole Church. And
this Article shall be exactly observed by all Colloquies.

14. Upon the fifteenth Article of the eighth chapter. The Brethren of Brittany
shall consider whether they can provide a sufficient Number of Pastors to make
up a Provincial Synod: And in case they cannot, care shall be taken in the next
National Synod to incorporate them with some convenient Province.

15. The Church of Metz shall be entreated by Letters from this Assembly to
send a Deputy unto some one of our Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and to join
themselves unto one of the nearest Provincial Synods of this Kingdom.

16. A Declaration from the Churches of Nivernois, Bourbonnois and La March
having been presented by the Brethren of Berry; it was ordained that those
Churches should be Incorporated with the Synod of Berry.

17. The Pastors and Churches in the Baylywick, of Gex are exhorted to conform
themselves in all things unto the Discipline of our Churches, and that they may
more easily be enured unto it, a decree passed in this Synod for their being
Incorporated with the Province of Burgundy at present, and in the next National
Synod farther care shall be had of them.

18. In the third Article of the ninth Chapter, these words. As much as may be
shall be razed, and in the same Chapter the last clause of the seventh Article,
after these words, The Provinces having, shall also be blotted out.

19. On the eleventh Article of the same Chapter. Monsieur l'Oyseau was charged
to inquire whether the Acts and Papers of our National Synods were at Vitre or
not. And Monsieur Ferrier was to make inquiry whether they were not in
Languedoc, and to see that they be sent, unto that Province which is empowered
to call the next National Synod, and in case they be not sent unto it, the said
Province shall entreat those before-named Gentlemen Mr. l'Oyseau and Bailey that
they would seek diligently for them.

20. The word Common after that of piety in the first Article of the tenth
Chapter shall be razed out, and in the second Article of the same Chapter these
words also, As much as may be. And the Churches are exhorted to a strict
observation of it.

21. Upon the fourth Article. Some of the Brethren, because of diverse
inconveniences which have already, and may hereafter happen through
oppositions made against this Article, moved, that whereas the continuing of
public solemn Prayers, which had been appointed in the times of trouble and
calamity, drew with it a contemptuous neglect of Sermons, and of the Worshipping
of God in their private houses, and a superstitious opinion of their present
necessity now in times of peace: that therefore the Pastors of Churches should
be advised to dispose their people by degrees to the observation of this
Article, and the Consistories should wisely consider of what herein would most
contribute unto edifying.

22. Upon the fifth Article of the same Chapter, the Deputies of Lower
Languedoc moved this doubt, whether Pastors ought to attend at Funerals. This
Assembly considering the condition of our Churches, and the manner of Burying,
does leave it wholly to their discretions.

23. The sixth Article of the eleventh Chapter shall hold good, according as it
was formerly decreed by the National Synods of Poictiers and Saumur. And as for
Preaching in the houses of Gentlemen when their Children are Baptized,
Ministers shall Act therein prudentially, and in such a manner as will most
promote the edification of their Churches. And as for that word Infirmity, it is
not to be understood of the Infants, but of their Parents.

24. Instead of those words in the tenth Article of the same Chapter, It were
well, these shall be inserted, It ought to be.

25. On the fifth Article of the twelfth Chapter. The Churches are required
punctually to observe it.

26. On the fifth Article of the thirteenth Chapter. All kind of censures shall
be inflicted upon the breakers of Marriage-promises, whether expressed in words
de praesenti or de futuro.

27. On the six and twentieth Article of the same Chapter, to the word ratified
which is in the close of that Article, there shall be this added, and blessed.

28. On the first Article of the fourteenth Chapter, after these words, Till he
have first renounced there shall be added, publicly.

The Discipline being read, all the Deputies of the Provinces did swear unto
its observation, and that they would seriously and sincerely endeavor that it
should be religiously observed in their respective Provinces in all its
Articles.

CHAP. IV. Observations made on reading the Acts of the Synod of Gergeau.
1. THE Town and Church of St. John d' Angely desiring that the Decree of the
National Synod of Gergeau might be disanul'd, and that Monsieur d' Amors might
be restored to them; This Assembly does ratify that Decree of the aforesaid
Synod, and ordains farther, that the said d' Amors shall remain with the
Church of Chastelheraut, and charge the Province of Xaintonge to provide out
of hand another Pastor for the Church of St. John.

2. Monsieur de Bargemont petitioning by Letters, that the Censure inflicted on
him by the Synod of Gergeau might be reverst, and razed out of the Acts of the
said Synod. This Assembly replied, that they were very desirous that the said
de Bergemont would clear up his Innocence, and justify himself fully before the
World, and therefore did ordain him to produce the Evidences of his Innocence
and Integrity, before the next Provincial Synod of Poictou, that it may be
thence transmitted unto the next National Synod, and then all requisite care
should be taken about the razing of the aforesaid Censure.

3. Upon the difference between the five Colloquies of Xaintonge and that of
Aunix, This Assembly judges, that it is but just and reasonable that the
Colloquy of Aunix should bear a fourth part of the Charges of the Provinces of
Xaintonge, notwithstanding the determination of the Provincial Synod of Poictou
to the contrary.

4. The appeal brought by the Church of Beaune and Vannes from the Decree of
the Provincial Synod of Burgundy, past in favor of Monsieur Manissier, is made
null and void, because the said Church appeared not to prosecute it.

5. That debate on behalf of Monsieur Claudius Jobart concerning Festivals, and
which had been inserted among the appeals in the Synod of Gergeau, shall be
transferred unto the head of particular matters in the said Synod, the aforesaid
Jobart protesting that he never brought any appeal against the Province of
Burgundy.

6. The Church of Orleans complaining that it was oppressed by a Decree of the
Synod of Gergeau, which had adjudged unto the Church of Gergeau the Moneys
granted by his Majesty, which belonged to it till the meeting of this present
Assembly. This Assembly considering all circumstances, finds no reason to alter
the Decree of the aforesaid Synod. And for time coming ordains that the
Provincial Synod shall do in it as they think fit.

7. Upon the difference between the Synods of Poictou and Xaintonge about the
Churches of Montignac, Marsillac, and Villefagnon; The Churches of Montignac
and Marsillac, are adjudged unto the Province of Poictou: and that of
Villefagnon is left to its o^n choice to which of the Provinces it will be
Incorporated; but being once Incorporated, the said Church shall not at its
pleasure depart from it. And this their choice once made shall be notified unto
the next Synod of both the Provinces. However the Province of Xaintonge shall
retain their right in the Minister of Marsillac.

Proposans may not Preach nor Administer the Sacrament without Imposition of
hands. See Act. 6. of the 3d. Synod of Rochel.
8. Letters shall be written to the Pastors and Professors in the Church of
Geneva, entreating them not to send our young Students in Divinity to Preach,
and Administer the Sacraments in Country Villages before Ordination;
principally the Students who are hereafter to be employed in the Churches of
this Kingdom; because it is contrary to our Discipline, and to the Practice and
Custom of the Primitive Church, and for that we feel already the inconveniences
hereof.

9. If Deacons of the Church of Bearne in Switzerland should come into this
Kingdom, and have not been first duly examined and ordained by imposition of
hands, or have not had elsewhere any Pastoral charge, and should yet
notwithstanding, as they have done in other places take upon them to exercise
the Ministerial office, Of the Deacons of Bearne coming into France, and
exercising the Ministry.
to Preach the Word, to administer the Sacraments, as the Mode of some Foreign
Churches is so to do; they shall first subject themselves to a new examination
here, and be received into the Ministry among us, in that very self same manner
as Proposans are, who never were Ordained. And for other persons, who were
duly examined, and to whom the right hand of Fellowship has been given in
Foreign Churches, and are now called to a Pastoral Charge in some one of our
Churches in this Kingdom, they shall be admitted by the Provincial Synods
according to the manner prescribed by our Discipline.

10. The Church of Paris shall be censured for not revising that Book styled
Apparatus ad fidem Catholicam, not the others, as they were injoined by the
last Synod at Gergeau: And that Church which is charged to call the next
National Synod, is now by this appointed to review and examine those books.

11. The differences fallen out between the Synods of Higher Languedoc, and
Lower Guyenne concerning the Churches of Montagnac, Leyrac and some others, and
which had been dismissed by the last Synod of Gergeau unto the Provincial Synod
of Xaintonge, and by that of Xaintonge to the decision of this Assembly, shall
be thus determined; Full power is again given unto the said Synod of Xaintonge
to perform that Article of the National Synod of Gergeau; and to this purpose
the said Province of Xaintonge shall take care that notice be given unto the
said Provinces of the time and place of their next Synod.

12. In pursuance of that Decree of the national Synod of Gergeau: the Province
of Normandy shall give full satisfaction unto Monsieur Vatable, for whom
nothing at all has been yet done.

13. The Article of the Synod of Gergeau being read, which ordered Letters to
be written unto the Duke de Lesdiguieres about the 17000 Crowns, See the Synod
of Montpel. partic. matt. 17. And the Synod of Gergeau, partic matt. 5.
being Moneys of the Churches of Lower Languedoc: We have thought fit that both
the Articles of the Synods of Monpellier and Gergeau, relating to this matter
be razed out; Provided that the Deputies of Languedoc have first of all the
sight and perusal of those Acquittances pretended to by his Lordship.

14. Whereas differences have sprung up between the two Provinces of the upper
and neither Languedoc about the Churches of Cormes and St. John du Brueil. The
Decree made in the Synod of Gergeau for their determination is now again
confirmed by this present Assembly, and they be censured, who did not according
to their duty put in execution the said Decree; And therefore the Deputies of
both these Provinces shall give notice unto those Churches to appear in the
Colloquies and Provincial Synods of the Nether Languedoc.

15. John Mussidan Bordaires presented his humble Petition unto this Synod,
requesting that his name might be blotted out of the Catalogue of Vagrants,
into which it was inserted by the last Synod of Gergeau, and that he might be
permitted to make a Proposition from some text of the Holy Scripture, in order
to his readmission into the Ministry. This Assembly having received several
relations from diverse of our brethren concerning his insufficiency for so great
and weighty a Calling, did advise him to lay by all hopes and thoughts of
re-entring into this Sacred Office, because the Lord did not think him fitly
qualified for it, nor would own or accept of his service in it: But that he
might not be totally disheartened, the Province, whereunto he retires himself,
is entreated to assist him with their Charities, and to employ him as a
Schoolmaster in the teaching of youth.

16. The Synod willing to express their affectionate respects to Monsieur
Berger, and intending as the former Synod of Gergeau to seal and testify their
great love and care for him, and for his better subsistence (the Deputies of
the Provinces of Orleans and Berry having informed us of his deplorable
condition.) It does ordain that over and above the two Portions assigned him
from the Kings Money in the late dividend at Gergeau, two other Portions shall
be added toward his relief by the Province of Berry.

The favorable Opinion of the Book of the Eucharist writ by the Lord du
Plessis.
17. The Pastors and Professors in the Church of Geneva having read, according
to the desire of the late Synod at Gergeau, the book of the Lord du Plessis
upon the Eucharist, and given a very honorable testimony to it: This National
Synod does render unto his Lordship their hearty thanks for his great zeal and
affection to the truth of God, and for his worthy labors in the defense
thereof, and orders that it be printed out of hand, believing that the Lord
will give his blessing to it.

18. The difference between the Provinces of Vivaretz and of both the
Languedoc's concerning Moneys assessed by these latter upon that of Vivaretz
shall be finally determined, and to this purpose the Decree made in the late
Synod of Gergeau is now ratified, because the Brethren of Vivaretz have brought
nothing against it, but what had been answered over and over. And this Article
shall be in full force as to those 3000 Crowns which had been raised by those
Provinces before the Synod of Gergeau.

19. Master Gabriel Raoul presented himself personally before this Synod,
humbly desiring his readmission into the sacred Ministry from which he had
been deposed by the Provincial Synod of the Lower Guyenne held at Nismes.
Aymet, which Sentence was ratified by the Ministers assembled at St. Foy, with
the Authority of the National Synod of Montauban in the year 1594. After that
the said Raoul had been patiently and for a long time heard speaking what he
could in his own defense, and that the Acts of the said Synod of Aymet had been
reviewed, as those also of the Pastors assembled at St. Foy, declaring the
enormous crimes whereof the said Raoul was guilty, and after reading the
Certificates of several Colloquies, Churches and Godly persons, unanimously
proclaiming him a person utterly unworthy of Employment in the Gospel Ministry,
as also that Act of the National Synod of Saumur confirming his deposal. This
Assembly ratified those Judicial Sentences past upon him by the foregoing
Synods, and declared the said Raoul utterly unworthy of ever being readmitted
into the sacred Ministry; and farther advises him to humble himself deeply
before the Lord in a most bitter Repentance for his heinous offenses, and for
time to come to live Holily and Christianly in a private and secular life, and
to betake himself to the practice of Physic in some Church of Christ. In the
mean while all the Papers relating to his deposal, and the Certificates given
him by several of his Friends, Ministers of the Gospel, shall be deposited,
with the Church of St. Foy, to be forthcoming upon all occasions. And whereas
he begged an Attestation from this Assembly, we declare that none other can or
shall be given him than what is expressed in the very words of this Act. And
the Province whereunto he shall retire for Habitation and Employment, is
required to take notice what use and benefit he shall make of the good Counsels
that have been here given him, and what his after Conversation is, and
accordingly to give in their Opinion whether he be fit or no to be received as
a private Member into Communion with our Churches.

CHAP. V. Of Appeals.
1. THE Church of Xaintes appealed from the Judgment past against them by the
Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, about Monsieur Primrose, ho was given by that
Synod for Pastor unto the Church of Bourdeaux, Messieurs Renaud Minister of the
Church of Bourdeaux, and Roy Elder in the Church of Xaintes, having been both
heard, Monsieur Roy declared, that the church whom he represented would desist
from their Appeal, provided the church of Bourdeaux would secure them another
Minister, or that the Province would do it, or that they might be assisted for
a time with one of the Ministers of Rochell. This Assembly does confirm the
Call of Monsieur Primrose unto the Church of Bourdeaux, yet reprehends the
carriage both of Monsieur Primrose, and that Church of Bourdeaux in his Call,
and ordains that the said Church do perform their promise engaged to the
Provine of Xaintonge, of giving them a Proposan meet to be employed in the
Ministry. And the said Province is enjoined to take speedy care that the Church
of Xaintes be supplied with an able Pastor, besides him who at present
labors among them, because of the great importance of that Church.

2. The Inhabitants of Elbaeuf appealing from the Decree of the Synod of
Normandy, which had incorporated them with the ^hur^h of Beauroger. This
Assembly gives leave unto those Inhabitants of Elbaeuf to join themselves unto
the Church of Quevilly, provided that they continue their Contributions to the
Church of Beauroger, lest tha^ by their departure from it, they should cause
its dissolution.

3. The Church of Poictiers appealed from that Decree of the Synod of Poictou,
which would have reinstated Monsieur de la Dugnie in his Office of Elder. This
Assembly judges that the said Church did well in making their Appeal from that
Synodical Ordinance; and that Provincial Synod shall be censured for giving
Judgment that the said de la Dugnie, notwithstanding these offenses whereof he
was guilty, and which were owned in the very Judicial Decree of that Synod,
should be restored.

4. The Elders of the Colloquy of Nismes appealing from the Decree of the Synod
of Lower Languedoc, by which an hundred and sixty Liv^rs of the Moneys granted
us from ^he King's Bounty had been assigned over unto Monsieur de Falgueroles,
in consideration of his many and great Employments; this their Appeal was
rejected and made null; and the Decree of the said Synod ratified and confirmed.

5. Monsieur Sohnius appealed from the Decree of the Synod of Higher Languedoc,
which had ordered, that because the said Sohnius was not ordinary Pastor in the
Church of Montauban, therefore he should not participate in the Moneys granted
us by his Majesty. This Assembly censuring the Province of Higher Languedoc for
derogating from the Ordinance of Gergeau, by which four Pastors were assigned
unto the Church of Montauban, it does ratify and confirm that Ordinance before
mentioned at Gergeau, and declares that the said Master Sohnius ought to
receive his share in the said Moneys equally with the other Pastors which are
in actual service.

6. Monsieur Berauld appealed from the Decree of the Province of Higher
Languedoc, which would in the distribution of his Majesty's Royal Bounty, that
in all Colloquies and Synods the number of Pastors and Elders should be equal.
This Assembly judges that the said Master. Berauld had sufficient cause for
his Exception against it, and to appeal from them unto this Synod, and
therefore the Ancient Order established in our Synods and Colloquies, shall be
observed according to the Discipline, without any other particular Regulation
concerning it, that so all suspicion and occasion of differences in our
Churches by such an innovation may be cut off and prevented. And all Ministers
are advised in such cases to manifest their Self-denial, and how far they be
estranged from Covetousness, and that they do prefer the public before their
own private benefit and advantage.

7. Monsieur Berauld appealing from the Decree of the Consistory of Montauban,
confirmed by the Synod of Higher Languedoc, importing, that Ministers had no
power to call into the Consistory the Ministers of other Churches to consult
together with them about Church Affairs without the previous advice and consent
of the Consistory. This Appeal is rejected and made void, and this National
Synod ratifieth the Decree of the Provincial Synod of the Higher Languedoc in
what concerns Ordinary Consistories: However it intends not by this act to
abridge Ministers of their privilege (when they be desired to give some
private advice) consulting with such of their Brethren as they shall judge fit
to call into the Consistory.

8. Monsieur Paul de la Ville appealed from the Synod of Vivaretz, for
decreeing an Excommunication against him, unless he did immediately withdraw
his Son from out of the Jesuits College in Tournon: This Assembly approving
the just severity of the Synod of Vivaretz against the said de la Ville, does
expressly forbid him ever to send his Son back to Tournon; and in case of his
obedience unto this our Order, that then he be restored unto his Office of
Elder in the Church, and that all censures denounc't against him shall cease
and be disannulled.

9. Master Lawrence Brunier, and Mr. Simeon Codur formerly Ministers in the
Church of Usez, Appealed from the Sentence of the Synod of Lower Languedoc,
whereby the said Master Simeon Codur for the facts specified in the Decree of
that Synod, was suspended from the Sacred Ministry for the term of a full year;
which being expired, he might officiate as Pastor in some other Church of any
other Province, by attestation and discharge had and obtained from that Synod:
And the said Master Lawrence Brunier is suspended the Sacred Ministry for three
months time, after which the Colloquy of Nismes is to provide a Church for him
but out of the Colloquy of Usez. Which appeal both the said Ministers, Mr.
Lawrence Brunier and Simeon Codur had once retracted and revoked, but yet since
have took up, and again revived it. Farther also there presented themselves as
Parties to this Appeal the Lady Margarita de Brahier, and Susanna de Sallette
Wife of the said Master Lawrence Brunier, complaining that the said Synod of
Lower Languedoc, had not took any the least care for the reparation of her
honor, wronged as she pretends by the said Codur. This Assembly having read
the acts of the said Synod of Lower Languedoc, and the proceedings of Brunier
and Codur, one against the other, and the accusations of the said Lady against
Codur, and having examined the said Codur upon all those Articles whereof he
was accused by the said Mr. Lawrence Brunier and his Wife, who pressed them
home upon his Conscience, as also that the said Codur did apply himself to both
their Consciences, charging them to give glory unto God by a free, full and
sincere confession of the Truth: This Assembly did in the first place judge the
Provincial Synod of Lower Languedoc worthy to be censured for their tumultuous
and disorderly departure from the place of their meeting, and for proceeding in
this affair contrary to the Discipline, and for producing before us Acts, which
were never signed by the Moderator and Scribe of their Synod, as in course they
should have been, and for getting those subscriptions out of their Synodical
Sessions. And as for the said Codur, although he cannot be fully and plainly
convicted in every particular of the matters laid unto his charge, yet
nevertheless this Assembly judges that there is cause enough for confirming,
as it now does confirm in every point and article the sentence of the said
Synod of Lower Languedoc concerning the suspension of the said Codur from the
Ministry, and the excluding him from the Province of Lower Languedoc: as also
it does confirm the suspension of Mr. Lawrence Brunier for three Months,
because of that excessive animosity manifested by him in his prosecution of the
said Codur; however it restores the said Brunier unto the Colloquy of Usez, to
be employed by them immediately, if they think meet: But because of the great
divisions which are in the Town of Usez, the said Brunier shall not exercise
his Ministry in it, unless the next National Synod shall otherwise determine
for him, who may restore him, if they please, unto the Town and Church of Usez,
on their petition for him. And that the honor of Mrs. Susan de Sallette, Wife
of the said Brunier, may be repaired, which was damnified by imprudent words
uttered against her by the said Codur, the said Codur is injoined to
acknowledge his offense, and the scandal given by him, here before this whole
Assembly, and shall ask pardon of the said Brunier, and shall further declare
that he believes the said Gentlewoman to be a person of great virtue and
honor, and that he is sorry to have spoken any thing prejudicial to it, and
that he has scandalized the Church of God by it. All which the said Codur
shall not only protest in this Assembly, but also in the Consistory of Usez,
where he shall give the same satisfaction unto the said Mistress Susan de
Sallette, begging her pardon in the presence of the Elders and Deacons of that
Church, and of the Lady Marguarita Brahier if she please to be there, and of
ten or twelve other persons, such as the said Brunier and his Wife will choose.
And hereupon all Prosecutions at Law before the Magistrates both of the one and
other side, whether directly or indirectly had or done, shall immediately and
eternally cease. And if either of them contradict this decree, he is hereby
declared totally deposed from the Holy Ministry. And the said Master Lawrence
Brunier and Simeon Codur acquiesced in this Ordinance, and the said Codur
having made his acknowledgment, in the form prescribed him unto the said Master
Lawrence Brunier and his Wife, they were reconciled together, and like loving
Brethren did mutually give each other their hands. And that Peace may be made
in the Church of Usez, this Assembly orders Messieurs Renaud, Esperien, Sohnius
and Gigord to visit that Church, and to dispose their minds unto it. And that
no new Controversies may hereafter arise upon the score of the Writings and
Proceedings relating to this business, they shall be all lodged in the hands of
Monsieur Chamier.

10. An Appeal was brought by the Church of Puylaurens and Monsieur Voysin the
Minister, from a Decree of the Synod of higher Languedoc, ordaining the said
Voysin to return unto the Colloquy of higher Quercy, and to serve the Churches
of St. Clear, Blenac and Calvinett. This Assembly rejects and makes void
this Appeal, and confirms the Decree of the Synod of Higher Languedoc, but on
this condition, that those Churches last-mentioned do fully satisfy within
three months the Church of Puylaurens all those expenses they have laid out
upon the said Voysin.

11. The Colloquy of Albigeois appealed from the Synod of Higher Languedoc,
because they had now adjudged the Church of Mazamet and St. Amand, which
formerly belonged to the Colloquy of Albigeois, unto the Colloquy of Lauragais,
This Assembly leaves the Churches to their full Liberty, and to choose that
Colloquy which lies most commodiously for them. And in consequence hereof the
Church of Mazamet joined it self unto the Colloquy of Lauragais, according to
their desire and choice. And in the next National or Provincial Synod the
Church of St. Amand shall declare into which Colloquy of these two, it will be
Incorporated.

12. Monsieur de Clermont and the Church of Pringey appealed from the Synod of
Anjou and Touraine, which had adjudged Monsieur le Bloy to the Church of
Angers, notwithstanding the right Monsieur de Clermont pretended to have in the
said le Bloy, who had been Educated for the Ministry at his sole charges. This
Assembly, because of the importunity of the Church of Angers, has confirmed
the Call given by them unto the, said le Bloy, but on this condition, that the
Church of Pringey shall be provided of Monsieur Douchet, who is now in England,
immediately upon his return, or of some other able Pastor, by the Church of
Angers.

13. The Church of Montlimard appealed from the Synod of Dolphiny about the
Erecting of a College in the Town of Die. This Assembly orders the
Provincial Synod of Dolphiny to put a final period unto this Controversy.

14. The Churches in the Principality of Orange brought their Appeal against
the Province of Dolphiny, for three portions of the King's money, to be
attributed unto the Churches of the said Principality, as it had been decreed
in the Synod of Gergeau. This Assembly does Ordain, that according to the
Dividend made at Gergeau, the Churches in the Principality of Orange shall
receive three portions of the moneys assigned unto the Province of Dolphiny,
and that without allowance of any charges, unless what had been expended in the
recovery of them. And this Order shall be of force unto this day; but for the
future, they shall be provided for by that new distribution, which shall be
made in this Assembly.

15. The Elders of the Churches of Lue, Tarbies and Brignoles appealed from the
Colloquy and Synod of Provence, which had ordained that the moneys laid out
upon Monsieur Baptist Beliste, should be redemanded from those said Churches,
it having been disbursed wholly and solely for his particular Maintenance This
Assembly judges that it is most agreeable to found reason that the charges of
Journeys should be born by the whole Province, and come out of the public
purse; but as for such Expenses as were done for expediting and forwarding of
particular business relating unto those particular Churches, they ought in
Conscience and Justice to be defrayed by those Churches.

15. The Appeal brought by Joseph Pallott, from the Decree of the Provincial
Synod of Higher Languedoc, is dismissed over to the decision of that Province,
which is hereby fully empowered to determine finally of it.

CHAP. VI. Of General Matters.
1. THE Petition tendered by our Brethren of the Marquisate of Saluces Exiled
for the Gospel's sake from their Houses and Inheritance was read, and 'twas
judged reasonable, Concerning the Faithful of the Marquisate of Saluces refuge
it, the Province of Dolphiny.
that the Churches of the said Marquisate should be preserved and confirmed in
their Union and Communion of Faith and Discipline which they have ever had with
the Churches of this Kingdom. And therefore the King's Majesty shall be most
humbly entreated to recommend them to the Duke of Savoy, that the Liberty
granted them by his Edicts may be continued and confirmed to them. And Letters
also to this purpose shall be written from this Assembly unto the Duke of
Savoy, and to the Duke de les Diguieres, and the Churches of the Valleys shall
be exhorted to join themselves into a stricter Bond of Union, as they have done
in times of former troubles, one with the other.

Pastors must not be Nonresidents.
2. All Pastors shall be obliged to a personal Residence in their Churches, and
who so live at a distance from them, shall within three months time at the
farthest, after notice given them to this purpose, retire unto them, on pain of
being suspended from their Ministry. And the Deputies shall immediately upon
their return, acquaint their respective Provinces with this Decree; that so the
Provincial Synods may put to their helping hand for its better observation.

3. For as much as diverse Ministers not deputed unto this National Synod, do
carry themselves with very little reverence or respect unto it; 1603. The 17th
Synod.
that such inconveniences for the future may be avoided, it is ordained, That
if any Pastors not delegated by their Provinces unto these National Assemblies,
do notwithstanding appear in them, they shall have no place of sitting, nor be
admitted into them, unless it be when matters of a most general and public
concern as to Doctrine and Discipline are treated and debated, and then also
for no longer time than those Assemblies shall judge meet and fit.

Concerning Hautyus Printing of the Bible at Rochel.
4. The Pastors and Professors in the Church of Geneva complained of our Bibles
printed at Rochell. This Assembly having revised the Decree of the Synod of
Saumur, by which the privilege of Printing those Bibles was granted unto
Monsieur Hautin deceased; And for as much as the said Impression is very much
advanced, and that from all parts our Ears are filled with great complaints of
the scarcity and dearness of those Bibles printed at Geneva, and of the bad
Paper, and worse Letter used by them in their last Edition in Quarto: It was
advised to dispatch Letters to our Brethren of Geneva, desiring them not to
take it amiss, that we continued the Printing of our Bibles at Rochell,
according to the unanimous desire of all the Churches in this Kingdom; and in
the mean while our Printers at Rochell shall be exhorted to hasten their said
Impression, and to vend it at as low a price as possibly they can: and Monsieur
l'Hommeau is requested to add a good Index to it.

That Article concerning Antichrist shall be inserted into the Body of our
Confession.
5. Diverse Pastors and Members of several Churches remonstrated in this
Assembly, how they had been troubled and prosecuted for calling the Pope
Antichrist in their private and public discourses. This Synod protesting that
this was the common Faith and Confession of all our Churches, and of this
present Synod, That the Pope is the Great Antichrist, and one of the principal
causes of our separation and departure from the Church of Rome, and that this
Confession was contained in, and extracted out of the holy Scriptures, that it
had been sealed with the blood of a world of Martyrs. Therefore all the
Faithful, be they Pastors or private Christians, are exhorted constantly to
persist in the profession of it, and openly and boldly to confess it; yea and
this very Article shall be inserted into the body of the Confession of our
Faith, and the General Deputies of our Churches at Court are required to
petition his Majesty, that none of his Officers in any Sovereign, or other
Inferior Courts of Judicature may be suffered to infringe our Liberty of
Conscience granted us by his Edicts, of making a free Confession of our Faith,
and that none of them may trouble or vex us, as diverse of them have done for
this very matter. And who so are now prosecuted and molested on this account,
or may be hereafter, they shall be supported and defended by the whole Body of
the Churches in the best manner that can be, according to that firm Bond of
Union, which is established among us. And Letters shall be written to our Lords
the Judges in the Mixed Courts, to exhort them vigorously to maintain this
Article of our common Confession.

Concerning those words Pretended Reformed.
6. A general Case was proposed, Whether the Faithful might lawfully use in
public Acts and Instruments before Magistrates, these words, Of the pretended
Reformed Religion, especially if those Magistrates be of a contrary Religion to
us. This Assembly thinks fit, that an humble Address be presented to his
Majesty, entreating him, that we may not be forced to speak or act any thing
contrary to our Consciences; and in the mean while all the Faithful are
exhorted to abstain from that word of Pretended, it being repugnant to our
Faith, and to that sincere, and free, and open confession we are bound to make
of it.

Whether a private Christian may appropriate unto himself a place of Burial,
and erect Monument upon Pillars?
7. This Case was propounded by our Brethren of Xaintonge, Whether a private
person might appropriate unto himself a place of Burial, and erect upon Pillars
or any other way a Monument unto himself, and whether the Lords of the Manor,
or other Gentlemen, may set up their Escutcheons in our Temples. As to what
concerns our Churches, This Assembly ordains, That in matters of Sepulchers
the ancient plainness and simplicity shall be retained, nor shall any private
person appropriate any spot of ground unto himself in particular, because we
express hereby our Communion as with the Saints in their Death, so in our hope
and expectation of a blessed Resurrection; And the same plainness and modesty
shall be observed in our Temples, leaving however unto Colloquies and
Consistories to act on special occasions as they shall judge meet.

The Form of Certificates that shall be given unto Officers of the Mixed Courts,
and to Governors of places.
8. The Attestations granted unto Officers in the mixed Courts (where they be
one half Protestants, and the other Papists) shall run in the same form with
those given unto Governors, as it was expressed and inserted into the acts of
the Synod of Montpellier in these terms We Ministers and Elders assembled in
the Colloquy of N. in the Province of N. do testify, that whereas Monsieur N.
has applied himself unto us, for our Attestation of his being a Protestant,
professing the Reformed Religion, he being chosen by his Majesty, for the
Government of N. vacant by the death of Mr. N. lately deceased, we do attest
and certify unto the Kings most excellent Majesty that the said Monsieur N.
does make open and actual profession of the Reformed Religion, and that he
communicates with us in the Holy Sacraments, and is a person of a Godly life,
and well reported of, performing all the duties belonging to his said
profession; and therefore we do give him this our Testimonial, for his use and
service, as in reason and Conscience we stand obliged.

9. Messieurs Berron and Videl demanding that out of the Common stock of Moneys
granted us by his Majesty there might be drawn the sum of Six thousand Crowns
for the founding an University at Die: and whereas the Deputies of the Town of
Die protested, that they sought not a penny of the said Moneys for themselves,
only that other Churches having Academies they had none, and that the
necessities of their Churches did require one. This Assembly, having considered
the whole, judges that there cannot be granted unto the said Town of Die any
farther sum than was at first demanded by their Deputies.

10. Our Brethren of the Church of Die requesting that Monsieur Chamier might
be constituted by this Synod the Professor of Divinity in their intended
Academy; This Assembly does confirm that Article of the Synod of Gergeau,
whereby it was ordained that Monsieur Chamier ought not without the express
consent of the Churches of his Province be removed from his Church of
Montlimart.

11. Our Brethren of Dolphiny desired that some means might be contrived for a
Conference and Union with the Lutheran Churches in Germany, Means of Union with
the Lutherans. See the Synod of Vitre. part M. Act. 27. and the 3d. Synod of
Rochel, Act. 4. after the choice of the Moderator.
that so the Schism between us and them might be removed. This Assembly
desirous to see the fruits of such a noble project, orders Letters to be
dispatched to the Orthodox Universities of Germany, England, Scotland, Geneva,
Basil, and Leyden, and to Messieurs des Gourdon and de Fontaines in London,
entreating them to travel with us in the effecting of this Holy Union; and that
Princes may be engaged to put forth their authority herein, that so we may all
be more firmly united among our selves in the Confession of one and the same
Doctrine.

12. This Case was propounded. A Proposant, never called nor ordained unto the
Ministry, takes upon him to baptize a Child. Is this baptism valid? This Synod
judges that the scandal given unto the people be carefully taken away; And
forasmuch as that baptism is of no force, the Child shall be brought into the
Church of God by true Baptism, according to the decision of the Synod of
Poictiers.

13. This Case was moved. Whether an Oath might be lawfully taken before the
Magistrate, by laying the hands on, and kissing of the Bible. This Assembly
judging that Ceremony to be of dangerous consequence, declares that it ought
not to be used; but that whosoever are called out to swear, shall content
themselves with the bare lifting up of their hands.

14. The Province of the higher Languedoc moved, whether disputations in
Theology might be introduced among our Ministers in their Colloquies and
Provincial Synods. This Assembly following the Decree of the Synod of Saumur
dismisseth such disputes over unto the Schools, and judges their usage
^angerous among Ministers.

Another Copy has of the Lower Guy^nne.
15. That Order made by the Province of Anjou against a Lord, of misrule chosen
by the Lawyers, is approved and confirmed by this National Synod.

16. If any of the Brethren have observed in the Writings of our Authors
somewhat deserving censure, they be desired to inform the Provincial Synods of
it, which are ordered to convene as soon as may be after the breaking up of
this National Assembly.

Every Province to maintain a select number of Scholars.
17. Every Province shall be bound to maintain a certain number of Scholars,
named to this purpose, out of the dividend of our Moneys granted us by his
Majesty: which said Scholars shall be obliged to study either in the
Universities of this Kingdom, or else where at the Order of the Province that
maintains them. And the said Scholars shall not be admitted into the Ministry
in their respective Provinces without producing good and sufficient
Testimonials of their Learning and Godliness, signed by the Pastors and
Professors of those Universities, wherein they have studied.

18. Messieurs Sohnis, Beraud, Gigort, Ferrier and Chamier, are appointed a
Committee, to draw up a Body of Laws for the right ordering of our Schools and
Universities, which shall be presented by them unto the next National Synod.
And in the mean while that the order already set up in the University of
Montaubon may be confirmed, the Pastors, who at the breaking up this Synod,
shall return unto it, and others that live near it, shall pass over unto
Montaubon, and exhort the Consuls in the name of this Assembly to put to their
helping hand together with their Pastors and Professors, that it may be duly
observed.

19. When as a Professors place in an University comes to be vacant it shall be
lawful for the other Professors together with the Pastors and Consistory
thereof to nominate another Person by way of Provision, who till the meeting of
the Provincial Synod, may read Lectures, and perform the duties of that office.

20. That Article of the Assembly of St. Foy concerning Counselors resigning
their places in the Mixed Courts shall be exactly observed by all the Provinces:
because it contributes abundantly to the better conduct of all our Affairs.

21. This Assembly ordains that the sum of Nine Thousand Livers which had
been assigned unto Monsieur de St. Germain out of the small income of the years
1602 and 1603. shall be entirely paid him by Monsieur Palot, if he has not yet
done it, although there had been but Six thousand Livers ordered him by the
Assembly of Saint Foy. And that the sum of four thousand, five hundred Livers
which was ordered by the said Assembly unto Monsieur Bordes, shall be also
entirely paid him by the said Palot for every one of those years, if it be not
as yet done, although he was not mentioned in the Account of the year 1602. nor
in that of the year 1603* and there had been ordered him only twelve hundred
Livers. And the said sums shall be paid by the said Palot unto those two
Gentlemen before any other moneys payable either to Ministers or Governors,
without any allowance or defalcations made by the said Palot for Taxes or
Values of Moneys; As also the sum of 2000 Livers a year, ordained unto Monsieur
des Fontains for his pains taken in auditing the Accounts of the said Palot and
which as Wages had been paid him by the said Monsieur Palot for both these
years, 1602 and 1603. and shall be allowed unto the said Palot in the first
place before all other moneys of the said Churches and Garrisons, all this
notwithstanding any debates whatsoever formed to the contrary by the General
Deputies, who hereafter may be ordained to reside near his Majesty, who also
shall be paid their respective Compositions preferably to all others out of the
Moneys of the said Churches.

22. Monsieur de St. Germain and Monsieur des Bordes General Deputies for our
Churches at Court have the thanks of this Assembly for their faithfulness and
diligence in the discharge of their Office, as also the like thanks is rendered
to Monsieur des Fontains for his pains taken with Monsieur Palot in auditing
his Accounts, according to the Commission given him by the Assembly of St. Foy.

23. Our Universities are advised to do their utmost endeavor in getting a
public Library, and in particular, the King of Spains Bible in many Languages
Printed at Antwerp.

24. Our Universities shall bring in their Accounts together with all their
Acquittances from the Synod of Montpellier unto the next National Synod. And
because of the great importance of the University of Sedan, and its singular
usefulness unto our Churches; This Assembly out of the Dividend of Moneys
granted to our Universities, does farther add over and above what was given it
by the Synod of Gergeau the sum of three hundred Crowns more.

25. There having risen up great Differences about the Deputation of Monsieur
Du Bourg unto the King, who was sent by the Provinces of the Higher and Lower
Guyenne, and that of Higher Languedoc, of Normandy, the Isle of France, and the
Church of Paris. These Provinces and that Church in particular are very sharply
censured for acting contrary unto what had been determined in the Assembly of
St. Foy, and thereby sowing the Seeds of division among us; and the said Du
Bourg shall be admonished to look to it, that he bring no inconveniences by
his manner of proceedings upon our Churches and that such like troubles may be
for the future prevented and avoided (because they be contrary to, and
destructive of our Union,.) all the Provinces shall be warned that for the
future they do not grant any authority unto any one single Church or Person to
dispose of affairs, which may be of general concernment unto their Provinces,
without having first communicated them unto them respective Provincial Synods,
or Political Assemblies.

CHAP. VII. Of Particular Matters.
1. THe Province of Berry desired some course might be taken, first, with those
Churches, who arrogating to themselves all the Moneys of his Majesty's bounty,
did grant out of it but sorry, niggardly pensions; and secondly with those who
complain of their grievances in the inequality of payments to which their
Provinces were taxed; and lastly, about the assistance and relief which is to
be Ministered unto Churches in their first rise and gathering. This Assembly,
devolved the whole upon the prudence of that Province in which these cases
might fall out, and to act according to the rule of Charity in and about them.

2. The same Province of Berry prayed that the Synod of Burgundy might be
injoined to censure Monsieur Textor by the authority of this Assembly for
quitting the Church of Lorges, he not having obtained leave neither from his
Church nor Province: As also for that he neglected to give notice of it unto
this Assembly. The whole business was dismissed over to the next Synod of the
Isle of France, there to be determined.

3. The complaint of the Colloquy of Niort against the other Colloquies of the
Province of Poictou, about the third part of all expenses to be defrayed by
that Province, is turned over to the judgment of the Synod of Xaintonge.

4. The Church of Mauvaisin demanded that License might be given to Monsieur
Girard to Preach occasionally among them. This Assembly confirming the decree
of the Synod of Gergeau, does expressly forbid the said Girard in any wise to
Preach at Mauvaisin.

5. Monsieur Bourg complaining that Monsieur Forton and some of the Elders in
the Church of Bourdeaux had in diverse places slanderously reported of him that
he intended to revolt from the profession of the true Religion; This Assembly
not crediting such relations, and being persuaded that he will constantly and
faithfully persevere in the profession of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, does
remit the cognizance of this affair unto the Consistory of the Church of
Bourdeaux, which is ordered to look into it with more than ordinary care and
diligence.

6. The Lord Vicount of Paulin and the Church of Compagnac desiring it, we
grant that the said Church shall be conjoined with the Colloquy of Quercy.

7. The Churches of Dauphiny are charged to notify unto the other Provinces
when it may be needful to assist the poor Fugitives banished the Marquisate of
Saluces, and from the Valleys of Piedmont and Savoy.

8. The Provinces of Anjou, Poictou and Normandy shall by turns supply the
Church of Rennes with a Pastor, until such time as it shall please God to give
a fixed one unto them; and the Colloquy of Lower Poictou shall begin, Anjou
next, and last of all Normandy.

He was Minister of Fentenay.
9. The little book of Monsieur de la Vallee concerning a person possessed by
the Devil shall be read and examined by the Synod of Xaintonge, and if they
judge sit, let it be imprinted.

10. The next Provincial Synod of Dolphiny is charged to moderate the Taxes
laid upon the Church of Montlimar by the Colloquy of Die, the said Church
complaining of its being over-rated.

11. For as much as the Pastors and Elders of the Church of Bergerac have
petitioned that Monsieur Beraud the younger might be permitted to continue the
exercise of his Ministry among them, and that Monsieur de Beraud his Father
gives way unto it, as appears by letters under his own hand: This Assembly
confirms the Call of the said Beraud the son unto the Ministry of the Church of
Bergerac, for so long time as his Father can dispense with him, considering the
great need he will have of him now in his declining years.

12. Monsieur Hesperian is confirmed in the Ministry of the Church of St. Foy,
and Letters shall be sent unto his Father from this assembly, desiring his
consent unto it.

13. This Synod approves that Order established in the Baylywick of Gex,
concerning their Supreme Consistory in Matrimonal Causes, and nothing therein
shall be innovated.

14. The Churches of the Baylywick of Gex shall have their share in the Moneys
granted us by the King until the next National Synod, and in the mean while
their Pastors shall dispose their people to contribute something toward the
common charges of the Churches.

15. The Deputies of the Isle of France shall tender unto their next Provincial
Synod the Letters and Memoirs of Monsieur du Perch sent by him unto this
Assembly, that satisfaction may be given the said du Perch for what he
pretends owing to him from their Province, and to this purpose notice shall be
given him of the time and place of their meeting by the Church of Paris.

16. Letters were read from the Church of Vertueil whereupon this Assembly
ordered, that immediately Letters should be written to the Lords Commissioners
for executing his Majesty's Edict in Dolphiny, recommending that Church unto
them, that so it may be named the first Town of the Baylywicks of Dolphiny, as
it was ordered at the Synod of Grenoble in the year 1602. and that the Town of
Briancon might be reputed the second.

17. Letters from our Brethren in the Valley of Barcelona, craving advice how
to govern themselves under their apprehensions of being deprived by the Duke of
Savoy of their precious Liberty to profess the Gospel, and worship God
according to his holy Will prescribed in the Scriptures. This Assembly desiring
most sincerely their Consolation, does earnestly exhort them to a stricter
Union with the other Valleys of Piedmont, assuring them of all Offices of
Christian Charity, in case they should be persecuted or banished, they being
Members of our own Body, united with us in the same Doctrine and Discipline.

Concerning the settling of our Religion at Issoire.
18. Letters from the Church of Issoire being read; this Assembly ordered the
General Deputies at Court vigorously to endeavor that the exercise of our
Religion might be established according to the Edict in the said Town of
Issoire, and in other places of the lower Auvergne; and the Colloquies of St.
Germain and Anduza in the lower Languedoc shall supply them with Ministers: And
that this their Establishment may be the better and sooner effected, they shall
have four Portions of the Moneys granted us by the Kings Majesty, out of that
Sum appointed for the lower Languedoc. And in order hereunto the said
Colloquies of St. Germain and Anduze shall assemble themselves within a Month
after the breaking up of this Assembly to consult together about those
Ministers who are to serve and shall be sent into the Lower Auvergne; and those
Churches there shall in the mean while do their utmost endeavor to get
themselves furnished with able Ministers. And the Province of Higher Languedoc
shall have the same care and kindness for the assistance and relief of the
Churches of the ^igher Auvergne.

19. The poor, fallen Christians in the Marquisate of Saluces demanding Counsel
what course they should take after this their great Offense: This Assembly
ordered that Letters should be sent them to forsake those places, where they be
constrained to participate in Idolatry, and to accompany their banished
Brethren in bearing the Cross of Christ.

20. The Universities shall be once again exhorted to get for themselves if
possible a public Library, See this Art. 24. of genesis mat.
and in it the great Bible of Antwerp.

21. The General Deputies of our Churches at Court are ordered by this Assembly
to do their utmost for the repose and welfare of the distressed Valleys of
Chasteau-Dauphin.

22. Monsieur Claudius Jobard Citizen and Inhabitant of Geneva complained
against the Province of Burgundy, for wrong done in their public Synodical
Acts at Ullim unto Master David Peaget Minister in the Baylywick of Gex, when
as by the Colloquy of Gex, who had inspected and examined that matter, the said
Peaget was justified and absolved of the Crimes imputed to him, and that the
Ministers of Geneva, and Doctor Polanus Professor of Divinity in the University
of Basil had given laudable Attestations under their Hands of his Godly Life
and Conversation. This Assembly considering the rashness of the Sentence
denounced against the said Peaget, and that too in his absence by the Synod of
Burgundy, orders that it be razed out of the Acts of their Synod, and that he
be restored to his good Name with Honor.

23. Monsieur des Bordes shall take care of the Business relating to the City
of St. Ambroise, and to write unto their Consuls for Advice in what manner he
is to act for them.

24. The Synod of higher Languedoc is charged to prosecute Monsieur Hollyer,
and see that he do appear in person at the Provincial Synod of Vivaretz, and
demand leave both of his Church, and Province, from which he is departed
without their Consent, contrary to the Discipline.

25. The Complaint of Monsieur Desparlay Vice-Seneschal of the higher Guyenne
shall be presented unto His Majesty by our General Deputies: And in the mean
while he is desired to quit his Lawsuit begun with the Magistrates of the City
of Lectoure.

26. Messieurs Sonis, Josion, Chauffepied, du Bourg, and de^ la Guard are
ordered to take the City of Orange in their way homeward, and to appease the
troubles stirred up in that Church and City; and to assure them that upon our
reading their Letters and those of Monsieur Blacon's, this Assembly confirming
the Union of that Church with the other Churches of this Kingdom, had charged
their General Deputies to bestir themselves as the necessity of their Affairs
did require, in their behalf, and that Letters to this purpose should be
written unto His Majesty, mediating with him for their Indemnity, and future
preservation.

27. The Church of Beaulne shall pay Monsieur Caille the Sum of 560 Livers,
which it is indebted to him, and bound to satisfy him fully by Decree of the
former Synod of Burgundy, held the last year; and that Synod shall see their
Decree accomplished.

28. Monsieur de la Faye relating the extreme poverty of the Church of Aubenac,
A Decree concerning the Church of Aubenac. See the Synod of St. Maixant,
partic. mat. 25.
and their utter inability for these two last years past to maintain their
Minister: This Assembly ordains, that the said Monsieur de la Faye shall
receive an Hundred Crowns before any others out of the first Moneys that come
in clearly unto the Province of Vivaretz, and are payable to it for this
present year, and the remainder of those that are past. Because the said
Province of Vivaretz has received two Portions more than is due unto it upon
the account of Ministers in actual service. And for time to come the said
Monsieur de la Faye shall receive three Portions of those Moneys assigned unto
that Province, and that preferably to all others, without any deductions for
Costs, Taxes, or bad Moneys to be allowed by him. And to this purpose the
Province of Vivaretz shall have two Portions given it over and above the number
of Pastors actually employed in its service.

29. Monsieur Ganthois Minister and Deputy of the Church of Sedan complained of
the Synod of the Isle of France, Picardy and Champagne, that whereas by a
Decree of the National Synod of Gergeau they were allowed four Pastors, they
had retrenched their number; and farther they remonstrated how greatly
incommodious it was unto them by reason of excessive Charges, and tiresome long
Journeys to be personally present at their Provincial Synods, which ordinarily
were held at some place near Paris. This Assembly ordains that for time past
both parties shall bring and give in their Accounts according to the Allotment
for four Pastors made at Gergeau: An Order for the Church of Sedan.
and for time to come the said Church of Sedan shall remain incorporated with
that Synod, as it had been by the Ordinance of Gergeau, but it shall be
dispensed with all as to its presence in the said Provincial Synod, provided
they attend on the meetings of the Colloquy of Champagne, and in case of
Appeals from the said Colloquy, that they send these by the Deputies of the
said Colloquy, who shall personally appear in the Provincial Synod. And the
said Colloquy of Champagne is further injoined to give unto the Church of Sedan
its Dividend of the Moneys assigned that Colloquy by the Synod of Gergeau, and
to act conformably to this our Order until the next National Synod.

30. That Book of Monsieur Ferrier Entitled (...) shall be revised by himself,
and communicated to our Brethren the Pastors of Geneva, before it be reprinted
the second time.

31. The Provinces are charged to collect the Memoirs of those Memorable Events
which have fallen out these Fifty years last past, and to send them unto
Monsieur d' Aubigny in Poictou, to be inserted by him in his History of this
present Age.

32. The Province of the Isle of France complaining that Five Hundred Livers
were drawn out of the whole Sum allotted them by the Dividend of Gergeau, An
Order of 500 Livers for the Ministers of Mantes and Fontainebleau, out of the
Moneys of His Majesty's Bounty, and assigned unto the Province of the Isle of
France. See St. Maixant. partic. mat. 22.
and particularly assigned toward the Maintenance of two Ministers in their
Province: This Assembly judging it a matter of dangerous consequence for any
Ministers to be thus preferred above their Brethren, enjoyneth the said
Province of the Isle of France not in the least to regard it, and forbids
those Ministers on pain of the greatest Censures to draw out their Pensions by
any other way, than what is usual and common to all the Churches. However for
the encouragement and accommodation of those two aforesaid Ministers, Pastors
in the Churches of Mantes and Fountain-bleau, two Portions more are ordained
the Isle of France, over and above those adjudged to it for Ministers in actual
service.

33. The Province of Vivaretz shall make a present Gift of an Hundred Livers
unto the Province of Lower Languedoc, out of the 372 Livers which they pretend
to be owing them by that of Vivaretz; and the Accounts of both these Provinces
shall be audited in the next Provincial Synod of the Lower Languedoc; and in
case those of Vivaretz refuse this condition they shall be bound to make a full
payment of the said 372 Livers.

34. The Church of Lions petitioning for an able Pastor, fit to undergo so
weighty and important a charge: This Assembly ordains that Monsieur Bailly do
exercise his Ministry there until the next National Synod.

35. Because of the inability of the Church of Saumur to do it, therefore the
remainder of Moneys due unto that Church out of the Sum allotted toward the
Maintenance of their University, shall be employed in the purchase and building
of a College meet for their Academical Exercises.

36. That the differences betwixt those of Provence and Dolphiny may be finally
composed; this Assembly ordains that those of Dolphiny do bring in their
Accounts, and pay unto the Provencals the seventh part of all those Moneys
which the said Province of Dolphiny has received for the years 98, 99, 1600.
and the seventh part of the Assignations remaining as yet unpayed for those
years, deducting only from the said Moneys the Sum of two hundred Livers,
remaining in their Hands, and to be allowed them upon pretense of Charges.

An Order for the Church in the Court of Madame.
37. A motion was made for providing the Church in the Court of Her Royal
Highness His Majesty's Sister with an able Pastor; and Monsieur du Moulin
Minister in the Church of Paris informing this Assembly that the Church of Metz
has assisted the said Church with two Ministers, who have each of them served
his Quarter, and that he the said du Moulin is to serve the third and next
Quarter, beginning the first of May, according as the Church of Paris had been
injoined; therefore, the Church of Rouan having three Ministers, and well able
with much ease to undergo this task, it is Ordained that the said Monsieur du
Moulin, and Monsieur de la Riviere Minister in the Church of Rouen shall in
their turn serve the said Church, and that Monsieur de la Riviere shall begin
with the next year 1604. and Monsieur du Moulin the year ensuing.

38. Our Brethren of Anjou demanded that Monsieur Renaud might be constituted
Professor of Divinity in the University of Saumur. This Assembly grants it,
provided that he and his Church of Bourdeaux do consent thereunto.

39. Differences having risen betwixt the Provinces of Dolphiny and Provence
about Accounts of Moneys employed by the Deputies, who had met at the Synod of
Saumur from both these Provinces; this Assembly most earnestly entreats them
before their departure hence to compound the matter among themselves; and that
it may be effected, Monsieur de Lhomeau and Monsieur de Grenoville are
appointed to hear the differences, and to make report of the whole unto this
Assembly; which being done by them, and heard by the whole Synod, that so a
final period might be put unto these unhappy differences, which had been of too
long a continuance, It was ordained, that those of Dolphiny should be
accountable unto them of Provence, for the seventh part of those Sums actually
received by them in the years 1598, 1599, and 1600. and for the seventh part of
the Assignations, which are yet unpaid, only deducting from the whole the Sum
of two Hundred Crowns remaining in their Hands, and to be allowed them in lieu
of charges and all other pretensions whatsoever.

40. Considering the Importance of the University of Sedan, and the great
Service it has done, and still does unto a great part of our Churches, this
Assembly ordains that in the Dividend of our Moneys granted us from ^is
Majesty's Bounty, there shall be an Addition of three Hundred Crowns more to
those five Hundred assigned to it by the Synod of Gergeau.

41. The Provinces are desired to consider against the next National Synod,
whether the Word Damnation, attributed unto our Lord, in the tenth Section of
our Catechism may be retained or changed.

42. Monsieur des Fontaines left the Original Accounts of Monsieur Palot in the
Hands of our General Deputies, who are charged to get them Copied out, and sent
unto Rochell, together with other Papers to be preserved in the Archives there.

43. The Province of Xaintonge is ordered to Convene the next National Synod in
the City of Rochell in the Month of May, and in the year 1605. unless there
should fall out some other General Assembly in the mean while.

44. The Assembly proceeding to a new Election of General Deputies for the
Churches, according to the regulation made in the Assembly of St. Foy, among
all that were recommended by the Deputies of the Provinces, It chose only these
two, the Lord of St. Germain, and the Lord of Bordes, ordering that they be
continued in this their Office, because of their good report, and general
satisfaction given by them unto the Provinces and Churches in their former
administration; who having accepted this Office, did Swear the Union prescribed
at Mantes, and solemnly promise to employ themselves with all faithfulness to
the utmost of their power in the discharge of the Duties thereof, according to
their Commission given them at Saint Foy.

45. The Sum of five and forty Thousand Crowns coming in unto us this year from
the Moneys of His Majesty's Bounty, after mature consideration had of the State
of our Universities and Churches, they were distributed in manner following.

CHAP. VIII. A Dividend of the Sum of 45000 Crowns both for our Universities
and Churches.
For the Universities.
Crowns. Sols. Denier. Of Saumur 1111 05 8 Of Montauban 1111 05 8 Of
Montpellier 700 06 8 Of Nismes 700 06 8 Of Sedan 800 00 0

All the Provinces shall have for their respective Churches according to the
Number of Ministers in actual Service, and of the Proposans they were obliged
to maintain.

For the Provinces.
Cro. S. D. The Isle of France for 62 portions, to wit, for six and forty
Ministers in actual service, comprising in it four Pastors in the Principality
of Sedan, and ten Churches to be provided for, with six Proposans. 3748 11 6
Normandy for 45 portions, out of which they provide for their vacant Churches,
and maintenance of Proposans, according to the number of their Colloquies. 2720
24 10 Orleans and Berry for six and thirty portions, for seven and twenty
Ministers, six Churches unprovided, to be supplied with Ministers, and three
Proposans. 2176 19 06 Brittany for 15 portions, for seven Pastors, four
Churches to be provided for, and four Proposans. 906 19 6 Anjou and Tourain for
27 portions, for twenty Ministers, four Churches to be provided for, and three
Proposans. 1632 14 9 The Higher and Lower Poictou for fifty portions, for nine
and thirty Ministers, eight Churches to be provided for, and three Proposans.
3022 38 4 Xaintonge and Aunix for sixty portions, for forty eighty Ministers,
six Churches to be provided for, and six Proposans. 3627 13 0 The Lower Guyenne
for sixty portions, for nine and forty Ministers, and seven Churches to be
provided, and five Proposans. 3627 13 0 The Higher and Lower Vivaretz and
Vellay for eight and twenty portions, for nineteen Ministers, including what
was ordained for the Church of Aubenas, six Churches to be provided for, and
three Proposans. 1692 42 1 The Lower Languedoc has one hundred portions for
fourscore and four Ministers in actual service, six Churches to be provided
for, four Pastors for the Lower Avergne, and six Proposans. 6045 21 11 The
Higher Languedoc, eighty portions, for sixty and four Ministers in actual
service, six Churches to be provided for, four Pastors for the Higher Auvergne,
and six Proposans. 4836 17 11 Burgundy has six and twenty portions for
thirteen Ministers, casting in Lions into the number, four Pastors for the
Colloquy of Gex, six Churches to be provided for, and three Proposans. 1571 47
8 Provence has sixteen portions for seven Pastors, seven vacant Churches to be
provided for, and two Proposans. 967 15 6 Dolphiny and Orange have seventy and
one portions for nine and fifty Pastors, whereof three for the City of Orange,
four Churches to be provided for, and eight Proposans. 4292 12 9

46. All the said Provinces shall bring unto the next National Synod the
Accounts of their Administering of these Moneys, divided among them, for the use
of their Pastors, and Unprovided Churches, and of the Proposans, whom they
stand obliged to maintain, that so the sums granted, but not employed by them,
may be restored unto the Synod.

47. Thanks shall be returned, and are now rendered unto the Lords de St.
Germain, and des Bordes, our General Deputies at Court, for their singular
fidelity and diligence in the discharge of their Trust, as also unto Monsieur
des Fontaines for his great pains in bringing Monsieur Palot to Audit his
Accounts, according to the Commission given him by the Assembly of St. Foy.

CHAP. IX. Here follows the Account of what was granted to Monsieur Palot and
to Monsieur du Candal.
1. THIS Assembly grants unto Monsieur Palot, that he shall first choose his
Assignations out of the years 1598, 1599 and 1600, that so he may be reimburst
of the Moneys advanced by him in the years aforesaid, without advancing one
upon the other, according as was ordained by the Commissioners.

2. This Assembly counts it unreasonable to give unto the said Palot any
Interest for the Moneys said to be advanced by him, nor does it think fit to
grant him that preference demanded by him for his confused and general
advances, that so he should be reimbursed out of the first and best Moneys
remaining due for the years 98, 99, 1600, 1601, 1602.

3. This Assembly restores unto the said Palot the sum of 1599 Crowns, paid
by him in the year 99, by virtue of an Order from the Assembly of Samur, upon
condition, that he reimburse himself out of the remaining Moneys of the years
98, 99, 1600, belonging to the Ministers and our Cautionary Towns, he deducting
from it the portions of the Higher and Lower Guyenne, unless he would rather
choose to recover it from the Parties themselves, as it was ordered by the
Commissioners.

4. This Assembly cannot allow of, nor part with the 2000 Crowns paid unto the
Deputies of the Assembly at Saumur, in the year 1601, for that half year in
which they did no Survice, nor can they allow upon the years 1601, and 1602,
and 1603, the sum of 1800 Crowns unto Monsieur de Parabelle, which had been
ordered him out of the remainders of the years 98, 99, and 1600.

5. Nor can it grant at present unto the said Palot, out of the clear Incomes
of the years 1601, and 1602, a restitution of those dividends, which have been
razed out of his Accounts, because he keeps the last quarter still in his own
hands to reimburse himself, nor in particular for those portions, whereof he
once had the first payment granted him by this Assembly.

6. Yet notwithstanding that Order of Counsel regulating the Taxations of the
said Palot at 1200 Crowns for the years 1601, 1602, and 1603. this Assembly
does think fit to give him for the years 1601, and 1602, a penny in the Liver
for Moneys already and actually paid, provided that within six days after his
being at Lions, he do pay the Arrears due unto our Churches, from the two first
Quarters of the years 98, 99, 1600, 1601, and 1602, and to every one of the
Provinces their particular shares of the 4847 Crowns, owing by him upon the
third Quarter of the year 1601, and of the 5528 Crowns, which he ought to pay
upon the third Quarter of the year 1602, as also what he owes us for
reimbursing him a penny farthing in the Liver for the bad Moneys of former
years, according as the Accounts shall be stated immediately betwixt all the
Provinces, and Him the said Palot, in the presence of Monsieur des Fontaines;
with this express condition, that if the said Palot do not at the time
mentioned pay in at Lions the sums aforesaid, that then the Churches shall not
be bound to allow him the penny in a Liver, but only two deniers and an half
(which is not a full farthing in the Liver) according to the Order
beforementioned. And as for the remaining sums of the third and fourth
Quarters of the years 1601, and 1602, the said Palot shall make payment of them
according to the Covenants past betwixt him and this Assembly, not including in
this Resolution either Provinces of the Higher Languedoc, or Lower Guyenne.

CHAP. X. An Account of the Dividend of One hundred and five and thirty
thousand Crowns, given by His Majesty every year unto the Reformed Churches of
France, according to which the Lord Isaac du Candall, and Monsieur de Visouze
shall make payment of each particular sum at the time hereafter appointed for
the year next coming, 1604, and this in pursuance of that Agreement made with
the said Lord of Candall, and the Deputies Assembled in this present National
Synod held at Gap in Dolphiny, before Monsieur Rostrain His Majesty's Public
Notary.
L. S. D. THERE must be paid, in the first placed, to the Province of Provence,
for sixteen Churches, the sum of 2091 05 6 To the Province of Brittany for
fifteen Churches 2720 03 4 To the Province of Burgundy for twenty and six
Churches 4715 07 8 To the Province of Vivaretz for twenty and eight Churches
5728 02 0 To the Lower Guienne for Churches 10881 13 0 To the Lower Languedoc
for 108 Churches 18136 0 0 To the Province of Poictou for fifty Churches 09068
0 0 To the Isle of France, Picardy, etc. for 62 Churches 07969 15 2 To the
Province of Champagne 03252 12 4 To the Province of Xaintonge for 60 Churches
01881 13 2 To the Province of Anjou for 27 Churches 04886 14 0 To the Province
of Higher Languedoc, and Higher Guyenne 14528 11 0 To the Province of Orleans
and Berry for six and thirty Churches 06520 19 8 To the Province of Dolphiny
for seventy one Churches 12876 12 8 To the Province of Normandy for 45 Churches
08261 4 10

A Dividend among our Universities.
L. S. D. There shall be paid to our University of Montauban 03333 06 8 To the
University of Saumur. 03333 06 8 To the Academy of Montpellier 01500 00 0 To
the Academy of Nismes. 01833 00 0 To that of Sedan. 02400 00 0

And all these Sums shall be paid by the said Lord of Candall unto those
Universities at the Terms prefixed, before any other payments whatsoever.

And what remains of the overplus of three quarters, shall be equally paid in
to each of the Provinces, according to the Account before-appointed, by three
equal portions, at the Terms prefixed, allowing him a Sous in the Liver.

What shall become due unto the Provinces of the Isle of France, Normandy,
Orleans, Anjou, Poitou, Higher and Lower Guienne, shall be paid into the
Consistories of Paris, Rouen, Orleans and Poitiers; and for the Higher
Languedoc and Guienne unto Mr. J. Bardon; and what shall be due unto the
Province of Burgundy, unto Mr. J. Le Gras Merchant, in the City of Lions.

And in case it should so fall out, that our Lords the General Deputies should
not receive either the whole, or part of their Assigned Stipend from the Lesser
Account, according to agreement: It is now resolved, that what may be wanting
to make it good, one half of it shall be taken out of the Total Sum of 135000.
Livers, which were to be paid in unto the Provinces in the three Quarters, and
shall be deducted from every one of the Provinces; with the allowance of a Sous
in the Liver unto the Lord of Candal; and the other half shall be deducted out
of the Moneys appointed by His Majesty for payment of the Garrisons; and to
this purpose an Order shall be given unto the said Lord of Candal, and our
General Deputies shall be paid before all other persons.

And this same course shall be taken for all pay^ents in the year 1605. And
this Rule shall be in force till the Meeting of the next National Synod.

CHAP. XI. A Roll and Catalogue of all the Reformed Churches of France, as well
those which are actually supplied with Pastors, as of those which shall be
before the Meeting of the next National Synod to be held at Rochell in the Year
1607. otherwise the Provinces will be enforced to make Restitution of those
Moneys ordained for them out of the Stock given us by His Majesty's Royal
Bounty. There was tackt unto this Roll the Names of those Pastors and Proposans
who are to be maintained by the Provinces.
The First Roll of Pastors and Proposans in the Isle of France, Picardy,
Beausse, and Champagne.
Isle of France. Churches. Ministers. Paris. Monsieur de Montigni. Francois de
Lauberan. Mr. de la Faye. Mr. du Moulin the eldest Son. Mr. Couett. Mr. Durand.
2. Le Plessis. Mr. du Bois the elder. 3. Claye. Mr. d'Aronde. 4. Mantes. Mr.
Chaurim. 5. St. Averne. Mr. de Beaulieu. 6. Fontainbleau. Mr. Voulas. 7.
Tequin. Mr. du Val. 8. Meaux. Mr. Choquett. 9. Peju. Mr. Conouailles. 10. La
Fere and Artenay. Mr. Marlette. 11. Senlis. Mr. Beaulieu Lord of le Blanc.
Picardy. Churches Ministers. Clermont. Mr. de Losses the younger, Lord of La
Touch. Le Villy. Mr. Richard. Laon. Mr. Morell. Guise. Mr. de Veins.
Compiegne. Mr. de Losses the elder, Lord of La Touch. St. Quentin. Mr.
Richier. Oistimont. Mr. Blanchard. Estaples. Mr. le Baulne junior. Boulognes
Mr. -- Calais. Mr. Teslier. La Ferte au Vidame. Mr. du Bois. La Beausse.
Churches Ministers. Houdan. Mr. Biolott. Blainville. Mr. Gravelle. Ampon au
Perch. Mr. Couronne. Moulons. Mr. Rougihaut. Ay. Mr. Brisbard. Colloquy of
Champagne. Churches Ministers. Von. Mr. de Gastine. Chaalons. Mr. Viriot.
Virtry le Francois. Mr. Yoland. Helmauric. Mr. Cousin. Vassy. Mr. Chevilette.
Nefancour. Mr. Candemiere. Espances. Mr. de Beauvois senior. St. Marc. Mr.
Carre. Sedan. Mr. Fornelle. Mr. du Tilly. Mr. Gantois. Mr. -- Mr. Canelle.

There were threescore and two Portions ordered unto all these Pastors, being
six and forty in actual service, and ten Churches destitute of Ministers, three
of which belong to the Colloquy of Champagne, and six Proposans, one of which
shall be appropriated to the said Colloquy. The whole Sum for those sixty and
two Portions amounted to 3748 Livers, seven Sous, and six Deniers.

The Second Roll of the Pastors and Proposans in the Province of Brittany.
Churches. Ministers. Viellevigne. Mr. Ferguson. Nantes. Mr. Oyseau. Croisie.
Mr. le la Prote. Sion. Mr. de la Place. Blain. Mr. David Richier, and Mr. Rene
de Losses Lord of La Touch. Arche-bernard. Mr. Andrew le Noir Ld. of
Beauchamps. Rennes. Mr. Fautrat. Vitre. Mr. Merlin senior, and Mr. Pazault.
Dinan. Mr. Pallori.

Yet when the Synod of Gap sat, there were no more than seven Pastors in
actual service, and four Churches and four Proposans to be provided for and
maintained, ad fifteen Portions were allotted them out of the Kings Moneys; but
since God increased the number of their Ministers, and this Province had
assigned it 906 Crowns, 48 Sous, 4 d.

The Third Roll of the Churches, Pastors, and Proposans in the Province of
Orleans, Berry, Blaisois and Nivernois.
Orleans and Berry. Churches Ministers. Orleans Mr. du Moulin the Father
Sancerre Mr. Dorival Gian Mr. Fontaines Gian Mr. Pinette Blois Mr. Vignier
Chastillon sur Loin Mr. Melett Chastillon sur Loire Mr. Le Noir Boisgency,
Lorges and Marchenoit Mr. Samuel de Chambaran Espenille Mr. Giraud Aubusson Mr.
Vermer Argenton Mr. de Rieux Mer Mr. Bourguignon Chasteausdun Mr. Simpson
Gergeau Mr. Boucher Pisons and Seneu Mr. Charretier Romoranti^ Mr. Brun La
Chustre Mr. Granier Ginvelles and Luneau Mr. de la Roche disione. St. Leonard
Mr. de Monsanglar Chirac Mr. Jurieu St. Amont Mr. Jamet Issondun Mr. de Beauval

Mr. Berger was Emeritus, and had four Portions assigned for his subsistence.

Mr. Granier lives at Sancerre. There be six Churches and six Proposans to be
provided for.

The Fourth Roll of the Churches, Pastors and Proposans in the Province of
Anjou, Tourain and Maine.
Tourain. Churches Ministers. Tours Mr. des Aigues Mr. Coupe Loches and
Chastillon Mr. Grevon Previlly Mr. Rogier Chinon and l'Islebouchard Mr.
Pevillaud Vandome Mr. Salomeau Montoire Mr. Didier Anjou Churches Ministers.
Saumur Mr. Bouchereau Angers Mr. de Blois Beauge Mr. John Fleury Loudun Mr. de
Clairville, he died in the year 1608. Loudun Mr. Bid, died 1607. Choupes Mr.
Goudry Gaon and Vandelles Mr. Besnard Le Man's Mr. Vigneu Belesme Mr. Notman La
Hay Mr. de la Comb Chasteau du Loir Mr. du Fresne Mont Gobert Mr. de la Noue.

Monsieur de Lessard is Emeritus. In all twenty Pastors, four Churches
destitute, and three Proposans; so there was assigned to this Province of
Tourain and Anjou twenty seven Portions, which amounted to 1632 Crowns,
fourteen Sous, and nine Deniers.

The Fifth Roll of the Churches, Pastors and Proposans in the Province of the
Upper and Nether Poictou.
Colloquy of the Upper Poictou. Churches Ministers. Poictiers Mr. Clemenceau
Chastetheraud Mr. d'Amours, he died lately. Mr. Picard, suspended. Touars Mr.
Andrew Rivett. senior Parteney Mr. Ricourt, lately deceased. Mr. Manceau
Lusignan Mr. Mazieres, he died at Talmond. Mr. Mestayer succeeded him. Sansay
Mr. Monnestier Cove Mr. L'Estang Mr. Cuville Civray Mr. de la Roche Croize Le
Vigan Mr. Favre La Trimoville Mr. Brun Chauvigny Mr. Florand Roche Choart Mr.
Roche, and since Mr. Forgeau Le Boucheron Mr. Joubert Colloquy of Niort and St.
Maixant. Churches Ministers. Niort Mr. de la Blaschiere senior. Mr. Chauffepied
St. Maixant Mr. Chesneau Chamdenis Mr. Guillermett Mougon Mr. la Blascheire,
old Son. St. Gelais Mr. la Blascheire, the youngest Son. Melle Mr. Manceau, who
died at Partenay, and since him, Mr. Rene Forest. Aulnay Mr. de L'Estang
Issoudun Mr. de la Vallee Chefboutonnee Mr. Olliver, he lately revolted; since
Mr. John Chalmot of Niort Colloquy of the Nether Poictou. Churches Ministers.
Fontenay Mr. de la Vallade Luson Mr. Bomaud St. Benoist Mr. Textor, who died
lately. Mr. Daniel Guermeau, a Rocheller. Mr. de la Place, who is since dead.
Talmont upon the Jard. Mr. Masseres, deposed. Mr. James Prunier was received in
the mixed Assembly held at Fontenay before St. John's Fair. 1614. Monne Mr.
Vatable St. Giles upon Vic Mr. Prascisault Le Poire Mr. de Bonvouloir, since
sent unto St. d'Angely. Mouschamps Mr. de Losses Lord of la Tousche the elder;
but since dead. Chantonnee Mr. Tirenu Marevil Mr. Marchand St. Ermine Mr. Papin
a Rocheller Mouilleron Mr. Berny Pausanges Mr. Moreau Vaudore Mr. Champanois La
Chastagneraye Mr. Texier, and since Mr. George Tompson, a Scotch-man. Colonges
les Reau Mr. Dantonnet

In all thirty nine Pastors, eight Churches to be provided for, and three
Proposans, which made up fifty Portions for the whole Province of Poitou,
amounting to 3022 Crowns, 40 Sous, and 10 Deniers.

The Sixth Roll of the Churches, Pastors, and Propasans in the Province of
Xaintonge, Aulnix, and Augoulmois.
1 Colloquy, of St. John d'Angely. Churches Ministers. St. John d'Angely Mr.
Fremond de Vigier, Lord of Moustier, now dead; to him succeeded Mr. Japhet de
Vigier, Lord of Bessay; his Son Mr. du Bon Vouloir. Taillebourg Mr. William
Rivett, the younger Brother, Lord of Chanvernon. St. Savinian Mr. Alix Tonna
Charante Mr. Jouanneau, and since Mr. Ferry Tonnay Boutonnee Mr. de la
Viennerie Matta Mr. Rousseau. 2 Colloquy, of the Islands. Churches Ministers
St. Peter's of Olleron Mr. de la Croix; he died in the year 1610, since St.
Peter's of Olleron Mr. Guilielmi Castle of Olleron Mr. Petit, the younger Royan
Mr. Deschareves, dead, but since Mr. Heraud Mornac Mr. le Coq Aruert. and la
Tremblade, and Jonin, is since separated from them. Monsieur Rossignol La
Tremblade Mr. Papin Marennes Mr. Jeremy Boisseul, he died 1609. since Mr.
Zachary Crispin, Lord of Chabosselay an Anjouin, and Mr. Richier, Lord of
Vandelin Cour, a Britton Saujon Mr. Paul Bonnet, junior St. John Dangles Mr.
Berger, deceased; since Mr. de la Forest Soubize Mr. Chevalier Moize Mr.
Beauja, sent to St. Mesmes, since Mr. Thomas Guyot, Lord of Chappeauvert St.
Just Mr. Tolouse, a Rocheller Third Colloquy, of Aunix. Churches Ministers.
Rochel. Mr. Du Mont. deceased. Mr. James Merlin. Mr. Samuel L' hommeau. Mr.
Jerome Coulommies Born in Bearn. Mr. Louis Le Ceueler, Lord of la Chappeliere
an Angevin. Mr. Daniel Goire, a Rocheller. Mr. Gideon de Montmartyn, Lord of La
Turpiniere, he died 1609. Mr. John Peter Salebert, a Rocheller, received into
the Ministry in the Colloquy of Aulnix held at Nieul on Thursday the 6th of
Feb. 1613. but he was Ordained at Rochell by Mr. James Merlin on the Lord's Day
in the Afternoon, March 3. 1613. in the Great Temple with most solemn and
extraordinary Prayers. St. Martins in the Istle of The. Mr. German Chauveton,
Lord of Beauvois, he died in the latter end of year, 1604. Mr. Fautrard and
Englishman ( I suppose he was Born in the Island of Guernzey, for one of his
Name was Minister there in the year 1647.) but he died of the Plague a
Fortnight after Mr. de Beauvois. Since Mr. Jews Aubyneau a Rocheller Ars in
the Isle of Re Mr. Daniel Chanett. La Flotte in the Isle of Re Mr. Daniel
Gorre, who was after sent unto Rochell. La Flotte in the Isle of Re Mr. John le
Chatre a Rocheller. Marans Mr. Pillard Marans Mr. La Violette Bourneuf and
Dampierre Mr. Febrve Surgeres Mr. Tagaut Nieul Mr. James Guibert, a Rocheller,
sent to Archiac and Jonsac; he afterward turned Apostate. Nieul Mr. Peter
Menanceau a Rocheller. Mauze Mr. Andrew de Mazieres, Lord of La Cave Laleu,
l'Ommeau and Lozieres Mr. Samuel Veupillet a German Sales, Tore, and Mortagne
Mr. Toussainet a German The Fourth Colloquy, of Xaintes. Churches Ministers.
Xainctes Mr. Bonnet senior, dead since Mr. Petit senior Pons Mr. Land removed
to Mortagne Mr. Heraud of Rochell sent to Royan Mr. Peris Archiac and Jonsac
Mr. Menanceau, sent to Nieul in Aulnix Plassac and Clan Mr. Calbert, and since
Mr. Choquet Mortagne Mr. Chastaigner, dead since. Mr. Land. Gemouzat Mr.
Gabart Rieax Mr. Marcon Mr. du Perch, and since Cozes Mr. James Chalmot of
Rochell The Fifth Colloquy, of Augoalmois. Churches Ministers Stelaud de
Lindoire Mr. George Pacard the Elder, sent unto Rochefoucald; he died in the
year 1610. La Rochefoucaud Mr. Hog, sent to Angoulesme, and since Mr. Pacard
senior La Rochebeaucourt Mr. Pitard Jarnac Mr. Pacard the Eldest Son Cognac Mr.
Barjemont removed Mr. Bizett removed Mr. John Perreau of Rochell Vertueil Mr.
Colladon, since deceased. Mr. Trochereg, a Baron of Scotland, but removed to
Saumur Mr. Peers sent to Pons. Vertueil Mr. Comareg. The Sixth Colloquy, of
Jonzac. Churches Ministers. Jonzac Mr. Pollot, dead, since James Guibert, who
revolted; after him holy Mr. Welsh a Scotch Minister, who spent eight hours
every day in Prayer. Barbezieux Mr. Petit the Elder, sent to Xaintes Mr.
Theophilus Rossell of Nantes. St. Mesmes Mr. Beaujan Baigne and Chaux Mr.
Boyannat La Roche Chalais Mr. Bellot

There be forty eight Pastors in the whole Province of Xaintonge, six Churches
destitute, and six Proposans, without including Mr. Herald lent unto the
Church of Marsillac; so that it had sixty Portions, amounting to 3627 Crowns,
and 13 Sous.

The Seventh Roll of the Churches, Pastors, and Proposans in the Province of
Lower Guienne.
The First Colloquy of Higher Agenois. Churches Ministers. Tonneins Mr. de
Monjone Mr. de Beaucons Clerac. Mr. Ricotier the Father Mr. Ricotier the Son,
the Grandson was, I think, Minister also in the Church of Tonneins, and exiled
with the other Ministers 1685. Castelmoron Mr. Bausty Pathe Mr. Mermet the Son
Monflanquin Mr. Freron the Father Tournon Mr. Freron the Son Monheur Mr.
Scillade Leyrac Mr. Sylvius the Son La Parade Mr. Fevran Grateloup Mr. Vidouse
an Apostate Puymirol Mr. de La Fayole The Second Colloquy, of Lower Agenois.
Churches Ministers. Bordeaux Mr. Renaud, he died 1610. Mr. Primrose a
Scotchman. Libourne Mr. de la Vallade Castillon Mr. Baduell Ste. Foy Mr.
Hesperian Ste. Foy Mr. de Bessoly Aniche Mr. D'Anglade Jouzac Mr. Majence
Parole Mr. Lamy Morancour Mr. Zamett Bazas. Mr. Goudon Velines Mr. Vassar Duras
Mr. Peniot The Third Colloquy, of Condomois. Churches Ministers. Nerac Mr.
Mermet the Father Mr. Masparrault Mr. de La Nusse Mozin Mr. Luillier
Casteljaloux Mr. du Luc Caumont Mr. Villebon La Bastide Mr. Sylvius the Father
Le Mont de Moisin Mr. de Palloque Gouse Mr. Melet Bifesensac Mr. Guynier Tartas
Mr. Pourrat Sos Mr. du Mier The Fourth Colloquy, of Perigort. Churches
Ministers. Bergerac Mr. Pyneau Mr. Beraud junior Islegeac Mr. de Monbaron
Montpasier Mr. de Bessole Aymett Mr. de Salettes Berbignieres Mr. Dalbier
Sausigniac Mr. de la Roche Longuier Mr. Chauveton Limeuil Mr. de Blasmont
Mussidan Mr. Escallier La Force Mr. Du Pin Pomport Mr. Regnac Limoges Mr. --
Turennes Mr. Roy Argentueil Mr. De la Faye

In all forty eight Pastors, six Churches destitute, and five Propsans, which
make up sixty Portions for the Lower Guienne, amounting in all to 3627 Crowns
and 13 Sous.

The Eighth Roll, of the Churches, Pastors and Proposans in the Province of
Higher and Lower Vivaretz and Vellay.
Higher and Lower. Vivaretz and Velle. Churches Ministers. Valonsales la Gorge
Mr. Labat Aubenas Mr* de la Fare Meriac and Jansac Mr. Imbert Villeneufve
debere Mr. de la Motte Annonay Mr. de Salvary Bonlieu Mr. Quimpson De Faigues
Mr. Traiulles St. Apollinaire de Gluiras Mr. Faucher Sannoy Mr. Arnaud St.
Sauveur Mr. du Cross Privas Mr. Valeton Tournon de Privas Mr. Reboulet St.
Vincent Mr. Bizett Rousin de Blaye Mr. Carat Chalancon Mr. Mercier Cheillar Mr.
Daufin

Mr. Peter Raillet is Emeritus. In all there be seventeen Pastors in this
Province, and there were allotted two supernumerary Portions for the Church of
Aubenas, six Churches destitute, three Proposans, so that it had twenty eight
Portions amounting to 1692 Crowns, 42 Sous, and one Denier.

The Ninth Roll of the Churches, Pastors, and Proposans in the Province of
Lower Languedoc.
The First Colloquy, of Usez. Churches Ministers. Usez Mr. Cry Bagnols Mr.
Thomas St. Ambroise Mr. Petit Le Vaux Mr. Lion Le Vaux Mr. Lion Berjac Mr.
Galois Grenouillac Mr. Maignan St. Genus Mr. Railli Lussan Mr. Texier Boucoiran
Mr. Arbaut Blansac Mr. Bouton Montarenne Mr. Arnand Montfrin Mr. Villarett The
Second Colloquy, of Montpellier. Churches Ministers. Montpellier Mr. Gigord Mr.
Peyrol Mr. Rudavel Lunell Mr. Preudhomme Mangue Mr. Tortolon Pignay Mr.
Moncassin Bedamis Mr. Roussell St. Andre Mr. Sebastian Gignac Mr. Nisole
Beziers Mr. De la Pause, deposed, and revolted Florensac Mr. Remirail Montagnac
Mr. Serres Pousson Mr. Massouverain The Third Colloquy, of St. Germain.
Churches Ministers. St. Germain Mr. de la Faye Valfrancesque Mr. Aiguion Bar
Mr. Biail Pont du Montuer Mr. Cailleteau St. Andre de Valborgne Mr. De la
Bastide St. Estienne Mr. Noine Sauvenians Mr. Paul Marnegues Mr. Toussaincts
Florac. Mr. Ricaud St. Marcell Mr. Fressol. Le Coulet Mr. Drague St. Private Mr.
Guisau Castaignol Mr. Gallicien The Fourth Colloquy, of Nismes. Churches
Ministers. Nismes Mr. Mousnier Mr. Perrier Mr. Saffran Galarques Mr.
Claverolles Aubaix Mr. de Marizi Clarensac Mr. Tuffan Vauvert Mr. Jannin
Marsillargues Mr. Justamond Aiguesmortes Mr. Bransillon Sommiers Mr. Chaunes
St. Laurens Mr. Tuffan junior Aimargues Mr. Fillon Calvilon Mr. Rennoy
Verguises Mr. Boulet Nages Mr. Terond Bierme Mr. Venturin St. Gilles Mr.
Mercator The Fifth Colloquy, of Sauve. Churches Ministers. Sauve Mr. Lazare de
Vigean Mr. Gasques St. Aulay Mr. Palquier Gorges Mr. Brumet Vallerangue Mr.
Villett Mermant Mr. Jarry Sumene Mr. Abrahac St. Laurens Mr. Nicholas Montardis
Mr. Juvan La Planquette Mr. Falquerolles Nonablett Mr. Pepin Le Rey Mr. Rogier
Quissatt Mr. Sebastian Durfort Mr. Laurent Pompignan Mr. Mernere Cornac Mr.
Guillaumin St. Jean Mr. Fully The Sixth Colloquy, of Andusa. Churches
Ministers. Anduse Mr. Baille La Salle Mr. Courault Vezenobre Mr. Robert Toirat
Mr. Paulet Sondorgues Mr. Zuentin Ales Mr. Marion Milet Mr. Desmarais Lihan Mr.
Valet Mr. Bahet St. Jean Mr. Fit Generaigues Mr. Baruc Tournac Mr. Matthieu

In all eighty four Pastors, six Churches destitute, four Pastors for the Lower
Avergne, and six Proposans to be provided for, which make One hundred portions,
amounting to 6045 Crowns, 21. Sous, 11 Deniers, for the Province of Lower
Languedoc.

The Tenth Roll of the Churches, Pastors and Proposans in the Province of
Higher Languedoc, and Higher Guienne.
The First Colloquy, of Albigeois. Churches Ministers. Castres Mr Duadet Mr
Balleran Mr Josion Realmont Mr Raffin Lombes Mr Severac La Cauve Mr. l'Allemand
Vianne Mr de Miramont Angles Mr Cazaux Vabry Mr Affier, or Acier Bassac Mr de
Sages St. Amone Mr Beranger Pourdelac Mr Maulieres Requecourbe Mr Bourgaut
Castelnau Mr. Offrion Briteste Mr. Favre Veins Mr. Castelfranc The Second
Colloquy, of Lauragais. Churches Ministers. Puylaurens Mr. Voisin the Eldest
Brother Mr. La Curve Cuq Mr. Voisin the Younger Le Mont St. Puelles Mr. Aubriol
St. Paul Mr. Villemur Mazamet Mr. Roussel Cormant Mr. Candomere Venel Mr.
Lespmasse The Third Colloquy, of Rouergue. Churches Ministers. Milhaud Mr. Du
Teil Mr. Jolly the Elder Brother St. Romederac Mr. Jolly the Young. Bro. St.
Affrique Mr. Boutoux Brusques Murasson Mr. Remiral The Fourth Colloquy, of
Foix. Churches Ministers. Pamiers Mr. Froger Les Bordes Mr. Du Puy L'aisne Foix
Mr. Ollier More Mr. Roger Mazeres Mr. Ologary Caulmont Mr. Givaudan Saverdun
Mr. Du Puy junior La Bastide Mr. Bourgade Camerade Mr. Austre The Fifth
Colloquy, of Armagnac. Churches Ministers. Lectoure Mr. Savoye Mauvoisin Mr.
Gardesi. He was a most severe Nathan to Henry IV. Puygasque Mr. Monin L'Isle
Jourdain Mr. Du Prat Le Masde Verdun Mr. Constans Carrouillin Mr. Falgueirac
Sievras and Soubieres Mr. La Font The Sixth Colloquy, of Lower Quercy. Churches
Ministers. Montaubon Mr. Michael Beraud the Father Mr. Tenans Mr. Bernard Sonis
Mr. Mark Anthony Benoist Negrepelisse Mr. Girard Caussade Mr. Le Grand Voyliac
Mr. Galiaste St. Antonin Mr. Tolosani Villemur Mr. Forgereau, removed to
Rochefoucaud, in the Colloquy of the Lower Poictou Bruniquet Mr. Tremble Albias
Mr. Charles (the Father) dead Maussac Mr. Richard Campagnac Mr. Vrisse St.
Leophary Mr. Richeteau

Ministers, Emeriti, 1. Mr. Nadal, 2. Mr. Tayaut, 3. Mr. Grave, 4. Mr. Causse,
5. Mr Goudon. The Province of Higher Languedoc, and Higher Guienne had in all
64 Pastors, 6 Churches, and 6 Proposans to be provided for; and 4 Pastors more
for the Higher Auvergne, which makes 80 Portions in all for that Province,
amounting to 4836 Crowns, 17 Sous, and 11 Deniers.

The Eleventh Roll, of the Churches, Pastors and Proposans in the Province of
Burgundy, Lyonnois, Forest, La Bresse, and Beaujolois.
The First Colloquy, of Lions. Churches Ministers. Lion Mr. de Brunes
Bamargental Mr. Le Faucheur Beaujoloy Mr. Comin Cluny Mr. Ricard Rodenelle Mr.
de Lorme The Second Colloquy, of Chaalons. Churches Ministers. Chaalons Mr. Le
Blanc Conches Mr. Textor Buzi Mr. Pyneau Parey Mr. Collinet The Third Colloquy,
of Dijon. Churches Ministers. Vauvre Mr. Cassegrain Issurtille Mr. Gaussan
Aurne le Duc Mr. Eliot Aralon Mr. Allaigonne The Fourth Colloquy, of Gex.
Churches Ministers. Sessy Mr. Moria Gex Mr. Molan Toirier Mr. Quinson Orney Mr.
Prevost Dinonne Mr. Grillet Chalam Mr. Jappe Coulonge Mr. Grois Versoir Mr.
D'espagne, or d'Espancy Farges Mr. Perier Sammais Mr. Aubery Croisell Mr.
Percull

There was granted to the Province of Burgundy 26 Portions for 13 Pastors, in
which the Church of Lions is comprehended for one, and four Pastors for the
Colloquy of Gex, six Churches destitute of Ministers, and three Proposans.
Which 26 Portions do amount in the full and whole unto the sum of 1571 Crowns,
47 Livers, and 8 Deniers.

The Twelfth Roll, of the Churches, Pastors and Proposans in the Province of
Provence.
Provence. Churches. Ministers. Lormarin Mr. de la Planche La Crolle Mr. de
Chamforan Merindol Mr. Ricard Cabrieres Mr. de la Cross Seyne Mr. Chaslier
Manosques Mr. Codur Le Lui Mr. Toussaincts

There were sixteen Portions granted to the Province of Provence for seven
Pastors, and two Proposans, which made in all 967 Crowns, 17 Sous, and six
Deniers.

The Thirteenth Roll, of the Churches and Pastors, and Proposans in the
Province of Dolphiny.
Dolphiny. The First Colloquy, of Vanduson. Churches. Ministers. Puigilat Mr.
Perron Vieaux Mr. Perrot Fenestrelles Mr. Lanselne Jordan Montoules Mr. Guerin
Vilaret Mr. Anastase Meaux Mr. Daniel Nonin Les Cardonnes Mr. Joshua Ripert The
Second Colloquy, of Ambrun. Churches. Ministers. Ambrun Mr. Matthiew
Fessinieers Mr. Andrew Rebert Guillestau Mr. Pascal Arieu and Chaesteny Mr.
Jourdain Queirac Mr. -- Moulines Mr. Giles The Third Colloquy, of Gappensois.
Churches. Ministers. Gap Mr. Barbier Veisnes Mr. Faugier Serres Mr. Martinet
Orpier Mr. Javel Corp Mr. Estienne Vandiomene Mr. Abrau The Fourth Colloquy, of
Grenoble. Churches. Ministers. Grenoble Mr. Caille Mr. Cresson La Meure Mr.
Vulson Mine Mr. Fabry St. Jean D'ambornes Mr. Gubrier Grenin Mr. Magnett Oyan
Mr. Espagnet Aumonesteir Mr. Estriem Delbermont Mr. Gap. The Fifth Colloquy, of
Die. Churches. Ministers. Nione Mr. Perria Vinsabre Mr. Persol Le Bins Mr.
Petit Talignan Mr. Maugies St. Saveur Mr. du Gaeye Orange Mr. Roussell Mr.
Maurice Courtoison Mr. de La Vesne St. Pantheon Chasteau Mr. Felix, and Mr.
Ollivier The Seventh Colloquy of Valentinois. Churches. Ministers. Montlimart
The great Chamier Mr. Canter Lurion and Conol Mr. Vinay Valence Mr. Mercure
Crest and Hure Mr. Sagues Bourdeaux Mr. Gillier Dieu Le Fit Mr. Girard
Chasteau neuf du Mazene Mr. Dauphin Beze and Bonnieres Mr. Jay The Eighth
Colloquy of Viennois. Churches. Ministers. St. Marcellin Mr. Bouguin Romans Mr.
Agur Pont de Royans Mr. Denis Eyrier Beaurepaire Mr. Durant

There be two Pastors Emeriti in the Province of Dolphiny, viz. 1. Mr, Mallet,
2 and Mr. Dinson. In the whole Province there be 59 Pastors, 4 Churches
destitute, and 8 Proposans to be maintained; There be 3 for the City, and
Principallity of Orange, so that the said Province had 71 Portions, which
amounted to 4292 Crowns, 12 Sous, and 9 Deniers.

The total Sum of the Pastors, Proposans and Churches of the said 13 Provinces
is 440.

The Province of Normandy was not cast into this Account.

There be 54 Churches destitute of Pastors.

There be Ministers in actual service, 478.

There be Ministers Emeriti, 11.

There be 46 Proposans.

Although the Province of Normandy did not send any Deputies unto this National
Synod, so that there was no Catalogue taken of its Churches, Pastors and
Proposans, as there was of all the other Provinces: Yet this National Synod of
Gap did adjudge unto the said Province 46 Portions, which amounted to 2420
Crowns, 23 Sous and 10 Deniers; out of which Moneys that Province is to assist
it is Churches, maintain its Proposans according to the number of its Colloqies.

All these Articles, Decrees and Canons beforementioned, were resolved, voted
and passed in the Seventeenth National Synod of Gap; which ended the 23d day of
October, 1603. And thus Signed in the Original.

Chamier, Moderator. Ferrier, Assessor.
Scribes.
Vignier and Roy



CHAP. XII. Remarks upon the Deputies of this Synod.
1. MR. Daniel Chamier, was the Son of a worthy Minister in Dolphiny, who,
riding to a Provincial Synod, was drowned. His Son Daniel is, in common
discourse among the French Ministers, styled the Great Chamier. A man of vast
Learning, great Prudence, and indefatigable Industry; very dear unto, and
highly esteemed by their National Synods, to which he was frequently deputed,
chosen Scribe in that of Gergeau, and Moderator in two National Synods, of Gap
and Privas. He was killed at the Siege of Montauban (where he was Pastor and
Professor of Divinity) with a Canon Bullet, having a C on it (being the
Hundredth that was shot against the Town) upon the Lord's Day, the day, as he
said, of his rest; and indeed, God took him into his Eternal rest, as he did
Elijah, by Horses of Fire, and Chariots of Fire. He has so Learnedly confuted
the Papists in his Panstratia Catholica, that none among them ever undertook to
Answer it. There be also printed his Epistolae Jesuiticae, and his Corpus
Theologiae, and in French, La Confusion des disputes Papists. There is also an
Answer of his to some Questions of Cotton the Jesuit. But of him more in my
Icones.

2. Ferrier, who was Assessor in this Synod, was an Infamous Apostate; He Writ
Hypotyposes Theologicae.

3. Monsieur Vignier, who was one of the Scribes, was the very Learned Son of a
most Learned Father. His Theater de l'Antichrist was a grievous tormenting Boil
unto the Papists. He Writ a Dissertation in Latin about the Venetians
Excommunication by Paul V. against Cardinal Baronius. And Theses de
Satisfactione Christi.

THE Acts, Decisions and Decrees OF THE XVIIIth National Synod OF The Reformed
Churches OF FRANCE, Held the Third time in The City of Rochel, on the 1st, day
of March, In the Year of out Lord 1607.

The CONTENTS Of the third Synod of ROCHEL. 1607. The 18th Synod.

Chap. I. The Deputies and Synodical Officers, a great debate about the
Deputies of the City of Rochel, who claimed to themselves the privilege of a
Province. The promise of submission wanting in several letters of Deputation
censured. A Canon against Pastors Non-deputed assisting in this Synod. No
Appeals to be heard till the seventh day after the opening of the National
Synod. Letters from the Prince Elector Palatine the common wealths of the
Netherlands, Switzerland and Geneva read. The Synods sense of them. The Case of
Monsieur Regnault. Chap. II. Observations on the Confession. Piscators opinion
of our Justification by Christ's passive Obedience only censured. 4. Huguets
answer to Piscator suppressed. 5. Mr. Sohnis answers Piscator by order of the
Churches. 6. The Count of Nassaws Letter about Piscator 7. The Confession
approved and sworn. Chap. III. Observations on the Discipline. A Colloquy may
lend a Minister. 3. A Synod. 6. Months out of the Province. 8. Persons Married
by the Mass shall do public Penance. 16. Particular Churches may celebrate a
Fast, without asking leave of the Colloquy, on extraordinary occasions. 21. The
Discipline approved and sworn. Chap. IV. Observations on the National Synod of
Gap. Scholars unordained may not administer the Sacraments. 6. Four
Universities censured for not bringing in their Accounts. 10. No private
persons, nor Consistories can dissolve Marriage Promises. 11. Chap. V. General
Matters. Charities for the poor Exiles of Salluces. 3. Proposans admitted at
silent Learners into National Synods. 5. The case of Competitors, for a
Professorship in the Universities, determined. 6. Pecuniary matters may be
determined by another Province. 8. two Deputies shall be sent, and no more from
contending Churches. 12. Such at Marry Popish Wives shall bear no Office in the
Churches. 13. Two Canons about Monks. 15, 16. The Baptism of Midwives null.
18. Three cases about Marriage, 19, 20, 21. Orders about Scholars Pensioners.
24 Elenchus novae Doctrinae suppressed. 25. Professors of Divinity shall finish
their course in three years. 31. Cases about accused persons, 37, 39. Chap. VI.
Of Accounts. A Dividend of 135000 Crowns among the Churches and Universities,
and General Deputies. Chap. VII. Other Accounts of Moneys to be paid by the
Lord of Candal. Chap. VIII. Memorials and Instructions given to the Lords
General Deputies. Chap. IX. Appeals. Two divided Churches healed. 1, 2. The
Appeal of a Deposed Minister rejected. 15. A great contention composed. 19.
Chap. X. Particular matters. 3. Non resident Pastors ordered to their Churches.
1, 2. A great contention composed. 6. Monsieur Primrose. Pastor of the Church
of Bourdeaux recalled into Scotland. 9. Dissentions in a Church made up. 19. A
case of Witchcraft. 21. A case about a Donative. 22. Moneys of two Churches for
the Exiles of Salluces, 23, 24. A case about a Child's Baptism. 35. The
Insolency of a Capuchin Friar. 37. A poor Minister relieved. 39. Censures taken
off from a Church and Minister. 43. A Petition to the King. 52. Chap. XI.
Particular matters relating to the Isle of France. Chap. XII. The Roll of
Deposed Ministers. Chap. XIII. Orders about Legacies. Chap. XIV. Political
Acts, the King's Letter to the National Synod. 4. Chap. XV. The Lord of Candals
Account.
The Third Synod of ROCHELL.
SYNOD XVIII. 1607.
In the Name of God. Amen.

Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches in the Kingdom of France,
held at Rochell the first day of March, and continued till the two and
twentieth day of April in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and
seven.

CHAP. I Names of the Deputies and Synodical Officers.
Monsieur Beraut chosen Moderator. Monsieur Merlin Assessor.
Scribes.
Monsieur Andrew Rivet and Monsieur Roy. --



THERE appeared in it as Deputies from their several Provinces, the Pastors and
Elders hereafter named.

For the Province of Xaintonge, Aunix and Augoulmois, Monsieur George Pacard
Minister in the Church of Rochefoucaud, Master James Merlin one of the Pastors
of the Church of Rochel, Monsieur Arthur de Partenay Lord of Genouille Elder in
the Church of Tonney-boutonne, and Mr. Daniel le Roy Elder in the Church of
Xaintes, with Letters from the said Province. Mr. Gigord was a man of most
singular Piety, holy in his Life, happy in his Death. He died full of Peace and
Joy in Believing, ravished with the consolations of Gods Spirit.


For the Province of Lower Languedoc, Master Christopher de Barjac Lord of
Gasques Pastor of the Church of Vigan, and Master John Gigord Pastor and
Professor in the Church of Montpellier, and Tristram de Brueis Lord of St.
Chappe, Elder in the Church of Nismes, and Stephen du Vergier Ordinary
President in the Chamber of Accounts of Languedoc, Elder in the Church of
Montpellier, with Letters of Commission from their Province.

For the Province of Orleans, Berry, Blesois and Nivernois Master Joachim du
Moulin Pastor of the Church of Orleans, and Master Nicholas Vignier Pastor of
the Church of Blois, together with the Lords Daniel de St. Quintin Baron of
Bellet Elder in the Church of St. Amand, and Michael de Launay Lord de
Filaines, Elder in the Church of Blois, Mr. Joachim du Moulin was the godly
Father of that excellent man of God Mr. Peter du Monlin.
empowered with authority from their Province.

For the Province of the Isle of France, Picardy, Champagne, Brie, and the Land
of Chartres, Master Francis de Lauberan Lord of Montigny Pastor of the Church
of Paris, and Master Tobias Yoland Pastor of the Church of Vitry le Francois,
and Paul de Charites Lord of Plessis Chennelle, Elder of the Church of
Chartres, commissioned by Letters from their Province.

For the Province of Lower Guienne, Perigord and Limousin Mr. Paul Baduel
Minister of the Church of Castillon, Mr. Gilbert Primrose, Pastor of the Church
of Bourdeaux, together with John du Puis, Lord of Cazett, Elder of the Church
of Castillon, and Mr. Stephen Manial, Elder of the Church of Bourdeaux.

For the Province of Anjou, Touraine and the Maine, Monsieur Abel Bid Pastor
of the Church of Loudun, and Master Peter Solomeau Pastor of the Church of
Vandosme, together with James Ridouett Esquire Lord of Sanzay, Elder of the
Church of Bauge, and Bartholomew de Bruges Elder of the Church of Loudon.

For the Province of Higher Languedoc and Higher Guyenne, Master Michael Beraud
Pastor and Professor in the Church of Montauban, Daniel Raphin Pastor of the
Church of Realmont, John de Periott Elder of the Church of Montauban, and Peter
Philippin Elder in the Church of St. Antonine.

For the Higher and Lower Vivaretz and Velay, Monsieur John Valeton Pastor of
the Church of Privas, and Master Christopher Gammon, Elder of the Church of
Nonnay, bringing with them Letters of excuse for not having sent the number of
Deputies prescribed by the Canons of former Synods, which were in no wise
admitted, and therefore the said Province was censured: However their Deputies
were received for this time; This Assembly declaring it should not be made a
president for future neglects, as also that if in time coming they did not send
the full number of four Deputies, they should have no power of Voting, and this
in pursuance of what had been decreed in the National Synod of Gap.

For Provence, Monsieur Daniel Chanforan Pastor of the Church de la Cost, and
Peter Texier Elder of the Church of Lormarin, with Letters of excuse for not
having sent the number abovementioned, which, because of the paucity of
Ministers in their Province, was for this time only received. And they were
enjoined for the future to send four Deputies, or to incorporate themselves
with some other Province.

For the Province of Higher and Lower Poictou, Master James Clemencean Minister
and Pastor of the Church of Poictiers, and Andrew Rivett Pastor of the Church
of Touars, together with Samuel Mauclerc Lord of Marconny Elder of the Church
of Poire and Belleville, and Monsieur Joseph des Fontaines Elder of the Church
of Mesle.

Mr. Perri^ writ the History of the Albingezses. He dedicated the Second Part
to the Duke of Candale Eldest Son of the Duke of Espernon, who became a
Protestant.
For the Province of Dolphiny, Mr. John Paul Perrin^ Pastor of the Church of
Nians, and John Vulson Lord de la Columbiere Pastor of the Church de la Mure,
together with Charles de Veze Lord of Coucy, Elder of the Church de Dieu le
fit, and Lord of the said place, and Francois de la Comb Elder of the Church
of St. Marcellin.

For the Province of Burgundy, Lionnois, Forest, Bresse, Beaujolois and Gex,
Monsieur Esaiah Bailey Pastor of the Church of Lion, and Daniel de Piotay Pastor
of the Church of Gex, together with John de Jaucourt Lord of Villarnoul, Elder
of the Church of Avalon, and Master Claudius Cotereau Elder of the Church of
Dijon, and Counselor in the Parliament of Burgundy.

For the Province of Normandy, Mr. John Gueroult Pastor of the Church of
D'Indebeuf, and John Boudrier Lord de la Buissonniere Pastor of the Church of
Alencon, and Samuel de L'Escherpiere Lord de la Riviere Pastor of the Church of
Rouan, together with Nicholas Le Febvre Elder of the Church of Caen, with their
Letters of Commission. The Synod of the said Province, and the Colloquies of
the Higher Normandy were all censured for leaving the Nomination of their
Deputies unto the Colloquy, and for not sending an equal number of Pastors and
Elders, according to the Canons of our Discipline; however the four
forementioned Deputies were admitted.

For the Province of Brittany, Master Rene de Loss, Lord de la Touch, Pastor
of the Church of Blain, and Master Peter de la Place Pastor of the Church of
Sion, together with Jews d'Avangour Lord of Bois de Cargrois, Elder of the
Church of Nantes, and Elias de Goulaines Lord de Loudoniere Elder in the Church
of Vielle Vigne.

There came also with Letters of Commission from the Country of Bearn Master
Isaac Balldraind Pastor of the Church of l'Escar, and principal of the College
of the same place, craving admission and privilege of Voting in this Assembly,
which was granted him: But the said Churches were exhorted for the future to
join an Elder in Commission with that Pastor, whom they shall depute unto our
National Synods.

Master James Capel called otherwise du Tilloy Pastor of the Church of Sedan,
and the Lord Peter de Bury Elder of the same, presented themselves as Deputies
from the Churches of the Sovereignty of Sedan in this Assembly, but were not
admitted as representing a particular Province, because they were Members of
the Colloquy of Champagne, yet it was granted them to assist in this Assembly,
when as matters concerning Doctrine and Discipline in general were debated, and
that they might in their turn propound what did particularly concern their
Churches and University.

Prayers being ended, and the Assembly proceeding to the choice of their
Moderator, Assessor and Scribe, there came into the Synod the Deputies of the
Commonalty and City of Rochell, demanding to be admitted, and to give their
Vote in that Election, as constituting a Province together with the other
Provinces of the Kingdom, especially when as any Affairs not relating to the
Doctrine or Discipline of the Churches, but for our common preservation should
be treated. This caused a very great debate, and at last it being judged that
this Assembly was purely Ecclesiastical, and it being utterly uncertain whether
any matters of another nature might be handled in it, it was finally
determined, that the Moderator, Assessor and Scribe should not be chosen but by
such persons as were purely Ecclesiastical. However those Deputies were
admitted into the Synod, and had their privilege of Voting in it, according to
the Decree at Chastelleraut, in case other matters fell under consideration.

Monsieur Beraut was Elected Moderator, and Monsieur Merlin Assessor, and to
Gather and Record the Acts of this Synod, Monsieur Rivet and Roy.

In the Letters of Deputation, that Clause of Approbation and Submission unto
the Decrees of the Synod in no wise to be left out.
In reading the Letters of Deputation, it was observed, that those of certain
Provinces wanted that clause which promised Approbation and Submission unto the
Decrees and Resolutions of the Synod: Whereupon they were all admonished In no
wise for the future to omit it, as being very necessary for the ratifying the
Decrees of these Assemblies, and of this our Brethren of Bearn are particularly
to be informed.

Whereas the Pastors and Elders of diverse Churches, not deputed unto this
Synod, were yet very importunate to be admitted to the seeing and hearing of
all matters transacted in it. This Assembly considering that their number did
daily and excessively increase, which might at last cause confusion, and other
evil consequences, in case every one should be indifferently received; it was
resolved that entrance should not be granted to any other besides the Deputies,
unless when as the General matters of Doctrine and Discipline should be
debated. And this Order shall hold good for the future; nor shall they be
suffered to be present at these debates, who have no business calling them unto
these Synods, unless they produce a Certificate of Leave had from their
Churches, together with the time limited for their tarrying.

No Appeals shall be considered till the 7th day after the meeting and sitting
of the Synod.
For as much as diverse persons at the opening of the Synods are very
importunate, and thereby disturb the Order of Affairs, pressing impatiently the
dispatch of their own particular concerns, because of the Expenses they are
enforced to make by a long Attendance: Notice shall be given to the Churches,
that for time coming, no Appeals shall be meddled withal till the seventh day
after the sitting of the Synod; that so the parties concerned in them may not
be overhasty, and that they may have fit time for their Appearance.

The Answers of his Highness the Prince Elector Palatine returned unto the
Letters of the Synod of Gap, by which he had been entreated to endeavor the
Uniting of the Protestant Churches, being read, as also those others from the
Ecclesiastical Senate of the Palatinate, from the University of Heidelberg,
from the Provincial Synods of Holland and Zeland, from the County of Hannaw,
and the Classis of Lauzanna, Morges, Iverdon, from the Canton of Bearn, and
Church of Geneva: This Assembly (having found evident Testimonials in them of
their sincere affection to the seeking and procuring the Common Good, How the
Lutherans may be reunited, see the Synod of Vitre, part. mat. 27. and of Gap.
Genesis matt. 11.
and in special an entire Approbation of the Confession of Faith owned and
received in the Churches of this Kingdom) does render most hearty thanks unto
God, for vouchsafing us so great a benefit, well-hoping, that by their
persisting in it, the Lord will be pleased graciously to touch the Hearts of
them, who as yet dissent from us, and disagree with us, to embrace it also. And
all persons are exhorted to be mighty Wrestlers with God in humble and ardent
Prayers that it may be effected.

The Letters also of Monsieur Regnault Pastor of the Church of Bourdeaux were
read, who was charged with those of the Synod of Gap, when he went into Germany
about his own private Affairs, to be delivered unto those to whom they had been
directed. And because that such a Negotiation was not a little Incommodious to
him, and that upon his return, he was summoned personally, and at his own
charges to appear at Court, and that he was at the Expense of printing the
Confession of our Faith: This Assembly gives him the Sum of seventy Crowns, to
reimburse his Charges, and thanketh him for his care and faithfulness in the
delivery of those Letters, and for having communicated with Monsieur Piscator,
and brought back with him his answers. But order is given unto the Synod of
Lower Guyenne to examine him upon some certain points mentioned in the
aforesaid answers, as for styling himself the Messenger or Ambassador of the
Churches* and for submitting the Confession of Faith of the Churches of this
Kingdom to the Censures of Foreign Universities; and in case these can be
proved upon him, he shall be censured. And forasmuch as the Letters of Monsieur
Piscator have been communicated to others before they were tendered to this
Assembly, the said Synod shall make a strict inquiry into this matter, and know
whether Monsieur Regnault were guilty of it or no.

CHAP. II. Observations on reading the Confession of Faith.
1. ON the tenth Article, in which it is said, that the whole offspring of Adam
are infected with Original Sin, The Pastors of Lauzanna by their Letters
request that our Lord Jesus Christ may be excepted. But it was not found
needful to accord it to them, because that it is expressly mentioned in another
Article of the same Confession, and for that in this place it is to be
understood of other persons; as also for that the Scripture expresses this in
plain terms.

2. Whereas the Synod of Gap had charged the Provinces to consider in what
terms the twenty fifth Article of the Confession of Faith should be couched,
and to come prepared for it, unto the present Synod, and to judge whether any
mention should be made of the Catholic Church, spoken of in the Apostles
Creed, as also whether it would not be expedient to add the word pure to that
of true Church in the twenty ninth Article, and that all in general should come
ready to debate that Question of the Church: The Provinces having been heard
speak by their Deputies, it was finally resolved by common unanimous consent
that nothing should be added to, or taken from these Articles, and there should
be no more discourse had about that point of the Church.

3. It was Decreed that nothing should be added unto the eighth Article of our
confession, which treats of Justification, because it is couched in the very
express words of Scripture, and in its own common phrase. Those Explications
and Amplifications desired by some, may be received either from Doctors in our
Universities or Pastors of our Churches.

4. Whereas Doctor John Piscator Professor in the University of Herborn by his
Letters of answer to those sent him from the Synod of Gap, does give us an
account of his Doctrine in the point of Justification, Concerning Man's
Justification in the Opinion of Piscator.
as that it is only wrought out by Christ's Death and Passion, and not by his
Life and Active Obedience: This Synod in no wise approving the dividing causes
so nearly conjoined in this great effect of Divine Grace, and judging those
arguments produced by him for the defense of his cause weak and invalid, does
order that all the Pastors in the respective Churches of this Kingdom do wholly
conform themselves in their Teaching to that form of sound words which has
been hitherto taught among us, and is contained in the Holy Scriptures, to wit:
That the whole Obedience of Christ both in his Life and Death is imputed to us
for the full remission of our Sins, and acceptance unto Eternal Life; and in
short that this being but one and the self-same Obedience is our entire and
perfect Justification. And the Synod farther ordains that answer shall be made
unto the Letters of the said Doctor Piscator, propounding to him this Holy
Doctrine together with its principal foundations, yet without any vain
jangling, and with that devotion as becomes the singular modesty expressed by
him in his Letters to us, wherein there is not the least bitterness or
provoking expression, leaving it unto God, who can when he pleases, reveal
unto him the defects which are in the Doctrine of the said Piscator, as also to
assure him that he has exceedingly satisfied this Assembly in his Explications
on that Topic of Repentance.

The suppression of the Book of Felix Huguet on the point of Justification, for
being written without the Warrant, though in the name of all our Churches,
against Piscator.
5. Letters were sent by Mr. Felix Huguet Minister of the Gospel, together with
two Copies of a Book writ by him in Latin concerning Justification, which said
book he had for some time past caused to be Printed at Geneva, without the
knowledge of the Pastors of that City, or the Approbation of the Pastors of the
Province of Dolphiny where he resides. Upon report made of it by several
Brethren Pastors of Churches ordered to peruse the said Book, both as to its
style and matter; The Synod judges the said Huguet to have incurred a most
grievous censure; first for writing in the name of the Synod in a matter of
General concern without any warrant from it for so doing, and secondly for
giving a public answer to a Book which, was never published; and lastly for
having Printed his Book contrary to the Canons of our Church Discipline: And
therefore it ordains that the said Book be suppressed, and that thanks be
returned to the Magistrates of Geneva for their preventing of its public sale,
and to entreat them that for the future they would totally suppress it. And
farther the Synod has thought good, that in the Letter which shall be written
unto Dr. Piscator, he shall be acquainted that Huguets Book was writ without
the order, knowledge and consent of our Churches, and only attempted by him
upon a private caprice of his own, without any public Warrant or Authority for
so doing.

Monsieur Sohnis answers orthodoxly, and in the name, and by order of the
Churches unto Piscator.
6. Whereas Monsieur Sohnis Pastor and Professor of the Church and University of
Montauban, has at the desire and in the name of this Assembly written Letters,
and an Answer unto those of Piscator, which upon perusal are found very
orthodox: It Is ordered that thanks be returned unto the said Sohnius for his
labor and diligence; but yet for peace and concord's sake, it is thought good
to detain them by us for a while, and Monsieur Sohnis is entreated to suspend
the publication of his Treatise about Justification for some short time, till
we see what fruits the sweet and gentle procedures may produce, and the next
National Synod shall then license it.

7. Monsieur Regnault Pastor of the Church of Bourdeaux, having sent us the
Copy of Letters written to him by the most Illustrious Lord John, Earl of
Nassau, in which he expresses his desire of maintaining the Peace and Union of
the Church, and particularly promises to hinder the out-breaking of Piscator's
Notions, provided he be not provoked elsewhere by any others. This Assembly
ordains, John Earl of Nassau his Letters unto Monsieur Regnault.
that Lettes shall in its name be written unto the said most Noble Lord,
thanking him for his pious affection, and humbly entreating that Prince to
continue his endeavors for effecting of that much-desired Union, and to take
care that none of his Subjects do break out into bitter expressions, and to
assure him on the behalf of our Churches in this Kingdom, that no person shall
be suffered to exasperate Dr. Piscator by any public Writings; as also that if
any one has heretofore done it, he had no Commission for so doing from us, and
it was disowned by this Synod, and that we shall take special care to prevent
it for the future.

See the first Synod of Rochel, G. Mat. 6. and of Montauban observat. upon the
Confess. Art. 4. The Article concerning Antichrist to be printed and inserted
into our Confession.
8. Our Printers shall be once again charged, according to the Decrees of the
Synods of Montauban and Saumur to put the word Union, instead of Unity in the
twenty sixth Article of our Confession. And all Pastors, in whose Churches
there be Printing Houses are required to oversee the next impressions, that so
it be done accordingly.

9. That Article concerning Antichrist inserted by the Synod of Gap into the
body of our Confession, and making the thirty first having been in its order
read, weighed and examined, was approved and allowed by general consent both as
to its form and substance, for very true, and agreeing with
Scripture-Prophesie, and which in these our days we see most clearly to be
fulfilled. Whereupon it was resolved, that it should continue in its place, and
that for time coming it should be imprinted in all Copies, which should come
from the Press.

10. That word Superintendent in the thirty third Article shall abide,
according as it was expounded by the Synod of Gap.

11. Whereas the Pastors and Classis of Lausanna, Morges, etc. do demonstrate
in their Letters, that it would be fit to add unto the close of the thirty
third Article after the word Appertaining this restriction, as far forth as
they be grounded on the Word of God; This Assembly has found it needless and
superfluous, because that the foregoing words, For in Excommunication we ought
to follow what our Lord has declared to us, do sufficiently express unto us
the aforesaid Restriction.

12. Whereas some have remonstrated that it were meet to express in the thirty
sixth Article more clearly that Union which the faithful have one with another,
and which is signified to us in the Lord's Supper; But this point having been
debated, it was judged needless; for that the Conjunction of the head with the
Members there mentioned did necessarily infer the mutual Union and Communion of
the Members one with another.

13. The Consistories of Churches in which our Printers live, are charged for
time to come to have a special care that our Printers do not forget those words
of our Lords Institution, Take, Eat, etc. And Drink, ye all, etc. according as
was Decreed in the Synod of Saumur.

14. The Province of Higher Languedoc scrupling the word Lieutenant in the
thirty ninth Article; This Assembly saw no reason for it, but that it might
continue in it, as importing nothing contrary to what is signified by that word
when attributed unto Magistrates by the Holy Scriptures, and equivalent to
those words which the Word of God does bestow upon them.

15. The Confession of Faith having been read over word by word, and in every
Member, Article and Clause of it, it was unanimously approved and sworn to by
all the Deputies present in the Synod, who promised and protested to live and
die in this Faith, and particularly in what had been determined according to
the Scriptures, That we be justified before God by the imputation of that
obedience of our Lord Jesus, which he yielded unto God his Father in his Life
and Death. Which said Protestation the Deputies of the Provinces will by the
Authority of this Synod cause also to be taken by all the Pastors of their
respective Provinces, which had sent them.

CHAP. III. Observations on the reading our Church Discipline.
1. ON the Second Article of the first Chapter after these words of their
Doctrine shall be added, approved at least by the space of two years since
their Conversion, and confirmed by good Testimonials from those places in which
they live.

2. On the fourth Article of the same Chapter, that alternative of two or three
shall be removed, and there shall be mentioned three only.

3. No Church shall for the future undertake (whatever solicitations may be
made it) to examine or ordain those Pastors, which are to serve out of this
Kingdom, but herein they shall conform unto the Discipline, and the Decrees of
former National Synods.

4. After these words in the fourth Article, which shall be advised, there
shall be added, without being able during that all whole time to administer the
Sacraments, that so, etc.

See Synod of Gap, 4 Art. upon the Discipline.
5. That Article of the Synod of Gap concerning the eleventh Canon of this first
Chapter shall be most strictly observed; and that it may be better kept for the
future, in all Consistorial, Classical and Synodical Censures, diligent inquiry
shall be made into the Conversation, and Manner of Preaching used by every
Pastor, and an Oath shall be imposed on the Examinant to speak the Truth to the
best of his knowledge, and that they may the better answer to every point, they
shall read unto them the said Article of the Discipline.

6. On reading the ninteenth Article, the Synod ordered Letters should be
written unto the Lords of this Kingdom, professing the Reformed Religion, that
they be entreated when ever they are called from their Houses unto Court, or
when ever they travel, that they would not fail to take their Pastors with them.

7. The Synod expounding the twenty eighth Article by these words (their
Churches being heard) does understand the Consistories and Chief of the people,
and by these words, for certain considerations does understand, whatever may
fall out in general, and not particularly the proceeds of Censures.

A Colloquy may lend a Minister for three, and the Provinc. Synod 6 months out
of the Province. See the first Synod of Vitre, g. Mat. 24.
8. On the thirty third Article, where speech is had about the consent of
Pastors and Churches in case of Loan of Ministers without the Province; It is
now decreed, that notwithstanding any Appeal to the contrary, a Colloquy may
lend a Pastor for three Months, and the provincial Synod for six.

9. The means prescribed by the Synods of Gap and Gergeau to prevent their
ingratitude who refuse maintenance unto their Pastors, are left to be used
according to the discretion and charity of the respective Consistories.

10. These words shall close up the forty eighth Article, and all sentences of
suspension for what cause soever shall stand good, notwithstanding any Appeal,
until the final Judgment.

11. On the first Article of the third Chapter, That Custom introduced into
some certain Churches, that Elders going out of Office do nominate their
Successors, is reprehended, and it is decreed according to the Discipline, that
they shall be chosen by the common Suffragies of the Consistories.

12. On the fourth Article of the fourth Chapter. Notice is given unto
Provincial Synods, diligently to enquire who those Pastors and Elders be that
give* Testimonials contrary to the form prescribed by our Discipline, that so
they may be censured. And for time coming all Pastors giving Attestations unto
Tradesmen or others, who desire them upon none other account than to be
acknowledged as Church Members, shall specify that they promised never to
abuse them as Instruments for begging or wandering from one Church unto another,
and in case they should so do, that then they be reputed null and void, and be
torn in pieces.

13. Churches, whose Members are Prisoners in Paris or elsewhere upon the
account of Religion, Prisoners for Religion to be relieved.
are exhorted to minister unto their Necessities by be relieved, their
Charities and Alms-deeds.

14. This Sentence shall conclude the fourth Article of the fifth Chapter,
however without being able to treat of Church Matters, but in those places
where the Consistory does ordinarily meet.

15. On the ninth Article, whole Consistories shall not be excepted against,
nor one of the Pastors and Elders in case a Consistory judge the causes of that
Exception invalid, notwithstanding the Appeal.

Persons married by a Priest must confess their sin publicly.
16. On the twentieth Article, such as have been married by a Popish Priest,
shall not be dispensed from making public Acknowledgment of their sin by the
Consistory, whatever their quality or condition may be.

17. To the seventh Article of the eighth Chapter, after these words, shall be
chosen, these must be added, with a low voice.

18. Reading over the division of the Provinces, it was thought good that the
greater, and which are furnished with a larger number of Pastors, should
consult whether it were not commodious for them to be divided into two; and
they are requested to come prepared with these Resolutions upon it unto the
next National Synod.

19. On the third Article of the ninth Chapter, The Provinces are left at
liberty to send their present Deputies unto the following National Synod,
provided they judge it expedient.

20. The clause which was razed out of the seventh Article of the ninth Chapter
by the Synod of Gap, to wit, The Provinces having been first informed by that
which was charged to convocate the next Synod, shall be again inserted, but
with this restriction in the end, if it may possibly be done.

21. On the third Article of the tenth Chapter, License is given unto
particular Churches to celebrate a Fast, they first consulting with their
Neighbour-Churches, and on great and urgent causes, for which they shall be
accountable unto the Colloquies and Provincial Synods.

22. To the eleventh Article of the thirteenth Chapter, after these words, with
the Niece, shall be added, and the Grand Niece.

23. To the fifteenth Article of the same Chapter after these words sufficient
attestation, there shall be added, of Promises.

24. To the sixteenth Article of the fourteenth Chapter there shall be this
addition made to close up that Article, And in case the matter be urgent, then
unto the Universities or Neighbor Ministers.

The Church Discipline having been read and approved by all the Deputies, they
swore unto its observation, and promised to see that it be carefully observed
in their respective Churches, and to solicit their Provinces for its
performance.

CHAP. IV. Observations on the National Synod of Gap.
1. THAT Exhortation given by the Synod of Gap for reading the Confession of
Faith, and Book of Discipline in the Provincial Synods, is only to be
understood thus, if it may conveniently be done.

2. This Assembly judges that it is no proper time at present to make an
Apology for the Confession of our Churches.

3. In that Article of the same Synod treating of the 31th Article of the
Confession of Faith, where it speaks of the Call of the first Pastors in our
Reformed Churches, these words, And to teach, which are found in some certain
Copies, shall be razed, and instead of simply, shall be inserted principally,
and that last clause, And not unto the small remainders of their corrupted
Call, shall be thus read, Rather than unto the small remains of their ordinary
Call.

4. Our Brethren of Normandy shall out of hand conform to the other Churches in
their reception of Elders and Deacons.

5. The Churches of the Baylywick of Gex, shall be incorporated with the
Provincial Synod of Burgundy.

See observe. 8. of the Synod of Gap upon that of Gergeau, Scholars not ordained
may not administer the Sacraments.
6. In the Letter which shall be written to our Brethren of the Church of
Geneva, they shall again be entreated not to send our Proposans to preach in
their Villages, and to administer the Sacraments before they have been lawfully
Ordained. They shall also be further entreated to take special care of our
Students in Divinity; and when as they demand a Testimonial, to give them none
but upon good and sufficient knowledge of their Lives, and as their diligence
has deserved, and most especially in case of Monks who have quitted their
Monasteries, to whom this Assembly has limited the term of two years before
their reception into the Sacred Ministry, and our said brethren of Geneva shall
be advised to detain those who are too forward. And farther it is thought good
to pray them that they would endeavor with their Magistrates and People to
conform themselves unto the other Churches of Christ in the use of Leavened
Bread at the Lords Supper, according to the example and received practice of
their Neighbor Churches of Berne.

7. The word Damnation as it is qualified and explained in the tenth Sunday of
our Catechism shall remain unchanged.

8. The Church of Sedan shall be joined, according to the Article of Gap, unto
the Synod of the Isle of France, and to the Colloquy of Champagne, and shall be
present by its Deputies at the said Colloquies and Synods: On which condition
they shall receive the four portions, which had been assigned them by the Synod
of Gergeau.

9. The Ministry of Monsieur Baily, who was granted by the Synod of Gap unto
the Church of Lions, having been exceeding fruitful unto this very day, and
mightily edifying unto that Church; This Assembly ratifieth that Grant, and
bestows him upon them for their ordinary Pastor; so that the Province of
Lower Languedoc for the future shall not have any the least pretensions or
right unto him.

10. This Synod judges the Universities of Montauban, Nismes, Montpellier and
Sedan, worthy of severe censures, for not bringing or sending hither the
Accounts of Moneys received for the maintenance or their Professors and
Regents, according to the Decrees of Gap and Gergeau. And that for the future
they may be more careful of the Moneys belonging to the University of
Montauban, there shall be detained in the hands of the Receiver General five
hundred Livers, and for the Universities of Nismes, Montpellier and Sedan, two
hundred and fifty Livers for each of them, and with this farther penalty, that
in case hereafter they shall be guilty of the like neglect, there shall be
defaulked from their portions five hundred Crowns; But if upon auditing their
accounts they be found just and faithful, then the detained sums shall be
restored to them. Finally, the Provincial Synods are ordered to give in unto
the National Synods a true report, as in Conscience they be bound to do, how
the Professors and Regents in the several Universities of their respective
Provinces do discharge the duties of their places, and to be very careful in
the form of their Acquittances, and other evidences of their Integrity, and to
send them all by the Deputies of their Province unto the National Synods.

11. Reading that Article of the Synod of Gap concerning censures to be
inflicted on the breakers of Marriage-promises without just cause, diverse
difficulties in diverse places having risen hereupon: This Assembly judges that
neither private persons, nor Consistories have authority to dissolve such
Promises, and therefore they shall be turned over to the Judgment and Lawful
Decree of the Civil Magistrates, and those refractory persons who will not
discharge their injoined duty shall be pursued with all Church Censures.

CHAP. V. Of Particular Matters.
St. Maixant, Art. 1. of observat. on this Synod.
1. IT is ordained for time coming that particular Acts of Appeals, Censures,
and things of the like nature, shall not be delivered, but unto the parties
concerned in them.

2. This Assembly declares that the Act of the Synod of Montpellier, not
permitting any Certificate to be given them who through fear of Witchcraft
would solemnize their Marriage in other Churches besides their own, shall
remain in full force, as not being contrary to that of the Discipline, which
concerns attestations in the Chapter of Marriages.

Charities ordered the poor Saints of Saluces.
3. For as much as the necessities of our poor Brethren of the Marquisate
Saluces are exceeding great, they being banished and persecuted for the true
Religion, as is evident by the Relations of their Deputies Charles Garnier and
Constans Vivyan; This Assembly exhorts all the Churches in the Provinces of
this Kingdom to assist them by extraordinary Alms; and it is left to the
prudence of every Provincial Synod, to take that course for Collecting the
Charities for them as they shall judge most proper and convenient to the state
of their respective Churches. And whereas in diverse Churches there have been
Moneys already gathered for them, it is ordained, that in no wise those sums
be diverted from their designed use, but be out of hand sent unto them; And
that they may be reputed Natural French men, our Deputies which shall be sent
unto Court, are expressly charged to procure the Declaration from his Majesty
for their being naturalized.

4. Henceforward the Deputies of the Provinces shall bring with them unto the
National Synods an exact Catalogue of the number of Churches, Ministers, and
Proposans in their respective Provinces, together with an account of their
particular Stipends, annually paid them by the Receiver of the Province, as
also the Testimonials of the Universities concerning our young Students in
them, if possibly it may be done.

Proposans may be present as silent Learners in National Synods.
5. Proposans may be admitted into the National Synod, when as general Matters
of Doctrine and Discipline are debated, provided they bring with them good
Testimonials. But as for other Persons, which are not Ecclesiastic, whatsoever
their quality or condition may be, it has been already judged inexpedient,
because of diverse ill Consequences, to grant them this privilege.

A remedy against contentions for the Professors place in an University.
6. If in case of difference about the Call of Professors and Regents in our
Universities, one of the contending parties should seek for relief and
assistance any where else than in our Ecclesiastical Assemblies, he shall be
prosecuted by all the Censures of the Church, and if he continue obstinate and
rebellious, he shall then be Excommunicated; and if he be already seized of a
Professorship, this Synod Decrees, that no Wages shall be paid him, and
declares him a Person utterly incapable of any Academical Office.

7. To prevent for the future that evil custom crept into the Churches, and
which has caused a great deal of trouble unto this Synod, by reading and
examining an infinite number of Acts passed before secular Judges, which may
finally bring in upon us that base Chicanery, so much practiced by crafty
Lawyers, and utterly unworthy the Gravity of these Assemblies: Wherefore all
such manner of proceedings are most expressly forbidden, and all persons are
commanded to keep themselves to a native plainness and simplicity, as best
suiting with Church affairs; on pain of having their papers and propositions
rejected, who shall do otherwise.

Pecuniary matters may be dismissed from one Province to another.
8. In case a person complain of His being overcharged in pecuniary matters by
the Provincial Synod, in which the Synod is a Party, he may demand a hearing
before the next Provincial Synod, which shall have power to judge finally in
that affair, without bringing such matters before the National Synods.

9. When as the public Fast shall be celebrated in the Churches of France,
those of Bearn shall be acquainted with the time and causes of it, by the
Province of Lower Guyenne; and those Churches shall be comprised in all matters
relating to our Union, yea and in those Complaints and Petitions which shall be
presented unto his Majesty by the means of our General Deputies.

10. Monsieur Baldran Deputy for Bearn, moved, that whereas the Churches of
Soulle and Bigorre lying within the bounds of France, were yet notwithstanding
unto this day annexed to the Churches of Bearn, and supported by them both with
the grant of Pastors, and Moneys for their subsistence; wherefore he requested
that they might be enrolled among those, who shared in the Moneys of his
Majesty's bounty; and withal he left them to the sole disposal of the Churches
of this Kingdom either to be Incorporated with them, or implanted into any
other Synod besides that of Bearn, as they should conceive most expedient. This
Assembly ordains that for the present two portions of the said moneys shall
be assigned out of the Dividend of Lower Guyenne unto those two before
mentioned Churches, and they have full power to declare in the first Provincial
Synod of Bearn to which of the Provincial Synods of France they will adjoin
themselves, consulting therein their own convenience and edification, and shall
produce their Memoirs concerning it before the next National Synod.

11. For as much as great contentions have arisen in the Churches because that
their Ministers stipulated with them only for a certain term of time, and at
their reception into the Pastoral Office among them did reserve unto themselves
a pretended right and power of leaving them, when that term was expired: The
Provinces are exhorted to keep inviolably the ninth Article in the first
Chapter of our Church Discipline, and never to receive a Minister into that
Sacred Office without consigning him to some particular flock, among whom he
shall have his fixed residence.

No more than two Deputies can be sent from contending Churches. Such as marry
Popish Wives cannot be employed neither in the Civil nor Religious Offices of
the Church.
12. In case of contentions falling out among Church Members, or between two
Churches for time to come they shall neither of them send more than two
Deputies either to the National or Provincial Synods, nor shall a greater
number, tho they come, be admitted unto a hearing.

13. If one professing of the Reformed Marry a Woman of the Popish Religion, he
shall not only not be admitted unto Offices in the Church which are purely
Ecclesiastical, but be also excluded from those of another nature, such Syndics
and Proctors, who have the management of the civil affairs of our Churches: and
in case such an one be already invested with those charges, he shall be
immediately and actually deposed.

14. Churches having Universities erected in them, their Pastors by the advice
of the Academical Counsel may on extraordinary occasions read Lectures of
Divinity, that so they may be qualified in case of necessity for the Professors
Office in them.

15. Monks and Priests having once professed the Truth of the Gospel, and
afterward with the Dog returned unto their vomit, though they should once again
abjure the Popish Religion, and desire leave to preach a Probation-Sermon in
order to their Reception into the Ministry, shall not in the least be admitted
unto any Theological Exercise among us, Apostates Monks or Priests not to be
received into the Ministry, till ten years Trial of their Repentance, and not
then neither, without the Advice of a Not. Synod. Monks quitting their
Cloisters shall be sent back to their Native Countries with attestations. See
Synod of St. Maixant observat. upon this Synod. Art. 4. Midwives Baptism null,
because they had no calling from Christ to administer it.
till we have had ten years Trial of their Repentance; nor shall they, when
that time also is expired, be admitted without the previous Advice of a
National Synod.

16. Monks forsaking Popery shall not be received into Church Fellowship, till
they be found well instructed in the grounds of the Reformed Religion; and they
shall be sent back unto the Provinces whereof they are Natives, with
Certificates attesting for what Employment they be best qualified.

17. Consistories may not deliver unto Parties their Bonds, though they be
reconciled, and do demand them.

18. The Deputies of Lower Languedoc moved this Case, Whether persons having a
long time professed the true Religion, and coming to understand they were
baptized only by a Midwife, ought to be rebaptized: This Assembly judges that
they ought to be publicly baptized in the Church of Christ, according to the
Institution of our Lord by a Lawful Minister. Their former Baptism being wholly
null and void, because done by one who had no Call unto that Office.

19. It was demanded what censure they deserved, who live in an Incestous
Marriage, though they have the Pope's Dispensation? This Synod ordains that the
25th Article of the General Matters in that of Saumur, be punctually observed,
and judges those persons unfit for Communion in our Churches, till such time
as they be separated one from the other.

20. Women whose Husbands are absent from them, by reason of heinous crimes,
cannot with a safe Conscience contract Marriage with any other as long as their
Husbands be alive.

Leprosy dot not dissolve^ Matrimony.
21. This Assembly concurring with the foregoing Synods of Lion and Vitre,
declares their Marriages Null and void, who had contracted them selves unto
others, their parties yet living, although they were separated upon the account
of Leprosy.

22. All Printers are admonished, that when they print our Form of Baptism,
they take care to express that sentence of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. in its
express and proper words, That the Children of Believers are holy.

23. No Attestations shall for the future be given unto Governors or
Lieutenants of our Cautionary Towns, by that Colloquy wherein he or they
reside, without calling in one or more Colloquies of that same Province, nor
without hearing the Inhabitants of the Towns concerned, in case the Recommended
Officers be Natives of the same Province. And this Rule shall be observed with
respect unto those who demand Attestations to capacitate them for an Office in
the Chambers, e. i. the Courts of the Edict.

Orders about Scholars in Pension of the Provinces.
24. Scholars, Students in Divinity, especially such as are maintained at the
Charges of the Provinces, or of particular Churches, shall finish their course
in the Universities of this Kingdom, in which we comprise those of Bearn, Sedan
and Geneva; and they shall not be permitted to travel unto Foreign
Universities without leave first granted them by their Provincial Synods, who
shall prescribe them the place and time of their abode.

25. Monsieur Chamier having in writing given us an Account of that Book
entitled, Elenchus Novae Doctrinae, we do order its suppression.

26. The Deputies of Lower Languedoc demanding whether something in the 52d
Section of our Catechism might not be conveniently changed particularly in what
relates to our Communion with Jesus Christ in the preaching of the Gospel, in
Baptism and the Lord's Supper. This Assembly is of Opinion that nothing should
be added or diminished, because the terms in which that Section is couched, do
very plainly express the different degrees of Faith, by which we receive Christ.

27. The Province of Lower Guyenne desired, that that passage concerning Judas
his being received into Communion by our Lord at his holy Table, in the last
Section of the Catechism might be changed. This Assembly judging the Question
problematical, and not a point of Faith, thought it inconvenient to make any
alteration, because also the main Doctrine for which this Example was urged, is
generally believed to be true, and on this all Ministers in their explications
of it ought principally to insist.

28. The Province of Anjou having tendered their Accounts by the Lord de
Bruges, one of their Deputies, of the Moneys assigned them by the Synod of
Montpellier, for the Erection and Maintenance of an University in the City of
Saumur, and received by them from the Sieurs Palot, and du Caudal, from the
first grant of the said Moneys unto the last day of December last past: This
Assembly commissionated Monsieur Vignier Minister of the Gospel, and Monsieur
des Fontaines, Texier and le Fevrier Elders, to examine and close up those
Accounts; which being done, and report made by them, it appeared that Monsieur
Phillip Pinaut, Receiver of the said Moneys, stood indebted to them in the sum
of 4292 Livers, 15 Sous, and 8 Deniers, upon the whole; which said Audit, and
final Reckoning, is approved and ratified by this Synod; and it is further
ordered, that the said sum of 4292 Livers, 15 Sous, and 8 Deniers, shall remain
in the hands of the said Pinault, to be employed in the Maintenance of the said
University, and about nothing else, as we shall hereafter take care for. And in
so doing the said Receiver and Province shall be acquitted and discharged of
the said Moneys. And the Originals of the Accounts aforesaid shall be kept in
the Consistory of Rochell, and the Duplicates and Copies evidencing the whole,
shall be lodged in the hands of the said Pinault, with the consent of the
Deputies of that Province.

29. The Province of Xaintonge moving whether it were not needful to make a
complete Answer to the Works of Bellarmine: This Synod charged the Deputies of
Dolphiny to entreat Monsieur Chamier to prosecute his worthy Labors, begun by
him upon this Subject.

30. Every Province shall choose one particular Church in it, where the Original
Acts of their Synods shall be conserved, that in case of necessity they may
have recourse unto them.

31. The Professors of Divinity in the Universities of this Kingdom, shall be
advised so to contrive their Lectures and Common-places, that they may be
completely finished in three years time.

32. The Province of Orleans and Berry demanding that the time for Proposans,
tendering themselves unto Synods and Colloquies with their Propositions might
be fixed equally: This Assembly judged that it were best and most convenient to
leave it as before unto the liberty and prudence of those Meetings.

33. Moreover at the request of the same Province it was ordained, That
Churches which had Ability should be desired to Erect Libraries for the service
of their Ministers.

34. Monsieur Perrin is entreated to finish his begun History of the True
Estate of the Albingenses and Waldenses; and to help him in it, all persons
having Memoirs by them, either of the Doctrine, Discipline, or Persecutions of
those poor Saints of Christ, are charged to transmit them to him with all
possible care and diligence.

35. Into whose hands there may fall a little Treatise about the dispossession
of the Devil out of a Demoniack in Soreze, they are required to suppress it.

36. No Scholars for the future shall be received by the Provinces as
Pensioners, and who be now maintained at the trivial Schools by the Moneys of
his Majesty's bounty, till such times as they shall have finished their Studies
of Humanity, and have begun their course of Philosophy, and shall give in good
Security for repaying the sums received by them, and expended on them, in case
that through their default they do not serve the Church in the Ministry of the
Gospel.

37. This Case was propounded by the Deputies of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne,
How they should deal with them, who being accused of Crimes, were absolved by
the Magistrates, and yet afterward new evidence appeared against them, and the
scandal continued. The Synod leaves it wholly to the prudence of Consistories,
who shall comport themselves herein according to circumstances, and take
special care that the Lives and Reputation of the Brethren be not exposed to
needless dangers.

38. The Deputies of Normandy requiring that the proper Hebrew names of the Old
Testament, according as they be printed in this last Edition of our Bibles,
might be refined, and pronounced as in the former Ancient Impressions. This
Synod judges it more convenient that they remain as they are, and that nothing
be changed by our Printers in any of their After-Impressions.

39. Monsieur Beraud propounded this Case, Whether an Elder of the Church
accused of some enormous Crime, and justified by an Inferior Judge, and yet
drawn by his adverse Party to a Superior Tribunal, may, whilst this Appeal
stands in force against him, exercise his Office in the Church? The Synod
judges that he ought to refrain until such time as he be finally acquitted and
discharged by due course of Law.

See the Synod of Gergeau, p. m. 39.
40. The Provinces are exhorted to assist the poor Churches, especially in their
distribution of his Majesty's Bounty conferred upon us.

41. The General Deputies are charged not only to manage the general Affairs of
all our Churches, but the particular ones of every single Church, especially
when as a difficulty is started about the Erection and Conservation of it,
according to the Edict. And this Order shall bind the Provinces to seek out
diligently a Legal Title for the Erection of our Churches, and to associate
themselves with the Deputies in all Prosecutions at Law necessarily required,
that so their Erection may be obtained and confirmed.

A conditional Supersede as to the Article of Antichrist.
42. Whereas since the last Resolution taken by us concerning that Article
Antichrist, and its insertion into the body of our Confession of Faith, and in
consequence thereof its being printed, his Majesty has notified unto us by our
Deputies, as also by Monsieur de Montmartyn, that the publishing of this
Article would exceedingly displease him: This Assembly ordains, That the
Printing thereof shall be superseded, unless any Member of our Church be
molested for it, or be brought before the Magistrate for his confession of it,
or any Minister, for Preaching, Teaching, or Writing about it; and his Majesty
shall be humbly entreated to interpose his Authority that no one be disquieted
for the Impression which is already past, or for being possessed of any Copies,
received from the Press.

43. The Deputies of Higher Languedoc craved the Advice of this Synod, what
should be done in that case of Moneys received by their Deputies sent unto the
Assembly of Chastelleraut, in the year 1605. and which had been given them to
defray the Charges of their Journey and Abode there, by the Churches, and by
his Majesty's Liberality. This Synod ordains, That the Receivers and
Detainers of the said Moneys, not having given in their Accounts for them unto
their respective Provinces, nor having received from them good and vallid
Acquittances and Discharges, shall be bound to do it, and in case of defailure,
they shall be prosecuted with all Church Censures, and other due courses of
Law, if that the Provinces and Churches do so require it.

44. In reading the Synod of Gap about Censures inflicted on the Violators of
Marriage-promises without just cause, several difficulties were related to have
arisen in diverse places upon this Subject. Wherefore this Synod decrees, That
neither private persons, nor Consistories have any Authority to dissolve such
promises, but shall remand them back unto the Cognizance, Order and Legal
Judgment of the Civil Magistrate; and in case any refuse obedience hereunto,
they shall be prosecuted by all Church Censures.

45. Some moved, how expedient it would be that our Academies were regulated
according to the number of our Provinces, and that the sums now demanded for
augmentation of the Regents and Professors Sallaries, was too great, and
particularly for that of Saumur. But this Synod not having time enough at
present to debate this matter, does require all the Provinces to consider of it
against the meeting of the next National Synod. And that our weaker and poorer
Churches may be more comfortably relieved and supplied: Those Churches who are
better able to maintain a College without any assistance from others, or the
public, are desired to bring in an Account of what can be done by them; That
so we may make the best estimate we can, how to complete and perfect our
Universities. And the Provinces next adjoining to our Universities, are
requested to have a most careful eye over them, and to be responsable for them
unto the next National Synod, and of the diligence or neglects of duty by its
Officers and Professors. And till that time we do not judge meet to grant any
augmentation to that of Saumur.

46. The Deputies of diverse Provinces, moving that there might be particular
Colleges erected in their respective Provinces for the educating of Youth in
Humanity before they were sent unto our Universities: This Assembly grants
them their request, and that the eleven Provinces, which have no Academy, shall
have each of them the sum of 100 Crowns for this very purpose. And these
Provinces are charged to bring in an Account unto the next National Synod, how
they have employed the said Moneys.

47. Monsieur Vignier is entreated to study well that controversy about the
great Antichrist, and to bring in his work unto the next National Synod.

CHAP. VI.
An Account of the Dividend of one hundred, five and thirty thousand Livers,
given by his Majesty every year unto the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom; Out
of which great sum the Lord of Candal and his Commissary Monsieur de Visouze
shall make payment of these lesser sums here under mentioned in manner and
form following, and at the times appointed, and this according to those
Articles of Agreement made betwixt him and the Lords General Deputies of our
Churches in the National Synod of Gap. 1603.

To the Universities.
L. S. D. To the University of Montauban. 3333 6 8 To that of Saumur. 3333 6 8
To that of Montpellier. 1500 0 0 To that of Nismes. 1833 0 0 To that of Sedan.
2400 0 0

To the L. L. General Deputies.

To the Lords General Deputies officiating at Court for us, 1650 Livers, being
one half of 3300 Livers which added to 10200 Livers, taken out of the lesser
Account do make up 13500 Livers, which is their allotted yearly Sallery. The
remaining moitay of the said 3300 Livers, the Lord of Candal is to receive out
of the Moneys ordered for the payment of our Garrisons and by him to be paid
into the said L. L General Deputies.

To Ministers.
To the Province of Provence there shall be paid in the sum of 2181 l. 12 s.
for 17 Churches including in it 300 l. overpluss assigned to them. To the
Province of Brittany the sum of 2403 l. for 19 Churches including in it 300 l.
overpluss assigned to them. To the Province of Burgundy the sum of 4727 l. 4.
s. for 40 Churches, including in it the sum of 300 l. overpluss. To the
Province of Vivaretz the sum of 3399 l. 2 s. for 28 Churches, including in it
also 300 l. overplus. To the Lower Guienne the sum of 8269 l. 4 s. for 72
Churches, including in it the like sum of 300 l. To the Lower Languedock the
sum of 11842 l. 10 s. for 107 Churches. To the Province of Poictou the sum of
5613 l. for 48 Churches, taking in the 300 l. overpluss. To the Isle of France,
Picardy, Champagne, and Beausse the sum of 7827 l. 10 s. for 68 Churches,
including the 300 overpluss. To the Province of Xaintonge the sum of 7937 l. 6
s. for 69 Churches, taking in the 300 l. overpluss. To the Province of Anjou
for 29 Churches the sum of 3209 l. 16. s. To the province of Higher Languedoc,
and Higher Guienne for 94 Churches, the sum of 10404 l. 10 s. To the Province
of Orleans and Berry for 36 Churches the sum of 4284 l. 10 s. including the
300 l. over pluss. To the Province of Dolphiny the sum of 8933 l. 10 s. for 78
Churches taking in the 300 l. overpluss. To the Province of Normandy the sum
of 6166 l. 6 s. for 53 Churches taking in the 300 l. overpluss.
And this whole sum shall be paid in by three equal portions unto the
Universities, the Lords General Deputies, and to the Receivers of the
Provinces, at the time and manner following.

Viz. The portions of the Isle of France, Picardy, Brie, Champagne, Beausse,
Normandy, Anjou, Orleans, Poitiers, Lower Guyenne, Higher Languedoc, and Higher
Guienne, the Universities in the said Provinces being included into the hands
of their Receivers, who shall be appointed by them; The first payment to be
made the first of July next coming, the second on the second day of October
following, and the third on the last of January in the year 1608. And for the
Isle of France, Picardy, Brie and Champagne in the City of Paris, For Normandy
in the City of Rouan. For Orleans and Berry at Orleans, for Poictou at
Poictiers, for the Lower Guienne at Bourdeaux, for Higher Guienne and Higher
Languedoc at Montauban, and for Anjou in the City of Tours, including in it the
University of Saumur.

And the portions due unto the Provinces of Provence, Lower Languedoc, Brittany
and Xaintonge into the hands of the Receivers, who shall be appointed by them,
at three equal payments, the first at the end of July, the second at the end of
October, and the third at the end of February in the year 1608. viz. for Lower
Languedoc and the Universities of Montpellier and Nismes in the City of
Montpellier, for Britain at Nants, for Xaintonge at Rochel, for the Provinces
of Burgundy and Dolphiny and Vivaretz in the City of Lions.

The two first payments shall be maid at the Fairs in August and Allhollantide
of this present year, and the last upon twelfth day immediately after.

And the said Provinces shall be obliged to appoint and name in every one of
those before mentioned Cities, a particular House whereunto the said Lord of
Candal may come, and make payment of the said Moneys.

October Quarter for Ministers shall be paid out of the Moneys of the said
Quarter by the said Lord of Candal.
L. S. D. To the Province of Provence for 17 Churches. 0756 18 6 To the
Province of Brittany for 19 Churches. 0846 00 0 To the Province of Burgundy for
40 Churches. 1781 00 0 To the Province of Vivaretz for 28 Churches. 1246 14 0
To Lower Guienne for 63 Churches. 3205 16 5 To the Lower Languedoc for 73
Churches. 4764 5 6 To Poictou for 48 Churches. 2137 4 0 To the Isle of France,
etc. for 68 Churches. 3027 14 0 To Xaintonge for 169 Churches. 3071 4 6 To the
Province of Anjou for 29 Churches. 1291 4 6 To the Higher Languedoc and Higher
Guienne for 94 Churches. 4185 7 0 To Orleans and Berry for 36 Churches. 1602 18
0 To Dolphiny for 78 Churches. 3472 19 0 To Normandy for 53 Churches. 2359 17 0

And whereas there will be wanting 33750 Livers to complete the last Quarter of
the said sum of 135000 Livers, or whatsoever part of it he may receive shall
be actually paid in by him the fifteenth day of August the next year unto every
one of the Provinces, defalking only one Sous in the Liver, and unto such
persons as shall be constituted by the said Provinces, to receive it for them.
And if any more Moneys shall be recovered after the said fifteenth day of
August the next year, he shall pay it in by Bills unto every one of the
Provinces, according to the Dividend, which shall be made by our General
Deputies residing with his Majesty, provided they will accept of it.

And this order for the Dividend shall hold good not only for this present year
1607. but also for the year ensuing, 1608. yea and till the holding of the next
National Synod.

Dividend.

There shall be sixty and nine portions paid into the Province of Xaintonge for
54^ Pastors in actual service, six Proposans, and nine Churches destitute of
Ministers.

There shall be 107 portions paid into the Province of Lower Languedoc for 90
Pastors. 5. Churches vacant, six Proposans, and one Minister Emeritus by reason
of his age: only five of these portions must go to the Lower Auverg^e.

There shall be 36 portions paid into the Province of Orleans and Berry for 21
Pastors, 9 vacant Churches, and six Proposans.

There shall be 68 portions paid into the Province of the Isle of France for 48
Pastors, seven vacant Churches, two Ministers Emeriti by reason of age; and
five of those portions are supernumerary.

There shall 72 portions be paid into the Province or Lower Guienne, the
Churches of Soullais, and Bigorre, for 62 Pastors in actual service, four
vacant Churches, five Proposans, and one portion granted as an Honorarium to
Monsieur Baduel.

There shall be 29 portions paid into the Province of Anjou for 19 Pastors in
actual service, for six vacant Churches, three Proposans and one Minister
Emeritus by reason of his age.

There shall be paid ninety and four portions into the Province of Higher
Languedoc and Guienne for seventy Pastors in actual service, six vacant
Churches, seven Proposans, four Pastors Emeriti, thirteen of these portions
were super-numerary, and four of them for the Higher Auvergne.

There shall be paid in forty eight portions to the Province of Poictou for
thirty nine Pastors in actual service, for five Churches vacant, three
Proposans, and one Pastor Emeritus.

There shall be paid in thirty eight portions to the Province of Vivaretz for
eighteen Pastors in actual service, five Churches vacant, three Proposans, and
two portions added as an Honorarium to Monsieur de la Faye Pastor of the Church
of Aubenas.

There shall be paid in seventeen portions to the Province of Provence for
seven Pastors in actual service, seven Churches vacant, and three Proposans.

There shall be paid in seventy eight portions to the Province of Dolphiny for
sixty one Pastors in actual service, seven Churches vacant, eight Proposans,
and two Ministers Emeriti.

There shall be paid in forty portions to the Province of Burgundy, Gex, and
Lionnois for twenty nine Pastors in actual service, seven vacant Churches, and
four Proposans.

There shall be paid in fifty three portions to the Province of Normandy for
thirty eight Pastors in actual service, seven Churches to be provided for, six
Proposans, and two Ministers Emeriti.

There shall be paid in nineteen portions to the Province of Brittany for seven
Pastors in actual service, seven vacant Churches, four Proposans, and one
Pastor Emeritus.

CHAP. VII. An Account of those sums which the National Synod has Decreed to
be paid out by the Lord of Candal Receiver General of the Moneys given by his
Majesty unto the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom.
IMprimis; He shall reimburse the Sieurs de la Noue and du Cross the sum of
fourscore and twelve Livers paid down by them for verifying of those Letters
Patents, discharging all the Ministers of the Reformed Churches in France from
payment of any Taxes whatsoever, and for the Seal af^ixed to those Letters of
our Bill of Grievances presented to his Majesty.

He shall pay unto Mr. Reynault Minister of the Church of Bourdea^x, the sum of
two hundred and ten Livers for those Reasons expressed in the Synodical Decree.

He shall pay unto Messieurs du Bois Cargrois and Gigord Professors in the
University of Montpellier the sum of 400 l. which were given them by the Synod.

He shall pay to Mr. Theophilus Bleuet Lord of La Comb the sum of 120 l. for
those causes expressed in the Synodical Order.

He shall pay unto Corneille the Printer in this City six Livers, for printing
the general Laws of our Universities composed by this Synod.

There is the sum of eight hundred twenty eight Livers, which the said Lord of
Candall is to keep in his hands, deducting but of it for himself one Sous in
the Liver, and to pay it in by equal portions unto the Provinces for the first
Quarter of this present year 1607. and the said sum shall be allowed him in his
Account of Disbursments, he producing the forementioned Orders, and the
Acquittances from the parties to whom he paid it.

CHAP. VIII. Memorials and Instructions given to the Lords of Villarnoul and de
Mirande, the General Deputies of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom,
attending upon His Majesty, how to bring Monsieur Palot to Account for the
Moneys dispensed by by him, which His Gracious Majesty was pleased so bestow
upon our Reformed Churches.
FIRST You must take the Oaths of Messieurs de la Nouve and du Cross and then
prosecute the said Palot before the Lords of Pontcarre and of Beaumarchais, who
are the Judges constituted by his Majesty to hear and determine the said
Accounts.

And whereas the said Palot may persist in what he has formerly urged to avoid
all Accounting, that the Receivers General upon whom he has Moneys assigned,
have not as yet brought in their Accounts, or Copies of them, that they might
be examined, and verified, and it might be known whether the Moneys of their
Accounts have been diverted to other uses, to there prejudice of those
Assignments; you must then inform our Lords the Judges, that this is a mere
fiction and evasion. For if the said Palot had a desire to see those Accounts,
he might with a wet finger be satisfied. Let him but present his Petition unto
the Court of Exchequer in Paris to have sight and Copy of the Accounts of the
last Receivers General, upon whom as he says were his Assignments, and there
they lie, and it will he granted him immediately. And in case the said Palot
refuse to petition the said Court, the Lords our General Deputies shall compel
him to it, and force him in their names to take out Coppies and Extracts
concerning those Receivers General, and whatever else may necessarily relate
unto the said Palot.

And whereas the said Palot does take for granted that there is due unto him
the sum of twelve thousand Crowns and more: It is necessary that our General
Deputies should demand sight of those Accounts brought in by him, that it may
be proved whether he has made a good and just Receipt for all his Moneys;
which they may easily do, and the said Receipt may be verified, but taking out
from the Exchequer Copies and Extracts or all Moneys which the Receivers
General have imposed or paid in to the said Palot. All which any Attorney
belonging to the said Court of Exchequer will get dispatched for them out of
hand.

And forasmuch as we have too just cause to fear it, that in the Account
brought in by the said Palot, there will be found several double false
Reprisals, All the Deputies of the Provinces are charged to send unto our Lords
the General Deputies a Copy of all Accounts given in by their particular
Receivers in their respective Provinces, that so we may have a full and perfect
knowledge of the Receipt and Disbursment set down and used in the Account of
the said Palot.

So that if any thing should be owing to him, which is very improbable and
incredible, he may be paid by the Receivers General of Thoulouse, who were
ordered in the closing up of their Accounts for the years 1600, and 1602. To
pay in unto the said Palot the sum of 15966 Crowns, six Sous, and ten Deniers.
For out of this sum there will not only be enough to satisfy him, but there
will also remain some Moneys in stock for our Churches. And it is to be feared
that he has made the like mixtures in his other General Receipts, in which he
has left a Fund for accommodating with all the Debtors: And this affair is of
so long continuance, that people do now a days forbear speaking of it, as if it
were so old as to be forgotten, which usually falls out in all general matters.

And when as the said Accounts are brought in, and cleared up, then all Papers
remaining in the hands of the said Palot concerning those Assignations, shall
be taken from him, and the Receivers General, and the Debtors are to be
prosecuted. And if any of those assignations appear to be of no worth nor
value, our General Deputies shall use their best and utmost endeavor to get
new and better Assignments.

And that it might be made appear that there was such a good debt of fifteen
thousand nine hundred sixty and six Crowns, five and forty Sous and six
Deniers owing unto our Churches, there was put into the hands of our Lords
General Deputies the Extracts taken out of the Chamber of Accounts for the
Province of Languedoc.

Done at Rochel this 12th day of April. Signed Berault Moderator of the
National Synod. Rivet Scribe. Roy Scribe.


CHAP. IX. Of Appeals.
1. MOnsieur de la Rouviere Doctor of the Civil Law came empowered by the
Common Council of the City of Usez into this Assembly to defend an Appeal,
which certain of the Consuls and Inhabitants of that City had made from the
Colloquy of Usez, and the Provincial Synod of Lower Languedoc held at St.
Hippolyte, by whom Mr. Laurence Brunier Minister of the Gospel, was restored
unto his Pastoral Office in the Church of Usez, against the will and desire of
these his Opponents. On the other part the said Mr. Brunier Pastor of that
Church, and de Janas Doctor of the Civil Law came also furnished with ample
powers from a great Assembly of that City, disavowing those powers of the Sieur
de la Ruviere, and of the Consistory there. Now although the disavowal of the
first powers by the second, might have been very well contested; yet
nevertheless because of the consequence and importance of this affair, the
Assembly passing by that formality, did give audience to both Parties, that it
might take some effectual course about the principal. Wherefore the Deputies of
that Province were heard give in the reasons moving the said Province of Lower
Languedoc to restore the said Mr. Brunier unto the Church of Usez, and Monsieur
Codur, unto the Ministry in their Province, contrary to the Decree of the
National Synod of Gap, which had excluded Monsieur Brunier from the City and
Church of Usez, until the meeting of this present Assembly, and Mr. Codur from
that Province. Monsieur de la Rouviere was also heard speak on behalf of the
Appellants, and offering his objections as well against that decree of the
Provincial Synod, as against the very person of Monsieur Brunier. Monsieur
Brunier also was heard speak in his own defense and justification, and the
Deputy sent together with him from the Consistory of the Church of Usez, who
testified the unanimous desire of the Consistory, and of the whole Church to
enjoy him for their Pastor, and how eminently acceptable and successful the
Ministry of the said Mr. Brunier was among them. Letters also were read from
the Church of Beziers, and one of their Elders sent by them declared the
importunate desire of the said Church, that Monsieur Codur might be confirmed
in the Pastoral Office to them, as also how very fruitful and edifying his
Ministry had been among them. Upon the whole, this Assembly did utterly dislike
and disapprove of those proceedings of the Provincial Synod of Lower Languedoc,
for neglecting the Decree of the National Synod of Gap, and for introducing
Monsieur Brunier into the Church of Usez, and Monsieur Codur again into the
Province, and does judge the said Province to have incurred a very great
Censure by its notorious transgression of a decree made by the National Synod,
a crime of very dangerous consequence, because if Provincial Synods shall
slight the Authority of the National, they will open the Floodgates to let in
upon us a deluge of unseen mischiefs. And the said Monsieur Brunier has
deserved a sharp reproof for listening unto methods for his restoration, which
tho sought out by others, were in truth propounded by himself unto the
Provincial Synod, and for that he acquiesced rather in the Judgment of a
Provincial Synod than of the National, yea and acted contrary to it. And the
like Censure is inflicted upon Monsieur Codur, who, being excluded the said
Province, could not of right have sought a readmission into it, nor ought the
Province when he sought it, to have readmitted him. And as for the Church of
Usez, it cannot but be blamed for its precipitancy and impatiency, in not
tarrying till the time prefixed by the National Synod was expired, when they
might have lawfully redemanded their Pastor. Moreover, these Appellants
themselves cannot be justified nor wholly absolved from guilt and miscarriages;
for they have testified too much animosity against a Reverend Minister of the
Gospel, for slight and trifling matters only, and there be some of them who
have merited a very smart and sharp reproof, because they having at first
endeavored his restoration amongst them, have since by an unaccountable
Levity destroyed the Work which they were building, and have attempted his
total and perpetual exclusion.

But for as much as the infinitely Wise God has extracted good out of all
these evils, and made all these Feuds, and Animosities, all these
Heart-burnings, and Contentions wonderfully to contribute to the advancement of
his glory, the propagation of the Gospel, the conversion of many Sinners, and
the singular edification of both these Churches of Usez and Beziers: This
Assembly does judge meet to accommodate and compound all these differences in
manner and form following. First Monsieur Brunier is presented unto the
Ministry in the Church of Usez, and the Province of Lower Languedoc is ordered
to provide him an assistant out of hand. And Monsieur Codur, he also is
conferred upon the Church of Beziers, to be from henceforth their ordinary
Pastor, and the Sieurs Brunier de Janas, and de la Rouviere were all actually
reconciled one unto the other in the presence of this Synod, and they did all
solemnly promise that they would use their best endeavors to reconcile and
reunite their several and respective parties now absent. And that this might be
more easily effected and attained, the Sieurs Bailey, Perrin, de la Colombiere,
and Valeton are charged as they return home to their own Churches, that they
pass over to the City of Usez, and compose the differences between the opposite
parties in it; And Monsieur Codur is also charged to bear them company, and to
deal with his Friends and Allies, and Acquaintance there, that they may embrace
this sacred and desirable peace. And Letters shall be written unto all the
Appellants in the name of this National Synod, and signed by Synodical Officers
to press and exhort them to be at peace among themselves, to put a period unto
all their divisions and dissentions, and to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace.

2. The Consistory, and far greater part of the Church of Tonneias appealed
from a Judicial Sentence given by their Provincial Synod held at Nerac, for
that they had freed and discharged Mr. Francois de Monjoux, Pastor of their
Church, from his Ministry in it, and relation to it, and given him unto the
Church of Bazas and its Annexes, and for that he the said Mr. Monjoux had
acquiesced in the said Sentence. And the said Church complained that this was
done without ever hearing them and that they did disown and disavow that
Person, who had been sent by some of the Jurates and Magistrates of their Town,
nor did they in the least approve of their Elder's Silence in that Synod, when
as this matter was under debate. This Assembly judges that the Synod had acted
too precipitantly in giving Mr. de Monjoux his Dismission without a more ample
hearing of his Church, and therefore orders, that he shall continue as
formerly their Pastor; but the said Church of Tonneias shall also for their
part take care, as in Conscience they are bound, that his necessities be
supplied, and a comfortable maintenance be provided for him. And in the mean
time their Actings and Proceedings, who procured his Conge and Dismission, are
very much blamed, as also their Deputies and Monsieur Monjoux, who were all
present in this Assembly, were censured, and their Clubs and private Cabals
about Church Matters out of Consistory were all reproved, and particularly that
Chicannery and contentious humor of theirs in getting all their Acts expedited
and dispatched before Public Notaries and Secular Judges. Wherefore this
National Synod does advise and conjure them in the name of our Lord Jesus to be
reconciled, and at peace among themselves: which these persons now present did
readily yield and accord unto, and as a pledge and token thereof did mutually
take each other by the hand, promising that they would deal and mediate
effectually with their absent Parties to be at peace also; and the Pastors of
Lower Languedoc, as they return homeward, shall ride over unto Tonneins, and
labor to make up, and conciliate all these differences. And whereas the Parish
of Dunet was heretofore incorporated with the Church of Tonneins, it shall be
conjoined and reunited to it. And in case any new difficulties should be
started about it, the next Provincial Synod is charged by the Authority of this
Assembly to assoil and remove them. And it the said Parish yield its consent to
be united with that of Tonneins, the said Church shall take an especial care
about the safe going and coming of their Pastor in the exercise of his Ministry
among them. And as for that particular fact of John Carrier, who complains of
his being deposed from his Office in the Eldership without any just occasion,
the aforementioned Deputies are charged to hear him upon the place, and to do
him right by a final Judgment on his Cause, and they shall do the same for the
Deacon, who also makes the like complaint as the Elder. And it is farther
decreed, that there shall be twenty Crowns paid out of the common Stock of the
said Church and Town unto the Sieurs Fassas and Carrier, to defray their
Expenses, and to recompense them for their Costs and Trouble in this business,
which could not amount upon a moderate computation unto a lesser sum.

3. The Church of Angoulesine, together with their Pastor Mr. Hog, complained
of the Synod of Xaintonge, for condemning the said Church to pay unto the Heirs
of Monsieur Mauget Vivian, their late Pastor, the sum of six hundred and twelve
Livers, and that it should be paid out of their portion of Moneys given by his
Majesty unto the said Church. This Assembly judges that the said Mr. Hog has
done very well in thus appealing, because those Moneys granted us by the King,
are only appropriated unto Pastors in actual service, so that the Provincial
Synod did wrong the said Church of Angoulesme by that their Judgment. And upon
consideration had of the Heirs of Mr. Mauget Vivian deceased, and their great
poverty, and the deep poverty of the said Church, and the right that it has
unto the Moneys of his Majesty's Bounty, there was adjudged unto those Heirs
the sum of three hundred Livers, and the said Province of Xaintonge, Aulnix,
and Augoumois is ordered to make payment of it unto them out of the Moneys,
which are in the hands of the Receiver General for the fourth quarter of the
years 1604, and 1605.

4. The Church of Saujon appealed from the last Provincial Synod of Xaintonge
held in their Town, for that it had obliged the said Church to give twelve
Sermons every year unto the Parish of Medis, and to celebrate once in the year
the Lord's Supper in it, the said Parish paying the sum of an hundred Livers
toward the maintenance of their Pastor; the Church of Saujon declaring, that
through the goodness of God they were well able to maintain their own Minister,
without any assistance from the said Parish. This Assembly ordained, That those
of Medis should ordinarily attend upon Divine Service in the Church of Saujon,
but that Mr. Bonnett should sometimes visit them as his conveniences and
occasions may suffer him, without obliging him to time. But and if the said
Parish of Medis should rather like to incorporate it self with Meschiers, or
any other Church, or would have a Pastor of its own, which is left wholly to
their own choice and liberty, then the Church of Saujon shall be acquitted and
discharged of all relation to them, and Medis unto them respectively, nor shall
the one lay claim or pretend unto any thing of or from the other.

5. Monsieur Vaisse Pastor of the Church of Campagnac appealed from a Decree of
the Synod of Higher Languedoc and Higher Guyenne held at Realmont, by which the
said Church of Campagnac was joined unto the Colloquy of Lower Quercy, in case
it provided it self of another Pastor, or if it would keep the said Vaisse,
then the said Church was joined unto the Colloquy of Albigeois, yet not
hindering the said Church to contest its rights and privileges before this
Assembly. Monsieur Benoist Deputy for the Colloquy of Lower Quercy (in which
quality his Commission was approved, without obliging him to demand leave of
his Church of Montauban) was heard speak on behalf of that Colloquy. Whereupon
this National Synod confirmed the Judgment of the Provincial Synod, judging
that it was in no wise expedient that the said Vaisse should be turned over to
the Colloquy of Lower Quercy, and ordained that he should continue in his
Pastoral Office and Relation unto the Church of Campagnac, which should be
joined to the Colloquy of Albigeois, which is ordered to bear with the said Mr.
Vaisse, although he cannot come so often as he would unto the said Colloquy,
especially if the places be far distant one from the other.

6. Monsieur Tenans Pastor of the Church of Montauban, and Rector of that
University, appealed from an Ordinance of the Synod of the Higher Languedoc and
Guyenne, which having deputed extraordinarily some Pastors to examine two
Candidates for the Profession of the Greek Tongue, had devolved the Expenses of
their Journey, and abode upon the Stock of the said University, and had
deprived him the said Rector of his Vote in judging of the Capacities of the
two Competitors. This Assembly judged that the Rector had done very well in
thus appealing. For as to the first point, it is but just that the Costs should
be defrayed by them, who through their contentious temper do draw persons
before extraordinary Judges. And as for the other Article, the Rector could not
be deprived of his Vote, unless they had just causes to except against him,
whereof the rest should take cognizance.

7. The Church of Benet and St. Maixiere appealed from a Decree of the Synod of
St. Maixant confirmed by the Provincial Synod of Poictou, for returning back
again unto the Church of Champdenys those Members which had left them since the
gathering and settling of the Church of St. Maixant. This Affair was remanded
unto the Provincial Synod, to be revised by it, and when as they have well
considered all circumstances of the conveniences and inconveniences relating
to those Churches, the said Synod shall pass a final Judgment thereupon, and
provide for one, without any ways in the least prejudicing or damnifying the
other.

8. The Colloquy of Lower Poictou appealed from an Ordinance of their
Provincial Synod, which had incorporated the Church of Maillezay with the
Church of Benet for a time But this Appeal was rejected, and the Order of the
Synod was confirmed as long as it made good for the Edification of both
Churches.

9. An Elder of the Church of Marans appealed from the Synod of Xaintonge held
at Saujon, for lending the Sieur de la Violette one of the Pastors of the
Church of Marans unto the Church of St. John d'Angely, for one whole year,
after which term he might return again to Marans, which made Monsieur Pillard
hereupon to leave them. Several of the Inhabitants of Marans were called in,
yea and those of the best quality and account among them, who offered unto this
National Synod, that they would maintain two Pastors, without ever in the least
taxing or burdening those persons (who desired the departure of Monsieur
Pillard from them) above what they were ordinarily rated and assessed, or what
they would freely give and contribute of their own accord. This Assembly
approving and applauding their Zeal, and finding their offers to be very just
and equitable, and contrariwise blaming and condemning the Ingratitude of that
other party, who would force away their Ancient Pastor, does ordain that both
those Ministers shall be and continue to be the ordinary and standing Pastors
of that Church, which shall pay unto each of them a like equal stipend, without
leaving one behind in Arrears, when and whilst the other is paid totally and
entirely. And in case they do not obey this Decree, and that one of these
Ministers should come to be lent or removed, it shall be the Sieur de la
Violette, who shall tarry yet three months longer at the Church of St. John
d'Angely, over and besides that year, which the Provincial Synod had
determined, and that term being expired, he shall return unto the Church of
Marans.

10. Monsieur de Bontoux Minister of the Church of St. Africa appealed from the
Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, for that they had suspended
him the exercise of his Ministry a whole month, because he went out of their
Assembly against their positive prohibition. This Appeal was vacated, and the
Colloquy which abetted him in this his groundless Appeal was also censured

11. Whereas Monsieur Raffin has executed an Order of the Provincial Synod of
Higher Languedoc and Guyenne in the City of Milhaud, that the Elders of the
Church there should communicate at the Lord's Table before the Judges and
Consuls, and this conformably to the Decisions and Decrees of our former
National Synods; this Act of his was approved and ratified, and the Appeal of
the said Magistrates disannulled; nor indeed did they insist much upon it, but
gave up their Cause.

12. Whereas the Provincial Synod of Lower Guyenne had restored Monsieur
Reynauld unto his Pastoral Office in the Church of Bourdeaux, this their
Judicial Decree is confirmed by the Authority of this present Assembly, and the
rather, because that those persons, who had appealed from it, have dropped their
Appeal, and seem to be well satisfied.

13. Monsieur des Fontaines appealed from the Provincial Synod of Poictou held
at Chastelheraud, for that they had judged he was sufficiently reimburst by the
Churches of that Province all the Charges expended by him in his Journey unto
the General Assembly of Saumur held in the year 1596. And whereas he pretended
other sums to be owing to him, for several other journeys, they sent him unto
the Governors of our Cautionary Towns to be recompensed by them, because he
was their Deputy unto that Assembly, and that they received two thirds of the
Moneys granted us by his Majesty. Upon hearing this whole affair, this Assembly
did also judge that he was sufficiently satisfied by those Churches of Poictou;
who yet were exhorted to entreat those Governors to perform their duties, and
pay their just debt unto the said Mr. des Fontaines.

14. The Appeal of the Church of Nage and it is Annexes, about what is owing
unto their late Pastor Monsieur Terrond was dismissed over to the Provincial
Synod of Lower Languedoc, who by their judicial sentence shall put a final
period unto that controversy.

15. Theophilus Bluett Lord of la Comb, formerly Pastor of the Churches at
Lassay in the Province of Main, and of Rouelle in Normandy, having certified
under his own hand, that he acquiesced in that judicial sentence past upon him
by the Deputies of the Synod of Anjou, Touraine and Maine, who had deposed him
from the Ministerial Office, and all acts and exercises thereof, tho now he
brought his Appeal from them. This Assembly does confirm that sentence of the
Deputies, and deelareth the said Bluett to be totally deposed from the holy
Ministry of the Gospel, and that notice hereof shall be given unto all the
Churches.

16. The Synod of Dolphiny having past another Vote, that Monsieur Chamier
should be once more importunately solicited to accept of the Professors Chair
in Divinity in their University of Die: The Church of Montlimart brought their
Appeal from if unto this Assembly, which did thereupon revive and ratify the
former Decrees of those two National Synods of Gergeau and Gap, which had left
unto the Churches their Pastors, and the Pastors unto their Churches, and that
they should and be divided one from the other, but by their joint and mutual
consent, and the said Provincial Synod was censured to have insisted again upon
this affair, after that it had been determined by two National Synods.

17. The Church of Lions appealed from the Synod of Burgundy, which would
constrain them to pay the fifth penny of all Charities received by them to the
maintenance of Proposans, notwithstanding those many reasons, arguments and
exceptions they had urged and brought against it. This Assembly having heard
both parties does leave the said Church in full liberty freely to dispose of
their own Poor's Money, but yet it advises them seriously to consider what is
expedient to be disbursed by them in charities, and whither they can keep a
good Conscience in neglecting a work of so great necessity.

18. The Lord of Rochefort and the Inhabitants of that Town professing the
Reformed Religion appealed from the Synod of Xaintonge held at St. John
D'Angely, for adjudging Mr. Chevalier to the Pastoral Office in the Church of
Soubize. Upon heating of both parties, and perusal of all Articles of Agreement
made first and last between them: This Assembly confirms Monsieur Chevalier in
his Ministry to the said Church of Soubize, whereof he is now the fixed Pastor,
and the Members of the Church of Rochefort have full liberty to compound the
matter with the Church of Soubize upon those terms imported in their second
Agreement made with that Consistory, or else they may Incorporate themselves
with the Church of Tonnay-charante: and both the said Chevalier and that
Consistory are Censured for using them of Rochefort so rigorously, as to refuse
Communion with them at the Lords Table, and to hinder the Baptizing of their
Infants in their Church Assembly.

19. The Churches of Barbezieux and Xaintes contended about the Ministry of
Monsieur Petit, who pretending that the Colloquy of Janzac held at Pons, had
discharged him from the Church of Barbezieux, because of their great
ingratitude to him, and in case they did not satisfy him all Arrerages of
Sallary due unto him for his service among them in two months time, and for
that the judgment of the said Colloquy had been confirmed by the Synod: and the
said Petit not having been entirely paid what was owing him, he had therefore
left Barbezieux, and settled at Xaintes, to which he was lent by the Synod for
a month, and now he had contracted with the Church there. And the Church of
Barbezieux complaining of this matter unto the mixed Assembly held at St. John
d' Angely, a Decree was there made, that Monsieur Petit should return unto the
said Church of Barbezieux, and that the Church should come to account with him
before the Colloquy. And Monsieur Roy Elder of the Church of Xaintes did
hereupon bring in his Appeal, because the said Synod declared to him, that
according to the Canons of our Discipline it had full power finally to
determine this matter, and that the said Petit did not in the least repugne or
oppose it: Who being after summoned unto that Colloquy, which was ordered to
examine his Accounts, did yet nevertheless make no appearance; for which cause
the said Colloquy had enjoined him to return unto his Church on pain of being
suspended, from which he now appealed, and has ever since continued his
Ministry in the Church of Xaintes, notwithstanding all Counsels and
exhortations given him by the Colloquy of Xaintonge to be advised and ruled by
them. And in this state has this affair stood till the last Synod of the
Province held at Saujon, unto which it had been remanded, and by that Synod it
was dismissed over unto this Assembly.

Now although the ingratitude of the Church of Barbezieux be very notorious, and
well known unto this Assembly, yet because the pretended Liberty was only
conditional and threatened, the said Monsieur Petit could not make use of it as
he has done, yea tho it had been absolute, he ought not to have usurpt that
power so as to ally himself unto another Church without having first consulted
the Colloquy, and till he had first obtained Letters Testimonial from it, and
the Church in which he last served: and therefore the said Mr. Petit was most
sharply censured, and he was told to his face, that if ever he fell into the
like offense a second time, he should be deposed from the sacred Ministry. And
the Church of Xaintes also was judged worthy of a severe Censure for practicing
by unlawful means to deprive the Church of Barbezieux of its Pastor, and the
said Church of Barbezieux was justly condemned for their ill treatment of, and
unworthy carriage to the said Mr. Petit. Upon which account, and because both
those Churches are faulty and blameworthy, the said Mr. Petit was removed from
both, and neither of them should enjoy him, and he is put upon the Roll of
distribution, among those Ministers who are to be provided of Churches by this
present National Synod in the close of it; which judges that both those
Churches have forfeited the Ministry of the blessed Gospel of Christ, one
having lost it for their sin of ingratitude in demanding work, and enjoying the
labors of their Minister, and denying him bread, by which he and his poor
Family might live: And the other is deprived of the Ordinances, because they
endeavored to rob another Church of its Pastor, and would get him by unjust
and unlawful means, quite contrary to the Canons of our Discipline. Moreover
this Assembly has rejected and disannulled the appeal of Monsieur Roy from the
mixed Assembly before mentioned, and that also brought by Monsieur Petit from
the Colloquy of Jonzac. And as for the Appeal of the Church of Barbezieux from
the Decree past in the last Synod or Saujon, this Assembly cannot blame the
patience and indulgence of that Synod, because of all former circumstances; but
yet it cannot but censure the last Colloquy held at Abaigne for producing
before us Acts and Writings signed when their meeting was broken up, and unto
which neither the Moderators nor any other of the Pastors had given their
consent. And that Church of Barbezieux shall come to a full account with the
said Mr. Petit, and shall give him entire satisfaction betwixt this and the
next Synod, on pain of being for ever deprived of the Ministry of God's holy
Word and Sacraments.

20. Monsieur Rossell at present Minister in the City and Church of Orange,
appealed from a Decree of the Synod of Lower Languedoc. But this Assembly
dismissed it over to the Provincial Synod of Vivaretz, which is fully
authorized finally to decide and determine the matters in controversy betwixt
them.

21. The Church of Mauze in Aulnix, having opposed by an Appeal the Liberty
granted unto Monsieur de la ^ave by the Colloquy of Aulnix, and confirmed by
the Synod of Saujon, and not appearing to make good the Contents of their
Appeal, the Judicial Sentence of the said Colloquy and Synod was confirmed. And
the Appeal of the Church of Jonzac for its being separated from that of Clan,
which was decreed by the same Synod; and the Appeal of the Church of Mirambeau
about the translating of Monsieur Rossignol from them unto the Church of
Arvert, neither of these Appeals being abetted and defended by any person, they
did both fall to the ground of course, and were both declared null, and desert.

22. Whereas the Church of Mirambeau having demanded of the Synod of Xaintonge
a portion of his Majesty's Moneys, was refused the grant thereof, because they
had no Pastor, and do now therefore make their Appeal. This Assembly judges
that the said Synod proceeded well and wisely, and that the Appeal of the said
Church is causless and unreasonable. But that Provincial Synod is advised to
present one of their Proposans, who is maintained out of our common Stock, unto
this vacant Church.

CHAP. X. Of Particular Matters.
1. THE Sieurs Richard Pastor of the Church of Meusac and Islemade Richeteau
Pastor of the Church of St. Leophary and Charles Pastor of the Church of
Archiac represented unto this Synod (the two first by word of mouth, the last
by his Son Minister of Villemur) the great Difficulties they met withal in
executing that Canon of the Synod of Gap, obliging Pastors to a personal
Residence on their Churches, which being considered by the Provincial Synod of
Higher Languedoc, and particularly as relating to the said Ministers, who now
lived in the City of Montauban, the final Judgment on their Case was remitted
unto this Assembly. Monsieur Beraud Pastor and Professor in that Church and
University, was heard deliver his thoughts about this Affair. And diverse Acts
being produced and read on both sides, many of which proved evidently the
convenient Houses and Lodgings that those Churches had provided for these their
Pastors (who complained without any just ground) though other Acts did offer
the contrary. After a mature debate of the whole, this ensuing Decree was made
and published, that the said Richard and Richeteau shall both of them remove
from the City of Montauban unto their respective Churches, which are enjoined
to accommodate them with convenient Housen as soon as possible, and to augment
their Salaries unto a just competency, and this at farthest within the space of
one year: And if the said Churches shall refuse or neglect this their bounden
duty, they shall be deprived of the Ministry of God's Holy Word and Sacraments;
and if the said Ministers shall refuse to reside in those Habitations provided
for them before the year be expired, they also shall be suspended from their
Ministerial Office. And every one of these Plaintiffs and Defendants on both
sides are sharply censured for producing several Attestations, Inquiries, and
other such like Acts done and confirmed by and before Public Notaries, and
Secular Judges. And as for Monsieur Charles the Elder, this Assembly,
considering the Age, great Charge, and that Assistance which he has promised
unto his Father-in-law, and that Help which his Son has promised unto him,
does dispense with his personal Residence in his Church, for so long a time as
his Church shall permit him, and he may live where he now does. And these
Ministers, Charles, Richard and Richeteau, are expressly forbidden all
intermeddling in any sort whatsoever with the Affairs of the Church and
University of Montauban, unless they be duly called and invited to it by the
Consistory of that University.

2. Mr. Charles the Younger shall for the future make his constant Residence in
his Church of Villemur; and whereas he pretends, that he was absolutely given
up and resigned unto the Church of Puylaurens, and that he was only lent unto
that of Villemur, This Assembly requires the Provincial Synod of Higher
Languedoc and Guyenne to examine the truth of this matter, and till the said
Synod determine otherwise about him, he shall serve the Church of Villemur.

3. The Colloquy, Church and University of Montauban petitioned that Monsieur
Beraud might be restored to them, and to continue in his Office amongst them.
The Sieurs Beraud, Father and Son, and the Deputies of the Province were all
heard speaking in their order to this matter, as also Monsieur Bouchereau
Pastor of the Church of Saumur, who pleaded that Monsieur Beraud the Younger
had engaged himself for one year to be professor in that University. This
Assembly considering the necessities of the said University of Saumur, decreed
that Monsieur Beraud should tarry with them another year, to commence on the
fifteenth day of April next coming; which term being expired, Monsieur Beraud
the Son shall serve in the Ministry in his Father's stead, and perform all the
duties belonging unto his Office; and he shall then be appropriated to, and
fixed in the Church and University of Montauban, nor may the Provincial, Synod
nor Colloquy, nor the said Church provide themselves of any other for the
Ministry in that Church, or for the Profession of Theology, during the time of
his loan unto the Church and University of Saumur.

4. The Church of St. Ireney le Perch in the Country of Limousin petitioned
this Assembly for a Pastor, that so their Ruin and Dissipation might be
prevented, and that they might be helped with some Moneys to make him up a
competency for his subsistence with them. The Assembly considering that
Monsieur Alix was lent unto the Church of Angeau, does enjoin the Provincial
Synod of Berry to examine Monsieur Solomon a Proposan, and in case they find
him well qualified, they shall set him apart to the work of the Ministry by
Imposition of hands, and send him unto the said Church of St. Ireney le Perch
for two years only, in case the Church of Orleans be not destitute of Pastors,
which is much feared; for both the Pastors of Orleans and Angeau have been a
long time very sick and like to die. And the said Church of St. Ireney le
Perch shall be put upon the same Roll with the other Churches to draw forth,
and receive its portion of the King's Moneys.

5. Whereas the Elder of the Church of Villefaignun and Savelles has
petitioned that they might be without any longer delay provided of a Pastor,
the next Synod of Xaintonge is charged to take care of them, and to give order
for their supply. And in the mean while the Neighbor Ministers of Xaintonge
and Augoulmois are required to visit and officiate by turns in the said Church.

6. There being great divisions and contentions among the Pastors and
Professors in the Church and University of Montauban, and particularly one
lately fallen out between Messieurs Beraud the Younger, and Duncan first Regent
of their College, and Competitor for the Profession of the Greek Tongue, and
there having been very ill doings, and of dangerous consequence in their
proceedings, their Cause being removed from the Colloquies and Synods by the
said Duncan and others unto the Court of the Edict in the City of Castres. This
Assembly* that past evils may be remedied, and such as are future may be
prevented, does enjoin those Gentlemen concerned in these differences, and who
are now personally present in this Synod to be reconciled one unto the other,
which was done accordingly. And that the absent parties might be reunited,
Messieurs de Gasque, Gigord, and those Elders deputed by the Province of Lower
Languedoc, shall take in their way homeward the City of Montauban, and are
charged by the Authority of this Synod to accommodate and compose all their
dissensions. And it is farther ordained, That both the said Mr. Beraud the
Younger, and Mr. Duncan shall desist all pursuits about the Profession of the
Greek Tongue, and for peace sake a third person shall be chosen into that
Office. And whereas the said Duncan was obliged by a special Article of the
said Colloquy to prosecute his Appeal in the Court of the Edict, the Provincial
Synod is ordered to inflict a very severe Censure upon that Colloquy, in case
that Article be found registered in the Original of their Acts, which for this
purpose shall be produced. And Messieurs de Gasques, Gigord, St. Chapte, and
Bergier, as they travel through the City of Castres, shall acquaint his
Majesty's Officers professing the Reformed Religion in that Court, how very
prejudicial it will be unto our Churches, if those Academical Differences shall
come to be impleaded at their Bar, that so according to their Zeal and Piety,
they may prudently provide for our public and common benefit, and take care in
due time that the Liberties and Privileges of the Churches be not invaded nor
disseized.

7. Monsieur de la Vallade is confirmed in his Ministry unto the Church of
Fontinay, unto which he was formerly presented, nor shall the Province of
Guyenne or Bergerac claim any right to recall him; and this Decree passed
without any opposition from the Deputies of the said Church and Province, who
declared they had no Commission to redemand him. So that all Agreements and
Covenants made betwixt the said Vallade and his Father and the said Church are
ratified, and become perpetual. However, this Assembly does not approve of that
Form in which they be drawn up, especially with reference unto the Moneys,
which they pretend to have furnished him; and in case the Church of Bergerac
should demand him, the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge is empowered with
Authority to determine finally of him, and all matters between him and them.

8. The Churches of Maringues and Paillac in Auvergne petitioned this Assembly
that they might be supplied with able Ministers; and because of their deep
poverty, and want of necessary means to allow a sufficient maintenance for a
Pastor, the Synod of Lower Languedoc was enjoined to lend them a Minister for
one year, they taking the first opportunity of their meeting to apply
themselves thither for one: And that a competency may be the more easily
provided over and above the four portions out of the King's Money formerly
allotted unto those of the Lower Auvergne, there be two more granted to them,
and the said Churches of Maringues and Paillac shall receive four of them, and
the other two shall remain with, and belong unto the Church of Issoire. And it
is farther ordained, That the said Synod of Lower Languedoc shall in the mean
time choose a Proposan of good hopes, and well qualified, who may be given as
ordinary Pastor unto the said Church of Issoire.

9. Monsieur Primrose Pastor of the Church of Bourdeaux brought Letters from
the Magistrates and Ministers in the Church of Edinborough in Scotland, written
and directed to this Assembly, and other Letters also written by his Majesty
the King of Great Britain, recalling him home unto his Native Country to
serve the said Church of Edinburgh; and he declared farther, that he had never
absolutely engaged himself either to this Kingdom, nor to any particular Church
in it, but had always reserved a liberty of departure, when as he should be
duly recalled. This Assembly replied, that they would not in the least abridge
him of his liberty, but as he had acquired it, so he might use it with a good
conscience, yet nevertheless they entreated him to consider well of all
circumstances, and to have a tender care and respect unto the Church of
Bourdeaux, which by his most fruitful preaching and exemplary godly
conversation had been exceedingly edified. Whereupon he promised seriously not
to abandon the said Church, till it were better supplied.

10. The Sieur de la Buissonniere desiring that the Canon about calling the
Provincial Synod of Normandy might be explained. This Assembly decrees, that
every Colloquy shall meet in its course in those places which are most
commodious, and the said Province is injoined to call unto their Synod a Pastor
and Elder out of every Church, and that it could not in any wise approve of
their former actings being directly repugnant unto our Discipline, to call only
the Deputies of the Colloquies, and the said Province was censured for that
irregular practice, and the Higher Normandy is forbidden to Congregate and pack
up into one their two Colloquies, as they have done heretofore.

11. The Church of Cormes and that of St. John du Brueil petitioning to be
incorporated with the Colloquy of Rovergue, and separated from that of Sauve;
This Assembly having heard Monsieur Gasques speaking on behalf of the Lower
Languedoc, that they did not oppose it; their Petition was granted them,
provided that the Synod of Higher Guyenne would carefully inspect and watch
over them.

12. The Church of Foix and Tarascon complained of their utter inability to
maintain a Pastor by reason of the excessive poverty of the Inhabitants of
those places. This Assembly did therefore add two Portions more out of the
Kings Money to that which they already had, and entreated Monsieur de Montigny
to persuade Monsieur du Mattellet to accept of the Pastoral Charge of that
Church, and to assist and encourage him in it.

13. The Petition of the Church of Bourg Argentall was granted, and they shall
be henceforward incorporated with the Church of Bonlieu in Vivaretz, but on
that condition mentioned in the Act of the Provincial Synod of Burgundy, that
when as by the good providence of God they may be enabled to maintain a Pastor
of themselves, that then they shall be returned back unto the said Province.

The Deputies of the Lower Guyenne petitioning, that the Decree of their
Provincial Synod might be confirmed, that all their Churches might be obliged
to put the moneys Collected by them for the poor Exiles of the Marquisate of
Salluces into the hands of Monsieur Bernardin Elder in the Church of Thonneins,
that he might be reimbursed the four hundred Crowns lent by him upon his
Majesty's Grant of that sum unto the Deputies assembled at Chastechelaud, and
who had already paid it in to the Brethren of the said Marquisate. This
Assembly has confirmed, and does now by this present Act ratify and confirm
that Decree aforesaid, and it shall be accordingly executed and performed, but
so that every Church shall be taxed according to its ability, and the said
Collection thus assessed shall be levied according to the said Rate and Tax.

15. Madam la Faye being fallen blind is recommended to the Charity of the
Church of Bourdeaux, which is entreated to continue their wonted Relief and
Assistance to her.

16. Monsieur Haulier Pastor of the Church du Mas d' Assier is enjoined to ride
unto Vivaretz, and in obedience to the Synodical Decree made at Gap, to Account
with the Church of Annonay, and to give them full satisfaction within six
months time all delays and excuses being set by.

17. Monsieur Baldran Deputy for the Churches of Bearn petitioned that Monsieur
Esperian, the younger, Minister of St. Foy might be restored unto their
Province and to serve in one of their Churches, The Elder of the Church of St.
Foy was heard, who produced a Letter written by the Father of the said Monsieur
Esperian, declaring that his Son if he pleased might continue where he was.
This Assembly did not approve that the said Esperian should be any wise obliged
unto the Churches of Bearn to the hindrance of his abode at St. Foy; and this
was so determined by the National Synod of Gap, and is now ratified by this
present Synod. And the said Esperian by our authority is now fixed and
appropriated to the Church of St. Foy, yet with this restriction, that in case
of great and indispensible necessities he may assist the Churches of Bearn as a
Pastor, as they also shall in like manner assist ours by virtue of that holy
Ordinance of Communion betwixt the Churches of our Lord Jesus.

18. Monsieur Durdes Pastor of the Church of Pamiers, did by his Son acquaint
this Synod of that great Affliction God had laid upon him in depriving him of
his Eyesight, together with very many domestic troubles befallen him, partly
by Persecutions in former times, and grievous Sicknesses; and that the Church
of Pamiers is not of sufficient ability to maintain another Minister. Wherefore
the Province of Higher Languedoc is enjoined to deal kindly with him in their
Dividends of his Majesty's Liberalities, and to provide for him under his
pressing necessities.

19. That all Dissensions arising in the Church of Xaintes about.
Church-Offices, may be prevented for the future, this Assembly does judge fit,
that as soon as the said Church shall be provided of a Pastor, one third of
their Consistory shall be changed, and another third at the years end, and the
residue the year following; and the Election of the two thirds who are to
continue and enter into Office shall be made by majority of Votes of the said
Consistory, and those who have a mind to be discharged shall enjoy their
Liberty. And this Canon was made for the said Church at the request of the
Province of Xaintonge, and to be perpetuated in the said Church, but without
any prejudice in the least unto other Churches.

20. Our Brethren in the Baylywick of Gex shall subscribe the
Church Discipline, yet with this Restriction, that they shall not be obliged
unto some particular Canons, which shall be excepted by name in their
subscribed Copies, and this because of their present estate and circumstances.

21. The Deputies of Poictou craved resolution unto this Case. Some persons
lately married were tied up from Conjugal performances by Witchcraft, and
thereupon separated one from the other, and the Wife was since married unto
another Man, and afterward her first Husband unto another Woman: May these
persons be admitted to the Peace and Communion of the Church? This Assembly
remits the Judgment of the matter of fact unto their Provincial Synod, which is
ordered particularly to examine all circumstances.

22. The Deputies of Lower Languedoc moved this Case; whether a Colloquy might
refuse payment of a Donative given by the Provincial Synod unto the Widow of a
deceased Minister, upon this pretense, that the said Widow died before the
time of paying the said Donative became due, and whether her death may cause a
Revocation of that Relief from the indigent Heirs of the said poor deceased
Widow? This Assembly resolves in the negative, and censureth that Colloquy for
making a needless stir and opposition.

23. The Church of Rochell having collected eight hundred Livers for our Exiled
Brethren of the Marquisate of Salluces, this sum of Moneys was ordered to be
paid in to the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny, which was done accordingly, and
the said Province shall bring in their Account how they distribute it unto the
next National Synod.

24. The Church of Bourdeaux delivered unto the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny
four hundred Livers collected in it for our Exiled Brethren of the Marquisate
of Salluces, and the said Province is to bring in their Account how they have
distributed it unto the next National Synod.

25. Monsieur Pynaud brought in his Accounts of Moneys received for the Pastors
in the Province of Aujou, Touraine, and Main. This Assembly did not judge sit
to examine the particulars of that Account, but left it unto the Pastors and
Elders deputed by the said Province to make report how many Ministers and
Proposans they had in their District, according as was ordained for the other
Provinces.

26. The Province of Xaintonge petitioned that the Church of Bourdeaux might be
compelled to perform their promise made unto them of giving them a Proposan
instead of Monsieur Primrose. This Assembly judging the demand of the said
Province to be but equitable, does yet notwithstanding exhort it to acquit that
Church of its Obligation, because it has none assurance of the Ministry of
the said Mr. Primrose, he having obtained his Conge and License of departure
from this present Synod.

27. The Decree of the Synod of Pons (in Aulnix) made in the year 1605. for the
conjunction of the Consistory of Rochell with the Province of Xaintonge in all
Ecclesiastical and Political Affairs, is confirmed by this present Assembly.

28. That Petition of the Church of Roffec about its separation from the Church
of Vertueil, and being couched upon the Roll of separate and distinct Churches,
is remanded back unto their Provincial Synod to be finally determined by it.

29. The Petition of the poor Widow of Monsieur Roussepeau is dismissed over
to the consideration of the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, to whose Charity she
is recommended, and that Synod is authorized to oblige the Church of Pons to
assist her with some relief answerable to her necessities.

30. A difference arose between the Province of Normandy and that of Anjou,
Touraine, and Main, about the Church of Monjoubert, which is made up of diverse
Buroughs and Villages lying partly in the County of Perch, and partly in the
Dukedom of Normandy, upon which account, one of those Provinces demands the
said Church to be incorporated with the Colloquy of Alanson, and another with
the Colloquy of Main. This Assembly considering the present State of the said
Church, and being very desirous of its preservation, and because its Pastor was
presented to it by the Province of Normandy, and he is now residing there, does
decree, that it shall continue joined unto the Colloquy of Allanson, until such
time as the Quarters of Monjoubert and Allieres can maintain a Minister of
their own. And then those Churches shall return unto the Colloquy of Main.

31. Monsieur de Bonvouloir at present Pastor of the Church of St. John
d'Angely having obtained License of Departure from the Province of Poictou,
upon this condition, that he should reimburse the Church of Poire and and
Belleville the sum of four hundred and fifty Livers, which they had spent upon
him at the Schools and University: This Assembly, at the request of the
Deputies of Poictou, ordains, That the said Sieur de Bonvouloir shall come to
account with the said Church within the space of two months about the Moneys
they pretend due unto them from him; and before an half year is ended, he shall
make them full satisfaction for all Arrears which he owes to them, or on
default hereof, he shall return again, and be subject to the Authority of that
Province of Poictou, who have full power to dispose of his Ministry.

32. The Deputies of Provence demanding of this Assembly one or more Pastors to
supply their vacant Churches; and this Assembly at present not knowing where to
find them, does entreat and exhort the Provinces of Dolphiny and Lower
Languedoc to assist those Churches with some of their Ministers, until such
time as God shall have in his good providence provided a sufficient number for
them.

33. Upon the petition of Monsieur Perrin, this Assembly decreed that the
Quarters of the upper and neither Cedron shall be joined to the Church of
Mombrun, till such time as they can get and maintain a Pastor of their own.

34. Monsieur Durdes Pastor of the Church of Pamiers writ Letters unto Monsieur
de Beauvois a Gentleman of Normandy, in which he acknowledges that the said
Gentleman had lent him a certain sum of Money during the time of his Exile in
London. These Letters shall be communicated to him by the Deputies of Higher
Guyenne, and the said Durdes shall bring in his exceptions against them unto
the Colloquy of Foix at their next meeting, and in case those exceptions of his
be not of any force or value, he is enjoined to give full and speedy content
and satisfaction unto the said Gentleman.

35. The Provincial Deputies of Normandy moved this Case from the Church of
Caen; Whether a child born in marriage (disallowed by our Discipline) being
presented unto Baptism by Godly Sureties, who had formerly presented others
unto this Sacrament, issued from the same married persons, might be Baptized.
Answer was given them, that the Parents fault cannot prejudice the Children; so
that there is no difficulty at all in the case; nor should they make any
scruple in the least of admitting such Infants unto Baptism, especially when as
Godly persons will become Sureties for their Religious Education. Yet
nevertheless the Church should at the same time testify that they do not
approve of the said Marriage.

36. Monsieur de la Buissonniere petitioned in the name of the Colloquy of
Caen, that Monsieur le Seneschal Minister of the Gospel might be at their
disposal, notwithstanding the Provincial Synod had granted him unto the Church
of Orbec, contrary to the intention of Monsieur de Lasson deceased, by whose
Legacy he was educated unto the Ministry. The Last will and Testament of the
said Mr. Lasson deceased being produced and read in this Assembly, there was
this clause expressed in it, That he had ordained the Churches of Caen and
Lasson should be called together to dispose of that Proposan, who was
maintained at the University by the Moneys and Legacy he bequeathed to that
intent and purpose. Wherefore this Assembly judged that the said Synod ought
not to have presented the said Le Seneschall unto the Church of Orbec contrary
to the advice and consent of those two Churches, it being a great prejudice,
yea and a downright infraction of the Will of the said Testator. However those
two Churches are entreated not to be over urgent for the Recalling of the said
Pastor, till that Church of Orbec have time to provide it self of another.

37. Monsieur de la Buissonniere informed this Assembly of the Insolences and
Seditious Challenges of a certain Capuchin Friar, affixed by him to the public
view of the world in some public places of the City of Allanson, but that for
peace sake he refused to do the like in answer to him. This Assembly commended
his modesty and prudent carriage for time past, and exhorts him to persist in
it for the future upon the like occurrences. And our General Deputies are
ordered to insert this among others into our Bill of Grievances to be presented
unto his Majesty, the many Libels and insolent provoking Challenges made us by
our Adversaries.

38. The Deputies of the Province of Brittany desired that Monsieur Oyseau
Minister of the Gospel might be remanded back unto them, he having quitted both
them and the Church of Nantes, in which he was Pastor without any Leave first
had and obtained from either of them. A Letter was read from the said Monsieur
Oyseau, and Monsieur Rivet his Son in Law alleged several arguments to justify
his departure from them. But tho this Assembly found that the proceedings of
the said Mr. Oyseau were not altogether laudable, yet they did allow him to
exercise his Ministry in the Province of Poictou where he lives at present,
and the said Province of Poitou shall assist the Church of Nantes with
Ministers for the full space of one year, to wit Monsieur Rivet, or some other
for him shall preach there six months, and tho other six any Pastors whom the
said Province shall choose; and during the said time Monsieur Oyseau shall
supply their Churches whose Pastors do officiate in the Church of Nantes, and
the Church of Nantes shall pay these Ministers who are lent them their wages,
and Mr. Oyseau shall also receive his Salary from those Churches in which he
preaches during their Pastors absence.

39. Monsieur Baduel Pastor of the Town of Castillon declared his great
poverty, occasioned by the Confiscation of his Fathers Estate upon the Account
of Religion. This Assembly did therefore ordain that over and above that
portion which he receives from his Church there shall be another paid him out
of the General Stock, and a third Portion more by the Province, to comfort him
under his great losses and oppressions.

40. The Deputies of Provence petitioning that the Province of Dolphiny might
pay unto them the residue of the seventh part of those Moneys which were
adjudged them by the National Synod of Gap, and which they had actually
received of Monsieur Pallott for the years 1598, 1599, and 1600. Deducting out
of it the sum of 2250 l. Which the Deputies of Provence do acknowledge they
have received; besides they demanded interest for the Moneys detained from
them: This Assembly having seen the Accounts of payments made unto the said
Province of Dolphiny signed and concluded by the said Pallott the 5th of June,
1601. and having heard Monsieur de la Comb Deputy for the said Province
confess that he had actually received of the said Pallott the sum of 3302
Crowns, thirty Sous and eight Deniers, including therein three hunched and
forty Crowns, one Sous and three Deniers, which the said Pallott had restored
to him since the said Account for one half of his right in it: And the said de
la Comb requested on behalf of his Province, that those of Provence might
allow a sous in the Liver unto him the said de la Comb over and above the 2260
Livers which he the said de la Comb had paid in unto those of Provence. This
Assembly decrees that those of Dolphiny shall pay in to those of Provence in
Money or moneys worth the sum of 665 Livers, 9. Sous, and one Denier, and then
both these Provinces shall sign and execute mutual releases one unto the other,
without any prejudice unto the Decrees of the Synod of Gap, or the Contents
thereof.

41. This Assembly ordains that one half of the sum of 665 Livers owing by
the Province of Dolphiny unto that of Provence shall be given to the five
Pastors, who were in actual service during that time the said moneys was in
arrears and the Church of Luc shall out of hand pay unto Monsieur Megnant their
Pastor all moneys due unto him for the whole time he has been employed in the
Ministry among them. And whereas the Province of Dolphiny demands from that of
Provence to be allowed their Charges toward a journey of some Commissioners
they had sent to Court; this Assembly does not approve thereof in the least,
nor shall there be so much as one Denier defalked from the Province of Provence
upon that score.

42. Although the Province of Xaintonge have ordered to the contrary, yet this
Assembly does now decree and ordain, That the six portions attributed to the
six Pastors of the City of Rochell shall be detained by the said Church, out of
which that Church shall be obliged to maintain a Student in Divinity according
to their promise.

43. Though this Assembly had very good and sufficient reasons (which were
before mentioned in the 19th Article of Appeals) to deprive the Church of
Xaintes, for their unworthiness, of the Ministry and Labors of Monsieur Petit,
and to lay him by also unemployed in the Lord's Harvest: Yet having since
observed both in that Church and Minister a godly sorrow, and great displeasure
for their past proceedings, and sinful miscarriages; It does once more present
the said Monsieur Petit to the Pastoral Office in the said Church; but with an
express charge and injunction upon the said Province, that in case either
through the Churches or his default, the Divisions and Contentions be
continued, or that any new ones shall break but among them, that they shall
remove him without delay from the exercise of his Ministry unto some other
place, where they shall conceive he may be more useful, and as will be most
expedient for the general good and edification of the whole Body of those of
our Religion.

44. Monsieur du Bois shall continue in the Service of his Church of la Vall,
according to those Agreements made with him, and approved by the Provincial
Synod; only he shall serve the Church of my Lady Bar for the time appointed;
and the said Province shall remand the said du Bois, to perform the duties of
his Ministry more diligently.

45. The Province of Xaintonge is charged to get without delay a supply for the
Church of Vertueil, and, till it have a settled Pastor of its own, that the
Neighbor Ministers do by turns officiate and dispense all Ordinances of
Religious Worship to it.

46. The Church of Rochel having at the entreaty and desire of this Synod
promised to maintain Monsieur Peyris, who is now a Proposan, and to take
special care that within six months time he should be duly qualified for the
Ministry of the Gospel: This Synod does hereby bind and oblige that Church,
which shall give him a Call to the Pastoral Office, in case upon a strict
Examen he be found capacitated for it, to make restitution unto the said Church
of Rochel of all that Moneys, which they have disbursed in his Education at
School and University, to fit and prepare him for their service in the Ministry.

47. Monsieur Hog complained, that he was put to very great costs and charges
in the necessary defense of himself against the Insolences and Assaults of the
Carmelite Friars of Rochefoucaud, and humbly desired that some course might
betaken for his Reimbursement, he being in no wise able of himself to sustain
the loss. But this Assembly dismissed his Petition unto the Synod of his own
Province, which is required to consider it, and give him due satisfaction.

48. Whereas the sum of one hundred Crowns was adjudged unto the Province of
Xaintonge for the setting up of a Free School in it, the said Moneys shall be
employed upon the College of Rochefoucaud for its subsistence, and the like
sum shall be conferred upon the Province of Lower Guyenne toward the
Augmentation of the College of Bergerac.

49. Whereas the province of Dolphiny draws forth out of the General Stock of
our Churches one portion under the name of Monsieur Mercure a Minister of the
Gospel, who does actually serve several Churches both in that Province, and in
Vivaretz, it is now ordered once for all, that those particular Churches shall
not have particular portions assigned to them, but shall be reputed for one
only, because he is sole Pastor to them all.

50. The two portions that were adjudged unto Monsieur de la Faye, Pastor of
the Church of Aubenas by the Synod of Gap over and above that other which the
Province was to pay, shall be continued to him; and this order shall hold good
till the sitting of the next National Synod.

51. Whereas there be differences arisen between the Province of Lower
Languedoc and that of Vivaretz, about certain sums of Money, ordered to be
expended in several Journeys, which were undertaken by the joint and common
consent of them both, and for the common good and benefit of both those
Provinces: This Assembly having heard both Parties, ordains, That the
Province of Vivaretz shall be acquitted by that of Lower Languedoc in paying
out of their first and dearest Moneys by the Lord of Candall, the sum of three
hundred Livers. And all the Provinces are straightly and expressly enjoined, that
for the future they do never divert any of the Moneys granted us by his Majesty
unto such Affairs, without the consent of Ministers and Churches who are
particularly concerned in them; nor shall this be done at all, without mature
and previous deliberation had about it.

52. A most humble petition shall be presented unto his Majesty, to beseech him
to order that Monsieur Masela (having been wickedly prosecuted at Law about the
Interment of his deceased Mother, and put to the vast charges of seven or eight
thousand Livers in his own defense against that unreasonable and unrighteous
Suit,) may have some amends and satisfaction given him for his great damages.

CHAP. XI. Particular Matters relating to the Provinces of the Isle of France,
Picardy, and Champagne.
Article the First. MOnsieur Du Bois the younger, addressing himself unto this
Assembly, to prove his Liberty, in being freed not only from the Church of La
Ferte au Vidame, and its annexed Congregations, but also from the Province of
the Isle of France and Champagne; after perusal of the Acts of the Colloquy and
Synod of the said Provinces; he was declared free, and to be disposed of
elsewhere, according to the Rules of our Discipline, as this Synod shall judge
meet, and in the mean while he may continue the exercise of his Ministry in the
Church gathered in the house of the Lady de la Bar. Article 2. The Provincial
Deputies of Burgundy, Lyonnois and Forest complaining that Monsieur le Faucheur
at present Minister of the Church at Nonnay in Vivaretz, had quitted the said
Church and Province, without ever having his Legal Dismission from them, and
therefore demand that he be remanded back unto the Church of Dijon. And the
Deputies of Vivaretz being heard, who required the confirmation of his Ministry
unto the Church of Nonnay: And the Deputies of the Isle of France demanding him
for the Church of Paris, and those of Sedan also petitioning that he might be
assigned to them for their Pastor: And the Deputies of Dolphiny producing
Articles of Agreement made between them and the said Faucheur, in consequence
whereof they claimed him for the service of the Church in Grenoble. This Synod
in no wise approving those Articles of Agreement, and finding that the Province
of Burgundy has a just right unto him, though yet it was not absolute, and
that neither the Churches of Paris or Sedan have any the least pretext of claim
unto him; It therefore using that power and authority which they have over him,
who ought as Pastor to be responsible unto this Assembly, does confirm him as
fixed Pastor unto his own Church of Nonnay, without ever suffering either his
Father or himself to pretend unto any right for the future of leaving that
Church, or to be given unto any other. Article 3. The Church of Chastillon on
the Loir petitioning that Monsieur Solais might be given them for their
Minister, the Synod did not judge it reasonable to grant them their request,
because he was not discharged by the Province of the Isle of France, whereunto
he belongs. But the Province of Orleans and Berry are ordered out of hand,
and with as much convenience as they can, to provide a Pastor for the said
Church. Article 4. Monsieur de Montigny demanding in the name of the Province
of the Isle of France, that Mr. de la Touch the Elder should reimburse the
Church of Paris the Moneys laid out by them for his Education when he was their
Scholar; or that he be sent back again unto the said Province, therein to
exercise his Ministry. This Assembly ordains, That the hundred Livers given
by him unto the Church of Compiegne, shall be deducted, and allowed him in the
Account; and farther ordains, that he bring in his Account by the hands of
his Brother, a Minister in the said Province, unto their next Provincial Synod,
that the remainders of his Debt may be seen and known, as also what may be
owing him from the Moneys of his Majesty's Liberality; which Account being thus
Audited, those who have the Arrearages of that Moneys in their hands, shall be
bound to make good payment of it. Article 5. Monsieur de Montigny requested on
behalf of the Church of Paris, that Monsieur Ferrier might be given them for
their Minister. The Synod having heard the Deputies of Lower Languedoc, and
considered the Call given the said Ferrier by the Church of Nismes, judges
that he cannot be conveniently removed from Nismes, and farther enjoins him to
discharge with care and diligence his Office of Pastor and Professor there.
Whereupon the said de Montigny renewed with greater importunity his demands,
that Monsieur le Faucheur, and Monsieur Peyrol might be given unto the Church
of Paris instead of le Ferrier. The Synod judged it inexpedient to alter its
resolution, so lately taken about le Faucheur, nor to come to a new one about
the said Peyrol, considering his Office of Pastor and Professor in the Church
and University of Montpellier. And he being farther urgent with them for
Monsieur Chave, the Synod replied, he was not at their disposal, because he
wholly appertained unto the Church of Geneva. Article 6. A Proposition was made
about the expediency of reducing the number of our Universities, several
Brethren judging them to be too many, and that the Professors and Regents in
them might be lessened and fixed, and that a general sum might be assigned to
them, because that of Saumur demanded an Augmentation. The Synod not being able
at present to come to a stated resolution on these Articles, ordered all the
Provinces to be ready with their thoughts about them against the next National
Synod. Article 7. And that the poor Churches of this Kingdom may be relieved
with the greater ease and advantage; such Churches as are of ability to
maintain a College, shall bring with them an Account of what they can do,
without the assistance of the public: That so an estimate may be taken of what
may be added to complete and perfect our Universities. And the Provinces
bordering on the Universities already erected, are entreated to watch, over see
and visit them, and to certify the Approaching Synod, of the duties or
defaults of their respective Regents and Professors. And in the mean while it
was not judged convenient to bestow on that of Saumur the Augmentation demanded
by them; but it was deferred until the next National Synod. Article 8. Monsieur
de Montigny and Poupart instantly demanding Monsieur Bid to be given at least
for some time as Minister unto the Church of Paris. The Synod having heard the
said Bid, and Monsieur de Burges Elder of the Church of Loudun, did not find
it reasonable to deprive them either for a time, or for ever of the Ministry of
their said Pastor. Article 9. The Synod proceeding in their distribution of
Pastors, freed from all engagements, did grant Monsieur du Bois to be the
Minister unto the Church of Laval in the Maine. Article 10. Monsieur du Alias
Merlin.
Moulin demanding whether Dory Lord of Grateloupe might be readmitted into
fellowship with the Church, he continuing in that Marriage state solemnized
between himself and the Granddaughter of his late Wises Sister, because it was
allowed by the Judicial Court at Nerac, which had registered the Licenses
granted him by his Majesty. This Synod duly pondering all circumstances, and
diverse other matters proposed about it, have determined, that both himself and
Wife may be reconciled unto the Church, and received into Communion, provided
that they be first admonished of the fault committed by them, and also, that it
be notified unto the people that we do not at all approve of this Marriage.
Article 11. The Deputies of the Isle of France moving about the five hundred
Crowns, which were drawn from them by the two Pastors of the Church of Mantes
and Fountainbleau: This Synod considering the supernumerary portions assigned
unto the said Province and their Annexed Congregations, judges that they have
no reason to complain for what is past, and for the future it does order five
supernumerary portions more to be assigned unto the said Province, for the
better relief of those two Churches of Mantes and Fountainbleau. Article 12.
And farther, it enjoyneth the said Province to cause those two Pastors to
conform themselves unto the Discipline of our Churches, and to rest contented
with the ordinary stipends, received by the other Pastors of that Province; and
in case they do not acquiesce in the Authority of this Synod, they shall be
prosecuted according to the Canons of out Discipline. Article 13. The Deputies
of several Provinces instantly demanding that some Colleges might be erected
for the educating our Youth in good Learning before they be sent unto the
Universities: This Synod has granted unto all the Provinces in which there be
no Universities, the sum of one hundred Crowns each, toward the setting up of
Lesser Schools, wherein Children may be trained in Grammar-Learning: And the
Provinces are charged to bring in their Accounts of their faithful disposal of
this Money unto the next National Synod. Article 14. The Province of Burgundy
is ordered to call the next National Synod within two years, and in case the
said Province cannot conveniently nor safely do it, then the privilege of
summoning it, shall be devolved on the Province of Poictou: And the two years
are thus limited, to commence the first of May next ensuing.
CHAP. XII. The Roll of Deposed Ministers.
1. IN Xaintonge Monsieur Constantin, a man of indifferent stature, whose face
and skin are of Olive-colour, his eyes somewhat great, a small red beard, and
about forty years of age.

2. In the Province of Anjou, Theophilus Bluett, otherwise de la Comb, tall of
stature, black hair, large whiskers on his beard, when he speaks he bends down
his eyelids, aged about thirty nine.

3. In the Province of Poictou Baptist des Touches, near sixty years of age, of
a middle stature, his beard black, mingled with gray, of an Olive complexion: A
fellow utterly unlearned.

4. In the same Province, Oliver Enguerrand, Apostate, about thirty years of
age, of a middle stature, pretty full faced, having no beard.

5. In the Province of Normandy, James de l'Obel, alias du Val, born at St. Lo,
heretofore Minister in the Baylywick of Gisors, tall of stature, brown hair, a
meagre visage, aged about five and forty or fifty years.

6. In the Province of Lower Languedoc, Samuel des Planteuit, alias de la
Pause, formerly Pastor in the Church of Beziers, about seven and twenty, or
eight and twenty years of age, full visag'd, and pur-blind.

CHAP. XIII. Orders about Testamentary Legacies.
1. ALthough we would not prescribe them any Laws who desire to relieve the
Church of God in its necessities, and that they be at their own liberty to
dispose of their Charities, whether by Stock, Rent or Moneys, and to assign it
to any certain Church, College or Hospital, under such Assurances and
Conditions as in their wisdoms they shall judge best consisting with their
Affairs: Yet this Synod does judge it needful to advise the Saints to exercise
their pious Liberalities according to the Word of God, and the example of the
Primitive Church. And that such Charities of theirs may be well secured, and
faithfully dispensed according to the Intention of the Donors.

2, Therefore the said Donors shall be advised to settle their Legacys or Gifts
upon some certain Churches, for the maintenance of their poor, or of the
Sacred Ministry therein, with this clause, that in case of Interruption by war,
or any other public calamity, that such rent shall be employed by the next
adjoining Church, or otherwise to be disposed of as shall be judged most
fitting by the Consistory, Colloquy, Provincial or National Synods.

3. Such as dwell in places of greatest security shall bestow their Gifts in
ready moneys, if possibly they can, rather than in stock, That so the said
Moneys may be laid out in purchase of some yearly rent, arising from the
Chambers or the nearest Guilds to the Chambers often the City of Rochell,
Montauban, Montpellier, Nismes, or other houses, whose principal Inhabitants,
or those who manage the affairs of the said Cities, do Profess the Reformed
Religion, who shall be entreated by the Provincial Synods to do the Church this
right as to assign the Rents out of the clearest Common Income, and this by
good Contracts passed between them and the Deputy of that Church (to which the
said Legacies had been bequeathed,) and the Mayors, Sheriffs, Consuls, and
principal Burgesses of the said Cities, and other persons of note residing in
them: And the Consistories of those places shall be present at those Contracts,
to see that no Article or condition which may contribute to the Ratification
and security of the premises be omitted, and the Consistory of that Church to
whom the Legacy is bequeathed, or its Deputies shall be vigilant and careful
that the payment of those Rents be well made, and constant and that it be given
in either by Bills of Exchange, or any other ways, with the least charges that
may be in the Provinces, and that the dividend be made in such a proportion
unto every Church, as of right belongs to them. And Provincial Synods are
enjoined to look to it, that the Intentions of the Donors be not diverted, but
punctually and most exactly observed and followed. To this purpose there shall
be annually tendered by every Church unto their Colloquy, and by the Colloquies,
unto their Provincial Synod a just and true Account of what has been given, by
whom, and to what uses, with an Exhibition of the Contracts, that they may be
registered. And in case there be any considerable sum of Moneys in Stock, they
shall be carried unto some one of the aforesaid Cities, as shall be thought
most advisable, there to be laid up in Bank for the benefit of the Churches, to
which the said Moneys were bequeathed.

4. And forasmuch as we who live in France are under diverse Laws and Customs,
and that the style and form of contract is very different in several Provinces:
It Is therefore decreed that in every Province there shall be one and the same
form used for Legacies and Gifts, which shall be transmitted unto all the
Consistories, and by them communicated unto the Notaries professing Reformed
Religion, and unto such others as may be thought expedient.

The form shall be conceived in these ensuing words excepting always a power of
changing it in case of necessity.

I give and bequeath to the maintenance of the Ministry of the Gospel in the
Church of N. (...) the sum of N. (...) which my will is that it be laid out in
purchasing of a settled Rent, or Estate in Land in the Cities of Rochel,
Montauban, or Monpelier, etc. and this by the advice of the Consistory of the
said Cities, which Rent or Revenue shall be annually paid in and delivered unto
the Consistory of the said place for the better maintenance of the sacred
Ministry without ever being diverted to any other use, And in case it should so
fall out, which God of his great mercy prevent, that the Ministry of the word
there in that Church should be suppressed, either by war, or any other publicly
calamity, it is my will, that during the said Intermission, and until the
re-establishing of the said exercise of the Ministry, that the said Rent be
employed toward the maintenance of the nearest Church unto that said place, or
otherwise, as shall be judged most fitting by the Consistory, Colloquy,
Provincial or National Synod of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom. And I
humbly and earnestly entreat the said Synods to have a strict and watchful eye,
that this Moneys be not diverted unto any other usage, than what is now
designed and intended by me.

CHAP. XIV. Political Acts of matters treated in the National Synod held at
Rochell in the month of March 1607. by His Majesty's Writ.
THE Lords de la Noue and du Crois, Deputed by the Assembly of Chastelleraud to
reside near his Majesty, being present in this Synod, delivered us the Kings
writ, the Tenor whereof is as follows.

This 29th day of December in the year of our Lord 1606. His Majesty being at
St. Germain in Lay, He then granted and permitted, that in the National Synod,
which shall be celebrated by his subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion in
the City of Rochell this next ensuing March, they may proceed to the Nomination
of their Deputies, whom his Majesty permits to reside near his Royal Person, on
condition, that the said Deputies shall be Nominated out of six persons, who
are Members of the same Synod, to be presented unto his Majesty, out of whom he
may and will choose two, to whom that Office shall be given, and which shall be
continued to them for three full years, as also that in the said Synod, the
Deputies aforesaid shall debate of none other business, excepting the
aforementioned Nomination, and matters purely Disciplinary, relating to the
well-governing of their Churches, as is expressly declared in the Edicts and
Grants of his said Majesty, on pain of forfeiting those Grants and Privileges,
in case they act contrary to this his will and pleasure. His said Majesty
having commanded me to dispatch the said Writ, which he would sign with his own
hand, and enjoined me also to countersign it, being a Member of his most
Honorable Council of State, and Secretary of his Commands.

Signed thus Henry. And below Forgett.

2. It being moved, Whether the Deputies of the City of Rochel be called in to
the Debate about the King's Writ: The Assembly considering that they were only
summoned as a National Synod, under which Quality the Answer given to the 17th
Article of the Memoirs last presented unto his Majesty, expressly forbids the
admission of any other persons, Ministers and Elders only excepted, into our
Synodical Meetings, on pain of forfeiting them for the future: It was resolved
that a Committee of Pastors and Elders should be delegated unto the Mayor,
Aldermen and Council of the City, and represent unto them this difficulty,
craving their Advice upon it, and give them to understand upon what grounds
their Deputies sent unto us, have not been hitherto received by us: Whereunto
they gave this Answer, That it was their sole Intention to be present only at
those Debates which related to the Writ sent by his Majesty down unto this
Assembly, as being matters purely civil, according to that exception made in
his Majesty's Answer to the 17th Article of the Memoirs last presented him, and
as by the same Answer they were allowed to be present at Political Assemblies;
whereupon the Synod having pondered their Arguments, and considering their
Importunity, gave leave unto them to be present with us upon the Debates about
his Majesty's Writ; and accordingly Monsieur de Romagne and de Mirande the two
Sheriffs of the City, and de Beaupreau, and the Bailiff of Aunis, Burgesses of
the said City, were admitted into the Synod.

3. The said Writ having been read: The Assembly well weighing the Conditions
inserted in it, judged that they had no powers to proceed to the Election of
any new General Deputies, because they found themselves not in the least
authorized by the said Writ to give them Commissions and Instructions, nor
could they discharge those who were here present: Whereupon they found it
expedient to send unto his Majesty some Deputies from the whole Body of this
Synod, to get information and direction upon these difficulties, and with all
humility to represent unto his Majesty the manifold defects in the said Writ,
and to demand more ample Liberty to treat of all Affairs relating to the
execution of his Edicts, and the preservation of our Churches, and particularly
about the nominating of Deputies, and matters depending on it, as of their
number, and time of continuance in that Office. And to this purpose Monsieur
Gigord Pastor of the Church of Montpellier, and du Bois de Cargrois, an Elder,
were named and commissioned as Deputies with Letters unto his Majesty, and to
my Lords the Dukes of Buillon and de Sully, and to my Lords de Sillery and du
Plessis.

4. Monsieur Gigord, and Monsieur du Bois de Cargrois returned from Court, and
presented unto this Synod his Majesty's Letters, which were couched in these
following Lines.

By the King.
TRusty and well-beloved;
we are well pleased with the Deputation you fent unto us by Monsieur Gigord
and du Cargrois, who are the present bearers of this our Answer to you, whom
also we have willingly heard upon the matters represented us on your behalf;
and in special we are exceedingly contented, since we understood by them your
thankful acknowledgment of that particular Favor and Good Will we so lately
testified unto you, not only in Granting you our License for your National
Synod to be held in our City of Rochel, but also by the same means permitting
you to Nominate those Deputies, who shall succeed those, who resided in our
Court the last year; as also the reasons which we had for our so doing, to-wit,
the Comforting of our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, and to ease
them of that burden and extraordinary charge, with which, had that Election
been made in any other form, they must needs have been grievously oppressed. As
to the difficulty raised by your said Deputies and declared by them to have
been first raised by your selves about the right understanding of our Writ,
expedited by us for the licensing of your Synodical Assembly, and your desires
of being better informed about our will and intentions in it, that you might
not in the least act contrary thereunto; if you had but consulted our Deputies
sent by us unto your Assembly, they both could and should have delivered you
from that uncertainty. For we expressly declared to them at their departure, and
gave them in charge to declare unto you all passages that had been here
transacted during the time of their Residence at our Court; which we do now
confirm unto you; as also, that if after you have heard them, you shall have
occasion of representing to us any matters about the observation of our Edict
(which is a Law by which we our selves will be governed, and resolve that it
shall be in every point and tittle of it so exactly observed, that nothing
shall be added to it, nor taken from it) it is our pleasure that you commit it
unto them, and that they also accept of that Commission from you unto us. As
touching the form of the said Election, both for the number of your Deputies,
and the time of their Residence near our Person, being matters considered and
judged by us very profitable and needful, our Will is, that nothing contained
in our said Writ be changed. And if in case one of the said Deputies retained
by us in our Court should during the time of his Service depart this Life, we
shall then order one of those six recommended by you to us, to succeed him for
the remaining time of his Office. And having entrusted your said Deputies to
give you a more ample discovery of the special Motives of our said Will and
Pleasure, we will at present trouble you no farther, than to assure you, that
you shall ever find us propitious and favorable to your just Petitions and
Demands; as we also expect from you the continuance of your Fidelity and ready
Obedience to us, whereby you will merit from us new occasions and testimonials
of our Ancient Love and good Affection to you.

Dated at Paris this 25th day of March, in the year of our Lord 1607. Signed
thus, Henry, And a little lower Forgett.
And subscribed, To our Trusty and Well-beloved, The Deputies of the National
Synod held by our Royal License in our City of Rochel, by our Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion.

5. Before any consultation or debate was held about the nomination of new
Deputies, the Assembly heard Messieurs de la Noue, and du Crois discoursing of
all that had passed during the time of their Deputation, and approved of their
service, praising and thanking them for their great care and pains in it; and
being discharged from this their Employment at Court, they promised to deposit
into the hands of the Deputies that should be nominated to succeed them, all
the Acts, Memoirs, and Papers of importance whatsoever that were in their
Custody.

6. Monsieur du Crois one of our General Deputies tendered in unto this
Assembly his Account of 18000 Livers received by him of the Moneys Given and
granted by the King to defray the charges of our Deputies at the last Assembly
held at Chastel-heraud in the year 1605. and together with the Papers
evidencing and justifying his said Account, which were rendered unto the
Deputies of every Province, To wit, for the Isle of France unto Monsieur de
Montigny: for Normandy, an Acquittance signed by Monsieur de Courtomer to
Monsieur le Fevre; for Xaintonge, to Monsieur Pacard; for the Higher Languedoc
to Monsieur Raffin: for the Lower Languedoc to Monsieur Gasquers, for the Body
of the City of Rochel to Mr. de Romagne: For Poictou to Monsieur Clemenceau:
For Provence to Monsieur Chanforan: For Brittany to Monsieur du Bois de
Cargrois: For Anjou to Monsieur Bid: For the Lower Guyenne to Monsieur de
Primrose: For Dolphiny to Monsieur Perrin an Acquittance of 600. Livers, the
said Monsieur du Crois retaining the sum of 600 Livers more by him, as having
the Quality of Deputy from the said Province unto the aforesaid Assembly: And
for Burgundy to Monsieur Bailey. And die said Sieur du Crois was acquitted and
discharged of the whole sum aforesaid of 18000 Livers.

7. Upon the Question moved about the number of Deputies which ought to be sent
unto his Majesty, and the Commission to be given them, the Assembly judged,
That forasmuch as all Commissions for the greatest part do never exceed the
number of two, and that there can be no swerving from the Commission given by
their Provinces, therefore there should be but only two nominated, who shall be
charged to represent unto his Majesty, that it will be needful to have a
General Political Assembly to precede the Provincial ones of the same nature,
wherein the condition, and number of the Six, and the three years term of their
Charge may be debated and resolved on; and till such time as it shall please
his Majesty to grant us this our Petition, we do most humbly beseech him to
accept of the said two Deputies to negotiate our Affairs as the former; who
within one month after their Arrival, shall inform the Provinces of his
Majesty's pleasure herein: And because it is needful the Deputies should depart
immediately without delay, they shall be taken from among those who be here
upon the place, and not chosen by the Deliberative Votes of this Assembly.

8. The Deputies, which are now going unto Court, shall be entreated to assist
the Foreign Ministers employed in the Pastoral Office of our French Churches,
to get them Letters of Naturalization. And Monsieur du Caudal shall be obliged
to bring in unto the General Deputies against the 15th of August next, a
Breviate of his Account, together with his Acquittances.

9. Forasmuch as diverse persons, to trouble and vex their adverse Parties, do
plunge them in infinite Charges and Expenses, drawing their Processes both
Civil and Criminal before other Courts than the Chambers of the Edict; Our
Deputies are charged to make report of it unto his Majesty, and in this
particular to be favorable not only to the Bodies of Churches, but even unto
particular Persons, when as necessity shall so require.

10. The Lords of Villarnou and de Mirande were nominated by this Assembly to
repair to Court, and to inform his Majesty with the abovementioned Causes for
which this Assembly could not conform, themselves to the terms of his Majesty's
Writ: And in case his Majesty shall accept of them, till such time as the
General Assembly do meet, they shall then attend his Majesty in the Quality of
General Deputies of the Churches. But and if his Majesty shall not be pleased
to grant us speedily a General Assembly, they shall continue in that Office a
full year, during which time they shall in the general name of all the Churches
conjoyntly act and prosecute whatever may concern their universal good and
welfare, as also the particular benefit of every Church and Province, and shall
make a faithful report of all matters unto his Majesty from the Memoirs
delivered to them by this Assembly, and shall solicit an answer to them, and
govern themselves in all things conformably to the Orders enacted and
established for the said Deputies in the Assembly of St. Foy, and the
Instructions which shall now be given them. And the Provinces are advised to
have recourse unto them in all Affairs both general and special relating unto
the Churches, without making any private prosecution by any other persons
besides the said Deputies. And the said Deputies were sworn, and entered upon
their Office the 14th day of this present month.

CHAP. XV. The Account of the Lord du Candall for the Moneys given us by His
Majesty.
1. THE Sieurs de Genouille, Bergier, des Fontaines, de Burges, le Fevre, de la
Comb, and Texier were Commissionated to examine the Account of the Lord of
Candall, and they made report of the many difficulties in it, because he did
not produce any Acquittances, nor other Evidences proving his Accounts.
Whereupon the said Lord du Candal pleaded for himself, that the true reason why
he had not brought with him those Acquittances was, because he never imagined
that the Provinces would have scrupled the truth of those payments he had made
them. This Assembly ordained that for this time only, the Account should be
cleared and finished, but it should never be made a President of for hereafter;
which was done accordingly. And the said Commissioners reported that the said
Lord of Candal was indebted 55639 Livers, 19 Sous, and 3 Deniers. Allowances
being made for sums accounted for, but not received, which the said Lord du
Candall shall endeavor to get in, and having recovered them shall pay unto
those particular Churches to whom they are owing and become due, against the
fifteenth day of August next coming, and this in ready Money, or good Bills of
Exchange, according to the Contracts made with him at the Synod of Gap, and he
shall bring with him the Acquittances of those who received the Moneys from him
unto the Lords General Deputies residing at Court within fifteen days after.
And our General Deputies shall bring them a Copy fairly written and collationed
of those Acquittances unto the next National Synod, unless a Political Assembly
should chance to be held before it. And the Original of that Account shall be
reserved in the Archives of the Consistory of Rochell.

2. The said Lords General Deputies shall cause the said Lord of Candall to
bring unto them the Acquittances and other Evidences of his Account cleared and
finished in this Assembly for 55639 Livers, 19 Sous, and 3 Deniers. which he
was indebted for upon the closing up of the said account: And to this purpose
there was delivered to them the said Deputies a Copy of the whole; that so they
might be enabled so prosecute, if need were, the Execution of that Account,
with all its Apostils and additions as it had been concluded and finished.

3. That Obligation of the said Lord of Candall unto the Churches was put into
Monsieur Merlin's hands, to be reserved in the Archives of the Consistory of
the Church of Rochel. And a collationed Copy of this Original shall be produced
in the next National Synod by the Deputies of that Province.

4. Our Deputies at Court shall assist the Pastors of our Churches, who are
Foreigners by Birth, to get out Letters of Naturalization from his Majesty.

5. The Lord of Candall, Receiver General for the Churches, shall deliver in to
our Lords General Deputies, before the 15th day of August next coming, a
Breviate of his Accounts, together with all Acquittances, Evidences and Proofs
of it.

6. There having been several Writings and Memoirs prepared at Chastelheraud to
be tendered unto his Majesty, wherewith Monsieur de Crois had been entrusted,
he surrendered unto this Assembly the Writings concerning Religion, Justice, the
Treasury, and our Cautionary Towns, in seven dictinct Pieces; as also all the
Evidences belonging to the said Writings, and their Acquittances, which were
either given or offered by him unto the Deputies of the Provinces, to whom they
did properly belong. Moreover, he put into the Archives of the Guildhall of the
City of Rochel, the Writs concerning the Continuation of the Cautionary Towns:
As also he delivered into the hands of this Assembly the last Warrant granted
for discharge of the Deputies, and the nomination of those, who were now called
into Office. And over and above all this, he yielded up the Letters Patents for
exemption of our Ministers, with the Decree of their Verification in the Court
of Aids at Paris. And the two Writings prepared upon the aforesaid Memoirs
presented to, and answered before his Majesty's Council, together with the
Letters Patents for the executing of those Answers; with which Writings, to
wit, Memoirs of Castelheraud, Letters of Exemption, and the Original of the
answered Writings, Monsieur de Mirande was entrusted; to whom those who may
need them, shall apply themselves: And the said Monsieur de Crois was acquitted
and discharged of all those Writings; and he farther engaged to put into the
hands of the said Monsieur de Mirande the other Writings, which remain at
Paris, and particularly those concerning our Affairs with Monsieur Palott, of
all which upon his delivery of them he shall be discharged.

These Acts were subscribed by Beraud, Moderator. Merlin, Assessor.
Scribes.
Andrew Rivett, and Roy



The End of the Third Synod of Rochel.
THE Acts, Decisions and Decrees OF THE XIXth National Synod OF The Reformed
Churches OF FRANCE, Held in the Town of St. Maixant, in the Province of
Poictou, In the Year of our Lord 1609.

The Contents of the Synod of St. Maixant. 1609. The 19th Synod.

Cap. 1. DEputies to the Synod. The Provinces of Dolphiny and Vivaretz
censured. Deputy of Sedan excluded. Synodical Officers chosen. A Canon about
Pastors not deputed. Cap. 2. Observations on the Confession approved and sworn.
Cap. 3. Observations on the Discipline. A Canon for receiving proposans into
the Ministry. 2, 3, 4. Ministers not to study Chemistry. 6. A Case about
Baptizing of sick Children. Notes on the 20th Article of the 14th Chapter. 12.
the Discipline sworn. Cap. 4. Observations on the National Synod of Rochel. Of
Monks quitting their Convents. 4. Monsieur Chamier commended. 6. Mitigation of
a Canon in favor of the Children of poor Ministers. 8. Monsieur Vignier
commended for his Theater of Antichrist. 9. Cap. 5. Of Appeals. A deposed
Minister never to be restored. 1, 13. A Deputy and no Deputy. 5. the case of
Monsieur le Blanc Minister of Lions. 8. The Widow of a deceased Minister shall
be paid her Annuity from the day of his death. 12. A difference between two
Ministers composed. 20. Three Churches to be visited. 23. Divisions in the
Church of Orleans cemented. 27. A scandalous Minister censured. 28. Cap. 6.
General matters. A Case of Conscience. 4. Canon about briguing for Deputations
unto Synods. 5. A deposed Minister most severely censured. 7. An Order for
maimed Soldiers having the Cross on their back. 10. Of Attestations. 11. Act
for a National Fast. 12. A subtle and crafty Schismatic to be carefully
watched. 14. A Case about Baptism administered by a deposed Minister, whether
valid. 16. What to do when Marriage-banes are forbidden? 17. A Pocket-Bible
designed for the Press. 18. Whether a Minister may press a person to discover a
secret crime unto the Magistrate. 20. Ministers appointed to study some
particular Controversies in the several Provinces. Cap. 7. Of Universities. The
Universities of Montauban, Nismes, and Montpellier censured. 1, 2. The Duke of
Sully's College of Boisbelle. 8. Cap. 8. Particular Orders. Letters unto the
Judges in the mixed Court of Castres. 5. A poor Minister relieved. 8. the
Seignory of Geneva can pretend no right to the Natives of their City Ministers
in France. 11. Complaints against the Ministers of Mants and Fontainbleau. 23.
Copies of the Acts of the National Synods not to be communicated. 26. A
Controversy moved by de Royer, and terminated by this Synod. 35. Cap. 9. An
Order for calling the next National Synod. Cap. 10. The Roll of deposed
Ministers. Cap. 11. Moneys divided among the Churches: Cap. 12. A Catalogue of
the Churches, having portions out of the King's Money. Cap. 13. Account of the
Dividend for the three first Quarters. Cap. 14. Account of Moneys given upon
particular occasions.
THE Synod of St. Maixant.
In the Name of God!
CHAP. I. The Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches in the
Kingdom of France, held at St. Maixant, the 25th of May, and diverse days
following, in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and nine, wherein
presented themselves as Deputies from all the Provinces, the Pastors and
Elders, who are hereafter named; to wit;
FOR Provence, Provence.
Monsieur Peter Chalier Pastor of the Church of Seynise, and Bartholomew
Recener Pastor of the Church or Merindol, together with Elias de Glandevez,
younger Son of the House of Puymichell, Lord of St. Ajon, Elder of the Church
in Puymichell, and Peter Texier Elder of the Church of Lormarin or Rouangis.

For the Province of Dolphiny, Dolphiny.
Master John Vulson Lord de la Columbiere, Pastor of the Church de la Mure, and
John Felix Pastor of the Church of Grenoble, together with Charles Martyn Lord
of Champoleon Elder, of the Church of Champoleon, and Francois de la Comb,
Elder of the Church of St. Marcelin, chosen in the last Synod of their
Province; and the said Lord de Champoleon not appearing, Monsieur Jacob Videl
Elder of the Church of Brianson presented himself, who was chosen in the
preceding Synod, but was not informed of the alteration made in its last
Sessions. Whereupon this Assembly judged the said Province worthy of Censure,
for not having acquainted the said Videl with their change: And there having
been given an honorable Testimony unto the said Videl by the Deputies of the
Province, he was admitted to give his deliberative Vote, until the coming of
the aforementioned Lord de Champoleon, after which he may return to his own
home; but the expenses of his jourrley shall be defrayed by the Province. Yet
at his entreaty, the Synod gave him his choice either to tarry or depart.

Vivaretz and Vellay.
For the Province of Vivaretz and Vellay, Monsieur Daniel Richard Pastor of the
Church of Choillar, and John du Roure, Elder of the Church of Aubenas; who
Reporting the excuses mentioned also in the Letters of their Province, for
their repeated failure in the number of their Deputies, they not sending four,
the Synod did not at all approve of them; but upon promise made by them in the
name of their Province, to perform their duty in time to come, they were on
this condition admitted for this time, though censure was past upon the
Province, and accordingly executed on them the said Deputies, that for the
three first days of Session they should be deprived of their deliberative Votes
in it.

Lower Languedoc.
For the Province of Lower Languedoc, Monsieur Jeremy Ferrier, Pastor of the
Church of Nismes, and Monsieur John Chauve, Pastor of the Church of Sommiers,
together with William Girard, Lord of Moussac, Elder of the Church of Nismes,
and John James du Crois, Lord de la Comb, Elder of the Church of Mompellier.

For the Province of Lower Guyenne, ^erigort and Limousin, Monsieur Jeremy
Bauconis Pastor of the Church of Tonneins, and Isaac Sylvius Pastor of the
Church of Clerac, together with John de Vertueil Lord of Mallerett, Elder in
the Church of Bordeaux, and Jacob des Mais Elder also of the same Church.

Lower Gayenne, Perigart and Li^^^sin. Burgu^dy and Gix.
For the Province of Burgundy and Baylywick of Gex, Monsieur Peter Colinett
Pastor in the Church of Parey le Moynean, and Anthony le Blanc Pastor of the
Church of Lions, with James de Jaucourt Lord of Rouvray. Elder of the Church of
Chastillion seated upon the Seyn, and John le Gras Elder of the Church of
Lions; whose reasons having been heard inducing them to transfer their right of
calling the National Synod unto the Province of Poictou, as was decreed by the
last Article of the Synod of Rochel, they were accepted and approved: And they
demanding that the privilege of Convening the next Synod might another time be
granted to them, answer was returned, that in due time they should be
considered, when as they could present us with a commodious and safe place.

Higher Languedoc and Guyenne.
For the Province of Higher Languedoc, and the Higher Guyenne, Monsieur William
le Nautonnier, Lord of Castelfranc, Pastor in the Church of Venez, and Mark
Antony Benoist; Pastor in the Church of Montauban, with George du Bourg Senior,
Elder in the Church of Isle Jourdain, and Levy de Barsac Lord of Breuil, Elder
in the Church of St. John du Breuil; which said Lord du Bourg neither appeared
in person, nor sent his Excuse for Nonappearance; whereof the Province shall
have notice given it.

For the Province of Brittany, Mr. David Richer, Brittany.
Pastor of the Church of Blain, and Andrew le Noir, Lord of Beauchamp, Pastor
of the Church of Roche-bernard, with Louis d'Avangour, Lord du Bois de
Cargrois, Elder in the Church of Nants, and Elias de Goulevez Lord of
Loudauinieres, Elder in the Church of Vielle Vigne.

For the Province of Normandy, Mr. Abdias Denis Lord of Mondenis, Normandy.
Pastor of the Church of Fescamp, and Benjamin Banage, Pastor of the Church of
St. Mere Eglise, with Charles de Fouquerett, Lord de la Hay, Elder in the
Church of Rouen, and John de la Rey, Lord of Narsouquett, Elder in the Church
of Montivillier.

The Isle of France, Beausse, Picardy and Champagne.
For the Province of the Isle of France, Beausse, Picardy and Champagne,
Monsieur Samuel Durant, Pastor of the Church of Paris, and John Baptist Bugnet,
Pastor of the Church of Compeigne, with Gideon de Serres, Lord of Pradett,
Elder of the Church of Paris, and James de Harderet, Lord de Bijanette, Elder
of the Church of Blainville: But the said de Bijanett neither appeared in
person, nor sent his excuse for non appearing; whereof the Province shall have
notice given them.

Orleans, Blesois, Berry and Nivernois.
For the Province of Orleans, Blesois, Berry and Nivernois, Mr. Stephen de
Mont-sanglard, Pastor of the Church of Corbigny, and Samuel de Chambaran,
Pastor of the Church of Lorges and Marchenoir, with Francois Semelle, Elder of
the Church of Corbigny, and Josiah Perrinett, Elder of the Church of St. Amand.

Anjou, Tourain and Main.
For the Province of Anjou, Touraine and the Maine, Monsieur Samuel Boucherean,
Pastor of the Church of Saumur, and Daniel Couppe, Pastor of the Church of
Tours, and together with them Toussainct Lord of Leard.
Leard, Elder of the Church of Bauge, with whom was deputed Bartholomew de
Barge, Elder of the Church of Loudun, who yet neither appeared in person, nor
excused his absence by any Letters unto the Synod; whereof notice shall be
given unto the Province.

Xaintonge, Aunix and Augoumois.
For the Province of Xaintonge, Aunix and Augoumois, Monsieur John Merlin,
Pastor of the Church of Rechel, and Paul Bonnett, Pastor of the Church of
Saujon, together with Arthur de Partenay Lord of Genouille, Elder of the Church
of Tonnay Boutonne, and Peter Babouett, Elder of the Church of Saujon But the
Lord of Genouille being absent by reason of sickness, Elias Glatinon; Elder of
the Church of Augoulesme, being substituted in his stead, was personally
present at this Synod, and afterward the said Lord de Genouille being
recovered, and coming to it, the other returned unto his own habitation.

Higher and Lower Poictou
For the Province of Higher and Lower Poictou, Monsieur Jonas Chesuean, Pastor
of the Church of St. Maixant, and Andrew Rivett, Pastor of the Church of
Touars, together with Rene de Caumont, Lord of Fiebrun, Elder of the Church of
Sansay, and Stephen Chesneuert, Lord de la Miletiere, Elder of the Church of
Talmond.

General Deputy.
Moreover, the Lord de Mirande one of the General Deputies of the Reformed
Churches of this Kingdom appeared personally in this Synod, and had his place
and privilege of voting in it, according to the former Decrees passed in
favor of those our said Deputies.

There also offered himself Monsieur d'Or, Sedan.
one of the Pastors of the Church of Sedan with Letters from the Mareschall
Duke of Bouillon, and from the Pastors of the Principality of Sedan and
Raucourt, craving to be received into this Assembly, to have privilege of
voting in it, as well as the other Deputies. But the Assembly gave them the
self same answer, which had been given them by former Synods, that forasmuch as
the said Churches were incorporated with the Colloquy of Champagne, and the
Provincial Synod of the Isle of France, they judged it in no wise fit to grant
them their demand: Only they were Suffered as other Pastors not deputed unto
the Synod to be present when points of Doctrine and Discipline were Debated,
but should not be otherwise heard in any other matters propounded by them, than
speaking by the mouths of the Pastors and Elders deputed by their Province. And
the said Churches were Censured for importuning the reception of this R. person
among us, because of their private deputation given to him, after that an Order
had past to the Contrary in the last National Synod. And Letters shall be writ
unto the Lord Duke of Bouillon to entreat his Highness that the order of our
Churches may not in the least be interrupted, but most inviolably observed, yea
and in those affairs, which do more especially concern his own Principality.

Prayers being ended Monsieur Merlin was chosen Moderator, and Monsieur
Ferrier, Assessor and Monsieur Rivett a Pastor, and the Lord du Pradell an
Elder, were chosen Scribes of the Synod.

It was also decreed for the future that Pastors and Elders who were not
deputed by their Provinces should not be admitted into the National Synods, but
only when as the Confession of Faith, and Discipline should be read and
observations made upon them, during the said reading, and that they should be
excluded from all other affairs both General and Particular; and this Ordinance
should serve as a Declaration of the mind and sense of foregoing Synods about
those Articles and Canons relating unto the said Pastors and Elders
Non-commissionated. And the Provinces shall be admonished that for great and
weighty reasons they do henceforward by their own authority retain at home with
them all Pastors of Churches and Elders, who have no deputation from them unto
the National Synods, that so the complaints and importunity of those who have
no call to sit or vote in them may be obviated and prevented.

CHAP. II. Observations upon Reading our Confession of Faith.
UPON the 14th Article, The Provinces were exhorted to study whether it were
not expedient to take away those particular expressions which mention the
Heresies of Servetus, and to acquiesce in a general detestation of his Errors,
and the rather because they be now extinct, and buried in oblivion. And the
Province of Burgundy is ordered to communicate this Decree unto the Reverend
Pastors and professors of Geneva for their advice.

The Confession being read with great attention, every word, point and article
thereof was unanimously approved and ratified by all the Deputies, who did
promise and swear by the holy Name of God that for themselves, and their
Respective Provinces, who had delegated them, they should Teach and Preach it,
and unviolably keep and observe it.

CHAP. III. Observations upon Reading of our Discipline.
ON the fourth Article of the first Chapter, The Deputies of Lower Languedoc
propounded, that the different courses took in diverse Provinces about the
Choice, Examination, and Ordination of Ministers brought with it a world of
Inconveniences, and was the occasion that unworthy persons were in several
places admitted into the Ministry. This Synod judged it exceeding needful to
Establish an Express Canon, exactly, universally and most uniformly to be
observed by all the Provinces; which being prepared, was approved and consented
to by the whole Assembly and inserted into the Body of our Discipline in the
form following.

The Decree for Receiving of Proposans into the Ministry.
2. The 4th article of the first Chapter of our Discipline shall be couched in
these words, its beginning being joined with the fifth Article in manner
following. A Minister of the Gospel (unless in time of persecution, in which
case of great and urgent necessity he may be chosen by three Pastors only,
together with the Consistory of the place) shall not be admitted into this holy
Office but by the Provincial Synod, or Colloquy, provided that Colloquy be
composed of seven Pastors at least; and in case there be not so many to
complete it, the Neighbour-Ministers shall be invited to concur in this
Election. And the Elected Proposan shall be presented to them with good and
valid Testimonials, not only from the Universities and particular Churches, but
also from the Colloquy of that Church wherein he has been longest conversant.
The Proposan shall be examined in this method; first by a Proposition, one or
more from the Word of God; the Texts whereon his discourse is to be grounded,
shall be given him: One of these his Exercises ought to be in French, the other
in the Latin Tongue, in case the Colloquy or Synod do judge it meet; and he
shall have four and twenty hours time to prepare himself for each of these his.
Exercises. If by these he shall have given satisfaction unto the Assembly, then
a Chapter of the New Testament in Greek shall be put into his hand, upon which
he shall be posed, that it may be known whether he does understand that
Language, and can expound it; and afterward, he shall be examined in the
Hebrew, whether he can at least read it, and use good Books for the better
finding out of God's Sacred Will in the Scriptures. And to this shall be added
an Essay of his upon some of the most needful parts of Philosophy; and the
whole shall be managed with great tenderness and charity, and without
affectation of any thorny or unprofitable Questions. Finally, he shall make a
Confession of his Faith in Latin, upon which he shall be examined, and
opposed. And if upon the whole he be judged capable, the Assembly shall declare
unto him the duties of the Office whereunto he is called, and denounce unto
him, in Christ's Name, that Authority, which is now conferred upon him, to
preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments in that Church of Christ,
whereunto he is now sent, upon his full Ordination. And in conclusion, two
Ministers shall be deputed to present him unto the people.

3. The 5th Article shall begin with the words of the fourth. He that shall be
presented, shall preach the Word of God publicly on three several Sundays,
(but not administer the holy Sacraments) all the people hearing him, that so
they may know his manner of teaching, etc. And after these words in the end,
The Order of presenting a Minister unto the Church.
Nor shall the Pastor be imposed upon the Church against his will, shall be
added this clause, and the difference shall be determined according to the
Canon above mentioned at the costs and expenses of the Church which had
demanded him.

4. In the 7th Article about the manner of Imposition of hands, toward the end
after those words, That so he may well and duly discharge it, shall be added as
follows: And a prayer meet and pertinent to the purpose shall be conceived,
in which the Pastor shall insert these or the like words, We beseech thee, O
God, to enrich and furnish this thy Servant duly chosen according to the Order
established in this thy Church, with the Gifts and Graces of thy Holy Spirits,
adorning him abundantly with all Endowments needful for his worthy discharge of
this High Calling, to the Glory of thy great Name, the Edification of thy
Church, and the Salvation of his own Soul, whom we do now dedicate and
cousecrate by this our Prayer unto the Office of a Gospel Minister. At these
words the Pastor praying, shall stand up, and lay his hands on the head of the
Ordained. Minister, who kneels before him at the foot of the Pulpit. And Prayer
being ended, and the new Pastor risen up, the two Ministers deputed by the
Synod or Colloquy; shall give him in the presence of all the people the Right
hand of Fellowship* And this Canon and Form shall be unanimously observed by
all the Provinces.

5. On the 11th Article, the Provinces are bound in Conscience to give in a
faithful report unto the National Synods, whether the Ministers of their
Churches do hold fast the form of sound words in their public Sermons.

6. On the 17th Article Colloquies and Synods shall have a watchful Eye over
those Ministers, who study Chemistry, and grievously reprove and censure them.

7. On the third Article of the 7th Chapter, it was advised, that for the
future the additions made at the close of Propositions in Colloquies should be
omitted, because of the inconveniences which have happened, and do far exceed
the benefit, which we expected from them: And all Pastors shall be censured by
Pastors only in presence of the Elders.

8. On the 7th Article of the 8th Chapter, these words, with a Low voice, added
by the Synod of Rochel, shall remain; and it is enjoined, that if any Province
do act otherwise, that they conform for the future unto this Order.

9. On the 15th Article of the 8th Chapter, in the distribution of the
Provinces, those of the Isle of France, of the Land of Chartres, of Picardy,
Champague, Brie, and the Sovereignty of Sedan, petitioning that this Assembly
would approve of the Dividing the said Province into two Synods. This Assembly
did not think it convenient to authorize that Separation, and commands them to
remain United as before, notwithstanding what had been decreed by them in their
Provincial Synod, and the repeated Instances of their Provincial Deputies in
this present Assembly.

Advice about Bapusm.
10. On the 6th Article of the 11th Chapter, a Question was propounded by the
Province of Higher Languedoc, Whether in case of grievous sickness, and the
Child being in apparent danger of death, he might be baptized on Lecture-days,
before Sermon began, and whether Baptism might be administered at such times
when as there is no Sermon preached, but only public Common Prayers? It was
answered, that if the Consistory, or any of the Elders did attest the Malady of
the Infant, the Pastor might do it. And if the observation of this Article
should beget new difficulties, the Provinces were entreated to come prepared
unto the next National Synod, for their assoiling of them.

11. On the twelfth Article of the thirteenth chapter, The Provinces are
exhorted to bring their thoughts unto the next National Synod, whether any
alterations may be made in it or not.

12. A motion was made about the 20th Article of the same Chapter, whether
something might not be relaxed of its rigor out of respect to a great Lord,
who had chosen a Popish-Lady, that consented to be Married by one of our
Ministers, provided he would not compel her to an open profession of our
Religion. Upon which it was decreed, that the said Canon should be exactly and
equally observed toward all persons, whatever their quality or condition might
be as to the world.

13. Instead of these words, That he may able to protest with a good Conscience
in the same 20th Article of the said Chapter, these shall be inserted. And
shall with a good Conscience publicly protest before the Church of that place
where his said party is well known that she has renounced, -- And whereas the
Province of Lower Languedoc requested, that to obviate the levity of such
persons, they might not be Married in our Churches, till such time as they had
communicated at the Lords Table: This Assembly not altering that Canon, leaves
the affair unto the prudence of the Consistory.

14. On the twenty second Article of the same chapter, it was wholly left to
the prudence of the Consistory, to judge and determine in what space of time a
Widdower might decently Marry a second Wife, after the death of his first.

15. The Deputies of Vivaretz demanded upon the thirteenth Article of the
fourteenth chapter, whether it would not be expedient to fix a set time for
their Excommunication, who send their Children unto the Schools of the Jesuits:
This Assembly left it wholly to the prudence of Consistories.

16. On the twenty seventh Article of the fourteenth chapter, although the
Province of Xaintonge had demanded it, yet the Synod did not approve their
inserting of those words, to set up May-poles. However the Churches are charged
to proceed by all censures against those who do it out of superstition, and
commit Insolences and Debauches before them.

17. The Church Discipline having been read was approved by all the Deputies,
together with the aforesaid observations on it, and they all promised and swore
for themselves and Provinces, to procure to the utmost of their power that it
should be carefully and diligently observed.

CHAP. IV. Observations upon the National Synod of Rochel.
See the third Synod of Rochel.
1. THE first Article of general matters, which did not permit the Deputies to
carry with them the Acts of Appeals, and of particular matters, was for diverse
considerations revoked.

2. The Lords our General Deputies are again charged to require of his Majesty
a Declaration for the Naturalizing the poor Fugitives of the Marquisate of
Saluces.

3. The excuses made by the Churches of Bearn, for not sending their Deputies
unto this Synod were accepted and approved, and Letters of thanks were ordered
to be writ them, and to exhort them not to suffer such persons to be Married in
their Temples, who wander from the Neighbor Provinces without attestations.

Concerning Monks quitting their Convents. See the third Syn. of Rochel, g. m.
16.
4. The Province of Poictou requesting that some course might be taken to
prevent that great abuse committed by Monks, who having quitted their Convents,
did rove up and down, hither and thither, from one Church unto another: This
Assembly answered, that there could not be any better Expedient found out, than
the exact observation of that Canon made in the Synod of Rochel, which sends
them back to the Province where they were born, nor did we judge it convenient
to comply with the Province of Berry, who would have a public Stock erected,
and set apart for the maintenance of such fellows.

5. Letters shall be dispatched from this Assembly unto Monsieur Tilenus
Professor at Sedan, about the matters relating to him, proposed in this Synod.

6. U on hearing the report made by the Deputies of Dolphiny concerning the
Labors of Monsieur Chamier on the controversies of these times: This Assembly
applauded his great diligence, and gave him advice to pursue the finishing of
his whole work, that it may be published to the World entire; Promising that
the next national Synod shall take notice of his great charges and expenses,
and seal their acknowledgments to him with a pledge and character of their
respects and bounty.

7. Letters were sent from Monsieur Perrin, accompanied with others from the
Province of Dolphiny, informing us of the progress made by the said Perrin in
his History of the Albingenses and Vaudois, whereof the rude draught was now
pr^sented. This Assembly approving his method, exhorts him to continue his
labor, and to finish it as soon as possible: And Messieurs Ferrier, Durant,
Benoist, Castelfranc and Vignier, are entreated to transmit unto him whatever
Memoirs they have found out, or can get, that so it may be published suddenly.
And this Synod will assist him with their bounty to help to bear his great
expenses in books, and for its impression.

8. The Children of poor Ministers are exempted from the rigor of that
Article, which had ordered, that no Scholars should be maintained out of the
Moneys of the Kings bounty, See the 43d Artic. of g. m. in the third Syn. of
Rochel. Moderation in favor of the Children of poor Ministers.
until such time as they have finished their Studies of Humanity, and begun
their course of Philosophy. And it is left unto the discretion of Synods and
Colloquies, at what age and capacity they shall judge fit to enroll them in the
Catalogue of Pensioners.

9. Monsieur Vignier presenting his Theater of Antichrist, composed by him in
obedience to the command of the National Synod, received the thanks of this
Assembly for his great and worthy pains, and the University of Saumur is
ordered to peruse it, and having given their opinion of it, we order that it be
Printed together with the Authors Name.

The Province of Dolphiny acquitted for her receipt and distribution of Moneys
for the poor Refuged from the Marquisate of Saluces.
10. The Province of Dolphiny by the Authority of this Synod is discharged of
all accounts of Moneys received from the Provinces, for the poor Fugitives of
the Marquisate of Saluces, and their Deputies, who were charged in the Synod of
Rochel, with four hundred Livers gathered in the Church of Bourdeaux, and with
eight hundred Livers from the Church of Rochel, are also acquitted by this
Synod. And the aforesaid Province is also discharged of the sum of six hundred
sixty five Livers, nine Sous, and one Denier, paid by it unto the Churches of
Provence, conformable to the Order of the last Synod.

11. That Article concerning the Synod of Normandy, shall remain as it is, and
the Province shall continue to summon to it all its Pastors, according to the
Discipline.

12. The Deputies of Xaintonge remonstrating that the censure past by the
foregoing National Synod on the Consistory of Soubize, and Monsieur Chevalier
its Pastor, was grounded on a false accusation, and therefore required that the
said Censure might be razed out of the Book of our Acts. This Assembly
dismissed the whole unto the Synod of Xaintonge, who should hear both the
Accusers and Accused, and by the Authority of this Assembly judge finally of
that affair, and in case it were found to have been ill-reported, to cast the
self-same Censure upon the false Accusers.

CHAP. V. Appeals.
1. JAMES de l'Obel, otherwise du Val, being deposed from the sacred Ministry
for the sin of Adultery committed by him, and which he himself had confessed to
the Consistory of the Church of Gisors, wherein he served, summoning hither the
Pastors and several Elders of the Church of Rouen, came also in Person unto
this Assembly with his Appeal from the former sentence of Deposition past in
that Consistory against him, and from its confirmation given by the Provincial
Synod of Normandy the first of April, 1609. This Synod having heard both the
said du Val, and the Deputies of the Province, judges that the Consistory of
his Church, and the Synod of his Province had proceeded most regularly and
rightfully against him, and that therefore He the said du Val had aggravated
his crime by his sinful Appeal, and that he shall continue on the Roll of
scandalous deposed Ministers, without all hopes of ever being restored to so
Sacred an Office more.

2. The Colloquy of Gex appealed from a Decree of the Synod of Burgundy, by
which an exchange had been made between the two Churches of Divonne in the
Baylywick of Gex, and that of Issurtelle in the Province of Burgundy of their
Ministers, Monsieur Grillet and Gaussant: The Synod ordaining that the Church
of Issurtelle should pay the charges that Monsieur Grillett was at in his
removal, and that of Divonne or the Colloquy of Gex the charges of Monsieur
Gaussant in his. The Synod after hearing of Monsieur du Pan Deputy of that
Colloquy, and the Deputies from the Province of Burgundy, judged that the
Provincial Synod of Burgundy had by their Decrees done wrong unto the said
Church and Colloquy, and therefore charge the said Province and its Colloquy
to reimburse the injured Church and Colloquy of their Expenses, out of the
common Moneys belonging unto that whole Province.

3. The same Colloquy appealed about the Tax imposed on it, for bearing the
charges of the Assembly of Chastellheraut. But this their appeal was
disannulled, because the said Colloquy had received its part of the moneys
granted us by the King, upon condition that the Provinces should be discharged
for the expenses of their Deputies unto the said Assembly. And Monsieur du Pan,
Deputy for the said Colloquy by consent of the Province of Burgundy, was told,
that the portions granted the Pastors in the Baylywick of Gex, ought to be
employed toward their better maintenance, and as an augmentation of their
Stipends, on this Condition, that three of them together with as many Elders
should always appear in person at their Provincial Synod, and should pay their
proportion of expenses which were of necessity to be disbursed about the common
affairs of the Province, and the whole to be raised out of the Moneys given us
by his Majesty. And this Assembly by its own authority does ratify that
Ordinance of the Provincial Synod concerning the residence of Ministers upon
their Churches, and those Churches are bound to provide convenient houses for
them.

4. The Judicial Sentence of the Synod of Burgundy, ordaining Monsieur Clark to
continue Minister in the Church of Gex, was confirmed; nor may the said Pastor,
at the call of any private persons go and serve other Churches, without having
first obtained Leave from his Consistory, or of three Elders at least. And the
Appeal of diverse Pastors who had contradicted the said Colloquy, was rejected
and made void.

5. Monsieur Toussaincts Pastor in the Church of Luke in Province, presented
himself unto this Synod, pretending his call to be a Member of it, and to have
been deputed by the Province who having afterward retracted their choice, he
now Appealed from it. The Synod having heard both him, and the Deputies of the
Province, and understood that he himself had procured his own discharge from
this Deputation, and Had given his free consent to the Election of others,
declared his pretensions Null, his claim void, and his journey to be undertook
without ground, and that therefore he should bear his own charges: And farther
censureth him for his ill proceedings, and ambitious seeking of an office
whereunto he had no call, and from which he had discharged himself; and
advises the Province to take care that for time coming our National Synods be
no more troubled by any ambiguities in their Letters of Commission and
Deputation.

6. The Consistory of Chaallons upon the Saone complained in their Appeal, of a
Censure of the Synod of Burgundy, because they refused to admit a certain
Marriage to be solemnized in their Congregation: But this their Appeal was made
void, and the Actings of the said Consistory in refusing the celebration of
that Marriage judged over rigorous.

7. The Church of Dijon brought their Appeal, because Monsieur Chassegrain
their Minister had been adjudged from them unto the Church of Chaallons upon
Saone, without their ever being able to redemand the Moneys given by them to
the said Monsieur Cassegrain for his pension at Geneva or elsewhere. This
Assembly judged, that Considering the long time the said Chassegrain has lived
at Chaallons, without ever being redemanded by those of Dijon and Beaune, that
the Province had a power of Disposing of him, and that he is not bound in his
own person to make restitution of Moneys that had been bestowed upon him for
his Education and Subsistence.

8. The Church of Chaallons upon Saone entered their Appeal in this Synod,
because that Monsieur le Blanc formerly their Pastor, but now of the Church of
Lions, had his dismission from them by leave of the Colloquy, upon this
condition, that he should restore unto them the Moneys wherewith they had
Supplied him during his Studies at Geneva, and for the buying of Books, and the
overplus of wages received by him above the time he Served among them. Yet
nevertheless the aforementioned Provincial Synod of Burgundy had discharged
him of all payments, and afterward granted him to the Church of Lions. This
Assembly having perused the Memoirs of the Church of Chaallons, heard their
arguments, and those of the Synod, and of Le Blanc, did condemn the proceedings
of that Church of Chaallons, and Suppressed its Memoirs, because they revived
the minuter passages and circumstances of matters long since transacted in
Consistories, Colloquies and Provincial Synods, and ordained that the whole
series of affairs passed between the said Church and Monsieur le Blanc should
be razed out of the Registers of their Consistories and Colloquies; and
farther, it approves of the Call of the said le Blanc unto the Church of Lions,
who also shall restore fifty Crowns unto the Church of Chaallons upon the Soane
disbursed by them (for his maintenance in the University) and the overplus of
his wages received by him over and above the time that he served them in the
Ministry; And the Church of Lions shall see that this be faithfully performed;
and the said sums of Money so received by the Church of Chaallons shall be
paid in to that of Dijon in consideration of the charges they were at before
hand for the encouraging and promoting the Studies of the Sieur Cassegrain,
whose Ministry the Church of Chaallons does now enjoy: And furthermore there
shall be taken out of the Stock of the Province of Burgundy an Hundred Livers,
to be added unto the aforesaid sum, for the benefit of the Church of Dijon,
unto which the said Sieur le Blanc shall not be obliged to make restitution of
the sum of one hundred and fifty Livers received by him for that time in which
he was by Decree of the Synod remanded back unto Dijon and Beaune. And further
it was ordained that the Moneys before mentioned, which ought to have been
restored unto Dijon, shall be employed toward the discharging of the said
Churches of Dijon and Beaune from the Heirs of Monsieur Paillard, and the
remaining over plus of what was due unto him shall be paid in by equal portions
from those two Churches of Dijon and Beaune. And as to what concerns the second
place for Religious Worship in the Baylywick, that which was ordained by the
Provincial Synod shall hold good, but only till such time as we may obtain
another place in the Baylywick, and distinct from that of Beanue.

9. The Appeal of the Church of Mure in Dolphiny from the Decree of the
Provincial Synod, being about pecuniary matters, is according to the Canon made
in the last Synod of Rochel, turned over to the Neighbor Province.

10. The Appeal of diverse Colloquies in the Lower Languedoc from an Order made
by that Province for their continuing United in one, and not divided into two
Synods, is vacated and made null; and notwithstanding their Arguments drawn
from the greaness of their expense, long tarrying, unequal distribution of
Offices, and the like, reported by the Deputies of the Province; It is decreed,
that they shall abide in the same estate in which they are, and the said
Province shall take some effectual course to prevent as much as in them lies,
the inconveniences above mentioned by them.

11. The Sieurs de Falgueirolles and Paulet Ministers, and de Gasques an Elder,
appealing from the Judicial Sentence of the Synod of Lower Languedoc, which had
declared, that the Bailiff of Vigan might be admitted into their Synodical
Assemblies, only as a mere spectator, though at first he claimed it of right,
by virtue of his Office, and as a Magistrate, contrary to that Privilege and
Exemption granted unto our Synods and Colloquies by His Majesty. The Synod
judges that the aforesaid Ministers and Elder had very good warrant for their
Appeal, and it abrogates and censures the Judicial Sentence of that Synod.

The Widow of a deceased Minister shall be paid her Annuity from the day of
his Death.
12. The Church of Sauves appealing from the Decree of the Synod of Lower
Languedoc, which had ordered them to pay unto the Widow of Lazaras de Pedon,
their late deceased Pastor, her Annuity, beginning from the very day of his
death. This Assembly ratifieth the Judicial Sentence of that Provincial Synod,
judges the Appeal null and void, and ordains, that the said Annuity shall be
employed for the benefit of the Orphan Daughter of the said deceased Minister.

13. Henry Dindault (formerly Minister in the Church of Nieuil in Aunix,
deposed from the Sacred Ministry, first by the Colloquy of Aunix, and afterward
by the Provincial Synod held at Barbezieux, (and the whole process of it was
confirmed by the last National Synod held at Rochel, which had declared him
utterly incapable of ever exercising the Ministry) did now make his Appeal unto
this Assembly, and that it might be admitted, appeared in person, professing
his repentance for many and grievous sins committed and acknowledged by him,
but denying others whereof he also was accused, and importunately demanded a
mitigation of the Sentence past upon him by the before* mentioned Synod, and
that he might be again restored unto the holy Ministry. This Synod having heard
the Deputies of Xaintonge declaring the proceedings in their Assemblies against
him, the Letters and other Writings of the said Dindault, hearing also his
Confessions, Apologies and Protestations, does ratify and confirm the Judicial
Sentence of the said Synod of Xaintonge, and declares him for ever incapable of
being readmitted unto the Ministerial Office, and exhorts him unto a true
Repentance, and amendment of life: Upon evidences whereof given by him, he may
be received unto Communion at the Lord's Table.

14. The people of Marchenoir appealed from the Decree of the Provincial Synod
of St. Amand, which had equally imparted the Ministry of Monsieur Chambaran
unto them, and the Inhabitants of Lorges, upon condition that those of Lorges
should pay one half of his Stipend. This Assembly ordains, that the Article of
the Provincial Synod be observed both by them of Lorges and Marchenoir; and in
case the Inhabitants of Lorges refuse this condition, that then the
extraordinary Sermons shall be preached at Marchenoir. And in the mean while
the said Synod is required to observe more carefully the 8th Article in the 5th
Chapter of our Discipline, which gives ample power of judging finally and
without Appeal in such cases unto Provincial Synods.

15. The Sieur Quinson, Pastor of the Church of Chartres and Favieres,
appealing in their name from a Decree of the Provincial Synod of the Isle of
France, held at Charenton, by which the Lord de Bijannettes was left at
liberty, either of communicating with the Church of Blainville, whereof he was
a Member, or because he was nearer with that of Favieres, he contributing both
to the one and other: This Assembly confirms that Decree of the Synod of the
Isle of France, and declares the Appeal to be null and void, because the
difference is of their nature, which may be finally determined by the
Provincial Synods. However, for time coming it is ordained, that no Member
shall join himself to another Church without leave first had and obtained from
the Colloquy or Provincial Synod, which shall very well weigh and consider of
all Motives and Arguments inducing to it.

16. This Assembly took no notice of the Appeal brought by the Province of
Lower Languedoc from the Judgment of that of Vivaretz, about the business of
Monsieur Rossell, because, according to the Canon of the last National Synod,
it might have been finally determined in that Province; as also, because the
difference arose from a particular Agreement which the said Rossell made with
the Church of Gignac, wherein they had obliged themselves to pay him over and
above his Salary, that portion accrewing to them from the Moneys granted us by
His Majesty. Nevertheless this Synod did expressly prohibit for the future all
such Bargains and Agreements, and ordains, that Pastors shall have from their
Churches settled and certain Wages, in which payment shall not be reckoned
their Augmentation from the Moneys of His Majesty's Bounty. And Ministers shall
give Acquittances unto their Churches of all Moneys received from them at the
quarterly payments.

17. The Sieur Guibert, Pastor, complaining of a Judgment passed in the
Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, whereby he was consigned Minister to the Church
of Archiac: The Assembly having heard the Deputies of that Province, and the
said Guibert also, declared the Decree of the said Province just and equitable,
and ordains his continuance in the said Church, until such times as by advice
of the Colloquy, or of the same Province, he may be elsewhere employed, if need
be; but they be exhorted to take care for his comfortable maintenance.

18. The Colloquy of Main appealing from a Decree of the Colloquy of Touraine,
chosen Umpire between that of Main and Anjou, by which the Church of Prinjey
and Gallirante had been adjudged to the Colloquy of Anjou; upon hearing the
Arguments produced by the said Colloquies, this Assembly revoketh and reverseth
the Decree aforesaid, and adjudgeth the Church of Prinjey and Gallirante unto
the Colloquy of Main.

19. A difference falling out between the Provinces of the Isle of France and
Berry, upon this occasion, diverse Gentlemen and others formerly Members of the
Church of Chartres, had lately joined themselves unto the Church of Basoches
and Genouille, gathered in the Colloquy of Blesois, because of its nearness to
their Habitations, and more Commodious for them. The Synod hearing the
arguments on both sides, and perusing the Memoirs, does leave the Gentlemen and
other persons to their full Liberty, either for Basoches and Genouille or for
that of Chartres.

20. The Sieur Beraud Pastor and Professor in the Church of Montauban, and the
Sieurs de Novellan and de Vaures, Deputies from that Church unto the last Synod
of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne held at Pamiers, appealed, for that the said
Beraud was aggrieved by the aforesaid Synod, which having restored the Sieur
Benoist to the aforesaid Church, and refused to give him his dismission, tho he
humbly demanded it, and had ordained that he should be reconciled with the said
Benoist, that they might live for the future amicably, in peace, and good
correspondence together. And the Sieurs de Novellan and de Vaures appealed for
that the said Sieur Benoist was sent back unto the Church of Montauban, as if
he were one of their own proper Pastors. Upon hearing the complanits of the
Sieur Beraud and the Deputies of the said Church, and the defense made by
Monsieur Benoist; and on perusal of diverse Acts and Letters written on both
sides, and the Provincial Deputies also being heard, producing the Acts on
which their Decree was grounded, and relating the Charge and Commission given
them as they passed through Moutauban, both from the party favoring Monsieur
Beraud, and the party desiring the continuance of the Ministry of the said
Benoist: This Assembly observing in all their proceedings more of passion than
of reason, ordains, that the said Beraud be out of hand reconciled with the
said Benoist, and the said Benoist shall testify unto him the great desire he
has for the future of living with him in all Love, Honor and Respect, and
entreat him to forget and forgive all past miscarriages: And furthermore, it
does absolutely and fully ratify and confirm that Decree of the Provincial
Synod, disannulling the Appeal of the said Deputies, and exhorts them to a
mutual reconciliation, and to use their utmost endeavor for the effecting an
entire and universal Peace in the said Church. And in case this be not done,
the next approaching Provinvincial Synod is charged by virtue and authority of
this Assembly, to remove them both from it, and to employ them elsewhere in
some other distinct Churches of the Province, and by some other Ministers to
serve and supply the Church of Montauban. And the Sieurs Bauconis, Silvius, and
de Malleret, are ordered to travel unto Montauban, and to give the said Church
a punctual Account of this our Decree in all its circumstances, and the
Expenses of their Journey shall be defrayed by it. And whereas the Deputies of
the said Church do desire that Garissoles and Cabault, Proposans maintained by
them, might be examined in this National Synod; and that it would be pleased to
give in their Opinions of them, whether they were persons sufficiently
qualified for the Sacred Ministry, and capable of assisting their other
Pastors; it was resolved, that this matter should be left wholly to the
Judgment of their Provincial Synod, who should determine both of their
Capacity, and Induction into the said Church, whereunto, however they should
not consent, till such time as they had unanimously agreed about the Ministry
of Monsieur Benoist; on which condition they might grant the demands of the
said Church. And in case it should be a long time before the Synod Assembled,
that then the Colloquy of Lower Quercy shall finally determine this Affair,
provided that they call in, to act together with them, the Colloquy of
Armagnac, that so all sinister thoughts of partiality in their Judicial
Sentence may be obviated and prevented And if in pursuance hereof, they shall
perceive a design laid for the exclusion of Monsieur Benoist, then they shall
not in the least proceed to the Ordination of the said Proposans, nor unto
their Instalment in the Church of Montauban.

21. The University of Montauban appealed because the last Synod held at
Pamiers refused to admit of Monsieur Gardesie unto the Professors place of the
Greek Tongue. This Assembly decrees, that the Synod, or both the Colloquies
which shall judge about the Proposans of the Church of Montauban, shall also
take cognizance of this Affair: And in case they do grant the said Gardesie
unto that University, and he consent unto it, that then they do dispose of one
of the said Proposans, or of some other person, whom they believe will best
edify the Church of Mauvoisin, unto its service in the Pastoral work.

22. The Appeal of the Common Council of the City of Montauban on behalf of the
Counselors in their Colloquy is dismissed over to the next Political Assembly
of the Province.

23. The Sieurs des Baconis, Sylvius and de Malleret in their journey unto
Montauban, about the affairs of that Church, are ordered to visit the Churches
of Meusac, Islemade, and St. Leophary, and to take knowledge of their Estate,
and Proverty, that so they may testify unto the approaching Synod of the
Higher Guyenne, whether the Sieurs Richaud and Bicheteau can be maintained by
them, and whether they be able to encourage them in their personal residence
among them, according to the Decree of the National Synod of Rochel.

24. Whereas Monsieur Beraud appealed from the Judgment of the Provincial Synod
of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, for their continuing the Sieurs Richaud and
Bicheteau in the Curatorship of the University of Montauban since the Decree of
the last National Synod, and for their approving of that custom of precedence
among the Elders, according to their Seniority in Office: This Assembly
expounding the Canon of the aforesaid Synod of Rochel, declares that it never
intended to set up any ordinary Curators, excepting those that be upon the
place, and it only gave leave unto the Consistories, and University Counsels to
call in upon extraordinary occasions such persons as they judged best able to
advise and assist them; and therefore can in no wise approve of this Intendency
ordained by the Provincial Synod. And as for the other point, it cannot allow
the Provincial Synods to make orders about precedence, and condemns the said
Province for so doing; and farther it does appoint all Consistories to use
their prudence in preventing of those disorders and confusions, which may fall
out on such punctilio's, and to take care that every one have that respect paid
him which is due unto him.

25. The appeal of the Sieurs Rafin, Perrot, and Phillipy about their expenses
unto the last National Synod is sent back unto the Neighbor Province, with
full power to determine finally therein, according to the Canon of the same
Synod concerning Pecuniary matters.

26. The Sieur Beraud brought in an Appeal of the Colloquy of Armagnas, which
complained of the Province of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, that merely out of
conformity to their Neighbors, would send their Deputies to the Synods of
Lower Languedoc and Guyenne. This Assembly approving the resolution of the said
Synod, Censures the Colloquy for their opposition, and makes null and void
their Appeal.

27. Master Claudius Maillard Doctor of Physic, and heretofore Elder in the
Church of Orleans appealed from the judgment of his Provincial Synod held at
Gien, by which the said Maillard was censured together with his book written by
him against his own Pastor Monsieur du Moulin, and because it had ordained that
his Censure should be published in the Church before the whole Congregation;
the said Maillard pleading that neither his Book nor Person ought to have been
censured, but only that formality of his having caused it to be printed; and
farther, that the Censure past upon Mr. du Moulin by the same Synod ought also
to have been published in the Congregation. Upon perusal of that aforesaid
Printed discourse, and published by the said Maillard, and sent by him
subscribed with his own hand unto this Assembly, and the several acts produced
by him proving his assertions. And Monsieur du Moulin being heard apologizing
for himself, and his demand of License to depart from the said Church and
Province, both which he had long ere this have quitted, had it not been, that
he expected the sitting of this Assembly; and the Deputies of the said Church
being heard earnestly requesting his return unto them: The Acts also of the
Colloquy held at Baugency being perused, which condemned the Consistory of
Orleans, for not deposing of Esaiah Fleureau from his Office, and for not
publishing his suspension from the Lords Table, notwithstanding his Appeal, and
finally the act of the Synod beforementioned, together with what was done
about its execution by the Deputies sent from the Synod: After mature
deliberation of all these things, this Assembly judged that the said Maillard
had do reason at all to Appeal from the sentence of the Synod, considering the
greatness of his fault, which is again condemned both in substance and
circumstance; and ordains that he shall call in all his Books dispersed
abroad and suppress them, and judges that the said Colloquy ought in no wise
to have hindered the Appeal of the said Fleureau: And as for the said Sieur du
Moulin, This Assembly approves the judgment of the Synod, and the proceedings
of the Pastors delegated for its execution; but cannot allow of the departure
of the said du Moulin, since the denunciation of the said Sentence: And it
ordains that the said du Moulin, shall be restored unto the Church of
Orleans, which is injoined to love, honor and maintain him; And that an
effectual reconciliation may be wrought among them, Messieurs Ferrier, Chauve,
de Montdenis and Basnage Ministers, together with the Lord of Fiefbrun an
Elder, and the other Elders Deputed with the aforesaid Elders unto this
National Synod, are commissioned by it to transport themselves unto the Church
of Orleans, and there by Authority of this Assembly, to ordain whatsoever may
be judged expedient for the mollifying of those Hearts, and abating of those
heats, and reconciling of the divided parties, and the happy re-establishment
of the Ministry of the said Sieur du Moulin in that Church, and to inflict such
Censures as are meet upon the Refractory and Contumacious Members, which shall
oppose and hinder this pacification.

28. The Provincial Synod of Poictou dismissed over unto this Assembly the last
Censure of Master Fiacre Picard sometime Minister in the Church of
Chastelheraut, who being convicted in the said Synod of several notorious
Crimes, was suspended until now from his Office, and commanded to appear in
person before this Assembly. The Deputies of the Province gave an account of
the Synods judgment past upon him, produced the Accusations brought in against
him, and the several proofs and Evidences of them, together with his Letters
and Confessions. After which the said Picard was called in, and heard speak in
his own defense; some things he owned, and others he denied, whereupon this
Assembly confirms the judgment past upon him by the Province of Poictou, and
farther to shame and humble the said Picard, it Decrees that he shall continue
suspended for a full year, and until the next Provincial Synod of Xaintonge,
unto which he shall give his personal appearance, and bringing with him
sufficient Attestations of his good Life and Conversation, approved by the
Inhabitants of the places of his abode, he may be readmitted into the Sacred
Ministry, but not to officiate within the Precincts of the Province of Poictou;
and as for his request, that we would in some manner relieve him under his
great wants: this Assembly grants unto the Province of Xaintonge a
supernumerary portion, which may be given to him.

29. The Appeal of diverse persons inhabiting the Parish of St. Sulpice within
the Marquisate of Royan, who by the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, were
adjudged to the Church of Royan, was reported, together with the arguments
urged on both sides; This Assembly leaves the said Inhabitants unto their
liberty to join themselves either to the Church of Saujon or Royan, as best
likes them, only advises them to choose that which is nearest the place of
their abode. And this same order shall be of force with respect to the Village
of Petit Pont, and la Maison des Hurtins near unto la Tremblade, that so the
Decree of the Synod of Xaintonge may be confirmed and established. And the
Appeal of the Church of Aruert is hereby vacated.

30. The Appeal of the Sieur Maurice, Pastor in the Church of Orange,
complaining or his Provincial Synod for their over much Indulgence unto the
Lady d' Aramond is rejected; It being a known case that that same Synod could
finally determine in such affairs.

See the Roll of Apostates in the Synod of Castres.
31. The Church of Vertueil and Villefaignon appealed from a Decree of the the
Synod of Xaintonge, which adjudged Monsieur Perier to be Minister in the Church
of Pons for one year, with purpose, as the Deputies of the Province declared,
to have continued him there during life, if so be those of Pons should approve
of it, who also did most importunately demand it from this Assembly. Upon
hearing of all the parties concerned, this Synod ordains that the said
Monsieur Perier shall be the proper and ordinary Pastor of the Church of Pons,
but with this condition, that the said Church do pay unto the Church of
Vertueil and her annexed Congregations three hundred Livers, disbursed by them
for his maintenance at the University; and those annexed Congregations shall
remain united and conjoined as formerly unto the Church of Vertueil: And the
Sieur Gomard Pastor of the said Church of Vertueil, shall do the same work at
Villefaignon as the said Perier had done before him, to whom also the said
Churches shall pay the remaining dues of his Sallary.

32. The Appeal of Monsieur Voysin from the Colloquy of Lauragais concerning
the maintenance of his Uncles Widow, Madam Voysin, by the Church of
Puylaurens, is remanded back unto the Province, to pass a final Judgment on it.

33. The Appeal of Samuel Gautier Lord of Aulnes from the Provincial Synod of
Normandy was rejected.

34. The Appeal of the Church of Pamiers from the Decree of the Synod of Higher
Guyenne, importing that the said Church should pay yearly the sum of five and
forty Livers unto the poor necessitous family of their late deceased ^astor
Monsieur Fraugier, was read. Whereupon this Assembly, having heard on the one
side Monsieur Nouellhan pleading for that Church, and the Deputies of the
Province on the other side against them, declared the Appeal Null, but withal
ordered that the Province was bound in Prudence and Charity to take some course
for their present relief, and future subsistence, either at the sole charges of
that Church, or in case of their inability, by the help and assistance of the
Province; which also is advised to consult whether it would not be more
expedient to continue the Pension as it is now stated, or to pay in at once or
twice a good round sum as a settled stock for the discharge of that Pension.

35. Monsieur Welsh a Scotchman Minister in the Province of Xaintonge Appealed
from the said Province; because that in its last Synod held at Rochel, they had
adjudged his Ministry unto the Church of Jonzac until such time as God should
recall him back into Scotland; Which was a grievance to him. This Assembly
having read his Letter, and the reasons urged for him, and for the Province
against him, approves the Judgment of the Province, and Decrees that he shall
serve in the said Church: However for the Consolation of the said Mr. Welsh it
injoins the next Colloquy to the Classis of Jonzac, or the Synod, to deliberate
what will be best expedient both for him and the Church; and in case he be not
inclined to serve the said Church of Jonzac, another Church shall be provided
for him within the Province, such an one as may be most meet for him, excepting
that of Pons, to which he was once presented by this Assembly. And further he
is commanded both in Preaching and in the exercise of Discipline to conform
unto that order and manner used and accustomed in the Churches of this Kingdom.

36. The Church of Foix and Tarascon complained in their Appeal of the Synod of
Higher Languedoc and Guyenne for entering into the common charges a part of two
Supernumerary Portions, which had been granted them by the last National Synod.
Upon which it was answered that the said Church had done well in appealing, and
that it was unjustly Decreed by the said Synod; which is now injoined by the
authority of this Assembly to make restitution of what they had taken from
those two aforesaid Portions unto the said Church.

37. The Sieur de Beauvoysin Appealed from the judgment of the Provincial Synod
of Lower Languedoc, because of the differences fallen out betwixt him and
Monsieur Esaiah Ferrier Pastor in the said Province* Upon hearing the state of
that whole affair at large, and the method used by the Province, which never
refused to accommodate it, but only delayed it, because of the absence of one
of the Parties, caused by the proceedings of the other; This Assembly judged
the Appeal of the said Beauvoysin to be ill laid, and therefore remands the
whole process back again unto the Province; and injoineth both Parties
personally to appear at their next Synod, and that Provincial Synod to work out
between them a good reconcilement. Upon which the Memoirs brought by the Lord
of Puymichel Deputy for Provence were restored to him, that he might put them
into the hands of the said Sieur de Beauvoysin.

38. The Colloquy of the Isles in Xaintonge Appealed from the Decree of the
Provincial Synod, which had rebuked the said Colloquy for over-rigorous
censuring the Minister of the Church in St. Just, because of his nonappearance
at their Meeting in Soubize, and of the Sieur Petit Deputy from the Synod for
publishing that aforesaid Decree in the said Church. This Assembly having heard
Monsieur Merlin speak in behalf of the Synod, and Monsieur Bonnet for the
Colloquy, judged that the Church of Soubize failed in their Letter of Summons,
inserting a clause that the Colloquy had exceeded their power by an
over-rigorous censure inflicted on the said Church and Minister; and it
approves the Decree of the Synod against the said Colloquy: But for as much as
publication has not been made of it, we do ordain that it shall be forborne:
only Monsieur Petit shall read in the Consistory of the Church of St. Just this
present Article, that so the honor of the said Minister maybe repaired.

39. Bertrand Faugier formerly Minister of the Church of Viners in Dolphiny
appealed from the Decree of the Synod of that Province, whereby he was Deposed
from the Sacred Ministry; but his Appeal was declared null and void, for
nonappearance in person at this Assembly.

40. The Appeal of the Church of Lamure in Dolphiny from a Decree of their
Provincial Synod being only about Money matters shall according to the Canon
made at Rochel be determined by the next adjoining Province.

CHAP. VI. Of General Matters.
1. NO Church shall seek a Minister for it self out of the Province, unless it
have first consulted with the Colloquies or Synod of the Province.

2. The Provinces shall be admonished carefully to observe the tenth Article of
the eighth Chapter of our discipline, wherein are declared the proper causes
which may be brought by Appeals unto our National Synods, and if any shall
hereafter bring those matters before us, which are determinable in Provincial
Synods, they shall not be heard. And Provincial Synods shall give notice hereof
unto such persons as Appeal without just cause.

3. The Deputies of those Provinces, in which are erected the Mixed Courts
consisting of half Protestants and half Papists, are ordered in the name of
this Assembly to wait upon the Lords Presidents, and Counselors of those Mixed
Courts professing the Reformed Religion, and to exhort them to persevere in
their zeal and good affection to the general welfare of the Churches, and of
their poor oppressed Members, who have recourse to them for justice against
their oppressors, and Letters shall be written to them to this purpose.

4. The Consistory of Nerac shall in the Name of this Assembly exhort the Lords
Presidents and Counselors professing the Reformed Religion in the mixt-Court
of Guyenne to take special care that nothing do pass in their Court to the
prejudice of the Edicts and Articles granted to the Professors of our Religion,
and that private persons may not be unjustly oppressed. And in case of their
neglect, and connivency at such injustice, the Consistory of the said Church
shall proceed against them by all Church Censures.

5. The Deputies of Lower Languedoc moved this Question; what course should be
taken with those persons against whom the Consistories having proceeded by
Church Censures for their delinquencies, according to the Discipline, were yet
abetted by their Friends and Kindred, who combining together with them against
the Consistories, do forbear hearing of Sermons, neglect Sacraments, and refuse
their ordinary contributions toward the maintenance of the Ministry. It was
decreed, that they be prosecuted both abettors and abetted with all
Church Censures; and Colloquies, and Provincial Synods ordered are to take
special care that these Censures be duly executed.

6. The Deputies of the Isle of France and Picardy propounding it, the
Provinces are charged to proceed against such as do by underhand dealings
canvass for deputations unto Politcal Assemblies, by all Church Censures. And
they who Represent the Provinces shall make oath that they never obtained to be
Deputies by any of those unfair practices, and in all Elections of members unto
such Assemblies in whatsoever place, Borough, City, or Province, that they
neither have nor shall in any wise give their Votes for them who by such undue
courses have demanded, Craftily contrived, or Ambitiously affected, and sought
after those Deputations, nor have they, nor will they seek or demand the same
for themselves by such or the like ways and means. And in case his Majesty out
of his Royal Bounty should defray their charges at those General Assemblies; It
is ordained, that the Moneys, so given by him, shall be received by the
Treasurer of the Churches, for their benefit; and the Churches shall pay the
respective Deputies all the expenses of their Journey.

Professors are exempted from all Deputations unto Political Assemblies.
7. the Provinces are enjoined never to depute unto our General National
Assemblies, whether Political or Ecclesiastical, the Professors of Theology,
nor shall they be employed in any Deputations unto Court: And whether they
shall be sent or not unto our National Synods, it is left wholly to the prudence
of the Provinces.

8. Theophilus Bleuitt, otherwise called, de la Comb having been deposed from
the Ministry by the Province of Anjou, and his deposition ratified by an act of
the last National Synod held at Rochel, presented himself unto this Assembly
craving the favor of readmission into the Ministry. The Assembly having heard
the causes for which he was deposed, and those enormous Crimes whereof he stood
convicted, declares him utterly unworthy of that Sacred Office; yea, that he
shall not be so much as suffered to teach School in any of the Reformed
Churches of this Kingdom, and forbids him for the future ever to put his foot
within any of our Synodical Assemblies more.

9. The Deputies of the Isle of France moving it, this Assembly decreed, that
in those Provinces where that Custom was established, of bringing the fifth
Penny of all Charities to the Colloquies or Provincial Synods, to be employed
in the maintenance of our Proposans, shall continue it as long as they see it
expedient: And in case any Churches of the Provinces should oppose themselves
against it, they be enjoined to conform unto the practice of the major party,
on pain of being deprived of the Ministry. In consequence hereof, the Deputy of
Burgundy complaining of the great inconveniences befallen them by the
Exemption of the Church of Lion from this Ordinance, it was again decreed, that
the said Church should be subjected to it, as well as the other Churches of
that Province.

10. It Is left to the prudence of Consistories to judge what Poor are fit to be
relieved by every particular Church, and who are to be sent back unto the
places of their Nativity, or of their former Residence: And herein to carry it
with all Charity both toward the Poor, and those Churches whereunto they do
return them.

An Order for maimed Soldiers bearing the Cross on their Cloaks.
11. The Deputies of the Lower Guyenne moving it, this Assembly resolved, That
Protestant Soldiers, to receive the Relief granted by His Majesty unto those
who had been maimed in His Service, might wear the Cross on their Cloaks, not
as a Badge of Superstition, but as the Mark and Cognizance of their Afflicted
Condition, and they should not therefore be excluded Communion at the Lord's
Table: But withal, they be advised to take special care that in
Church-Meetings they do avoid all occasions of giving offense unto the weak
Members.

Advice for Pastors about Attestations to be granted unto Officers in Garrisons
or Courts of the Edict.
12. Ministers in giving their Attestations unto them who would be provided of
Offices, as Governors, and Lieutenants of places in our Cautionary Towns, (the
places of Surety granted us by the King) or of Offices in the Courts of the
Edict, shall be exceeding careful that the 23th Article of General Matters in
the National Synod of Rochel, be fully observed, and those who do act otherwise
shall be suspended from their Ministry for one whole year.

13. Diverse Provinces complaining of the general contempt of the blessed Gospel
of our Lord Jesus, of the Blasphemies, Debauches, and Profaneness universally
abounding among us, of the woeful decays of Faith and Charity, threatening us
with a deluge of Divine Wrath ready to break in upon us for the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, and that therefore it is most needful to appoint a day
of solemn public Prayer and Fasting to be kept in all the Churches of this
Kingdom, for their extraordinary humiliation before God, and the averting of
his Judgments from us. This Assembly ordains, that it shall be celebrated in
all our Churches the first Tuesday of November next ensuing, which will be the
fifth day of the same month.

14. That hereafter there may be a General Uniformity in the Churches of this
Kingdom in the Administration of the Lord's Supper, and all scruples by reason
of difference and singularity arising in weak, but honest hearts, incapable of
distinguishing between the Substance and Circumstance of the Sacred Action may
be prevented; all Pastors are enjoined to abstain from any new or private
Methods of their own, as of reading the words of Institution between the
ordinary long Prayer, and that appointed particularly for this Sacrament, which
ought indeed to be read after, nor shall they, whilst reading the words of
Institution, uncover the Bread and Wine, nor shall they bring the people up in
ranks unto the Table, there to sit or stand, whereas they should cause the
faithful to pass one after another up unto it; nor shall the Exhortations or
Thansgivings be made till that the Elements have been distributed among the
Communicants of every Table; nor shall the Cup be given by the faithful one
unto another, it being contrary to the express Letter of a Canon of our
Discipline, which ordains Pastors, if possible, or if they cannot, the Elders
to assist the Pastor tired by the multitude of Communicants in populous
Churches, to deliver it. And Colloquies and Synods shall have their Eyes over
those who act contrary to this Order, and reduce them to their duty by all
befitting Censures.

15. Colloquies and Synods shall use their best discretion in the exercise of
Discipline upon those persons, who, that they may inflame our Churches, raise
and foment Divisions in them, do get into Offices of Judicature, do plead for
those Incendiaries, and procure them Monopolies and secret Subscriptions under
Hand and Seal.

16. The province of the Isle of France demanding that the poorer Churches
might be relieved out of our common Stock: The inconveniences having been well
considered in case a General Order about this matter should be enacted; This
Assembly does, as that of Rochel did before it, leave it wholly to the prudence
and charity of the several Provinces, to see that what is done herein do make
for Edification.

17. The Deputies of Xaintonge propounding this Question, Whether a Baptism
administered by a deposed Minister at the request, and in the presence of the
whole Church, were valid? This Synod judges, that in case the deposed Minister
had presented his Appeal unto a National Synod, the Baptism were valid, and
ought not to be reiterated. But nevertheless, if any such Deposed Minister
shall hereafter presume to Administer any public Ordinances, he shall be
denounced Excommunicate immediately.

18. The Deputies of Poictou demanding how they should act where the Banes of
Marriage were forbidden before the last time of Publishing. This Assembly
judged, that in case the opposition were made without Authority from the Civil
Magistrates, the Consistories might continue their Publication, but otherwise
not, unless the Magistrate should only forbid the Celebration of that Marriage,
and not the Publishing of the Banes.

19. The Deputies of Xaintonge informed this Assembly that the Printer of
Rochel designed with our approbation a new Impression of the Bible in a Lesser
Volume, more Commodious, and that might be easily carried any where in the
pocket; and forasmuch as diverse Godly persons desired there might be an Index
added to it of those Texts, which were most proper and pertinent for confirming
the Truth, and confuting Error: This Synod approved the undertaking because of
its singular usefulness, and entreated Monsieur Merlin to see it accomplished:
which also he promised to perform.

20. The Deputies of Poictou craved remedy against that evil custom in diverse
Churches, of sending their Pastors without Elders unto Colloquies and
Provincial Synods. This Assembly replied that no general Order could be well
decreed in this Case, and therefore left the whole unto the prudence of the
provinces.

A Minister may not press any to discover a secret Crime unto the Civil
Magistrate.
21. A Case was proposed, How a Minister might govern himself when enjoined by
the Magistrate to press those who were privy to any notorious Crime to reveal
it. It was answered, that he was under no obligation of obedience unto such
commands, no more than he was to discover the secret passages and transactions
of the Consistory. Wherefore all Pastors are admonished to take no notice of
any such injunctions, and the Churches are ordered to stand by them in case,
for this their refusal, their Ministers should be prosecuted by the Superior
Civil Powers.

22. The Province of Anjou made this Proposal, that it were expedient the
Provinces should nominate some worthy Ministers particularly to Study
controversies, and in every Province some one to be most prepared for the
defense of one particular Truth opposed by our Adversaries. The Assembly
approved and embraced the motion, and divided the controversies among the
Provinces in this ensuing Order. To wit.

1. To Poictou, de verbo Dei Scripto and non Scripto. 2. To Anjou, de Christo,
and Pontifice, and Antichristo. 3. To Xaintonge, de Ecclesia and Conciliis. 4.
To Orleans and Berry, de Ministrorum vocatione, gradibus, and potestate
Clavium. 5. To the Isle of France, de Monachis, Clericis and Laiciss. 6. To
Provence, de Limbo Patrum, Infantium, and Purgatorio, 7. To Normandy, de
sanctorum beatitudine, Invocatione, reliquis, Angelorum Hierarchiis, cultu and
Ministerio. 8. To the Higher Languedoc, de Sacramentis in genere, and de veris
in specie. 9. To the Lower Guyenne, de sacrificio, and Missa Poncisl^i^^ 10. To
Burgundy, De quinque falsis Sacramentis Pontificiorum, ubi and de Indulgentiis
and Jubileo. 11. To the Lower Languedoc de Statu primi hominis, peceato, and
causa peccati. 12. To Brittany, de precato Originali, Lege and Legis
impletione. 13. To Vivaretz, de libero arbitrio and praedestinatione. 14. To
Dolphiny, de justificatione, bonis operibios, and meri^o in genere and in
specie.
And the Provinces shall choose Persons meet and fit for this work, and shall
enjoin them to be ready upon all occasions, as often as necessity requites them,
either to defend the Truth, or refute the Adversary.

23. Neither Colloquies nor Synods shall be Assembled in any other form than
that prescribed by the Discipline, whatever Authority may be pretended for it.
Nor shall any Single Minister give of his own head an Attestation upon any
ground or occasion whatsoever, to such who not professing our Religion, may
demand it of him, without Warrant first had from his Colloquy or Synod for so
doing, on pain of being Suspended from the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Universities and Colleges.
WHereas the Deputies of the Church of Montauban were ordered by the last
National Synod held at Rochel, to bring in a faithful Account of the Moneys
assigned to their University, and have given no Satisfaction unto this Assembly
about this matter, there appearing diverse defects in their said Accounts: This
Assembly does therefore turn them over to the Synod of Higher Languedoc, before
which they shall produce the Evidences and Acquittances of those their
Accounts; and having audited and cleared them from all defaults, they shall
make report thereof unto the next National Synod. And farther, this Assembly
declares, That it is not our Intention that the Wages of Regents in the
several Classes, should be put into those Accounts, but only those of the
Professors in Divinity, and of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues, and the two
Professors of Philosophy. And the Commissioners, who shall be appointed to
audit the said Accounts, are to remember, that they allow of no Wages, but only
to them who are in actual service, and not to any vacant Professorship.
Moreover, they shall over-see the extraordinary Counsels of the University, and
give their Judgment whether matters have been well or ill managed, and the said
University Counsel shall be only composed of Pastors and Elders named by the
Provincial Synod. Finally, we do not judge it reasonable, that the aforesaid
Deputies of Montauban should lay claim to any Moneys from the Province, or
University, to defray their Charges hither; nor shall the said Province be
obliged to allow them one Farthing.

2. A Censure was past upon the Universities of Nismes and Montpellier, for not
having brought in their Accounts, 1609. The 19th Synod.
(as they were ordered by the last National Assembly held at Rochel,) neither
to this Assembly, nor to their own Provincial Synod, and the Province was also
censured for not calling them to account; and therefore they be enjoined to
carry their Accounts unto the Consistory of the Church of Lions, unto which
there shall be called two of the Neighbor Pastors within one month after the
Meeting of their Provincial Synod. And the same difficulties being found in the
Accounts of the University of Sedan, it is also charged to bring them in in
good form, and make report of them unto the next National Synod: And whereas
there is in that University a Professor of the Laws, which is not instituted in
any of our Universities by the Authority of our National Synods, we give them
to understand that no Salary, though allowed by them unto him, shall be comprised
or approved in the said Accounts.

3. The Debate about the Government of our Universities having been dismissed
over to this National Assembly by that last held at Rochel, a Decree now
passed, that inasmuch as their number could not be diminished at present,
without many inconveniences, those which were erected by the Synod of Rochel
shall be continued, to wit, Montauban, Saumur, Nismes, Montpellier and Sedan;
only the number of their Professors shall be thus stated and fixed, at
Montauban two Professors in Divinity, whereof one being a Pastor, shall receive
for his Salary but three hundred and fifty Livers, and the other seven hundred.
One Professor of Hebrew, who being a Pastor, shall receive but two hundred
Livers, being half-wages for his professing the Hebrew Language. One Professor
in Greek, who shall have four hundred Livers, and two Professors of Philosophy,
who shall have four hundred Livers a-piece. And in case the said University
shall in a short time be supplied with Professors wholly Academical, and not
having any other Employment, to whom complete Wages must be given, then the
overplus wanting to them shall be paid them by the next National in Synod, if
the said University be not by their Accounts indebted to us; which said
Accounts shall be stated from their first Institution, according to the number
and quality of their Professors in actual service. And in case the City of
Montauban should refuse to maintain that College composed of a Principal and
seven Regents, who are now in it, we do declare unto them that their Privilege
of being an University, shall be devolved from them upon the Town of Bergerac,
which offers a far greater Maintenance.

4. The Universities of Nismes and Montpellier shall receive two thousand five
hundred Livers, equally to be divided between them both, that so a Professor of
Divinity, and another of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues may be maintained in each
of them, and that the other incidental necessary Charges of the said
Universities may be defrayed.

5. Five hundred Livers shall be given unto Sedan for the Maintenance of one
Professor in Divinity, one of the Hebrew, and another of the Greek Tongue.
There shall be maintained at Saumur as many Professors as at Montauban, and
their little College also consisting of five Regents. And for their
Maintenance, according to the draught already brought in, there is granted them
the sum of four thousand one hundred and ninety Livers. All which sums are
bestowed upon the said Universities free from the defalkation of a Sous upon
the Livers, which the Lord du Candal has liberally and generously quitted to
them in this Assembly. And all these Orders are only established for the
present, and to be in force no longer than till the meeting of the next
National Synod; whereunto the Provinces are exhorted to come prepared with
their best digested thoughts about this important business.

Those of the Town of Bergerac, assisted by the Deputies of their Province,
reported unto this Assembly, that they had raised a Stock of Moneys sufficient
to maintain an Academy for the Education of our Youth, and to detain them from
going to the Colleges of the Jesuits. This Synod highly applauded their zeal
and forwardness, and grants the Privileges of a College unto that already
founded by their Collections and good Husbandry. But because of the general
complaint of the Provinces, that we have too great a number of Universities, we
cannot permit the Erection of any new ones, besides the College of Bergerac,
according to the description given us of it, will render those inexcusable, who
send their Children unto the Jesuits because, it is as well supplied and
furnished with Regents to instruct our Youth in Grammar-Learning and
Philosophy, as the best of our Adversaries.

7. The Province of Dolphiny is exhorted to rest contented with their own
proper stock, for the same reasons as were alleged in the case of Bergerac,
only one hundred Crowns are allotted to them as to those Provinces which have
no Universities.

8. My Lord the Duke of Sully acquainting this Assembly with his design of
settling a College, for the benefit of the Churches of this Kingdom in the Town
of Gergeau, until such time as that of Boisbelle built by him be completely
finished. The Synod applauding his noble pious design, consents that there
shall be settled upon this Foundation five hundred Crowns yearly, to be taken
out of the Moneys granted us by his Majesty's liberality, on this condition,
that the said College be governed by the same Laws and Orders with the others
formerly erected in this Kingdom.

9. Although the Universities of Montauban, Nismes, Montpellier and Sedan have
not done their duties about their Accounts as they were charged by the last
National Synod; yet for some certain considerations this Assembly suffers them
to receive from the Treasurer General, the Moneys ordered them by the said
Synod, but on this condition, that if they do not bring in an exact Account
unto the places appointed, they shall forfeit their privileges of being
Universities.

10. We leave it to the Prudence of Academical Counsels to determine at what
times our young Students having perfected their Course of Philosophy, may be
admitted to make their Proposition, without tying them up to a fixed and limited
term, because of the vast difference between the parts of some, and the great
and apparent progress of others in humane learning: And they may judge also
whether it be convenient, that the censures past upon our Scholars, should be
done in their presence, or in their absence only and to be reported to the
Proposan by the Moderator.

11. The Universities and Colleges are injoined strictly to examine our
Students in Philosophy, as soon as they have finished their course of two
years, and all Rectors and Professors are forbidden to create them Masters of
Arts, unless they be found capable; and this self same order shall oblige
Professors of Divinity for their Scholars, that they do not make them
Licentiates in Divinity but upon the very self same terms.

12. Those Provinces which had an hundred Crowns a-peice granted them by the
last National Synod of Rochel for the erecting of Schools, and have not
produced their Regents Acquittances in this Synod, are charged to bring them
unto the next, on pain of losing their Privileges.

13. The Province of Anjou tendering by Monsieur Bouchereau one of their
Deputies, the Accounts of Moneys ordained for the maintenance of the University
of Saumur: This Assembly having audited them, decreed that the five hundred
Livers expended in building of Galleries for convenience of the Professors and
Scholars in their Temple, shall be born by all the Churches of this Kingdom,
because of the poverty of that Church, and their faithful and prudent
management of the said Moneys received by them. And upon a full view of their
Accounts, it appeared, that the Officers, Regents, and several Professors of
that University had been paid their Stipends to the first day of April past,
and that the Sieurs de Trochorege Professor of Divinity, Birgam Professor of
the Hebrew, and des Rochers Principal of the College were paid theirs before
hand by way of advance unto the first day of July next coming. And all this
being deducted from the Account aforesaid, Master Philip Pineau Receiver of the
said Moneys, stands indebted to the said University in the sum of one thousand
two hundred, thirty nine Livers, nine Sous, and two deniers, which shall be
employed for the maintenance of the said University, in such manner as shall be
hereafter ordained. And the evidences of the said Accounts shall be kept by the
Province of Anjou, but the Originals shall be transmitted to the Archives of
the Church and Consistory of Rochel.

CHAP. VIII. Of Particular Matters.
1. THE Sieurs Cerizier an Elder, Guerin and the Senior du Moustier Deputies
from the Church of Loudun, petitioned that two Ministers might be given them
for Pastors out of the Synod of Poictou. This Assembly not approving their
searchings abroad in several Synods, especially in that of Poictou, for
supplies, has sent them back to their own Province, to be provided there
according to the Discipline. And it being told them, that Monsieur Fleury was
at liberty to quit his Church in their Province, they demanding him, he was
accordingly given them for their Pastor.

2. The difference between Monsieur Constantin and the Province of Xaintonge
about Moneys claimed by him from them, is dismissed over to the Synod of
Poictou, to be finally determined by them.

3. The Church of Orleans requesting a supply of Moneys to the defraying of
those extraordinary Charges they have been at, by reason of their divisions.
This Assembly turned them over to their own Province, who should provide for
them out of the common Stock distributed among them.

4. The Province of Upper Guyenne shall judge whether the Sieur Girard may
Preach in the Church of Mauvoisin, he being employed by its Pastor, without
breaking of their Peace: And in case it may be done, the Prohibition past
against him in the Synod of Gergeau, shall be taken off the File.

5. Mr. Castelfranc and Benoist, Pastors, and Mr. Barjac an Elder, are ordered
by this Assembly to acquaint the Lords President, Judges and Counselors of the
Court of Castres, from their personal knowledge of what past in the Synod of
Gergeau, that Monsieur Ferrier, Minister in the Church of Nismes, did neither
by word or deed in the least derogate from their true and due honor; and to
confirm this their Message, Letters shall be written in the name of this
Assembly unto the said Lords.

6. The Accusation of Ascanius Allion against Monsieur Cante, is again remanded
back unto the Province of Dolphiny, to consider of it, and what is to be done
in it, after their having heard the new matters of fact, which the said
Ascanius pretends to bring in as Evidence against him: And this Assembly orders
Monsieur Videl to give him twelve Crowns out of the Moneys collected for the
Poor of the Valleys, and six Crowns more to be given by him unto Joshua Faravel
of the Marquisate of Saluces.

7. Mr. Roy, formerly an Elder in the Church of Xaintes, renewed again his
complaint, for that the Order of the last National Synod about changing the
Eldership in the said Church, has been only in part, and not totally and
entirely observed; nor was that Reparation given his Wifes honor, (who had
been affronted, when as God-mother she presented a Child to Baptism,) as was
ordained by the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge. This Assembly judges, that for
the first of these the Consistory of the said Church is justly consurable,
having but in part performed what was enjoined them, and they be once again
commanded to fulfill the whole Article; and in case of their not doing it, the
Synod is charged to proceed against the said Consistory by all Church Censures.
And for the second point complained of by him, this Assembly, by and with
Consent of the Deputies of that Province, and of the said du Roy, does send it
back unto the Synod, or to the Delegates of the Colloquies of Xaintonge, who
shall by Authority from us judge finally of it.

8. The Sieur Rochers, at present Minister of the Church de la Chese in
Poictou, representing his very great wants, and complaining both of the Church
of Gardonne, and the other Congregations in Perigord annexed to it, for being
indebted to him all the Moneys granted us by His Majesty's Liberality, for part
of which he gave an Acquittance the same day that he had his License of
departure by the Colloquy of Perigord, and yet that very part is detained from
him by the Province of Lower Guyenne. This Assembly having heard the Deputies
of that Province, and the Sieur Charron offering satisfaction should be given
him by those particular persons who were behind-hand in Arrearages to him, or
else in present ready Money, or in that which was equivalent; it did advise him
to accept of the offers made him, and by way of advantage, the Lord du Candal
was ordered to pay him an hundred Livers, which shall be abated in Account from
the Province of Lower Guyenne, and shall be deducted by the said Sieur Rochers,
if so be that the Province of Xaintonge, unto which he is dismissed, do find
that there be two years of the King's Bounty owing to him. And whereas the
Church of Saueilles is also indebted to him, the Province of Poictou is ordered
to examine the matter, and to see that he be fully satisfied.

9. The Church of Marennes petitioning that the Sieur Richer the younger, who
was now freed from that Church wherein he Ministered in the Province of
Champagne and Brie, might be presented to them for their Pastor: This Assembly
grants that the said Richer may preach among them until such time as Monsieur
de Chabosselay their Pastor shall return unto them: And the Colloquy of the
Isles shall judge of what may be best expedient for the said Church, and
whether the said Richer may be confirmed in it; and in case he be not employed
there, he shall be at full liberty to dispose of himself elsewhere.

10. The Church of Paris petitioning by the Sieurs Durand and du Pradel, that
Monsieur Ferrier might be either sent, or absolutely given them for their
Pastor: This Assembly weighing the reasons urged by the Church of Paris for it,
and those of the Deputies of Nismes and Languedoc against it, Judges that they
cannot equitably dispose of the Ministry of the said Ferrier: Yet on the other
hand considering the great importance and needs of the Church of Paris, it
entreats the Church of Nismes to lend their said Minister Monsieur Ferrier for
one year, or to resign him up wholly to them for life, when as they shall be
particularly requested to it by the Church of Paris.

An Order concerning Ministers born in Geneva, but settled in the Churches of
France, that neither the Lords nor Ministers of that City can pretend any right
unto them.
11. The Lords and Pastors of the City and Church of Geneva sent their Letters
unto this Assembly, demanding that the Sieurs Chauve and le Faucheur. whom they
claimed as their own, might be returned to them, to exercise their Ministry
among them. After hearing the Provincial Deputies of the Lower Languedoc and
Vivaretz, and understanding they had none other Title to them, than that of
their Birth, which also the Churches of France has unto diverse Pastors, that
have, and now do actually serve the Church of Geneva; This Assembly judged,
that their right unto them was not considerable, and therefore entreats the
Lords and Ministers of the City of Geneva, that they would not for the future
lay any claim, or pretend any right unto them, they being lawfully established
Pastors in this Kingdom, according to the Discipline of our Churches, by which
the Pastors are fixed and appropriated unto their Flocks immediately upon their
Ordination. All which shall be notified unto the Seignory and Ministry of the
said Church and City of Geneva.

12. The Church of Chastelheraut petitioned this Assembly to provide them a
worthy Pastor, they being utterly unable to procure one: It was ordered that
they be assisted for six months by the Neighbor Ministers, and by the Colloquy
of Higher Poictou, and particularly by Monsieur Clemenceau Pastor of the Church
of Poictiers for the first month, beginning with the first of July, and the
second by Monsieur Monestier Pastor of the Church of Saujon, by Monsieur Forent
Pastor of Chauvigny the third, by Monsieur Mestayer Pastor of Lusignan the
fourth, by Monsieur Cuville Pastor of Couche the fifth, and by Monsieur Favre
Pastor of Vigean the sixth.

13. Remonstrances were made on the one hand by the Churches of Maringues and
Paillac, and on the other by the Church of Issoire, this last complaining that
whereas two portions of four had been formerly assigned to them, now in the
last National Synod they were taken from them, without their knowledge or ever
being heard speak for themselves, and given unto those of Maringues and
Paillac, as also that they could never get a Minister, settled among them by the
Synod of Lower Languedoc, but only the lone of one, and him too at excessive
Rates and Charges. After hearing the Deputies of Lower Languedoc, the Assembly
ordained, that for time to come the Churches of Maringues and Paillac should be
joined to the Province of Burgundy, and in the distribution of its moneys four
portions shall be assigned unto the said Churches according to the decree of
the National Synod of Rochel. And as for the Church of Issoire it shall remain
incorporated with the Province of Lower Languedoc until the next National
Synod: In which three portions of the Kings Moneys shall be allotted to it. And
the two Provinces into which the said Churches are dismissed, shall provide
Pastors for them as soon as possibly they can.

14. The affair of the Sieur Drouet Pastor in the Church of Pont le Evesque in
Normandy is remitted over to the same Province, he having produced no Appeal
from it.

15. The Petition of the Inhabitants of Vertueil craving Relief from the
Judgment given against them in this Assembly, for their conjunction with those
of Villefaignan, and equally to enjoy the Ministry of Monsieur Comar, is turned
over to the next meeting of the Colloquy of Augoumois, which is authorized by
this Assembly, after hearing both parties, to determine finally of that affair.

16. The Sieur Solomon a Minister having been lent for two years unto the
Church of St. Triers le Perch in Limosin by the last National Synod, and being
redemanded by the Church of Vanjaux in the Province of Berry, by whom he was
maintained. This Assembly ordains that the said Mr Solomon do return within
three months unto his said Church of Anjeau at the Charges of the Church of St.
Triers, and the Provincial Synod of Guyenne shall provide a Pastor for them as
soon as possible they can.

17. A Petition was presented by diverse Gentlemen and others, Heads of
Families, Members of the Church of Montagu, in conjunction with the Deputies of
Poictou, Declaring that forasmuch as they were well able without the Church of
Vielle Vigne comfortably to maintain a Pastor, they therefore craved that one
might be conferred upon them, and that they might be reincorporated with the
Province of Poictou. This Assembly ordains, that those two Churches of Vielle
Vigne and Montague, shall continue united together, and that the Pastor shall
alternatively exercise in both Churches his Ministry, and shall appear in
person always at the Provincial Synods of Brittany; and both these Churches
shall remain in this estate, till that by the common Consent of them both, and
of the two Provinces, it be otherwise altered and ordained by Authority of a
National Synod.

18. Letters being writ from the Church of Minerbois meeting in the houses of
the Lords de Beaufort and de Paulignan, desiring that they might by the
authority of this Assembly be joined unto the Province of Lower Languedoc, and
that they might be assisted with some Money from the General stock of the
Churches, for the maintenance of that Minister, which shall be assigned them:
The Synod having heard the Deputies of both the Provinces of Higher and Lower
Languedoc, adjudgeth the said Church unto the Higher Languedoc, and that
Provincial Synod is enjoined to provide them of a Pastor, and now from this
very hour there shall be one portion given to it as to the other Churches of
the said Province, which shall, because of the great number and advantages of
its Churches, supply that of Minerbois out of its own Stock, that so an
addition may be made unto the said portion, and to what sums may be collected
in the said Church to raise a competent subsistence for the Minister that shall
be given them.

19. The Letters of Monsieur Aubriot, Pastor of the Church of Maes Saints
Puelles, were read, which related his great Poverty, and the lamentable
necessities of his Church, and he craved two or three supernumerary portions
for his Maintenance in the said Church. This Assembly ordained, that the
Province of Higher Languedoc shall add to the portion of the said Aubriot two
portions more to be taken out of the Stock of the said Province, without
drawing any augmentation to themselves from the general Stock of the Churches;
considering that they have two portions drawn forth under the names of two
Pastors and Professors in the University of Montauban.

20. The Deputies of Provence propounding several matters not appertaining to
this Synod, they were dismissed over to the next Political Assembly.

21. The Deputies of Dolphiny complained that the Sieur Scoffier educated at
their Charges in Geneva, was Ordained Pastor to a Church in Berry, and craved
that he might be again returned unto Dolphiny. This Affair was dismissed over
to the Provincial Synod of Burgundy, with full power of putting a final period
to it, whether by making restitution of the Moneys disbursed on him, or by
enjoining the said Scoffier to return unto the Province of Dolphiny.

23. The Provinces of Vivaretz and Dolphiny contending about the Church of
Soyon, it is decreed that Monsieur Murac, Pastor of the said Church, shall
subject himself as a Member of them to the Synods of Vivaretz, until the Church
of Valence be provided of a more convenient Meeting Place within the Province
of Dolphiny, whereunto the said Murac shall be appropriated; and that portion
given under his name shall continue settled on the Church of Soyon. But as long
as the Pastor abovementioned shall actually serve the said Church, the portion
aforesaid shall be allotted to the easing and benefit of both Churches.

Concerning the Ministers of Mantes and Fountainbleau. See Syn. Gap. p. m. 32.
23. The Complaint of the Isle of France being again renewed, for that the two
Ministers of the Church of Mantes and Fountainbleau by command from the Lord
Duke of Sully, do receive five hundred Crowns out of the portions adjudged that
Province. This Assembly ordains, that the said Synod shall remonstrate unto
those Ministers once more their duty, and command them accordingly to perform
it, otherwise they shall be proceeded against by all Censures. Yet
nevertheless, for the support of those Churches, and of the Province also, over
and above the two ordinary portions under the names of the aforesaid Ministers,
and the five extraordinary granted by the National Synod of Rochel, there be
two portions more by way of vantage decreed to be thrown into the Stock of the
said Province, which shall be paid them until the sitting of the next National
Synod.

24. Considering the deep Poverty, and great Burdens of the Church of
Maringues, by reason of their former very grievous sufferings, over and above
the two portions assigned unto their Pastors, a third extraordinary one is now
also bestowed upon them until the Meeting of the next National Synod.

25. The two portions formerly granted unto the Church of Aubenac, shall be
continued to it, till the Sitting of the next National Synod.

26. Monsieur Poitey having gathered the Acts of our National Synods into one
Volume, See Syn. Gap. p.m. 28.
and tendered it unto this Assembly, humbly craving leave that by our Authority
the Copies thereof might be distributed, we approving the Zeal and good
Affection of the said Piotey, do not judge it expedient that any Copies thereof
should be imparted, because of the ill consequences that may happen hereon, and
therefore advise him to rest contented for the present, and to detain by him
his worthy Labors for his own private use and benefit.

27. There being a difference between the Higher and Lower Languedoc about the
Churches of Cormes and St. John du Brueil; order was given to those of the
Higher Languedoc, to demand their remaining Debt of the portions of those two
Churches from the Province of Lower Languedoc, which had received their Moneys;
and in case they refuse to give them satisfaction, than the Province of
Vivaretz, by the Authority of this Synod, shall judge and determine finally of
that Affair.

28. The Province of Higher Languedoc is exhorted to consider the Expenses that
Monsieur Benoist, Pastor of Montauban, has been at in his just defense against
the unjust proceedings of his Adversaries.

29. The same Monsieur Benoist presented the Letters of Monsieur d'Islemade,
which were recommended to the Lord of Mirande our General Deputy, as also the
Affair of the Sieur Piloty, propounded by the Deputies of Lower Languedoc.

30. Whereas the Widow of Monsieur Quinson deceased, complains of the
Colloquy of Gex, for not paying her the Arrears due unto her of her Annuity;
this Complaint is dismissed over to the Province of Burgundy, who shall by
their Judicial Sentence put a full and final period to it.

31. The Church of Gien Situated upon the Loire being destitute of a Pastor,
and addressing themselves unto this Assembly, petitioned by their Letters and
by Monsieur Alix their Deputy, that by our Authority they might be provided. We
Considering the necessities and importance of the said Church, Monsieur Francis
l' Oyseau, now free of I engagements, is granted to them for their ordinary
Minister; who also accepted of the Charge, and was sent unto that Church, who
were required to take care for his Comfortable Subsistence, as being a most
faithful and eminent Servant of Christ, and one that has industriously and
painfully discharged his Ministry in Sundry and diverse places for many years
together as appears by those honorable Testimonials lying by him, and given
him from those Churches.

32. The Church of Poictiers complaining of the Loan of Monsieur Clemenceau
their Pastor for one month unto the Church of Chastelheraut, that they could
not in the least spare him: This Assembly considering their necessities, does
nominate in his stead the Sieur de la Roche Crese Pastor of the Church of
Cuirey.

33. The Deputies of Berry complained in the name of their two Colloquies
against that of Orleans, about an agreement made by the Church of Orleans and
others with the Sieur Fluereau. This business was dismissed over to the
Province of Burgundy, by whose Judicial Sentence a full and final period shall
be put unto it.

34. The Churches of Vitray in Brittany and of Lassay in the Maine being at
variance about the Ministry of Monsieur Conseil sometimes Pastor in the Church
of Puylaurens in Lauragais. This Assembly having heard the Deputies of both
Provinces, and what was urged on either hand as argument for them, does censure
the said Conseil for his actings in both those Churches, as also that Church of
Lassay for their secret dealings with him to gain him wholly to themselves: yet
nevertheless, judging that the Church of Vitre had no just title to the said
Conseil by virtue of his private promise past unto them, the Province of Higher
Languedoc having transferred him unto that of Anjou, he shall therefore
continue Minister in the said Province, and be consigned to the Church of
Lassay.

35. Master James Royer sent Letters and a book unto this Assembly, treating of
that controversy first started by him in the Church of Geneva, and afterward
continued in that of Metz. The Letters of the Pastors of Geneva relating to
this matter being read, and those also of the Consistory of Metz, craving
advice from us about that custom of their Elders giving the Cup in the
Sacrament unto the Communicants, and reciting the words of Institution at their
delivery of it, from the eleventh Chapter of the first of Corinthians, This
Synod having already determined what should be done herein by an express Canon
inserted into our Discipline (in which nothing shall be changed for whatever
Difficulties may arise about the delivery of the Cup;) It cannot by any means
approve of the actings of the said Royer, nor at all of publishing the said
book, nor the great passion discovered in his Letters And therefore Ordains
that Letters be written unto the Church of Metz, that by them he be exhorted to
follow the things that make for Christian peace and love; and we counsel and
advise the said Church in answer to their Request, that forasmuch as Pastors in
Populous Churches cannot without excessive toyling themselves deliver the Cup
to every individual Member Communicating at the Lords Table, they may use the
help of their Eldership, but withal they shall enjoin them silence, and the
Pastors only shall speak when these Sacred Elements are distributed, that so it
may be generally and manifestly known, that the adminstration of the Sacraments
is wholly appropriated to the Pastoral office.

36. To put an end to the difference between the Sieurs Durdez and de Beaune,
this Assembly being very well satisfied that the said Durdez is indebted for
those sums of Moneys mentioned in his Letters, entreats the said de Beaune
to rest contented with one hundred Livers, out of one of those portions
allotted to the said Durdez.

CHAP. IX. An Order for Calling the next National Synod.
ORDER is given to the Province of Vivaretz to Assemble the next National
Synod, and that within two years immediately after the month of May next, and
it is left to the prudence of the said Province to choose the place, and to give
notice of that day, wherein the Synod shall be opened.

CHAP. X. The Roll of Deposed Ministers.
THeophilus Bluett, and James de l'Obell, who were formerly deposed, their
Deposals is new confirmed without any hope of Restoration; and their names
were inserted in the National Synod of Rochel, at the end of General Matters.

Henry Dindault, whose Deposition was confirmed in the Appeals beforementioned
in this Synod, he is about five and twenty, or six and twenty years old, low of
Stature, Chess-nut colored hair, pale and meager, low visag'd.

Bertrand Faugier deposed in Dolphiny, sometimes Minister in the Church of
Vienna, is of mean stature, black hair, beginning to be gray, fat and
corpulent, aged about five and fifty, having a very long and large beard, and a
little short-sighted.

James Vidouse deposed in the Lower Guyenne, about five and thirty years old,
low of stature, Chess-nut colored hair, long and large beard, pale, and often
winking with his eyes.

One called Senerac, or Serverat, or Sajerac, born at Castres in Albigeois,
formerly Minister in the Church of Lombert, in the same Colloquy, is revolted
from the Truth of the Gospel unto the Idolatrous Church of Rome; he is a fellow
short and thick, black hair'd, he had a full beard, but is now shaven,
wrinkling always his forehead, about thirty five years old.

Vagrants. John Rostolon, Native of Bearne, calling himself a Proposan, pretty
tall of stature, meagre, small eyes, the hair of his eyebrows very thick, not
separated, black hair, little or no beard, about four and twenty years old.

CHAP. XI. Moneys divided among the Churches.
1. THE Moneys gathered for the Poor of the Marquisate of Saluces were
deposited in the hands of Monsieur Videl at the General Assembly of Gergeau by
the Sieur Chaussepied from the Province of Poictou, amounting to the sum of
fourteen hundred four and forty Livers, eight Sous, and six Deniers, and are
now in the hands of the Deputies of the Province of Dolphiny.

By the Province of Orleans and Berry, one thousand nine hundred Livers.

By the Province of Brittany, seven hundred and fifty Livers, and three Sous.

By the Province of Normandy, one thousand Livers.

By the Province of Xaintonge, one thousand thirty six Livers.

All which said sums of Money shall be delivered into the Consistory of the
Church of Grenoble, and distributed according to the advice of those Colloquies
named in the Provincial Synod of Dolphiny, and the Accounts of the said
distribution shall be brought in to that Synod, and by it tendered unto the
next National Synod; and the other Moneys already received, or hereafter to be
received from the Provinces, not mentioned in this Act, shall de disposed of in
the same manner.

2. The Lords Governors of our Cautionary Towns are entreated by this Assembly,
and shall be exhorted by the Pastors of those Churches whereunto they do
belong, to bear their part and share in all charges and expenses for the common
public concernments of our Churches, and to bepaid out of the Moneys which are
assigned them, and particularly to allow a Sous in the Liver of those Moneys
which have been formerly given to our Lords the General Deputies, who be
discharged from that defalcation. As also to bear part in the losses of the
years 1604 1605 and 1606 their whole part amounting but to two thousand, four
hundred twenty seven Livers, and six Sous.

4. Report being made of what was offered by the Lords du Pradel, Rocheblave
and Ricard about the Commission for Receiving our Moneys granted by his Majesty
to the Churches of this Kingdom: This Assembly having well pondered all those
matters and circumstances, and heard the Lord du Candal speaking of the said
Commission, which was grounded on the Contract of Gap, which he has most
faithfully discharged, judges that they cannot in the least remove the said
Lord du Candal from his Office and Trust, but confirm and continue him in it;
yet nevertheless, thanks were returned unto the said Lords du Pardel,
Rocheblanc and Ricard for their singular affection and respect to the
well-being of our poor Churches.

4. It is decreed, that the former Order in the distribution of Moneys
according to the number of Pastors in each Province, shall be observed,
excepting only, when as the poorer Provinces are to be gratified, by reason of
the number of their Churches, the portions assigned to them not being
sufficient for them.

Henceforward in all Rolls brought from the Provinces unto these National
Synods, for their portions of Money to be distributed among them, no other
names shall be allowed of Pastors, but such as are in actual service, or that
be disabled by age or infirmities, together with those of our Students in
Divinity, without mentioning the Churches unprovided for. And it is left unto
Synods to take care of the poorer Provinces, to order for them according as
they shall see needful.

These Original Acts and Decrees of the National Synod of St. Maixant, begun
the 25th of May, and ended the 19th of June, 1609. were thus signed by Merlin,
Moderator. Ferrier, Assessor.
Scribes.
Rivet and Pradel,



CHAP. XII. A Catalogue of the Churches from whom there it Allowance given out
of the King's Moneys till the next National Synod.
1. THE Province of Xaintonge has sixty four Pastors in actuals service, one
portion for Monsieur Picard, six Proposans, in all 71. 71. 2. Anjou has 21
Pastors in actual service, three Churches vacant, and three Proposans, in all
27. 27. 3. The Higher Languedoc has 74 Pastors in actual service, five
Churches to be supplied, two portions for Foix, one portion for Jouarre, seven
Proposans, in all 84. 84. 4. Orleans has 25 Pastors in actual service, five
vacant Churches, and six Proposans, in all 36. 36. 5. Dolphiny has sixty four
Pastors in actual service, three Emeriti, eight vacant Churches, eight
Proposans, in all 83. 83. 6. Normandy has thirty Pastors in actual service,
two Emeriti, six vacant Churches, six Proposans, and one portion, supernumerary
in all 51. 51. 7. Provence has seven Pastors in actual service, seven vacant
Churches, three proposans, and three supernumerary portions, in all 20. 20. 8.
Brittany has 8 Pastors in actual service, six vacant Churches, four Proposans,
two supernumerary portions, in all 20. 20 9. Burgundy has 29 Pastors in actual
service, six vacant Churches, three Proposans, three supernumerary portions,
and four portions for Maringues and Paillac, in all 46. 46. 10. Vivaretz has
twenty three Pastors in actual service, five vacant Churches, three Proposans,
one portion for the Church of Vaurdy, two supernumerary for the Church of
Aubenas, in all 34. 034. 11. Lower Guyenne has 65 Pastors in actual service,
two portions for Mr. Baduel, one vacant Church, and five Proposans, in all 73.
073. 12. The Lower Languedoc has 95 Pastors in actual service, six Proposans,
three portions for Issoire, one supernumerary for Maruegues, in all 105. 105.
13. Poictou has one and forty Pastors in actual service, four vacant Churches,
three Proposans, in all 48. 048. 14. The Isle of France, etc. has 47 Pastors
in actual service, two Emeriti, two vacant Churches, seven portions for Mantes
and Fountainbleau, six Proposans, in all 64. 064. In all 762.

CHAP. XIII. An Account of the Dividend in the three first Quarters.
For our Universities.
Montauban 2450. Saumur 4190. Montpellier 1250. Nismes 1250. Sedan 1500. nbsp
10640. To our General Deputies at Court 01650.

To the Pastors of Churches.
l. s. d. In Provence 2508 18 6 In Brittany 2508 18 6 In Burgundy 5380 10 6 In
Vivaretz 4055 03 6 In Lower Guyenne 8302 10 6 In Lower Languedoc 11526 16 0 In
Poictou 5601 08 6 In Xaintonge 8141 14 6 In Anjou 2982 01 6 In Higher Languedoc
9277 09 6 In Orleans and Berry 4276 01 6 For the College of Gergeau 1508 00 0
In Dolphiny 9467 01 0 In Normandy 5932 15 0 In the Isle of France 7368 11 6 The
total sum is 88960 10 0

In these sums are included the hundred Crowns given to every one of the
Provinces for their respective Schools and Colleges; to wit; to Provence,
Brittany, Burgundy, Vivaretz, Lower Guyenne, Poictou, Xaintonge, Berry,
Dolphiny, Normandy, and the Isle of France.

The Quarter of October for our Pastors.
l. s. d. Provence 0885 16 06 Brittany 0885 16 06 Burgundy 2037 08 00 Vivaretz
1505 18 00 Lower Guyenne 3233 05 04 Lower Languedoc 4650 11 09 Poictou 2126 00
00 Xaintonge 3144 14 00 Anjou 1195 17 04 Higher Guyenne 3720 09 04 Orleans 1594
09 04 Dolphiny 3676 03 06 Normandy 2258 17 00 The Isle of France 2834 13 00 The
total sum is 33750 00 00

The Assembly having long waited for news of the Sieurs Ferrier, Fiefbrun and
de Malleret, whom they had Deputed unto his Majesty about that affair before
mentioned, and committed to their management, but finding that they passed the
time limited them, and being now resolved to conclude this meeting, did give
order unto the Lords our General deputies to prosecute that business at Court,
and to present his Majesty with our most humble petition about it, and the Lord
of Mirande was immediately upon his coming to Paris to acquaint those
forementioned Deputies, that as soon as they had spoken with his Majesty their
commission was expired, and that the very next day after, they should all of
them return to their several homes, and give an account unto the General
Deputies, of their long tarrying at Court, and what retarded their answering of
this Synods Expectation from them; and our General Deputies shall inform the
Provinces of what these Gentlemen have done as to their Deputation. Moreover
the Lords General Deputies shall acquaint the Provinces with all occurrences
necessary to be known by us, especially if it be of Common concernment for the
Churches.

CHAP. XIV. An Account of those Sums of Money which were given upon particular
occasions by the Synod of St. Maixant.
1. To the Sieurs Ferrier, de Fief-brun, and Malleret, Deputed by the Synod
unto the King to defray the charges of their journey the sum of 500 l.

2. In Charity to the Wife of Theophilus Bluett, 60 l.

3. To Monsieur Perrin Minister of the Church of Nyons, 150 l. Total Sum 700
l. All which moneys amounting to 700 l. allowing the Lord of Candal his Sous in
the Liver, the Assembly ordered to be deducted from the october Quarter, which
is to be paid in to the Provinces the last year 1608.

5. The Lord of Candal is desired to put 250 l. (of the 500 l. first m^ntioned)
upon the account of the Governors, who are to bear one half of our charges in
deputations unto Court.

4. Mr. Rivet Pastor of the Church of Touars was ordered to bring in this
Ensuing account of the Universities appertaining to the Reformed Churches of
this Kingdom unto the next National Synod, in Case they should call for it.

1. To the University of Montauban the sum of 3000 l. for two Professors in
Divinity at 700 l. Sallary by the year, each 1400 l: and for two professors of
Philosophy at 400. Sallary by the year each the sum of 800 l. For one
Professor in Greek 408 l. a year, and for one Professor in Hebrew, 400 Livers a
year, which is in all 3000 l. 2. To the University of Saumur, The sum of 4190
l. For two Professors in Theology at 700 l. Salary by the year each, 1400 l.
For two Professors in Philosophy at 400 l. Salary by the year, each is 300 l.
For one Professor in Greek 400 l. For one Professor in Hebrew 400 l. More for
the College Erected at Saumur to the first Regent yearly the sum of 360 l. to
the second, 300 l. to the third, 200 l. to the fourth, 180 l. to the fifth 150
l. All which sums amount as before to 4190 l. 3. To the Academy of Nismes and
Montpellier Equally the sum of 2500 l. viz. For two Professors in Theology at
700 l. Salary by the year, each, is 1400 l. For two Professors in Hebrew at 400
l. each a year, is 800 l. More for other necessary occasions of the said
Academies 300 l. For which they must be accountable, The whole sum put
together amounts unto 2500 Livers Tournois. 4. To the University of Sedan the
sum of 1500 l. for one Professor in Divinity his yearly Salary, 700 l. For one
Professor in Greek 400 l. Yearly. For one Professor in Hebrew the like sum.
All which amounts to 1500 l. 5. To the College of Gergeau 1500 Livers.
Signed thus in the Original June, 18. 1609. Merlin Moderator.

End of the Synod of St. Maixant.
THE Acts, Decisions and Decrees OF THE XXth National Synod OF The Reformed
Churches OF FRANCE, Held in the Town of PRIVAS the fourteenth day of May, In
the Year of our Lord 1612.

The Contents of this National Synod. 1612. The 23th Synod.

Cap. 1. DEputies of the Synod. Synodical Officers. Cap. 2. Orders about
Election of Moderator, and Deputies. Censures upon a Delinquent Deputy, unduly
Elected. 3. Cap. 3. The Oath of Union sworn by all the Deputies. Cap. 4.
Observations upon the Confession. Means for the preservation of Union. 2. A
Prohibition unto Printers. 3. Confession approved and sworn. Cap. 5.
Observations upon the Discipline. Canon amended about Novices. 1. Proposans to
be examined in the Synod of Burgundy. 3. Modest Habits of Ministers and their
Families. 4. A Canon for the Poor. 5. A Case about Suspension and an Appeal. 8.
A Case about an Appeal from a Pastor. 11. Whether Condemned Malefactors may
Communicate at the Lords Table. 12. A Case about Marriage-promises. 14. There
be sixteen Provinces. 15. The Discipline approved and sworn. Cap. 6.
Observations on the Synod of St. Maixant. A Canon about Ministers Sermons, etc.
1. Two thousand Livers given Mr. Chamier to encourage him in the study of his
Panstratia Catholica. 2. Two hundred Livers given Mr. Perrin for his History of
the Albingenses. 3. A Canon about Monks Abjuration of Popery. 5. Children may
be bapti^^d before Sermon, in case they be very sick. 7. Professors not to
assist at Political Assemblies. 8. The Synods of Languedoc censured. 9. Cap. 7.
Of Appeals. Method for healing the Divisions in the Church of Montauban. 5. A
Minister imposed upon a Church against his and the Churches will. 6. A penitent
Minister suspended. 10. An Appeal of the D. of Lesdiguieres, with its Effects.
11. A negligent Minister censured. 15. Ferrier a Pastor censured. 16. Ferrier a
covetous, pragmatical Minister severely censured. 16. An Appeal of a private
person from a whole Synod slighted. 19. Elders and Deacons may distribute the
Cup at the Lord's Table, but silently. 22. Divisions in the Church of Orleans
how composed. 23. A Minister cited, and not appearing unto a Synod, shall be
deposed. 24. Intercession for Ferrier, and the Synod affronted by those his
Intercessors. 25, 26. A Church, Minister, Colloquy and Synod censured. 27. An
Accused Minister suspended, 28. A Book against the Mass suppressed 34. An
unqualified Elder. 34. Cap. 8. The King's Proclamation of Pardon. Cap. 9. The
Synods Declaration against this Proclamation. Cap. 10. General matters.
Inspection of Presses. 1. Of Proposans. 2. A Canon about calling of Converts
unto Church-Offices. 4. An Act for the National Fast. 5. Cap. 11. The Act of
Reunion. Cap. 12. A Warrant for 45000 l. for the Churches. Councillors in the
Courts of the Edict censured. 14. A Catalogue of all Pastors and Proposans must
be sent from the Provinces to the National Synods. 15. The patience and courage
of the Synod. 16. Palot sued. 17. Cap. 13. Particular matters. A Petition from
the Protestants in the Archbishopric of Avignon. 1. Monsieur Chamier desired
by two or three Universities at one time to be their Professor in Divinity. 2.
Difference between the Churches of Nismes and Valence. 3. Non-residents. 5. A
Riot in a Church examined. 16. The misery of the Churches of Gex. 19. The
Church of Bergerac censured, 21. Mr. du Moulin has the thanks of the Synod for
his Book of Justification against Tilenus. 26. Pastors removed. 31, 32, 33.
Cap. 14. Of Colleges and Universities. Cap. 15. Roll of Vagrants and
Apostates. Cap. 16. Lord of Candal's Accounts. Cap. 17. A Dividend of Moneys
among the Provinces. Cap. 18. A Dividend of Moneys among the Universities and
General Deputies.
THE Synod of PRIVAS. 1612. The 20th Synod.

In the Name of God.
Acts of the National Synod held at Privas in Vivaretz, in the Year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred and twelve, begun the 14th of May, and continued
for several days after, even until Wednesday the fourth of July.

CHAP. I. Of the Deputies to the Synod.
There appeared as Deputies,

FOR the Province of Vivaretz, Master John de la Faye, Vivaretz.
Pastor of the Church of Aubenas, Mr. Michael le Faucheur, Pastor of the Church
of Annonay, Paul de Chambaud, Lord of St. Quintin, Elder of the Church at St.
Fortunate, and Isaac Gautier Advocate, Elder of the Church of Annonay.

For the Churches of the Principality of Bearn, Mr. John d'Abadie, Bearn.
Pastor of the Church of Nay, and Mr. Raymond Thoulouze, Pastor of the Church
of St. Gladie, and the Lord David de Brassalay, Elder of the Church of Maslay,
and Master David de Saliens, Lord of Hairdultant, Advocate for the King in
Navarre, Elder of the Church of Baigter, or Baigle.

For Provence, Monsieur James de la Planche, Provence
Pastor of the Church of Lormarin, and Mr. Peter Huron, Pastor of the Church of
Riez, Peter de Villeneufve, Lord of Espinouze, Elder in the Church of Riez, and
John Feurandy, Elder of the Church of Manosque.

For Dolphiny, Mr. Daniel Chamier, Pastor of the Church of Montlimard, Dolphiny.
and Mr. John Paul Perrin, Pastor of the Church of Nions, and Mr. John Julian
Advocate, Elder in the Church of Grenoble, and Francis de la Comb, Elder in
the Church of St. Marcellin.

For Burgundy, Mr. David du Piotay, Pastor of the Church of Gex, Burgundy.
and Mr. Anthony le Blanc, Pastor of the Church of Lions, Mr. Job Bonnett
Advocate, Elder in the Church of Chaalons, and Humbert Perreau Advocate, Elder
in the Church of Bussy.

For Berry, Orleans, Blesois, Dunois and Nivernois, Berry.
Mr. Stephen de Montsanglard, Pastor of the Church of Corbigny lez St. Leonard,
and Mr. Simeon Jurieu, Pastor of the Church of Chastillion upon Loir, and Jerome
Groslott Lord de l'Isle, Elder in the Church of Orleans, and Elias du Bois Lord
of Seinerreves, Elder in the Church of Chasleaudun.

Lower Languedoc.
For the Lower Languedoc, Mr. Andrew de la Faye, Pastor of the Church of St.
Germain, and Mr. Peter Rossel, Pastor of the Church of Bedarieux, and Peter de
Malmont Advocate, Elder in the Church of Nismes, and John Breny Lord of
Hommes-Sargues, Elder in the Church of Albiez.

Higher Languedoc.
For the Upper Languedoc, Mr. Bernard de Sonis, Pastor and Professor of Divinity
in the University of Montauban, and Mr. Hector Joly, Pastor of the same Church,
and Levy de Barjac, Lord of Biraul, Elder in the Church of Brueil, and James du
Croix Advocate, Elder in the Church of Castres.

For the Lower Guyenne, Mr. Moses Ricotier, Pastor of the Church of Clerac,
and Mr. Moses Ferrand, Pastor of the Church de la Parade, and John de Verteil,
Lord of Maleret, Elder in the Church of Bourdeaux, and Stephen Maniald
Advocate, Lower Guyenne. Xaintonge.
Elder also of the same Church.

For the Province of Xaintonge, Aulnix, and Augoulmois, Mr. Paul Bonnet, Pastor
in the Church of Saujon, and Mr. Samuel Petit, Pastor of the Church of Xaintes,
and Samuel de Campet, Baron of Saujon, Elder in the Church of Saujon, and Elias
de Glatignon Advocate, Elder in the Church of Angoulesme.

For Poictou, Poictou.
Mr. Isaac de Camille, Pastor of the Church of Cobe, and Mr. George Tompson,
Pastor of the Church de la Chastaignoraye, and Moses Suzannes Lord de la
Forest Breduliere, Elder in the Church of Marevil, and Peter de Cognac
Advocate, Elder in the Church of Fontenay.

For Anjou, Anjou.
Tourain, le Main, etc. Mr. Peter Perillan, Pastor of the Church de l'Isle
Bouchard, and Mr. John Vigner, Pastor of the Church of Man's, and James de
Laufernat, Lord of Villiers, Elder in the Church of Audenay, and Daniel Fevron
Advocate, Elder in the Church of Loudun.

For Brittany, Brittany.
Mr. John Parant, Lord of Preau, Pastor of the Church of Vitre, and Mr.
Bertrand d' Avignon, Lord of Souvigne Pastor of the Church of Rennes, and
Stephen le Maistre, Lord de la Reignelaye, Elder in the Church de la
Roche-Bernard, and Gaspard Ezille, Lord of Coign, Doctor of Physic, Elder in
the Church of de la Moussay.

For Normandy, Normandy.
Mr. Moses Cartaud, Pastor in the Church of Dieppe, Mr. John Bonvier, Lord de
la Fresnaye, Pastor in the Church of Caen, and John de Bradefer, Lord de la
Maneville, Elder in the Church of Fontaine Grougny, and Paul du Vivier, Elder
in the Church of Bajeux, but absent by reason of his sickness; which excuse was
accepted.

The Isle of France.
For the Isle of France, Picardy and Champagne, Mr. Peter du Moulin, Pastor of
the Church of Paris, and Mr. John Carre, Pastor of the Church Despense, and
Anthony de Cormons, Lord of Villeneufve, Elder in the Church of Sezanne, and
Elias Biggott Advocate, Elder in the Church of Paris.

Deputy General.
The second day after the opening of this Synod, there came also unto it James
de Jacourt, Lord of Rouvray, Deputy General for the Reformed Churches of
France, residing with their Majesty's, who had his privilege of Voting in this
Assembly.

After Prayers offered up to God, the whole Assembly elected Mr. Daniel Chamier
Moderator, and Mr. du Moulin Assessor, and the Sieurs de Monsanglard and
Maniald Scribes.

CHAP. II. Orders about the Election of Moderator and Deputies. A Deputy
censured for bringing his Election.
1. LEST in choosing the Moderator any one should give his vote who had by undue
ways and crafty designs gotten his Deputation unto these National Synods, it
was unanimously resolved by this whole Assembly that the first thing which
shall be done in it, before ever the Moderator be chosen, shall be the reading
of the Letters of Commission granted by the Provinces unto their Deputies to
represent and act for them, and the Pastors of that place in which the Synod
shall be Assembled, shall administer the Oath unto the respective Deputies, who
shall swear by the Eternal God, that they have not themselves in their own
persons, nor do they know that any other for them, or that any of their
Colleagues has Craftily or by any undue means and underhand dealings procured
his or their Deputations.

2. The Deputies of Lower Languedoc moved, that before we passed unto any other
business, Inquiry might be made, whether any of the Provincial Deputies, since
their Election, had not Committed such Acts as merited Exclusion from this
Assembly. The motion was accepted, and order Given for the Examen that the
unworthy might be Censured.

3. The Lord of Barjac was Censured for not adhearing to the Resolutions taken
in the Assembly of Saumur by plurality of suffrages, Anno 1611. And for joining
himself unto their private Cabal, who would have made the Lesser number carry
it from the greater, contrary to the Natural Order of all Synods. But the said
Lord of Barjac giving public Testimony of his sorrow for this Miscarriage, and
protesting seriously for the future never in any wise to depart from the
Universally received order of being Concluded by the Majority of Votes, his
Censure was taken off, and his offense remitted to him. To prevent all
divisions in the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, this National Synod framed
an Act or Oath of Union to be taken by all the Deputies.

CHAP. III. The Oath of Union sworn by all the Deputies of the Reformed
Churches of France assembled in the National Synod at Privas in Vivaretz, and
subscribed by them all, the day, month and year above-mitten.
WE whose Names are here under written Deputies for the Reformed Churches of
France Assembled in a National Synod at the Town of Privas in the Province of
Vivaretz, knowing by past-experience, that nothing is more needful to preserve
the Weal, Peace, and good Estate of the said Churches than an holy Union and
unviolable Concord both in Doctrine, Discipline and their Dependencies, and
that the said Churches cannot long subsist without a good, intimate and mutual
Conjunction one with the other, and better kept than formerly. Being for this
cause desirous to remove all seeds of disunion and occasions of divisions which
may hereafter trouble the said Churches, and to prevent all Impostures,
Calumnies, private Factions, Plots and Practices, by which diverse persons
ill-affected to our Religion, do endeavor to dissipate and ruin them: Which
quickens us more than ever to find out by joint accord, and Common Consent, the
proper and most effectual means of our just, lawful and necessary conservation
in the aforesaid Union, under that obedience due unto his Majesty our Sovereign
Lord and the Queen his Mother. We have in the Name of all our Churches, and for
their good, and for the service of their Majesty's Sworn and Protested, and we
do Swear and Protest, (Promising also our utmost Endeavor that these very
self-same protestations shall be ratified in and by all our Provinces,) to
remain inseparably united and conjoined in that confession of Faith of the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom read in this Synod, approved and ratified by
every one of us, Swearing not only in our own Name, but also in the respective
Names of all the Churches of our Provinces, which have Deputed us unto this
Synod, that we will live and die in it. As also we Protest in our own and their
Names to keep inviolably that Ecclesiastical Discipline Established in the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, and to see its Canons observed, for the
better Government of these our Churches, and the reformation of life and
manners: Acknowledging that it is Most agreeable to Gods holy Word, whose
Authority is Supreme; And we Protest and Swear to yield all obedience and
fidelity to their said Majesty's, desiring nothing else, but that under the
Protection of their Edicts, we may serve our God with Liberty of Conscience.

CHAP. IV. Observation on Reading the Confession of Faith.
1. WHereas there is mention made in the 14th Article of the Heresies of
Servetus, some of the Deputies desired that the specifying of them might be
removed, because those his Heresies are now as it were dead and buried, and the
Deputies of the Provinces, in pursuance of that Decree past in the last
National Synod of St. Maixant, having brought with them the Judgment of their
respective Provinces upon this Subject, it was thought meet, that nothing
should be innovated in that Article, but that it should be entirely left as we
found it.

2. That Union in Doctrine may be preserved among us, and no Errors may be
suffered to creep into our Churches: All Pastors in actual service, and all
Proposans who are to be received into the Ministry, shall sign this following
Article,

I Whose Name is here underwritten, do receive and approve the Contents of the
Confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom, and do promise to
persevere in it until death, and to believe and teach agreeably thereunto. And
whereas some persons contend about the sense of the eighteenth Article,
treating of our Justification, I declare and protest before God, that I
understand it in the same sense in which it is received in our Churches,
approved by our National Synods, agreeably to the Word of God, which is, That
our Lord Jesus Christ was obedient to the Moral and Ceremonial Law, not only
for our good, but also in our stead, and that his whole Obedience yielded by
him thereunto is imputed to us, and that our Justification consists not only in
the forgiveness of sins, but also in the Imputation of his Active
Righteousness; and subjecting my self unto the Word of God, I believe that the
Son of Man came to serve, and that he was not a Servant because he came into
the World. I do also promise, that I will never depart from the Doctirne
received in our Churches, and that I will yield all Obedience to the Canons of
our National Synods in this matter. And this Article shall be religiously
observed in and by all the Provinces.

3. Our Printers be forbidden henceforward to print the Confession of Faith
with this Title, The Confession of Faith revised and amended by the National
Synod.

4 The Confession of Faith being read, and heard, was approved by all the
Deputies, who protested that by the Grace of God, they would live and die in
it: As was manifest by their Act in swearing the said Union.

CHAP. V. Observations upon Reading of our Church Discipline.
Article 1. IN reading and revising the Discipline of our Churches, this
National Synod voted, That whereas in the close of the second Canon of the
first Chapter, the time and manner of admitting Novices lately converted from
Popery to the Reformed Religion, are particularly specified: Now instead of
these words, [Unless in a Provincial Synod] these ensuing shall be inserted,
Unless by the Advice of Provincial and National Synods; and the said Canon
shall be finished with this Sentence, Nor shall they be Ordained by Imposition
of Hands no more than if they were unknown persons without the Advice of
Provincial and National Synods. Article 2. On the third Canon of the first
Chapter, after these words which do almost conclude it, [And after long
experience had of his Repentance and Godly Conversation] There shall be nothing
added, but the last clause shall be blotted out; viz. He being found meet and
sit, and sufficiently qualified to teach the Church, may be chosen and called
unto the Sacred Ministry. Article 3. The Deputies of Burgundy demanding that
they might not be bound by that Canon of the Synod of St. Maixant, that seven
Pastors should be present at the Examination of that person, who is called unto
the Ministry, because there is so great a distance between the Churches of
their Province, which renders its observation impossible and impracticable, as
also because the most of their Colloquies are composed but of five Pastors.
This Assembly, for many and weighty reasons, would not in the least change that
Article; and therefore advised them to defer the Examination of the Candidate
until the Meeting of their Provincial Synod. Article 4. On the This is now the
19th in one Edit. 1653. and in that of 1663. but that 20th in 1666. and in 1678.
eighteenth Canon of the first Chapter, which enjoined Ministers to press their
People to Modesty in their Garments, and by themselves and their Families to be
patterns of it unto their Flocks, great complaints were made and brought in
against many Ministers, not only of their neglects, but also of their
opposition to it, and that their Wives and Children were very vain and immodest
in their Garbs and Dresses. This Synod earnestly desiring to remove so great a
scandal, does give express order unto all Moderators of Colloquies and
Provincial Synods to reform those Excesses by the severest Censures; and the
refractory shall, by the Authority of this Synod, be suspended from their
Ministry, until such time as they have removed this scandal. And that this
Canon may be better and more strictly observed, permission is given unto
private persons, according to the Rules of our Discipline, to inform their
Consistories of those aforesaid Excesses, and to demand a reformation of them,
which in case it be denied; they may address themselves unto the Colloquies,
who shall enforce them to it by Censures, even both the Consistories and their
Abettors. Article 5. The fourth Canon of the fourth Chapter shall be couched in
these terms: That those disorders may be prevented which daily happen through
Certificates given unto the Poor, every Church shall endeavor to maintain its
own Poor; and in case any poor person should be constrained through the urgency
of his Affairs to travel abroad, then Ministers shall carefully examine him in
their Consistories, about the causes of his Journey, and give him Letters
directed to the next Church, lying in the right way that he must go, specifying
his name, age, stature, hair, and place whereunto, and the cause of his Travel,
and that assistance which was given him, together with the date of the day and
year; which Letters that Church whereunto he is directed shall keep by it, and
give him others unto the next. And all Certificates formerly given shall be
torn in pieces. Article 6. These words shall be added unto the 28th Canon of
the fifth Chapter, Unless in case of High Treason, according to the known
Judgment of former Synods. Article 7. Unto the same words in the 30th Canon of
the same Chapter, Unless in case of High Treason, these words following shall
be added, Revealed unto the Magistrate. Article 8. The Deputies of the Isle of
France demanded an exposition upon the 18th Canon of the fifth Chapter of our
Discipline, about Appeals from public Suspensions, that they might know
whether a Consistory having decreed a public Suspension against a delinquent
Member or Minister, and he appealing from it, they might, notwithstanding his
Appeal, yet proceed unto Suspension. This Synod determines, that the
Consistory ought not to proceed any farther, but shall admit of the Appeal,
unless it be in case of public Crimes, notoriously known unto the whole
Church. And the next Colloquy or Provincial Synod shall judge finally of that
Appeal. Article 9. Express order is given unto the Provinces to see that the
33d Article of the fifth Chapter of our Discipline be punctually observed and
obeyed. Article 10. In pursuance of the Observations made by the National Synod
of Rochel, on the ninth Article of the fifth Chapter of our Discipline, after
these words, Pastors and Elders, these shall be added, nor shall there be any
Appeals admitted from full Consistories, nor from the greater part of them, yet
the said Appeals shall be in force against particular members of the said
Consistory, whether Pastors or Elders, provided those Appeals be received by
the Consistory, and being approved by it they may proceed farther:
Notwithstanding any Appeal brought in to the contrary upon the admission or
rejecting of the said Appeals. Article 11. A Case was moved, whether in those
Churches where there is but one Pastor, and an Appeal is brought against him,
the Elders may judge of this controversy. This Synod determines, that Elders
may judge of all emerging differences, yea so far as of suspension from the
Lords Table, matters of Doctrine and of Excommunication only excepted; In which
two points Elders may not judge without their Pastor. Article 12. The Deputies
of Berry demanding how we should carry it toward malefactors accused of
unpardonable Crimes by the Civil Laws, and yet giving Laudable Testimonies of
their Repentance, did Demand the consolation of communion with us in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: This Synod judges that the Criminal giving
plenary satisfaction unto the Church, he may be received into Communion with us
at the Lords Table, although he cannot expert from the King any Pardon of his
Crime: One Jurisdiction not clashing with the other. Article 13. The 24th Canon
of the 5th Chapter shall be thus worded; He whose suspension had been declared
unto the Congregation, and afterward evidencing his repentance before the
Consistory by good works, and a godly life, and sufficient Testimonies, shall
be received unto the peace and fellowship of the Church upon the acknowledgment
of his offense. Article 14. A difficulty was moved whether Promises of Marriage
made in words de Futuro were as obliging and indissolvable as those by words de
praesenti. This Assembly judges they be not of equal force and virtue, there
being as great a difference between words de praesenti and de futuro, as
between promise and performance, word and deed. For it is a clear case, Espoused
persons may on diverse accounts be separated, which cannot dissolve a Marriage
already consummated, as, difference in Religion, unknown before the promises,
impotency fallen out by some accident since the promises: And this is farther
evident by the publication of Banes after Betrothings, which is therefore done,
that any one may have Liberty to bring in his reasons against it, which are
never admitted when Marriages are celebrated, but only when they be designed
and promised. And often times it so falls out, that one of the Espoused Parties
retracting its promises, takes up a Resolution never to marry, whence it would
follow, that if Betrothed persons were bound by words de futuro, then the
Innocent and wronged Party should never marry, which would entangle Conscience
in very great Temptations; and tho God has ordained, that whom he has joined
together Man shall not in any wise part asunder, yet they may be separated by
the Civil Magistrate; And that Authority of the Magistrate will in some Cases
oblige us to hold them separated, whom God had once joined together in this
holy ordinance. It Is true that Betrothed Persons in Scripture are called
Husband and Wife, not that they be so already in very truth and deed, but only
because the Scripture oftentimes styleth things shortly to be done as if they
had been already done. And though a Betrothed Wife committing Whoredom be by
the Law of Moses as severely punished as a Married Woman that commits adultery,
yet it does not thence follow that she is an Adultoress. For in the same
Chapter, a Daughter playing the Whore in her Fathers House is also punished
with death. Therefore for these and other causes, and for that the Laws of the
Kingdom do decree that Promises of Marriage shall be made in express words de
futuro: This Assembly ordains, that from henceforward All the Members of our
Churches shall Universally and Uniformly conform to the Laws and Customs of
this Kingdom, not only as to the bare words, but also as to their sense and
meaning, and that the words de futuro shall not be reckoned by the parties as
obliging and dissolvable as words de praesenti: So then for time coming the
fifth Article in the Chapter of Marriges shall be Couched in these words.
Henceforward in Promises of Marriage the words de futuro shall be used, as also
in all Espousals, nor shall those words be taken as indissolvable as the words
de praesenti, because words de praesenti do not Promise, but effect and perform
Marriage, yet those words and Promises de futuro shall never be dissolved
without very great and lawful causes. And therefore that Custom of diverse
Churches, celebrating the Espousals by the Ministry and Benediction of the
Pastor, and gift of bodies with words de praesenti, is expressly condemned: For
this Synod reckons that by this Ceremony the parties be truly and actually
joined together in Marriage, and that consequently all Banes are preposterous
and useless, because done after Marriage, and the Blessing of the Church
thereby rendered altogether needless. Yet we don't count it ill for Ministers
to assist at Espousals, nor that they should by prayer implore the Divine
Blessing on the intended Marriage, nor that they should exhort the Betrothed
Persons to mutual Love, Unity, Faithfulness and the fear of God; only, that
they ought to forbear those other formallities, which sometime render a bond
indissolvible, which we be afterward necessitated to break and untye, because
of those oppositions which are made at the publishing of the Banes, and for
diverse other Causes that may then happen. And the Churches of Rouen and Dieppe
who solemnize Espousals in the Temple after the same manner as public
Marriages, are exhorted to abandon this usage, and to conform unto the received
Custom in the Churches and Provinces of this Kingdom. Article 15. Whereas
formerly the 16th Article of the eighth Chapter of our Discipline contained the
distribution of the Provinces, it shall be henceforward the 15th, and the
Provincial Synods shall be thus distributed. 1. The Isle of France. 2.
Normandy. 3. Brittany. 4. Berry. 5. Anjou. 6. Poictou. 7. Xaintonge. 8. Lower
Guyenne. 9. Higher Languedoc. 10. Bearn. 11. Lower Languedoc. 12. Provence. 13.
Dolphiny. 14. Sevennes. 15. Vivaretz. 16. Burgundy.
Article 16. The Church Discipline being read, was unanimously approved by all
the Deputies then present, who promised to observe it, and see it observed in
their respective Provinces. And this Assembly gave an express charge to
Monsieur Valleton, Pastor of the Church of Privas, to get the Confession of
Faith, and the Book of Discipline transcribed, that so the Copies of them might
be signed and subscribed by all the Deputies of this Assembly, and the
subscribed Copy shall be deposited in the hands of the Deputies of that
Province which is appointed to summon the next National Synod.
CHAP. VI. Observations made on Reading the Acts of the next National Synod of
St. Maixant.
1. IN pursuance of the Decree made by the National Synod of St. Maixant in
their Observations on the 11th Canon of the first Chapter of our
Church Discipline, all the Provinces are strictly enjoined, on pain of Censure,
to have a very careful Eye over their Ministers, that they preach not up any
new Doctrines, and that they affect not in the Pulpit, nor in Writing, nor in
any other Discourses, any phrases or modes of speech which be strange and
foreign to the Sacred Scriptures, and that they intersperse not Latin, Greek,
nor Hebrew sentences in their Sermons, nor surcharge them with many profane
Histories. And those Deputies who shall be sent by the Provinces unto the next
National Synod, are charged to bring their Memoirs with them, whether this
Decree had been observed or not.

2. Monsieur Chamier having presented his Controversial Writings unto this
Synod, according as he was enjoined by the last National Synod, he received the
thanks of the whole Assembly for the great progress he had made in them, and he
was earnestly entreated and encouraged to finish his designed Labors, and that
he would be pleased to print the three first Tomes at once, and to assist him
in the great and necessary Charges he must needs be at, the sum of two thousand
Livers is ordered to be paid him now in hand.

3. Monsieur Perrin also presenting his History of the Albingenses and
Waldenses, it was put into the hands of Messieurs Roussett, Cuville, de Preaux,
Petit and Joly, Ministers of the Gospel, who were ordered to bring in their
Opinion of it, and in consideration of his Charges, this Synod orders him the
sum of three hundred Livers.

4. The Provinces which have not observed that Decree of the abovementioned
Synod, which forbad all additions to be made at the close of Propositions and
Colloquies are exhorted conscientiously to obey it.

5. In the observations made by the same Synod upon the Acts of the former
National Synod held at Rochell, in which there was great discourse and debate
about Monks, who quitting their Cloisters, did join themselves to the Communion
of the Reformed Churches; but Information being now given of diverse Scandals
arriving from the public declaration made by these Monks in our Churches: This
Assembly judged that it was in no wise expedient for the said Monks to make any
declarations publicly until such time as we have good experience of their
abilities sincerity, and discretion. However their simple and unfeigned
Abjurations shall be admitted either publicly or in the Consistories.

6. That Article of the same National Synod about those Remonstrances which
should have been made in the Chamber of Nerac, shall be razed.

7. Nothing shall be altered in that Article of the aforesaid Synod, which had
approved the administration of Baptism before Sermons, and at the ordinary
public Prayers, excepting in that clause, which specifies the lawfulness of
this Action, in case there be apparent danger of death, and that the Consistory
do attest it, or at least some of the Elders, because this clause seems to
favor that Opinion of the necessity of Baptism: And the remaining part of the
said Article shall be in force until the next National Synod, and in this
Interval the Provinces are charged to Study the point diligently, and to come
prepared with the judgments of their respective Consistories, Colloquies and
Provincial Synods, and to send them in writing confirmed by solid Arguments;
that so after mature consideration had of the whole, the Case may be finally
decided by plurality of Votes gathered from the several Deputies of that Synod.
And that this may be the more easily effected, Monsieur Sonis, du Moulin, le
Faucheur, and la Faye, are nominated to put in writing the reasons both of the
one side and other, which have been here urged, and a Copy of them shall be
carried hence together with the Acts of this present Assembly unto their
Provinces by the Deputies.

8. The Deputies of Berry requesting that some course might be took to avoid
the violating of that Canon made at St. Maixant, Bearne.
which forbad all Professors in Divinity to intermeddle with Political
Assemblies: This Synod ordains, that it be punctually observed, and in case
any of them do accept of such a Deputation, whoever he be, shall be punished
with Suspension from his Professorship for the space of six months.

9. Information being made of the great disorders in the Provincial Synods of
Higher and Lower Languedoc, of the tricks and subtle underhand dealings
(fitter for Attorneys and Petty-Foggers, than for such grave Assemblies)
commonly practiced by them, and of the contempt of Church Discipline, from
whence have sprung up very many and grievous scandals: This Synod does most
strictly enjoin all Provincial Synods, and most especially those now mentioned,
that for the future they do reform and conduct themselves better, on pain of
being dealt withal as violators of the Discipline, and that in the severest
manner; and particularly it threatens the Moderators in those Meetings with
Suspension from their Charges, in case they connive at them, and do not their
utmost to redress these irregular and scandalous actions.

CHAP. VII. Of Appeals.
1. THE Church of Orange complaining by her Deputies, that they were excluded
from the Political Assembly held in Dolphiny. This Assembly remands them unto
the next General Political Assembly, unto which they shall present their
complaint, if they judge meet.

2. Master Gautier complained on behalf of the Church of Annonay, that they had
never been reimburst their Expenses, which they were necessitated to make in
getting supplies, during the absence of their Pastor Monsieur Faucheur, who was
deputed to the Assembly of Saumur. This Synod orders the Province of Vivaretz
to see the said Church of Annonay be paid an hundred Livers, including in that
sum the six and thirty already received by them.

3. The Church of Armagnac appealed from a Decree of the Provincial Synod of
Lower Languedoc held at Florac, which had imposed on them the Sieur Thevond to
be their Pastor against their consent. And the said Mr. Thevond also appealed
from the Synod of Montpellier for removing him against his will from
Aigues-mortes. This Assembly after, hearing of all Parties; and perusal of the
Acts of both these Synods, judges that the said Province has very much
transgrest the Discipline, by lending the said Thevond unto the Church of
Aigues-mortes, and by restoring the said Pastor unto the Church of Armagnac;
and therefore ordains, that the next Colloquy or Synod shall provide the said
Thevond of another Church, and that he be removed from that of Aigues-mortes,
or of Armagnac, and the Church of Armagnac is sharply censured for her strange
proceedings in obstructing the return of the Sieur Thevond to them, as also
Benezet, Elder of that Church, and his Companions, who without any just cause
given, did prosecute the Expulsion of the said Thevond from among them.
Moreover, we do very greatly condemn him the said Thevond, for his
pragmaticalness, and unnecessary intermedlings with Civil Affairs, as also for
his unhandsome actings in the celebration of his Marriage, that he might avoid
the Tying of the Point, a notorious Character of his Infidelity and Distrust of
God, deserving a Deposal from the Sacred Ministry, and the Sieur Chambrun,
Pastor of Nismes, who blessed that Marriage, is liable unto the same censure.
But this Assembly contents it self with that softer Reprehension given him by
the Colloquy, hoping that it will redound unto his future benefit: And in case
he has not as yet fully satisfied the Censure imposed on him by the said
Colloquy, he is ordered immediately to fulfill it, on pain of being suspended
from his Ministry.

4. The Deputies of the Church of Aigues-mortes complained of that Article of
the Assembly at Saumur, which authorized the prosecution of Monsieur de
Berticheres at the instigation of the Lords General Deputies, and the said
Deputies of Aigues-mortes remonstrated that the said Assembly was surprised for
otherwise it had been impossible for the said de Berticheres to have been
admitted into the said Church. The Synod refused to take cognizance of this
Affair, it having been determined by the said Assembly of Saumur; and because
it conceived that a subsequent Assembly of the same nature could best judge of
its own preceding Sentence, and of whatsoever might be proposed with reference
unto that subject; and therefore remands the Plaintiffs thither; but it charged
our Lords the General Deputies at Court, to give order, that this Affair be
remanded unto that Assembly there to be determined, and in the mean while
nothing shall be innovated or altered in that Article.

5. Monsieur Benoist, Pastor in the Church of Moutauban, and de la Vialle
Lieutenant Criminell in the same City appeared in this Assembly, craving
Remedies against those Dissentions which have arisen about the Ministry of the
said Benoist in the said Church. This Assembly deputed the Sieurs Perrin and
Ferrand Pastors, and de Mallerett, Glatignan and Bonnett Elders, to pass over
unto Montauban, and after hearing of the several Parties, to find out some
means of reconciling them, and to contrive some expedient whereby their
Differences may be composed; and upon report of the whole matter by these
Deputies, the Synod declared, that of right Monsieur Benoist belongs unto the
Church of Montauban, he having been adjudged as such by the National Synod of
St. Maixant: Yet nevertheless, in regard of the present Disposition of that
Church of Montauban, it decrees the said Benoist to continue in his Ministry of
the Churches of Realville and Albyas until the next Provincial Synod; in which,
if the said Benoist be not demanded by the Church of Montauban by their general
and unanimous Consent, according to the Discipline, the said Provincial Synod
is enjoined to provide the said Benoist of some other Church, wherein he shall
make his Residence; and the whole shall be so managed, as that the honor of
his Ministry may be kept unblemished, because he is not discharged from his
Church for any fault committed by him, but merely for the peace of it.

6. The Elder of of the Church of Aulais in Sevennez complaining of the Synod
of Lower Languedoc for imposing Monsieur Jarry as Pastor upon their Church
against their will, and this testified by him openly in their Synodical
Metting: That Province is censured for breaking of our Discipline: And the next
Colloquy which shall sit is to provide the Church of Aulais of another Pastor,
and the Sieur Jarry of another Church, and the said Province shall defray the
Charges of the said Jarry, amounting to the sum of two hundred Livers.

7. The Agreement made betwixt the Church of St. Antonine and that of Verfeuil
upon their Appeal brought hither, is approved by this Assembly, which does also
confirm Monsieur Guerin in the Pastoral office of the said Church of St.
Antonine.

8. Monsieur Bailey Pastor in the Church of Lions presented in this Assembly an
Account of the difference between his Church and the Province of Burgundy: And
the Deputies of that Province being heard requesting that the Decree of their
Synod concerning the fifth penny of the poors Money might be observed by the
said Church of Lions: This Assembly ordered that they should punctually observe
and practice that Canon of the National Synod of Rochell relating to this
matter, and it should also be done in and by all the other Churches of that
Province.

9. The Colloquies of St. Germain, Anduze, and Saulne demanding A separation
from the Synod of Lower Languedoc, that for time to come they might make a
distinct Province; The whole affair having been Seriously weighed and
considered, as also that the Synod of Lower Languedoc composed of an hundred
Pastors and as many Elders, are of an exceeding distance, and that their great
number brings the greater Confusion: This Assembly judges the said separation
to be very needful for their Ecclesiastical meetings; And that for the future,
the six aforesaid Colloquies shall be divided into two Provincial Synods,
whereof the one shall consist of the Colloquies aforementioned, viz. of St.
Germain, Anduze and Saulne, and shall be called the Synod of Sevennes and
Gevaudan, and the other three Colloquies shall make another Synod called by the
Name of the Synod of Lower Languedoc.

10. Monsieur Gautier did by his Proctor Captain Pascall Appeal unto this
Assembly from the Judgment given in the Synod of Bagnals against Monsieur
Bansillon Fastor of Aiguemortes, who considering his notorious Crimes, had not
dealt severely enough with him. This Assembly approves of his Appeal, and
judges that the Province for their lenity and gentle Censures of him, are
themselves worthy of the sharpest Censures. And therefore it decrees, that
upon this very account, and for what has been transacted in this Assembly
concerning the said Bansillon, and because he has positively denied those
matters, which since his Repentance he owneth and acknowledges, that he shall
be suspended from his Ministry for the space of three months.

11. An Appeal was brought in the Name of the Lord Marshall de Lesdiguieres,
Viscount of Villemur, from an Order of the Provincial Synod held at Revel,
which in pursuance of a Decree past in the preceding Colloquy, had ordained
Monsieur Charles, Pastor of the said Town of Villemur, to abide and live there,
notwithstanding the instant desires of the people to the contrary. This
Assembly having heard the Commissioners deputed to examine this Affair, and
perused their Evidences produced by them, and having heard both the said
Charles, and the Lord of Bellujon, Governor of the said Villemur sent by the
said Lord Marshall, who also joined with him in this Appeal; it judges that
the said Sieur Charles has incurred the Censures of the Church for his
pragmaticalness in intermedling with State-matters, and for carrying unto the
said Lord Marshall a Libel fraught with defamatory Articles against the said
Governor de Bellujon; as also for bringing away with him Memorials of the said
Marshall, quite contrary to his intention. And in like manner is the said
Governor de Bellujon censured for not having first of all formed his
Complaints in the Consistory, and thence gradually prosecuted them in the
Colloquy and Synod, according to the Rules of our Discipline, and for that he
suffered his Family to separate themselves from the Body of the Church of
Villemur, and to go and join themselves in Communion elsewhere. And inasmuch as
there is little hopes that the said Charles may for the future live quietly,
and exercise profitably his Ministry in that said Church, it is ordered, that
the next Provincial Synod shall provide it of another Pastor, and him of
another convenient Church, and this without any impairment to his Reputation or
Ministry. And these several Parties were mutually reconciled, pledging their
words to bury in oblivion the remembrance of all past-matters, and that they
would live for time to come in all Brotherly Love and Concord. And whereas the
said Charles complained, that the Expenses in this Appeal and Cause, were too
heavy a burden for his Church, the Province was ordered to provide therein
according to Charity.

12. The Sieur Isaac Boiteux Minister in the Church of Bussy in Burgundy
appealed; His Father, Mother, and the Pastors of the Church of Geneva joined
with him in the said Appeal, craving that he might be restored unto his aged
Father, who is a Pastor in the said City of Geneva; their Letters also were
tendered unto this Synod, grounded upon this, that he was only a Loan unto the
said Province, which yet avows the contrary, and that the said Boiteux promised
without any restriction or reservation to serve them during life. But he not
appearing in person in this Assembly, the whole affair was dismissed over to
the Province of Vivaretz, with full authority from this National Synod to make
a final decision of it.

13. The Colloquy of Higher Poictou Appealed, complaining of the Synod of
Poictou held at Thouars, for dismembring the Church of Marcillac from their
Colloquy, and joining it to the Colloquy of middle Poictou: Upon a full hearing
of the matter, this Assembly approved the Judgment of the said Synod.

14. The Sieur Peyrol Pastor in the Church of Montpellier complained of an
Order made by the Synod of Lower Languedoc, importing that the Pastors of
Montpellier should have a careful Eye over his Sermons in the Church, and
Lectures in the School. But the Deputies of the said Province protesting that
it was never the Intention of the Synod to make any such Order, or that it
should be executed, and that they having razed it out of their Synodical
Register, (which also was ratified by the very next subsequent Synod) might
well content him. This Assembly judges, that this Attestation of the Deputies
may suffice him, because for that good and laudable Testimony given him, we
believe that the Article was null both before and after the razing of it. And
the said Sieur Peyrol is exhorted to undertake courageously, and to discharge
faithfully his Professorship of Divinity according to the desire, approbation
and expectation of his Province.

He afterward revolted.
15. The Sieur de Sousais appeared personally in the Synod, and having been
heard in his defense against the Accusations of the Province of the Isle of
France, who proved that he had deserted his Church of Bordes without leave, and
that he had been already absent from it the space of eighteen months. This
Assembly dismissed the final Judgment of his Case unto the Provincial Synod of
Berry, with full Authority to determine it; in which he shall justify himself,
as also from all other Crimes whereof he is suspected and accused, and the time
and place of that Synods meeting shall be signified to him; till which we judge
it also expedient that he shall not exercise his Ministry.

16. The Complaints and Accusations brought in against Mr. Jeremy Ferrier,
Pastor of the Church of Nismes, were heard, as he was also in his Defense and
Answers. This Assembly over-looking many of his miscarriages, for which he had
been dealt withal particularly, and by word of mouth privately reproved, and
for which he deserved a very sharp Censure; it does now admonish and charge him
to give glory unto God by a penitential Acknowledgment of his sins committed
both in his Office of Pastor and Professor, and in his management of Civil
matters, and more especially for his abandoning the Church of Paris without
leave from it first obtained, contrary to the promise made by him at his
Admission into the Ministry there, that he would always continue in their
service: Item, he was reproved for his great neglect of his Professoral Office
ih Divinity, which he could not discharge whilst he made several Journeys unto
Court, and to Political Assemblies, contrary to what had been decreed in the
National Synod of St. Maixant, and for not taking care about the supply of his
Place, and discharge of his Office by some fit person during his Absence; and
farther, for his intermedling with the Moneys of the University, And
appropriating more of them than was his due, even the sum of three thousand one
hundred and three Livers, five Sous, and six Deniers to his own private use. It
was commonly reported of him, that he was bought off by the Popish Clergy by a
Pension of 3000 Crown^; if they were so liberal; but he turned Apostate
afterward, and was excommunicate. See the Synod of Tonneins, the last Act.
Item, for giving his consent to the publication of Captain Gautier's Letters,
which he should rather have suppressed; they having caused such contentions as
lie not now in his power to allay, unless he imbark himself in tricks and
shifts utterly unbecoming his Ministerial Calling. For which causes it was
ordained, that he should by Letters written with his own hand, give full
satisfaction to the Church of Paris, and clear his hands of the aforesaid
Moneys belonging to the University; and farther, to obviate and stifle all
fears, jealousies, reports and suspicions concerning him, he is expressly
forbidden to present himself in any Political Assemblies, be they Provincial or
General, for the space of six years. And out of kindness to him, and that the
honor of his Ministry may not be blasted, it is decreed, that he shall
exercise it in some other Province, as may be judged most conducing to the
Glory of God, and the Edification of the Church.

17. The Church of Mussaye brought in their Appeal from a Decree of the Synod
of Brittany held at Blain in the month of November last, for that they were
deprived of their portion of Moneys granted unto the Churches by the King. This
Assembly reverseth that Decree, and ordains that the said Church shall enjoy
her part and share of those Moneys as well as the other Churches of the
Province, and the payment that has been now made her upon this order shall be
allowed in the Accounts of the Receiver of that said Province: And the Lord
Baron de le Moussaye is praised for his singular zeal and good affection
testified by him in the advancement of Gods glory and the Settlement of the
Churches.

18. The Province of Lower Guyenne is obliged to see that order of the Synod of
St. Maixant better observed; for it ordained that Monsieur Salmon, who was lent
by the National Synod of Rochel for two years unto the said Province, shall be
restored unto the Province of Berry: And the said Province of Lower Guyenne is
enjoined to Restore the said Monsieur Salmon, or to reimburse the Province of
Berry their charges expended by them in his Education at the University: And in
case they neglect to execute this Decree, the Receiver General shall detain in
his hands three portions of His Majesty's Moneys belonging unto that Province,
until such time as this Order be performed. And in case the said Salmon be
disobedient, refusing either to return unto them, or make them satisfaction, as
is before ordained, he shall be, as he is now declared, suspended from the
Ministry.

19. The Appeal of Monsieur Maillard from a Decree of the Provincial Synod of
Berry concerning the Sieur Alix, is disannulled: Because an Appeal brought by a
private person, who has no Office in the Church, against a Synod, is utterly
unworthy of any consideration.

20. This Assembly remanded back again the Appeal of Monsieur de Montsanglard
(Pastor of the Church of Corbigny St. Leonard, from a Decree of the Synod of
Berry held at Castillion upon Loir) unto the same Synod, which is commanded to
provide him for his yearly maintenance the sum of five hundred Livers,
comprizing in it the Rentcharge of his house. And in case his Church through
poverty be not able to pay him so much, then the said Synod shall make it up
unto him from the Moneys granted us by His Majesty.

21. The Church of Saint Loo in Normandy complained, that whereas the
Inhabitants of Hauteville going to the Church of Havre for the Worship of God,
had formerly contributed toward the maintenance of their Pastor; they now were
by the Provincial Synod discharged from the said Contribution: This Assembly
does ratify the Decree of the said Synod.

22. The Sieur Mazett, one of the Pastors in the Church of Metz, in the Dukedom
of Lorrain, appearing in this Assembly, reported the Divisions fallen out in
his said Church on this occasion, that the Deacons having by an ancient Custom
distributed to the Communicants the Cup in the Lord's Supper, with these words,
This Cup is the Communion in the Blood of Christ, omitted these words, which we
bless. Also there were read Letters from the said Church of Metz, containing
their Arguments upon which they grounded their observation of that Custom. This
Assembly having maturely pondered whatever was said by both Parties, does
confirm the Sentence given by the National Synod of St. Maixant, which allowed
Elders and Deacons in case of necessity to deliver the Cup, but without
speaking, founding this their Decree upon the example and practice of our Lord
Jesus, who only himself spoke at his last Supper, but yet permitted his
Apostles to distribute among themselves the Bread and the Cup. And as to the
abridgment of these words, which we bless, this Assembly judges, that none
should be employed, but such as can authoritatively utter all the words of
Institution. Nor can the Example of the Church of Geneva any ways relieve the
Church of Metz, because that at Geneva, in their delivery of the Cup, the
Deacons are silent, but not so the Pastors. For which causes, and that the
Authority and Reverence due unto this holy Sacrament, may be kept up and
maintained, the said Church is exhorted to conform it self in this matter unto
the Example and Practice of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the general Custom of
our Churches, and this to be done by the sweetest ways possible, without any
thing of violence.

23. This Assembly was informed, how that the Consistory of the Church at
Orleans, and in particular a certain Elder of it called Mesmein, did, (but with
a previous Protestation to declare unto the Supreme Magistrate, and to the
Kings Attorney the matters transacted in it) set themselves against an Order of
the Provincial Synod held at Blois, ordaining a General Colloquy in pursuance
of the Decrees of their former Provincial Synods, as also that the Sieur Eruet
Doctor in Physic had writ a Defamatory Libel against that Canon of the
Assembly of Saumur, which enjoined all the Provinces to establish Counsels for
their mutual safety, and against that Decree of the said Synod held at Blois:
This Assembly reproving and condemning all these Proceedings, as being contrary
to our Discipline, and to the Union of all our Churches, did Depute the Sieurs
du Moulin, la Fresnaye, and Cartaud Pastors, together with the Sieurs Bigot,
Manevill, and du Bois Elders, as they return in their way homewards to pass
unto Orleans, and there to Assemble the Consistory, and notify unto them the
pleasure of this National Synod, which is, that the Canons and orders of Saumur
be observed, as best agreeing with our duty unto their Majesty's, and what had
been practiced during the life of Henry the Great of Glorious memory; and full
Power is given unto the said Commissioners to determine finally in the Name and
Authority of this Assembly, of this affair, and to suspend and remove all past
excesses in and about it whatsoever, and the Charges of the said Deputies,
during their abode at Orleans, shall be defrayed by that Province.

24. The Appeal of Master John de Vassan Pastor of the Church of the Castle
upon Loir who stands accused of several Crimes, and suspended by the
Commissioners, which were Deputed by the Provincial Synod of Anjou, is
dismissed over to the next approaching Synod of that Province, and in case he
do not appear in person to justify himself, he is from this very instant
declared to be deposed from the Sacred Ministry.

25. The Sieurs d' Arguillon and Barnier two Magistrates of the City of Nismes,
together with Arnold Guyrand second Consul, and Vestric Favier a Member of
their Common Council, as also the Sieurs Suffren and Chambrun Pastors of the
said Church of Nismes deputed by their Consistory unto this Assembly, did
instantly and most importunately entreat that their Pastor Monsieur Ferrier
might not be removed from them, notwithstanding what had been before resolved
about him in this Assembly, as also that he might at their request be restored
to them, and that leave might be granted him to assist personally in Political
Assemblies, in case he were commissionated thereunto. Whereupon the said
Deputies of Nismes being demanded if they had any thing to offer from the said
du Ferrier, answered, that he had charged them with nothing as from himself.
The Assembly having maturely debated the Remonstrances and Petitions of the
said Deputies, and applauded their Zeal and great Love to Monsieur Ferrier,
gave them to understand, that forasmuch as the causes moving them to transport
the said Ferrier out of the Province, were still valid and in being, they could
not depart from their former Resolution, which was not taken up on design of
reflecting on, or interesting the said Church of Nismes; for which they have as
high an esteem and value, as for any other Church of Christ in the Kingdom, and
they hope that the whole Church will submit it self unto this Synodical Decree.
Whereupon the said Deputies, and particularly the Sieur d' Arguillon speaking
first, renewed with great vehemence his desires, adding very injurious words,
full of menaces, threatening us with the confusions that would arise hereupon in
the Church of Nismes, and that he would give them notice of it. He was
seconded, according as it had been concerted among them in private, by the
Sieur Vestrie Favier with discourses full of Arrogance and Threats, with a
Protestation of Appeal unto another Synod, and let this do what it pleased,
they would never part with the said Monsieur Ferrier, and that he should
continue to exercise his Ministry both in Nismes and in the Province also.
Accusing this Assembly of passion and partiality in its Judgment: Whereupon the
Assembly desiring an Act of Record for such injurious Language, and to know
whether the said Deputies would avow or disavow it, the said Vestrie returning
again into the Synod to evidence his owning of all his former discourses, gave
us Memoirs of them stuffed with falsehoods and calumnies, all subscribed and
attested with his own hand; the which Copy was ordered to be safe kept, and
forthcoming, in case of need, at the next National Synod.

26. And the Sieurs Suffren and Chambrun are sharply censured for becoming the
Bearers of such Libellous and injurious writings against this Assembly, to whom
it was declared that they might and ought to have excused themselves from any
conjunction in such a Deputation; because by their departure from the City of
Nismes, the whole Church was left without a Pastor; and this their offense was
judged so grievous, and their contempt of this Assembly so intolerable, that
they deserved a very long suspension from their Ministry. Yet nevertheless out
of pure respect unto the Church of Nismes, and that it may not be left
destitute of its Ministers: The Synod does Mercifully pardon them their
offense, and injoyns them most strictly upon their return unto Nismes to do
their utmost that this Synodical decree be put in execution against the said
Ferrier, and that they do their utmost endeavor to prevent whatever Murmurings
or troubles may hereupon fall out, and that they keep their Church in peace.
And in Case after the dissolution of this Assembly they presume to act contrary
to what is now commanded them, the next Colloquy of Lions is authorized to
proceed against them, and all other Pastors and Elders, Accomplices with them in
the same Rebellion, even to suspension, yea and deposition from their
respective charges. And as for Monsieur Ferrier this Assembly will provide him
a Church out of the Province, which shall be signified unto him; and if after
notice given him he continue to preach at Nismes or within the Province, He is
from this very instant declared suspended from the Ministry, and not to be
restored but by the next National Synod.

27. The Church of Vallence Appealed from the Provincial Synod of Vivaretz held
at Annonay, and from the Synod of Dolphiny held at Veyners, for removing from
them the Sieur Murat their Pastor. The Memoirs and Acts of the said Synods, and
of the Colloquy of Nismes being read, and both parties having been heard speak
upon this present Case: Monsieur Murat was sharply Censured for his
over-forwardness in closing with the Invitations of the Church of Nismes, and
for urging by dishonest ways the Church of Vallence to give him his Dismission,
and this extorted also under the pretense, and with the plausible Attestation
of his singular prudence. And the Church of Nismes is severely censured for all
its proceedings, and particularly that contrary to the Decree of St. Maixant in
the first Article of General Matters; it sought a Pastor for it self out of the
Province without first consulting with their Colloquy or Synod. And the Synod
of Vivaretz also was blamed for acting contrary to the Discipline, in judging
(notwithstanding the Appeal of the Church of Vallence, lay neglected by them)
that the said Murat was at liberty. And the Provincial Synod of Dolphiny held
at Veyners is also censured, for suffering themselves to be surprised and
inveigled into this present Act, and passing too slight a Judgment on it,
whereas they should have been more reserved, and done as the Colloquy of
Nismes, which dismissed the whole Affair unto this Assembly. For these causes,
and after mature deliberation upon the whole, this Assembly enjoyneth the said
Murat to return unto his Church of Vallence within three months, and in case of
contravention unto this Ordinance, we do presently denounce him suspended from
the Ministry.

28. Monsieur Isaiah Ferrier appeared in person before this Assembly (he was
Minister of St. Gyles in Lower Languedoc) to answer those Accusations which
were brought against him by the Sieur de Beauvoysin, who appealed from the
Synods of Vigan and Baignols; and that the truth of those Accusations might be
proved, Commissioners were ordained to receive and examine them; who having
heard them, and seen the Evidences produced by the said Sieur de Beauvoysin,
and upon their Report made of them, and of matters confessed by the said
Ferrier, the Assembly pronounced this Sentence, viz. that the said Ferrier be
suspended from the holy Ministry until the next National Synod. And forasmuch
as among those many Articles of which he stands accused, several cannot be
fully proved, because of Processes yet hanging in the Court of Castres: The
Assembly does order the said Ferrier to appear before the Synod of Vivaretz,
and to justify himself, if he can, in their presence; and the said Synod shall
transmit his Defense of himself, whatever it be, over unto the next National
Synod, that so he may be either restored, or more severely censured; and in
case he cannot justify himself between this and the next National Synod, he is
now, as he shall then be denounced, Deposed from the Ministry of the Gospel.
And in case he should be restored by the National Synod unto the Ministry, yet
shall he not be sent back unto his Church of St. Gyles, nor to any other in
that Colloquy. Nevertheless there shall be allowed him betwixt this time and
the next National Synod, a yearly portion of the King's Moneys toward his
subsistence. And also the Province of Lower Languedoc is sharply censured for
their long connivance at so great a wickedness, and for not doing their duty in
endeavoring to suppress the scandal, and thoroughly to purge the House of God
from such defilements.

29. The Appeals of the Sieur Conain from the Decree of the Synod of Parey le
Moyneau, as also that of the Sieur Truchis, (who yet did not send his Appeal
unto this Assembly) are declared null and void, and the Judgments past in the
Provincial Synods of Burgundy against them are by this present Act ratified and
established.

30. The Appeal of the Church of Avalon from the Province of Burgundy being not
prosecuted by any one in this Assembly is declared Null.

31. The Appeals of the Colloquy of Gex from the Synod of Bussy, and also that
of Pont du Velle, were wisely and rightly judged by the Synod of Burgundy, and
the said Colloquy, is exhorted to conform it self for the future unto the
Orders thereof.

32. The Church of Manosques appealled from an Ordinance of the Synod of
Provence held at Lire, September 1610. And complained, how that by the said
Ordinance an yearly grant of sixty Livers formerly accorded to them by a
preceding Synod, was then reversed. This Assembly does confirm that Article of
the said Synod of Lire. Yet nevertheless it recommends the said Church of
Manosques to the care of that Province.

33. An Appeal was brought by diverse Churches of the Lower Guyenne from a
Judgment of the said Province, importing, that the more opulent and wealthy
Churches should be deprived of their portions in the King's Moneys, and that
their shares should be employed to the comforting of poorer Churches, that so
they might be kept up, or restored. And whereas the Deputies of the said
Province requested that the Judgment of their Synod might be confirmed; This
Assembly leaves that Province wholly to their liberty, either to follow the
aforesaid Expedient, or those other Overtures particularly notified unto those
Deputies, and it recommends with the greatest earnestness their poor Churches
unto the Charity of those, which flourish, and are in a better condition as to
the World.

34. That Book written by Monsieur de la Viennerie, Pastor of the Church of
Tonne Boutonne in Xaintonge, entitled, A Commentary upon the Canon of the
Mass, having been read and examined as to its chiefest Points, to wit,
Invocation of Saints, Justification, Predestination, and diverse others, there
was observed in it several odd expressions and phrases, which were not only
obscure, but also doubtful, suspicious and erroneous: Whereupon in pursuance of
the Judgment given by the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, the said Manuscript
was ordered to be suppressed; and farther, the Province was exhorted to watch
carefully over the Doctrine delivered from the Pulpit by the said de la
Viennerie.

35. Whereas there is a great Dissension sprung up in the Church of Montauban
about the Sieurs Loupiat and Gouze, who are Elected Elders; This Assembly
condemns the proceeding of the said Sieur de Gouze, as being full of vanity,
and for insisting on it, that he ought to be preferred to the Sieur Loupiat in
their nomination unto the people: Also the said Gouze is blamed for his
animosity in searching out crimes and persons to accuse Monsieur Loupiat, who
yet could never make proof of those matters laid by them unto his charge.
Moreover, the Consistory there is also censured for not restraining those
proceedings by a strict and severe exercise of the Discipline, and for not
executing the Judgment of the Colloquies and Synods of their Province, given
forth on this occasion: And the said Consistory is enjoined to see to it, that
the said Gouze and all his Partners do make satisfaction, as in reason they are
bound, unto the said Sieur Loupiat, for the injuries they have done him: And in
case they so do, the said Loupiat shall be entreated to desist from all
prosecutions at Law against the said Gouze; but in that matter we leave him to
his liberty. And the said Loupiat at the next Election shall be received into
the Eldership according to the Canons of our Discipline. And as for the said
Gouze, we do not conceive him qualified at present for the Office of an Elder.

36. The Province of Lower Languedoc, assembled at Florac to provide a Pastor
for the Church of Meruez fit for their service, did lend the Sieur Ollier,
Pastor of the Church of St. Andrew de Valborgne; Whereupon the said Church
brought their Appeal into this National Synod; Which having heard the whole
matter did approve of the Loan made by the aforesaid Provincial Synod, but
withal gave them to understand that when as the six Months for which he is lent
shall be expired, that then the said Sieur Ollier shall return again unto his
Church of St. Andrew de Valborgne.

CHAP.VIII. His Majesty's Proclamation of Pardon.
BEFORE we proceed unto General matters, we shall first exhibit his Majesty's
Letters Pattents, concerning their Pardon, who have held Provincial Political
Assemblies since that National one, which was convened at Saumur in the year,
1611.

LOUIS by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre,
To our Beloved and Trusty Counselors sitting in our Court of Parliament and
of the Edict, Greeting.
When God called us to the Government of this Kingdom, to Wear the Crown, and
weild the Scepter of our Ancestors, we took up a fixed resolution to follow
that form and order in management of State Affairs, which was Established by
the Deceased King our most Honored Lord and Father, whom God absolve;
Believing that we could not better secure the Kingdom which he had left us,
than by imitating his example, who had raised it from the deepest desolation to
the highest Pinnacle of Glory. And we have met with that success and happiness
herein, that none of our Subjects have had any the least occasion to complain
of us; For we have took such an effectual course in the Administration of our
Government, that we have given general satisfaction unto all Persons whom God
has Subjected to us, and particularly unto those of the Pretended Reformed
Religion: for we have not only graciously answered their Petitions and Bills of
Grievances, which they had presented to us, but we have also sent diverse
Persons of Quality into all the Provinces of this Kingdom with Commissions and
Authority to see the Edict of Nantes executed in all its Articles, and
particular Orders, and other Privileges Granted and Accorded in the Reign of
our Deceased Lord and Father to them, and in all other cases whatsoever in
which it might be executed, that so by this means we might free them from all
fears and apprehensions of troubles; which have been formerly the grounds and
pretenses used by those our said Subjects for holding extraordinary Assemblies
without our Royal Permission, and would have made others of a different
persuasion to suspect and grow jealous of them. Wherefore we being most
desirous to provide against those evils, and to preserve that Peace, Union, and
good correspondence most Happily Established and kept up by the Edict and its
exact observation, we do by and with the Advice and Consent, and in the
presence of the Queen Regent, our most Honored Lady and Mother, and of the
Princes of our Blood, and with the Princes and Officers of our Crown, and being
fully assured of the good Will in general of our said Subjects, of their zeal
and fidelity to our service, and designing to deal favorably with them, We
have of our mere and special Grace, Plenary Power, and Royal Authority remitted
and abolished, we do remit and abolish by these Presents their offense
committed by them who have called, or assisted in person at those Assemblies
aforesaid, which have been held without our Permission in sundry Provinces of
this Kingdom, and also of all matters fore-passed, or done in Consequence of
them, and we will that they be all fully acquitted, cleared, and discharged
from them; and we expressly forbid our Attorney general and his Substitutes in
any wise to make any Inquiry, Suit, or Prosecution for them. Yet nevertheless
that we may prevent for the future the Licentious calling of such Assemblies
forbidden by the Edicts, and special Orders made on these accounts by the Late
King our most Honored Lord and Father, in the Obedience of which it is our Will
and Pleasure that those our said Subjects shall continue, and in pursuance of
the eighty second Article of the Edict of Nantes, and of the Ordinance of the
fifteenth of March, 1606. at also of that Answer given the nineteenth of August
next following unto their Bill of Grievances presented by the General Deputies
of the said Religion, the Extracts of which are fastened unto these Presents
under the Seal of our Chancery, We have prohibited, and do prohibit and forbid
all those our said Subjects of the said Religion for the future to make any
Congregations or Assemblies for treating or debating of holding any public
Assemblies, without having first got our Royal License and Permission expressly
to this purpose, upon pain of being punished at breakers of our Edicts, and
Disturbers of the public Peace; However we do give them full Liberty of
holding their Consistories, Colloquies, and Provincial and National Synods, at
has been formerly granted to them, but with this condition, that they admit
none other persons into them but Ministers and Elders to treat of their
Doctrine and Church Discipline, upon pain of losing their Privilege to hold
these Assemblies, and on all Moderators of answering for it in their private
and personal Capacities. And we do command that these our present Letters
Pattents be read, and recorded, and that you cause those our said Subjects to
enjoy the benefit of their contents, and farther that you see them exactly and
punctually observed in the whole extent of your Jurisdiction, without
permitting or suffering them in the least to be transgressed. Moreover we
command and enjoin all Governors and Lieutenant Generals, Particular Governors,
and their Lieutenants in the Governments of our Provinces, and Cities of their
Jurisdiction, and the Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, and Consuls of them to see
that they be very carefully kept and observed: And the first of our Beloved and
Faithful Counselors, and Master of the Ordinary Requests of our Household, and
Counselors in our Court of Parliament in those places, and others our Justices
and Officers to make informations of those transgressions aforesaid, and to
give us speedy advice of it; and in the mean while to proceed against such at
shall be found Delinquents according to due course of Law, and the Tenor of
our Edicts and Ordinances For such is our Will and Pleasure. Given at Paris the
24th day of April in the year of Grace, 1612. and of our Reign the Second.

Signed LOUIS, And a little Lower by the King in his Council. De Lomenie. And
Sealed with Yellow Wax, the great Seal appendant at the bottom with a single
Thread.

CHAP. IX. The Synods Declaration against this Proclamation.
The Letters Patents of His Majesty bore date the 13th of April, 1612. And the
Synods Declaration was dated the first of Ju^, 1612.
1. HIS Majesty's Letters Patents were read, containing his Royal Pardon unto
them, who had called Political Assemblies since that General one held at
Saumur; which exceedingly surprised and astonished this National Synod; and
that there might be some remedy provided in time against such Impendent Storm,
it was judged needful by all the Deputies unanimously to prepare a Declaration
on this occasion, which should be inserted in this place among our Acts, and
forthwith Printed, that so by this Imprinted Act, the Innocence of our
Churches might be attested and published to the whole Christian World.

Here follows the said Declaration.

THE Reformed Churches of this Kingdom Assembled in a National Synod at Privas,
having, as it usual, took the Oath of Fidelity and Humble Obebedience to their
Majesty's Command and Service, and being informed by diverse Deputies of the
Provinces that the Kings Letters Pattents were directed to the Parliaments and
Courts of the Edict, containing an Abolition and Pardon of the faults pretended
to have been committed in calling of Particular Assemblies in the several
Provinces, as also a Pardon for what has been heretofore, and since transacted
in them; they could not be unsensible of such an horrid dishonor as this done
unto them, so great, so contrary to their Intentions, and to that Loyalty they
have ever upon all occasions expressed both to the service of his Majesty, and
the happiness of his Government; and they could not but be pierced with a most
just grief to see themselves blasted with so great a reproach on the account of
the said Provincial Assemblies, which have been always held as they were in the
Reign of Henry the Great of most happy Memory, and since also by a Privilege
granted the said Churches in a Letter Written by her Majesty unto the General
Assembly of ^aumur the 22th of August, 1611. by which they were commanded every
one of them to break up, and depart unto their respective Provinces, and carry
back unto their Principals, who had Deputed them, the good Intentions of their
Majesty's. Upon which the said General Assembly inferred their Right and
Privilege of Meeting in particular Assemblies, and voted the Congregating of
them, and ordained that the Deputies of every Province should bring with them
their Cahiers to be perused, and what reflections had past upon them, and
answers given to them; which was a matter well-known unto the Lords of the
Council, nor could they believe it or judge it unreasonable, because that in
those very Instructions given unto the Commissioners sent by their Majesty's
into the Provinces, about the inexecutions and transgressions of the Edict,
they were commanded to return home immediately, and without delay, that they
might be in the Provinces before the meeting of those particular Assemblies:
and it is a most certain truth they were for the most part either Authorized by
the summons of his Majesty's Lieutenants, or by the conduct and direction of
some one or other of the Presidents in the Sovereign Courts, and ever in the
Magistrates presence. The Kings Officers and other persons of Quality having
express charge from their Majesty's to be there upon the place, and sit with
them; or otherwise some one of the aforesaid Commissioners sent by the said
Provinces did moderate and preside in them. None of which would ever have
plunged themselves in so much guilt, in case there had been any as is now
pretended. Yea so far were our Lords of the Council from judging us guilty,
that on the contrary they received all our Cahiers, Remonstrances, and most
humble Petitions, framed in those Assemblies, with the greatest kindness, and
have since answered them. Insomuch at they never esteemed them Criminal, nor
needing Abolition and Pardon. This grieveth, and wounds deeply the very Souls
of all who do Profess the Reformed Religion in this Kingdom, because it fastens
the blot and brand of a Crime upon them, which that they might evade, they have
on all occasions hazarded both their Lives and Fortunes.

But they have another and farther ground of Grief and Affliction, which it
that these Letters Pattents look at if some ill men had a design of kindling
again those Flames, and reviving once more those old hatreds and animosities of
their Fellow Citizens and Countrymen against them; which have lain Dead and
Buried these many years, and that they are seeking a new pretext, wherewith
their most inveterate Enemies may be hereafter furnished to assault and ruin
them, and finally to render them odious and execrable to all sorts of persons
both at home and abroad, within and without the Kingdom. Such consequenoes as
these cannot but involve them in great troubles, cannot but shake and unsettle
the repose and tranquillity of the Government, and grievously augment their
fears and sorrows, being compelled after this manner to ease their burdened
Spirits, and to express their sense and resentments of such great indignities;
because they cannot but avow themselves the best and most Faithful Subjects
that ever their Majesty's had, or shall have in their Kingdoms and Dominions.

For which cause the said Churches, conformably to those humble Addresses, made
by their General Deputies unto the Council, and to their Petition presented
unto the Court of Parliament of Paris, the 14th of May last, do declare as they
have done, that they never requested, nor demanded, nor did by any Letters of
theirs endeavor to obtain that Abolition or Pardon, that it was never done by
them, nor are they so much as in word or thought guilty of those imaginary
Crimes presupposed in them, and that they be ready all of them jointly and
singly to be responsible for their actions, and to publish them to the whole
World, openly, and at noonday, counting all manner of torments far more easy
to be born, than that they and their Posterity should be stigmatized with such
a shameful brand of Infamy, which might hereafter deprive them of that true
honor and glory, which was ever ascribed to them, of being true Frenchmen,
and to be reputed and accounted by strangers the most Loyal and most Faithful
Subjects of His Majesty, in the worst times, persons uncorruptible, and the
best and most affectionate unto His Government.

Moreover, they do farther declare, that they will not in the least either help
themselves, or make use in any manner of way of those aforesaid Letters of
Abolition and Pardon, and that they disavow those persons, if there be any
such, as have accepted, and consented to them. And whoever shall demand or
approve them, we declare those persons to have acted contrary and prejudicial
to the sincerity of their Intentions, and to their approved Loyalty and
Fidelity: All which we do once more publish, not out of vanity or vainglory,
but to give Testimony unto the Truth; and that we are ready to adventure our
Honors, Estates and Lives in the performance of those Duties, Services and
Obedience, which Their Majesty's may expect from us, who are, their most
humble, most faithful and most obedient Servants and Subjects.

From Privas in Vivaretz, the first of June, 1612. Signed by Chamier,
Moderator. Du Moulin, Assessor.
Scribes.
Monsanglard, and Manjald,



CHAP. X. General Matters.
2. THE Consistories of those Towns in which Printers professing our holy
Reformed Religion do live, are exhorted to look carefully to the Impressions of
our Psalm-books, that nothing be inserted into the Calendars trenching upon the
honor of any particular persons. And our Brethren, the Pastors of Geneva, are
desired to bear a strict hand over the Printers in their City, that this Canon
be punctually observed by them.

3. Proposans maintained by the Provinces shall not be received into the
Ministry without the consent of their respective Provinces; nor shall any
Proposans maintained by particular Churches be received into a Pastoral Charge
without the consent of those very Churches from whom they received their
Exhibitions.

4. The Deputies of the Province of Aujou queried at what time after their
Conversion from Popery to the Communion of our Reformed Churches, such persons
might be called into the Office of Elders and Deacons. This Assembly ordained
that it might be about the same time, that other such might be admitted into
the Ministry, to wit, after two years trial and experience had of them, and of
their sincerity.

5. Forasmuch as a torrent of Dissolution, Irreligion and Profaneness is broke
in upon us, and most shameful divisions are risen up in our Churches, which do
visibly and terribly threaten us with the near approaches of God's Judgments,
ever since the Death of our late King. This Assembly enjoyneth all the Churches
within the Realm to proclaim an extraordinary Fast, which shall be celebrated
the first Wednesday in November next, and be Universally and most Religiously
observed by them.

The Provinces are exhorted carefully to collect the History of those Ministers
and other Christians, who in these last times have suffered for the truths of
the Son of God, and to transmit such Memoirs unto Geneva that they may be
inserted into our Book of Martyrs, and published to the World by the Pastors of
that Church.

7. Although a person be chosen Counselor for the Province, and would thereupon
be reputed for, and Act as an Elder, yet shall he not be admitted unto the
Office of an Elder, unless he pass through the forms prescribed by our
Discipline.

CHAP. XI. The Act of Re union.
8. THE present National Synod* of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom
desiring to secure the Peace and Union of the said Churches, and inflamed with
the Zeal of Gods House and Glory, and grieved to see Satan sowing the Seeds of
discord among us, which redound to the Infamy and weakening of the said
Churches, and may in after times produce worse and more dangerous effects;
moved with charity toward the Members of our body, and being willing to make
some provision for a Fraternal concord, the indispensable duty of all the
Faithful, has and does now resolve to exert it self even unto the utmost for
the compassing of a Blessed and Holy peace and reunion among ourselves under
their Majesty's Authority. And having once again Sworn our Oaths of Allegiance
and Fidelity to them, and that this Union may be the more easily effected and
obtained; This Assembly orders the Sieurs du Moulin and Durant Pastors, and
the Sieur de l'Isle Grossat Elder in the Church of Orleans to be joined as
Commissioners together with our General Deputies in Court. And all persons are
exhorted to labor that the Memory of past matters be Buried in Oblivion, and
in the name of all our Churches to become Peacemakers, that so the several
humors and different Opinions risen up in the Assembly of Saumur may be
Balanced, Allayed, and Composed, Declaring that the General desire of the said
Churches is to reunite in one their affections, who have been alienated from
each other; and this to be done according to the Methods and Counsels given and
prescribed by this Assembly, whereunto they may make such Additions as their
Zeal and Prudence shall suggest; and they shall diligently and conjointly
inform the Provinces of their actings herein, together with the result and
success of their Mediation. To this end Letters shall be Written and sent from
this Assembly unto the Lords Mareschals and Dukes of Bouillon and de les
Diguieres, exhorting and adjuring them in the Name of God, that they would be
pleased at the instant entreaties of our Churches to join themselves together
with us in an humble Petition and Address unto their Majesty's, and to testify
by evident effects their Zeal and Affection toward them, and readily to
embrace all opportunities that may either publicly or privately contribute to
the safety of the State, Quiet and Honor of the Kingdom, as also that they
would be pleased to join themselves together with our Churches for the
procuring an entire removal of those Letters of Abolition, verified and
published of late by the Parliaments, although never demanded nor deserved by
us, and to insist on it that the more important and necessary matters in our
Petitions tendered unto their Majesty's may receive a gracious answer, and to
endeavor that for the future all gratifications of persons and parties may be
equal, and all marks and notes of division and separation may be removed,
demonstrating thereby their forgetfulness of what is past, and that they do
cordially pursue, without partiality, the good of all, and that generally (upon
all occasions which may so fall out) they do manifestly express their zeal,
care and affection to the common public Weal of our Churches as they shall be
required, admonished and informed by the General Deputies of the said Churches.
Moreover, the said Lords shall be exhorted in our beforementioned Letters,
that they would be pleased to resign up their own private Interests to those of
the public, and that they would lay by their own particular Resentments (which
have been very much inflamed by the cunning crafts, artifices and devices of
the Enemies of our Religion) and that they would hold a more firm
Correspondence and sincere intelligence with the Lords Duke of Rohan, and of
Sully, of Soubize, de la Force, and of the Lord du Plessis, and with all
others, from whom, by reason of these unhappy differences, they have been
estranged, that so being all jointly reunited in the Bond of Friendship, they
may more advantagiously promote the common Weal of our Churches, the repose and
happiness of the State, and the establishment of their Majesty's Authority. And
the like Letters to the same purpose shall be written to the Lords of
Chastillion, of Parabere, to the Dukes of Rohan and of Sully, to the Dukes of
Soubize, and de la Force, and to the Lord du Plessis, from this Assembly, to
acquaint them with our desires and invitations in the name and behalf of all
our Churches to join in with the Lords Dukes of Bouillon and de les Diguieres,
and that as we had exhorted these, so we do earnestly exhort their Lordships
also to quit and forego their own particular Resentments and Discontents, and
that as formerly they have, so they would be pleased now and evermore to
testify their zeal and affection for the Weal and Repose of our poor Churches;
and that they would demean themselves with a generous frankness and integrity
in their mutual Correspondence and Reunion one with the other, that being
united in a perfect Bond of Charity, they may with conjoined Forces promote and
advance the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus. Letters also shall be written unto the
Lady Duchess of Tremouille, entreating her in the name of all our Churches, to
continue her endeavors in mediating the said Peace and Reunion, and to give
her thanks for her singular care in the Education of her Children in the True
Religion, and in the Fear of God, and in Love and Affection to our Churches,
hoping and praying that they may hereafter prove excellent and useful
Instruments of God's glory, and of the Churches good. And it shall be protested
to all and every one of those Lords in the name and behalf of our Churches in
the said Letters directed to them of our Intention and Resolution to consider,
honor and value them according to their Families, Qualities, Dignities, and
Merits, as being the most honorable Members of our Body. And the said Letters
shall be presented them, to wit, unto the Lords of Bouillon and of les
Diguieres, of Chastillion, and to the Lady Duchess of Tremouille by the
immediate hands of our General Deputies: Those for the Lord Duke of Rohan, and
my Lord of Soubize, by the Lords Barons of Saujon and Bonnet, Deputies for the
Province of Xaintonge, who shall also acquaint them particularly from this
Assembly with our sentiments, desires and designs, exhorting them to approve of
them, and to consent unto them, and they shall be entreated to declare freely
their thoughts of the whole, that so the General Deputies may be out of hand
advised, and allured of it. The Letter to the Lord Duke of Sully shall be
tendered by Monsieur de l'Isle Grossat, Deputy for the Province of Berry. That
to the Lord de Plessis by the Sieurs Perillau, Vigneux and Ferrand, Deputies of
the Province of Anjou. That for the Lord de la Force by the Sieurs de Brassalay
and du Hau, Deputies of Bearne. That for the Lord de la Parabere by the Sieurs
de Cuville and Cognac, Deputies of Poictou. And all these Gentlemen are charged
with one and the same Message as abovementioned, only they may make such
additions as their zeal and dexterity shall judge to be most conducing to the
Weal and Perfection of so glorious a work. Moreover, this Assembly entreats
and exhorts that for God's sake, and the glory of his great name, and their
own salvation, and for the peace and welfare of the Nation; yea it adjures by
all that is desirable or commendable, the whole Body of our Communion in
general, and every faithful Soul in particular, to divest themselves of all
Animosities whatsoever, and to lop off immediately all dissolutions and
dissentions, lest they should be the causes of the dissipation of the Churches
of God in this Kingdom, which have been planted in the Blood of infinite
Martyrs, and preserved by the Zeal and Concord of our Fathers; and that they
would at length open their Eyes and see, and consider that the Churches Enemies
bottom all their designs of ruining us upon our own Intestine Dissentions, and
that by reason of these we are become very little, and exceeding despicable
with our Adversaries. And all Pastors and Elders of Churches are enjoined
diligently to procure the Reunion of the respective Members of their Flocks,
and to lend one another their helping-hand to effect so good a work, and
mightily to insist upon it in their pu^lick Sermons, and private Exhortations
and Remonstrances: And in case they should meet with contempt, scorn and
reproach in the discharge of this their duty, and that any one through an
obdurate perverseness should show himself implacable and irreconcilable; This
Assembly, according to that Authority which the Great God gives unto the
Ministers of his holy Word, denounces to them the dreadful Judgments of God,
and wishes that they may be had in Execration among and by all the Faithful;
yea, all the (ensures of the Church shall be exerted against such Refractory
persons, and the utmost rigor of our Discipline shall be inflicted and
executed upon them, lest the good Name of God should be blasphemed through our
sins, and that we may not contract upon our selves the guilt of the Churches
desolation; but rather that b the Bond of Peace and Fraternal Union, the Church
of God may send forth a sweet perfume among our Adversaries, and his holy Name
may be blessed and glorified by the Children of men.

9. And whereas in the prosecution of the said Reunion, the several persons
before mentioned to be employed in it, must needs be at considerable Expense;
this Assembly leaves that Affair unto the prudence of our Lords the General
Deputies, who shall apply themselves to the Lord of Candall, with this our
Order, to disburse Moneys for their necessary Charges. And the Lords the
General Deputies at Court, are ordered to complain unto their Majesty's, that
the Moneys granted by them by way of Augmentation unto our Churches are not
paid, nor have we the disposal, or management, or receipt of them; and they
shall again by word of mouth renew their former Instances, and vigorously
importune that the said Augmentation-Moneys, and all other sums belonging to
us, may be put into such hands as shall wholly depend upon our Churches, that
so according to the Warrants granted us for the said Moneys, and according to
the Promise made us, they may be paid in unto us without any defalcation or
diminutions, and that our poor Churches may be cased of that Penny in the Liver
(which the Receivers attribute unto themselves,) and their condition bettered,
if may be. And as to what sums have been advanced by the aforesaid Lords
Deputies, notice shall be given thereof unto the Provinces.

CHAP. XII. A Warrant signed for 45000 l. for the Churches.
FRiday the 22th of June, the Lord de Rouvray produced in this Assembly the
Original Grant of Augmentation of five and forty thousand Livers which it has
pleased His Majesty to bestow upon our Churches. And this Assembly ordered the
said Lord de Rouvray to return for us and for all the Churches, our most humble
thanks unto their Majesty's, who have by this their extraordinary Bounty laid
new obligations upon us to call upon our God with the greatest Ardency in our
Prayers, that he would bless and prosper their Majesty's Persons, Crown and
Government. And the said Grant was deposited in the hands of the Sieur Bonnet,
Pastor and Deputy of Xaintonge, who was to lodge it safely in the Archives of
Rochel; whereof he shall give advice by Letters under his own hand unto the
said Lord de Rouvray.

The Copy of that Warrant.
This first day of October, One thousand six hundred and eleven, the King being
at Paris, assisted by the Queen Regent his Mother in Council, having been well
informed for what considerations the late King of glorious memory had by a
Warrant of the third of April, One thousand five hundred ninety and eight,
granted unto his Subjects of the P. Reformed Religion, the yearly sum of five
and forty thousand Crowns to be employed in some secret Concerns of theirs: And
although His present Majesty be not obliged by those secret Articles, Warrants,
and Answers unto Memoirs made in favor of those his said Subjects, to increase
or augment the said sum; yet nevertheless, desiring as much as in him lies to
gratify and favor his laid Subjects, and that he may-give them a sense of his
good will and love to them, His Majesty, by the advice of the aforesaid Lady
the Queen Regent, and of his mere grace and liberality does grant unto those of
the said P. Reformed Religion, the abovementioned sum of five and forty
thousand Crowns, and over and above the same another yearly sum five and forty
thousand Livers as an Act of Bounty, which said Moneys he wills and o future it
be issued out of the General Fonds of his Treasury, by virtue of this present
Warrant, which to this purpose he has signed with his own hand, and is
counter-signed by me his Councillor in his Council of State, and Secretary of
his Commandments.

Signed Louis, and Lower, Philippeaux.

12. This Assembly gives full power to the Lords our General Deputies to pass
a contract with the Lord du Candal about the Receipt and management of the five
and forty thousand Livers Augmentation Money, and if possible they shall make
but one only Contract of the two sum, to wit, of that first granted, and of the
aforesaid Augmentation, and of their Receipt, always reserving the right of our
Churches.

13. The some General Deputies are charged to oppose themselves formally
against all persons whatsoever, that shall endeavor at Court to obtain any
Relief to the detriment of the body of the Churches in this Kingdom, and
contrary to the Union sworn by us, and advice shall be given hereof unto the
Churches, that so the Pastors more especially, and the Consistories may do
their duty in suppressing such like motions and Enterprises, as being
scandalous, and menacing the Churches with great confusions.

14. This Assembly injoyneth all the Consistories of those places, where the
Courts of Parliament and Chambers of the Edict are established, to remonstrate
unto the Counselors professing our holy Reformed Religion their timorous
luke-warmness in not opposing and resisting the Verification and Recording of
those Letters of Abolition, it being their special duty to have opposed them,
and to have demanded that their Act of Opposal might be recorded: Moreover the
Consistories of those self-same Towns are exhorted to present unto the said
Parliaments and Chambers of the Edict the General Declaration of this National
Synod concerning those Letters of Abolition.

15. This Assembly ordains that for the future the Provinces shall send unto
the National Synods a Catalogue of their Pastors in actual service, and of the
Proposans maintained by them, attested by the Manual Subscription of the
Moderators and Scribes of their Synods: Otherwise there shall be no reckoning
made of the Rolls brought in, when as the Moneys given us by his Majesty shall
come to be distributed.

16. This Assembly yielding to the necessity of the times, and observing that
whatsoever Petitions and Addresses have been made unto their Majesty's by our
extraordinary Deputations, are always ill resented, and misconstrued, and
became so very unpleasing and distastful to their Majesty's, that they would
never vouchsafe a kind or acceptable answer to them; therefore it does at
present conceive it best for us to keep our selves unto the ordinary ways of
humble Petitions and Remonstrances, by the mouths of our General Deputies,
Hoping that the goodness and clemency of the King and of the Queen Regent his
Mother, and that the Justice of our Lords in the Privy Council will by this
means, the former having been disliked by them, grant that we shall at last
reap and receive the fruit and benefit of them. And to this purpose the said
General Deputies shaving rendered our most humble thanks unto their Majesty's
for their gracious favors conferred upon their most Loyal and most Humble, and
most Dutiful Subjects of the Reformed Religion, and particularly for the
Augmentation of fifteen thousand Crowns a year granted to our Ministers) are
charged most humbly to Petition their Majesty's, that they would be pleased to
exempt them from that necessity which is imposed upon them (and now with
greater severity than ever, and contrary to that Liberty of Conscience promised
us) of stiling our selves, of the pretended Reformed Religion: Because we had
rather and more willingly suffer the greatest torments, than stand obliged to
condemn with our own mouths our most holy Religion. And their Majesty's also
shall be requested to grant leave unto us in all Cities and Towns where* there
be a number of families of our Religion, to keep lesser Schools, for the
Education of our Children, and that those Restrictions and Modifications
annexed unto the answer given to that article in our last complaint and Bill of
Grievances may be taken off the file: This being a matter which can never be
dismembered nor severed from our Liberty of Conscience. And whereas contrary to
the hopes conceived at first by the Churches, when they sent their
Commissioners from every Province, this Assembly is fully assured from all
quarters, that the far greater part of our demands and remonstrances have been
rejected, and that they have been all turned over to the Privy Council, and
that it may be truly said, that after all the great coyl and noise made,
nothing has been yielded us, except a few Burying places, and those also in
diverse places to the detriment and disadvantage of our Religion, the said
Deputies are charged to complain thereof unto their Majesty's, and most humbly
to petition that it may be remedied and redressed and to this purpose the
Memoirs of the Provinces and Churches groaning under these oppressions shall be
put into their hands, that so some effectual course may be taken for their
relief, and by such methods as they shall judge most fit to effect and compass
it; and they shall farther insist on the Revocation of the Letters of Abolition
verified in the Courts of Parliament. And whereas it is a matter of great
importance and concernment to all the Provinces, that they be duly acquainted
with the issue and success of our Renewed and Repeated Supplications unto their
Majesty's, the aforesaid Deputies are enjoined, that as soon as they shall have
received an answer to them, they do immediately transmit it unto the Provinces.

17. The Sieurs Bigot and de la Comb were Deputed by this Assembly to
prosecute at Law Monsieur Palot, that so the Churches Moneys remaining in his
hands, and with which he was entrusted, and which he owes unto us, and would
never render an account of them, may be recovered. And to this purpose it
gives Letters of Attorney unto the said Sieurs Bigot and de la Comb, with
full power to receive all offers from Monsieur Palots Partners, and to treat
with them in the Name of all the Provinces, and authorizeth them to accquit the
said Partners of any sums which may be due by the said Palot even to the one
third of the whole, provided the said Partners will make good the other two
thirds, if they cannot compound with them upon better terms, that so the two
thirds may come free info the Churches hands. But and if they cannot obtain
better terms, and that they may be enabled to defray the Costs of this suit,
they shall receive an yearly allowance of fifteen Hundred Livers, to be paid
them quarterly by the Lord of Gandal, out of those Moneys which are to be paid
into the Churches for the october quarter of the year one thousand six hundred
and Eleven, and this to be done proportionably every year, quarter and day as
long as the suit continues, and we farther promise, that if it shall please God
to succeed their care and diligence with his Blessing, to give them a
considerable gratuity for their pains. And the said Sieurs Bigot and de la
Comb are ordered to advise and consult with the Lords General Deputies,
without whose Approbation they may not receive any offers from the Partners,
nor act any thing in the said process. And the said Lords Deputies shall
deliver unto the said Bigot and de la Comb all Papers concerning this matter,
and notify unto them at what time they may be in Paris, and the said de la
Comb is allowed for his journey thither the sum of one hundred and fifty
Livers, which shall be paid him by the Lord du Candal out of the forementioned
quarter, of the sum of fifteen hundred Livers.

CHAP. XIII. Of Particular Matters.
Monsieur Archimaud came unto this Assembly with Letters from several persons
living in the County of Venisse and Archbishopric of Avignon, and with Letters
also from the Lord of Saint A^ban, requesting that according to a Decree made
in their Synod at Montdragon, held by his Majesty's authority, they might be
admitted to sit and vote among us as another Province, and farther, that they
might be assisted with some Moneys, at least to help forward the meeting of
their Arbitrators, as it had been agreed by them. This Assembly accepting of
their Agreement with us in the Confession of faith owned in all the Churches of
this Kingdom, does profess to embrace them in this Union as dear Brethren, to
whom they are ready to impart all Christian Love, and are sorry that they
cannot in this Assembly, which is purely Ecclesiastical, give them the
privilege of being a distinct Province, that belonging properly to a Political
Assembly, unto which for this purpose they must apply themselves; and farther,
we cannot at present assist them with any Relief Suitable to their necessity,
by which this Assembly might give them a solid and substantial token of that
good will it bears them: However the effects and fruits thereof according to
our ability shall be manifested upon all occasions. And their Affair at Court
was most affectionately recommended to our Lords General Deputies residing near
their Majesty's.

2. Monsieur de Vialle Lieutenant Criminal of Montauban tendered Letters unto
this Assembly, humbly petitioning that the Sieur Chamier Pastor of Montlimard
might be bestowed upon the University of Montauban, to read and Profess
Divinity in it. And the Lord du Plessis also at the same time did by the Sieur
Perillau demand him for the University of Saumur to be Professor there. But
upon hearing the Deputies of the Church of Montlimard, and the Deputies of the
Province of Dolphiny, who produced Letters from Monsieur de Gouvernett by the
hands of Monsieur de Chambaud, and presented them unto this Assembly, they
declared against the Interests both of Montauban and Saumur, because of their
particular right and title unto Monsieur Chamier, and they urged farther that
by the Decrees of three National Synods he could not be removed from his
Church; And having heard the protestation of Monsieur Chamier, declaring that
he had no inclination to remove, and that he would leave himself wholly to the
disposal of this Assembly; for diverse Considerable reasons, notwithstanding all
these oppositions it was resolved that the Sieur Chamier should be put into the
distribution of Pastors and Professors, And the Church of Montlimard should be
provided of another Pastor.

3. There being a very great difference between the Churches of Nismes and
Vallence about Monsieur Murdt recalled by the Church of Vallence to be their
Pastor, as the Assembly was composing and determining it, the Sieur Mallamont
Elder of the Church of Nismes came in, and accused that Act of the Colloquy of
Nismes presented by the Sieur Bansillon as false and forged, who yet avouched
the contrary, and tendered for proof thereof the whole Act of the said Colloquy,
but not signed. This Assembly not being able to Judge of the pretended forgery,
remanded back the said Bansillon and Mallamont unto the next meeting of the
Colloquy of Nismes, there to end the difference betwixt them, and the said
Colloquy is enjoined on pain of Censure always for the future to see their Acts
Subscribed and Attested.

4. Monsieur, Richaud Pastor of Mazac presented unto this Assembly Letters from
his Father, broken with age and poverty, requesting that his portion of Moneys
from the Kings bounty might be sent unto him into the Lower Languedoc, where he
desires to retire and end his days: This his request was granted. And the
Province of Lower Languedoc is enjoined to pay in the first place before any
other Pastor without the least diminution the said Monsieur Richaud his portion
assigned him as Pastor, and as every other pastor has or shall have, according
to what may be hereafter decreed in this Assembly.

5. Information was given in to this Assembly that in the Province of Higher
Languedoc there were diverse Pastors, who did not reside in their Churches.
Whereupon that Province was expressly enjoined to see to it that every Pastor
might have a dwelling house, and personally reside with his Flock, and that
they Censure the disobedient, excepting the Sieurs Bichetteau and Richaud,
according to the report made in this Assembly by Monsieur Malleret Deputy of
the National Synod of St. Maixant, who was Commissionated to go unto the very
places, and to take notice of all the difficulties pretended or real on this
Subject.

6. The Sieur du Puy Pastor of the Church of St. Stephen and St. Marcellin in
Forest demanding in the Name of his Church to be separated from the Province
of Burgundy, and joined to that of Vivaretz, and also to be assisted with
portions, and some other sums of Money, for the better support of his Church,
which is threatened with utter ruin: This Assembly does readily grant them
their desire, and that they shall be separated from the Province of Burgundy,
and be joined to that of Vivaretz, and orders that three annual portions be
given them for their Relief in cafe of necessity, which shall be paid them
without abatements until the next National Synod.

7. The Sieur Moze Minister of the Gospel, having complained in this Assembly,
that he was suspected in the Assembly of Saumur to have driven on some secret
designs at Montellimard against Monsieur Chamier, tho without any ground or
occasion on his part; and the said Monsieur Chamier having declared that at his
return from the said Assembly, he could not meet with any evidence whereby to
convict the said Moze: This Assembly does assent unto the truth of what is
declared by the said Moze, and it shall be improved as is Meet and Equitable,
for his service; but withal it cannot but take in ill part the actings of the
Synod of Dolphiny, which discharged him from one Church without giving him
another.

8. The Colloquy of Usez is charged to pass over unto Nismes, and to demand of
that Consistory the Original Letters of Captain Gautier which Monsieur Ferrier
avoucheth to be among the Papers of that Consistory: And to this purpose the
Copy which the Sieur Faye delivered into this Assembly was put into the hands
of Monsieur Chamier, who promised that he would tear in pieces both that Copy
and its Original, according to the desire of this Assembly.

9. The Sum of two hundred Livers was ordered unto Andrew Chanforan Son of
Monsieur Chanforan Pastor of the Church of Pouzain, and to be paid by the
Province of Provence, in lieu of an exhibition which the said Province was
obliged to allow the said Andrew as a Proposan, since the last Synod of Rochell
until that of St. Maixant; and whereas Monsieur Chanforan the Father demands of
the same Province certain Arrears of Moneys granted by the King, and received
by the Sieur Callian upon the portion assigned to the Church of la Cost,
whereof he was a member in the year one thousand six hundred and eight, this
Assembly ordains that the aforesaid Province shall pay in unto the said
Monsieur Chanforan the sum of two and forty Livers, claimed by him both for his
Arrears, and from the Church of Muil, which was annexed unto that of la Cost,
saving always to the said Church of la Cost their power of producing an
Acquittance under the hand of the said Chanforan, and to the Province thereof
redemanding six Crowns upon the portion of the Church of Muil, as annexed to
that of la Cost, and the aforesaid sums amounting to two hundred and forty
two Livers, shall be taken out of the first Moneys which become due unto the
Province of Provence.

10. Monsieur Perrin is desired to review his History of the Albingenses which
has been perused by our Commissioners, and to present it finished unto the
Synod or Dolphiny, that according to the desire of this Assembly it may be
printed.

11. The demand of Gilbert Vernoix Printer at Bergerac about a recompense for
his having Printed some certain books, is remanded back unto the Synod of Lower
Guyenne, that he may be satisfied, as the said Synod shall think meet.

12. The Deputies of Poictou requesting that the Province of Normandy might
fulfill that Promise made by them in the National Synod held at Gergeau, for the
relief of Monsieur de Vatable, who is overwhelmed with extreme poverty, and to
whom there is due the sum of an hundred Livers by the Church of Luneray: This
present Synod ordains that the said Province of Normandy do fully content and
satisfy the said Vatable, and pay one half of what is due unto him out of their
own purses, and take up the other half from the Church of Luneray, in which he
was Minister.

13. The Deputies of Xaintonge redemanding from the Province of Poictou two
Churches said by them to have been severed from their Province, are remanded
back again unto the said Province of Poictou, before whom they shall open their
complaints, and in case they cannot agree among themselves, they shall refer
the difference unto a neighbor Colloquy or Synod, with full power to compose
it.

14. The Deputies from the Churches in the Principality of Bearn, having
presented their desires according to the Instructions given them by their own
Synod in Writing; This Assembly replies unto their first Article, that they
cannot approve of the actions of such Provinces, as hinder their Students in
Theology from Studying in the University of Bearn, and it accepts also of the
Recommendations given by those Deputies of the Church of Bigorre, of Souilles
and of Astaingues: And as to their second and third demands, they were advised
to observe the Canons of our Church Discipline; and as to the last Article in
their Instructions, this Assembly can give them none other answer than this,
that it highly applauds of their Zeal and good affection, and leaves them to
their liberty of sending to our National Synods either one or more Pastors and
Elders.

15. The Sieur Beauvay complaining by Letters of the Province of Higher
Languedoc for not fulfilling that decree of the National Synod of St. Maixant,
which enjoined the said Province to pay him the sum of one hundred Livers owing
him by the Sieur Durdes a Minister in the said Province: This Assembly
ordains that the said hundred Livers shall be detained in the hands of the
Lord du Candall, or of his Deputy, to be given unto the Sieur Carthaud Pastor
of Diep in Normandy, that he may pay them unto the said Sieur de Beauvais.

16. The Sieur Champoleon demanding by Letters from this Assembly to be
reimburst of his expenses of his Journey from Saumur to Dolphiny, and from
Dolphiny back again to Saumur, where he found the Assembly broke up, and which
Journey he undertook at the command of the said Assembly: This Synod orders him
to have recourse unto another Political General Assembly for his answer.

17. Relation being made in this Assembly of those unheard of Riots committed
by the Sieur de Tremoulet, in the Church of Servest in Vivaretz, the Colloquy
of Annonay is ordered to meet as soon as possible they can, and to examine the
matter of fact, and by the Authority of this Synod judicially to censure and
condemn it. And in the mean while, the Pastors shall Assemble the Consistory of
that place, and Summon before them the said du Tremoulet, and all his Partners
in that Scandal, and in case of their nonappearance, immediately to suspend
them from the Lords Table, and to denounce this their suspension publicly
before the whole Congregation.

18. Report being made of the extreme Poverty of Mr. William Papin, who was
discharged from his Ministry, and is now Emeritus, and at present residing in
Dolphiny; this Assembly gives him freely one portion free of all Taxes for his
Subsistence, which shall be drawn out of the Province of Vivaretz, where he
once served, and given unto the Province of Dolphiny, with order that they pay
it him punctually.

19. The Churches of the Baylywick of Gex reported by their Deputy the Sieur du
Pain, how that they were dispossessed of all their Ancient Church Lands and
Stock, and that their Temples wherein they worshipped God, were taken from them,
notwithstanding all their Petitions and Endeavors to preserve them. This
Assembly gave express order to our Lords the General Deputies in Court, that
they be very urgent with their Majesty's, that the twelve hundred Crowns
granted unto the said Churches, and taken from the five and forty thousand
Livers of Augmentation lately given unto our Churches, may be paid out of some
other Fund, and that the said Augmentation-Moneys may come in wholly and freely
without cloggs and defalcations unto our Churches: And farther, that the
Churches of Gex may be assisted with some Relief toward their Building of
other Temples.

20. The Church of Montpellier was censured for seeking Monsieur de Faucheur to
be their Pastor by oblique and very unbecoming ways: And the Church of Annonay
also fell under the same Censure for driving that unworthy Bargain with the
said Church of Montpellier.

21. The Lords General Deputies informed this Assembly how that the Church of
Bergerac deserting the Union of our Churches, had by undue means procured to
themselves the sum of fifteen hundred Livers out of the five and forty thousand
Livers of Augmentation toward the maintenance of their College, to the great
prejudice of all our Churches, and especially of their own Province. This
Assembly judges them worthy of the greatest and severest Censures, and
enjoyneth their Provincial Synod to make them yield up that Warrant gotten by
them for the said sum: And in case of their refusal, the said Synod shall
denounce unto them by the Authority of this Assembly, that their portions out
of the King's Moneys shall not be paid them, but detained in the hands of the
Receiver General of the Province: And if it be found that any one of their
Pastors have tampered in this Disunion, they shall be suspended from their
Charges, and all the other Delinquents shall be censured as Schismatics and
Deserters of our Union: And farther, it is ordained, that none of their Pastors
or Elders shall be received as Members of the Provincial or National Synods,
until such time as they have fully submitted themselves to our common Order,
and so receive their portions in the usual and ordinary ways which are
appointed them.

22. The Affairs of the Churches in the Principality of Bearn are particularly
recommended to the care of our Lords General Deputies at Court.

23. The Province of Dolphiny having not brought in to this Assembly the
Account of their distribution of the Charity-Moneys gathered, and deposited
with them for the poor Refugees of the Marquisate of Salluces, as they were
enjoined:This Assembly does once more command and enjoin them, on pain of
Censure, to perfect the said Account, and to bring it in to the next National
Synod. And whereas in consequence hereof the Sieur de la Comb presented an
Acquittance which the Provincial Synod held at Ambrun the seventeeth day of
June, One thousand six hundred and ten, had given hi Assessor, Guyonne and
Jullien Scribes, the aforesaid Sieur de la Comb is discharged by this present
Assembly of the sums of seventeen hundred fifty nine Livers and eleven Sous,
which had been delivered to him in the National Synod of St. Maixant by the
Provinces of Berry and Britain, by whom also the said Sieur is acquitted, he
having deposited them in the hands of the Province of Dolphiny.

24. A difference having risen between the Church of Sezane and the Sieur
Normund, Pastor of Belesme, about some Moneys which the said Normund had
received in the name of the Church of Sezane, he having visited them in hopes
to be called unto the Ministry among them, the Deputies of the Isle of France
were appointed to compose it; which Agreement now perfected by them, is
approved and confirmed by this Assembly, and it ordains, that the said Sieur
Normund do out of the Moneys received by him, restore sixty Livers unto the
said Church, and pay it for their use into the hands of Monsieur Montigny,
Pastor of the Church of Paris, and this within three months, within which time
also the said Church shall restore unto the said Normund his Books and Clothes
in their custody, and so they shall give mutual Discharges and Releases unto
one another.

25. The Deputies of Anjou demanding reimbursement from the Province of
Brittany of moneys expended by them, and paid by the Church of Saumur toward
the maintenance of Giles Drisonieurs formerly a Monk in the Province of
Brittany; and the Province of Brittany contesting with them to the Contrary.
The whole affair is dismissed over to the Province of Normandy which is finally
to determine it.

26. Monsieur Moulin having tendered unto this Assembly a Latin book made by him
upon the controversy with Piscator concerning justification, The Sieurs Sonys,
la Fresnaye, le Faucheur, and Bonnett, were ordered each of them to peruse and
read it, and make report of it, who gave in a very honorable Account of it, as
containing sound and orthodox Doctrine, and contributing very much unto the
Churches Edification; whereupon Monsieur du Moulin had the thanks of the whole
Assembly given him for his great labors taken in the conference at Paris on
this Article in defense of the Truth. Yet nevertheless lest that reunion
projected in this Assembly should be retarded, it advises him not to publish
it, till the sitting of the next National Synod; during which time he shall
send a Copy of his book unto every Province, that so this matter being more
carefully examined, it may come forth with general Approbation and Satisfaction.

27. The difference between the Isle of France, and le Sieur de le Touch
Pastor of Mouchamp in Poictou is dismissed over to the next Provincial Synod of
Berry, who by authority of this Assembly shall put a final period to it.

28. A Letter was read from the Inhabitants and Consistory of the Town of
Clerac, and their demands heard also by the mouth of Monsieur Ricotier their
Pastor: But this Assembly devolved the whole matter over to the next General
Politic Assembly, then and there to be provided for according to the Decree of
the last Assembly of Saumur, 1611.

29. The Sieur Bigot having tendered Letters from the Church of Paris,
earnestly requiring that the Sieur Chauve, Minister of the Church of Sommieres,
might be given them for their Pastor, as also the Letters of the said Chauve
written unto the said Church of Paris. This Assembly judges that the desire of
the Church of Paris cannot be gratified, considering the great opposition made
by the Province of Lower Languedoc, and the Answer made them by the said
Monsieur Chauve.

30. The Charges of the Deputies of Higher Languedoc unto this Assembly, shall
be defrayed out of the portions of His Majesty's Moneys belonging unto that
Province.

31. The Sieur Chamier is granted unto the Church of Montauban for Pastor, and
Professor of Divinity in their University, upon this condition, that the said
Church and University do give him full contentment as to his Stipend; and the
said Sieur Chamier shall betake himself within three months unto Montauban, and
the Wages of Professor in Theology, and the portion of the King's Moneys shall
be counted to him from the first day of July next coming.

32. The Sieur Ferrier is given Pastor unto the Church of Montlimart, and
thither he shall transport himself within one months time after the
signification of this present Order to him, and he shall cease Preaching in the
Church of Nismes upon the penalties before mentioned.

33. The Church of Annonay had the Sieur Moze given it for Pastor, and he is
charged to mind his duty, as also his Church is required to give him full
content, and the Province of Dolphiny shall give a portion unto the said Sieur,
Moze proportionable to the time in which he had nothing assigned him.

34. The Sieur Escoffier, Pastor of the Church de la Chastre in Berry, is
ordered, on pain of suspension, to content the Province of Dolphiny for their
Charges expended on him whilst he was a Scholar.

35. The Province of Berry being indebted to the Churches the sum of fifteen
hundred Livers Moneys belonging to the Academy of Boisbelle: This Assembly
forgiveth them the one half, and orders that they make restitution of the
other half, viz. seven hundred and fifty Livers within three years, they paying
a third part of the said sum every year.

CHAP. XIV. Of Colleges and Universities.
1. THE Church of Clermont in Beauvoysin was censured for not bringing in the
Account of the Distribution of the three hundred Livers granted to the College
erected in their said Town, and the Province of the Isle of France, shall
receive that Account from them, and exhibit it unto the Province of Berry; and
in case the said Moneys have been ill managed and dispensed, they shall be
deprived of that Right and Privilege claimed by them for a College.

2. The Province of Guyenne was severely censured for not doing their duty, in
making the Church of Bergerac come to account with them, and they be enjoined
to bring the said Account for the time past unto the Synod of Higher Languedoc.
And in case they comply with the command of this Assembly, to quit their grant
of fifteen hundred Livers, the three hundred Livers which were ordinarily given
them, shall be continued unto their College; but if they do not, that Province
shall not claim any Right in the said three hundred Livers and Augmentation.

3. The Province of Provence also was censured for not bringing in their
Account of the Moneys given them for their College, and they are ordered to
tender in that Account unto the next Synod of Dolphiny; and in case of failure
herein, they shall also forfeit their Right and Claim unto a College.

4. The Province of Poictou also was censured for not having brought in their
Account of their College, and they were ordered to tender it unto the Province
of Xaintonge; and in case of failure herein, we declare their Privilege of a
College to be forfeited; and farther, they be enjoined to agree among
themselves about a certain place where they may erect a College.

5. The Account brought in by the Province of Berry concerning their College,
was accepted and approved.

6. The Account brought in by the Province of Xaintouge for their College, was
also allowed and approved.

7. The Account of the Province of Burgundy for their College is remanded back
again to be more exactly revised by them.

8. The Province of Brittany shall audit their Accounts for a College in the
next Synod of Anjou; and in case of failure herein, they shall forfeit their
Privilege and Claim unto a College; nor shall the said Province receive a
farthing token of the Moneys granted and designed for a College.

9. The Province of Normandy was censured for bringing in a partial Account
concerning their College, and they are turned over to the next Synod of the
Isle of France, there to perfect their Accounts, or else they shall be deprived
of their Right unto a College.

10. The Consuls and Inhabitants of the Town of Privas complaining that the
Synod of Aubennas had taken away their College which they had maintained for
diverse years past, by the encouragement given them from the Provincial Synod
held at Annonay: This Assembly decrees, that the said College shall be fixed
and settled in this Town of Privas, and be assisted with the same Salary as
other Colleges, the said Consuls adding according to their promises and offers
four hundred Livers of their own common Moneys, and they are desired to
discharge their duty in maintaining the said College, as they have hitherto
done to their great honor, and their former Accounts are all allowed and
approved.

11. All Accounts about Colleges which have been redemanded shall be brought
unto the next National Synod there to be revised and approved.

12. It Is left to the prudence of the Provinces to erect as many Schools and
Colleges more as they can, or else to assist those already in being with some
better Maintenance.

13. All the Provinces shall have Colleges, excepting such as have Maintenance
assigned for Universities, yet nevertheless those very Provinces besides their
Universities may erect Colleges at their own Charges; and that of Languedoc
shall give unto the said College of Beziers the sum of four hundred Livers to
be raised out of the Stock of their University-Moneys, amounting to two
thousand six hundred Livers.

14. The Provinces requesting that their Colleges might be enlarged in number,
and better provided for with Maintenance: It was resolved that their number
should not be augmented, but that every Province which has Right unto a
College shall have four hundred Livers a year allowed them for their College,
until the next National Synod.

15. Since that Decree about the Accounts of our Academies at Nismes and
Montpellier (which amounted to the sum of sixteen thousand eight hundred and
fourscore Livers) the Deputies of Lower Languedoc having remonstrated unto this
Assembly, that in the Account of the University of Nismes, there was a
resumption of sixteen hundred and four Livers, eighteen Sous, and eight
Deniers, owing from the Sieur Palot, whilst he was Receiver General; and seven
hundred and twenty Livers in the Account of the University of Montpellier, they
petitioned this Assembly, that they would be pleased to allow thereof in
payment, and that the said sums might be deducted upon the Debet of the said
Account, as also that there might be allowed unto the Sieurs Ferrier and Gigord
for the years 1601, 1602, 1603, and 1604, the sum of sixteen hundred Livers
wanting to make up the sum of six hundred granted them by an Ordinance of the
Provincial Synod of Montpellier, and this both for the time past and to come;
and farther, to allow upon the Debet of the same Account unto the Sieur Gigord
his Wages for the years One thousand six hundred and nine, ten and eleven,
which were not allowed him upon pretense of his being absent; and farther, that
they would be pleased to allow toward the Impression of certain Books, the
sums which were razed out. This Assembly did hereupon ordain, that upon the
Debt of the aforesaid Accounts there shall be allowed and deducted the sum of
sixteen hundred Livers unto the said Sieurs Gigord and Ferrier for the years
abovementioned, besides what was allowed them for their Wages by the
Commissioners, and for the years 1609, 1610 and 1611. And unto the Sieur Gigord
(notwithstanding what was alleged against him for his absence) the sum of one
thousand and fifty Livers, according to the Account stated in the National
Synod of St. Maixant; and farthermore, the said sums owing by Pallot, provided
that they make it appear by his Account that they are due unto them, and not
received from him, and that the overplus amounting to eleven thousand one
hundred and nine Livers, shall be paid out of the Moneys due unto the Churches
of the said Province, as it shall be appointed in the Dividend; and for the
seven hundred and one and fifty Livers due unto the Heirs of Monsieur Mousnier
deceased, who in his lifetime was Professor of Divinity in the University of
Nismes, as appears from the close and upshot of that Universities Account, they
shall be paid out of those Moneys which may be owing the said Province of Lower
Languedoc by the Lord du Candall, or his Deputy, he being now at Privas, from
the remainders of Moneys to come in for the years One thousand six hundred and
four, five and six; And where they cannot be entirely paid, they shall be
reprised out of the Moneys which shall hereafter become due.

16. Out of the Arrearages due unto the Churches from the remaining Moneys of
the years six hundred and four, five and six, amounting to the sum of two and
twenty thousand five hundred threescore and fifteen Livers, the Assembly
ordains, that the tenth portion of the said Moneys be given unto the Sieur
Vignier as a Gratuity and acknowledgment of his Charges and great Pains taken
in the Writing and Printing of his Book entitled, Le Theater de l'Antechrist.
And the fortieth part of the said Moneys is freely given unto the Sieur Cuper,
Deputy of the Lord du Candal, and the said portions shall be paid, only with an
abatement of a Sous in the Liver, unless the said Sieur Vignier be pleased to
accept of five hundred Livers clear of all encumbrances or defalcations.

17. Out of the best Moneys of Arrearages due unto the Churches by the Lord du
Candal for the years six hundred four, five and six, there shall be given the
sum of three hundred Livers unto Monsieur Tompson Pastor of the Church of
Chaflaignerey to help to bear his Charges in Printing his book entitled; la
Chasse de la Besle Roman, as also unto the Sieur Sonis Professor of Theology
in the University of Montauban there shall be given the sum of three hundred
Livers out of the same Moneys, as a gratuity for his worthy Labors.

18. The Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc having given their reasons why
the Churches of Sevennes and Gevaudan, tho separated from them should bear one
half of the half of eleven thousand one hundred, and some odd Livers, for which
the whole Province were jointly together become debtors unto the General stock
of the Churches: This Assembly ordains, that both the one and other Synod
shall make restitution of the said sums by equal portions, both alike, and this
within the term of three years, and they shall bring in their Accounts for it
unto the next National Synod.

19. Whereas upon auditing the Accounts of the Province of Higher Languedoc for
the University of Montauban in this Assembly it appeared that they owed five
thousand, four hundred, and sixteen Livers, thirteen Sous, and four Deniers, it
is now decreed, that the said Province shall repay this Money within the term
of three years by equal portions yearly, and the first payment to begin this
very year, until the whole debt be fully satisfied; not but that the said
Province may take its course in Law against those who have had the management
of those Moneys.

20. The Assembly having debated about the number of Universities to be
maintained by us, have resolved that till the next National Synod, the
Universities of Montauban, of Saumur, of Nismes and Montpellier shall be
maintained, but according to those Laws and Orders which shall be hereafter
prescribed to them; and in case they do not bring in unto the next National
Synod a good and satisfactory Account of their Moneys, they shall from this
very day be razed and dissolved.

21. In Regulating the Professors for our Universities of Saumur and Montauban,
this Assembly Ordained that there should be two Professors of Divinity in full
employment, and to each of them there shall be given the yearly sum of seven
hundred Livers, and they shall also in case of Ability be permitted to serve in
the Ministry, the Church compounding with them about their Salary, and the
portion of Royal Moneys shall be reckoned as a part thereof: And as touching
the other Professors those Orders made by the National Synod of St. Maixant
shall be observed, excepting always that the first Regents, if capable of
teaching Rhetoric, and Professing Eloquence, shall only receive four hundred
Livers Salary, and thus there shall be given one hundred Livers over and above
the three hundred formerly assigned unto the first Regent at Saumur, and an
hundred Livers more unto Montauban for their first Regent also, over and above
the wages he now receives from the said City.

22. And to every Professor of Divinity in the University of Nismes and
Montpellier that is in full employment, there is ordained the sum of seven
hundred Livers, fourteen hundred for the two, and to the Professor of Hebrew
four hundred Livers, to both eight hundred: and to the College of Beziers the
four hundred Livers beforementioned, the whole sum thus granted amounting to
two thousand six hundred Livers, and in case the Moneys be not thus employed
according to the purpose and intendment of this Assembly, that then they shall
be returned and re-entred into the Common stock of our Moneys.

23. How and After what manner the University exercises shall be performed, and
how these Universities are to be governed: This Assembly injoyns the Council of
these Universities to prepare a Model, as each of them conceives best and most
expedient for them, and let it be brought into the next National Synod, that
then there may be a General Canon enacted and established for them.

24. The University of Montauban demanding the Sieur Gardesy Pastor of Mauvezin
to be given unto the said University for Professor of the Greek Tongue, and
that their Charges in getting and transporting Professors to them might be
considered and defrayed: For the first this Assembly sends them back unto their
own Province there to be heard about this their inquiry; and as to the last
about paying their charges, it could not in the least be granted them.

25. The Deputies of Dolphiny requesting to be assisted with some Moneys to
help to defray their Charges in maintaining their University of Die, this
Assembly to gratify them once for all ordains that the said Province shall
receive out of the Moneys owed us by the Province of Lower Languedoc the sum of
three thousand Livers, and they may stop the said sum, it now lying in the
hands of the Lord du Candal, who shall make payment of it unto that person
appointed by the Province of Dolphiny to receive it out of the portions that
would befall the said Province in the Dividend: And this sum shall be a Fund for
the Province of Dolphiny, and the product hereof shall go to the support and
maintenance of their aforesaid University, nor shall the principal be ever
alienated; and a just account of the whole shall be brought into the next
National Synod.

26. The Lord of Candal shall keep in his hands out of the Moneys to be
distributed by him unto the Provinces of Higher and Lower Languedoc, Sevennes
and Berry, the sums they are found indebted to us in the Arrears of their
Accounts for Universities and Colleges, to wit, from the Province of Lower
Languedoc and Sevennes eleven thousand one hundred and nine Livers, from the
Province of Higher Languedoc five thousand two hundred forty and four Livers,
from the Province of Berry seven hundred and fifty Livers, according to the
terms prescribed the said Provinces, that so the said sums may be distributed
by the said Lord du Candal according to the Order of this Assembly, viz. from
the Moneys owing by the Higher Languedoc two thousand Livers to Monsieur
Chamier, and from the Moneys owing by the Lower Languedoc and Sevennes three
hundred Livers unto Monsieur Perrin, and these two Ministers shall be paid out
of the first Moneys detained in the hands of the Lord du Candal for the first
year.

27. The Province of Anjou having brought in their Accounts of Moneys appointed
to the University of Saumur, was found behind-hand indebted six hundred sixty
and one Liver, and one Sous, which sum the said Province shall be accountable
for unto the next National Synod, and the Originals of those Accounts are
ordered to be delivered unto the Deputies of Xaintonge, that by them they may
be lodged in the Archives of Rochel.

28. The Account of the University of Montauban having been brought in to this
Assembly, together with the difficulties about it for the years One thousand
five hundred ninety and eight, and ninety nine, when they had no Professors in
their University, as likewise for the following years, in which a part of those
Moneys appointed for their University, had been employed toward the
maintenance of their College; as also part of the Moneys of the years ninety
eight and ninety nine had been thus diverted and employed: The Synod thought
fit to allow of those Moneys designed for their University for the years ninety
eight, ninety nine, sixteen hundred, and sixteen hundred and one, and the
others following, which had been profitably employed in the maintenance both of
their College and University; and ordains with reference to those aforesaid
years of One thousand five hundred ninety and eight, ninety nine, and sixteen
hundred, that the Moneys which had been employed in the year sixteen hundred,
shall only be allowed of, without any regard had unto the employment made of
the overplus in the years following, or to the Account of the Receipt which
the said University should have given for those aforesaid years fourscore and
eighteen, nineteen and sixteen hundred, amounting to nine thousand two hundred
sixty five Livers, sixteen Sous, and four Deniers, and the Expense to two
thousand two hundred forty five Livers, and eighteen Sous; and there was found
in the Receipt which should have been made by the said University, that it was
indebted in seven thousand and nineteen Livers, eighteen Sous, and four
Deniers: Out of which sum deducting two thousand five hundred ninety and nine
Livers, which the said University should have received from the Sieur Palot for
three quarters of the year One thousand five hundred and ninety eight, and
which are brought in by Reprisal, to be recovered by the Churches from the said
Palot, the Province of Higher Languedoc remains indebted the sum of one
thousand four hundred and sixteen Livers, thirteen Sous, and four Deniers,
which they shall pay in at the terms appointed by the aforementioned Ordinance.

29. This Synod was informed, how that certain Churches in the Lower Guyenne,
lying on the Frontiers of Bearn, as Tartar, Mont de Marsan, Lauze, Bigorre,
Soulez, and some others, were now and then assisted by the Pastors of Bearn,
and yet were put upon the Catalogue of Churches actually served, that so they
might have the portions ordained for every Pastor in the Lower Guyenne. This
Synod does not at all approve or allow that those Churches should be thus
inserted into the Catalogue; however, it leaves the matter unto the
consideration of the next National Synod, and commands the said Province to
provide Pastors out of hand for those Churches, and such as may personally
reside among them, and be in actual service to them, and none else, to receive
their portions; whereof the said Province shall yield up a good Account, or
else be bound to make restitution of every one of those respective portions.

30. The twelve Pastors in the Land and Bayliwick of Gex, shall receive by way
of recompense for the loss of their Church-stock, which was once in their
possession, the sum of twelve hundred Crowns out of the Augmentation-Moneys;
and although the Joynt-Interest of all our Churches lies near the heart of
this Assembly, yet because of the remonstrances and importunities of the
Deputies of Burgundy, it grants over and above the twelve hundred Crowns unto
the said Pastors the sum of six hundred Livers to be divided equally among
them, but on this condition, that they shall engage their people to contribute
according to their ability toward their maintenance; and of this they shall
bring in Evidence and good Proof unto the next National Synod, or otherwise
they shall be deprived of all manner of Assistance and Relief from us.

31. The Province of Burgundy is enjoined to provide two Pastors for the
Churches of Maringues and Paillac, and to give them both two free portions out
of those two and thirty assigned in the dividend unto their Province, and they
shall give an account hereof unto the next National Synod.

31. The two portions formerly conferred upon the Church of Aubenas by the
foregoing Synods, are now left to the free Disposal of the Province of
Vivaretz, which shall receive in full seven and thirty portions, in which are
included the three portions assigned unto the Church of St. Stephen's in
Forest.

33. Provence was ordered to provide a Pastor for the Church of Aix, of Laux,
and Marseille, and two free portions for him taken out of the portions assigned
in the Dividend unto that Province; as also one portion unto the Sieur Maurice
a Minister Emeritus, and furthermore one portion unto the Church of Manosques,
and to get it speedily a Pastor, and of all this they shall render an Account
unto the next National Synod.

34. There shall be deducted for the Lord du Candal what remains of the thirds
taken by the Sieur de Visouze out of the Sous upon the Liver, the said Visouze
not liking to do by his portion of the said thirds of the University Moneys as
the Lord du Candal has done by his, who freely and generously bestowed it on
our Universities. Therefore he shall draw forth four Deniers out of the Liver
of the Moneys belonging to the said University.

35. The sum of one hundred Livers over and above the two hundred Livers
assigned by the Synod of St. Maixant shall be paid in unto Monsieur Or T^^ant.
Renault, Pastor of Montauban, and Professor of the Hebrew tongue in that
University.

36. The next National Synod God willing shall be held in the Province of Lower
Guyenne within the space of two years, and in the Month of May, saving that it
may be either hastened or delayed as the Lords General Deputies, or either that,
or the neighbor Provinces shall advise of. And the Provinces of Brittany and
Provence are left to their Liberty to send more than two Deputies, viz. one
Pastor and Elder each, which is only granted them for this next National Synod.

CHAP. XV. The Roll of Apostates.
1. JOSHUA Guibert a man of a mean stature, the hair of whose head and beard is
very black, his eyes black, long visaged and staring out, his skin tawny,
shaking his head, and spitting at his first approaches, stammering in his
ordinary discourses, black teeth, and very Slovenly in his Apparel, has
quitted Xaintonge, where he was Minister in the Church of Archiac, and
renounced the truth of Christ's holy Gospel.

2. James Cyespe born at Puy in Velley, twenty six years old, or there-about
low of stature, black hair'd, and of a lowering countenance, having been accused
of an enormous crime by a Popish schoolmaster when he was at Carpentras in the
Jesuits College, he returned again with the dog unto his vomit of Popery, and
publishes himself at present Chaplain and Almoner unto the Bishop of Vallence.
He was sometimes Minister at Crest in Dolphiny.

CHAP. XVI. The Accounts and Disbursments of our Moneys by the Lord du Candal.
THE Deputies out of every Province appointed to examine the Accounts of the
Lord du Candal, and to make a Dividend of the Moneys given us by his Majesty,
have reported that they were personally present at the auditing and finishing
the Accounts brought in by the Lord du Candal unto the Synod of St. Maixant in
the year one thousand six hundred and nine, that he was in Arrears for the
years 1604. 1605. and 1606. the sum of forty thousand, three hundred, and
twenty Livers, nineteen Sous, and one Denier, for the payment whereof he
presented a Breviate of the sums paid by him, according to the ordinance of the
said Synod, amounting to the sum of Ten thousand, six hundred and fourscore
Livers, and five Sous, and that he has yet remaining in his hands to ^e
distributed among the Churches, according to the Dividend of the said Synod the
sum of four thousand, seven hundred, sixty and six Livers, seven Sous. He
declared farther, that he could never be paid the sum of two thousand, two
hundred, fourscore and seven Livers, ten Sous, razed out of the said Account,
and charged upon the Garrisons, nor the sum of two and twenty thousand, five
hundred and seventy five Livers, seven Sous and one Denier, which yet remains
due, to wit, from the Receiver General of the Revenue at Poictiers for the year
1604. the sum of six hundred and one and twenty Livers, nineteen Sous and one
Denier, and for the year 1605. Three thousand six hundred Livers, and from the
Receivers of Limoges for the years 1604, 1605, 1606. the sum of eighteen
thousand three hundred, fifty three Livers, eight Sous, of which sums he made
Reprisal in his Account, and says that he has given evident proof of his
diligence used to recover those sums aforesaid unto the Commissioners appointed
by his Majesty for the clearing of his Accounts, which not appearing unto us,
the Lords du Rouvray and de la Milletiere our General Deputies are entreated to
see those Accounts cleared, and the said Lord du Candal is desired to continue
his endeavors for the recovering of those Moneys which are yet due unto us.

They made farther report that for the years one thousand six hundred and
seven, six hundred and eight, he was in Arrears the sum of eight and thirty
thousand three hundred and twenty Livers, fifteen Sous, for the payment of
which he brought in an Account attested by the Lord de la Milletierre,
amounting to thirty three thousand, seven hundred forty and eight Livers,
fifteen Sous and five Deniers, and declares that he has remaining by him the
sum of four thousand, four hundred, seventy and seven Livers, two Sous and
seven Deniers to be distributed among the Churches, as was before ordered.

Moreover they acquainted the Assembly that they had seen and examined the
account tendered them by Monsieur Sulpitius Cuper Deputy of the said Lord du
Candal, for the years 1609, 1610, and 1611. Whose Receipt amounts to four
hundred and five thousand Livers, and his disbursment for the years 1609, and
1610, and for three quarters of the year 1611, to the sum of three hundred
seventy and one thousand two hundred twenty nine Livers, nineteen Sous and four
Deniers, and there was time given for payment for the years 1610, and 1611. For
four and twenty thousand nine hundred, fifty and five Livers, nineteen Sous and
eleven Deniers, because he could not produce his Acquittances. And therefore
their remains due for those years the sum of ten thousand Livers and eight
Deniers, and for the last Quarter of the year, 1611, three and thirty thousand,
seven hundred and fifty Livers, which he must pay according to the order before
settled by the Synod of St. Maixant. Out of which Moneys this Assembly appointed
that there should be distributed the sum of three thousand Livers formerly
given unto the Sieurs Bigot and de la Comb according to that Article inserted
into their Deputation, and three hundred sixty and six Livers to defray their
expenses at this present Synod; so that there remains of the said sum three
and thirty thousand, four hundred Livers and eight Deniers.

CHAP. XVII. Here follows the Dividend of four thousand seven hundred sixty and
six Livers arising from the Arrears of the years 1604, 1605, and 1606.
according to the Account of St. Maixant. In which the Provinces of Higher
Languedoc and Lower Guyenne are not contained, they having received the
portions befallen them in ready Money, or by Warrants under the hand of the
said Lord du Candal.
L. S. D. FOR the Province of Dolphiny. 0653 12 06 For the Province of
Viva^etz. 0267 15 00 For Provence. 0157 10 00 For Lower Languedoc. 0826 17 06
For Burgundy. 0362 00 00 For the Isle of France. 0504 00 00 For Berry. 0283 10
00 For Poictou. 0378 00 00 For Xaintonge. 0559 12 06 For Normandy. 0401 12 06
For Brittany. 0157 10 00 For Anjou. 0212 12 06

Another Dividend after the same manner of the sum of four thousand, four
hundred, seventy and seven Livers, two Sous and one Denier, arising from the
Arrears of the years, 1607 and 1608.

L. S. D. For Dolphiny 0614 04 00 Vivaretz 0251 12 00 Provence 0148 00 00 Lower
Languedoc 0777 00 00 Burgundy 0340 08 00 The Isle of France 0473 12 00 Berry
0266 08 00 Poictou 0355 04 00 Xaintonge 0525 08 00 Norm^ndy 0377 08 00 Brittany
0148 00 00 Anjou 0199 16 00

Another Dividend among all the Provinces of the sum of thirty thousand three
hundred and ninety Livers of the remaining Moneys for the last Quarter of the
year; 1611. according to the Regulation made in the Synod of St. Maixant and
diverse other orders.

L. S. D. For Normandy 2034 00 06 Dolphiny 3310 05 08 Berry 1435 05 09 Higher
Languedoc 3350 13 04 Anjou 1076 16 10 Xaintonge 2831 14 02 The Isle of France
2552 10 04 Poictou 1914 08 00 Lower Languedoc and Sevennes 4187 14 03 Lower
Guyenne 2911 09 02 Vivaretz 1356 00 04 Burgundy 1834 12 04 Brittany 0797 13 02
Provence 0797 13 02

There remains for the years 1609 and 1610. ten Livers and eight Deniers, for
which the Lord du Candal is to be accomptable.

Another Dividend among all the Provinces of one hundred and fourscore thousand
Livers given by his Majesty unto the Churches, for this present year, and for
the years following according to the Decree of this National Synod of Privas,
and to be observed until the next National Synod; according to which the Lord
du Candal, and the Lord de Visouze shall make payments of those sums at the
terms which shall be hereafter appointed.

Deductions which must be made from the said sum of one hundred and fourscore
thousand Livers.

In the first place there shall be allowed by the Warrant beforementioned.

L. S. D. To the University of Sedan. 4000 00 00 To the Churches in the
Baylywick of Gex 3600 00 00 To the College of Bergerac 0600 00 00

CHAP. XVIII. A Dividend for the Universities.
L. S. D. FOR the University of Montauban 3000 00 00 Viz. For the two
Professors in Theology 1400 00 00 For one Professor in Hebrew being a Pastor
0300 00 00 For a Greek Professor 0300 00 00 For two Professors in Philosophy
0800 00 00 For the first Regent 0100 00 00 For the University of Saumur 4299 00
00 Viz. To two Professors in Divinity 1400 00 00 For a Professor in Hebrew 0400
00 00 For one in Greek 0400 00 00 To two Professors in Philosophy 0800 00 00 To
the first Regent 0460 00 00 To the second 0300 00 00 To the third 0200 00 00 To
the fourth 0180 00 00 To the fifth 0150 00 00 For the Universities of Nismes
and Montpellier 2600 00 00 To wit to the two Professors in Theology 1400 00 00
For two Professors in Hebrew 0800 00 00 For the College of Beziers 0400 00 00
To the General Deputies 1650 00 00

This is but one half of the sum of three thousand three hundred Livers
ordained for them, by the preceding Sypods, besides the sum of two thousand
two hundred Livers upon the lesser Account; The other moiety of the said three
thousand three hundred Livers was cast upon the Account of the Garrisons, to
make up the sum of thirty thousand five hundred Livers, tho it had been
ordered to be paid in yearly unto the said General Deputies.

Wherefore there remains to be distributed to the service of the said
Churches the sum of one hundred and sixty thousand, two hundred and sixty
Livers, which were divided in manner following.

L. S. D. To the Isle of France for 64 portions and the College 13457 17 4
Normandy for 51 portions and the College 10805 9 9 Brittany for 20 portions
and the College 4480 11 8 Anjou for 38 portions 5712 16 4 Poictou for 50
portions and a College 10601 1 2 Xaintonge for 71 portions and the College
14886 1 5 Berry for 36 portions and the College 7745 1 0 Burgundy and its
College and Gex for 32 portions, and 600 Livers granted to those of Gex with
their College 7528 18 8 Dolphiny for 84 portions with their College 17638 9 0
Vivaretz for 36 portions and a College 7745 1 0 Provence for 20 portions and a
College 4684 12 3 Lower Languedoc for 52 portions 10609 10 2 Sevennes and
Gevaudan for 53 portions and a College 11213 10 11 Higher Languedoc for 81
portions 16526 7 3 Lower Guyenne for 80 portions and a College 16722 6 7

And all these several sums the said Lord du Candal shall pay in quarterly
unto the Universities, Deputies, Commissioners and Provinces at the terms
appointed, and in manner following.

What comes into the Provinces of the Isle of France, Berry, Normandy, Anjou,
Poictou, Lower Guyenne, Higher Languedoc, taking in the Universities within the
said Provinces, shall be paid in to such Commissioners as shall be hereafter
named.

The first payment shall be made on the first of July.

The second the fifteenth of the next October.

The third on the last of January following, when we date the year 1613.

And for the Isle of France the payment shall be made at Paris, for Normandy at
Rouan, for Berry at Orleans, for Poictou at Poictiers, for the Lower Guyenne at
Bourdeaux, for the Higher Languedoc at Montauban, for Anjou at Tours.

For the Lower Languedoc, Sevennes, Provence, Brittany and Xaintonge.

The first payment shall be before the last day of July.

The second before the last of this next October.

And the third before the last of February, sixteen hundred and thirteen.

To wit, for Provence, Lower Languedoc and Vivaretz in the City of Montpellier.

For Brittany at Nants.

For Xaintonge at the City of Rochel.

And for the Provinces of Burgundy, Dolphiny and Vivaretz to the Commissioners
which are or shall be named by the said Province, at the City of Lions.

To wit, the two first payments at the Fairs in August and All-hallontide, of
this present year, and the third at the Fair of the three Kings, in the year
1613.

And the abovementioned Provinces shall be obliged to appoint in each of those
before named Towns; one certain house unto which the Lord du Candal may come,
and make payment of those Moneys. And the said Lord du Candal shall pay in
quarterly unto the said Churches whatsoever he can actually recover of that
Quarter unto each of the Provinces equally, (they concurring to the abatement
of a Sous in the Liver,) within the fifteenth of August of the year 1613. at
the places, and unto the persons named by the said Provinces. And touching the
overplus which remains to be recovered after the fifteenth of August in the
year 1613, he shall give in his notes in writing unto every particular
Province, who shall come and take them according to the Account and Dividend,
which shall be made by our General Deputies at Court. Of all which sums thus
actually paid down by the said Lord of Candal he shall take and keep unto
himself a Sous in the Liver, which was freely granted him, excepting for the
Universities, from whom he may detain only four Deniers, a farthing in the
Liver, which in truth is not his, but the right and due of the Lord de Visouze.

And as for these Rescriptions of the last Quarter, he shall only take three
Deniers; and the whole shall be managed and dispatched in a full and exact
conformity to that agreement past between him and the Deputies of our Churches
at the National Synod of Gap, and the Regulations made in the following years.

Moreover the said Lord du Candal is required not to divert unto any other uses
the Moneys of our Churches and Universities, whatever orders he may receive
from other hands, without an express order from a National Synod; otherwise it
shall not be allowed him in the yielding up of his Accounts.

Done at Privas in Vivaretz the 4th. of July, 1612. Subscribed by Chamier
Moderator. Monsanglard Scribes. Du Moulin Assessor. and Maniald. Scribes.


THE Acts, Canons, Decisions and Decrees OF THE XXIth National Synod OF The
Reformed Churches OF FRANCE, Held in the City of Lower Tonneins, in the
Province of Lower Guyenne, Begun on Friday the second day of May, and ending on
Tuesday the third of June, in the Year 1614. under the Authority, and by the
Permission of Louis XIII. King of France and Navarre.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Synodical Acts. 1614. The 21th Synod.

Chap. I. CAtalogue of Deputies. Synodical Officers chosen. Chap. II. An Order
about Letters of Deputation. Chap. III. Urgent matters. Important advice by the
Deputies of the Council of Lower Guyenne given unto the Synod. Art. 6. Chap.
IV. Observations upon the Confession of Faith. Chap. V. Observations upon the
Discipline. Chap. VI. Observations upon the Synod of Privas. The eighteenth
Article of the Confession explained. Observat. 19. Chap. VII. Appeals. Chap.
VIII. General matters. Chap. IX. Of Particular matters. Chap. X. Of Colleges
and Universities. Chap. XI. Accounts of Universities and Colleges. Chap. XII.
Lord of Candals Accounts. Chap. XIII. Dividends of Moneys among the Provinces
and Universities. Chap. XIV. Roll of Deposed and Apostate Ministers. Chap. XV.
An Act of the Oath of Union. Chap. XVI. An Act about the meeting of the next
General mixed Assembly. Chap. XVII. The Synods Bill of Grievances. Chap. XVIII.
A Project for uniting all the Protestant Churches, which have shook off the
Papal yoke^* Chap. XIX. Letters from James 1. K. of Great Britain unto the
Synod, with the Synods Answer, and several other Letters. Chap. XX. The
Excommunication of Jeremy Ferrier an Apostate Minister.
THE Synod of Tonneins.
In the Name of God. Amen.
Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches in France held at
Tonneins, within the Province of Lower Guyenne, on Friday the first of May, and
continued till Thursday the third of June, in the Year of our Lord 1614.

CHAP. I. Deputies Names. Officers chosen.
1. AFTER Invocation of the Name of God, the Letters of Deputation were read,
that so the Call of every person assisting in it, might be known, and the Oath
taken by them, that they had not by any secret, underhand or undue practices
gotten themselves Elected Deputies, and that they knew not any of this Assembly
to have so done; after which they chose the Sieur Gigord Moderator, and
Monsieur Gardesy Assessor, and Monsieur Rivett a Pastor, and Monsieur Maltret
an Elder, to be Scribes.

2. The Assembly proceeding in their Examination of the Letters of Commission
begun with the Province of Higher Languedoc, and Higher Guyenne, for which
there appeared Monsieur John Gardesy, Pastor in the Church of Mauvesin, and
Bennet Balarand, Pastor in the Church of Castres, with Peter du Puy, Lord of
Sabournac, Elder in the Church of St. Paul la Miate, and Denis Maltret,
Advocate in the Court of Castres, Elder of the Church in that City.

3. For the Province of Poictou, Monsieur Andrew Rivet, Pastor of the Church at
Touars, and Peter de la Vallade, Pastor of the Church in Fontenay Compte, with
Jonas de Bessay, Lord of Bessay, and Elder in the Church of Marueil, and Giles
Begaud, Lord of la Begaudiere, Elder in the Church of St. Fulgentius.

4. For the Province of Brittany, Monsieur de la Place, Pastor of Sion, and
Andrew le Noir, Lord of Beauchamp, Pastor of the Church gathered in the House
of my Lord the Duke of Rohan, with Stephen Groyer, Lord of Kerbouchart,
Councillor of the King, and Alloue de Guerrande, Elder in the Church of
Croisis, and James de Beaulieu, Elder in the Church of Rennes.

5. For the Province of the Isle of France, Picardy, Champagne, and the Land of
Chartres, Mr. James Imbert Durant, Pastor in the Church of la Ferte of the
Vidame, and Abraham de la Cloche, Pastor of the Church of Chaltray, together
with Elijah Bigot, Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, and Elder in the said
Church, who tendered Letters of Excuse from the Sieur Vauquet, Elder of the
Church of Laon, declaring the Reasons of his absence from this National Synod,
of which his Province shall take cognizance, and they be exhorted to take care
that for the future there may be none of their Deputies wanting.

5. For the Province of Vivaretz, Vellay, and Forest, Monsieur Daniel
Chanforan, Pastor of the Church of Poussin, and Monsieur John du Croy, Pastor
in the Church of Villeneuve de Berg, together with James Olivier, Advocate in
the Court of that place, and Elder in the same Church, and James Garnier, Elder
in the Church of Privas.

7. For the Province of the Lower Guyenne, Monsieur Jeremy Bancons, Pastor in
this Church of Tonneins, and Ezechiel Marmett, Pastor in the Church of Nerac,
together with Francis de Lusignan, Baron of Lusignan, Governor for the King in
his Town and Castle of Puymirol, and Elder of the Church there gathered; and
John de la Nouaille, Elder in the Church of Gensac.

8. For the Province of Xaintonge, Aulnix, and Augoulmois, Monsieur Louis le
Chevelier, Lord of la Cappelliere, and Jerome Colomiers, both Pastors in the
Church of Rochel, together with Leon de St. Maure, Baron of Montosier, Elder in
the Church of Been, and Peter de Breuil, Lord of Fontenelles, Elder in the
Church of Barbezieux.

9. For the Churches in the Principality of Bearn, Monsieur John de Dizerotte,
Pastor in the Church of Olleron, and Peter de Nauguey, Doctor of Physic, Elder
in the Church of Lescar.

10. For the Province of Anjou, Touraln, le Maine, Condomnois, Vendomois, and
the Lower Parche, Monsieur Samuel Bouchereau, Pastor in the Church of Saumur,
together with Eleazar de la Primauday, Lord of la Barree, Elder in the Church
of Bourgueil, and Abes dit Val, Lord of Villiers, the King's Attorney in the
Election, and Granary of Salt at Chasteaugontier, and Elder of the Church
there, who related unto this Assembly, that Monsieur Daniel Coupe, Pastor in
the Church of Tours, their Fellow-Deputy, was absent through the opposition of
his Consistory, which also was confirmed by the Brethren that passed through
that Town. Whereupon the Synod judged the Authors of his absence highly
censurable, and cannot approve of the said Coupes compliance with their will,
to the prejudice of what had been decreed in the Provincial Synod. And that a
meet Censure, according to the merits of the Cause, may be duly inflicted on
them, express order is given to the Pastors and Elders of the Isle of France
and Anjou, that in their return from hence homeward, they shall pass unto
Tours, and particularly inquire into this fact, and by Authority of this
Assembly shall pass Sentence on them, and all their Charges shall be defrayed
by that said Church, and they shall make report of their duty herein either in
Person or by Letters unto the next National Synod.

11. For the Province of Higher Languedoc, Monsieur John Gigord, Pastor and
Professor of Divinity in the Church and University of Montpellier, and John
Bansillon, Pastor of the Church in Aiguemortes, together with Peter de
Massanes, Councillor for the King, and General in the Court of Assistants at
Montpellier, and Elder of that Church, and Henry de Farrell, Lord of St.
Private, Elder in the Church of Usez.

12. For the Province of Sevennes and Gevaudan, Monsieur John Bony, Pastor in
the Church of Sauve, together with James de Combier, Lord Baron of Fonds and of
Serignac, Elder in the Church of Juissac, and Peter de Sduorin, Lord of
Pomaret, and of St. Andrew de Valborgne, Elder in the Church of the same place,
who presented Letters from Monsieur John Fitz, Pastor in the Church of St. John
of Gardenengue, excusing his absence by reason of sickness befallen him in his
Journey; which excuse being warrantable, was accepted by this Assembly. Since,
there arrived Monsieur Esaiah du Marez, Pastor of the Church of Alez, who being
substituted in his stead, and tendering the Act of Substitution unto this
Synod, he was immediately admitted.

12. For the Province of Provence, Monsieur Samuel Toussain, Pastor in the
Church of Luc, with Balthazar Geronte, Lord of Verages, Elder in the Church of
Aiguieres.

13. For the Province of Dolphiny, Mr. Paul Guyon, Pastor in the Church of Dieu
le Fit, and Denis Bouteroue, Pastor in the Church of Grenoble, together with
James de Veze, Lord of la Lo, Elder in the Church of Montlimart, and Francis de
la Comb, Elder in the Church of St. Marcellin.

14. For the Province of Burgundy, Lyonnois, Bea^jolois, Brosse and Gex,
Monsieur Peter Colinet, Pastor of the Church of Paray in Charolois, and Peter
Eliot, Pastor of the Church of Arnay le Duc, together with John de Jaucour,
Lord of Villarnou, Elder in the Church of Avalon, and John Grace, Elder in the
Church of Lion.

15. For the Province of Normandy, Monsieur Benjamin Banage, Pastor of the
Church at Karentan, and Samuel de l'Escherpiere, Lord of la Riviere, Pastor in
the Church of Rouen, together with Paul du Vivier, Lord of Beaumont, Elder in
the Church of Bayeux, and James le Noble, Lord of la Leau, Elder in the Church
of Dies.

16. For the Province of Orleans, Berry, Blezois, etc. Monsieur Daniel Jamett,
Pastor of the Church of St Amand in Bourbonnois, and Samuel de Chambaran,
Pastor of the Church of l'Orges and Marchenoir, together with Jews de
Courcillon, Lord of d'Angeau, Elder in the said Church, and James de Brissay,
Lord of Jenonville, Elder in the Church of Gergeau.

17. There appeared also in this Assembly Stephen Chesneverd, Lord of la
Millitiere, General Deputy of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom, who was
admitted, and had both his deliberative and decisive Votes granted him.

CHAP. II. An Order about Letters of Deputation.
See the third Synod of Rochel, Art. 1. after the choice of the Moderator. 2.
Vitre, Art. 1. after the Roll.
1. ALL the Provinces for the future are enjoined to express the proper names
and surnames of the Pastors and Elders deputed by them unto these National
Synods, and to specify that particular place wherein they exercise their
respective Offices. And whereas that failure observed by former National Synods
about Submission and Obedience, is still found wanting in several Letters of
Deputation from diverse Provinces; it is ordained, that it shall be promised in
express terms, without any condition or modification whatsoever, unto all
things which shall be determined and decreed by these National Synods.

CHAP. III. Urgent Matters.
2. THE Church of Paris excused its Consistory, and Monsieur du Moulin one of
their Pastors, about his absence from this Assembly, though nominated thereunto
by the Synod of the Isle of France, and offered, that if he might have speedy
notice of it, and this Assembly judged it needful, he should yet come unto
them: But upon debate it was found utterly inconvenient for the said Monsieur
du Moulin to appear in person among us, or that the cause of his trouble should
be examined and judged by this Assembly, this being no proper place for its
trial; for by such an Anticipation we should imbroil our selves with the Civil
Magistrates, wherefore the excuses both of the Consistory of that Church, and
of the said Sieur du Moulin were accepted.

3. The Letters of the Lords Dukes of Rohan and Sully, and from the Lord du
Plessis Marli, were received and read in this Assembly, all tending to assure
the Churches of this Kingdom of their holy Resolution immovably to persevere in
our Faith and Discipline, and to adventure their Estates, their Lives and
Fortunes for the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, expressing also their
great desire that all the Members of our Churches might be preserved in a sweet
and perfect Concord. After thanks given them in the person of their Messengers,
Letters were ordained to be written unto each of them, applauding their Zeal
and Religious Affection, and exhorting them to perseverance in this their godly
Resolution; and farther, to assure them that this Assembly will do its utmost
endeavor that their pious desires of uniting all the Members of the Church may
be accomplished.

4. This Assembly being informed that Mr. David Hume formerly Pastor in the
Church of Duras in the Lower Guyenne was lately returned from his native
Country of Scotland, and as he passed through England, his Majesty of Great
Britain had charged him with a Letter, to be delivered to us, concerning
differences sprung up in our Churches on several points of Doctrine. The
Assembly ordained that (before it was read unto us) a Copy thereof should be
transcribed and sent unto the Lord de Rouvray our Deputy General at Court, that
so in case we should be suspected there, he might immediately discover that it
was nothing of State Affairs, but only a Point of Doctrine, which concerned all
the Reformed Churches gathered in diverse Kingdoms, and Republics: To
Communicate in which Matters we had all freedom ever promised us, and as for
those of another nature we would never intermeddle with them, unless we had an
express and new permission from the King.

5. Monsieur Hume being called in, did by word of mouth relate what was given
him in charge by his Majesty of great Britain, who advised this Assembly as
from him to procure and maintain a firm Union in points of Doctrine among the
Pastors, Professors and others the Members of our Churches, without quarrelling
with the Divines of Germany or any persons teaching otherwise, who handled the
point of Justification in a different manner from us: and particularly that we
would silence that controversy risen up between the Sieurs du Moulin and
Tilenus, and yet to prize and value those Gifts which the great God has so
plenteously bestowed upon them for his Churches Edifying; Assuring us farther
of his Majesty's good will, affection and purpose to defend the Churches of
God, and particularly ours: Which also was the substance of his Letter. See
afterward the 18th observe. on the Synod of Privas.
This Assembly returned their most humble thanks unto the King of Great Britain
(speaking by the said Mr. Hume the bearer of his Letters,) and put off their
consideration and resolutions about this affair unto its proper place, viz.
then to be debated, when as the Acts of the Synod of Privas shall be reviewed.

6. The Deputies of the Council for the Province of Lower Guyenne craving leave
to be heard in this Assembly about matters of great importance, which they were
ordered to declare unto us, being introduced, they began to vindicate and
justify the means used by them in their prosecution of the violations of the
Edict, by which their Churches had exceedingly suffered, whereof they gave many
and particular instances in diverse Articles, and concluded with an earnest suit
unto this Assembly that we would by all lawful means prevent divisions among
our selves, and so obviate the Plots and practices of the enemies of our
Religion in the present State of affairs which are now upon the wheel.
Whereupon the Assembly did assure them of that favorable construction it put
upon their good intentions, and on their proceedings as reported by them, and
of the ways and means they had used; and it farther promised that every one of
the Deputies of this Synod should remonstrate the same unto their respective
Provinces, that so none ill opinion might be taken up or entertained to their
prejudice. And as for those remedies craved by them for hereafter, against our
common public evils, and their particular sufferings, the Assembly knows
none more proper and fit than what is offered us, viz. the next General
Assembly granted us by their Majesty's, who therefore shall be most humbly
thanked for it, and yet most earnestly and humbly entreated to change the place
of their meeting, and to defer the time thereof unto the twentieth day of
August next, that so the Provincial Assemblies may sit the longer, and have the
more time and leisure to intend and perfect our desired Union. And this
Assembly sees it self obliged to procure it, because of what has been already
Proposed and advanced, which also it will do by all lawful and possible means.
And as for the Modifications and restrictions of the Writ, it Judges that they
ought to be sent over to the mixed Provincial and General Politic Assemblies,
which the Deputies unto this Synod shall every one of them at their return
represent unto their respective Provinces; and Monsieur de Rouvray our General
Deputy shall be written unto out of hand, to present our most humble thanks, as
also our beforementioned Requests unto their Majesty's, that so this Assembly
may receive an answer before its dissolution.

CHAP. IV. Observations made on Reading the Confession of Faith.
Article 1. THERE, being found some difference about the 6th. Article of the
Confession in the Latin and French Copies; the first restraining that
approbation which had been determined in the Mystery of the Trinity unto the
four first ancient Councils, but the others extending it indefinitely unto the
ancient Councils: This Assembly decreed that nothing should be altered in the
French Edition of it. Art. 2. On the 8th. Article. Because that in diverse
Copies there was a Typographical Error which altered the very sense of the
Article, Exprimant que Dieu (fait) Convertir, au lieu de dire (qui'l Scait)
Convertir, this Assembly exhorts the Pastors of those Churches which have
Printers, to admonish them that they get some Judicious Person to oversee and
correct the press, that we may not be troubled any more with complaints of this
nature, and that once for all our Confession be Printed with the greatest
exactness according to the Copies revised in the last National Synods, and the
like notice shall be given to the Pastors and Professors in the Church of
Geneva. Art. 3. On the 9th. Article instead of these words (qui'l y ait) there
must be read, qui'l ait. Art. 4. Montauba^ obs. 6. Saumur obs. 1.3 Rochel obs.
13.
On the 39th. Article, toward the close of it, the words of Institution shall
be added, according to the Decree of former National Synods, in the express
terms of St. Matthews Gospel, Take, eat, etc. Art. 5. The Confession of Faith
of the Churches in this Kingdom having been read word by word was approved in
all its Articles by the Deputies, not only for themselves personally, but
generally for all the Provinces represented by them, and by whom they were
commissionated, and all of them swore for themselves, and for their Principals,
That they believed it to be true, that they would teach it as such, and procure
to the utmost of their power that it should be taught and believed in and by
all their Churches and Provinces.
CHAP. V. Observations on Reading of our Church Discipline.
Article 1. St. Maixant Observat. 2.
THE Deputies of the Province of Orleans and Berry having noted it, it was
ordered that after these words in the close of the fourth Article in the first
Chapter (His ordination being completely finished in that Church whereunto he
is sent) the following words shall be razed (then there shall be Deputed three
Ministers to Present him unto the People) in lieu of which these shall be
substituted: Which shall be informed. of his Election by Act and Letters from
that Synod or Colloquy, carried and read unto them by a Pastor or Elder. Art.
2. The 5th. Article shall begin with these words, He whose Election is declared
and published to the Church shall make a Proposition etc. Art. 3. See Syn. of
Rechel obs. 4.
The 7th. Article shall not begin with these words (when Ministers are to be
ordained) but with these following, All which as before having been observed,
two Pastors, Deputed expressly by the Synod or Colloquy to ordain by imposition
of hands, the Minister Elect, being come unto the Church, He of them who is to
Preach, shall treat of the nature and manner of ordination etc. Art. 4. St.
Maixant Obser. 4.
Whereas the Deputies of Burgundy moved about the sense of the 7th. Article, as
to the hand of fellowship, and of the newly Elected Pastors presence at the
Acts of Colloquies and Synods after his Election* This Assembly judges that
the hand of fellowship ought not to be given him but immediately after his
ordination, and that this is the sense of that Article, and tho he may be
permitted entrance into the Colloquy or Synod, yet shall he not be admitted to
give his decisive suffrage the first Sessions after his Ordination. Art. 5. In
expounding the 19th. Article of the same Chapter, this Canon was made, Orltans
Art. 3.
That none of the Pastors Ministering in the Houses of Princes and great Lords
should be chosen Deputies unto our National Synods, unless it were for that
particular Province unto which their Church and Consistory is joined at the
very instant time of their Deputation. Art. 6. The Deputies of the Isle of
France insisting for a change of some words, 1 Par. 22
which their Provincial Synod judged needful to be altered in the 47th. Article
of the same Chapter: This Assembly thought it inconvenient to make any
alteration. Art. 7. The Deputies of Vivaretz demanding that in the second
Article of the 7th. Chapter the number of Elders which are to be sent unto
Synods or Colloquies might be reduced to the same with that of Pastors; and
that one Elder only might be Commissionated with the Pastor: The Assembly
ordained that there should be nothing changed in it. Art. 8. As to what has
been observed by the Province of the Isle of France on the 5th. Article of the
8th. Chapter, this Assembly ordains that the Article shall not be changed, but
these words following shall be added to it, Saving always their power to
prosecute that ungrateful Church, according to the Judgment of the Provincial
Synod. Art. 9. On the 5th. Article of the 3d. Chapter after these words, They
shall herein follow the Common form, there shall be these added: And they shall
suffer none other books to be read but the Canonical books of the old and new
Testament. Art. 10. In the 2d. of Article the 11th. Chapter, instead of these
words that he were chosen Doctor, it were best, so that all Ambiguities may be
removed, to read both Doctor and Minister. Art. 11. The Province of Berry
remonstrating by their Deputies that the 5th. Article of the 13th. Chapter had
been changed at Privas without the Consent of the Provinces, and demanding that
it might stand as it had been couched by the Synod of Gergeau; which also was
demanded by the Province of Lower Languedoc and Sevennes. This Assembly
ordained, that the Article should remain in that very form as it was framed by
the National Synod of Privas. Art. 12. Vert^eil 26.
At the request of the Deputies of the Isle of France, this Assembly
considering the 32d. Article of the 13th. Chapter, treating of Monks and
Priests revolting from the truth of the Gospel, which they had once embraced,
and returning like Swine to Wallow in the Mire of Idolatry, does Judge meet and
fit for the removing of all Ambiguities, that these following words should be
added to it, viz. Chaunting Masses, and entering again into their Cloisters.
Art. 13. 1 Paris. P. M. 17. Do not evil that good may come, lest the end should
be destruction.
The Deputies of Higher Languedoc moved, that because of the great advantage
would accrue unto us by Monitories gotten out of their Ecclesiastical Courts
against those of the Church of Rome, especially in compelling them to confess
the truth, it would be very convenient for us to allow the demanding of them,
and that the 11th. Article of the 14th. Chapter might be razed out. But this
Assembly ordained that the article should abide in its full force, and nothing
at all to be changed in it. Art. 14. Montpellier, p. m. 16.
Although the Deputies of Sevennes demanded it, yet this Assembly did not conceive
that the 32th. Article in the same Chapter concerning Duels needed any further
explication, wherefore it shall continue as it is, the words being very clear
and plain, and their sense obvious to any common Understanding, and their exact
and careful observation of this Canon is recommended unto all the Consistories.
Our Church Discipline being read, the Assembly approved of it in all its
Articles, and all the Deputies Promised, and Swear for themselves, and their
Churches and Provinces, that they would observe it in their own persons, and
use their best endeavors that it should be most carefully observed in their
respective Churches and Provinces.


CHAP. VI. Observations on reading the Acts of the National Synod of Privas.
Art. 1. Privas, Art. 3. after the List of the Deputies.
IN reading that Article concerning such as will not yield to the Majority of
votes in our General Assemblies: the Deputies of the Province of Xaintonge
craved advice how to Censure them that will not acquiesce in the votes and
resolutions of our General and Provincial Assemblies, whether Ecclesiastical or
Political, but set themselves vigorously against their Execution. This Assembly
ordains, that such refractory persons in any of those Assemblies shall be
prosecuted with all Ecclesiastical Censures, according as Consistories,
Colloquies, Provincial and National Synods shall Judge meet. Art. 2.The Lord de
la Millitiere Deputy General earnestly demanding, both in his own name, and in
their's also who were joint Deputies together with him for the Reunion, that
the Censure past on the Sieur de Barjac, which seemed to revive the Memory of
our bypast divisions, might be taken off the file, and razed out of the Acts
of the Synod of Privas. This Assembly ordained that the said Canon shall remain
in those very words in which it was conceived. Art. 3. In that Article which
gives leave unto Elders, the Pastor being refused and excepted at, to Judge of
some Emergent differences, yea even to suspension from the Lords Supper, the
Province of Lower Languedoc demanded that there might be some mittigation of
its rigor. This Assembly Judged that that Article should abide as it was
conceived, whithout any alteration at all. Art. 4. Upon the fourth Article
treating of Marriage-Promises, that they should be made in words de futuro, The
Lord de la Riviere demanded that the name of the Church of Rouen might be razed
out of that admonition which had been given it, Privas, obs. 3. See Vitre 2.
Observat. upon this present Synod. Art. 2.
and to that of Diep, to forsake their Custom of betrothing persons publicly
in their Temples declaring that in the Church of Rouen they were only done in
the Consistorial Chamber, the Pastors and Elders being present. This Assembly
acquainted him, that they could not in the least approve of this Order and
Practice among them. Art. 5. Privas, obs. 2. on the preceding Synod.
On that Article concerning the Works of Monsieur Chamier Pastor and Professor
at Montauban, the Assembly ordained that before they be sent unto the Press,
they shall be put into the hands of some certain Pastors and Professors in
Divinity to be perused and examined, and the Pastors and Professors his
Colleagues in the Church and University of Montauban are named to this purpose.
Art. 6. Privas, obs. 3. upon the preced. Synod. and p. m. 10.
The Synod of Dolphiny is charged to read over the History of the Waldenses and
Albingenses, collected and written by Monsieur Perrin, who also is required as
soon as it is Printed to send a Copy to every one of the Provinces. Art. 7.
Privas, obs. 7. upon the preced. Synod.
That Article which deferred the changing of that of St. Maixant, concerning
Baptism, to the examination of the Provinces, being now again read, this
Assembly advised that the Provincial Deputies should gather the judgment of
this Synod by Majority of voices, and not the particular opinion of each single
person. In pursuance whereof, it was carried by plurality of Votes, that the
order practiced before the said Synod of St. Maixant should be still observed,
and that it should not be lawful to celebrate Baptism, unless there were a
Sermon either immediately before or after that Sacrament. Art. 8. Privas,
Appeal 2. 2 Vitre, Appeal 7. below Appeal 31.
On that Article concerning the expenses of the Church of Annonay in getting a
Minister to Preach among them during the abode of Monsieur le Faucheur at
Saumur: This Synod ordains, that it shall pass into a General Canon, that the
Provinces shall defray the charges of those Churches whose Pastors are
Commissionated unto General Assemblies, be they either Political or
Ecclesiastical. Art. 9. Privas, App. 10.
The Assembly having received a good Testimonial of the worthy carriage of
Monsieur Bansillon Pastor of Aiguesmortes since the last National Synod, does
ordain that that Article of his Censure be razed out of the Acts of the Synod
of Privas. Art. 10. Privas, g. m. 8.
Reading the Act of Reunion, the Lord de la Millitiere General Deputy gave in
an account of the endeavors used by the Sieurs du Moulin, Durant, de l'Isle
Groslot together with the General Deputies in reconciling all those Lords
mentioned by name in that Act, as also of other private persons; for which the
Assembly returned them hearty thanks, and does discharge them of their
Commission with that honor which is deservedly due unto them for their great
diligence in it. Art. 11. Privas, Ap. 1.
The Churches in the Principality of Orange reiterating their complaints by the
month of the Sieur Julien against the Synod of Dolphiny held at Veins, for
excluding them from the Political Assembly of that Province: This Assembly (the
Deputies of that Province having owned the charge brought in against them, viz.
That they were excluded an Ecclesiastical Synod) judges that the said Churches
of the Principality of Orange ought to be restored unto their former
privilege. Art. 12. Privas, p. m. 21.
Mr. Mayor of Bergerac declaring on behalf of that Church and Town, that it was
never their Intention to depart from the Union of our Churches, or to procure
their own private good to the prejudice of the Public, as they were condemned
for by the Censure of the National Synod at Privas: And the Province being
heard on those inquiries they were obliged to make, and testifying for them,
that they could never find by any Witnesses, nor by any probable conjectures,
that they had gotten the Kings Writ of grant for their College out of the
Moneys bestowed upon the Churches; See below of Universities 2.
and the said Mr. Mayor requesting on their behalf that that sum might be
vouchsafed them by order of this Assembly out of the free and charitable
benevolence of our Churches: It was decreed that the said Mr. Mayor should
produce an Act, proving that the said Communalty of the Town of Bergerac do
address themselves for this matter unto this Synod, and that they renounce all
other ways of obtaining it, and particularly the effects of that Writ
aforesaid, and upon doing this, they were promised full contentment in all
their demands. Art. 13. The Deputies of the County of Venise and Archbishopric
of Avignon requesting, Privas, p. m. 1.
that according to what was promised them in the Synod of Privas, so by the
authority of this Assembly our Deputies in Court might recommend their affairs
unto their Majesty's, and that particular Prayers might be offered up unto God
for them in all the Churches; This Assembly grants them their desire on those
two heads, and enjoyneth all the Deputies as soon as they return unto their
respective Provinces to report unto those Provincial Assemblies their miserable
estate, that so it may be inserted into their Memoirs which shall be sent unto
the next General Assembly. Art. 14. Privas, p. m 3.
The National Synod of Privas having ordered the Colloquy of Nismes to examine
the matter of Fact about that difference between Monsieur de Bansillon and de
Mallamont concerning an Act of that Colloquy for which Mallamont accused him of
forgery. It appears by an Act of the said Colloquy since held, and now
produced, that that which was produced by the Sieur Bansillon was
certainlytrue, and the said Sieur Mallamont being fully convinced of it, does
renounce his Accusation of the said Bansillon. Art. 15. Privas, p. m. 8.
Monsieur Brunier Pastor of the Church of Usez is charged to yield up unto the
Province of Lower Languedoc, those Letters forged by that infamous Apostate
Jeremy Ferrier under the name of Captain Gautier. Art. 16. Privas, App. 18.
In executing that Decree of the National Synod of Privas about the Expenses
which the Province of Orleans had disbursed in the University upon Mr. Solomon,
and which the Province of Lower Guyenne, now enjoying his Ministry, stands
obliged to return back again unto them: The Deputies of Berry acknowledged that
they drew out of the hands of the Lord du Candal the sum of five hundred Livers
upon an Acquittance of the said Province of Guyenne, which yet the said
Deputies redemanded, as having before paid it in unto the said Solomon for his
encouragement. This Synod ordains, that the Moneys detained by the said
Province of Orleans shall remain in their custody, saving always to the said
Province of Guyenne a power of redemanding from the said Solomon what they had
disbursed for him. Art. 17. Privas, App. 23.
The Decree of the same Synod, concerning the Charges of those Commissioners
sent unto Orleans, which were to be equally defrayed by all the Churches of
that Province, shall stand valid. Art. 18. Privas, App. 34.
Le Sieur de la Vienerie, Pastor of the Church of Tonne-Boutonne in Xaintonge,
presented his Petition, that the Canon of the Synod of Privas concerning his
Book, might be moderated, and those words in it by which his said Writings were
declared to be very suspicious and erroneous in the points of Justification,
Predestination, Invocation of Saints departed, etc. might be obliterated.
Moreover, he professed that he was not convinced in his Conscience to be guilty
of those matters whereof he is accused, and desires they may be proved, he
having written nothing, but what he believes to be the truth. This Assembly
voted, that the aforesaid Canon should remain still in force; and that Monsieur
Banage and Bouchereau should peruse his Book, and give him instruction, and
make report thereof unto this Synod; which they did accordingly; whereupon this
Assembly did once more enjoin him to suppress that his Manuscript, which though
revised by himself, cannot be approved of neither in his words, nor in his
manner of handling it: And exhorts him in his way of teaching to follow the
form of sound words contained in the holy Scriptures; however, we judge
charitably of him, and of his Opinions and Intentions, believing that he is
orthodox, and sound in the Faith, principally as to the Fundamentals of
Religion. Art. 19. Privas obs. 2. upon the Coufession.
Revising that observation made upon the 18th Article of our Confession of
Faith, especially about the Oath enjoined to be taken by all Pastors actually
employed, and Proposans who are designed for the Ministry, concerning
Justification, diverse Provinces remonstrated that it needed some explanation:
See Art. 5. after the Roll, in this Synod.
The Assembly, after mature deliberation and long debate had of the matter,
ordained that it shall be couched in these terms. Forasmuch as diverse persons
demand an explanation of the 18th Article of the Confession of our Reformed
Churches in this Kingdom, wherein the Doctrine of Justification is freely
asserted; this Synod declares, that in this point, the Form of Doctrine which
ought to be received and taught in the Churches of this Kingdom, according to
the Scriptures, is, That Man (not having in himself, either before or after his
Effectual Calling, any Righteousness of his own, by which he may subsist before
the Judgment Seat of God,) he cannot be justified but by Jesus Christ our
Savior, who being incarnate, was obedient unto his Father from the first
moment of his birth, unto the last of his ignominious death upon the Cross,
having most perfectly both in his life and death, fulfilled the whole Law given
unto men, and that particular Commandment imposed on him by his Father of
suffering, and giving his Soul a ransom for many: By which most perfect
Obedience we are justified, because it is counted ours by the Grace of God, and
apprehended by that Faith which he gives unto us. From which we are assured,
that through the merit of this whole Obedience we have, and shall obtain the
forgiveness of all our sins, and be made worthy of everlasting life. And all
Pastors, Professors in Divinity, and all other the Members of our Churches are
enjoined to hold fast this Doctrine, and in no wise to depart from it, and they
be forbidden either by word of mouth or writing to teach or preach publicly or
privately any thing that may be directly or indirectly repugnant to it.
Moreover, this Synod ordains, that whosoever are chosen into the holy
Ministry, shall promise it before God; and all Consistories, Colloquies and
Provincial Synods shall exert their whole Authority to see this Canon
punctually observed, inspecting their Ministers, and all other persons, that
none act contrary hereunto, and to prosecute such as do, with all the Censures
of the Church.

Art. 20. Privas p. m. 12. see about this Saumur p. m. 32. Montp. p. m. 4.
Gergeau p. m. 2. Gap obs. 12. on the foregoing Synod.
In obedience to that Decree of the National Synod of Privas, the Province of
Normandy has paid in to Monsieur Vatable the hundred Livers by the hands of
the Deputies of Poictou, and took up from them their Acquittance.
CHAP. XVII. Appeals.
1. MOnsieur John Constans, Pastor of the Church at Mazgravier, appealed from
the Decree of the last Synod of Higher Languedoc held at Mauvesin, for refusing
him leave to withdraw from that Town, though requested by him because of his
Wifes sickness, which could not brook the Air of Maz, and because of those many
unkindnesses he has for diverse years received from them; and the Sieur Darder
for from the Decree of the same Synod, which permitted the said Monsieur
Constans to live at Montauban until the next Provincial Synod: Both of them
being heard, and the Deputies of that Province declaring the reasons which
swayed them to pass that Decree; This Assembly does discharge the said Monsieur
Constans from all Pastoral relation unto the said Church of Mazgravier, on
condition that the next Colloquy do provide a Pastor for the said Church who
shall reside with them, and the said Constans of another Church; And Ordains,
that till this can be performed, he shall continue to serve the said Church as
before, but without being obliged unto residence, and the said Church is
enjoined to make full payment to him of all his Arrears of Salary, or they
shall not be provided of another Pastor.

2. 3. Rochel, g m. 2. and observat. 11.
The Appeal of some Elders in that Church of Mazgravier from the same Synod,
was rejected, because it was of the Nature of those things which might be
finally determined within the Province; and the parties were told that they
deserved a very sharp reproof, for presenting unto this Synod Acts attested by
a Public Notary, as also for that (contrary to the Canons of our National
Synods) Elders going out of office had named their successors, whereas they
ought to be chosen by the common suffrages of their Consistory.

3. The like Judgment was past upon the pretended Appeal of Isaac Perrier, it
being a matter which ought to be determined by the Provincial Synod.

4. John Froment suspended from his office of Elder by the Synod of Higher
Languedoc in opposition to a decree of his Colloquy which had restored him
although neither the Consistory, nor his adverse party nor any other had
Appealed, was now heard upon his Appeal: The Deputies of the Province making no
answer to the reasons of his complaint, this Assembly Censured the said
Province for proceeding so unjustly, and contrary to all order, and therefore
re-instateth the said Froment in the Eldership.

5. Monsieur Paul Banquemar a Citizen of Rouen complained of the Consistory of
that Church for not suffering the Banes of his Daughter to be published after
the contract had been past before the Notary, unless she were first of all
Betrothed by the Pastor; he judging this act of theirs contrary to the Canon of
the Synod of Privas, Privas, obs. 9.
appealed from the Provincial Synod of Normandy held at Sees in the year 1613.
by which that Custom of calling in the Pastors before the publishing of Banes,
tho formerly practiced, was not confirmed, and imposed upon all their Churches.
This Assembly finds the Consistory of Rouen to be too severe in in this matter,
and that the Synod should not have made it necessary, and for the future it
injoyneth them to leave those parties to their Liberty: And on the other hand
it exhorts the Appellant to be more Moderate than he has been in his Letters,
remonstrating to him, that it is his duty not to revive those old quarrels,
which through the vigilance of the Consistory, and his own silence, had been
long ago buried in oblivion.

6. The Sieur Fevry Pastor of the Church of Tonne-Charante Appealed from a
Decree of the Province of Xaintonge for detaining him in the Ministry of that
Church, notwithstanding the Petition of his Father, who redemanded him. This
Assembly grants him his Liberty, provided he make it appear unto the Colloquy
or Synod of the Church he serves, that he is called by another Church near
unto that of his Fathers, according to the methods observed by us, whereof the
said Synod or Colloquy shall take cognizance within the space of one year at
the farthest.

7. St. Maixant, p. m. 17. 2. Vitre, obs. 3. on the former Synod.
The differences between the Provinces of Poictou and Brittany about
dismembring the Churches of Montagu and of Viellevigne are dismissed over to
the Province of Anjou with full Authority from this Assembly to put a final
period to them: Because the Church of Montagu was not heard in the Synod of St.
Maixant, as the Deputies of Poictou do relate it.

8. The Sieur Textor being Emeritus, a discharged Pastor, Appealed from an
Ordinance of his Synod of Burgundy for diminishing his portion granted that
Province in his Name, and for his use. See below Art 11.
This Assembly injoyneth the said Province to restore him all his Arrears, and
for time to come to give him the quiet enjoyment of the whole. And this order
shall be of-force not for him only, but for all others in the like
circumstances with him, nor may the Provinces dispose of their Moneys to any
other uses.

9. The Sieur Collinet having Appealed from the Decree of the Synod of
Burgundy, Gap App. 15.
this Assembly Ordains that the Province shall pay the C not only of the said
Collinet, but also of the Messenger, who was sent unto Court with the verbal
processes of the Churches of Chaalons, Paray, etc.

10. The Colloquy of Chaalons Appealing from the Ordinance of the Synod of
Burgundy which had adjudged the Church of Mascon unto the Colloquy of Lions,
and by Consequence would dispose of the Sieur Perreaud formerly Pastor of Pont
de Vaux. This Assembly Decrees that the Church of Mascon should remain
incorporate with the Colloquy of Chaalons, until such time as the Church of
Pont de Vaux may be provided of another Pastor, which shall be done without any
delay.

11. The Sieur Rigert a Pastor Emeritus in the Province of Dolphiny complained
in his Appeal against the Synod of that Province for taking his portion to the
common Charges with others. See above Art. 8.
It was Decreed that the said Province should for the future leave his portion
wholly free unto him.

12. Clement le Servier, otherwise le Dauphin having Appealed from the Sentence
of the Provincial Synod of Dolphiny, for deposing him from the Sacred
Ministry, and not appearing to defend it in this Assembly, his Appeal was
declared null and void.

13. The Church of Val Francesque Appealed from the Synod of Sevennes, because
it granted unto the Quarter of St. Romans that the Lords Supper should be
celebrated amongst them upon a Sabbath day: But this Appeal of theirs was
declared null, for that its contents was of the nature of those things which
might be finally determined in the Synod of their Province.

14. The Appeal of Monsieur Massouverain Pastor of the Church of Poussin in
Lower Languedoc was declared null, because he neither appeared in Person nor by
Letters to prosecute it. And the said Massouverain is injoined to appear before
the Province of Sevennes there to answer unto such matters as shall be brought
in against him.

15. The Appeal of the Church of Teyrac in the same Province about the Ministry
of the Sieur Guerin was declared null, because none appeared for them, nor did
they send any Memoirs concerning it.

16. The Appeal of the Church of Vigan about the Free School of that Province
granted to the Church of Anduze, was rejected, because it was of the Nature of
those businesses which might be determined finally by the Province.

17. It was also judged needless to bring into this Assembly an Appeal from the
Decree of the Provincial Synod of Sevennes for their refusing to annex the
Churches of the upper Rouargue unto their Province.

18. Whereas an Appeal was brought in by the Province of Burgundy redemanding
Monsieur Margonne formerly a Minister of their's in the Church of Noyers, 2
Vitre, obs. 5. upon the foregoing Synod.
but at present serving the Church of Chastillon on the Loire: And the Deputies
of Berry assuring this Assembly that God has eminently owned and blessed his
Ministry there, with singular success: All which being seriously considered,
His Call unto the Church of Chastillon was confirmed by the authority of this
National Synod; and it farther ordained that the Province of Berry should give
unto the Province of Burgundy a Proposan meet and sit for the Sacred Ministry,
and such an one as shall be acceptable unto the said Province, and this against
the sitting of their next Provincial Synod.

19. An Elder of the Church of Castel-Sagrat, and Monsieur Tinell the Father
appealed from the Synod of Sevennes for refusing to give them Monsieur Tinell
his son at present Pastor in the Church of Anduze, whom they earnestly demanded
to be bestowed on the Church of Castle-Sagrat as their own peculiar Pastor.
This Assembly (approving that decree of the Synod of Sevennes, because the
ordinary forms in the request of those of Castle-Sagrat were not observed) does
ordain that Tinell the Father, and the said Church of Castle-Sagrat shall
observe those regular and necessary forms and courses injoined by our
Discipline, and shall apply themselves to the Synod of Lower Guyenne, or to the
nearest Colloquy of the upper Agenois, who shall judge of the carriage of the
said supplicating Church, and what interest those of Puymirol may have in their
Minister, and in case the Colloquy or Province beforementioned do yield unto
the demand of the Father, and of those of Castel-Sagrat, the Synod of Sevennes
or the next Colloquy of Anduze shall approve thereof, and grant the young
Tinell according to their desire unto the said Church of Castle-Sagrat.

20. The Colloquy of Sauve appealing from an Ordinance of the Synod of
Sevennes, which had injoined every Colloquy to defray its own charges: This
Assembly answered, that the judgment of that Synod was wrong, and the Colloquy
did well in its Appeal. And that for time to come the Decree formerly made
shall hold good, and be in force not only to the defraying all charges about
Deputations, but also for their share and participation in charitable gifts,
and in all other Moneys of the like Nature.

21. The Letters of Charles Roy public Notary at Loudun, together with his
Appeal from the Sentence of the Provincial Synod of Anjou being read, See above
the 6. obs. on the former Synod.
were rejected, and the said Roy was exhorted to conform himself unto the
Orders of our Church in the administration of Baptism, which have been
approved, ratified, and confirmed by the common and unanimous consents and
suffrages of all the Provinces represented in this National Synod.

22. The Province of Champagne complaining of a decree past in the Provincial
Synod of the Isle of France, which had devolved upon the same Synod the right
of calling it unto any place as in their discretion they should judge meet,
provided it were carried by plurality of Votes: This Assembly ordained that the
Colloquy of Champagne shall have the privilege every fourth year in course of
appointing time and place for the meeting of that Synod.

23. The Church of Pons appealed for that the judgment of their Colloquy was
confirmed by the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, whereby they were condemned to
pay the Sieur du Perier his sallary during his suspension. But this Appeal of
their's was dismissed over unto the Province of Poictou and there finally to be
decided, See 3 Recl^d g. m. 8.
according to their Canon established about pecuniary matters: and the same
Province shall finally judge and determine of their complaint who were deprived
of all assistance and supplies from the Moneys of his Majesty's liberality ever
since they had been destitute of a Pastor; in case the Province of Xaintonge
(to whom for this purpose they shall make their first addresses) refuse to do
them right.

24. The Sieur In two other Copies he is called Gaud^^^e. Gesille.
Gouside Pastor in the Church of Gevaudan appealed from the Synod of Lower
Guyenne, because they refused to discharge him from that Church, and the Synod
of higher Languedoc together with the Church of Villemur, demanding the said
Gouside to be their own appropriated Pastor, joined with him in the said
Appeal. This Assembly (acknowledging that the Synod of Lower Guyenne have a
right to detain him) yet, because of the great want and earnest desire of the
Church of Villemur, and the necessary affairs of the said Gouside which call
him into those parts, and would otherwise very much distract him in his
studies, does grant both to him, and to that Church and Province their joint
requests, but with this condition, that the said Province shall provide an able
Proposan fit for the Ministry to serve in the Church of Gevaudan, and shall
present him unto the next Colloquy of higher Agenois, in case the Province of
Lower Guyenne cannot bestow upon them another Pastor.

25. The Deputies of the Church in the Sheriffdom of Nerac took out an Appeal
against the Synod of Lower Guyenne, which had grievously censured the said
Church, and obliged it to receive the Sieur Latanne for their fourth Pastor,
who was formerly Pastor in the Church of Senitot in Normandy, though he professed
that he was only a Loan unto that Church, he having been preengaged by his
Father, and with his own consent unto the Church of Nerac, yea and in his
absence, and before he was ordained unto the Ministry of the Church of Senitot,
to which he had never gone, but on this condition, that the Church of Nerac
might recall him any time when they pleased. This Assembly having patiently
heard their several discourses, and seen the Writings produced by the
respective Parties, does judge that the actings and proceedings of the
Consistory of Nerac, are justly censurable, and it does de facto censure them,
declaring that it has done very great wrong unto the said Sieur Latanne, in
taking him off from that Church wherein he served, and not employing him in
theirs whereunto they had called him; that they began ill, in lending a
Minister that was never theirs, and that they ended ill, in producing diverse
acts and deliberations of their own expressly contradicting one another. And as
for the said Sieur Latanne, this Assembly testifies for him, that he did not
in the least intrude himself among them, and that he had a right to take his
leave of the Church of Senitot upon the recalling of him back unto them by his
Father and the said Church of Nerac; from which nevertheless, for peace sake,
and the bettering of its estate, he is set at liberty and discharged, and may
be presented unto any other; and the said Church of Nerac is ordered to pay
unto him the said Latanne his wages due unto him ever since his coming among
them, deducting only what he has re^eived for serving of other Churches, unto
which he was sent by the Colloquy.

26. The said Sieur Latanne remonstrating that the Act delivered to him, and to
those of Nerac, had some ambiguity in it as to what concerns the payment of his
Salary, which might possibly be refused him, and cause a greater difference
between him and that Church than ever. This Assembly having heard Monsieur
Marmet upon this subject (who was concerned in it, and declared his purpose
about it) did ordain, that the aforesaid Latanne should receive from Monsieur
Gorton out of the first moneys of the Portions assigned unto the Church of
Nerac the sum of three hundred Livers, and give a general release unto the said
Church of Nerac, nor shall any of the Churches in which the said Sieur Latanne
has exercised his Ministry since his return into Guyenne be either by them of
Nerac, or by the said Latanne, troubled with demands of money on his Account.

27. Whereas Anthony de Roussan Ballance-maker in the City of Lions (another
Copy reads Achilles Bulliond Advocate for the King in the election of Lions)
appealed from a decree of the Synod of Burgundy and Lionnois, Gap, App. 8.
below p. m. 38.
injoining him on pain of excommunication to take away his son from the Jesuits
School: The Assembly having heard his arguments inducing him thereunto, do
judge them frivolous and null, and consequently his Appeal also, and approves
and ratifies the Decree of that Provincial Synod.

28. Master Isaac Ferrier appearing in person to prove his being acquitted and
justified by the Province of Vivaretz, Privas, Ap. 28
and demanding to be restored unto the Sacred Ministry: The Assembly
Commissionated two Pastors and two Elders to inspect the Papers produced both
by him and that Province, and to make report thereof in order unto sentence;
which being done by them, and they Reporting what he had owned and confessed at
the Synod of Privas, and also that there was required a more ample evidence and
testimonial as to his life and deportments since, than he has yet offered. For
these Papers of his were all examined in the Consistory, Colloquy and
Provincial Synod. Moreover the Deputies of Vivaretz declared what had passed in
their Synod about his pretended Justification: and the said Ferrier having been
heard upon the whole, and his assertions, denials, and replies being all
maturely considered, it was found that he had not given any satisfaction in the
least unto that order of the Synod of Privas, nor lived since with that
regularity as one who was bound by his conversation to have gotten the Churches
approbation, but rather has given new grounds and occasions for new
accusations to be brought in against him. Yet because that in the most
principal points he seems not to be fully convicted, this Assembly continues on
him his suspension until the next National Synod, and in the mean while he
shall retire unto some certain Church in the Province of Higher Languedoc, or
unto the City of Geneva, at his own liberty: but so to live, that he procure
either from the said Church or Province a public and honorable Testimony of
his Repentance: And as to what is past, we give him leave to use all lawful
means for his justification, which also he shall produce in that Synod, that
they may take cognizance thereof: And in the mean while a portion shall be
continued him for his subsistence out of the Moneys assigned to the Province of
Higher Languedoc, which shall be paid him in free of all Charges, and power is
given him to recover the Arrears granted him the last year, and now lying in
the hands of the Lord du Candal, or of the Receiver for the Province of Higher
Languedoc.

29. The Church of Beziers appealed from the Synod of Lower Languedoc for
refusing to pay the Wages of the Sieur Codur during the time of his absence
from them about the general Affairs of the Church, and for which the said Sieur
Codur has obliged himself by promise not to demand a penny from the said
Church of Beziers: This Assembly considering the long time of his absence
(during which he served the whole Province in general) and for that the said
Church of Beziers has paid the said Sieur de Codur his Wages all along, and
been besides at other charges in getting Ministers to supply his place, does
ordain, that the Province of Lower Languedoc, by way of recompense, shall pay
in unto the said Church the sum of four hundred and fifty Livers, without
casting in to this payment, or making any allowance for it the portion of
Moneys granted us by the King; and also the said Church shall cancel that
obligation the Sieur Codur has given them.

30. The Church of Beziers brought another Appeal, upon another account;
Monsieur Codur had been lent for six months unto the Church of Ganges by the
Province of Lower Languedoc, but was since redemanded by another Synod of the
same Province; whereupon at the earnest request of the Sieur Codur, who desired
to be set at liberty, he prevailed with both Parties to refer his disposal unto
the Judgment of this Assembly. After hearing the Deputies of the said Church of
Beziers, and the said Sieur Codur in their complaints, demands, reasons and
answers, the said Codur was yielded up for fixed Pastor unto the Church of
Ganges, who should enjoy him as their own; and it was further decreed, that the
Province of Lower Languedoc shall send unto the said Church of Beziers two
Pastors, who shall serve them by way of Loan, until such time as they can be
provided of a Pastor to be wholly appropriated to them, which shall be done as
soon as possible. And for the present the Elder of the Church of Ganges binds
himself for the whole Church, that the said Sieur Codur shall minister to them
of Beziers for three months longer.

31. Another Copy reads Meenyers.
Monsieur Mernyeur the younger, Pastor of the Church of Pompignant and la
Cadiere, appeared in this Assembly to prosecute an Appeal brought by him from
the Synod of Sevennes, which would have deprived the Church of St. Hyppolyte of
its hopes ever to enjoy him for their Pastor, and enjoining the said Mernyeur
to make his Residence in any one part of his Church, excepting that which is
contiguous unto that of St. Hyppolyte: And several Deputies in the name of
sundry the Inhabitants of the said St. Hyppolyte, appeared also as Appellants
from the same Synod, for declaring that they could not maintain two Pastors,
and had rejected their Petition, wherein they humbly requested of them that the
said Sieur Mernyeur might be given them for their Minister, and that those
Churches of Pompignant and la Cadiere might be incorporated with theirs of St.
Hyppolyte. After a fair hearing of all these Appellants, and of the Deputies
for the Province of Sevennes, this Assembly ordained, that the next Colloquy or
Synod of the Province shall make a Deputation of some Pastors and Elders, who
shall upon a Lord's day assemble that Church of St. Hyppolyte, and by the
Majority of Votes learn from them their will, and ability to maintain two
Ministers, in which case they shall join another Pastor unto him that is upon
the place, and the said Sieur Mernyeur shall remain affixed unto his own
Churches, which he shall carefully serve, especially because the Sieur Boni
has from the Colloquy of Sauve engaged himself for the punctual payment of his
Salary. And farther, it ratifies the Judgment of the Provincial Synod of
Sevennes in that Article of his not living at St. Hyppolyte, and commands the
said Mernyeur, that he do this very next ensuing morning return home unto his
Church, and personally reside at it.

32. The Church of Nismes appealed from the Province of Lower Languedoc, for
refusing them the grant of the Ministry of Monsieur Chauve, at present Pastor
in the Church of Sommieres, urging for themselves the great importance of their
Church, and the indispensible necessity they had of a Pastor, whose Age and
Experience might be able to undergo the burdens of so numerous a Congregation.
After hearing the Letters of the said Church of Nismes, and their request,
uttered by the mouth of the Sieur de Another reads Pierre d'Or; another Pinedon.
Pucchredon their Deputy, and the Arguments of the Provincial Synod by their
Deputies to the contrary, this Assembly ordained, that the said Sieur Chauve
should be lent for three months unto the Church of Nismes, after which term the
Provincial Synod (having heard both the Churches, and the said Sieur de Chauve)
may judge whether it be needful or not to dispose of his Ministry, and if they
find it necessary, then by the Authority of this Assembly they shall give him
unto the Church of Nismes, and they shall provide that of Sommieres with
another Pastor either taken from Nismes or elsewhere.

33. The Sieur de la Faye, This was razed out by the second of Vitre, Obs. 6.
upon this present Synod.
Pastor of the Church of Aubenas in Vivaretz, appeared in this Assembly
Appellant from the Judgment of the Provincial Synod, which had threatened him
with the greatest Censures, as if he had deserved them; and farther had
ordained, that the next Synod of his Province should remove him unto some other
Church, which in their wisdom they should conceive to be more expedient for
him, and that in the mean while the Colloquy should have a watchful Eye over
his conversation. But this Assembly condemned all the proceedings of that
Province in this Affair, particularly, for receiving Informations against the
said Sieur de la Faye unattested, and for censuring him without any cause or
Reason, and for not having recorded that their Censure, nor brought hither any
Record thereof; and therefore approving the Appeal of the said Sieur de la
Faye, it does abrogate that Sentence of the said Provincial Synod as infamous
and unjust in every article, branch and member of it.

34. Certain Inhabitants of Caussade Appealed from a Decree of the Provincial
Synod of Higher Languedoc, This was reverst in the 2d Synod of Vitre, p. m. 12.
importing that the Sieur Grand formerly their Pastor, but afterward suspended
for three months, and then removed from three years, should now at last the
term being expired be imposed again upon them. This Assembly (over-looking the
formalities which ought to have been observed in their Appeal, but were not)
did graciously receive both them and it; and having heard the Province, and
seen the Decree declaring several miscarriages whereof the said Grand had been
guilty, ordained that he be summoned to make his personal appearance before us,
and to be heard speak with his own mouth what he has to say for himself, and
then to be Judged according to the merits of his cause. Whereupon, the said
Sieur Grand having been examined by a Committee appointed for that End, and
they making report of his confessions and answers, this Assembly aggravated his
Censure, and Judged that he could not exercise his Ministry to the edification
of that Church of Caussade, and therefore does ordain that he be disposed of
somewhere else, by the Colloquy of Lower Quercy at their next meeting, and that
he be for ever made incapable of returning to Caussade, nor may the said Church
ever have power over him, or his Father who became bound for him, to redemand
the Moneys disbursed by them on his Studies, because they enjoyed the exercise
of his Ministry for some space of time.

35. The Colloquy of the Isles Appealed, for that Monsieur de la Forest
formerly Pastor in the Church of St. John d' Angely was given by their
Provincial Synod unto the Church of Mauze in the Colloquy of St. John d'
Angely. The Sieur Cocq' a Minister having been heard speak for that Colloquy,
and the Deputies of the Synod of Xaintonge for the Province, this Assembly
confirms the said de la Forest in the Pastoral office of that Church of Mauze
and ordains that the Province shall provide for the Church of St. John d'
Angely as soon as possible they can.

36. The Church of Again Appealed, because having demanded their portions free
of all taxations, the Synod of Lower Guyenne had refused it: This Assembly
rejected their Appeal, and dismissed over the affair relating to it unto the
said Province, which shall provide for their Pastors maintenance, as soon as
one shall be settled with them.

37. The Church of Boislebeque appealing from the decree of the Synod of
Normandy, by which Monsieur Simson was not only excluded from the said Church
of Boislebeque but also from all other Churches of Normandy; this their Appeal
was made null and void, and the judgment of the said Province confirmed, which
is entreated to take care that the said Church of Boislebeque be supplied with
a second Minister, in case they shall judge it needful.

38. The Colloquy of Albigeois brought an Appeal from the Judgment given in
their Provincial Synod of Higher Another Copy Higher Guyenne.
Languedoc, about the affair of Monsieur Josion one of the Pastors of the
Church of Castres, relating to the Censures past against the said Colloquy and
their Deputies. After hearing the Sieur Raffin Pastor of the Church of Realmont
for the said Colloquy, and the Deputies of the said Province, together with the
said Josion, and the Sieur de la Garrigues Deputy of the Church of Castres, and
the report of the Commissioners deputed to inspect the writings produced by the
several parties, and who were ordered to examine and hear Witnesses dwelling
upon the place, and who were particularly mentioned by name unto them, this
Assembly took off the Censure inflicted upon the said Colloquy and its
Commissioners by the said Synod; and yet approves of its judicial sentence in
all other particulars, and ordains that all Papers concerning this business
be deposited with Monsieur Gardesy, that so the remembrance of them may be for
ever forgotten.

39. The appeal of Monsieur Raffin Pastor of the Church of Realmont from the
Synod of Higher Languedoc, which had confirmed an Ordinance of the Colloquy of
Albigeois, obliging the said Church to visit the annexed Church of la Fenasse
every six weeks, was disannulled, and the decrees of the Provincial Synod and
Colloquy were both confirmed.

40. The Consuls of Pamiers appealed from a decree of the Synod of Higher
Languedoc, which would not grant them the precedence claimed by them, to
communicate first at the Lords Table before the Judge of that City: But this
their appeal was rejected, because it was of the nature of those things, which
might be finally determined by the Synod of their own Province.

41. The appeal of Monsieur Grave, Elder in the Church of Pamiers from the
Decree of the Synod of Higher Languedoc, about Moneys ordered to be kept by
Monsieur Ligonnier in his hands, was declared null and rejected, and the act of
that Synod was ordered to be put in execution, and made effectual.

42. The Sieur Collinet appealing from the decree of the Provincial Synod of
Burgundy, this Assembly ordained that that Province should defray the expenses
of his journey to Court, because he was sent thither to carry the verbal
process of the Churches of Chaalons, Paray, etc.

43. The Consistory of Mornac appealed from the Decree of the Synod of
Xaintonge, which had ordained that the said Church should pay unto the Sieur
Cocque their Pastor his arrears due unto him from them; but this their appeal
was rejected by this Assembly, who also injoin the said Church to make full
payment unto him of his just dues, or otherwise they should be deprived of the
Sacred Ministry of the Gospel by the next Colloquy of the Isles, or by the
Provincial Synod, who have all authority given them so to do from this Assembly.

44. The Sieur Suffran appealed from the Colloquy of Lionnois which had
suspended him from his Ministry, to which he says he submitted purely out of
fear. This Assembly having heard the Deputies of that Colloquy, and the
arguments of the said Suffran comprised in a Script of His presented to us,
finds the Colloquy to have judged prudently and piously in every particular of
their Sentence, and ordains that he be provided of a Church as soon as may be
in the Province of Lower Languedoc or in some neighbor Province; and that in
the mean while a portion of Moneys allotted unto the Pastors shall be detained
in the hands of the Lord du Candal to be paid unto him. With this condition,
that when as he shall be provided of a Church, that portion shall be put upon
the score of the Province, wherein it lies and he officiates.

CHAP. VIII. General Matters.
1. THE Province of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne proposed that a most humble
Petition might be tendered by them unto their Majesty's, that they would be
pleased to grant unto their Ministers a full maintenance. This Synod is of
opinion, that it were more proper for a Politic Provincial Assembly to make
this request, than for us which are but an Ecclesiastical.

2. The same Province moved another case: Whether Consistories might be allowed
to give in evidence unto the Civil Magistrate against insolent and outrageous
persons abusing their Pastors or Elders, who called them, according to the Duty
of their Places before them. This answer was returned, that that Canon of our
Discipline forbidding the discovery unto a Civil Judicature of matters
transacted in the Consistory ought not to be restrained to the sole confessions
of Crimes, but is to be understood in the most comprehensive sense of all
things whatsoever, excepting only such riots and outrages, whose fact being
notorious, it may be lawful to inform the Magistrate of: But as for outrageous
words, of what kind soever they may be, Consistories shall apply the censures
of the Church to redress and reform them.

3. The Province of Higher Guyenne requested that there might be a particular
Canon made for removing Elders from their office in the Churches, 1614. The
21th Synod.
and that the time of their coming in, and going out might be fixed and limited.
This Assembly Judges that this matter should be left to the prudence of
Provincial Synods. But nevertheless it ordains that if an Elder be deputed
unto a National Synod by his Province, he shall continue in his office, tho the
term thereof be expired, until such time as he have discharged the trust
reposed in him, and shall have given an account unto the Province of those
affairs concredited to him, and dispatched by him in that National Synod.

4. Forasmuch as diverse Provinces have remonstrated that by Reason of the
continuance and growth of ungodliness, we be daily threatened with the most
dreadful Judgments of God, and that there is an indispensable necessity of
extraordinary prayers unto the throne of Grace for the prosperity of their
Majesty's, and for imploring the good blessing of God upon the beginning and
progress of the Kings personal Government, who will be very shortly declared
Major, and that the public weal of the State may be promoted, the Peace and
Union of our Churches more firmly stablished, that therefore we be called out
to celebrate a public Fast in all the Churches of this Kingdom: This Assembly
for these causes now-mentioned does appoint the fourth day of this next
September to be observed generally in all the Churches of this Kingdom as a day
of Solemn Prayer, Humiliation and Fasting. And as for those extraordinary
Prayers which are used, it is left unto the Churches prudence where they be in
use, either to continue them, or lay them down.

5. The Deputies of Berry demanding some alteration in that Canon of the
National Synod of Rochell concerning Monks, 3 Rochel g. m. 16. See St. Maixant,
ob 4 upon the same Synod.
who forsaking their Convents, were to be sent back unto their respective
Provinces: Because it lays a very burdensome charge upon the poor Churches,
which are utterly unable to Support under it. This Assembly Judged it not their
duty to make any change in that Canon; only it advises the Provinces to be
very circumspect in their reception of such persons, and in the dispensation of
their charities, lest they become a charge unto the Provinces which do already
need relief.

6. At the request of the Provincial Deputies of Burgundy and Orleans, 2 Syn.
of Vitre g. m. 38.
our Lords the General Deputies are entreated and exhorted, and also by this
Assembly, to get those Letters Patents for exempting the Pastors of our
Churches from all taxes and other subsidies verified, they having been already
granted: And the Deputies of the Provinces in this Synod are charged to carry
back this same Petition unto their Mixed Provincial Assemblies, that so they may
join their most humble requests with those of the General Assembly; in case it
be not done before the time of their meeting.

7. The Province of Dolphiny desired that those words Prestre and Prestrise in
the 5th. Section of our Catechism might be changed into those of Sacrificateur
and Sacrificateure, because none questioned their sense and meaning, and for
that words were received by common usage. The Assembly did not Judge it any
wise convenient to alter these words.

8. At the request of diverse Provinces it was ordained that our National Synods
should not only not innovate any thing in the confession of Faith, Catechism,
Liturgy, and Discipline of our Churches, unless the matter had been first
Proposed by one or more Provinces, but also unless it were a thing of very
great importance, nor should that be resolved on, till such time as all the
Provinces being duly informed of it, had first debated it at home in their
respective Synods; and if it so happen that any of them shall have considered
of it before the rest, they may write their thoughts about it unto that
Province, which is empowered to call the next National Synod; and, in case the
matter be urgent, it shall be couched in the Letters of Summons, that so they
may come prepared for it.

9. The Province of Dolphiny moved, whether if two or three Witnesses were
brought by an Informer to give in evidence against a Pastor or Elder, they
might be admitted, so that their testimony should be of sufficient force and
virtue to condemn the accused, although there be none other crime objected against
them. This Assembly sees no difficulty at all in the case.

10. The Province of Anjou requesting it, 1. Paris 27.
this Synod injoineth all Consistories in their choice of Elders, to cause such
persons to be elected as are irreprehensible, according to our Discipline, and
carefully to observe that Canon about the qualities necessarily required in
them who are called unto those Offices. And all Colloquies and Provincial
Synods are charged to put to their helping hand, that this Ordinance be duly
kept and observed.

11. The Province of Xaintonge moving it, this Assembly ordained that such
Persons who get themselves preferred unto the Government of our cautionary
Towns, or unto the office of Counselors in the mixed Courts, or shall obtain
any other places granted unto Gentlemen professing our Religion, without taking
the necessary attestations according to the Letter and import of the Kings Writ
for Governors, and the particular Articles for Counselors in Sovereign
Courts, they shall be declared Desertors of the Union of our Churches, and
prosecuted with all Church Censures. And those of our Religion which are in
possession shall be exhorted to keep still possession of those places, and not
to resign them, but on this condition, nor consent to their admission and
reception, who offer themselves without such a Testimonal. And as for those
other ways of complaints and remonstrances to be made unto their Majesty's, of
the notorious violations of our Privileges, they shall be carried unto the
next approaching Political Assemblies granted us by the Writ of their said
Majesty's. But for the present our Lords the General Deputies are charged to
require that some other person duly qualified according to the above mentioned
orders may be substituted in the place of the Sieur Berger, who is of late
revolted from the truth. And if that particular Government, now become vacant
by his Apostasy be not supplied before the next meeting of the general
Assembly, notice shall be given unto them of it, that so they may prosecute it
in the name of all the Provinces.

12. At the request of the same Province of Xaintonge all Consistories be
injoined to take special heed that Commanders in our Cautionary Towns do not
admit into their familiar converse any debauched persons who be guilty of
crimes deserving corporal punishment.

13. And whereas the same Province, has desired that we would frame another
form of excommunication besides that which is inserted in our Discipline, we
concur with them in their motion, and shall take care that it be done
accordingly.

14. The Province of the Isle of France requested that an order might pass for
our Readers to publish the Banes of Marriages out of their desks, 3. Rochel.
observe. 23.
and not for Pastors to do it from the Pulpit. But this matter was left to the
prudence and liberty of Consistories.

15. The aforesaid Province of the Isle of France demanding it, this Assembly
ordained, that the Canons of former National Synods concerning Attestations
should be most strictly observed, and whatsoever Consistory presumes to give
one in any other form shall be most severely censured: And therefore all
Officers into whose hands such Attestations may fall are entreated to detain
them, and to present them unto the Provincial Synods, or Colloquies, upon whom
the Churches which have given them are dependant.

16. The Provinces of Xaintonge, the Higher and Lower Longuedoc, Privas, of
Colleges, 23.2. Vitre, of Colleges, 1.
and of the Isle of France all moving that it would be expedients lessen the
number of our Universities in this Kingdom, and to reduce them unto two only,
that so they might be rendered more complete: This Assembly does not judge meet
to diminish their number, but advises that the Professors there employed do
discharge their duty carefully and acquit themselves of their Offices
faithfully and most conscientiously.

17. Provincial Synods, 2. Paris 3.
Colloquies, and Consistories are expressly forbidden to admit any Persons unto
the Lords Table, who directly maintain Idolatry, or breed up their Children in
it, or have recourse unto the Pope for Dispensations, that they may enjoy
Benefices, or others under their name. And all such are judged utterly unworthy
of obtaining Testimonials from our Churches, whereby they may be advanced unto
those important Charges in our Cautionary Towns.

18. The Lord's General Deputies are ordered to give their Majesty's the most
humble Thanks of this Assembly, for that they have been pleased to discharge
our Churches of the Sous in the Liver, which was formerly taken for paying the
Salaries of our General Deputies out of the Moneys granted us by their
Liberality, Privas, p. m. 20.
and they are with all humility earnestly to request them to ease us of paying
three thousand six hundred Livers, which have been extraordinarily given unto
the Inhabitants of the Baylywick of Gex, by way of recompense for the loss of
their Churches Stock, whereof they were formerly in possession, and that it may
be paid them out of some other Fund than ours.

19. Relation being made that diverse Persons of eminent Note and Quality, 2.
Synod of Vitre, g. m. 34.
both within and without the Kingdom, are designing how to bring the Orthodox
Churches of France, England, Germany, Switzerland, the Low Countries, and
Geneva, to a nearer Communication in some convenient place, by Deputies sent
from them all, that so there may be a more strict and familiar Correspondence
in Doctrine effected and kept up among them; whereunto His Majesty of Great
Britain expresses a very great inclination. It was resolved, that those
excellent persons who travail in this most pious Undertaking, should have the
Thanks of this Assembly, and be entreated to persist in their laudable
prosecutions of it. And in the mean while this Design shall be imparted by the
Provinces unto such as understand these matters, that so this Proposal may be
more seriously advised on in the next National Synod.

20. For as much as the pernicious Doctrine of the Jesuits against the Lives,
Estates, and Authority of Sovereign Princes is propagated, and most impudently
published to the World by the chiefest of that Sect; Suarez having within a few
months gone beyond all the Fellows of his Order, in a Book newly published by
him: This Assembly detesting that abominable Doctrine, together with its
Authors, exhorts all the faithful of our Communion to abhor and execrate it,
and all our Ministers and Professors are to Teach and Preach against it
powerfully, and to batter it down with force of Arguments, and to defend at the
same time conjoyntly together the Rights of God, and those of the Higher Powers
ordained by him.

CHAP. IX. Particular Matters.
1. THERE was read an Act of the Colloquy of Higher Agenois, in which the
Council of Lower Guyenne complained against the Lord of Pujole, and against a
certain Judgment of the said Colloquy, past in his favor, because that the
said Lord had seriously protested of his sincere intentions to persist in the
profession of our Religion, they could not imagine that he would admit into his
heart such a disloyal thought as to abandon the Sacred Communion of our
Churches, and to bring the worst of evils upon his Soul in good earnest; 1614.
The 21th Synod.
yet nevertheless they did judge the said Lord worthy of the heaviest Censures
for his great miscarriages in all his public actings, particularly, that
instead of demanding in a lawful Assembly the Reformation of those Defaults and
Abuses he pretended to have observed in the Council, he had as much as in him
lay exposed it to the highest contempt and infamy, and followed a course
notoriously contrary to all Orders, which have been until now uniformly obeyed
and practiced among us with good acceptance and success; a matter of very
dangerous consequence, and which might cause an irreparable breach in our
Union: Which fault of his he did confess and acknowledge, and promised for the
future to conform himself to the Canons which are now, or hereafter may be
established by these Assemblies. And Monsieur Ferrand, a Pastor, was ordered to
acquaint this Assembly of it. All things duly considered, this Assembly
approves of the Judgment of that Colloquy, and of the said Lord du Pujol's
submission, and having once more reiterated the same Remonstrances, it drew
from him those promises, by means of which he was reconciled unto the
Provincial Council, and to all those who were known to have shared in the
scandal that he had given: And all the Churches, Parties in those disturbances,
were exhorted to live in Peace and Union for the future, which was mutually
promised on all sides.

2. The Deputies of the Churches of Auvergne remonstrated their deplorable
estate and condition, earnestly desiring the favor and assistance of this
Assembly, to help them in their prosecutions at Court, that they might be
enabled to uphold and continue the exercise of the true Religion at Issoyre,
and that they may be provided of a Pastor meet for so weighty a work; this
Assembly ordered the Lords General Deputies to have a most especial care of
their concern, and to allow them the two hundred Livers which they have
received on account from the Lord du Candall; and they do farther grant them
one hundred Livers more, and continue unto them their four portions which had
been formerly appointed to be paid in unto them free of all taxations and
defalcations by the Province of Sevennes and Gevaudan upon the score of any
charges ordinary or extraordinary whatsoever, and it ordains that the
Churches of Issoyre shall be incorporated with the said Province, from which,
according to order, they shall receive their aforesaid portions, and dispose of
them toward the maintenance of their Pastors, and the remainders thereof shall
be expended in defraying their charges before mentioned until the next National
Synod.

3. The same Deputies for that Province of Higher and Lower Auvergne having
petitioned this Assembly to provide them a Pastor for the aforementioned
Church of Issoyre, had granted them Monsieur Babat, who was now at full
liberty, to serve the Church of Issoyre, and its annexed Congregations, and to
be their own peculiar Pastor, who shall be brought over to them with his
household goods and Library at their charges, and they shall furnish him with
Moneys and the assistance of an Elder to be present at the Provincial Synods of
Sevennes, as often as they should be summoned to them.

4. The Lord Vicount of Leyran demanding by his Letter sent unto this Assembly,
2. Vitre, g. m. 11. Two Copies read Dan. and Din.
some additions from us unto two hundred Livers which he promises for himself
shall be paid to the gathering and constituting of a Church at Legran
l'Imbrassat and d'Ur; there was granted him one ordinary portion, and another
half extraordinary, both free of all charges ordinary and extraordinary from
that Province, just as it comes from the Dividend made by the National Synod,
and that said Province shall be accountable for the disposal of those portions
unto the next National Synod. And Letters also shall be written unto the said
Lord of Leyran, praising and commending his Zeal and Affection toward the
advancement of the Kingdom of God.

5. John de Luna, and Laurens Fernandez, both Spaniards; presented themselves
Montauban, declaring their Abjuration of Monkery and Popery, and approving of
their Conversation ever since their Conversion; as also Stephen Conversett of
the Franche Comte, who had quitted the Order of the Dominicans, and Peter
Mercurin a Provincial, who had also abandoned Popery. This Assembly granted
unto the said Fernandez, Conversett, and Mercurin, an hundred and forty Crowns
a-piece, and farther ordains, that the said Mercurin shall be put into the
Catalogue of Proposans, and be first of all employed in the Ministry in
Provence. And as for John de Luna, who desires leave to retire for some time
into Holland, there be sixty Livers granted him for his Voyage. And whereas one
called Buisson, born in the Lower Guyenne, is lately converted from the Popish
Religion unto the Reformed, thirty Livers are given him toward his relief
until the next Provincial Synod, wherein he shall be particularly cared for.
All which shall be paid, without making it a Prefident for the future; and the
Provinces and Pastors are expressly charged and forbidden never to present more
unto these Assemblies any such Converts.

6. The Sieur Constantin declaring his most miserable estate, and craving our
charitable Relief in his deep Poverty; this Assembly ordained, that there
should be paid him yearly the sum of an hundred Livers, which shall be put to
the account of the Moneys distributed to the Province of the Higher Guyenne,
and immediately 300 Livers were given him to defray his charges in coming unto
this Assembly, and the Corporation of Bergerac shall be exhorted to augment his
Salary as Regent of that Classis in which he serves.

7. The Deputies of the Church of Pons did in the name of its Elders and Heads
of Families present their Petition, that they might be provided of a Pastor;
This Assembly ordained, that Monsieur Constant, who is now freed from the
Church of Mazgravier, be given unto the said Church of Pons, in case that they
like of him, and he of them. And that they may treat hereof, the aforesaid
Deputies are advised to go to Montauban, in which City they may hear, and
discourse with him about it; who having been there, they did bring with them
the said Constant, who consented to pass over unto their Church, that they
might have a proof of his Ministry, and he a trial of their Tempers; and in
case of mutual Agreement, he intended to settle among them as their Pastor:
This Assembly approved of this their Reciprocal Transaction, and decrees, that
after their acceptance of him according to the Discipline of our Churches, he
shall be confirmed in his Pastoral Office to them.

8. The Deputies of the Church of Pons demanding the establishment of a
College in their City, 2. Vitre, Appeal 2.
and a supply of Moneys necessary its charges, were remanded back to the
Province of Xaintonge, who should take such care about it, as they judged
needful.

9. The Churches of Souls having deputed the Sieur Bustonoby Pastor, 2. Vitre,
p. m. 19.38
remonstrate the necessity and advantage that would accrue by the personal
Residence of Ministers among them, which yet they could never effect by reason
of their poverty and inability, requesting also some little Moneys to forward
the impression of a few Manuscripts in the Biscain Language; this Assembly over
and above the portions received by them from the Province of Lower Guyenne,
does bestow upon them two portions quitted, free, and discharged of all
expenses, taxations, and deductions whatsoever, and three hundred Livers to be
paid at one entire payment toward the Printing of the said Manuscripts: And
the said Province shall bring in those Moneys upon Account unto the next
National Synod.

10. Mr. Stephen Rochers, Pastor of the Church of Monthasillac and Piles,
having been suspended from his Office by the Provincial Synod of St. Foy, until
the next Synod of that Province, appeared in person before this Assembly,
petitioning to be restored unto his Ministry, and producing laudable
Certificates from the Colloquy and Church of Bergerac, where he has since
resided, as also from that in which he had served, his request was granted him,
and he was declared from this instant Reinstated into the holy Ministry, which
he was exhorted to discharge with all prudence, diligence and faithfulness; and
whereas he complained of his Churches Poverty, the consideration thereof was
deferred till such times as the Moneys granted us by the King should come to be
distributed.

11. The Deputies of the Isle of France demanding that another Order might be
Issued out against Monsieur de la Touch Pastor of the Church of Mouchamp in
Poictou to Account with them about the Moneys owing them for maintaining him
several years together in his preparatory Studies for the Ministry, 2. Rochel,
p. 3. m. 4. Privas, p. m. 17.
to the performance of which he stands obliged by the very orders of one or two
former National Synods. This Assembly having heard his exceptions, and
reflecting upon the inconsiderableness of the debt, and that his brother has
served in the Ministry in the very self same Province, and that he was at great
expenses in Paris, where he fell sick in a Journey which he took on purpose to
put an end to this business, does cancel his obligation, and entreats the said
Province also never to trouble him any more about it.

12. The difference in the Church of Mussidan, and the Complaint of Monsieur
Chabot, for that the Public worship of God had been transferred unto Lunga,
and the Sieur Latane given without the Consent of the said Chabot unto that
Church, are dismissed over unto the Provincial Synod to be examined by it and
that matter concerning our Cautionary Town there it shall be decided by the
next Mixed Provincial Assembly; and that things may be brought into a good
temper in order to an accommodation, some of the Members of this Assembly shall
in their way homeward call in at Mussidan, and by their best arguments persuade
them to a sincere Peace and hearty Union among themselves.

13. Phillip Marulles born at Realmont, Student in Divinity in the University
of Montauban, was presented by the Deputies of Higher Languedoc, craving some
charitable assistance from this Synod; who gave him sixty Livers, to be paid
him by the Receiver General out of the Moneys allowed unto the said Province.

14. The Deputies of Vivaretz reported, that diverse Churches in their Province
sending two Elders unto their Synods, caused an Inequality in their Votes, and
the lesser Churches on several occasions do make greatest noises and
complaints. This Assembly leaves that Synod, In case of contestation, full
power to gather the suffrages, not by Deputies, but by their Churches; however
this shall not be made a precedent unto the other Provinces.

15. John Guerin second Regent in the College of Die in Dolphiny, requested to
be restored unto the sacred Ministry of the Gospel, from which he was deposed
thirty years ago, for a crime committed by him, when as he lived at Geneva.
This Assembly, having read and heard the Attestations given him by the Churches
of Dolphiny, in which he has since made his abode, and of the University of
Die, and of his Provincial Synod, gave orders unto the said Provincial Synod to
write unto our Reverend Brethren the Pastors, Professors and Elders in the
Church of Geneva to give us their thoughts about it, and in case by their
answer they approve and consent unto it, the said Province having pondered all
circumstances, and believing that he may be useful in Edifying God's Church, is
empowered with full authority from this Assembly, to restore him unto the
Ministry.

16. The Deputies of Berry declaring that the Moneys granted unto the Lord Duke
of Sully for the College of Boisbelle were laid out and employed in repairing
the College of Chastillon, Privas, p. m. 35.
and in diverse other pious and requesting that they might be discharged from
making restitution of them, as they had been enjoined by the National Synod of
Privas, they being in no wise able to do it by reason of their deep poverty,
and very great necessities of their Province; This Assembly compassionateing
their deplorable condition, does for this reason only grant them their request.

17. The great necessity and famine befallen the Church of Mas St. Espueilles
having been reported in this Assembly, St. Maixant, P. m. 19.
the Lord du Candal w to pay out of the Common Moneys of our Churches unto the
Inhabitants of the said City the sum of nine hundred Livers, and to Monsieur
Aubriot their Pastor charged with a great and numerous family the sum of three
hundred Livers, the whole being 1200 l. Which sum of nine hundred Livers shall
be distributed by the Consuls and Consistory, who are to give an Acquitance for
it. And that the said distribution may be made among the People with the
greater Order and fidelity, Monsieur Isaiah Lignier, Lord de la Menarie Elder
of the Churches of Melquel and Lunel, who is now personally present in this
Assembly, and was an Eyewitness of their sore and deep affliction, is
entreated to see this Charity well-managed and distributed, and he shall carry
home with him what other Collections he has received for the said City. Which
accordingly he promised to see done and performed.

18. The Deputies of Dolphiny complaining that the Sieur Scoffier had not
obeyed the Decree of the Synod of Privas, St. Maixant, p. m. 21. Privas, p. m.
34.
in paying the Moneys which he owed them; this Synod voted that ninety Livers
should be detained, out of the Moneys beloning to the Province of Berry (in
which the said Scoffier serves as a Minister) in the hands of the Lord du
Candal, and delivered unto the Province of Dolphiny; yet leaving the Province
of Berry at Liberty to take what course they thought good to recover the said
sum from Monsieur Scoffier.

19. The Deputies of Dolphiny complaining that the Sieur Jarry had received
thirty Livers from the Church of Castel-Dolphin, upon promise that he should
come and serve them, which yet he has not done, nor restored to them the said
Moneys; Order was given to the Synod of Sevennes, that they injoin him to make
them satisfaction, and that they consult what censure to inflict upon him.

20. Bertrand Auger, or Faugier, who was put upon the File of the Deposed
Ministers by the National Synod of St. Maixant, having cleared himself of the
Crimes laid unto his charge, was restored unto the exercise of his Ministry by
the Synod of Dolphiny, whose Deputies now demanding that his name might be
razed out of that black Kalander, this Assembly did accordingly grant it to
them.

21. A judgment of the Province of Normandy about some Money-matter being put
in execution, Privas, p. m. 25.
which was remanded thither by the Synod of Privas; this Assembly ordained,
that the Province of Brittany should pay two thirds of the charges expended by
the Sieur Trizonius, who was commissionated in that affair by the Province of
Anjou; and the Moneys for the said charges shall be kept by the Lord du Candal
in his hands out of the Moneys appertaining to the Province of Brittany, unless
their Deputies would rather compound, and make present satisfaction.

22. Complaint being made by the higher Generality of Normandy, that the
general charges for the whole Province were divided by equal portions between
the Lower and Higher Normandy, although there was a very great inequality both
of Churches and Colloquies betwixt them; this Assembly ordains for the future
that the said Charges shall be divided into five parts, whereof the Lower
Normandy shall pay three, and the Higher the other two.

23. The Synod of the Isle of France complained of the Church of Paris for not
paying in, as the other Churches of that Province have done, and still do the
fifth penny of their Charity-Moneys. This Assembly having heard the Sieur
Bigot, and seen the Acts of the Provincial Synod, and the Accounts of the said
Church, approves of the administration of their Charities, and orders that
the said Church shall continue in the same estate as it was heretofore, only
that their Deputies shall bring in to their Provincial Synod an account how
they dispose of their fifth penny.

24. The difference betwixt the Church of Orleans and their Provincial Synod,
about Claudius Garnier a Dominican Friar converted unto the Protestant Reformed
Religion, is turned over to the Province of Anjou, to put a final period
thereunto by the authority of this Assembly.

25. The Province of Lower Languedoc having referred unto this Assembly the
separation of the Churches de la Bastide, Viras, Vignas, and Bessars from the
Church of Barjac, that they might be incorporated with the Province of
Vivaretz. After hearing the Deputies of both Provinces, and perusal of the
Judgment given by the Synod of Lower Languedoc, the aforesaid Churches were all
adjudged unto the Province of Vivaretz, excepting only that those of the
Quarter of Bessars, and only they are left to their own choice, whether to
continue Members of the Church of Barjac, or to follow those other Churches.

See before Appeal 38.
26. The expenses of Monsieur Raffin in his journey to this Assembly for
defending that Appeal brought by the Colloquy of Albigeois shall be re-imburst
him by the Provinces of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, out of the portions
allotted to the said Colloquy.

27. The difference between the Colloquy of Albigeois and the Synod of Higher
Languedoc and Gyuenne, about the distribution of their respective portions, is
dismissed over to the Synod of Lower Guyenne, who have full power to put a
final period to it by the authority of this Assembly.

28. The Province of Lower Languedoc desiring to be discharged by this Assembly
from paying those sums for which they stood indebted unto the Synod of Privas,
because that the Apostate Ferrier, who had their Moneys, and whom they had
impleaded for them, has removed his cause by way of Appeal* unto the Council:
It was ordained, that the Decree of Privas should not in the least be changed;
And yet notwithstanding that these Petitioners should be helped in their just
prosecution of the said Ferrier at Law by all the Churches.

29. This Assembly approving the labors of Mr. Andrew Rivet Pastor of the
Church of Thouars, and particularly those learned Works of his published
against the Adversaries of the Truth, gave him their thanks for them, and as a
testimony of that love and honor they bear him, do give him the sum of six
hundred Livers out of the common stock of all the Churches.

30. The Synod of Poictou having proposed that there might be a new division
and increase of Colloquies in the said Province, after hearing the arguments
pro and con, this Assembly ordained that the Colloquies should abide in number
and form as they have ever been until now.

31. The Sieur Chabot petitioned by Letters unto this Assembly that the public
Preaching of Gods Holy Word, together with the administration of the
Sacraments, and all other exercises of our Holy Reformed Religion might be
again restored unto the Church of Mussidan; It was ordained that Messieurs d'
Anglade and Esperien Ministers of St. Foy do visit that Church, and Preach at
Mussidan, and dispose the dissenting parties to a reconciliation, till the
meeting of their next Provincial Synod.

32. The Province of Higher Languedoc is exhorted to consider the distresses of
the Church of Aiguesmortes, and to assist it with a supernumerary portion,
equal unto any of those other portions given by them unto Pastors, and to be
paid out of that stock of Moneys which will be allotted them in the general
Dividend.

33. And the said Province is entreated to give unto Master Andrew Chanforan
the Son of Monsieur Chanforan Pastor of the Church of Poussyn the first place
that falls vacant for any Proposan, Privas, p. m. 19.


34. The Deputies in this Synod are charged when they return unto their
respective Provinces to recommend unto them the continuance of their Charity
toward the poor Refugees of the Marquisate of Salluces, a great many of them
still groaning under very pressing wants.

2. Vitre, obs. 8. upon this Synod.
35. According to the Decree of the National Synod of Privas, the Province of
Normandy have paid their debt unto Monsieur Vatable, and the Moneys were
deposited for him into the hands of the Deputies of Poictou.

See the 5th Article after the Roll of names. 2 Vitre, obs. 7. upon the Synod.
36. The Letters of the King of great Britain received at the opening of this
Assembly, and those from the Church of Geneva, and those which were since its
Session, sent from his Highness the Prince Elector Palatine, and from the Lord
Marshall Duke of Bouillon to it; being read, as also the Letters of Monsieur
Moulin and Tilenus, treating of the difference between them: The Assembly
deputed certain Pastors to peruse the Inventory transmitted us from the
Professor Tilenus, and Monsieur du Moulin's Confession of Faith about the
effects of the Personal Union, who made report, that the said Inventory
contained certain terms and modes of speech that were uncouth and improper, yet
imputed unto the said Monsieur du Moulin as his, and extracted out of a
Conference held with him at Paris, whereof they could not make any Judgment
unless they had sight of the Original, or at least of a Copy of its Acts
exactly and well collationed. And as for the confession of the said Monsieur du
Moulin sent unto this Assembly, they do find it for its substance orthodox, and
wide enough from all suspicion of Eutychianism, Nestorianism, Samosatenianism,
and Ubiquitism. Wherefore, that this difference may be totally extinguished,
and a most sincere reconciliation effected between the divided Parties, this
Assembly ordained, that all the Printed Copies of the Professor Tilenus his
Book, and that Manuscript before mention Styled the Inventory, as also the
Latin and French Books written by the said Monsieur du Moulin relating unto
this Question, shall be sent to Saumur, and deposited with the Lord du Plessis
Marly, that so the remembrance of this contention may be for ever buried in
oblivion. And Monsieur du Moulin and the Professor Tilenus are exhorted by this
Assembly to meet together on the same day, and at the same place in Saumur,
where the Pastors of the neighboring Churches together with the Pastors of
that Church, and the Professors of that University may be summoned in together,
who with the said Lord du Plessis shall endeavor a firm Union in Doctrine
between these two persons, and a sincere forgetfulness of all Matters past
betwixt them. And in the mean while Monsieur du Moulin is exhorted to continue
his labors in his Church with that same zeal and greatness of Spirit as
heretofore, and to take courage and comfort unto himself from that Approbation
and Testimonial which has been, and is still given him for the orthodoxy of
his Faith and soundness of his Doctrine. And report shall be made of these
methods and means used by us unto His Majesty the King of great Britain, to his
Highness the Prince Elector Palatin, to the Lord Duke of Bouillon, in our
Letters of answer to them particularly, together with our humble requests unto
his Majesty of great Britain, to his Electoral Highness the Prince Palatin, and
to the Lord Marshall Duke of Bouillon that they would be pleased by their
Authority to oblige the said Monsieur Tilenus personally to engage in this
Interview and conference; and to command that the beforementioned Printed
Books and Manuscripts, which may have past out of this Kingdom into their
Dominions, may be all called in and suppressed. And this also shall be inserted
in our answer unto the Church of Geneva.

37. This Assembly ordains that the portion of the Sieur du Moulin Pastor of
the Church at Orleans shall be discharged of all Taxes and Costs upon the
Provinces, See the 4th Article after the names of the Deputies.
and paid in unto him full and free.

38. Master Hume formerly Pastor of the Church of Duras having found on his
return home from Scotland and England his said Church provided of another
Pastor, and the Province not calling him unto another Church, he is declared
free by this Assembly to serve in any other place where God shall call him,
either in the same, or in any other Province of this Kingdom.

39. This Assembly having been, read, and heard the Letters and arguments of
Achilles Bonhout which prevailed with him not to remove his son from the
Jesuits school, and that the consistory of the Church of Lions cannot in the
least compel him to it, does Judge them null, and commands the said Consistory
to inflict upon him, and all others that shall be guilty of the like scandal,
the severest Censures of the Church according to our Discipline.

40. The Church of Metz by their Letter bearing date the tenth of May, and
received the second of June, petitioned this Assembly to send them such a
Pastor out of the Churches of this Kingdom, as It Judged would most contribute
to their Edification, and if It thought good, either Monsieur Chevillette
Minister of Vitry, or Monsieur de la Cloche Minister of the Church of Moysi,
both of them in the Isle of France. This Assembly left the consideration of
this matter unto the said Province, and prayed them in their next Synod to
gratify the Church of Metz,

CHAP. X. Of Colleges and Universities.
1. MOnsieur Joly, one of the Pastors of the Church of Montauban, made report
in this Assembly, that for diverse months last past he has took upon him the
profession of the Hebrew Language, and for the benefit of the University, and
the assistance of Moniseur Tenant, he desires to continue in it, requesting
that the hundred Livers remaining of the four hundred assigned unto Professors
of the holy Language, might be granted him, Monsieur Tenant receiving only
three hundred of those four. The Council of the University having joined with
the said Joly in his Petition, this Assembly granted them their demand, and
exhorted the said Monsieur Joly to acquit himself worthily of this his new
Employment, which he also promised.

See above 12. obs. upon the former Syn.
2. Monsieur Elias Alba, Mayor of Bergerac, having on behalf of the Corporation
of the said Town performed the Condition proposed to them by this Synod, and
brought an Act of the Townhouse dated the twelfth day of this month, by which
the whole Bench and Common Council of that Town assembled together, do give him
full power to declare, that upon our Order for payment, of the sum of 1500
Livers out of the Moneys granted by His Majesty unto the Churches of this
Kingdom, they would yield up their whole Right in the King's Writ of Grant of
the said sum unto the disposal of this holy Synod, which also is most humbly
petitioned by them to give them the Grant thereof for the maintenance of their
College. This Assembly commending their submission unto the Ordinance of our
Churches, and in consideration of their Importunity, and for the benefit of
their College does grant unto them the sum of twelve hundred Livers, including
in them the four hundred which had been before granted them; See St. Maix. p.
m. 2.
which sum shall be paid them after the usual manner out of our Church-Moneys,
and gives them free and full power to recover the portions of their Pastors,
which were stopped in the hands of the Receiver of the Province of Lower Guyenne;
and recommends unto their Christian Charity the Sieur Constantin, one of the
Regents of their College.

3. Monsieur Joly, one of the Pastors of the Church of Millan, deputed by the
Colloquy of Rouargue, demanding a sufficient Fund for erecting a School at
Millan aforesaid, and at the Church of Essene, received this answer that at
present we could not erect any new Colleges, and that the Church of Essene
should receive their portion as soon as they had a Pastor in actual service
with them.

4. Privas. Art 17. of Universities.
, The University of Montauban desiring that the Moneys, for which by their
Account brought in and audited at the Synod of Privas, they stood indebted,
might be forgiven them; this Assembly judges, that it is utterly unfit to make
any alteration in that Decree of Privas.

5. Monsieur Gigord, Pastor and Professor in the Church and University of
Montpellier, reported unto this Assembly, that the sums received by him, and
not allowed by the Synod of Privas, were razed out of the Books, because being
at that time absent, he was never heard, and making it appear by acts and
attestations, that he served three quarters of the years 1598, 1599, and 1600,
contrary to what had been alleged, and taken up in prejudice against him. This
Assembly allowed him the wages he had received for that whole time, amounting
to nineteen hundred and five and twenty Livers; and as for the other sums of
the ensuing years, amounting unto eighteen hundred and sixty Livers; this
Assembly thankfully acknowledging his past labors, and the excellent gifts
which God has bestowed upon him, as also his readiness and willingness to
continue in the service of his Church, it does frankly liberate and discharge
him from all manner of restitution of the said sum, which was generously given
him by the joint and unanimous consent of all the Deputies, yea, and after that
those of the Lower Languedoc and Sevennes were gone out of the Synod, in
obedience to its Order.

6. Privas, of Colleges, Art. 13.
A difficulty was raised by the Committee for inspecting the Accounts of
Universities and Colleges, because the Provinces divided those very Moneys
among themselves in diverse places, though it had been given them for their
Colleges; the Decree of Privas not being express to the contrary; this
Assembly ordained, that such Provinces, as could conveniently do it, should
join Stocks together, and complete one College only, leaving unto the rest,
which could not do otherwise their liberty of parting them into two only, but
not into more, and that they would add of their own as much as they could
possibly spare, that so they might claim of right the name and reputation of a
College.

7. 2. Vitre, of Universities, Art. 10.
As to those demands and proposals of the University of Montauban made by
Monsieur Chamier, this Assembly ordained, that they should draw out the sum of
three thousand Livers freed from the payment of four Deniers in the Liver, due
unto the Sieur de Vissouze. But their demands of augmenting the Regents Salary,
could not be granted them. For that the Corporation of Montauban stands obliged
to them by an Act of the National Synod of St. Maixant, on pain of forfeiting
their Privilege of being an University, to add unto their Stipends. And as to
the times of payment, which is at three Terms yearly, that depending upon an
Order agreed upon by all the Churches with the Receiver General, it could not
be altered, because it is the fixed term for all Ecclesiastical Moneys. As to
the Account; it is needless for any Receiver to travel on that score to our
National Synods, because the Provincial Deputies may and ought to bring their
Acquittances with them, and to be responsible for them.

8. Privas. Art. 19. of Universities. 2. V^tre, of Univers. 31.
The Deputies of Dolphiny desiring a certain sum of Moneys to be paid yearly
unto their University of Die: This Assembly over and above the 3000 Livers,
which were paid them at once by an Order of the National Synod of Privas, does
give them 400 Livers more to be paid them annually as an augmentation to the
maintenance of one Professor.

St. Maixant. of Univers. 3. 2. Vitre, of Univers. 16.
9. Whereas the National Synod of St. Maixant did grant, and that of Privas did
continue it unto the University of Saumur; this Assembly does also add unto it
the sum of six hundred Livers yearly to render their College more accomplished,
and that it may be stockt sufficiently with Regents, and all needful Officers.
For which sum the Province of Anjou shall be accountable, as for all other
University-Moneys unto the next National Synod, and they are desired to appoint
such a Receiver, as can discharge the trust freely, or at the least, that he be
such an one us will accept of an halfpenny only in the Liver.

10. Monsieur Anglade, Pastor of the Church at Pomport, 2. Vitre, p. m. 18.
complained unto this Assembly, that the Province of Lower Languedoc was
indebted to him for several years Arrearages of Salary, as Professor of the
Hebrew Language in the University of Nismes: It was agreed upon between him and
the Deputies of that Province, that the said Province should come unto an
Account with him at the next Synod of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, and should
give him satisfaction, in case they find themselves indebted to him, as he
says they are from the very beginning of his Professorship in the year 1603.

11. The demand of the Church of Viellevigne to have a School granted it, is
dismissed over to the Province of Brittany.

12. The Pastors of the Colloquy of Gex reported by the Deputies of the
Province of Burgundy, Privas g. m. 14.
that contrary to what was ordained in the Provincial Synod held at Gex in May
last, that the said Town of Gex should receive out of the Moneys assigned unto
their Ministers in the said Colloquy, sixty Livers toward the maintenance of
their College, and the said Ministers had freely acquiesced in it; yet
nevertheless the Inhabitants of the said Town making their Application unto the
Council, had got an Order for two hundred and fifty Livers out of the said
Moneys, a matter of great prejudice unto the Ministers of that Colloquy: This
Assembly judges the said Town worthy of a very grievous Censure, to have
provided for themselves in such a manner as is contrary to the Discipline and
Union of our Churches, and they be enjoined, to take none other courses for the
establishment of their College, than such as depend upon our Discipline, and
that they have recourse unto the Province of Burgundy for the sixty Livers,
assigned to their College by virtue of an Ordinance of that Provincial Synod.
And in case of Non-obedience unto this our Act, they shall be proceeded against
by all Ecclesiastical Censures.

13. The Statutes framed for the conduct and government of our Universities,
Gap, p. m. 18. Privas, of Universs. 2^.
having been read in this Assembly, were approved, and Provincial Synods,
Colloquies, Consistories, and Academical Councils are all exhorted to have a
special Eye, that they be carefully and punctually observed.

CHAP. XI. The Accounts of our Universities and Colleges; as also a Dividend
of Moneys given by their Majesty's unto our Churches, Universities and
Colleges since the National Synod of Privas, 1612.
1. THE Accounts of the University of Montauban for Moneys given them by the
National Synod of Privas for the years 1612 and 1613, having been presented by
Mr. Daniel Chamier, and John Bardon, were perused and examined, and a Decree
past that they should be allowed of as to the sums contained in their receipt
of those two years a 1612 and 1613, without making it a Precedent for the
future, nor approving the Expenses of the said University over and above their
Income assigned them in the Synod of Privas, and the books of those Accounts
remain in the custody of the said Bardon, together with the Copy of the
Accounts duly signed, whose Original was given unto the Deputies of Xaintonge,
to be put into the Archives of the Town of Rochel.

2. The Accounts of the Universities of Montpellier and Nismes for Moneys given
them by the Synod of Privas for the years 1612 and 1613, were brought in by Mr.
John Bansillon, read and examined; and whereas it appeared by them, that one of
their Professors in Theology at Montpellier had his Wages paid him for half of
this present year, and the Professor in Hebrew until May last, it was decreed,
that those Accounts, or the signed Copy of them should be left in the hands of
the said Bansillon, and presented unto the next National Synod by the Deputies
of Lower Languedoc.

The Accounts also of the College of Beziers shall be brought unto the Synod
of Lower Languedoc, there to be audited, and afterward tendered unto the
National Synod. And all this shall be done without making it a Precedent for
the future, nor as approving the Expenses of the said University over and above
their Income settled upon them by the Synod of Privas. And those Books of
Accounts shall be in the keeping of the said Monsieur Bansillon: And both the
said Universities shall give in their Accounts about the four hundred sixty and
six Livers, two Sous, and eight Deniers remaining in the hands of the Receiver
of Lower Languedoc.

3. The Account of the University of Saumur for Moneys of the years, 1612 and
1613. seen, examined, and shut up by the Synod of Anjou assembled at Saumur the
fifth of April 1614. was presented, together with the Books thereof, unto this
Assembly, and now revised, and cast up by Commissioners ordained to that
purpose; who made report, that the said University had paid all the wages of
the Professors, Regents, and Officers belonging to it unto the first of April
last. And more, those of the two Professors in Divinity, one in Philosophy, of
the four Regents, and of their Bedel unto the first of July now coming; And
that they have yet in Arrears by them for the perfecting the said Account the
sum of 1062 Livers and eight Sous, for which they will be responsible, and
their Books of Accounts, together with the Original of the said Account
approved in all its Branches, were by this Assembly left with Monsieur
Bouchereau, who brought in the Account for this University, to be put into the
hands of the Deputies of Xaintonge, and by them to be laid up in the Archives
of Rochel.

4. For the future the Universities of the Higher and Lower Languedoc shall
bring in their Accounts unto their Provincial Synods to be examined by them,
and afterward by the Deputies of the said Provinces, they shall be presented
unto our National Synod.

5. The Account of the College of Brittany for Moneys from the year 1608 unto
the year 1612 having been read, examined, and shut up in the Synod of Anjou the
fourteenth of May 1613. and the sum of 1200 Livers put down to their Receipt
for those four years beforementioned, paid into the Colleges of Blain,
Vitre, and Viellevigne, it was past also in this Assembly. And whereas the said
Province was to have accounted for the years 1612 and 1613. by its Deputies,
they were ordered to bring in the said Accounts unto the Synod of Anjou, and
thence unto the next National Synod, on pain of being deprived of all their
College Money for time to come.

6. The Account of the Province of the Isle of France for the College of
Clermont form the year 1607 unto this now current 1614. according to the Decree
of Privas, having been read, examined, perfected, and approved by the Synod of
Berry the seventh of March last, and there being omitted in the Heel of the
Account sixty one Livers and five Sous, which have been since made good by the
Synod of the said Province of the Isle of France, in obedience unto that Order
of transmitting it unto Berry the 13th. of March last: Therefore the whole was
approved.

7. The Account of the College of Berry settled at Chastillon on the Loire for
the yeas 1612 and 1613. was past and approved for the eight hundred Livers
given to it.

8. The Account of the College of Poictou was perfected and accepted by the
Synod of Xaintonge the ninth of April 1614 and approved by this Assembly, but
with this proviso, that it should not be made a Precedent for time to come.

9. The Account of the College of Burgundy for the years 1612 and 1613. was
cast up, examined, and approved.

10. The Province of Normandy reporting that through the death of several
Regents, they had lost their Acquittances, and could bring in none other
Account, than the Attestation of their Provincial Synod, which inserted a
particular Article to this purpose into their Memoirs: This Assembly admitting
their excuse for what is past, injoineth the said Province, and all other
Provinces to see the Accounts for their Colleges allowed and approved by their
respective Synods, and from them to be transmitted unto the National.

Privas, of Universities 10.
11. The Account of the College of Vivaretz was cast up and accepted.

12. The Account of the College of Sevennes was examined by the Synod of their
Province, and approved in this also.

13. The Province of Provence having given in none Account of the Moneys
granted them for their College, according to the form appointed them, nor set
up any Schools according to what was decreed in the former Synods, is pardoned
for what is past, but enjoined for the future to erect one or two Colleges,
and to bring in sufficient discharges unto the next National Synod, on pain of
losing their right unto a College.

14 The Province of Xaintonge having brought in no Account of their College,
they were injoined to bring it in to the next Provincial Synod of Poictou, who
shall examine it, and make report thereof unto the next National Synod.

15. The Sieurs Bigot and la Comb made report unto this Assembly that they had
received the sum of three thousand Livers being their Salary for executing a
Commission given them by the Synod of Privas, which having performed, they were
now discharged and the said sum so paid was approved on all hands both by the
Synod, and the said Bigot and la Comb.

CHAP. XII. A Collection of the Accounts of the Lord du Candal Commissionated
to receive and distribute the Moneys granted by the King unto the Reformed
Churches of France, for the maintenance of their Ministers, and a Dividend of
the said Moneys.
THE Commissioners deputed by the National Synod held in the City of Tonneins
in the month of May in the year 1614. And chosen out of every Province to
receive the Accounts of the Lord du Candal, and to make a Dividend of the
Moneys given our Churches by the King, did report unto the said Synod, that in
their examination and auditing of those Accounts, they have found the said Lord
du Candal by an Account taken in the National Synod of Privas to be indebted
for Arrears of the years 1604, 1605, and 1606. the sum of two thousand two
hundred and eighty seven Livers, and ten Sous, thrown upon the Account of our
Garrisons, and again the sum of 22575 Livers, 7 Sous, and 1 Denier due from the
Receivers of Poictiers and Limoges, the said sums amounting to 24862 Livers, 17
Sous and 1^ Denier, for the recovering of which he was entreated to become our
Solicitor, and as a proof of his care and diligence herein, he brought in by
his Deputy Sulpitius Cuper a Bill comprising the remainders of the said years
and of the year 1609. according to a Decree of the Synod of St. Maixant, by
which it does appear, that the said Lord du Candal had received the sum of
24862. Livers, 17. Sous and 1. Denier, the sum of 4193. Livers, 10. Sous and
more 10. Livers and 8. Deniers remainders of the years, 1609. and 1610. Whereof
he brings in for expenses the sum of 1300. Livers paid by an order of the Synod
of Privas to wit unto Monsieur Vignier 500. Livers unto Monsieur Sonis 300.
Livers, unto Monsieur Thompson 300. Livers, to the Sieur Cuper the Deputy of
the said Lord du Candal 200 Livers, and to Taxes and Charges in clearing the
Account yielded by him for the said Arrears before the Lords Commissioners
ordained by the King to audit his Accounts 150 Livers: and he couched in
Reprisals the sum of 22669 Livers, nine Sous in two Articles, to wit, 20318
Livers, 16 Sous, which he could never get out of the hands of the Receivers of
Poictiers and Limoges, and that they may be recovered there must be made a
special Article to be presented by the Deputies in the General Assembly, that
so our Lords the General Deputies and they may Join together in their demands,
to have the said Moneys re-assigned them, as also the sum of 350 Livers, 13
Sous, which he could never recover from the Garrisons, which ought to be
remonstrated in the said Assembly, the whole disbursment in expenses and
reprisals amounting to the sum of 22119 Livers, nine Sous, which deducted from
the said sum of 24873 Livers, 18 Sous and nine Deniers, there remains a clear
debt owing by him of 2753 Livers, eight Sous, and nine Deniers, and 97 Livers
six Sous, and four Deniers, which could not be comprised in the Dividend made
by that said Synod of Privas, of the Arrears aforesaid, which comes in all to
2850 Livers, 15 Sous, 2 Deniers, out of which, beside the sum of 150 Livers,
couched as above in expenses, he requires farther to be allowed him the
reimbursment of his Charges in the year 1604 in his prosecution and soliciting
of the said Arrears, which he proved by the Bills lying before us, and
according to the Reference dismissed over unto the said Commissioners.

2. More they reported, that he made good payment of the 4766 Livers, 17 Sous,
arising from the said Remainders, according to the Dividend made by the said
Synod of Privas; as also the Payment of the sum of 4570 Livers 15 Sous,
according to another Dividend made by the same Synod for the remainders of the
years 1607 and 1608. As was evident by the certificate of the Lord de Rouvray
one of our General Deputies, who had seen the Acquittances of the said payments.

3. Moreover they saw the Certificate of the said Lord de Rouvray of the
Acquittances presented to him for the sum of 24955 Livers 19 Sous, and 11
Deniers for born by the said Synod of Privas. Upon which score also the Act of
the said respit of payment was read.

4. They also saw, examined, and cast up the Account of the Sieur Sulpitius
Cuper Deputy of the said Lord du Candal for the last quarter of the year 16111.
for the whole year 1612. for the three first quarters of the year 1613. whereof
the receipt amounted unto 348750 Livers, to wit, for the said quarter of the
year, 1611. 33750 Livers for the year 1612. 180000 for the three quarters of
1613. 135000 l.

5. They also saw and examined the disbursment of 328937 Livers, three Sous,
one Denier, to wit for the last quarter of 1611. 33750 for the year 1612.
174295 l. one s. five d. and for the three quarters of 1613. 130882 l. 18 s.
eight d. whereof there is a Respit of payment on five Articles of the year
1612. the sum of 5931 l. 11 s. nine d. through want of Acquittances, which he
will produce before the Lords General Deputies, and bringing their Certificates
the said Act of Respit shall be removed.

CHAP. XIII.
THere remains due for the year 1612. and three quarters of the year 1613.
the sum of 9812 l 16 s. and 11 d. which debt arises from the Moneys detained
in his hands out of the portions of the Provinces of Higher Languedoc, Lower
Languedoc in obedience to an Order of the Synod of Privas for the said year
1612. and for three quarters of the following 1613. whereof he has disbursed
in payments since according to the order of the aforesaid Synod.

Unto the University of Die 3000 l. to Monsieur Chamier, 2000 l. to Monsieur
Perrin 300 l. So there remains clear in his hands 4512 l. 16 s. 11 d.

Over and above the said sum of 4512 l. 16 s., 11 d. for the said years 1612.
and three quarters of the year 1613. The said Lord du Candal, is yet to pay of
the Arrears of 1604, 1605, and 1606. the sum of 2839 l. 13 s. 3 d. including
in it the 97 l. 6 s. 4 d. which was included in the Dividend of Privas, as was
before declared. Out of which sum deducting the Sous in the Liver, which
amounted to 141 l. 19 s. there remained 2697 l. which was divided among the
Provinces in manner following.

L. S. D. To the Province of Lower Guyenne 299 10 00 To the Province of Higher
Languedoc 303 00 00 To the Province of Sevennes 194 08 00 To the Lower
Languedoc 194 09 00 To Provence 78 14 00 To Vivaretz 134 15 00 To Dolphiny 314
8 00 To Burgundy 199 16 00 To the Isle of France 237 15 00 To Normandy 190 18
00 To Brittany 74 18 00 To Anjou 105 9 00 To Poictou 197 00 00 To Xaintonge 265
14 00 To Berry 134 14 00

Another Dividend of the sum of 11109 Livers, out of one part, and of 5245
Livers of another, which the said Lord du Candal owes, and ought to have kept
in his hands by Order of the Synod of Privas from the Dividends allotted unto
the Provinces of Lower Languedoc, Sevennes, and the Higher Languedoc out of the
years 1612, 1613, and 1614. amounting to the sum of 16354 l. Out of which
there must be deducted the payments made by him in obedience to the Orders of
the Synod of Privas, and which he is to pay by Order of this present Synod.

First, unto the University of Die 3000 l. To Monsieur Chamier 2000 l. to the
Sieur Perrin 300 l. besides what has been remitted unto Monsieur Gigord 3775
l. And to re-imburse Monsieur le Gras for the expenses of the Colloquies of
Lionnois 389 l. 6 s. And for what the said Lord du Candal has paid more than
he received for the years 1604, 1605, and 1606. and for the Sous in the Liver
out of the sum paid unto the said Sieur Gras, 57 l. 15 s. And the remaining
sum is 6831 l. 19 s. which shall be divided among the Provinces in manner
following.

L. S. D. To the Isle of France 576 1 0 To Provence 189 0 0 To Berry 324 1 0 To
Brittany 180 1 0 To Sevennes 477 1 0 To Vivaretz 324 1 0 To Poictou 450 1 0 To
the Lower Guyenne 720 2 0 To Xaintonge 639 1 6 To Normandy 459 1 0 To the Lower
Languedoc 468 1 6 To Burgundy 288 1 0 To Anjou 252 1 0 To Higher Languedoc 729
1 0 To Dolphiny 766 2 0

Another Dividend among the Provinces of the sum of 18000 l. granted by his
Majesty unto the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, and this shall serve not
only for this present year, but as a standard for the following years until
the next National Synod, whereby the Lord du Candal, and the Sieur de Vissouze
shall make their payments out of the said sum at the terms as shall be
hereafter fixed, and conformably to the Articles of Agreement formerly drawn up
and signed between him, and the Deputies of the National Synod of Gap, in the
year 1603. when he first entered into Office, and according to that Order given
to our Lords the General Deputies at the last National Synod of Privas.

Out of which sum before any Dividend be made unto the Churches, there shall
be drawn forth these following sums for the service of our Universities,
Colleges and Proposans.

The Dividend of the Universities.
L. S. D. For the University of Sedan by an express Order 4000 00 00 For the
Churches of Gex 3600 00 00 For the Sieur Constantine Regent at Bergerac 100 00
00 For the College of Bergerac 1200 00 00 For three Proposans sent unto
Montauban at the charge of 120 l. each. 360 00 00 To the University of
Montauban 100 l. ordered unto Monsieur Joly for his Professing Hebrew 100 00 00
And to Monsieur de Vissouze his right 51 13 00 For two Professors in Divinity
1400 00 00 To the Professors of Hebrew 400 00 00 To the Greek Professor 400 00
00 To the two Professors in Divinity 800 00 00 To the first Regent 100 00 00
For the University of Saumur. 600 00 00 More to the same (only deducting out of
it four Deniers in the Liver,) 4771 10 00 For what was granted them by the
present Synod, and employed by them according to their Decree, 600 l. including
in it 81 l. 10 s. for the 4 d. in the Liver. 600 00 00 Thus disbursed, to the
two Professors of Philosophy 1400 00 00 To the Professor of Hebrew 400 00 00 To
the Greek Professor 400 00 00 To two Philosophy Professors 800 00 00 To the
first Regent 460 00 00 To the second Regent 300 00 00 To the third Regent 200
00 00 To the fourth Regent 180 00 00 To the fifth Regent. 150 00 00 For the
Universities of Nismes and Montpellier, including the four Deniers in the Liver
of the said Sieur de Vissouze the sum of 4236 13 04 For the University of Die
including the aforesaid four Deniers the sum of 0406 13 04 There remains to
be divided among all the Provinces the sum of 159973 11 0 Thus, 1. To the
Province of the Isle of France for 48 Pastors, 14 Proposans, and 12
supernumerary portions, in all 64 portions, and for their College 400 l. the
sum of 12970 02 8 2. L. 10416 S. 16 D. 8
For Normandy for 40 Pastors, six Proposans and five supernumerary portions, in
all 57 portions, and for the College 400 l. the sum of 10318 12 4 3. Brittany
for eleven Pastors, two (another Copy says three) Proposans, six, (another
Copy says seven) supernumerary portions, in all 20 portions, the sum of 04328
03 4 4. Anjou for 24 Pastors, 3 Proposans, one supernumerary portion, in all 28
portions, the sum of 05499 09 0 5. Poictou 47 Pastors, three Proposans, and an
half portion for Chauvigni, in all fifty portions and an half, and for the
College 10318 12 4 6. Xaintonge 68 Pastors, five Proposans, and a half
supernumerary portion, in all 73 portions and a half, and the College, the sum
of 14836 00 0 7. Berry for 29 Pastors, 3 Proposans, 4 portions supernumerary,
including those of Moulins, in all 36 portions, and the College 07470 14 0 8.
Burgundy for 19 Pastors, 14 Proposans, 2 portions for Mariagues, and 7
supernumerary, in all 32 portions, 600 l. for those of Gex, and 400 l. for the
College, the sum of 07285 02 8 9. 15719 17 0
Dolphiny for 66 Pastors, 8 Proposans, 4 portions supernumerary, in all 78, and
the College, the sum of 19719 17 0 10. Vivaretz for 26 Pastors, taking in the
portion of the Sieur Murat, Pastor of Valence, 3 Proposans, and six
supernumerary portions, 7264 06 0
including two portions for Forest, in all 35, and the College, the sum of
07274 06 0 11. Provence for 11 Pastors, 3 Proposans, 1 portion for the Sieur
Maurice the Elder, a Pastor Emeritus, and six supernumerary, in all twenty one
portions, and the College, the sum of 04524 11 0 12. 131666 11 0
Lower Languedoc for 62 Pastors, 3 Proposans, and the College of Beziers, the
sum of 13666 11 0 13. Sevennes for 12 Pastors, 3 Proposans, 5 portions
supernumerary, taking in those ordained for Issoire and Maruejolles, in all 60
portions, and the College, the sum of 12184 10 0 14. For Higher Languedoc and
Guyenne, for 78 Pastors, seven Proposans, one portion and a half for Leyran,
16596 10 0
in all 86 portions and a half, the sum of 16989 08 0 15. Lower Guyenne for 78
Pastors, 5 Proposans, one portion for Souls, in all 84 portions 16596 10 0 16.
Each 196 03 2
To the Sieurs Suffran and Heeme each a portion 00139 16 4 The total Sum 169973
10 0

All which sums the said Lord du Candal shall pay Quarterly both to the
Universities, and Commissioners of the provinces, and at the terms and manner
following,

To wit, that part which belongs to the Provinces of the Isle of France, Anjou,
Normandy, Poictou, Lower Guyenne, Berry, and Higher Languedoc, taking in the
Universities which are in those Provinces, into the Commissioners hands, whose
names have been already, or shall be given in unto him by those Provinces. And
the first payment shall be made the first of July, the second on the 15th of
October following, and the third the last day of January next ensuing; for the
Isle of France in the City of Paris; for Normandy at Roan; for Berry at
Orleans; for Poictou at Poitiers; for the Lower Guyenne at Bourdeaux; for the
Higher Languedoc at Montauban; for Anjou at Tours.

As for the Lower Languedoc, Sevennes, Brittany, Provence and Xaintonge, the
first payment shall be made at the latter end of July next, and the second on
the fifth of October following, and the third in the end of February next
ensuing. For Provence, Lower Languedoc and Sevennes in the City of Montpellier;
for Brittany at Nants; for Xaintonge at Rochel.

For the Provinces of Burgundy, Dolphiny and Vivaretz at the City of Lions,
viz. the two first payments at the Fairs in the next August and November, and
the third at the Fair of Twelfth-Tide, which will be in January, 1615.

And the said Provinces shall be obliged to nominate and choose some one certain
house in each of these Cities, whereunto the said Lord of Candal may be
directed to make payment of those Moneys.

And the said Lord of Candal also shall pay in to the said Churches the last
quarter of the year 1613, which he shall deliver in unto every one of the
Provinces equally, they abating the Sous in the Liver, before the 15th of
August, 1615. And he shall give in to all the Provinces, desiring it, an Answer
in writing of the Account and Dividend that shall be made by our General
Deputies residing at Court. Privas of Colleges Art. 26.
And out of all those sums, which shall be actually paid by him the said Lord
of Candal, he shall detain in his hands a Sous in the Liver, which was accorded
to him, excepting for the Universities, of whose Moneys he shall only detain
four Deniers in the Liver, which is the right of the Sieur Vissouze. And as for
the Accounts of the last quarter three Deniers only. This being according to
the Contract and Articles of Agreement past between him, and the Deputies of
our Churches at the National Synod of Gap.

Moreover, G^gta^ p. 11.46.
this Assembly enjoyneth the said Lord du Candal not to divert the Moneys of
our Churches and Universities which shall be received by him unto any other
uses, whatever Orders he may receive from other hands, but only by an Express
Order of a National Synod; otherwise it shall not be allowed him in his
Accounts.

CHAP. XIV. The Roll of the Deposed and Apostate Ministers.
1. IN the Isle of France George Suisse, alias Soulais, formerly Minister at
Fountainbleau, suspended from his Office for his vicious and ungodly Life, he
is since revolted: A fellow of a low stature, black hair, about forty years of
age.

2. Item, one going by the name of Merlette, born at Reims in Champagne deposed
for his Insufficiency, he has since revolted a fellow tall of stature
Chess-nut colored hair, somewhat brown, little or no Beard: He was of the same
Province.

3. Esme de Beauvalet, otherwise d'Aix and de Beauval, formerly Pastor of the
Church at Lavall in Picardy, suspended from the Sacred Ministry for his vicious
life, and wicked conversation, he is since revolted; a fellow low of stature,
Chess-nut colored hair, and bald, about 45 years old.

4. In Anjou, John de Vassan, low of stature, Eagle-nos'd, wide mouthed, little
or no Beard, deposed for his infamous Uncleanness; he is since revolted, aged
about 34 years.

5. In the Lower Languedoc, Jeremy Ferrier, a tall fellow, black and curled
hair, of an Olive-greenish Complexion, wide, open nostrils, great lips,
censured and suspended for his lewd carriage, and wicked manner of living, he
has since deserted the Ministry, and was excommunicated out of the Church,
from which also he has (since apostatized; aged about 38 years.

He was Pastor and Professor at Nismes.
6. In Dolphiny Josias Montagne, a middle sized fellow, having a black and
tufted Beard, mixed hair, open and roving Eyes, about 40 year old, sometimes
Minister at Orpierre, but since an Apostate.

The Churches in the Principality of Bearn shall have the privilege of calling
the next National Synod, upon condition that they observe the resolutions and
decrees of the National Synods of France, and bring in their Appeals unto them:
as also that if any difficulty should arise about the Meeting of the said Synod
in the said Principality, that they shall within the space of an year give
notice thereof unto the Province of Brittany, that they may enjoy the right of
Calling the Synod unto the City of Vitre, and no where else; and this at the
end of two years, and about May. Saving always that it may be hastened or
deferred, as our General Deputies and the Neighboring Provinces do think fit.
And in case the Synod be held in Bearn, leave is continued unto the Province of
Brittany to send but one Pastor, and one Elder, and the like Privilege is
granted unto Provence, unto whatsoever place the Synod shall be convocated.

All what has been above mentioned was debated, resolved and decreed since the
second of May, unto the third of June inclusively, in the year of our Lord
1614. To whom be Honor, Praise and Glory for ever more. Amen.

Subscribed by Gigord Moderator. Gardesy Assessor. Andrew Rivet. Scribes. Denis
Maltrett. Scribes.


CHAP. XV. An Act of the Oath of Union Taken, Sworn, and Subscribed by all the
Deputies of the Reformed Churches of France Assembled in their National Synod
at Tonneins in the Province of Lower Guyenne in May 1614.
WE whose Names are hereunder Written Deputies of the Reformed Churches of
France Assembled in a National Synod held at Tonneins in the Province of Lower
Guyenne, knowing by past experience that there is nothing more needful for the
preservation of the peace and welfare of our Churches than an holy Union, and
inviolable Concord, both in Doctrine and Discipline, and their dependencies,
and that the said Churches cannot long Subsist without a Good, a Strict, and
Mutual Union, and conjunction of one with the other, and this better kept and
maintained than formerly. Therefore being desirous what in us lies for the
future to remove all seeds of division, and occasion of partialities, between
the said Churches, and to obviate all Impostures, Plots, Calumnies and
Practices whatsoever, by means whereof diverse Persons ill affected to our
Religion do endeavor its utter Ruin and destruction: For which reason we are
more bound than ever by an unanimous consent and agreement to use those means
which will most and best contribute to our just, lawful, and necessary
preservation in the Union aforesaid under the authority of our Sovereign Lord
the King, and the Queen Regent his Mother, we have, in the Name of all those
Churches, and for their Weal and Happiness, and for the service of their
Majesty's, Sworn and Protested, and do Swear and Protest, yea we do also
promise, that we will see these our Protestation; to be ratified in and by all
our respective Provinces to continue inseparably United and conjoined in the
Confession of Faith owned and Professed by the Reformed Church of this Kingdom,
and confirmed, approved, and ratified by us all: We Swear as well in our own
Names, as in the Names of all the Churches and Provinces, which Commissionated
us to be their Deputies unto this Assembly, that we will live and die in this
Confession, as also we do protest that we will keep inviolably that
Ecclesiastical Discipline, which is established in the Reformed Churches of
this Kingdom, and to observe its Canons for the Government of these Churches,
and the reformation of manners; owning and acknowledging that it is agreeable
to the Word of God, under whose supreme and unviolable authority We Protest and
Swear to yield all obedience and fidelity to their Majesty's, desiring nothing
more than through the favor of their Edicts to serve our God without any
Violence offered unto our Consciences.

Sworn and Subscribed by Gigord Moderator. Gardesy Assessor. Rivet and Scribes,
Maltrett Scribes,
And by all the other Deputies with their own hands.

CHAP. XVI. An Act for the Meeting of the General Mixed Assembly.
THE Lord of Rouvray our General Deputy having sent unto this Synod his
Majesty's writ bearing date the 22d. day of this present month, by which at the
request of this National Synod the time of meeting for the next National
General Assembly is put off till the a 25th. of August, but without any change
of place: This Assembly judging the City of Grenoble to be a very inconvenient
place because of its great distance, and for being the Residence of a
Parliament, and for diverse other great and weighty reasons, ordered that
Letters should be written unto the Lord Marshal Duke de Lesdiguieres, and
presented to him by the Deputies of Burgundy and Dolphiny, who also by word of
mouth should humbly entreat his excellency, not only to take in good part the
change of the place of meeting, which all the Deputies convened at this Synod
have unanimously desired, and hold necessary, but also that he would be pleased
to join with them in their humble request, and Petition unto their Majesty's by
the Lords our General Deputies, who shall present unto them Letters from this
Assembly, in which with all humbleness it shall be declared that the late King
of most happy Memory did usually make choice of the most meet and convenient
places for the holding of those Assemblies. And the said Lords Deputies shall
use their utmost care and diligence to give notice and information of the
success of this their undertaking, before the 15th of July, or sooner, if may
be, unto the Provincial Assemblies, in case of refusal. This Assembly advises
also that it would be expedient that they send each of them one Deputy chosen
out of their whole Body, to reiterate with all submissions and reverence their
most humble Petitions unto their Majesty's and by conjoined Supplications to
obtain this change from them.

Moreover the Lords General Deputies are most expressly charged to prosecute
their complaints of that grievous Outrage Committed by the Lieutenant in the
Government of Guise against Monsieur Sigart Pastor of the Church of Levall, and
to desire that justice may have its due Course upon that Officer, they
corroborating by word of mouth what has been written unto their Majesty's from
this Assembly about it. They be also exhorted, according to the Canon made at
Privas, most humbly to petition their Majesty's that we may be exempted from
that necessity (which is now more eagerly and violently pressed upon us than
ever, yea and with greater severity, rigor and exaction than heretofore and
against that Liberty of Conscience, which has been so often promised us) of
styling our selves, of the pretended Reformed Religion; we rather choosing to
suffer all kind of torments, than to be compelled with our own mouths to
condemn our own most holy and true Religion.

Moreover they be exhorted to assist the Church of Dijon; whose place of
Meeting for Religious Worship is removed four long Leagues distant from that
City, although by the Edict they may have their Temple in the Suburbs. And yet
this poor Church has been frustrated of its expectations, and earnest
requests, after ten years Prosecution and Attendance at Court for if.

They shall also complain of the Commissioners that were sent into Burgundy to
see the Edict of Nants executed, for that they refused to hear the Petitions
tendered them for restoring the exercise of our Religion in seven ancient Baily
wicks, and in the Cities of St. John, de Laune, and de Noyers, where the Word
of God had been duly and constantly Preached in the years 1576, and 1577.

And they shall favor and stand by that opposition made by those of our
Religion in Vivaretz against the Petition presented to the Council by the Judge
of the Lower Vivaretz, who would of his own head and authority bring into the
Royal Courts of Villeneuve, of Berg and Annonay, Causes determinable in the
Provosts Court, which is expressly contrary to that Article of the Edict,
declaring, that the Judgment of Declinators, and Exceptions against the
Jurisdictions of a Court, shall only appertain to the Mixed Chambers of the
Edict, or to other Courts, at the choice of the Professors of our Religion.

They shall complain also of letting decay the Fortifications of Clermont in
the Lower Languedoc, one of our Cautionary Towns, and given us as a pledge and
hostage for our security: The Papists in the mean while fortifying the Town
against the Castle.

They are also entreated to be careful of that business of Monsieur de la
Guard, Governor of Tonneins, who being summoned, and brought before His
Majesty and Council, after a world of difficulty, was dismissed over to the
Chamber of Grenoble; from whence the Jesuits, and other Clergy of the Romish
Church would fain remove it back again to Paris. And they shall use all means
possible to prevent it.

Latter end of May, 1614. Subscribed by Gigord, Moderator. Gardesy, Assessor.
Andrew Rivett and Scribes. D. Maltrett Scribes.


CHAP. XVII. A Memorial of our Grievances, and Petitions exhibited and debated
in the National Synod of Tonneins, and judged meet to be presented unto the
Mixed Provincial Assemblies, and from them to be brought unto the National
Political Assembly, and recommended to their consideration by all the
Provinces, and particularly to the special care of our General Deputies, till
that Meeting.
1. THE first grievance complained of by the Province of Orleans was, that the
Lord of Denonville having been fully justified by Decree and Proclamation of
the Chamber of the Edict at Paris from all matters laid unto his charge; yet he
was nevertheless deprived of his Office of Lieutenan unto the the Lord Duke of
Sully in the City of Gergean. The Assembly enjoined all the Deputies to
complain of this Act of Injustice unto the mixed Assemblies of the Provinces now
at hand; and to see this their, complaint entered and registered in the Memoirs
which shall be presented unto the said General Assembly. And in the mean while
the Lord our General Deputies are entreated to continue their pursuits and
endeavors for restoring him unto his Office, and to renew their request at
Court for it, unless there be some other Government conferred upon him.

2. That change made in the City of Alez by Monsieur Riband a Popish Gentleman,
reported in the name of the Province of Sevennes by Monsieur des Marests a
Pastor, as found to be exceeding prejudicial to our Rights and Privileges, and
to our cautionary Towns. And it was ordered that this should be joined unto the
former complaint.

3. Also that bold attempt of the Franciscan Friars to join the new buildings
of their Convent with the very Walls of Castel-jaloux, to the damage of that
our Cautionary Town.

4. Item, That affair of the Church of Montlimard, who opposed the reception of
the Friars Recollect into their Town; because that in our Cautionary Town,
nothing should be changed, but all things should continue as they were at first.

5. Also that affair concerning the settling and establishment of the Church of
Valence, near unto the City, which has been hindered by dividing the
Commissioners.

6. Item, the notorious Injustice used toward the Inhabitants of Lands in the
Higher Languedoc, the Apostate Senerac being made their Judge, and having
gotten a Commission to bring at any time all his affairs before the Privy
Council; by means whereof he tyrannizeth over all persons, with whom he has
any Processes of Law, or that shall have a Suit with him.

7. That affair of the Church of Pousanges in Poictou, who have endeavored to
take off the Prohibition laid upon them for building their Temple, although they
have an undoubted Right for so doing of above forty years standing, and they
have Preaching without any hinderance or denial in the Market-house.

8. The Suspension of Monsieur de Valobsance, Counselor in the Presidial Court
of Montpellier, because he was of Counsel for the Province against them of
Aiguesmortes, is another;just grievance.

9. The Concern of the Son of Monsieur Ravy, put by from his Office of
Lieutenant in the Company of Montpellier, although the Churches had a special
Order for it under the late King's own Signet, and which he had enjoyed for
diverse years, is another grievance.

10. The grievances and troubles of Monsieur Cardett and other Gentlemen vexed
by the Lady Countess of Auvergne, who has, in direct opposition to the Edict
by Letters of Evocation, removed their business from the Court of Castres to
that of Paris.

11. The Complaints of those of Lower Languedoc about the Government of
Pecquaire, whereof Captain Gautier having been Governor by Commission and
Letters Patent, yet is now adjoined unto that of Salines, which belongs unto
the Governor of Aiguesmortes.

12. The Churches in the Principality of Bearn united with ours in Doctrine and
Discipline, received and admitted heretofore by their Deputies into our General
Assemblies, and into the last National Synod by their Deputies Dyserotte and
Naguett, reported their very uncertain estate, and the many dangers surrounding
them, and wherewith they be menaced, by the unhappy divisions in the House of
Benac, and others banded, against the Lord Duke de la Force, which will throw
them into a very miserable condition; especially since Popish Priests and
Ecclesiastics have full Liberty as they do to overrun their Country. This
Assembly does now more cordially than ever embrace their Union and Communion,
and deputeth from us the Sieurs de Vilarnou and de Chambaran unto the said
Lord's to exhort them unto concord; who having returned, and given an account
of their Commission, reported the great difficulties they meet with to
reconcile them, by reason of the obstinacy of one of the Parties, and the
staggering condition of the said Churches, which exceedingly need the
Assistance of our's in France to be a buttress and support unto them. It
entreats therefore the General Deputies to have especial and particular respect
and care of their concerns, and to deal for them at the Council with the very
self-same affection and diligence, as for the Churches of France in all matters
needful for them, particularly to get for them some effectual order to redress
the grievances with which they be so very much burdened and afflicted. And this
also shall be represented unto the Provinces, and by them it shall be carried
unto the General Assembly, unto which also the Deputies of the Principality of
Beans shall bring their Memoirs and Instructions as well about the affairs
beforementioned of the Lord Duke de la Force and Benac, (provided it be not
since made up and composed,) as about all others tending to their preservation.

13. The affair of Monsieur de Villemade about his pension promised him out of
the Privy Purse in regard of his great sufferings shall be once more
recommended unto the next General Assembly.

14. The affair of the Sieurs de Labe Father and Son, who, contrary to the
privilege of their Profession were both by an Order of Council deprived of
their Appeal, and remanded over to the Parliament of Bourdeaux.

15. The Sieurs de la Comb and Bigot having been discharged from that
Commission given them at Privas, this Assembly gave order unto the Provincial
Deputies to report the true estate of our matters against Monsieur Pallot, viz.
That nothing else could be gotten besides a sorry answer unto a Petition
presented from us, that he might be compelled to make payment of the just debt
owing by him unto our Churches upon the clearing up of his Account, amounting
to 24900 l. Which yet has been fruitless and ineffectual. And whereas the
above named Commissioners had charged on him another greater debt of above
200000 l. The said Pallot defended himself from all payments with this Evasion,
that either those Moneys were diverted to other uses, or they were Non-Valoirs,
being never paid in unto him. And therefore although the said Commissioners Bigot
and de la Comb have received the thanks of this Synod; yet they were ordered
to put into the hands of our General Deputies all papers in their Custody
relating to this affair. And that for the future, the matter having been once
laid open before the Provinces, it shall be recommended to a General Assembly
to embrace the prosecution of it, and to follow their Majesty's with our most
humble requests, that we may be paid the said sums according to the Intention
of their warrants granted us at first, and other orders in pursuance of their
first, truly and faithfully without any deductions for Non-Valoirs.

16 The Inhabitants also of the Bareny de Combata in Sevennes, who in seven
Towns for the greatest part of them being Protestants, are yet deprived of
their Temples, and all exercise of the Reformed Religion, and constrained to
travel many a long Journey, and expose themselves to a world of inconveniences,
that they may worship God according to his holy word, and all because they have
a Popish Landlord, who yet would not oppose the re-establishment of their
Churches, provided it were ordained by the supreme Authority. And let it be
particularly observed, that in one of the Towns of that Barony, called Vie
there was a Church and Pastor in the year 1561.

17. The other Provinces are exhorted to join with that of Dolphiny to obtain a
sufficient time for the poor Communalties and Villages in the Bailywick of
Gresivaudan to recover their just rights from their wicked Popish debtors, and
that all proceedings at law against them may cease and be vacated, because the
Commissioners appointed to judge between them were not the one half Protestants
as they should have been, and because that the Respit of three months allotted
them to bring in their Appeal before the Chamber of the Edict at Grenoble was
too short, and could do them no service: The Writ of Appeal not having past the
Seal, till the time was lapst, and the three months already expired. During
which time the Syndick of the Communalties got a Writ of Foreclusion against
the said Creditors.

18. The affair of the Church of Monosque and Tourves, who having got an Order
of Council, that of Monosques to build a Temple for the worship of God neat
unto their place of abode, and that of Tourves within their own bounds, as
being privileged, because a Bailywick, yet could never obtain unto this day,
that those orders should be put in execution.

19. Lastly there is recommended to them the affairs of the Churches of Antibe,
Forqualq^ier, and Derbordes, which although they had proved incontestably that
the worship of God according to our Reformed Religion was publicly in use and
exerecise among them in the year 1577. Yet notwithstanding Judgment is still
suspended to their very great prejudice.

CHAP. XVIII. Expedients for reuniting the Christian Churches, which have shook
off the Papa Yoke, and for composing the differences, which are already risen,
or may hereafter rise up amongst them offered and propounded to them.
1. WE must lay down this as a foundation-principle, that to endeavor an Union
and Agreement between the Churches is a most useful, pious and necessary work,
and very feasible. As to its possibility, we say, that such an Union cannot be
effected without the concurrence, aid, assistance, and conduct of those
Sovereign Princes, who have withdrawn themselves from the obedience of the
Pope: among whom his Majesty of Great Britain, as being the Chiefest, and most
Potent Monarch, of a most clear anti piercing Judgment, and most affectionately
inclined hereunto, can most effectually promote and advance it.

2. This being presupposed, we conceive that some certain place should be
chosen of safe and convenient access, whereunto two Divines shall be sent by
his Majesty, and two from the Churches of France, and two from the Low
Countries, two from the Cantons of Switzerland, and one or two from each of the
German Princes embracing and professing our Faith.

3. Zealand in our opinion would be the most commodious place for such a
Treaty, which is as it were the fore-door of England, and easily to be aborded
by the Messengers of the respective Princes and Churches.

4. And when they meet at this place, let there be no disputes about Religion:
for when once the Spirits are inflamed, there will be no yielding on any side,
and all parties will return homeward with the imaginary Triumphs of their own
Victories. Wherefore it were better to lay before them on the Table the several
Confessions of the Reformed Churches of England, Scotland, France, the
Netherlands, Switzerland and the Palatinate, etc. And that out of all these
Confessions there might be framed one in common to them all, in which diverse
Points may be omitted, the knowledge whereof is not needful to our everlasting
happiness. Among which the controversy moved by Piscator, and several subtle
opinions lately broached by Van-Armin, about free Will, the Saints
Perseverance, and Predestination, may be reckoned: It being a most certain
Truth that all the Errors in Religion have sprung hence, that men would either
know too much, or have too much, that is to say, either out of curiosity, or
from their avarice and ambition. It Is this last Sin that has corrupted and
ruined the Church of Rome. But yet Satan does use his utmost endeavors by the
first to corrupt ours. However could we but gain that authority and power over
our selves so as to ignore diverse matters, and to rest contented with points
only necessary to Salvation, we should have gone a great and good part of the
way, and made a considerable progress in our WORK of UNION.

5. This Confession being once prepared, it must be subscribed not only by the
Deputies then and there present, but also by the several Princes, and by our
National Synod. And let this Canon be enacted, that if any controversy should
hereafter be moved either in England, France or Germany, in the Low Countries
or Switzerland, nothing shall be concluded or decided, much less innovated in
or about it, without the general consent and concurrence of all the Provinces,
that have signed this Agreement.

6. It Is probable that thus far we shall meet with little or no opposition. The
Parties treating being the Reformed Churches, agreeing in the fundamental
Articles of Faith, only dissenting from one another in the quillets of
Ceremonies, and Church Government.

7. Concerning which Ceremonies and Church Discipline a mutual Declaration
should be made, and added unto the said Confession, by which the said Deputies,
in the names of their Principa's, do declare, that the Churches shall not judge
nor condemn one another for this difference; it not hindering our mutual
Agreement in the same true Faith and Doctrine, and that for all this we may
cordially embrace each other as true Believers, and Joynt-Members of one and
the same Body.

8. It were fitting that after this Conference had, as a pledge of their mutual
Concord the Lords Supper were celebrated, wherein the Pastors from England, and
the other Nations should all mutually communicate together, and that Sacred
Feast should commence with a most Religious Fast, not only to be observed by
those Deputies, but also by that particular Church, where this Synod shall be
assembled, that so the assistance and blessing of God may be prayed down upon
this holy and important work.

9. Let such Deputies be chosen whose tempers lead and bend them unto this
noble design; that is to say, let them be such as are peaceable, grave, and men
fearing God, prudent, and not contentious; let them come furnished with full
power, and with ample Letters of Authority to proceed in this great and good
work, and let this be couched in the same Letters of Commission, that their
Principals who send them do sincerely promise to receive with all possible
respect the Conclusions of this Assembly, and that they will by all just and
lawful ways see them observed. And during the Session of this Synod, let there
be unanimously published in all the Provinces a General Fast, in order to the
deriving down the blessing of God Upon it, und to touch the hearts of the
people with respect and reverence for it.

10. During the sitting of this Assembly, it were sit that Messengers should go
and come from His Majesty of Great Britain, that so nothing might be concluded
in it without his Advice and Authority; and that as soon as the Conference
shall be ended, the whole body of this Assembly should pass over into England,
to make tender of their Duty to His Majesty, and to thank him, and receive his
sage Advice about the means of reducing into practice their Synodical and
Pacisick Counsels and Conclusions.

11. It will be necessary that before the breaking up of this Assembly, they
would assign a certain day within the year, of meeting again at the same place,
and make report then and there of what has been done it their respective
Provinces to effect and execute it, and what obstructions they met with in
their prosecution of it. For it will be a most difficult matter in one Assembly
to provide all Expedients for Peace and Union: And there may be those
Provinces, who may not approve of every point concerted and agreed on, or they
may happen to pitch on some better means, than were at first seen and contrived.

12. In the interval of these two Assemblies His Majesty of England, and the
Provinces of our Confession may so order it, that some Pastors and Doctors of
the Lutheran way, may be sent from the Lutheran Princes and Churches unto this
second Assembly to travail in this excellent work of Reuniting them with us,
and us with them. If this can be obtained, the means of Agreement are likely to
be such as these following.

13. The Points in difference betwixt us and the Lutheran Churches are of two
sorts. There be some wherein our Agreement is very easy; of this nature are
the Ceremonies of the Lutheran Churches, which may be excused and tolerated,
because they be matters rather of decency than of necessity. As also some
certain Opinions about Predestination, concerning which a special Article may
be framed in our common Confession, which all without any difficulty would
approve of, provided always that curiosity might be avoided. And this was done
in the Confession of Ausburg, which speaks exceeding soberly, and expressly
declineth that Question. There is also some difference betwixt us about the
necessity of Baptism, which in a good sense may be affirmed necessary to
Salvation; that is to say, that Baptism should be celebrated in the Christian
Church, and necessary that it be not despised, but observed by every particular
Member, without pushing on the Question of necessity any farther.

14. There is in the next place that Article of the Lord's Supper, wherein we
shall meet with more difficulty; for it has two main brandies, 1. That of the
Ubiquity of Christ's Body; 2. Another about our Receiving of, and Communion
with the Body of Christ in the Sacrament.

15. As to the first of these Points, we may well agree in these things, 1.
That Jesus Christ took in the Womb of the Virgin Mary a true Humane Body like
unto ours in all things, sin only excepted. 2. That his Body has true flesh,
and its quantity and dimensions. 3. That when his Body was lodged in the Womb
of the blessed Virgin, and hung upon the Cross, and lay buried in the Grave, it
was not at that time elsewhere, nor in diverse other places at once. 4. That the
Eternal Son of God is every where present in all places. 5. That he is ascended
up into Heaven, that he fitteth at the right Hand of God; that the Father has
given him all Power in Heaven and in Earth. 6. That Glorification has removed
from him the infirmity, but not abolished the Verity of his Humane Nature. 7.
That in the last day he shall come in that self same flesh, which he took from
the Virgin Mary, to judge both the quick and the dead. If besides these, there
be some differrent Opinions, about which we cannot agree, this must be obtained
from both Parties, that they do not thereupon condemn and damn each other, and
that no more Books about this Controversy be hereafter written, nor any
Invectives thrown out in Sermons from the Pulpit, but that we live in brotherly
Love, waiting upon God for more Light, who will not refuse it unto them, that
in Faith beg it of him.

16. Touching the Sacrament; and our participation of the Body of Christ, we
may harmoniously agree in these Points; 1. That the Sacramental Elements are
not bare and empty Signs, nor only mere naked Symbols, and simple Instituted
Figures of the Truth. 2. That in the Lord's Supper we do really and in very
deed partake of the Body of Christ Jesus. 3. That the Bread is not
transubstantiated, nor cease to be Bread after the Consecration. Whence it
follows, 4. That the Sacrament ought not to be adored, but our hearts must be
lifted up unto Jesus Christ in Heaven. As for the manner of our participation
of the Body of Christ in his Holy Supper, we need not be scrupulously
inquisitive about it, only to join Issue with the Apostle, who says in the 3d
to the Ephesians, that Jesus Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith; whence it
inevitably follows, that he is a mere stranger unto the hearts of all
Unbelievers. But if any one be otherwise persuaded, let him succor and support
his weak Brethren, and not judge and persecute them with violence and cruelty:
Wherefore in those matters wherein we be all agreed, let us walk with one
another hand in hand heartily and cheerfully toward Heaven.

17. We know there be two sorts of Errors, some in Points of Faith, and others
in exterior Actions and Practice. Of this first sort are those Errors about the
nature of Jesus Christ, about Predestination, and Free will; of the Second are
those about Communion in one kind, the Adoration of the consecrated Host,
Prayer in an unknown Tongue by the Petitioner. Errors of this last sort, although
in themselves less, yet do they most often occasion the greatest divisions, and
do most venemously exasperate men's Spirits, and immediately engender Schism.
For if a man communicate at the Lords Table with an erroneous person in the
doctrine of Predestination, or about the Nature of Jesus Christ, or who
believes that the Body of our Lord is every where, in all places at once, although
this Error be very great, yet may it not trouble him who is a Communicant with
him: But and if we communicate with one who gives religious adoration unto the
bread, or pretends to sacrifice the Lord Jesus Christ, such an action would
scandalize us, and must needs drive us from that Communion, lest we should
participate with him in his Idolatry, or in a false Sacrifice. Now we have this
advantage together with the Lutheran Churches, that all our differences are of
the first kind, and as for those external Ceremonies used and practiced by
them, we have no such difference, but what may be easily composed, yea and that
too with a wet Finger.

18. It were fitting to lay before them on the Table the Concordat of the
Polonish Churches, made at Sendomir, in the year 1570. and since revived in the
Synod of Ulodislan in the year 1581. that so we may learn by their example to
serve our selves of all things which may contribute unto this Union, and are
worthy of our imitation. And possibly there may be found some Lutheran Churches
who for peace sake would not insist upon their Ubiquity, but frankly yield it
up and part with it.

19. The same Order should be observed in this second Assembly as in the first;
and the same difference paid unto his Majesty of great Britain, and it should
be opened with a fast, and concluded with the celebration of the Holy Supper of
our Lord, at which both the Lutheran Ministers and ours should communicate
together.

20. It is very needful that some course should be taken to bring the several
Churches and People to embrace and practice the Articles of this Union, and
that Sovereign Princes and Estates do promise to exert their Authority about
it, and that those words of Lutheran, Calvinist, and Sacramentarian, Gustazus
Adolphus K. of Swi^^dland would have them styled the Evangelical Churches.
being wicked badges of distinction, were utterly abolished, and that our
Churches should ever after be called the Christian Reformed Churches. And all
Invectives from the Pulpit, or Press, or Writings against the Brethren of
either side shall be forbidden under the severest penalties. And that the
Catalogues of Books vended at Frankford maybe no more stuffed with injurious
Titles as formerly. And the German Princes should, at some certain days
mutually agreed on, send their Pastors unto the principal Churches of their
Neighbor Princes, and also admit and receive of their Ministers into theirs,
and so communicate together on some set and solemn day at the Lords Table.

21. If it should please God to bless this Holy and Laudable Design with
success, which would be a Crown of Eternal Glory unto his Majesty of Great
Britain, and to the Princes joined with him therein, then would it be a
convenient time to solicit the Romish Church unto a Reconciliation; which
whether it may be really effected, or is at all feasible, seems as yet very
doubtful: because the Pope will admit of no Council nor Conference, at which he
may not preside. But could this General Union of all Christians be once
accomplished we should be then more considerable, and Ministers might Preach
with more authority, and greater success than ever.

CHAP. XIX. A Letter from His Majesty of Great Britain.
To Messieurs the Pastors and Elders Assembled in their National Synod at
Tonneins in France.
Sirs,
HAving received intelligence that your Assembly would be held in Gascony the
first of May, in which some persons may be engaged to revive that Controversly
about Justification, and to urge the Consciences of others to assent against
their own judgment, unto matters not sufficiently Understood by them. We
thought good to send you Monsieur Hume one of our subjects, and of your Pastors
with this our present Letter, to exhort you in our Name, not to suffer the
spirits of your Pastors and Professors to be imbittered one against another,
about distinctions more substile than profitable more curious than needful; but
that you would endeavor to Moderate those animosities which are grown up
already to too great an height among several of your Ministers, and that you
would quench those sparkles of dissension, which meeting with wood, hay,
stubble, and slight rather than substantial matters, may inflame you into such
aschism as will Consume you all, unless you do timely prevent it, and stifle it
in the birth, by committing to the fire those Books, Papers and Manuscripts,
which serve only as fuel unto new Controversies, rather than promote your
Edifying, and give occasion to the Enemies of Gods Church to advance themselves
on your weaknesses, and to be the more hardened in their Errors. Particularly we
entreat you to compose the difference risen up betwixt the Sieurs du Moulin and
Tilenus, if it should be brought unto your immediate Cognizance and discussion,
and not be removed out of the way by Arbitrators, which we judge of the two to
be the best, and by arbitrating their fact, you your selves, will publish unto
the World how great a value you have for the Gifts of God in both those
personages. That honor with which God has invested us by exalting us unto the
highest and most eminent place in his Church for the defense of the truth, or
duty to serve it in our regal dignity and to the utmost of our power, and that
particular desire we have to see a good Peace and Union to flourish among all
Sincere Professors of the Christian Faith, and our care for your preservation,
as being the first Churches which have rejected the yoke of Idolatry, do induce
us to deal so freely with you. And we promise our self from your prudence that
all matters shall be pacified, and amicably composed among you, as we have
commanded Master Hume to press you more amply by word of mouth thereunto, to
whom you may give credence, receiving him as our Messenger, and as a persom
well-known unto you and sufficiently commended by his own excellent good parts,
and a Lover of peace, which above all things we recommend unto you; and so we
pray God to Bless your godly debates and consultations, and to have you always
in his holy keeping.

From our Palace this 15th Day of March,1614. Signed James R.


The Synods Answer. To the King of Great Britain.
Sire,
THAT Zeal with which it has pleased God to inflame your Royal Spirit, and
that abundant care which your most Serene Majesty vouchsafes to take of all
the Christian Churches, obliges every good servant of God to pour out
continual prayers and supplications to the Lord of Glory for your Majesty's
long Life and Prosperous Reign and Preservation. The Churches of France in
whose name we be here Assembled have the deepest sense of this obligation,
because they have most frequently and to their great advantage received the
comfortable influences of this bright shining star in the Heaven of God 's
Church, for which we render unto our God the glory, and to your most Serene
Majesty our humblest thanksgivings, and shall ever reserve in our Memories the
perpetual character of an inviolable gratitude. We have received with all
reverence and submission those good and wholesome Counsels which your most
Serene Majesty was pleased to send us, which, as flowing from the Holy Spirit
of God, have confirmed us in those pious resolutions that were before lodged up
in all our hearts, and since reduced into act with unanimous consent in our
Synodical Decrees. We are enforced to our great regret to acknowledge there was
an evil thing flung in among us, but also we can assure your Majesty, that
hitherto it has met with very small encouragement, and we trust it shall never
be able to make any breach in the peace of our Churches, because we are
resolved through grace vigorously to oppose it, and to Conserve that Order and
Union which has been until now kept up among us. We had grubbed it up by the
very roots, if it had been found among us, as it is elsewhere and out of this
Kingdom. And as for that difference between the Sieurs Tilenus and du Moulin,
we believe that your Majesty's helpful hand will exceedingly advantage us, and
we promise your Majesty for our selves, that we shall give all reasonable
satisfaction unto those that trouble us, provided they do not attempt to break
us in pieces. The way of Arbiters has been ever desired by us, and that
silence which we ordered and imposed, might have been successful, if the
divided parties had but a little yielded on their side, and strove who should
have made the first advances, we believe so much of the good intention both of
the one and other that they had joined hands, and each had quitted his
particular Interest for the peace, repose and comfort of their Consciences
which desired it. We will be responsible for one of them according to the power
which God has given us over him, and we are in good hopes of the other,
especially if your most Serene Majesty shall be pleased to employ your powerful
Counsels in the furtherance of so good a work. In the mean while we have Judged
it necessary to suppress those writings, which might any ways feed and nourish
this bitter controversy between these two servants of God, leaving the total
suppression thereof unto an interview of both parties, which we have appointed
at Saumur upon very equitable and most reasonable terms. It is the desire of
our Souls that those self same Writings dispersed abroad without this Kingdom
might be suppressed, and we most humbly supplicate your most Serene Majesty to
order their suppression in your Kingdoms of great Britain. As for that Heroic
design of your Majesty's communicated to us by Mr. Hume for re-uniting the
Churches of diverse Nations into one and the self same Confession and Doctrine,
we look upon it as an Undertakement worthy so great a King, and well becoming
that Divine Zeal, with which the Celestial Majesty has inflamed your Royal
Soul; and we also shall bring in our poor offerings and tribute Penny thereunto
in due time and place, and with our whole Heart and Soul we ardently pray that
the same may be hastened and brought unto perfection to the great Glory of our
God, and confusion of the Adversaries of his Truth, in hatred of whom we have
condemned and detested that Execrable Doctrine of Regicides, which violates the
sacred Majesty of Kings, and asserteth that whole Realms may be interdicted by
the Pope. And farther we earnestly desire to maintain a good correspondence
with the Churches of your Kingdoms, whereof we give your most Serene Majesty
all possible assurance, and do most humbly beseech you to accept of our
devoutest Prayers and Services, which with submission to his Majesty our
Natural King and Sovereign, we do lay at your Majesty's Feet, ever remaining as
we are, of your Sacred Majesty, etc.

From Tonneins May 1614. The most humbly devoted Servants, the Pastors and
Elders of the Reformed Churches in France Assembled by the permission of our
most Gracious Sovereign Lewis the thirteenth in a National Synod and in the
name of all, Gigord Moderator. Gardesy Assessor.
Scribes.
Andrew Rivet and Denis Maltrett.




A Letter from the Church of Geneva. To the National Synod of the Reformed
Churches of France assembled at Tonneins.
Messieurs, and our most Honored Brethren,
YOUR Charity, and that Communion which we ever had with you in our Lord Jesus,
and the word of his Grace, has on all occasions made us joint partners with
you in those singular benedictions the great God has poured down upon your
Churches, as also at all times and upon all occasions to sympathize with you in
your afflictions, by a most sensible and cordial fellow-feeling of them. Yea
it is this very selfsame passion that does at present give us access to you, and
inviteth us not to let slip this opportunity of your National Synod, for the
consolating our own Souls, by imparting to you our thoughts and purposes
combined with yours in one and the same faith, common to us all. If our Wishes
could have been granted, we would not have put off our communion as now we do
unto these dumb Letters, but we had satiated our Souls by a personal presence,
interview and converse with you. But for as much as the hard Laws of necessity
do restrain us, we believe it will not be unpleasing to you, tho we be absent
from you in body, that by our Letters we testify our presence with you in
Spirit, rejoicing in your Order, and in the stedfastness of your Faith in
Christ, and that with Vows and Hearts most intimately united with your
devoutest Prayers we first of all adore the infinite goodness of the Lord for
inspiring their Majesty's with that great benignity and singular clemency so as
to continue you your Liberty and Privilege of holding your National Synods in
peace and security. These Assemblies representing all your Churches are a
divine Bulwark against the assaults and invasions of your Enemies, and a most
firm Cement of your Sacred Union, a sovereign remedy against all your Maladies,
and in one word the very basis of that excellent building, which God Almighty
by his own wonder-working hand has miraculously raised up in your Nation. This
is so rich and singular a Mercy, that we cannot sufficiently admire the
Providence and Wisdom of God, which did at first suggest the usage and
establishment of it, and his special assistance, support and bounty in
continuing it. And we doubt not of Satan's machinations to unhinge it. We must
tell you Sirs, when ever the time comes of the sitting of your National Synod
that we are possesed with holy jealousies and solicitous fears, trembling at
those confusion and horrible mischief brought forth by that wicked one upon an
ungodly World, by which it is corrupted and ruined: whence we take occasion to
lift up our Souls in extraordinary Prayer unto Heaven, that our great head and
chief Pastor would deign to preside in the midst of you by the sole authority
of his holy word, and to conduct you by his good Spirit, bending your hearts to
an entire subjection, docility and obedience to him, and that he would still
keep his ground among you, and firmly uphold and maintain the possession of his
Sanctuary, in the midst of you, from whose fixedness and stability, Life and
Health is convened into all it is parts and members, and that he would vouchsafe
you that Grace to obtain a testimony hereof immediately from himself, that your
last works may be better than your first. And in this juncture of affairs we
are more earnest in our wrestlings with God than ever; because we cannot rid
our Souls from the frightful apprehensions of enjoyed a calm: In our peace, as
says the Sacred Scripture, we have had great bitterness. The Commotions in
your Kingdom, the report whereof is scattered far and near, make us believe
that that bloody Spirit which raged so much heretofore in Murders and Massacres
is not yet glutted nor satiated, and that the wrath of the just and dreadful
Jehovah will burn more than ever against the enormities and impenitencies of
the World, hardening it self under the patience and indulgence of God, and that
the poor Church will be a sharer and sufferer in those judgments for her
wretched compliance with an ungodly World, even then when he respited and
reprieved her from that mortal hatred it has ever born her. We should wrong
your integrity, and approved wisdoms did we so much as entertain a sinister or
distrustful thought of them, yet nevertheless that great and earnest concern we
have for your well-being does make us assume she Liberty to exhort you by all
that is most sacred, dear and precious with you, that on all occasions which
shall offer themselves unto you, you would not only justify your selves fully
and clearly before the World, but our most Holy Religion also which is
professed by you, and that renouncing all secular designs and interests, you
would keep to the Commandments of our God, which are the true infallible rule
of wisdom, and the standard of our patience, to the perfecting of our Works. It
will be a prerogative favor bestowed on you by Heaven to have kept that
unvaluable treasure of the Faith in a pure Conscience toward God, and it will
give you a most signal Victory over your Adversaries who calumniate you, to
their deeper conviction and confusion; It will evidence your singular prudence
before the Churches of Christ to have been able to guard your selves against
the hatred and scorn of the World, poverty and baseness, a mean, uncertain, and
perilous condition here below. Yea we fixedly hope that our good God will hear
and answer your and our daily Prayers, by not exposing you unto any sorer
trials; but that under the long and happy Reign of your King you may be
delivered from all fears of your Enemies, and serve him in Holiness and
Righteousness the remainder of your days. There were some other heads upon
which we could and would have enlarged, and communicated to you our thoughts,
but we shall at present forbear, Mr. Jeremy F^^rier, Pastor and Professor at
Nismes, who revolting from the Truth, was excommunicated July 14. 1613.
being overborn with grief and horror caused by the fall of that * eminent
Apostate, who having for many years together abused the excellent gifts of God,
and that place of Honor he held among you, and was particularly supported by
you, does now serve as a sorrowful spectacle of the direful vengeance of God
Almighty. His past ungodly conversation was not bruited abroad in foreign
Nations, till such time as they heard of his Revolt, which like a sudden
thunder clap stunned and amazed all that had the relation of it, as of an
unexpected and prodigious ruin. We have heard and read what has been spoken
and written of him, and we cannot guess at any other ground of his depravation,
than his pragmatical intermedling with mundane affairs. From whence we take the
freedom to entreat you for Gods sake, strictly to inspect into vocations and
employments, that they be not mixed nor confounded to the detriment both of the
one and other. The Ministerial function is expressly limited by the Word of God
as to its Laws, Ends, Means and Actings, it being altogether different from,
yea and totally contrary to the secular Government; And we conceive that there
is no such difficulty in the matter, but that Ministers may be kept within the
inviolable bounds of their most holy calling, and yet be useful unto the
public without glorying in those little arts of subtilties and surprisals,
which abutt at no other Mark than temporal and carnal profit. Besides that it is
a very rare thing to find a man capable both of the one and other calling,
there is this grand mischief in it, that flesh and blood seeing in the Holy
Ministry nothing but what is mean and humble, despicable, and painful,
difficult and dangerous, and contrariwise meeting in the management of secular
affairs with food and fuel enough for Pride, Ambition and Covetousness, (the
ground of all envies and jealousies) and with the means and helps to carryon
designs of self advancement and domination, as tricks, craft and dissimulation;
It will be almost impossible to hinder the spreading of this contagion, which
creeps insensibly into the greatest wits, and seizes upon them at unawares,
and not as an affected and approved vice. We know very well, that necessity,
the Law of the present day, is pleaded and urged on behalf of this Practice,
too too much in use among you, to vindicate and justify it. But for Gods sake,
most dear Brethren, we beseech you to consider, whether it were not better that
your temporal affair should suffer some inconveniences, than your Spiritual
ones to be contaminated; And whether the great risque you run in ruining and
depraving your Pastors should be preferred unto your temporal Interests. And
whether it were not better to have a Reserve among you of some pure and savoury
salt against the general corruption, rather than to hazard all in this
Universal overthrow by the World, upon which Theater we see the most valiant
Champions to be foiled. If the necessity be absolute, peremptory and
indispensable, then let them go about such secular political affairs with
regret and grief, troubled at their enforced distraction from their Heavenly
calling, lamenting a the Spouse in the Canticles, that they have made me the
keeper of the Vineyard, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept. Let them go, but
then only, when your businesses are in extreme danger, at it were at the last
gasp, when you need the greatest Circumspection, a most immovable fidelity, and
unchangeable integrity, and without any affectation or introduction of
ambition, or hidden, disguised interests. No man going to War intangles himself
with the World, that so he may the better please his Captain that has listed
him. That commination is very dreadful, the Priest shall be as the people, and
that lamentation exceeding doleful, All this evil and mischief is from the
Prophets, and the Stones of the Sanctuary are lying at the four Corners of the
Streets. Let us, most Dear and Honored Brethren, give up and resign our selves
to the conduct of true Wisdom, speaking to us from the Word of God, which is,
to forsake our own. This also, most Honored Brethren should be endeavored,
that all persons whatsoever in the Ministry, when called forth unto those
secondary employments of the Church, do retain in their deportments and
conversations the marks and characters of their first and most Sacred Vocation.
Let their Devotion, Piety, Gravity, Self-denial, and Sequestration from Worldly
pleasures, used with too great a liberty by many Christian Statesmen serve to
maintain the sweet odor and reputation of our Church Government, and to keep
up inviolably the authority of their most Holy Ministry, and to bind the Souls
and Consciences of men by religious humility to an everlasting dependence on
the Majesty of their great Lord, whose holiness and Sovereign Wisdom shines
forth most resplendently in the Order of his service, as the Queen of Sheba saw
and admired it in the Court of Solomon. Impiety and Impudence are too much in
vogue every where. But let the Sanctuary, the Church of God be at least the
Receptacle and Habitation of true and unfeigned Piety, where it may act and
breath freely at in the open Air, with an uplifted countenance, in a courageous
demonstration of the Spirit, and evidence of Truth, convincing and condemning
the unfruitful works of darkness, and awakening with its bright shining
Flambeau the drowzy Consciences of a perverse generation, it may encourage the
faithful unto perseverance, and preserve the Remnant of Jacob in this day of
dispersions and desolations. The last Enemy of the Church, and he has been
essentially one and the same in all ages and places, and therefore she is now
exposed unto all the mischiefs he can do her, it the World: The World
succeeding the the stood of Heresies and Persecutions disguiseth himself into a
Friend and Ally, and the poor Church being respited and reprieved from her
former contention, and destructions by a short peace, he makes short work with
her, and brings upon her the consumption determined, which ravageth her poor
and small remainder,. These last times have yielded us sufficient evidences and
tokens of his rage and desolations. Faith is decayed, zeal grown cold, the
Gospel and the cross are become ridiculous, and contemptible, the language of
Canaan is quite forgotten, and a multitude of Souls in Israel debauched by
following the Counsel of Balaam. Now a strong and vigorous resolution is most
needful. His cheats and impostures can never be prevented, but by a rejection
of them, when they crave at first their admission. We are bound also in
Conscience to request and solicit you, tho we be very well satisfied that it
is already upon your Hearts, to take care that those different sentiments,
which for these last years have troubled your Church in the Doctrine of
Justification may be suppressed. Those opinions have been fomented and imbitered
by prejudices grudges, and secret hatable; they have been spread abroad, and
propagated, into a multitude of unprofitable and dangerous questions by
frequent disputes and wranglings. As for our part although we hold absolutely
the same Faith with your Churches, and do apply whole Christ unto our selves
for Redemption from Death and Wrath, and to obtain everlasting life, and that
we judge it to be communicable by imputation of all his obedience done and
suffered by him in his human Nature, which we were bound to have yielded
according to the law of God in our persons; yet we could never approve of such
great strife and altercation between Brethren who were otherwise minded, much
less can we approve of their bitter separation and mutual condemnation. So that
we had rather that little spark had been suffered of its own accord to have
dwindled away into nothing, than by blowing it into a flame by so many
oppositions to kindle a greater fire in the hearts of Gods People, which has
tormented then with a world of ungodly jealousies, suspicions and prejudices,
and those too in an age tossed and beaten with the tempestuous winds of
contention and victory. We have diverse time suggested this advice, and
importunately insisted on it, that there might be a Temperament and Expedient
found out for a Concordat, which without condemning or prejudicing either party
might be sufficient to guide and direct Conscience, and totally to exclude all
errors subversive of Faith, and destructive of Salvation in this fundamental
point. And we have received abundant consolation, for that the self-same
Counsels have been prescribed by a great and most potent Monarch, and by very
many learned men and most celebrated Universities. And we were exceedingly
satisfied, that you did not reject, but were well-pleased with our proceedings
and intentions, as we do according to the Universal Laws of Christian Charity
freely forgive their unkindnesses to us who have been displeased with us for
them. And you most Honored Sirs, since you have not only knowledge and wisdom,
but power also to judge and determine in these matters we beseech you to exert
that power so forcibly and effectually, that you may pluck up by the roots all
unprofitable and curious questions, and see to it, that your Pastors and
Professors do with all sincerity pursue those things which make for the
Edification of your Churches in Faith and Godliness, and that they utterly
abandon all those opposition of Science falsely so called. On which point we
presume to deliver our mind with our usual freedom, and we desire you would
revise that form couched and conceived in the Synod of Privas, and once more
deliberate about it; not that we except against the substance of it in the
least, but because its manner seems to threaten you with worse breaches, and
far greater partialities. We are not the first, who have observed the Remedy of
forms to be very dangerous, especially when a controversy is not formed into a
party, unless it be in Articles purely necessary, and determined by the Word of
God it self; and when it is otherwise impossible, all means failing us to detect
the fallacies of our real Adversaries; and such strait bands instead of
conjoyning and settling, have for the most part dislocated the members, and
wounded them more sorely. We desire also that when new authentic forms shall
come to be framed, the Churches might be first of all consulted, that so our
ears may not be broken with the din, and complaints of their being surprised,
and of an usurped domination over Conscience, and of reproaches for
precipitancy and connivency, as we are informed has been the issue of that at
Privas. And in short we should think it best to leave your Confession alone,
immovable, and not as you often do, dig it up, and lay open this Foundation,
which though for the present it may be done, with a good Intention, and with
laudable moderation, yet may in after times produce a world of licentiousness.
Above all we most instantly request this of your Piety totally to extinguish
those Accessory questions, which being altogether needless and unprofitable, do
extremely endanger Gods Church, and are naturally apt to engender Heresies or
Atheism among the ignorant people. We very much fear that the Printing of
Tilenus his book will be a great stumbling block, and hindrance to this work,
and therefore we judged it necessary to obstruct the publication of its answer
and are in great trouble what other lawful course we may take for the
justifying of our Dear Brother, whom he has so grievously impeached. However,
if it shall be thought good for the weal of the Church that he be silent, and
there be no more invectives or mutual recriminations left standing on the File;
we hope some other Expedients may be found out to salve the honor and the
reputation of our Brother, especially since the controversy is not about any
point in it self fundamental, which is to be defended, but occasionally, and in
disputation, where all sort of arguments, and ways of proving, though they be
not always good and receiveable, do not consequentially import a simple and
absolute assertion; because had it not been for their serviceableness to
confirm the conclusions, they had never been at all mentioned. And we cannot
think it any wise convenient to redeem the honor of a private dispute from the
Laughter and Scorn of the Enemies of Truth, by letting in upon us a swarm of
perilous and curious Questions, together with horrible scandals, and scruples
perplexing and tormenting Conscience. Let Us labor rather to extirpate these
animosities, and to draw these divided Spirits nearer in love one unto the
other. And then the offender, who in our opinion cannot with any Conscience
judge so unworthily of our Brother, will be the first, as in duty bound, to
acquit and clear him, exchanging his Invectives into Brotherly admonitions.

We receive frequent and mournful relations of that accursed Practice of Duels,
yea and among persons of our Religion; and tho we believe this violent and
brutish Sin is so strongly rooted, as to elude and reject all remedies, yet
because of its atrociousness and enormity, we desire your holy Synod to consuls
of the last and Sovereign Remedy, even that dreadful power which the word of
God has given unto his Church to draws out the Spiritual Sword against such
notorious delinquents, without connivency, dispensation, or respect of persons,
that by its implacable severity against those daring Rebels, the Lord blessing
his own ordinance, their feet which ran swiftly to shed innocent blood may be
hereafter stopped and restrained. At least, let us weep and groan before the
Lord, that this evil may never be imputed to us, that we may be delivered from
the guilt of so much Blood as has been wickedly spilt among us, that it may
never lie at our doors, nor our Consciences may ever reproach us for having
lent our heart or hands unto that murdering spirit, and that we may never be
marked with this brand of infamy which is peculiar to the enemies of God, to
have been Executioners of his vengeance upon themselves.

Finally, most Honored and Dear Brethren, knowing the great care you have for
us, and how much you are allarumed with reports of Plots and Preparatives for
War against us, we give you to understand, that through grace, excepting Gods
ordinary discipline of fears and threats, he does yet keep us in peace, and
lengthens out our tranquillity; by which we are taught continually to conside
in him, who quickneth the dead, and not to be puffed or lifted up with pride
and carnal security, but Religiously to improve our repose unto his service and
glory, and the general aid and benefit of all the Churches. And we thank you
heartily for your kind acceptance of our affection, expressed, in sending so
great a number of your Scholars to Study in our University, which is a very
great honor to us, and we shall do our utmost endeavors by all means to fit
them for your future service, by moulding them into the form of sound words,
and into that doctrine, which is according to godliness, weaning and
withdrawing them as much as in us lies from that vanity of Jesuitical
knowledge, wherein to our great grief so many gallant hopeful wits have through
vain curiosity and affectation been wretchedly ensnared, especially in the
endless Mazes and Labyrinths of Metaphysical terms and questions, the true
Siminaries of all novelties and heresies. Help us as we shall you in united
Prayers unto the throne of grace; you have been exceeding helpful to us this
way in our frequent distresses, and we conserve the Memory thereof by us, and
ever shall, as of a most precious Jewel. And may the most blessed God continue
his divine grace and favors to you and us, perfecting his strength in our
infirmities, uniting all our hearts in a perfect charity, and grant us to keep
the Faith unto the end, and to finish our course with joy, and to lay hold of
Eternal Life, and that we may all be to the praise and glory of his grace
through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whose power and Spirit we do with all our
hearts recommend your holy Synod, and all your Churches in general, Subscribing
our selves most sincerely, Most Honored and Dear Brethren,

Your most humble and most affectionate Brethren in the Lord, the Pastors and
Professors in the Church and University of Geneva,and in their Names, S.
Goulart. J. Diodati.



A Letter from the Lord of Plessis Marli, unto the National Synod of Tonneins.
Sirs,
I Could not let the 'Deputies of this Province part from me without giving you
assurance of my most humble and faithful service, and to entreat you,
notwithstanding all the tricks and wickedness of this age, to believe that I am
speaking to you as one who is quitting this world, and has nothing left him to
dispatch, but his own Epitaph, which through divine grace shall never give the
lie to my past life, and after all, I shall never take my own private Interests
for the Rule of my Life or actions, nor so abound in my own sense as to
counteract the common Resolutions of our Churches, whose prudence I have always
found safest, because Conscience is its eye and guide. Sirs, All good men
expect two principal blessings from your holy Synod, the first is that you
would be pleased by your Authority once for all to suppress those unnecessary
Questions, which trouble the concord of our Churches in that Doctrine, which
notwithstanding the many evil times have past over us, has been preserved
until now in its purity among us. The other is that by continuing the Oaths
enjoined by the last Synod of Privas, you take the most proper and effectual
course to heal the wounds, which our unhappy divisions have these years last
past made in the Union of our Churches; and I see no Expedient more likely to
suceed, than unanimously and with joint consent to agree and pitch upon one
General end whereunto all and every one shall direct and aim. I Salute most
humbly every Member of your Assembly, and beseech God Almighty to assist and
fortify you by his holy Spirit for his own glory, and for the Union,
Restoration, and Propagation of his Church.

From Saumur April 20. 1614. Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, Du
Plessis.


The Duke of Rohan's Letter to the National Synod Assembled at Tonneins.
Sirs,
THOSE strong obligations which the Churches of France have laid upon me, do
engage me to seek out all occasions whereby to testify my gratitude. It Is this
which causes me to write at present, and to crave this favor of you, to
believe that I shall never forget those assistances I received from you in the
last Synod of Privas, and particularly from diverse Churches of this Kingdom,
yea and from those I have never known. Certainly Sirs, I shall Confess it
freely that the effects of your kindnesses have exceeded my services; yet I
hope that for the future you will know you have not have obliged an ungrateful
person. And that what you have kept for me shall be always cheerfully employed
for your selves. We are fallen into such a time as need extraordinary Prayers
unto God for his Guidance and Counsel. We have been much afflicted since the
Assembly of Saumur by divisions sown and fomented among us. The Synod of
Privas, knowing it to be the most compendious Course for our Ruin, did
endeavor to prevent it. But diverse persons being unacquainted with our malady
then, there could not be a thorough cure effected. But now every one knows it,
and may contribute something thereunto. For my part I think it no difficult
matter for us to use the true Remedy, which consists in an entire reunion of
all our Members, that so we may be but one Body; and the more fit to serve God,
the King and our Country, and the more able to divert our enemies from
enterprizing upon us, from whom also we might take away the very will of doing
it, by its impossibility. This Sirs, is a work well-worthy of your Assembly. I
exactly conformed to the desires of the last Synod, and I do now again renew my
promises of observing your Orders not only in that, but in whatsoever else you
shall judge to concern the glory of God, whom I ardently beseech that he would
preside in your Councils, and to give me that grace never to abuse his favors
conferred upon me, but that employing whatever I have received from his divine
Majesty to the advancement of his Kingdom, I may consecrate the remainder of my
days unto his service. My Lord Baron of Montausier has particular orders from
me to acquaint you with my intentions and proceedings, and especially with that
journey of the Lord of Hautefontain taken by my command unto his highness the
Prince. I desire you would believe him in what he shall inform you as if it
were my self, and I shall always approve my self to you all generally and
particularly, Sirs,

From St. John d' Angely, this 24. of April. 1614. Your most Humble and most
Affectionate to do your service, Henry of Rohan.


A Letter from the Lord of Caumont to the National Synod of Tonneins.
Sirs,
I Well hoped to have had strength enough to have been personally present with
you, and to have enjoyed the honor and contentment of saluting your Holy
Assembly, and to have given you my self by word of Mouth, the assurance of my
fidelity and affection unto whatsoever the service of my God obliges me for
the support of his Churches, and the advancement of his Glory. But being at
present detained by important businesses which the Sieur de Maillez shall
inform you of, I entreat you therefore most humbly to be pleased with my
absence, and to believe that no person in the World is more ready to expose his
life and the Lives and Estate of all his with greater cheerfulness and
willingness for Gods cause and yours than I shall be to adventure mine, and the
lives and fortunes of all mine. And I pray God that by his Holy Spirit he would
be pleased to preside in the midst of you, and to conduct your Holy Wills in
such manner as he knows to be most expedient for his Glory, the Weal, Repose,
and Conservation of his Church, whereof having the honor to be a Member, I
shall ever remain in its Communion, and subject my self wholly in all things
unto it under the privilege of the Edicts, and the authority of their
Majesty's, entreating you to lay your Commands upon me, and to be assured that
in whatsoever I may serve the public, and every one of you in particular, you
shall have evidence of my obedience and loyal affection. The Lord follow you,
most Reverend Sirs, with his choicest Favors and Benedictions. I am,

From Paris, May 2. 1614. Your most Humble and Affectionate Servant Caumont.


A Letter from the Lord of Chastillon, to the National Synod of Tonneins.
Sirs,
MY past actions (which through Divine Grace no Man has just cause to complain
of) are, I believe, sufficient proofs of that care I ever had for the reunion
and good intelligence of the great men of this Kingdom professing the true
Religion, and the fear of God, as also of that respect I paid unto the desires
of the last National Synod of Privas, intimated to me by their Letters; and
what I have since done, both at Court for our general concerns, and, since my
return, in this Province, to conserve your Lives and Privileges enjoyed by you
during the reign of the late King, will testify that the true blood of the
late renowned Lord Admiral de Chastillon is in my Veins, and that I have
managed all public affairs fallen into my hands with all uprightness and
justice, as the Sieurs Gigord and Codur, who have been Eyewitnesses of my
deportments, can more fully inform you if they please. Sirs, this my Letter
drives at none other end, than to let you see what deference I have for you,
and that my whole life shall be employed in the service of the Churches, and I
beseech you to believe, that besides it, and the service of the King, and your
preservation and advancement there is nothing in this world more dear unto me.
And if I can do you in my station any particular service either here or
elsewhere, you shall always find me ready for it. Had it been as easy for me to
have been personally present with you, as I have the will, I swear unto you,
that my own mouth should have verified unto you what I now write, that I am
more than any man in the World, of

Montpellier April. 26. 1614. Your Reverences, The most Humble, and the most
Affectionate to do you service, Chastillon.


The Letter of the Mareschall Duke of Bouillon to the National Synod of
Tonneins.
Sirs,
I Delayed writing to you, because I was in hopes to have sent my Letters by
one of the Pastors of his Highness the Prince Elector Palatine, who should have
past through this City in his way unto your Synod, and have delivered those of
his Highness to you. But that little time he had for so long a Journey, and the
little safety that now is on the Highways having kept him at home, they were
directed to me, that I may send them as I now do unto you; and I shall take
this occasion to confirm you in those assurances I have given you of my entire
affection and service for the Weal, Preservation and Increase of our Churches,
upon whose account you are now Assembled, and that I desire to keep up with
them a good Union and Correspondence. It Is to my very great regret that there
have been some little differences between Monsieur du Moulin and Monsieur
Tilenus one of the Professors in my University, to the suppressing of which I
have done all that lay in my power; In so much that all those bitter
reflections are allayed and quasht, and I dare promise, that from your prudence
and the interposal of his Majesty of great Britain, who writes to you by Mr.
Hume Pastor of the Church of Duras, and by the mediation of the Elector
Palatin, whose Letters this bearer from me delivers to you, you will meet with
some proper Expedient for their final determination, so that those two great
personages considerable for their Profession and merits may employ the gifts
which God has bestowed upon them more unto the Churches profit for the future.
And I will be Surety for the Sieur Tilenus that he shall pay the greatest
deference unto your good Counsels, and on my part I shall contribute all that
you can expect from me to so good a work, whereof I earnestly attend the happy
Issue through your wise and prudent direction. I shall detain you no longer,
but with the offer of my prayers unto God Almighty, that he would please to
guide and influence your Spirits and Councils, that their result may be glory
to his great Name, and happiness unto his Church.

From Sedan, May 3. 1614. A Postscript with his own hand.
Sirs,
Although I am well assured that your Intentions are all leading to a good
Reunion, both in Civil and Church Affairs, yet will I not forbear quickening
you hereunto, and the rather because Satan and his Engines are now more than
every at work, marvellously busied and employed to divide us, having found in
this degenerate age more debauched persons, and greater debaucheries than in
times past. Wherefore I protest unto you, that in what concerns my self in
particular, that I shall freely discharge my duty and services according to
what shall be resolved on in your Common and United Counsels, and seek for my
self none other benefit and advantage than to live and die in the fear of God.

Your most humbly to do you service Henry de la Tour.




CHAP. XX. The Excommunication of Monsieur Jeremy Ferrier, sometimes Pastor and
Professor in the Church and University of Nismes, denounced in the Church of
Nismes, upon the 14th of July, 1613 being the Lords Day [Extracted out of a
little Book Entitled, The Troubles happened in the City of Nismes in
Languedoc] July 15. 1613. and Printed the same year.
MAster Jeremy Ferrier formerly Minister of the Word of God, having been judged
by the National Synod, yet has not in the least owned and acknowledged God's
singular Mercy and Benignity to him, nor the Gentleness and Clemency of his
Judges. He has took no notice of his great and heinous offenses, though God
saw them, the Church observed them, and the World cried out of them. Some days
after Sentence had past upon him, he made semblance as if he acquiesced in it,
requesting to be provided of another Church. His Judges had respect unto his
demand, and provided for him very much unto his convenience. But the close and
issue has evidently demonstrated that what he did was all in Hypocrisy, was
nothing else but fraud and mockery. Instead of humbling himself, he waxed more
fierce and fiery, he kicked against the pricks, he hardened his heart against
the voice of God speaking to him. He has multiplied and increast his sins,
seeking Sanctuaries for his Rebellion from the World, and protection by it in
his Enter-prizes, following the train and lure of his own lusts, and loving
this present World, he would rather be a slave to the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, than to serve God and his Church, and betaking himself to
wicked and unworthy courses, he has refused to be reformed, and hates
Discipline and Correction, scorning and trampling under foot all Church Order.
He has most licentiously inveighed against, and satyrically lampoon'd the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies; he has let fly the worst of Calumnies against the
Servants of God generally and particularly, in public and private, by word of
mouth, by Pen and Writing; He threw himself wittingly and wilfully upon
temptations, and into the snares of the Devil; he became his own Seducer, and
like tile Devil, endeavored to seduce others: He has by his ungodly
comportments scandalized those that are without, and such as are within; he
has attempted to mischief the Church of God, for which the Lord Jesus has
shed his most precious Blood: He did most solemnly engage unto the Church of
Paris, yea he swore it with as great seriousness as possible, that he would
never take upon him, nor aspire unto any other Calling than that of the Sacred
Ministry, unless the Colloquy of Lionnois should discharge him by taking from
him all possible means of subsistence: Before which nevertheless when he was
called, he refused to appear, and would not be judged of God, nor by the Men of
God: He has cast himself into a contumacious and audacious Rebellion, into the
most injurious and excessive Insolences; he has published himself guilty of a
notorious and horrible Perjury, totally deserting the Sacred Ministry, having
rejected all the Summons and Invitations unto Repentance made him for a whole
year together, by diverse Church Assemblies, in diverse places; and at diverse
times, by many most excellent Servants of God, who cordially and industriously
labored after his Conversion and Reformation: He has despised the
long-suffering, patience and forbearance of God, and of the Church, and never
heeded those public Admonitions, which according to the Discipline were used
to reclaim him, and bring him back again unto his duty. But he persists
obstinately in his sins, in his Disobediencies and Rebellions, and hardens
hardens himself in his Impenitency; insomuch, that we must speak it, though not
without tears and groans, that he has lost his privilege and right of
Burgesship in the City and Family of God. For these Causes we the Pastors and
Elders of the Reformed Churches in the Lower Languedoc, Deputies of this
Province, having charge and care of the Colloquy of Lionnois, and authorized
thereunto by the National Synod, we denounce the said Master Jeremy Ferrier, to
be a scandalous man, a person incorrigible, impenitent, and ungovernable; and
as such, having first invocated the holy Name of the Living and True God, and
in the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the conduct of the Holy
Ghost, and with Authority from the Church, we have cast, and do now cast and
throw him out of the Society of the Faithful, that he may be delivered up unto
Satan, declaring that he ought not to be reckoned, reputed, nor numbered as a
Member of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor of his Church, but that he be counted, and
esteemed as a Publican and Heathen, as a Profane person, and contemptuous
despiser of God; exhorting all the Faithful, and enjoining them in the Name of
our Lord and Master no more to hold any conversation with this Son of Belial,
but to estrange themselves, and be separated from him, waiting that if in any
wise this Judgment and Separation serving for the destruction of his Flesh, may
contribute to the Salvation of his Soul, and strike into his Conscience a
terror of that great and dreadful day, in which the Lord will come with
thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon the ungodly, and to convince
the wicked of all their impieties, sinful designs and abominable works
enterprised by them against his Church.

Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord negligently. Amen!

If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, Let him be Anathema Maranatha. Amen!

Come Lord Jesus Christ! Even so come quickly! Amen!

This dreadful Sentence was denounced against the said Ferrier in the Church of
Nismes on the Lords Day, July the 14th 1613. by Monsieur Brunier Minister of
the Word of God in the Reformed Church of the City of Usez.

Examined and Compared with the Printed Copy.

Acts, Decisions, and Decrees OF THE XXII. NATIONAL SYNOD OF THE Reformed
Churches OF FRANCE, HELD The second time at Vitre in the Province of Britain.

This Synod was opened on Thursday, May the 18th, and ended on the 18th of June
following, being the Lord's Day, 1617.

The CONTENTS of the Second Synod of Vitre.
Chap. I. DEputies unto the Synod. Moderator and Scribes. Chap. II. Rules about
Spectators in the Synod. 2. Promise of Submission to the National Synod. 1. The
Pastor and two Elders of that Church in which the National Synod is held, may
sit in it. 4. An Address unto the King. 5. Oath of Union. 6. Chap. III. The
Confession of Faith sworn. Chap. IV. Observations on the Discipline. 19. Canon
of the first Chapter of the Discipline explained. 3. Proposans shall not be
admitted into Consistories. 4. Advice upon the 16. Canon of the fifth Chapter
of the Discipline. 5. Form of Excommunication prudential. 6. The Case of Elders
violating the 28 Canon in the fifth Chapter of the Discipline. 8. Remarkable
Providence to be collected. 9. Synodical Officers must be chosen by a low
voice. 10. The 14, and 15. Canons in the last Chapter of the Discipline, most
strictly to be observed. 14. A Case about Duels. 15. The Discipline approved
and sworn. 16. Chap. V. Reflections upon the Synod of Tonneins. A Complaint of
the Isle of France against the Province of Anjou. 1. Censure taken off from a
delinquent Province. 6. Du Moulin and Tilenus reconciled. 7. A Petition for the
Exiled Protestants of Saluces. 8. Chap. VI. Of Appeals. The Provincial College
of Xaintonge settled at Rochefoucauld. 2. A Case of Monsieur Beauchamp, Pastor
to the D. of Rohan. 3. Discipline exercised upon a delinquent Minister. 9.
Samuel du Frenay, Student in Divinity, dealt withal by the Synod about his
Heterodoxies. 19. An Appeal of the Church of Maringues. 30. Divisions in the
Church of Aymargues, how composed. Chap. VII. A Speech unto the King. Chap.
VIII. General matters. No Attestations to be given unto the Moors banished out
of Spain. 3. Abuse about the Baptism of Moors. 4. The poorer Churches to be
relieved. 6. Whether a Patron may sell his right of Presentation. 7. Care about
Converted Monks. 8, 19, and 22. Foolish Sports suppressed. 9. A Pastor may not
leave his Church at pleasure. 12. Of Catechizing. 13. The Impressions of the
Bible to be more correct. 14. Complaints against the Inhabitants of Saumur, for
griping poor Scholars at Pension in their Houses. 17. Censures against them who
get Prohibitions, against their Consistories. 20. Ministers not to meddle with
State Affairs in their Pulpits. 21. The Synods care about Printing of Monsieur
Chamier's Panstratia. 23, 24. The Assembly at Rochel. 25, 26, 27. The doleful
estate of the Church of Auverne. 28. Chap. IX. The Kings Letter to the Synod.
G. M. 29. Sermons may be Preached on Holy Days. G. M. 31. A Committee of
Divines Ordered to the Synod of Dort. G. M. 34. No National Fast injoined by
this Assembly, and why. G. M. 35. Reasons why the Province of Bearn did not
call the National Synod. G. M. 36. The Church of Sancerre persecuted. 37. Canon
against Non-Residence reinforced. G. M. 38. Deputies relieved. G. M. 39. Palot
how to be prosecuted. 42. Chap. X. Partiular matters. A Petition unto the
Prince of Orange. 3. Monsieur Imbert, Minister in the Church of Orleans. 6.
Complaints against Monsieur Perrery a Minister. 8. Against Monsieur Richer,
another Minister. 9. A Silenced Minister restored. 12. A Ladies Legacy unto the
Church of Essars. 14. Oppressions of the Churches in the Colloquy of Foix. 15.
Complaints against a Minister rejected. 19. The Case of Monsieur D' Anglade.
20. A Bookseller of Geneva complains against a Minister in Bearn. 23. The
progress of the Gospel at Langres. 25. Engagements of Monsieur Guerin. 28. The
Works of Monsieur Sohnis Ordered to be Printed. 36. The Case of Huberus. 31.
And of Solera. 32. Chap. XI. Dividend of Moneys among the Churches. Chap. XII.
Of Universities and Colleges. Chap. XIII. Roll of Apostates and deposed
Ministers. Chap. XIV. Lord of Candal's Accounts. Chap. XV. Dividend of Moneys
among the Provinces.
THE Second SYNOD of VITRE. 1617. The 22d Synod.

SYNOD XXII. 1617.
In the Name of God. Amen.
Acts of the second National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, held in
the City of Vitre, in the Province of Britain; the eighteenth day of May, and
for several days following, in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
and seventeen. The Synod broke up on Sunday the eighteenth of June.

CHAP. I. Names of Deputies. Election of Synodical Officers.
1. PRayers having been first offered up unto God, as usual at the opening of
all Synodical Meetings, The next thing in order dispatched, was Reading the
Letters of Commission tendered by the Deputies, that so an exact knowledge
might be had of their Call, who sat and voted in this Assembly. Monsieur
Andrew Rivet, Pastor of the Church of Thouars, was chosen Moderator; Monsieur
John Chauve Assessor, Pastor of the Church of Sommieres, Monsieur John Jammet,
Pastor of the Church of St. Amand in Bourbonnois, and Elijah Bigot, Advocate in
the Court of Parliament of Paris, and Elder of that Church, were chosen Scribes.

2. The Synod examining the Letters of Commission Impowering the Deputies of
the Provinces to sit and act in it, began with those of the Isle of France,
Picardy, etc. for which appeared Monsieur John Baptist Bugnet, Pastor of the
Church of Compiegne, Samuel Quinson Pastor of the Church de la Ferte au Vidame,
together with Elijah Bigot, Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, and Elder of
the Church there, and Philip de Cormieres, Esquire Lord of Fromentieres, and of La
Hay, Elder in the Church of Chaltray.

3. For the Province of Normandy, Monsieur Obadiah de Mondenys, Pastor of the
Church of Fescamp, Peter Paris Pastor of the Church of Pontoison, together with
Samuel le Call, Esquire Lord of Beurevil, Elder in the Church of Gisors, and Michael
le Petit, Lord of la Joisiere, Elder in the Church of St. Lo.

4. For the Province of Britain, Monsieur Peter de la Place, Pastor of the
Church of Sion, Guy le Noir, Lord of Crevain, Pastor of the Church of Roche
Bernard and Croisis, together with Elias de Goulaine, Esquire Lord of Laudouiniere,
Elder of the Church of Viellevigne, and John Ravenell, Lord of Boistillenil,
Elder in the Church of Rennes.

5. For the Province of Berry, Orleans, etc. Monsieur Daniel Jammet, Pastor of
the Church of St. Amand, John Guerin, Pastor of the Church of Baugeney,
together with John de Bussieres, Controller of his Majesty's Salt-Granary at
Sancerre, and Elder of the same Church, and John du Plessis, General-Assessor
of his Majesty's Subsidies at Pithinieres, Elder of the Church of Chilleure.

6. For the Province of Anjou, Tourain, etc. Monsieur John Vigneu Pastor of the
Church of Man's, Renatus Conseil Pastor of the Church of Lassay, together with
Giles Bouchereau, Lord of la Mothe, Advocate at Saumur, and Elder of the same
Church, and Hannibal de Farsy, Lord of St. Laurence, Attorney in the Exchequer,
of the Lordship and County of Laval, Elder of the Church there.

7. For the Province of Poictou, Monsieur Andrew Rivet Pastor of the Church of
Thouars, Paul Geslin, Lord of la Pilletiere Pastor of the Church at
Chastelheraut, together with Giles Begaud, Esquire Lord of la Begaudiere, Elder in
the Church of Mountague, and Samuel Maucler, Esquire Lord of Marconnay, Elder in
the Church of la Ganache.

8. For the Province of Xaintonge, and Aulnix, etc. Monsieur Samuel L' ommeau
Pastor of the Church of Rochel, William Rivet, Lord of Chanvernon, Pastor of
the Church of Taillebourg, together with John Preverant, Lord of Piterne, Judge
of Montignac, and Elder of the Church there, and Monsieur Elijah Dieu, the Lord
High Justice his Attorney in the Lordship of Soubize, and Elder of the Church
in the same place.

9. For the Province of Lower Guyenne, Monsieur Peter de la Musse Pastor of the
Church of Nerac, Peter Hefperian Pastor of the Church of Ste Foy, together with
John de Geneste, Lord of La Tour, Advocate in the Court of the Edict at Nerac,
and Elder of the Church of Sauvetat, and Peter de Pichard, Captain of Gironde
and Castelmoran, Elder of the Church of Gironde.

10. For the Province of the Principality of Bearn, Monsieur John de Capdeville
Pastor of the Church of Navarrins, together with John de Angerre, Advocate in
the Parliament of Pau, and Elder of the Church in the same place.

11. For the Province of Lower Languedoc, Monsieur John Chauve Pastor of the
Church of Sommieres, James de Chambrun Pastor of the Church of Nismes, together
with William de Girard Lord of Moussac, Elder of the Church in the same place,
and Peter de Calviere, Lord of St. Cesaire, Elder in the Church of Nismes.

12. For the Province of Dolphiny, Monsieur John Felix Pastor in the Church of
Romans, Denis Bouteroue Pastor of the Church of Grenoble, together with Peter
Guyon Lord of Salbetter, Elder in the Church of Manars, and Solomon Vulson Lord
of Villette, Elder in the Church of Mean.

13. For the Province of Vivaretz, Forest, etc. Monsieur Peter He after
revolted, and proved a True Turn-Turk.
Marchat, Pastor of the Church of St. Stephens, John Moze Pastor of the Church
of Annonay, together with James de Serres, Doctor of the Civil Law, Elder in
the Church of Aubenas; and whereas the Lord of Cussons, Elder of the Church of
Annonay, was also chosen, and named in the Letters of Commission, but did not
appear, his absence was not approved by the Assembly. Yet afterward, on the
third of June, the said Lord of Cussons returning from his Depuration unto the
Assembly at Rochel, was received into this Assembly.

14. For the Province of Sevennes and Gevaudan, Monsieur Jews Courant Pastor
of the Church of Anduze, and Andrew de la Faye Pastor of the Church of St.
German, together with John de Barjac, Lord of Villeneufre, Elder in the Church
of Vigan, and John de Barjac, Lord of Gasques, Elder in the Church of St.
Martyn.

15. For the Province of Burgundy, Lionnois, Charlois, and Gex, Monsieur Jews
de la Cost Pastor of the Church of Dijon: Peter Boulenat Pastor of the Church
of Avalon, instead of Monsieur Eliot Pastor of the Church of Arnay le Duke
(whose excuses were admitted, and in case he should afterward come unto this
Assembly, the said Boulenat might, if he please, return) together with Albert
du Mars, Esquire Lord of Balenes, Elder in the Church Another Copy reads, of
Maringues.
of Vesle, and Monsieur John Gravier, Advocate in the Parliament of Dijon, and
Elder of the Church there.

16. For the Province of Provence, Monsieur Peter Maurice, Pastor of the Church
of Lormarin, together with Charles de Bachy, Esquire Lord of St. Stephens, Elder in
the Church of Thouars. And whereas Monsieur Samuel Toussain Pastor of the
Church of Luke, and Monsieur John Clement, called Captain Cadet, Elder of the
Church there, appeared also with Letters of Commission from the Synod, held at
Cabrieres the fifteenth of April last. This Assembly having heard the said
Deputies, declared the Deputation of Monsieur Maurice, and St. Stephens to be
lawful, and that of Monsieur Toussain and Clement illegal, as being done
contrary to the Canons and Forms of our Church Discipline: Yet nevertheless for
diverse important Causes, and for the service of the said Province, the said
Toussain and Clement were both admitted as Members of it; only the said
Toussain was censured for accepting of the said Deputation, and the rather,
because it appeared by the acts of St. Maixant, that he is relapst into the
same fault, for which he was threatened: that if he once more offended in the
like manner, he should be proceeded against with greater severity. The Synod
also that commissionated them was censured for assembling themselves
irregularly, and not observing the Rules and Orders which are usually, and
necessary to be observed in such Synodical Meetings. And since it appears there
be very many and great Divisions in that Province, the Province of Lower
Languedoc, is charged to Commissionate some certain Pastors and Elders, who by
the Authority of this Assembly, shall assemble the Synod of the said Province,
and meeting with them shall use their utmost power and endeavor to appease
their troubles, and to reunite those that be divided, and to restore and settle
Order in those Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

17. The twenty second day of May, there came into this Assembly for the
Province of Higher Languedoc, Monsieur John Josion Pastor of the Church of
Castres, and James Joly afterward turned Apostate.
Joly Pastor of the Church of Milland, together with James de Laureney Baron of
Mombrun, Provost of Figeac, Elder in the Church of Cajars, and John de la
Viale, Counselor for the King, and Lieutenant Criminal in the Seneschalsey of
Quercy and Montauban. The excuses urged by them for their delays were rejected,
and their Letters of Commission judged defective. And all these four Deputies
did take, and swear, and subscribed for themselves, and those who
Commissionated them, the Oath of Union, the Confession of Faith, and our
Church Discipline.

18. All and every one of these Deputies swore and protested, before God,
Privas. Art. 1. after the Election of the Moderator. Alez. Art. 3. ibidem.
that they did not use any indirect nor underhand-dealing, nor did any other
for them, procure, as they knew, their Deputation, nor did they know that any
of their Colleagues had brigued his or their Election unto this Assembly.

CHAP. II. Rules and Orders about Bystanders, and Spectators in the Synod.
1. WHereas the Letters of Commission, brought by the greater part of the
Provincial Deputies, do exceedingly differ in that Clause of Submission due and
owing by the Churches unto the Decrees of our National Synods: And for that
very much of our time, is spent and wasted in examining and debating of them.
It is now decreed, that for the future All the Provinces should confine
themselves unto the words and substance of this ensuing form. We promise before
God to submit our selves unto all that shall be concluded and determined in
your Holy Assembly, to obey and execute it to the utmost of our power; being
persuaded that God will preside among you, and lead you by his holy Spirit into
all truth and equity by the Rule of his Word, Tonneins Art. 1. after the Roll
of the Deputies.
for the good and edification of his Church, to the glory of his great name:
which we most humbly beg of his Divine Majesty in our daily Prayers.

2. Whereas diverse Pastors and Elders, chosen by the Provinces, have not
appeared in their own Persons, but by their Surrogates in this Synod, the
Provinces shall be advertised to take Cognizance of their Excuses, and to pass
Judgment on them by the Authority of this Assembly.

3. The Provincial Deputies of Britain, Tonneins at the and, and underneath g.
m. 36.
did give an Account of their Calling the National Synod unto this place,
because the Province of Bearn had resigned their privilege unto them, which
the last National Synod held at Tonneins had conferred upon them. This Assembly
approved of what was done by them, but yet told them, it had been requisite, on
their part, to have been more diligent and careful in acquainting the Provinces
more early of the time and place of meeting, by their Letters of Advice and
Summons. And this Advertisement shall serve for all the Provinces, that when as
any one of them shall have the charge and privilege of Indicting our National
Synods, they may so order matters, as to free and acquit themselves of all
blame and complaint in this particular.

4. Monsieur Petre Pastor of the Church of Vitre, Petitioned for his Church and
Consistory, that he, together with the Elders of the said Church, might be
permitted to sit in this Assembly, whilst the Confession of Faith, and the
Ecclesiastical Discipline were reading: The Synod granted it for himself, and
for two Elders chosen and named by the Consistory, and unto those other
Pastors, who having leave from their Churches to attend the Synod about the
concerns of their Churches, 3. of R^chel Art. 3. after the Elect. of the Mother.
St. Maixant the same, Alez. ibid.
or their own private business, as also unto Proposans: But as for others who
would intrude themselves, that Canon of the National Synod of Rochell in the
year sixteen hundred and seven, shall be strictly observed.

5. As soon as the Assembly was formed and settled, the first thing they Voted
was an Address unto his Majesty, to testify the Joy of all our Churches, Below
g.m. 29.
for those many and wonderful Blessings which God has graciously vouchsafed
Him; and to protest unto his Majesty from all the Deputies of the Provinces
here Assembled, and from all the Churches of this Kingdom; that we are, and
ever will be, his most humble, most loyal, most affectionate, and most obedient
Subjects and Servants. And to this purpose there were deputed from among the
Pastors, Messieurs Hesperien, and Bouteroue, and from the Eldership, Messieurs
de Balene, and de Moussac, who had Letters given them to present unto his
Majesty, together with a particular Message, which they were to deliver him in
the name of this Assembly. Of which the Lords Deputies, who are now sitting in
the Town of Rochel shall have notice given them, and Letters shall be sent to
the Lord du Candall, to furnish these our Deputies with a supply of Moneys to
defray the Charges of their Journey.

6. The Oath of Union of all the Churches of this Kingdom, Pri^as. Art. 4.
after the Elect. of the Moderat.
under our most humble obedience, due unto the King was renewed, sworn and
subscribed by all the Deputies in this Assembly, both for themselves and the
respective Provinces from whom they were Commissionated.

CHAP. III. The Confession of Faith.
THE Confession of Faith of these reformed Churches, in the Kingdom of France,
was read word by word, from the beginning to the end, and approved in all its
Articles by all the Deputies, as well for themselves as for their Provinces
that sent them, and all of them swear for themselves and Provinces, that they
would teach and preach it; because they believed that it did perfectly agree
with the Word of God, and they would use their best endeavor, that as it had
been hitherto, so it should be ever more received and taught in their Churches
and Provinces.

CHAP. IV. Observations on reading of the Church Discipline; Containing matter
of advice given unto certain Provinces.
1. THE Deputies of Anjou proposed that it would be necessary not to limit our
Proposans to so short a time as they be confined to by the fourth Cannon, in
the first Chapter of our Discipline, St. Maixant Observat. 1.
for preparing their Propositions. This Assembly not changing the said Canon in
the least, does leave it wholly to the prudence of Colloquies and Synods to
prolong the time, according to their knowledge of the quickness or dullness of
their Proposans parts and capacities.

2. The Deputies of the Isle of France demanding that those words of the fourth
Canon in the first Chapter of our Discipline, St. Maixant Observat. 5.
(And it shall be declared un^o the Elected Pastor, that Authority is given him
in the name of Jesus Christ to preach the word, and to administer the
Sacraments;) should be repeated before the people, by the Pastors appointed to
ordain him. This Assembly did not think meet to make any alteration.

3. The aforesaid Deputies of the Isle of France craving Explication of the
19th Canon in the first Chapter of our Discipline about the Conjunction of
Churches and Consistories in the Houses of great Lords and Princes, Orleans 3.
to the Churches and Consistories in the places of their abode. This Assembly
dismisseth them to the practice of the third Canon framed in the National Synod
of Montauban; the observations then and there made upon the Discipline,
clearing up this very matter now in question.

4. The Province of Orleans and Berry reported, 2 Paris Art. 8. 1 Rochel Obs.
26.
that several Proposans concluding from the seventh Canon, in the fifth Chapter
of our Discipline, which had left it to the prudence of Consistories to admit
Proposans into their Meetings, that they had therefore an undoubted right of
entrance into Colloquies and Synods; and accordingly did demand it. This
Assembly (leaving that Canon entire as it is) for diverse weighty reasons, does
not judge expedient, that Proposans should have admission or session in our
Colloquies, or Synods.

5. The Deputies of Normandy craving advice how to execute the sixteenth Canon
in the fifth Chapter of our Discipline, Synod of Montpel. Obs. 10. on the
Discipline.
and what censure should be inflicted on our Members, who Married after the
Popish manner? The Assembly returned this Answer, That the Consciences of such
persons should be followed with the most serious, lively, and effectual
Counsels and Summons unto Repentance, both in public and private.

6. The Deputies of the Isle of France requesting, that a form of
Excommunication might be framed by this Synod, in which those words, Delivered
unto Satan, might be omitted. The matter was left wholly to the prudence of
Consistories, Alez. g.m. 21.
to use such a Form as they should judge moll expedient.

7. At the request of the Province of Higher Languedoc, 2. Paris 2.
It was ordained, that these ensuing words should conclude the 26th Canon of
the fifth Chapter of our Discipline, viz. And the same judgment shall be made
of all other faults deserving public penance.

8. The Province of Sevennes demanding what manner of Censure should be
inflicted on Elders, Synod of Figeac. 10.
either in Office or discharged, who violate the 28th Canon in the fifth
Chapter of our Discipline. This Assembly exhorts all Consistories to proceed
against such persons, by all the Censures of the Church, even so far as to
depose them from their Office, and for those that are out of Office, they shall
most sharply reprove them, with threats of never being any more admitted into
the Eldership, and all Magistrates professing the Reformed Religion, shall be
entreated not to require any such Confessions from our Pastors or Elders; and
in case they should persist in those demands, they also shall be sharply
censured by the Consistories.

9. Forasmuch as the last Canon in the fifth Chapter of our Discipline has
been never executed, Poictiers p. m. 34. Alez. 1. obs. upon this syned.
notwithstanding the many Exhortations of our former National Synods. This
Assembly does most strictly injoin all the Deputies to notify unto their
respective Provinces, that they do forthwith nominate and appoint one Pastor
out of every Colloquy, to make a Collection of the most remarkable Providence
that have fallen out these last years in their division, and to report them to
the next Provincial Synod, that they may be sent unto Monsieur Rivet, Pastor of
the Church of Thouars, who is ordered to receive them, and to compose a History
of them, which shall be by him brought in unto the next National Synod.

10. The Deputies of Dolphiny made report of diverse incouveniencies that have
fallen out in chosing the Moderators of Synods and Colloquies with a low Voice,
1. Syn. of Paris 2. 3. Syn. of Rochel Obs. 17.
which manner of Election was conformable to the seventh Canon in the eighth
Chapter of our Discipline, and they Petitioned that it might be lawful for them
to act otherwise, viz. by a clear and audible Voice. This Assembly does judge
it inexpedient to make any change in that Canon, and all the Provinces be
injoined exactly to conform thereunto.

11. The Province of Dolphiny demanding that the sixteenth Canon in the
eleventh Chapter of our Discipline, 1 R^chel Obs. 43.
might be concluded with this Addition, That Consistories shall be injoined to
proceed against the transgressors of that Canon by all Church Censures. The
Assembly did not judge meet to make any additions to it: yet nevertheless all
Consistories are charged to exhort the faithful to bring their Children unto
Baptism as soon as conveniently they can. And such as disobey this Order, shall
be suspended the Lord's Supper.

12. The Province of Berry demanding that the seventh Canon in the 13th Chapter
of our Discipline, 1 Paris Art. 35. St. Maixant. g. m. 18.
might be explained, and that they might be directed how to govern themselves,
when in the public Celebration of Marriage in our Churches, there is open
opposition made against it. The Assembly leaves it wholly to the prudence of
the Consistories, to do therein as they shall think meet.

13. The Deputies of Normandy requesting that for the better executing the
twentieth Canon, Vercueil, Art. 7.
in the 13th Chapter of our Discipline, a certain time might be prefixed for
the Celebrating of their Marriages, who, so they might marry, would therefore
make profession of the Reformed Religion, especially when as we are very well
satisfied of their knowledge. The Assembly did not think good to add any thing
unto the said Article, but leaves it to the Consistories discretion, either to
prolong or shorten the times, according as they shall be satisfied with the
knowledge and piety of those persons.

14. Forasmuch as we see daily, 2 Syn. of Paris 31. St. Foy, 23.
to our grief and sorrow, Impiety, Lukewarmness, and indifference in Religion,
not only to creep in, but to grow upon us more and more, to the great dishonor
of the glorious Name of God, and the indelible reproach of the true Religion.
All the Churches are most expressly injoined to observe punctually, and with the
exactest care, the 13th and 14th Canons in the last Chapter of the Discipline,
without any acceptance of persons, and to give in an account thereof unto
Colloquies and Synods, who are ordered to take notice of it, and to inflict the
heaviest Censures upon those Consistories, which neglect this their bounden
duty.

15. The Deputies of the Isle of France craving advice about the difficulties
met by them in executing the 32d Article of the 14th and last Chapter of our
Discipline, Montpel. p. m. 16.
which enjoineth a speedy publication of their suspension from the Lords Table,
who either give or take a Challenge to fight a Duel: This Assembly
distinguishing between them whose offense is known only to a few particular
persons, and those who have publicly committed it before the Sun, and which is
known to the whole World, exhorts Consistories to judge prudently in the
Case; so that the Discipline of our Churches may not be violated.

16. Our Church Discipline having been read distinctly, word by word, was
approved in all its Articles, and sworn to by all the Deputies of the
Provinces, both for themselves, and for those who were represented by them; and
they were all exhorted to see it most exactly kept and observed; whereof they
all gave good assurance, and promised to be with their whole power assisting to
it.

CHAP. V. Reflections on reading the Acts of the last National Synod,
Celebrated at Tonneins.
1. THE Deputies of the Isle of France read an Act of theirs in this Assembly,
Tonneins Art. 12. in the Roll of Pastors.
and reported what was done by them in execution of that Commission, which had
been given them, and the Provincial Deputies of Anjou to censure the Church and
Consistory of Tours, and Monsieur Coupe Pastor of the said Church, for not
obeying the Decree of the Province of Anjou, concerning the deputation of
Monsieur Coupe, unto the National Synod of Tonneins, and declared farther, how
that the said Deputies of Anjou had not assisted them in the least in it. This
Assembly approving all that has been done by the said Deputies of the Isle of
France, does charge the next Provincial Synod of Anjou to hear what the said
Deputies of Anjou can say for themselves, and why they had not joined with them
in executing the said Commission, with which they were equally entrusted with
the Deputies of the Isle of France.

2. Forasmuch as the third Article of Observations, Privas Observe. on the
Discipl. Alez. Observe. 2. on this very Synod.
made by the National Synod of Tonneins, on the Acts of that of Privas, was
omitted by him, who dictated the said Acts: This Assembly thought good to
insert them into the Acts of this present Synod, which it does in these
following words. As for that Canon which gives way to Elders, the Pastor being
refused because of exceptions taken at him, to judge of differences, even unto
suspension from the Lord s Supper; the Province of Lower Languedoc demanding,
that some change might be made in it: This Assembly Ordained, that it should
abide in those very self same words in which it was couched at first.

3. The Province of Britain complaining of a Judgment past by the Provincial
Synod of Anjoy, in executing a Decree of the National Synod of Tonneins,
Tonneins Appeal 7. Below, p. m. 10.
was now heard, in what it had more to say and offer unto this Assembly; But
when they had done, the judgment of the said Province of Anjou, for dividing
the Church of Montague from that of Viellevigne, was confirmed; And the Church
of Viellevigne is admonished to contribute lovingly toward the maintenance of
their Pastor; and in case of their inability, the Province of Britain shall
make provision for him out of the moneys apportioned to them from his Majesty's
liberality; and those private persons who will join themselves unto the said
Church of Viellevigne, shall not for time to come, at their will and pleasure,
depart from it, to be joined in Communion with that of Montagu.

4. The Deputies of the Province of Dolphiny, Tonneins Obs. 5. on the Synod of
Privas. Alez. p. m. 3.
gave notice unto this Assembly, that their Synod had seen and perused the
History of the Waldenses and Albingenses, collected by Monsieur Perrin; but it
was not printed nor distributed according to the Order given the said Monsieur
Perrin, by the National Synod of Tonneins. Now it is Ordained, That the said
History shall be sent unto our Honored Brethren, the Pastors and Professors in
the Church and University of Geneva, who shall be desired by the Synod of
Dolphiny to peruse it; and whereas the said Monsieur Perrin requests a sum of
money toward the Printing of the said Book, The Province of Dolphiny is
injoined to solicit it is impression, for there can be nothing more given or
added by us, to what was formerly granted by the Synod of Privas.

5. A Canon of the Synod of Tonneins was read, Tonneins Appeal 18.
concerning the Appeal of Monsieur Margonne, sometimes Pastor in the Province
of Burgundy, but since withdrawn unto the Church of Chastillon, on the Loire,
in the Province of Berry; which Canon had ordained that the said Province of
Berry, should give unto that of Burgundy, a Proposan before the next Provincial
Synod: The said Province of Burgundy reported, that they having no information
given them of the time and place when the Synod of Berry met, they could not
demand them to fulfill the conditions and terms enjoined in that Canon;
wherefore they besought this Assembly to confirm the aforesaid Canon, which it
also did, and injoined the very next Provincial Synod of Berry, fully to answer
and satisfy the Contents and Import of the said Canon of Tonneins.

6. The Province of Vivaretz requesting, Tonneins Appeal ^2.
that the Censure imposed on them by the National Synod of Tonneins, might be
reversed, and took off the File, and that the Letters of Monsieur de la Faye,
Pastor of the Church of Aubenas, on whose account the said Censure was decreed,
might be read, he joining together with the Province in this their request;
This Assembly considering that the discontents on all hands are now appeased,
and desiring the weal and repose of the said Province, and particularly of the
Church of Aubenas, has granted them their demand.

7. That Act of the National Synod of Tonneins being read, Tonneins p. m. 35.
about the difference between Monsieur du Moulin and Tilenus, on which the Lord
of Plessis-Marly had been entreated to contrive away for Reconciling them by
calling in some of the Neighbor Pastors, together with the Professors in the
University of Saumur. Monsieur Rivet tendered unto this Assembly a Letter on
this subject from the said Lord du Plessis, by which he informs them of what he
had done in it, and how that the Sieurs Fleury, Le Bloy, Rivett, Rerilla^, and
Bouchereau, Pastors in the Church of Loudun, Angers, Touars, of the Isle
Bouchart, and Saumur, and the late Monsieur Craig, Professor of Divinity in the
University of Saumur, had been called in by him unto his Assistance in this
affair, from which at last there resulted a good Accord between both the
Parties, who were mutually reconciled in points of Doctrine, notwithstanding
that some harsh words, if rigorously taken, and badly understood, might be
drawn contrary to their avowed sense and sentiments. Thanks were ordered, in
the name of this Synod, to be returned unto the Illustrious Lord Du Plessis,
and to the R. Reverend Monsieur Rivet, our Moderator, now present; and the same
also should be rendered unto his Colleagues, by the Deputies of their Province,
and special notice hereof should be given by every one of them unto their
Synodical Assemblies, that so thanks might be offered up unto God unanimously,
and as it were with one mouth, and humbly to beg of his most glorious Majesty,
that this sacred Concord might not only be confirmed by an uniform judgment
between these two Eminent Members, but also betwixt all the rest of our Body.
However afterward Tilenus deserted the Communion of our Churches, and died in
that of the Arminians.

8. Letters shall be written from this Assembly unto the Lord Mareschall Duke
of Lesdiguieres, Gap. g. m. ^. Tonneins p. m. 39.
entreating him to recommend unto his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, the
poor Protestants banished out of the Marquisate of Saluces, beseeching him,
that he would be pleased to permit them, out of his Royal Favor, to return
unto their Houses and Inheritance; and that he would grant unto them their
former Liberty of Conscience in the Service and Worship of God.

CHAP. VI. Appeals.
1. AN Appeal being brought by the Church of St. Fulgent, from the Sentence
given out against them, in the Provincial Synod of Poictou, held at Touars,
which had ordained, that Monsieur de la Beguadiere, should continue with the
Church of Montague. This Assembly having seen the Memoirs of the said Church of
St. Fulgent, produced by the Provincial Deputies of Britain, and heard the
said de la Begaudiere speak for himself, judges that the Appeal ought not to
be admitted, and confirms the Decree of the said Provincial Synod of Touars,
yet it does also ordain, that the Province of Poictou ought to consider the
necessity of that Church of St. Fulgent, lest it should be at last dissipated
for want of a Pastor.

2. The Church of Rochefoucault, Tonneins p. m. 8.
appealing from a Decree of the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, held at Rochel,
which had ordained, that the College there established should be transferred
unto the Town of Pons, and the City and Church of St. John d' Angely appealing
from the said Ordinance, and demanding that the College might be fixed with
them. This Assembly judges that the said Province ought not to have made the
said Translation, and therefore confirms unto the Church of Rochefoucault the
College until the sitting of the next National Synod, when, in case it shall
appear, that the said College has not been well-maintained, nor the youth
duly educated and instructed; The said Synod may remove it unto that place
where they conceive it will be most beneficial to the Church and Province: and
the Church of St. John d' Angely, are exhorted to erect of themselves a
College, since God has blessed them with means and ability for so doing, and
the National Synod taking notice of their duty in this particular, shall give
them such Encouragement as in its wisdom shall be judged needful.

3. Alez. Observe. upon this Synod.
Monsieur Beauchamp Pastor of the Church of Belin, appealed from the judgment
of the Province of Britain, and his Appeal was received, although his affair
were of that kind, which might be decided finally by the Neighbor Province.
This Synod therefore amending the Judgment of the aforesaid Province,
ordains, That Supplicatory Letters shall be written unto the Lord Duke of
Rohan, that the Intendant of his Household do perform the Agreement which was
made with the said Monsieur Beauchamp; and in case it be not done, that then
the Province shall see him satisfied; because that during these four years
wherein the said Sieur Beauchamp has officiated as Minister in the Family of
the said Lord Duke, the Province received that portion of Moneys from the Kings
Bounty, which belonged to the said Monsieur Beauchamp.

This Mahaut afterward revolted.
4. The Sieur Mahaut had his Appeal admitted against the Judgment of the
Province of Britain, although he was freed from it, and set in the Catalogue
of Pastors to be disposed of and provided for by this National Synod; and in
case before the breaking up of this Assembly he be not presented unto a Church,
he shall be wholly at his own Liberty, to dispose of himself in any Province of
this Kingdom, where God shall be pleased to call him. And the Lord of Candal is
requested to retain in his hands a portion belonging unto Ministers to be paid
into that Province where ever he shall be employed as a Pastor. And for as much
as the Province of Britain has received in his name the moneys granted us
from his Majesty's Bounty, they shall make him restitution, and reimburse him
all the arrears of his portion free of all Costs, Taxes, and Charges
whatsoever, deducting only what he has received of that money from the time in
which he quitted the Church of La Mussaye until now.

5. The Church of St. Martyn appealed from a Decree of the Synod of Sevennes,
which had separated it from the Churches of Brenons and La Molouze. This
Assembly approved of that their Decree, but yet injoineth the said Province to
take care that the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ be constantly kept up in
the Church of St. Martyn, and that they do give them all necessary supplies out
of the moneys of his Majesty's Bounty assigned unto the said Province.

6. Monsieur Clemenceau Pastor of the Church of Poictiers, appealing from the
Synod of Poictou, which in prejudice to the Colloquy of Higher Poictou had
ordered 50 l. to be taken out of the 150 Livers, assigned by the said Colloquy
to the Son of the said Sieur Clemenceau, and given unto the Son of Monsieur de
Faure, Pastor of the Church of Aubenas: This Assembly ratifying the judgment of
the said Colloquy reverseth that of the Synod, which is injoined out of their
own stock, attributed to them, to raise fifty Livers for the young le Favre.

Tonneins Observe. 7. on the former Synod.
7. The Church of Niort appealing from the Judgment of the Province of Poictou,
which refused to allow them their charges which they had disbursed in getting a
supply during the absence of Monsieur Chauffepied their Pastor, who was sent
unto the last political Assembly. This Synod declares that this affair is of
that kind which ought to be finally determined by a Neighbor Province: but yet
for some weighty reasons and motives it does at present accept of their Appeal,
and amending the Decree of that Provincial Synod, ordains that the Canon made
in the National Synod of Tonneins be put in Execution; and whereas the said
Church of Niort have been at needless Expenses in seeking Ministers to supply
them abroad, without the Province, all their Costs and Charges shall be limited
and restrained to the sum of two hundred Livers, to be paid them out of the
moneys allotted unto the said Province, nor shall Monsieur Chauffepied be at
all obliged to make any restitution out of the moneys given him for his pains
and travel unto the said General Assembly.

8. The Church of Chastelheraut appealing from a judgment of the Province of
Poictou, their Appeal was admitted, notwithstanding it had been decreed
otherwise in former National Synods. Though still the Provinces be exhorted to
conform themselves unto their Orders, of else they shall be remanded back re
infecta, who ever bring unto these Assemblies matters which may and ought to be
judged in a Neighbor Province; and therefore amending the Sentence of the
Synod of Poictou, it ordains, that whereas the Church of Chastelheraut had
exhibited an hundred Livers toward the maintenance of a certain Fellow named
Pichon, formerly a Franciscan Friar, the Province of Poictou shall reimburse
the said Church the sum of fifty Livers.

9. Monsieur Paul Bonnet formerly Pastor in the Church of Saujon, Alez. Obs.
17. on this Synod.
appealing from the judgment of the Colloquy of the Isles, and since from that
of the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, which had ratified the Sentence of the
said Colloquy, by virtue whereof he was suspended the holy Ministry, until such
time as he had fully cleared himself from that crime whereof he was impeached
and accused. This Assembly having heard the Deputies of that Province, and the
Arguments and grounds of their proceedings against him, and the said Bonnet
speak in his own defense; approved the Decrees both of the Synod and Colloquy,
and ordained that his suspension should be continued until the next meeting of
the Provincial Synod of Poictou, which will be about six months hence: and at
present does Commissionate the Sieurs Chesneau Pastor of the Church of S.
Maixant, and Papin Pastor of the Church of St. Hermin, to take with them each
an Elder, either from their own or the Neighbor Churches at their own choice,
and to pass over unto those places at the charges of the Province of Xaintonge,
where the Crimes of which he stands accused, were committed, and they shall
make strict and particular inquiry into the truth of them, and make report
thereof unto the said Provincial Synod, who shall judge finally by authority
from this Assembly of the whole affair, either by aggravating his Censure in
Case he be found guilty, or by restoring the said Bonnet, if innocent, unto the
holy Ministry, which yet he shall never any more exercise within the said
Province of Xaintonge; and till this judgment be executed, the said Bonnet
shall be received into Communion with us at the Lord's Table, but in another
Church than that of Saujon. And that portion of moneys given us by his Majesty,
and received under his name by the Province of Xaintonge, shall be detained by
the Receiver of the said Province, to be restored to him free of all Taxes and
Costs from the time of his deprival, in case he be declared innocent, absolved,
and justified; but and if he be found guilty, the said Province shall be
responsible for it in their accounts unto the next National Synod. And whereas
the Church of Saujon demands reimbursement of costs expended by them during
Bonnets absence, they be remanded back unto the said Province of Poictou, who
shall judge definitively herein, and the next Synod of Xaintonge shall come to
an account with the Church of Saujon, and pay them all their charges which are
in justice due unto them, without expecting the Declaration of that final
Judgment, which was before mentioned.

10. The Church of Belin having appealed from a Decree of the Synod of
Britain, which had ordained the said Church to reimburse Monsieur de la Place
Pastor of the Church of Sion, a certain sum of moneys owing by them unto
Monsieur Aveline his Father-in-Law deceased: The whole business was dismissed
over to the Consistory of this Church of Vitre, because it was not of that
nature or moment as to be brought hither, or determined by these Assemblies.

11. The Appeal of the Church of Beziers from a Decree of the Synod of Lower
Languedoc, which had refused to give them two supernumerary portions, is
rejected; because the said Church neither sent any Memoirs about it, nor any
one to report the true Causes of their said Appeal.

12. The Appeal of the Church of Genouillac from a Judgment of the Synod of
Lower Languedoc is also rejected and declared null, because they sent not any
Memoir about it: and the Reverend and Learned Monsieur De Croy is confirmed in
the Pastoral Office of the Church of Beziers.

13. Whereas the Lord of Soubeyran, Consul of the City of Aimargues, and
certain Inhabitants of the said City have appealed unto this present Assembly
from the Synod of Lower Languedoc, which had confirmed Monsieur Boulet in the
Pastoral Office of their Church, and had refused to restore unto them Monsieur
Laurent; neither of those persons having appeared for them, nor having sent any
Memoirs unto the National Synod, they were declared to be fallen from their
Appeal, and to have lost all benefit and advantage by it; and the Judgment of
the Provincial Synod was now ratified, and the rather, because the Elder of the
said Church yielded his consent unto it in the name of the Consistory, and
farther declared, that the Ministry of the said Monsieur Boulet was exceeding
edifying and successful, and very acceptable unto the whole Church. Wherefore
the Colloquy of Nismes is charged to pursue the opposers of Monsieur Boulet's
Ministry and settlement there, with all Church Censures.

14. The Church of Privas appealed from a Decree of the Synod of Vivaretz,
Privas Art. 10. of Colleges.
which had transferred their College, settled in their Town, and confirmed by
the National Synod there in the year 1612. unto the Churches of Aubenas and
Annonay: but they not appearing about it, nor sending any Memoirs unto this
Assembly, the said Appeal was laid by until the next National Synod.

15. Another Appeal of the same Church of Privas, which was brought in from a
Judgment of the Synod of Vivaretz, that had injoined them to pay unto the Widow
of Monsieur Valeton deceased, the remainder of his Wages due unto him, as also
what he had disbursed out of his own pocket for their service, was declared
null, and the Judgment of that Synod ratified.

16. The Judgment of the Synod of Burgundy declaring, that the Church of Mascon
could not lay any claim of right unto the Ministry of Monsieur de la Cost,
Pastor of the Church of Dijon, was approved, and the Appeal of the Church of
Mascon made void, and the said Sieur de la Cost is confirmed in his Ministry
to the Church of Dijon.

17. Monsieur de St. Stephens presented Memoirs from the Church of Cailla,
appealing from a Decree of the Synod of Lower Languedoc, and offering several
reasons for their Appeal, demonstrating the singular benefit their Church would
receive by the Ministry of Monsieur de Gassaigne, and petitioned this Assembly
to bestow him upon them; and to remove the Sieur Terond unto the service of
some other Church. The Deputies of the said Province having been heard speaking
for it; the Appeal of the Church of Cailla was judged not receivable, and
Monsieur Terond was confirmed in his Ministry among them upon those conditions
expressed in their Synodical Decree, and the said Judgment is the rather
confirmed, because the Church of Manacelles will not consent that the said de
Gaissaigne their Pastor should be taken from them.

18. The Appeal of the Church de la Mote from the Judgment of the Province of
Poictou was not received, because the matter of it might be finally determined
at home in their own Province, and for that the Church had not sent any person
nor Memoirs to maintain and prosecute this their Appeal.

19. Samuel du Fresnay, Student in Divinity, appealed from the Decree of the
Synod of Normandy held at Falaise in April sixteen hundred and sixteen, by
which he was suspended the Lord's Supper; and because they had ordained his
suspension to be published unto the Congregation, and lastly for that they had
threatened him with Excommunication out of the Church, for Errors in point of
Doctrine maintained by him quite contrary to his promise made of abjuring them,
and that he would never any more vend and utter them, cither by word or
writing. He appearing personally in this Assembly, was heard speak for himself,
as also the Deputies of the Province on behalf of their Synod: And this affair
after a full hearing of both the Parties being found to be of very great
Importance, the Sieurs Josion, Montdenys, Courant, Chambrun, and Chamvernon,
Pastors, were Commissionated to examine the said du Fresnay, and to inform him
of the matters reported, and to bring in their report of the whole unto this
Assembly. Since that, the said Commissioners having informed us, that they had
heard, and convinced him by the word of God, of Errors against the Article of
Christ's last coming unto judgment, this Synod did give him another hearing,
and convicted him of that, and diverse other opinions, shaking the very
foundation of our Christian Doctrine, and he obstinately persisting in those
his Errors, and refusing to give glory unto God by abjuring of them: This
Assembly approving all former actings and proceedings against him, and of that
Sentence past upon him in the Synod of Normandy, and as yet respiting their own
judgment concerning him, do give him the space of four days seriously to
consider of those Instructions which have been now afforded him: and that time
expired, the said Du Fresne presented himself before us, and did by word of
mouth, and under his own handwriting declare, that he renounced all those
aforesaid Erroneous Tenants asserted by him, and that he was very much
displeased with himself to have believed and published them, and that he
desires to live and die in the purity of God's holy word taught in the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom. Upon which Declaration the Synod praised God
for his acceptance of them, and their poor endeavors, and received the said du
Fresne unto the Peace of the Church, and did immediately take off his Consure,
and ordered all his Writings, which were brought hither, together with his
Retractation, should be deposited in the hands of Monsieur Rivet our Moderator
and Pastor of the Church of Touars; and though it does not deprive him of his
hopes to continue his studies in Divinity, yet it does not judge expedient that
he be called out unto the Ministry till the sitting of the next National Synod,
in which he shall produce good and valuable Attestations from the places and
Universities in which he shall make his abode, how much he has profited by
those Instructions given him, and in case he ratify his present protestations
made in this Assembly (who are Ear-Witnesses of them) by his after actions and
Conversation, then we do ordain, that out of the common Fund of the Churches
moneys, the Lord du Candal, our Receivor General, shall put into the hands of
the Consistory of the Church of Saumur, the sum of two hundred Livers, to
defray his expenses in that City, and for every year henceforward the sum of
one hundred and fifty Livers, until the sitting of the next National Synod, and
this for to support and encourage him in his Studies, either at Geneva, Saumur,
or any other of our Universities in this Kingdom.

20. The Appeal of Monsieur de Bedaride, from a Decree of the Provincial Synod
of Dolphiny, is dismissed over unto the next Synod of Lower Languedoc, unto
which the Sieurs Bedaride, and Maurice, who was formerly Pastor of the Church
of Orange, and at present of that of Aiguieres in Provence, shall give their
personal presence, that they may be heard on those matters they have to offer,
and that Synod shall, by the Authority of this Assembly, make a final
determination of that affair, as also of that Complaint of Monsieur Julian the
Elder against Monsieur Maurice; and those several Parties shall not be suffered
in any wise to produce any Processes but what are purely Ecclesiastical.

21. Master Paul Maurice Pastor of the Church of Aiguieres in Provence,
appealed from a Decree of the Synod of Dolphiny, which had disannulled the
promise made by the Colloquy of Valentinois unto the said Maurice, for
receiving his Son into the Catalogue of Scholars, Pensioners in the said
Colloquy. This Assembly ordains that the Canon made by the Province of
Dolphiny, about the reception of Scholars Pensioners, shall for the future be
observed, and the Son of the said Maurice shall have the reversion of the next
Pension for a young Scholar, in whatsoever Colloquy of the said Province it
becomes Vacant.

22. The appeal of the Church of Breau and Aulais, from the Decree of the
Provincial Synod of Sevennes, is declared null, and the judgment of the said
Synod is confirmed.

23. The Church of Quissac appealing from the Synod of Sevennes, their Appeal
is declared null, because they sent no Memoirs concerning it unto this
Assembly: and therefore the judicial Sentence of the said Synod was ordered to
be put in Execution.

24. The Church of Rochecouart was heard in their Appeal from the Decree of the
Synod of Poictou, and the Deputies of that Church were told, that the Synodical
Decree against them was confirmed, and the Pastors of Rochebeaucourt and
Vertueil, and Monsieur Peterin an Elder deputed unto this Assembly from the
Province of Xaintonge, were ordered out of hand to go unto the said Church of
Rochecouart, and to use their best endeavor to appease the differences in it,
and to reunite its divided Members, and to desire Monsieur Fourgaud, their
Pastor, to divest himself of the burden of his Pastoral Office in it, we
granting him, in consideration of his great and continual Maladies, that he
shall be Emeritus, and only preach unto them, when his own conveniences and
health may permit him.

25. That Appeal of the Church of Tours, from the judgment of the Province of
Anjou, was dismissed over to the Synod of Poictou, who shall put a final Period
to it, by the Authority of this Assembly.

26. The Appeal of the Church of Vsez, from the judgment of the Synod of Lower
Languedoc, is declared null, and the Ministry of Monsieur Fauchet is confirmed
in the Church and University of Nismes.

27. The Church of Aulais appealed from a judgment of the Synod of Sevennes,
and sent Letters and Memoirs about it unto this Assembly, which accepted of
their Appeal against the Decree of the said Synod, and declared, That the
Church of Another Copy has B^^^ize, another B^^^ez, and another B^u^ezz.
Brunize shall be for the future annexed unto that of Aulais, according to their
own desire, and request, unto this Assembly, by their Letters written to us.

28. Monsieur Banconis, Pastor of the Church of Tonneins, appealed from the
judgment of the Synod of Lower Guyenne, for that they had dismissed Monsieur
Marmett from being their Minister, and had fixed him in the Pastoral Charge of
the Church, gathered in the House of that most Illustrious Prince the Lord Duke
of Rohan. But this Assembly declared, that the Appeal ought not to be admitted
by them, because that very Synod has full power finally to determine of this
affair, and does therefore ratify this Synodical Decree.

29. The Sieur Colinet, Pastor of the Church of Paray, having appealed from the
judgment of the Synod of Burgundy, which had ordained, that he and Monsieur
Gravier his Colleague, should serve the Church of Bourbon, their Appeal was
declared null and void, because he neither sent Letters nor Memoirs about it
unto this Assembly.

30. The Sieurs Charon, la Fosse, and Gillet, appealing from the Synod of Lower
Guyenne, for restoring Monsieur de Puch unto his Office of Elder in the Church
of Bergerac, were never to be regarded in their Appeal; because they had not
sent any Memoirs or Letters concerning it unto this Assembly.

31. The Church of Maringues appealed from the judgment of the Province of
Burgundy, which had given Monsieur Chesneau their Pastor from them unto the
Church of Soubize in Xaintonge; but they afterward disclaimed and quitted their
Appeal, insisting only to be reimburst of their Charges expended by them in
bringing the said Chesneau, and his Books, from Geneva to Maringues, and
settling him among them; and also, that their other Expenses in getting and
settling among them Monsieur Tonnel instead of Monsieur Chesneau, according as
the Lord des Brosses, Elder of the Church in Soubize, had offered, and stood
bound for it unto the Synod of Burgundy, might be paid in unto them. This
Assembly having seen the account of the said Charges amounting to the sum of
two hundred and eight Livers, nineteen Sous; and that Article of the Synod of
Burgundy relating to it, has ordained, that there shall be presently taken two
hundred and eight Livers, nineteen Sous, out of the moneys belonging to the
Province of Xaintonge, and put into the hands of the Deputies of Burgundy, who
also on their part shall pay unto the said Monsieur Chesneau, the Arrears of
his Salary due unto him, as appears by a Schedule now tendered by the Elders of
the said Church of Maringues, and since granted, by him, unto a certain
particular Friend of his; and the Province of Xaintonge may redemand the said
sum from the Church of Soubize.

32. The Appeal of Monsieur Roussell from the Sentence of the Synod of
Dolphiny, held at Nions in April 1617. obliging the said Roussell to live in
that Province, was declared null, because he had neither sent any Letters or
Memoires about it unto this Assembly.

33. The like Judgment was past upon the Appeal of Monsieur Videl, acting for
the Sieur Bouyer, from a Decree of the same Synod.

34. The Church of Vitre appealed from a Judgment of the Province of Britain,
by which an hundred Livers were taken out of the four hundred granted to their
College, and given to the maintenance of a small School in the Church of
Viellevigne. This Assembly ordains, that the sole right of having a College
shall belong to the Church of Vitre, and they shall be fully paid their four
hundred Livers. Tonneins of Univers. Art. 11.
And the Province shall out of the supernumerary Portions, attributed to it,
assign an hundred Livers unto the Church of Viellevigne, and continue the
payment thereof for the maintenance of a School there. And whereas the College
of Vitre has not had any Exhibition to this very day, this Assembly will pass
a special Order, which shall for the future be observed by the Province of
Britain, as to this concern.

35. The Sieur Soubyran, Consul of the City of Aimargues, Above Art. 13.
together with diverse Inhabitants thereof, Appealed unto this Assembly by
Letters and Memoires, which were delivered by the Sieur Margaret, for that the
Synod of Lower Languedoc had confirmed Monsieur Boulet in the Ministry and
Pastoral Office of the said Church of Aymargues; and required that Monsieur
Laurent, who had been removed from them by the said Synod might be restored: On
the other side the Consistory of the said Church petitioned by Letters and
Memoires sent by the Sieur Tarascon one of their Elders; that the Judgment of
the said Synod might be confirmed. After a serious Debate of the whole affair,
and hearing the Deputies of Lower Languedoc; it was declared, that the Appeal
of the Sieur Soubyran, and the other Syndics with him, could not be approved,
and that the judgment of the Synod should be fully executed, and the Ministry
of Monsieur Laurent confirmed in the Church of Bernixy. And it being apparent
by what has been brought before this Assembly, that there be very great
divisions in the Church of Aymargues, the Assembly ordered the Sieurs Josyon,
Joly, and the Baron of Montbrun, and de la Viale, Deputies of the Higher
Languedoc, as they return to their respective Churches to pass over unto
Aymargues, and to use their utmost care, diligence and prudence to heal their
breaches, and to reunite the divided Members of that Church, and to procure and
settle Peace in it, and to prosecute those contumacious Persons who rebel
against the Government of our Churches, and of that particular Church of
Aimargues, with all Ecclesiastical Censures.

CHAP. VII. A Speech made unto the King by the Deputies of the National Synod
of the Reformed Churches in France, together with his Majesty's Answer to it,
the 27th of May, 1617.
THE National Synod held at Vitre, in the Province of Britain, having deputed
unto his Majesty Messieurs Peter Hesperian, Pastor of the Church of St. Foy in
the Lower Guienne; Denis de Bouteroue, Pastor of the Church at Grenoble in
Dolphiny; Albert de Mars, Esquire Lord of Balene, Elder of the Church at Maringues
in the Upper Auvergne, and William Gerard Esquire Lord of Moussac, Elder in the
Church of Moussac, and Province of Lower Languedoc: they were admitted into his
Majesty's presence the 27th day of the same Month, and the said Mr. Hesperian
did express himself in these words unto the King.

SIRE,
THere be now prostrate at your Majesty's Feet, in our Persons, all your
Subjects professing the Reformed Religion, represented by the National Synod,
Assembled by your gracious Permission, and under your Royal Authority, in your
City of Vitre, who have deputed us unto your Majesty, to testify unto your
Majesty the extraordinary joys and thankfullness of your said Subjects, both to
our God and your Majesty, for that the Kingdom is in Peace, your Authority in
great Splendor, and your Sacred Person at full Liberty; and this by that wise
and generous resolution, which you have undertook and executed by a just
punishment of the grand Disturber of your Kingdom, and Oppressor of your
Authority, and which was worst of all, of one, who had exposed your Sacred
Person to the most imminent and apparent dangers.

This Action of your Majesty was altogether extraordinary, it was an Enterprise
purely divine and miraculous; for it turned in a moment the storm into a calm,
Wars into Peace, our frights into assurance, our perils into security, and
tyranny into a most rightful and righteous Government. At this instant, as if
your Sacred Majesty were now come unto the Crown, France knows that it has a
King, and the whole World, That the King of France is most worthy to reign and
govern.

At this instant that your Majesty holds the Reins of Government in your own
hands, all your Subjects do render that most humble obedience and subjection
which is due unto you, and particularly those of the Reformed Religion, who are
most ready and willing to hazard and adventure their Estates, their Honors,
and their very Lives for your Majesty's Service.

And in truth, Sire, this Assembly which has deputed us unto your Majesty, was
no sooner formed, but that it did most solemnly protest and swear, as we also
are charged in the name and behalf of all the Churches Reformed in your Kingdom
now to protest and swear, that we will never depart from that most humble
obedience, and most faithful service, which as your true, liege, and natural
born Subjects, is our bounden duty unto your Majesty.

And we feel and know, that we are indispensably obliged to it by those
numberless favors and benefits, which we received from Henry the Great, our
late King, and your Majesty's Father of most glorious Memory, and by those
continued to us by your Majesty, and which we hope shall be still vouchsafed
us, because we believe that the maintenance of your Authority is our Security,
and the firmness of your Crown that of our repose and safety. But yet there is
another Bond and Obligation stronger than all these upon us, even that of our
Conscience and Religion, which from the divinely inspired Scriptures are taught
and instructed to subject our selves unto the higher Powers, and that to resist
them is to resist the Ordinance of God, who we know has exalted your Majesty
unto the Throne, put the Crown upon your Head, the Scepter into your Hand, and
all Heroic Virtues into your Royal Heart. And therefore, Sire, next and after
our God, we do acknowledge your Majesty to be our only Sovereign: And it is an
Article of our Creed, that there is no middle Power between God and the Kings.
It Is with us reputed a most damnable Heresy to call this truth in question, and
to turn it into disputation is a capital Crime to be punished by the Judges.
This Lesson, Sire, we learnt of our Predecessors; this we believe and publish
in all places, and this Doctrine we preach from our Pulpits in our Churches,
and teach from the Press unto the World; and we will live in it, Sire, that our
Posterity after us may learn and practice it by our Example.

Therefore is it, that we hope your Majesty, crediting and considing in our
immovable Loyalty, will be pleased to continue to us the benefits of your
Edicts, and that your Royal Ears will be open to our Complaints and Grievances,
and that holding the Balance steady and right, you will do us upon all
occasions right and justice: By which your Majesty will the more confirm us in
our unchangeable purpose and resolution to live and die in the quality of your
most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subjects and Servants.

Monsieur Hesperian having finished his Speech, his Majesty returned this
Answer: Do you continue to serve me faithfully, and you may be well assured,
that I will be a good and kind King unto you, and that I will preserve you
according to my Edicts. And taking from him the Letter which the Synod had
written him, he gave it to Monsieur de Pontchartrain, commanding him to read
it, and return an Answer to it.

Printed by Abraham Saugrain living in St. James his Street, over against the
three Sawcers, according to the License given the 16th of June 1617. and Signed
by H. de Mesmes.

CHAP. VIII. General Matters.
1. THE Motion of Lower Languedoc, 1 Paris 38.
for certain new Canons about Divorces, was not accepted.

2. This Assembly Ordained, at the request of the same Province, Figeac 8.
that such Parents who choose for their Childrens Baptism Sureties of the Romish
Religion, though they appear not in Person, but by their Proxies of the
Reformed Religion, shall be prosecuted, both Parents and Proxies, with all
Church Censures.

3. Notice shall be given in all our Churches, to take special heed, Saumur
Obs. 11.
that they give no Attestation unto the Moors (banished out of Spain, and who
wander from one Church to another) till they be very well satisfied of their
Religion, and religious Conversation; and such as have been already received,
and make their abode in any of our Churches, shall be once more examined with
all possible care, as to their Faith, and Knowledge, and Life, and in all
Attestations that shall be given them, express mention shall be made of their
having been baptized, and of the number of their Children.

4. The Deputies of Xaintonge moved, Li^^s p. ni. 30.
whether Moors and other Infidels, that were brought away by pure force out of
their Native Country into Christendom, and baptized by Popish Priests, without
any previous Instructions in the Doctrines of Christian Religion, ought to be
Rebaptized, they having been since duly Catechized by our Protestant Ministers.
This Assembly, though it acknowledges abundance of defaults in their Baptism,
does yet notwithstanding hold, that such persons ought not to be rebaptized.
And therefore those Churches unto whom these poor Wretches be presented, are
advised to take all possible care, that they be well principled in the Faith of
our Lord Jesus.

5. At the request of the Provincial Deputies of Anjou, Saumur g. m. 2^. Alez.
g. m. 1.
and of the Isle of France. This Assembly ordained, that the Decree of the
National Synod of Saumur shall be still in force, which was couched in these
words, That although by reason of the present necessity of these times in which
we now live, Pastors are permitted to be sent Deputies unto these Political
Assemblies, in which affairs, relating to the Churches preservation, are
treated and debated: Yet our Provincial and general civil Assemblies are
earnestly requested to discharge and dismiss all Pastors from Deputations unto
Court, and this at the desire of several Provinces.

6. At the request of the Province of Berry all the Provinces are enjoined to
extend their Equity and Charity toward the poorer Churches, Gergeau. p. m. 39.
in their distributions of the Kings money, and in their allowances for
expenses in travel unto the general Assemblies, whether they be Political or
Ecclesiastical.

7. The Deputies of Burgundy demanded whether a Patron might with a good
Conscience sell away his right of Presentation unto any Rectory or Benefice, 1
Vitre g. m. 15.
provided he dispose of those moneys unto pious uses. It was answered, that he
might warrantably do it. For it was thus decreed in the National Synod of
Vitre, in the year 1583.

8. The same Province of Burgundy demanded that a special Canon might be made
for direction how we should receive, 3 of R^chel g. m. 16 Below Art. 19.
and what maintenance we should exhibit unto Monks, who come unto us from
foreign parts. Order was given unto the Provinces where such Fellows first
come, to examine them most strictly, and to see whether they be fit for the
study of Divinity, that so they may be supplied with maintenance accordingly,
or to employ them in other Callings according to their Capacities; and the said
Provinces shall give account of them unto the National Synods, that they may
dispose of them as of their own Peculiar.

9. The Province of Higher Languedoc moving it, F^^lli^rs Obs. 14.
all the Churches are injoined to suppress, with the greatest care imaginable,
all manner of Insolences, such as they call Charivary's Redemptions of
Marriage, and the like: and they, who after admonitions prove incorrigible,
shall be prosecuted with all Ecclesiastical Censures; and Magistrates
professing the reformed Religion are entreated to exert their Authority, so as
to hinder or punish such Scandals.

10. The Deputies of the said Province demanding, Gap Obs. 9. upon the former
Synod.
that Ministers ordained abroad, without the Kingdom, might not be permitted to
exercise their Ministry in our Churches at home, without subjecting their
Testimonials unto the Examination of Colloquies, or Provincial Synods. The
Assembly ordered, that all the Provinces should yield exact Conformity unto the
ninth Article of Observations upon the Discipline made by the Synod of Gap on
that of Gergeau.

11. At the request of the forementioned Deputies, the Professors in our
Universities are ordered not to be too easy in giving their Testimonials unto
Scholars, but first of all carefully to examine their parts, proficiency, and
conversations, and according to the progress they have made in Humanity, St.
Maixant g. m. 30. and of Univers. 8. Alez. g. m. 6.1 Paris 13.
Philosophy, and Divinity, and as they shall merit, to give them their
Attestations.

12. On a Remonstrance exhibited by the Deputies of Normandy, it is ordained,
that if a Pastor have given his Ministry unto any one particular Church, he
shall not leave it at his pleasure, but shall first demand and obtain the
advice and consent of his Colloquy, or Provincial Synod in the matter, and in
case they judge of its expediency, he may remove.

13. This Assembly ordains, St. Foy 7.
that Catechizing be more frequently used in all our Churches than ever, and
that the manner of expounding it, whether Sermon-wise, or by Questions and
Answers, is wholly left to the prudence of the respective Consistories, who are
to consider of the capacities and apprehensions of the Children in their
Churches.

14. Forasmuch as diverse notable errors have been met withal in the Impressions
of whole Bibles, and of the New Testament singly, and of the Psalm-Books; The
Consistories of those Churches, which have a Printing Press belonging to them,
are injoined to look carefully to it, that their Printers have good Overseers
and Correctors of the Press, and that they Print with a fair Character, and a
good Paper: And particularly the Pastors of the Church of Montauban are charged
to call in all the Copies of the New Testament, Printed in their City, in
Octavo, and to suppress them, because of the many and frequent faults in that
Impression, which quite alter and pervert the sense, and because of the evil
Consequence, if that Impression should be vended; and in answering the Letters
of our Brethren the Pastors and Professors in the City and University of
Geneva, this Clause shall be inserted, that we earnestly desire them to over
see the Impressions of the Holy Bible, of the New Testaments, and Psalm Books,
that they may for the future be more correct than heretofore.

15. The Deputies of the Isle of France demanding that the second part of the
fifth Canon in the sixth Chapter of the Discipline might be a little qualified;
Saumur g. m 8.
This Assembly did not think fit to make any alteration in it: but exhorts
Consistories, Colloquies, and Synods, to use it unto Godly Edifying.

16. The Deputies of Anjou and Poictou remonstrating how exceeding needful it
is, Figeac 51 Alez Obs. 4. upon this Syn.
that our Universities should be supplied with able Professors in Divinity:
This Assembly exhorts the Provinces to come prepared for this Debate unto the
next National Synod, and in the mean while to consider how to raise a Fund for
the maintenance of some Scholars of great parts and hopes, who may be wholly
destinated unto this work, or to find out some better expedient, if they can.

17. Complaints coming to us from diverse hands, Alez. Obs. 5. upon this Syn.
that the Pensions paid by Scholars in the University of Saumur, are so very
high, and the expense so exceeding great, that many cannot, and others will not
send their Children to it. This Assembly charge Monsieur Rivet, Lanusse, and
de la Pilletierre, that in their way homeward to their respective Provinces,
they do visit the University Council of Saumur, and report unto them these
Complaints, and to assure them, that in case they do not take some effectual
course for moderating those excessive rates for lodging, diet, and washing, the
next National Synod will advise about it; and transfer the said University to a
cheaper and more convenient place.

18. The Deputies of Bearn brought with them a History of our Martyrs collected
by that Province in the year fifteen hundred sixty and nine. This Assembly
ordained, that it be sent unto Monsieur Goulark Pastor of Geneva, that it may
be added to the next Impression of our Martyrology.

19. For the right understanding of those Canons made by the Synods of Rochel,
in the year sixteen hundred and seven, and at Tonneins in the year sixteen
hundred and fourteen, Above Art. 8.
concerning a fixed Rule about the quota to be exhibited unto Monks for the
defraying of their expenses, who abandoning their Convents do come and embrace
the Protestant Religion, and live in Communion with our Churches: This Assembly
ordains, that for the future the Churches and Provinces which first received
them, shall not have any power to redemand the charges they have been at about
them from those Provinces in which they were born.

Mentauban Obs. 9. Alez. Obs.
20. Forasmuch as the nine and twentieth Canon in the fifth Chapter of our
Church Discipline had ordained, that if any persons, professing the Protestant
Religion, should cite their Pastors, or Elders, or the whole Consistory before
the Civil Magistrate, to enforce them to bear witness against Delinquents, who
had confessed their faults before them, that they should be prosecuted with all
Church Censures, yea even as far as Excommunication. This Assembly does farther
injoin all the Churches to prosecute such persons with the very self-same
Censures, who that they may avoid the Censures of their Consistories, do arm
themselves with Prohibitions from the Civil Magistrate, although the matters
for which they be censured are purely Ecclesiastical, and not belonging to the
Civil Tribunal or Jurisdiction.

21. All Ministers are forbidden to vent in the Pulpit their private Sentiments
of State Affairs, St. Foy 26. Alez. Obs. 5. upon this Syn.
it being contrary to the Resolutions taken up in our general Assemblies. And
Consistories, Colloquies, and Provincial Synods, are injoined to have a
watchful Eye over such Pastors as so do, and to inflict upon them all the
Censures of the Church, yea and to suspend them from the Ministry; and the same
punishment shall be also laid on them who in their public Sermons do clash one
against another upon these matters.

Privas Obs. 5. upon the former Synod.
22. The Deputies of Anjou demanded at what time Monks who are lately converted
from Popery unto the truth of the Gospel, might be admitted to make their
public abjuration. Answer was given by this Assembly, that it was left wholly
to the Wisdom of the Consistory to act therein, according as they found such
persons to have grown in Grace, and in the knowledge of God's Truth.

Tonneins Obs. 4. on the former Synod.
21. The Sieur de la Viale, one of the Deputies of Higher Languedoc, presented
unto this Assembly Letters from Monsieur Chamier, Pastor and Professor of
Divinity at Montauban, by which he informed us of the progress made by him in
his body of Controversies, which he undertook at the entreaty of the last
National Synod held at Rochell, and that there were three Volumes ready and
fitted for the Press, the heads and matters of which were included in a
particular Memorial, that was also tendered by him. The Assembly ordered their
thanks to be returned him for his great and worthy labors, and that the two
thousand Livers which had been formerly promised him by the Synod of Privas,
should be kept by him as an encouragement for his travail, and to help defray
his charges: and that the Church of God may be no longer deprived of his most
singular and fruitful Labors, whose publication it has most ardently desired
these many years; The Consistories of Paris and Lions are ordered to treat with
the Printers and Booksellers of their Cities, and with those of Geneva, or with
their Company, who deal in such matters, to undertake the Impression of these
three Volumes without delay, and to get them Printed either in Germany or
Geneva; and in case they should demand moneys to be paid them in before hand,
they may oblige themselves to advance three thousand Livers, deposited for this
purpose with the Lord of Candal, unto those that will engage to finish the said
Impression, provided, that as soon as it is finished, they do cause to be
delivered into those aforementioned Consistories of Paris and Lions, according
to the Articles Covenanted between them, so many entire and perfect Books, as
will satisfy the aforesaid sum of three thousand Livers already received by
them, at the rate of four deniers per sheet. And these Books lodged in the
hands of those two Consistories shall be sold unto the Pastors of our Churches
at a very moderate price; reserving always twelve complete Copies to be
presented unto their Reverend and Learned Author, free of all costs and charges
whatsoever. And farther those Consistories beforementioned shall be
accountable unto another National Synod for their receipt and disbursement of
the sum aforesaid, and of the Books received and sold by them. And that this
Excellent Work of Monsieur Chamier may be the sooner finished and wrought off
at the Press, he is entreated to send speedily unto the abovementioned
Consistories, the Titles of his Works, the number of Quires, and of Folio's in
each Quire, together with one Folio-leaf of the same fairly written, that so an
estimate may be made of the bulk of the whole. And these two Consistories
having perused it, they shall consult together about the best and most
advantaglous terms they can agree on with the Printers, which being signed,
notice thereof shall be given unto Monsieur Chamier, with their request, that
he would be pleased to send his Manuscript Copy unto such a place as they shall
appoint him, at the charges of the Undertaker, who shall be reimburst, by
deducting such a number of Books, at the rates before contracted for, as his
charges amounted to in fetching the said Original Papers from their Reverend
Author. And the said Printers shall be obliged to work off the whole Impression
within the space of one year at the farthest, from the date of the Contract
made with them.

24. In pursuance of this Order for Printing those worthy Labors of the most
Reverend Chamier, Thomas Portau a Printer, living at Saumur, appeared in Person
before this Assembly, and offered those terms unto it, which were accepted.
Whereupon the Consistory of Saumur were charged to contract with him, taking
therein the advice of the Lord du Plessis their Governor, and of Monsieur
Rivet Pastor of the Church of Touars; and Monsieur Chamier shall be entreated
to deliver unto the said Portau his Manuscript Copy, who on notice given him
shall wait upon him for it, and at his own charges: And besides this Article,
there shall be added these ensuing Conditions unto the Contract, stipulated
with him, that he shall finish the Impression of these three Books against the
next Mart of Franckfort, and that he shall bring them to the place appointed
before the next Easter at the farthest, that he shall print them on fair and
large Paper, which will hold ink without washing, such as that on which the
Lord du Plessis his Book of the Eucharist was Printed, with as large a Margent,
and weighing fifteen pounds a Ream, or there away; that the Character shall be
such as that Little Cicero Printed by Colomies; that the Letters shall be new
founded with which he begins the work, and to be renewed in the progress
thereof, in case occasion do require it, and that the Consistory, contracting
with him, do judge it needful; that the stamps for the Latin, Greek and Hebrew
Quotations shall be all new and proportionable to the Work, that the Books,
which according to the beforementioned Articles and Conditions he is to render
unto the Churches, shall be kept at Saumar, there to be sold, and a part of
them shall be sent by the said Portau to Lions and Rochell, and all of them
delivered unto the respective Consistories of those Churches, who shall take
care for their being distributed abroad among our Ministers. And in case
Monsieur Chamier shall not deliver his Copy unto the said Fortau, then the
Consistory of Paris is ordered to divide equally the three thousand Livers,
remaining in the hands of the Lord du Candal, and to send the respective
dividend thereof unto the Provinces to whom it does belong.

25. This Synod received Letters from the Gentlemen deputed by the Provinces
unto the Assembly at Rochell, and Monsieur Preau, Pastor of the Church of Vitre
Commissionated by them, reported their unanimous intentions and resolutions to
live and die in the Union sworn by all the Churches, for which he was ordered
to render them the hearty thanks of this Synod, and to assure them that we
never had, nor will ever have any other end or aim, than firmly and inviolably
to secure and promote this holy Union. And as touching that particular reported
by the said Du Preau unto this Synod, by word of mouth, and by Letters from the
said Assembly, how that the necessities of the day obliging them to send
several Deputations unto Court, and elsewhere, whilst the six Provinces met,
and since all the others have joined them, they were forced to borrow in one
place five hundred Livers, and in another place two thousand Livers more, to
defray their charges, and there will be a want of five hundred Livers more to
make another, and their last Deputation unto Court, which they shall be
constrained also to take up at Interest; For the payment of which sums the
Deputies aforesaid, have, by an Act which was here presented us, bound and
obliged the moneys given us by the Kings Liberality for the maintenance of our
Ministers. This Assembly gives those Deputies to understand, that the disposal
of this money is wholly and solely in the power of our National Synods, and of
this in particular, and that not a penny of it can be disposed of by any
Political Assembly whatsoever; yet notwithstanding (for some special reasons in
this juncture, and not intending hereby to make a precedent of it for the
future) the Lord du Candal is ordered to pay unto the said Deputies the sum of
three thousand Livers, and this only by way of Loan, that so their expenses may
be cleared of: And whereas the six Provinces have borrowed five hundred Livers,
this Synod can do nothing in it, because it was employed on a private concern
of the City of Rochell, and by parity of reason, the other Provinces might as
well demand a reimbursement of their charges also, expended by them on the like
occasions. And our Lords, the General Deputies, are entreated most humbly to
Petition his Majesty, that the said three thousand Livers may be returned us
again, and distributed among our Churches. Since this, the said Deputies
assembled at Rochell, have writ unto this Synod by the Lord of Cusonnel, Deputy
for Vivaretz, that now they had no need of the said sum of four thousand Livers
demanded by them before. Whereupon advice was given to the Lord of Candal, to
furnish them only with two thousand one hundred Livers.

26. Monsieur du Preau did also represent the distressed estate of the City and
Church of Sancerre, See below g.m. 37.
who by reason of their past sufferings, and to secure the possession of this
Cautionary Town, were well-near undone, having borrowed so much moneys, and
Mortgaged their Estates for the payment thereof, that without considerable
assistance and relief from the Churches, they shall never be able to pay their
Debts, nor to free their Estates from those great Encumbrances. The same also
was attested by Letters from the Lord Baron of Belette, and by the Deputies of
Berry. This Assembly considering that all the Churches are concerned in the
preservation of this important place, exhorts those Provinces which have not
as yet charitably contributed toward their relief, to do it out of hand, and
to remit the moneys Collected by them unto the Consistory of the said Church.
And our General Deputies are requested to have an extraordinary care of that
City for the future.

27. The same Monsieur du Preau complained to us from the Deputies, in the
Assembly at Rochell, that Monsieur du Crest, Pastor of the Church of Manosques
in Provence, did together with his Church and Consistory, oppose the Election
of the Lord Baron of Semis, and of Monsieur Huron, a Pastor, to be Deputies
unto the said Assembly. Whereupon an Order past, that those Pastors and Elders
which were authorized by this Synod, viz. the Deputies of Lower Languedoc, to
take cognizance of those many and great differences which are fallen out in the
Province of Provence, should also examine this matter, and inflict such
Censures as the Authors and Partners in these Divisions have incurred and
deserved.

28. Moreover Monsieur de Preau informed us of the deplorable Estate of the
Churches in Auvergne, which Information was confirmed by Monsieur Babat, Pastor
in the Church of Issoyre, who came from them. This Synod having heard them
both, and perused the Letters sent from the Assembly at Rochell, and those from
the Consistory of Issoyre, and from the Lord Viscount of La Roche Courtan, all
advising us or the most miserable Condition of those poor and persecuted
Churches; It does ordain, that whereas the Deputies of the Provinces assembled
at Rochell have recommended this affair unto our Lords the General Deputies,
the Synod will in a more special manner take care of this, and be more
concerned for it than for any other, and will Petition his Majesty, that
Commissioners may be dispatched thither out of hand to cause the persecutions
to cease, and that satisfaction may be given unto our poor Brethren, who have
been so barbarously and cruelly tormented, and that his Majesty's Edicts may be
vigorously and faithfully put in execution. And forasmuch as the Deputies of
Sevennes, and the said Babat, have urged the necessity of settling two Pastors
in those Churches aforesaid; this Synod ordains, that the Province of
Sevennes, shall provide two Pastors for them, to be sent unto them immediately,
one of which shall reside in the Town of Issoyre, and the other shall serve the
Churches of the Mountain, according as it shall be prescribed them by the said
Province. And that those two Pastors may have a comfortable maintenance, this
Synod, continuing the Decree of the former National Synods, which had appointed
four Portions, free of all charges, for those Churches of the Upper Auvergne,
does add a fifth for their Encouragement. Which five Portions shall be received
by the said Province, and paid into the very hands of those Pastors, to each of
them the sum of five hundred Livers. And the remaining Portions shall be
distributed, by those Provinces, toward the necessities of those said
Churches, and all this to be duly and continually performed until the meeting
of the next National Synod. Below p. m. 25. Alez. p. m. 20.
And in the mean while the respective Members of those Churches shall be
pressed to contribute toward the maintenance of their Pastors, and they shall
give an account of their duty herein unto the next National Synod. And whereas
the said Monsieur Babat requests that he may be discharged from the service of
those Churches, he was ordered to continue the exercise of his Ministry among
them until the meeting of the approaching Synod of Sevennes, by which, in case
he then desire it, he may be set at liberty, and another substituted in his
place. However, till the sitting of that Provincial Synod, the said Babat shall
wholly serve the Town Issoyre as its proper Pastor, and the Colloquy of St.
Germain shall give another Pastor to supply the Churches of the Mountain. And
forasmuch as the said Babat has been at great expenses in traveling unto this
Synod, and to the Assembly of Rochell, the Lord of Candal is ordered to pay him
an hundred Livers out of the mass of moneys belonging to all our Churches. And
as for that demand of the Deputies, that a Fund might be given them for the
raising and fixing of a College at Issoyre; This Assembly cannot do it,
because that having eased many persons among them of the charge in maintaining
their Ministers, they may very well, as in Conscience they are bound, and we
also exhort them to do, take care of this matter themselves.

CHAP. IX. The King's Letter to the Synod.
Above Art. 5. after the Catalogue of Deputies.
THE third of June, Messieurs Hesperien, and Bouteroue, Pastors, and Balene and
Moussac, Elders, deputed by this Assembly unto the King, returned hither, and
notified unto us with how much kindness and favor they were received by his
Majesty, and having declared to him their Commission, and delivered their
Memoirs and Instructions, he heard, and answered them very graciously, as
appears by his Majesty's Letter brought with them unto this Assembly, and they
had the thanks and applause of all the Deputies in it for their most
affectionate care, faithfulness and diligence in the discharge of their
Commission. And because it very much imported our Churches to be particularly
informed of that good will and love his Majesty bears them, that so they may be
in an extraordinary manner stirred up to praise and bless the Lord for it, and
own and acknowledge themselves to be more strictly obliged to fidelity and
perseverance in their obedience and subjection due unto his Majesty, and to
pray more heartily for the augmentation of his Majesty's Prosperity and
Grandeur: This Assembly ordained, that the Letter which it pleated his Majesty
to write us should be transcribed, and Copies thereof sent abroad among the
Churches, which is here inserted word for word in this present Article.

By the KING.
To our Dear and Well-beloved the Deputies of our Subjects of the pretended
Reformed Religion assembled in their Synod at Vitre.
we received your Letters of the one and twentieth day of this Month, by which
we have sensible experience of your Zeal and Affection for our Service, and for
that of the Commonweal; participating (as you have done) in the common joy of
all our Subjects, for the Peace and Settlement of the Kingdom, which we have so
happily procured for them, whereof we were also more particularly informed by
your Deputies sent unto us for this same purpose; from whom we have gladly
received the fresh assurances and protestations made by you of persevering in
your Loyalty and Obedience to us, as you have done heretofore: and you may be
very well assured, that we will be always careful to maintain and preserve you
in all your privileges formerly granted to you. And we will give you all in
general, and every one of you in particular, new tokens of our Love and good
will upon all occasions, which shall occur unto us.

Given at Paris, the 29 th of May, 1617. LOUYS. Phelippeaux.


2. The Deputies of Xaintonge demanded a Decree, Nymes 11.
that no Colloquy might hence forward separate any particular Congregation
which was annexed, to conjoin it unto another, without the previous advice and
authority of a Provincial Synod. This Assembly finding their demand very
Equitable, did Ordain, that this should be an Universal Canon, binding all
Colloquies and Churches.

3. Diverse Persons of Quality having moved it, that inasmuch as our Mechanics
are obliged, by the Kings Edict, to forbear working on the Festivals of the
Romish Church, over and besides the Lord's day; It is left unto the prudence of
Consistories to Congregate the People, on such Holy Days, either to hear the
word Preached, or to join in common public Prayers, as they shall find to be
most expedient. See Synod of Saumur. Art. 13. of. g. m.
And whereas Complaints are made us, that in some Churches before Sermon they
sing part of the Psalm, and reserve the last Verse for conclusion of the
Exercise. This Assembly injoins all the Churches to sing This last Clause was
rased out in the seventh Obs. of this Synod by that of Alez.
out the whole pause, and to conform themselves as much as may be to the
ancient Order.

4. Monsieur de Bertreville, our General Deputy, came unto this Synod the sixth
day of June, and took his place in it according to the Canons of our National
Synods, and had his Vote of deliberation and decision, and swear, and
subscribed the Oath of Union of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom.

5. The Lord of Bertreville, our General Deputy, declared to us, Tonneins g. m.
6.
that the King's Letters Patents, though granted, for exempting our Ministers
from payment of Taxes, were not as yet verified, nor delivered into his hands,
nor unto his Colleague the Lord of Maniald. This Assembly does earnestly
entreat them to use all needful means to get them dispatched as soon as possible.

6. Whereas the National Synod of Tonneins had injoined all the Provinces to
consider of a Proposal made by several great Persons both at home and abroad,
Tonneins g. m. 19. Alez. Obs. 6. upon this Synod.
touching the most proper means of entertaining a good Correspondence with all
Orthodox Churches, and to procure a good Union in Doctrine betwixt us and them,
and to invite over, unto the same Communication, even those that are of a
different persuasion from us. All the Provinces declared what had been done by
them as to this matter. This Assembly did thereupon judge expedient, that we
should make a little halt, till such time as those, who had first made these
Overtures, did prosecute this affair with more vigor. And in the mean while,
Monsieur Rivett, Pastor of the Church of Touars, Chauves, Pastor of the Church
in Sommieres, Chamier, Pastor and Professor in the Church and University of
Montalban, and du Moulin, Pastor of the Church of Paris, are nominated a
Committee, and to consult of such a project as will best conduce to the
accomplishing of this design. After which (in case they be summoned and called
forth unto this work) they shall all meet together at Saumur, and conjointly
with the Lord du Plessis, and the Pastors and Professors of Divinity in that
Church and University deliberate about it; and shall draw put a Plot of it,
which shall be sent into every Province, there to be perused and debated by
their Synods, that so their Deputies may come prepared for it unto the next
National Synod.

7. Whereas diverse Provinces had charged their Deputies to demand of this
Assembly a National Fast to be celebrated in all the Churches of this Kingdom:
Gergeau. g. m. 13.
Now for that it has pleased God to turn away his wrath from us, and to give
us manifest tokens of his goodness, it was not judged expedient at this time to
proclaim a General Fast, but (according to the Canons of our National Synods)
that Province whose right it is to Convene the next National Synod, is ordered
to consult with our Lords the General Deputies about it, who are entreated
(that in case any emergent Providence does summon the Churches to sanctify an
extraordinary Fast) to confer with the Consistory of Paris about it, and to
acquaint the said Province therewith, whose Synod being assembled, and
resolving on it, they shall give notice of the time for its Celebration unto
all the other Provinces. 3 Rochel g. m. 9. and in the Roll. See at the Conclus.
of Tonneins above Art. 3. after the Roll.


8. The Deputies of the Churches in the Principality of Bearn, gave in their
reasons, wherefore they had not accepted that privilege of calling this
present National Synod, which was at their request granted them by the last
held at Tonneins, and on those terms and condition mentioned in the Article of
the said Synod. This Assembly did not now ^^dge it reasonable that those
Churches should be subject to the Discipline of our Churches in this Kingdom,
or that for the present they should immed^^^^y depend on our National Synods.
Privas p. m. 14. See the second Synod of Charenton. 2 Obs. upon the Acts of the
former National Synod.
But nevertheless they shall give in their final resolutions, what they intend
to do, unto the next National Synod, and in case they be of the same mind then
as they are now, this Assembly declares, that their Deputies may have the
privilege of sitting and voting in our National Synods, upon this Condition,
that they shall first ask leave of the Provinces to give in their Suffrages in
such Cases as concern the Churches of this Kingdom.

9. It was told in this Assembly how much the Church of Sancerre was oppressed
by the Earl of Marans, one of whose men had but a few days since assassinated a
very Eminent Member of that Church. It was immediately judged necessary to
write unto his Majesty about it, and that the Lord of Bertreville, our General
Deputy, should deliver with his own hands unto the King this our Letter, and
most humbly Petition his Majesty, that Sancerre may be kept up as one of our
Cautionary Towns, by his supreme Authority, and that the Inhabitants thereof
may enjoy peace and quietness, since it has pleased God to give it unto the
rest of his Majesty's Subjects, and our General Deputies shall be very urgent
for it.

10. That Canon of our Church Discipline binding Ministers to a personal
residence on their Churches shall be most exactly observed by all the
Provinces. 1 Paris 12. Montauban g. m. 10. Alez. Obs. 8. on the Synod.
And whereas this has been broken by too many, and principally in the Higher
Languedoc, diverse of their Pastors living at Montauban, and not with their
flocks, every one of these are injoined to depart from thence with their
Families unto those places where their Churches are gathered, and this at the
farthest within three months after that this Canon of the present Synod shall
have been signified to them, and the Consistory of the Church of Montauban is
ordered to give notice thereof unto all these Non-Residents inhabiting their
City. And in case they refuse to yield obedience unto it, we declare them from
this very instant suspended the holy Ministry. And Colloquies and Synods shall
immediately upon such suspension provide a supply of Pastors for those vacant
Churches, who shall oblige themselves personally to reside among them. And the
said Consistory of Montauban shall notify unto the Churches the suspension of
their Pastors, and that they have full power to choose and call in any other
according to the Canons of our Church Discipline. And the next National Synod
shall be informed by the Provinces of their duty in this particular.

11. To obviate the Complaint made by several Provinces, how that their
Commissioners having received their moneys from the Lord of Candal, do keep it
in their own hands longer than they ought, denying many times that they have
received any from him: The said Lord du Candal is desired, that either himself,
or his Commissioners would be pleased to send a Copy of their Receipts, as soon
as they be given him or them, unto such persons in every Province as shall be
named to him for this purpose. That so the Province may be certainly informed
at what time, and to whom he paid in their moneys, and the poorer Churches may
not be left unpaid and unprovided for diverse Months together, as they have been
by the wickedness of those Receivers Commissionated by the Provinces upon the
pretexts but now mentioned.

12. Forasmuch as diverse Deputies in this Assembly declared that they brought
not with them moneys enough to defray their Charges during this Session. The
Deputy of the Lord du Candal being how in Town, was ordered to supply them, and
that out of the Dividend belonging to their Provinces, for which sums so
received by them, they shall be accountable unto their respective Provinces.

13. Whereas we are at present necessitated to be at unusual expenses, in
dispatches, deputations, and extraordinary businesses for the Churches, this
Assembly requires the Lord of Candal to pay in unto our Lords the General
Deputies the sum of four hundred Livers at one entire payment, Alez. Obs. 15.
on this Synod.
it being to be disposed by them as they shall have occasion between this and
the next National Synod.

14. Several Deputies informed this Assembly how they were charged by their
Provinces to request that some speedy course might be took with the Sieur
Pallott, Gap at the Roll. Privas g. m. 17. Alez. g. m. 4.
to compel him to make Restitution of those great sums owing by him unto the
Churches, according as it appears from the Accounts Examined by the
Commissioners thereunto appointed. Farther, a certain Person offered himself to
prosecute him at Law at his own charges, and to be accountable for the whole
unto the next National Synod, and demanded none other recompense for his pains
therein, than what the Synod should freely give him, and that too according to
the profit redounding by this his service unto the Churches. The Assembly
though it liked well of this offer, yet it gave Order to the Deputies of the
Higher and Lower Languedoc, of Sevennes, of Dolphiny, of Burgundy, Vivaretz,
Provence, and of the Isle of France, in their way homeward to their respective
Provinces, that they should step in at Paris, and assemble the Consistory of
that Church, and the Lords General Deputies, and confer all together of the
best and most proper means whereby to induce the said Palot to make payment of
those very great sums, whether it were by persuasions used to him, or by
accepting of such a Composition as shall be offered by him, or by some others
for him. And in case they cannot before their departure from Paris conclude the
matter with him, through straits of time; They shall give Letters of Attorney
unto the said Consistory, and to the General Deputies, to treat with any person
that shall make the most beneficial and advantageous offers for the Churches,
according to the Articles and Agreements inserted into their Letter of
Attorney. And notice shall be given of what is done in this affair unto all the
Provinces.

15. The Sieurs de la Nusse, Jolly, and Parris, Pastors, and St. Lazare, De la
Buissiere, and de la Baterne, are constituted a Committee to Audit the Accounts
of our Colleges and Universities.

16. The Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny are charged to desire the Lord
Marshall of Lesdiguieres, to cause the Accounts of the Soldiers lying in
Garrison in the Cautionary Towns of that Province, to be dispatched out of hand
unto the Lords General Deputies; who have never had any correspondence with the
said Lord Marshall since they have been in office. But this present Article is
rased out of the original.

CHAP. X. Of particular Matters.
1. THE Lord of Monis, Governor of Pons, having writ unto this Assembly of his
great known expenses in keeping and repairing the Town of Pons, and desiring
that he might be reimbursed. An Answer was sent him to this effect, That this
Synod could not, though it would, give him any satisfaction, because the moneys
which are in its disposal, do belong unto the Ministry, and cannot be diverted
to any other use. However we will entreat the Lords General Deputies to address
themselves unto the King on his behalf, that so his Majesty may be pleased to
grant him (...) Order for the reimbursement of his charges.

2. Simeon Conte of St. Damian, one of the Refugees of the Marquisate of
Saluces, presented a Petition on behalf of Monsieur Bernardin Moilleur, another
Refugee of the same Marquisate (as appeared by his Attestation from the Church
de la Tour de la Serre, dated the 14th of October, 1616.) craving relief for
him from this Assembly: St. Maixant. 1. of distributions.
But it in no wise approved that the said Conte should run up and down from one
Church unto another begging their Charities, forasmuch as the Churches of this
Kingdom have already contributed, and with very great liberality, toward the
maintenance of the Exiles of that Marquisate, and therefore commanded him to
depart. However it orders that sixty Livers shall be taken out of our Churches
stock, and delivered unto Monsieur Chambrun, one of the Pastors in the Church
of Nismes, to be given unto the Son of the said Monsieur Bernardin Moilleur,
who is a Student in the University of Nismes, to encourage him in his studies.

3. The Lady Duchess of Tremouille is entreated by this Assembly to write unto
the Prince of Orange, that his Excellency would be pleased to show that
kindness unto the Sieurs Julian and Alary, and their Families, as to give them
leave to return and dwell in his City of Orange, and to enjoy their Estates and
Offices as formely. She is also entreated to write unto Prince Maurice, and to
the Lord Duke of Tremouille her Son, that they would join their requests with
hers unto his Excellency for the same purpose. And the Lord Marshall Duke of
Bouillon, shall be writ unto from us, entreating him to improve his Interest
with his Excellency on the behalf of those poor distressed Gentlemen.

4. Ascanius Allion was heard in his Complaints against the Province of
Dolphiny, St. Maixant p. m. 6.
as also the Deputies of the said Province in their defense against him.
Whereupon this Assembly advised the said Allion to carry himself with more
meekness and moderation, and to subject himself unto the Discipline of our
Church, and in case he refuse obedience to it, that then the Province shall
censure him according to his demerits. And because of his Poverty, this Synod
ordered thirty Livers to be given him, but withal injoined him immediately to
return to his own home, and not to trouble us any more with his needless
Company.

5. Quintin Mareschall, See the same demand, Privas p. m. 11.
a Printer, presented unto this Assembly a certain Article of the Provincial
Synod of Berry, held at Chastillon upon the Loir, whereby he was ordered to
Petition this National Synod for some moneys to set his Press at work. This
Assembly not approving of that Article, does however order that Province to
give the said Quintin, once for all, at one entire payment, fifty Livers.

6. Monsieur Imbert appeared in person before this Assembly, and declared on
what terms and conditions he was received into the Province of the Isle of
France, and that he should be at his own liberty at what time he pleased to
leave it; which yet has been since contested by the said Province. However he
is now discharged by them from the Church of La Ferte, and lent by the Colloquy
of Beausse to the Church of Orleans, until the sitting of this Synod. The
Deputies of the Isle of France claimed a right of redemanding him, as now they
did: And on the contrary, those of Berry, and the Deputies of Orleans insisted,
that he might be fixed in the Church of Orleans, because of the singular
success and fruitfulness of his Ministry, and the very great necessity
whereunto they were reduced, before the good Providence of God sent them this
worthy Minister. This Assembly adjudgeth Monsieur Imbert unto the Church of
Orleans for their proper Pastor, and injoineth the Province of Berry, to give
unto the Isle of France, between this and the next National Synod, a Proposan
sit to be employed by them in the sacred Ministry.

7. The Province of Sevennes declared unto this Assembly, that they were
ordered by the National Synod of St. Maixant, to receive three Portions for the
Churches of Auvergne, and to pay them in unto them, which they have done all
along ever since from that of St. Maixant to those National Synods of Privas,
Tonneins, St. Maixant. p. m. 13. Tonneins p. m. 2.
and this present Synod now sitting here at Vitre out of their own Purses; but
yet notwithstanding the Orders of those Synods, their Receiver could never get
one farthing of that moneys. This Assembly ordained, that inasmuch as the
Deputies of Sevennes had not brought with them the Acquittances from those
Churches, evidencing their payment of those sums unto them, that they should
carry unto the next Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc, the Catalogue of
Pastors actually serving those Churches of Auvergne, together with their
Accounts of the aforesaid moneys distributed by them, and attested by the
subscription of the Moderators, such as they tendered unto the National Synod
of Tonneins, as also the Acquittances given them by the Pastors that have been
ever since actually employed in those Churches. And the said Provincial Synod
shall put a final period unto this affair. And till they have heard and
determined it, the Lord of Candall shall keep by him those demanded Portions:
but when as the Order of the said Synod shall be offered him, then he shall
make payment of them. Or else the said Lord of Candall shall be accountable for
them unto the next National Synod.

8. The Deputies of the Isle of France made report, how that Monsieur Perrery,
at present Minister in the Province of Higher Languedoc, but formerly
maintained by their Province, had quitted the Church of Passavant in the
Colloquy of Champagne which was assigned him, and has not since returned,
though the time allotted him, by the Synod of Ay, in the year 1613. be expired,
nor has he reimburst them of the charges they had been at for his Education
and Studies in the University, for which cause he was summoned to appear before
the said Colloquy of Champagne, but he neglecting it, and excusing his absence
by Letters, declaring his intent and purpose never to return more into the said
Province, he was thereupon suspended the holy Ministry for one year, and this
suspension was notified unto him, as appears by his Letters dated the third of
March of this present year 1617. written unto the Synod of the said Province.
This Assembly having perused the Letters of the said Perrery, and heard the
Deputies of the Higher Languedoc, and maturely debated the whole affair, finds
that the Colloquy of Champagne has dealt too severely with the said Perrery,
and therefore amending and reforming their censure, ordains, that in case the
said Perrery has not forborne the exercise of his Ministry since the
signification of that his suspension, he shall abstain from it for the full
space of two Months, to commence from that very day on which the said
suspension shall be notified to him by the Deputies of Higher Languedoc; which
shall be done by them immediately after their return home unto their own
Province, and they shall urge him to pay in the moneys owed by him unto the
Isle of France within six months time, it being injoined him by this Assembly.
And on default hereof the Province of Higher Languedoc shall be obliged to send
him back again to the Province of the Isle of France, there to exercise his
Ministry. And the Colloquy of Armagnac is grievously censured for having
admitted the said Perrery unto a Pastoral Office among them, contrary to the
Canons of our Church Discipline.

9. The Deputies of the Isle of France complained, that Monsieur Richer, St.
Maixant p. m. 9. Alez. p. m. 44.
who was maintained at their charges, both at School and University, and
promoted in their Province unto the holy Ministry, has since abandoned the
Church whereunto he was assigned, and wherein he had served diverse years,
without ever reimbursing them their expenses in his Education, and has joined
himself unto the Province of Xaintonge. This Assembly having considered the
whole affair as it was represented by the Deputies of the Isle of France, and
by those of Xaintonge, declares, that the Isle of France suffered the said
Richer to depart too easily from that Church wherein he ministered: And that the
Province of Xaintonge is very much to blame in taking him into the Ministry
among them as they did without an Attestation, it being injoined by the Church
Discipline. And the said Richer is grievously censured for not having sought
his Dismission lawfully and with Attestation, which might have given Evidence
of his Doctrine and Conversation; and he is injoined by this Assembly to come
to an account with the Isle of France, and to give them satisfaction to a penny
of all their expenses on him before his Reception into the Sacred Ministry, and
this within the space of six months. On default whereof the Province of
Xaintonge is ordered to enforce him to perform this his duty by all
Church Censures.

10. The Lords of Laudouiniere, and of la Begaudiere, Gergeau p. m. 15. Above
Obs. 3. upon the Syn. of Tonneins.
Elders in the Churches of Mountagu and Viellevigne, were heard speak about the
differences betwixt those two Churches. Whereupon this Assembly granted the
Church of Mountagu its demand, that one half of the Portions of the Kings money
received under the Seal of Monsieur Ferguson, who was equally Pastor unto both
those Churches of Mountagu and Viellevigne, lying in the Provinces of Poictou
and Britain, from the year 1599. until the month of December in the year
1616. when they were separated, and had each of them distinct Pastors, should
henceforward be paid in unto them; and therefore it ordains, that out of the
remaining stock of those Portions in the hands of the Elders of the Churches of
Mountagu and Viellevigne, there shall be a Dividend made, and the one half only
shall be allowed to the payment of the Salary of Monsieur Ferguson, according
as the accounts shall be cleared up betwixt them by the Acquittances, and
Papers to be produced by the said Ferguson, and the Elders of those Churches,
and this moity shall take in not only the moneys of his Majesty's bounty, but
all other contributions made by particular Persons toward the maintenance of
the said Pastor. And it ordains farther, that by this means the Church of
Viellevigne shall give full satisfaction unto that of Mountagu, for the
overplus of the moity paid in by them toward the maintenance of the said
Pastor.

11. The Province of higher Languedoc demanded, T^^n^ins p. m. 4.
that it would please this Assembly to make a Decree, that the Churches of Vic,
Figenseac, Eutre, and Leyran, now lying in the Province of lower Guyenne, and
joined to it, might be separated from it, and incorporated with the Colloquy of
Armagnac, lying in the Province of higher Languedoc. It was ordered, That the
two Provinces should confer about it, and hear the Opinion of those Churches
upon the case, and afterward they should determine, that which they conceived
would be most expedient for them.

T^^neins Appeal 34.
12. Monsieur Grand, Pastor in the Church of Cajarc in the Province of higher
Languedoc, did by Letters humbly petition this Assembly to take off the Censure
filed against him by the National Synod of Tonneins, which had forbidden him
any more to Preach in the Church of Caussade. The Consuls and Elders also of
the said Church and Town joined with him in the same Petition. This Assembly
having considered the Testimonials given of him by the Colloquy of upper
Quercy, and also by the Synod of higher Languedoc, do give power unto the said
Province to license Monsieur Grand to return and exercise his Ministry as
formerly in the Church of Caussade; but in the first place they shall most
diligently consider whether his Presence and Preaching there will be for its
edification, and that the Church of Cajarc be duly supplied by another Minister.

13. The Church of Saumur contested with the Province of Britain about a
Pension and Maintenance exhibited by them unto Julian Fournier, who had quitted
the Convent of Capuchins in the City of Blois. The Deputies of Anjou and
Britain having been both heard, this Assembly moderated the said Charges, and
reduced them to the Sum of fifty Livers, to wit, twenty Livers for his Diet,
and thirty for his Cloths, which said Sum shall be paid unto the Church of
Saumur, by the Province of Britain, out of the Moneys granted us by his
Majesty's liberality.

14. The Lord Baron of Tournebu writ unto this Assembly by an Elder of the
Church of Falaise, that his late deceased Lady has bequeathed as a Legacy some
considerable Sums of Money which are in the Province of Zealand, to be employed
in the educating of a Scholar, either of Zealand, Basil, or Geneva, that may
hereafter serve the Church of Essars in the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments. And whereas the Sum bequeathed will not suffice for that purpose,
the said Lord promises on his Honor to make up the rest. After the Deputies
of Normandy had been heard, the Assembly, applauding the Design and Zeal of
this noble Lord, orders the Province of Normandy to entreat the said Lord not
to choose any Scholar out of this Kingdom, and that he would be pleased to
advise with his Colloquy and Synod about him, and in case he should not grant
unto us our desire, he shall be at his full liberty to choose him whence and
where he will, but with this Proviso, That as soon as he shall be sit for
service, he be presented unto the Province, and admitted by it according to the
Canons of our Church Discipline.

15. The Colloquy of Foix, in the Province of Higher Languedoc, writ and sent
their Complaints unto this Assembly, of those grievous Oppressions the Churches
in those parts have undergone for these last six Years, and the great Sums they
have been necessitated to expend in keeping possession of our Cautionary Towns
there, and to support themselves in the Courts of Parliament, Chambers of the
Edict, and the Council of State. This Assembly advised the said Colloquy first
of all to apply themselves unto their own Province: For we could not divert the
Moneys given for our Minister's subsistence unto any other uses.

16. The Colloquy of Gex petitioned this Assembly to compassionate the deep
Poverty of their Ministers, and to add something by way of augmentation to what
was given them in the Synod of Tonneins for their better maintenance. Whereupon
a Decree past, that the Lord of Candal should be desired to pay those Ministers
in the first place, before any others, and that the sixty Livers heretofore
allotted toward the maintenance of their College, and taken out of the Common
Stock of the Churches, should not any longer be allowed, because there is
provision made for the said College another way.

17. Monsieur Codur, Professor of Hebrew in the University of Montpellier,
complained, that he was never paid his Salery, since he exercised his Ministry
in the Province of Provence. This Assembly dismissed his Affair over to the
Pastors and Elders of Lower Languedoc, who are ordered by this Assembly to
visit the Synod of Provence, and to see that those Churches which have been
served by the said Monsieur Codur, do account with him, and give him full
satisfaction.

18. The Province of Berry declaring, that the last National Synod of Tonneins
had by a special Order appointed the Lord of Candal to detain by him one
portion under the Name of Monsieur Hume, and to be paid into that Province, in
which he should be employed as a Pastor; and he being called to the Cure of
Souls in the said Province, yet they could never receive a Penny of the said
portion, as was evident from the Accounts of the said Lord Du Candal. Whereupon
this Assembly did expressly enjoin him immediately to account with the said
Province, and to pay them out of hand what is owing to them.

19. David Chauveton, a Scholar, Alez. Obs. 10. upon this Syn.
maintained by the Province of the Isle of France, and since received into the
Ministry, and ordained Pastor to the Church of Claye, from which, having first
obtained license for three Months, he departed to visit his aged and diseased
Father, Pastor in the Church of Limeueill in the Province of lower Guyenne, but
returned not according to his promise: for which cause the said Province has
censured him, and condemned him to make a full restitution of all their Charges
they were at in his preparatory Studies to the Sacred Ministry. Which he not
having done, they complained of him unto this Assembly; who considering, that
the said Chauveton had served full three Years in the Ministry among them, and
that he came back unto the Consistory of Paris, and offered himself to minister
as formerly in the Church of Claye, or in any other they would be pleased to
provide for him, did nevertheless reprove him for not being punctual to his
promise, in returning at the time prefixed, nor sending some lawful excuse for
his absence; and the Province of Lower Guyenne could not receive the said
Chauveton without the consent and dismission of the Isle of France, whose he
was, and therefore ordains, that the said Chauveton shall pay within one Year
the Sum of three hundred Livers unto the said Province, in lieu of all their
Demands from him for Charges they were at in his Education at School and
University. And in case he be not able to do it, the Province of Lower Guyenne
shall disburse the said Moneys for him.

20. The Province of Higher Languedoc made report in this Assembly of the
Judgment passed by them in the difference between Monsieur d' Anglade,
T^nneins, of University-Accompts. Art. 10. Alez. Obs. 11.
and the Province of Lower Languedoc, which was remanded to them by the
National Synod of Tonneins, and that Monsieur d' Anglade required payment of a
certain Sum of Moneys owing him as Wages for his Profession of Hebrew in the
University of Nismes, and due unto him from the Year 1603, unto that of 1607.
By which Judgment of theirs the Province of Lower Languedoc was obliged to pay
in unto the said Sieur d' Anglade the Sum of four hundred Livers: but the same
Province pleading, that they had no notice given of the time when the Synod of
Lower Languedoc was held, this Assembly having considered the whole matter,
does ordain, that the said Province shall be accountable for this unto the next
Synod of Sevennes, and shall pay in unto the said Sieur d' Anglade, either in
good Bills or in ready Moneys, all his Arrears. Which it they do not, the
Judgment of the Synod of Higher Languedoc shall stand in force against them,
and be fully executed.

21. The Deputies of the Province of Lower Guyenne demanding, (...) p. m. ^.
that those three free Portions, which were ordained by the National Synod of
Tonneins unto the Churches of Souls (taking in that also which was adjudged
unto Monsieur Bustonoby, Pastor in Berne, and serving the said Churches of
Soul) might be continued: This Assembly considering, that the Moneys formerly
given were not employed to maintain a Pastor in actual service, cannot for the
present give any more than two Portions free of all charges, which shall be
delivered them by the Receiver of the Province of Lower Guyenne, and farther
ordains, that because those Churches are at a very great distance from those
of the Lower Guyenne, they shall be for the future incorporated with the
nearest Colloquy of Berne until the next National Synod, and then the said
Churches shall by the Deputies of Berne declare what course they have took in
obedience to this Decree, for providing themselves of a Pastor, and of their
just and faithful employment of the moneys that have been granted them.

22. The Sieur Piloty came unto this Synod, (...) M^^^^^^, p. m. ^^. A^^ p. m.
^8.
bringing with him an Order of the General Assembly held at Nismes, by which he
was dismissed hither to be recompensed for his losses sustained, and charges
expended in securing the Town of Aubenas for the Churches, and this in
pursuance of his Oath and Promise made by him unto the first Assembly of
Chastelheraut. This Assembly does not in the least conceive it self obliged to
reward him, nor that the moneys in its disposal should be alienated from their
proper use to the defraying of such expenses: yet nevertheless considering the
great necessities to which this worthy Gentleman is reduced by his good and
faithful services done the Churches, whereof he has valid and sufficient
Testimonials, there was granted him for his Journey hither, three hundred
Livers, which shall be paid him at sight by the Lord of Candall, and to relieve
him under his pressing wants, four Portions, free of all Taxes, on the Province
of Sevennes, and this to be continued till the sitting of the next National
Synod.

23. John le Febure, Bookseller at Geneva, writ unto this Assembly, Alez. Obs.
14. on this Synod.
humbly requesting it to take cognizance of the great Injury done him in the
person of his Daughter, by Monsieur Mainvill the younger, at present Pastor in
the Church of Orthez in the Province of Bearn, who had debauched his Daughter.
After hearing the Deputies of Bearn, this Assembly exhorted their Synod to
enjoin the said Mainvill to go out of hand unto Geneva, and there to clear
himself before the Magistrates of that City, of what is laid unto his charge,
that so the Holy Ministry may be freed of all Reproaches. And in case he refuse
obedience unto their Order, that they punish him according to the Discipline of
our Churches, with Suspension from his Sacred Office: and the Informations, and
other Papers sent unto this Assembly were deposited with the Deputies of Bearn,
and to be produced at the next meeting of their Synod.

24. Whereas the Consistory and Church of Moulins in the Province of Berry,
have petitioned this Assembly, Alez. Obs. 12. on this Synod.
that they might be joined unto that of Burgundy, and that Monsieur de la
Roche, who was lent them but for six Months, might be settled among them as
their own and ordinary Pastor. After that the Deputies of Berry had been heard,
this Assembly ordained, that the said Church shall carry their Petition unto
the next Provincial Synod of Berry, which is entreated to consider the matter
seriously, and to deal in it according to the Laws of Charity.

25. The Deputies of the Isle of France and Champagne made report of the
singular success of the Gospel at Langres, Alez. p. m. 52.
and what a fair prospect there is of a far larger harvest, but withal, that
they were embarrast with a world of difficulty in setting up the public
Exercise of our Religion, unless in the Bailiwick of Sens, which is the one and
only place they can meet withal, and they pray, that it may he granted them in
lieu of their Meeting Place at Atigny, which is at present, and has been for a
long time altogether useless to them. After that the Deputies of Berry were
heard, who informed, that they had no order from their Province as to this
matter, and yet were very importunate to retain the Temple for those of Sens;
this Assembly ordained, that the said Province of Berry should yield up the
said place of the Bailiwick of Sens unto the people of Langres; and in case of
refusal, then it does adjudge the Bailiwick of Sens to be incorporated with the
Province of the Isle of France and Champagne, who are fully empowered to make
choice of any place, that will most contribute to the edifying of God's Church.

26. Monsieur de la Place, Pastor in the Church of Sion, complained, that David
de la Place his Brother, though upon examination he was approved as a person
fit and qualified for the Ministry, yet hitherto he has been wholly neglected
by the Province of Britain, who have maintained him as their Proposan, and
that therefore he might be set at liberty from them. This Assembly ordains,
that the Province of Britain shall present him unto some Church within two
Months; and in case they do not, then he shall be given for Pastor unto the
Church of Lavall in the Province of Anjou, where he shall serve one whole Year,
and that expired, he shall be wholly freed from the Province of Britain, who
shall forfeit their power of recalling or assigning him unto any other Flock.

27. Monsieur Babat acquainted this Assembly, that it was utterly impossible
for him to comply with their Order, See above, on g. m. 28.
injoyning him to reside on the Church of Issoyre, until the next meeting of
the Provincial Synod of Sevennes, because he has not any maintenance at all
allowed him for his subsistence, and that of his poor Family. The Deputy of the
Lord du Candal being now in Town, was commanded to pay in unto the said
Monsieur Babat immediately one hundred and fifty Livers out of the Portions
attributed to the Churches of Auvergne, and the said Babat shall be accountable
for this Money unto the next Colloquy of St. Germain, and shall bring with him
to it an Elder of the said Churches to see those Accounts so tendered by him
audited and accepted, and the Commissioner of the said Province of Sevenues
shall take the Acquittance of the said Monsieur Babat for the Moneys so paid by
the Lord du Candal.

28. Monsieur Guerin, Pastor of the Church of Baugency, made report unto this
Assembly, Alez. Obs. 13. on this Synod.
how that he and several other persons of the same Province were obliged in
great Sums of Money, disbursed for the conservation of the Town and Fortress of
Gergeau, during the late Troubles, for which he is now prosecuted at Law, and
in danger of Arrests, and to be made a Prisoner during Life, unless it shall
please this Assembly to take some effectual and speedy course for payment of
this Debt out of the Augmentation-moneys granted unto the Churches by the
Treaty of Loudun. This Assembly being informed, that by the Treaty of Loudun a
certain Sum of Money was ordered to be paid in to the Lord Marquess of Rosny
for this selffame purpose, and that he has received it, decreed that Letters
should be written unto the said Marquess, that he would be pleased out of those
Moneys which have been paid in unto him for the reparation and fortifying of
Gergeau, to indempnifie the said Monsieur Guerin, and those other Gentlemen
bound together with him, and these our Letters shall be put into the hands of
the Lords our General Deputies, that they may themselves deliver them unto him,
and prevail with the said Marquess, that the Debt may be paid, and the said
Guerin and the rest of the Sureties legally discharged. And the Province of
Berry shall join with them in the same demand, and in case they should gain
nothing from him, that then the said Province shall inform all the other
Provinces, that so the Deputies unto the next National Synod may be charged
particularly to consider the Petition of the said Sieur Guerin.

29. The Deputies of Dolphiny brought in their Accounts of Moneys formerly
given unto the Protestants exiled from the Marquisate of Saluces, P^i^as, p. m.
29.
which were examined and allowed, and delivered unto the Scribes of this
Assembly, with all the Acquittances, that they might be carried unto Rochel,
and lodged up in the Archives there, and the said Province of Dolphiny was
discharged.

30. Monsieur Sonis, Pastor and Professor of Divinity in the Church and
University of Montauban, did by Letters petition this Assembly to assist him
with a Sum of Money to help to print several Books composed by him. And whereas
diverse Provinces had it in their Instructions to move, that for the future no
recompenses might be given unto any on such occasion, unless they had written
at the desire and order of a National Synod: This Assembly applauding the Zeal
and Pains, the Diligence and Faithfulness of the said Professor in his Place
and Calling, recommends it to the Province of Higher Languedoc to peruse the
Manuscript Copies of the said Monsieur Sonis, and to testify their respect
unto him, so as that none of his worthy Labors be buried in silence and
forgetfulness, but that they be published for the common benefit of God's
Church.

31. Mr. Christian and Jacob Huberus, Brethren, and Sons of Monsieur Huberus,
Pastor of the Church of Berne in Switzerland, came unto this Assembly, bringing
Letters from the Lords of Berne, and from the said Huberus their Father,
demanding great sums of money, which the late Monsieur Sturmius, Father of the
Wife of the said Huberus, Alez. g. m. 10.
had lent (partly of his own, partly of what he had borrowed, and stood engaged
for unto others) for the good and service of the Reformed Churches in this
Kingdom about forty years ago, whereof they tendered in an Account, and several
Memoirs relating to it; which having been perused and examined, this Assembly
did not believe that the Papers produced did at all oblige our Churches to make
satisfaction for any of those great sums; and this shall be notified by Letter
from us unto the Lords of Berne, and to the said Monsieur Huberus; and two
hundred Livers were ordered to be paid immediately by the Lord du Candal, unto
these two young Gentlemen, the Sons of Monsieur Huberus, to help to defray the
Charges of their Journey hither.

32. Monsieur Solera a Spaniard born, who having forsook his Native Country,
retired into France, and has for a good space of time followed his studies
hard in the Church and University of Saumur, and the Deputies of the Province
of Anjou understanding by his Testimonials from the Consistory and Professors
there, of his progress in Piety, good Learning, and knowledge of Divinity; The
Province of Normandy demanded him for their Proposan, and designed to exhibit a
Pension to him, till such time as he should be found fit and qualified for the
holy Ministry. This Assembly ordained, that the Portion attributed unto the
said Province for a second Pastor in the Church of St. Lo, shall be disposed of
toward the maintenance of the said Solera; and in case he be called forth unto
the Ministry, and be employed in the said Church of St. Lo, or in any other of
the same Province, that the said Portion shall be continued to him as unto the
other Pastors.

33. Monsieur de la Viale, Deputy for the Province of Higher Languedoc,
Tonneins p. m. 5.
Petitioned on behalf of Laurence de Fernandez, that the sum of an hundred and
twenty Livers, which by the National Synod of Tonneins had been ordered to be
paid in yearly to him, might be continued for the future. This Assembly
declared, that in as much as the said Fernandez had learnt a Trade, and was
Married, and took up his residence at Montauban, the said Relief could not be
continued to him: and in case he be pinched with wants, the Church of Montauban
shall assist him out of their Poors stock, with their Charities.

34. Peter Mercurin a Provencal, maintained out of the Churches money, Alez.
Appeal 9.
ever since the last National Synod of Tonneins until now, presented his
Testimonial from the University of Montauban, and Petitioned, that whereas he
had been assisted with the supply of an hundred and twenty Livers, that it
might be continued to him for some longer time. This Assembly ordered the Lord
of Candal to pay him once for all the sum of sixty Livers, that so he may
return home unto his own Province of Provence, and be put upon Employment
according to his abilities, and the Decree of the National Synod of Tonneins.

35. Monsieur Suffran, a Pastor in the Province of Lower Languedoc, Tonneins
Appeal 43.
Petitioned by Letters this Assembly, that the Order of the Colloquy of
Lyonnois, and ratified by the National Synod of Tonneins, forbidding him the
exercise of his Ministry within the Colloquy of Nismes, might be repealed. This
Assembly having received a very good account of the said Suffran from faithful
Witnesses, does grant him his request, and injoineth the Province of Lower
Languedoc to provide him a Church in any Colloquy, as they shall judge
expedient.

36. Nicolas In another Copy he is called Joucune, in another Jouann^.
Jane having lately abjured in this Church of Vitre the Errors and Idolatries
of the Papacy, was recommended to the Province of Normandy, to take care that
he might be employed in some way of living as he is best qualified, and the
Lord of Candal is ordered to give him thirty Livers to help carry him into the
said Province, whereof he is a Native. And forasmuch as the Deputies of
Normandy have informed us, that it will be a full year ever their Provincial
Synod do meet, the Colloquy of Caen is entreated to take care of him, till that
time, and that some provision be made for him.

37. Monsieur du Bois, Alez. p. m. 61.
a Minister, having been discharged from the Church of Laval, by reason of its
poverty, by the Synod of Anjou, was put into the Catalogue of Ministers, who
were to be disposed by this Assembly, and in case that it should break up
without presenting him to some vacant Congregation, he has full liberty given
him to dispose of himself in any one Province, as the Lord shall be pleased to
direct him; and there shall be one Portion out of the moneys of his Majesty's
bounty, retained by the Lord of Candall, to be given unto that Province in
which he shall be employed, and those moneys of his Majesty's bounty shall be
paid in to the said Monsieur du Bois until the first of July, as if he were an
actual Pastor in the Church of Lavall: and this in pursuance of that agreement
made by that Church with him, but with this Proviso, that he be always employed
in a Church whereunto this Assembly shall have adjudged a Portion of those
moneys. And the Province shall give advice hereof unto the Lord of Candal, who
shall be accountable for it unto the next National Synod.

38. Monsieur Mahaut having been put into the Catalogue of Pastors, who are to
be disposed by this Assembly, Above Appeal 4. Alez. Appeal 54.
was presented by it this day unto the Church of Gisors in Normandy, and the
said Church was exhorted to receive him, and to entertain him lovingly, and the
Lord, of Candal shall reserve his portion in his own hands, because the said
Mahaut will receive that which is allotted unto the Church of Gisors, wherewith
he was well satisfied.

39. The Lord of Vieville requested this Assembly to entreat the Pastors of the
Church of Vitre to visit the Church gathered in his House as often as
conveniently they can, whereunto the said Pastors did voluntarily consent, and
promised that they would go once a Month, but could not quit their own Church
upon the Lord's days. The Assembly acknowledging that this affair did properly
belong to the cognizance of the Provincial Synod of Britain, yet because it
would be a very long time before they met together, entreats the aforesaid
Ministers to give that Church in the Lord of Vieville's House, six Sermons on
so many Sundays yearly, and six more on such Days as they shall consider and
agree on.

40. The Province of Lower Guyenne complained unto this Assembly, T^nn^^^s p.
m. ^.
that the three hundred Livers which were granted to Monsieur Bustonoby, by the
Synod of Tonneins, are not yet paid by the Lord du Candal, but were paid by the
said Province out of its own Purse. Order was now given unto the Lord du
Candal, to reimburse the said Province out of the moneys remaining in his hands
on his last Account.

CHAP. XI. The Dividend made according to the Catalogue of Pastors brought in
by the Deputies of every Province.
Montpellier, Obs. 5. upon the Discipl. and g. m. 16. 3. of Rochel. g. m. 4.
Privas g.m. 16.
1. ACcording to the Canons of former National Synods, there was brought into
this Assembly the Catalogue of Pastors actually serving our Churches. And
forasmuch as the greater part of the Deputies of our Provinces do declare, that
diverse Churches are unprovided, being destitute of Pastors, some being removed
by Death, and others by some other Accident very lately: This Assembly having
weighed all circumstances, do now in their distribution of his Majesty's
liberality ordain, That there shall be put upon the Catalogue in every Province
such Churches as are immediately to be supplied, that so a Portion may be drawn
out for every Church, but on this condition, that the Provinces shall make
proof unto the next National Synod by Acts of their Provincial Synods duly
attested, that the said Churches have been provided for, and at what times. And
in case of failure herein, the Moneys so received by them on this occasion,
shall be detained for the future from them. Moreover, this Assembly,
considering the great Necessities of all the Provinces, has added to each of
them some Other Portions.

2. The Roll of Pastors in actual service, in the Province of Lower Guyenne was
perused, and whereas the Deputies remonstrated, that heretofore the Church of
Sommieres had never less than two Pastors at once, a Portion was granted them
for a second Minister, and another for the Church of Villefort, and a third
Portion for the Church of Pecquay, unto which Churches the said Province shall
out of hand send them Pastors, and give in full proof of their obedience unto
this Order at the next National Synod: And over and above all this, there was
granted it a supernumerary Portion, to be appropriated according to the
designation of the Deputies of this Province unto the Church of St. Cesarca and
its annexed Congregations.

3. The Deputies of Poictou reported, that they had six Churches to provide
for, being lately destitute of Pastors, to wit, that of Rochefoucault,
Lusignan, Sivray, La Chastaigneraye, Chantonnay, Puisbeliart, and Poire; for
which six Portions were ordained, but on this condition, that they be
accountable for these Sums unto that next National Synod; and by way of
augmentation, they had given them one Portion supernumerary.

4. Two Portions were appointed the Province of Berry, one for the Church of
Bourges, and another for that of Suilly and its annexed Congregations, on this
condition, that they be carefully supplied, and that an account hereof be given
in unto the next National Synod. And whereas the Deputies demanded another
Portion for the Church of Ouchant, at present served by the Ministers of Blois,
it being necessary that they should have a Pastor of their own, this Assembly
would not grant them, because the said Church may be conveniently supplied by
the aforesaid Ministers, and in consideration of the great Necessities of the
said Province, there were seven supernumerary Portions appointed for them,
whereof two shall be given free of all Taxes and Charges unto Monsieur Guerin,
Pastor of Baugency, for diverse good and valid Reasons moving this Assembly
thereunto.

5. The Province of the Isle of France was enjoined to provide the Church of
Langres of a Pastor, to which purpose there was assigned it one Portion, and
moreover, because of the multitude of poor Churches in it, there were twelve
supernumerary Portions more granted, to be disposed by them for the relief of
the most necessitous and indigent Congregations.

6. The Province of Burgundy shall make proof of their Care and Duty in
providing for the Church of Noyers an able Pastor at the next National Synod,
to which purpose they had one Portion assigned them, and those two formerly
granted, were ordered to be continued to the Churches of Maringues and Paillac,
and over and above this, seven supernumerary Portions.

7. Pour Portions were granted unto the Province of Xaintonge, that the
Churches at present destitute of Pastors there might be provided for, viz. a
second Pastor for St. John D' Angely, one for Villefaignan, one for Tonnay
Boutonnay, and another for Genonsac. And whereas they demand another Portion
for Baigne, Chenonceaux and Monlieu, when as they shall have brought in their
account for these beforementioned Portions unto the next National Synod, then
care shall be taken about some provision for the said Church, it so be it be
supplied by a Pastor. Moreover, the said Province shall have two supernumerary
Portions, comprising in them that Moiety granted by the Synod of Tonneins for
the relief of Messieurs Rossignol, Gabard, Paris, du Plot, Velez, and Toussain,
who were Pastors Emeriti, by reason of their Age and Infirmities, and otherwise
very much afflicted with Wants.

8. The Deputies of Higher Languedoc protested, that these ten Churches were
become lately vacant by the death of their Pastors, or by some other accident,
and that there be several others to be provided for by that Province as soon as
may be; to wit, Castelnau, Brassac, Cormies, Aisones, Caumont, Manosques,
Pairasque, Figeac, Sevenieres, and la Tronquiere; to every one of which there
was a Portion assigned, provided they were really vacant, and care taken they
be supplied. And that Portion and half assigned them by the Synod of Tonneins
is continued to them, on this condition, that the whole Portion shall be
employed for the relief and assistance of the Church of Leyran, and the half
unto Monsieur Aubriot, a Pastor Emeritus.

9. The Province of Anjou declared, that they were just now presenting a Pastor
unto the Church of Chasteau du Loir, and another unto that of Mondoubleau; for
which cause two Portions have been adjudged to them, and another under the name
of Monsieur Gomarus, Professor of Divinity in the University of Saumur, and two
supernumerary Portions were added by way of augmentation unto the poorer
Churches; and whereas Monsieur de la Cost, late Pastor of the Church of Dijon,
is given unto the University of Saumur for a Professor in Divinity, another
Portion is also granted the said Province.

10. One Portion was assigned the Province of Sevennes for the Church of
Maruejols, and another shall be divided between the Churches of Combs, and St.
Basilc.

11. Seven Portions were appointed unto the Province of Normandy, one for the
Church of St. Peter on the Dine, another for the second Minister of St. Lo,
another for the Church of Cheffreine, another for that of Gaure, another for
that of Gisors, another for that of Fescamp, and lastly, another for that of
Havre de Grace; all which are lately become vacant by the decease or removal of
their Pastors, and these shall be supplied with able Men as soon as possible,
whereof the next National Synod shall take cognizance; and six Portions shall
be farther added for the relief of the poorer Churches.

12. The Deputies of Vivaretz protested, that these five Churches following are
lately destitute of Pastors, and that the Province will see they he supplied
out of hand, to wit, St. Savior, La Bastide, de Viral, St. Pons, de Mirabel,
Rochers, and lastly, le Poussin. For every one of these this Synod ordained a
Portion, on condition that the Province should notify their Care and Duty in
providing able Ministers for them unto the next National Synod; and six
Portions more were added, including those two for St. Stephen's which had been
allotted it by former National Synods, and of the four remaining a half Portion
shall be given unto Monsieur Chanforan, because of his great poverty.

In the Province of Provence there were three Churches to be provided for, viz.
la Cost, Sederac, and la Charse: and that Provincial Synod was ordered to give
unto each of them a Pastor, and therefore three Portions were added to them,
for which they shall be accountable unto the next National Synod; and there
were given them more to be distributed among their poorer Churches six Portions.

14. The Deputies of Lower Guyenne assured this Assembly, that they were now
getting Pastors for these Churches following, viz. for Nerac a third Pastor,
for Beaune, Benac, Condom, Espiens, Sause de Misne, Hastingues, Bayonne, Le Mas
and Caumont, and Pellegrue, all which are lately become vacant; for which there
were assigned nine Portions, and the Province shall give account of them unto
the next National Synod.

15. Two Portions were laid by for the Province of Dolphiny, to wit, for the
Church of Montbrun, and Beaurepaire, and because of the great poverty of diverse
Churches in the said Province, this Assembly has granted them seven
supernumerary Portions.

16. The Province of Britain had the Privilege of taking out one Portion
under the Name of Monsieur Marmet, Pastor of the Church gathered in the House
of the Lord Duke of Rohan; and because of the great poverty of the Churches in
that Province, there were eight supernumerary Portions more allotted to it,
whereof one shall go to the Church of Nants free of all charges, and out of the
seven others shall be taken an hundred and fifty Livers to be thus employed, to
wit, one hundred Livers to the College of vielle Vigne, and fifty Livers to the
relief of the said Church.

17. The Deputies of Lower Languedoc reported, Alez. p. m. 72.
that in the dividend of the Portions for the said Province, there was but one
Portion only assigned to Monsieur Scoffier an ancient Pastor and Emeritus,
although there was formerly allowed him one and an half. This Assembly gave order
to the Lord of Candal, that he should give annually a Portion and half unto the
said Scoffier, who shall give an Acquittance for the Money unto the Receiver of
the said Province, and this to be continued until the next National Synod.

CHAP. XII. Of Universities and Colleges.
1.THE Province of Lower Guyenne demanding, Privas of Coll. Art 25. Tonneins p.
m. 16.
that our Universities might be lessened in their number, and reduced unto two,
and those well maintained. This Assembly did not think fit to diminish their
number.

2. The Deputies of Sevennes requesting, that one part of the University in the
Lover Languedoc might be wholly assigned to them: This Assembly did not think
it expedient to grant them their request.

3. The Province of Lower Languedoc reported, that it were expedient to reunite
the two parts of their University, whereof one is at Nismes, and the other at
Montpellier, and that the effecting of it might be left unto their Synod, they
calling in the Deputies of the adjoining Provinces to consult about it. This
Assembly owneth the needfulness of their Proposal, and for diverse good
considerations it does at present decree this union, ordaining that the whole
University shall be established at Nismes, and that the University-Council
shall be assembled as soon as may be, they calling in the Deputies of the next
adjoining Provinces, which are now mentioned by name, to wit, for Dolphiny
Monsieur Felix, for Vivaretz, Monsieur Moze, for Sevennes Monsieur Courant, for
Provence Monsieur Morris, all of them Deputies unto this present National
Synod; and they being all assembled, shall furnish that University with able
Professors, according to the Canons enacted in our former National Synods, and
the abovementioned University-Council is injoined to take special care, that
the Youth in it be duly instructed and encouraged in Learning and Godliness
under the Discipline of their Regents, and that the Professors be faithful in
the discharge of their Place and Office.

4. The Deputies of Sevenes demanded, that out of the Moneys given by his
Majesty's liberality unto their Province, there might be an addition made of
some other Sums to the four hundred Livers assigned for maintenance of a
College, and this to be done in every Province. This Assembly answered, that no
augmentation could be granted on this account. And the said Province of
Sevennes was advised to consider well of the demand made by the Church of
Anduze, and to take care that the College there settled be well maintained.

Tonneins, of Univers. 12.
5. The Consistory and Common Council of the Town and Church of Gex writ unto
this Assembly, how that they had and did acquiesce in the Decree of the
National Synod of Tonneins concerning their College, and humbly petitioned this
Assembly to bestow upon them out of that stock of Moneys given our Churches by
his Majesty's liberality a certain Sum toward its maintenance. It was decreed,
that the Lord of Candal should give them to this purpose yearly an hundred
Livers.

6. Forasmuch as the Houses upon which the College of Saumur is built were
purchased with Moneys belonging unto all the Churches, Gap p. m. 46.
as it has been related in this Assembly; order is given unto Monsieur Rivett,
Pastor of the Church of Thouars, to make inquiry in whose Name that Contract
and Purchase was signed and sealed, and to declare it unto the Consistory of
the Church of Saumur, who shall make report thereof unto the next National
Synod.

7. Complaint being made unto this Assembly on behalf of the Professors in our
Universities, it is ordained, (...) p. m. 37.
that for time to time, our Universities shall be paid quarterly at the four
Quarters of the Year out of the three first Quarters of the Moneys granted by
the King to our Churches.

8. The University-Councils be injoined to choose out the eldest Proposans, and
command them to read the Scriptures in the Church before Sermons, and to
censure such of them as refuse obedience unto this Canon.

9. In like manner those University-Councils be expressly charged to see the
Laws and Statutes made in our former National Synods for the well-governing of
these our Universities, to be most carefully and exactly observed and obeyed,
that so we may hear no more any ill reports of them, but that the Scholars do
carry themselves with all modesty as becomes their profession, and that they
do give diligent attendance on the Greek and Hebrew Lectures, and that they be
personally present at Divinity-Disputations; and that the said Statutes may be
better observed, the Provincial Synods in which those Universities be erected
are charged to depute yearly two Pastors taken out of those Churches whereunto
the Universities do belong, who shall at some certain times, but most
especially before the sitting of their Synod, visit the said Universities, and
make inquiry whether the Professors and Scholars both of them do faithfully and
diligently intend and mind their Duties. And the Deputies of those Provinces
shall bring into the next National Synod the Laws and Statutes of our
Universities, which were formerly enacted in our National Synods, and report
impartially what they have observed of every ones obedience to them.

10. The University of Montauban requested that the Salaries of their
Professors might be augmented, Tonneins of Univers. 7.
because his Majesty's liberality unto our Churches is augmented. But it was
not judged meet to make any farther additions than what had been before
ordained for them.

11. Monsieur Joly, Tonneins of Univers. 1.
Pastor and Professor in the Church and University of Montalban, Petitioned
that he might have some small augmentation unto the hundred Livers, ordered him
by the Synod of Tonneins, for his better encouragement in the profession of the
Hebrew Language. This Assembly not being in a capacity to augment his wages,
does exhort Monsieur Tenans, the other Hebrew Professor, to allow his Colleague,
Monsieur Joly, one hundred Livers out of the three hundred assigned to him;
because though he is in office, yet the main burden thereof lies upon Monsieur
Joly.

12. The Deputies of Higher Languedoc demanded a sum of moneys for the erecting
of two Colleges, the one at Millaud, the other at Pamiers, Ibidem 3.
remonstrating on the one hand the great distance of their Churches from the
University of Montauban, and on the other hand the lamentable Poverty of the
Church of Pamiers, and those adjoining to it, as also, that the Church of
Milhaud has a College of Jesuits planted in the very bowels of it. This
Assembly being disabled from increasing the number of our Colleges, cannot
gratify those Deputies in their desires. And yet exhorts the said Province to
have a special regard unto the necessities of the Church of Pamiers, and to
provide for it, according to their abilities.

13. The Deputies of Anjou joined in a Petition from the University of Saumur,
which was presented by Monsieur Benoist, Gap g. m. 19.
Professor of the Greek Tongue. Upon which this Decree past, that in as much as
it is needful that our Universities should be supplied with Professors in
Theology, in case of their death, or other disability for service: The Province
wherein that University stands, shall convene the University-Council, and
having pitched upon a Pastor of whose good will and inclination to take upon him
the Professors Office they be well assured, they may by the Authority of this
National Synod remove him from his Church. But the said Pastor shall not
however quit it till it be first duly provided of another Pastor, for which
purpose the said Church shall have two Months time allowed them to procure him,
and that he may be the sooner had and obtained, the Province which took away
their Pastor to employ him in the University, shall be aiding and assisting to
them in it.

14. In pursuance hereof this Assembly out of their particular respect to the
University of Saumur, Above App. (...) Alez. App. 4.
which requested immediately to be provided of a Professor in Divinity, does
nominate Monsieur de la Cost, Pastor in the Church of Dijon, and Deputy for
the Province of Burgundy, unto that Chair, because of the many and honorable
Testimonials we have received of his singular Piety and deep Learning; and he
promised obedience unto this Assembly, and that he would wholly devote himself
unto this Employment, which by their great Wisdoms he was judged capable of.
Whereupon he was exhorted to embrace the Office of a Professor in Divinity in
the University of Saumur, to which he shall remove before Winter, and shall
perform some act in that profession before the sitting of the Provincial Synod
of Anjou, in which he shall undergo the Examen as in this case is ordained, and
afterward shall be confirmed in his Calling and Office, and shall be paid his
Wages as Professor from that very day of his dismission from the Church of
Dijon; and that it may be supplied according to the Decree beforementioned,
this Assembly accepts of the motion made by the Deputies of Burgundy to write
unto the Synod of Berne, that they would be pleased to resign Monsieur de
Chandieu, Pastor in the Church of Oleron, unto us, and that the said de
Chandieu would yield his consent to come and serve the Church of Dijon; which
Letters were given unto the said Monsieur de la Cost, who was now traveling
unto Berne about his own private concerns. And because it is a matter of great
importance to design at present (by reason of unavoidable necessities which may
so fall out) some one Pastor or other that may take upon him the Professors
Office, and may be fitted and qualified for it: This Assembly entreats and
exhorts Monsieur de Chanvernon, Pastor of the Church of Taillebourg, to dispose
himself unto this profession, that when upon another vacancy the Lord shall
call him thereunto, he may be capable of serving in it.

15. The Charges brought in upon Account by the University of Saumur, Tonneins
of Univers. 9.
in getting and bringing Monsieur Gomarus, with his Family and Household Goods
thither, and to pay him for Salary twelve hundred Livers yearly, as also what
was expended on a Bedel, Doorkeeper, and the Rent of the College, were all
allowed unto the Deputies of Anjou.

16. The Province of the Isle of France not bringing its accounts for their
College is born with for this time, Alez. of Univers. 17.
and their excuses admitted; but they be injoined to reckon fully with the next
National Synod for all moneys received by them for the said College since that
of Tonneins.

17. The Province of Lower Languedoc not having brought in their Accounts for
the Universities of Nismes and Montpettier was judged by this Assembly worthy
of a very grievous censure, and it is ordered that full satisfaction be given
by them unto the Decree of Tonneins, and they shall bring unto the next
National Synod, all the Accounts, as well of the past moneys received by them,
as of what they shall hereafter receive till the meeting of the next Synod.

18. In like manner the Province of Higher Languedoc was severely censured, for
not having sent any Account of the University of Montauban, and we do now
declare, that they shall lose their privilege of being an University, in case
they do not bring in all their Accounts from the Synod of Tonneins unto the
next National Synod.

19. The Account of the College of Normandy was seen and verified in their own
Province, and brought into this Assembly, where it was closed up and approved;
but they were advised hereafter to bring their Acquittances in a better form
than at present.

20. The Account for the College of Britain was perused, accepted, shut up,
and allowed of for the years 1613, 1614, 1615, and 1616. inclusively.

21. The Account for the College of Sevennes was produced, and approved for the
years 1614, 1615, and 1616. inclusively.

22. The Account for the College of Beziers was seen and allowed for the years
1612, 1613, 1614, 1615, and 1616. But it appeared thereby that they had in
their hands five and fifty Livers, for which they shall be accountable
hereafter.

23. The Deputies of Dolphiny declared, that the Account for the College of Die
was seen and settled by their University Council, and was allowed in this
Assembly for the years 1614, 1615, and 1616.

24. The Province of Poictou is injoined for the future to bring in their
Accounts of the College of Niort, according to the Canon of the Synod of
Tonneins; and the Account was approved for the years 1613, 1614, 1615, 1616.
and for January Quarter in this present year now current.

25. The Province of Burgundy brought not in the Account of their College; but
they were born with for this time, however they shall be accountable for the
whole unto the next National Synod.

26. The Account for the College of Rochefoucaut was seen and allowed for the
years 1612, 1613, 1614, 1615, and 1616. for which time they received one
thousand and six hundred Livers, ten Sous. There remain one hundred Livers
which have not been employed by them, for which they must be responsible unto
the next National Synod.

27. The Account for the College of Berry was seen and closed up, and allowed
for the years 1614, 1615, and 1616.

28. The Commissioners examined the Account for the College in the Province of
Vivaretz, and because it was found defective, this Assembly ordains, that the
said Province shall bring in unto the next National Synod, their Accounts of
the years 1614, 1615, and 1616. together with all Bills, and Acquittances, and
on default hereof, there shall be detained from the said Province the sums
paid, and not employed to the maintenance of the said College.

29. The Commissioners appointed to examine the accounts of the Province of
Provence, brought in their report, that the moneys given them for a College
have been quite diverted, and employed about petty A, B, C. Schools, contrary
to the intention and decree of the foregoing National Synods, yea and the
Deputies of the said Province have not brought with them any Acquittances, for
which they were censured, and the Deputies of Lower Languedoc which are to
visit that Province upon other affairs, shall peruse those Accounts, and shall
take care that the moneys designed unto a College be wholly employed in it, and
their Acquittances of what they have received and disbursed for time past and
to come, shall be brought in to the next National Synod, and in case of default
herein the said Province shall forfeit its right unto a College.

30. This Assembly cannot approve that the College of Bergerac should neglect
to send hither its account, and they be injoined to do it for the future, and
in the mean while the sum of twelve hundred Livers is continued to them
according to the Synodical Decree of Tonneins.

31. Whereas the National Synod of Tonneins had formerly assigned four hundred
Livers toward the maintenance of the College of Die, this Assembly adds two
hundred more, which the Lord of Candal is ordered to pay unto it.

32. The Province of Sevennes having requested the privilege of calling the
next National Synod, it was granted them, and that they should summon it about
three years hence, in a commodious place, and in the Month of May, saving that
they may anticipate the time for important reasons, upon which they shall
consult with the Lords General Deputies, and their Neighbor Provinces.

CHAP. XIII. The Catalogue of Apostates and Deposed Ministers.
1. IN the Province of Poictou, James Mettayer born at Chandonnier in the same
Province, about five and thirty years old, formerly Pastor of Lusignan,
revolted the eight and twentieth day of March last, and was declared an
Apostate by the Synod held at Thouars the eighth of April following, he is a
Fellow of mean stature, a little black Beard, black-hair'd, and looking down
toward the Earth.

2. In the Province of Anjou, Anthony du Perch born at Alencon, heretofore
Pastor in the Church of Mondoubleau, about six and forty years old, his hair
and beard black, of a middle stature, hook nosed, club-footed, was deposed from
the holy Ministry for deserting of his Church.

3. In the Province of Lower Languedoc, Esajah Ferrier, heretofore Pastor in
the Church of St. Giles, was suspended the holy Ministry by the two former
National Synods for his ungodly Conversation, and is since revolted, betwixt
five and six and thirty years of age, a Fellow of mean stature, and dark
Chessnut colored hair.

4. In the same Province Alexander Sellon was deposed for the heinous Crimes of
Adultery, Perjury, and Slandering, he was born at Nismes, sometimes Pastor in
the Church of Vauvert, about thirty five or thirty six years old, short of
stature, red hair'd, little or no beard.

5. In the Province of Provence, Andrew Bassett, born at Venes in Dolphiny, he
revolted whilst he was Pastor of the Church de la Cost, mean of stature,
about thirty years of age, having a fine, clear red beard, a sullen illlookt
Fellow, frowning when he speaks, roving with his eyes, and lowering with his
head toward the ground.

6. In Dolphiny, Joshua Barbier, heretofore Pastor in the Church of Livron,
black hair'd, a squinting, purblind Fellow, short sighted, tall of stature,
glib of tongue, about forty years of age, he is now turned Apostate.

7. In the Province of Sevennes, Peter Cailleteau, heretofore Pastor in the
Church of Pont de Mortvert, about sixty five years of age, short of stature,
square shouldered, broad faced, a dim-sighted Fellow, he was deposed for his
vicious and ungodly Conversation.

CHAP. XIV. The Accounts of the Lord du Candal Treasurer of the Moneys given
unto the Reformed Churches of France by his Majesty for the Maintenance of
their Ministers: As also the Dividend made of those Moneys, and decreed by the
National Synod of Vitre in the Months of May and June, 1617.
1. THE Commissioners deputed by the Synod, and chosen out of every Province to
hear and examine the Accounts of the Lord du Candal, and to make a Dividend of
those Moneys, brought in their Report unto the said Synod, that in hearing and
examining the said Accounts, they find the Lord of Candal to charge himself
with the Receipt of five hundred sixty and five thousand five hundred, forty
and three Livers, thirteen Sous, and nine Deniers: To wit,

2. For October-Quarter, in the Year 1613. the Sum of five and forty thousand
Livers, for the whole Year 1614. the Sum of one hundred and fourscore thousand
Livers, and for the whole Year 1615. the like Sum of 180000 li. and for the
three first Quarters of the Year 1616. the sum of one hundred and forty four
thousand, six hundred Livers.

3. Item, The Sum of two thousand, eight hundred, thirty nine Livers, thirteen
Sous, and nine Deniers, which he owed on his last Account when it was
liquidated, closed up, and settled in the National Synod of Tonneins, and since
appeared to be due when his Account was revised by the Commissioners appointed
from his Majesty to that purpose.

4. Item, The Sum of five thousand, two hundred, forty and five Livers detained
by him from the Province of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, which he was to have
paid for the Years 1612, 1613, and 1614. according to the Order of the same
National Synod.

5. Item, The Sum of seven thousand, three hundred, thirty four Livers detained
by him out of the Years aforesaid from the Provinces of Lower Languedoc and
Sevennes, being a part of the Sum of eleven thousand one hundred and nine
Livers, ordered by the same Synod to be kept back from the said Provinces: The
overplus, amounting to three thousand, seven hundred, seventy and five Livers,
was remitted unto the said Province by another Decree of the same Synod.

6. More, The Sum of five hundred, twenty and five Livers were detained by him
out of those Moneys with which he was to have supplied the Province of Lower
Guyenne for the Year 1613. by an Order of the Synod of Privas, and to be paid
in unto the Province of Berry.

7. All these particular Sums put together made up the said total Sum of five
hundred, sixty and five thousand, five hundred, forty three Livers, thirteen
Sous, and nine Deniers.

8. They also made report of the Total Expense in the said Account for
October-Quarter in the Year 1613. and the whole Year 1614. and three quarters
and an half of the Year 1615. and three quarters of the Year 1616. both for the
Pastors and Universities, amounting to the sum of five hundred thirty three
thousand seventy eight Livers, nineteen Sous and two Deniers. In which is not
comprised the sum of five hundred twenty five Livers, whereof he made a
separate disbursement for the Province of Berry, and that added unto the
aforesaid sum, makes in all five hundred, thirty three thousand, six hundred
and three Livers, eleven Sous, and two Deniers.

9. And his Total Receipt being five hundred sixty five thousand, five hundred
forty three Livers, thirteen Sous, and nine Deniers, therefore the said Lord of
Candal owes the sum of one and thirty thousand, nine hundred thirty and nine
Livers, fourteen Sous and seven Deniers, besides the sum of sixty thousand and
five hundred and five Livers, fourteen Sous and one Denier, owing by him by
forbearance, for not bringing his Acquittances, which he shall produce before
our General Deputies, and bring with him their Certificate for his so doing
unto the next National Synod. Which said Debt, Monsieur Sulpitius Cuper
rendering account for the said Lord du Candal, declared to have risen out of the
sum of three hundred and five Livers, fourteen Sous remaining due unto the
Province of Xaintonge for the Year 1614. and for that nothing had been paid for
the first half quarter of October, in the Year 1615. to the University of
Sedan, and College of Bergerac; as also it arose out of a far greater sum taken
by reprisal out of the Account aforesaid, which has been raised and given to
the said Lord of Candal to be recovered by him, that so, if it were once
recovered, it might be distributed among all the Provinces, according to the
Dividend made by the National Synod of Tonneins, where the Accounts of the
distribution were then, as now the Decree of this present Synod shall be given
him to this very purpose.

10. Over and above the Debt before mentioned, the said Lord of Candal owes
for October Quarter of the Year 1616. the sum of forty five thousand Livers,
which he shall distribute unto the Churches, according to the Dividend made in
the Synod of Tonneins.

11. Moreover, he owes for the said Quarter the sum of nine thousand six
hundred Livers, being an Augmentation granted unto the Churches by the Treaty
of Londun, which began the first of July 1616. and the said Lord of Candal has
accounted for the first July-Quarter, which shall be distributed according to
the aforesaid Dividend. And it must be ^oted here, that the said Quarter should
have amounted unto eleven thousand six hundred and fifty Livers for the said
Augmentation, but there had been subtracted from it by an Order of Council the
sum of sixteen hundred and fifty Livers to make up the Pension promised unto
our Lords the General Deputies.

12. Upon the Debet of the same Account for the three first Quarters of the
Year 1616. there shall be taken the sums hereafter specified, one part of which
the said Lord of Candal is ordered to make good payment of, and another part to
detain in his own hands till further orders.

13. And first of all, the said Lord of Candal is ordered to reserve by him the
sum of three thousand Livers, which he shall deliver unto that person who
undertakes to print the Works of the most Reverend Chamier, and shall take up
an Acquittance from him.

14. More, the sum of two thousand one hundred Livers, granted to the Deputies
in the Assembly of Rochel, for defraying the Charges of their Deputies at
Court, which sum the said Lord of Candal shall deliver unto Monsieur Gaultron,
a Citizen of Rochel.

15. More, the sum of seven hundred Livers for defraying the Expenses of the
Deputies from this present Synod to his Majesty.

16. More, four hundred Livers, ordered to be paid unto our Lords General
Deputies at Court for the like Journeys unto Court.

17. More, the sum of three hundred Livers, paid by the Province of Lower
Guyenne unto Monsieur Bustonoby, according to a Decree of the National Synod of
Tonneins.

18. For Monsieur Piloty's Journey, three hundred Livers.

19. A Gratuity to Monsieur Cuper, three hundred Livers.

20. To Samuel du Fresne, two hundred Livers.

21. To the Sons of Monsieur Huberas Pastor of Berne, two hundred Livers.

22. To Monsieur Babat Pastor of Issoyre, an hundred Livers.

23. To the Son of Monsieur Bernardin Molleur one of the Refugees from the
Marquisate of Salluces the sum of sixty Livers, paid by the Lord of Candal unto
Monsieur Chambrun Pastor of Nismes.

24. To Monsieur de St. Matthieu, sent by the Lords General Deputies to the
Assembly at Rochel, by his Majesty's Order, the sum of an hundred and fifty
Livers.

25. To Nicolas Jane, formerly a Monk, thirty Livers.

26. To Ascanius Allion, thirty Livers.

27. For three Portions granted to the Churches of Auvergne by the National
Synod of Privas, and put upon the Account of the Province of Sevennes, whose
Deputies made report, that they had paid them into these Churches, although they
never had received the Moneys, those Portions amounting to the sum of sixteen
hundred and seventy seven Livers, which this Assembly ordered to be kept by the
Lord du Candal in his own hands, until the Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc
have finally decided that Affair.

28. To the Soldiers and Porter of the Castle and Garrison of Vitre, the sum of
six and thirty Livers.

29. All these Parcels summed up together, do amount to nine thousand, five
hundred, fourscore and three Livers, which shall be paid by the Lord of Candal,
who shall reimburse himself on the Debt of his Account, arising from the three
first Quarters of the Year 1616.

30. Whereas by a particular Act delivered unto Monsieur Cuper, Deputy of the
Lord du Candal, Mr. Rivett, and Mr. Chauve, Pastors, were charged as debtors
for the sum of twelve hundred, sixty and two Livers, which they had distributed
according to the Order of this present Synod unto some certain poor Churches,
and had given an Acquittance for it, as if it had been received for their own
use; This Assembly acknowledged, that it was done upon none other ground than
to facilitate the Account of the said Lord du Candal, and that the said sum was
paid in by them unto those particular Churches, according to that Order and
Instructions they had from this Synod, and that therefore we do discharge those
Reverend Ministers, Rivet and Chauve, and acquit them fully of the said Moneys.

CHAP. XV. A Dividend of Moneys among the Provinces.
1. A Dividend made among all the Provinces of the sum of two hundred twenty
five thousand Livers, granted by his Majesty unto our Churches, and this for
the present Year and the Years following until the next National Synod,
according to which the said Lord du Candal shall make payment of the said sum,
as it was agreed between him at the National Synod of Gap, and the Lords
General Deputies who treated with him by its Authority.

2. Out of which sum of 225000 li. before any dividend be made unto the
Provinces, there must be deducted these sums following, which are allotted for
the yearly maintenance of our Universities and Colleges.

3. For the University of Die, six hundred Livers.

4. For the College of Bergerac, twelve hundred Livers.

5. For the University of Sedan, four thousand Livers.

6. For the University of Saumur, five thousand one hundred and ninety Livers.

7. For the University of Montauban, three thousand seven hundred and eleven
Livers.

8. For the University of Nismes, two thousand two hundred and thirty six
Livers.

9. For the Pension of Samuel du Fresne, one hundred fifty seven Livers, and
ten Sous.

10. For the Churches and College of Gex, four thousand three hundred Livers.

11. More, to complete the Pensions of our Lords the General Deputies, three
thousand three hundred Livers.

12. All which Parcels amount to the sum of four and twenty thousand six
hundred ninety and four Livers, ten Sous, which shall be taken out of an
hundred sixty eight thousand seven hundred and fifty Livers, being three
quarters of the said sum of two hundred and twenty five thousand Livers.

13. Therefore there remains to be distributed for the said three Quarters
among all the Provinces, the sum of one hundred thirty nine thousand eight
hundred and fifteen Livers, ten Sous, and four thousand eight hundred Livers
more to those that have Colleges, among which those are not comprised which
have Universities erected and endowed.

14. To the Isle of France for fifty Pastors, four Proposans and twelve
supernumerary Portions, in all sixty six Portions, and four hundred Livers for
the College, the sum of eleven thousand one hundred forty eight Livers, two
Sous.

15. To the Province of Poictou for two and fifty Pastors, three Proposans, and
one supernumerary Portion, in all six and fifty Portions, and four hundred
Livers for their College, the sum of nine thousand five hundred and nineteen
Livers, twelve Sous.

16. To the Province of Lower Languedoc for sixty four Pastors, three
Proposans, and one supernumerary Portion, in all sixty eight Portions and four
hundred Livers for the College of Beziers, the sum of eleven thousand four
hundred and seventy three Livers, sixteen Sous.

17. For the Province of Berry for thirty three Pastors, three Proposans, and
seven supernumerary Portions, in all three and forty Portions, and for the
College four hundred Livers, the sum of seven thousand four hundred and two
Livers, eleven Sous.

18. To the Province of Xaintonge for sixty eight Pastors, five Proposans, and
two supernumerary Portions, and one for Monsieur Bonnet, in all seventy six
Portions, and four hundred Livers for the College, the sum of twelve thousand
seven hundred and seventy six Livers.

19. To the Province of Burgundy for twenty four Pastors, three Proposans, and
seven supernumerary Portions for those of Maringues and Paillac, in all six and
thirty Portions, and four hundred Livers for the College, the sum of six
thousand two hundred and sixty two Livers, twelve Sous.

20. To the Province of Vivaretz for nine and twenty Pastors, three Proposans,
and six supernumerary Portions, including herein two Portions for the Forest,
in all eight and thirty Portions, and four hundred Livers for the College, the
sum of six thousand five hundred eighty and eight Livers, six Sous.

21. To the Province of Anjou for eight and twenty Pastors, three Proposans and
two Portions supernumerary, in all thirty three Portions, the sum of five
thousand three hundred and seventy four Livers, five Sous.

22. To the Province of Higher Languedoc for fourscore and four Pastors, seven
Proposans, and one Portion and half supernumerary, in all fourscore and twelve
Portions and an half, the sum of fifteen thousand and sixty three Livers,
fourteen Sous.

23. To the Province of Lower Guyenne for seventy and seven Pastors, five
Proposans, in all eighty two Portions, the sum of thirteen thousand three
hundred and fifty three Livers, fourteen Sous.

24. To the Province of Sevennes for fifty three Pastors and three Proposans
and two supernumerary Portions, and five other Portions for the Churches of
Issoyre and Higher Auvergne, and four Portions for Mounsieur Piloty, in all
sixty and seven Portions, and four hundred Livers for the College, the sum of
eleven thousand and three hundred Livers, and nineteen Sous.

25. To the Province of Normandy for four and forty Pastors, six Proposans and
six Portions supernumerary, in all six and fifty Portions, and four hundred
Livers for the College, the sum of nine thousand five hundred and nineteen
Livers, twelve Sous.

26. To the Province of Provence for fifteen Pastors, three Proposans and six
supernumerary Portions, in all four and twenty Portions, and four hundred
Livers for the College, the sum of four thousand three hundred and eight
Livers, sixteen Sous.

27. To the Province of Britain for eleven Pastors, two Proposans, one Portion
for Nants, and eight more supernumerary, in all two and twenty Portions, and
four hundred Livers for the College, the sum of nine hundred and ninety Livers,
fourteen Sous.

28. To the Province of Dolphiny, for fourscore and three Pastors, eight
Proposans, and seven supernumerary Portions, in all ninety and eight Portions,
and four hundred Livers for the College, the sum of sixteen thousand three
hundred fifty nine Livers, six Sous.

29. To Monsieur du Bois, for one Portion, the sum of one hundred sixty two
Livers, seventeen Sous.

Another Dividend of the sum of six and fifty thousand, two hundred and fifty
Livers, which is the fourth Quarter, and to be distributed among the Churches
only.

1. To the Province of the Isle of France, four thousand three hundred twenty
three Livers.

2. To the Province of Poictou, three thousand six hundred sixty eight Livers.

3. To the Province of Lower Languedoc, four thousand four hundred thirty four
Livers.

4. To the Province of Berry, two thousand eight hundred and twenty Livers, and
ten Sous.

5. To the Province of Xaintonge, four thousand nine hundred seventy eight
Livers.

6. To the Province of Burgundy, two thousand three hundred and sixty Livers.

7. To the Province of Vivaretz, two thousand four hundred eighty nine Livers.

8. To the Province of Anjou, two thousand one hundred sixty two Livers.

9. To the Province of Higher Languedoc, six thousand fifty eight Livers, ten
Sous.

10. To the Province of Lower Guyenne, five thousand three hundred seventy one
Livers.

11. To the Province of Sevennes, four thousand three hundred eighty eight
Livers, ten Sous.

12. To the Province of Normandy, three thousand six hundred sixty eight Livers.

13. To the Province of Provence, one thousand six hundred eighty Livers.

14. To the Province of Britain, one thousand four hundred forty five Livers.

15. To the Province of Dolphiny, six thousand four hundred and nineteen Livers.

16. A Portion to the Sieur du Bois, sixty five Livers, ten Sous.

Acted and Decreed in the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France,
held at Vitre, the eighteenth day of May, and the days following, in the year
of our Lord one thousand six hundred and seventeen.

Signed by Andrew Rivett, Moderator. Chauve, Assessor. D. Jammet, and Biggot,
Scribes,
And by all the Deputies of the Provinces, both Pastors and Elders.
The number of Pastors then actually in service in those Churches were seven
hundred and thirty one, and of Proposans sixty six.



The End of the First Volume.
Synodicon in Gallia Reformata:

OR, THE Acts, Decisions, Decrees and Canons OF THE SEVEN LAST National
Councils OF The Reformed Churches IN FRANCE: A WORK never before Extant in any
LANGUAGE.

Collected and Composed Out of the ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT ACTS of those COUNCILS.Z

VOL. II.

By JOHN QVICK, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson for Thomas Parkhurst at the Three Bibles and
Crown in Cheapside, and for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCII.

THE CONTENTS OF THE National Synod OF ALEZ.
Chap. I. DEputies to the Synod. Synodical Officers chosen. Chap. II. Letters
from the Duke of Rohan. The Pastors of Alez sit in the Synod? Oaths taken by
the Deputies that they had not procured themselves to be Elected. 3. Monsieur
Turretin no Deputy, yet has the privilege of a Deputy in this Synod. Letters
from the D. of Lesdiguieres, and from the Lord of Chastillon. Chap. III. Oaths
of Union. Chap. IV. Observations upon the Confession of Faith. Confession
sworn. Chap. V. Observations upon the Discipline. A Case about a Solemn Fast on
Days of Ordination. 2. About Proposans fit for the Ministry. 3. Catechizing
enjoined. 5. A Cannon about Habits and Fashions, especially of Ministers and
their Families. 6, 7. About Deposed Ministers. 9. A Case about the Readers in
Churches. 12. A Cannon of the N. S. of Privas inserted into the Discipline. 16.
Whether the Banes of Strangers may be published. 17, 18. The Discipline
approved and sworn. Chap. VI. Observtions on the National Synod of Vitre.
Elders without the Pastor cannot suspend a Person from the Lords Table. 2. The
Case of Mr. Beauchamps Pastor to the D. of Rohan. 3. A Select number of Pastors
to be chosen out of the Churches to be made Professors upon a Vacancy in the
Universities. 4. The prudent care of the Synod against pragmatical Ministers.
6. Non-Residents declared Rebels against the Discipline. 8. Samuel de Fresnay
encouraged by the Synod. 9. The Case of Mr. Chauveton. 10. Of Mr. D' Anglade.
11. Of Mr. Guerin. 12. Of the Booksellers of Geneva. 14. Chap VII. Mr. Chauve
reports why neither himself, nor the Sieurs Du Moulin, Chamier and Rivet went
not to the Synod of Dort. 16. The Case of Mr. Bennet. 17. Chap. VIII. Of
Appeals. Of Mr. Gaussens. 3. Of Mr. La Cost. 4. Of Mrs. De Sales. 5. Of Mr.
Rossens. 6. Of Mr. De la Fage. 11. Of Mr. de la Garie. 12. Of Mr. de Rieu. 13.
Of the Church of Privas. 17. Of the Baron of Ganges. 19. Of Mr. Gallpin. 20. Of
Discipline severely but justly exercised upon Two Scandalous Ministers. 24, 25.
The Case of Mr. Des Maretz. 29. A Cannon made against filling of Consistories
with Relations. 31. The Case of Mr. De Monsanglard. 36. Cottelier a Scandalous
Minister Deposed. 50. Of Mr. Mahaut. 56. Discipline exercised upon a Scandalous
Minister. 65. Chap. IX. Of General Matters. Ministers may not intermeddle with
any Political Affairs. 1. Palot's Business. 4. Act for the National Fast. 5.
About Proposans. 6. Huberus comes to this Synod again with his Petition. 10.
Care for Ministers Maintenance. 17. Advice to the Pastors of Geneva. 20. Chap.
X. Form of Excommunication. Chap. XI. The Cannons of the Synod of Dort
incorporated with those of the Churches of France. Chap. XII. The Oath taken by
the Deputies against Arminianisme. An Order to the Lord of Candals Deputy.
Chap. XIII. Particular Matters. Mr. Martin's Relation of his Book, Le Capuchin
Reformed. 1. A Minister Emeritus cared for. 2. The sad case of the Church of
Privas. 7. A Spanish Protestant cared for. 11. The sad State of the Church of
Issoire. 20. Chap. XIV. Of Canons for the Province of Provence. Chap. XV. Of
Colleges and Universities. Chap. XVI. Of Accounts. Chap. XVI. Of Laws for the
Universities of the Reformed Churches in France. Chap. XVIII. Of Dividends of
Moneys amongst the Provinces. Chap. XIX. Of the Lord of Candal's Accounts.
Chap. XX. Of Moneys which the Synod ordered the Lord of Candal to pay to
Provinces and particular Persons. Chap. XXI. Of the Catalogue of Apostates and
Deposed Ministers.
The Synod of Alez. 1620. The 23th. Synod.

SYNOD XXIII. 1620.
In the Name of God. Amen.
Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches in France, and
Principality of Bearne held at Alez in Sevennes, the First Day of October, and
the Days following, in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred and
Twenty.

CHAP. I. Deputies and Officers of the SYNOD.
1 IN which there met for the Province of the Isle of France, Monsieur Peter du
Moulin Pastor of the Church of Paris, Isaac de Juigne Pastor of the Church of
Vassy, and Thomas Papillon Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, and Elder of
the Church there gathered. Monsieur de Marolles Elder in the Church of Vitry
was nominated in the Letters of Commission, but absent; however he did by
Letters written under his own hand excuse his absence; which Letters were
remanded back unto his Provincial Synod to judge of them.

2. For the Province of Normandy, Monsieur Samuel de L' Escherpiere Lord of
Riviere Pastor in the Church of Rouen, Daniel Massys Pastor in the Church of
Caen, Antony Bridon Esquire Lord of Boisleroy Elder in the Church of Fescamp, and
James de Montbray, Esquire Advocate in the Court of Vires, and Elder in the Church
of Conde.

3. For the Province of Britain, Monsieur Ezechiel Marmet Pastor of the Church
gathered in the House of My Lord Duke of Rohan, and Philip de Vassaut, Esquire Lord
of Pennonstet, Elder of the Church of Roche Bernard.

4. For the Province of Orleans and Berry Monsieur Daniel Jammet Pastor in the
Church of St. Amand, Nicolas Vigner Pastor in the Church of Blois, John de
Bennis Advocate, Elder in the Church of Gien, and Galliot de Gambris Esquire Lord
of Soussesse Elder in the Church of Romorantin.

5. For the Province of Tourain and Anjou, Monsieur Samuel Bouchereau Pastor in
the Church of Saumur, Matthew Cottieres Pastor in the Church of Tours, George
Rabboteau Advocate, Elder in the Church of Pruilly, and Monsieur de la Plant
Elder of the Church of Saumur being absent, and excusing himself by Letters,
his excuses were admitted.

6. For the higher and lower Poictou, Monsieur John Chauffepied Pastor of the
Church at Niort, John Carre Pastor of the Church at Castelheraud, Giles Begand
Lord of la Begaudiere Elder in the Church of Mountagu, and Esajah du Mas Esquire
Lord of Montmartyn, excusing his absence because he fell sick upon the way unto
this Synod, his Excuse was admitted.

7. For Xaintonge Mr. Daniel Chanet Pastor of the Church or Ars in the Isle of
Re; John Constans Pastor of the Church of Pons, Peter Packquet Elder of the
Church of Rochefoucault, Peter Fromentin Elder of the Church of St. John D'
Angaly.

8. For the lower Guyenne Mr. James du Luc Pastor of the Church of
Castlejatoux, James Private, Pastor of the Church of Chastillon: Francis Joly
Counselor and Secretary to the King, and his Auditor in the Chancery of
Bourdeaux, and Elder of the Churchthere; and John Guillim de Boutieres Esquire Lord
of Artigues, Elder in the Church of Grateloup.

9. For Vivaret, Mr. David Agard Pastor in the Church of Valence, Daniel
Richard Pastor of the Church of Cheilar, John de Blache Lord of Blesset Elder
of the Church in Bouffres, and John de Roure Advocate, Elder of the Church of
Aubenas.

20. For the lower Languedoc Mr. Laurence Brunier Pastor of the Church of Vsez,
Michael le Faucheur Pastor of the Church of Montpellier, Charles de Bouques
Lord of Pons, Doctor of the Civil Law, and Elder of the Church of Montpellier,
and Antony de Roques Lord of Clausonne Elder in the Church of Montfrin.

11. For the higher Languedoc and Guyenne Monsieur John de Voysin Pastor of the
Church of Realmont, and Antony Garissoles Pastor of the Church of Puylaurent,
Paul de Luffee Lord of Maraval, Governor of Mavesin, and Elder of the Church
there, James du Puy Deputy-Lieutenant in the Seneschalsy of Montauban, and
Elder of that Church.

12. For ^urgundy Mr. Peter Helliot Pastor of the Church of Arnay le Due,
Francis Pereault Pastor of the Church of Mascon, and Noel du Noyer Elder of the
Church of Bussy. Monsieur Salmasius was nominated Deputy unto this Assembly,
but excused himself by Letters, as also did Monsieur Guichard, and Forest, who
beigg Elders were both substituted in his place, whose excuses were remanded
back unto their Province that it might judge of their validity.

13. For the Province or Provence Mr. Peter Huron Pastor in the Church of Reis,
Elias de Glandevi^ Lord of Anjou Elder in the Church of Puymichel.

14. For the Province of Dolphiny, Mr. Paul Guyon Pastor of the Church of Dieu
le sit, Peter de la Croze Pastor of the Church in Courtezon, James Bernard
Advocate, Elder of the Church in Montlimart; and Moses du Port Elder of the
Church de la Meure, the Lord of Champoleon was also nominated in the Letters of
Commission, but excused himself by Letters unto this Assembly.

15. For the Province of Sevennes Monsieur Peter Guillamin Pastor of the Church
of St. Andrew de Valborgne, Daniel Venturin Pastor of the Church of Vigan, John
de Vignoles Lord of Bonnet Elder in the Church of Colegnac, and John Baldwin
Doctor of Laws Elder in the Church of la Salle.

16. There came also for the Churches in the Principality of Bearne, Monsieur
Peter L' abbadye Pastor of the Church of Paw, and John de la Cost Lord of
Padet Elder of the Church of Moneing. In whose Letters of Commission there
being wanting the clause of Submission, that Article of the Synod of Vitre was
read unto them relating to it. Whereupon they offering their reasons why they
could not entirely subject themselves unto the Discipline of our Churches in
France, principally because of the present juncture of Affairs. They were
admitted to a consultive Vote, under the limitations expressed in that Act of
the Synod of Vitre, that it should be left to the Will of the Provinces,
Whether they should have a decisive Vote in certain Cases concerning the
Churches of this Kingdom, and this by provision only until the next National
Synod.

17. The Sieur Chalas one of the General Deputies of the Reformed Churches in
this Kingdom near His Majesty was present also in this Assembly according to
the Charge given the said Lords General Deputies in the last general Assembly
held at Loudun, and Order of our Church.

After Invocation of the Name of God, the Reverend Monsieur Peter du Moulin was
chosen Moderator, Mr. Brunier Assessor, and Messieurs Vignier and Papillon
Scribes,

CHAP. II. Remarks and Passages of the First Session.
LEtters were presented from the Lord Duke of Rohan unto this Assembly, whereby
he assured them of the continuance of his Zeal and Affection to the Glory of
God, and to the weal and happiness of our Churches, for which he had the thanks
of the Assembly returned him in their Letters.

2. Messieurs des Maretz and Ollyer Pastors of the Church of Alez petitioning
to be admitted into this Assembly, and to assist at the reading of our
Confession of Faith, and Church Discipline, it was granted them as also unto
two Elders whom the Consistory should appoint, but as for such Ministers as
were not commissionated hither by their Churches and all other Persons the
Canons of the Third Synod of Rochel and that last of Vitre should be punctually
observed. Vitre. Act 4. after the List of the Deputyes.


3. Every one of the Deputies in this Assembly took the Oath according to the
Decree made in the Synod of Privas that they had not brigued their Deputation
unto this place neither directly nor indirectly, Privas, Act. 1. after the
Names of the Deputyes.
neither for themselves nor for any others. And this shall be observed in like
manner for the future in all our National Synods.

4. Monsieur ^uretin Pastor and Professor in Divinity in the Church and
University of Geneva having brought Letters from the Pastors and Professors
there fully testifying and expressing their Holy Affection to the Churches of
this Kingdom, and of their most near and intimate communion with us, was
entreated by this Assembly to give us his presence during his abode in this
City, and to take place among us, and to communicate his Counsels and Votes in
matters that should be proposed, which he also did. And after mature and exact
consideration of the several clauses in those Letters tendered by him, an
Answer was made unto them.

5. The Letters of the Lord But he sometime after revolted.
Duke of Desdiguieres were also presented unto this Assembly, expressing his
desire for the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Letters of Thanks
were ordered to be sent unto His Excellency.

6. Monsieur Bansillon Pastor in the Church of Aiguemortes having brought
Letters from the Lord of Chastillon, and by word of mouth given this Assembly
the Protestations of the said Lord after the Heroic Example of his Famous
Ancestors to spend himself and Estate in the advancement of Christ's Kingdom,
was desired to carry back Letters of Thanks from this Synod unto that Noble
Lord.

CHAP. III. An Act of the Oath of Union subscribed by all the Deputyes, both
Pastors and Elders.
The same Oath was Enacted at Tenneins 1014.
WE whose Names are hereunder written Deputies of the Reformed Churches of
France assembled in our National Synod in the City of Alez in the Province of
Sevennes, knowing by experience of what is past, that there is nothing more
necessary to preserve the peace and welfare of the said Churches than an holy
Union and inviolable consent both in Doctrine and Discipline, and their
dependencies, and that the said Churches cannot long subsist without a good,
strict, and mutual Union and Conjunction of one with another, and this better
kept and maintained than heretofore. Therefore being desirous for the future to
remove all seeds of Division, and occasion of partialities between the said
Churches, and to obviate all Impostures, Plots, Calumnies, and Practices
whatsoever by which diverse Persons ill-affected to our Religion do endeavor
its ruin and destruction; for which reason we are more bound than ever to use
by an Unanimous consent and agreement such means as will most and best
contribute to our just, lawful, and necessary preservation in the aforesaid
Union under the Authority of Our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Queen Regent
his Mother, We have in the name of all those Churches, and for their welfare,
and for the Service of Their Majesty's sworn and protested, and do swear and
protest, promising that we will see these our Protestations ratified in all our
respective Provinces, to continue inseparably United and Conjoined in that
Confession of Faith owned and professed by the Reformed Churches of this
Kingdom, confirmed, approved and ratified by us all: We swear as well in our
own names as in the names of the Churches and Provinces which have
Commissionated us to be their Deputies unto this Assembly, that we will live
and die in this Confession: Moreover we do profess that we will keep inviolably
that Ecclesiastical Discipline, which is Established in the Reformed Churches
of this Kingdom, and observe its Cannons for the Government of the said
Churches, and the Reformation of manners, owning and acknowledging that it is
agreeable to the Word of God, under whose Supreme and Inviolable Authority we
protest and swear to yield all Obedience and Fidelity to Their Majesty's,
desiring nothing more, than through the favor of their Edicts to serve our God
without any violence offered to our Consciences.

Sworn and Subscribed by Peter de Moulin Moderator of the Synod, Minister of
the Church of Paris, and Deputy for the Isle of France, Picardy, Champaigne,
etc. By Lawrence Brunier Assessor, Minister of Christ in the Church of Usez,
Deputy for lower Languedoc. By Nicholas Vignier Minister of Christ in the
Church of Blois, Scribe of the Synod, and Deputy of the Province of Orleans and
Berry. By Thomas Papillon, Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, and Elder of
that Church, Deputy for the Isle of France, and Scribe of the Synod.


Sworn and Subscribed by Isaac de Juigne, Pastor of the Church of Vassy and
Deputy for the Isle of France, Picardy, Champaigne, etc.

2. By Samuel de L' Escherpiere, Lord de la Riviere Minister of the Word of God
at Roan, by Daniel Massys Pastor of the Reformed Church in Caen, by James de
Montbray Elder of the Church of Conde upon Noireau, and by Anthony Bridou Lord
of Boissleroy Elder in the Church of Fescamp Deputies for the Province of
Normandy.

3. Sworn and subscribed by Paui Guyon Minister of the Word of God in the
Church of Dieu le fit, by Peter de la Croze Minister of the Holy Gospel in the
Church of Courtozen in the Principality of Orange, by Moses du Port Esquire Doctor
of Law and Advocate, Elder in the Church of la Mure, By James Bernard Doctor of
Law and Advocate, Elder in the Church of Montlimart, Deputies for the Province
of Dolphiny.

4. Sworn and subscribed by Paul Huron Pastor of the Church of Riez, by Elijah
de Glandeves, Lord of Ajon, Elder in the Church of Puymichel, Deputies for the
Province of Provence

5. Sworn and Subscribed by Daniel Venturin, Pastor of the Church of Vigan, by
Peter Guillaumine Pastor of the Church of St. Andrews de Valborgne, by John de
Vignoles Lord of St. Bonnet and of Colegnuc Elder of the same Church, by John
Baudouin Doctor of the Civil Laws and Elder in the Church de la Salle, Deputies
for the Province of Sevennes.

6. Sworn and subscribed by Ezechiel Marmet Pastor of the Church gathered in
the House of my Lord Duke of Rohan, by Philip de Vassaut Esquire Lord of Penmoncel,
Elder in the Church of Roche Bernard, Deputies for the Province of Britain.

7. Sworn and subscribed by Daniel Jamett Pastor of the Church in St. Amand in
Bourbonnois, by Galliot de Combis, Lord of Soustelle, Elder of the Church of
Romorantin, by John de Benes, Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, and Elder of
the Church of Guyan, Deputies for the Province of Orleans and Berry, etc.

8. Sworn and subscribed by Peter Heliot, Pastor of the Church of Arnay le
Due, by Francois Perreault Minister of the Gospel in the Church of Mascon, by
Noel du Noyer Lord of Joncey, Elder in the Church of Bussy, Deputies for the
Province of Burgundy, Lyonnois, Bresse, etc.

9. Sworn and subscribed by Daniel Chanet Pastor of the Church of Ars in the
Isle of Re, by John Constans Pastor of the Church of Pons, by Pasquet Elder of
the Church of Rochefoucault, by Peter Formentin Esquire Lord of Chastinat, Sheriff
of the City of St. John d' Angely, Deputies for the Province of Xaintonge,
Aunix, and Augoulmois

10. Sworn and subscribed by John de Voisin Pastor of the Church of Realmont
in Albigeois, by Anthony Garissoles Pastor of the Church of Puylaurent in
Lauragais, By Paul de Luffee Lord of Maravaut and Governor of Maulterin in
Armagnac, Elder of the same Church, by James du Puy Elder of the Church of
Montauban Deputies for the Province of higher Languedoc, and the higher Guyenne.

11. Sworn and subscribed by J. Chauffepied Pastor of the Church of Niort, by
John Carre Pastor of the Church of Chastelheraut, by Giles Begaud Lord of la
Begaudiere, Elder of the Church of Mountagu, Deputies for the Province of
Poictou.

12. Sworn and subscribed by Samuel Bouchereau Pastor of the Church of Saumur,
by Matthew Cottiere Minister of Gods Word at Tours, by G. Raboteau Elder in the
Church of Pruylly, Deputies for the Province of Anjou, Touraine and le Main.

13. Sworn and subscribed by Peter de Abbadie, Pastor of the Church of Pau, by
John de la Cost Lord of Badett Plaisance and of Monheim Elder of the Church in
Monheim now mentioned, Deputies for the Principality of Bearn.

14 Sworn and subscribed by John du Luc Pastor of the Church of Castle jaloux,
by James Private Pastor of the Church of Castelle upon the Dordogne, by Francois
Joly Elder of the Church of Bourdeaux, by John de Boutiers, Squire of the Kings
Body, and Lord of Artigues, Elder in the Church of Grateloup, Deputies for the
Province of the lower Guyenne.

15. Sworn and subscribed by David Agard Pastor of the Church of Vaylance, and
of Soyon, by Danlel Richard Pastor of the Church of Chedard in Batiere, by John
de la Blache Lord of Blesset, Elder of the Church de la Bastie, by John de
Rovre Doctor of the Civil Laws, Lord of Esbonaud, Elder in the Church of
Aubenas, Deputies for the Province of Vivaretz.

16. Sworn and subscribed by Michael le Faucheur Pastor of the Church of
Montpellier, by Anthony de Raques Lord of Claussonnes Elder of the Church of
Montfrin, by Charles de Bouques Lord of Pons, Doctor of the Civil Laws, Elder
of the Church of Montpellier, Deputies for the Province of Lower Languedoc.

17. Sworn and subscribed by John de Chal'ais General Deputy for the Reformed
Churches of France near His Majesty.

The Sieurs Des Marez and Ollier Pastors of the Church of Alez craved admission
into this Assembly, and leave to assist at the Reading of our Confession of
Faith and Church Discipline, which was granted not only for themselves but for
two Elders also, who should be chosen out of the Body of their Consistory.

And whereas diverse other Pastors, who were not commissionated by the Provinces
did take upon them to come unto this National Synod, and to sit and tarry in it
as Spectators during the whole time of its Sessions, the former Cannons made by
the National Synods of Rochell and Vitre were now revived, and ordered to be
put in execution against them.

CHAP. IV. Observations upon the Confession of Faith.
1. THE Word Unity which is found in diverse printed Copies of the Six and
Twentieth Article must be changed into that of Union, according to the former
Advice given in the National Synods of Montauban, Saumur and Rochell.

2. The Confession of Faith having been read word by word, and examined in
every particular Point and Article thereof was most unanimously approved and
sworn to by all the Deputies then present, who did not only promise and
protest to live and die in this Faith; but also to procure its observation in
their respective Provinces, and to cause it to be sworn by their Principals by
whom they were Commissionated.

CHAP. V. Observations on the Church Discipline.
St. Maixant Observat. 2.
1 ALL Two other Copies read, our Provinces.
our Churches are Exhorted to govern themselves in the Election, Examination,
and Ordination of their Pastors according to that Order prescribed in the
Fourth Cannon of the First Chapter: And whereas the Provinces of both the
Languedocs and Sevennes have usually begun with an examine, they shall
henceforward conform themselves punctually to that Article.

2. The Province of Anjou moved, whether a Solemn Fast ought not to be
observed at the Ordination of Ministers. A Decree past that nothing should be
innovated in this matter, but the former Customs should be retained; only if
there was a particular necessity for it, the Third Canon in the Tenth Chapter
of our Discipline shall be most exactly followed. 1 Paris Act. 34. Orleans Act.
5.


3. Upon the Ninth Canon of the First Chapter the said Province of Anjou
demanded, what is the Duty of that Church or Province which has a Proposan
every way fit for Employment in the Holy Ministry, and has not a vacant
Congregation for him, and he is earnestly importuned by some other Church or
Province to be lent unto them. This Assembly ordains that the Canon shall be
most exactly observed, That no Proposan shall be lent or sent without assigning
him to some particular Church to which he shall stand related as their Pastor.
And it his own Church or Province cannot employ the said Proposan, they may out
of their Charity grant him unto that Church or Province, which desires him of
them; where he shall be fixed as their own peculiar Minister.

4. The Provinces are Exhorted to make inquiry in their Synods whether the
Eleventh Canon be observed or transgressed; Ste Foy. Act. 7.
that so the Transgressors of it may be censured according to the former
Decrees of our National Synods.

5. Catechizing being a most necessary and prositable Ordinance, Ste Foy. Act.
7.
all the Provinces are enjoined to see the Twelfth Canon more carefully
observed in their Churches than it has been formerly; and the Provinces shall
give in an account hereof unto the next National Synod.

6. This ensuing Cannon made by the Synod of Privas shall be read in all
Consistories, that so the scandals given by Pastors Transgressors of it may be
prevented for the future; and all Consistories shall give in an account thereof
unto Colloquies, and Colloquies unto Provincial Synods, and Provincial Synods
unto the National.

7. Reading the In the Discipline Printed at Queville 1663. It is the 19. Act.
in 3. other Copies that I have it is the 20. Act.
Eighteenth Canon in the First Chapter of our Discipline, which enjoined
Ministers See in the the Acts of the Synod of Privas, Observat. 2. upon the
Disciplie.
to exhort their People unto all Modesty in their Fashions and Habits, and they
themselves to go before them in a good Example they, their Wives, Children and
Families refraining all bravery in Apparel; Many Complaints were brought in
against diverse Ministers, whose Wives and Children transgressed this Holy
Canon, and were exceeding vain in their Habits, fashioning themselves according
to the World, and were very much estranged from that Modesty commanded and
expected from them and all theirs. This Assembly desirous to remedy such a
growing and notorious scandal, does give express charge unto all Moderators of
Colloquies and Provincial Synods to correct and reform these Excesses by
Censures and severe Reprehensions, and by the Authority of this Assembly to
suspend the Refractory from the Sacred Ministry, until such time as they have
removed all matters of offense. And that this Canon may be the better observed,
License is given unto all private Persons according to our Discipline to inform
the Consistories of the aforesaid Excesses, and to demand their Reformation.
Which being denied, they may address themselves unto the Colloquies for
Censures against these Offenders, In the Discipline printed at Queville 16. It
is the 20. In the latter Editions it is the 21. Act.
and all those who shall abett or countenance them in such their scandalous
miscarriages.

8. In those Copies of the Nineteenth Canon, where toward the end of it are
these words, To make but one and the self-same Church and Consistory, those
words one and the self-same Consistory shall be blotted out.

9. Upon the Fiftieth Canon there was this Observation. Forasmuch as through
the corruption of the Age in which we live it may so fall out, That a Minister
deposed in one Colloquie or Province may intrude himself into another, and take
upon him to preach the Word, before the Meeting of the National Synod, by which
all the Churches in this Kingdom may be advised of the said deposed Person.
This Assembly does Exhort all Pastors, and Consistories not easily to admit any
Stranger from another Province into the Pulpits, unless they be very well
acquainted with him. And as for Apostates, the Pastors of the adjoining
Churches in which they revolted live, shall give speedy and public notice of
these Apostates, that so none of our Churches or Ministers may be surprised by
them.

10. On the Second Canon of the Third Chapter, Ste Foy Act 9.
the Provinces of the higher and lower Languedoc were particularly enjoined to
observe the said Canon more carefully for the future.

11. The Second Canon of the Second Chapter shall be thus worded, Regents and
Schoolmasters shall subscribe our Confession of Faith and Church Discipline,
and no Towns nor Churches shall admit of any one without the consent of the
Consistory of that place.

12. On the Fifth Canon of the Fifth Chapter a Question was moved by the
Province of Provence, Whether a Person that was never called to the Office of
an Elder might warrantably read the Word of God, and the Common Prayers unto
the Church in the Ministers absence, especially in lesser Churches, which have
no Consistories, nor any Persons fit to read. This Assembly judges that the
Consistory has full liberty to choose any one whom it conceives meet to read
the Scriptures and Prayers, although he be not in the Eldership, provided he be
of sufficient years and unblameable Life, and that he have subscribed the
Confession of our Faith, and Church Discipline.

13. At the req^est of the Province of Sevennes to these words in the Sixteenth
Canon of the Fifth Chapter, Fathers and Mothers who marry their Children, shall
be added these following, Tutors, Guardians, and all other Persons instead of
Parents who dispose of their Orphans and Minors in Marriage.

14. These words as much as may be shall be rased out of the Ninth Canon of the
Twelfth Chapter. And in all the Provinces Pastors shall be obliged to
administer the Cup as well as the Bread unto every individual Communicant
without distinction of Persons, as also they shall use meet words in the
Administration of both the Elements to quicken the Hearts and Spirits of the
Communicants at the Lords Table. And express Order is given to all Provincial
Synods that they take special care that Pastors do not in the least transgress
this Canon.

15. On the Third Canon of the Thirteenth Chapter, the Province of Normandy
desired, That all the Churches of this Kingdom would conform themselves to
their Custom, That Espousals before Marriage should be Celebrated by Ministers
with Prayers and Exhortations to the betroathed Persons to prepare them for
that Holy Estate whereunto they be called. The Assembly though it praises and
approves of this their practice, and of them that observe it, yet did not
judge meet to oblige all Persons necessarily thereunto, but leave the faithful
unto their liberty.

16. On the Fifth Canon of the same Chapter there was made this reflection.
That whereas there is a great difference in diverse Copies of our
Church Discipline, that Canon which was made by the National Synod of Privas
shall be inserted word for word into the Body of our Discipline, To wit,
Henceforward all promises of Marriage and Espousals shall be made by words de
futuro, nor shall such promises be reputed as firm and undissolvable as the
words de Praesenti, because the words de praesenti do not promise Marriage, but
do effectually accomplish it. Nevertheless those words de futuro shall not be
dissolved without very great and lawful cause, Wherefore the Custom of some
certain Churches is condemned who celebrate Espousals by the Ministerial
Benediction of their Pastors with gift of Bodies by words de praesenti: For by
such a Solemnity we cannot but account the Parties to be truly and actually
Married, and that the Publication of Banes is thereby preposterous, done after
Marriage, and another Solemnization of the Marriage, in Gods Church is
needless. However we cannot disapprove of Ministers officiating at Espousals,
or that they should pray for, and Exhort the Parties betroathed to mutual Love,
Concord, Fidelity, and the Fear of God; but we would have them leave those
other Formalities, which serve only to render a Bond indissolvable, which
oftentimes we be constrained afterward to break by reason of Oppositions made
at the Publication of the Banes, and for diverse other Impediments which may
happen. For this cause all the Churches shall hereafter utterly abandon that
custom of Solemnizing Espousals in the Temple with those Formalities resembling
Marriage, and they shall conform themselves unto the other Churches of this
Kingdom.

17. On the Sixteenth Canon of the Thirteenth Chapter, the Province of Anjou
demanded, Whether we should suffer the Banes of Strangers, as Germans, Scots,
or any others to be published in our Churches, without having Certificates from
their Country, which will be very difficult to obtain, and possibly may be
counterfeit. This Assembly leaves the matter wholly to the prudence of
Consistories, and to act therein as will be most expedient, ordaining however
that if possible they should get Certificates.

18. On the same Canon the Province of lower Guyenne requested that another
might be made for the right ordering of Banes, which are mostly attended with
Titles full of vanity. Tins Assembly conceiving that such an Ordinance would
not take well with Persons of Quality, does therefore advise them to keep, as
much as possibly they can within the bounds of Christian Modesty and Simplicity.

Above the 1. Synod of Rochell. Observe. 59.
19. The Seventh Canon of the Fourteenth Chapter shall be couched in these words
Neither Counselors nor Attorneys at Law may plead in such Causes as tend to
the suppression of the word of God preached, nor to the setting un of Mass, nor
in any wise shall they be suffered to give Counsel or Assistance unto the
Romish Churchmen in those Causes which have a tendency directly or indirectly
to the oppression of the Church.

See Synod of Orleans. Act. 22.
20. The Province of Normandy demanding that the Eleven Canon of this Fourteenth
Chapter might be a little mollified, This Assembly ordained that it should
abide in its full and whole Power, according to what had bin decreed in the
Synod of Tonneins.

21. On the Sixteenth Canon, Synods, Paris 1. Act. 29.
Colloquies and Consistories are Exhorted to watch over Ministers and other
Persons, who shall publish their Works, and not first of all communicate them
in Manuscript to be perused and approved by the Divines thereunto appointed;
and the Transgressors of this Canon shall be most severely censured.

The Articles of our Discipline having been read and diligently considered were
sworn to by all the Pastors and Elders Deputed unto this Assembly, both in
their private and public Capacities, and they promised for themselves and
Provinces to see them faithfully and carefully observed.

CHAP. VI. Observations made on Reading the Acts of the last National Synod
held at Vitre.
1. THAT Article enjoining Monsieur Rivett to compose an History of those
Remarkable Providence which had befallen our Churches, (...) observe. (...)
upon the (...).
being read, together with his Excuses by Letters for nonperformance, the
Provinces not having communicated to him their Memorials as they were ordered;
This Assembly commands that Letters shall be dispatched to Monsieur Buffon
Lieutenant General of Casteljaloux exhorting him to prosecute this great Work
undertaken by him of writing the History of our times, and that he would be
pleased before it go unto the Press to impart it unto the Synod of his
Province; and all the other Provinces be charged to send unto him their Memoirs.

2 P^^^ Ob^arv. 2. upon the Synod of ^^^^ins.
2. In reading that Canon of Tonneins inserted into the last Synod of Vitre,
which gave leave unto Elders in Consistory, the Pastor being excepted against,
to suspend a Scandalous Person from the Lords Table: The Provinces of Berry and
Sevennes remonstrating that many and great inconveniences might fall out by
the Execution of such an Ordinance. This Assembly Decreed, That although for
good and just causes the Pastor had been excepted against, yet the Elders only
by themselves might not proceed to suspend any Person from the Lords Table,
without the Presence and Approbation of a Neighbor Pastor.

3. On that Article concerning Monsieur de Beauchamp, 2. Vitre. Appeal. 2.
which enjoined the Province of Britain to give him satisfaction for his
Pension due unto him for his Four Years Service, Minister in the House of the
Lord Duke of Rohan; and the rather, because the said Province had for that
whole time received the Portion of the said Monsieur Boauchamp out of the
Moneys given us by His Majesty's liberality: And the Letter of the said
Minister were read, in which he complained of the Injustice of the said
Province, and requested that a particular Church of Anjou might be appointed by
the Authority of this National Synod to adjudge unto him the Sum of Eight
Hundred Ninety and Eight Livres, Ten Sous, and Nine Deniers which are Owing
him, and be detained in the hands of Monsieur Boitereul Receiver of the said
Province of Britain. This Assembly decrees that Monsieur de Beauchamp and
Monsieur de Pestere for the Province (the Deputies of Britain declaring that
all Writings concerning this Affair are lodged with him) shall appear before
the Consistory of Saumur on the First day of April next, that so their Accounts
being Audited the Consistory of the said Church of Saumur may by the Authority
of this Assembly finally determine this Matter. And in the mean while the said
Sum of Eight Hundred Ninety and Eight Livres, Ten Sous and Nine Deniers shall
be stopped in the Hands of the said Receiver of the Province of Britain, to be
restored unto the said Monsieur de Beauchamp in case it be found due unto him.

2. Vitre g^ m. 6 Below of Univers. 12.
4. Whereas the Provinces had been Exhorted by the Synod of Vitre to consult by
what means our Universities might be provided of Professors in Divinity. This
Assembly having heard the Opinion of sundry Provinces here tendered by their
Deputies, decreed, That for this purpose there should be chosen out a certain
number of Pastors in the Actual Service of these Reformed Churches, without
burdening our selves with a new Fund, or choosing Scholars, who by reason of
their sew years and inexperience are less fit to govern the Youth in our
Universities.

5. Monsieur Boucherau having been heard about those complaints made in the
Synod of Vitre, concerning the Excessive Rates paid by our Students at Saumur
for their Lodging and Diet, This Assembly was fully satisfied of the
groundlessness of those complaints.

2. Vitre. g.m. 17. 2 Vitre. g. m. 21.
6. That Canon forbidding Ministers to preach their own private Sentiments on
State Affairs being read, and Report made unto this Synod that several
Ministers had acted contrary to it in the last political Assembly held at
Loudun. This National Synod desirous to stifle all Seeds of Division forbore
looking into what is past; but for the future it did straightly forbid all
Ministers to treat of State-Matters in their Sermons or Pulpit Discourses, on
pain of being suspended the Holy Ministry, because the only Subject of their
Sermons and public Preaching should be the Holy Word of God; and the venting
of State-Matters by them exposes the Gospel of Our Lord Jesus unto contempt,
and the Provinces shall take special care that an Account hereof be given by
their Deputies when they return from the General Politic Assembly, as also of
what may be foisted in of this nature into their Writings and Printed Works.

7. These words, as much as may be, shall be razed out of that Canon which had
enjoined the Churches to sing full parts of Psalms, 2. Vitre. g. m. 31.
and so conform themselves into that Ancient Custom in use with us ever since
the Reformation.

8. The last Synod of Vitre had enjoined sundry Ministers of the higher
Languedoc residing in the City of Montauban, 2. Vitre. g. m. 38.
and not in their own Churches, to depart thence, and to live actually they and
their Families in those places where they be fixed Pastors, and that within
Three Months after Notice given them of this Decree, and in case of
disobedience it was expressly declared to them that they should be suspended,
yea, and they were then denounced to be Suspended from the Holy Ministry. But
now the Letters and Excuses of the Sieurs Richard Pastor of the Church of Muzac
and Islemade, of Benoist Pastor of Albai and Realville, and of du Mas Pastor of
Verlai, dwelling at Montauban being read, and the Provincial Deputyes of higher
Languedoc having been heard speak about them: This Assembly besides their
Suspension judges those Ministers to be guilty of open Rebellion against our
Order and Church Discipline, and to have despised very many of our National
Synods, and to have abandoned their Flocks, and therefore it declares them to
be Usurpers of the Sacred Ministry; and farther it does very severely censure
that Province of higher Languedoc for suffering such great Disorders so long a
time unpunished, and the Consistory of the Church of Montauban for permitting
them to preach after the Declaration made of their Suspension at Vitre; and
farther confirming the aforesaid Sentence, it declares the said Benoist and
Richard to be suspended the Holy Ministry for Three Months to Commence from
that very day when as this present Act shall be signified to them, and if in
case within Three Months time they do not obey the Canons of our National
Synods, and reside personally among their People, they are from this very
instant deposed. And as for the Sieur du Mas this Assembly does as yet grant
him one Month more after that this Decree shall be notified to him, and in
case he be not then Obedient, and reside on his Church, he is, declared
suspended from the Holy Ministry, which said Suspension shall continue upon him
till he do conform; and the Portions or Moneys arising from His Majesty's
Bounty that might accrue unto them as unto other conformable Ministers shall be
detained by the Lord du Candal in his own hands until such time as they have
entirely satisfied this present Synod and this its Ordinance. But
notwithstanding all that is imported in this Censure Monsieur Gardesy is
Excepted, he having a lawful Excuse for his Abode at Montauban, by reason of
his great Age, and for his laudable Travels undertook and sustained by him for
the Service of Gods Church in the Flower and Vigor of his Youth: And this
present Act shall be Sinned and Authenticated by the Manual Subscriptions of
the Moderator, Assessor, and both the Scribes of this Synod, and shall be read
and signisied both in the Consistory of the Church of Montauban, and in the
respective Consistories of the Churches of those forementioned Ministers by
the Deputies of the Province of Lower Guyenne, at the Charges of the Province
of Higher Languedoc, and they shall be allowed Six and Thirty Livres to defray
their Charges, which shall be paid them in by the Lord of Candal out of the
Moneys belonging to the Province of Higher Languedoc. And that Province is
commanded to see the Discipline more exactly observed, especially in the point
of Pastors Residence in their Churches.

9. Samuel du Fresne Student in Divinity in obedience to the Order of the last
Synod held at Vit^e presented himself before this Assembly, bringing with him
Testimonials from the Consistory of the Church of Saumur, certifying of his
Piety, Religious Conversation, Soundness in Doctrine, diligence in visiting and
comforting the Sick, and of his Silence when admitted to assist at their
Consistorial Sessions, and the Rector and Pro^^ssors of the University
attesting the same things also, and that on all occasions whether by Theses
publicly defended, or private Conferences and Discourses, and by Propositions
from the Word of God he has manifested his good Learning and Proficiency in
the Languages and Divinity: This Assembly giving Credence to his Attestations
has granted to the said Samuel du Fresne the Sum of One Hundred Livres for
his Journey hither, and Two Hundred Livres more for his maintenance for One
Year, in which time he may be called out unto the Ministry in some one of our
Churches.

10. The Sieur Chauveton having been condemned by the Synod of Vitre to pay the
Sum of Three Hundred Livres to the Province of the Isle of France, 2. Vitre.
p. m. 17.
which had maintained him in his Studies, or in case of his default the
Provinces of Lower Guyenne in which he is now Minister was to make satisfaction
for him. The Letters of the said Chauveton were read by which he humbly
requesteth to be discharged from paying that great Sum, because it was not
long of himself, that he returned not within the time prescribed unto his
Church of Claye, where he once served, but because of the many heavy Domestic
Burdens that lay sore upon him. And the Province of Lower Guyenne being heard
in their Remonstrances made by them upon this Account: The Assembly confirmed
the Decree of the former National Synod, and that it might be Executed, the
Lord of Candal is ordered to keep the said Sum of Three Hundred Livres in his
own hand, out of the Moneys belonging to the Lower Guyeune from the Kings
Liberality, that so they may be restored unto the Province of the Isle of
France, and Monsieur de Chauveton may be acquitted from all Payment, because of
his great Poverty, which was fully notified unto this National Synod.

11. On that Affair of the Sieur d' Anglade concerning Arrearages of Sallary
pretended to be due unto him by the Province of Lower Languedoc for his
possession of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of Nismes, 2 Vitre. p. m. 18.
his Letters having been read, and the Judgment of the Province of Seventies on
the Account produced by him: This Assembly decrees Four Hundred Livres unto
the said Sieur d' Angtade, to wit, Three Hundred Livres to be paid him out of
the Moneys appropriated to the University of Nismes, and owing to him as
Professor of the Hebrew Tongue there; and an Hundred Livres more out of the
Common Stock of the Province of Lower Languedoc, and these Moneys arising from
both these Funds shall be paid in unto him by the Lord of Candal.

12. Whereas the Province of Berry has yielded that the Church of Moulins
should be incorporated with the Province of Burgundy, this Act of theirs is
confirmed by the Authority of this National Synod: And as to that difference
between the said Church of Moulins, and the Province of Berry, about Moneys due
unto it from the Province, 2. Vitre. p. m. 22.
as Monsieur John Durand their Pastor had made report thereof unto this
Assembly: They shall account with the Deputy of the said Province at their next
Synod, who shall come into Burgundy on purpose to terminate this Affair. And in
case they should not agree, the Province of Anjou shall put a final period to
it by the Authority of this Assembly.

13. Reading that Article concerning the Sieur Guerin Pastor of the Church of
Baugencey, who together with diverse other Persons of the Province of Orleans
and Berry stand bound in a very great Sum of Money. 2. Vitre. p. m. 26.
The Deputies of the said Province having remonstrated that notwithstanding all
their Urgencies and Importunities with the Marquis of Rosny, and the repeated
instances of our General Deputies at Court with the said Lord, they could never
get from him so much as one Farthing; by reason whereof the said Monsieur
Guerin and his Sureties are in great trouble, and threatened that they shall be
compelled will they nill they to make payment, or else to lie and die in
Prison. Wherefore they most humbly petition this Assembly to have compassion on
the said Guerin and his Suretyes, and to continue unto him that self-same
Charitable Assistance until the next National Synod, which was granted him in
the last. This Assembly would most cordially have complied with their Desires:
But being bound up by His Majesty's Order, It cannot divert the Moneys given
our Ministers for their Ministerial Labors unto any other Uses.

14. Upon that complaint of John le Febure Bookseller and Citizen of Geneva
against the Sieur Menuielle, the younger, 2. Vitre. p. m. 21.
at present Minister and Pastor of the Church of Orthez, whose Judgment had bin
dismissed to the Synod of Bearn, which also was advised to enjoin him to go
unto Geneva, and there to justify himself from the Crime imputed to him before
the Magistrates of that City, and in default thereof that Synod was to suspend
him from the Ministry. Now after hearing the Relation of all passages done at
Geneva both before the Magistrate and Consistory at the instance of the said le
Febre, and the Mediation of the said Menuielle's Friends to compound the matter
with him, and the Letters written by the said le Febure unto the Synod of
Bearn, the Shifts and Subterfuges of the said Menueille, and the Reasons
inducing the Synod of Bearn not to suspend him being all urged by their
Deputies. This Assembly not brooking that a Man blasted in his Reputation, and
accused of the Crime of Fornication, should be Countenanced in his Sin, and
encouraged in the Functions of the Sacred Ministry to the great Dishonor and
Reproach of so High and Holy a Calling, does once more Exhort the Synod or
Colloquie of Bearn to interdict the said Menuielle the Exercise of the
Ministry, until such time as he shall have fully cleared himself from the Crime
imputed to him. And notice hereof shall be given by Letters in our name unto
the Synod of Bearn, as also of some other matters, which we have judged fitting
to acquaint them with, according to that Communion which is betwixt us and
them, and these matters shall be notified to them by their Deputies.

15. The Synod of Vitre ordained the Sum of Four Hundred Livres should be
delivered unto the Lords our General Deputies for the defraying of several
Expenses that they should be necessitated to make at Court about Dispatches, 2.
Vitre. g. m. 41.
Expeditions, and other Extraordinary Charges for the Service of our Churches:
And the Lord of Bertreville formerly our Deputy General having sent unto this
Assembly an account of the disbursement of the said Sum made both by himself
and the Lord Maniald his Colleague in the Exercise of their Office, as also
that they had deposited in the hands of Monsieur de la Riviere Pastor of the
Church of Ronen an Hundred Sixty and Eight Livres, being the remainder of the
said Sum of Four Hundred Livres. This Assembly returns their most hearty
thanks unto the said Lord of Bertreville for his great care and faithfulness,
and ordains that the Sum aforesaid of an Hundred Sixty and Eight Livres should
be put into the Common Treasury of the Church, and that the like Sum of Four
Hundred Livres shall be paid in to the Lords de Favas and Chalais our General
Deputies to be used by them on the like occasions, according as the necessity
of our Affairs may demand it; and for which they shall be accountable unto the
next National Synod.

CHAP. VII. Monsieur Chauves 's Report.
16. MOnsieur John Chauve Pastor of the Church of Sommiers made Report how that
in pursuance of the Commission given him, and the Sieurs du Moulin, Chameir and
Rivet by the National Synod of Vitre to consult together of the most proper and
necessary means to procure a good and firm Reunion of all the Churches, which
have quitted the Communion of the Church of Rome, they would have Traveled
into Holland, and according to the Invitation and Desire of the High and Mighty
Lords, The States General of the Confederate Netherlands, they would have
personally assisted at that General Council of the Reformed Churches held at
Dort, which also was signified to the Province of Sevennes by our General
Deputies at Court, and by the Church of Paris unto them the said Chauve, du
Moulin, Chamier and Rivet: But that afterward they brake off their Journey,
and came back again into Languedoc upon the Intelligence which he and Monsieur
Chamier received at Geneva, that they were forbidden by His Majesty to go unto
that Council, This Assembly approving of what the said Sieur Chauve had done,
and thanking him for it, Ordered that the Expenses of his Journey should be
repayed him out of the Common Moneys of our Churches as should also those of
Monsieur Chamier. In consequence whereof the said Sieurs Chove and Chamier
brought in their Accounts; the Expenses of Monsieur Chamier amounted to Two
Hundred Eighty Five Livres, and those of Monsieur Chouve to One Hundred Seventy
Four Livres, which the Lord Candal was ordered to pay unto them both without
delay.

17. The Sieur Paul Bennet remonstrated unto this Assembly how that the last
Synod of Vitre had Ordained that he should not be restored unto the Ministry in
the Province of Xaintonge, ^ Vitre. App^^l. 9.
although he were perfectly absolved from that Crime imputed to him, And that
since having been absolved, he was thereupon restored unto the* Functions of
the Sacred Ministry by the Synod of Poictu acting by Authority derivred from,
and in Obedience to that Decree of the said National Synod of Vitre, which yet
did not readmit him into the Ministry in the Province of Xaintonge: Now he
humbly petitioned this Assembly, That they would be pleased to take off the
said Restriction, that so the blott cast upon his Ministry being expunged, he
might exercise it with Honor in Xaintonge as formerly, and the Synod of
Xaintonge from whence he came joined with him in the same request which was
attested both by their Synodical Act, and viva voce by their Deputies,
notwithstanding an Appeal brought by the Colloquy of the Isles of the said
Province of Xaintonge against the said Petition. This Assembly having read the
Decree of Vitre, relating to him, did not think meet to make any alteration in
it. But ordered that the free Portion of Moneys granted by His Majesty, and due
unto the said Bonnet by that Ordinance of Vitre should be paid in unto him.
And the said Province of Xaintonge is once again enjoined to come to account
with him, and to make him good payment.

CHAP. VIII. APPEALS.
1 LEtters from the Consuls and Consistory of Realmont were presented by the
Sieur Coras one of the Consuls of the said City unto this Assembly, requesting
that Monsieur Voisyn might be continued in his Ministry among them,
notwithstanding the Appeal of the Church of Montauban, and of Pont de Camarez
from the Synod of Puy Laurens in the Higher Languedoc, which had lent him unto
the Church of Mauvoysin until the sitting of the National Synod. This Assembly
commending the Zeal of the Church of Realmont has ordained that he shall
continue in the Service of their Church, and exhorts them to give all
Contentment unto him their said Pastor according to that Affection which he
has ever born them. And the Colloquies of Albigeois, Lauragais, and Lower
Zuercy shall help the Church of Mauvesyn out of their Pastors until the Meeting
of the next Provincial Synod, as they have been entreated so to do by Monsieur
de Maravat. And to this purpose the said Colloquies shall be assembled as soon
as the Deputies are returned from this Assembly, without delay.

2. The Province of Normandy craving an Augmentation of Moneys for the setting
up of Two Colleges, because of the great extent of the said Province. This
Assembly could not make any Additions to what had been ordained for them by
former National Synods. And as for the Appeal of the Church of Diep from the
Decree of the Provincial Synod, which had adjudged the College of that
Province unto the Town of St. Lo, it was declared null, and the Decree of the
Provincial Synod ratified.

3, The Sieur Gaussens Pastor of Ponteau de Mer appealed from the Judgment of
the same Provinces, for that they would never yield unto the repeared instances
of himself and Father in diverse Synods, that he being freed from the Church in
which he serves and has served ever since he was in the Ministry, and from
that Province, he might live nearer his Aged Father, that so he might be
Comforted and Assisted by him in his declining Age, especially since his
Reverend Father had at his own Charges bred him up unto the Ministry. This
Assembly having heard the Deputies of the Province arguing to the contrary, and
testifying of the fruitfulness and good success of his Ministry, and the great
Affection which his People bear him, do ordain that according to the Discipline
of our Church, the Person and Ministry of the said Gaussens shall remain fixed
unto the said Province of Normandy.

4, Whereas the Synod of Vitre had granted Monsieur de la Cost unto the
University of Saumur to be their Professor in Divinity, 2. Vitre. Of
Universities. 14. Aelow of Univers. Act. 12.
upon condition that he should undergo an Examine in the Province of Anjou
according to the Canons of our Church Discipline, and the Deputies of the Synod
of Anjou in Conjunction with several Ministers of the Provinces of Poictou,
Normandy, Berry, and Britain having judged by his Examination, and Probationary
Lectures on the Old and New Testament, and Public Disputations that God has
not called him unto that Accademical Profession, and therefore did desire him
to rest contented with his Ministerial Calling only, and to exercise his Gifts
in some particular Church of Christ, where God's Holy Providence might make use
of him. Now the said Sieur de Cost brought in his Appeal from them. This
Assembly does ratify the Judgment of the Provincial Deputies of Anjou and of
those other Pastors which were employed in the said Examine; and yet
nevertheless for diverse reasons and Considerations, and for the Repose and
Comfort of the said Sieur de la Cost it does ordain, that he shall be put into
the Catalogue of Pastors, who shall be entreated to prepare and fit themselves
for the Public Profession of Theology against the next National Synod, and in
the mean while the said Sieur de la Cost shall be at liberty to settle himself
in any Church as he thinks good, and he shall receive Three Hundred Livers out
of the Common Moneys of our Churches for the Charges of his Journey over and
above what he was to have received by Order of the said Deputies who were
present at his Examination, toward his Maintenance, and till such time as he
be provided of a Church he shall enjoy another single Portion free of all
Charges, and Two Hundred Livers more for one whole Year, within which time he
is obliged to fix himself Pastor in some particular Church, and therein to
Exercise his Ministry.

5. Mrs. Isabeau de Sales Relict of Monsieur Samuel Toussain late Pastor in the
Church of Luke now Deceased, appealed from the Synod of Lormarin in Provence,
for that they had ordered Seventy Five Livers only to be paid her, without
giving her any satisfaction for what was due unto her said deceased Husband for
his Journeys on behalf of his Church and Province, nor unto her for the first
year of her^ Widowhood. This Assembly honoring the Memory of the said Monsieur
Toussain; and the many Services done by him in his life time unto the Churches,
does now ordain, That the Province of Provence shall immediately pay in Four
Hundred Livres unto the said Gentlewoman Mrs. Isabeau de Sales, which shall be
put out to interest in safe hands for the Children of the said Sieur Toussain:
And farther there shall be paid in unto the said* Widow Seventy Five Livers
more, which were granted her by the Synod of Lormarin. And the Province shall
exhibit yearly for the space of Ten Years the Sum of Seventy Five livers
toward the maintenance of the Children of the said Sieur Toussain; and the
Church of Luc also shall pay in unto the said Gentlewoman all Arrearages of
Sallary which remain due unto their late Pastor Monsieur Toussain her deceased
Husband, according to the Account she has produced and proved.

6. Mr. Bartholomew Ressens Pastor of the Church of Velaux appealed from the
Synod of Proven^e, which had proceeded diverse ways very unjustly against him in
several Synods inclusively from the Year 1612, unto the Synod of Aiguieres in
the Year 1619. In which they had not only refused him his part of the Portions
granted unto the Church of Velaux by the National Synod of Privas, but they had
also over and above oppressed him with sundry and very grievous Burdens,
particularly that they suspended him for Three Months time from the Holy
Ministry; and yet that very self-same Assembly did a while after re-instate him
again as before into it, having first compelled him to very unbecoming
Submissions to them, and entertained diverse Accusations against him without any
Proof or Foundation, yea after that Messieurs Brunier, Chambrun, and de St.
Caesaire had given in their Judicial Sentence upon his Cause, For these
Reverend Persons by Authority from the National Synod of Vitre came unto the
Synod of Lormarin held in the said Province in the Month of November, in the
Year 1617, and having heard and examined all matters relating to him, they did
absolve and justify him. Mr. Ressens having ended, the Deputies of the said
Province were heard, and Monsieur Brunier also reported what he and his fellow
Commissioners had done in Obedience to the Commission given them to visit the
said Province by the National Synod of Vitre: Whereupon this Assembly does very
severely censure that Province of Provence for their Levity, Confusions and
immoderate Passions, which were too too evident by the Acts of their Synod at
Aiguieres: And therefore disanulling their Judgment, it does ordain that all
those Acts concerning the said Mr. Ressens shall be rased out of their
Synodical Books: And forasmuch as the said Ressens has not carried himself
with that decorum as he was and is obliged to by the Cannons of our
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and for that he has failed in his Duty and Respects
unto Synodical Meetings, and has been too much occupied in worldly Affairs, and
discovered a very greedy, covetous heart after dishonest gain, which put him
upon a very shameful Action confessed by him openly in this National Assembly,
which had he not done would otherwise have merited his Suspension from the
Ministry; but forasmuch as the Lord himself has in much Mercy chastised him
for it, and for that he has made a full, and free and ingenuous Confession, and
shamed himself publicly for this miscarriage whereby our bowels are moved with
compassion for him, and has given us hope that for the future 'twill be a Spur
to excite and quicken him unto his Duty, and to be more careful and circumspect
in his walking, for all which considerations we contenting our selves at
present with this public Repremand given him in full Synod, do expressly forbid
him to accept of any Deputation for the future unto Political Assemblies, or to
appear hereafter as a Delegate personally in any one of them. And as for those
Accounts lying between him and the said Province, they be dismissed over to the
Church of Alez to be audited by them, and having done it, to make Report
thereof unto this Assembly.

7. Mr. Andrew Guarin Pastor of the Church of Jonias and Gordes appealed from
the Synod of Provence, which had ordained Twenty Crowns unto the said Churches
to pay off their great Expenses they were enforced to by the Lord of the Soil,
who would not suffer them to worship God in their Temple built on his Land; and
he complained farther of the outrages done him (which is also come to our
hearing) by the Commissioners of that Province. Now although this Affair be not
of their Nature which are to be brought before the National Synods, yet for
diverse reasons this Assembly has took this particularly into its
consideration, and does condemn the Province of Provence for their uncharitable
proceedingss, which savor of a base Chicanery every way unbecoming the
Servants of God; and we do appoint the Colloquy of Gapensois in Dolphiny to
inspect their Accounts, and to add what they shall judge equitable unto the
Churches beforementioned, and that by the Authority of this Assembly; which
will immediately recommend their afflicted Condition unto our Lords the General
Deputies, who shall address themselves unto His Majesty and the Privy Council
for Justice against their potent Oppressor.

8. Monsieur R^phael Gabett Pastor of the Church of Tulette in Dolphiny
appealed from the Judgment of the Synods of Province held at Manosques the Five
and Twentieth of October in the Year 1618. And at Aiguieres the Second of May
1619. Which refused to give him License of Departure and Honorable
Testimonials, though they were but his just and lawful dues, and had been
granted him by the Church of la Code, in which he had served the space of Three
years, and also by the Synod of Thouart, when he quitted it. And he complained
farther, that they denied to reimburse him the necessary Charges he was forced
to be at in diverse Journeys to this purpose, and that they had rejected most
unjustly this his Appeal, when it was tendered to them. This Assembly judging
the proceedings against the said Monsieur Gabett very unjust, and detective in
diverse points, as was demonstrated unto the Deputies of that Province, It
ordains that all the Acts concerning the said Gabet shall be rased out of
their Synodical Books, and does very severely censure the said Province, and
confirms the said Gabett in his Ministry at Tulett in Dolphiny, and that the
Province of Provence shall give him the Testimonials demanded by him, and
Twenty Livers appertaining to him as Arrearages of his Sallary.

9. Mr. Peter Mercurin Pastor of the Church of Cisteron in Provence appealed
from the Synod of that Province for denying him a Sight and Copy of their
Synodical Acts, (...)
which might inform him of the Arrears due unto him for his ^ension whilst he
was yet Student, and another had not been substituted in his place; and he
complained that they enforced him to yield up unto the Province Twenty Livers
which were given him by the National Synod of Vitre. This Affair was dismissed
over to the Colloquy of Baronniers in Dolphiny, which should audit his
Accounts, and determine finally about them by the Authority of this Assembly.

10. Monsieur Boulet a Pastor of the Church of Vergeres and Condoignac appealed
from a Decree of the Synod of Sevennes, confirming the Judicial Sentence of the
Province of Lower Languedoc, which had ordered Four Hundred Livers to be paid
him by the Churches, and Two Hundred Livers out of the Kings Money including
therein the Portion of the said Churches, when as there was more due unto him.
This Assembly declared that this matter did not belong to the Cognizance of
National Synods; and therefore ratifying the Synodical Decree of Sevennes, it
does Exhort the said Boulet to abstain from all terms of Law in his Appeal, and
in case he has any new matter of Objection against the Province of Lower
Languedoc, he may again apply himself unto the Province of Sevennes.

11. Mr. John de la Faye Pastor of Aubenas appealed from the Synod of Vivaretz
held at Chasteauneuf; which had given leave unto the Church of Aubenas to
dismiss him, as also that he should never any more exercise His Ministry
within the Province of Vivaretz. Hereupon the Informations brought in against
the said de la Faye by certain Ministers and Elders Commissionated by a
Colloquy held at Meyras in August last, were called for and read, and the
Deputies of the Province were heard in what they had to declare and offer from
their Principals. The Letters also of some of the Elders in the Consistory of
Aubenas and other Inhabitants of the said Town joining themselves in that
Appeal of Monsieur de la Faye were produced they having to this purpose deputed
the Sieur de la Borie, de Fons, de Seures, and de la Faisse with them unto this
Assembly. Monsieur du Sault also, one of the Elders of the said Church was
heard speak, who together with several other Members of the said Church,
Consistory, and Inhabitants of Aubenas demanded that the Decree of the Synod of
Chasteauneuf might be Executed. This Assembly saw upon the whole very great
miscarriages in every party; and therefore did first of all censure those
Commissioners who instead of quenching the Fire of Division and Contention, had
poured in fresh Oil to increase the Flames, and fomented Quarrels and
Lawsuits among them directly contrary to the Rules and Canons of our National
Synods. It censureth also the Provincial Synod for pronoucing Sentence so
rashly, when as there were just grounds of exceptions against the Evidence; and
without ever hearing the Confession of the said de la Fay, or Convincing him in
the least of his Offense, and for expressing immoderate Passion against him,
and foisting into their Acts Matters of small moment as if they had been great
Crimes. It censureth also the Elders of that Church of Aubenas in general for
diverse failures observed in their proceedings contrary to our
Church Discipline; and particularly those among them, who would prefer the
lesser number unto the greater, and bring in little pettifogging tricks into
Consistories, which are Ecclesiastical Assemblies, a matter of dangerous
consequence, and pernicious unto our Churches. And as for Monsieur de la Faye,
this Synod not being able any longer to endure those great faults of which he
is guilty by his own Confession, and that he may be excited for the future
better to consult the honor of his Sacred Function, whereunto he is called of
God, It does now suspend him for Two Months from all Exercises of his
Ministry; which time expired, The Colloquy of Valentinois in Dolphiny shall at
the Costs and Charge of the Church of Aubenas Commissionate some certain
Pastors and Elders to restore the said de la Faye unto his Office in it, and
mediate and effect a good and firm Peace and Reconciliation betwixt them all,
And in the Name of God, all the Members of the said Church and Consistory who
are here present are now Exhorted by this Assembly to use their best endeavors
that it may be promoted, effected and preserved, among all their
Fellow-Citizens, which also they did very solemnly promise. And that nothing
may be wanting to compose and heal their differences, and that the Hearts of
all may be disposed and engaged to this Holy Peace and Union, the Sieurs
Chauffepied, and Bernard shall immediately visit them, and deal with the
Consistory, and the private Members of the said Church to incline and work over
their Hearts and Spirits to embrace it.

12. Monsieur de la Garie Minister and Professor of Philosophy at Losanna
brought his Appeal against the Synod of Higher Languedoc held at Puylaurent,
which would not suffer him a Scholastic Trial for the Professors Chair of the
Hebrew Tongue in the University of Montauban, though he offered it, and yet at
the same time they confirmed Mr. Abel Bicheteau in the said Professorship
without any previous Examen or Disputation. However this Assembly could not but
observe an evident default in the settlement of the said Monsieur Bicheteau
both on his part, and that of the University of Montauban, and on the Synods
also which had confirmed him, yet does it ratify the Decree of the said Synod
of Puylaurent, and fixes Monsieur Bicheteau in his Profession; and recommends
Monsieur de la Garie to the Province of Higher Languedoc, not only to defray
the Charges of his Journey hither, as is just and reasonable, but to prefer him
also unto the Pastoral Office in some vacant Congregation, he submitting
himself first unto an Examination, according to the Decree of the National
Synod of Gap. Moreover it enjoyneth the said Province to observe more exactly
the Canons of our National Synods in the reception of Public Academical
Professors for time coming.

13. Monsieur Isaac de Rieu Pastor of the Church of Pont de Royans appealed in
his own Name, and in the Name of diverse others, Ministers and Elders, (now
absent) from a Sentence denounc't against them in the Synod of Dolphiny held at
Briancon the 18th day of June, One Thousand, Six Hundred and Twenty, about a
Commission which they together with the Colloquy of Ambrun had jointly
executed. This Assembly not in the least approving the Action of these
Appealers in granting Letters of Attorney before a Notary Public unto the said
de Rieu, as if there had been a cause to be pleaded in a Civil Court of
Judicature, It does dismiss them over for the substance of their business unto
the Synod of Lower Languedoc, which shall judge definitely thereof, and the
rather because the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny had not brought with them
those Papers which was necessary to discuss it, and because it was utterly
unfit that Monsieur de la Croze should upon his own Charges (although he did
generously offer it) ride into that Province to fetch those Memorials.

14. Monsieur Olhagaray Minister in the Church of Mazeres presented an Appeal
of the Colloquy of Foix from the Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc held at
Puylaurent the 18th day of June One Thousand Six Hundred and Twenty, for that
they had defaulked from the Portions belonging to the Church of Foix, which
were granted them by the Synod of Rochell, though not mentioned in the last
Synod of Vitre, and the said Province refused to make payment of them. This
Assembly promised to take care of this Matter, when as they should distribute
the Churches Moneys, and that in the mean while it would make Inquiry into what
had been ordained by the former National Synods: And whereas the Deputies from
the Council of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne requested on behalf of the said
Colloquy of Foix, That they might be assisted with some Moneys to Erect a
College in the City of Pamiers; they were answered, That what had been decreed
as to this purpose by the Synod of Vitre should be confirmed by this of Alez.

15. The Inhabitants of the Town of St. Aignan appealed from a Judgment past
against them in the Synod of Xaintonge, held at Tonnay Charente, by which they
were annexed to the Church of St. John d' Angely; but this their Appeal was
rejected, because it was of such an Affair as might be finally decided within
the Province.

16. Monsieur Philip Pinauld appealed from the Provincial Synod of Anjou, who
had conferred his Office of Receiver for the University of Saumur on Monsieur
Bouquett, because he would discharge it freely, and demanded nothing for his
pains therein, saving only for the Transcribing of his Accounts. This Assembly
leaves the whole Affair to the disposal of that Province, provided they give
General Releases unto the said Pinault.

17. The Church of Privas appealed from the Synod of Vivaretz held the last
August at Chasteauneuf, for abridging them of their Liberty in the choice of
their Pastors, which they ever had before, and did by the consent of their
Colloquy always choose them either from within, or without the Province;
whereas now the Provincial Synod takes unto it self an Absolute Authority of
providing for them; and has farther declared, That the Portion of the Kings
Money, which was wont to be paid in unto the said Church, does now of right
belong unto Monsieur Lubac, although he be none of their Minister. nor does
them any Service. This Assembly blaming the said Province of Vivaretz for those
words, of permitting them to choose in times past, which seem to condemn those
Worthy Ministers who so affectionately served the Church of Privas in its
necessity, as if they had been guilty of some grievous fault, whereas they be
every way worthy of Commendation and Thank, and not of a Toleration or
Connivency: And farther blaming that Synod for those words of Absolute
Authority, which it had arrogated unto it self, It ordains that the Church of
Privas shall enjoy its free Liberty, and may for the future provide it self of
a Pastor any where as the Lord shall give them opportunity, taking always with
them the Approbation of their Colloquy and Synod. And forasmuch as this
Assembly has heard talk of Monsieur Lubac, an Order shall be sent him, to
appear before them, and to give an Account of himself. And in the mean while
the Portion due unto the said Lubac shall be stopped in the hands of the
Province of Vivaretz until such time as he shall have cleared himself of
matters laid unto his charge.

18. Several Elders and other the Inhabitants of the Town of Gignac petitioned
that they might have a Pastor appropriated to them, because of those continual
assaults they meet with from the Adversaries of the Gospel; they appealed also
from the Synod of Lower Languedoc, which had imposed upon them against their
wills Monsieur duChacornas to be their Pastor. And yet contrariwise diverse
Elders and other the Inhabitants of the said Town of Gignac and St. Andrew
Petitioned that the said de Chacornas might be confirmed by the Authority of
this Synod to be their Pastor. The Assembly reproving those Inhabitants of
Gignac for their levity and unserious temper, which ingageth them in heats and
disputes exceeding prejudicial unto their Consciences, and repugnant to the
Edifying of Gods Church, and Exhorting them to an Holy Union, Concord, and
Perseverance in the profession of the Truth without wavering, did promise to
provide them a Minister for Six Months time, who should make it his business
to reconcile and settle them, and afterward they shall be recommended unto
their Province to give them a fixed Pastor. And whereas they demand assistance
from us toward the maintenance of their Minister, all possible care also shall
be taken herein for their full satisfaction.

19. An Appeal was brought by the Lord of St. Stephens Baron of Gangers from
the Judicial Sentence of the Colloquy of Sauve, ratified by the Provincial
Synod of Sevennes and Gevaudan held at Meyruez in the Month of July last, by
which the said Baron of Gangers was ordered publicly to be suspended from
Communion at the Lords Table for the Injuries and Violencies done by him to
Monsieur Coder Minister of the Church of Gangers, and farther that if the said
Lord continued to trouble the said Codur in the Exercise of his Ministry, that
then the Province would espouse his Quarrel, and defend him by all lawful ways
Ecclesiastical and Civil. And in the same Appeal the Consuls and Inhabitants of
Gangers did by their Deputies represent how that the same Synod had also in the
same manner censured them, for that they had given leave to the said Monsieur
Codur to withdraw himself from them unto a Neighbor Church, until such time as
that the Synod had provided better for him. And yet nevertheless they were,
enjoined by the Synod to pay him continually his Stipend as if he were actually
in service among them; In short, they demanded, that the said Codur might be
removed out of their Town and transplanted elsewhere. The Appellants being
called in, and heard in all what they had to speak or offer, and the Provincial
Deputies of Sevennes in the reasons moving their Synod to pass such a Sentence
on them; and Monsieur Codur also being heard in his defense, and pretended
Justification, and two Elders of the Church of Gangers with Letters from the
Consistory requesting that the said Church might be no longer deprived of Gods
Holy Word and Sacraments: This Assembly ratified the Judicial Sentence given by
the Synod of Meyruez as to the suspension of the Lord Baron of Gangers from the
Lords Table, and the Publication of it, together with the censure past on the
said Consuls and other the Inhabitants of Gangers, as being Accomplices and
Partners with their Lord in all his Violencies and Indignities used toward
their Pastor; Moreover it censureth the Consistory of the said Church for their
Levity; manifest enough by their Letters and Testimonials contradictory one
unto another. And as for Monsieur Codur to procure him peace, and to effect he
peace of the said Church of Gangers, he shall be removed from the said Church,
and the Province of Sevennes are ordered either by their Synod, or by he
Colloquy of Anduze to settle him elsewhere, and in order hereunto they shall be
assembled before New Years day next coming, till which time the said Church of
Ganges shall duly pay him his Stipend, and they shall also satisfy him for all
his Arrearages fully unto this very day. And whereas the said Monsieur Codur
has met with a world of Fatigues and Troubles by reason of his Employment in
Political Affairs to the great hinderance and unsuccessfulness of his Ministry,
he is entreated never any more to entangle himself with them, nor to assist in
Person for the future in any of those Political Assemblies. And whereas the
said Lord Baron of Gangers, the Consuls and other Inhabitants of Gangers here
present were exhorted to reconcile themselves with the said Monsieur Codur, and
the Sieur Codur reciprocally to forget the Injuries he had received, and that
they would mutually embrace each other, and live in an Holy Concord and Love,
this was freely and cheerfully done by all Parties. Whereupon this National
Synod to strengthen and consolidate this Union, and to conciliate them with
those who were absent, did take off the Suspension from die said Baron, and
restores him to the Peace and Communion of the Church, and by this means all
Processes both Civil and Criminal on all sides shall cease, and never be used
more.

20. Monsieur Gallpin Judge of the City of Vsez, appealed from the Synod of
Lower Languedoc, which had suspended the said Gallpin from the Lords Table, and
ordered that the said Suspension should be published in the Church. Although
this Affair be not of their Nature, which according to the Cannons of our
Church Discipline ought to fall under the Cognizance of National Synods, yet
for procuring that sweet Blessing of Peace, and for diverse other Important
Considerations, This Assembly did enter upon the Debate thereof; and
accordingly judged that the Synod of Lower Languedoc had just cause for
suspending the said Galpin from the Lord's Table, and this not upon the account
of his Office, for which they did not in the least intermeddle with him; but
for that Reproach the said Galpin has brought upon the Church very
unseasonably by his Extravagant Actings against the Sieur Gondin Viguier
(Provost) of the City of Vsez; and for discovering himself by the by to be of
another Religion than the Reformed, of which he now makes profession. However
the Synod for diverse reasons does not think meet that his Suspension should be
published. And forasmuch as the principal end of this Assembly is to promote an
Holy Union among all the Members of our Church, and principally among Persons
whom God has in his Providence advanced unto public Office and Honor, The
said Monsieur Galpin is exhorted to reconcile himself with Monsieur Gondin, and
both of them jointly to take such Rules and Measures as may secure the Public
Peace and Tranquillity of Gods Church, in their respective Places and Callings.
And the said Galpin and Gondin having testified their acquiescence in this
Decree, they were both reconciled, and promised to surcease all Lawsuits and
Processes whatsoever, and to live in Amity and Concord together, and that in
case they should act contrary to these their promises, that they would submit
themselves unto all Censures of the Church; to suspension from the Sacraments,
yea, and to Excommunication it self, and that the Consistory and Colloquy of
Vsez, and the Synod of Lower Languedoc should with the highest Authority
proceed against them. Whereupon the Suspension and its publication decreed
against the faid Galpin by the Synod of Lower Languedoc was taken off, and he
was immediately restored to the Peace and Communion of the Church.

21. The Sieur Boulet appealed from the Synod of Lower Languedoc held at Vsez
in March last, because he having opposed the Election of Monsieur Astier to the
Office of an Elder, they had censured him. This Assembly confirms the Judicial
Sentence or the said Synod, and does grievously censure the said Boulet for
retaining so long and notorious a passion, contrary to the Laws of Christian
Charity, which forbid us to harbor Wrath, and command us to exercise Love unto
all Gods Children. And Monsieur Astier also is severely reproved for expressing
so much disrespect as he has done unto the Sacred Ministry, which he has
vented in scurrilous and opprobrious Language against the said Boulet. And
finally the Commissioners deputed by the Colloquy to meet at Nismes about this
matter they were very sharply censured for wasting their time, and putting the
Parties to so great charges by their tedious dilatory proceedings, utterly
unbecoming their Calling.

22. A great Number of the Inhabitants of the Town of Sauve appealed from the
Censure inflicted on them by the Synod of Sevennes held at Vigan the 24th day
of April in the year Sixteen Hundred and Seventeen, and requested that the said
censure might be rased, and taken out of the Acts of the said Synod, and the
Consistory there joined with them, as also Monsieur Bony contented so far, as
that they might have another Minister, to exercise among them, though herein he
acted contrary to the Decree of that Synod, which had inhibited them all
Inquiries after a Second Pastor, This Assembly judging this Affair not to be of
their kind which ought to be tendered unto the National Synods, does therefore
remand them and it back again unto the Province, and either in a Colloquy, or
Synod to procure for themselves another Minister, according to the Rules
prescribed by our Discipline, and for Peace sake it does amend the Censure of
the Synod of Vigan, and ordains, That those words inserted in it, of factions
and quarrelsome shall be rased out of it.

23. The Church of Lormarin together with their Pastor Monsieur Morris, and
Corrigier one of their Elders appealed from the Synod of Provence held at
Remoules in May last, which having suspended the said Morris for three Months
from the Ministry, the same Synod did some few days after restore him again:
And yet afterward they compelled them the said Morris, and Corrigier to beg
the pardon of that Synod upon their knees, the Moderator calling upon God in
Prayer before hand on purpose to expose them, when as there was no cause at
all, nor had there been any on their part for so great an Indignity, they
having given no provocation which might merit such ignominious usage. This
Assembly condemns the Province of Provence for abusing our Discipline, and
exposing the Sacred Ordinance of Prayer to contempt and scorn, and orders
that their Act of Suspension past in the Synod of Remoules be rased out, of all
Books in which it may have been recorded; and the Acts of the said Synod being
wholly cleared, and renewal, the Old Copyes shall be delivered into the hands
of the said Mr. Morris, and this present Act shall be read in the next Synod
of Provence by Monsieur Huron their Deputy, and entered into the Register of
the Synodical Acts of Provence.

See below in the Catalogue of Apostates and Deposed, Act. 9.
24. Mr. Hector Joly appealed from the Synod of Higher Languedoc held at
Puylaurent in June last for suspending him a whole year from the Ministry, and
that term expired for ordering him to quit the Province, though they licensed
him if he could, to get himself into some other Church in another Province. The
cause of his suspension was Adultery: And the Church and City of Montauban
complained of the too much Lenity and Indulgence extended by that Synod toward
the said Joly, and of their censure given forth against the Consistory of
Montauban. The Deputies of the said Province declared the true grounds of their
Synodical actings against Joly, and of their censure upon the Consistory to be
these, viz. Because they had neglected their Duty to him, and the forms
requisite and usual in all our Ecclesiastical proceedings. Joly also was called
in, and suffered to speak for himself, and to produce by word of Mouth and
Writing whatever might make for his Defense and Justification. But after all
that could be said by him or for him, This Assembly approved the Judicial
Sentence of the said Synod of Puylaurent in every Title and Member of it, yea,
and in its censure inflicted on the Consistory of Montauban, because of the
notorious defaults confessed by them in their actings. And all matters having
been narrowly examined and considered; which were alleged by the said Joly,
and particularly those Acts now produced by him, he was now found to be really
guilty of that Crime whereof he stood accused, and of very foul and wicked
practices to palliate and stifle it. Insomuch as his Ministry could be no
longer useful, but must needs be a very great and public scandal. For these
Causes this Assembly aggravated the Judgment of the Synod of Puylaurent, does
now declare the said Joly to be totally deposed from the Sacred Ministry and
interdicts him all manner of Acts, Duties, and Exercises appertaining to it.
And at his request. the Papers which he had produced out of the Civil Courts
were all returned into his own hands.

See below in the Catalogue of the Apostates and Deposed.
25. Stephen Girault appealed from the Synod of Xaintonge held at Marennes in
July Sixteen Hundred and Seventeen, which had declared him utterly unworthy of
that Holy and Honorable Office of a Pastor in the Church of God, and deposed
him from the Ministry, without any hope of ever being restored to it, unless he
did wholly reform his Life and Manners, and become a new Man before the sitting
of this present National Synod; and likewise he appealed from another Sentence
since that of the aforesaid Synod past upon him by the Sieurs Constans and
Rossel Deputed by the Colloquy of Pons in December, in One Thousand Six Hundred
and Nineteen, to make inquiry into the Life and Conversation of the said
Giraud, by which he was suspended for Three Months from Communion with the
Church of God at the Lords Table, and this his Suspension was ordered to be
notified from the Pulpit to the whole Congregation. The Deputies of the
Province of Xaintonge were desired to declare the Reasons of their rigorous
dealings with this Girault, and Girault also was heard in all his Apologies for
himself both by word of Mouth and Writing. In which he confessed and owned some
of the Crimes whereof he was accused, but confidently extenuated and denied
others: This Assembly finding the said Stephen Girault convicted of
Profaneness and Lasciviousness, Drunkenness, Theft, Perjury, contempt of
Church Discipline, Slandering, Coveting dishonest gain; in short, a Fellow
whose Life and Manners have no resemblance with that of a Servant of God, but
directly contrary to him, and one who is utterly unworthy the Name of a
Christian. It has and does now declare him to be deposed from the Holy
Ministry, and totally interdicts him all manner of Acts and Offices belonging
to it; leaving it to the judgment of that Church, where he shall reside,
whether they will admit him or no as a private Person to communion with them at
the Lords Table, which yet they shall not do till such time as they have had
long and undoubted Evidence and Experience of his thorough Reformation and
Amendment of Life, and conceive him worthy of so great a Favor and Privilege
upon very good and satisfactory Grounds and Reasons.

26. The Colloquy of Rouergue presented their Appeal by Monsieur Jaques Pastor
of the Church of St. Breuest, from the Synod of Higher Languedock held at
Millaud, by which the said Colloquy was condemned to pay Five Hundred Livers
(another Copy has Five Hundred Crowns) unto Monsieur du Luc, for razing the
place at Monntelarat it being a matter obtained by surprise, and against that
use whereunto the Churches Money is to be employed. After hearing the Arguments
of the said de Luc against the said Colloquy, and the reasons alleged by the
Deputies of the Province, the Assembly did not judge this Affair to belong to
the Cognizance of Synods, and therefore remands it back again to the Cities and
Corporations in the Colloquy of Rouergue, that they may give satisfaction as
they shall see reason for it. The Moneys granted us by the Kings bounty shall
see reason for it. The Moneys granted us by the Kings bounty being destinated
to other and better purposes.

27. The Church of Authun and Couches appealed from the Synod of Burgundy,
which refused to give them Monsieur Textor for their Minister, and had censured
them for that they persisted in their Endeavors to procure him. This Assembly
not being able to invalidate the Judgment of the said Province of Burgundy,
because those who are concerned in it, are not here neither in their Persons,
nor by their Memoirs, yet does it however enjoin the said Province to take
care, That the said Church of Cauches be speedily supplied with an able
Minister according to the Canons of our Ecclesiastical Discipline.

28. The Church of Foussay appealed about the maintenance of Monsieur Vatable
their Pastor from the Synod of Poictou; but their Appeal was rejected because
it was of the nature of those things which might be determined by Provincial
Synods.

29. The Sieur des Maretz appealed from a Decree of the Synod of Vivaretz held
at Privas, which had confirmed those Orders of the Colloquy of Rochefoucaut
dated the 25th of June, 1619. and that of Privas Dated the 10th of November,
1619. and enjoined him the said des Maretz wholly to quit the Church of Vals as
soon as they should have paid him the remainders of his Sallary. The Deputies
of the Church of Vals petitioned that they might be provided of another Pastor,
and those of the Province produced the reasons moving them to pronounce that
judgment against him. Upon the whole, this Assembly, although it does confirm
that Ordinance of the Synod of Vivaretz as to the removal of the said des
Maretz from the Church of Vals, yet cannot in the least approve of the
proceedings of the said Province in their manner of Interdicting him his
Ministry there: And although he be exhorted to be more careful in preserving
the Honor of his Calling, and to adorn it with that prudence and gravity which
well becomes it; yet nevertheless do we recommend him unto the said Province of
Vivaretz to settle him in some particular Church, which shall be done either by
the Colloquy or Synod. And that till he be provided, he may maintain himself
and Family, the said Province shall give him one Portion free of all Rates and
Taxes out of the Moneys granted us by His Majesty's Liberality, and Fifteen
Crowns in ready Money for the Expenses of his Journey, and the Church of Vals
shall pay him off fully his wages to this very day; and to this purpose the
Moneys which would otherwise accrue unto the said Church of Vals shall be
detained in the hands of the Receiver of the Province of Vivaretz: And the
Sieurs Agar and Richaud are charged by this Assembly that they do both of them
in their respective Places and Capacities use their best endeavors that the
said Church do give all content and satisfaction unto the said Sieur des Maretz.

A Canon made against those Churches who fill their Consistories with Persons
nearly related by blood or Affinity each to other.
30. Monsieur de la Cloche appealed from the Provincial Synod of Britain for
detaining from him, as he pretended, Moneys which were owed him by the Church
of Nantes. This Assembly dismisseth him over to the Province of Anjou, who
shall judge definitively in this matter according to the Cannons of our
Discipline.

31. The Church of Chalays appealed from an Order of the Synod of Burgundy held
at Gex in the year 1617, about an opposition made by Monsieur du Noyer an
Advocate against the admission of several Persons nominated to be Elders,
because already the Consistory of that Church was filled up with near
Relations, as of Father and Son, Three Brothers in Law, an Uncle and Nephew,
and that the said du Noyer having opposed himself to this disorder, they did
thereupon suspend him from being an Elder in the said Church. This Assembly
judges that the said opposition was very warrantable, because of the many
Relations and Kindred that were in it; and that the Colloquy did but right,
when they took off the Counsel from the said du Noyer: And though for the
present it suffers the State of the Consistory of the said Church of Chalais to
continue, yet, does it injoyne them for the future to observe as much as in
them lies the Consul given them by the Synod of Burgundy, concerning their
change of Elders: So that they had no cause at all, nor ought they to have
appealed from that Synodical Exhortation.

32. The Church of Valon, la Gorce, and Salvas appealed from the Province of
Vivaretz, for denying them help and assistance by which they might have stemmed
and resisted those many Evils befallen them by the Persecution of the Baron of
la Gorce; and for not suffering them to be incorporated with the Province of
Lower Languedoc, which they had most earnestly desired and requested, do still
persist in their desire of being incorporated with it. This Assembly cannot
consent that the said Church of Valon should be severed from the Province of
Vivaretz, for many and weighty Reasons; and therefore enjoyneth the said
Province of Vivaretz to have a most especial care of the said Church of Valon
in their distribution of His Majesty's Money, that so they may be aided and
supported under their many and heavy Burdens and most grievous Oppressions.

33. The Church of Milhaud brought their Appeal from a Judgment of the Province
of Sevennes, which refused to repay them the Charges they had been at in
maintaining Noel le Gele, formerly a Carmelit, Friar in the Church of Rome, and
sent by the Church of Maruejols unto that of Milhaud. This Assembly judges
that the Colloquy of Rouergue should defray his Charges, because the said le
Gele is dedicated to their Service.

43. The Church of Luke appealing from the Synod of Provence, This Assembly
judged that their demand of being reimburst their Charges for the pretended
Synod of Thouars could not be admitted, because they did not therein suffer
alone, but all the Churches bore them Company in the said Province of Provence;
nor should there be any words made about the Twenty Crowns, which the said
Synod ordered for a Schoolmaster, because we would not have old Dissentions
long since extinguished to be again revived; and it cannot be made appear that
the said Sum of Twenty Crowns was ever actually paid: And whereas they demand
some relief; for the future there shall be Consideration had of them in the
Dividends of His Majesty's Bounty.

35. The Church of Montpellier appealed from the Synod of Lower. Languedoc
about the Collection made for building the Temple at Castelnau; but their
Appeal was rejected, and the Decree of that Synod confirmed, on Condition, that
the Minister who shall be settled in that Church of Castelnau and its Annexed
Congregations do reside not at Montpellier, but at Montferrier, Clappier, or in
some other place most convenient for the Service of that Church, and the Temple
shall be built at a greater distance from Montpellier, and the Elders shall be
chosen out of the places where the said Church is gathered, or in case they
dwell at Montpellier, they shall not be chosen without the consent of the
Consistory of Montpellier, and if a Collection should be made in that Church
for building a Temple in the midst of the places beforementioned; The said
Church shall appoint one of her Elders by name to gather and distribute the
Moneys so Collected according as was ordained by the Synod of Lower Languedoc.

36. The Deputies of the Province of Burgundy presented a Letter from Monsieur
de Monsenglard Pastor of the Church of Corbigny, with his Appeal from the
Sentence of the Colloquy of Berry held at Corbigny, who notwithstanding the
great and known Poverty of his Church, had by their decree struck off Fifty
Livres a year from his Wages, and in case he could not bear it, he should be
put into the Catalogue of Ministers that were to be removed, and in pursuance
of another Decree of the Synod of Berry and Orleans held at Gergean in July
last, they moderating somewhat of the rigor of the said Sentence, did order
the said Sieur de Montsanglard to rest contented with the Sum of Four Hundred
and Fifty Livres, but ye withal, they ratified another part of that Sentence,
which was that he should be enrolled amongst the Pastors who were to be removed
unto other Churches, unless his said Church would rather choose to complete the
Sum of Five Hundred Livres yearly for him, and then the Execution of the said
Decree should be forborne till the meeting of the next Synod Letters also were
read from the said Church of Corbigny declaring their deep poverty, and
requesting a charitable relief for their subsistence, but they did not make any
the least mention of their Appeal. And the Deputies of the said Province of
Berry made Report, That the said Sieur de Monsanglard had not brought in any
Appeal unto their Synod from that Decree, whose Execution is put off till the
meeting of the next Synod, nor does he at all intimate it, nor did the said
Church of Corbigny in his or their Letters now lately received by them,
intimate that there was any such Appeal of his own foot; but this only that he
joyneth in with them in their Common Petition for Assistance and Relief, as
also did these Deputies for them. This Assembly remands the business of the
said Monsanglard unto the Synod of Berry, and as for that Relief requested by
the said Church, care shall be taken of it, when we come to make a Dividend of
the Churches Moneys.

37. The Appeal of the Colloquy of Rovergue from the Synod of higher Languedoc
concerning Monsieur Combret is declared null.

38. The Appeal of the Colloquy of Vsez from the Synod of Lower Languedoc,
(which had ordained that the Portions assigned to Professors in the University
of Nismes, being Ministers of the Gospel, though not in actual Service because
of their said Professorship, should be free and discharged of all Costs and
Taxes,) was declared to be ill grounded, and the Synodical Decree is now
ratified.

39. The Appeal of Monsieur Vulson la Colombiere from the Synod of Dolphiny
held at Gap was declared null and void.

40. The Appeal of Sieur Philippin born at Newcastle in Switzerland, See the
List of the Deposed, Act. 9.
heretofore Minister at Castle: Dolphin in Dolphiny, but now a deposed Minister
is declared null and void.

41. The Appeal of Monsieur Connain from the Synod of Burgundy was rejected.

42. The Appeal of the Consuls and Magistrates of the City of Millhaud from the
Synod of higher Languedoc was declared null, as were also that of diverse
Inhabitants of St. Autonine, and that of the Colloquy of Lower Queroy against
the Church of Montauban.

43. The Appeal of the Churches of St. Andrew, St Marcel and Saumain from the
Synod of Sevennes was declared null.

44. The Appeal of Monsieur de Falquerolles from the same Provincial Synod was
also declared null, and that Canon of the said Province ascertaining the
Expenses of Deputies unto Political Assemblies shall be observed.

45. The Appeal of the Church of St. Paul in Lauragais against Monsieur de
Villemar a Member of the Synod of higher Languedoc held at Puylaurent in June
last was declared null.

46. The Appeal brought in by Monsieur de Malvolsin in behalf of the Colloquy
of Albigeois from the Decree made in the last Synod of Puylaurens in the higher
Languedoc about dismembring the Church of St. Amand from that Colloquy, was
declared null, because he produced no Memoire from the said Colloquy relating
to it.

47. The Appeal of Monsieur Bleuet from a Decree of the Synod of Burgundy about
restoring a certain Elder in the Church of Beaune was remanded back again to
the said Province, that their next Synod might judge of the matter.

48. The Colloquy of the Church of Sancerre appealed from the Synod of Orleans
and Berry held at Sancerre in the year Sixteen Hundred and Nineteen, which
ordain that the Church of Sancerre should be divided from the said Colloquy,
and joined unto that of Bourbonnois, and the Church of Chilleure should be
annexed unto that of Sancerre. Monsieur de Benes gave in the reasons of the
Colloquies Appeal in their Name, and the Deputies of that Province defended the
Ordinance of their Principals; upon hearing of both Parties, This Assembly
abrogated that Ordinance of the Synod of Berry, and leaves the said Churches
in the same Condition they were in formerly.

49. The Church of Montauban brought their Appeal against the Provincial Synod
of Sevennes, for denying them Monsieur Ollyer one of the Ministers in the Town
of Alez to be their Pastor. The Deputies of the said Church of Montauban were
heard speaking for it, the Consuls, Magistrates, and Consistory of the Town and
Church of Alez for themselves also, and particularly Monsieur Ollier who
resigned himself wholly to the disposal of this Assembly; and the Deputies of
the Province of Sevennes gave in the reasons of their refusal, viz. the
singular fruitfulness and success of the Ministry of the said Monsieur Ollier
among them. After all, the Assembly confirmed Monsieur Ollyer in his Pastoral
Office to the Church of Alez according to the Canons of our Church Discipline,
and advises the Church of Montauban to mind their Duty better for the future
than they have done heretofore, in maintaining one or more Scholars, who may
serve them in case of need, without being enforced to rob and spoil other
Churches.

See below in the Catalogue of Deposed Ministers, Act 7. of this Cottelier.
50. Monsieur Matthew Lansard appealed from the Synod of Lower Languedoc held at
Vsez in May last, which had restored the Sieur John Cottelier formerly Minister
in the Church of Nismes unto the exercise of his Ministry, upon condition that
he should employ himself in some other Province, contrary to the Decree of the
foregoing Synod in the same Province held at Malquel in the Month of May,
1619; which had deposed the said Cottelier from the Sacred Ministry as a Person
utterly unworthy so Holy and Honorable a Calling. The said Cottelier was
called in, and heard speak for himself against the said Lansard, and whatever
he could urge in his own Defense, and Justification; and the Deputies of the
Province brought in the Reasons and Motives both of the one and other Sentence,
and of the Enquiry made about him at Nismes by Commissioners sent thither to
that very end and purpose. Upon the whole, this Assembly did very grievously
censure that Province of Lower Languedoc for restoring the said Cottelier again
unto the Ministerial Office, contrary to the Canons of our Church Discipline;
and it does also censure the Church of Montpellier for suffering him to
administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper among them, and other Churches
were censured, which admitted him to preach in their Pulpits in that Province
of Lower Languedoc, at that time when as he was interdicted all the Duties of a
Gospel Minister in that very Province. And forasmuch as the said Cottelier has
by his Vices and Debauches rendered himself utterly unworthy of so Sacred a
Function, this Assembly does now totally depose him from the Holy Ministry,
without any the least hopes of his ever being restored to it.

51. The Appeal of the Colloquy of Albigeois from the Synod of Higher Languedoc
held at Puylaurent about Church Rates is dismissed over to the Colloquy of
Montpellier in Lower Languedoc.

52. The Appeal of the Church of Realmont against that of la Fanasse brought in
at first into the Synod of Puylaurent in the Higher Languedoc, and from thence
hither, is now declared null.

53. The Appeal of the Consistory and Church of la Tremblade from the Censure
and Judgment given against them by the Synod of Xaintonge held at Marennes was
rejected; because the contents thereof was of that nature, which might be
finally determined in their own Province.

54. In like manner the Appeal of the Church of Bruillet in the same Province
of Xaintonge, and that of Monsieur de la Chaussee Elder in the Church of St.
Claud brought against the Synod of the same Province held at St. John d' Angely
about the Ministry of Monsieur Hog was rejected; because the matters of both
these Appeals might be finally decided within their own Province.

55. The Province of Poictou brought in an Appeal against the University
Council of Saumur about their receiving of Monsieur Cameron into the
Professorship of Divinity, whereunto he was called by them, according to a
Decree of the Synod of Anjou. The Deputies of Poictou were heard in their
Arguments and Oppositions made against the Sieur Camerons promotion unto that
Chair; and the Deputies of Anjou were heard speak for their Province, and for
the University of Saumur, as also Monsieur Vignier, who with the Sieurs de la
Buissonniter and de la Place had been called in from the Neighbor Provinces by
the said University to examine the said Sieur Cameron. Although this Assembly
believes that the said Province of Poictou were stirred up unto their
Opposition by a Godly Zeal, yet notwithstanding it does approve and confirm
whatever has been done by the Province of Anjou, by the University of Saumur,
and by all the Commissioners of the other Provinces in the Call of the
aforesaid Monsieur Cameron unto the Profession of Theology, and declares it to
have been well and lawfully done by (them.

56. Monsieur Mahaut appealed from the Synod of Normandy, for not approving his
Call unto the Church of Roan, which had chosen him for their Pastor, and he had
accepted of it, being now out of all Employment, and not related unto any
Church. This Assembly could not approve of the Church of Roans dealings with
the said Sieur Mahaut, no more than it can of their distinction made between
the most eminent Members and the Heads of Families, which they are forbidden to
use for the future, because of many inconveniences that may ensue upon it: And
yet forasmuch as the said Sieur Mahaut has requested to be discharged from the
said Church of Roan, as is evident from the Consistorial Acts of that Church,
which were produced, he has no reason to repute himself their Pastor. And that
the said Mahaut may have an Answer unto his Letters sent unto this Synod, he is
remanded back unto the next Provincial Synod of Normandy, who shall dispose of
the Person and Ministry of the said Monsieur Mahaut by virtue of the Authority
of this Assembly, and in the mean while according to the Decree of the Synod of
Normandy he shall go and serve the Church of Ponteau de Mer.

57. The Church of Nismes appealed from the Synod of Lower Languedoc held at
Malguiol for denying them Monsieur Chauve to be their Pastor. Whereupon the
Counselors, Magistrates and Consuls of Nismes, as also the Deputies from
Sommieres were called in, and heard in what they had to oppose against this
Appeal of Nismes, who pleaded their particular Right unto the Person and
Ministry of the said Monsieur Chauve. There were Deputies also from the Church
of Montauban on the same Errand, demanding that he might be conferred upon
them. This Assembly also sounded the inclination of this Reverend Minister, who
did as ingeniously inform them that there is and ever had been a most sincere
and mutual Affection and Correspondence between him and his Church of Sommiers,
and that the Lord had poured out a singular Benediction upon his poor Labors
in it. The Deputies also of the Province of Lower Languedoc gave in their
Reasons why they had refused him unto the Church of Nismes. All which having
been maturely debated and considered, This Assembly did confirm Monsieur Chauve
in his Ministerial Relation unto the Church of Sommieres, concurring herein
with the judicial Sentence of the said Province, and yet compassionating the
necessities of that Chrch of Nismes, it does lend the said Monsieur Chauve to
them for one year, to begin from that day he shall be chosen by the Church of
Nismes, and that time expired, he shall return again unto Sommieres there to
fulfill the Ministry he has received from the Lord.

58. The Church of St. Martin de Bobaux appealed from the Synod of Sevennes for
having assigned them no more than Ten Crowns in liew of all that assistance
which was granted them by the National Synod of Vitre. This Assembly ordained
that the said Church of St. Martyn shall receive a free Portion discharged of
all Rates and Taxes out of the Moneys appropriated to the said Province of
Sevennes.

59. The Church of Ars in the Isle of Re appealed from the Synod of Xaintonge,
because it had ordered Monsieur Chesnet their Pastor to be removed from them
unto that of St. John de Angely. The Letters of the said Church being read, and
the Deputies of the Province, and the Sieur Chesnet being heard; This Assembly
confirms his Ministry in the Church of Ars, and leaves the Province of
Xaintonge to take care for the Church of St. John d' Angely, and to supply its
present necessities by some other Person.

60. The Lords Magistrates, Consuls, and Consistory of the City and Church of
Nismes brought in their Appeal from the Synod of Higher Languedoc held at
Mazieres for denying them Monsieur Chamier to be their Professor in Divinity.
The Remonstrances and Petitions of the Deputies of Lower Languedoc being heard,
as also the Arguments urged to the contrary by the Lords in the Government of
Nismes, and the Consistory and Council of the University of Montauban, and the
reasons of the Synod of Higher Languedoc being reported by the Deputies of that
Province, declaring the grounds of their Refusal: This Assembly would not alter
any thing in the said University of Montauban, and therefore confirmed Monsieur
Chamier in his Ministry, and Professorship there; and exhorts the Lords
Magistrates and Consuls of the City of Montauban, and the whole Church to give
full contentment unto the said Monsieur Chamier, that so he may be the more
encouraged in his great labors among them, and be the more useful to him.

61. The Churches of Caen and Santal appealed from the Provincial Synod of
Normandy about a certain Sum of Money assigned to the College of the said
Province: But this Appeal was turned over to the nearest Colloquy of the Isle
of France.

62. The Church of St. Pons brought their Appeal from the Synod of Vivaretz,
held at Chasteauneuf, for that it had appointed Monsieur de la Motte to be the
Pastor of their Church together with that of Mirabel, contrary to the desires
of the said Church of Pons, and that Fourscore Livres which was formerly
assigned unto both those Churches in common, were now wholly attributed by the
same Province unto the sole Church of Mirabel. This Assembly considering the
many difficulties and obstructions that Monsieur de la Motte conflicts withal
in the exercise of his Ministry in that Church of St. Pons, does enjoin the
Colloquy of Aubenas, to provide the said Sieur de la Motte of another Church,
and that they may do it the more easily, it shall be by way of Exchange,
translating some other Minister into his place, to whom Monsieur de la Motte
shall be substituted, and so the said Churches of St. Pons and Mirabel may
continue incorporated each with the other and mutually enjoy the said Sum of
Fourscore Livres, an augmentation granted them by their Province toward the
maintenance of their Minister. And in case the Colloquy cannot provide a Church
for the said Sieur de la Motte, matters shall remain in the same State as they
now be till the sitting of their next Provincial Synod. And in the mean while
the said Church of St. Pons shall be assisted and supplied by the Pastors of
that Colloquy, each of them preaching to it in his respective turn.

63. An Appeal was brought by sundry of the Inhabitants of St. Lawrence
D'aiguze in the Lower Languedoc against certain Orders of the Colloquy of
Nismes held at Aimargues in February last, and of the Synod of Lower Languedoc
held at Vsez, in the Month of May last, for restoring the Sieur Gabriel Tuffan
unto the Holy Ministry, from which he was suspended by the Colloquy of Nismes
held at the said Aimargues in July of the year 1619, though he was never duly
absolved from those Crimes of which he was accused, and for which he was
suspended the Ministerial Office. The Deputies of Lower Languedoc were heard
declaring the Reasons of their Judicial Sentence, and the Commissioners of the
Colloquy of Nismes giving in theirs, and the said Tuffan speak for himself;
After which, the Assembly debated with themselves the whole Affair, and
censured the said Province, and particularly their Commissioners for their want
of gravity, and gross self-contradiction in all their proceedings: See
concerning this Tuffan the 2 d. Synod of Charenton, in the Catalogue of
Apostates.
And as for the said Sieur Tuffan he being found guilty of plunging himself
Head and Ears in State-Matters and Businesses of this World, expressly contrary
to the Precept of the Apostle, and having thereby contracted on himself much
guilt, utterly unworthy a Person of his Calling; This Assembly suspended him
from the Sacred Ministry, and interdicted him all the Functions thereof till
the sitting of the next National Synod; by which he may be restored, provided
that he bring with him sufficient Testimonials to it of his Repentance and
Religious Conversation, and of his serious improvement of this Public
Reprehension. And in case the next National Synod cannot be convened in the
year Sixteen Hundred Twenty and Three, the Synod of the Lower Languedoc may
restore him unto his Office, but not to serve within the Precincts of the
Colloquy of Nismes. And in the mean while a Portion shall given him yearly for
his subsistence free of all Rates and Taxes by the said Province. And the
Church of Bellegarde together with the annexed Congregations shall
notwithstanding this Synodical Sentence past upon him, give him the said Tuffan
full satisfaction for the time that he did them Service as their Minister; and
the Colloquy shall see them do it.

64. An Appeal was brought by the Church of Alez about a Pulpit set up in the
midst of the Women's Seats, which has occasioned diverse Quarrels, Batteries,
Lawsuits, and Suspensions from the Lords Table. But the Decision of it was
dismissed over to the Colloquy of Vsez in the Lower Languedoc.

CHAP. IX. GENERAL MATTERS.
1. THIS Assembly being informed of great Divisions fallen out in the Province
of Lower Languedoc, 2 Vitre. g. m. ^.
through the multitude of Ministers, who are personally present at their
Political Provincial Assemblies, and of manifold Inconveniences arising from
the Deputation of Pastors about State Affairs, and principally by sending them
in business unto Court; and designing a remedy for this sad disorder, which
does re^ect upon the Ministry a world of Reproach and Scorn, and diverteth
Pastors from their Studies and Ministerial Duties, and is exceeding chargeable
and incommodious unto their Churches; It forbids most expressly all Ministers
in that Province, and in all the other Provinces of this Kingdom to accept
henceforwards of any Deputations unto Court, or to become the Deputies of
others, although they be Persons of the greatest Quality, or to be deputed unto
them. And it exhorts the said Province of Lower Languedoc to send their
Deputies from Colloquies rather than from the Churches: And it entreats the
next General Assembly to confirm this our Canon, and if possible totally to
discharge all Pastors of Churches from intermedling with State Affairs. And in
short it does enjoin Provincial Synods to take special Notice of such Ministers
as shall accept of those Deputations, and to prosecute them with the severest
censures, yea, and to suspend them from their Ministry. And in case the
Provincial Synods prove negligent, the National will take cognizance of this
their neglect, and call them to an account for it.

2. Monsieur Boucheteau Minister of Gods Holy Word, and the Sieurs de la
Begaudiere, de Benes, Joly Bernard, and du Puy Elders were appointed a
Committee to audit the Accounts of the Lord du Candal.

3. The Lords de la Riviere, and de Juigne Ministers of the Gospel, and de la
Begaudiere, de Benes, Pusquet, di Bouques, and Joly Elders, were nominated to
receive the Accounts of our Colleges and Universities, and to make report
thereof unto this Assembly.

4. The National Synod of Vitre having given Commission unto some certain
Deputies of diverse Provinces jointly together with our Lords the General
Deputies at Court to compel the Sieur Palot to account with them for those
great Sums he is indebted unto the Churches, 2 Vitre. g. m. 4.
and these according to their Commission, having devolved it on the Consistory
of Paris to take care of this concern; who did to this purpose employ the
Sieurs Guidon, and d' Huisseau Elders of the said Church of Paris. Now the
Letters of those two Gentlemen, Monsieur Guidon, and d' Huisseau being read, as
also the Memoirs of what they had done in their prosecution of the said Palot,
This Assembly approved and confirmed the Powers which had been granted them by
the Lords our General Deputies, and Consistory of the Church of Paris, and it
thanketh them for their great pains, and entreat them to continue this their
Prosecution, and as a Testimonial of our Gratitude, we do paesent them with Two
Thousand Livres, which they shall receive out of the first Moneys of the Four
and Twenty Thousand Livres, which the said Sieur Palot was condemned in open
Court after the Trial was heard, to pay unto our Churches, for which gratuity
the said Sieurs Guidon and d' Huisseau shall being in their Account, as also of
the Overplus of the said 24000 Livrs. But in case the said Sum of 24000 Livres
should not be paid by the said Sieur Palot, yet the Sum of 2000 Livres
wherewith they be presented by this Assembly may be taken by them out of the
clearest Moneys which shall be received from the said Palot. And as for those
other great Sums remaining due from him unto the Churches, This Assembly does
freely give and grant unto the said Guidon and d' Huisseau a quarter part of
whatever may be recovered by them, provided they pursue the Processes and Suits
in Law at their own Costs and Charges, without expecting any other
gratification or reimbursement from the Churches. And if perchance the said
Gentlemen should not accept of these conditions, and refuse to finish the
prosecution of this Affair hitherto undertaken and performed by them, then
shall they be reimburst of all their pass Expense and Charges, according to the
report they shall make of them in all Sincerity and Justice unto the Consistory
of the Church of Paris, which shall notify it unto all the Provinces, and they
conjoyntly with our Lords the General Deputies shall make an equal Dividend of
the Paper and Accounts relating to those Sums among all the Provinces, that so
every particular Province may prosecute the said Palot for their respective
Sums in such a way and manner as best pleases them. In pursuance of this
Decree Letters of Attorney were ordered to be given unto the said Guidon and d'
Huisseau by the Deputies of the Isle of France, provided they would by a
public Act of their own Signed and Sealed stipulate to their Approbation and
acceptance of this present Synodical Act and Decree, and promise to go thorough
with the prosecution of the said Palot, conformably to the Conditions and Terms
propounded and included in it.

5. Forasmuch as there is a most dreadful Deluge of Ungodliness overflowing the
whole Land, and horribly corrupting all Ranks and Degrees of Men amongst us,
which does call aloud unto us to humble our selves before God, and the late
doleful Changes happened in the Churches of Bearn, and in diverse other Churches
and Provinces united and incorporated with us, which are either ruinated, or
upon the very brink of ruin and destruction do all warn, invite and summon us
to turn away Gods Wrath from us by a most serious and speedy Repentance, and
sincere Conversion; Therefore this Assembly ordains that a Public Fast shall
be solemnly kept and observed in this Church of Alez on Saturday the Fourteenth
of November, and on the first Thursday in March next ensuing in all the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom.

6. A Motion and Petition from the Province of Normandy, St. Maixant. Observe.
2.2 Vitre. g. m. 11.
that there might be a special Canon made with reference unto our Proposans;
because all former Orders have been ineffectual, and very great Inconveniences
do fall out daily through want of a sufficient knowledge of the Qualities and
Conversations of such as we are to receive into the Ministerial Office. This
Assembly is of another Opinion, judging that there is no need of any new
Canons. But it enjoyneth all the Provinces exactly to observe those which are
inserted into the Body of our Discipline, and in the Acts of our National
Synods, and not to lay on hands suddenly on any Person. And whereas those said
inconveniences have risen hence, that the Doctors and Professors in our
Universities have been over-liberal, and too too favorable in their
Testimonials given to our Scholars, they shall be admonished for time to come
never to grant them out of favor or respect to any person contrary to Truth,
and Sincerity. And in like manner all the Provinces be forbidden to admit the
Scholar of another Province into the Ministry among them, without the express
consent and attestation of that Province from whence he departs.

7. The Lord of Candal shall not pay any Money unto any Member of, nor to any
Person that comes from the Political Assemblies, without a particular Order
under the hand of the Receiver of the Province, and to be charged on the
account of the Provincial Synods. And in case he do otherwise, those Sums so
paid by him shall not be allowed in his Accounts, nor shall those Receivers
give him an Acquittance for them.

8. The Moneys granted us by His Majesty shall not be diverted from those Uses
to which they were originally intended, our National Synods having ordained
that they be distributed among the Ministers, and to the Widows of the poorer
Pastors, and to our young Scholars, and Students in Divinity, and to the
defraying of Synodical Charges, when as the necessities of our Churches shall
require such Assemblies.

(...) Maxiant Ob^ervat* 5. on the former Sy^^^.
9. The Province of Poictu moved that a Canon might be past for determining the
Age of Ministers Children, who are to be received into the number of Scholars
Pensioners by the Provinces. This Assembly leaves it to the prudence of
Colloquies and Synods to ascertain it, according to the Decree of the National
Synod of Maixant.

10. Mr. James Hubner came unto this Assembly as he had done unto hat last
National one held at Vitre, 1 (...) 2.
presenting Letters from the Lords of the Canton of Bearne, requesting on
behalf of Monsieur Hubner his Father, that he might be reimburst of diverse
great Sums of Money owing unto Monsieur Sturmius deceased, Father of the Wife
of the said Hubner. This Assembly answered him that none of the Writings
produced by him did bind or oblige our Churches, but the late King Henry the
Great of Glorious Memory, and the late Prince of Conde. And therefore Letters
shall be written in the Name of this Assembly unto the Lords of Bearn, to
inform and certify them of the Truth of this Matter, and an Hundred Livres
were given unto the said Mr. Hubner to pay the Expenses of his Journey hither,
without ever hoping for the future of drawing any Moneys from our National
Synods.

11. Forasmuch as diverse Churches are decaying, Poictiers. g. m. 21.
and will at last be dissolved for want of maintenance for their poor
Ministers. All our Churches are exhorted, That as they love the increase and
advancement of Christ's Kingdom they would endeavor to raise a Fund, either by
Gifts from the Living, or Legacies from Dying Persons in their last Wills and
Testaments, or by any other convenient ways: That so the Sacred and unvaluable
Treasure of Gods Word may be always conserved among us, and our Offspring
after us in Generations to come may be Educated and confirmed in the True
Religion.

12. The Lord of Candal shall be personally present at our next National Synod,
that he may have his Commission confirmed by the Universal approbation of our
Churches; and the Lords General Deputies shall see to it, that the said
Commission bear not the Title of an Office. And the said Lord of Candal is
entreated to give Notice unto the Provinces of the time when he can make
payment unto the Provincial Receivers of their Quarterly Dividend, and of the
Quantity of the Sum wherewith they may be furnished, and the Copies of his
Letters sent them, in which shall be presented the Transcripts of all
Acquittances for Moneys paid by him already, and that he may hereafter pay unto
the Pastors. And he shall produce all his Acquittances before the Lords our
General Deputies, and the Consistory of the Church of Paris, or such Persons as
shall be deputed by them to audit his Accounts, that so they may be verified in
our National Synods. In all which he shall demonstrate his diligence for the
payment of the Moneys on all Bills and Orders that have been put into his
hands, and in default thereof there shall be Reprisals made on his Accounts.

13. A Motion was made by the Province of Sevennes, that all Public Notaries
professing the Reformed Religion might be forbidden in their executing of
Marriage Contracts to make a Gift of the Bodies of betroathed Persons;
especially where one is of a contrary Religion, until such time as the
Consistory of that Church shall have taken cognizance thereof. Privas Observat.
9. upon the Discipline.
This Assembly leaves it to the prudence of the Province of Sevennes, or any
other, where such things as these be practiced to make a By-Law, which may most
effectually contribute unto their future edifying.

14. That Order passed in the Province of Xaintonge excluding the president of
the last Provincial Synod from being chosen Moderator in the next, 1. Paris. 2.
and that he who was deputed unto one National Synod may not be unto the
ensuing, was repealed and vacated. Provincial Synods being left in full liberty
to nominate any Persons whom they shall judge meetest for both the Employments
according to our Church Discipline.

15. The Province of Burgundy demanded, 3. Rochel. Observat. 17. 2. Vitre.
Observat. 10.
whether was most expedient to choose Moderators and Deputies for Synods by a
low or loud Vote. This Assembly is of opinion, that for the avoiding of many
Inconveniences it were best to make those Elections by a low Voice.

16. The Province of Dolphiny moved, whether a Minister might together with his
Ministry exercise the Profession of Philosophy. 1. Rochel. Observe. 18.
This Assembly judges that these two Professions are not convenient to be
discharged by one Man at the same time.

17. Forasmuch as every particular Church is obliged to raise a certain Stipend
for its Pastors, St. Maixant. Appeal. 16.
no Minister nor Pastor of any Church shall touch a doit of the Kings Money,
but it shall be paid him in by his Consistory, and all Expenses in Travel unto
Synods and other Ecclesiastical Meetings shall be defrayed by the Churches
themselves, that so the Ministers may be freed of all manner of Reproach, and
may in no wise be diverted from their Studies, and Duties of their Calling by
the care of worldly matters. And Synods shall make inquiry after such as do
transgress this Canon, and correct them by all Church Censures. But this shall
not be so understood as if Ministers were hereby debarred the receiving of the
Moneys granted us by His Majesty, or to give Acquittance for it, provided they
give in an Account thereof unto their Churches. and that they do not make with
them any secret Bargain or Covenant for it.

18. The Protestants are Exhorted to make in every Church Collections for the
poor persecuted Protestants of the Marquisate of Salluces, and the Moneys so
collected shall be put into the hands of Monsieur Gras living at Lions.

19. In all Churches there shall be kept a Register of all Marriages,
Baptismes, and Burials.

20. The Pastors and Professors in the Church of Genvea shall be desired,
Montauban. g. m. 46.
to suffer no new French Translations of the Bible to be printed in their City,
nor that any alterations be made in our Liturgy: And that if they have any
Annotations for the common received Translation, they would be pleased to print
them by themselves, and before they do it, to give notice thereof unto the
Churches of this Kingdom, and to take our advice first in it.

CHAP. X. FORM of EXCOMMUNICATION.
2. Pa^is 2. 2. Vitre. 2. Observa^ upon the Discipline.
21 THE Province of Poictou requested that there might be another Form of
Excommunication framed, of a larger Nature than that in our Discipline, because
the horrible Corruptions of the Age we live in do indispensably need it, and
call upon us loudly to put it in Execution. Whereupon this Form following was
drawn up,

See the Excommunicat. (...) J^^emy Fer^^er in the and of the Synod of T^^nei^s.
My Brethren, This is the Fourth time that we declare unto you that N. N. has
been suspended the Lords Table for that heinous Crime of N. committed by him,
to the great scandal of the Church of God, and yet he continues impenitent and
rejects all Counsels and Admonitions that have been given him, which
suspension and its causes we have fully notified unto you, that you might join
your Prayers with ours unto the great God to soften his stony heart, and to
move him unto Repentance, and to bring him out of the high and broad way of
destruction. But notwithstanding our Indulgence to him, and long suffering and
forbearance of him, although we have prayed, entreated, threatened and adjured
him to break off his sinful courses, and to return unto the Lord, and tried all
means to bring him unto Repentance. he yet persisteth in his Ungodliness and
Impenitency, and is more obstinate and hardened in his Rebellions against God,
and tramples under foot his Holy Word, and scorneth that Discipline which God
has set up in his Church, boasting himself of his Sin, and causes unto the
Church for a very long time a world of grief and trouble, and the Holy and
Effectual Name of Jehovah our God to be blasphemed. Wherefore we Ministers of
the Word and Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom God has armed with
Spiritual Weapons, Mighty through God to destroy the strong holds of Sin, which
oppose and exhalt themselves against him, and to whom the Eternal Son of God
has given an ample Power of binding and loosing in Earth, declaring that what
we shall do here below he will ratify and make it good in Heaven, we being
willing to purge and cleanse the House of God, and to free the Church from all
Reproach and Scandal, and to glorify the Name of God by pronouncing an
Anathema. upon the Wicked and Godless Sinner; We do in the Name and by the
Authority of our Lord Jesus, and by and with the Advice of the Pastors and
Elders assembled in the Colloquy at N. and of the Consistory of the Church of
N, We have, and do cut off the said N. from the Communion of the Church, we do
Excommunicate him, and cast him out of the Society of Gods Saints, that he may
be reputed by you as a Publican and Pagan, and that among the faithful he may
be an Anathema and Execration. Let his Company be looked upon as contagious and
plaguey, and his Example possess your Souls with terror and horror, and make you
tremble under the Mighty Hand of God, and know that it is a fearful thing to
fall into the Hands of the Living God. And this our Sentence of Excommunication
the Son of God himself will ratify, and may he succeed and prosper it in such
an effectual manner, that this proud Sinner being ashamed and confounded before
God, may give Glory to him by his Conversion, and that being delivered from the
power of the Devil, who has hitherto kept him in Chains and Bondage he may be
sorry for his Sin with a Godly sorrow, and turn from it with a repentance unto
life never to be repented of. Let us my well-beloved Brethren call upon our
God, that he would be pleased to yearn with the bowels of his compassion upon
this vile and miserable Creature, and that this horrible Sentence which to our
very great regret and grief we pronounce against him, by and with the Authority
of the Son of God, may serve to abase and humble him, and to reduce him into
the way of Life and Salvation, who has wandered and strayd as a lost Sheep in
the crooked paths of destruction, Amen! Amen! Cursed is he who does the Work of
the Lord negligently. Amen! If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him
be Anathema, Maranatha. Amen!

22. The Province of Xaintonge craved advice, what course we might take with
them, who take out from the Courts of Parliament Prohibitions against the
Orders and Censures of the Church as if they were intolerable abuses. This
Assembly injoyneth all Synods, Colloquies, and Consistories to proceed against
such Persons as Rebels against the Discipline of our Church, and to inflict
upon them the last and heaviest censure of Excommunication provided they have
first endeavored by the ways of Love and Kindness, and Grave Religious
Counsels to reduce such Persons unto their Duty, and to subject them unto our
Church Orders.

CHAP. XI. The Canons of the Synod of Dort incorporated with those of the
Reformed Churches of France.
23 A Motion was made in this National Synod that some course should be taken
in time to prevent the spreading of the Arminian Errors that have of late so
much troubled the Churches of the Netherlands, that they create no trouble to
the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom. This Assembly embraced the motion very
readily, and approved of it as very laudable, just, and needful for the peace
of the Church of God, and for the Conservation of the purity of our Doctrine,
and for the farther strengthening of our Union with the Foreign Reformed
Churches; and therefore counting the Maladies of the Low Country Churches a
very fair Advertisement and warning unto us, and that we may imitate so
excellent an Example, and prevent the danger threatened us by making use of
these self-same means they did for the Expulsion of those Errors out of their
Bowels, wherefore, forasmuch as the National Synod of Dort called by the
Authority, wise Counsel, and vigilant forecast of their High and Mighty
Lordships the States General of the Confederate Netherlands and of all the
United Provinces under their Jurisdiction and Government, and in which assisted
personally diverse great and very Learned Divines from many other Reformed
Churches of our Lord Jesus, has been in the Netherlands and still is a most
effectual remedy for the Reformation of the Church, and the grubbing of
Heresies in the Article of Predestination and its depencies. This Assembly
after invocation of the Name of God, decreed, that the Articles of the said
National Council held at Dort, should be read in full Synod, which being read
accordingly, and every Article pondered most attentively, they were all
received and approved by a common unanimous consent, as agreeing with the Word
of God, and the Confession of Faith in these our Churches, that they were
framed with singular prudence and purity, that they were very meet and proper
to detect the Arminian Errors, and to confound them, for which reason all the
Pastors and Elders Deputed unto this Assembly have sworn and protested jointly
and severally that they consent unto this Doctrine, and that they will defend
it with the utmost of their power even to their last breath. The Form and
Tenor of which Oath, together with the Deputies Names subscribed shall be
added to the close of this Article, that the consent may be rendered the more
Authentic, and Obliging to all the Provinces. And this Assembly ordains that
this very Canon be printed, and added to the Canons of the said Council, and
that it shall be read in our Provincial Synods, and in our Universities, that
it may be approved, sworn, and subscribed to by the Pastors and Elders of our
Churches, and by the Doctors and Professors in our Universities, and also by
all those that are to be ordained and admitted into the Ministry, or into the
Professors Chair in any of our Universities. And if any one of these Persons
should reject either in whole or in part the Doctrine contained in, and decided
by the Canons of the said Council, or refuse to take the Oath of Consent and
Approbation, This Assembly decrees that he shall not be admitted into any
Office or Employment either in our Churches or Universities. Moreover this
Assembly conjureth by the bowels of Divine Mercy, and by the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant all Ministers, Pastors of Churches, to whom the Cure of
precious Souls is committed, that they would walk together evenly and
harmoniously in one and the same way, that they abstain from all idle,
unprofitable, and curious Questions, that they do not pry into the Sacred Ark
of Gods hidden and unrevealed Counsels and Decrees, above or beyond what is
recorded in his written Word, the Holy Scriptures of Truth, but rather that
they would humbly own and acknowledge their ignorance of those profound and
unfathomable Mysteries, than intrude themselves into things unlawful, and that
they would so order their Discourses and Sermons concerning Predestination,
that it may promote Repentance and Amendment of Life, consolate wounded
Consciences, and excite the practice of Godliness; that by this means all
occasions of Disputes and Controversies may be avoided, and we may abide united
in one and the same Faith with our Brethren of the Netherlands, and other
Churches of our Lord Jesus without the Kingdom, as maintaining together with
them and contending for one, and the same Faith, assaulted by the same common
Enemies, and called to one and the same hope through our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be Honor and Glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

CHAP. XII. The Form of the Oath taken in the National Synod, and which is to
be administered unto all the Members of Provincial Synods.
I N. N. do Swear and Protest before God, and this Holy Assembly that I do
receive, approve and embrace all the Doctrines taught and decided by the Synod
of Dort, as perfectly agreeing with the Word of God, and the Confession of our
Churches. I Swear and Promise to persevere in the Profession of this Doctrine
during my whole Life, and to defend it with the utmost of my power, and that I
will never, neither by Preaching nor Teachings in the Schools, nor by Writing
depart from it. I declare also and I protest that I reject, and condemn the
Doctrine of the Arminians, because it makes Gods Decree of Election to depend
upon the mutable Will of Man, and for that it does extenuate and make null and
void the Grace of God; it exalts Man, and the powers of Free Will to his
destruction, it reduces into the Church of God old, ejected Pelagianisme, and
is a Mask and Vizard for Popery to creep in among us under that disguise, and
subverteth all Assurance of Everlasting Life and Happyness. And so may God help
me, and be propitious to me, as I swear all this without any Ambiguity,
Equivocation or mental Reservation.

Sworn and Subscribed by

Peter du Moulin Pastor of the Church of Paris, Deputy for the Isle of Franse,
and Moderator of the Synod. Laurence Brunier Pastor of the Church of Vsez,
Deputy for the Province of lower Languedoc, and Assessor of the Synod. Nicholas
Vignier Pastor of the Church of Blois, Deputy for the Province of Orleans, and
Scribe of the Synod. Thomas Papillon Elder in the Church of Paris, Deputy for
the Isle of France, and Scribe of the Synod. Isack de Juigne Pastor of the
Church of Vassy, and Deputy for the Province of the Isle of France, Picardy,
etc. Samuel de L'Escherpiere Pastor of the Church of Roan, Daniel Massys Pastor
in the Church of Caen, Antony Bridon Elder in the Church of Feschamp, James de
Montbray Elder in the Church of Conde, Deputies for the Province of Normandy.
Ezechiel Marmet Pastor in the House of the duke of Rohan, Philip de Vassaut
elder in the Church of Roche Bernard, Deputies for the Province of Britain.
Daniel Jammen Pastor of the Church of St. Amand, John de Bennes Elder in the
Church of Gien. Galliot de Cambirs, Elder in the Church of Romorantin, Deputies
for the Province of Orleans. Samuel Bouchereau Pastor of the Church of Saumur,
Matthew Cottiers Pastor of the Church in Touns. George Rabbotteau Elder in the
Church of Pruilly, Deputies for the Province of Touraine. John Chauffepied
Pastor of the Church of Niort, John Carre Pastor of the Church of
Chastelheraud, Giles Begaud Elder of the Church of Mountagu, Deputies for the
Province of Poictou. Daniel Chanet Pastor of the Church of Ars, John Constans
Pastor of the Church of Pons, Peter Pa^quet Elder in the Church of
Rouchfoucauld, Peter Promentin Elder in the Church of St. John de Angely,
Deputies for the Province of Xaintonge. James du Luc Pastor of the Church of
Casteljaloux, James Private Pastor of the Church of Chastillion, Francis Joly
Elder in the Church of Bourdeaux, John Guillim Elder in the Church of
Grateloupe, Deputies for the Province of lower Guienne. David Agard Pastor of
the Church of Valance, Daniel Richard Pastor of the Church of Cheilar, John de
Blache Elder in the Church of Biuffres, John de Rouvre Elder in the Church of
Aubenas, Deputies for the Province of Vivaretz. Michael le Faucheur Pastor of
the Church of Montpellier, Charles de Boaques Elder in the same Church, Anthony
de Roques Elder in the Church of Montfrin, Deputies for the Province of lower
Languedoc. John de Voysin Pastor of the Church of Realmont, Antony Garrissoles
Pastor of the Church of Puylaurent, Paul de Luppe Elder in the Church of
Mauvoisin, James du Elder in the Church of Montauban, Deputies for the higher
Languedoc. Peter Helliot Pastor of the Church of Arnay le Duc, Francis
Perreauld Pastor of the Church of Mascon, and Noyer du Noyer Elder in the
Church of Bussy, Deputies for the Province of Burgundy. Peter Huron Pastor in
the Church of Riez, Elias de Glandeves Elder in the Church of Puymitchel,
Deputies for the Province of Provence. Paul Guyon Pastor of the Church of Dieu
le Fit, Peter de la Croze Pastor of the Church in Courtezon, James Bernard
Elder in the Church of Montlimart, and Moses du Port Elder in the Church of La
Mure, Deputies for the Province of Dolphiny. Peter Guillamin, Pastor of the
Church of St. Andrew de Valborne, Daniel Venturin Pastor of the Church of
Vigan, John de Vignoles Elder in the Church of La Salle Deputies for the
Province of Sevennes. Peter L'abbadie Pastor of the Church of Pau, and John de
la Cost Elder in the Church of Moneins Deputies for the Principality of Bearn.
De Chalas General Deputy for the Reformed Churches of France. Touretin Pastor
and Professor of Divinity in the Church of Geneva.
24. Whereas the Deputy of the Lord du Candall has acquainted this Synod, that
several of the Deputies unto this present Synod, having no Letters of Order
unto the said Lord of Candall to pay them the necessary charges of their
Journey in case he should pay them, the Receivers of the respective Provinces
might make some difficulty to allow those payments of his unto the said
Deputies in his Account. This National Synod does ordain that those Receivers
aforesaid shall take the promises and Acquittances of the said Deputies as
ready Moneys paid by the said Lord du Candall out of the very first Moneys that
be either has already, or shall hereafter receive for the Churches, and that
they shall ho a sufficient discharge for him the said Deputy, and good and
valuable in the Audit of his Account.

25. The Deputies unto our National Synods, Privas g. m. 15.
shall hereafter bring with them the Catalogues of all the Churches, and of all
the Pastors in actual Service in their respective Provinces, Signed and
Subscribed by the Moderators and Scribes of the Provincial Synods: And in case
they neglect the doing hereof, there shall be no Respect nor Care had for them
in the dividend of the Churches Moneys.

26. All the Provinces, which have Supernumerary Portions assigned to them in
the General dividend, shall give an Account how they have employed, and to what
use they have put those Supernumerary Sums, in the next National Synod.

27. In pursuance of that debate in this Synod concerning those great Sums of
Money remaining due unto the Churches from the Sieur Palot: This Assembly did
this Thirteenth day of November pass a Letter of Attorney before a public
Notary, which was delivered unto the Deputies of the Isle of France, with this
Express Restriction, that they should not put it into the hands of the Sieurs
Guidon and d'Huisseau; till such time as they have agreed and stipulated by
some public act duly executed in Law that they do approve of the Act past in
this Assembly, and do solemnly promise, that they will most effectually
prosecute the said Sieur Palot, according to the Conditions and Articles
mentioned and declared in that our said Act.

CHAP. XIII. PARTICULAR MATTERS.
1 MR. Gasper Martyn Minister of the Church of Saillans in Dolphiny related the
great loss sustained by him in the printing of his Book, styled Le Capuchin
Reform, a great number of Copies being left upon his hand through the Craft
and Knavery of the Booksellers; who having printed more Copies than they
should, took out their own Number, and leave him to pay the rest, and in truth
to stand indebted for the whole Impression. This Assembly highly honoring him
for his great sufferings for professing the Truth, and the usefulness of his
Works, and in consideration of his present wants, do bestow upon him one
Portion free of all Taxes and Charges, which shall be paid him until the
sitting of the next National Synod, over and above that ordinary Portion
allowed the Church of Saillans for him; and Monsieur Turretin was now desired
to deal with the Printers and Booksellers of Geneva that the said Mr. Martyn
may have satisfaction given him for the damage he sustaineth by their means.

2. Monsieur James de la Planche having faithfully served the Church of God for
Six and Twenty Years in Provence, and being now taken blind, and almost broken
by the Pthysick, and borne down with many other Afflictions, occasioned through
his past labors and sufferings, and through his declining Age; for which
causes he was declared Emeritus by the Synod of that Province, and discharged
with a very honorable Testimonial from the Exercise of his Ministry; and now
conflicting with great wants, and needing Relief in his Old Age, he petitioned
this Assembly that some care might be had of him, and a competent maintenance
assigned to him yearly; The Assembly compassionating his Poverty, ordained a
Portion free of all Charges for him, which shall be paid by the Lord of Candal
unto Monsieur Gras at Lions, who shall see that the said Sum be remitted him
unto the place of his Abode; and the Sum of Six and Thirty Livres was now
given him in hand to defray the Expenses of his Journey thither.

3. Mr. John Paul Perrin Minister of Nions in Dolphiny presented himself before
this Assembly to render an Account of Printing his History of the Vaudois and
Albigeois, 2 Vitre. Observe. on the former.
and he farther declared that he was now writing the General History of the
Church from the beginning of the World to this Age in which we live. This
Assembly applauding him and thanking him for his Pains and Labors in the
beforementioned History, leaves it to his prudence and Conscience to judge
whether such a Work as he is now undertaking will be of use and benefit unto
the Churches, because we would not impose that task upon him which would be
needless and unprofitable. And whereas the said Monsieur Perryn informed us of
the numerousness of his Family, and that he had a great charge of Children, and
humbly requested tha the might have some Relief from us, especially for the
breeding of a Son of his, formerly debauched by the Jesuits, but now through
Grace brought home again unto Repentance, a youth of Excellent parts, and
yielding great hopes that he may be hereafter eminently useful in the Ministry:
The Province of Dolphiny was exhorted to take care of him and his Family
according to the Laws of Christian Charity, and the great Merits of the said
Monsieur Perrin.

4. Monsieur Albiac Dr. of the Civil Law Living at Velleneusve in Berry
petitioned to be reimburst the Sum of Fifty Crowns expended by him in
executing a Commission for the Churches of the Four Neighboring Province, viz.
of Lower Languedoc, Dolphiny, Sevennes, Vivaretz: This Assembly judges, That
the Provinces which employed him ought to see him satisfied, and each of them
shall pay him equally their parts of so just a Debt, and the quota of their
Moneys shall to this purpose be detained in the hands of the Lord du Candal,
that he may be honestly repayed.

5. Mr. Simon Daniel Hosl^ie Pastor of the Church of Villenusve in Berry
petitioned that some Relief might be allowed unto his Church, because of the
great losses it sustained in the Troubles of Privas, as also to help defray the
Expenses they shall be at in a Suit at Court about the Consulship of their
Town. This Assembly judging that the Moneys granted us by His Majesty ought not
to be diverted unto such uses, does notwithstanding recommend their Affair unto
our Lords the General Deputies, that they might get right due to them by the
Lords of the Privy Council, and because of the Necessities of the said Church
there shall be a supernumerary portion assigned to them, when we make the
public Dividend.

6. Monsieur Massez Notary Public and Secretary to the Consul of Montauban in
the Higher Languedoc requesting to be reimburst by the Churches the great
Expenses he was at in prosecuting the wrongs done him by the Parliament of
Tolouse; It being a business of General Concern because of the Notorious
Violations of the Edicts granted us by our Kings. This Assembly exhorted the
Province of Higher Languedoc to take care that the said Monsieur Massez have
satisfaction given him for his past Losses, and that he be indemnified for the
future, and that they extend their Charity to him in a most ample and exemplary
manner, since they themselves have judged his case to be of very great
Importance to all the Churches.

7. The Magistrates, Consuls, and Consistory of the Town of Privas having
represented both by Letters and Word of Mouth by Monsieur Tavernier one of
their Elders deputed to us, the great Losses, Damages, and Afflictions
sustained by them since the Death of Monsieur Chambaud, whereby they be now
reduced to a most lamentable condition, and worthy of our most tender
compassions, which also was confirmed by Letters from the Synod and Political
Assembly of Vivaretz, and praying some Charitable Relief to be Exhibited to
them, that so this considerable and populous Church might not be totally
desolated and dissolved. This Assembly ordained, That the Sum of Six Hundred
Livres should be given the said Church of Privas for a present supply: And all
the Churches of this Kingdom shall by their Deputies here in this Assembly, as
soon as they return unto their respective Provinces be exhorted to open the
Bowels of their compassion to the said afflicted Church of Privas, and to
relieve them by a General Collection upon the Lords Day in their respective
Temples. The Moneys of which Collection shall be sent unto the Churches of
Lions and Nismes to be distributed by them unto that of Privas. And Letters
also shall be writ to the Lord Governor of Montauban, to the Marquesses of La
Charse of Montbrun, and other the Parents and Kindred, of the late Deceased
Monsieur de Chambaud, desiring them to take special care of the Religious
Education of his Children, that they may not be diverted from the True
Religion, and trained up in Popish Idolatry, but that they would be pleased to
undertake for them, and become their Tutors and Guardians according to the
known Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

8. The Heads of Families, professing the Reformed Religion, in the Baylywick
of Orillac in the Mountains of Upper Auvergne, petitioned that the Portions
granted them by the National Synods of Gap and Rochel might be contined to
them: This Assembly ordained, that the Portion belonging unto the said Church
in the Baylywyck of Orillac shall be given it free and discharged of all Taxes
by the Province of Higher Languedoc. Gap. p. m. 18 3. Rochell.


9. Monsieur Casaud Pastor of the Church of Lectoure petitioned on its behalf
for some charitable Relief to raise it up from that woeful Ruin and Misery into
which it is now plunged, and to sustain it against its Enemies for the future.
This Assembly compassionating the said Church, did order and assign a free
Portion out of the Dividend of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne unto it; and one
part of the Collection which shall be made in the Higher Languedoc and Guyenne
for the Church of Privas shall be given unto the said Church of Lectoure.

10. The Church of Tulette belonging to the Province of Dolphiny, but enclosed
on all parts with the County of Venisse humbly requested some relief for its
subsistence. Because this is a Church of great importance, very poor, exceeding
feeble and unable to resist the many Enemies which do surround it. This
Assembly ordained that besides the free Portion which it should receive as well
as others out of the Dividend for the said Province of Dolphiny, It shall have
also an half portion free out of the Common Stock of all the Churches until the
sitting of the next National Synod.

11. Hierome Quevedo a Spaniard, escaped out of the Prison of the Inquisition
demanded some relief that he might live in the profession of the Gospel. This
Assembly ordered him an Hundred Livres out of the common Moneys of the
Churches, which shall be put into the hands of the Consistory of Montpellier to
pay him Quarterly a Portion, that so he may learn some honest Trade whereby to
gain a livelihood. Which Sum shall be continued to him or taken from him as
the Consistory of the Church of Montpellier shall judge of his Deportments.

12. Lawrence Joly one of the Exiled Protestants of the Marquisate of Salluces
having brought Letters from the Church of Guillestre (which is composed of the
poor Refugees of the said Marquisate) unto this Assembly, did most humbly
petition that they might have a Portion of the Moneys granted us by the King
for the maintenance of a Pastor, because they are in hopes that it may allure
and attract a great many others who are groaning under that sore and heavy
persecution in the Marquisate, and do hunger after the Bread of Life, and
ardently desire the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, to quit and forsake it.
This Assembly in the Dividend of its Moneys will ordain a supernumerary Portion
for the said Church of Guillestre.

13. Monsieur Guingonis shall be assisted with Ten Crown out of the common
Moneys belonging to the Province of Province. And as for Mr. John Dury Student
in Divinity, the Province of Lower Languedoc is ordered to provide for him
according to the Canons of our National Synods; and in the mean while he shall
receive Twenty Crowns out of the Moneys appropriated to the said Province of
Lower Languedoc, that so he may quit this Town and remove to Montauban.

14. Anthony Verdier formerly a Priest in the County of Avignon had Six Livres
given him that he might depart hence unto Grenoble.

15. The Church of St. Paul Trois Chasteaux demanding some Relief to set up a
School among them, and to help build their Temple, were dismissed over to the
Province of Dolphiny, which is exhorted to have a special care of that Church.

16. Monsieur John Perier Pastor of the Church of Paillac in Auvergne did on
behalf of his Church complain against the Provincial Synod of Burgundy, for not
giving him the Portions granted by the National Synod of Privas, and requested
that they might be joined unto Sevennes. As for their Incorporation with the
Province of Sevennes this Assembly sends them back unto the Synod of Burgundy,
to whom they shall deliver this Petition of theirs; and take out thence an Act
to be presented unto the next National Synod. And whereas Two Portions were
assigned the said Church of Paillac, the one of them shall be free and
discharged of all Rates and Taxes whatsoever, and the other shall be of the
same Nature with those of the other Churches in the Province of Burgundy.

17. There was ordained the Sum of Forty and Eight Livres to be paid unto the
Sieurs Guarin, Ressens, Gabet and Mercurin Pastors, to wit, Twelve Livres to
each of them for Eight Days they have tarryed in this Town at the Commandment
of this Assembly; which said Sum shall be paid them by the Lord of Candal out
of the common Stock of the Churches.

18. Monsieur Blewett remonstrated on behalf of the Church of Martille, the
great Expenses they have been necessitated and enforced to by reason of the
many and frequent changes of Pastors, imposed upon them by the Province of
Burgundy which has utterly disabled them to maintain the said Mr. Blewett,
their present Minister. The Province of Burgundy is exhorted to take care of
this matter; and it is enjoined to give unto the Church of Isurtille one Portion
and half of the Kings Money until such time as they be reimburst of their
Moneys expended about the change and removal of their Ministers.

Of this Joly see Castres. AA. 50. Of Appeals. Catalogue of Depositions. Act. 9.
19. Mr. James Joly Pastor of the Church of Milhaud having made report unto this
Assembly of the great charge lying upon him, and especially for that the Family
of his Brother being destitute of all Relief must now be maintained by him.
This Assembly to testify their Charity and Compassion toward them, ordains,
That a free Portion shall be assigned the Province of Higher Languedoc, which
shall deliver it unto the said James Joly, and this Order shall be in force and
continue till the next National Synod. See App. 24.
And as for the Papers which contain the Acts and Ecclesiastical proceedings
against Mr. Hector Joly, and were produced in this Synod, they shall not be
restored to him, but shall be kept according to the appointment of this
Assembly.

20. The Petitions of the Church of Issoyre were presented by Monsieur le Blanc
their Pastor. 2 Vitre. g. m. 28.
This Assembly ordained that the concern of the said Church shall be
recommended unto our Lords the General Deputies attending upon His Majesty. And
the Portions attributed unto the Churches of Issoyre, and of the Mountains of
Auvergne shall be continued them until the next National Synod. And whereas
they demand maintenance to be allowed them for a College: This Assembly cannot
at present make any alteration in the Decrees of the Synod of Vitre, nor can it
possibly restore the new College in Auvergne, except Almighty God should out
of his Sovereign Mercy be graciously pleased to augment the number of our
Churches.

21. The Church of Beaune is ordained to satisfy Monsieur Blewett for his
service among them whilst he was their Pastor, Vigeac. 33.
and till they do this they shall not be provided of another Minister.

22. The Church of Marseilles, and Monsieur Ressens their Pastor complained
that of the Moneys given them by former National Synods, there is a very
considerable Sum owing them from the Province of Provence, and this by the
Judgment of the University-Council of Nismes; which was appointed by the Synod
of Lower Languedoc, with full and absolute Authority from the National Synod of
Vitre to judge of this Affair. This Assembly commissionated the Sieurs Joly, de
Benes, and Boisleroy to Audit those Accounts, who reported that they found the
Province of Provence indebted unto the Sieur Ressens the Sum of One Thousand
Six Hundred Livres, Sixteen Sols and Ten Deniers unto the Seventh of December
last, the Rights of the Receiver of the said Province being deducted. This
Assembly ordained, That there should be paid unto Monsieur Ressens in ready
Money the Sum of Five Hundred Livres by the said Province, and whereas there
remains due One Thousand, One Hundred, Twenty and Three Livres, Sixteen Sols,
and Ten Deniers, this shall be paid him also either in ready Money, or
Moneys-worth at the next Colloquy of Gapensois, which is ordered to make good
payment, and to produce his Acquittances, and farther to allow the said
Monsieur Ressens for his Expenses in these Expenses both at Grenoble and
elsewhere in executing the Decree of the said University-Council of Nismes, for
which the said Province of Provence shall give him Thirty Livres.

23. Diverse defaults having been observed in the Government of the Churches of
Provence, 2. Vitre. Act. 16.
as appeared from the Acts of their Synods which were read openly in this
Assembly, and from a particular Inquiry made thereinto, by the Province of
Lower Languedoc which Was Commissionated by the last National Synod of Vitre to
visit the said Province. Now that these great Disorders may be prevented and
avoided for time to come, these following Canons were first framed, and then
enjoined the said Province of Provence, to be most exactly observed in every
Point and Article by it.

CHAP. XIV. CANONS for the PROVINCE of PROVENCE.
1 THE Provincial Synod of Provence before it breaks up shall determine of
some certain place where the next Synod shall be held, and nominate the Church
that shall have the right of calling them together, and that Church by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Two nearest Churches shall appoint the time of
their meeting.

2. No Person of what Quality or Condition soever shall be admitted into those
Synodical Assembles without Letters of Commission from his Consistory. And in
the mean while the Consistories are exhorted to receive the Gentry into the
Office of Elders, that so they may be capable of being Deputed unto the Synods.

3. No other Matters shall be treated of, or debated in those Synodical
Assemblies but such as be purely Ecclesiastical.

4. The Synodical Offices shall be so distributed as that all Ground and
Occasion of Envy, Jealousy, and Discord may be avoided and removed.

5. The Scribes of the Synod shall not couch the Synodical Acts or Articles in
forensical Forms or Terms of Law, but in a Natural plainness and brevity.

6. The Deputies shall not depart from their Synod, till such time as their
Acts have been fully concluded on, read and subscribed, and the said Acts shall
be read over in the next ensuing Sessions.

7. In all pecuniary matters the Decrees or our National Synods shall be
strictly followed, which ordered all Appeals on those Occasions to be dismissed
over to the next adjoining Province, whatever the Sum may be. And Pastors are
exhorted not to quit their Churches for such Affairs, unless their presence at
the Debate about them should be of indispensable necessity; but they shall send
their Accounts fairly written, and cleared up with their Acquittances unto the
places where they be summoned. And they shall take special care that they be
not Sollicitors of any Process, unless upon very urgent occasion.

8. And whereas there is not a sufficient Number of Pastors in that Province to
form Three Colloquies, and 'twill be very inconvenient there should be but Two,
in case a Controversy should arise betwixt both the Colloquies, they shall
therefore all meet in one Synod jointly together, until such time as the good
providence of God shall have augmented their Numbers.

9. And that these Canons may be observed in the said Province of Provence,
Monsieur Brunier Pastor of the Church of Vsez shall sit in Person in the next
Synod of the said Province, and it shall always as often as their Synods be
called give timely Notice thereof unto the Provinces of Lower Languedoc and
Dolphiny, that they may depute some of their Pastors unto the said Synod, as i^
is usually practiced in the other Provinces, for the upholding and better
conservation of a mutual Correspondence.

24. Whereas a proposal was made of Incorporating the Churches of Provence
either with the Province of Lower Languedoc or with that of Dolphiny, and the
many difficulties arising about it have persuaded us to lay it by for the
present; yet because of the great multitude of Churches and Ministers which are
in Dolphiny, and because that the Borders of many of them are contiguous with
the said Province of Provence, which if united to it would constitute a
convenient Synod. The Province of Dolphiny is therefore exhorted to consider
which of their Churches may be adjoined unto Provence, and to make report
thereof unto the next National Synod.

25. A Petition from the Church of Senerac was presented by Monsieur de
Cahuzac, craving Advice and Counsel, how to govern themselves under that
Interdiction of the Holy Ministry, and Exercise of the Reformed Religion thrown
out against them, and some Relief for their Pastor. Their case was recommended
to the Province of Higher Languedoc, to take care of them according to their
necessities; and the Lords our General-Deputies at Court are desired also to
use their utmost endeavors for the taking off that wicked Prohibition laid
upon them, of Worshipping God according to his Appointment.

26. Mr. Paul Daude formerly Pastor in the Church of St. John de Gardon neque
but deposed from Ministry by the Province of Sevennes, presented his Petition
to be restored again unto it, according to those hopes given him by the Synod
held at la Salle. But when as the Crimes for which he was deposed had been
related in this Assembly, It confirmed his Sentence with this addition and
aggravation, That he should be for ever Deposed, and never meddle any more with
any of the Acts and Functions of the Sacred Ministry, exhorting him withal to
betake himself to some other Calling; for he must not flatter himself with
false hopes of being readmitted unto this Sacred Office,

27. The Church of Paris complained that whereas they had out of mere bounty
quitted to the poorer Churches of the Isle of France, Picardy, and Champagne
the Four Portion assigned unto their Pastors, the said Province would now have
them absolutely and peremptorily to be at their disposal, and not suffer the
Church of Paris to finger One Farthing of that Money. This Assembly judges
that according to the distribution made in our National Synods those aforesaid
Portions do properly belong unto the Church of Paris, and they shall be wholly
and solely at their disposal. But yet we entreat the said Church to extend
their usual Charity unto that Province, and generously and christianly to
refresh the bowels of its poorer Churches.

28. Monsieur Piloly brought Letters from the Assembly of Loudun, 2. Vitre. p.
m. 20.
craving that the Portions granted him by the National Synod of Vitre might be
continued to him. This Assembly consulting the Judgment of the said Synod of
Vitre, professes that the whole Representative Body of our Churches is not
obliged unto any such Recompenses, nor may the Moneys assigned for the Relief
of our poor Ministers be diverted unto such uses, considering the miserable
condition whereunto the greatest part of them be now reduced. But yet the said
Monsieur Piloly shall have paid him his Four aforesaid Portions unto the First
day of January next coming in the year 1621.

29. Monsieur Lubac being summoned to give an account why he laid down his
Ministry in the Church of Privas, and does not care to exercise it, though he
was called thereunto: This Assembly having heard the Report of the whole
proceedings upon which the Colloquy of Privas grounded their Sentence of
Suspension against him, and which was since confirmed in the Synod of Vivaretz,
and the said Monsieur de Lubac speaking in his own defense, and clearing
himself from the Crimes whereof he was accused, and not understanding plainly
and sufficiently the proofs of the said Accusations on the one hand, nor of his
Justification on the other does nevertheless confirm his Sentence of
Suspension, and dismisseth this whole Affair over unto the Colloquy of
Valentinois in the Province of Dolphiny, And the Sieurs de la Croze and du Port
Deputies of Dolphiny, and the Sieur Richard of Vivaretz shall personally assist
in it, and revise again all former passages, and take new Informations and
particularly hear what Monsieur de Couches Minister of Tournon can either
allege for or against him, and all this at the sole Costs and Charges of the
Province of Vivaretz, which shall be rated by the Colloquy of Valentinois to
make payment unto the said Deputies, that so Monsieur de Lubac may be absolved
if innocent, or condemned if guilty by the Authority of this present Synod for
the matters already brought in against him, or which may be now afresh offered
by the Consistory of Privas, who shall make a careful and faithful Report of
all Ecclesiastical Acts that have past on this occasion; that so the Sacred
Ministry may be purged and acquitted of all Reproach and Jnjust Reflections:
And although the said Monsieur Lubac should be justified, yet shall he not
serve in the Province of Vivaretz any more.

30. Whereas the Lords Governor, Magistrates, Consuls and Consistory of the
City of Orange petitioned that Monsieur Chambrun might be presented to the
Pastoral Office in their Church: The Lords Magistrates, Consuls, and Consistory
of Nismes were heard speaking of their Right and Interest both in the Person
and Ministry of the said Monsieur Chambrun, moreover the Provincial Deputies of
Dolphiny, and of the Lower Languedoc do contend to retain him: and Monsieur de
Chambrun desiring to be discharged, and to be at liberty for his Healths sake,
which was mightily impaired and broken within these Two last years, and had
diverted him very much from the Duties of his Calling: This Assembly having
very great Respect and Honor to the Church of Orange, does grant them the said
Monsieur de Chambrun for their Pastor, but with this proviso, that he shall
continue in the Service of the Church of Nismes till such time as they be
provided of another Minister.

31. Letters were read from his Excellency the Prince of Orange, and the Lords
Curators of the University, and the Burgomaster of the City of ^eyden in
Holland, requesting that Monsieur Rivet might be confirmed in his Office of
Divinity-Professor in the said University, either, for his Life, or else at
least till the meeting of the next National Synod. After hearing the terms on
which the Province of Poiclou had consented to the dismission of the said
Monsieur Rivett, and the Letter of the Heads of Families in the City of Thouars
and the Church there, granting Aprolongation of his term of two years unto the
said University. This Assembly highly valuing the Favor and Honor of such an
Illustrious Prince, and his great Merits from all the Reformed Churches, and
that most strict and entire Union betwixt the Holy Churches of the Netherlands
and ours of France, does yield that the said Monsieur Rivett shall be continued
for two years more unto the Famous University of Leyden, which term being
expired he shall return unto his Church, according to the Agreement past
between them.

32. Monsieur Marmet declaring his great poverty, This Assembly knowing his
eminent Zeal and Piety, have granted him his Request, and discharge him from
his Church, leaving him full liberty to accept of any other place whereunto he
may be called, and may tend most to the Glory of God, and his own Temporal and
Eternal benefit.

33. A Petition from Monsieur Ferrier formerly a Carthusian Monk, but now a
Professor of the Reformed Religion, and residing in the Province of Anjou where
he was born. This Assembly exhorts the said Province of Anjou to continue unto
him his Pension of Eight Pence a Day, and not as they have done to defaulk from
it, because of his Age and Quality. And the Province of Britain, where he first
quitted his Monastery and Popery are desired to provide him yearly a new Suit
of Clothes throughout.

34. Monsieur Josian having been lent by the Province of Higher Languedoc unto
the Church of Montauban for Six Months, and recalled from them by the Church
of Castres, whereof he was Minister, before the Expiration of that term, The
Church of Montauban petitioned that he might be lent them for a much longer
time, and because of their continual and growing necessity, they desire that
Monsieur Garissoles may be lent them also. This Assembly having a very high
esteem for the said Church of Montauban, and considering its Necessities and
Importance, ordains that Monsieur Josian shall be lent them for Three Months:
And notwithstanding all the Excuses and Remonstrances of Monsieur Garissoles
not to be removed from the Service of his Church of Puylaurens, yet shall he
also be lent unto that of Montauban for Six Months, at the end whereof the said
Sieurs Josian and G^rissoles shall each of them return unto their own Churches,
nor may that of Montauban make any private bargains or agreements with them.

35. Monsieur Capel Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in our University of Saumur
complained, that he having boarded a certain Scholar called du Duc recommedned
to him by the Church of Bourdeaux, and now employed by the Province of Lower
Guyenne, yet was not paid for his Diet and Lodging. This complaint of his was
ordered to be sent unto the aforesaid Province, or to the Church of Bordeaux,
who are both entreated by this Assembly to make him full satisfaction, as they
are bound in Conscience to see it done.

36. The Church of Montauban complained against the Province of Lower Guyenne
about some certain Scholars, who having renounced Popery; had been maintained
by them, but they could never be reimbursed their charges; This complaint of
theirs was dismissed over to the Province of Xaintonge, whose Synod should put
a full and final period to it.

37. Upon the Remonstrance of the Church of Montauban, See above 12. Observat.
upon the Discipline.
That it has been an Ancient Custom with them, for their Elders to deliver the
Cup. This Assembly would not alter any thing in those Decrees, which it had
enacted in the Chapter of Observations upon the Discipline; and therefore
commands all Pastors, without Exceptions, to conform unto our Established
Order.

38. Monsieur Raffin Pastor of the Church of Realmont petitioned for some
Relief to help him in his defense of the Church of Venez, which is dangerously
prosecuted by our Enemies, and Monsieur de Combalasse Pastor of the said Church
presented another Petition to the same effect. This Assembly dismissed them
both and their Affair unto the Province of Higher Languedoc, who are ordered to
assist the said Raffin as they shall judge convenient, and pay in unto the said
Sieur Combalasse his Portion free of all Taxes and Costs whatsoever, until such
time as the Church of Venez shall enjoy the Legacy, bequeathed them by the Lady
of Venez lately deceased, and as to the troubles raised against the said Church
of Venez they shall be recommended to our Lords the General Deputies at Court.

39. The Request of Monsieur Balarand for the Church of Brassac is dismissed
over by the Province of Higher Languedoc, to take care therein according as the
Necessities of the said Church, and the great Merits of the said Reverend and
Worthy Minister do demand, he having continued his Labors for many years
together in the said Province in the Lords Vineyard,

40. The Province of Lower Guyenne, and the Church of Bourdeaux petitioned that
some Moneys might be granted them in recompense of their great Charges in
defending themselves at Law against the Lord of St. Angel. This Assembly
applauded the Zeal of the Church of Bourdeaux but could not give them any
Moneys.

41. The Church of Puymiroll presented a Petition craving some speedy Relief
for that their whole Town was lately burnt by a most dreadful Fire. This
Assembly Exhorts the Province of Lower Guyenne, and the Neighboring Provinces
to assist the said Church of Puymirol by some special Collections. And the
afflicted State of the distressed Inhabitants of that Town is recommended to
the Lords General Deputies, who shall move it unto His Majesty, that by His
Royal Bounty they may be graciously Relieved.

42. This Assembly, understanding by Letters from the Church of Gignac their
sore affliction and straits to which they be reduced by the impetuous Assaults
of their Adversaries, have sent the Reverend Monsieur Faucheur Minister of the
Gospel, and Professor of Divinity in the University of Nismes to visit, comfort
and strengthen them: And the Province of Lower Languedoc is ordered to defray
the Charges of his Journey.

43. The Province of the Isle of France repeated afresh their Complaints
formerly made by them in the Synod of Vitre against Monsieur Perrery for not
satisfying the Decree of that Synod. 2. Vitte. p. m. 8,
This Assembly having perused the Memoirs offered by the said Perrery in his
own defense, and heard the Provincial Deputies of the Higher Languedoc about
restoring the said Perrery to the Ministry by the Synod of Millaud in the year
Sixteen Hundred and Seventeen, approves of what was done by the said Synod,
and Entreats the Province of the Isle of France to rest satisfied with the
Sum of Five Hundred Livres in lieu of the whole Debt from the said Perrery,
whereof Two Hundred Livres belonging unto the said Province are left in the
Lord of Candals hands for them already, and the said Lord shall keep for them
Three Hundred Livres more: And in case the said Sum of Three Hundred Livres be
not paid into the said Province of the Isle of France, then there shall be Five
Hundred Livres detained by the Lord du Candal in his hands for them.

44. The Province of the Isle of France petitioned that the Order of the
National Synod of Vitre against the Sieur Richer might be put in Execution, he
having retired into Xaintonge without their consent. After that the Provincial
Deputies of Xaintonge had been heard both as to what relates unto the Canon now
mentioned, and also unto the said Monsieur Richer, This Assembly ordained that
the Canon of Vitre shall be Executed in every Article and Title of it, and that
the Accounts of the said Richer might be cleared and closed, they shall be sent
unto the Church of Saumur before the First of May next: Yet we earnestly
entreat the Province of the Isle of France to deal charitably with the said
Richer, and not to exact what they may do in rigor of Law from him.

45. The Province of Dolphiny are entreated to continue the Pension allowed by
them to the Widow of Monsieur ^alques.

46 The Church of Baux in Provence exhibited an Information of its deplorable
Poverty brought upon them by the outrageous Persecutions which they have
suffered from the common Enemies of our Religion in their Exercise of it, who
put them to unsupportable Expense and Charges. This Assembly ordered that for
their Relief an half supern^merary Portion out of our Common Stock besides
their ordinary Portion should be given them until the meeting of the next
National Synod, to whom they shall bring in their Account how they have
employed it; and their Affair shall be recommended to our General Deputies.

47. Monsieur Huron petitioned to be discharged from his Ministry in the Church
of Riez in Provence: But he was dismissed back unto the Synod of his said
Province who should proceed therein according to the Methods and Forms
prescribed by our Church Discipline.

48. The Colloquy of Challons in Burgundy shall judge finally without Appeal of
the differences which are risen between the Sieurs Racaud, La Dize, Fornevet
and other Persons in Communion with the Church of Beaune.

49. The Province of Sevennes complaining of a Judgment past against them by
the Province of Lower Languedoc in favor of Monsieur Serignac about certain
Expenses of his made in his Journey unto the Synod of Tonneins, they were
dismissed over to the Judgment of the Province of Vivaretz, who should order
that Party which has done the wrong, to pay the Charges.

50. The Provincial Deputies of Sevennes making report that Sixty Two Livres,
Seven Sous, and Six Deniers are owing to Monsieur Babat at present Pastor of
the Church of Castagnols from the Churches of Auvergne according to the
Accounts shut up, and approved by Decree of the National Synod of Vitre. This
Assembly ordains that the Province of Sevennes do pay him out of hand the
said Moneys.

51. A Petition from the Church of Serucrettes in Sevennes. This Assembly
ordered that their Affair at Court be recommended to the Lords our General
Deputies; and Letters shall be written unto the Lord of Antragues that he would
be pleased to accommodate them with some ground on his Lands for the building
of a Temple, wherein they may Worship God publicly, and that Churches Portion
of the Kings Moneys shall he paid in free of all Charges to it by the Province
of Sevennes.

52. The Church of Langres did by their Letters, and by the Mouths of the
Deputies of the Isle of France report the great difficulties and troubles they
con^^licted with in setting up the Public Exercise of our Religion, and what
Oppositions they had met withal, and still did every day from the Enemies of
the Truth. This Assembly to enable that Church to subsist the better, and
thereby to enlarge the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, ordains Two Supernumerary
Portions to be paid unto them, and this to continue until the sitting of the
next National Synod.

53. The Church of la Bastide complaining of its deep poverty, and that for
Sixteen years together, by reason of it, they could not allow a Farthing
toward the maintenance of their Minister Monsieur Lawrence, who was all that
time destitute of a Church, till of late that he was provided for by the
Province of Vivaretz. This Assembly commiserating the sore and heavy Trials of
the said Mr. Lawrence, do order that Two Hundred Livres be immediately paid him
out of the Common Stock of the Churches, because he was left out in the
Catalogue of Pastors lying before the National Synod of Vitre, and that the
said Church of la Bastide may not he dissolved but kept up, the Province of
Vivaretz is require particularly to consider whether the Church of Rodes may
not be commodiously joined to it, or else to think of some other means meet for
its preservation.

54. The Complaint of the Church of Quissac how that some of those
Congregations which were formerly annexed to it were now separated and
dismembered from it, was rejected, 2. Vitre. Appeals.
although they were set on by the Province of Sevennes; and the said Province
was ordered to take special care that those newly constituted Churches be well
kept up by them.

55. That Affair of Monsieur Hommel Doctor of Laws at Valence shall be
recommended to our Lords General deputies.

56 Mrs. Jane Nallet Widow of Mr. David Selastian late Minister in the Church
of Clermont in ^odeve complained, that the Pension granted her by the Province
of Lower Languedoc has been left out of the Accounts of the said Province, so
that she is like to perish for want to Maintenance, and that One Hundred and
Twenty Livres due unto her are not paid her. This Assembly ordains that the
said Hundred and Twenty Livres be paid the said Gentlewoman out of the first
Moneys which the Receiver of the Province of Lower Languedoc shall get into his
hands.

57. The Deputies of Bearne declared the necessity of settling a Church in the
Country of La Boure, belonging to the Province of Lower Guyenne, and the rather
for that they had now in Bearn a young Student in Divinity sit to be employed
in the Sacred Ministry, who could preach to them in their own Language, and
Opportunity and Advantage they never had before. This Assembly desiring to
enlarge the Kingdom of Our Lord Jesus ordains that Three Hundred Livres a year
shall be allowed the Province of Lower Guyenne to set up a Church in the
aforesaid Country of La Boure, upon condition that they render an account of
the Employment of the said Moneys unto the next National Synod.

58. The Remonstrances of the Churches of Monredon, of L' Isle in Jourdain, St.
Severe, St. Seve and Aysseins are disinissed over to the Province of Higher
Languedoc, who shall look carefully into those matters specified by them, and
act for them as it shall judge most beneficial to them.

59. The Judgment past by the Colloquy of Anduze about the Differences and
Quarrels that happened in the Church of St. John de Gardonengues through the
dis-placing of their Seats, and which was ratified by the Provincial Synod of
Sevennes, being none of those matters that are to be brought before our
National Synods, is remanded back again to the said Province of Sevennes to see
it Executed.

60. Concerning that difference fallen out in the Church of Alez since the
Decree of this Synod, the Relation of which concludes the Chapter of Appeals,
This Assembly having heard the Magistrates, Consuls, Consistories, and Deputies
of the Church, and Companies of the Town, and Monsieur Ollier particularly, did
exhort them all to an Holy Concord, and Cordial Union, which that it might be
the better effected, the Pensions of both their Ministers shall be equal, so
that Monsieur Des Maretz shall not have more than his Colleague Monsieur
Ollier, but they shall each of them receive yearly the Sum of Seven Hundred
Livres a piece, and that Church shall bear their Charges unto Colloquies and
Synods, and all those Acts in the Register of the Consistory prejudicial to the
Reputation of Monsieur Ollier shall be razed, that so all grounds and occasions
of Divisions may be removed. And in case this present Agreement should be
violated, then the Colloquy of Vsez is empowered to judge finally of this
matter, and to remove Monsieur Ollier from his Ministry in this Church of Alez,
and to dispose of him elsewhere, and that by the Authority of this National
Synod.

61. The Provincial Deputies of Anjou reported, that the Portion given by the
National Synod of Vitre unto Monsieur du Bois was paid out of the Moneys of
that Province, and that the Sums mentioned in the Lord of Candalls Account for
the said Portion for the years 1617, 1618, and three quarters of 1619 ought to
accrue unto the said Province, because they have already paid them out of
their own Purse. This Assembly ordains that the Sum of Six Score Livres
employed in the said Account for those years beforementioned under the Name of
Monsieur du Bois, and whose payment has been forborne, shall be now paid in to
the Receiver of the said Province of Anjou, and his Acquittance being produced
it shall be allowed the Lord of Candal in his Account: And the said Forbearance
being now discharged, The Lord of Candal shall keep one Portion in his hands to
be delivered unto Monsieur du Bois at the place of his Abode.

62. The Lord of Clausonne acquainted this Assembly, that His Majesty had made
him his Lieutenant Governor in the Town and Castle of Lectoure, and therefore
he craved our Certificate of his being a Protestant, professing the Reformed
Religion, and a Member in full and actual Communion with our Churches. This
Assembly could not in reason deny him, especially he being at this Instant a
Deputy to it, and one of the Elders for the Province of Lower Languedoc.

63. This Assembly willing to provide, as it had promised a Pastor for the
Church of Gignac, and considering its great importance, and acknowledging the
singular gifts with which the Holy Ghost has richly endowed Monsieur Codur
formerly Minister in the Church of Ganges, and that he is every way fit and
qualified for the Service and Edification of that Great and Populous Church,
this Assembly entreats him to go and preach in the said Church of Gignac, until
the meeting of the next Provincial Synod of Lower Languedoc; which he accepted
and promised to remove thither as soon as possible. And when that Synod shall
meet, the said Church of Gignac having a Pastor settled among them for Life, he
shall be at full liberty to retire himself either into the Colloquy of Anduze,
or into the Synod of Sevennes, who are ordered to secure a Church for him, or
else he may accept of the first Call which the Providence of God may vouchsafe
him. And that the said Church of Gignac may be able to subsist, The Portion
appropriated to it from among the Churches of Lower Languedoc shall be paid in
free of all Taxes and Charges to it by the said Province, and an half
supernumerary Portion out of the Common Stock of the Churches.

64. Whereas the Church of Montagnac craveth help and assistance against a
process in which they be entangled about the demolishing of their Temple in the
late unhappy Civil Wars. This Assembly recommends unto the Province of Lower
Languedoc the said Church, and orders them to relieve it out of those great
means which God has given them. And the Lords Deputies at Court are requested
to interest themselves particularly in their Affair.

65. The Colloquy of Gex petitioned leave that they might send only but two
Pastors and two Elders unto the Provincial Synods: But this their Petition was
dismissed over to the Province of Burgundy to decree in it what they judged
would be most expedient. And whereas the said Colloquy craveth an augmentation
unto the Moneys already given them, this Assembly desires them to rest
contented, because it could not be granted.

66. The Deputies of the Church of Montauban petitioned that Monsieur Guyon at
present Pastor in the Church of Dieu le fit in Dolphiny, might be given them to
be their Pastor. Upon hearing of the said Monsieur Guyon, and the Deputies of
Dolphiny, this Assembly declared its unwillingness to dispose of the Person of
the said Guyon and of his Ministry, especially since that his Church in which he
is now settled; has not been in the least acquainted with this motion.

67. The Colloquy of St. German in Sevennes was censured for their levity and
rashness in condemning Monsieur Toussain upon so groundless an Accusation, and
for their suspending him from the Exercise of his Ministry; and the Province of
Sevennes was censured for conniving at this great Offense. And that the Sacred
Ministry may be discharged of all blame and ill reports, the said Monsieur
Toussain shall appear in Person at the next Provincial Synod of Lower
Languedoc, there either to be justified or condemned as the case requires, and
this according to the Canons of our Church Discipline.

68. The Letter of Monsieur Marbais was read, and the Assembly remitted his
Affair unto the Province of Poictou to give him satisfaction therein.

69. The Church of Nismes did both by Letters, and word of Mouth by the Sieurs
Ollivier and Mazaudier petition that Monsieur Jamett might be given them for
their Pastor, he being a Person every way qualified in respect of his Gifts and
Graces to edify it, and to repair those sore breaches which the Apostasy and
Debauches of some of their former Ministers had caused among them. This
Assembly having a special respect unto the Church of Nismes, and considering
its great necessities and importance, because of the vast number of its
Members, and the University there erected, though it would not use its absolute
Authority in disposing of the Person and Ministry of Monsieur Jamett, yet
neither can it bear with his Excuses, nor with the Oppositions made by the
Deputies of the Province of Orleans and Berry, therefore it does entreat the
Church of St. Amand, and the said Province of Berry also, in which he does at
present exercise his Ministry, to consider seriously with themselves of the
great importance of that Church of Nismes, and to grant them their request, as
in Christian Charity they be bound, and particularly by reason of that Holy
Communion which is between all the Saints, and Churches of this Nation. And
Letters shall be dispatched to His Grace the Lord Duke of Sully, that he would
be pleased to give his consent unto this Call.

70. Monsieur de Chasteaumal reported in this Assembly his Fathers many and
good services done for the Churches, and the many heavy losses suffered by him
for the profession of the Gospel, and the true Reformed Religion, and requested
that a Pension might he allowed a Son of his whom he designeth for the
Ministry. Although this Assembly knows that such an Affair as this ought not to
he taken notice of by the National Synods, yet because of the Hereditary Piety
of the said Lord of Chasteaumal, the Province of Dolphiny is enjoined to
consider and honor him, and to bestow the first vacant Scholarship in their
Province upon his Son.

71. Letters from the Church of Sancerre, and the Deputies of Orleans and
Berry, as also from the General Assembly held at Loudun informed this Synod of
the great necessities of that Church. Whereupon two supernumerary Portions were
ordered for their Relief as a Testimony of our unfeigned Love to that important
Church which shall be paid them yearly by the Province of Berry, who for that
purpose should receive them in the General Dividend, and make good payment
thereof, till the sitting of the next National Synod.

72. Whereas the National Synod of Vitre had granted unto Monsieur Scoffier an
Aged and Worthy Minister, 2. Vitre. Act. 17. Of the Dividend.
declared Emeritus, one supernumerary Portion and half for his subsistence, it
shall be joined to the Moneys of the Province of Sevennes, whose Receiver
without any further Order shall pay it in free unto him of all Taxes and Costs
whatsoever.

73. The Lord of Clausonne acquainting this Assembly with the Poverty of the
Church of Montfrin in the Lower Languedoc, an half supernumerary Portion was
ordered unto that Church, which shall be numbered in the distribution as one of
the Churches in the Province of Lower Languedoc.

74. Monsieur de Anjou representing the Poverty and Necessity of the Church of
Puymichel in Provence, a supernumerary Portion shall be granted to it in the
General Dividend.

75. The Assembly having ordained that in the last Sessions of this Synod there
should be a List brought in of the Churches to whom the Collected Charities
should be imparted, and by what Provinces they should be particularly assisted:
Now that this Decree may be the better executed, it was judged meet, that the
Collections made in the Provinces of Dolphiny, Lower Languedoc, Province,
Sevennes, Vivaretz and Burgundy shall be assigned to the Church of Privas. And
the Moneys Collected in Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, shall be appropriated to
Lectoure. And the Charities Collected in the Lower Guyenne and Xaintonge shall
be given unto Puymirol. And the Collection in the Isle of France, Normandy,
Britain and Berry shall be paid into the Church of Netancour, and that of Anjou
and Poictou shall go toward the relief of Vendosme. Nor shall these Charities
so Collected be any way prejudicial to that General Collection which we have
designed for the Refugees out of the Marquisate of Salluces.

76. It being the bounden Duty of all Pastors personally to reside on their
Churches, the Deputies of Lower and Higher Languedoc, and of Sevennes are
obliged immediately upon their return home unto their respective Provinces to
notify unto those Ministers who neglect this their Duty, that they go and
reside on their Churches within Three Months, on pain of being suspended the
Sacred Ministry.

77. That Affair concerning the Children of the Lord de la Reynela whose Uncle
and Guardian is the Lord of la Garelaye shall be recommended to the Lords
General Deputies at Court to prosecute it most vigorously and effectually.

78. Upon complaint made by the Widow of Mr. Emanuel Sebastian, Minister of
Gods Word, lately deceased: This Assembly ordered that all Arrears of Pension
due unto her since her Husbands Death by the Province of Sevennes shall be
punctually paid her out of the first Moneys that come into the Receivers hands
of the said Province, and he himself shall pay those just Debts with his own
hands immediately unto her.

79. Whereas the Church of Vsez has craved leave to seek for it self a third
Pastor either within or without the Province, This Assembly grants it to them,
but with this proviso, that they keep close to the Forms prescribed by the
Discipline, and that they act nothing herein to the prejudice of their present
Ministers, and particularly that they do not in the least diminish that double
Honor they ought to have for the Reverend Monsieur Brunier and his Family,
whose great labors have been for these many years that he has served them,
and yet continue to be, exceeding useful and beneficial to their Souls.

See of this Jacornai in the Roll of Apostates in the Synod of Castres.
80. The Church of Gignac having been exceedingly perplexed ever since the Call
of Monsieur Jacornais unto the Ministry among them, who was recommended to them
by the Province of Higher Languedoc, it seemed good unto this Assembly to
remove him thence, yet without any Impeachment unto his Credit or Ministry, his
Conversation being every way blameless and unreprovable, only he has met with
no encouragement nor maintenance from them, though the said Church of Gignac
has received ever since his presentation to them their Portion of the Kings
Money. Wherefore the said Province of Lower Languedoc is enjoined to see that
the said Jacornais be fully satisfied, and that he have his Sallary paid him
until such time as he be provided of another Church, and that it may be done
effectually, they shall either detain from the said Church of Gignac what is
owing them by the Province, and so force them to reimburse him, or else they
shall make it up out of the Common Stock of their Province. And in case the
Colloquy of Nismes or any other of that Province shall be Assembled before
their Synod, they shall take care to settle the said Sieur de Jacornais in such
a Church as in which he may ful^l the Ministry he has received from the Lord.

81. The Lord of Antrague Picheron complained by Letters of the outrage done
unto Captain Peter Stephens. It was ordered that these Letters should be
delivered to the Provincial Council of Sevennes, who are to take care about it,
and this Affair also shall be immediately recommended unto the Lords General
Deputies.

82. The Sieurs Fitz, Eymar, and Paulett having sojourned in this City a
considerable time at the Command of this Assembly, the Province of Sevennes is
ordered to reimburse them all their Expenses.

83. Susanna Morris Daughter of Monsieur Morris Deceased, formerly a Pastor
in the Church of Dieu le fit in Dolphiny was dismissed over to the said
Province to be relieved in her poverty.

84. Advice being given of diverse Defaults in the Province of Lower Languedoc,
particularly that the Moderators in one Synod are ever after Assessors in
another, contrary to that freedom required by our Discipline in the Election of
Synodical Officers; And Secondly, That certain Pastors are Commissionated to
receive the Moneys belonging unto Colloquies, which in time may draw Reproach
upon the Ministry, and divert our Pastors from their Studies, and other Duties
of their Calling. And Thirdly, The way of Communicating one to another by
Circular Letters, Matters of Importance instead of calling the Colloquies, and
there imparting those Affairs unto them: And Fourthly, The Brigues in the
choice of Elders falling out too too often in many of their Churches. Wherefore
this Assembly commands the said Province of Lower Languedoc to remove those
Disorders and to give an Account of their Obedience to this Canon at the next
National Synod.

CHAP. XV. Of COLLEGES and UNIVERSITIES.
1 PRofessors of Philosophy in handling Physical or Metaphysical Questions
which have a Correspondence with Divinity shall take care that they so do it as
not to injure in the least the Principles of our True Religion; and that they
infuse not any Scruples contrary to Piety into the tender minds of our Youth.
And Doctors and Professors in Divinity shall abstain as much as in them lies
from all Curious and Unprofitable Questions, though much in vogue among the
Romish Churchmen, nor shall they enlarge in the Confutation of unknown
Heresies, nor any more than is barely necessary for the right Interpretation of
the Holy Scriptures, in expounding whereof they shall keep themselves to that
gravity and simplicity which shines forth so conspicuously in the Writings of
those Famous Divines, whom the Lord raised up to kindle in the last Century the
Flambeau of the Gospel in these and the Neighbor Nations.

2. A Motion was made by the Province of Poictou, that no Professors nor
Principals in our Colleges or Universities should practice Physic lest they
be taken off from attendance on their Profession; but rather that their
Sallaries should be augmented, that so they might apply themselves wholly to
the Duties of their Office and Calling. This Assembly foreseeing the
difficulties which will occur in case that such a Canon as is now desired
should be framed and enacted, does therefore leave the matter unto the prudence
of our University-Councils, to aft therein as they shall conceive will redound
most to the Profit and Honor of the Universities.

3. No Professors of Divinity, although they be Pastors also, unless they be
sent with Letters from their Churches, or called by Colloquies and Synods, when
as matters relating to their University, or important points of Doctrine be
handled, shall ever appear in Colloquies, or Provincial and National Synods.

4. A Minister may at the same time be Professor in Divinity, and of the Hebrew
Tongue. But it is not seemly for him to profess the Greet also, because the
most of his Employment will be taken up in the Exposition of Pagan and Profane
Authors, unless he be discharged from the Ministry. Nevertheless Professors in
Divinity and of the Hebrew Tongue, which are in Holy Orders, shall ever be
reputed Pastors of that Church in which their University is Erected, and where
they do ordinarily reside, provided the Church do consent unto it, and shall
take their turns in preaching, only they shall be discharged from the Exercise
of Church Discipline, and from other burdensome Employments of the Ministry.
And whereas several Ministers are at this day actual Professors in those
Faculties in our Universities, and yet are not reputed Pastors there, though it
be the place of their constant and ordinary Residence; they shall be tolerated
until the next National Synod, unto which they shall make Report of the
Churches consent and choice of them for Pastors where they sojourn, or else
they shall be provided of Churches of their own.

5. A Motion was made about reducing the Number of our Universities, that so
they might be the better furnished with all needful Professors both in
Divinity, and in the other Arts and Sciences. It was not thought good at
present to make any change or alteration, lest it should occasion any
difference, and breach in that good Correspondence, which ought by all means to
be kept up among us. But nevertheless the Provinces are exhorted to bring with
them unto the next National Synods their mature and well-digested Thoughts on
this Subject. As also all those Cities which have Universities Erected in them
shall bring into the next National Synod an account of what means they have, or
Fund sufficient for the maintenance of a complete and perfect University.

See the First Synod of Charinton. Observe. 18. upon this Synod.
6. Diverse Proposals were set on foot by Monsieur Beraud both from himself, and
from the University of Montauban. As for the First, The said Monsieur Beraud is
confirmed in his Professorship of Divinity in that University, because of the
laudable Testimonials which the Deputies of Higher Languedoc have given of his
Academical Exercises these Two years last past. Yet nevertheless that said
Province is censured for not having observed the Formalities required by our
Discipline in the Call of the said Monsieur Beraud unto the Professors Chair in
Divinity. Although the said Monsieur Beraud had undergone a very rigorous and
severe Examination, as the Deputies themselves of that Province had attested.
For the Second, it is Decreed, That the said Monsieur Beraud over and above the
Seven Hundred Livres which he receives from the University, shall also have
one free Portion out of the Kings Moneys belonging unto the Province of Higher
Languedoc, as all other Pastors have which are Ministers in our Universities.
And whereas the said Monsieur Beraud has not enjoyed his said Portion ever
since his Professorship at Montauban; the Province shall be obliged to restore
unto him all his just Dues and Arrears even to this very day, and that out of
the very first Moneys which it shall receive from the Lord of Candal, because
they have always took up the said Portion under his Name. And whereas there is
a loud and general complaint of very bad Payments by that University of
Montauban unto its Professors; since nothing appears to the contrary but that
the said University has the same kindnesses and allowances as all our other
Universities, therefore it shall rest contented with the Common Order
established herein by the former National Synods, which was, that the Moneys
assigned unto our Universities shall be taken out of the three first Quarters
of the year from the Common Stock of all the Churches, without leaving them to
the last Quarter whose payment is more uncertain.

7. The Wages granted by the University of Montauban unto an Academical
Secretary cannot be allowed, but shall be razed out of their Accounts both as
to what is past and to come.

8. Whereas the University of Saumur did together with Commendatory Letters of
the Lord Du Pllessis Marly request, that Mr. Cameron might be continued in the
Profession of Theology there; and on the other hand the Church of Bourdeaux,
and Monsieur Joly on its behalf redemanded him back to the Exercise of his
Ministry, among them, according to that Obligation which lies upon him as
their Pastor, and Monsieur Privas Deputy of the Lower Guyenne consented to it
by Order of, and Memoirs from the said Monsieur Cameron. This Assembly
acknowledging that the said Church of Bourdeaux has an undoubted right to the
Ministry of Monsieur Cameron, yet notwithstanding, because of the pressing and
urgent Necessities of the said University of Saumur, which is of mighty
concernment to all our Churches in general, It does now Order and Decree that
Monsieur Cameron shall continue in the said Professorship in that University
until the next National Synod, and the Church of Bourdeaux is entreated to
allow and approve thereof. And during this time the said University shall use
her best and utmost endeavors to procure them another Professor in Divinity.

9. The Church of Rochefoucauld demanded an Augmentation for the better support
and maintenance of their College. This Assembly, because the Example would be
leading, could not grant it; but exhorts the Province of Xaintonge to take it
into their consideration, and to assist the said Church with a competent Sum
of Moneys drawn out of the Common Stock of that Province, that so this College
may be kept up, which has been already so very useful and profitable unto them.

10. The University of Montauban moved for the revision of a Decree past in the
National Synod of Privas, and about the Six Deniers allowed in the Livre unto
the Receiver of that University. But it was judged unfit to be Debated, and
therefore let fall.

11. A Contention having risen between the City of Alez and Anduze about the
College Erected in the Province of Sevennes, This Assembly not inclining to
make any alterations at present in the Estate of the Provinces, nor to obstruct
that good Union which ought to be kept up, and preserved among the Churches,
does ordain, that the said College (according to the Synod of Tonneins) shall
continue in the Town of Anduze until the next National Synod, when and unto
which the Province of Sevennes shall give in a faithful report of the State of
the said College, that in case it be not such as makes for the advantage of
the Churches, it may be removed elsewhere.

12. The Assembly proceeding to choose Pastors, who may supply the vacant
Chairs of Professors in our Universities upon all occasions especially in
Divinity, according to a former Decree past by it in its Observations on the
last National Synod of Vitre, has nominated Monsieur du Moulin, Vignier,
Bouchereau, Garissoles, Cottieres, Chanvernon, and de la Cost. All which are
exhorted to dispose and fit themselves betwixt this and the next National Synod
for the said Public Profession of Divinity.

CHAP. XVI. Of ACCOUNTS.
13 THE University of Saumur brought in their Accounts for the years 1616,
1617, 18. And for the First Quarter of this current Year 1620. And the said
Account having been performed with much exactness and fidelity, was accepted of
and approved.

14. The said University of Saumur petitioned, that whereas on their faithful
Account now brought in by them, there remains a certain Sum of Moneys in
their Receivers hand, that we would be pleased to leave it with them for
enlarging the Classical Seats of the College, they being too few at present
for the great number of Scholars in it. This Assembly granted that Three
Hundred Livres should be disbursed by them to that use, upon condition, that
they give an account how the said Sum was employed unto the next National
Synod.

15. Whereas the University Council of Saumur had granted Twenty Livres a year
unto their Printer, they shall be allowed him for what is past; but it shall
not be made a presedent for the future.

16. The University of Montauban brought in their Accounts for the years 1614,
1615, 1616, 1617, and 1618, which were approved, though their Expenses exceeded
their Receipts by 397 Livres, Fifteen Sous.

Tonneins of Univers. 6. 2. Vitre. Of Univer. 16.
17. The Province of the Isle of France being obliged to bring in its Account
for the College of Clermont ever since the National Synod of Tonneins, and not
having done it, nor for that erected at Charenton, which though tendered was
not accepted, because the form of it was not of any force or value, is for the
present spared, but with this express injunction that they do bring in unto the
next National Synod their Accounts aforesaid in due form, with all the
Evidences and Acquittances, or else they shall lose and forfeit their
Privilege of having a College.

18. The Accounts of the Province of Normandy for their College in the years
1616, 1617, 1618, 1619. were allowed and approved.

19. The Province of Orleans and Berry brought in their Account of the College
erected at Chastillon upon the Loir, for the years 1616, 1617, 1618, 1619,
1620. which was accepted and approved.

20. The Province of Poictou brought in the Account for the College of Niort
for the years 1617, 1618, and 1619, which was accepted, allowed and approved.

21. The College of Bergerac in the Lower Guyenne brought in its Account from
the First of April, 1614, unto the last of March, 1620. And their disbursements
did far exceed their Receipts of what Moneys had been given them out of the
Common Stock of the Churches.

22. The Province of Vivaretz having divided their College into two, 2. Vitre.
Of Univers. Act. 29.
to wit, one at Anonay, the other at Aubenas. That of Annonay accounted for the
years 1614, 1615, 1616, 1617, 1618, and 1619, and for Six Months of this year
now current, 1620. And Aubenas accounted for the years 1615, 1616, 1617, 1618,
and for Nine Months of the year 1619. And the Accounts of both these Colleges
were allowed and approved. But whereas the said Province of Vivaretz desired
leave that in lieu of employing the Four Hundred Livres of the Kings Money
which has been granted them for their Colleges, they may dispose of it to the
setting up of some little Schools: This Assembly would not allow of this
change, nor to the Province of Burgundy which made also the very same request.

23. The Province of Lower Languedoc brought in their Accounts for the College
of Bezieres for the year 1617, 1618, and 1619, which were allowed and approved.

24. The Accounts of the College of Anduze were brought in by the Province of
Seventies, and were exceedingly commended for the years 1617, 1618, and 1619.

25. The Province or Burgundy tendered the Account of their College for the
years 1617, 1618, and 1619. But because the said Account was not in due and
valid form, and that the said Province accounted but for Three Hundred and
Fourscore Livres yearly, whereas they should have for Pour Hundred; they were
enjoined for the future to bring in their Accounts for the whole and entire
Sum, and to justify them by producing their Evidences and Acquittances from
their Provincial Synods, and to present them in a better form unto the next
National Synod. And for this once they be indulged.

26. The Colloquy of Gex shall account for the dispensing of their
Colledge-Money unto the Provincial Synod of Burgundy, that so their Account may
be brought in to the next National Synod, us is done in all the other Provinces
of this Kingdom; or else they shall lose their privilege of a College.

27. The Province of Provence was grievously censured for not bringing in an
Account of the Moneys received by them for a College, notwithstanding the many
and frequent warnings given them by the former National Synods, and they be
commanded to keep better Order for the future, or else they shall be deprived
of those Moneys which had been granted them for their College.

27. The Account of the College of Dolphiny was received, and their Expense
very much exceeded their Receipt of the Kings Money. But the said Province is
exhorted to produce in their future Accounts all the Evidences and
Acquittances, which will prove and justify them.

28. The Account rendered by the University of Nismes for the Moneys distributed
by them, and with which they were entrusted by the National Synod of Tonneins
was received and approved, except in some few particulars. As on the year 1618,
Four Hundred Livres are charged by them for bringing the Household Goods and
Library of Monsieur Codur Professor of the Hebrew Language from Montpellier
unto Nismes, whereas Two Hundred were allowed, and the other Two Hundred razed
out. Again Eight Hundred and Fifty Livres given unto Monsieur Fancheur
Professor of Divinity, partly, as a gratuity, partly for the removing of his
Goods unto their City, Two Hundred and Fifty shall be blotted out. This
Assembly however to testify their great respects for the said Monsieur
Fancheur did present him with the Sum of Four Hundred and Fifty Livres as a
gratuity, that he might increase his Library, and be more cheerful and
serviceable in his Academical Profession, as also they gave him One Hundred and
Fifty Livres to help pay his Charges in the transport of his Household Goods
from Vsez to Nismes. In like manner an Hundred Livres were razed out of their
Accounts, which had been ordered by them unto Monsieur Vagumar their Printer to
buy his Stamps and Characters. Out of their Account for the year 1619, was
razed the Sum of Sixty Livres given unto Monsieur Codur, and Monsieur Petit
Professors of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues to help defray their Charges unto
the Provincial Synod held at Malgutol; as also out of the year 1620, was razed
the Sum of Ninety Livres adjudged unto the Sieurs Codur, Petit, and Faucheur
to carry them to Vsez, and Forty Livres laid out in Printing the Book of a
young Scholar. All which particular Sums put together, amounted in the whole
to Six Hundred and Twenty Livres, and were razed out of their Account, and the
Province of Lower Languedoc shall detain it in their hands out of the Moneys
belonging to the said University of Nismes, that they may deduct it, and give
allowance for it. Moreover this Assembly cannot allow unto Monsieur Bowdon, who
was formerly the Receiver of the said University-Moneys more than One Sous in
the Livre, for his pains and trouble in getting it in, and paying it out unto
them. And for the future the Receiver shall rest contented with Six Deniers in
the Livre for that his Employment, as all other Receivers for our Universities
have. And whereas the Professors of the aforesaid University of Nismes do crave
an allowance for the Charges of their Journey and Abode here in seeking to get
Monsieur Chamier for Divinity Professor, nothing was granted them on that
Score, but the Province of Lower Languedoc was ordered to see them satisfied.

29. The Account of the College of Britain was received and approved for the
Years 1617, 1618, 1619, and 1620.

CHAP. XVII. General Laws for the Universities of the Reformed Churches of
FRANCE.
1 IN every University there shall be a double Council, The one Ordinary,
composed only of Pastors of the Churches, and Public Professors, and of the
Principal of the College, and the President of this Council shall be the
Rector. The other extraordinary, made up of the principal and most Eminent
Church Members to be chosen by the Guild Hall of the Town; provided that these
Electors be Persons professing the Protestant Reformed Religion, or else they
shall be chosen out of the Consistories, in case they have not the Power and
Privilege of the Civil Government in their hands; And the Pastors and Public
Professors shall be all Members of this Extraordinary Council. Rut their
President shall be freely chosen by them according to the Circumstances of
Places and Persons.

2. The ordinary Council shall meet once a Week: The Extraordinary shall be
assembled only when as Occurrences and Matters of great Importance are offered,
or at the request of the Ordinary.

3. The Duty of the Extraordinary shall be to choose Professors, and Regents of
Classes, to Suspend, and Depose them from their Office, or otherwise to censure
them according to their Demerits, and especially those who having been
frequently admonished to look diligently unto their Charge are found
refractory, and rebel against the ordinary Council. And it shall be one part of
the Office of the Extraordinary Council to dispose of the University-Moneys.

4. The Ordinary Council shall have a watchful Eye overall Public Professors,
Regents, and Auditors, that every one perform duly his bounden Duty.

5. The Rector shall be chosen from among the Pastors and Professors, excepting
only the Principal, who can never attain that Honor, and the Rector shall
continue in Office one year at least, yet the Ordinary Council of the
University may choose him again, and prolong his time in the Rectoral Chair if
they see good reason for it.

6. All the Members of the Ordinary Council, not one of them excepted shall be
subject, yea, and the Rector also, and his Colleagues, unto the Censures which
be generally given four times in the Year, before the Celebration of the Lords
Supper; as in the Consistories, and the Regents being assembled together with
the Principal, who shall then be president, they shall all be subject unto this
Canon.

7. These are called by us our Public Professors, the Professors of Divinity,
of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues, of Philosophy, the Mathematics, Eloquence,
and all others.

8. We shall need Two Professors at least in Divinity, one of which shall
Expound the Holy Scripture, without expatiating into Common Places. The other
shall read Common Places. If God do bless us with Ability we will have a Third,
and then one of them shall Expound the Old Testament, and the other the New:
And the Third shall handle Common Places, which he shall have finished at least
in Three years time, with that brevity and solidity as becomes a Scholar. And
that the Students may be the more profited, our Professors in Divinity shall
dictate to them the general heads of their Lectures.

9. Doctors and Professors of Divinity shall be chosen by the Extraordinary
Council of the University, and presented to the Provincial Synods there to be
Examined, Admitted, and Confirmed, according to the Third Canon in the Second
Chapter of our Church Discipline.

10. Every one of them shall read Four Lectures a Week, and shall exercise
their Scholars in Propositions every Week, both in Latin and French, according
to that Order, and upon those days, appointed by the Council of the University.

11. There shall be private Disputations in Divinity every Week, and public
ones once a Month under every Professor.

12. All Students in Divinity shall be registered by the Rector, they having
been first of all examined by the Ordinary University-Council, and bringing
with them good and valid Testimonials of their Life and Conversation, and of
their proficiency in Humanity and Philosophy; that so they may be turned back
in case they have made no progress nor advancement in that preliminary Learning.

13. And all those aforesaid Students shall be bound to be personally present
at all Theological Lectures, Propositions, and Disputations, as also to propose
and maintain Thesis, and every one of them shall dispute successively in his
and their respective turns, and according to the Course and Order of their
Matriculation: Excepting always the Fresh-men or new Comers, who may be
excused from Propositions and Public Disputations for Six Months time, or one
year, at the Discretion and Judgment of the Professors.

14. The Divinity Theses for Public Disputation shall be very brief, yet
comprehending, if possible, a full common place: However without loading them
with Objections, which may be offered in Dispute, nor with a long Scrol of
Arguments, to confirm the Truth, for this would turn the Theses into Volumes.

15. The Student in Divinity that is to maintain a Thesis, before Disputation
shall make a brief Supposition in Latin discovering the Design and Tendency of
the Thesis, thereby to exercise his Style, and render himself the more useful
and accomplished.

16. The Scholars shall pass a free and modest Censure upon every Proposition
in that self same Language in which it was delivered, and in the absence of the
Proposan first by the Students in Divinity, next by the Professors and Pastors,
and the Pastors and Divinity Professors each of them in their turn shall be
Moderators of this Censure.

17. These said Students in Divinity may choose from among themselves a Praetor
and Six Assessors, who shall keep the Catalogue of their Colleagues Names and
every one in order give Notice of the time of his Exercises, and they may make
Bylaws among themselves, which shall be ratified and approved by the
University-Council, who also shall see to it, that every one of them do
according to this present Order exercise themselves in Disputations and
Propositions, and neglect no means for their growth and increase in Wisdom and
Learning for their after-serviceableness.

18. All Students in Divinity shall be examined once a year, those at least who
receive Pensions from the Provinces or particular Churches, that so we may have
a more faithful and just account of them, and thereby to quicken them the more
unto their Studies, and to a better improvement of their time and parts.

CHAP. XVIII. A Dividend made among all the Provinces of Two Hundred and Fifty
Thousand Livres given by His Majesty to the Reformed Churches of France, and to
be received this Ensuing Year, 1621. And the Years following, until the sitting
of the next National Synod, according unto which the Lord of Candal shall make
Payment of the said Sums, as was covenanted with him at the National Synod of
GAP.
OUT of the Three first Quarters of the said Sum of Two Hundred Twenty Five
Thousand Pound there must be distributed One Hundred Sixty Eight Thousand,
Seven Hundred and Fifty Livres in manner following.

l. s. d. To the University of Sedan 4000 00 00 To the College of Gex taking
in the 3600 l. granted the King 4300 00 00 To the University of Saumur 5190 00
00 To the University of Nismes 2236 00 00 To the University of Montauban 3151
00 00 To the College of Bergerac 1200 00 00 To the University of Die 0600 00
00 A Supply of Maintenance to our Lords the Geneneral Deputies. 3300 00 00 1.
To the Province of the Isle of France, Picardy, Champagne, Seventy One Portions
for Fifty Pastors in Actual Service, One Church (another Copy reads Eleven
Churches) to be provided for, Twelve Supernumerary Portions, Four Proposans,
Two Pastors discharged, Two Supernumerary Portions for the Church of Langres,
and Four Hundred Livres for the College, in all Eleven Thousand, Three Hundred
Thirty and Four Livres, Two Sous, and Two Deniers 11334 02 02 2. To the
Province of Poictou for Sixty Portions, to wit for Forty Nine Pastors in Actual
Service, Two Pastors discharged, Two Pastors to be provided of Churches, Three
Proposans, Two Supernumerary Portions, and Four Hundred for the College, in
all Nine Thousand Six Hundred and Forty Livres, and Two Deniers. 09640 00 02 3.
To the Province of Lower Languedoc Seventy One Portions, viz. for Sixty Two
Pastors in Actual Service, Two Pastors professing the Greek and Hebrew Tongues
in the University of Nismes, an half supernumerary Portion for Mr. Brunier
Pastor of the Church of Vsez, an half Portion for the Church of Montfrin, an
half Portion for Gignac, one Emeritus, Three Proposans, and One and half
supernumerary Portion, and Four Hundred Livres for the College, in all Eleven
Thousand, Three Hundred, and Thirty Three Livres, and Eight Sous. 11333 08 00
4. To the Province of Orleans and Berry Forty Seven Portions, for Thirty Two
Pastors in Actual Service, three Churches to be provided for, three Proposans,
two supernumerary Portions for the Church of Sancerre, and seven supernumerary
Portions for the whole Province, Four Hundred Livres for the College, in all
Seven thousand six hundred thirty and eight Livres, three Sous, and eight
Deniers. 07638 03 08 5. To the Province of Xaintonge Eighty Portions for Sixty
three Pastors, in Actual Service, three Portions for Monsieur Welsh, Toulouse,
Gabard, one Portion for Monsieur Bonnet, which shall yet be paid him, though he
exercise his Ministry in another Province, Eight Portions for Churches to be
provided for, Five Proposans, and Relief for the poorer Churches, and Four
Hundred Livres for the College, in all Twelve thousand, Seven Hundred and
Nineteen Livres. 12719 00 00 6. To the Province of Burgundy Forty one Portions
for twenty two Pastors in actual Service, two Churches to be provided for, one
Pastor Emeritus, three supernumerary Portions particularly assigned to the
Churches of Moulins, Paillac, and Maringues, Four Proposans, and Eight
supernumerary Portions, one of which is to be paid in to Monsieur Perreauld
Pastor of Mascon, One supernumerary Portion for Monsieur Le Planche a Pastor
Emeritus in the Province of Provence, and Four Hundred Livres for the College,
in all Six thousand seven hundred and thirteen Livres, thirteen Sous. 06713 13
00 7. To the Province of Vivaretz Forty One Portions for Twenty Fight Pastors
taking in Messieurs de Lubac and des Maretz, three Proposans, four Churches to
be provided for, two Portions supernumerary for la Forest, one for the Church
of Vallon and la Gorce, one for Villeneusve in Bery, and by way of Vantage two
supernumerary Portions more, and Four hundred Livres for the College, in all,
Six thousand seven hundred and thirteen Livres, thirteen Sous. 06713 13 00 8.
To the Province of Anjou thirty six Portions for twenty seven Pastors in Actual
Service, two Professors of Divinity, three Proposans, one supernumerary portion
for the Church of Veizins, for a Pastor Emeritus, and three supernumerary
portions cast in as a vantage for the benefit and casing of the whole Province,
in all Five thousand, five hundred forty and three Livres, fourteen Sous. 05543
14 00 9. To the Province of Higher Languedoc a hundred and one portions for
eighty Pastors in Actual Service, four Pastors Emeriti, a supernumerary portion
for Monsieur Joly Pastor of Millaud, seven Proposans, nine supernumerary
portions, with which particularly were to be relieved the Churches of Lectoure,
Minerbois, Plaisance, Calvinet, and Foix, according to the Decrees of former
National Synods, in all fifteen thousand, five hundred fifty and three Livres,
two Sous. 15553 02 00 10. To the Province of Lower Guyenne, Eighty five
portions for Sixty eight. Pastors in Actual Service, five Proposans, one
portion for the Church of Bourdeaux, two portions for the Sieur Bustonoby,
eleven portions for Churches unprovided, and to refresh the bowels of the Poor,
and three hundred Livres for the gathering of a Church in the Land of La Bour,
in all, thirteen thousand three hundred eighty and nine Livres, seventeen Sous,
and nine Deniers. 13389 17 09 11. To the Province of Sevennes Sixty five
Portions for Fifty three Pastors, impowering always the said Province to make
those portions equal unto all the Pastors, there being a greater number of
them, than have portions, One Church to be provided for, five portions for the
Churches of Issoyre and the upper Auvergne, one portion and an half for
Monsieur Scoffier a Pastor Emeritus, three Proposans, a supernumerary portion
for Maruejols, and Four hundred Livres for the College, in all, Ten thousand,
four hundred and Nine Livres, and nine Sous. 10409 09 00 12. To the Province of
Normandy, Fifty seven Portions for seven and forty Pastors in Actual Service,
two Churches to be provided for, a supernumerary portion for the Church of
Quillebeauf, six Proposans, six portions supernumerary, and four hundred Livres
for the College, in all, nine thousand one hundred seventy eight Livres, three
Sous, and eight Deniers. 09178 00 80 13. To the Province of Provence, twenty
three Portions for fourteen Pastors in Actual Service, two Churches to be
provided for, seven supernumerary portions, whereof one goes to the Church of
Puymichel, one to that of Velaux, and one to that of Luc, and the half one to
the Church of Baux, and Four hundred Livres for the College, in all, three
thousand nine hundred forty and one Livres, sixteen Sous. 03941 16 00 14. To
the Province of Britain twenty two portions for eleven Pastors Actually in
Service, one Church to be provided for, two Proposans, eight supernumerary
portions, whereof one shall be given to the Church of Nantz, and Four hundred
Livres for the College, in all three thousand seven hundred eighty and seven
Livres, sixteen Sous, and eight Deniers. 03787 16 08 15. To the Province of
Dolphiny, One hundred and five portions, viz. to Eighty six Pastors, eight
Proposans, ten supernumerary portions, out of which there shall be given to the
Church of Ambrun one, to Barraux one, to the Church of Guillestre one, one to
the Church of Romans, one and half to the Church of Tulette, and Four hundred
Livres to the College, and one portion more assigned to Mr. Gaspar Martyn, in
all Sixteen thousand, five hundred sixty and nine Livres, two Sous, and six
Deniers. 16569 02 06 To Monsieur de la Cost 00154 00 00 To Monsieur du Bois
00154 00 00 The Total Sum of these three First Quarters 168750 00 00

Out of the last Quarter of the said Sum of Two Hundred Twenty Five Thousand
Two Hundred and Fifty Livres there belongs.
l. s. d. To the Province of the Isle of France 4403 03 07 To Poictou 3721 00
00 To Lower Languedoc 4403 03 08 To the Province of Orleans and Berry 2914 15
08 To the Province of Xaintonge 4962 06 08 To Burgundy 2542 13 08 To the
Province of Vivaretz 2542 13 08 To the Province of Anjou 2232 12 00 To the
Higher Languedoc 6263 13 08 To the Lower Guyenne 5271 08 04 To the Province of
Sevennes 4031 01 04 To Normandy 3534 19 00 To Provence 1426 07 08 To Britain
1364 07 04 To Dolphiny 6511 15 00 To Monsieur de la Cost 0062 00 04 To
Monsieur du Bois 0062 00 04 The whole Sum of October Quarter 56250 00 00

CHAP. XIX. The Account of the Lord Candal Receiver General of the Moneys given
by the King unto the Reformed Churches of France, and the Dividend of the said
Moneys as it was Ordered and Decreed in the National Synod of ALEZ, in the
Months of October and November, of the Year 1620.
1 THE Sieurs Bouchereau Pastor, de la Begaudiere, Joly de Bedennes, Bernard
and du Puy Elders having been Commissionated by this National Synod to Audit
and Examine the Lord of Candal's Account, they made report, that the Lord du
Candal had charged himself Debtor for Receipt on his last Account to the last
National Synod in the Sum of One and Thirty thousand, nine Hundred thirty and
five Livres, fourteen Sous, and Seven Deniers.

2. Moreover, that he charged himself with the Sum of Fifty four thousand six
hundred Livres for October Quarter in the Year 1616. And for Nine thousand six
hundred Livres, being part of the two and twenty thousand five hundred Livres
of the Augmentation Moneys granted us by His Majesty at the Treaty of Loudun.

3. Item, He charge himself with the Sum of One Hundred fourscore and five
Livres, seven Sous, and two Deniers for the Arrears of Moneys which were left
in his hand by the Synod of Vitre.

4. And that he had made Reprisal of Fifteen thousand four hundred ninety and
eight Livres, seven Sous, and six Deniers out of the half Quarter of October in
the Year 1615, and of twelve thousand one hundred and sixty Livres, sixteen
Sous out of the October Quarter in the Year 1616, because he could never get
the Bills paid, which had been given him, for that the Receivers General had
been discharged.

5. He is found Debtor on the Remains of this Account the Sum of three
thousand two hundred forty and five Livres, nineteen Sous, four Deniers, and
says that this Debt arises out of the three thousand Livres which the Synod
of Vitre had ordained for printing the Learned Works of Reverend Chamier, and
from one hundred fourscore and five Livres, seven Sous and two Deniers, which
were on Account, and forborne in the Synod of Vitre under the Name of the
Deputy of Xaintonge; to whom they were never paid.

6. Which said Sum of three thousand two hundred forty and five Livres,
nineteen Sous, nine Deniers, he will free and discharge himself as soon as
demanded.

7. And whereas in the said Account given in at Vitre there was forborne the
said Lord of Candal the Sum of Sixty thousand five hundred and five Livres,
fourteen Sous, one Denier, including in it the one hundred, fourscore and five
Livres, seven Sous, and two Deniers, as above, now he brings in an
Acquittance for the said Sum of Sixty thousand five hundred and five Livres,
fourteen Sous and one Denier, therefore the forbearance and Debt of the said
Account yielded at Vitre are most effectually paid off and discharged.

8. And the said Commissioners did justify that the said Lord of Candal had
charged himself with the Debt of Six hundred eighteen thousand seven hundred
and fifty Livres, for which he has given credit in the years 1617, 1618, and
in the three first Quarters of the Year 1619: But upon Examination of his
Account, we find that he has paid in more than was due by ten Sous and six
Deniers, whereof he shall be reimburst on the Debt.

9. But yet he holds by forbearance on Account the Sum of Four thousand twenty
nine Livres seven Sous, and six Deniers under the Names of the Commissioners of
Provence, the University of Sedan, and of the Sieurs du Bois and du Fresne,
whose Acquittances he must produce at the next National Synod.

CHAP. XX. The Account of Moneys ordered by the National Synod of ALEZ to be
paid by the Lord of Candal out of the Sum of Three Thousand Two Hundred Forty
and Five Livres, Nineteen Sous, Nine Deniers, for which he is indebted on his
last Account brought in to that Synod.
l. s. d. TO Monsieur Scoffer a Minister Emeritus for this present Year 1620.
An half Portion ordered him by the National Synod of Vitre. 0114 05 00 To
Monsieur du Fresne, for what was given him in lieu, of his Pension, and
assigned at the Synod of Vitre. 0300 00 00 To the Commissioner of the Province
of Vivaretz for the Church of Privas the Sum of 0600 00 00 To the Sieur Giraud
formerly a Pastor in the Synod of Xaintonge the Sum of 0060 00 00 See of this
Giraud in the Roll of Apostates in the Synod of Castres.
To Monsieur des Maretz Pastor in the Province of Vivaretz the Sum of 0045 00
00 To Monsieur de la Cost 0300 00 00 To Monsieur Laurens Pastor of la Bastide
in Vivaretz the Sum of 0200 00 00 To the Commissioner of the Province of
Xaintonge for what was owing the said Province by forbearance in the Account at
Vitre. 0185 07 02 To the Sieurs N.N. the Sum of 846 l. 11 s. 1 d. which they
did immediately distribute by Order of that Synod unto several very poor and
indigent Ministers. 0846 11 01 Again unto Monsieur de la Cost, over and above
the 168 l. which Monsieur de la Riviere paid into the said Lord of Candal 32
Livres, to complete the Sum of two hundred 0032 00 00 To Solpitius Cuper
Deputy to the said Lord of Candal the Sum of 0400 00 00 To the said Lord of
Candal for what remained due unto him in the heel of his Account brought in at
the said Synod of Vitre, ten Sous, and six Deniers. 0000 10 06 To the said Lord
of Candal for his Taxations of a Sol in the Livre of the said Sum of three
thousand two hundred forty five Livres, nineteen Sols, and nine Deniers, which
he will pay without any deduction, the Sum of 0142 06 00 The total Sum is
Three thousand two hundred forty five pounds, nineteen shillings and nine
pence, equal with the Debt of the said Lord du Candal; which being paid off
the said Lord is acquitted, and his Debt discharged. 3245 19 0

8. The Province of the Isle of France, Normandy, Higher Languedoc and Anjou,
demanding that the Privilege of Calling the next National Synod might be
granted to them, this Assembly did bestow it upon the Isle of France. But the
said Province is desired to consider well beforehand whether that the Deputies
unto it may be safely and commodiously lodged; which if they cannot do, they
shall give Notice thereof unto the Province of Higher Languedoc, who shall in
that case have the Right of calling it devolved upon them. And as to the time
of meeting for the said Synod it is designed in May next two years hence,
unless any of the Provinces together with the Lords General Deputies should
think it needful either to hasten or defer it, whereof they shall give timely
Notice unto the Isle of France, as also of those important Reasons for their so
doing. But it shall not be held in the year 1623.

CHAP. XXI. The Catalogue of Apostates and Deposed MINISTERS.
1 DAniel Bourguignon formerly Pastor in the Church of Dolot and la Selle,
having revolted from the profession of the Truth was Deposed from the Holy
Ministry by the Provincial Synod of Orleans and Berry, held at Argenton in the
Year 1617. He is about forty years old, red favored, Copper-Nos'd, of a
Laughing Countenance, a little stooping, Gore-bellied Fellow, of a Middle
Stature, and Black Beard.

This Fellow was a most malicious and mischievous Apostate. A right Turn-Turk
2. Peter Marcha styling himself du Pras, born at Annonay in Vivaretz, an
Apostate, about Six and thirty years old, heretofore Pastor in the Church of
St. Stephens in Forest, tall of Stature, Chestnut-colour'd Hair, Head lifted
up, he was deposed for Adultery by the Province of Vivaretz.

3. John Pressac, alias Martin, born at Montauban, formerly Minister in the
Church of Brieteste in Albigeois, an Apostate, of mean Stature, about thirty
years old, he has little eyes, sunk deep into his Head, and purblind, brown
Chestnut Hair, pale Visag'd, great Nose, rash and haughty in speaking.

4. N. Laurens, an Apostate born at Montpellier, a little dwarfish Fellow,
about thirty years old, bald headed, black Beard, little Eyes, great Lips,
pale-Visag'd, formerly Pastor in the Church of Aymargues, in Lower Languedoc,
publicly accused of Adultery.

5. Hector Joly formerly Pastor in the Church of Montauban, in the Higher
Languedoc, about Nine and forty years old, pretty tall of Stature, black Hair'd
was deposed by this Synod for the heinous Crime of Fornication.

6. Stephen Giraud, heretofore Pastor of the Church of Gemauzac in Xaintonge,
about two and thirty years old, high enough of Stature, black Hair, red Faced,
his Eyes sunk into his Head, was deposed by the Synod of Xaintonge with hopes
given him, and a promise of being restored; but he was totally deprived and
deposed by this Synod for Drunkenness, Adultery, and Theft.

7. John Cottelier sometimes Minister in the Church of Nismes in the Lower
Languedoc, about Five and thirty years, little of Stature, but a well compacted
Fellow, bald headed, black Hair, scarce any Beard, high Forehead, he was
deposed for Fornication and other Crimes.

8. Paul Daude formerly Minister in the Church of St. John of Gardonenque
Deposed by the Sentence of the Provincial Synod of Sevennes, and his Deposition
was confirmed in this for diverse notorious Crimes; he is a Fellow about two and
thirty years of Age, of a flaxen colored Hair, red Beard, a long and ghastly
Visage, great Nose, Ferrets Eyes, sunk deep into his Head, and yet poreing upon
the Earth, and short of Stature.

9. N. Philippin, born at Newcastle in Switzerland, tall enough, and great
necked, red Beard, a bald uplifted Head, wide, open Nostrils, lame of his right
hand; he was sometimes Pastor of the Church of Chasteau Dauphin, but
interdicted the Ministry for diverse Natural Infirmities by the Synod of
Dolphin, and now a Vagabond.

Done and Decreed in the National Synod of Alez (which sat from the First day
of October, till the Second of December,) 1620. Signed in the Original by du
Moulin Moderator. Brunier Assessor. Vignier Scribe. Papillon Scribe, and by all
the rest of the Deputies


The Synod of Alez began on a Thursday, and ended on a Wednesday. The Original
was lodged in the Archives of Rochell.

THE Acts, Canons, Decisions and Decrees OF THE XXIV. NATIONAL SYNOD OF The
Reformed Churches OF FRANCE, AND OF BEARNE, HELD IN The Town of Charenton St.
Maurice near Paris the First day of September, and ended the First of October
in the Year of Our Lord, 1623.

By the Authority and Permission of Lewis. XIII. King of France and Navarr,
being the Sixty Fourth King of this Realm, in the Fourteenth Year of his Reign.
In which Sat the First Commissioner for His Majesty, the Lord Augustus Galland
a Member of the said Communion, according to His Majesty's Letters Patents of
the 17th. of April, 1623, verified in Parliament the Second of May following;
it being His Majesty's Pleasure, that always in all Colloquies and Synods for
the future there shall be present an Officer of the King professing the
Reformed Religion to represent his Person, and see that nothing but
Ecclesiastical matters were Treated and Debated in them, as had been Decreed by
the Edict.

The CONTENTS of the Synod of CHARENTON.
Chap. I. THE first Commissioner from the King in a National Synod, the Lord
Augustus Galland. Deputies to the Synod. Election of Officers. Chap. II. The
Kings Commission to the Lord Galland. Chap. III. A great Debate about this
Commission. Chap. IV. Approbation of the Confession of Faith. Chap. V.
Observations upon the Discipline. Chap. VI. Observations upon the Synod of
Alez. Chap. VII. Reflections upon those Observations made by the Synod of Alez
on two Acts of the National Synod of Vitre. Chap. VIII. Reflections upon their
Appeals. Chap. IX. Reflections upon their Chapter of General Matters. Chap. X.
Reflections upon that of particular Matters. Chap. XI. Reflections upon their
Colleges and Universities. Chap. XII. One Observation on their General Laws
for the Universities. Chap. XIII. Appeals unto this National Synod. Chap. XIV.
Of General Matters. Chap. XV. A Remarkable passage about Monsieur Primrose
Pastor of the Reformed Church of Bourdeaux, and Arnoux the Jesuit. See G. M.
16. Chap. XVI. A Canon passed in Obedience to the Kings Letter that no
Ministers should be Deputies unto Political Assemblies. See G. M. 17. Chap.
XVII. The Causes of the French Kings unwillingness to suffer Monsieur du Moulin
to be Minister in the Church of Paris, or elsewhere in the Kingdom. A Catalogue
of du Moulins Works. Dr. Twisses Testimony of him and them. Chap. XVIII.
Particular Matters. Chap. XIX. An Expedient to preserve the Churches Peace, P.
M. 11. Chap. XX. An Account of Curcellaeus, another Ecebolius, P. M. 17. Chap.
XXI. Mr, Camerons Address unto the Synod, P. M. 33. Chap. XXII. Of Universities
and Colleges, Chap. XXIII. The Lord of Candals Accounts. Chap. XXIV. A
Dividend of Moneys among the Provinces. Chap. XXV. The Roll of Apostates. Chap.
XXVI. The Decision of the Arminian Controversies. Canons about Predestination,
Election, and Reprobation. Errors rejected, Chap. I. Of Christ's Death and Man's
Redemption by it. Errors rejected, Chap. II. Of Man's Natural Depravedness,
Conversion, and Gods Method in it. Errors rejected, Chap. III. The Saints
perseverance. Errors rejected. Chap. IV. all subscribed by the Moderator and
Deputies. XXVII. Remarks upon some of the Members of this Synod.
THE FIRST Synod of Charenton. 1623. The 24th. Synod.

SYNOD XXIV. 1623.
In the Name of God. Amen.
The Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France held at
Charenton near Paris the First of September, and diverse Days after, in the
Year of Our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Twenty and Three.

CHAP. I. The Kings First Commissioner, Deputies, and Synodical Officers.
THE Lord Augustus Galland Councellor of the King in His Council of Estate, and
Attorney General of the Kingdom of Navarre was Commissionated by His Majesty to
open this Synod by his Royal Authority, and to be present in all its Sessions,
as shall be afterward Declared.

There appeared as Deputies for the Province of Normandy, Mr. Benjamin Basnage
Pastor of the Church of Charenton, John Maximilian de Baux Lord de L' Angle
Pastor in the Church of Roan, John Lewis Mustel, Esquire Lord of Boisroger, Elder
in the Church of Ponteau de Mer, and James de la Loys Elder of the Church of
St. l o.

As for the Province of Orleans and Berry Mr. Simon Jurieux Pastor of the
Church of Chastillon on the Loir, James Imbert Durant Pastor of the Church of
Orleans, Elijah du Bois, Esquire Lord of Senelieres, Elder of the Church of
Chasteaudun, and John du Four, Counselor to the King, and his Judge in the
Sessions of Blois, and Elder of the Church there.

For the Province of Anjou Mr. John Vigneux Pastor of the Church of Man's, Isaac
le Pelletier Pastor of the Church of Vandome, George Rabboteau Advocate and
Elder in the Church of Pruilly, and Samuel Pruchieur Lord de la Mesnerie, and
of the Waters and Forests in the Sheriffdom of Anjou, Elder of the Church of
Bange.

For the Province of the Higher and Lower Poictou Mr. Isaac Caville Pastor of
the Church of Cove, James Cottiby Pastor of the Church of Poitiers, Claudius
Gourjault, Esquire Lord of Venoars, Elder in the Church of ^usignun, and Michael
des Roulins Esquire Lord of Bois St. Martyn, Elder in the Church of Mouschamp.

For the Province of Xaintonge, Mr. William Rivett Lord of Chauvernown Pastor
of the Church of Taillebourg, Theodore de ^ignon Judge Assistant in the Town of
Rochefoucaut, and Elder of the Church there, and John Thomas Judge of Mirambeau
Elder of the Church there, as for Michael le Blanc Pastor of the Church of
Rochell, and deputed at the same time together with the said Lord of
Chauvernown he fell sick just as he came to Paris, and departed this Life on
Wednesday the Thirteenth of this instant September, and was buried the next day
in the Churchyard of Charenton aforesaid.

For the Province of the Lower Guyenne, Mr. John Alba Pastor of the Church of
Tonneins, James Berdolin Pastor of the Church of Duras, Seigneron Buffoon
formerly Lieutenant in the Seneschally of Castlejaloux, Elder of the Church
there, and Mathias Capduroy, Advocate in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and Elder
of that Church.

For the Province of Lower Languedoc Solomon Crubelier Pastor of the Church of
Vauvert, and John Faucheur Pastor of the Church of Nismes, and Professor of
Divinity in that University, James ^esquet Doctor of the Civil Law and
Advocate, Elder in the Church of Montpellier, and (...) du Mas Doctor of the
Civil Law and Advocate, Elder in the Church of Lunel, absent, never came unto
the Synod.

For the Province of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne, Mr. Peter Beraud Pastor and
Professor of Divinity in the Church and University of Montauban, Peter Savoys
Pastor of the Church of Castres, John Mauzy, the Kings Attorney in the
Judicature of Ville ^ongue Elder in the Church of Puylaurens, and James
Herauldy Doctor of the Civil Law, and Advocate, Elder in the Church of Figeac.

For the Province of Burgundy Mr. Isaiah Bailey Pastor of the Church of ^ions,
James Clerk Pastor of the Church of Sessy, Peter de L' Oriol, Esquire Lord of
Zarlac Elder in the Church of Bourg, and Albert de Mars Esquire Lord of Balenes
Elder in the Church of Maringues absent, and did not come unto this Synod.

For the Province of Dolphiny, Mr. James de Chambrun Pastor of the Church of
Orange, Adrian Chamier Pastor of the Church of Montlimart, Moses du Port Esquire
Captain and Constable of the Castle of Lamure Elder of the Church there, and
Daniel Bois Advocate in the Parliament of Grenoble, and Elder of the Church in
that City.

For the Province of Sevennes Mr. James Berlie Pastor of the Church of Quissac,
Paul Paulett Pastor of the Church at Vazenobre. Andrew du Crois, Esquire Lord of
Vazenobre and Elder of the Church of St. German and Calbergue, and Anthony
Despeces Doctor of the Civil Law, and Advocate Elder in the Church of Alez.

For the Province of the Isle of France, Mr. Samuel Durant, and Mr. John
Mestrezat Pastors of the Church of Paris, Peter de Launay Counselor and
Secretary to the King, Elder of the said Church, and James de Herouard, Esquire
Lord of ^osseuse, Elder in the Church of Baillolett.

The Lord of Montmartyn Deputy General for the Reformed Churches in this
Kingdom to His Majesty, took his Place, and sat personally in this Synod,
according to the Canon of our Churches in this case provided.

Eight Days after the opening of the Synod there came and craved admission
into it, The Sieurs Bertrand d' Avignon Lord of Souvigne Pastor of the Church
of Rennes, and John de Gennes Lord of la Baste Elder in the Church of Vitre,
Deputies for the Province of Britain, and being demanded the reasons of their
delay, and late coming, they answered that it arose hence, that their
Provincial Synod could not be held early enough, because that His Majesty
having given Order to some particular Persons to send an Officer who might
assist in Person in it, they put off his Nomination and Commission so long that
they have lost all this time, which Excuses of theirs were accepted by the
Assembly.

Twelve days after the Synod had sat there came into it Mr. John D' Isserotte
Pastor of the Church of Moneings, Deputy for the Principality of Bearn, who
declared that the Letters of Convocation unto this present Synod came not into
their Province but very lately, so that they could not assemble their own Synod
timely enough for the Deputies to meet at the opening of this Assembly, and
that Mr. Samuel Campaigne Elder in the Church of Olleroon, who was deputed
together with him, fell sick just as they were beginning their Journey, so that
he had not time to acquaint the other Person with it, who was ordered in case
of such an Accident to succeed him in this Office, and therefore he humbly
requested this Synod to accept of these his Excuses, which it also did, and
gave him his privilege of sitting and voteing in it. But forasmuch as in his
Letters of Commission the clause of submission was couched in those very
self-same terms, and under those conditions, wherewith the Deputies of the said
Principality had been hitherto admitted into these Assemblies, and that the
Synod of Alez had suffered those Conditions because of the juncture of Affairs
then, and by provision only until this present Synod; therefore this Assembly
does ordain in pursuance of the limitations and restrictions made in the
foregoing National Synods the Provinces shall have full liberty to require that
the said Sieur D' Isserotte may not in some cases concerning the Churches of
this Kingdom not be permitted either his deliberative or decisive Vote; and
that before the breaking up of this Synod, he do produce the reasons why the
Churches in the Principality of Bearne have so long deferred their full and
entire subjection to the Discipline of the Churches in France, and of which
this Assembly will consider and give judgment.

The Sixteenth day after the Synod had sat there came unto it for the Province
of Vivaretz Mr. Joseph Villou Pastor of the Church of Chambon, Solomon Faure
Pastor of the Church of Privas, Anthony Perrottin Advocate, Elder in the Church
of Villeneusve de Berg, and John Faure Lord of Champlas Elder in the Church of
Tournon near Privas who related, that through the delays and difficulties
caused by the Governors and Officers of His Majesty their Provincial Synod
could not meet but toward the end of August, which had exceedingly retarded
and put back their Journey, so that they could not possibly come any sooner
unto this Assembly. Their Excuses were admitted, and they were admonished for
the future to keep exactly to the form prescribed by the former National
Synods in their Letters of Deputation, and to bring in Writing the Names of
those Persons, who being Commissionated, could not come hither unto this Synod.

The One and Twentieth day after the Synod had first met and sat there were
Letters brought and read in full Assembly from the Province of Provence
assembled in their Synod at Cabrieres on the Eight and Twentieth day of August
last; By which they excuse themselves, and crave that they may be excused for
not having sent any Deputies unto this Assembly: But all their Excuses were
rejected, and the said Province was censured for their neglect of this their
Duty, they being able, if they had, been willing to have Commissionated some
from out of their Body unto this Synod; and they were farther censured for that
their Letters were full of blots and razures, and that the clause of submission
unto the Votes and Canons thereof was not couched in such full and Emphatical
terms as the former National Synods had prescribed.

Prayers having been offered up unto God, and all the Letters of Deputation
read and examined, The Reverend Mr. Durant, Pastor of the Church of Paris was
nominated and chosen Moderator, Mr. Bailey Assessor, and Mr. Faucheur a Pastor,
and Mr. Launay an Elder to be Scribes.

CHAP. II. The Kings Commissson to the Lord GALLAND.
AS soon as the Synodical Officers were chosen, the Lord Galland declared that
by virtue of, and in Obedience to his Majesty's Letters Patents bearing Date
the Seventeenth of April last, and verified in his Court of Parliament the
Second of May following, by which His Majesty had ordained that in all
Assemblies of his Subjects of the Reformed Religion whether Coloquies or Synods
one of His Majesty's Officers being of the same Religion should assist in
Person, and see that nothing should be propounded or handled but only such
Affairs as were permitted by his Edicts, and that he should make report thereof
unto His Majesty, He came now and sat in this Assembly, for that His Majesty
had Commissionated him as his Deputy unto this present Assembly, as was evident
by the Letters Pattents of His said Majesty, subscribed by the Kings own Hand
Lewis, and a little Lower, by His Majesty's Order, De L' Omeny, and Sealed with
the Great Seal in yellow Wax, and Dated the Twenty Ninth of July last, which
were produced and read, The Tenor whereof is as follows.

Lewis by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre, to our well-beloved and
faithful Counselor in our Council of State and Privy Council, our Attorney
General in our Realm of Navarre, Monsieur Augustus Galland, Greeting. We having
Willed and Ordained by our Letters Patents bearing Date in the Month of April
last, that our Subjects of the P. Reformed Religion might hold their Synodical
Assemblies as formerly, and meet and treat about Matters of their Discipline,
and that we would Commissionate one of our Officers of the same Religion to be
present in those Assemblies, and to see that none other Matter should be
Debated in them but what is according to our Edicts: Now forasmuch as in the
Month of September next, there will be convened at Charenton an Assembly of
the Deputies of the said Religion from out of all the Provinces of this our
Kingdom: For these Causes we being well assured of your good affection unto our
Service, and to the Repose and Peace of our Estate, we have Commissionated, and
do by these presents Commissionate you to meet and be present with them in the
said General Assembly, whether it sit at Charenton or be removed elsewhere by
our permission, during the whole time of their Sessions, and carefully to take
heed that nothing he Treated or Debated in it contrary to our Service, or
prejudicial to the Public Peace. And in case any other thing shall be proposed
or Debated than what concerns the Order and Discipline of the said P. Reformed
Religion, you shall oppose and suppress it, and make those Remonstrances
against it as be in such cases needful, and give us full and timely notice of
the whole and of all and singular passages transacted in it. And because of
that confidence we have of your Loyalty and Affection we have Commissionated
and Deputed, and do Commissionate and Depute you for this very end and purpose
to be present in all those Assemblies held by our Subjects of the said P.
Reformed Religion by our License at the said Town of Charenton, without your
having need of any other powers than what are now given you by these present
Letters Pattents, which you may communicate unto such Persons as you shall
think fit, so that none of those our aforesaid Subjects may pretend ignorance,
you having received full power from us. For such is our will and pleasure.
Given at St. Germain in I aye, this Nine and Twentieth day of July, and in the
Year of Grace One Thousand Six Hundred and Twenty Three, and in the Fourteenth
Year of Our Reign. Signed Jews, and a little lower, By His Majesty's Order.

D' LOMENY.

CHAP. III. A great Debate about this Commission.
THE Letters Pattents being read, The Lord of Montmartyn, Deputy General of the
Churches unto His Majesty reported, that when as He and his Colleague the Lord
Maniald were informed of His Majesty's Will as aforesaid, they did what lay in
their power by reason and argument to dissuade His Majesty from passing this
Declaration, But notwithstanding all that they did or could urge, His Majesty
was not pleased in the least to heed or regard them, but caused this
Declaration to be verified in his Court of Parliament. So that neither himself
nor the Lord Maniald being able to do any thing more, they left it unto this
present Assembly to reiterate their Complaints unto His Majesty, and if they
thought good, to tender their Petitions unto His Majesty about it. The Synod
deliberating in presence of the Lord Augustus Galland about this Affair, and
cousidering that by this Declaration of His Majesty, our Colloquies and Synods
were most unjustly charged and condemned for having past beyond the Bounds and
Limits of their most humble Duty which they have always deferred and paid unto
His Majesty in all their Consultations and Debates, and moreover that the
benefit of his Edicts was greatly retrenched, and those favorable Concessions
which His Majesty had granted us were now as good as totally revoked, it is
resolved, that a most solemn humble address should be presented to His Majesty,
that he would be pleased to maintain our Churches in all their Liberties, which
had been accorded to them, and which they had ever heretofore enjoyed, and two
Pastors with two Elders were ordained to draw up the Form of the said Petition,
and Address, and the Deputies of the Provinces, who have any Memoirs on this
Subject, are commanded to communicate them. However this Synod being willing
and desirous to give clear, full, and unquestionable Evidence or their Duty,
Obedience and Loyalty unto His Majesty, they admitted the said Lord Augustus
Galland among them, that he might be an Eye and Ear-Witness of the Integrity
and Uprightness of their Proceedings and Deportments, assuring themselves that
His Majesty having perused their most humble Petition and Address, and seeing
and acknowledging the Sincerity and Loyalty of these Assemblies; he would be
graciously pleased out of His Royal Goodness to reinstate us into our former
Liberties and Privileges.

Every one of the Deputies in this Assembly according to the Decrees of former
Synods did Swear and make Oath that he had not brigued his Deputation to it
neither directly nor indirectly, neither for himself nor for any other. And
this Oath shall for the future he taken by all the Members of our National
Synods.

CHAP. IV. Approbation of the Confession of Faith.
THE Confession of our Faith being read word by word, and most carefully
attended to and considered in all its Points and Articles was unanimously
approved by all the Deputies present in the Synod, who did all promise and
swear that by the Grace of God they would live and die in this Faith, and that
they would cause the said Oath to be taken in every one of their Provinces,
and that to the utmost of their power they would procure and endeavor its
Observation.

The Confession of Faith being finished, This Assembly, that they might
testify, as they were bound, their most sincere Respects and Duty unto His
Majesty, did Depute the Sieur de Chambrun, and Mestrezat Pastors, and de
Jurlatt and Rabbotteau, together with the Lords our General Deputies unto His
Majesty, to tender their most humble and thankful Acknowledgments, Submissions
and Duties unto His Majesty, and in the Name of all the Reformed Churches of
this Kingdom to make protestation of their most unviolable Fidelity, and
perpetual Obedience, and unvvearied faithful Service unto His Majesty.

CHAP. V. Observation on reading of the Discipline.
1 WHEN as the Fourth Canon of the Fourth Chapter was read several of the
Provinces requested that some certain and proper means might be found out,
whereby to prevent those Frauds which are usually committed in Attestations.
The Synod judging it needless to make any Additions unto the said Canon, does
enjoin all Consistories and Pastors carefully to examine both those
Attestations, and the Persons that bring them, that they may receive from their
own Mouths a Testimony and Confession of their Religion, and an Evidence of
their Knowledge and Understanding in it.

2. On the Sixteenth Canon of the Fifth Chapter, the Deputies of Poictou
demanded, Whether such as having been Married after the Popish manner, or
having so Married their Children, and being afterward convinced of their Sin,
and testifying their Repentance for it might be discharged from their Public
Suspension. This Synod judging that this Censure is become almost indispensably
necessary to retain them within the bounds of Duty, who are otherwise but
too prone to lavish out into such like or worse Offenses, does ordain that the
Canon be most strictly and exactly observed. And the rather, because that
without such a suspension the Scandal given unto the Church of God cannot be
sufficiently repaired.

3. On the Twelfth Canon of the Ninth Chapter, instead of those words, After
which shall be celebrated the Lords Supper, these only shall be inserted, and
the Lords Supper shall be celebrated. That so the time of its administration
may be left wholly to the power of Synods.

4. In reading the Eleventh Canon of the Thirteenth Chapter of the Discipline,
the Province of Xaintonge moved whether a Man who had married his Wifes Niece
might be admitted to Public Penance, and to the Peace and Fellowship of the
Church. The Synod judging such a Conjunction, incestuous, declares, That as
long as they continue to cohabit together as Man and Wife, the Man shall not be
received neither to the one nor other.

5. On the Sixteenth Canon of the Thirteenth Chapter the Province of the Isle
of France requested that hereafter in all Certificates to be given by our
Consistories that the Banes of Marriage had been published in their Churches,
it might be expressly inserted, that the said Banes were published in those
Churches where the Parties contracted are either well-known, or else held their
personal residence for the greatest part of their time. The Synod enjoyneth all
Pastors to express in such Certificates that the Parties contracted do usually
reside in those Churches where their Banes aforesaid were published.

6. On the Fourteenth Canon of the Fourteenth Chapter, the Province of Dolphiny
requesting, that after these words, In the Colleges of Priests, Monks, Jesuits
and Nuns, there might be added, and other Popish Schoolmasters. The Synod
ordains that nothing shall be added unto the said Canon, yet notwithstanding
does it forbid all Parents to take any Person into their Houses of a contrary
Religion to instruct their Children. Moreover it leaves it to the prudence of
Consistories, Colloquies, and Provincial Synods to make such Canons as they
judge will best suit with the Condition of the Churches under their Conduct and
Direction.

7. The Canons of our Discipline having been read and seriously considered. All
the Pastors and Elders Deputed unto this Assembly did for themselves, and for
their respective Provinces with their hands lifted up to Heaven, swear that
they would keep and observe it, and see to the best of their power that it
should be kept and observed by all their Principals who had sent them.

8. Letters from the Pastors and Professors in the Church and University of
Geneva were read in Answer unto those of the last National Synod, by which they
assure us of their Unanimous consent and agreement with us not only in the
Essentials of Religion, but also in outward Circumstantials and Ceremonies, and
as an Evidence hereof, they have embraced that advice given them by the
aforesaid Synod, ever at the Lords Supper after the words of Institution, and
Distribution of the Sacred Elements to add a word of Exhortation, and that
whereas heretofore they had only used unleavened Bread in conformity to their
Neighbour-Churches in the Canton of Bearne, now out of Love and Conformity to
us and ours, they did and would for the future use Common Bread at this Holy
Sacrament. And whereas their Elders had formerly assisted their Pastors in the
Delivery and Distribution of the Calice, they had resolved that it should be
done by the Pastors only. Adding over and above very many other kind
expressions of their endearing Love, and fraternal Union with the Churches of
this Kingdom. Upon which this Assembly resolved that an Answer should be
returned them fully testifying our mutual Affection, and high and reciprocal
Esteem and Honor for them.

CHAP. VI. Observations on reading the Acts of the National Synod of ALEZ.
1 WHereas in their Reflections on our Ecclesiastical Discipline the said Synod
of Alez had enjoined all the Provinces to see that the Twelfth Canon in the
First Chapter of the Discipline concerning Catechizing should be strictly
observed. This Assembly repeats the same injunction, and charge the
Provincial Synods to make report unto the next National Synod whether this
Canon has been carefully observed or not.

2. And as the said National Synod of Alez, so does this also Decree and Enioyn
all Consistories to read that Canon made at Privas about Moderation in the
habits of Pastors and their Families, and it does enjoin all Colloquies and
Synods to put forth their helping hand for its better observance, and to see
that all Consistories do read it once a year in their Assemblies, and to make
report hereof unto the next National Synod.

3. On that Canon of the same Synod injoyning Pastors to deliver the Cup as
well as the Bread at the Lords Table, Diverse Provinces requesting that those
words, As much as may be, which had been razed out by the Synod of Alez from
the Ninth Canon of the Twelfth Chapter of our Discipline, might be again
restored. This Assembly considering that the far greatest part of the Churches
in this Kingdom do conform themselves unto that Canon of the said Synod, and
that very many Churches both abroad and at home have since acquiesced in it,
that also such an observation as this contributes more to the Dignity and
Reverence of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and tends very much unto the
Edification of the Communicants, therefore does it injoyne all the Churches to
observe most uniformely that Canon of the said Synod of Alez.

CHAP. VII. Reflections on their Observations passed upon the Acts of the
Notional Synod of VITRE.
4 THat Canon prohibiting Ministers intermedling with State-Matters in their
Pulpits and Sermons, framed by the Synod of Vitre, and reinforced by that of
Alez shall be read in their Consistories; and all Provincial Synods are
expressly charged to see that it be put in Execution, and to bring good proof of
their Obedience, Care and Diligence as to its observation unto the next
National Synod.

5. On that Canon commanding Pastors to reside in their Churches, This Assembly
decreed, that after the Twelfth Canon in the First Chapter of our
Church Discipline, there shall be this immediately inserted, All Ministers
shall actually reside in their Churches on pain of being Deposed from their
Ministerial Office.

CHAP. VIII. On the Chapter of APPEALS.
This Codur Apostatized afterward in his Old Age; and was therefore Deposed by
the Synod of Loudun, 1659
6 WHEN as that Canon was read concerning the Church of Ganges, and Monsieur
Codur formerly Pastor of it: The Assembly understanding by the Provincial
Deputies of Sevennes that the said Province could not in all this time provide
a Church for the said Codur, It does now decree that the said Province shall
present him unto one between this and their next Synod, and in case of their
neglect, the said Codur is enjoined to wait upon the Synod of Dolphiny, which
is ordered by this Assembly to assign him a particular Church, where he may
profitably employ himself in the Ministry, and not rust in Idleness.

See of this Tuffan Syn. of Alez. Appeal 63. and the Roll of Apost. in the
second Synod of Charenton.
7. The Canon concerning the Church of St. Laurence, and Monsieur Tuffan their
late Pastor, suspended by the Synod of Alez, and whose Suspension was prolonged
till the sitting of this Synod, but under this condition, that he might be
restored unto his Ministerial Office if so be the calling of this National
Synod had been deferred for any longer time. This Assembly being informed by
the Deputies of Lower Languedoc, that the said Tuffan has ever since his
suspension demeaned himself with very much Humility and Modesty, and suffered
very great hardships in the late troubles for which reasons he had been
restored unto his Office in the last Synod held at Vsez according as it had
pleased the aforesaid Synod of Alez to concede it, had the said Province then
and there received the News of the Calling of this Assembly. Wherefore this
Assembly approving fully the Decree of the Synod at Vsez, and confirming the
said Tuffan again in his Ministry, does overlook that Formality omitted by the
said Synod, which should have tarried till the time prescribed by the Synod of
Alez were totally expired, and farther it does mitigate the rigor of the Canon
of that Synod, and permits the Synod of Lower Languedoc to assign unto the said
Tuffan a particular Church in the Colloquy of Nismes, or any one near unto it,
but still with the consent of the said Colloquy.

CHAP. IX. On the Chapter of GENERAL MATTERS.
8 THAT Canon concerning Attestations given unto Proposans shall be read in
Consistories, Colloquies, and in all University Councils, and the Provincial
Synods shall so exert their Power that it be most strictly observed.

9. That Canon about Means and Maintenance for our Ministers, and the keeping
up of the Holy Ministry shall be read in all Consistories, which are exhorted
to procure its Execution and Observation as much as in them lies.

10. On those words in the form of Excommunication, In the Name and by the
Authority of our lord Jesus, and by the Authority of the Pastors and Elders
assembled in Colloquy, and of the Consistory of this Church. The Provinces of
Anjou and Poictou demanded whether a particular Consistory might not proceed to
Excommunication without the advice and consent of the Colloquy. This Synod
judged according to our Church Discipline that Consistories might warrantably
do it, provided there were no Appeal. Yet nevertheless because of the great
importance of this Action the Consistories are exhorted to get it strengthened
by and with the Approbation of the Colloquy, at least with the advice of the
Neighbour-Pastors if it may be had.

11. The Province of Berry requesting that the said Form might be inserted
into the Body of our Discipline, and that another Form might be drawn up to be
joined with it for the Restoration of a Penitent Excommunicate. The Synod
leaving it to the prudence of Ministers and Consistories to use such a Form in
the Reception of Penitent Excommunicates as they shall judge most convenient
for Places and Persons; ordains that the aforesaid Form of Excommunication
shall be incorporated with our Discipline, and placed immediately after the
Seventeenth Canon of the Fifth Chapter, and those words which before concluded
it shall be razed out, viz. Using this or any other Form as shall be advised by
the Consistory. Instead whereof shall be inserted these, My Brethren this is
the Fourth time, etc.

CHAP. X. On the Chapter of PARTICULAR MATTERS.
12 ON that Canon about composing an History of the Albingenses, This Assembly
having been well informed of the Learning and Abilities of the Sieur du Tilloy
Pastor in the Church of Sedan, decrees that he be entreated to write the said
History, and the Provinces are exhorted to send him whatever Memoirs they have
on this Subject.

13. On that Canon concerning Monsieur Pilotis, the Deputies of Sevennes
requesting that he might be reimburst the losses which he had heretofore
suffered in the Service of our Churches. This Assembly agreeing with the Synod
of Alez has answered, that the Moneys attributed unto the Churches can not be
diverted unto other uses.

14. That Canon condemning the Province of Higher Languedoc to make restitution
of the Sum of Five Hundred Livres unto that of the Isle of France, the
Province of Languedoc requesting that it might be discharged from paying the
Two Hundred Livres which yet rest due: This Assembly judged, that it ought not
to change a Tittle in the said Canon, and that the said Province should apply
it self unto that of the Isle of France, to whose Charity they be recommended.

15. On the next Canon concerning Monsieur Richer, this Assembly having seen
the Judgment of the Consistory of Saumur, Deputed to clear up his Accounts,
does confirm the said Judgment; yet nevertheless it entreats the Province of
the Isle of France to deal charitably with the said Richer, according to the
Canon of the Synod of Alez, and the advice of the Consistory of Saumur.

16. The reading of particular Matters being over, it was observed that diverse
Provinces though they were ordered by the foregoing Synod to execute several
Canons, yet had not brought with them any proof of their care and diligence in
so doing. The Synod therefore ordained, that for the future the Provincial
Deputies should produce the Acts of their Provincial Synods, and other needful
Evidence of their having performed the Matters which were enjoined them.

CHAP. XI. On the Chapter of Colleges and Universities.
17 THE Synod of Anjou petitioned that the Fourth Canon concerning Professors
of Divinity and the Hebrew Tongue who are Ministers to be reputed Pastors of
that Church wherein the University is seated, might be explained. This Synod
confirming the decree of Alez, declares this to be the sense and meaning of
it, That the Churches are not obliged to give them Wages, nor employ them in
such frequent services as their ordinary Pastors, but leaves it to die
prudence and discretion of Consistories to agree with the said Professors about
their work and maintenance as they shall judge most consonant to reason and
equity.

18. In that Fifth Canon by which the Province of Higher Languedoc is censured,
after those words, And for not having observed all the Formalities required by
the Discipline in the reception of the said Monsieur Beraud into the Professors
Chair of Divinity, shall be added these following, When as the said Sieur
Beraud had submitted himself unto the most Rigorons Examen, even as the
Deputies themselves of that very self-same Province had attested.

19. On the Eleventh Canon which had settled the College of the Province of
Sevennes in the Town of Anduze by provision only, till the meeting of this
present Synod. This Assembly ordains that since by their silence both that
Province and the City of Alez do seem to consent unto it, things shall continue
in that Estate in which they are at present.

20. Reading that Article about bringing in the Accounts of our Colleges and
Universities, Monsieur Basnage and le Clerk Pastors, and Du Port and du Four
Elders, were constituted a Committee to examine all such Accounts.

CHAP. XII. Observations on the Chapter of General Laws for our Universities.
21 THE Synod after Debate had of what Classick Authors should be read in
Schools, does order all Tutors and Regents of the Lower Classes on every
Saturday to read unto their Scholars a Section of the greater Catechism either
in French, Latin, or Greek according to their Capacities, and to cause them to
get it by heart, and to give them a plain and familiar Exposition of it.

CHAP. XIII. Appeals unto this National Synod of CHARENTON.
1 WHereas the Church of Mesnil-Imbert appealeth from the Sentence of the Synod
of Normandy, which had ordained that the said Church should be joined to that
of Falaise: The Deputies of that Province being heard, they did declare that
they had no notice nor intimation given them of this Appeal till this very
moment, and Monsieur de Beaufiel Deputy for the said Church being heard,
praying that they might be joined unto that of Orbec; This Synod injoyneth the
Province of Normandy to procure the reunion of the Church of Mesnill-Imbert
with that of Falaise, and in case that the said Church of Mesnill will not
consent unto this reunion, then to conjoyn them with that of Orbec. And the
Province shall annex that of Falaise unto such a Church as will with the
greatest ease and readiness admit of it, and in the mean while the said
Churches shall be served by the Neighbor Ministers according to the Ordinance
of their last Provincial Synod.

2. Monsieur Belon Pastor of the Church of Gevaudan in the Lower Guyenne
appealed from the Judgment of the Synod of Higher Languedoc, which had declared
that the Church of Montauban should not give him any recompense for his labors
among them during the time of his Retreat and Sojourning in it. The Synod
ordains that the Judgment of the Province shall hold good.

3. An Elder of the Church at St. Savinian appealed from a Decree of the Synod
of Xaintonge, which had set Monsieur des Oullieres at liberty, so that he might
join himself unto the Church of Tailleburg and contribute toward the Ministry
there. This Synod for diverse reasons does reserve to it self the cognizance of
this Matter, and reforms the said Sentence, and confirms that of the Colloquy
of St. John d' Angely held at Jarnac the Two and Twentieth day of April last.

4. The Lord of Lodde, together with the Consistories of the Churches of
Treviers and Collumbieres appealed from the Decrees of diverse Colloquies and
Synods held within the Province of Normandy, which had assigned the Pension
given by the Lady of La Hay du Puy for the maintenance of a Proposan in
Divinity unto the Son of Monsieur. Basnage, who had not as yet attained unto
that Degree. The Synod being not in a capacity to judge of this Affair, because
the Acts and Evidences necessary to be perused, before a judgment can be given
on it, are not produced, has left it to the Consistory of the Church of Paris
finally to d^^erm^n^ it within one Months space after the breaking up of this
Synod. And the said Province is ordered to send that Act of the said Ladies
gift, and the resolutions of the Colloquies and Synods thereupon thither unto
that Church of Paris, that so they may judge of it by the Authority of this
Synod. And whereas Monsieur Basnage declared that he would decline acceptance
of the said gift, the Synod confirming the payments which have been already
made, ordains that for the future no Money shall be paid without security for
its restitution.

5. Monsieur Perreaud Pastor of the Church of Mascon appealed from two Decrees
of the Colloquy of Lions, one of which concerned certain Charges expended by
him in his Travells unto that Colloquy, and another which ordered him to return
unto his Church within six Weeks. This Synod ordains that the said Perreaud
be censured for troubling it with such trivial matters, and which might be
ended in his own Province, and for that he has not acquiesced in that other
Ordinance of the said Colloquy so very just and equitable, as nothing more, and
that he return home again unto his own Church without delay.

6. Another Appeal was brought by the same Perreaud from a Decree of the Synod
of Gex, which had censured him for being absent Fourteen Months from his
Church, and that there should also be deducted Seven Months Wages from out of
his Stipend; and the Church of Mas^on also appealed from the same Decree
demanding a greater abatement to be made of that Sum. This Synod confirming
the former Censure of the Synod of Gex, does reduce his payment unto Four
Months Wages, and which shall be deducted out of the Sallary paid him from the
Kings Moneys, and his Church, according to that Order made by the Colloquy of
Lions.

7. The Elders of the Church of H^^re de Grace Appealed from an Order of the
Provincial Synod held at Dieppe about a certain Sum of Moneys. But this
Assembly rejecting their Appeal, censured the said Elders for troubling them
with such a slight matter, which might be easily determined in their own
Province.

8. The Sieur de Gasques appealed on behalf of the Church of St. Martyn de
Bobaux from the Synod of Sevennes held at Alez, which had given Monsieur d'
Allegre away from them to be Pastor unto the Churches of Auvergne, without
taking any care how they might be supplied. The Deputies of the said Province
of Sevennes being demanded about this Affair, answered that what they had done
in removing the Sieur D' Allegre was by and with the consent of the Elder of
the said Church of St. Martyn, who also had dismissed him, though for what
reasons he was discharged by them, they knew not. This Assembly orders the said
Province to provide without delay a Pastor for that Church, and to restore
Monsieur d' Allegre to it or to take some other speedy course that it be
immediately and out of hand supplied: And for the future it commands the said
Province never to consent that a Pastor be separated from his Church by their
sole License, till they have been first of all fully informed and satisfied
about the causes of the said dismission and separation.

9. The Consistory of Castres brought in an Appeal from the Decrees of the
Colloquy of Albigeois, and the Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc by which
Monsieur de Combalasse Pastor of the Church of Vabres for words uttered by him
in the late troubles, and which had caused a tumult in the said City, was
censured by the said Colloquy, and farther obliged by the Synod to appear in
Person before the Consistory of Castres, and to give satisfaction to it unto
their Church, and to the Consuls of the said City. This Assembly considering
that the Offense for which he is now questioned, is of their Nature which were
ordered to be buried in Oblivion by the Peace, and Amnesty given us by His
Majesty, does think ^it that the aforesaid Consistory should rest satisfied
with the Decree of their Synod, it having been fully performed, and so should
be no more at all mentioned.

10. The Sieur de L' Allen appealed from the Judicial Sentence of the Province
of Xaintonge, confirming that of the Consistory of Rochell, which had not only
condemned him to abjure the Errors collected out of his Works and Writings, to
which he had satisfied, but he was over and above obliged to make a public
Recantation of them, and to do Penance for them before the whole Church there.
Although this Assembly approves the Acts and proceedings of the said
Provincial Synod and Consistory of Rochell as done with great Prudence and
Charity, yet nevertheless yearning with Bowels of compassion on the said Sieur
de L' Allen, and considering these great and solemn protestations of Repentance
made by him in this Assembly, and ratified by a new and particular, and
voluntary Act of Abjuration subscribed with his own hand, we do ordain that he
be received to the Peace and Communion of the Church, but on this condition,
that he do not participate of the Lord Supper, till after two Months Trial and
Experience had of his Obedience and Constancy, which time shall begin from that
very day in which this present Act shall be published in the Church of Rochell,
on the Lords day immediately after Sermon by Monsieur Berauld Pastor and
Professor of Divinity at Montauban, who is Deputed by this Assembly unto the
Church of Rochell for this very end and purpose. And if the said Sieur de L'
Allen shall ever hereafter relapse into his former Errors, and vent them either
by Writing or Discourse, or any other manner or way whatsoever, this Synod does
ordain that he be then cast out of the Church by Excommunication.

11. The said Sieur d' Allen requested that the Paper in which was written the
Retractation and Abjuration of his aforesaid Errors and that Act confirming and
recording this his Abjuration made in this Synod might not be sent to Rochell,
because he intended to quit that City, and live at Paris: This Assembly for
diverse reasons moving them thereunto ordains that the said Record shall be
kept by the Consistory of the Church of Paris.

12. The Sieur de Richelieu Pastor of the Church of Plouer and St. Malo
appealed from the Sentence of the Provincial Synod of Britain, which had
ordered the Sieurs du Preau and de So^vigne Pastors, and the Sieurs de Conte an
Elder to visit that Church, and to inquire into those Disorders committed in
it, and to take some course for their removal, and that they may be prevented
for the future. After that the Deputies of the said Province had been heard,
and the said Monsieur de Richelieu also, and the Acts of the said Visitation by
those Commissioners were read by him, and owned by them. This Assembly judged
that the said Provincial Synod had very well and vvisely acted in ordering of
the Visitation, but yet nevertheless they should have took notice of matters of
greater importance than are contained in their Report, and they should have
vvaved the cognizance of such slight and trifling Accusations, which were
never proved, nor should they have troubled this Assembly with such needless
and unprofitable storys. Farther the Commissioners did not proceed uprightly in
the execution of their Commission, because they did not mark and observe what
might be said as well for and in behalf of the said Monsieur de Richelieu as
against him, and for that they accepted and admitted of all kind of Evidence
and Witnesses against him, though they were never so passionate and Parties in
the case, and some also who were not legally to be admitted unto a Deposal
against a Minister* And as for the said Sieur de Richelieu, This Assembly
judges him worthy of a very grievous Censure for neglecting his Duty, and not
keeping up Order and Discipline in his Church, for not holding Consistories,
nor passing Censures as ought always of course to have been done and practiced
before Communion days at the Lords Table, and for leaving his Church before the
time appointed, and without having demanded or obtained his License of
departure in due form, and above all for expressing too much levity in his
imaginations, and for giving too much way unto his passions, and for speaking
disadvantagiously of other Persons, and insulting over the dead, whom he took
for his Enemies, and who could not speak for themselves. And whereas this
Assembly could not at present be fully and satisfactorily informed of the State
of that Church of Plouer, the Colloquy of Constantine in the Province of
Normandy is ordered to visit it by their Deputies, who are Authorized by this
Assembly to provide for that Church as they shall judge meet, and to order all
matters for its edification in Godliness; and if they see cause for it, they
shall remove and discharge the said Sieur de Richelieu from his Ministry; and
the Expenses of these Deputies shall be defrayed by that Province of Britain.

13. The Church of Die, and the Sieurs Martinett and Huron appealed from two
Judicial Sentences denounced in the Provincial Synod of Dolphiny against them,
to wit, Monsieur Martinett complained for that the said Synod had ordained his
removal from the said Church of Die, upon pretense of ease and quieting his
Spirit, though he had been preferred unto that Church by some former Synods.
And Monsieur Huron appealed for that the said Synod had forbidden him the
Exercise of his Ministry within the Province of Dolphiny; whereunto he had
retired in time of the late troubles. And the said Church appealed for that the
said Synod had refused and rejected their endeavors to get Monsieur Huron for
their Pastor. Whereupon the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny were heard give in
their Report of the causes and occasions moving their Synod to pronounce those
Judgments, and the aforesaid Martinett and Huron were heard in their reciprocal
Accusations and Apologies, and in like manner the Messengers of the said Church
were heard speak for it, and the Acts relating to these Affairs were all
produced and perused upon the whole. This Assembly does ratify the Judgment of
the said Province of Dolphiny, and discharges the said Monsieur Martinett from
his Pastoral Office in the Church of Die purely for his ease comfort, provided
always that the said Church do pay him, if they have not already done it all
his Arrears due unto him from the very first day that he was set at liberty
from them by the aforesaid Synod, and he is at full liberty to accept of any
other Church. And as for the maintenance of the said Martinet since that time
he was first of all discharged, and set free of serve the Church Beaumont, This
Assembly exhorts and entreats the said Province out of Charity to pay him
the one half of his Salary, And forasmuch as Monsieur Huron, has been convicted
to have left his Church for little or no just cause, and to have brigued his
Election into the Church of Die, and to have fomented the Divisions in it,
betwixt the Church and Monsieur Martinett, in whose expulsion out of it he had
the greatest hand and part, having consented to diverse irregular Actings and
Contentions; and adhered to the Rebellions of several Members of the said
Church, to the contempt of its Consistory and of the Decrees of many
Ecclesiastical Synods, and for that he kept Conventicles, private Meetings,
Proclaimed Fasts, and Days of Prayers, and Writ Books contrary to the Analogy
of Faith, and Form of Sound Words, and has done many other things contrary to
the Order and Discipline Established in the Church of God, and that honorable
Calling of the Holy Ministry. This Synod aggravating the Judgment of the
Provincial Synod of Dolphiny suspends the said Huron from the Sacred Ministry
for the space of Three Months, and sets him at liberty to be employed in some
other Province than that of Dolphiny. And forasmuch as in their endeavors to
get the said Huron to be their Minister, the Consistory and Pastors of the
Church of Die have too much adhered to the unruly motions of some private
Persons, and strangely supported their insolences and proud irregular actings,
This Assembly does judge them also worthy of a very sharp censure, and exhorts
them for the future to testify and express more Vigor and Zeal for the
Discipline of our Churches, and to maintain it in theirs, and to see the
Decrees and Canons of our National Synods put in Execution. And that all these
Censures may be performed, the Sieurs Paulet and Berlie Pastors Deputies for
the Province of Sevennes are appointed by this National Synod to pass over unto
the said City of Die, as they return home unto their Province, and in the
Consistory of that Church there to make denunciation of them.

14. The said Sieur Huron the next day came into this Synod, petitioning that
his suspension might be taken off, and that some maintenance might be provided
for him until such time as he were presented unto another Church. But the Synod
confirmed his suspension, and ordered that some small matter should be allowed
and given him for his present Relief.

15. The Church of Sauve and Monsieur Rossel Pastor of the Church of Montlimart
appealed from a judgment of the Synod of Dolphiny, by which his Ministry was
refused to that of Sauve, and confirmed in that of Montlimart, though the
former did most earnestly re-demand him. After hearing the Deputy of the Church
of Sauve and Monsieur Rossel speaking for it, as also Monsieur Chamier for the
concern of the Church of Montlimard, and the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny
and Sevennes, This Synod ordains that Monsieur. Rossel shall be lent unto the
Service of the Church of Sauve in the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments until
the next National Synod, and injoyneth the Colloquy of Montlimart to take care
that the said Rossel be then restored unto his Office again in that Church.

16. Monsieur de Gouvernet Lord of Mirabel appealed from a Decree of the Synod
of Dolphiny concerning Monsieur Perrin Pastor of the Church of Serres. After
that the Deputies of that Province had been heard. who reported that there was
nothing to this purpose spoken of or handled in their Synod at Mure; This
Assembly because of the absence of Monsieur Perrin, and their want of Acts
needful to determine this Affair, has given full Authority to the Province of
Burgundy to judge therein, and the Province of Dolphiny is enjoined to send
their Acts unto it, and to adjourn the Parties thither.

17. Monsieur Peyreille Pastor of the Church de la Cabarede appealed from a
judgment of the Colloquy of Albigeois, and the Synod of Higher Languedoc, which
had Deposed him from the Holy Ministry. The Letters of the said Peyreille
directed unto this Assembly being read, and the Acts of all proceedings had
against him by the Colloquy of Albigeois having been perused, and the Deputies
of the Province of Higher Languedoc having spoken on behalf of their Synod;
This Assembly did not only confirm the Sentence of the said Colloquy and
Province, but does farther aggravate it, by depriving the said Peyreille
utterly of all hopes of ever being re-instated into the Sacred Ministry.

18. The Lord Broccard formerly president of the Exchequer at Dijon brought his
Appeal from a Decree of the Provincial Synod of Burgundy, but it was declared
null; and the Consistory of Dijon is enjoined to proceed against him the said
Broccard by all Church Censures, in case he detain his Daughter from her
Husband without his consent.

19. The Church of Croset brought its Appeal from a Judgment of the Synod of
Burgundy, which ordained that the Churches of Cheury and Puilly should both
equally and by turns enjoy the Ministry of their Pastor with that of Crosett.
This Assembly remanded back again this Affair unto that Provincial Synod, which
having congregated its Four Colloquies shall revise it over once more, and then
pass a final Sentence on it.

20. The Church of Monoblett appealed from the judgment of the Province of
Sevennes, because it had lent their Minister Monsieur de Merveils for Sixth
Months unto the Church of St. Hippolyte. The Church also of St. Hippolyte
brought an Appeal from the same Judgment. The Deputy of St. Hippolyte was heard
petitioning that the Ministry of Monsieur Marvel might be confirmed to them
during Life, and the Deputies of that Province were heard also, and the Letters
from the said Churches were read audibly and distinctly, and a Canon of the
National Synod of Tonneins, and several other Acts were all perused and
considered; after which this Assembly altering the Judgment of the said
Province, ordained that according to their request Monsieur Marvells be settled
during Life in the Ministry of that Church of St. Hippolyte, and charge the
said Province to get out of hand a supply for that of Monoblett.

21. The Consuls of the Town of Anduze appealed from a Decree of the Synod of
Sevennes, importing that Monsieur Couront should continue his Ministry in the
Church of Anduze, and the said Courant petitioned that he might be freed from
their Service. The Deputy of that Church, and the Deputies of the Province
having been heard, and Letters of the said Courant being read; this Synod
discharged the said Courant from his Ministry in that Church, and orders the
Province to present him unto some other Congregation, and farther the Deputies
of Sevennes are charged as they return home to pass through Anduze, and to
accord and pacify the Differences between their Consuls and Consistory. And
whereas the Deputy of the said Town has brought in a complaint against
Monsieur Ollier another of its Pastors, This Assembly considering that their
Complaints are about sorry Trides, and that they had not first carried them as
they ought to their own Provincial Synod, does ordain that Monsieur Ollier
continue in his Ministry there until the sitting of the next Provincial Synod,
who shall take care of this business.

22. Monsieur Tricot Pastor of the Church of Chasteau du Loire complained of
the Consistory of the Church of Tours, for that being ordered by the Provincial
Synod of Anjou in their Name and Authority to judge of a difference betwixt
Monsieur du Verger an Elder in that Church and himself, they gave a respit of
Hearing for Fifteen days unto the said du Verger, before which time this
National Synod will be dissolved, and the Parties concerned deprived of all
means for bringing in their Appeal, and having it here determined. This
Assembly considering that the said du Verger is absent, dismisseth over the
Affair to the Colloquy of Anjou with full power in two Months time after our
breaking up, to judge finally thereof.

23. Monsieur Guerrin Pastor of the Church of Baugency brought in his Appeal
from the Judgment of the Provincial Synod of Berry. This Assembly for certain
reasons drawn from the special nature of the matter in question judges that it
does not belong to the cognizance of our Ecclesiastical Assemblies, as it has
been also thus determined by the Provincial Synods. However we would not have
it to be made a President.

24. The Church of Puylaurens appealed from a Judgment of the Synod of Higher
Languedoc, by which Monsieur Garissoles Pastor of that Church was lent unto the
Church of Montauban until the meeting of this National Synod, which yet was
contrary to a Decree of the last National Synod held at Alez, which had only
lent Monsieur de Garissoles unto that said Church for Six Months, with an
express prohibition unto the said Church of Montauban not to detain him beyond
that time. Monsieur du Bois Deputy for the Church of Montauban having been
heard, and the Elder of the Church of Puylaurens, as also the Deputies of the
Province, this Assembly corrected and condemned the Judgment of the said Synod
of Higher Languedoc, for violating the Decree of the last National Synod of
Alez: And yet considering the great necessity of the Church and University of
Montauban, ordains that Monsieur de Garissoles shall remain in the Church of
Puylaurens until the next Provincial Synod, which may then bestow him upon the
Church and University of Montauban, provided that he yield his consent unto it,
which that he may be induced to, Letters shall be written him from this
Assembly to persuade and encourage him to accept thereof.

25. The Church of Montrevil Bonnein appealed from a Judgment of the Provincial
Synod of Poictou for giving away Monsieur Two Copies call him Delon, but a
Third D'Vssen
Delon their Pastor from them unto the Church of Montauban. After that the
Deputies of the said Province had been heard, the Assembly confirmed Monsieur
Delon in his Pastoral Office in the Church of Montauban upon the same terms and
conditions as were expressed in that Decree of the Provincial Synod of Poictou.

26. The Church of Touars appealed from the Judgment of the Synod of Poictou,
which for some special reasons had remanded back unto the Colloquy of Higher
Poictou their Petition about Monsieur de la Piltiere whom they desired to be
their Pastor, and who is now Minister in the Church of Chastelheraut. After
hearing the Deputy of that Church of Touars, and the Deputies of the Province,
and the Letters of the Lord Duke, and Lady Duchess of Tremouille, and of the
Church of Chastelheraut, and those of Monsieur de la Piltiere, and the Memoirs
sent by him tending to his being discharged from the Church of Chastelheraut,
because of his indisposition. This Assembly valuing the Health of the said
Sieur de la Piltiere, and for diverse other considerations does bestow him upon
the Church of Touars, and whereas the Church of Chastelheraut pretends to have
been at great Charges and Expenses about the said Sieur de la Piltiere, the
Judgment thereof is devolved over unto the Colloquy of Higher Poictou, which is
enjoined to provide the Church of Chastelheraut of an able and worthy Minister,
considering what an important Post it is.

27. The Church of Vassy appealed from the Judgment of the Provincial Synod of
the Isle of France for depriving them of Monsieur Juigne their Pastor, because
he had for diverse years together complained of their unkindness and
unthankfulness unto him. The Church of Passavant, Mont, and Pressigny appealed
from the Judgment of the same Synod, because it had deprived them for their
manifest and notorious ingratitudes of their Pastor the Sier Babinett, Of this
Babinett see the Roll of Apoitates, and Deposed in the National Synod of
Castres.
and had given him unto the Church of Vassy. At the same time the Church of St.
Quentin appealed and complained of Monsieur de Juigne, who having been
presented to their Church for Pastor by the Synod aforesaid, and agreed with
them, and also begun to exercise his Ministry among them, upon pretext of
fetching his Goods and Books from Vassy returned thither, but never came back
again unto them, and had left them quite destitute. After hearing the Deputies
of the Church of Vassy, and St. Quintin, and the Deputies of the Province, and
perusal of diverse Letters written unto this Assembly by the Churches of Vassy,
Passavant, Mont, Pressignay, and St. Quintin aforesaid, and by the said
Monsieur de Juigne: This Synod acknowledging that the Province had but too
great reasons for making those exchanges and removals, does yet notwithstanding
(because of the satisfactions and amends since made by them) ordain that the
said Sieur de Juigne shall continue in the Church of Vassy, and the Sieur
Babinett in the Church of Passavant, Mont and Pressigny, and that the Church of
St. Quintin may be no longer vacant, This Assembly charge the Deputies of the
Isle of France now present in it to write in their Authority unto the two
nearest Ministers of the City of St. Quintin, that they ordain Monsieur
Mestayer by imposition of hands unto the Ministry in that Church, and that he
continue there until the sitting of the next Provincial Synod, which may either
continue him in it, or supply the said Church some other way, and provide
another Church, which shall be more to the advantage of the said Monsieur
Mestayer. And farther this Assembly censureth those Churches of Vassy and
Passavant for their disingenuity and ingratitude toward their Pastors, and the
said Monsieur Juigne for his irresolution and unfixedness.

28. Monsieur Juigne some days after this censure came unto this Synod, and
requested that the Note and Reproach of ingratitude fastened on his Church of
Vassy, and of irresolution on himself might be removed, because that he was
ever well pleased with his Church, and their not contributing to his
maintenance came not from want of Will, but from their Poverty and Inability.
This was granted, but the Censure past on him was ordered to hang still on the
File.

29. The Lord of Aldebert Judge of Sauve appealed from the Judgment of the
Synod of Sevennes, which had ordained that though Monsieur Bony Pastor of the
Church of St. Andrews deserved to be suspended, yet he should only receive a
sharp and public Reproof, and be continued in his Ministry.

After the Letters, of the said Aldebert and Bony were read, and the Sentence
of the said Province of Sevennes, and those Acts produced when the Judgment was
given, and the Deputies of that Province were heard, and Monsieur Rossel his
Petition for the said Bony, how that because of his Absence the Business might
be remanded back again unto the Province; This Assembly declares that the said
Province deserves a very severe censure for being so slow and remiss in its
proceedings, and using an unjustifiable Indulgence and Lenity when it came to
Judgment, and decrees that the said Bony shall continue suspended from his
Ministry from that very day, whereas this Synodical Sentence shall be signified
to him, (which the Deputies of the said Province shall forthwith inform him of)
until the next Sessions of the Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc, unto which
the Parties aggrieved shall make their complaints: The Deputies of Sevennes
being charged to summon them unto it, that so the said Synod by the Authority
of this Assembly may examine, and judge, and aggravate the Sentence if need be.
And that Province of Sevennes is ordered to proceed with rigor and vigor
against all other Pastors, who have demeaned themselves ill in their Office,
and to render an account thereof unto the next National Synod.

30. The Church of Nions appealed from a Judgment of the Synod of Dolphiny,
importing that the said Church should not seek for it self a Pastor without the
Province, and that Monsieur Bouvier should be their Minister for Six Months.
The Acts needful to be known for the right understanding of this Case having
been all read, and the Deputies of the Province being heard, This Assembly
judged that at present there was no reason for that Church to seek a Pastor
abroad out of the Province, and the said Province is enjoined to provide them a
Minister fit for their Service.

31. The Lord of Puyredon Elder in the Church of Nismes appealed from the
Sentence of his Consistory about Matters of Precedence, and the way of
gathering the Votes and Suffrages in the said Consistory. This Synod judging
this Affair not fit to be debated by it, has dismissed it over to the Colloquy.

32. Whereas the Elder of the Church of Charenton, St. Mere, Vallognes, and le
val de Serre appealed from the Sentence of the Provincial Synod of Normandy,
which had provided for the safety and comfort of Monsieur Basnage their Pastor,
that he should be removed from them, and placed elsewhere as he himself should
approve of. This Appeal was declared null.

33. The Appeal of Monsieur Bicheteau Professor of the Hebrew Tongue at
Montauban from the Judgment of the Synod of Higher Languedoc held at Montauban
the Five and Twentieth day of April last, is declared null.

34. An Appeal of Monsieur De Mas Pastor in the Church of Campaign from the
Higher Languedoc held at Montauban the Five and Twentieth day of April last is
declared null.

35. The Appeal of Monsieur Perrier formerly Pastor in the Church of Paillac
from the Judgment of the Synod of Burgundy which had Deposed him from the
Sacred Ministry was declared null.

36. The Pastors and Elders of the Church of Issurtille appealed from the
Judgment of the Province of Burgundy, for refusing them the grant of the half
supernumerary Portion for the future, which was allowed them by the Synod of
Alez. The Letters of the said Elders having been perused, and the Deputies of
the Province heard, This Assembly confirms the past Payments, and ordains that
for the future the supernumerary Portions granted unto the said Province shall
be wholly at their own disposal.

37. Monsieur Le Pin Elder in the Church of Issurtille appealed from the
Judgment of the Synod of Burgundy held at Gex in this present year, but his
Appeal was declared null and desert.

38. That Appeal of the Elders of Aubenas and Annonay from the Judgment of the
Provincial Synod of Vivaretz, which had reunited the College parted before
betwixt those Two Cities, and resettled it at Privas, was declared null and
void.

CHAP. XIV. Of GENERAL MATTERS.
1 THE Sieurs de Chambrun and Mestrezat Ministers of the Gospel, de Jarlan and
Rabboteau Elders, who together with our General Deputies had been commanded by
this Synod to wait upon His Majesty, being now returned, made report, that they
delivered unto the Lord Chancellor unto the Lord de la Vieuville, and to the
Lords Principal Secretaries of State the Letters of this Assembly, of whom they
had a very gracious and kind Reception, and every one of those Lords assured
them of the Kings sincere intentions to conserve the peace of the Kingdom, and
particularly for His Subjects of the Reformed Religion, provided that they
persisted in their Duty and Obedience, and farther they advised the Pastors and
Elders of this Synod upon their return unto their respective Provinces, who had
sent them, that they would deal effectually with them to continue in their due
Obedience. After this they were introduced into His Majesty's Presence, who was
then attended with My Lord Chancellor, and the other Lords of the Privy
Council, to whom they delivered the Letter of this Assembly, and assured His
Majesty in the Name of this Assembly and of all the Reformed Churches of this
Kingdom, whom they represented, of their Loyalty, Submission, and Obedience,
whereunto they were obliged by their Birth, Religion, and Benefits conferred
upon them by His Majesty. And farther, they returned their most humble thanks
unto His Majesty for that Peace he was pleased to vouchsafe unto his Subjects
of the Reformed Religion, and did with a most profound Humility petition His
Majesty, that they might through his Royal Goodness and Justice evermore enjoy
and possess it. Whereupon His Majesty did with his own Mouth give us this
Answer, That if his Subjects of the Reformed Religion did carry themselves
well, and lived in that Duty and Obedience which God and Nature required of
them, he would continue to them the Privileges of his Edicts, and that My Lord
Chancellor should tell us his mind more amply and at large.

After which My Lord Chancellor bespake them in these words, That His Majesty
having been well informed of the Actions and Deportments of the Synod till now
was exceedingly satisfied. But that His Majesty would discover unto them his
mind upon two points, the first whereof concerned Foreign Pastors, That it was
His Majesty's Will, That the Churches should not serve themselves in the
Ministry of any other Persons than such as were born in the Kingdom, and were
his Natural Subjects, for some private reasons which he needed not to tell
them, but one of them was very evident, because his Natural Subjects, who are
such by their Birth, would be more tied unto his Service than any Foreigners.
The other related to the last Synod held at Alez, yet was it not in the least
intended by His Majesty to impair or alter the Liberty of the Churches with
reference to their Faith, or the Exercises of their Religion, either in
Doctrine or Discipline; but it was very displeasing unto His Majesty that the
National Council of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom held at Alez should
oblige all Pastors by their Corporal Oath to approve a Doctrine defined in a
Foreign State. And that though His Majesty gives protection to the Religion,
yet you must not mistake him, he intends it not for a Novel and Exotic Faith.
When as his Lordship had finished his Discourse, The said Deputies did most
humbly petition His Majesty graciously to hear them upon those two points,
which His Majesty having favorably granted; They declared as to the first,
That it was true, That now as for a long time ago the Churches of this Kingdom
had made use of some Foreign Ministers, but that they ever had this honor to
have kept themselves within the limits of all Duty and Service to His Majesty,
and that during the War His Majesty had left unto the Churches their Pastors,
without informing himself of their Country or Nation. But since His Majesty did
us the favor as to acquaint us with his Will and Pleasure in a time or Peace,
that we must have no Strangers to officiate in our Churches, it would be so far
from preserving our Churches, that it would leave some of them destitute, and
some others desolate, and allay very much of the taste and sweets of that
quodeace we now enjoyed. Moreover that among those of the Church of Rome in
this Kingdom there were a multitude of Ecclesiastics of other Nations, which
enjoyed the most honorable and profitable Benefices and Dignities of the
Gallican Church, wherefore His Majesty was most humbly petitioned, that he
would be pleated not to make this severe distinction between his Subjects, so
as to permit those of one Religion to use Strangers, and to deny it unto the
other. And as for the Second Point, It was a truth, that the Synod of Dort,
made up of the Deputies of diverse Reformed Churches had decided some certain
points of Doctrine, whereby to oppose the Errors which troubled the Churches of
the Netherlands. But that this Decision did most harmoniously agree with the
Confession of Faith in the Churches of this Kingdom, and which had been
presented to His Majesty's Predecessors. So that the substance of the Doctrine
asserted arid maintained by that Synod was not new, and that there was nothing
novel in it, excepting its Formality and Application as a Fence and Boundary to
keep out diverse Errors that were then rising and breaking in upon us. So that
His Most Excellent Majesty was most humbly entreated not to believe that his
Subjects had any such design as to make him the Patron and Protector of a Novel
and Foreign Doctrine. After that the Deputies had finished their Discourse,
they were commanded to withdraw, that His Majesty might consider and deliberate
about what had been said by them; and being a while after called in again, My
Lord Chancellor told them as to the first head, that His Majesty having heard
the Matters that were propounded by them, would not remove the Foreign Pastors
from their Flocks in this Kingdom, who were now in Office, and at present
actually employed: But it was his pleasure that for the future no more should
be received. Whereupon His Majesty taking the words out of the Lord Chancellors
Mouth, repeated it himself, I will not that one of them that is now in the
Ministry of their Churches be turned out. Afterward My Lord Chancellor
continuing his Discourse told them, That as for the second point that His
Majesty left us wholly at liberty to judge of our Doctrine, and would not
himself have the cognizance of it; but only gave us to understand, that no Man
should be obliged to pin his Faith upon another Sleeve, or to swear unto the
Faith of a Stranger, but that every one should believe as he would. Whereupon
these Deputies judging and believing that this Answer did not m the least
prejudice them nor our Churches, because no Person in the Reformed Churches
swears unto another Faith, after they had once again returned Thanks unto His
Majesty for all His Favors, and protested afresh of their most humble
Obedience and inviolable Affection to His Majesty's Service, they departed. And
having before their return hither waited upon the Chancellor privately, and
rendered him thanks, as also to the Lords de Pisieux and d' Herbant for that
Audience and very kind reception they had by their means from His Majesty, they
were informed by them that His Majesty was very well pleased with them, and
that he retained his Intentions of keeping the Peace, provided his Subjects of
the Reformed Religion continued in their Obedience.

2. When as the Deputies had ended their Report the Lord Galland Commissioner
and Deputy for the King in this Assembly related what was given* him in charge
by His Majesty upon these two aforesaid points: This Synod yielding all
Obedience to His Majesty's Will in what concerns the admission of Strangers for
the future, does yet resolve to take all opportunities of petitioning His
Majesty that our Churches may enjoy the same liberty they ever had in this
matter. And as for the second point concerning the Oath, The Synod declares
that the Intention of that of Alez was not in the least to wound His majesty's
Authority, of which they will be always most tender and sollicitous, nor did
that National Synod design to bring into this Kingdom any Foreign Customs, or
Strange Doctrines, or New Opinions, but only to testify the Union of the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom with those of the Low Countries in certain
points of Doctrine, which have been in all times entertained and embraced by
them, and for their substance are comprehended in our Confession of Faith, but
upon which there fell out some Controversies in the Netherlands. However that
they may give all possible contentment and satisfaction unto His Majesty, This
present Synod considering that the City of Dort is a Dependence and Member of a
Foreign Commonwealth, it does ordain that the Reference had in the said Oath
unto that City shall be taken away, nor shall it for the future be administered
in the Churches and Universities of this Kingdom. And the said Oath shall be
hereafter taken in that form as is expressed in the close of the Canons decreed
in this present Synod, which by, its special Order were printed and inserted
into these present Acts.

3. The Province of Normandy moved that a Canon might be ordained to oblige all
Pastors to visit once a year the respect Families of their Churches, and to
take notice of their progress in Piety, and to press them to it by the most
quickening motives. Although this Synod does not judge it necessary to make any
New Canons on this occasion, yet nevertheless does it exhort all Pastors and
Consistories carefully to oversee the Flocks committed to their charge,
according to the Rule of Gods Word, and the Example of those Worthy Ministers
who have been noted and renowned for their diligence and faithfulness in the
House of God.

4. That same Province also requested that the Moneys given us by His Majesty's
liberality might not for the future be distributed by the number of Pastors but
of Churches. This National Synod as that of Privas before it, decrees, That
the former course and practice shall stand, and that the said Portions shall be
distributed according to the number of our Ministers; but withal, it exhorts
the Provinces in their particular distribution of the said Moneys to have a
special regard and compassion for the poor and weaker Churches.

5. The Province of Anjou petitioned the Synod, that some expedient might be
found out for settling of a certain Maintenance upon our Universities. But there
could not be at present any thing done in it.

6. The Province of Lower Guyenne moved, whether it might not be expedient to
add some Marginal Notes unto those Texts in our French Bibles, and to be
published in the next Impression of the Holy Bible, which our Adversaries
accuse us to have falsified and corrupted. This Assembly did not judge it
needful, because our Translation of the Sacred Scriptures has been
sufficiently defended by our own Divines, as will appear to any one that will
but take the pains to consult their Learned and Orthodox Writings upon this
Subject.

7. The Province or Lower Languedoc demanding License for our Pastors to
continue their receiving of Moneys belonging to the Colloquies: This Assembly
did very sharply reprove and censure the said Province for acting contrary to
that Canon made at Alex, and forbids all Ministers so much as to intermeddle
with that Receipt, and the Deputies of the said Province immediately upon their
return home are charged to give notice of this present Ordinance unto them; and
if any one of them for the future dare violate it, this Assembly declares him
from this very instant suspended the Sacred Ministry, which suspension shall
continue upon him till the sitting of the next National Synod, before which he
shall appear in Person to give an account of his Actions. And the Moderators of
Colloquies and Synods are commanded to exert all their Power that this Canon be
observed, or else they shall answer for it in their own private Capacities.

8. The Province of Burgundy moved, that for the future no Church nor Minister
might be admitted to bring in any Proposal or Petition unto the National Synod
but by the way of the Provincial Synods, and the Deputies of their Provinces.
This Assembly accepted and approved of the motion, as agreeing with the
Sentiments and Canons of former Synods, and made it into a Canon.

9. The Province of Dolphiny requesting of this Synod that some certain Persons
might be selected to collect out of the Writings of the Fathers such passages
as will be of use in that Controversy of Church History. This Synod because
there have been published a vast number of Books on this Subject, and a
multitude of Collections already made by diverse of our Orthodox Divines does
not judge it needful to employ any one particularly on such a Task: But yet
withal it exhorts all them to whom God has given those Abilities, that they
would improve them so as to frame and compose a faithful Church History,
wherein we may have the rise, growth, and progress of all Controversies, and
their confutation by the Sacred Scriptures for the greater Edification of Gods
Church.

10. The same Province demanded, Whether Consistories might compel an Advocate
by Ecclesiastical Censures to depose against his Client such matters as had
been secretly communicated to him. This Assembly considering that Advocates are
entrusted with many Secrets, and obliged by the Duties of their Office and
Calling to conceal Matters confided to them by their Clients, judges that no
Consistories ought to urge them to it unless in cases of High Treason, or
things of such great importance.

11. The Provincial Deputies Commissionated to our National Synods shall not be
suffered to plead for any Church, or private Person who appeals from the
Judgment of their Province. But it shall be lawful for them to bring with them
the Memoirs and Instructions of the said Churches and particular Appellants,
and tender them unto the National Synods, who may leave them in the hands of
Commissioners to make report of them.

12. This Synod ratifying the Decrees of former Synods, forbids all
Colloquies and Provincial Synods to divert the Moneys given us by the King in
any manner whatsoever from their primary use and intendment whereunto they were
appointed; and ordains that they shall be only employed toward the
maintenance of our Ministers, and the upholding of the Sacred Ministry, of the
maintenance of our Universities, Colleges, Proposans, the Widows of Pastors,
and they shall be expended in defraying the necessary Charges of our National
Synods, according to the Will and Pleasure of His Majesty.

13. Monsieur d' Huisseau appearing in this Assembly as he and Monsieur Guydon
had been ordered to give an account of their prosecuting Monsieur Palot, for
the recovery of those great Sums of Money he was indebted unto the Churches.
He declared that both himself and the said Monsieur Guidon now absent, since
the last National Synod held at Alez (which they had acquainted with the
process commenc't by them against the said Palot,) could not make any great
progress therein, because of the Wars which a little while after brake out, and
for that the Commissioners appointed by the King to audit the said Palots
Accounts were all out of the way. But yet notwithstanding they had not been
altogether idle, nor lost their time: For though this Affair were exceedingly
imbroyl'd, yet had they got such light into it, as would be very beneficial
unto the Churches, and not only to some of them which were more particularly
concerned above other, but would be very useful to the Exchequer it self, and
to the said Monsieur Palot. That the difficulty formerly experienced in getting
Commissioners who might examine the Accounts of the said Palot, had made them
conclude, that to bring this Affair to an happy period, it were best to carry
and leave it with the Sedentary Judges, as those are, in the Sovereign Courts.
And since the opening of this Synod the Lord Malat Secretary to His Majesty, a
Man of great Probity, Capacity, and Intelligence, and very well known, did by a
third Person make this offer, That in case he would give him a quarter of what
Moneys might be gotten in from this Affair, he would undertake the prosecution
of it without ever demanding any thing else from the Churches for defraying his
Costs and Expenses. If therefore it would please this Synod to continue and
prorogue for Six Months longer unto the said Lords Guidon and d' Huysseau the
faculties and powers granted and confirmed to them by the last Synod of Alez,
and give them leave to associate with them the said Lord of Mallat, and to
prosecute this Affair in such Courts and Jurisdictions as they should think
good, on condition, that one quarter of what might be recovered, should be
given them in lieu of all their Charges and Recompense, they hoped that within
the term of Six Months the Churches should be well contented with their pains
and undertakings, and reap the fruit and enjoy the benefit of them. And that an
estimate might be made of their progress in this Lawsuit within that time,
This Assembly is desired to Authorize the Synod of the Isle of France to take
cognizance thereof, that so according to the success and profit had and
obtained, they may either order it to be continued, or surceased. Moreover this
Assembly is requested to charge the Lords our General Deputies to come in and
assist the said Lords, Guidon, Mallat, and d' Huisseau upon such occasions as
do occur, and when as they shall be desired by them. But the Synod thought it
more convenient before they proceeded any farther to conferr in the first place
with the Sieur Palot, because we had now an easy opportunity for so doing, and
therefore voted that the Seur Palot should be entreated to come unto this
Assembly, which accordingly he did, and upon discourse he offered, that if this
Assembly would be pleased to nominate a Committee of their own Members, he
would very willingly confer with them about this Affair. Whereupon the Lords of
Montmartyn one of our General Deputies, Basnage a Pastor, Du Port, du Four, and
de Launay Elders together with Monsieur d' Huisseau were appointed to confer
with the said Palot, and see if they could bring him to put a fair and amicable
end unto it. Who having discoursed with him, informed this Assembly that he was
so far from compounding with the Churches, and refunding any thing unto them of
the great Sums demanded by us, that on the contrary he avowed they were very
much indebted to him. The Synod hereupon Commissionated the Lords, Durant and
Mestrezat Pastors, Marbau, Massoners, Biggot and de L' Aunay Elders of the
Church of Paris to act jointly together with the Lords of Montmartyn and
Manialt our General Deputies, or with any one of them in the absence of the
other, and to resolve and conclude in the Name and behalf of our Churches
whatsoever they should conceive meet in this Affair, and to treat and agree
with one or more Sollicitors, and to give full Powers unto him or them to
prosecute it on such Articles and Conditions as in their Wisdoms would most
contribute to the Weal, Benefit, and Advantage of our Churches. And to this
purpose a special Letter of Attorney was Sealed to them, and Delivered by all
the Provincial Deputies of the Churches in this Synod, but on this Condition,
that he or they with whom they agreed should not demand nor pretend unto any
Moneys of right from the said Churches for their Pains, Costs, Losses or
Sallaries in the pursuit and solicitation of this Affair.

14. The Lord of Candal came into this Assembly, and assured it of the
continuance of his sincere Affections and Service unto the Churches, and did
farther declare and notify with how much diligence and importunity he and the
Lords General Deputies for Five Months together in this present year had
solicited both His Majesty, and the Lords of his Council, that the Moneys
granted by his Bounty unto the Churches might be assigned on some particular
Tally for this year. That a long time was spent before he could find any
success of his endeavors. But at last they would give him Orders and
Assignations, which in truth he refused to accept, because he knew them to be
naught and worth nothing. And that finally about the end of the last April they
had given him others, which he was constrained to take, because he saw the
Lords of the Council fixed in their resolutions of giving him none other. That
indeed these latter Assignations were a little better than the former, but it
would be a very great while before any payment were made, that it would be at
least Six or Eight Months before the first Sum would become due, that the
whole Assembly knew they would not grant him any Order or Tally for the last
year 1622, yea, and His Majesty had revoked his former grant of Moneys to the
Churches for the year 1621, and employed them elsewhere to some other purposes:
And as for the Arrears due unto us in the foregoing years, he had took all care
possible, and used the utmost diligence to recover them, but with very little
or no success, that he had brought in his Accounts, and prayed the Assembly to
constitute a Committee to audit and close them. The Assembly having most
heartily thanked the said Lord of Candal for his singular care, respects and
kindnesses upon all occasions expressed unto the Churches, and desired the
continuance of his Love, did nominate Messieurs de Basnage and Le Clark
Pastors, du Port and du Four Elders to peruse and examine his Accounts. And
whereas a world of inconveniences will befall our Churches by so long delay of
paying in the Moneys granted us by His Majesty for this year now current, the
Synod deputed the Sieurs de L' Angle, a Pastor, and du Port an Elder, and the
Lords of Montmartyn and Candal to wait upon His Majesty, and on the behalf of
this Assembly most humbly to beseech him to grant some other Assignations and
Orders for the more speedy paying in of His Majesty's Great Bounty unto our
Churches, and that as a Token of His Royal Goodness and Liberality he would be
pleased to add some other Sums to us instead of those which have been taken
from us in the last foregoing years, we having received not so much as one
farthing or doibt for them.

15. A few days after the said Deputies being returned from the King, they
made Report in this Assembly how Graciously they had been received by His
Majesty, who assured them that in case his said Subjects of the Reformed
Religion continued in their Duty and Obedience, he would always give them all
possible content. And the same Expressions of kindness they received also from
the Lords of His most Honorable Privy Council, who ordered out of hand Forty
Thousand Livres to be paid in unto them, they yielding up unto their Lordships
the old Warrants for the like Sum; but as for what was requested about
reimbursing us the years past by fixing those Sums due unto us on some other
Tallies and Assignations, their Honors were pleased to say, There was no
reason why they should promise it.

16. The Province of Anjou requested that the University of Saumur might not
any longer be left destitute of Professors in Divinity, but that some speedy
care and course might be taken to send Monsieur Cameron to be Professor of that
faculty in it. The Lord Commissioner and Deputy for His Majesty unto this
Synod, declared that it was the Will and Pleasure of His Majesty that those two
Gentlemen, Mr. Gilbert Primrose, and Mr. John Cameron should not be preferred
neither of them to any Public Office either of Pastors in the Churches or of
Pastors and Professors in the Churches and Universities of this Kingdom, not
because of their Birth as being Foreigners, but for some private Reasons of
State, relating to his Service. And the said Lord of Galland presented us His
Majesty's Letters Written and Signed with His Own Hand Jews, and a little
lower de L' Omeny: Dated the Twenty Fifth day of this present Month. The
Assembly understanding this to be His Majesty's pleasure, would not put it to
the Vote, Whether they should be continued or not in their Ministry, but
deputed the Sieurs Cottiby Minister of the Gospel, and du Bois, and St. Martyn
Elders together with the Lord of Montmartyn General Deputy to carry unto His
Majesty a Petition from this Assembly, wherein this Assembly did most humbly
beseech His Majesty, that as he had lately with his own Mouth most graciously
promised, so His Majesty would be pleased to give Order that all our Ministers
might as fully enjoy the fruit and benefit of his promise.

CHAP. XV.
N. B. What picque the King of France had against Monsieur Cameron as I cannot
tell, so I shall not write my guesses and conjectures about it, because they
may be, and may not be true. Mr. Cameron, if he had designed, what afterward
some others attempted, a coalition of both the Religions, Protestant and
Popish, yet certainly was no Papist, yea, far enough from their Doctrine and
Worship. But he had angered the Jesuits not so much as his Reverend Colleague
and Countreyman. And this was the true reason, why Monsieur Primrose was
necessitated to quit Bourdeaux and France, when as Cameron was permitted to
tarry, and return to Bourdeaux, and was preferred unto the Professors Chair in
Divinity afterward at Montauban.

On Whitsunday in the year 1619. Father Arnoux the Jesuit preaching before the
King, Queen, and Court of France in the Castle of Amboise, attempted a Task
impossible, to whiten Blackamores, to wash or wipe his Church clean, and
especially his own Order from an indelible blot, viz. That they held it lawful
to kill Kings. This the Jesuit with a boldness and audaciousness, which is the
proper Talent of their Society, would have some how or other evaded. He assures
that Royal Auditory with the greatest confidence, that it was never the
Doctrine of their Catholic Church, never believed by these good Fathers, that
Subjects might lawfully rebel against their Sovereigns, yea that it does
anathematize all those who teach and preach that the Sacred Persons of Princes
may be lawfully made away and murdered, yea, that the whole Society of Jesuits
does condemn, detest, and as much as hi them lies does anathematize all
Advisers, Abettors, and Aiders of Rebels against their King upon any pretext,
whatsoever. His Majesty and that whole illustrious Auditory were overjoyed
at this free and liberal Declaration of the Jesuit, and quitted the Sermon, as
they said very much edified: And His Majesty told it publicly that he had
great reason to be pleased with the Fathers of the Society, and that Father
Arnoux had in the Name, and stead of them all plainly and fully enough
condemned the Book of Mariana. Monsieur Primrose was present at this Sermon,
and fretted at the heart to hear an Impudent Jesuit abuse the good Nature of
his King with such odious Equivocations, and to laugh in his Sleeve at the
simplicity of his over credulous Auditors. Whereupon he entreated Monsieur de
Modene, at that time a Person utterly unknown to him, to ask of Father Arnoux,
Whether Friar James Clement that stabbed Henry the Third in the Bowels with a
poisoned Knife, being a Prince Excommunicated by the Pope had killed his King?
And suppose the Pope should Excommunicate His Majesty now reigning, and
declare his Throne and Kingdom vacant, whether he would then own Jews XIII.
for his King? And if at that time an Assassinate, as John Chastel, Peter
Barriere, or Francis Ravaillac all Disciples of the Jesuits, should attempt
upon His Majesty's Life, he would accurse and anathematize him as guilty of
Treason in the last and highest degree, for daring to lift up his bloody hands
against the Sacred Person of his King? The Bystanders immediately comprehended
the cheat and imposture of the Jesuit, and how they had been gulled by him; for
he could not make any Reply to the demand of this Protestant Minister Monsieur
Primrose. But though he could not answer his Arguments, the Jesuit found out
means and opportunity to cry him quitts, and to be revenged upon him. For
'tvvas be that solicited the Parliament of Bordeaux, and by his Interest got
that Decree to pass in it, That no Stranger not born in the Kingdom should be a
Minister in France. Monsieur Gilbert Primrose hereupon being outed of his
Church passed into England, and was chosen Pastor of the French Church of
London, in whose Service he continued till his Death. And where now succeeds
him, though at some distance, in the same Pastoral Office his Reverend and
Worthy Grandson. See this Relation, in page 75, and 76 of his Panegyrique a
tres grand, and tres puissant Prince Charles Prince de Galls, 1624.

CHAP. XVI.
17 THE Lord of Galland required that for the future no Pastors might be
deputed unto Political Assemblies, declaring it to be His Majesty's Pleasure,
expressly notified in his Letters written unto this Synod. Whereupon it was
unanimously voted, that His Majesty's Command should be absolutely obeyed; and
as it was enjoined so His Majesty's Letter should be inserted into the Acts of
this Synod, the tenor whereof is as follows.

By the KING.
Trusty and well-beloved,
we have heretofore made known unto you what was our intention concerning
Foreigners being Ministers in the Reformed Churches of this our Kingdom, and in
particular about those Two Scotchmen, the Sieurs Primrose and Cameron lately
Ministers in our City of Bourdeaux. And whereas in your last sent unto us you
started some difficulties about it, we do now once again declare it to you that
it is our Will and Purpose that the said Primrose and Cameron shall neither of
them in any wise he employed in the Public Offices of Ministers in the
Churches, or of Ministers and Professors in the Churches and Universities of
the Reformed Religion in France, not so much because of their Birth as
Foreigners, but for reasons concerning our Service. Moreover you shall again
move them, That in obedience to our Command formerly notified to you, no
Ministers shall b e deputed unto Political Assemblies, and they should of
themselves have made a Canon against it, because their Ministerial Calling is
quite of another Nature, and such Deputations must needs distract and hinder
them, if they do not wholly take them off from the Occupations and Duties of
their Spiritual Function. And in ca*e they should make any difficulty to comply
with our Will herein, you shall give them to understand that they will enforce
us to take some other course with them, either by a Public Declaration against
them, or else by those very Warrants which shall be issued forth in Our Name
and Authority for the holding of those Assemblies. However its not our mind to
exclude the Ministers of those places where those Assemblies do meet from
sitting in them. And let this our intention be inserted into the Register of
your Assembly, that so none may pretend ignorance in case of their failure and
transgression. For such is our Will and Pleasure.

Given at St, Germans in Lay this 25th. of September, One Thousand Six Hundred
and Twenty Three. Signed Jews, and below L' Omenie.
And on the Superscription thus, To Our Trusty and Beloved Counselor in Our
Council of State and Privy Council, and Attorney General for our Dominion of
Navarre, The Lord Galland Our Commissioner unto the Synod of Charenton.

18. The Synod being informed that the Public Notary who received the Letters
of Attorney given unto the Sieurs Durant, Mestrezat, Massocos, Biggot, and de
L' Aunay had through inadvertency omitted the1 Revocation of the Letters of
Attorney formerly granted by the preceding National Synods for the recovery of
the Arrears owing to our Churches by Monsieur Palott, it has declared, as it
now does and will again declare if need be, that all former Letters of Attorney
granted unto any Persons whatsoever by the former National Synods, are revoked,
and we do will that they be esteemed null, invalid, and of none effect.

19. The Assembly being desirous that the succeeding National Synods may have a
particular knowledge of the number of Pastors employed in the Churches of this
Kingdom, it does ordain, that there shall be now written a Roll and Catalogue
of the Names end Sirnames both of Ministers in Actual Service in every
Province, and of their Churches, as also of Ministers discharged and Emeriti,
and of all vacant Churches; which Catalogue shall be attached to the Original
Acts of this Synod, and kept by that Province whose Privilege it will be to
convocate the next National Synod: And this shall alvvay be continued in all
subsequent National Synods. And all the Provinces are enjoined to bring with
them the Names and Surnames of every Minister in actual Service to whom a
Dividend is allotted; and that this may be done the more carefully and
effectually, they shall bring with them the Acts of their Provincial Synods
subscribed and attested by the respective Moderators.

20. The Sieurs Cottiby Pastor, and du Bois St. Martyn an Elder, who were
deputed unto His Majesty from this Assembly most humbly to petition His Majesty
that Monsieur du Moulin Pastor of the Church of Paris might have His Majesty's
Gracious Leave to return into this Kingdom, and be restored unto his Flock, and
to the Exercise of his Ministry, and that the Sieurs Primrose und Cameron might
also be restored unto the Church of Bourdeaux, and Church and University of
Saumur, whereof they were Pastors and Professors; Those being now returned
from Court, they reported, that His Majesty received them with His wonted
Candor and Goodness, and having given them Audience, he did by the Lord
Chancellor tell them that His Majesty had Graciously received their Message,
but commanded him to acquaint them, that for diverse good reasons (which if
they were known to us, would very well satisfy us, His Majesty could not
permit that the said Ministers, du Moulin, Primrose, and Cameron should live in
His Kingdom; and that since from His Majesty's own Mouth and Writing, they
understood his Will, it was his pleasure that they should make no Replies.
Hovvever because of their most humble petition, His Majesty would permit those
Ministers to reside within His Kingdom, but on this condition, That they should
neither be employed in the Pastoral or Professors Office. But in time Matters
might be better ordered to their contentment.

CHAP. XVII.
THE reason of the French Kings Indignation against Monsieur du Moulin, and for
which he would never admit him to serve either in his Church of Paris, or in
any other Church or University of this Kingdom, as it has been related to me
by some eminent Ministers of that Nation, was this, That when Jews the
Thirteenth by the Advice of Cardinal Richelieu, his perpetual Coadjutor in all
Affairs of State, (as he styled himself,) did first attempt the ruin of those
poof Churches, Monsieur Du Moulin writ a Letter unto James the First King of
Great Britain, (who had a value and kindness for this Learned Minister) in
which he informed His Majesty, how that not only the Eyes of all the Reformed
Churches of France were upon him for help in this the day of their Exigency and
great distress, but the Eyes also of all other the Reformed and Protestant
Churches in Europe. This Letter was delivered to the King; but as some credibly
informed, dropped afterward into the hands of the Duke of Buckingham, who sent
the very Original it self unto the French King. Upon the Receipt whereof, he
immediately issues out Warrants to seize and apprehend Monsieur du Moulin;
which were not executed with that speed and secrecy, but that Monsieur du
Moulin had timely notice given him by some of his Friends at Court, to flee for
his Life out of the Kings, Reach, and Dominions, which he did accordingly; and
was sometime afterward called to be Pastor and Professor in the Church and
University of Sedan, a little Principality, of which the Marshall Duke of
Bouillon was Sovereign: And here this Worthy Minister of Jesus Christ lived the
rest of his days, dying in a good old Age, and full of days, in the Ninetieth
Year of his Life, 1650.

The Works Published by him were these.

I do admire him upon the Eucharist and on Purgatory. He has my heart when I
read his Consolations to his Brethren of the Church of France, as also
entreating of the Love of God. I would willingly learn French to underitand him
only, and have a long time desired, and still do get any thing that he has
written, Dr. Twisse
1. Petri Molinaei Elementa Logica, Lugduni Batavorum, 1596, 1603. 2. Meditatio
in Psalmum 123. adversus Jacobum Perronium Episcopum Eburo nicensem. 3. De
Peregrinatione and Altaribus. 4. De Monorchia Temporali Pontifieis Romani,
Londini l614, in Octavo. 5. Narre de la Conference verbale and par Escrit tenue
enter Monsieur du Moulin, and Monsieur Bayze, 1602, in Octavo. 6. Accroissement
des Eaux de Siloe pour eteindre le feu de Purgatoire, and noyer les
satisfactions humaines, and les Indulgences. A la Rochelle, 1604, in Octavo. 7.
Defense de la Foye pour Jacques, 1. Roy de la Grande Bret^gne. A la Rochelle,
1604, in Octavo. 8. Trente deux demandes proposees par le Pere Coton, avec les
Solutions. Item Soixante and quatre demandes proposees en contre-eschange, a la
Rochelle, 1617, in Octavo. 9. Veritable Narre de la Conference enter les Sieurs
du Moulin and Gontier, en Auvrill, 1609, in Octavo. 10. Theophile, ou de L'
Amor Divin, a la Rochelle 1609. in Twelves. 11. Heraclite, ou de la Vanite and
Misere de la Vie huma^ne, 1609, in Twelves. 12, * Apology pour la Saint Cene
du Seigneur contre la Presence Corporelle, and Transubstantiation, 1610, in
Octavo. 13. * Accomplissement des Propheties. Livre auquel sont exposees les
Propheties de L' Escriture Saint concernantes le Pontife Romain, et son
Siege, a la Rochelle, 1612, in Octavo. 14. Action de graces du R. Pere Gontery
a R. Viseur, pour avoir entrepris sa defense contre le Sieur du Moulin, and
respondu a ses demandes touchant L' Autiquite, 1612, in Octavo. 15. Le Saint
Reveil Spirituel. a la Rochelle in Sixteens. 16. Defense de la Confession des
Eglises Reformees de France, contre les Accusations du Sieur Arnauld. a
Charenton 1617, in Octavo. 17. De la Toute Puissance de Dieu, and de sa
Volonte. a la Rochelle, 1617, in Octavo. 18. Lettre a Messieurs de L' Eglise
Roman, a Saumur 1611, in Octavo. 19. Veritable Narre de la Conference enter
les Sieurs du Moulin and de Raconis Professeur en Theology, a la Rochelle
1618, in Octavo. 20. * Bouclier de la Foy, ou defense de la Confession de Foy
des Eglises Reformees du Royaume de France, contre les objections du Sieur Jean
Arnoux, a Charenton, 1618. and a Sedan 1612, in Octavo, Translated into
English, and printed in Quarto. 21. Conseil fidele, and Salutaire sur les
Marriages enter persons de contraire Religion. a Charenton 1619. in Twelves
and Octavo. 22. Lettre ecritts a un de son Troupeau, sur la Calamite present,
1621, in Octavo. 23. Response a quatre demandes faites par un Gentilhome de
Poitou. a Sedan 1623, in Octavo. 24. Sermon sur le ix. Chapitre de Daniel,
verset premier jusques a neufieme. a Sedan 1623, in Sixteens. 25. Element de
Logique. a Sedan 1628, in Octavo. a Paris 1624, in Twelves and Twentyfoure. 26.
Elemens de la Philosophy morale, a Sedan 1624, in Twelves, and Twentyfours.
27. Du Combat Chrestien, ou des Afflictions, a Messieurs de L' Eglise Reformee
de Paris. a Sedan 1622, in Twelves. 28. Refutation de la Replique du Cardinal
du Perron, in Folio, and in Quarto. 29. Dialogues Rustiques, deux, Parties, in
Octavo, and in Twelves. 30. Juge des Controverses, in Octavo, 2 Vol. 31.
Hyperaspistes, seu defensor veritatis, in Octavo. 32. Anatome Arminianismi, in
Quarto 33. Vates, in Octavo and Quarto. 34. Opera Philosophica, Logica,
Moralia, Physica, in Octavo. 35. La Philosophy, Logique, morale, and Physique,
in Octavo. 36. Esclaircissement de la Doctrine Salmurienne, in Octavo. 37.
Lettres de Reconciliation, a Monsieur Amyraut, in Octavo. 38. Oppositions a la
parole de Dieu. 39. Journal des Capucins, in Octavo. 40. Instruction pour
Consoler les malades, in Octavo and Twelves. 41. Vocation des Pasteurs, in
Octavo. 42. Nouvelles Brigues pour le Batiment de Babel, in Octavo. 43. Examen
du Livre du R. L. Joseph de Morlais, Capucin, in Octavo. 44. Examen de la
Doctrine de Messieurs Amyraut, and Testard, in Octavo. 45. Trois Sermons faits
en presence des Capucins, in Octavo. 46. Dix decades des Sermons, in Eighteens
47. Testament d'une Mere a Son Enfant a Naitre, in Octavo. 48. Vies de Leon 1.
and Gregoire, 1. in Octavo. 49. Prieres du Moulin, in Twelves. 50. Quatrains de
Pibrac, Gr. Lat. and Fr. in Octavo. 51. Anatomia Missae, in Twelves. 52. L'
Antibarbare, ou du Language inconnuo in Octavo and Twelves. 53. Iconomachus, in
Twelves. 54. De Cognitione Dei, in Twentyfours. 55. Justification contre les
Impostures de Limbourg, in Octavo. 56. Anatomy du Livre de Coeffettean, in
Octavo. 57. Lettres a Monsieur Drelincourt, touchant le Sieur de Villeneuve, in
Octavo. 58. De Poenitentia, in Octavo. 59. * Traite des Traditions Romans, in
Octavo. 60. Theses Theologicae de Natura Ecclesiae, Sedani 1621, in Quarto. 61.
De Ecclesiae Visibilis dignitate, Sedani 1622, in Quarto. 62. De notis verae
Ecclesiae. Sedani 1622, in Quarto. 63. De Obedientia and Potestate, nec non de
Voto Obedientiae Monastica. Sedani 1623, in Quarto. 64. Ode dediee a la Memoire
de feu Monsieur le Duc de Bouillon, Prince Souverain de Sedan. a Sedan 1623, in
Quarto. 65. Lettre a Monsieur de Balsac, 1633, in Octavo. 66. Response a la
Lettre de Monsieur de Balsac 1633, in Octavo. 67. Lettre a Monsieur de la
Milletierre. a Sedan 1635, in Octavo. 68. Second Lettre a Monsieur de la
Milletierre, a Sedan, 1638, in Octavo. 69. Oration de Laudibus Theologiae.
Sedani 1629, in Sixteens. 70. * Anatomy de la Mess, ou est Monstre qu' elle
est contraire a la parole de Dieu, a Sedan 1636, in Octavo. 71. Deuxieme party
de L' Anatomy de la Mess en Francois and en Latin. a Sedan 1639, in Octavo.
72. * Le Capucin. Traite au quel est descrite L' Origin des Capucins, and
leurs Vaeux, reigles, and Disciplines, Examinees. a Sedan 1641, in Octavo. 73.
Meditation pour se preparer a la Saint Cene, a Charenton 1643, in Twelves. 74.
P. Molinaei and Mosis Amyraldi adversus Friderit. Spanheimium Libri Judicium,
seu pro Dei Misericordia, and Sapientia, and Justitia Apologia. Roterodami
1649, in Octavo. 75. Exhortations faites a ses Enfans peu de temps avaunt Sa
Mort. a Charenton 1658, in Octavo.
N. B. Those Books marked with the Asterismes are Translated and Printed in our
English Tongue.

CHAP. XVIII. PARTICULAR MATTERS.
1 THE Province of Poictou requested that Monsieur Ferrand Pastor of the Church
of St. Claud might be joined unto their Synod, because that the Churches of
Champagne-Mouton, and Courcilles which are Dependencies of the said Province,
do compose two thirds at least of his Auditory. But the Deputies of Xaintonge
opposed it, for that their Province had maintained the said Ferrand, and
received him into the Sacred Ministry, and presented him unto the Church of St.
Claud, and the two others did of their own accord annex themselves unto it.
Letters from the Church of St. Claud were read, declaring that they could not
be separated from the Province of Augoumois, but rather if there must be a
separation that it might be from the Churches of Champagne-mouton and
Courcilles, in case they demanded that Monsieur Ferrand should personally
reside among them. This Assembly decreed that as long as those three Churches
continued annexed each to other, they should be reckoned as Members of the
Province of Xaintonge; and when as that of Poictou could provide distinct
Pastors for those of Champagne-mouton and Courcilles, or one for them both,
they should then return back again unto the Province of Poictou; in which case
the Ministry of Gods Holy Word and Sacraments may be fixed in the Church of St.
Claud, and the Province of Xaintonge shall take care that they be supplied with
an able Minister, and that he have a competency to maintain him.

2. In pursuance of the Judgment past by this Assembly on the Appeal brought by
the Church of Mesnill Imbert, (the Province of Normandy requesting that some
Provision might be made for Monsieur Bayeux designed Pastor to the Church of
Falaise and Mesnill Imbert) This Assembly leaves it to the care of that
Province to allow him what they shall think fit, and forbids that Province of
Normandy to burden the Churches, as they have done, with Exhibitions unto
Proposans, before they have a Call unto the Ministry.

3. The Province of Poictou requested that the Church of Rochechouart, which
was formerly of their Synod, but is now of late joined unto the Province of
Lower Guyenne, might be again conjoined with that of Poictou. The Deputies of
Lower Guyenne being demanded their Opinion of it, replied, that they were never
concerned in this Matter, nor would, unless that Monsieur Barthe Pastor of the
Church of Limoges, and at present living at Rochechouart, should take up his
constant Abode in their Province. Whereupon this Assembly decreed that the said
Monsieur Barthe should retire unto his own Church, and that the said Church of
Rochechouart should return again unto the Province of Poictou, which shall be
obliged for the future to provide them of a Pastor.

4. Monsieur L' Oyseau a Pastor Emeritus may retire into his own Province of
Poictou, where his Portion, shall be assigned him.

5. The Province of Lower Guyenne requested that the Higher Languedoc might be
obliged to reimburse them those Portions, which they had received under the
Names of Monsieur Perery, and Casaux, two Ministers now octually serving in the
Churches of their Province. This Assembly considering the Condition of the
Province of Higher Languedoc, and its singular care in getting a supply for
those Churches which the aforesaid gieurs Perery and Casaux did of late serve,
and that those Portions were assigned during their Abode in that Province, and
that the Sums demanded are very small and inconsiderable, judges that there
ought not any restitution to be made in this case.

6. The Province of Higher Languedoc petitioned that some certain Churches in
the Colloquy of Nerac might be joined unto the Colloquy of Armagnac. The
Deputies of Lovver Guyenne, to which Nerac belonged, opposed this their
request. Whereupon the Synod ordained that the Colloquy of Armagnac shall be
Augmented and Corroborated by the Addition of some more Churches from out of
other Colloquies in the Higher Languedoc, and leaves the Execution of this
Decree unto the care of the said Province.

7. Mr. Joly formerly Minister in the Church of Montauban, See Alez. Appeals 24.
Deposed from his Office by Sentence of the National Synod of Alez, petitioned
this Assembly that he might be restored unto the Ministry, because that the
aforesaid Synod had not utterly deprived him of all hopes of restoration. That
judicial Sentence at Alez being diligently revised and considered, and the
Provincial Deputies of the Higher Languedoc heard, who declared that they had
an Express Order from their Province to intercede for him with this Synod, and
the Attestations of the Church and Consistory of Montauban, and of the Synod of
Higher Languedoc being produced, and read, who certified of the Godly
Conversation of the said Joly ever since his Deposal, and all requesting his
Restoration; This Synod judges that he may be reinstated once more into his
Ministerial Office; but yet nevertheless for a farther Proof and Trial of his
Repentance and Conversion his re-establishment is deferred till the meeting of
the next National Synod.

8. The Deputy of the Province of Bearne reported that their Circumstances were
such at present as would not suffer them entirely to conform unto the Orders of
our Churches in France, and therefore requested that they might be borne withal
a little longer. This Synod thought good to forbear them till the sitting of
the next National Synod.

9. Whereas the Province of Lower Guyenne demands that the Pastor of the Church
of Labor to whom the National Synod of Alez had granted the Sum of Three
Hundred Livres might be reckoned a Member of their Province, and sit in their
Synod, and be accountable to them for his Ministry. This Assembly judged that
Matters should be left in the same manner as now they be, and were heretofore
until the meeting of the next National Synod, but on this condition that the
Province of Bearne shall be accountable both for those Moneys, and the Service
of that beforementioned Pastor, and the Success of His Ministry in the said
Land of La Bour.

10. The Province of the Isle of France demanded what course should be taken
with professed Arminians, and such as spread abroad in Discourse their Dogmes and
Tenants. This Synod decrees that all Dogmatizers be prosecuted with
Church Censures, And as for such as are known Arminians, but do not disperse
their Opinions, our Pastors and Consistories shall deal with them for Three
Months time in order to reclaim them unto sound Doctrine: But in case they
continue obstinate after that time, they shall be debarred Communion with us at
the Lords Table.

CHAP. XIX. An Expedient to preserve the CHURCH-PEACE.
11 THE Province of the Isle of France moved that, to preserve our Union, and
prevent those Divisions which will otherwise creep in insensibly upon us, and
that the sound Doctrine, which has hitherto through the Grace of God been
preached, may be always taught and kept up in our Churches, and never
corrupted by the Invasion and Admission of those Errors condemned in the Synod
of Alez, by the Curiosity and Contentious Humor of such as love to abound in
their own sense, the Province of the Isle of France moved this Synod to advise
of some Expedients, which might curb and bridle those unruly Spirits, who
else would not be kept within the stated bounds of their Duty. This Assembly
received the Motion very kindly, and approving it, decreed, that all
Consistories, Colloquies, and Provincial Synods should carefully see to it,
that the Canons of our Church Discipline about Printing of Manuscripts be most
strictly observed, and that before they be carried to the Press: they be most
exactly perused, and approved by those Divines who are appointed by the
Provincial Synod so to do, and that there be rendered an Account hereof unto the
next National Synod. Moreover all Pastors, be it in their Writings, or in their
Sermons are to keep themselves within the bounds of Christian simplicity, and
to prune off from all their Discourses and Exhortations those needless
Excrescencies of curious Questions, and to oppose such Persons as shall attempt
to subvert the Truth delivered to us by our Teachers of Blessed Memory, whose
Ministry the Lord so signally owned in the great Work of Reformation: And that
they would so order all their Doctrines and Sermons as they might have a
direct tendency to promote the Churches Peace, and the Edification of the
Consciences of their Auditors.

12. Monsieur Bustonoby Pastor in the Churches of Mauleon, Sanquis, and Montori
in the Land of Souls in Biscay complained that the two Portions granted him
by the Synod of Vitre, had not been paid him free of all Charges ever since the
year 1619, though it was so ordained by that Synod, and he therefore
petitioned that what was behind due, might be paid unto him, moreover that
two other free Portions might be granted toward the maintenance of another
Minister in those Churches aforesaid, because he was not able alone by himself
to perform all Pastoral Duties in them. The Deputies of the Principality of
Bearne, and of the Lovver Guyenne, were heard replying to him, and afterward
the Synod ordained that the Portions assigned by the Synod of Vitre and Alez
should be paid him in free accordingly, and that as long as he shall serve
those Churches alone without a Fellow-helper in the Work of the Ministry, their
payment shall be continued to him, and when as a Colleague shall be joined with
him, there shall be another free Portion added for his Colleague also: And this
Assembly entreats him to inquire and use his best endeavors to get an
Assistant, and the Portion for the Assisting Pastor shall be kept in the Lord
of Candals hands till such time as he be called and settled together with him
in those Churches.

13. The Church of Montauban demanded that Monsieur Ollyer, who with the
Consent and Order of the Colloquy of Vsez, empowered thereunto by the National
Synod of Alez, was lent unto them, might now be their fixed Pastor during Life.
After that the Provincial Deputies of Sevennes and Lower Languedoc had been
heard speak on this Affair, The Assembly ratified that Order of the Colloquy of
Vsez by its own Act and Authority.

14. Whereas his Grace the Lord Duke of Trimouille and the Church of Vitre
demanded that Monsieur Blanchart Pastor of the Church of Conde upon Nereau in
the Province of Normandy might be preferred unto the Church of Vitre. After
hearing of the Provincial Deputies of Normandy, and reading the Decree of that
Province, which enjoined the said Blanchart to return back unto his Cure, upon
pain of being declared a Desertor of it; and the Deputies of Britain informing
this Synod they had hot any Memoir or Command from their Province concerning
this Matter: This Assembly decreed that a very severe and rigorous Censure
shall be inflicted on the said Blanchart for contemning the Discipline of our
Church, and that he shall return again unto the Church of Conde within two
Months after the Dissolution of this Synod, or if not, that he shall be then
suspended from the Ministerial Office.

15. Monsieur du Bois formerly Pastor in the Churches of I a Val and la Bar
but set at liberty by the Provincial Synod of Anjou complained unto this
Assembly, that whereas the Church of Fontaines and Crocy in the Province of
Normandy had given him a Call to the Ministry among them, the Synod of that
Province would not agree unto it, nor suffer him to be settled in that Church.
This Assembly after hearing the Deputies of Normandy in this case, decreed,
that the said Monsieur du Bois shall be received and fixed in the Pastoral
Office of the said Church of ^ontaines and Crocy until the next meeting of the
Provincial Synod of Normandy.

16. Monsieur Joly petitioning this Assembly for some Relief for himself and
poor Family until the sitting of the next National Synod, and that leave might
be given him to aspire unto the Profession of the Hebrew Language in case there
should be a vacancy. This Assembly granted him the letter, and because of his
wants, and the distressed Condition of his Family, they do give him an Hundred
and Fifty Livres, and for the future do continue unto him one free Portion
under the same Name as it was granted him by the National Synod of Alez.

CHAP. XX.
N. B. This Curcelles was after fixed Pastor in the Church of Vitre le Francois
in Champagne, where having begot his Servant Maid with Child, he forsook his
Church, and fled into Holland, that the might escape the punishment due unto
his crime, which of his free will he had committed; where he returned with the
Dog unto his former Vomit, and lick up his once Abpured ^rror^ and lived and
dyed an implacable line my of the Truth and and of all its Professors. When he
was dead, there was found among his Books a Manuscript written with his own
hand against the Godhead of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and the profession of the
Truth.
17 MOnsieur de Courcelles formerly Pastor in the Church of Amiens, having
refused to subscribe the Doctrine received in the Synod of Alez, did freely and
of his own accord resign his Pastoral Charge into the hands of the Provincial
Synod of the Isle of France, but now protesting in this Assembly that he had
quite rejected those Arminian Dogmes, and that he did own and acquiesce
entirely in the Doctrine received of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, and
humbly petitioned this Synod, that they would be pleased to restore him again
unto his Charge, upon the promises he did now make of retaining the form of
sound words. After that the Deputy of the Isle of France had related the
proceedings of their last Synod upon the fact of Courcelles his quitting of his
Place and Calling, he was again called in, and did plainly, and clearly, and
with great earnestness avow and confess his consent unto the whole Doctrine
taught and contained in those Canons decreed at the Synod of Alez, and in this
also, holding and believing it to be the truth, and agreeing with the Word of
God, and that he renounceth all Errors condemned in those aforesaid Canons; and
that he believes those said Canons in every Branch and Article of them, and
was resolved to sign and defend them for the future to the utmost of his power
during Life. The Assembly having received this his Declaration and Protestation
restored him again unto his Ministerial Office, and remanded him back unto the
Isle of France to be presented unto a Church, and in case he could not meet
with one in that Province, then he might accept of a Call in any other. And for
his Comfort he had License given him in the interim to preach in any Church for
its Edisication, yea, and in the Church of Paris also, provided the Reverend
Pastors of that Congregation, did invite him to it. Moreover this Assembly
approved of all those former proceedings of the Province aforesaid in and about
this business of Courcelles, as having been done and managed with singular
prudence, Candor, and Charity: And it gives also unto the said Courcelles one
Portion for his subsistence, until such time as he be provided of a Church.

18. Letters were tendered and read in this Assembly from the Lords Curators and
Professors in the famous University of Leyden, requesting that Monsieur Rivett,
who had been lent unto the said University by a former National Synod for their
Divinity Professor might be confirmed and continued to them during Life by the
Authority of this also. The Letters of Monsieur Rivett writ unto this Assembly
were in like manner perused; and his Brother the Lord of Chamvernown declared,
that Doctor Rivett testified and expressed a continual Love and sincere
Affection, as in Duty he was bound, unto his Native Country, and that Cordial
desire he had always to serve it; but that he could not at present be removed
from the University of Leyden, but to its very great damage and his own in
particular, for which cause he entreated this Assembly to continue him for some
few years more in the aforesaid University of Leyden. The Synod did hereupon
grant him his request, and ordered his continuance there until the next
National Synod, and that an answer should be written unto the Lords Curators
and Professors there accordingly. He lived there to his Death, which fell out
in the year 1651. His Works are Printed in Three Folio's.

19. The Church of Alez petitioned that the Reverend Monsieur Chauve Minister
of the Church of Sommieres, might be co^ferred upon them for their Pastor.
After perusal of these Letters, those of Monsieur Chauve were also considered,
who complained that his burden was too heavy for his Shoulders, and that he
could not without assistance go through the necessary Duties of his Charge in
either of those Churches. The Deputies also of Sevennes, and the Lower
Languedoc, and Monsieur L' Espeisses for the Church of Alez were all heard;
whereupon this Synod confirmed Monsieur Chauve in his Ministry of the Church of
Sommiers and enjoyneth the said Province to take care that he have help and
comfort given him in his great labors.

20. The Church of Bourdeaux petitioned that Monsieur Alba Minister of the
Church of Tonneins, and Ferrand Minister of La Parade, in the Province of Lower
Guyenne might be bestowed on them for their Pastors. Another Petition also was
presented from the Lords President and Counselors in the Court of Again, that
they might be favored with the Ministry of the same Monsieur Alba. After
perusal of several Letters from the Churches of Tonneins, La Parade, Bourdeaux,
and Again, and those of the Lords President, and Counselors there, and hearing
of Monsieur Coderois, Elder in the Church of Bourdeaux, and of Monsieur Alba,
and of the Provincial Deputies of Guyenne; This Assembly presented Monsieur
Ferrand unto the Church of Bourdeaux, and Monsieur Alba unto that of Again until
the next National Synod: And it does enjoin the Colloquy, and on their default,
the Synod of that Province to make some speedy provision for the Church of La
Parade, that they may be without delay supplied with a Pastor.

21. Relation was made by the Province of Vivaretz concerning some Miscarriages
of Monsieur des Maretz heretofore Pastor in the Church of Valet. This Assembly
not being able to judge of this Matter, because of his absence, has dismissed
the business unto the next Session of the Colloquy of Valentinois in Dolphiny,
to take cognizance of it, and to examine Witnesses about it, and to give a
final Judgment therein, by Authority from it, and ordains that the said des
Maretz be cited to appear before them, and that the Deputies of the said
Province shall carry those Evidences thither which they produced in this
Assembly.

22. Monsieur Huron a Minister without Employment was presented to the Church
of Mirembeau in the Province of Xaintonge at the request of Monsieur Thomas
Elder in the said Church, and this Assembly did also by way of Advance give
him Sixty Livres.

23. Monsieur Morell Deputy from the Church of Die desired this Assembly that
it would be pleased for the future to pay the Professors of that University
their Stipends; and in case the Synod would be pleased to do it, they offered
freely to relinquish their right which by contract with the Province of
Dolphiny they had over the said University; or else that we would grant some
greater Augmentation than heretofore toward the maintenance and keeping up of
the said University. This Synod ordered that the Six Hundred Livres granted by
the National Synod of Alez, should be continued unto that University.

24. The Province of Provence complained by Letters of Monsieur Huron sometime
since Minister of the Church of Riez in the same Province that he had lying by
him very many Papers belonging to them, and that he had not given an Account of
his Deputation unto the last Synod of Alez, and finally that he stood indebted
a considerable Sum of Money unto the said Province; and therefore they
requested this Assembly to enjoin him the said Huron to come in Person unto
their next Provincial Synod, and to give an Account of these Matters. After
that Monsieur Huron was heard speak for himself, and the Provincial Deputies of
Dolphiny, who produced the Memoirs of the Province of Provence, this Assembly
did not judge the two first Articles complained of either reasonable or
charitable, and declares him acquitted and absolved from them: And as for the
third concerning the Sums of Money pretended to be owing by him, the
Cognizance and Judgment thereof is devolved on the Consistory of Montpellier,
unto which Monsieur Huron may send, or in Person deliver what he has to produce
for his own Justification and Discharge.

25. The same Monsieur Huron complaining that the Province of Provence have not
paid him one farthing of the Dividend he should have had of the Kings Moneys
since the sitting of the last Synod at Alez: This Assembly counting this Affair
not to belong to its cognizance, did remand it as that last immediately
foregoing unto the Consistory of Montpellier.

26. The Widow of Monsieur Toussaint deceased, late Pastor of the Church of Luc
in Provence complained, that notwithstanding all her earnest Solicitations and
Endeavors used by her with that Province she could never get a Denier of the
Four Hundred Livres, nor of the Seventy and Five Livres, nor a Doit of the
Arrearages ordained by the National Synod of Alez for the maintenance of her
poor Orphans. This Assembly ordains the Lord of Candal to pay the said Four
Hundred Livres unto the said Mrs. Toussaincts out of the Moneys belonging to
that Province, because of the security brought by her from Monsieur Galls her
Father, Physician to the City of Orange; and as for the Arrears, and other
Articles of her demands the Judgment of them is devolved upon the Colloquy of
Baronniers in Dolphiny, which enjoined to put the Decree of Alez in Execution,
and by Authority from this Assembly, to put a final period to this business.

27. The said Province of Provence having given in none Account of the
Observation of those Canons which were made particularly for them in the Synod
of Alez. This Assembly orders the Sieurs of Chambrun and Crubelier to go in
Person unto the next Synod of the said Province, which shall bear their
Charges, and that afterward the Province of Dolphiny and Lower Languedoc shall
send each of them one Pastor unto their following Synods to see those aforesaid
Canons punctually observed by that Province of Provence. And these Three
Provinces of Dolphiny and Lower Languedoc and Provence, shall each of them give
an Account hereof unto the next National Synod. And once more the said Province
of Provence is enjoined carefully to observe and keep those Canons, or else
they shall lose and forfeit all part and interest in the Moneys of His
Majesty's Bounty.

28. Monsieur Jasper Martin Pastor in the Church of Saliens complained that he
was never paid one farthing of that Portion granted him by the Synod of Alez,
and therefore petitions this Assembly to give him another until the meeting of
the next National Synod. This Assembly orders that he be paid in this present
year the Portion granted him in the year 1620. by that of Alez, and farther as
an augmentation the Sum of One Hundred Livres more.

29. Monsieur du Val heretofore Pastor in the Church of Falaise in the Province
of the Isle of France appeared personally in this Assembly petitioning to be
restored unto the Ministry, and provided of a Church by its Authority. The
Synod not being fully informed for what reasons the said Province had suspended
him the Exercise of his Ministry has remanded him b^ck again unto the said
Province, which shall dispose of him according as they shall judge best for the
Glory of God, and the Edification of his Church.

30. The Widow of Monsieur de Preau late Pastor in the Church of Vitre, in the
Province of Britain petitioned this Assembly to allow her the same Pension they
did others in her condition only till such time as she had finished her
Lawsuit commenc't against the Murderers of her Husband. This Synod not judging
this Affair to belong unto its cognizance has dismissed her over to that of
the Province, and recommends it particularly unto them.

31. Monsieur Joly formerly Pastor of the Church of Hour and Baillolet
petitioned this Assembly, that whereas the Colloquy of Beausse by Order of the
Provincial Synod of the Isle of France had suspended him from the Ministry for
Three Months time, because he had deserted those aforesaid Churches, we would
be pleased to take his suspension off the File, and out of the Acts of the said
Colloquy after that both the Lord of Sasseuse Elder in the said Church of
Baillolet, and the Deputies of the Province had been heard: This Assembly
approves of the said suspension: Yet for diverse Considerations does ordain
that it be razed out of those Acts.

32. The Province of Lower Guyenne complained that in the dividend of Moneys
given us by the King, and to be received this very Year, the Synod had
forgotten the Sum of Three Hundred Livres appointed by the National Synod of
Alez for maintaining of a Minister in the Churches in the Land of La Bour in
Biscay. This Synod entreats the Lord of Candal that out of the good Moneys
which might accrue for the Wages of a Second Professor in the Universities of
Saumur, Montauban, and Nismes, he would be pleased to pay unto the aforesaid
Province of Lower Guyenne, the Sum of Three Hundred Livres yearly.

CHAP. XXI.
33 MOnsieur Cameron represented unto this Assembly, that although he had been
sought after, and earnestly urged to accept of very advantageous Employments
without the Kingdom, yet he would not at all close with any of them, because of
his great Affection and Obligation unto the Churches of France: But His Majesty
not approving that he should at present re-enter upon his Ministerial or
Professoral Offices in Church or University, he was now destitute of
Employment, and so without any convenient means for the maintaining of his
Family, wherefore he entreated this Venerable Assembly to have respect unto
him, and his desolate Condition. The Synod did hereupon order a Thousand Livres
to be paid him, viz. Seven Hundred Livres for his Sallary as Professor this
present year, two hundred Livres for one Portion, and one hundred Livres more
for defraying the Charges of his Travels. And the Lord of Candal is desired to
pay him the said Thousand Livres out of those Forty Thousand, which His Majesty
has been pleased now to bestow upon us in ready Money, and he shall deduct and
abate Seven Hundred Livres out of those Moneys he should have paid in for this
present year unto the University of Saumur, and Three-Hundred Livres out of the
Remainders of the precedent years yet unpaid. Mr. Cameron was called afterward
to be Professor of Divinity at Montauban, where he died in the year 1625, about
44, or 45 years of Age. His Works are his Myrothecium in Quarto, and (...) in
Folio.

CHAP. XXII. Of UNIVERSITIES and COLLEGES.
1 A Motion was made about reducing the Number of our Universities unto two,
and this by several Provinces, that so they might be the better furnished with
Professors. After it had been debated the Synod came to this Resolution, that
for the present nothing should be either innovated or altered either as to
Number or Place, but as they were so they should continue fixed at Saumur,
Montauban. and Nismes.

2. Professors who have served in our Universities this present year 1623.
shall be paid their Sallaries as heretofore.

3. This Assembly considering the Poverty of our Churches, and how necessary it
is for us to be good Husbands of His Majesty's Liberality, ordains that for
the future the Professors place in Greek shall be suppressed, as being
superfluous and of small profit.

4. Whereas formerly the Office of Principal in our Universities was distinct
from all other Offices, It shall be for the future suppressed, and the
superintendency of the Principal over the College shall be conferred upon some
one of the Professors or Pastors according as the University Council shall
think fittest, and he shall also receive the Sum of One Hundred Livres yearly,
and his Lodgings in the College.

5. No Wages shall be given in our Universities unto a Printer.

6. The Doorkeeper and Bedell's Office may be united in one, and he shall have
but sixty Livres yearly.

7. To the University of Nismes shall be given for the future the Sum of
Eighteen Hundred Livres, viz. for two Professors in Divinity each Seven hundred
Livres, and to the Hebrew Professor four hundred only.

8. Monsieur Codur who is at present Professor of Hebrew in the University of
Nismes shall have our hearty thanks for his great pains taken hitherto in his
Office, and shall be preferred unto the Church of Bernix to be their Pastor, or
to any other, as the Colloquy or Provincial Synod shall judge convenient. And
besides the Portion appropriated unto that Church wherein he may officiate,
there shall be continued to him that Portion granted him by this until the
sitting of the next National Synod. And whereas Mr. Petit was formerly
Professor of the Greek, he shall be henceforward Professor of the Hebrew Tongue
in that University.

9. There shall be given to the University of Montauban the Sum of Three
Thousand Four Hundred and Fifty Livres, To each of the two Professors in
Divinity the Sum of Seven Hundred Livres, To each of the Two Professors in
Philosophy Four Hundred Livres, Besides Eight Hundred and Fifty Livres more are
ordered unto the said University until the next National Synod, and no longer;
nor shall this be drawn in consequence, as a president for time to come.

10. For the University of Saumur there shall be delivered out the Sum of Four
Thousand one Hundred Livres, viz. for two Professors in Divinity to each Seven
Hundred Livres, for one Professor in Hebrew Four Hundred Livres, for two
Professors in Philosophy to each of them Four Hundred Livres, for the Principal
of the College One Hundred Livres, for the Regent of the first Classis Four
Hundred Livres, for the Regent of the Second Three Hundred Livres, for the
Regent of the Third Two Hundred and Fifty Livres, for him in the Fourth Two
Hundred and Ten Livres, for him in the Fifth Nine Score Livres, and for the
Bedell and Doorkeeper Sixty Livres.

11. And forasmuch as in each of our Universities there is at present but one
Professor in Divinity, This Assembly decrees that the Sum of Two Thousand One
Hundred Livres for the Three vacant Professions shall be detained in the hands
of the Lord du Candal from out of the Second and Third Quarters of the year
1624, to be distributed among those Professors who shall be established. And in
case the said Offices should not be provided for, or some one of them should
remain vacant, The said Lord du Candal shall distribute that Sum detained in
his hands among the Churches.

12. The Orders to be expedited for paying the Sallaries of our Professors and
Regents shall be Given and Signed by the Rector and University Council, and
shall have this clause expressly inserted in them that the said Regent and
Professors were all of them in actual Service.

13. This Synod also desirous to make some Canon that may be observed about
admission of Students in Theology, who are to be maintained by the Provinces,
it does therefore decree that for the future, the Provinces shall take special
care in the choice of Scholars whose Exhibitions are to be paid them by the
Colloquies, because they are hereafter to serve in the Sacred Ministry, above
all looking to their Lives and Conversations, to their Capacities and
Understandings, and to their Natural Gifts and Parts, and strictly to examine
the Attestations of Consistories and Colleges, in which they have been
conversant: And they shall not admit any into this number but such as have
finished their Course in Philosophy, and who shall prove it by producing their
Letters of Mastership in the Arts, or some other equivalent Testimonials, nor
shall they receive any without good and valid securities for restitution of the
Sums received in case of Apostasy, and diversion or promotion to another
Calling, besides that of the Ministry. And that we may proceed in the said
Choice with the more and greater Caution, and that Persons of mean hopes may
not be nominated, the said Scholars shall not only be examined by the
Colloquies who present them, but also by the Provincial Synod. And that they
may be retained within the bounds of their Duty, the Colloquies or Provinces
who send them unto the Universities to be their Seminary and Nurslings, shall
inform the University-Councils, and the Council of the Schools of them, that
they watch over them continually, and take a most especial and signal care of
them above all others, and not to give them at any time leave to wander or
travel abroad, or to remove elsewhere without having first consulted their
Colloquies. And the Professors shall be obliged to examine them yearly twice at
least, and give faithful notice unto their respective Colloquies of their
Conversation and Studies, and Ministers Children shall be preferred above all
others, caeteris paribus.

14. The Province of Anjou presented the Account of the University of Saumur
for Three Quarters of the year, 1620. for the whole year 1621, and for Three
quarters of the year 1623. But forasmuch as they did not bring with them any
Acquittances or Evidences to justify the said Account. This Assembly being
thereby disabled from examining and concluding it, has dismissed it over to
the Colloquy of Higher Poictou, which shall audit it, and give in an Account
thereof unto the next National Synod. In the mean while whereas in the
disbursement of the said Account there appears in diverse Articles a Notorious
diversion and Abuse and Alienation of the said Moneys, This Assembly orders
that the Sums employed in the said Account for the Printers Wages, the Tax
imposed on some of the Regents, for a Gallery in the Temple, for repairing one
of the Professors Lodgings shall be immediately razed out, and detained from
the said Province of Anjou, saving always unto them a full power of
re-demanding those Moneys from such as had ordered their disbursements,
whosoever they were.

15. The Province of Orleans and Berry brought in the Account of their College
settled at Chastillon upon the Loir for the years 1621, 1622, and until the
12th, of May 1623. which was allowed and approved. And the Province of the Isle
of France may lend them Four Hundred Livres out of their Colledge-Moneys, until
such time as they can fix on a convenient place where to Erect it.

16. The Province of Poictou brought in the Account of the College of Niort
for the years 1620, and 1621, and by a stop put on the said Account in the
Province, the said College stood indebted the Sum of three hundred Livres,
which were never distributed, because that College was suppressed by Order of
His Majesty; for which three hundred Livres that Province must hereafter be
accountable.

17. The Province of Lower Guyenne did not bring in any Account for the
College of Bergerac since the Month of March 1620, because His Majesty had
given express order, that they should not have a Penny paid them.

18. The Province of Xaintonge brought in their Account for the College of
Rochefoucault for the year 1620, which was not approved. And whereas the said
Province complained that they received nothing for the years 1621, and 1622,
though yet they maintained their College all that time. This Assembly
ordains the said Province to tender unto the next National Synod an Account
of their disbursements in those years, who shall give them something in
consideration thereof.

19. The Province of Sevennes rendered no Account for the College settled at
Anduze by the National Synod of Alez, because they never received a farthing
token since its Erection. And whereas they now require to be reimbursed all
their Costs and Expenses ever since the Establishing of their College, This
Assembly ordains them to bring in their Account unto the next National Synod,
who will do for them as is meet.

20. The Province of Britain presented their Account for the College Erected
at Vitre ever since the Synod of Alez unto this time, and makes Receipt both of
Four Hundred Livres given it by that National Synod, as also of two hundred
Livres more which the said Province was bound to furnish yearly toward the
maintenance of the said College, and the said Account was approved and allowed.

21. The Province of Vivaretz brought in no Account for the College settled at
Privas by the Synod of Alez, because they received just nothing although they
bore the Charges of its Establishment and Maintenance; for the Re-imbursement
or which Sums they requesting some speedy and careful course might be taken,
they were dismissed over to the next National Synod, who would do for them as
was meet and convenient.

22. The Province of the Isle of France presented an Account which had been
tendered the last March unto their Synod for ten years beginning in 1613, and
ended the last December, 1622. But inasmuch as they produced neither Evidences
and Acquittances to clear and justify the disbursements in that Account, as
they were enjoined by the last National Synod: The Commissioners could not
proceed to examine and close it. This Assembly judges the said Province of the
Isle of France to have incurred a severe Censure for despising the threats of
the last National Synod, and for not perfecting their Account of Moneys given
toward the maintenance of their College: And commands them immediately after
the meeting of their next Provincial Synod to bring in their Account unto the
Colloquy of Roan, which by Authority from this Assembly shall examine it, and
make report thereof unto the next National Synod, on pain of losing their Right
and Title unto a College.

23. The Province of Dolphiny brought in their Account for the University of
Dye, which was allowed and approved.

24. The same Province also brought in their Account for the College settled
at Ambrun, and produced several Acquittances, by which it appeared their
disbursements on it were far more than the Moneys given by the National Synod
for it. This Assembly approving of the said Accounts, exhorts the City of
Ambrun to carry their Acquittances unto the Provincial, that so the Provincial
may bring them unto the National Synod.

25. This Assembly rejected the Excuses made by the Province of Normandy for
not bringing in their Accounts of their College, and they be charged to be
more careful for the future, and not fail to bring in their Account unto the
next National Synod, both for what is past and will ensue till that time.

26. The Province of Lower Languedoc declared that they could not give an
Account for their College at Beziers because since the sitting of the National
Synod at Alez, they never received a Denier toward it.

27. The Province of Burgundy presented their Account for the College settled
at Pont de Velle, but having brought no Acquittances, they were ordered to
carry them back with them; and to tender them in due and better form unto the
next National Synod.

28. The same Province also brought in their Account for the College of Gex
for the years 1617, 1618, 1619, 1620, and 1621, which was allowed and approved,
and there was granted an Augmentation of an Hundred Livres more unto the said
College.

29, There was no Account brought in by the Province of Provence, though they
had been expressly obliged to it by the last National Synod of Alez. Wherefore
they be enjoined to produce it unto the next National Synod on pain of
forfeiting their Right unto a College. And the Deputies of Dolphiny and Lower
Languedoc, as they have been by a former Decree of this present National
Assembly enjoined, shall go in Person unto the Synod of that Province, and
particularly inform themselves of the State of the said College, and whether
that Province has discharged their Duty with reference to it or no.

CHAP. XXIII. The Accounts of the Lord of CANDAL.
1 THE Seurs Basnage and le Clerk, Pastors, du Port and du Four Elders having
been constituted a Committee to audit the Lord of Candals Accounts, do report,
that examining and perusing of them, he makes himself Debtor for the Sum of
Four hundred, fourscore and eighteen thousand, eight hundred twenty five
Livres, Received for the last Quarter of the year 1619, and for the years 1620,
and 1621. And out of the said Moneys he has disbursed the Sum of Four hundred
fourscore and eighteen thousand eight hundred and fifty Livres, ten Sous, and
four Deniers. So that there would be owing the said Lord of Candal the Sum of
five and twenty Livres, ten Sous, and four Deniers. But it must be observed
that in the said disbursement there is included the Sum of one hundred
threescore and nine thousand eight hundred forty and two Livres, two Sous and
two Deniers, whereof there was made reprisal in ready Money in the said
Account, and not received from the Quarters of October in the years 1619, 1620,
and 1621, on these terms that he continued his diligence, care, and labor for
the recovery thereof, that so it being got, a Dividend might be made thereof
among the Churches; And the said Lord of Candal shall bring in Evidence unto
the next National Synod of his care and diligence for the recovery of the said
Moneys, and how he shall have disposed of them.

2. Moreover in the said disbursement there is included the Sum of Six
thousand five hundred and eighteen Livres, one Sous, and four Deniers, which
was forborne him in four Ar icles of the said disbursement for want of
Acquittances from the Receivers of the Provinces of Provence, Britain, and
College of Bergerac, which he is ordered to produce before the next National
Synod.

3. Moreover the said Lord of Candal produced the Acquittances of those Parties
which had been forborne him on the former Accounts rendered by him unto the
National Synod of Alez, by reason whereof the said Parties are now discharged.

CHAP. XXIV. A Dividend made among all the Provinces of the Sum of Two hundred
twenty and five thousand Livres granted by His Majesty unto the Reformed
Churches of France for the next Year 1624, and in the Years following until the
sitting of the next National Synod, according whereunto the said Lord of Candal
is to make these following Payments as it was formerly agreed with him in the
National Synod of GAP.
OUT of the Three first Quarters of the said Sum of Two Hundred twenty and
five thousand Livres, which amount to Eight Score and eight thousand seven
hundred and fifty Livres there must be distributed these Sums following.

l. s. d. To the University of Sedan 4000 00 00 To the Colloquy of Gex, taking
in the Three thousand six hundred Livres ordered them by His Majesty, and an
hundred Livres Augmentation given them by this present Synod for the College
of Gex, the Sum of 4500 00 00 To the College of Bergerac 1200 00 00 To the
University of Saumur 4100 00 00 To the University of Nismes 1800 00 00 To the
University of Montauban 3450 00 00 To the University of Die 0600 00 00 An
Additional Gratuity to our Lords General Deputies for their good Service unto
the Churches 3300 00 00 To the Province of Normandy for Four and fifty
Portions, viz. for Four and forty Pastors in actual Service, two Churches
vacant that must be supplied, for six Proposans, two supernumerary Portions,
and four hundred Livres for a College, the Sum of 8230 17 00 To the Province
of Berry for Four and Forty Portions, viz. For Six and twenty Pastors in actual
Service, two Pastors Emeriti, three Proposans, and three supernumerary
Portions, and Four hundred Livres for a College, the Sum of 2600 10 00 To the
Province of Anjou for two and thirty Portions, viz. Seven and twenty Pastors in
actual Service, three Proposans, and two supernumerary Portions, the Sum of
4640 08 00 To the Province of Poictou for Sixty three Portions, viz. for Six
and forty Pastors in actual Service, six vacant Churches to be supplied, three
Pastors Emeriti, taking in Monsieur L' Oyseau, three Proposans, and five
Portions supernumerary, and four hundred Livres for a College, the Sum of
9535 17 05 To the Province of Xaintonge for Fourscore and five Portions, to
wit, for Sixty and three Pastors in actual Service, One Pastor to be provided
for, three Pastors Emeriti, five Proposans, and thirteen Portions
supernumerary, whereof one shall be settled on Monsieur Thevenot and another on
Monsieur Toulouse, and four hundred Livres for a College, the Sum of 12726 01
03 To the Province of Lower Guyenne for One hundred and six Portions, viz.
threescore and four Pastors in actual Service, One Pastor discharged, Sixteen
vacant Churches to be supplied, Five Proposans, and Twenty Portions
supernumerary for poor Ministers undone by the Wars, and for Impoverished
Churches, and three hundred Livres for the Churches of Labor, the Sum of
15371 06 06 To the Province of Lower Languedoc for Fourscore and Nineteen
Portions, viz. for two and fifty Pastors in actual Service, three Pastors
Emeriti, one of which is Monsieur Tourtelon, three vacant Churches to be
supplied, three Professors, three Proposans, and Five and twenty Portions
supernumerary, Four hundred Livres for a College, the Sum of 14756 04 09 To
the Province of Higher Languedoc for Sixscore and Eight Portions, viz. for
threescore and eight Pastors in actual Service, eight Pastors discharged,
twenty vacant Churches to be provided for, seven Proposans, and one and twenty
Portions supernumerary, taking in the Portion for Mr. Joly, the Sum of 18561
12 00 To the Province of Burgundy for six and thirty Portions, Another Gopy,
15600 l.
viz. for two and twenty Pastors in actual Service, two vacant Churches to be
provided for, to Monsieur de la Planche a Pastor Emeritus, three Proposans, and
eight Portions sepernumerary, whereof Bourg, Moulins, Paillac, and Maringues
must have their part, and four hundred Livres for the College, the Sum of
06910 10 00 To the Province of Dolphiny for an hundred and three Portions, viz.
for seventy and nine Pastors in actual Service one Pastor Emeritus, five vacant
Churches to be supplied, eight Proposans, and ten Portions supernumerary,
whereof La Mure, Another Copy, 15600 l.
Barraut, Raconis, Romans, Ambrun, Guillestre, shall have each of them one, and
Jallutte (another Copy has Tullette) an half of one, and four hundred Livres
for a College, the Sum of 15626 05 09 To the Province of the Isle of France
for threescore and one portions, viz. For six and forty Pastors in actual
Service, four Pastors discharged, one vacant Church to be supplied, four
Proposans, and six Portions supernumerary, and four hundred Livres for a
College is 09245 15 03 To the Province of Sevennes for Seventy Portions,
Another Copy, 10550 l. 17 s. 6 d.
viz. for one and fifty Pastors in actual Service, one Pastor discharged, four
Churches to be provided, three Proposans, and eleven supernumerary Portions,
whereof five for the Churches of Auvergne, for Quissac and Combras two, four
hundred Livres for a College, is the Sum of 15550 17 06 To the Province of
Britain for twenty Portions, viz. for ten Pastors in actual Service, three
vacant Churches to be supplied, two Proposans, and five supernumerary Portions
and four hundred Livres for a College is the Sum of 03302 18 03 To the
Province of Vivaretz for eight and forty Portions, viz. two and twenty Pastors
in actual Service, one Pastor to be maintained, two Pastors discharged, i. e.
Emeriti, six vacant Churches to be applied, three Proposans. and fourteen
Portions supernumerary, whereof two are allotted unto Monsieur Villon, and to
Monsieur Vinay and des Maretz each of them one, and to the Churchs of Vals,
Vallon, and Villeneufve de Berg to each of them one, and four hundred Livres
for a College, the Sum of 07360 11 00 To the Province of Provence for one and
twenty Portions, viz. Fourteen Pastors in actual Service, two Proposans, and
five Portions supernumerary, and four hundred Livres for a College is the Sum
of 03445 05 03 To Monsieur Bustonaby for three Portions, whereof one shall
remain in the hands of the Lord of Candal, until such time as another Pastor
can be provided for the Churches of Souls, (and tht Stock shall be deposited
with the Province of Lower Guyenne) the Sum of 0435 08 09 The Total Sum of
these Three Quarters is, 168750 00 00

For the Fourth Quarter amounting to the Sum of six and fifty Thousand two
hundred and fifty Livres.
l. s. d. There belongs to the Province of Normandy 3121 13 00 To the
Province of Berry 2312 06 08 To the Province of Anjou 1849 17 04 To that of
Poictou 3641 18 06 To the Province of Xaintonge 4913 14 02 To the Province of
Lower Guyenne 6127 14 08 To the Province of Lower Languedoc 5723 06 00 To the
Province of Burgundy 2196 14 04 To the Province of Dolphiny 6069 17 06 To the
Province of Sevennes 4046 11 08 To the Province of the Isle of France 3526 06
02 To the Province of Britain 1158 06 08 To the Province of Vivaretz 2754 16 00
To the Province of Provence 1218 19 06 To Monsieur Bustonoby 0173 08 06 The
Sum of the said October Quarter is, 56250 00 00

The Province of Higher Languedoc, of Normandy, Berry, and Burgundy,
petitioning that they might have the Privilege of Calling the next National
Synod, this Assembly granted it unto that of Higher Languedoc, which shall
Convocate it in May, Sixteen hundred and twenty six.

CHAP. XXV. The Roll of Apostate and Deposed Ministers. Another Copy read.

1 JAmes Merchant
Mahaut formerly Pastor in the Church of Haure de Grace in the Province of
Normandy, a middle sized Fellow, black Hair, a little Beard, roaving Eyes;
about forty years of Age. An Apostate.

2. John Guillemart formerly Pastor in the Church of Chandenier in the Province
of Poictou, about Fifty years of Age, having a black Beard, beginning to wax
gray, low of Stature, his Eyes looking downward after a Melancholy manner, an
Apostate.

3. Anthony le Blanc, born at Beaune, and Minister in the same place, about
five and forty years of Age, tall of Stature, a fair flaxen colored Beard,
eagle Nosed, a thin slender Fellow, small Crane Legs, an Apostate.

4. John Balsull
Balsull, sometimes Minister in the Church of Pragela in the Province of
Dolphiny, about two and thirty years old, low of Stature, black Hair, a
Melancholy Fellow, thin and Meagre, his Head stooping downwards, blubber Lips,
Deposed for Arminianisme by the Synod of Dolphiny.

5. Henry de Labac
^ubac formerly Minister in the Church of Privas in Vivaretz, about thirty
years of Age, mean of Stature, bald Headed, but that little Hair he has is a
dark brown chestnut color, of a wandering look, his Eyes sunk into his Head,
and shaking it upon all occasions, fierce in his Carriage, Deposed by the
Colloquy of Valentinois for Adultery and other Crimes.

6. James Repusseau
Repasseau formerly Pastor in the Church of Livron in the Province of Dolphiny
about Five and forty years of Age Deposed by the Synod of the said Province for
attempting to commit Adultery, but yet hopes were given him that he might be
restored unto the Sacred Ministry after some years of Penance, provided he
could then bring valid testimonials of his Godly and Religious Conversation,
and of his continued sincere and serious Repentance, which has been observed
by very many to be begun in him already, he lives for the present at
Montlimart. He was restored by the National Synod of Castres after ten years of
penance.

7. John de Dieu about thirty years of Age, born at Sauve, tall of Stature,
fair flaxen Hair, long Visage, great Nose, his Eyes sunk into his Head, his
Face very red, Deposed by the Synod of Sevennes for diverse Crimes, and since
turned Apostate.

8. -- Peyreille formerly Pastor in the Church of Cabarede in the Province of
Higher Languedoc, five and thirty years old, black Beard, great Head and Nose,
short feet, very low of Stature, Deposed by the Synod of that Province for
attempting to commit Adultery, for profaning Gods Holy Word, and diverse other
Crimes.

9. John de Fondevill formerly Pastor in the Church d' Osse in the Principality
of Bearne, low of Stature, fair flaxen Hair, fierce Carriage, great Eyes, about
thirty years old, Deposed by the Colloquy of Olleron for Adultery, Contempt of
his Ministerial Calling, extraordinary Vanity, and since Apostate.

10. Samuel Ceurrad
Pourrac formerly Pastor in the Church of La Bastide, Villefranche in the
Principality of Bearne, middle Stature, red Hair, and yet already turning gray,
about Five and fifty years of Age, crump-shoulder, bald-headed, Deposed for
Adultery by the Synod of the said Principality held at Nay the last August.

11. Peter Palocquz formerly Pastor in the Church of Luc in the Principality of
Bearn, of a low dwarfish Stature, cole black thin Hair, small Crane-Leggs,
pur-blind, about eight and thirty years of Age, Deposed by the aforesaid Synod
held at Nay for his un-natural and un-dutiful Carriage unto his Aged Parents,
for very great and shrewd suspicions of Adultery, from which he could never
clear himself, and because in his common Deportments and Conversation he acted
as one altogether unworthy the Sacred Ministry.

12. John Perrier formerly Pastor in the Church of Paillac in Auvergne, low of
Stature, red Hair, copper-Nos'd, about fifty years old, Deposed by the Synod of
Burgundy for deserting his Church, and a great many other Crimes.

All these aforementioned Acts, Decsiions, and Canons were past in the
National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, and Principality of Bearne,
assembled at Charenton St. Maurice near Paris from the First of September to
the First of October, in the year 1623. As also was sworn the Oath of Union in
Doctrine and Discipline, and of fidelity to His Majesty, as was practiced
heretofore in these National Synods, and in the very words of that Oath framed
by the Synod of Alez.

Thus Subscribed by Durant, Moderator. Bailly, Assessor. Faucheur Scribes. and
de Launay Scribes.


And there was this Appendix written by the hand of the Lord de Launay at the
close of this Synod.

A True Copy sent unto the Colloquy in the Land of Chartres attested by the
Manual Subscription of De L' Aunay, one of the Scribes of the said Synod, and
one of the Deputies for the Province of the Isle of France, and by these
Deputies, whose Names follow.

William Rivett. Berlie Pastor of the Church in Quissac. J. Clerc, De Chambrun.
Chamier Pastor of the Church at Montlimart. St. Amblier. Jurieu Pastor of
Chastillion on the Loir. Villon. Havres. M. de Langle Pastor in the Church of
Rouen. P. Paulett Pastor of Vezenobre. D' Avignon Pastor at Rennes. P. Beraud
Pastor and Professor in the Church of Montauban. Savoye Pastor in the Church of
Castres. Isle Pelletier Pastor in the Church of Vandome. Cottiby Pastor at
Poictiers.

CHAP. XXVI. CANONS and DECREES Made and Established in the National Synod of
the Reformed Churches of France held at Charenton near Paris, September, l623.
inviolably to be observed by all the Churches and Universities in that Kingdom.
CHAP. I. Of Predestination, Election, and Reprobation.
CANON I. FOrasmuch as all Mankind sinned in Adam, and are thereby become
liable unto the Curse and Eternal Death, God had done them no wrong, in case he
had left Men in their Estate of Sin, and under the Curse, and Damned them for
evermore. Thus speaks the Holy Apostle, Romans 3.19, 22. All have sinned and
fallen short of the Glory of God. And Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin is Death.
CANON II. But in this has God manifested his Love, that he sent his only Son
into the World, that whosoever believes in him may not perish, but obtain
everlasting Life, 1 John 4.9. John 3.16. CANON III. And that Men may be brought
to believe, God sends the glad tidings of Salvation in the Gospel to whom he
pleases, by the Ministration whereof Men are called unto Repentance, and Faith
in Jesus Christ crucified. For how shall they believe on him of whom they have
not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they
preach unless they be sent, Romans 10.14, 15. CANON IV. Such as believe not the
Gospel, the Wrath of God abides on them; but such as receive and embrace
Christ Jesus the Savior with a true and lively Faith, they be delivered by him
from the wrath of God, and Damnation, and are made partakers of Everlasting
life. CANON V. God is in no wise the Cause nor guilty of Men's unbelief, they
themselves are, as of all other their Sins. But Faith in Jesus Christ and
Salvation by him is the free gift of God, according as it is written, Ephesians.
2.8. You are saved by Grace, through Faith, and this not of your selves, but
the gift of God, and also Philip. 1.29. To you it is given freely and
graciously to believe in Christ Jesus. CANON VI. That God gives Faith in his
time unto some, and not unto others, this proceeds from his Everlasting Decree,
for known unto God from the beginning are all his works, Acts. 15.18. And he
does all things according to the Council of his own Will. Ephesians. 1.11. And in
the Execution of this Decree, he does by his grace soften the hearts of the
Elect, though they be never so hard and stony, and makes them to believe, but
he does in his Righteous Judgment leave the Non-Elect in their Wickedness and
Obduracy. And from this do we principally discover the profound depths of his
Mercy, and also that just distinction among the Children of Men, who were all
equally forlorn, lost and undone Sinners. And as the Decrees of Election and
Reprobation revealed by Gods Holy Word, does administer unspeakable Consolation
to Pious and Devout Persons, so as the Ungodly and Unbelievers take it, it must
needs be wrested and perverted to their destruction. CANON VII. Now Election is
the unchangeable purpose of God, by which according to the most free and good
pleasure of his Will, out of mere Grace, he has chosen in Jesus Christ unto
Salvation before the foundation of the World out of Mankind fallen by their own
fault, from their first Integrity, into Sin and Destruction, a certain number
of Men who were in themselves not better than others, for they were all alike
plunged into the same gulf of Misery. And this Jesus Christ God has also
constituted from all Eternity the Head and Mediator of his Elect, and the
Foundation-stone of their Salvation; and so decreed to give them unto Christ,
that he might save them, and call, and draw them effectually by his Word and
Spirit into Communion with himself, and to give them true saving Faith in him,
to justify and sanctify them, and having kept them by his Mighty Power in
Communion with his Son, to show forth the Sovereignty of his Mercy, and the
praise of the Riches of the Glory of his Grace, he will at last glorify them,
as it is written, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. God has chosen us in Christ before the
Foundation of the World that we might be Holy, and unblameable before him in
love, having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ
unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will, to the praise of the
Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in his Well-Beloved. And
Romans 8.29. Whom he predestined, them he also called, and whom he called, them
he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified. CANON VIII.
This Election is not diverse for kind, but one and the same only as to all that
shall be saved in the Old and New Testament. For the Scriptures does teach and
preach but one only good Pleasure, Purpose, Decrees, and Counsel of Gods Will,
by which he has chosen us from Eternity both to Grace and Glory, to Salvation
the End, and to the way and means, which he has prepared that we should use
and walk in. CANON IX. This self-same Election was not done out of foreseen
Faith and Obedience of Faith, Holiness, or any other good Quality and
Disposition, as a Cause or Condition prae-required in Man that is to be
Elected, but that God might give him Faith, and Obedience of Faith, and true
Holiness. And therefore Election is the Spring and Fountain of all saving Good,
from which flow out Faith, Holiness, and all other saving Gifts, yea,
Everlasting Life it self, as the Fruits and Effects thereof, according to that
saying of the Apostle, Ephesians, 1.4. He has chosen us, not because we were, but
that we might be Holy and Unblameable before him in Love. CANON X. Now the
Cause of this free Election is the only good pleasure of God, which does not
stand in this that he has chosen as a Condition of Salvation some certain
Humane Qualities or Actions, which are possible to be done, but in this, that
he has took unto himself some certain select Persons from among the vast
Multitude and Community of Sinners to be his peculiar Inheritance: Even as it
is written, Romans 9.11, 12, 13. Before the Children were born, and before they
had done good or evil, etc. It was said unto her, viz. Rebecca, the Elder shall
serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.
And Acts 13.48. And all those, who were ordained unto Eternal Life, they
believed. CANON XI. And forasmuch as God is most wise, unchangeable, knowing
all things and Almighty, therefore his Decree of Election can never be broken
off, nor changed, nor revoked, nor disanulled, nor can the Elect be reprobated,
nor their number impaired and diminished. CANON XII. The Elect are in due time
assured of their Everlasting and Unchangeable Election unto Salvation, though
it be done gradually, and in a very unequal measure. Nor do they get it by a
curious diving into the Depths and Secrets of God, but upon an exact scrutiny
into their own hearts they meet with Spiritual Joys, and Holy, Heavenly
Rejoycings, and with those infallible Fruits of their Election, noted and
recorded in the Word of God, such as Faith unfeigned in the Lord Jesus, a
Filial Fear of God, Godly Sorrow for Sin, and hungring and thirsting after
Righteousness. CANON XIII. From this assurance and inward Sense and feeling of
their Election Children of God do daily take occasion for greater Abasement and
deeper Humiliation of themselves before God, and to adore the unfathomable
depths of his Mercy, and purge themselves from all filthiness both of Flesh and
Spirit, and also to love God most ardently and transcendently, who has first
loved them with such a potent and unparalled Affection. So far are they by
this Doctrine from growing slothful, careless, carnally secure, or negligent of
Duty, and of keeping the Commandments of God, that they ordinarily through the
just judgment of God are guilty of these sins, who rashly and unwarrantably
presuming of their Election, do riot it at Noon day, and turn the Grace of God
into lasciviousness, and refuse to walk in the good ways of Gods Elect. CANON
XIV. And as this Doctrine of Divine Election according to the Infinite wise
Council of God was preached by the Prophets of old, by our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by his Apostles under both Testaments, and after recorded in the Holy
Scriptures; So also ought it now in our days to be taught publicly in the
Church of God; for whom it is principally designed, but with a Spirit of
Discretion, Religiously and Piously, in time and place, relinquishing all
curious Inquiries into the ways of the most High, and all to the Glory of Gods
Holy Name, the Peace and Comfort, the Everlasting Life and Happyness of his
People. CANON XV. Moreover the Sacred Scriptures do render this Everlasting
Free Grace of God in our Election the more illustrious, and recommend it to us
by testifying that all Men are not Elected, but that some in the Eternal
Election of God, are passed by, to wit, those whom God in his good pleasure
(which is always most Free, most Righteous, Unblameable, and Unchangeable)
Decreed to leave in that gulf of common Misery, whereinto by their own sin
they had flung themselves headlong, and not to give them saving Faith, nor the
Grace of Conversion; but having abandoned them to their own ways and lusts, he
does finally in his Righteous Judgment condemn and punish them Everlastingly
not only for their unbelief, but also for all their other sins, for the
manifestation of his Justice. This is the Decree of Reprobation, which does not
in any wise make God the Author of Sin, the very thought whereof is horrid
Blasphemy; but on the contrary does demonstrate him to be a most dreadful,
irreprehensible, and Righteous Judge, and Revenger of all Sin. CANON XVI. Such,
who do not as yet effectually feel in their own Souls a lively Faith in Christ
Jesus, or a particular confidence of Heart in God, Peace of Conscience, a
diligent care and endeavor to yield Filial Obedience, and to glorify God
through Jesus Christ, and do yet nevertheless use the means, by which God has
promised to work those Graces in us, they should not be discouraged when as
they here speak or Reprobation, nor should they reckon themselves in the number
of Reprobates, but they ought carefully to continue in the use of means, and
ardently to petition for that happy hour when this Grace of God shall be
abundantly poured down upon them, and to wait for it in all Reverence and
Humility, much less should they be affrighted at the Doctrine of Reprobation,
who, when as they desire to be sincere Converts, and would please God entirely,
and be delivered from this Body of Death, sin dwelling in them, yet cannot make
so great a progress in Piety and Faith as they would: Because God who is full
of Mercy has promised that he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the
bruised reed. But this Doctrine is indeed terrible unto them, who forgetting
God, and Jesus Christ our Savior, are totally imbondaged unto the
heart-piercing cares of this present World, and the Concupiscencies of their
fiesh, during the whole time of their unregeneracy. CANON XVII. Wherefore since
it is our Duty to judge of Gods Will by his Word, which testifies for the
Children of Believers, that they be Holy, not indeed by Nature, but through the
singular benefit of the Covenant of Grace, in which they be included with their
Parents; Fathers and Mothers fearing God should not doubt of their Childrens
Election and Salvation, whom God takes unto himself in their Infancy. CANON
XVIII. In case any Person murmur against the free Grace of God in Election, and
the Severity of Gods Justice in Reprobation; we should oppose them with that of
the Apostle, Romans 9.20. O! Man, who art thou, that contendest with God? And
with those words of our Savior, Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do
with my own as I please? But as for us, who adore these Divine Mysteries, let
us cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33, 34, 35, 36. O! The Depths of the
Riches, and of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how incomprehensible are his
Judgments, and his Waves are past finding out? For who has known the Mind of
the Lord? Or who has been his Counselor? Or who has first given unto him,
and it shall be rendered unto him again? For of him, and by him, and for him are
all things. To him be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
Errors Rejected. The Orthodox Doctrine of Election and Reprobation having been
Expounded, the Synod Rejected their Errors.
CANON I. I. WHO teach that the Will of God to save them that shall believe and
persevere in Faith, and Obedience of Faith is the full and whole Decree of
Election unto Salvation; and that there is nothing else revealed in the Word of
God concerning this Decree. For these deceive the simple, and do apparently
contradict the Holy Scriptures, which does not only witness that God would save
such as shall believe; but also that from all Eternity he has chosen some
certain Persons, to whom in his own time, he will rather give Faith in Jesus
Christ and perseverance than unto others. As it is written, John 17.16. I have
manifested thy Name unto the Men, whom thou have given me. And Acts 13.48. And
all those believed who were ordained unto Eternal Life. And Ephesians. 1.4. He has
chosen us before the foundation of the World, that we might be Holy. CANON II.
Those who teach that Gods Election unto Eternal Life is of diverse kinds, the
one general and Indefinite, the other definite and particular, and this again
is either incomplete, revocable, not-peremptory, but conditional, or else
complete, unchangeable, peremptory, or absolute: Item, there is Election unto
Faith, and another unto Life and Salvation; so that Election unto Justifying
Faith may be without a peremptory Election unto Salvation. For these are
nothing else but the vain Inventions of brain-sick-Men, forged without
Scripture Light or Warrant, and which corrupt the Sacred Doctrine of Divine
Election, and do dissolve asunder all the Links in that Golden Chain of our
Salvation, Romans 8.29. And whom God has predestined them he also called, and
whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. CANON III. Those who teach that the good pleasure and determinate
purpose of God, whereof the Scripture makes mention in the Doctrine of
Election, consists not in this, that God has chosen some certain Persons
rather than others, but in this that from out of all possible Conditions, among
which also are the works of the Law, or from the Rank and Order of all things
God has chosen the Act of Faith, though vile in it self, and the imperfect
Obedience of Faith, for the condition of Salvation; and that of his mere Grace
he will accept and reckon it for perfect Obedience, and judge it worthy the
recompense of Eternal Life. For by this pernicious Error the good Pleasure of
God, and the Merits of Our Lord Jesus Christ be all enervated, and Men are
turned away by unprofitable Questions from the true Doctrine of the Free Grace
or God displayed in our Justification, and the simplicity of the Scriptures.
And that Sentence of the Holy Apostle must be branded with falsity, 2 Timothy 1.9.
God has called us with an Holy Calling, not according to Works, but according
to his own determinate Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Jesus Christ
from the beginning of the World. CANON IV. Those who teach, that in Election
unto Faith, there is this Condition pre-required, that Man do make a good and
right use of Nature, that he be an honest Man, humble, and disposed for Eternal
Life, as if Election did some way or other depend on these things. For this
Opinion is rank Pelagianisme, and does too overtly and boldly tax the Apostle
of falsehood, when as he says, Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. We have all
had heretofore our Conversions in the Lusts of the Flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the Flesh, and of our Minds, and were by Nature Children of Wrath,
as well as others: But God who is Rich in Mercy by his great love, wherewith he
loved us even then when as we were dead in our sins, has quickened us together
with Christ, by whose Grace you are saved, and he has risen us up together
with him, and has made us sit down together in heavenly places through Jesus
Christ, that so he might manifest in Ages to come the abundant Excellencies of
the riches of his Grace, by his loving kindness toward us in Jesus Christ. For
you are saved by grace, through Faith, and this not of your selves, but the
gift of God, not of works, least any one should boast or glory. CANON V. Those
who teach that incomplete and not-peremptory Election of particular Persons is
done through foresight of their begun Faith, Conversion, Holiness and Piety, or
of its continuance for some time: But that complete and peremptory Election is
done from a foresight of their final perseverance in Faith, Conversion,
Holiness, and Piety, and therein lies that gratuitous and Evangelical
Worthiness for which he who is Elected is more Worthy than he who is not
Elected, and thus consequently Faith, and the Obedience of Faith, Holiness,
Piety and Perseverance are not the Fruits and Effects of Immutable Election
unto Glory, but Conditions and Causes without which there can be no Election;
which Causes and Conditions are prae-required, and foreseen in such a manner
in those Persons who would be completely Elected, as if they were already
accomplished. This is a Doctrine diametrically opposite unto Scripture, which
in diverse places inculcateth into our Ears and Hearts these and the like
Sentences, Romans 9.12. Election is not of Works, but of him that calls. Acts
13.48. All those who were ordained unto Eternal Life believed. Ephesians. 1.4. He
has chosen us in him that we might be Holy. John 15.16. You have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you. Romans 11.6. And if it be by grace, then it is no more
of works, 1 John 4.10. In this is love, not that we have loved God, but that
he has loved us, and sent his Son into the World that he might save us, CANON
VI. Those who teach that all Election unto Salvation is not unchangeable, but
that some of the Elect notvvithstanding all or any part of God's Decree may
perish, and that Eternally. By which gross Error they may make God changeable,
and overthrow the Consolation of Believers, which is bottomed and grounded
upon the immovable firmness of Gods Election, and professedly contradict the
Sacred Scriptures, learning us that the Elect can never be seduced. Matthew.
24.24. And John 6.39. That Christ loses not one of them, who are given him by
the Father. And Romans 8.29. Whom God has predestined, them he called,
justified, and will also glorify. CANON VII. Those who teach, that during
this Life there proceeds not from the unchangeable Election unto Glory any
other Benefit, or Experience, or Assurance, than what may flow from a
mutable, and contingent Condition. But besides that this is a most gross
absurdity to suppose a Certainty which is uncertain, it is also repugnant to
the common Sense and Experience of the faithful, who together with the Holy
Apostle rejoice in the Sense and Feeling of their Election; praising God for
this Divine Benefit, according to the Counsel of our Lord Jesus, for that their
Names be written in the Book of Life, ( Luke 10.20,) which is in Heaven. In
short they oppose the Sense of their Election to the fiery darts and
temptations of the Devil, challenging him thus, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's Elect? Romans 8.32. CANON VIII. Those who teach that God out of
his Just and Sovereign will only has not decreed to leave any one in fallen
Adam, and in that common Estate of Sin and Condemnation, and to pass them by in
the Communication of Grace necessary to work Faith and Conversion: For this is
firm and immutable, Romans 9.18. He will have Mercy on whom he will, and whom
he will he hardneth. Item, Matthew. 13.11. To you it is given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but unto them it is not given. Item, Matthew.
11.25, 26. I give thanks unto thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth for
this, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes and little Children. It is even so, O Father, for such
is thy good pleasure. CANON IX. Those that teach, that the cause wherefore God
sends the Gospel rather to one Nation than to another, is not the Sole and
Sovereign good will and pleasure of God, but because one Nation is better and
more worthy than another, to whom the Gospel is not communicated. For Moses
does in plain words contradict it, speaking thus unto the Children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. Behold the Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens belong unto
Jehovah thy God, the Earth also, and all that is in it, but Jehovah delighted
in thy Fathers only to love them. and has chosen their posterity after them,
to wit you from among all People, as is evident this day. And Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 22.28. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if these
Miracles had been done in Tire and Sydon which have been done in the midst of
you, they would have repented in Sackcloth and Ashes.
CHAP. II. Of the Death of Jesus Christ, and Man's Redemption by it.
CANON I. GOD is not only Soveraignly Merciful, but also Soveraignly just. And
his Justice requires, as it is revealed to us in his Word, that our Sins
committed against his Infinite Majesty be not only punished with Temporal, but
also with Eternal Punishments in Soul and Body. Nor can we avoid those dreadful
punishments, unless the Justice of God be fully satisfied. CANON II. Now we
being utterly unable of our selves to satisfy Divine Justice, and to deliver
our selves from the Wrath of God, God out of his boundless Mercy has given us
his Only Son to be a Surety for us, who was made Sin and a Curse upon the
Cross for us, and in our stead, that he might make satisfaction for us. CANON
III. This Death of the Son of God is the One, Only, and most perfect Sacrifice
and Satisfaction for our Sins, whose worth and value is Infinite, and which is
abundantly sufficient to expiate the Sins of the whole World. CANON IV. And
this Death is of so great a Value and Dignity, because the Person who suffered
it is not only a True Man, and perfectly Holy, but is also the Only Son of
God, of the self-same Eternal Essence with the Father and the Spirit. For such
a one must our Savior needs be, because he felt in his Death the Sense of Gods
Wrath and Curse, which we had deserved by our Sins. CANON V. Moreover the
Gospel-promise is, that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ crucified, shall
not perish, but have Everlasting Life: Which promise ought to be preached and
tendered indifferently unto all Nations and Persons to whom God in his good
pleasure shall send the Gospel, and together with it, the great Command of
Faith and Repentance. CANON VI. And whereas many who are called by the Gospel
do not repent nor believe in Christ Jesus, but perish in their Infidelity, this
comes not from any defect, or insufficiency in the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ
offered upon the Cross, but the fault is in and from themselves. CANON VII. But
all that truly Believe, and are delivered and saved from their Sins and
Everlasting destruction through Jesus Christ, this singular benefit is derived
to them from the mere Grace of God only, which he owes no Man, and it was
given them from all Eternity in Jesus Christ. CANON VIII. For such was the most
free Counsel, and most gracious will and purpose of God the Father, that the
quickening Power of God and the saving efficacious Virtue of his Sons most
precious Death, should extend it self unto all the Elect, to give them and them
only Justifying Faith, and thereby infallibly to bring them unto Salvation:
That is to say, God would, that Jesus Christ by the Blood of his Cross,
wherewith he confirmed the New Covenant, should efficaciously redeem all those
and none other out of every Nation, Kingdom, People, and Language, who from
all Eternity were chosen unto Salvation, and were given him by the Father,
that he should give them Faith, (which as all other Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
he has acquired for them by his Death,) and purge them by his Blood from all
Sin both Original and Actual, committed before and after Faith, that he should
keep them faithfully unto the end, and finally present them before the Father
glorious without any spot or blemish. CANON IX. This Council proceeding from
the Everlasting Love of God toward his Elect, has been powerfully
accomplished from the beginning of the World unto this very day; The Gates of
Hell having in vain opposed it, and it shall be also always in succeeding Ages
accomplished, yea, in such manner, that the Elect shall be in their appointed
time gathered into one, and there shall be always upon Earth in one place or
other a Church of Believers founded in the Blood of Jesus Christ, which will
bear a constant Love unto its Savior, who as the Bridegroom for his Dearly
Beloved Bride, has yielded up the Ghost upon his Cross, which also shall
persevere in his Service, and shall praise and glorify him now in time, and to
all Eternity,
Errors Rejected. The Orthodox Doctrine having been Explained, the Synod
Rejects their Errors.
CANON I. WHO teach that God the Father destinated his Son unto the cursed
Death of the Cross, without any certain or determined Counsel to save any one
particular Sinner; so that the Necessity, Utility and Dignity of the
Impetration of Christ Jesus his Death might have been wholly saved, and
continued in its perfect being, in all its parts complete and entire, although
the Redemption impetrated should never have been actually applied either to, or
by any one particular Person. But this Doctrine is injurious to the Wisdom of
God the Father, and to the merit of Jesus Christ, and is contrary to the very
Letter and express terms of the Scripture; for do but hear what our Lord
speaks, John 10.15, 17. I lay down my Life for my Sheep, and I know them. And
the Prophet Esaias says of our Savior, Cap. 53.10. When as he shall have made
his Soul an Offering for Sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,
and the good pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. In short this
Doctrine subverts that Article of our Creed, I believe the Holy Catholic
Church. CANON II. Who teach that the design of Christ Jesus in his Death was
not effectually to ratify the New Covenant of Grace by his Blood, but only to
acquire for his Father a right of contracting anew with Men another Covenant,
whether of Grace or Works it was not material. But this is repugnant unto
Scripture, which teaches Heb. 7.22. That Jesus Christ was, a Surety, and
Mediator of a better, that is to say, of the New Covenant, and Heb. 9.15, 17.
That a Testament is not in force till the Death of the Testator. CANON III. Who
teach that Jesus Christ by his satisfaction has not merited for any one
assuredly Salvation it self, or that Faith whereby his satisfaction may be
applied effectually to Salvation: But that he has only acquired unto the
Father the Power or plenary Will of treating anew with Men, and prescribing to
them new Conditions such as please him, and whose accomplishment depends on
the free Will of Man: And so it might have fallen out that either no Man, or
all Men might have accomplished them. For these have too mean and abject
thoughts of the Death of Christ Jesus, not owning nor acknowledging the
principal fruit or benefit acquired by it. This Doctrine would redeem from Hell
that Ancient and condemned Heresy of the Pelagians. CANON IV. Who teach that
this New Covenant of Grace which God the Father has contracted with Men
through the interposal of Christ's Death, does not consist in this, that we are
justified before God, and saved by Faith, as it lays hold of Christ's Death, but
in this, that whereas the Law required perfect Obedience, it is now abolished,
and God reckons Faith it self, and the imperfect Obedience of Faith for a
perfect and complete Obedience unto the Law, and out of his mere and pure
Grace, does esteem it worthy to be recompensed with Eternal Life. For these
Fellows contradict in express terms the Sacred Scripture, Romans 3.23, 24. Being
justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption which is in Jesus Christ,
whom God has ordained before all time to be a Propitiation by Faith in his
Blood. And thus introduce with profane Socinus a Novel and unheard of
Justification before God against the Unanimous and common Consent of the whole
Church. CANON V. Who teach that all Men are received into a State of
Reconciliation, and to the Grace of the Covenant, so that none is obnoxious
unto Condemnation, nor shall be condemned for Original Sin, but that they be
exempted from all the guilt which is in that Sin. For this Opinion crosses
the Scripture, which affirms, Ephesians. 2.3. That we are by Nature Children of
Wrath. CANON VI. Who serve themselves of that distinction, of the Impetration
and Application, that they may instill into the minds of simple and ignorant
Souls this Opinion, That God would equally impart unto all Men the benefits
purchased by the Death of Jesus Christ; and whereas some are made Partakers
sooner than others of the Remission of Sins, and of Eternal Life, that this
difference came from, and depends, chiefly on their free Will, applying unto
themselves that Grace, which is indifferently offered unto all. But this has
no dependency at all upon the gift of special Mercy, working efficaciously
within them, that they may apply it rather than others unto themselves. For
making semblance as if they propounded this Doctrine in a good Sense, they
endeavor slily to insinuate into Souls the most pernicious Poison of
Pelagianisme. CANON VII. Who teach that Jesus Christ needed not to have died,
nor indeed did he die for them, who were the Objects of Gods Sovereign Love,
and Elected unto Everlasting Life, as if these needed not the Death of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which is a notorious contradiction unto the Apostle, Gal. 2.20.
Christ has loved me, and given himself to the Death for me. Romans 8.32. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? God is he that justifies, who
will condemn? Christ is he that has dyed for us. They also contradict our
very Savior himself, John 10.15. I lay down my Life for my Sheep, and chap.
15.12, 13. This is my Commandment that ye love one another even as I have loved
you. There is no greater love than this, that one should lay down his Life for
his Friends.
CHAP. III. Of the Corruption of Man, his Conversion unto God, and the manner
how.
CANON I. MAN at first was created after Gods Image, and adorned in his
Understanding with the true and saving Knowledge of his Creator, and of
Spiritual things, with Righteousness in his Will, and Purity in his Heart, and
in all his Affections, yea, he was truly and thoroughly Holy; but being turned
away from God by the Instigation of the Devil, and his own free Will, he has
deprived himself of those Excellent Gifts, and contrary wise instead of them he
has brought upon himself Blindness, horrible Darkness, Vanity and perverseness
of Judgment in his Understanding, Malice, Rebellion and hardness in his Will
and Heart, and so in like manner impurity in all his Affections. CANON II. And
such as he is since the Fall, such Children are there begotten of him, he is
the corrupted Father Of corrupted Children, the Corruption through the Just
Judgment of God being derived from Adam down upon all his Posterity, Jesus
Christ only excepted, and this not only by imitation, as the Pelagians of old
asserted, but by propagation of his Corrupted Nature. CANON III. Therefore all
Men are conceived in Sin, and are born Children of Wrath, utterly unable to
perform any saving Duty, inclined unto Evil, dead in Sin, and in Bondage to it,
and without the Regenerating Grace of Gods Spirit they neither will nor can
return unto God, nor reform their depraved Nature, nor so much as dispose
themselves to a Reformation of it. CANON IV. It Is true that since the Fall
there remain in Man some Relics of Natural Light, by means whereof he yet
retains some Knowledge of God, and of Natural things, he can discern between
what is honest and dishonest, and expresses some kind of Care and Study for
Virtue, and Exterior Discipline. But he is so far from being able by this
Light of Nature to attain the saving Knowledge of God, and to return unto him,
that he does not so much as make a right use of it in Natural and Civil things,
but rather does in diverse ways soil and pollute it, and holds it under Hatches
through Unrighteousness, by doing whereof he is left inexcusable before God.
CANON V. And as it is with the light of Nature, even just so it is with the
Decalogue which God particularly gave unto the Jews; for it does indeed
discover the hainousness of Sin, and does more and more convince the Conscience
of it, but not propounding any Remedy, nor imparting any Strength or Power
whereby to get rid of this Misery, and being weak as to the Flesh, it leaves
the Transgressor under the Curse, so that he cannot possibly obtain any saving
Grace. CANON VI. This gift then which neither the Light of Nature, nor the Law
of God can give, is wrought effectually by the virtue of the Holy Ghost,
through the preaching of the Word, or Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, the
Gospel concerning the Messiah, by whom it has been, and still is the good
pleasure of God to save all Believers both under the Old and New Testament.
CANON VII. God revealed this Secret of his Will under the Old Testament to very
few: But since, under the New Testament, that the partition Wall of difference
between People is broken down and removed, God has manifested it unto more
Persons. The Cause of which Dispensation must not in the least be attributed to
the Dignity of any one Nation above another, or because they do better Husband
and improve the Light of Nature, but wholly and solely to the most free ^race,
and Love, and good pleasure of God. And therefore those who be made partakers
of so great a favor, infinitely above their Deserts, should ever acknowledge
it with all humbleness of Heart, and Thanksgiving; But others who be destitute
of this Grace, they should with the Apostle adore the Severity and Justice of
Gods Judgments, but not pry into them over-curiously. CANON VIII. And as many
as are called by the Gospel are called in good earnest: For God does by his
Word declare most truly and seriously what is well-pleasing to him, to wit,
that all who are caled by him should come unto him, and therefore he most
seriously promises, that all who come and believe in him, shall have rest unto
their Souls, and Everlasting Life. CANON IX. And whereas many being called by
the Ministry of the Gospel, do not come, nor convert themselves unto God, the
Gospel is not in fault, nor is Jesus Christ, who is offered in the Gospel, nor
is God, who by the Gospel calls them, and does also bestow diverse gifts upon
them; but the fault is their own, and to be found in themselves, who are
called, some of whom through their carelessness do not receive the Word of
Life, and others indeed do receive it, but not into their hearts; and therefore
after the flashy joys of a temporary Faith they turn back again; and others do
choke and strangle the Seed of the Word by the Thorny Cares and Pleasures of
this present World, and yield no fruit. This was the Doctrine preached by our
Savior in the parable of the Sower. CANON X. And whereas others called by the
Ministry of the Gospel do come, and are converted, this must not be ascribed
unto Man, as if he himself by his own free will made himself to differ from
others, who are as well provided with sufficient Grace for Believing and
Conversion. For this is the main butteress that under-props and supports the
proud Heresy of Pelagius; but it must be only attributed unto God; who, as he
has chosen his own from all Eternity in Jesus Christ, so also does he
effectually call them in their time, gives them Faith and Repentance, and
having delivered them from the power of darkness, he does translate them into
the Kingdom of his dear Son, that so they may show forth his Virtues, who has
called them out of their Darkness into his mavelous Light. That they may not
boast nor glory in themselves, but in the Lord. And this is the true
Apostolical Doctrine legible in their Holy Writings. CANON XI. Moreover when as
God executes this his good pleasure upon the Elect, and does convert them, he
does not only procure that the Gospel be preached outwardly to their Ear only,
nor does he only powerfully illuminate their Understandings by the Holy Ghost,
that so they may know and discern aright the things which are of Gods Spirit,
but by the Effectual Power of the same Spirit of Regeneration he pierces even
into the most inward Recesses of their Souls, he opens their heart which was
fast shut, softens their heardned heart, circumciseth the foreskin of their
Souls, infuseth new Qualities into the Will, and causes this dead Will to
live, yea and to become lively, of Evil, Good, of unwilling, stubborn and
perverse most obedient, he works upon it, and fortifies it, that as a good Tree
it may produce good Fruits. CANON XII. This is that Regeneration which is so
much celebrated in the Holy Scriptures, this is that Renovation and new
Creature, this is that first Resurrection from the Dead, this is that quickening
which God works in us, without us: Nor is this at all done by mere teaching
only, striking the Ear, or by moral persuasion, which is made up of persuasive
Arguments, or by any other the like means, so that after God has done his
part, it remains in the power of Man to be regenerated or not, to be converted
or not: No, but it is an Operation totally supernatural, most efficacious, and
yet at the same time most sweet, admirable, secret and unutterable; which
according to the Scriptures inspired of God the Author of this Operation, is,
as to its efficacy not in the least inferior to the Glorious Work of Creation,
or the Resurrection of the Dead: so that they in whose hearts God works after
this wonderful manner, are most certainly, infallibly, and efficaciously
regenerated, and do actually believe, and then their Will being already
renewed, is not only excited and moved of God, but being excited of God, it
does also work together with him; so that we may well enough say, that Man
believes and repents by reason of that Grace, which he has received. CANON
XIII. The Faithful during this Life cannot fully comprehend the manner of this
Operation; but yet they may be very well satisfied, since they know and feel
that by this Grace, they do from their heart believe in, and love their
Savior. CANON XIV. So then Faith is the gift of God, not because it is offered
of God unto the free Will of Man, but because in very truth it is bestowed
upon, inspired, and infused into Man, and also not only because God gives the
power of believing, and then waits till the Will of Man consents, and does
actually believe, but because, that he, who works both to will and to do,
yea, who works all in all, produces in Man a will to believe, and the Act of
Believing also. CANON XV. God does not owe this Grace unto any Person. For how
should God be indebted unto him, who can do nothing? He that is first has
something that may be repayed him again, but what can he owe unto him, who has
nothing of his own but Sin and Lies? He then, who has received this Grace from
God should yield Everlasting thanks unto God, and in truth he is thankful: He
who has not received it, or who cares not for these Spiritual concerns, but
pleases himself in his own, or is unconcerned for them, he does in vain boast
to have that which he has not. And as for those, who make an outward
profession of Faith and Amendment of Life, we ought not to speak or judge of
them otherwise than well, this the Apostles learn us. For the Secrets of Men's
hearts are hidden from us: But as for others, who be not called, we should in
our Prayers beseech God, who calls things, which are not as if they were, to
call them effectually, and we ought not in any wise proudly to insult over
them, as if we had made our selves by our own proper virtue to differ from
them. CANON XVI. And whereas by the Fall, Man cease not to be a Man, that is,
to be a Person endowed with Understanding and Will, and Sin which has spread
its Contagion through all Mankind, has not abolished the Nature of Mankind,
but has depraved, and spiritually killed it So this Divine Grace of
Regeneration does not operate upon Men, as upon Stocks and Blocks, nor does it
take away their Will, and its properties, nor does it force and compel it
against its own accord, but it does Spiritually enliven, heal, reform, and
bend it not less sweetly than povverfully, so that whereas formerly
Rebellions, and proud risings of the Flesh did fully domineer in it, now that
prompt and sincere Obedience of the Spirit begins to reign in it, in which
consists the true Spiritual restablishment and freedom of our Will. And were
it not that this wonderful Worker of all good did in this manner work for us,
Man could never hope of rising again from his lapst Estate by his own free
Will, which whilst he stood in Innocence precipitated him into the gulf of
perdition. CANON XVII. So then as this Almighty Operation of God, by which he
produces and sustains our Natural Life, does not exclude, but requires the use
of means, through which according to his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness he is
pleased to exert his own power; so that aforesaid Supernatural Work of God,
by which he does Regenerate us, does not exclude, nor in any wise subvert the
preaching of the Gospel, which the most Wise God has ordained to be the Seed
of Regeneration, and Food of the Soul. Wherefore as the Apostles and Doctors
who have follovved them, have all along piously taught and preached up this
Grace of God to his Glory, and the abasement of ^ll pride, and yet in the mean
while did never neglect to keep their People within the bounds of Duty by the
Sacred Councils of the Gospel, such as hearing of the Word, participation of
the Sacraments, and Exercise of Discipline; so also, God forbid, that those
who now teach and learn in the Church should presume to tempt God, by
separating those things which in his good pleasure he will have most straightly
conjoined together. For Grace is conferred by Admonitions, and the more ready
we are in the performance of our Duty the more Illustrious is the benefit of
God, vvorking in us, and its then that Gods Work goes onvvard most kindly. And
unto this our God, and to him only is due all the Glory of the Means, and of
their Fruit, and saving-Efficacy for ever and ever, Amen.
Errors Rejected. The Orthodox Doctrine having been Explained, the Synod
Rejects their Errors.
CANON I. WHO teach, That in strictness and propriety of Discourse Original Sin
was not of it self sufficient to condemn all Mankind, or that it should
deserve Temporal and Eternal Punishments, for they do professedly contradict
the Holy Apostle, Romans 5.12. who says, That by one Man only Sin entered into
the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed over all Men, forasmuch as all
Men have sinned. And ver. 16. The fault was by one Offense only unto
Condemnation. And Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin is Death. Who teach, that
Spiritual gifts, and good habits and virtues, such as Goodness, Holiness, and
Righteousness were not in the Will of Man; when he was first created, and so by
consequence, that they could not be lost nor separated from him by the fall:
For this is repugnant to that Character and Description we have of Gods Image
front the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.24. Who tells us it consisted in Righteousness and
true Holiness, which Virtues are truly seated in the Will.

CANON III. Who teach that Spiritual gifts were not separated from the Will of
Man in his Estate of Spiritual Death, because the Will of it self was never
corrupted, but only impeded in its Actions by the darkness of the
Understanding, and the unruliness of the Affections, which Impediments being
once removed, the Will can display its Natural Liberty, that is to say, it can
of it self either will and choose, or not will and refuse whatsoever good is
objected and propounded to it. This is a mere Novelty, and very erroneous,
tending only to exalt the powers of Free Will above the power of Free Grace,
contrary to what the Prophet Jeremiah has long since asserted, chap. 17.9. The
Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. And contrary to
what has been taught us by the Holy Apostle. Ephesians. 8.3. Among whom, viz. the
Children of disobedience, we also had heretofore our Conversation in the lusts
of our Flesh, fulfilling the desires of our Flesh and of our Minds. CANON IV.
Who teach that Man in his Unregenerate Estate is not totally nor properly
impeded, or deprived of all Spiritual Powers unto Spiritual Good, but that he
may hunger and thirst after Righteousness and Life, and offer unto God the
Sacrifice of a contrite and broken Heart, which will be acceptable unto God:
For these Assertions are downright contradictions to express Texts of
Scripture, as Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened being dead in your Sins and
Trespasses; And Genesis 6.5. And 8.21. Every imagination of the thought of Man's
Heart is only evil, and that continually, from his youth upwards. Besides to
hunger and thirst after Life, and to desire and long for deliverance from Sin
and its Misery, and to offer unto God the Sacrifices of a broken heart, this is
the peculiar property of the Regenerate, Psalm. 51.19. And of them who by our
Blessed Savior are styled Blessed Persons. CANON V. Who teach that Man
corrupted and as yet in his Natural Estate can so well use and improve common
Grace, (by which they understand the Light of Nature, or those gifts which
remain in him since the fall) that by his good usage of them, he may by degrees
obtain a far greater Grace, to wit, Evangelical and Saving Grace, yea and
Salvation it self, and so by this means God is ready on his part to discover
himself, and to reveal Jesus Christ unto all, because he does sufficiently and
efficaciously administer unto all those necessary means whereby they may attain
the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and of Faith and Repentance. But that this is
notoriously false, besides the Experience of all Ages, it is evident also from
Scripture Testimony, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He declared his words unto Jacob, his
Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with every Nation,
and as for his Judgments they have not known them. Acts. 14.16. And in times
past God suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Acts 16.6, 7. And
they were forbidden, viz. Paul and his Company, by the Holy Ghost to declare,
or preach his Word, i. e. the Gospel in Asia, and when they were come into
Mysia, they essayed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit, of our Lord Jesus,
suffered them not. CANON VI. Who teach, that when God does truly and savingly
convert Man, it cannot be that he should put into his Will new Qualities,
Habits or Gifts; and that therefore Faith by which we be first of all
Converted, and from which we be called Believers, is not a quality or gift
infused into us by God, but an Action of Man only, and that it cannot be called
a gift, unless it be upon this Account, that Man can of himself attain it. For
these are palpable Contradictions to the Divinely inspired Scriptures, which do
in plain terms declare, That God sheddeth abroad into our Hearts the new
Qualities of Faith, Obedience, and the sense and feeling of his Love, Jer.
31.3. I will put my Law in them, and I will write it in their hearts, Esaiah
44.3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, Romans 5. ver. 5. And the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us. And these
Opinions be repugnant to the Prayers and Practice of Gods Church in all Ages,
who have ever cried with Jeremy, 31.18. Convert me, O God, and I shall be
converted. CANON VII. Who teach, that Converting Grace is no other than a sweet
persuasion, or as some others of them explain it, that the most noble manner of
working in Man's Conversion, and most suitable to his Humane Nature, is that
which is done by swasion, and that nothing can hinder, but that the Grace,
which they call Moral, that is to say, Arguments simply persuasive, may change
the Natural Man into Spiritual, yea, that God does not any way else induce the
Will to consent, but by this way and manner of persuasions, and herein
consists the efficaciousness of Gods operation, by which he does so much
surmount the operation of Satan, Satan only promising temporal good things,
but God such as be Eternal. For this is rank Pelagianisme, and crosses the
whole tenor of Sacred Scriptures, which besides this way of operation, by
Moral Swasion, in the Conversion of Man does yet acknowledge another, to wit,
that of Gods Holy Spirit, which is far more Divine and efficacious, as in Ezekiel.
36.26. I will give unto them a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within
them; and I will take away the heart of stone, and give unto them an heart of
Flesh. CANON VIII. Who teach that God does not exert in the Conversion of Man
all the Majesty of his Omnipotency, so as thereby most powerfully and
infallibly to bow his stubborn and rebellious Will to believe and convert; but
notwithstanding Gods exertion of all those operations of Grace which are used
by him in Man's Conversion; yet Man may resist God and the Holy Ghost, even then
when as God purposed and had resolved to convert him, yea and that in very deed
Man does oftentimes resist God in such a manner as does totally and entirely
hinder his Regeneration, yea, that it is still in his own power whether he will
be regenerated or not. For this is nothing else but to rob God of the
efficaciousness of his Grace in our Conversion, and to subject the Action of
God Almighty to the will of the weak Man, which is contrary to the Apostolical
Doctrine, Ephesians. 1.19. learning us, That we believe according to the efficacy
of his Mighty Power. And 2 Thessalon. 1.11. And God fulfilleth and
accomplisheth in us all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
Faith with power. 2 Pet. 1.3. And by his Divine power are given unto us all
things appertaining to Life and Godlyness. CANON IX. Who teach, that Grace and
Free Will are Con-Causes, and act, though each his part, yet jointly together
in the first point of Conversion, and that Grace as a Cause does not in order
precede the efficiency or motion of the Will, that is in plain English, God
does not efficaciously help the Will of Man to convert it self, before the Will
of it self does first move and determine it self. But Gods Ancient Church has
many Ages since anathematized this Doctrine of Pelagius by the words of the
Apostle, Romans 9.16. It Is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows Mercy, 1 Cor. 4.7. And who is it that makes thee to differ
from another? And what have thou, which thou have not received? And Philip.
2.13. It Is God who works in us with Efficacy both to will and to do
according to his own good pleasure.
CHAP. IV. Concerning the Perseverance of SAINTS.
CANON I. THOSE whom God calls according to his determinate purpose unto the
Fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and regenerateth by his Holy
Spirit, he delivers them from the Dominion and Slavery of Sin, but not wholly
from their Flesh and Body of Sin in this Life. CANON II. Hence it is that we
daily see so many sins of Infirmity, and that the best Works of Saints are not
without their Spots, which is a continual ground for their deep humiliation
before God, and of recourse unto a crucified Jesus, and daily more and more to
mortify the Flesh by the Spirit of Prayer, and the Sacred exercises of Piety,
and to breath after perfection, till that being rid of this Body of Sin, they
may for ever Reign in Heaven with the Lamb of God. CANON III. By reason of the
Remainders of Sin indwelling in them, and of the Worlds and Satan's Temptations
those who be converted could not persist in this Grace, if they were left unto
their own Strength. But God is faithful, who through the Riches of his Mercy
does confirm them in that Grace, which he has once given them, and will keep
them by his power unto the end. CANON IV. Now although this power of God
strengthening and preserving true Believers in their Estate of Grace, be so very
great that it can never be surmounted by the Flesh, yet so is it, that Converts
are not always so guided and moved of God as they may not through their own
fault in some particular Actions swerve from the Conduct of his Grace, and be
seduced by the Lusts of the Flesh, to obey it. Therefore they ought always to
watch and pray, that they may not be led into temptation; and in case they
neglect this their Duty, they are not only obnoxious to be seduced and drawn
away by the Flesh, the World, and Satan into grievous and atrocious Sins, but
by the just permission of God they do actually fall, and that very shamefully.
And we have sad instances of this in David, Peter, and diverse other Godly
Persons mentioned in Scripture. CANON V. In the mean while by such Sins they
hainously offend God, and render themselves guilty of Death, they grieve the
Holy Spirit, they interrupt the Course and Exercise of their Faith, they do
wound their Consciences most sorely, and may lose the Sense and Feeling of the
grace of God for a time, 'till that he do once again lift up the Light of his
Fatherly loving Countenance upon them, which he may do upon the serious
renevval of their Repentance, and returning into the good vvayes of their Duty.
CANON VI. For God who is rich in Mercy according to the unchangeable purpose
of Election does not utterly take away from his own his Holy Spirit, no not in
their greatest and most lamentable falls, nor does he suffer them to fall so
low as to lose the grace of Adoption, and their Estate of Justification, or to
commit that Sin unto Death against the Holy Ghost. Nor does he so forsake them,
as to suffer them to be precipitated into Everlasting Destruction. CANON VII.
For even under those falls God preserves in them principally and most
carefully his Immortal Seed of Regeneration, so that it is not totally lost nor
destroyed in them: Yea, and afterward he does truly and effectually renew
them by his Word and Spirit, and bring them to Repentance, working in them a
godly sorrow for their Sins, so that with a contrite and broken heart, they do
petition for, and obtain their pardon through Faith in the Blood of the
Mediator, and feel once again the Grace of a Reconciled God, and adore his
faithfulness and tender bowels of Compassion, and do for the future work out
their Salvation more sollicitously, with fear and trembling. CANON VIII. So
then it is not from any Merit or Strength of their own, but by the Sole and
Sovereign Free Grace and Mercy of God, that they do not totally loose Faith and
Grace, nor live, and die, and perish finally in their Sins, which might easily
have been done, and without all doubt would have eventually befallen them, had
it not been for God himself, who can in no wise suffer his Council to be
changed, nor his Promise to be vacated, nor that their Calling decreed in his
Eternal Purpose should be revoked, nor the Merit, and Intercession of the Lord
Jesus, and his keeping of them should be annihilated, nor the Seal of his Holy
Spirit to be evacuated and abolished. CANON IX. And as for that keeping of the
Elect unto Salvation, and the perseverance of true Believers in Faith,
Believers themselves may be, and are according to the Degrees of their Faith
assured of it, by which they be certainly persuaded that they are and shall
continue true and lively Members of Christ's Church, and that they shall obtain
the forgiveness of all their Sins, and at last Everlasting Life. CANON X. And
therefore this Assurance does not arise from any particular Revelation, which
is besides or without the Word, but it proceeds from Faith in Gods promises,
which he has most abundantly revealed in his Holy Word for our comfort, and
from the witness of his Holy Spirit, together with our Spirit, that we be the
Children and Heirs of God, Romans 8.16, 17. and finally from a Serious and
Religious Study and endeavor to keep a good Conscience, and the unwearied
performance of good works. And should Gods Elect be deprived here below of this
Sacred Consolation, that they shall obtain at last the Victory, should they be
destitute of this infallible pledge and earnest of Eternal Glory, they would be
of all Men the most miserable. CANON XI. Yet notwithstanding the Scriptures
testify that Believers must conflict in this Life with many doubts, arising
from the Flesh, and being thus agitated with grievous temptations they may not
then feel this full Consolation of Faith, and this certainty of preserving. But
God the Father of all Consolation, will not suffer them to be tempted above
what they are able to bear; but together with the temptation, will give them
strength to undergo it, and a most happy issue out of it. 1 Cor. 10.13. and by
his Holy Spirit will again revive in them the assurance of their perseverance.
CANON XII. And this Assurance of persevering to the end is so far from rendering
true Believers proud, or plunging them into Carnal Security, that its rather
the Soarce and Root of true Humility, and of Filial Fear, of true Godliness and
Patience in all our Conflicts and Combats, of most ardent Prayers, constancy
under the Cross, confession of the Truth, and of Solid Rejoicing in God. So
that the Consideration of this benefit is a Spur and Incentive to quicken and
provoke them to a serious and daily Exercise of Thanksgiving, and good Works.
As is evident from Scripture Instances, and the Examples of Saints. CANON XIII.
So that when as the Confidence of Perseverance is enkindled again in the
faithful, which are recovered from their falls, this does not beget in them a
laziness and neglect of Piety, but a far greater care to keep themselves in the
ways of God, which are ordained for us to walk in: And they retain the
certainty of their hope, least by abusing the Paternal Love and Kindness of
their God, he should once again turn away his gracious and loving Countenance
from them, (the sight whereof is unto all the faithful far better than Life,
and the deprival of it far more bitter than Death) and they should fall into
greater anguish and torments of Conscience. CANON XIV. And forasmuch as it has
pleased God by his grace to begin his Work in us through the preaching of the
Gospel, so also will he preserve, continue and perfect it by the Hearing,
Reading, Counsels, Threatenings and Promises of the Gospel, and by our Usage of
the Sacraments. CANON XV. This Doctrine of the Assurance and Perseverance of
Real Saints and sound Believers, which is so abundantly revealed by God in his
Word unto the glory of his Name, and the Consolation of Pious Souls, and which
is imprinted by him on the hearts of the Faithful, is such as no Flesh can
comprehend, Satan hates, the World laugheth at, the Ignorant and Hypocrites
abuse, and is opposed by erroneous Spirits. But on the other hand, it has been
ever beloved, and that most ardently by the Spouse of Christ, and as a most
inestimable Treasure constantly defended, which God also will cause her
evermore to defend, so as no Counsel nor Force shall be ever able to prevail
against it. Now to this one God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit be Honor and
Glory for ever, and ever, Amen.
Errors Rejected. The Orthodox Doctrine having been Explained, the Synod
Rejects their Errors.
CANON. I. WHO teach that the Perseverance of True Believers is not an effect
of Election, nor a gift of ^od purchased by the Death of Christ, but its a
Condition of the New Covenant, which Man before his Election and peremptory
Justification, as they call it, must of his free will accomplish; for the
Sacred Scriptures witnesses that it flows from Election, and is given unto
the Elect by virtue of the Death, Resurrection, and Intercession of Jesus
Christ, Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it, and the others are hardened.
Also Romans 8.31, 32, 33, 34. He that has not spared his only Son, but given him
for us all, how shall he not also give us with him all other things? Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of ^ods Elect? It is God that will justify. Who
will condemn? It is Christ that is dead, yea rather, who is risen again from
the Dead, and who sits at the right hand of God, and who also makes
Intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall it be
Oppression? Or Tribulation? Or Famine? Or Peril, or Sword? Yea in all these
things we are more than Conquerors through him who has loved us. CANON. II.
Who teach, That God does indeed provide for the Believer strength enough, and
power sufficient for perseverance, and that in case he do his Duty, God will
preserve him: However let all things be supposed, which may be needful to
perseverance in Faith, and which God will make use of for his preservation, yet
still it depends upon the Liberty of Man's Will whether he will persevere or
not. This Opinion is bare-fac't Pelagianisme; and whilst the Professor of it
would make Man free, they make him Sacrilegious: Besides, it is against the
perpetual consent of the Gospel-Doctrine, which removes from Man all grounds of
boasting, and ascribes the Glory of this benefit to the Grace of God only; And
it thwarteth the Testimony of St. Paul, who says, 1 Cor. 1.8. that God will
confirm us unto the end, that we may be blameless in the day of Our Lord Jesus
Christ. CANON. III. Who teach that the Faithful and Regenerate may not only
fall totally and finally from Justifying Faith, and from Grace and Salvation,
but also that they often do so, and perish Everlastingly, for this Opinion does
not only annihilate the Grace of Justification and Regeneration, but also the
perpetual keeping of the Lord Jesus Christ, contrary to the express words of
the Holy Apostle St. Paul, Romans 5.9, 10. If Christ died for us when we were
Sinners, much more than being now justified by his Blood, shall we be saved
from Wrath by him. And against the Apostle St. John, 1 Ep. 3.9. Whosoever is
born of God sins not, for the Seed of God abides in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God, and against the words of Jesus Christ, John 10.28,
29. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, nor shall
any pluck them out of my hand, my Father who has given them unto me is
greater than all, and no one can take them out of my Fathers hands. I and my
Father are one. CANON. IV. Who teach that Believers and Regenerate Persons may
sin the sin unto Death, that is, they may commit that unpardonable sin against
the Holy Ghost. Although the beloved Apostle and Disciple of Our Lord in the
fifth Chapter of his First Epistle, after that he had spoken in the sixteenth
and seventeenth verses of those who commit the Sin unto Death, and forbidden
all Prayers for them, added in the eighteenth verse, We know that whosoever
is born of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and
that wicked one touches him not. CANON. V. Who teach, That none can have in
this Life without special Revelation any certainty of their perseverance. For
by this Doctrine the faithful are deprived of the most solid substantial
comfort, which is to be had in this Life, and are abandoned to the diffidence,
and wavering floating opinions and doubts of the Romish Church. But the Sacred
Scriptures every where deriveth this Assurance not from any special or
extraordinary Revelation, but from the proper marks of the Children of God, and
from his infallible Promises, especially from the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 8.38.
No Creature can separate us from the Love of God, which he has shown us in
Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 John 3.24. He that keeps his Commandments abides in
him, and God in him: And by this we know that he abides in us by his Spirit,
which he has given us. CANON. VI. Who teach, That the Doctrine of Assurance
of Perseverance and Salvation is a Pillovv for the Flesh to sleep on more
securely, and is in and of it self injurious unto Godlyness, Good Works,
Prayers, and all Holy Duties and Religious Exercises. And on the contrary it is
a laudable thing to be diffident and doubtful. But such Persons bewray their
Ignorance, and are mere Strangers to the efficacy of Divine Grace, and to the
operation of the Holy Ghost dwelling in the Elect, and contradict the Apostle
St. John, who does in express terms assert the contrary, 1 John 3.2. Beloved
now are we the Children of God, but what we shall be is not yet known. But
this we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like unto him; for we
shall see him even as he is. And they must be more abundantly convinced by the
Examples of Gods Saints both in the Old and New Testament, who although they
were assured of their Perseverance and Salvation, did not thereupon neglect
daily Prayers, or other Acts, Duties and Exercises of True Piety and Religion.
CANON. VII. Who teach, That there is no difference between a Temporary Faith,
and that which is Saving and Justifying, excepting the duration of it. For the
Lord Jesus himself does manifestly remark three other differences between those
who believe but for a time, and true Believers, when as he says, ( Matthew.
13.20. and Luke 8.13. and the verses following.) That those are they who
receive the Seed in stony ground, and these in good ground or in an honest
heart, that the former had no root, but these have a firm root, the one brought
no fruit, but these produced their fruits constantly and perseveringly in
diverse degrees and measures. CANON. VIII. Who teach, that it is no absurdity to
say, that when as the first Regeneration is extinct, a Man may be born again,
yea, he may be often new born. For by this Doctrine the Seed of God by which we
be new born is made corruptible; directly contrary to the Witness of St. Peter,
Ep. 1. cap. 23. Being born again not of corruptible Seed, but of that which is
incorruptible. CANON. IX. Who teach, That our Lord Jesus Christ did no where
pray for the infallible perseverance of Believers in the Faith, for they
contradict our Lord himself, Luke 22.32. I have prayed, Simon Peter, that thy
Faith may not fail. And the very Letter of St. John's Gospel, chap. 17.11.
where Christ says, that he did not pray for his Apostles only, but also for
all them, who should believe by their Word. Holy Father keep them in thy Name,
and ver. 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the World, but
that thou should keep them from evil. CANON. X. We Pastors and Elders whose
Names are hereunder-written, Deputies for the Reformed Churches of France unto
the National Synod of Charenton St. Maurice near Paris, in the Month of
September, 1623. do declare with all possible sincerity, the Articles and
Canons abovementioned to be grounded on the Word of God, and agreeable to the
Confession of Faith, owned and received in the Reformed Churches of this
Kingdom, from which in the presence of God we do protest, that through his
Grace, we will never depart.
In confirmation whereof we have hereunto affixt our Names, at Charenton
aforesaid, this 30th. day of September, 1623. Signed by the Pastors and Elders
of the said Synod. Durand Moderator De Baille Assessor Faucheur and Scribes De
Launay Scribes Berbie Pastor of the Church of Quaissac. J. Clerc de Chambrun
Chamier Pastor of Montlimart J. le Pelletier Pastor in the Church of Vandome
Savoys Pastor in the Church of Castres. Sir John Embelier Jurieu Pastor of
Chastillon on the Loir. Villon. Faures J. M. de Langle Pastor of Rouen P.
Paulet Pastor of Vezenobre Avignon Pastor of Rennes P. Beraud Pastor and
Professor in the Church of Montauban. Lottiby Pastor at Poitiers William Rivett
Pastor of Taillebourg in Xaintonge.


CHAP. XXVII. Remarks upon some of the Deputies Commissionated unto this Synod.
1 MOnsieur Durant the Moderator, was first Minister to the Landgrave of Hesse,
and after to that Excellent Princess Katharine Duchess of Bar, only Sister of
Henry the Fourth, and at last Pastor of the Church of Paris. He was a very Holy
Man of God, a most Eloquent and Zealous Preacher, he was like Lightning and
Thunder in the Pulpit. There be Three Excellent Sermons of his in print upon
the Nineteenth Verse of the Fifth Chapter, and First Epistle to the
Thessalonians. He grew sickly after his return from this Synod, and dyed in the
Year 1626.

2. Peter de Launay, who was the Lay-Scribe in this Synod, was a very Learned
Gentleman, and of great Reputation in the Churches of France. He has written
Commentaries upon all the Epistles of Paul in French, which are printed in Two
Volumes in Quarto. He Commented also, but under another Name, upon the
Prophecy of Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St. John.

3. Adrian Chamier was the Worthy Son of the Great Chamier, the Third Minister
successively from his Grandfather, a Pious Minister in Dolphiny. I knew five of
his Grandsons, all Learned and Godly Ministers, and Exiles for Christ. The
Ministry has been in this Family for Six Generations, Monsieur Ledger, that was
a Pastor in the Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont writes, that the Ministry
had been in his Family for above Four Hundred years, and that his Grandfather
preached when he was above an Hundred Years Old. See Legers Histoire General
des Vaudols, Livre 2. page 360. Adrian Chamier, was for his great Prudence and
Ability to manage Synodical businesses chosen Deputy to several of their
National Synods. He succeeded his Father in the Pastoral Office in the Church
of Montlimart. Of whom God lending me Life, I shall say more in my Icones.

4. Jurieu, he was the Father of Monsieur Jurieu the Learned Pastor and
Professor of Divinity in the French Church, and Illustrious School of Rotterdam.

5. Beraud, he succeeded his Father in both Functions as Pastor of the Church,
and Professor of Divinity in the University of Montauban.

6. Monsieur William Rivet, he was Brother to Andrew Rivet Professor of
Divinity at Leyden, distinguished from him by the Title of Lord of Champvernon.
He would never remove from his Church of Taillebourg. He was very dear unto the
House of Tremouille, Deputy to several National Synods, a Man of singular
prudence, and dexterity in the management and dispatch of the Synodical
Affairs, insomuch that when he died there was a great lamentation for him,
because of that great loss the whole Province sustained in his Death. But God
made it up in Two years time, by raising up Twenty Ministers capable of doing
all Services in their Provincial Synod, as I have been credibly informed by
some Ancient and Eminent Pastors of Poictou. He was a Man of great Learning. He
has writ de Justificatione, and another Book de Invocatione and Adoratione
Sanctorum defunctorum. I have seen another piece of his in French of the
Authority of the Scriptures, in Quarto, and there is a Fourth in Octavo, Des
droicts de Dieu.

Sir Augustus Galland, was the first Commissioner for the King in any of their
National Synods. He represented the King in this. I suppose he was born in
Bearn or Navar. He was a great Lawyer and Antiquary, his Works are printed in
one Folio, viz. Memoirs pour L' Histoire de Navarre and de Flandre, par
Guillemot Paris, 1648.

8. Monsieur de Baux Lord of L' Angle, Pastor of the Church of Caen, The
Reverend Dr. L' Angle Prebend of Westminster is his Son.

9. Monsieur Mestrezat, Of him see the Second Synod of Charenton, in which he
presided.

THE Acts, Canons, Decisions and Decrees OF THE XXIV. NATIONAL SYNOD OF The
Reformed Churches OF FRANCE, AND BEARNE, Assembled in The City of Castres, in
the Country of Albigeois, In the Year of Our Lord, 1626.

The CONTENTS of the Synod of CASTRES.
1 Chap. THE Lord Galland produced his Commission from the King to sit, and
represent His Majesty in this Synod. The Commission it self. Deputies to the
Synod. Election of the Synodical Officers. Chap. II. The Kings writ for calling
of the Synod, and ordering of Matters in it. Chap. III. The Commissioners
Speech to the Synod. Chap. IV. The Synods Answer to it. Chap. V. The Kings Writ
for Election of a new General Deputy upon the Death of the former. Chap. VI.
The Debate about that Writ. Chap. VII. The Synods Letter to the King about
this Election. Chap. VIII. Their Deputies return, with His Majesty's Answer
verbal and written. The Kings Letter. Monsieur Herbaut Miwister of State his
Letter to the Synod. Chap. IX. The Lord Commissioners more ample Declaration of
His Majesty's Will, and several points demanded by their Deputies. Chap. X. The
Kings Warrant and Order unto the Synod for the Nomination of their General
Deputies, without any Previous Political Assembly. Chap. XI. A Conference
between the Synod and the Lord Commissioner. Chap. XII. A Remonstrance of the
Lord of Angoulins on behalf of the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Free Burgesses of the
City of Rochell. Chap. XIII. Approbation of the Confession of Faith. Chap. XIV.
Observations on the Discipline. Chap. XV. An Act against Debauchery. Chap. XVI.
Observations upon the Acts of the last National Synod. Chap. XVII. No Minister
to depart the Kingdom without the Kings License. Chap. XVIII. A Deposed
Minister restored Chap. XIX. Appeals Chap. XX. Discipline Exercised upon a
Scandalous Minister. App. 34. Chap. XXI. Discipline exercised upon a Delinquent
Minister. App. 44. Chap. XXII. A Scandalous Minister Deposed. App. 51. Chap.
XXIII. Discipline exercised upon a vicious Minister, App. 53. See also the very
next Appeal Chap. XXIV. General Matters Chap. XXV. An Act to preserve Deeds,
Writings, Evidences belonging to the Churches, G. M. 13. Chap. XXVI. An Act for
a Public National Fast, G. M. 16. Chap. XXVII. Differences between the Cities
of Rochell, Montauban and Castres composed, G. M. 28. Chap. XXVIII. Particular
Matters Chap. XXIX. Care taken for a poor Persecuted Church, P. M. 29. Chap.
XXX. A Donative to Monsieur Chamier, P. M. 44. Chap. XXXI. Of Universities and
Colleges. Chap. XXXII. The Accounts of the Lord du Candal. Chap. XXXIII. The
Synods Letter to the King Chap XXXIV. Dividends of Moneys among the Churches
and Provinces. Chap XXXV. The Roll of the Deposed Ministers Chap XXXVI An Act
for Calling the next National Synod Chap. XXXVII Catalogue of all the Churches,
and Ministers in Actual Employment, together with the Vacancies. Chap. XXXVIII.
Letters from the Church of Geneva, The Synods Answer to them, and from the
Church of Paris.
THE Synod of Castres. 1626. The 25th. Synod.

SYNOD XXV. 1626.
In the Name of God. Amen.
The Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France and Bearne
Assembled at Castres in Albigeois in the Year of Grace One Thousand Six Hundred
Twenty and Six, the Sixteenth day of September, and the days following to the
Fifth of November, in the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of Louis XIII. King of
France and Navarre.

CHAP. I.
AT the opening of this Synod there appeared the Lord Galland one of the Lords
of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and Council of State, and
Attorney General for his Dominion of Navarre, as His Majesty's Commissioner,
Deputed by His Majesty unto this Assembly with this Letter following.

By the KING.
Dear and well beloved,
we being fully resolved to keep and observe, and see that our Edicts and
Declarations be inviolably kept and observed, and that you may enjoy those
Favors and Privileges, which are granted you by them, we have freely and
willingly suffered you to meet together in this National Synod Convocated by
you in our Town of Castres September next, where you shall only debate of such
Matters as concern the Discipline of your Religion; and have also at the same
time made choice of our Trusty and Well-Beloved Counselor the Lord Galland One
of the Lords of our Privy Council, and Council of State, and Attorney General
for our Dominion of Navarr to meet you from us and on our behalf in your said
Assembly, and to assist in person at all your Consultations; and to give you
plenary Assurance of our good and sincere Intentions for your Peace and
Comfort. Wherefore we will and require you to give him credit in all things;
and to rest assured, that as long as you contain your selves within the Bounds
and Limits of your Fidelity and Obedience; which you owe unto us, we shall
always treat you as good and Loyal Subjects, and shall give you to resent the
Effects and Fruits of our Favor and good Will unto you on all occasions that
may occur, as the said Lord of Galland shall in our Name more particularly
inform you.

Given at Nantes this 24th. of July, 1626. Signed ^eve^, and Lower,
Phillippe^ux.
And superscribed. To our dear and well-beloved the Deputies of the National
Synod of the P. Reformed Churches called by our permission unto the Town of
Castres.

There appeared in the said Assembly for the Province of Provence the Sieurs
Paul Maurice Pastor of the Church of Aiguieres, and James Franc Notary Public,
Elder of the Church of Lormarin.

For the Province of Vivaretz, Forest, and Vellay the Sieurs Alexander de
Vinay Pastor of the Church of Annonay, and Paul Accaurat Pastor of the Church
of Aubenas, and Daniel Arcajon the Kings Notary, and Elder in the said Church
of Aubenas, and Daniel Sabatier Elder in the Church of Villeneufve de Berg.
These Persons were requested to see that for the future their Provincial Synod
suffer not any Letters of Commission or Memoirs which shall be brought before
the National Synods by the Deputies of the said Province, to be formed out of
their Synodical Assemblies, nor that they be subscribed by any others besides
the Moderators, or Assessors, in case the Moderators of the said Synods shall
be chosen Deputies.

For the Province of Britain the Sieurs Andrew le Noir Lord of Beauchamp,
Pastor in the Church of Belin, and Philip de Vassant, Esquire Lord of Martimont,
Elder in the Church of Roche Bernard.

For the Province of Sevennes, The Sieurs Nicolas le Blanc Pastor of the Church
of Bar, and Lawrens Aymard Pastor of the Church of Lezan, together with
Claudius de Gabriac Lord of Beaufort, Elder in the Church of Avez, and Charles
de Calvet Lord of Aires Elder in the Church of St Private.

For the Province of Dolphiny Denis Bouteroue Pastor of the Church in Grenoble,
and John Corel Pastor of the Church of Ambrun, with David Chaluett Elder in the
Church of Die, and Anthony Brissett Elder in the Church of Montlimart.

For the Province of Burgundy, The Sieurs Peter Bollenatt Pastor in the Church
of Avalon, which meets for Religious Worship at Vaux. Alexander Rouph one of
the Pastors of the Church of Lions, together with Albert de Mars, Esquire Lord of
Baleines Elder in the Church of Maringues, and Lazarus du Puy Counselor for
the King in the Presidial Court of Berg in the Province of Bresse, and Elder of
the Church in the said Town.

For the Province of Higher Languedoc, The Sieurs Peter Ollier Pastor of the
Church of Montauban, and Moses de Baux Pastor of the Church of Mazamet together
with Mr. John de Ports Doctor of the Civil Law and Advocate in Parliament,
Elder of the Church of Castres, and the Lord John Brassar Doctor of the Civil
Law, and Advocate in Parliament, Elder in the Church of Montauban, but he was
detained by Sickness in the said City, and whereas another was substituted in
his place. He also came not for want of Notice given him.

For the Province of Lower Languedoc; The Sieurs John Chauve Pastor of the
Church of Sommieres, and Michael le ^aucheur Pastor of the Church of
Montpellier, with Francis Petit Doctor of the Civil Law, and Advocate, Elder in
the Church of Nismes, and Theophilus Ranchin Secretary of the Kings Chamber,
and Elder in the said Church of Montpellier.

For the Province of Lower Guyenne, The Sieurs John Mizaubin Pastor of the
Church of Saint Foy, and James du Fort Pastor of La Bastide in Armagnac,
together with Mr. John Joan Lord of Loullan, Advocate in the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, Elder in the Church of Duras, and Mr. Isaac Grenouelleau Advocate
also in the same Parliament and Elder of the Church of Castelsmoron in Albrett.

For the Province of Xaintonge the Sieurs John Constans Pastor of the Church of
Pons, and David Belot Pastor of the Church de la Rochechalais, together with
John Besne Esquire Lord of Angoulins Elder in the Church of Rochell, and Elijah
Marlat Advocate in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and Elder of the Church of
Mirambeau.

For the Province of Poictou, The Sieur Peter de la Vallade Pastor of the
Church of Fontenay la Conte, and Isaac du Soul Pastor of the Church of
Lusignan, accompanied with Gilles Begaud Esquire Lord of La Begaudiere Elder in the
Church of Montague, and James Coxdel Lord of Soignon, Elder in the Church of
St. Maixant.

For the Province of Anjou the Sieurs Daniel Couppe Pastor of Loudun, and
Stephen le Bloy Pastor of the Church of Angers, without any Elders, because
those who were Commissionated fell sick on their Journey; which Excuse was
admitted.

For the Province of Orleans and Berry, The Sieurs John Guerrin Pastor of the
Church of Baugency, and John Taby Pastor of the Church of La Charity,
accompanied with James Pasquier Counselor and Comptroller for the King in the
Town of Baugency, and Elder of the Church there, and Peter Longuet Advocate in
the Parliament of Paris, and Elder in the Church of Issoudun.

For the Province of Normandy, The Sieur John Baunier Lord of La Fresnage
Pastor in the Church of Caen, and Peter Erondelle Pastor in the Church of Roan,
Accompanied with Peter du Pertuis, Esquire Lord of Eragny, Elder in the Church of
Gisors, and Mr. Francis Quillel Lord of La Briere, Counselor and Assessor in
the Vi-County of Alenson, and Elder of the Church gathered in that City.

For the Province of the Isle of France, The Sieurs John Mestrezat Pastor of
the Church of Paris, and David Blondell Pastor of the Church of Houdan,
Accompanied with John de Gravelle, Esquire Lord of Beauterne, Elder in the said
Church of Houdan, and Isaac d' Huisseau Elder in the Church of Paris.

For the Province of Bearn, The Sieurs Peter Rival, Pastor of the Church of
Nay, and John de Pommarede Advocate in the Parliament of Navarre Elder in the
Church of Mourlans, who not having inserted in their Letters of Deputation that
clause of submission required by the former National Synods, were told that for
this time they were born withal on those Conditions expressly mentioned in the
Canons of the last National Synod, but for the future, they should not be
admitted into these Assemblies, nor have a consultive Vote in them, excepting
only when as the Confession of our Faith should be read, in which indeed and
nothing else they retain Union with our Churches.

The Second of October the Lord of Montmartyn General-Deputy for the Churches
of this Kingdom unto His Majesty came into this Synod, and took his place, and
voted in it according to the Canons of our Churches, and the usual practice of
former National Synods.

After Invocation of the Holy Name of God in Prayer, Monsieur Chauve was chosen
Moderator, and Monsieur Bouteroue Assessor, and Messieurs Blondel and Petit
Scribes.

CHAP. II. The Kings Writ for the Calling of the Synod, and ordering of
Matters in it.
AS soon as the Synod was formed, and the Election of its Officers past the
Lord Galland presented His Majesty's Letters Patents, which being read, they
were transcribed, and the Copy inserted into the Acts of this Synod, the Tenor
whereof was as follows:

The Kings Letters Patents.
Louis by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre
to our Beloved and Trusty Counselor in our Councils of State and Privy
Council and Attorney General for our Dominion of Navarre the Lord Galland,
Greeting.
We having permitted according to our Edicts our Subjects professing the P.
Reformed Religion to convocate and keep a National Council in our City of
Castres in the Province of Languedoc this next September, that they may as
usual take care about matters of Discipline appertaining unto their Religion,
wherefore it being needful that there should be present in the said Council a
Commissioner from us who might watch over our said Subjects, that they do not
treat of any other Affairs but such as are allowed them by our Edicts, and
knowing by past Experience that we could not pitch upon a more Worthy Person
than your self, of whose Fidelity and Affection to our Service, Sufficiency and
Abilities, we are very well satisfied, and remembering your singular care and
vigilance manifested in the last National Synod held at Charenton by our said
Subjects in the Month of September, and Year of Our Lord One Thousand Six
Hundred and Twenty Three to the general contentment both of us and them also,
For which causes we have Commissionated, Deputed and Ordained, and do
Commissionate, Depute, and Ordain you by these presents to go unto our said
City of Castres, and to sit in the said National Council in our stead and as
our Representative, and personally to be present at all their Consultations and
Resolutions, and to see, use, and exercise our Authority that nothing be
proposed or debated, but what does truly concern the Discipline of the Religion
aforesaid, according to the Tenor of our Edicts and Declarations, and
particularly of those made and published by us in September Sixteen Hundred
Twenty Three, about their holding of Colloquies and Synods, and you shall look
to it also that none of our Subjects do keep any private Conventicles in that
our said City. You shall also have a special care that nothing be moved or
debated in the said Council, but what may contribute to the benefit of our
Service, and the upholding of our Authority, and preservation of the Peace of
our Kingdom. And in case there should be any actings contrary hereunto we
command you immediately to suppress them, and in our Name and Authority to Act,
or to make such interdictions and prohibitions as you shall judge needful; of
which, as generally of all Matters transacted in the said Council you shall
form a good and ample verbal process, That, it being brought unto us upon your
return, we may advise of what shall be most expedient for our Service, and the
Tranquillity of our Subjects. And for the doing hereof we empower you with full
Authority, and give you our Commission, and especial Warrant by these presents,
For such is our Will and Pleasure.

Given at Nants, Another Copy has the Tenth day.
this Twentieth day of July, in the Year of Grace One Thousand Six Hundred, and
Twenty Six, and of Our Reign the Seventeenth. Signed Louis. And a little lower,
By the King. Philippeaux.
And Sealed with Yellow Wax.
CHAP. III. The Lord Commissioners Speech to the COUNCIL.
Proposals of the Lord Commissioner
THIS Commission being read, The Lord Galland declared fully and at large what
Orders had been given him by His Majesty, the Sum of which was an Assurance of
His Majesty's good Will toward His Subjects of the Reformed Religion, and his
Royal promise to preserve them in their Exercise and peaceable profession of
it, and that whilst they continued in their Duty and Obedience unto His
Majesty he would take care that his Edicts should be strictly and punctually
observed. 2. And that the Foundations of their Obedience may be the more firm
and solid, His Majesty exhorted his said Subjects of the Reformed Religion to
live in a greater Equanimity and Moderation with his other Subjects, though
differing from them in Religion. So that the difference in Religion may cause
no difference in their Affections, which His Majesty assures His said
Protestant Subjects shall be accurately observed toward them, that so they may
not in any manner be troubled or prosecuted upon the pretext and ground of
their Religion. 3. The Professors also of the Reformed Religion ought on their
part to promise, that they will not hold any Intelligence, Alliances, or
Correspondence with Persons abroad and without the Kingdom, but only with His
Majesty, Reposing their entire Confidence in His Majesty's Royal Word, Grace
and Favor. He added farther, That His Majesty commanded him to acquaint us,
that during the Wars he was never minded to abrogate or disanul the Edicts,
because he always had a particular regard to the Repose of his Subjects. For
immediately upon his being declared Major, he confirmed his Edicts, renewed his
Alliances, increased and augmented his Bounty unto the Ministers, and employed
in his most important Affairs of State the Lords and Gentlemen professing the
said Religion, and when as some special Occurrences necessitated him to act
otherwise, He did notwithstanding express and evidence the Effects of his
Clemency by receiving and pardoning whole Communities, and all such of His
Subjects as submitted themselves unto his Authority, he gave them a General
Amnesty to Indemnifie them. 4. And although the remembrance of those Actions be
dead and buried, yet it is His Majesty's Pleasure, that the Canon past in the
Synod of Realmont be put in Execution, and an Information taken and brought in
against those Ministers, who had embraced the Spanish Faction, and that the
Deputies unto this Council do Order a Declaration to this purpose to be drawn
up, not as if His Majesty intended an Hue and Cry should be issued out after
the guilty, or that they should be prosecuted for it, but that all occasions of
Troubles may be taken away, and that the Lives and Actions of those who
persisted in their Duty may not at all be blemished. 5. The said Lord
Commissioner added further, That it was His Majesty's Will as it had been
Decreed in the last Synod at Charenton, that Ministers should be confined to
the proper Duties of their Calling, and preach unto their People Obedience, and
not do as too too many did in the time of the late Troubles, get into Political
Assemblies, and intermeddle with Affairs of State. 6. And that Obedience and
Subjection unto His Majesty's Authority may be kept up inviolably, and not be
corrupted by any Foreign Manners or Way of Living; It is His Majesty's
Pleasure, and according to Laws in this case provided, That no Minister shall
depart the Kingdom without his Royal License first obtained, nor live in a
Foreign Land, nor shall these National Councils lend any of their Ministers
unto Foreign Princes or Republics, who may importune them to such a Loan,
either for a determinate time, or during Life, but they shall remit the demand
unto His Majesty, who in such cases will particularly consider his good
Neighbors and Allies.

CHAP. IV. The Councils Answer to it.
The Answer made unto what had been proposed by the Kings Commissioner.
WHereupon the Council having given thanks to Almighty God for inclining the
Kings heart to favor our poor Churches, and to continue his protection to
them, they did also render their most humble and unfeigned thanks unto His
Majesty, for those most sensible Expressions of His Royal Favor unto His
Subjects of the Reformed Religion, for giving us our Peace, and the accustomed
Effects of His Goodness and Clemency: And that His Majesty might have a
manifest token and evidence of our Obedience unto his Commands, now signified
to us, it was immediately and unanimously voted, that a Declaration should be
drawn up, as in Conscience we were bound, to discharge our Holy Religion of all
blame, and to testify our fidelity and submission unto His Majesty, from whose
Authority, Clemency and Justice next and immediately after God, the Churches of
France can only hope for support, protection, and preservation; being ready and
willing to lay down in His Majesty's Service all that is dear unto us, even our
very Lives and Fortunes, professing and calling ^od to witness, that this is
the Doctrine taught by our Pastors unto their Churches, agreeable to the word
of God in the Holy Scriptures, and that Confession of Faith, which is owned and
embraced by all the Reformed Churches of France. And the very first Vote which
past was this, that notwithstanding there have been ever found among our People
professing the Reformed Religion the noblest Instances and Patterns of a true,
great, and most Christian patience under the worst of usages and oppressions in
all places, and at all times sustained by them, yet nevertheless all and
singular the Consistories of our Churches shall continue their Counsels and
Exhortations to them of abounding in Christian patience, equanimity and
moderation, and to pay unto their Countrymen of the Romish Religion all
Offices and Duties of Humanity, Civility and Charity according to the Word of
God, and Intendment of His Majesty, who also is most humbly petitioned to cast
His Royal Eyes of Compassion upon the deep Afflictions of His Protestant
Subjects, who, though they have always labored to gain and keep the love and
friendship of their fellow-Citizens, and Contrymen, are yet notwithstanding
in diverse places of the Kingdom molested in their Persons, disturbed in the
Exercise of their Religion, deprived of their Temples, yea, and see them
demolished before their Faces even since the peace, or else given away from
them for dwelling houses unto the Rom^sh Priests and Ecclesiastics, and that
they be dispossessed of their Burying Places, and the Dead Bodies of very many
Persons dug up most ignominiously, that our Ministers have been barbarously
beaten, bruised, wounded, and driven away from their Churches, although they
have been the most innocent and inoffensive Persons in the World, who neither
injured the Public in general, nor any one in particular, as our General
Deputies shall more amply and at large make report hereof unto His Majesty.

Moreover the Council does farther declare, That as the Churches within the
Kingdom have ever been united in the profession of one and the same Faith and
Acts of Love and Charity, because they are part of the same Mystical Body,
whose Members have none other aim or end than with one heart to serve God and
the King in peaceable Lives, and Liberty of Conscience, so as for the Churches
in other Nations, they never had, nor ever will have any Intelligence,
Alliance, or Correspondency with them than what shall be approved by God and
His Majesty, desiring always to live in peace under the Wings of His protection.

Farther the Council protesterh, that our Churches had never the least
intimation or knowledge that any of their Members professing the Reformed
Religion have tampered in any Plots or Treasons with the Spaniard, or other
Enemies of this Crown, and if it could be proved to them that there be such as
were engaged in those pernicious designs and practices, we would be the very
first with heart and hand to subscribe unto their Condemnation, and to abhor
both them, their Accomplices and Adherents, as we now do from our very Souls
profess our Abhorrency and Detestation both of them, their Doctrine, and
practice, who having diverse times attempted to Assassinate the Sacred Persons
of Kings, do to this very day uphold and mantain Intelligencies and
Correspondencies both at home and abroad within and without the Kingdom against
their precious Lives, and Imperial Crowns, Dignities, and Regal Authority.

As for that Canon past in the Synod of Realmont, and read now unto us, This
Council cannot conceal its grief for the great wrong done unto that Synod,
because it was enforced by His Majesty's Commissioner then personally assisting
in it to frame an Act, which seems to take for granted that there were some
Ministers accused of holding Intelligence with the Spaniard the most implacable
Enemy of France, and of our Churches, though in truth there was not so much as
one found guilty of that Crime, and the Churches cannot but adore the goodness
of God unto them, that after the most diligent and rigorous Inquiries made to
this purpose, not one of our Pastors could be impeached, and that the malicious
and shameless Calumnies of our most invenim'd and inveterate Adversaries could
never fasten or prove their Accusation upon any one particular Person of one
Communion. The Event having at last demonstrated that our Churches were
condemned most unjustly, and cleared, and proclaimed innocent of all those
Accusations before the whole World.

And as for the two following points, This Assembly is resolved to give full
contentment unto His Majesty; And whereas our former National Synods have made
a Canon about the first, so will this also be as careful to enact another: And
the Acts of this Assembly shall answer for the second, so that His Majesty
shall ever have Universal Obedience, Subjection, Fidelity, and most Faithful
Service from our Churches, whereunto we are obliged by our Natural Duty, the
Motions of our Conscience, and the Ordinance of our God.

CHAP. V. The Kings Warrant for Choice of a New General Deputy.
THE Lord Commissioner Galland having been informed of the Death of the Lord
Maniald, one of the General Deputies of our Churches unto His Majesty, did on
the Five and Twentieth day of September present unto this National Synod this
following Warrant, dispatched by Express Order from His Majesty.

This day the Three and Twentieth of August One Thousand Six Hundred and Twenty
Six, His Majesty being at Nants, and considering that the term of Three vears
was now expired, in which the Lords of Montmartyn and Maniald, who had been
chosen General Deputies for His Subjects professing the P. Reformed Religion,
and in that Quality and Office to reside and serve at Court, and to attend upon
His Majesty in all his Progress and Motions, and that there must be a new
Election of some other Deputies to succeed them in their Office, and
considering farther that this Election could not be more conveniently done than
in a National Assembly and Council which His Majesty has permitted His said
Subjects of the Reformed Religion to hold in the City of Castres this September
next ensuing, that so they may not be put to unnecessary Expense and Trouble,
as they would otherwise be, if they should be forced to call another Assembly
on this occasion, His Majesty for these considerations, and diverse other good
and important reasons, relating unto his Service, the Repose and Tranquillity
of his Government and Kingdom, has granted License unto the Deputies which
shall be present at the said National Council to treat and choose new Deputies
who may reside and serve in that Quality near his Royal Person instead of the
said Lords of Montmartyn, and Maniald, and this in the presence of the Lord
Galland one of the Lords of our Council of State, and Commissioner unto the
said National Assembly, and to propose unto him Six Persons, capable, faithful,
and most affectionately inclined unto His Majesty's Service, and the Public
Peace, that out of them His Majesty may prick two unto the said Office of
General Deputies, by means whereof those aforesaid Lords of Montmartyn and
Manyald shall be discharged of their Employment, observing the forms in such
cases accustomed; provided always that in the Assembly aforesaid, there shall
not be any other Matters debated or handled excepting what concern the
Discipline of their Religion as has been determined by His Majesty's Edicts and
Declarations. In testimony whereof His Majesty has commanded me to expedite
this present Writ, Signed by His Own Royal Hand, and Countersigned by me one
of His Most Honorable Privy Council, and Secretary of State, and of his
Commands. Signed Louis, and a little lower, Philippeaux.

CHAP. VI.
The Synods deliberation upon the Writ.
THE Assembly consulting upon His Majesty's Writ, and considering that it does
not contain an Express Command, but only a simple permission to nominate
General Deputies, and that it does in such a manner restrain the said
permission, as that it leaves unto this Assembly no liberty nor power at all
of calling the said Lord of Montmartyn to an Account, who has from the first
time of his Election unto this present day, exercised the said General
Deputation, much less to give Instructions unto such as may be Elected unto the
said Office. Besides that this Assembly durst not adventure upon the said
Election without an open violation of His Majesty's Edicts, Letters Patents,
and Sealed Letters, and of our usual, and accustomed Order, and the Solemn
Protestation of former Synods, who have expressly declared, that they desired
and intended utterly to forbear all cognizance of Affairs of this Nature. And
farther that the Churches had been for a very long time together deprived of
the Assistance of His Majesty's Bounty, and that it would be needful most
humbly to petition him to order his Royal Promises to be observed, and entirely
accomplished and fulfilled. For these Causes and Reasons, and particularly that
we might keep within the bounds of Order, and to the Ancient practice of the
Churches, The Council judged it necessary to make a Deputation unto His
Majesty, and voted the Sieurs de Bouteroue and de Baleines to carry their most
Humble Petitions unto His Majesty, who were charged with Letters and
Instructions unto His Majesty, and to the Chief Ministers of State.

CHAP. VII. A Copy of the Councils Letter sent unto the King.
SIR,
The Synods Letter sent unto the King.
THE Sense and Experience we have of Your Majesty's Royal Bounty unto our
Churches, and of their great Sufferings, notwithstanding this your goodness,
through the Non-Execution of your Edicts in the Provinces of your Kingdom, do
compel us to depute unto Your Majesty the Sieurs Bouteroue and de Baleines to
lay at Your Majesty's feet, together with the sincere protestations of our
inviolable fidelity unto Your Majesty's Service, our most humble
acknowledgments and thanks for your gracious favors, and our just and
necessary requests for the relief and comforting of our poor Churches. We
humbly trust that Your Majesty will be pleased to give them a favorable
audience, and to grant us our most Humble Petitions, and to accept of the
Devout and most hearty Prayers of many Thousands of Godly Persons for Your
Majesty's Prosperity, who whilst they lie groaning under the most insupportable
pressures in the World do notwithstanding live in a profound Obedience unto
Your Majesty's Authority. And from the bottom of our Souls, and with the
greatest ardency imaginable we supplicate the Throne of Grace to bless and
preserve Your Majesty's Most Sacred Person, and to augment and continue the
happyness of Your Majesty's Reign and Government, being always, Most Dread
Sovereign,

From Castres September. 1626. Your most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient
Subjects and Servants, The Pastors and Elders of the Reformed Churches of
France Assembled in their National Synod at Castres, and for them all, Chauve
Moderator, Bouteroue Assessor, Blondel and Petit, Scribes.


CHAP. VIII.
THE Eight and Twentieth day of October, The Sieurs Bouteroue and de Baleines
Deputies unto the King returned with Letters from His Majesty, and the Lord d'
Herbaut Secretary of State, and reported that they had a very favorable
Reception from His Majesty, and Ministers of State, and that having presented
their Address unto the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
they had obtained a Command unto the Parliament of Thoulouse to take away the
Modifications put by the said Parliament upon the last Edict of Peace, and were
promised that Commissioners should be sent into the Provinces of Xaintonge, the
Higher and Lower Languedoc, Rochell and the Land of Aunix to see that the Edict
be duly executed. They were also assured that the Assignations formerly given
unto the Lord of Candal should be made good and valid; and that they had an
order for twelve hundred Livres to defray the Charges of their Journey, besides
the Sum of Ten Thousand Livres granted by His Majesty unto this Council to pay
their Charges. But as for the restoring of Monsieur du Moulin to the Church of
Paris, and a License for holding of a General Assembly, His Majesty was utterly
averse unto it, and would in no wise yield thereunto, and we should know more
of his mind upon this Article, and of his good intentions as to the nomination
of our General Deputies by his Commissioner the Lord Galland. Thanks were given
unto our good God that he had granted us to find favor with the King, and the
Deputies also which were sent unto His Majesty had the thanks of the Council,
and were commended for their Conduct and Dexterity, which was so acceptable
unto the King, and Lords of His Majesty's Council, and approved by this
Assembly.

A Copy of the Kings Letter unto this National Synod.
DEAR and Well-beloved,
we received the Letters by the Sieurs Bouteroue and de Baleines your Deputies,
and understood from their Mouths and your Address presented to us, what they
were ordered by you to declare unto us. Whereunto we have by word of Mouth and
Writing given those favorable Answers, which shall be related to you by those
your Deputies, to which we shall add with a willing mind the Effects or our
Grace and Royal favor upon all occasions that may occur for the Weal and
General happyness of Our Subjects of your Religion, and of you all joyutly and
severally; as we also promise our selves that you will keep you within those
bounds of Fidelity and Obedience, which good and Loyal Subjects owe unto their
King, and that you will verify by your actions the words of your aforesaid
Deputies, as we exhort you so to do, and moreover to give credence unto the
Lord Galland our Counselor in our Council of State in all things whatsoever
that he shall offer to you as from us.

Given at St. German in Lay this Fourteenth of October, 1626. Signed Louis,
and a little lower Philippeaux.
And the Superscription was thus directed, To Our Dear and Well-Beloved the
Deputies of the P. Reformed Religion Assembled by our License in a National
Synod in our City of Castres.

CHAP. IX. A Copy of the Lord Herbaut's Letter unto this Council.
SIRS,
YOUR Deputies were favorably received by His Majesty, and His Majesty heard
with very great satisfaction those Assurances from their Mouths of your
Fidelity and sincere intentions to the Public Peace and Tranquillity. When His
Majesty granted it unto you, it was with a full purpose inviolably to keep it
with you, and farther to give you with the enjoyment thereof all other matters
accorded to you by his Edicts. What remains but that on your part, you
contribute whatever His Majesty might expect from your Prudence and Conduct,
and to measure by what is past that the duration and firm settlement of your
Repose does principally depend on your Obedience, yielding unto his Majesty
what is due unto him, and is necessary for your well-being. And you may believe
that in so doing his Gracious Favors will be multiplied upon you daily, and
that I shall be ready to serve you in all good Offices with His Majesty, that
you may resent the comfortable Effects thereof according as you have deserved
them. In the mean while, I rest, Sirs,

Your most Humble and Affectionate Servant, Philippeaux.
The Superscription was, To my Lords, My Lords the Deputies Assembled by His
Majesty's permission in a National Synod at Castres.
CHAP. X. Amore ample Declaration of the Kings Will upon several points
demanded by the Deputies.

WHEN as the Letter of His Majesty but now recited was read, My Lord Galland
the Kings Commissioner, declared that for the reasons given by His Majesty unto
the Deputies, and according to the import of the Articles answered by the
Council, he could not consent unto the return of Monsieur du Moulin, nor for
diverse Considerations noted in those Articles now read could he at present give
way for the meeting of a General Politic Assembly. His Majesty reserving the
grant thereof when as there shall be need of it, and his Affairs of State may
well suffer it. And as to the Election of Deputies, His Majesty being not
willing that the Affairs of his Subjects of the Reformed Religion should be
without Conduct and Order, had immediately upon the Death of the Lord Maniald
one of the General Deputies, and from September last, Commissionated a Person
of Honor, and qualified for the discharge of that Office to act concurrently
with the Surviving Deputy the Lord of Montmartyn until such time as it may be
otherwise determined. And since by his Writ of the Tenth of October he had
given License unto this Synod to proceed unto the Election of Six Persons, well
inclined unto his Service, and to the Public, and having no dependence on any
one but himself, out of which His Majesty will prick two for the discharge of
that Office, therefore he exhorts the Synod to proceed unto the Nomination, and
to choose out Persons qualified as before, and has been usually practiced in
such cases, and this should be the rather done now, because the present
juncture of Affairs will not permit the calling of a Politic Assembly.
Declaring that in case we neglect the said Nomination; The Lord of Montmartyn,
and the other Lord nominated by the King will lay down the management of those
Offices. It being unreasonable that for want of General Deputies the common
Affairs of His Majesty's Subjects professing the Reformed Religion should be
abandoned and neglected. And the said Lord Commissioner presented His Majesty's
Writ, the tenor whereof is as follows,

This Tenth day of October, 1626 the King being at St. Germains in Lay,
considering that the term of Three years for which the Lord of Montmartyn, and
the Deceased Lord Maniald had been nominated to reside and serve at Court, and
to attend His Majesty in the quality of General Deputies for His Subjects of
the P. Reformed Religion is some while since expired, and that it so falls out
that there must be a new Election of some other Deputies to succeed them in
their Offices, and considering that this Election cannot be done more
conveniently than in the Assembly and National Synod, which His Majesty has
granted to be held by His said Subjects in His City of Castres this last
September, that so they might not be put to those great Expenses and
Incommodities which might betide them in case another Assembly should be called
for this purpose, as also for that the Weal and Safety of the Kingdom will not
at present comport with a Politic Assembly. His Majesty upon these
considerations, and for many other diverse and good reasons of great importance
to his Service, and the Repose and Tranquillity of His Government does grant
that the Deputies in the National Synod in the presence of the Lord Galland
Counselor to His Majesty in his Council of State, and Commissioner unto the
said Synod shall consult about the Election of Deputies to reside and serve
near His Majesty instead of the Lords Montmartyn and Hardy one of His
Secretaries, nominated by His Majesty in his Writ of the Thirtieth of
September last, and to offer unto him Six Persons meet and qualified for the
said Employment, whether they be Members of the said Synod or not, provided
they be such as are Loyal, and well affected unto his Service, and to the
public Peace, and that have no dependence on any Person in the World besides
him, that so his Majesty may prick two out of them, who may hold and discharge
the said Office of General Deputies. And in so doing the said Lords of
Montmartyn and Hardy our Secretary shall be divested of the said Employment,
they observing the forms as in such cases are usual and accustomed. Provided
always that in the said Assembly there be nothing else debated but the said
Election, and Matters relating to the Discipline of their Religion aforesaid,
according to the import of his Majesty's Edicts and Declarations. However this
shall not be made a Precedent, his Majesty reserving to himself the power of
permitting unto his said Subjects of the P. Reformed Religion to hold a
Politic Assembly when as in his wisdom he shall judge it needful; and his
Affairs of State can well comport with it. In testimony whereof I am commanded
by his Majesty to expedite this present Writ, which he was pleased to Sign
with his own Hand, and is Countersigned by me his Counselor and Secretary of
State, and of his Commands, and Exchequer. Signed in the Original, Louis, and a
little lower, Philippeaux.

CHAP. XI.
THE Writ having been read, the Council voted a Conference to be held about
its Contents at my Lord Commissioners Lodgings, and Twelve Persons Deputies of
the Council were constituted a Committee to this purpose. Who having made
Reports of the whole, The Council considering the change happened in Affairs by
the unexpected and sudden Death of the Lord Maniald, and the importunities of
the Lord Montmartyn his Colleague to be discharged, of such a Borden, as he
says, is impossible to be born by himself alone, and the pressing necessities
of our Churches requiring that some Persons should take upon them the care and
management of their Affairs, who might solicit them with renewed vigor, but
principally His Majesty's Writ animated by the Exhortations of his
Commissioner the Lord Gallanbd, who declared according to that Answer made unto
the Address presented by the Deputies, that the state of His Majesty's Affairs
would not permit His Majesty to grant us at present a General Assembly, And
that in case this Council would not nominate the Deputies, his Majesty himself
would do it, even as he had already took course to do it, having by his Writ
and Warrant of the Thirtieth of September expressly joined the Lord Hardy in the
Commission of the General Deputies with the Lord Montmartyn. For all these
reasons, and to avoid an infinite number of visible inconveniences: The
Council proceeded to Elect those Six Persons, which were to be presented to his
Majesty, and by plurality of Suffrages were chosen the Lords Claudius Baron of
Gabrias, and Beaufort, Jews de Champagne Earl of Suze, Henry de Clermont d'
Amboise Marquess of Gallerande, for the Nobility, and the Lords Basin Advocate
in Parliament living at Blois Texier the Kings Advocate in the Seneschalsy of
Armagnac, and Lazaras du Puy Counselor in the Presidial Court of Bourg in
Bresse for the Commons, that so his Majesty may out of them choose two, whom he
best likes, to exercise the Office of General Deputies.

But forasmuch as that Canon established in our Churches under the good
pleasure of His Majesty for the nomination of the said General Deputies,
requires that every third year by an express Warrant from his Majesty, there
should be called a General Assembly, and that before it there should be
particular Assemblies held in all the Provinces to prepare their Cahiers,
Memoirs, and all other Jurisdictions of the Provinces, and to deliver them unto
their hands who shall be deputed unto the General Assembly, which after wards
culleth out those Cahiers which most concern the Churches, and are to be
presented unto his Majesty for the Advancement of His Service, and the Peace
and Repose of His Subjects, And whereas it is full Six years ago since the last
Politic Assembly, was graciously permitted us by His Majesty, and that the
former National Synods held at Alez and Charenton, and this also of Castres
conformable to them, have peremptorily decreed that none of our Pastors shall
henceforward intermeddle with State Affairs, or assist personally in Politic
Assemblies, which also His Majesty has approved, The Council, because it would
not transgress His Majesty's Declarations, nor the Canons of the Synods
beforementioned, nor cause any prejudice to that Government which the goodness
of our Kings have approved in the Churches of this Realm, and which His Majesty
has given us to understand that he will not abolish, declares that it is none
of its design nor desire by this Election, whereunto the Churches are
necessitated, and the Kings Will obliges them to prejudice in the least the
Rights and Privileges of General Assemblies, to whom the care of State Affairs
does properly belong, nor shall it bind the succeeding National Synods to act
after this manner. Wherefore it charge the General Deputies who shall be
accepted by His Majesty, to demand at the end of Eighteen Months with the
profoundest submissions, and importunities imaginable his Majesty's Writ of
the Summons for the General Assembly, even as it has pleased His Majesty to
give unto our Churches the firm hopes thereof by His Royal and inviolable
promises expressed in plain and formal words in his Writ beforementioned. And
whereas the intendment of this Office is in the name of our Churches, to
represent unto His Majesty all those Matters, which concern the Weal and
Service of His Majesty, and the Repose and Subsistence of His Subjects, and
that to this purpose, it is absolutely needful that there should be Assemblies
held in the Provinces, unto which there may be brought all the Complaints,
Remonstrances and Propositions of all and every one of our Churches that from
them they may be brought unto the General Assembly, and the whole might be
there examined, and deposited into the hands of the General Deputies; and this
present Council being an Assembly of another Nature, and having no Commission
from the Provinces, it could not furnish the Deputies now Elected with those
necessary Memoirs and Instructions. They therefore who shall be retained by His
Majesty to discharge and execute this Office shall most humbly petition His
said Majesty that he would permit in every Province such an Assembly as soon as
possible, in which all Complaints and Remonstrances meet for His Majesty's
perusal may be collected and laid at His Majesty's feet by those Lords
aforesaid, our General Deputies, to whom they shall be sent, that so by this
means His Majesty may be duly and truly informed of the Deportments and
Grievances of all his Protestant Subjects, because there is not any thing of
greater importance to his Weal and Service than this is. The Council hoping
much from His Majesty's great goodness, is emboldned to pass beyond its
accustomed Bounds and Order, and to dispense with it self in this particular.
Otherwise it would have persisted in its most humble supplications, that it
might not be obliged unto the said Election.

The said Lords General Deputies shall confer with the Ministers of State, (it
being a thing of indispensable necessity) how they may hold a correspondency
with the Provinces, and the Provinces with them; because without such a
correspondency all their actings, yea, and their Office it self would be
utterly useless and unserviceable unto the Churches.

Every Province shall draw up a Cahier of the grievances of their Churches, and
of particular Persons professing our Religion, which shall be transmitted unto
the Church of Paris, which shall compile them into one general Cahier, to be
deposited into the hands of the General Deputies.

CHAP. XII. A Remonstrance of the Lord of Angoulins on behalf of the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and City of Rochell.
WHEN as the Council had thus decreed in pursuance of His Majesty's Pleasure,
that they would proceed unto an Election of General Deputies to reside near His
Majesty, the Lord of Angoulins one of the Sheriffs of the City of Rochell,
Elder of the Church there, and Deputy for the Province of Xaintonge,
remonstrated that in all such Actions the Lords, Mayor, Sheriffs, and free
Burgesses of the said City had in all times the Privilege of a Province, and
their Deputies did ever appear in Person in all general Politic Assemblies,
and in National Synods also, when as the General Deputies were to be chosen,
and he petitioned the Council that he might be granted his Vote in the said
Election, not only in his Quality as Deputy of the Province of Xaintonge, but
also in that his particular quality, as Deputy of the said Lords, the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and free Burgesses of the said City, according as he was
commissionated with full powers so to do by the said Lords, which he produced,
and were Signed by Gachot Secretary of their Council, the Fourteenth day of the
last October. The Deputies of the Province of Xaintonge were heard hereupon,
who declared that the said Lord of Angoulins being one of their Colleagues, and
Deputy together with them, might as such have his voice in the said Election,
or otherwise their Province would sustain a very considerable prejudice, if one
of its Deputies should be excluded from giving his suffrage in the said
Election. The Synod doing right unto the said Petitioner the Lord of Angoulins,
and not judging it reasonable that a single Person should have a double Vote in
such an Occurrence as this, decreed, that the said Lord of Angoulins should
only have one single Voice in the said Election, but however it should be left
unto his own choice to take what quality he pleased whether of Deputy for the
Province of Xaintonge, or of the City of Rochell only. And the said Lord of
Angoulins did at that instant, though it should not be drawn in consequence,
nor made a precedent for the future, nor prejudice the Rights and Privileges
of the said Town and Province, declare that he choose to give his Vote in
quality of Deputy for the said City of Rochell. And this present Act was
granted him, that he had made the said Declaration.

Forasmuch as there be diverse defaults in the Letters of Commission brought by
the Deputies of some Provinces; They shall be all exhorted by their Deputies to
see that Canon of the Synod of Tonneins executed, which had ordered that the
Names and Surnames of all Deputies should be expressly inserted into them: As
also to take special heed that all Letters of Commission and Memoirs be in no
wise Signed by the Persons Deputed unto the National Synods, nor by those who
are substituted in their stead in case of Sickness or Death, or any the like
accident, but by the Officers of the Provincial Synods as Moderators,
Assessors, and Scribes.

In pursuance of the Canon made in the Synod or Privas, The Provinces are
enjoined, to see that the Deputies of every Church do make Oath that they shall
not give their Votes nor Suffrages unto such as brigue their Elections and
Deputations unto our National Synods.

CHAP. XIII.
The Confession of Faith approved.
THE Confession of Faith being read word by word, and every Article distinctly
in its due Order, it was approved and ratified by the Unanimous consent of all
the Deputies, both Pastors and Elders, who protested as well for themselves as
for their Provinces that they would live and die in the profession of this
Faith, teach it in their Churches, and see it inviolably to be observed.

CHAP. XIV. Observations on reading the Church Discipline.
1 AFter those words in the Fifth Canon of the First Chapter, Without power of
administering the Holy Sacraments, these shall be added, nor of solemnizing
Marriages.

2 In reading the Nine and Twentieth Canon of the same Chapter, the Council
declares, that by the discord mentioned in that Canon we are to understand not
only what is moved by the Pastor, but by the Church, or Members among
themselves also.

3. On the first Canon of the third Chapter it was declared, that whosoever
accepted the Office of an Elder cannot be constrained to execute it, if before
his Reception thereinto, the consent he had once given be again revoked by him.

4. When the sixth Canon of the eighth Chapter was read at the request of the
Provincial Deputies of Berry, it was voted, That Provincial Synods should be
obliged before they brake up to proceed unto Censures, even as in the like case
a Decree had been framed for Colloquies.

5. All our Churches are exhorted faithfully and exactly to observe the ninth
Canon of the twelfth Chapter, concerning the Administration of the Cup in the
Lords Supper, and to be accountable for their Obedience to it unto the next
National Synod.

6. The eighth Canon of the Ninth Chapter shall be razed but of our Discipline,
as being superfluous and unpracticable in our Churches.

7. The same judgment having past on the fourth Canon of the tenth Chapter, it
was amended and changed into these words. Churches which have been accustomed
to make Public Prayers on some certain days of the Week may continue that
order, which for many years they have so happily observed, and other Churches
may imitate their good example, when as the Lord shall bless them with Ability
and Opportunity, and it may contribute unto their Edification.

8. And Pastors also in the faithful discharge of their duties shall endeavor
by their Remonstrances and Exhortations to prevent those great dishonours done
unto Almighty God by that general contempt of his Holy Word preached; very many
neglecting Sermons and Public Public Ordinances of Religious Worship, yea,
and Family-Prayers, of which Omissions a multitude of Heads of Families,
Householders, and their Domestics are exceeding guilty.

9. The eighteenth Canon of the thirteenth Chapter shall be couched in this
form, Such as dwell in those places where the Public Exercise of our Religion
is not est ablished may cause their banes of Matrimony to be published in the
Popish Churches, it being a matter purely political.

10. The Churches are enjoined by this Synod to give in an account unto their
Colloquies and Provincial Synods of all Infractions of the sixteenth Canon in
the fourteenth Chapter of our Discipline, and Colloquies and Synods are to
censure such Offenders, whether they have violated it by printing of Practical
or Controversal Treatises.

11. When the twenty fourth, twenty fifth, and twenty sixth Canons of the
fourteenth Chapter were read, it was voted, That this ensuing Canon should be
made, and read in all the Churches as soon as the Deputies were returned unto
their respective Provinces.

CHAP. XV. An Act against Debauchery.
FOrasmuch as the Wrath of God is visibly revealed from Heaven against the
Ungodlyness of Men, and is notoriously poured out upon those who being once
enlightened from above, and called to the knowledge of the Heavenly Truth have
afterward kept it under Hatches through their Unrighteousness, that so they
might more freely wallow in the Abominations of this World, and turn the Grace
of God into lasciviousness: The National Synod of the reformed Churches of this
Kingdom Assembled by His Majesty's License in the Town of Gastres, unable to
behold, without weeping Eyes, and a wounded bleeding heart, after such dreadful
Judgments and Desolations as have befallen us, the reigning Dissolutions and
Debauches of those Persons who style and own themselves Members of Gods Church,
though in very truth and deed they be horrible Profaners of his Holy Name, and
dishonorable Professors of our most Holy Religion by their Impious and
Licentious Lives, and do as much as in them lies deny the power of Godliness
by their open and shameless ingratitude to his Divine Goodness. Now for the
avoiding of Gods burning Wrath and Indignation, and more and more to stir up
the Bowels of his Fatherly Compassions (which he was pleased to remember for us
even in the midst of Judgment, yea, and then also, when as he smote his sinful
Heritage with his forest and severest strokes,) and that upon our Conversion
and Reformation his special Love and favor may be had and obtained, and that
this peace, which against all hopes he has given a stiff-necked and rebellious
People (who have bitterly provoked him to Jealousy, and as it is too too
evident have nothing profited by his Rod of Discipline and Correction) may be
preserved and continued, This National Synod decrees, That all the Churches of
this Kingdom shall be solicited by the most powerful Motives and Arguments to
humble themselves deeply in a most serious Repentance before his Divine
Majesty, and utterly to abandon all Vanities, Luxury's, Fantasticalness, and
sumptuous Superfluities in Apparel, those unseemly Ornaments and delights of
lascivious Curles, Paintings, Naked Breasts, Dances, Balls, Masquerades,
Wassaile-Feasts, Carnevalls, and all other unfruitful works of Darkness, that
so the Faithful, Reforming their Lives, and producing Fruits worthy of
Repentance, may demonstrate themselves by their good Works to be the
conscientious Guardians of that precious Jewel or saving Truths, which is
deposited with them. And all Consistories are enjoined to exert that Authority
given them of God diligently to suppress their Insolences, who glorying in
their shame and ignominy may attempt in aftertimes to continue in any of their
disorderly and sinful practices, and should set themselves to resist those
Remonstrances, which the Great and Holy God has or may issue forth against
them by his Sacred Word.

And that this most needful Canon may be executed with the greater
Faithfulness, Care, and Facility, This Synod does ordain that it shall be read
publicly in all our Churches, and an Account of its Observation shall be given
in unto Colloquies and Synods, on pain of being responsible in their own
Persons particularly for all its Transgressions and Violations.

The whole Church Discipline having been read, the Deputies of the Provinces
promised both for themselves, their Churches and those who had Commissionated
them to observe it in their own Persons, and to see it most Religiously
observed in their Respective Provinces.

CHAP. XVI. Observations on reading the Acts of the National Synod of Charenton.
1 THIS Council treading in the Steps of the last National Synod held at
Charenton, and yielding to the request of diverse Provinces, voted a most humble
Petition should be presented unto His Majesty, that all our Ecclesiastical
Assemblies might enjoy the self-same liberty as they ever had till the Year One
Thousand Six Hundred, and Twenty Three.

2. On reading the Third Article of Observations by the said Synod and of our
Church Discipline, it was voted, that the Ancient Custom should be retained for
Celebrating the Lords Supper in the close and issue of the National Synods.

3. The Third Article in the first Chapter of our Church Discipline made in
that Synod, shall hereafter be expressed in these terms. Ministers and their
Families shall actually reside, etc. And in obedience to this Canon all
Ministers within the Province of the Higher Languedoc, who are already, or may
hereafter reside in the City of Montauban shall immediately and without delay
conform themselves to that Order of their last Provincial Synod, on pain of
being deposed from their Ministry, and the next Provincial Synods shall yield
Account unto the next National Synod of their duty, in dealing with, and
censuring of such Delinquents.

See of this Cedur in the Roll of Apostates in the Third National Synod of
Charenton.
4. When as the Acts of the National Synod of Charenton were read, This Assembly
was informed, that a Decree of theirs concerning Monsieur Codurs his departure
into Dolphiny, who was there to be provided of a Church by that Province had
never been executed: A Vote passed, that he should personally appear within
eighteen days after his reception of this present Summons, before this
Assembly, and bring in the reasons of his disobedience: And in case of his
refusal, we do declare him suspended from the Sacred Ministry, and farther,
that notwithstanding his absence we will proceed to a final Judicial Sentence
against him.

5. The Province of the Isle of France is ordered to write unto the Church and
University of Sedan, that they would be pleased to resign the Manuscript Works
left by Monsieur du Tilloy deceased, that they may be printed, and the worthy
labors of that most Excellent Servant of God being published may become the
more useful.

6. The Council condescending to the Petitions of Monsieur Perreaud Pastor of
the Church of Mascon, and to the desires of the Provincial Deputies of
Burgundy, decreed that the Censure voted against him in the last National Synod
should be razed out of its Acts.

7. At the request of the Province of Lower Guyenne, and for that Honorable
Report and Testimonials they have given of Monsieur Huron, and in hopes that
the Church of Bessa whereof he is Minister will be more advantagiously edified
by him, it was granted that the Act of Censure denounc't against him by the
National Synod of Charenton should be razed out also.

8. The Writings delivered by Monsieur Perrin Pastor of the Church of Nyons and
by Monsieur de Mirebell deceased unto the Province of Burgundy, and by their
Deputies unto this Synod, were all ordered to be suppressed.

9. The Observation of the third Article of General Matters past in the
aforesaid Synod of Charenton is recommended unto all the Churches.

10. There were read the Acts and Letters of certain Elders and Heads of
Families in the Church of Montlimart, Letters from the Church of Sauve, and
from his Highness the Lord Duke of Rohan, and Audience was given unto the Lords
Caron and Mouschamp Deputies of Montlimart, and to the Provincial Deputies of
Dolphiny and Sevennes, as also to Monsieur Guerin Commissioned by the aforesaid
Lord Duke, and to Monsieur Rossel Pastor of the Church of Montlimart, lent by
the last National Synod unto the Church of Sauve till the meeting of this
Assembly. Whereupon a Decree passed that Monsieur Rossel should be lent for
Three years unto the Church in the Lord Duke of Roan's House, but with this
Condition, that the said Mr. Rossel shall not abandon the Church of Sauve,
before it be provided of another Pastor by the Colloquy of Sauve, or by the
Province of Sevennes, which is required to get them a supply out of hand, and
when as those three years of Loan be expired, both the said Monsieur Rossel,
and the Church of Montlimart shall apply themselves unto the Province of
Dolphiny, which is empowered by this Assembly to provide for the said Monsieur
Rossel and the Church of Montlimart to their mutual comfort and advantage.

CHAP. XVII.
ON reading the Seventeenth Article of General Matters of the last National
Synod, diverse Deputies related, how that it was generally believed in their
Provinces, that the said Synod contrary to the Custom of our Churches had
Treated and Debated of State-Matters. Whereupon this Assembly informed them,
that it was never the intention of that National Synod to have meddled with an
Affair of that Nature, the Cognizance and Decision of which had been always
left unto Political Assemblies, which were called by His Majesty's Writ
expressly to that end, and farther that the Synod in doing what it did was
wholly to testify its Obedience unto His Majesty's Will, notified to them by
the Lord Commissioner Galland, and confirmed by the very Letters of His
Majesty, declaring absolutely and precisely His Command and Pleasure therein.
Moreover, should not our Pastors have yielded that Obedience, they might all of
them have been branded for pragmaticalness, and taking upon them the cognizance
of Matters Foreign to their profession, which they never once desired, every
one of the Pastors protesting for himself, that they wished from their Souls
never for the future to be called unto such Assemblies, whatever Advantages
might thereby accrue unto them for His Majesty, And the Judgment past in this
case by the Synod of Alez in the first Article of General Matters is an Ample
Testimony that they were prejudged against it long before.

12. Whereas the Sieurs Guidon and d' Huysseau. had received Letters of
Attorney to prosecute Monsieur Palot, and they were not revoked, but upon
condition that the Lord Malat should be associated with them, which the said
Lord Malat would not yield unto, now that the said Act of Revocation may not be
construed in a sinister Sense, as if the aforesaid Sieurs Guydon and d'
Huysseau had been deficient either in diligence or faithfulness, who
contrariwise for those self-same Virtues have deserved exceeding well of our
Churches. This Synod declares, that it would have been a singular satisfaction
to it in case the said Sieur Malat might have been induced to undertake the
prosecution of that Affair which was jointly committed to him, and the
aforementioned Sieurs Guydon and d' Huysseau, who were not only always
exempted from all Defaults, but also from the very Suspicion thereof, and that
all kind of Testimonials and Thankfulness is due and owing them for their
Capacity, Carefulness, Diligence, Integrity, and Singular Love and Zeal unto
the Weal and Happyness of our Churches, nor cannot in the least be refused
them. Wherefore this present Order passed for their discharge shall be inserted
into the Acts of this Synod, that it may be carried into all the Provinces,
that so none may plead or pretend his Ignorance, and Unacquaintedness with the
intentions of this present, and of the last immediately preceding Synod.

Monsieur Palot of St Antonine presented a Petition unto this Assembly on
behalf of his Brother Palot, that it would be pleased to cause all processes
commenc't against him by the Lord Malat to cease, and that Arbitrators might be
chosen on both sides with full power to determine the differences betwixt him
and the Churches of this Kingdom. Letters also from the Lord Malat were read,
informing it of the great progress he had made in the Suit against him.
Whereupon the Synod finding the Complaints and Requests of the said Palot to be
unreasonable, and that from their former Experience, they could only conclude
them done on purpose to gain and spin out time, and to elude if possible the
Prosecutions already begun, it voted Thanks to be given unto the Lord Malat for
his care and pains, and that he be entreated to continue his Travel and
Diligence in this Affair; and the like thanks were ordered unto Monsieur
Arnault for his singular Affection to the Weal of our Churches; and the Lord
Commissioner Galland was also earnestly desired to befriend our Churches with
his kind Assistance at Court; and to speak for us unto the Kings Majesty, that
His Gracious Majesty would be pleased to ordain that Justice might be done us.

Letters were read from the Lords Marbaut, de Massanes, Bigot, and de Launay,
Commissioners named by the last National Synod to treat on behalf of all our
Churches with Persons capable of bringing the Sieur Palot to give us some
reasonable satisfaction. And also Monsieur Mestrezat another of those
Commissioners made report, of what had been done herein as we^l by himself as
by those others joined in Commission with him. Whereupon all their Actions were
ratified and approved.

In reading that Act of the Synod of Charenton containing His Majesty's Answer
unto the Sieurs Cottiby and du Bois Saint Martyn Deputed by the said Synod unto
His Majesty, in which hope was given unto the Churches, that the Prohibition
issued out against Monsieur du Moulin should be taken away, and that he should
be restored unto his Ministry in this Kingdom. And a Letter to this self-same
purpose from the Church of Paris also, requesting our Intercession with His
Majesty, that he would be Graciously pleased to grant unto the Churches the
enjoyment of their hopes. The Deputies of the Isle of France joined with them
in this their request. Whereupon it was resolved, that His Majesty should be
most humbly petitioned to grant leave unto the said Monsieur du Moulin to
return into France, and to the Exercise of his Pastoral Office in his aforesaid
Church, and the said Monsieur du Moulin shall be required by Letters from this
Synod to join with the Churches in their Petition for his return and
re-settlement in France, and that he shall address himself also by a particular
Petition of his own unto His Majesty, that he may be restored unto his Charge,
wherein by the Blessing of God he had such eminent success, that so if it may
be, His Majesty by so many importunate Petitioners may be prevailed with to
grant us our desires.

The Provincial Deputies of Lower Guyenne and Poictou being heard, it was voted
that the Churches of Rochechouart and Limoges should continue joined unto the
Province of Lower Guyenne, as they have been heretofore: notwithstanding that
they were separated from it by a Decree of the last National Synod, because
they cannot subsist if they be divided, nor can the Church of Limoges be united
unto Poictou without too much enfeebling the Colloquy of Limousin.

Master Peter Guillemin Pastor in the Church of La Bour presented his Petition
unto this Assembly, that the Sum of Three Hundred Livres granted the said
Church by the former National Synods may be continued, and that the Sum of
Threescore Livres more might be bestowed upon them for the breeding of a young
Scholar, who may be hereafter capable of serving the said Church, and to preach
in their Language, and that His Majesty may be petitioned, that He would grant
according to His Edicts Two Places more for Religious Worship unto the Faithful
of the said Country of Labor. It was voted that this Petition in all its
Parts and Members should be fulfilled, on this Condition, that the Scholar to
be maintained by them be presented unto the next Synod of Lower Guyenne, and
that the said Province of the Lower Guyenne do yield an account of the said
Sum of Sixty Livres unto the next National Synod, as also of the Three Hundred
Livres granted unto the said Church of La Bour, and the Pastor there shall be
obliged for the future to assist in Person at the Provincial Synods of Lower
Guyenne.

After the last Canon was voted, This Assembly recollected that heretofore the
National Synod of Tonneins had granted unto Monsieur Busthonoby Pastor of the
Churches in Souls the Sum of Three Hundred Livres to defray the Charges of
Printing some certain Books in the Biscayan Language, and that since by a
Decree of the Synod of Vitre the Province of Lower Guyenne was reimburst the
said Sum, which they had beforehand advanced to that purpose. Whereupon Order
was given unto the said Province to call in its next Synod the aforesaid
Monsieur Busthonoby to an account how he did employ and dispose of the said
Moneys, and to bring in that Account unto the next National Synod.

CHAP. XVIII. No Minister to Depart the Kingdom without the Kings Leave.
THE Lord Commissioner declaring that it was His Majesty's Will and Pleasure
according to Law that none of our Pastors should depart the Kingdom without his
Royal License, and that in case any Foreign Princes or States desired that any
of our Ministers might be either lent them for a time, or given to them
absolutely during Life, that then the said Minister should according to our
Laws first obtain His Majesty's License for his departure. The Council resigned
it self and all the Ministers of our Churches most fully and freely, as they
have ever done, unto the Laws of the Land.

This Synod inquiring into the causes obstructing the Execution of those
particular Canons that the last National Synod had made for the better
Government of the Province of Provence, judged that the said Province did
justly deserve a Censure in case it cannot vindicate and acquit it self from
all impeachments of neglect herein. And whereas the Sieurs Crubellier and
Chambrun who were appointed Commissioners by the Synod of Charenton to visit
that Province had been countermanded by Monsieur Recent, the said Recent is
enjoined to appear before the next Synod of Lower Languedoc and there to answer
unto all Matters that shall be brought in against him, and the said Synod shall
suspend him from the Ministry in case he be found to have deserved it. And
those Excuses of the Sieurs Crubellier and Chambrun are accepted, but withal,
the Reverend Mr. Chauve and Bouteroue, and in case they by some lawful
hindrance should be detained, then the Reverend Mr. Le Faucheur and Conel are
charged to go unto the next Synod of Provence, and there see the aforesaid
Canons of those former National Synods to be put in Execution, and to remedy
those disorders, which may and do retard their Observation.

The Agreement made between the said Province, and the Widow of Monsieur
Toussains is approved and confirmed.

The Commissioners appointed for remedying the Confusions in the said Province
shall give judgment in that case complained of by the Church of Lormarin, and
brought before this Assembly.

The Synod confirming the Sentence of the Province of the Isle of France,
decrees that Monsieur du Val shall be numbered among the Pastors that be
Emeriti, and that a free Portion shall be assigned and paid in unto him as
unto others of the same quality, and under his Circumstances.

That the Twelfth Article in the Chapter of Colleges and Universities may be
more accurately observed than heretofore, all Provinces within whose district
the said Universities be Erected are earnestly exhorted to put forth their
helping hand, that they be reduced into practice, and they shall bring proof of
their Obedience yielded to this Canon, unto the next National Synod.

The Province of Guyenne requesting it, this Council does confirm the R. R. Mr.
Alba, and Ferrand in the Pastoral Charge of the Churches of Again and Bourdeaux.

Report being made by the Commissioners appointed for examining the Memoirs of
Monsieur du Bois a Pastor sent by the last National Synod unto the Church of
Fontaines and Crossy till the sitting of the next Synod of Normandy, upon the
first Article of his Complaints and Demands, he was ordered to apply himself
unto the Province of Anjou, and the said Province should bestir themselves so
effectually, that he may have full satisfaction, and all his Debts paid him,
especially by the Lady de la Barce, and upon the Second that the Province of
Normandy shall give him an Account of his Portion, which they received for him
under his Name, it being entered under their Dividend. Moreover, they shall
either provide him of a Church, or give him an Honorable dismission from the
Ministry in their Province, in case there be no vacant Church in it, that
demands his Service, Which also shall be notified to him, and that the
aforesaid Province has proceeded to disch^rge him.

CHAP. XIX. 1626. The 25th. Synod.
A Deposed Minister Restored.
MOniseur James Repasseau presenting Honorable Attestations of His Deportment
ever since his Deposition, and with Showers of Tears most humbly petitioning
the Synod, that he might reap the fruits and benefits of those hopes which the
last National Synod had given him some ground to expect, and that upon evident
proofs and tokens of his sincere Repentance, he might be another day restored
unto the Exercise of his Ministry, and the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny
being charged by their Synod to intercede for him, and by word of mouth to
confirm those good and laudable Testimonials which had been given him by the
Church of Montlimard, where he has ever since resided, and by his Religious
and Exemplary Conversation exceedingly edified them. The Synod having tender
bowels of Love and Compassion for him, and yielding a just deference to those
affectionate entreaties of the Province of Dolphiny, and of the whole Church of
Montlimard, in which for these Four last Years he has made his constant abode
to their singular satisfaction, after serious Admonitions given him to stand
upon his guard, and diligently to ponder his Paths, and to walk in the House or
God with a very Godly Fear, and a most Religious Circumspection for the future,
because of the great scandal which was taken by the Church and World, by those
within and without at his Sin and Fall, especially his best and dearest Friends
having been horribly amazed and astonished at it, This Synod does now restore
him to his Ministry, and to the Exercise of all the Duties and Offices of a
Gospel-Minister, and decrees by this present Canon that his Name shall be
razed out of the Roll and Catalogue of Deposed Ministers, that so when as any
Church shall give him a Call to work among them, he may re-enter upon his
Pastoral Work, and charge with as great Honor and Comfort as he was deprived
of it with Grief, Ignominy, and Confusion.

CHAP. XX. APPEALS.
THE Sieur Ginoux brought his Appeal from a Judgment of the Province of
Sevennes, and he was patiently heard speaking of those pretended grievances,
which occasioned his Appeal, and of that opposition which was made and formed
by him and his Party against the Settlement of Monsieur Courant in the Pastoral
Office in the Church of Alez, and about the Suspension decreed against him from
the Lords Table by the Consistory of his own Church and the Provincial Synod.
The Deputies of Sevennes were heard also speaking in the behalf of their
Province. This Synod did hereupon declare that the said opposition was
groundless, 1626. The 25th. Synod.
and confirmed the Decree of the Provincial Synod for the Setting of the said
Monsieur Courant in the Church of Alez; and forasmuch as the said Sieur Ginoux
does yield unto those Exhortations and Remonstrances that have been made him,
and out of deference to them protests that he will relinquish as he now
relinquisheth all those Accusations brought by him against Monsieur des Marests
and his Colleague Monsieur Courant whom he reckons and believes to be True,
Worthy, and Faithful Ministers of the Gospel, Holy and Exemplary in their
Lives, of Unblemished and Unstained Reputations. And farther it ordains that
the said Sieurs des Marests and Courant shall openly and publicly declare
before the Consistory of Montpellier that they do reciprocally hold and esteem
the said Sieur Ginoux for an honest Gentleman, of good Reputation, and without
Reproach; and after this Declaration thus made, the said Consistory shall
reconcile them one to the other, and by Authority from this Synod the said
Sieur Ginoux shall be received by them unto the Peace and Commmunion of the
Church, and that Suspension decreed against him by the Province of Sevennes
shall be removed, and taken off the File.

2. Letters were read from the Church of Paris, with its appeal from the
Judgment of the last Provincial Synod, and Monsieur Mestrezat and d' H^ysseau
with the other Deputies of that Province were heard speaking to it. This
Assembly voted a Decree, that the Censure past on the Church of Paris in that
Synod of he Isle of France shall be reversed, and that the Church of Paris
shall be advised precisely to observe the Canons concerning the re-search of
Pastors: Moreover to comply with their instant, urgent Importunities Monsieur
Daille is purely and absolutely resigned to them.

3. Whereas John Mellier having opposed the Election and Reception of the Sieur
John Celaris into the Office of an Elder, and brought his Appeal unto this
Synod, it is remanded back unto the Province of Higher Languedoc, who have full
power to determine it.

4. The Synod ratifying the Judgment of the Province of Xaintonge, from whence
the Church of Montendre had appealed, This Assembly ordains, that for the
future Provincial Synods shall judge soveraignly and finally in all causes
about dismembring and conjoining of Annexed Churches.

5. And therefore according to this Canon the Appeal of the Church of St.
Hillary in the Province of Poictou is declared null, notwithstanding what has
been remonstrated to the contrary by the Lord de la Begaudiere.

6. For the same reason the Appeal of the Church of St. Fulgentius in the same
Province is disanulled.

7. The same Sentence was given on the Appeal of the Church of Quissac from the
Decree of the Province of Sevennes.

8. And for the like reason the Church of Sauve in the said Province having
brought an Appeal had it rejected.

9. Although the differences about the distribution of His Majesty's Liberality
granted us to our Churches ought not to be brought before these National
Synods, yet that the contestations in the Churches of the Lower Guyenne may be
terminated, the Deputies of that Province are commanded to confer with the R.
R. Mr. Belot and de Baux, Ministers of the Gospel, and with the Sieurs Marlat
and la Briere Elders, that in case they should hit upon an expedient of
accommodating Matters, it may be ratified by the Authority of this Assembly,
not that we would have a precedent made hereof. And once again that Ancient
Prohibition against our Ministers is now revived. That not one of them shall
touch a Denier of His Majesty's Bounty assigned to; and distributed by the
Provinces unto their particular Churches; because the said Churches ought
solely to receive it, and it must remain wholly at their disposal, and because
our Pastors shall not have an uncertain, but a most certain and determinate
Pension for their subsistence from their Churches.

10. The Appeal of Monsieur Perez Pastor of the Church of Cajarre was vacated;
and the Assembly enjoined the Province of Higher Languedoc to put forth their
hand, that the said Perez may receive for time coming greater satisfaction from
his Church than heretofore. And in case the said Church do not fully content
him, and pay him his just dues betwixt this and the next Synod of that
Province, they shall be deprived of his Ministry, and he shall be assigned to
some other Flock; yea and though they should give him all possible
satisfaction, yet shall he not be compelled to serve a Church against his Will,
whereunto he was not sent but for a time.

11. This Judgment past upon the Appeal of the Church of Angles; that it was
very needless, and ill laid, the Sentence of their Province being founded on
Equity and Charity.

12. The Appeal of Monsieur Peter Prevost a Pastor Emeritus is declared null.

13. The Church of Bergerac appealed and petitioned, that forasmuch as the
Sentence of the Province of Lower Guyenne has been invalidated, the Twelve
Hundred Livres formerly granted unto their College might be continued. The
Letters and Memoirs of that Church being read, and the Deputies of that
Province heard, this Decree was made, That the Four Hundred Livres given unto
every Province for their respectiye Colleges shall be continued unto that of
Bergerac until the next National Synod, unto which they shall give a clear and
good account of what has been done by them for the re-establishment of their
College, on default of which, that Sentence of the Provincial Synod for
translating the said College to the Town of Nerac shall be confirmed. And as
for the remaining Eight Hundred Livres, Four Hundred of them shall be detained
by the Lord of Candal in his hands, and the other Four Hundred shall be
accorded to the Church of Nerac, but on this condition only that the Town of
Bergerac do find out some means for the re-establishment of their College. And
our National Synods may hereafter give them sensible pledges of their
accustomed Love and Kindness.

14. Monsieur des Marests suspended the Holy Ministry by the Province of
Vivaretz, petitioned in his Appeals, that they might be obliged to restore him
unto the Public Exercise of his Office, and come to an account with him, upon
hearing the Deputies of that Province, this Synod voted that his suspension
should be removed, and that the said Province should account with him for the
Moneys owing to him before the Consistory of Alez, and that Monsieur Cuper
shall pay him presently in ready Moneys Three Hundred Livres, out of what might
accrue unto the said Province, and to repair the want of Charity which those of
that Province have been notoriously guilty of toward him, they shall for the
future take special care to encourage him in his Ministry.

15. Mr. George Arbaut formerly Pastor of the Church in Boiscoiran appeared in
Person before this Synod to maintain his Appeal. But upon hearing the Deputies
of the Province of Lower Languedoc, by which he was Deposed, and Monsieur
Paulett Pastor of the Church of Vezenobre who gave in Evidence against him on
one of the Principal Articles for which he was condemned, the Letters and Acts
produced both for and against him having been perused, The Synod confirmed the
Judgment denounc't against the said Arbaut, and declares him for ever unworthy
of Employment in the Sacred Ministry, and decrees farther that he shall not be
admitted to Communion in the Sacraments, till such time as being touched with a
deep remorse, and serious Repentance for his Sin, he do fully, freely, and
ingenuously Confess his Offenses before that Church, in which he constantly
resideth.

16. Monsieur Beraut Pastor of the Church of Montauban, and Professor in that
University, appealed from a Decree of the Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc,
and consequentially from the Actions of the Delegates of that Synod, and of the
Colloquy of Lower Quercy. Letters from the Magistrates in the Sheriffdom or
Montauban were read, as also from the Four Consuls of the said City; The Lords
de la Roche and Bardon Counselors in that Sheriffdom, the Lords de la Rose and
Auglas first and second Consuls, and the R. Mr. Charles a Minister one of those
Delegates, were all heard speaking of this Affair, and Monsieur Beraud also
declaring his grievances, as also did the Deputies of the Province. The Synod
did hereupon take unto it self the cognizance of this Case, and voted that the
R. R. Mr. Maurice and le Bloy Ministers of the Gospel, Martimont and Laullan
Elders shall to this purpose ride unto the City of Montauban, and joining with
the Consistory of that Church, shall inquire into those matters alleged
against Monsieur Beraud, and examine Witnesses, and form a Process against him,
and proceed to a definitive Sentence, and see that right be done upon those
Appeals, and the principal of that Affair as is but just and reasonable.

17. Monsieur Scoffier Pastor of the Church of Lunell brought an Appeal in his
own Name, and that of his Sister Mrs. Blandina Scoffier from a Judgment of the
Synod of Sevennes, which having been read and perused, This Synod declared that
the said Judgment was very unrighteous, and utterly unjustifiable. And that the
opposition made by Mrs. Jacquelina Scoffier was ill-grounded, and that the Sum
of Four Hundred and Three Livres, One Sous, Four Deniers liquidated by the
Consistory of Anduze, Authorized thereunto by the Synod of Sevennes, shall
immediately, and without delay be paid by the Receiver of the said Province
into the hands of the laid Monsieur Scoffier, to be employed by him for the
Relief of his poor Sister Blandina.

18. The Sieurs Guez Pastor, and Bien-nous-vienne Elder of the Church of
Aubusson declared the reasons of their Appeal and Complaints against the
Province of Berry. And the Deputies of the same Province, and Mr. Texier an
Elder delegated by the Consistory of Aubusson produced their Arguments and
Allegations to the contrary. After the whole had been heard and debated, the
Judgment of the said Province was invalidated, because they ought not to remove
a Pastor from his Church without assigning him to some other, much less should
they prefer a Scholar unto an ordained Minister. And farther it was decreed,
that Monsieur Guez should continue in his Pastoral Office in that Church of
Aubusson until the next Provincial Synod, and the differences between the
Elders of that Church, and Monsieur Guez, their Pastor, and between those
Elders and other Members of that Church are remanded back unto the same Synod.
And the Deputies of that Province are commanded to carry unto their Synod the
Memoir which was produced in this Assembly, and the Sieurs Salmon and Scoffier
are to make inquiry into the truth of those Articles of Accusation contained in
the said Memoir, that so the said Synod may do right unto the wronged Parties,
and censure the Delinquents.

19. This Assembly ratified the Judgment of the Province of Higher Languedoc,
and vacated the Appeal of Monsieur Bicheteau Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in
the University of Montauban, and decreed that a free Portion should be assigned
him on the Dividend of the said Province, and that he may according to the
Canons of former National Synods preach in the Church of Montauban, when as he
shall be thereunto requested by the Consistory, and as in prudence and charity
they be bound, they shall look more carefully after the General Edification of
the Church, and the particular Consolation of the said Monsieur Bicheteau.

20. The Letters and Acts of the Church of Pamiers were tendered by Monsieur du
Tocque their Deputy, and read in this Council, requesting on behalf of that
Church, that the Decree of the Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc might be
reversed, and Monsieur Galliard might be discharged from serving that Church.
The matter having been debated, the Synod declared upon the whole, That the
Province had judged well, and that the Church had ill appealed; and because of
the importance of that Church leave is given it to seek out for a second
Pastor, but yet nevertheless Monsieur Galliard should be continued in his
Ministry unto that Church until the next Provincial Synod, who shall have a
singular regard unto the Honor and Comfort of Monsieur Galliard, and provide
him of another Church, in case the Peace and Edification of that of Pamiers
shall so require it.

21. Monsieur Peyroll Pastor in the Church of Montpellier is enjoined within
five days after this present Act shall be signified to him personally to
appear in this City, and to answer unto such questions as this Synod shall
desire to be resolved in from his own Mouth, and in case he vefuse Obedience
unto this injunction, he shall then be prosecuted with the utmost rigor
according to the Discipline.

22. This Assembly ratified the Sentence of the Synod of Higher Languedoc,
which had disannulled the Appeal made by Ruinall against the Election of James
Canac unto the Elders Office in the Church of St. Afrique, and afterward
reconciled them one unto the other.

23. There were produced and read in open Synod Acts and Letters from diverse
Inhabitants of the Town of St. Ambroise, appealing from the Judgment of the
Synod of Lower Languedoc, as also from sundry other Inhabitants of the same
Town, Writing in favor of Monsieur Courroy, Pastor of the Church of the said
place. This Assembly confirmed the Sentence of the Colloquy of Vsez, and of the
Provincial Synod, and censured those Appealers in the Person of their Deputies,
for having through their unbridled passion passed Church-Acts out of
Consistory, in the Consuls House of their Town, and brought a parcel of
frivolous Accusations against Monsieur Courroy their Pastor, and decrees
farther that he be continued Minister unto the said Church of St. Ambroise, and
that if he should be removed thence, though it was at his own request, yet
shall not the said Church be provided of another Pastor, till the whole Body of
them have banished all their disorderly passions and bitterness, and be visibly
reunited in one and the same mind, that so they may by all just and peaceable
ways seek after a Minister, who may be conceived most proper and fittest to
promote their common Edification, and this shall be signified unto that Church
by the Deputies of Burgundy, who are charged in their way homeward to pass
through that Town of St. Ambroise, and then and there they shall inform the
Inhabitants of the Intentions of this Synod, and do their best endeavors to
reconcile them among themselves, and to their Worthy Pastor Mr. Courroy, and to
know their minds about it, that so they may malse report thereof unto the Synod
of Lower Languedoc, which is empowered by this Assembly to use all Lawful and
Holy Means for promoting the Peace and Edifying of that Church.

24. The Letters and Memoirs produced by the Consuls of Anduze appealing from a
Decree of the Provincial Synod of Sevennes, and from the Consistory of the said
Town who wore Parties to it were all examined. And the Deputies of that
Province together with the Sieurs Puyredon Deputy Consul and Cheiloit an Elder
speaking on behalf of the Consistory, and Monsieur Horle a Minister, were all
heard After which the Council rejecting that Appeal, and censuring their
proceedings, who had brought it in, and would support it by unusual and undue
means, and with Libels of Accusations written out of Consistory, stuff't with
matters of no moment, confirmed Monsieur Horle in the Pastoral Office of that
Church, and gives it leave to provide themselves of a second Pastor, either
within or without the Province, as the Lord shall offer them an opportunity,
and farther it decrees that the said Church shall attend their next Provincial
Synod, and gain an Order from it for re-uniting the Church of Tornas, now
joined unto that of Lezan, unto themselves, and the said Synod shall comply
with them in this their request, and use some other means for the maintenance
of that Church of Lezan, when as that of Tornas shall be again incorporated
with that of Anduze, as it was heretofore.

25, The Decree of the last Synod of the Isle of France, notwithstanding the
Letters and Complaints of Monsieur Richard Pastor, and and of some certain
Elders of the Church of Vandieres to the contrary, was confirmed, and the said
Richard was enjoined by the Synod to exercise his Ministry in those Churches
unto which he was assigned, on pain of being suspended from his Office; and
that Province is requested to compassionate his great wants, and to extend unto
him their wonted Charities.

26. Whereas Monsieur Razes appealed from a Judgment of the Provincial Synod of
Lower Languedoc, This Council rejected his Appeal, and to put a period unto the
contentions of the said Razes about the precedence of Monsieur Martyn an
Attorney at Bezieres, it decreed, that for the future no businesses of this
Nature should ever be presented unto these Assemblies.

27. The Appeal of the Church of Mazamet was also rejected, because it was not
of the Nature of those businesses, which ought to be decided in these Councils,
and because the Provincial Deputies of Higher Languedoc offered to take care
that both the Appealers and their Partners should have full satisfaction given
them.

28. The Appeal of Monsieur Rossel Pastor in the Church of Issoire about
pecuniary matters, is according to the Canons in that case provided, dismissed
over to the Judgment of the Province of Lower Languedoc.

29. The Several Appeals of Monsieur Genoyer Pastor of the Church of Riez in
Provence are devolved on the Colloquy of Ambrun, who shall call upon the Church
of Luc, to produce what they have to say for themselves, and to threaten them,
that notwithstanding their Appeal, in case of their absence, or refusal to obey
this Order, and to bring forth the Book of their Consistory, whereby the
justice or unreasonableness of what is demanded of them may be discovered,
Judgment shall pass upon them.

30. Report was made in full Council of the Contents of Monsieur Sauceux his
Memoirs, who appealed from the Judicial Sentences of the Synod of the Isle of
France and of their Commissioners sent on their behalf unto the Church of
Bayolett; and the Deputies of that Province were heard also: Whereupon without
invalidating the Judicial Sentences of that Synod, or of its Commissioners,
They were told that the form of their proceedings was wrong; that the said
Synod should have cited Monsieur Sauceux to have appeared before them, and have
omitted in that Act concerning him, the mentioning of His Majesty's Edict, and
that the bottom of the business may be found out, the Council decreed that the
Provincial Deputies of Normandy shall in their return homewards pass over unto
the Church of Bayolet, and shall examine the said Mr. Sauceux and his
Consistory, and after hearing both Parties, they shall pronounce a final
Judgment on them.

31. Whereas Monsieur des Maretz Elder of the Church of Oysemont has sent
neither Letters nor Memoirs to defend his Appeal from the Judgment of the
Province of the Isle of France, his Appeal was therefore declared null.

32. That Appeal from the Judgment of the Province of Burgundy, brought by the
L. L. Renaut and Fronevill in the Name of the Sieur L' Advise, touching a
certain Declaration delivered unto the Sieur de Villemenat to be kept by him is
declared null.

33. The Lord of Fournivall Elder in the Church of Beaune appealed in behalf of
its Consistory from a Decree past in the last Synod of Burgundy held at
Issurtilles, which had censured the said Consistory for not observing all
requisite Formalities in receiving a Person of the contrary Religion into
Fellowship and Communion with us; but his Appeal was declared null, and the
said Consistory was censured for appealing unto this Council upon the score of
a single Censure.

CHAP. XXI. Discipline Exercised on a Scandalous Minister.
This Peris did afterward by flight save himself from being prosecuted by the
Lord Commissioners for a Libel which was found upon him, and for which he was
condemned to the Gallows.
34 PEter Peris formerly Pastor in the Church of Estray in the Colloquy of Aunix
complained personally unto the Synod against the Province of Xaintonge, for
that having discharged him the Service of his Church, they refused him an
Attestation of his Life and Doctrine. The Deputies of that Province immediately
assigned the reasons of their refusal, grounded upon the scandalous
Conversation of the said Peris, and his Method of teaching, which was exceeding
offensive unto diverse Churches: And the said Peris Apologizing for himself, The
Council took thence occasion to interrogate him on diverse Articles, of which he
was accused, and convicted, as 1. For desertion of his Ministry, 2. Of
haunting, and overmuch familiar and scandalous Acquaintance and Communion with
our Adversaries, particularly with Apostates revolted from the True Religion
unto Romish Idolatry, and with Persons cast by the dreadful Sentence of
Excommunication for Errors and Blasphemies out of these our Reformed Churches.
3. Of Profaneness, Insolency and Vanity. 4. Of Lyings, Slanderings, and
Plottings against our Churches, and several of their Members. And forasmuch as
he had about him even now whilst he was under examination a most execrable
Libel against His Majesty's Honor, and the Tranquillity of the State, composed
by some mutinous Spirits, disturbers of the Public Peace, which was delivered
into the hands of His Majesty's Commissioner, the Lord Galland, to dispose of
it as his Lordship in his Wisdom should think fit, The Council Deposed the said
Peris from the Sacred Ministry, and debarring him all hopes of ever being again
restored to it, decrees that he shall be suspended all Communion in the
Sacraments until such time as he giving Glory unto God, and confessing his
Offenses, shall have manifested to the World the Gracious Fruits of a serious
and sound Repentance. And this Act shall be notified unto all the Churches.

35. Mr. Peju a Pastor, Baignou^^n Elder, and Rousseau, all deputed by the
Heads of Families in the Church of Mer declared the grievances for which they
appealed, and on the contrary the Provincial Deputies of Berry vindicated the
Sentence of their Synod, The Letters and Acts also of both Parties were
produced, and read both by Monsieur Peju, and by the Province: Upon the whole
the Council judged, that the Province ought not to have brought before this
Assembly Acts and Memoirs not verified in their Synods, 1626. The 25th. Synod.
and which were transacted in private Caballs, nor ought they to have hindered
the Church of Mer from Assembling to consult about joining with their Pastor in
his Appeal; and as for the said Monsieur Peju the Council advised him to stand
upon his Guard, and conscientiously to use and exercise that moderation
becoming his Age and Calling, and decreed that the two next Pastors to the
Church of Mer in the Province of Anjou shall visit that Church, and censure
very sharply those of its Members who have threatened and abused the Provincial
Synod, and shall commune with them about their desires and wants, that so a
report thereof may be made unto the approaching Synod of Anjou, which is
empowered to judge of all those Matters which are objected against Monsieur
Peju, and to dispose of his Ministry, either by freeing him from the Church of
Mer, or continuing him in it, as they shall upon due and diligent Inquiry find
will most contribute to the Service and Glory of God, and the Repose and
Edification of that Church, unto which the said Monsieur Peju is remanded back
again, there to continue his Ministerial Labors, until such time as this
Affair shall be finally judged and determined.

36. There were Letters from the Consistories, Heads of Families, and Monsieur
Ferrand Pastor of the Church of Bourdeaux, as also from Monsieur Percy Pastor
of the Church of Monflanquin, directed unto this National Synod read in it, as
also certain Memoirs were produced by the Provincial Deputies of Lower Guyenne.
The aforesaid Deputies, and the Sieurs Roberdeau and d' Herbaux sent by the
Churches of Monflanquin and of Bourdeaux were all heard: After which the Synod
ratified the Judgment of that Province, and finding Monsieur Percy by reason of
his Irresolutions and Inconstancy very much deserving Censure, decreed that
those Letters and Memoirs should be carried by the Deputies of Lower Guyenne
unto their next Provincial Synod where the said Monsieur Percy shall in like
manner appear in Person, and give a full account of all his Actions.

37. Monsieur Le Vineux Pastor of the Church of Bazas being Plaintiff, this
Synod to do him right ordained that the Province of Lower Guyenne shall restore
unto him his Portion granted by the National Synod of Charenton, in
consideration of the great damages and losses sustained by him during the last
troubles: And whereas that Church of Bazas appealeth from the Judicial Sentence
of its Province for* depriving it of the augmentation which was formerly given
it, The Synod not judging their Appeal worthy to be received, commands that
Church to apply it self unto one of the Neighbor Provinces, which shall take
cognizance of their Petition, and do them Justice according to the Canons.

38. It being necessary that Monsieur Bony Pastor of the Church of St. John of
Gardonengue should in person answer unto those many Articles of which he is
impeached and accused; This Synod commanded that within five days after the
signifying of this present Act to him, he should come unto this City, on pain
of being declared guilty and convicted of those Crimes imposed on him. And the
Deputies of the Church of Anduze shall out of hand give him notice hereof.

39. The Church of Bourdeaux appealed from a Decree of the Synod of Lower
Guyenne, by which Messieurs Alba and Percy were confirmed in their Pastoral
charge of the Churches of Again and Monflanquin, but their Appeal was vacated,
and the Sieur Roberdeau Deputy of the said Church petitioning that an Order
might pass for these Reverend Persons, Monsieur de la Fite Pastor in the Church
of Bigorre, de Baylin Pastor in the Church of Villemur, Another Copy calls
him la Fort.
* du Fas Pastor in the Church of de Baylin in Armagnac, and de Raynall, Pastor
in the Church of La Fite near Clairac to serve the Church of Bourdeaux
quarterly, upon condition, that the charges of those Four Churches in getting
themselves supplied during the absence of their respective Pastors, and Service
of that of Bourdeaux be defrayed by it; The Council told him that they did not
judge it equitable to dispose of the Ministry of those Reverend Ministers de la
Fite, and Bailin, till the consent of their Churches and Provinces of Bearn,
and Higher Languedoc was first obtained, because they depend upon them: And
forasmuch as the said Sieur de Roberdeau presented another and new request, and
most importunately urged that it might be lawful for him instead of the
forementioned Ministers de la Fite and Baylin to have recourse unto Monsieur
Berdolin Pastor of the Church of Duras, and D' Aubus Pastor of the Church of
Nerac to come and help the Church of Bourdeaux upon those same terms
beforementioned, The Council closed with his Offers, and condescending to his
Demand, enjoyneth the Churches of La Bastide, la Fite, Duras, and Nerac
punctually to observe this present Ordinance, and to permit their Pastors to
serve the Church of Bourdeaux quarterly as it shall call for them.

40. There being many difficulties fallen out in the discussion of that Affair
concerning Monsieur Espagnac, The Sieurs Taby and Longuet were appointed to
pass unto the Church of Vsez, and empowered to examine Monsieur Noguiere about
Matters relating to him, and to know of him whether he owneth those Papers that
are put into their hands, and to interrogate Witnesses that may be brought
before them, and shall cite him personally to appear before this Council, and
to answer such matters as shall be objected against him, and in case he refuse
Obedience-unto this Order, then he shall be immediately suspended the Holy
Ministry.

41. The Synod doing Justice on the Appeal of the Colloquy of Albigeois,
decrees that the Churches of the said Colloquy shall remain united as
heretofore.

42. The Synod forbad Monsieur Recens to bring any more unto our National
Synods Petitions about pecuniary Matters on pain of being prosecuted with the
utmost rigor of Church Censures, and dismisseth the consideration of those
Petitions unto the Province of Lower Languedoc, which shall put a final period
to them by the Authority of this Synod.

43. Monsieur Fabry Pastor of the Church de la Caune was commanded by the
Council to come into this City the very next day after this present Act should
be signified to him, or else he shall be proceeded against with the utmost
rigor of our Church Discipline, and the Deputies of Higher Languedoc shall
with the greatest diligence notify it to him.

CHAP. XXII. Discipline Exercised upon a Delinquent Minister. 1626. The 25th.
Synod.

44 THE Acts and Memoirs produced against Monsieur Peyroll, as also his
Declinatory Letters written unto this Assembly on design to elude his citation
and appearance being all read; and the Sieurs Astier, Carlincas, and the
Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc being heard, it was judged that the
Provincial Synod and Consistory of Montpellier had been too indulgent to the
said Peyroll, and borne with him too long considering that the suspension
threatened bore no proportion to the greatness of his Crime, and that the
Consistory should not have paid any respect unto his Appeal, when it was done
on purpose to obstruct the Execution of the Synodical Decree, nor should they
have connived at those Defaults observed in his Sermons, which have occasioned
so many Persons to complain of him. Moreover it was ordained, that the said
Peyroll for his Contentiousness at Law, and frequent failures in his promises,
should be suspended from the Sacred Ministry until the next Synod of Lower
Languedoc, during which time the Colloquy shall take care that the Church be
provided of another Pastor; and the Synod being informed by the Consistory of
Montpellier of the verity and reality of these Offenses taken at his Sermons,
and of the other defaults whereof he is accused shall aggravate his censure
even unto a Deposition from the Ministry, in case the said Peyroll refuse to
testify his Repentance by informing his promises, and by giving plenary
satisfaction unto the Church, which he has so grievously scandalized through
his violations of them.

45. The Sieurs Taby and Longuett Commissioners appointed by this Council to
pass over unto the City of Vsez, and to cite Monsieur Noguier Pastor of that
Church before them, having heard him, and the Witnesses brought forth unto
them, returned, and made Report of all the Acts produced both for and against
Monsieur Astier. After which the said Astier, and the Sieurs Noguier, and
Espagnac, and the Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc were all suffered to
speak in order; whereupon the Council Confirmed the Judgment of the said
Province in all its Articles, and immediately absolved the said Monsieur
Espagnac of the Crimes brought in against him by the said Astier, and censuring
the said Astier for his animosity and passion, ordains that he be reconciled
with his adverse Party, and that the Papers produced in this cause shall be
suppressed; which being done, and the said Monsieur Astier having entreated
Monsieur Aspagnac to forget what is past, The Council consents that the
Censures denounc't against him by the Synod of Lower Languedoc be repealed, and
taken off the File.

46. The Synod heard the Sieur Mercurin Pastor of the Church of Grace declare
his particular grievances of which he complained in his Appeal from the
Provincial Synod of Provence; and judging that the said Province ought not to
refuse their assistance to him against the Persecution suffered by him from the
Adversaries of the Gospel, it decreed that Monsieur Cuper shall immediately pay
him out of the Common Stock of Moneys belonging to the Churches of Provence the
Sum of an Hundred and Fifty Livres, for which the Receiver of that Province
shall be accountable, and that henceforward an half Portion shall be settled
upon him for his encouragement over and above what the Church of Grace has
hitherto enjoyed.

47. The Council doing right unto Monsieur Berauld upon his Appeals, and
disanulling all former proceedings against him, except those of the Committees,
which it had particularly ordained and constituted about his Affair, and having
examined all those Accusations, Depositions of Witnesses, Denyals and Defenses
relating to it, did unauimously and without the least disagreement declare, as
it now declares the said Monsieur Berauld absolved and justified from all
crimes imposed on him, and that there may be a real and hearty reconciliation
of the said Monsieur Berauld with those who were transported against him; and
that the peace and edifying of the Church of Montauban may be settled and
promoted, the Reverend Mr. Charles and Delon Pastors of the said Church were
commanded to come into this Assembly, and presenting themselves before it, they
were acquainted with its Holy Desires and Intentions, and were all of them
jointly and severally exhorted unto Concord, Union, and Brotherly Love, that so
the Church in which they officiate may be edified and comforted by their
Ministry, and that all sense of injuries and bitter animosities may be for ever
buried in the Grave of Oblivion.

48. Those Acts brought into the Colloquy of Albigeois by the Commissioners
Nominated in the Synod of Realmont to make inquiry into the crime imposed on
Monsieur Fabry Pastor of the Church de la Caune were all examined: And the said
Fabry was heard as to those grievances of which he complained in his Appeal, as
also was the Sieur de Maroule Pastor of the Church of Pont de Larq one of the
Commissioners, and the Provincial Deputies of Higher Languedoc. Whereupon the
Council condemned the supine connivency of the said Province, which for many
years together had never called their Pastors to an account for sundry
Accusations laid unto their charge; and passing by the reasons inducing that
Colloquy to give Judgment as it did, it ratifieth the Sentence of suspension
denounc't against the said Fabry, and having sharply reproved him according as
the Nature of his Offense required, it did farther decree, that when the time
of his suspension should expire, he should be restored unto his Office, and to
the Exercise thereof, but in another Church, and not in that of La Caune; from
which the Colloquy has already determined that he should be discharged.

49. That Appeal brought by the Elder of the Church of Vic-fezensac from a
Decree of the Synod of Lower Guyenne in favor of Monsieur Bragerac its Pastor,
that the Churches of Montreal and Vic-fezansac should pay him his Sallary, was
declared null.

50. Monsieur Gravier neither appearing in Person, nor sending any Memoirs to
defend his Appeal formed by him against a Decree of the Province of Lower
Guyenne, the Contents of which was a Declaration that Monsieur Potet a Minister
having past his word unto Mrs. Gravier to acquit her of a certain Sum of
Money, Mr. Gravier demanded its performance; but this Appeal was declared null
and void.

CHAP. XXIII. A Scandalous Minister Deposed.
51 STephen Girault heretofore Minister of the Gospel in the Church of
Barbezieux, having not defended the Appeal brought by him from the Sentence of
the Synod of Xaintonge, which Deposed him for many and grievous Crimes, and in
particular for Adultery: The Council declared his Appeal null and ratifying the
Deposition of the said Girault, does aggravate his Sentence by cutting him off
from all hopes of ever being restored unto the Sacred Ministry, either to the
Office or Exercise thereof.

52. The Inhabitants of St. Lawrence in Aigouze appealed from the Judgment of
the Synod of Lower Languedoc which had restored Monsieur Tuffan unto the
Ministry in the Colloquy of Nismes; but their Appeal was turned over to the
cognizance of the approaching Synod of Sevennes, which is ordered to proceed
against the said Tuffan in case the Matters whereof he is accused be averred,
and proved upon him by deposing him from the Holy Ministry, and Monsieur Aymar
is charged, to be present at the next Colloquy of Nismes, and there to receive
all proceedings old and new against this unworthy Fellow.

CHAP. XXIV. Discipline Exercised upon a Vicious Minister.
53. WHereas James Jolly sometimes Pastor of the Church of Milhaud appealed
from a Sentence past against him by the Synod of Higher Languedoc, which had
deposed him from the Holy Ministry: Upon hearing the Deputies of that Province,
and the said Jolly himself, who having been diverse times summoned to clear
himself of the Crimes laid unto his charge, though to no purpose, for he could
never do it: The Synod ratified the Sentence past against him in every article
and particular; and because the qualities of his Crimes proved upon him are
very heinous and atrocious, as tempting and soliciting of Women to Adultery,
abominable and profane Speeches, professed resolves and purposes to Apostatize
from the True Religion, and Blessed Gospel of our Lord Jesus, persuading and
enticing, like the Devils, other Ministers of Christ to join with him in his
Revolt and Apostasy, from all which horrible and scandalous Accusations he was
bound in Honor and Conscience to purge himself, and had he been innocent, or
had he but the least spark of Grace, or one grain of the fear of God been lest
in him, he would have done it: Moreover the said Jolly having discoursed with a
great deal of impudence, hardness and ungodliness in the very presence of the
Synod, and betook himself unto business utterly inconsistent with the Sacred
Calling of a Minister, for which, had he none other guilt upon him, he would
have merited a Deposal from that Honorable Office, The Synod seized with a
just horror at his impenitency, and aggravating the Sentence of his Provincial
Synod, denounces the said Jolly utterly unworthy, and altogether incapable of
any employment in the Sacred Ministry of the Gospel, deposes him, and does now
from this Instant declare him to be deposed from the Ministerial Function, and
for ever incapable of being restored to it, and depriveth him of all Communion
in the Sacraments, unto which he shall not be admitted, 'till we have had a
very long proof, and some years Trial and Experience of his Repentance and
Reformation, and that he have publicly and penitently acknowledged those great
and heinous scandals he has given unto the Church of God; and in case he
persist in his Rebellions, then the Consistories and Colloquies being assembled
together shall deliver him over unto the Devil by that dreadful Sentence of
Excommunication.

54. The Overseers of the Poor in the Church of Anduze appealed from a Decree
of the Synod of Higher Languedoc, and the Lord Aldebert Judge of Sauve
complained against the Sieur John Bony Pastor of the Church of St. John of
Cardonengue. Master Cailou was heard speak in behalf of the Church of Anduze,
and Mr. Aldebert the younger opened the reasons of their Appeal, and Mr. Bony
together with the Provincial Deputies Apologized for themselves against thorn.
The Council having accurately considered all the Accusations and Matters of
Offense included in those proceedings, judges that Mr. Bony deserves a very
heavy Censure for notorious Avarice and dishonest Gain, the guilt of which is
apparent and visible upon him, for that he disposed of the Goods of Pernette
Andouyne to his own and his Childrens profit, contrary to the Will and
Testament she had once made in favor of the poor Members of the Church of
Anduze. Moreover the Council declares that the said Master Bony cannot with a
good Conscience detain and appropriate unto his own use the Goods aforesaid,
but ought immediately to restore them; and to this purpose he was exhorted to
choose Arbitrators as the said Overseers of the Poor would also to compose the
differences between them, and to agree upon the terms of restitution: And it
was farther intimated to him, that in case the Execution of this Decree were in
the least hindered or delayed by him the said Bony, that the next Colloquy of
Nismes was Authorized to proceed against him, and to Depose him from the
Ministry. And forasmuch as he has expressed his Repentance with grief, and shame
for his Sin, and promised the Synod to give full satisfaction as before, and
for that he has patiently and penitently borne the Suspension from his Office
inflicted on him some Months ago, The Synod does restore him to the Exercise
of his Ministry. And whereas Monsieur Aldebert beforementioned had been
suspended from the Lords Table, that Censure, together with his being taxed for
a Calumniator, are both ordered to be taken off from him, but he shall be first
publicly reproved in the Person of his Son for that excessive Passion
manifested by him in his Accusations, Prosecutions, and bitter Expressions in
his Letters, all which exasperated the Province of Higher Languedoc against
him, and were the true meritorious causes why he was so severely judged by
them. And both of those Gentlemen Bony and Aldebert are exhorted to a mutual
reconciliation, and forgetfulness of what is past, and particularly the said
Aldebert is advised to demean himself for the future with more Candor and
Charity toward the said Bony: And in case there should happen any new matter
of Accusation against him, that he do prosecute him according to the Forms and
Canons of our Church Discipline. Moreover Master Melucis and Berle Pastors, and
Witnesses to the aforesaid Testament shall be examined by their next Provincial
Synod about their hand in this matter, that so they may be dealt withal
according to their demerits. And whereas Monsieur de Surville another Minister
could have given in a material Evidence against the said Bony, but was sworn to
Secrecy, he also shall be called to an account, and Justice shall be done upon
him.

CHAP. XXV. GENERAL MATTERS.
These poor Churches prayed for, and rejoiced at the birth of the greatest
Scourge and Plague, that ever was upon them.
1 WHereas all Pastors, and Heads of Families, and Members of our Churches ought
daily to implore the Throne of Grace for all Spiritual and Temporal
Benedictions to be poured down upon the Person of His Majesty Our Dread
Sovereign, and for the Glory of His Crown, the Peace and Prosperity of His
Kingdom and Government, they be all Exhorted in their Public and Private
Prayers importunately to beg of God, that he would be graciously pleased to
bless the Kings Majesty with Children of his own Body, and to this purpose all
the faithful shall with one accord join together in Common Prayers and
Supplications, that the Lord would hear and Answer the Requests of his poor
Children who live under the Sh dow of his Anointed, that the Scepter may be
strengthened in his hand, his House established from Generation to Generation,
and that over and above those Divine Graces and Favors which he has already
vouchsafed to him, he may after a long and happy Life be honored in succeeding
Ages with the Glorious Title of Father of Kings, as he is now with that of
Father of his People.

2. The Synod considering that through the Sovereign Mercy of God, inclining
His Majesty's heart by his Holy Spirit thereunto, the Churches of this Kingdom
do enjoy that great Blessing of Peace; and yet nevertheless there remain in the
hearts of many Persons very deep resentments of their past Sufferings, which
may prove hereafter the Seeds of new Broils and Dissensions, whereby the Honor
of God, and of our King, and the Public Tranquillity of the Nation may be
exceedingly prejudiced and endammaged, It exhorts in the Name and Authority
of God Almighty all the faithful to suppress and stifle those bitter
Animosities, which the unhappyness of our late Civil Wars, may have enkindled
in them, and that none of Our Members do trouble their Neighbors for Matters
done during those Troubles, since the Remembrance of them is abolished by His
Majesty's Edicts and Declarations of Peace, and that they would embrace each
other with a Cordial Love and Affection, and live for the future as Members of
one and the same Body, contending mutually and mostly who shall do His Majesty
the best and greatest Service, and repair the woeful breaches in the House of
God. And in particular the Inhabitants of this populous City ate Exhorted to
render all Reverence a^^ Obedience unto their Magistrates and Superiors, as
being established over them by the Authority of God; and the Magistrates also
are to exert their Duties toward them who be subjected to their Government
with all due and becoming Moderation, and Fatherly Affection; That so all sorts
of Persons both Superiors and Inferiors may aim and level in all their
Actions at the Glory of God, the Service of the King, and the Peace and Safety
of the Commonwealth

3. The Synod confirming the Canons of former Synods about an exhibition unto
Monks, decrees, that in case a Monk cannot be maintained by that Province in
which he was born, and that the said Province will not contribute any thing
toward his subsistence, then the Province which is charged with him shall make
application to the Lord of Candal, and take his allowance out of the Moneys
belonging to that Province, where he first lived, and quitted his Frock and
Idolatrous Religion.

4. Hereafter in the breaking up of these National Synods the Deputies shall
carry home with them the Accounts rendered by the Lord of Candal for Moneys
distributed by him unto every Province, that so all suspicions of partiality in
the Dividends of His Majesty's Bounty may be suppressed.

5. All the Provinces are expressly enjoined by this Synod, that they do not
prefer our Proposans before Ancient Pastors unto vacant Churches, and in case
any Moderators of Colloquies or Synods shall suffer this Canon to be violated,
they shall be suspended from their Charges.

6. That no Pastor discharged by Colloquies or Synods may hereafter assume unto
himself a liberty of wandering from one Province unto another and so intrude
himself into a particular Church without the consent of Colloquies and Synods,
a matter which redounds exceedingly to the dishonor of the Ministry, and is
become a most Notorious Scandal: The Synod ordains, that when as a Pastor
shall be taken off the Service of his Church and can not be presently settled in
another, yet shall he be obliged to live within the bounds of that Province,
either as a Pastor discharged, or else as one employed in such a manner as the
Province shall judge convenient, until such time as he meet with a Call unto
some other Church, whether within or without the Province, desiring him to be
their fixed Pastor.

7. The Pastors of the Church of Paris are ordered to revise the Marginal Texts
in our Confession of Faith, and to inform the Churches which have Printers to
take special notice of their Remarks, and to see that it be printed according
to their corrected Copy without any difference.

8. Such Churches as have Printing-Houses belonging to them shall advise our
Printers to be careful that they insert no Historical Remarks into the
Calendars, which may occasion trouble unto the Churches, and irritate the rage
and malice of our Adversaries.

9. There shall not be inserted into the Lett^^s of Deputation unto Colloquies
and Provincial Synods from particular Churches those selfsame clauses of
absolute submission which are used in the Provincial Letters unto the National
Synod.

10. It Is left wholly to the Discretion of Consistories what censures they
shall inflict on such who assist in Person at Baptisms, Marriages, or Funerals
solemnized by the Church of Rome.

11. That Canon of the National Synod of Gap about Burying in Temples and
Churchyards shall be most exactly observed by all the Churches.

CHAP. XXVI. An Act to preserve the Churches Writings, Deeds, etc.
12 Diverse Papers of very great Importance to our Churches, being lost to their
unspeakable prejudice, and all occasioned through their neglect of choosing
some one particular Church in each Province, wherein the Originals of all
proceedings by our General Deputies might be deposited, This Synod desirous to
prevent so great a disorder for the future, Decrees, That all Writings
remaining in their hands, who have been employed in the General Deputation
shall be redemanded of them by the Consistories of those Churches in which they
make their Residence, that so they may be more carefully preserved than
heretofore. And the Originals of all Declarations, Writts, Answers unto
Cahiers, and such other Papers concerning the General Body of our Churches
shall be carried unto Rochell, and lodged up in the Archives there. And as for
other Papers, and Acts of Proceedings relating to particular Churches, there
shall be one Church in every Province which shall have the keeping of them,
that so upon all occasions we may tell where to find them. And to this purpose
there was named for the Province of Higher Languedoc the Church of Montauban,
for the Lower Languedoc the Church of Nismes, for Sevennes Anduze, for Anjou
Loudun, for Burgundy Gex, for Vivaretz Privas, for the Lower Guyenne Ste Foy,
for Poictou Niort, for Xaintonge Rochell, for the Isle of France Paris, for
Normandy Alencon, for Britain Belin, for Dolphiny Die, for Berry Chastillion on
the Loir, and for Provence Aignieres.

14. Whereas diverse Provinces have been charged with the Memoirs of very many
Churches, groaning under the cruel Oppressions of our Adversaries, who do daily
deprive them of their Liberty of Conscience in the Service of God, and of those
Rights and Privileges granted us by the King; and Necessity requiring us to
seck out some Remedy against such growing Mischiefs, from his Majesty's Justice
and Protection, Monsieur le Haucher was ordered to collect into one Body all
those Grievances aforesaid, and all others which have been averred and signed
by two Pastors or Elders; shall immediately upon the Departure of this Council,
be sent unto him, that all may be gathered into one general Bill, and laid at
his Majesty's Feet, with our most humble Petitions unto his Majesty, that he
would be pleased to extend his Royal Protection unto his most faithful Subjects
of the Reformed Religion, who have no greater Ambition in the World, than to
yield all due Obedience and Service unto his Majesty.

15. The Province of Dolphiny craved Advice, what should be done with those who
violated that Canon of Tonneins, which had obliged Pastors to administer
Baptism only at such Church-Meetings in which the Word of God was preached,
either immediately before or after Sermon, because that diverse Churches do it,
when as only they come together unto their accustomed Morning, common, public
Prayers, without any Sermons at all. After a long and smart Debate about this
Matter, the Council owning that the formal necessary Words for Consecration and
Celebration of that Sacrament, were fully comprised in the Liturgy of our
Churches, and judging it for the present utterly unfit to urge the Observation
of that Canon of Tonneins, decrees, that the Provinces having examined the
Reasons alleged by both Parties pro and con, shall give unto their Deputies,
commissionated unto the next National Synod, the strongest Arguments to this
purpose, that so that Council may proceed to a final Resolution in the Case.

CHAP. XXVI. An Act for a public National Fast.
16. THE Wrath of God having been kindled against his People, and broken out
upon them in diverse Places, for many Years last past, so that he has visited
their Iniquities with sundry and very terrible Judgments, such as the Plague,
unseasonable Weather, the devouring Sword, the Desolations of War, all which
have brought upon us and upon the Provinces deep Poverty, woeful Miseries and
Calamities, which should have quickened us and them unto a most serious
Repentance and Reformation of Life: Yet notwithstanding the Generality of Men
do persist in their Sins, and abound in their Transgressions, so that the great
Lawgiver, who alone can save and destroy, has not called in his Wrath, but his
Hand is stretched out still, and a Multitude of our poor Churches in diverse
Places are sorely afflicted by the Enemies of the Gospel, who turn every Stone,
and use all sort of means, be they never so unjust and violent, to deprive us
of his Majesty's Protection, and the Benefits of that Peace, which his Majesty
was graciously pleased to grant equally and indifferently unto all his
Subjects: And forasmuch as the common sense of the most stupid Persons might
have learned them, that those many dreadful Judgments, with which the Lord has
scourged his Churches, have been drawn down upon them by their great
Impenitency, Stubbornness; and Hardness of Heart, and that God has called upon
them to lie low at to his Footstool in deep Abasement, Humiliation and
Contrition of Spirit, and by their Patience and Christian Moderation, to have
used and improved these Chastisements as divine Remedies against those dismal
and eternal Torments he had threatened them, and which they have most justly
deserved; and that in their deplorable Condition they should with Tears and
Prayers, with a most sincere Conversion and thorough Reformation have fled for
Sanctuary unto the Arms of Sovereign Mercy; that so that great God who creates
Good, and forms Evil, who gives Peace, and sends Adversity at his sole
Will and Pleasure, might have found them seeking those Blessings at his Hands
only, and not depended, as they have done too frequently, rashly and
inconsiderately, upon an Arm of Flesh: Wherefore this National Synod,
representing the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, injoineth all Pastors to
press home vigorously and zealously upon the Consciences of their People, true
Piety and Devotion toward God, due Obedience unto the higher Powers, sound and
perpetual Repentance from dead Works; the Want and Neglect of which have caused
ignorant Persons to blaspheme the holy and fearful Name of God, and to despise
and vilify the good Ways of his Truth and Reformation. And it does further
decree, that a solemn Day of Fasting and Supplications shall be kept and
observed in all the Churches of this Kingdom, the first Thursday in March next
coming; because the Necessity of humbling our selves before God, is absolute
and indispensable; there being none other way left us to turn away his Wrath
from us, and to hasten the time of our Deliverance, than by a Reformation of
our former Sinfulness, and a better and exacter ordering of our Actions and
Conversations for the future.

17. The Council exhorts all the Provinces, and the richer Churches in them
to erect public Libraries for the Ease and Benefit of their Pastors; and the
Deputies of Burgundy, as they return home-ward through the Lower Languedoc, are
charged to give particular Notice hereof unto the Consistory of Montpellier;
and the Church of Paris, and Universities of Montauban and Nismes, shall be
acquainted also with this our Request.

18. The Council enjoined all Persons who may hereafter audit their Accounts in
the National Synods, to bring with them their last Account; and all
Commissioners deputed to examine and close up such Accounts, shall not proceed
about the said Audit, till such time as they have duly and accurately perused
the Acts of the last Synod, concerning both these and their last tendered
Accounts, because there be Remarks in them, which look forward and backward,
both to the Years bygone and past, and those that are to come.

19. His Majesty having graciously permitted a general Collection to be made
throughout all the Churches of this Kingdom, for the impoverished Cities of
Rochel, Montauban, and Castres, their Deputies came into the Council, and
petitioned that there might be a Dividend made of the said collected Charities,
protesting withal that they would cheerfully acquiesce in its judicious
Assignation of them. Whereupon the Council decreed, that one quarter of those
Moneys should be given unto this Town of Castres, and the three other Parts
should be equally divided between the Cities of Rochel and Montauban.

CHAP. XXVII. Differences between the Cities of Rochel, Montauban and Castres,
1626. The 25th Synod.
composed.
20. THE Council composing the Differences which had fallen out between the
Cities and Communalties of Rochel, Montauban and Castres, in dividing the
Collection-Money beforementioned, they being at Variance among themselves
about it: And having heard the Reasons and Pretensions of the said Cities and
Communalties, both from the Mouth of their Deputies, and the Report of the
Commissioners appointed for the managing of this Affair; and having maturely
Considered the whole, decreed, That the fourth Part of those Moneys so
collected, shall be delivered into the City of Castres, and the other three
Parts shall be equally divided betwixt the Cities of Rochel and Montauban. And
that the said Cities and Communalties may reap and enjoy the Benefit and
Comfort of the said collected Charities, their Deputies here present are
enjoined to nominate one certain Person from among them, to receive those
Moneys, who is a Person of sufficient Honesty and Ability to be responsible for
them; together with three or four other Persons of known Integrity and
Fidelity, who may be present, and actually employed in the Distribution of
them, which shall be made by the Command and Authority of the Mayors and
Consuls of the said Cities; and those Commands and Orders shall be signed and
copied out by those now-mentioned Overseers for the Poor: And both they and the
said Receiver shall be obliged to send the Certificate unto the next National
Synod, of the faithful Employment of those Moneys unto the common Uses and
Necessities of their Poor, and that they were not in the least diverted from
the Intention of the charitable Donors, nor of his Majesty, unto the Benefit
and private Profit of some few particular Persons, either for defraying their
Expenses in Travel, or Deputations, or any other occasion whatsoever: And the
Council shall agree and pitch upon those aforesaid Receivers and Overseers. And
to facilitate the receiving of those Sums collected, and to prevent all Delays,
Confusions, Inequalities in receiving, and other Inconveniences which may fall
out, in case the said Cities should send abroad unto the Provinces and
particular Churches to gather in what had been granted them, and above all to
ease them of those great Charges which they must of Necessity be at in this
Case, it was thought best to order the Consistories of Paris and Lions to
choose a Person from among them to be the General Receiver of those Moneys. And
all the Provinces are enjoined to send speedily, and, if possible they can,
within a Month's space after the Return of their Deputies, the Moneys collected
by them, viz. the Provinces of the Isle of France, Normandy, Britain, Anjou,
Berry, Poitou, and Xaintonge, to those who are ordained to receive them in the
City of Paris; and those of Burgundy, Dolphiny, Provence, Vivaretz, Sevennes,
Higher and Lower Languedoc, and Guyenne, to them who shall be appointed in the
City of Lions; that so these Moneys being received by them, may be transmitted
to the particular Commissioners of the said Cities, either by Bills of
Exchange, or any other way, together with their Acquittances, according to the
Dividend before ordained.

2. In Pursuance of this last-named Article, the Lord of Angoulins was
nominated to be Receiver for the Town of Rochel; and for Overseers Monsieur de
L' Hommeau, and Monsieur Colomiez Pastors, together with Mr. Paul Mervant and
Nicholas Chesnell, Peers and tree Burgesses, and Elders of the City of Rochel:
And for the City of Montauban, the Lord Roques, first Consul, was declared
Receiver, and the R. R. Mr. Ollier and Charles, Pastors; together with the
Lords d' Assier, Barrampere, and du Bois, Elders, for Overseers. And for the
City of Castres, Mr. Thomas was nominated Receiver, and the Lords de la
Gasquerie, de Servoles, de Lissac, de Bernard the Elder, de Legonier, and Rony
the Auditor, for Overseers. And all and every one of these now-mentioned
Persons, were agreed upon and approved by this Council; which also enjoined
them, who received these Collections and Charities, to deliver them unto these
Receivers.

22. In every Province there shall be reserved a Cahier of the particular
Complaints and Grievances of particular Churches, oppressed upon the score and
account of Religion, that so those Cahiers may be all transmitted to the Church
of Paris, which shall compile out of them one general Cahier to be left in the
hands of our General Deputies.

CHAP. XXVIII. Particular Matters.
1. SOME having very cunningly and maliciously robbed the Deputies of Lower
Languedoc, of certain Papers quoted in an Inventory, which they had brought to
this Council, giving an account of the Grounds and Reasons of that Judgment
passed by the Provincial Synod on George Arbault: the Council being well
fatisfied of their Integrity and Fidelity, and particularly of Monsieur
Petit's, with whom all those Writings were deposited, did think it needful to
give them this Attestation, and fully to discharge them of all those Papers
which were delivered unto Monsieur Aymard, one of the Provincial Deputies for
Sevennes, who will exhibit them upon all Occasions, excepting those relating to
the Sieur Arbaut beforementioned, which he received from the hands of the
Sieurs Mestrezat and du Puy, (who were commissionated by the Synod to peruse
them) he having given them a Receipt under his own Hand, which was delivered by
him unto the aforesaid Monsieur Aymard, together with those Papers, and two
Inventories subscribed by the Sieurs du Cross and Petit.

2. In reading the Accusation of the Sieur Arbaut, and some other Acts brought
against him, the Colloquy of Anduze was ordered to inform themselves of the
Deportments of the Sieurs du Cross Pastor of the Church at Blansac, and of Raly
Pastor in the Church of St. John de Maruejoly, and to proceed against them: And
the Commissioners deputed by the Province of Lower Languedoc, were ordered to
deliver unto the said Colloquy, the whole Relation of their Proceedings. And
the said Colloquy should judge of those Differences which are risen up between
the said Arbaut, formerly a Minister, and the Colloquies of Montpellier and
Vsez, all which shall be notified to them by their Scribe.

3. Monsieur Tourtelon, a Pastor Emeritus, came unto the Synod, bitterly
complaining of his great Poverty and Misery, and petitioned for some Relief.
Mr. Cooper was entreated to advance an hundred Franks beforehand unto this
aged Gentleman, payable out of that Portion assigned to him; and which will
become due out of the Dividend for the Province of Lower Languedoc, to whose
Charity we do in an especial manner recommend him.

4. There was again read the Petition of John le Febure, 1626. The 25th Synod.
a Bookseller in Geneva, reiterating his former Complaints unto diverse of our
National Synods, against Monsieur Manueill a Minister, somewhere serving in the
Province of Bearn. After hearing the Allegations of the Deputies of that
Province, on behalf of Manueill, the Synod not admitting their Excuses, nor
being able any longer to suffer that the Advice and Orders of our preceding
Synods, and the Complaints of the said Febure, and of the Church of Geneva,
should be so wretchedly slighted and despised; and that a Fellow, blasted in
his Reputation for an infamous Crime, from which he has not acquitted, nor
cares to acquit and clear himself, should be continued in the Ministry in that
Province; and that Provincial Synod to have no regard at all unto the
Proceedings had against him by that famous City of Geneva, nor to take the
least care that the said Manueill should purge and justify himself from the
Crime imposed on him, that so the Scandal might be repaired, either by his
complete Absolution and Discharge, or by an exemplary Punishment inflicted upon
him for his said Offense: A Decree past, That in case the Synod of the said
Province of Bearn did not give full Satisfaction unto the Requests of this, and
of the former National Synods of our Churches, and produce undoubted Evidence
thereof unto the next National Synod by valid Acts of their Duty and Obedience
thereunto, that then their Deputies should be utterly excluded these Synods;
nor should they have either admission or session, consultive or decisive Votes
in them.

5. The Deputies of Bearn complaining, that the Parliament of their Province
did, directly and openly, set themselves against the Observation, of that Canon
of our Discipline, which enjoined Consistories to censure those Parents, who
sent their Children unto Colleges governed by Popish Priests and Jesuits. The
Synod ordered that his Majesty should be most humbly petitioned by the Lord
Mont-Martyn our General Deputy, That he would be pleased to leave unto the
Churches, the free use and exercise of our Discipline, which has been granted
us by his Majesty's Edicts. And the Pastors of Bearn should be exhorted to
exercise the Discipline more strictly and carefully than ever, because it is
founded upon the Word of God, and the Canons and Practice of God's ancient
Church.

6. The Sieur Pontier, formerly Pastor of the Church of St. Giles in the
Province of Poictou, reported the many and great Damages he had sustained since
he was discharged the Service of that Church; and that he was totally deprived
of his Portion, which would have otherwise accrued to him from the Moneys of
his Majesty's Liberality. The Synod (...) That out of the Arrears due unto the
Province of Poictou, the sa^^ ^^eur Pontier shall receive what would have
appertained to him of the Moneys settled on the Church of St. Giles, until such
time as they be provided of another Pastor. And some further care shall be
taken for him in the Dividend of our Moneys.

7. The Synod taking notice, that the Defects in the Call of Monsieur de Rye,
proceeded not from himself, but from the Synod of Provence; and having severely
censured that Synod for their Contempt of the Canons of our Discipline in the
Election and Ordination of Ministers, decreed, That the said Monsieur de Rye
shall be recommended unto that Synod to provide a Church for him; and that a
free Portion shall be allotted him out of the Dividend of the Churches of
Provence; and that thirty Livers shall be paid him in ready Money by Monsieur
Cooper, out of the Mass of Moneys belonging unto the Churches of that Province,
and the Receiver of that Province shall allow it on account unto the Lord of
Candal.

8. Whereas the Acts and Memoirs produced by Monsieur Courroy, Pastor of the
Church of St. Ambroise, and by his adverse Party, have been, by the Committee
that reported them, brought into the Synod, and are all tackt and bundled
together; and that through incogitancy the said Papers were delivered by
Monsieur Blondell, one of our Scribes, unto the Deputies of the Town of St.
Ambroise. The Synod ordains, That the Provincial Deputies of Burgundy,
when as they execute the Commission given them, shall take cave that the Papers
belonging unto the said Monsieur Courroy, be faithfully restored to him; and in
case those who now possess them shall refuse so to do, they shall be enforced
to it by the rigor of Church Censures.

9. Whereas the Parties are now agreed, that Clause in the Censure pronounced
against the Province of Vivaretz, by the Colloquy of Valentinois, shall be
razed out of the Act of the said Colloquy.

10. Upon that Complaint of Monsieur de la Garie, Pastor of the Church of
Barbezieux, the Synod decreed, That the Province of Higher Languedoc should pay
him, out of their best and clearest Moneys they shall receive from the Lord
Candall, an hundred Livers, whereunto the Charges of his Journey were limited,
upon condition that he do account, in the first place, for what he has already
received from the said Province.

11. The Synod inclining to grant the Church of Rochel their Request, who
demanded, That Monsieur Vincent, Pastor of the Church de L'Isle Bouchard, might
be settled among them, decreed, That notwithstanding the Remonstrances of the
Provincial Deputies of Anjou, and their insisting on their and that Church's
Interest in him, the said Monsieur Vincent shall, from this present day, be
reputed and owned as the peculiar Pastor of Rochel; but with this Condition,
that he shall continue the exercise of his Ministry for six Months longer in
the Isle of Bouchard: During which time the Province of Anjou shall do their
best endeavor to get them supplied; and on the other hand, the said Church
shall compound with that of Rochel to reimburse them of their Expense and
Damages, by removal of their Minister from them.

12. The Provincial Deputies of Xaintonge petitioning, That the Church of
Saveilles might he joined unto that of Villefaignan, and incorporated with the
Colloquy of Augoulmois, because of the present and pressing Necessities of that
Church. The Council remanded them back unto the Province of Poictou, which is
entreated, out of Charity, to comply with this Request of the Province of
Xaintonge, that so by that conjunction, the Subsistence of the Church of
Villefaignan may be the better strengthened.

13. Monsieur d' Anglade, Pastor of the Churches of Mouzie and Pomport, having
writ Letters unto this Synod, in which he prayed payment of some certain
Charges due unto him, as he pretends, from the University of Nismes; his
Request was rejected.

14. The Church of Auvergne do express their Approbation and Consent unto the
next Synod of the Higher Languedoc; that the said Synod may reunite all those
Churches into one Colloquy, and conjoin with them some of the nearest Churches
of St. Germain; in which case the Colloquy of Anvergne shall be annexed unto
the Synod of Sevennes.

15. The Sieur d' Huyisseau requesting, both for himself and the Sieur Guydon,
who was commissionated, together with him, by the Synod of Vitre, to prosecute
the Sieur Palot, that the Synod would be pleased to take some care about the
payment of their Expenses, and of the Sum of two thousand Livers, which were
granted them by the Synod of Alez. The Synod having not as yet been able to
recover one Penny from the said Palot, of those vast Sums he owes the Churches;
and there being not a Farthing paid of the twenty four thousand Livers, out of
which their two thousand Livers were to have been given them, those two
Gentlemen, Mr. d' Huysseau and Guydon were desired to have a little patience,
and to rest satisfied with this, that they were in the same Condition with all
the Churches; and that if it should please God at any time hereafter, as we
trust he will, to give us some Fruits of their Prosecutions, we would then make
good our Promises: And they were farther assured, that in case, before the
sitting of the next National Synod, nothing was recovered of our Debts from the
aforesaid Palot, that yet notwithstanding the said Gentlemen should have full
Contentment given them out of the first Moneys which the Lord of Candall pays
in unto the Churches: And whereas there is only two thousand Livers demanded by
them, this Council does, for their patient Forbearance, engage to pay them the
said Sum, and Five hundred Livers more. Which the said Sieur d' Huysseau did
very kindly accept, both for himself and his absent Colleague, Monsieur Guydon:
And he also promised to yield up that Account, cleared and framed by him, of
the Moneys accounted for by the said Palot, and not delivered into the Hands of
the Lords Commissioners, that so we may have recourse unto it, when need
requires, in out prosecution of the said Palot.

16. The Lord of Angoulin's requesting, on behalf of the City of Rochel, that
the Synod would be pleased to reimburse the said City the Sum of Two thousand
five hundred Livers, which were lent unto certain Deputies of the Provinces,
assembled in the said City, in the Year Sixteen hundred and seventeen. This
Demand was dismissed over to the next Politic Assembly, which his Majesty
shall be pleased to grant unto his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, that so
the said Assembly may take care about it, to whom it does belong, because the
Moneys of his Majesty's Liberality, and which are at the disposal of our
National Synods, ought not to be diverted from that particular Use and Service,
whereunto his Majesty has devoted them.

17. The Deputies of the Isle of France, declaring how very useful unto the
Churches, the worthy Labors of Monsieur Blondel, Pastor of the Church of
Howdan, might be; and the Synod being further informed of his rare Dexterity
and Diligence in the Employment of those excellent Talents which the Lord has
concredited to him for the Edification of his Church, it decreed, That he
should be publicly commended and encouraged, and that the Lord of Candall
should pay him in presently, as a Token of our great Esteem and Value for him,
a Thousand Livers, to buy him Books; and that as soon as his Works shall be
ready for the Press, the Synod will defray the Charges of their Impression. And
because his great Excellency lies in Church History and Antiquity, he is
earnestly desired to follow his Genius, and to combat and refute the
Adversaries with that Weapon.

18. The Demand of Quentin Mareschall, a Printer dwelling at Chastelheraut, is
dismissed over to the Province of Poictou, who shall take care of it, according
to the Rules of Christian Charity: And the said Mareschall is forbidden the
troubling our National Synod any more with his little Businesses.

19. The Synod, not abridging the Rights and Privileges of any Province, does
permit that of Higher Languedoc to recall Monsieur Casaux, a Pastor lent unto
the Church of Montagnac in the Lower Guyenne; and the Lower Guyenne may recall
Monsieur Testard, at present Minister of the Church of Realmont, in the
Province of Higher Languedoc, whenever the Necessity and Edification of the
Church shall so require.

20. Monsieur Mestrezat presented Letters from the Lord de Launay, and
requested, by word of Mouth, both for himself and his said Colleague, that the
Synod would be pleased to discharge them from that Commission, which the
National Synod of Charenton had entrusted them with. But this Synod not being
in a capacity to alter the Decree of that Synod, did earnestly entreat them
both to continue in that Employment for the general good of the Churches.

21. Monsieur Tolozany, Pastor of the Church of St. Antonine, relating the
great Poverty of his Church and Family, and the extreme Necessity whereunto he
is reduced in his old Age. The Synod not being at present in a capacity to
alter any thing in former Constitutions, for the Relief of our indigent
Ministers, does ordain, that immediately three hundred Livers be given him to
the easing of his Church, of which, in the Dividend that shall be made of the
Moneys granted us by his Majesty, there shall be a particular care taken.

22. Letters from my Lady Marchioness of Bouille, and from Monsieur du Mont,
formerly Pastor in the Church of Mimbre in the Territory of Maine, were read in
open Synod: And Information being made of the notorious Crimes committed by the
said du Mont, the Province is ordered to proceed forthwith against him, and to
depose him from his Office. And the said Lady shall be advised of it by Letters
from this Synod.

23. The Complaint of Monsieur Toussain, a Pastor Emeritus, in the Province of
Dolphiny, was given unto the Province of Sevennes, who should procure, by their
best Skill and Power, the payment of those Arrears of Wages due unto the said
Toussain by the Church of Marvejoils.

24. Monsieur Anot^er Copy calls him Benter.
Brucet a Proposan, being demanded by the Church of La Verdac to be their
Pastor, the Colloquy of Condommois is authorized to examine and ordain him.

CHAP. XXIX. Care taken for a poor persecuted Church.
25. THere were Letters from the Church of La Mote Mauravel, in the Province of
Lower Guienne, sent unto this Synod; and being read, together with their
Memoirs, we were informed of a cruel Persecution raised against the said Church
by the Lords Cardinal of Sourdis, and Bishop of Maillezais. Whereupon, the Lord
Commissioner was humbly desired to write unto his Majesty, and the Ministers of
State, on the behalf of that poor distressed Church. And Letters were also
ordered to be written, out of hand, unto the Lord Duke of Esperon, earnestly to
entreat his Grace, that by his Authority, his Majesty's Edicts, and the Public
Peace might be preserved. And our general Deputies at Court shall address
themselves unto his Majesty, that, according to his usual Clemency, and Royal
Goodness, he would be pleased to stop the Torrent of this Persecution, and to
exert his Justice, and punish the Infractors and Violators of his Royal
Ordinances, and to curb and restrain their Fury, who dare, in a time of open
Peace, to deprive his Majesty's Subjects of the Benefit and Protection of his
Edicts, of the Exercise of their Religion, and of the Safety of their Lives.
And the said Church of La Mote shall be immediately advised to keep and secure
the possession of their Temple, and Religious Worship, and to seek and get into
their Possession, all necessary Titles, Evidences and Proofs of their Right
unto their Temple; 1626. The 25th Synod.
and to bring those Evidences, and Acts of Prohibitions that have been served
upon them by the Officers of the said Lord Cardinal, and all other Proofs of
their Excesses and actual Outrages against their Members unto this City, that
so they may, with all diligence, be dispatched unto the Lord des Loges,
Advocate in his Majesty's Council, who will use all needful Means, on behalf of
our Churches, that their Adversaries may be prosecuted and punished.

26. Mousieur de la Motte, Pastor of the Church du Gua in Vivaretz, did, both
by word of Mouth, and written Acts which he produced, declare and prove his
great Losses and Persecutions sustained during the last Troubles. The Council
gave him good assurance, that in the Dividend of our Churches Moneys, there
should be a particular care taken for his Relief and Comfort.

27. The Synod compassionating the sad Estate of Monsieur du Bois, a Public
Notary, living in the City of Pouzin, ordered that three hundred Livers should
be paid him out of the Mass of Moneys, which will be allotted unto the Province
of Vivaretz. And whereas the Church of Paris lent him already, in his great
Necessities, one hundred Livers, they be desired, out of pure Christian
Charity, freely to forgive him that Sum.

28. The Synod taking into consideration the Complaint of the Widow of Monsieur
Rossel deceased, and the great Losses suffered by the Church of Bedarioux,
decreed, that the Province of Lower Languedoc, should pay her in the Stipend
allowed her for the Year of her Widowhood, and discharge that poor Church from
the payment thereof, and take special care that this Widow have some settled
Maintenance for the future. Moreover, an Order was granted, that because her
Necessities at present were very sore and pressing, she should receive fifty
Livers, which the Lord of Candall is entreated to advance beforehand, out of
the Moneys accruing unto the aforesaid Province, whose Receiver shall be
obliged to allow it him on his Account.

29. The Synod accepting his Offers, promised its best Assistance unto the
Reverend Monsieur le Faucheur, Pastor of the Church in Monpellier, and prayed
him to take heart unto himself, and courageously to employ those excellent
Talents and Graces (the Lord had blessed him with) in the Refutation of those
Heaps of Sophism's piled up by the Cardinal of Perron, in his huge Volume of
the Eucharist, that so the Church of God may be edified by so laudable and
profitable a Work, and the sorry sophistical Wranglings of the Enemies of God's
Truth may be checked and represt.

30. There was granted threescore and twelve Livers unto the Sieurs Maurice, de
Bloy, de Matrimont, and Collan, to defray the Charges of their Journey unto
Montauban, which is eighteen Livers apiece.

31. Monsier Caper was ordered to pay unto Mr. Moynier, Pastor of the Church of
Bourniquett, immediately, seven-score Livers in consideration of his great
Losses: and this is not intended as a diminution of that Relief which the Synod
has reserved for him, when it comes to divide the Moneys destinated to the
support and maintenance of our Churches in the Higher Languedoc. And the Synod
of that Province is charged to communicate unto his necessitous Family, as they
are bound by the Laws of Christian Charity, for its Subsistence.

32. An hundred Livers were assigned unto Monsieur Baylin, Pastor of the Church
of Villemur, and to be paid him out of the clearest Moneys which belong unto
the Churches: And farther it was voted, that when the Dividend should be made
of those Moneys, there shall be a special regard had unto the Necessities both
of the said Church and Pastor.

33. The Sieurs Crubel and Montanier, Pastors of the Churches at Bias and La
Corbaride, declared and proved before the Synod, by authentic Evidences and
Memoirs, the utter impossibility of their Residence on their Churches, because
of the dismal and deplorable Condition to which they be reduced. Whereupon
License was given them to reside at Montauban, until such time as it should
please God to bless those distressed Churches with Ability for their
Resettlement among them; and the next Provincial Synod shall take special care
that it may be effected.

34. The Churches of Souls and La Bour, being at a vast distance from the
other Churches of this Kingdom, whereby our National Synods have had little
knowledge of their Estate and Wants, and of that Relief which has by this and
former National Synods been ministered to them. The Sieurs Mizaubin and
Grenouilleau, are ordered to travel thither immediately upon the breaking up of
this Assembly, and as Visitors appointed by this Synod, to inspect their
Condition, and to inquire into those Differences between the Sieurs Busthonoby
and Guillemin, and to compose them, and to make report of the Necessities of
those Churches, they being now incorporated with the Synod of Lower Guienne,
unto it; and they shall take care that those Churches do, by their Deputies,
appear at their Synodical Meetings, and bring in an Account of their disposal
of those Moneys which have been formerly, and may hereafter be allotted them.
And that Synod is charged to concern it self for the well-being of those
Churches.

35. The Province of Sevennes having advanced a thousand Livers beforehand for
the Churches of Auvergne, did request this Assembly, that they might be
reimbursed. A Decree past, that the said Province proving those Disbursments,
they should be repaid accordingly out of the Moneys granted by the last
National Synod unto those Churches.

36. Monsieur Paulet informing this Synod with how great Violence he was
forced, and driven away from his Church of Vezenobre, it was immediately voted,
that his Cause should be particularly recommended unto the Lords our General
Deputies; and that when the distribution of Moneys shall be made in the close
of this Sessions, all care and respect should be had unto his Necessities.

37. The Lord and Lady of Dangeau, complaining that the Synod of the Isle of
France, had forbidden the particular recommending of them unto God, in the
Public Prayers made by the Church of Chartres, meeting at the Bridge of
Tranchefetus, although they had been formerly made for the Lord and Lady of
that Place. And the Deputies of the Isle of France having declared the Reasons
of that Prohibition, and justified it by the Acts of two several Synods; tho
they had also condemned the omission of those aforesaid Prayers, and that they
would have ordained their re-usage, were it not for those many Oppositions they
had encountered in it. The Synod decreed, That the Pastor of the Church of
Chartres, shall mention in his Prayers, and pray particularly by Name for the
said Lord and Lady, according to the Intention of the Synods of that Province.

38. The Sieur Codur writ Letters of Excuse, which were read in this Synod; as
also the Acts of the last National and Provincial Synods of Lower Languedoc,
concerning the removal of his Ministry out of the Province of Sevennes.
Whereupon it was decreed, that the Province should be censured for their
overmuch Indulgence to the said Codur, and judged, that the Gloss put upon the
Canon of the Synod of Charenton by one of its Deputies, was not in any wise to
be admitted, because it directly contradicted the Intention of that Synod. And
it does now forbid the said Codur to exercise his Ministry, either in the
Provinces of Lower Languedoc or Sevennes; and interdicts the Synods of those
Provinces, the granting him any License for so doing, on pain of censuring the
Moderators of those Synods in their private Capacities. Moreover, the said
Codur is once again commanded to obey the Canon of the National Synod of
Charenton, and to retire himself into the Province of Dolphiny, that there he
may be provided of a Church: And in case he refuse Obedience unto this Order,
the Synod of that Province is now empowered with full Authority to proceed
against him, according to the utmost rigor and severity of our Discipline.

39. There were six-score Livers ordered to the Lord of La Beguadiere, for
defraying the Charges of his Journey; which he took at the command of this
Synod.

40. There were sixty Livers paid the Lords Taby and Languett, who were ordered
to cite Monsieur Noguier unto this Synod, and to hear and examine Witnesses.

41. This Synod honoring the Memory of Monsieur Daneau, heretofore a very
famous Minister of Christ, Pastor and Professor of Divinity in the Church and
University of Bearn; and desiring to preserve his Works from the Grave of
Oblivion, entreats his worthy Son to gather them into one Volume, and to
publish them, and the Charges of their Impression shall be born by this Synod.
They be in one Volume in Folio.

42. Sixty Livers were ordered to be paid unto the Sieurs Mizaubin and
Grenouilleau, (Commissioners appointed by this Synod to visit the Churches of
Souls and Labor) to defray the Expenses of their Journey, of which they shall
give an Account unto the Province of Lower Guyenne: And in case this Sum be not
sufficient for the clearing their necessary Charges in that their Journey, then
the Province shall supply the rest, and bring it in upon Account unto the next
National Synod.

43. This Synod approved, that the Lord of Eragny, Deputy for the Province of
Normandy, should use all necessary means for getting a place ascertained, where
the Professors of the Reformed Religion may worship God in the Bailywick of
Chaumont, in the Territory of Vexin; and the said Place being obtained and
named, the Church of that Bailywick shall be incorporated with the Isle of
France, provided that the Quarter of Gisors do yield their Consent, and be the
lesser Part of the Church of Sancourt; and in case the two Provinces of
Normandy, and the Isle of France, cannot agree about it, they shall submit unto
the Judgment of the Neighbor Synod.

CHAP. XXX. A Donative to Monsieur Chamier.
44. MOnsieur Chamier Pastor of Montlimard, presenting unto this Council the
very learned Works of his most Reverend Father, which he published at the
desire of several former National Synods. The Council judging it equitable to
testify that great respect and honor they ever had for his Father, of blessed
Memory, and to give some acknowledgment of the Churches Debt and Thankfulness
for the many and eminent Services he had once rendered them, and these his
incomparable Labors now dedicated to it, do offer the Sum of three hundred
Livers presently to be given him by Mr. Cooper, out of the general Stock of the
Churches: And further, there shall two free Portions more be distributed to him
out of the Dividend, which will befall the Province of Dolphiny, and shall be
paid in unto the said Monsieur Chamier, betwixt this and the next National
Synod.

45. This Synod considering the long-continued Sufferings of the Sieur
Constant, during his Imprisonment in the Clink of the Common Goal of Bourdeaux,
and the great Expenses he must needs have been at for the getting his
Enlargement, voted and decreed, That out of the general Stock of Moneys
belonging to all our Churches, there shall be drawn out three free Portions,
and delivered to him, 1616. The 25th Synod.
betwixt this and the next National Synod, by the Lord of Candall.

46. Monsieur Belliot petitioning the Synod to have compassion on him, because
of his many and great Necessities, sore Afflictions, and Losses which he has
sustained, during his long Imprisonment in Bourdeaux; There was a Portion and
half free of all Charges and Taxes whatsoever, ordered to be paid him by the
Lord of Candall, until the next National Synod.

47. The Sieurs Petit and Duranty, Deputies from the Church of Nismes, made
their Addresses unto this Synod, That it would be pleased to grant them
Monsieur Baux, Pastor of the Church of Mazamet, to be their Minister. After
hearing the Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc on the one hand, who joined
with the said Gentlemen in their Demand; and on the other hand the Deputies of
Mazamet aforesaid, Monsieur Baux himself, and other Deputies of the Higher
Languedoc who opposed their Petition; A Vote past, that this Business should be
carried back unto the next Synod of Higher Languedoc, which is ordered to
provide for the Church of Mazawet, and to grant the Church of Nismes
effectually their Request.

48. The said Sieurs, Petit and Duranty, did farther petition this National
Synod, That by their Authority Monsieur Chambrun, who was removed unto the City
of Orange by the National Synod of Alez, might be restored back again unto the
Church of Nismes. But the Synod answered, That the said Deputies should apply
themselves unto the Church of Orange; and in case of their refusal, then unto
the Colloquy of Baronniers in Dolphiny, and so to get their Petition answered
according to their Hearts desire.

49. The Church of Vsez deputed the Sieur L' Exque with Letters unto this
Council, petitioning that Monsieur Buez, Pastor in the Church of
Cournon-Terrail, might be conferred upon them for their Pastor. The said Church
was ordered to apply it self unto the next Synod of Lower Languedoc, which is
injoined to dispose the said Buez to comply with the Desire of the Church of
Vsez, because of its great Importance, and for that there is very great and
good Reason the said Synod should yield unto their Requests.

50. The Synod being informed by the Deputies of Burgundy, that the Church of
Paillac was at present unprovided, and considering its great Importance,
orders that Monsieur Repasseau, a Pastor now at Liberty, shall be sent unto
that Church, to serve them as their own Pastor; and notice hereof shall be
given them, by Letters signed by the Officers of this National Synod.

51. The Lord of Quelus presenting Letters from the Church of Anduze,
petitioning, that Monsieur Vinay, Pastor of the Church of Annonay, might be
given them for their Pastor. After that the said Vinay, and the Deputies of the
Province of Vivaretz and Sevennes had been heard, their Petition was remanded
back unto the next Synod of Vivaretz, who were entreated to have a particular
respect, both to the Person of the said Monsieur Vinay, and his Preservation,
and the great Importance of the said Church; that so, as the Welfare of that
Church on the one hand, and Christian Charity on the other required, that
worthy Minister might be treated with all possible Respect and Kindness.

52. The next Synod of Lower Languedoc, which is charged to call Monsieur
Ressent to account for his Actings, shall be informed, that the Sieur Mercurin
declared in this Council, that the said Ressent sent him, against his will,
unto the Commissioners, Crubellier and Chambrun; and abusing of his easiness
and good Nature, never declared to him the Contents of the Letter of Credit he
sent by him; insomuch that when he came unto Vouert and Orange, he was
constrained to make up his Errand from what he could recollect of Discourses
past betwixt him and the said Ressent.

53. The Colloquy of Ambrun is ordered to judge finally in that Difference
betwixt the Church of Cisteron, and the Sieur Mercurin, and that by Authority
from this Council.

54. There is given an hundred Livers unto Mr. Repasseau, for the Supply of his
present Wants, and to help transport his Houshold-Goods unto Paillac, and the
said Sum shall be paid him out of the common Mass of Moneys belonging to all
our Churches.

55. Whereas Monsieur Bar, Doctor of Civil Law, and Advocate at Montlimard,
has composed a Treatise concerning Antichrist, and which has been perused by
several Divines commissionated thereunto, and they giving a very laudable and
good Account thereof, it was approved also by this Synod.

56. Monsieur Sarazin, Pastor of the Church of Campaign, had leave given him to
quit the Province of Higher Languedoc, and to accept of a Call from any Church
in the Province of Burgundy, but always upon this Condition, That he do not
leave the Church of Campaign before the Sessions of the Colloquy of Lower
Quercy, who are empowered fully to discharge the said Sarazin, and to take care
that that Church be not left destitute.

57. The Lord Commissioner Galland was humbly entreated to write unto the Lord
President of the Parliament of Toulouse, on behalf of diverse Inhabitants of
Briteste, because Warrants were issued out to apprehend them, and make them
Prisoners, although the Matter for which they are in Trouble, has been
pardoned by his Majesty's Act of Grace and Indemnity.

58. The Memoirs of Monsieur Rennoy, Pastor of the Church of Coluisson, were
presented unto this Assembly by Monsieur Petit, and were delivered unto the
Deputies of Lower Languedoc, who were to carry them unto their next Provincial
Synod, which was charged in an especial manner to consider of them.

59. Thirty Livers were ordered unto Nicolas Severin, out of the common stock
of our Churches, but on this Condition, that he never trouble us with his
Petitions more; and the Provinces shall take care to detain their Poor at home,
that these National Synods may be no more urged with their Importunities.

60. There was given as a Gratuity out of the best Moneys belonging to the
Churches, four hundred and fifty Livers unto Monsieur Cooper, Deputy to the
Lord of Candall.

61. An hundred Livers were ordered unto Sir Augustus Galland, his Majesty's
Commissioner in this Council, out of the clearest Moneys of our Churches, to
defray the Charges he was at in the Business of the Church of Froqualquier.

62. Out of its supernumerary Portions, the Province of Lower Languedoc shall
pay the Sum of thirty Livers unto Monsieur Noguier, at which the Charges of his
Journey hither, have been assessed by the Council.

63. Over and besides what he may else need to get off the Writ of
Imprisonment, issued forth against him by the Privy Council, and which had
turned over his Cause to be heard in the Court of Beziers, there was granted
the Sum of one hundred Livers unto Monsieur Pontel, which he shall receive out
of the common Stock of the Churches Moneys.

64. Twenty Livers out of the same Fund was given unto the common Crier of the
City of Castres.

65. Sixty Livers were given to the Doorkeeper of the Council, out of the same
Stock; and he is recommended unto the Lords, Consuls and Magistrates of this
City of Castres, that they would be pleased to restore him unto his Office of
Regent, which he has formerly exercised in their College.

66. The Lord of Candall is entreated to advance out of the half Portion
granted unto Monsieur Mercurin, Pastor of the Church of Grass, as much as will
be requisite to take off the Writ of Arrest against him in the King's Privy
Council, that so the Parliament of Provence may be deprived of the Knowledge of
those Matters, for which he is in Trouble, and do so very much hinder him in
the Discharge of his ministerial Duties and Calling.

67. The next Synod of Higher Languedoc, are charged to present Monsieur
Grasset, Pastor of the Church in the Isle of Jourdain, unto the Ministry and
pastoral Care of the Church of Mazamet, and to provide the Church in the
aforesaid Island of another Minister.

68. The Matters concerning the Church of Sarverettes, were particularly
recommended unto the Lord of Montmartyn our General Deputy.

69. The Province of Higher Languedoc is entreated to consider the Losses
sustained by Monsieur Daneau, Pastor of the Church of Castres, in the former
and latter Wars, that so out of their Charity he may receive some Relief and
Comfort.

70. Seven hundred Livers were given unto the Children of Monsieur Cameron
deceased, as a Testimony of that Honor we have for his Name and Memory, and
they shall also receive a yearly Portion from the Lord of Candall, until the
next National Synod. Moreover, Monsieur Olier, who pleaded for the Church of
Montauban, was told by the Council, that in case the said Church did not pay
the eight hundred Livers in unto his Children, which they owed unto Monsieur
Cameron their Father, and who was sometime Pastor and Professor in their City
and University, the like Sum should be detained from them by the Lord of
Candall, out of the Moneys settled upon their University, that so their just
Debts might that way be paid unto these poor Orphans; and the Moneys now given
them, and those others due from Montauban, shall be deposited with their
Guardian for their Use.

71. An hundred Livers were ordered to be paid unto Monsieur Bansillon, a
worthy Minister, in Consideration of the many Damages he has sustained, and
they shall be paid him out of the general Stock of our Churches; nor shall this
occasion the lessening of his Relief from the Province, who shall assist and
help him in the Prosecution of his Suit; the Account whereof shall be brought
in to the next National Synod, to be perused and considered by them.

72. The Church of Vezenobre is recommended to the Charity of the Province of
Sevennes.

73. Monsieur Another Copy calls him Merlat.
Market petitioning the Council to consider the Charges the Church of Pons have
been at in getting the Enlargement of their Pastor Monsieur Constans, their
Petition was remanded back unto the next Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, which
is exhorted to assist that poor Church out of the supernumerary Portions
couched in their Dividend.

74. In like manner the poor Churches of Masedazill, le's Bordes, Savarat, and
Camarades, are recommended to the Charity of the same Province, as is also
Monsieur Marsillon, who has been a very great Sufferer, that they would
consider him more than ordinary.

75. Monsieur Baux informed this Synod, that if he should go to Nismes, and
exercise his Ministry there, he had no certain Stipend promised him; and the
Lords Petit and Duranty their Deputies, did tell him as much, that they had no
Order from that Church, to make any Agreement with him about it, and the said
Petit did confirm the same in open Council. Whereupon the Church of Nismes was
exhorted fully to content and satisfy the said Mr. Baux; and in case any
Difference should arise about this matter, then it should be referred unto the
Consistory of Montpellier, who were empowered by this present National Synod to
decide it finally.

76. Monsieur Bardon, Receiver of the Moneys appertaining to the Province of
Higher Languedoc, is entreated to advance unto the Family of Monsieur Voisin,
out of the first Moneys he shall receive, that free Portion, which was granted
by this National Synod unto the said Family.

77. The Petition of the Church of Vielle Vigne, requesting that an hundred
Livers might be granted them for the keeping up of their School, was remanded
back unto the Province of Britain, who were charitably to consider of it.

78. A Petition from the Church of Tressans was presented unto this Council by
the Sieur Razes, who ordered the Province of Lower Languedoc to give the belt
Assistance to it; and an Account of their Condition is to be brought in unto
the next National Synod.

79. The Reverend Mr. Constans and Erondelle, gave in their Judgment about a
Book writ by the Sieur Bufon, and perused by them: whereupon a Vote passed;
that it should not be printed; and the Reasons moving the Council thereunto,
shall be reported unto the said Buson by Monsieur Fort, one of the Deputies of
the Lower Guyenne.

80. For as much as three free Portions had been allotted by the last National
Synod of Charenton, unto the Churches of Souls, in case they were provided of
a second Pastor: This Assembly authorizeth the Colloquy of Condonnois to
examine that Proposan, who was said to be fit for the Ministry; and the
Province of Lower Guyenne is charged to advance such a Sum as they shall judge
needful for the Maintenance of a second Pastor, and to make Report thereof unto
the next National Synod, which shall reimburse them those their Moneys.

81. This Council decreed, that out of the first Moneys which should be
received, the Sum of two hundred Livers should be presented to each of our
Professors in the University of Montauban and Saumur, for the Years one
thousand six hundred twenty one, and twenty two, in which they receieved
nothing.

82. The Province of Higher Languedoc understanding that there was a Dividend
of Moneys made by this Council, demanded the Reimbursement of four hundred
Livers, which in Obedience to a Decree of the last Synod at Charenton, they had
paid in to Monsieur Berauld Professor of Divinity in the University of
Montauban. But this their Demand was ordered to be brought into the next
National Synod, who will take Care to see them have Restitution made of that
aforesaid Sum disbursed by them.

83. The Account rendered by the Isle of France, for its College, was accepted;
and the Council voted, that the Censure pronounced against the said Province,
should be razed out of the Acts of the last National Synod.

84. This Assembly not judging it convenient unto Reason to repeal its own
Ordinance about Mr. Percy, did deposit that Act concerning several Heads of
Families in the Church of Montflanquin, and those Acts of the Church of
Bourdeaux, and of Monsieur Ferrand, in the Hands of the Deputies of Lower
Guyenne, who should make Report of them unto the next National Synod, to whom
the final Judgment of this Affair is dismissed.

85. The Deputies of Dolphiny presented Letters from Monsieur de Piotet, Pastor
of the Church of Molines, together with the Canons of our National Synods and
Church Discipline, compiled by him into a just Volume. Whereupon Commissioners
were nominated to peruse this his Collection, and they bringing in a very
favorable Report concerning it, Thanks were voted unto the said Monsieur
Piotet, and that he should by Letters from this Assembly be advised of the
Defects noted by the Commissioners in this his Work, that so he might complete
it, and render it more useful and serviceable to the Churches.

86. The Lord of Montmartyn, Deputy-General for our Churches, reporting unto
this Assembly, that there were diverse Orders which greatly imported the common
Good of all our Churches, and which he had obtained some Years ago from the
Privy Council, and of which it is very needful he should have the keeping, that
he may produce them upon all Occasions and Occurrences, for the better Service
of our Churches. And whereas several Deputies of the Provinces have
remonstrated, that for the Information of their Provinces, and the better
inabling them to pursue and execute those Orders of Council, there is a
Necessity that they should be possessed of the said Originals, or at least of
Copies most exactly transcribed from, and faithfully compared with them. This
Assembly taking into Consideration the many Copies of those Orders necessary
for the Provinces, all of which cannot possibly have the said Originals, but
with a great deal of Time and Expense of Moneys, did entreat the Lord Galland,
his Majesty's Commissioner to us, that he would be pleased to give himself the
Trouble of collationing the Copies with the Originals, that so they may be of
better Use and Service to the Deputies and Provinces which have sent them,
according as the Necessity of their Affairs may require.

87. The Magistrates of Castres having past a Judgment against Peter Peris, at
the Request of Monsieur Constans, now that the Charges may be defrayed of that
Process, an Order was given that the said Sieur Constans should presently
receive four and twenty Livers.

88. Forty Livers were ordered unto the Transcriber of the Copies of that
Cahier brought by the Magistrates of this City unto the Lord Montmartyn, and of
the Accounts given us by the Lord of Candall.

89. As soon as the time of the Sieur Fabre's Suspension is expired, the
Colloquy of Albigeois shall immediately assemble, and provide the Church of La
Caune another Pastor.

90. Monsieur Combalasse, Pastor of the Church of Venez, prayed this Assembly
to assist him, and the Widow of Monsieur Raffin deceased, with some Moneys,
that they might bring their Lawsuit to an End, about the Settlement of their
Temple in the Town of Venez: But their Demand, as had been before in the like
Case practiced by the National Synod of Alez, was dismissed over to the next
Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc: And in the mean while this Council
assured him, that they would improve all their Power and Interest to procure
the said Settlement.

91. The Provincial Deputies of Burgundy, and the Lord of Beaufort, Deputy for
the Province of Sevennes, shall in their Return homeward pass through the Towns
of Sauve and Anduze, and acquaint the Consistories there with the Intention of
this Council, and shall do their best Endeavors to reconcile the Sieurs Bony
and Aldebert, and put to their helping Hand, that the Overseer of the Poor in
the Town of Anduze, and the said Mr. Bony do agree upon Arbitrators, who may
put a Period to their Differences.

92. The Proceedings formed against the Sieurs Peris and Jolly, were delivered
unto the Provincial Deputies of Xaintonge and Higher Languedoc, in which
Provinces they both lived before their Deposal: And the Proceedings against the
Sieur Beraut was put into the Hands of Monsieur Baux.

93. The Council being informed of those excellent Gifts which the Lord has
liberally bestowed on Monsieur Godefrey, Doctor of the Civil Laws, and
Professor of that Faculty in the University of Geneva, ordered Letters should
be written to entreat him, because of his singular Knowledge in Antiquity, that
he would discover and publish to the World those Artifices and Disguises used
by Cardinal Baronius, and other Doctors of the Church of Rome, to corrupt and
alter the true History of the Ancient Church.

94. The Lord Commissioner was entreated to write unto the Lord President of
Toulouse, in Behalf of Monsieur Bidac, imprisoned at Sommieres, for abjuring
the Errors and Idolatry of the Romish Church; and Mr. Petit was charged to
carry unto that Parliament his Majesty's Letters and Command, and to join
themselves with the young Mr. Galland, the Lord Commissioner's Son, who will be
sent thither for this very End by his Father.

95. The Lord of Candall is desired to pay unto Monsieur Mercurin the Sum of
sixty Livers, which were given him by the National Synod of Vitre, and it shall
be allowed him in his Account for the Moneys appertaining to our Churches.

96. Mr. Mestrezat and d'Huysseau presented Letters from the Church of Paris,
most humbly petitioning that Monsieur Chauve, whom they had so often and
earnestly requested for their Minister, might now at length be bestowed upon
them: The Deputies also of the Isle of France joined with them in their
Petition: But Mr. Chauve as earnestly entreated the Council that he might be
continued in his Ministry unto the Church of Sommieres, because of its great
Afflictions and present Necessities: And the Provincial Deputies of Lower
Languedoc did with as much Importunity request that the Rights of that Church,
and of the Province might be preserved, and he in no wise removed from his
Pastoral Charge. This weighty Affair having been maturely deliberated, the
Council considering the Desire of the Reverend Mr. Chauve, and the singular
Importance of the Church of Paris, and the present Condition of that of
Sommieres, decreed, That the Church of Paris should carry their Demand unto the
next Synod of Lower Languedoc, which is injoined to pay all just Deference unto
this Request of the Church of Paris, and to gratify them fully in it, provided
that it be not a Case of Conscience with that Reverend Minister, and determined
by him positively, that it is his Duty to live and die with his said Church of
Sommieres.

97. A Letter was read from the Church of Vigan, and the Lord of Villencufve
their Messenger, and the Deputies of the Province of Sevennes were heard speak
as to its Contents. After which the Council gave leave unto that Church to seek
a Pastor for it self without the Province of Sevennes, and injoineth the
Colloquy of Sauve to assist the said Church, until such time as they be
provided of a Minister to their Contentment.

98. Mr. Constans and Mr. Belot represented unto the Council the great and
pressing Necessities they labor under, through their Inability of paying those
Moneys they borrowed during their Imprisonment at Bourdeaux. Whereupon the
Receiver of the Province of Xaintonge was ordered to pay them thirteen Portions
and an half (which were given them for the Years 1627, 1628, and 1629.) out of
the Arrears due in the Year 1621. And that the said Receiver may come to no
Trouble about it, he shall join the said thirteen Portions and an half unto
those other Portions which were given them, that so they may divide them
equally between them, as has been accustomed.

99. If any Church in the Colloquy of Nismes should desire Monsieur Baux for
their Minister, who is at present Pastor of the Church in Cucque; This Assembly
decreed, That he might have his Liberty, and accept of such a Call, without any
Obstruction or Molestation.

100. The Deputies of Sevennes are charged, as they return homeward, to pass
through the City of Beziers, and to recommend to the Judges and Counselors of
that Court the Affairs of the Church of Alez, and of those Reverend Ministers
Mr. Paulet and Banzillon.

101. For as much as in the Dividend to the Province of Higher Languedoc, there
were two Portions couched for two Professors of Divinity in the University of
Montauban, although it had been before determined by this Synod, that the said
Professors should receive but an half Portion, and give Acquittance unto their
Church for it; now the Lord of Candall is ordered to detain in his Hands one of
those Portions, and to account for it unto the next National Synod.

102. The Relation of Mr. Banzillon's Troubles was read, as also Letters
written by the Lord Marquess of Varennes, Governor of Aguemortes, unto his
Lordship his Majesty's Commissioner in this Assembly. Whereupon the Lord
Commissioner was most importunately entreated to intercede for Mr. Banzillon,
with the Lords Judges in the Court of Bezieres, and with the said Lord of
Varennes; and it was unanimously voted, that a most humble Petition should be
presented unto his Majesty, that his Majesty would be graciously pleased to
permit our Churches, and Ministers officiating in them, their enjoyment of that
Peace and Liberty, and their comfortable Effects, which by his Edicts are
accorded to us; and that his Majesty would order the said Lord Marquess, and
all other Governors of Places, to follow and imitate his Majesty in his
favorable Inclinations and Disposition toward us, and to cause his Subjects
of the Reformed Religion, both Ministers and People, who live within their
Governments and Jurisdiction, to reap the refreshing Fruits of his Majesty's
most gracious Favor and Protection. Moreover, this Council ordained, that till
such time as Mr. Banzillon may be restored unto the Exercise of his Ministry in
the Church of Aiguesmortes, that Church shall be supplied by the Neighbor
Pastors, to whose Christian Charity the said Church is in a most special manner
recommended; and that they would, upon all Occasions, assist it in its great
and pressing Necessities.

103. Mr. Petit made report of what had been done by him and Mr. Galland
junior, in their Conference with the Lord President in the Parliament of
Toulouse, and they presented his Lordship's Letters unto this Synod: And they
received the Thanks of this Synod for the Pains taken by them: And an Answer
was voted unto the Letters of the said Lord President; and the Consuls of
Montauban and Castres were desired to pass over to Toulouse immediately after
Martin-mass, and to solicit the Enrollment of his Majesty's Letters of Command
unto that Court of Parliament, and to see that the Restrictions opposed by that
Court unto his Majesty's Declaration be removed.

104. The Deputies of Dolphiny giving an honorable Character of Monsieur
Agard, who had lately quitted the Convent of the Jacobins at Avignion, a Vote
passed in the Council, That Report hereof should be made in the next National
Synod, and what Relief the said Agard has, and shall receive from that
Province, that so there may be some care taken to reimburse them.

105. That Monsieur de la Vallade may be maintained in his Sickness; and whilst
the Hand of God is heavy upon him, he being now visited in this City, The
Council ordered, that out of the Sum of Ten thousand Livers given by his
Majesty to defray the Charges of this Assembly, a fourth part of that Portion
of it, which would have accrued unto the Province of Anjou, should be presently
taken out and bestowed upon the said Sieur de la Vallade, and he shall not be
obliged to be accountable for it. And Mr. Cooper is requested to pay in this
Money beforehand unto him.

106. This Synod ordained, that all Papers brought by Mr. Bony and the Lord
Aldebert, should be deposited by Mr. de Puy and de Grenouilleau, into the hands
of the Provincial Deputies of Higher Languedoc; which was done accordingly.

107. Mr. Busthonoby, Pastor of the Churches in Souls, informed the Council,
That however the last National Synod of Charenton had ordered a Maintenance for
him in those Churches, yet there remained due, October Quarter, in the Year
1624, and the full Years 1625, and 1626. And he humbly prayed the Council to
compassionate him, under his pressing Wants and Necessities. The truth of this
his Information being undoubted and unquestionable, the Lord of Candall was
entreated to pay in unto him all those his Arrears; and if the said Lord would,
of his Christian Charity and Generosity, advance it beforehand, we assure him
he shall reimburse himself out of the first Moneys he receives for the Service
of our Churches.

108. The Synod observing, that by the Dividend made in the National Synod of
Charenton, there was granted unto the University of Montauban, over and above
its accustomed Allowance, the Sum of Eight hundred and fifty Livers, which were
to be paid them till the sitting of this Assembly; and through inadvertency,
that self-same Sum was again employed in a late Dividend, as if it were now
due, and to be paid unto the said University. The Synod therefore ordains,
that out of the said Eight hundred and fifty Livers, there shall be One hundred
Livers only given in lieu of the Principal unto the said University, and Sixty
Livers to their Beadle and Porter; and that the remaining Overplus, amounting
to Six hundred and ninety Livers, and also Ninescore and nine Livers and eight
Sous, for a Portion cut off from the Province of Higher Languedoc and Higher
Guyenne, of those which were employed in the said Dividend, shall be detained
yearly by the Lord of Candall from the said University and Province, and he
shall bring his Receipt and Account for all this unto the next National Synod.

109. The Lord of Candall is entreated to pay unto the Province of Berry, over
and above the Portions which were allotted it, one Portion omitted in the
Account of the said Dividend.

110. The Portion of Monsieur Dacier, a Pastor Emeritus, having been omitted by
the Synod of Charenton, through forgetfulness, when they made a Dividend of
Moneys belonging to the said Province of Higher Languedoc, shall be now
restored him, and paid into his Hands out of the very first Moneys that shall
be received for the Churches.

111. Whereas the Sum of Four hundred Livers was settled upon another College
besides that of Nerac, out of the Dividend for the Province of Lower Guyenne,
the laid Sum shall be detained by the Lord Candall, because there was a
particular Article of Four hundred Livers past for the College of Bergerac.

112. In case Monsieur Constans should be molested by the Apostate Peris, the
Council resolves to stand by him, and to make his their common Cause, and to
maintain his Innocence, and to defray all necessary Charges that he may be put
to in the Suit.

113. The Lord Another Copy calls him Chanitrier.
Chintrier, formerly Receiver of the Moneys (given us by his Majesty's Bounty)
for the Province of Xaintonge, shall deliver unto the Lord of Angoulins, an
Acquittance of the Lord du Candall, for the Arrears due unto the said Province
for the Year 1621, and for which the said Chintrier shall be discharged by the
Lord of Angoulins, and shall himself draw up, in due Form of Law, the Discharge
and Acquittance, which is to be subscribed by him.

114. The deep Poverty of the Church of Varis being reported by the Deputies of
Dolphiny, who also presented their Letters unto the Council, a free Portion was
voted for them out of the Dividend for the Province of Dolphiny, to be
delivered unto the said Church of Varis, between this and the next National
Synod.

115. The Deputies of Dolphiny presented Letters from Monsieur le Veilleux a
Pastor; which being read, the Council commending his Zeal and Piety, and
approving his Retreat from the City of Nismes, does charge that Province of
Dolphiny to provide a Church for him, in which he may employ those excellent
Gifts, which the God of all Grace has so plentifully showred down upon him,
for its edification.

116. The Council exhorted the Province of Anjou to get the last Tome of Mr.
Cameron's Theological Works printed, and promises that the next National Synod
shall take care to see them reimbursed the Charges they must of necessity be at
in that Impression.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Universities and Colleges.
1. THE Sieurs Roques and Huglas, first and second Consuls of Montauban,
Monsieur Weemes Principal of their College, and the Deputies of the Province of
Higher Languedoc, petitioned, That Mr. Charles, formerly Professor of Divinity
in the University of Ortez, and Principality of Bearn, might be removed thence,
and preferred to the Church and University of Montauban. But there was great
Opposition made unto it, because of the present and pressing Wants of the
Churches of Bearn; and their mighty struglings to preserve their University,
for which they had most humbly petitioned his Majesty, and the Agreement past
between them and the said Mr. Charles. After the whole had been debated, the
Synod judged, that they could not, by any Authority of their own, compel; nor
in Reason or Conscience ought they, by their Exhortations, to oblige those
Churches to discharge the aforesaid Mr. Charles, and to bestow him on the
Church and University of Montauban. Yet notwithstanding they acquainted the
Deputies of those Churches, that in case their Hopes and Endeavors should be
frustrated, they might then resign up the said Charles unto the University of
Montauban, and oblige, both that City, and the Province of Higher Languedoc, by
complying with their Desires.

2. The Synod not judging it convenient to lessen the number of our
Universities, and wanting Means at present to provide for their Subsistence,
being utterly disabled from adding any thing unto them more than formerly, they
decreed, That the Professors of Montauban and Saumur should receive out of the
first Moneys to be distributed among the Churches, the Arrears of the Years
1625, and 1626, without any diminution; and for the Years One thousand six
hundred and twenty one, and twenty two, a certain Sum out of that Stock and
Fund which is in the disposal of the Synod; and that such of them as are
Pastors, and have no Sallery from their Churches, shall be paid that Portion
which was allotted and settled on them, as upon the other Pastors, but with
this difference, that there shall be nothing deducted for Costs or Taxes out of
it.

3. This Synod having maturely considered the Reasons inducing the last
National Synod of Charenton to supress the Profession of the Greek Tongue, in
those Universities which are maintained by our Churches; has thought good once
again to restore It, but with this Condition, that the Professors shall explain
unto their Scholars the most elegant Treatises of the Fathers. And whereas Mr.
Weems, Principal at Montauban, has craved leave, that at the same time he
teaches the Greek Tongue, he may also teach the Mathematics and Metaphysics
unto the College; his Petition was dismissed over to the Council of that
University, who should do therein as their Prudence should direct them.

4. As for those Demands made by Monsieur Petit, Professor of Divinity at
Nismes, on behalf of that University, the Synod ordains; 1. That for the Years
1621, and 1622, the Professors there must rest satisfied with what they have
already received, and patiently bear their part in the common Incommodities
suffered by the Churches. And for the Years 1625, and 1626, they shall receive
their full Sallaries out of the first and clearest Moneys of his Majesty's
Liberality. 2. That those of the aforesaid Professors, who have the grant of a
free Portion, as the Sieurs Petit and Codour, shall receive it from the Hands
of the Lord of Candall's Deputy in the Province of Lower Languedoc. 3. That the
Sieur Codour, Professor of the Hebrew Tongue, shall come down unto the same
Terms with the Professors of the said Language in our other Universities; and
he may not demand a greater Sallary than has been granted and paid them until
now.

5. All the Provinces are exhorted to examine in their Synods, Whether our
Universities may not be removed from one place unto another? or, whether they
may not be reduced to a lesser Number than they are at present, that so the
next National Synod may decree therein what will be most expedient for the
whole Body of our Churches?

6. Such Pastors as are employed in the Profession of the Hebrew Tongue, shall,
over and above their ordinary Stipend as Pastors, receive also their Wages as
Professors. And as for Professors of Divinity, who serve the Churches of our
Universities, and receive some kind of Maintenance from them, because of their
ordinary Ministry among them, there shall be an half Portion granted to them,
which they shall receive also, but with deduction of their Pension promised
them by their respective Churches.

7. Two hundred and ten Livers shall be the yearly Sallary of the Regents in
the fifth and sixth Glasses of the College of Saumur.

8. The Synod gave leave unto the Province of Sevennes, to settle their College
in that Corporation, which would contribute most toward its Maintenance.

9. That the Right of our Churches may be preserved, and our Universities in
this Kingdom may be provided for; Letters were ordered to be written unto Dr.
Andrew Rivet, to dispose and persuade him to serve as Professor in one of our
Universities; and the like Letters shall be written to the Lords Curators of
the University of Leyden, to acquaint their Lordships with the Desires of this
Council, and entreat them to set Dr. Rivet at liberty: And the Church of Paris
is charged to see those Letters delivered into their Hands to whom they be
directed, and to receive their Answer, and make Replies unto them as they judge
meet.

10. That the College in this City of Castres may be preserved, the Council
ordained, that the said College shall, until the next National Synod, enjoy the
Sum of four hundred Livers yearly; which Moneys were detained in the Hands of
the Lord of Candall, out of the Moneys given unto the College of Bergeras,
without any the least prejudice unto the Grant formerly made unto the Province
of Lower Guyenne, in favor of the Towns of Bergerac and Nerac.

11. The University of Nismes having not brought in their Account of the Moneys
they had received and employed since the last National Synod, shall carry it
unto the next Synod of Sevennes, which is ordered to audit and finish it up, by
the Authority of this Assembly.

12. The Province of Higher Languedoc brought in their Accounts by the Hands of
Monsieur Bardon, who was constituted Receiver for the said Province, and
Paymaster of the University of Montauban, for the Years 1619, 1620, 1623, and
1624, but gave no Account for the Years 1621, and 1622, nor of the Years 1625,
and 1626, because he had not received any thing in those Years, by reason of
the Troubles and Wars that were then in being: and it appears upon the closing
up of his Account, that there is due unto him the Sum of two thousand one
hundred and fifty nine Livers, nineteen Sous and eight Deniers, proceeding in
part from eight hundred and eleven Livers, paid by him unto the Professors for
their Wages in the Year 1621, and for another Disbursement paid unto the said
Professors for their Wages in the Year 1625, and for seven hundred Livers paid
in to Madamoyselle Chamier for the Year of her Widowhood, for which Sum of two
thousand one hundred and fifty nine Livers, nineteen Sous, eight Deniers, there
was a Fund ordered for his Reimbursment, viz. the very first Moneys that are to
be distributed among the Churches: And the said Accomptant, and all others also
were injoined for the future not to make the Expenses in their Accounts greater
than their Receipt appointed them by the National Synods, on pain of Radiation.

13. The Province of Anjou having, in Obedience to the Decree of the Synod of
Charenton, given in unto the Colloquy of Higher Poictou the Accounts of Moneys
received for the Maintenance of their University at Saumur, three quarters of
the Year 1620, and for the complete Years 1621, 1623, and 1624, and for the
first quarter of the Year 1625, it appeared by that Account, that they had paid
five and twenty Livers, four Sous, and six Deniers more than they had received,
and it appeared by the said Account that they had received nothing for the
whole Year 1622, and yet nevertheless they had disbursed for three quarters of
the said Year, as the Acquittances of that Disbursment did evidently prove,
there being also no Moneys received for the Profession of Divinity, which was
then vacant. Wherefore the said Account was allowed and approved, and the
Censure against them in the Acts of the Synod of Charenton taken off, and the
Sums detained from them by the Decree of that Synod were now again rendered to
them.

14. The Province of Dolphiny having exhibited three Accounts of the Receipt
and Disbursment for the University of Die, for three Years, beginning at the
first Day of July, one thousand six hundred and twenty three, and ending the
first of July, 1626, the said Account was allowed and approved.

15. The Province of the Isle of France having brought in the Account tendered
by them unto the Colloquy of Roven, for their Colledg-Moneys for ten Years,
beginning at the Year 1613, and ending in the Year 1622, the Receipt amounted
to four thousand Livers, and their Disbursment to four thousand seven hundred
and four Livers, so that their Expense exceeded their Income full seven hundred
and four Livers. This Synod could not give way that the said overplus Sum
should be placed to the Account, whereunto also the Deputies of the Provinces
related their Consent, and they were advised for the future not to let their
Expense exceed the Funds ordained for the Maintenance of their College, on pain
of Radiation.

16. The Province of Xaintonge in Obedience to the National Synod of Charenton,
having brought in an Account of their Disbursments for the College of
Rochefoucauld, in the Years 1621, 1622, 1623, and 1624; the said Expense was
found to amount unto one thousand nine hundred fourscore and nineteen Livers,
ten Sous, without ever receiving so much as one Denier toward its Maintenance.

17. The Province of Orleans and Berry, having rendered the Account of their
College unto the Provincial Synod held at Chastillon upon Loir, for three
quarters of the Year 1623. and the full Years 1624, 1625. and for three
quarters of the Year 1626. their Disbursements amounted to three thousand four
hundred thirty and three Livers, nine Sous, and five Deniers; and their Receipt
to two thousand eight hundred Livers; so that there was due to them, six
hundred and thirty three Livers, nine Sous. The said Province was in joined for
the future to look to it, that their Disbursments do not exceed the Funds
allowed them by our National Synods, for the Maintenance of their College.

18. The Province of Poictou having rendered their Account for their College,
which was heretofore at Niort, it appeared that their Receipt amounted to three
hundred Livers, according to the Act of the National Synod of Charenton. And
forasmuch as their Deputies reported that his Majesty had utterly suppressed
their College at Niort, and would not suffer it any where in that Province; it
was decreed, That the said Province should be accomptable not only for the said
three hundred Livers, but also for what other Moneys they have received since
the last National Synod.

19. The Province of Vivaretz having not been able to render an Account (as
they were injoined by the last National Synod) of the Receipt and Disbursment
for their College at Privas, because of the late Wars, by reason of which they
never had so much as one Denier for fifteen Months; the said Province was
admonished not to fail their bringing of it in unto the next National Synod.

20. The Province of Sevennes presented their Account for the College of
Anduze, whose Expense amounted to three thousand two hundred and two Livers,
fifteen Sous, for its Maintenance in the Years 1621, 1622, 1623, 1624, 1625,
and 1626. And the Deputies of the said Province declared, That they had not
received for all those Years more than one hundred Livers.

21. The Province of Normandy brought in their Account, and it appears that
from the first of July 1620, unto this Day, they had received for the
Maintenance of their College the Sum of one thousand three hundred Livers, and
that they have disbursed thirteen hundred twenty four Livers, six Sous, and six
Deniers; and that therefore there is owing to them four and twenty Livers, six
Sous, and six Deniers, which they declared they would not demand.

22. The Province of Burgundy not having brought in any Account nor
Acquittances, notwithstanding that Injunction laid upon them by the National
Synod of Charenton, because the Church of Pont du Vellay, in which their
Colloquy does assemble, neglected to yield Obedience unto two Provincial
Synods, who treading in the Steps of the National Synod, had ordered that
Church to do it, as was evident from the Acts of those Synods. Besides, the
Deputies were so straightened for want of time to come unto this Council, that
they could not possibly inquire into this Omission. Whereupon the said Province
was charged to bring in their said Accounts shut up, and completely finished,
unto the next National Synod.

23. The Province of Britain having not been able to set up again their
College in the Town of Vitre, until January last, nor to get one Penny of
Moneys, besides the four hundred Livers destinated at f^^st for its
Maintenance; they were ordered to bring in their Account unto the next National
Synod, as also of what Moneys they may between this and that time receive
toward its Subsistence.

24. The Province of Dolphiny brought in diverse Acquittances for the College
settled at Ambrun, by which it does appear, that they had disbursed more than
received: And therefore the Council approving their Account, exhorted the
Church of Ambrun for the future to bring in their Account in due form unto
their Provincial Synod, that they may tender it unto the National.

25. The Province of Lower Guyenne shall render an Account of the Moneys
received and employed for the College of Bergerac, unto the next Provincial
Synod of Xaintonge, which is ordered to audit, examine and finish it, and to
make Report thereof unto the next National Synod.

26. The Deputies of the Province of Provence excusing themselves, that they
had not brought in what was commanded them by the last National Synod, and
grounding their Excuses on the precise Command laid upon them by the Duke of
Guise, to break up and be gone before they could dispatch any Business. The
Council did once more renew and ratify the former Decree of the Synod of
Charenton, and enjoineth that Province of Provence to yield Obedience to it, on
pain of forfeiting their Right unto a College.

27. The Province of Lower Languedoc declared that they had no Accounts to
bring in, because they had only received fifty Livers; and yet notwithstanding
their want of his Majesty's Bounty, they had given their accustomed Sallaries
unto the Regents in the College of Beziers.

28. The Sieurs Roques and la Cresse, first and second Consuls for the City of
Montauban, petitioned the Council, that Monsieur Garissoles Pastor of
Puy-Laurens, might be Conferred upon the University, to serve them in the
Quality of a second Professor of Theology; and the Deputies of that Province
joined with them in their Petition: yet the Deputies of Puy-Laurens opposed
themselves against the Consuls, and Mr. Garissoles desired leave to continue in
his present Station and Ministry. But the Council considering the Necessities
of that University, granted the Petitioners their Request, and ordered Mr.
Garissoles to go unto that University, and to take upon him the Profession of
Divinity, immediately after the sitting of the Provincial Synod of Higher
Languedoc, who shall provide his Church of Puy-Laurens with an able Minister to
their full Content; and the said Mr. Garissoles shall from this Instant receive
the Wages of a Professor; and the Church of Puy-Laurens is entreated to ease
him of his Labors in constant preaching to them, and to contribute as much as
in them lies unto his comfortable Subsistence.

CHAP. XXXII. The Accounts of the Lord of Candall.
1. THE Sieurs Constans and Bollenat, Pastors; d'Angoulins, Ranchin, du Puy,
and d'Hysseau, Elders, being commissionated by the Council to audit the Lord of
Candall's Accounts, which were presented by his Deputy Mr. Cooper, they made
Report that in examining and hearing of them, they found the said Lord of
Candall to charge himself Debtor on Account brought in to the National Synod of
Charenton, by Acquittances for October-Quarter, in the Year 1619, and for the
Years 1620, and 1624, the Sum of six thousand five hundred and seventy eight
Livers, one Sous, four Deniers, which said Acquittances he produced in good and
due Form; for which he was acquitted and discharged.

2. The said Lord of Candall stands charged on the said Account, 1626. The 25th
Synod.
with the Sum of one hundred sixty nine thousand, eight hundred forty and two
Livers, two Sous, and two Deniers; of which he has made reprisal in ready
Moneys, and Moneys not received for the October-Quarter of the Years 1619, and
of the complete Years 1620, and 1621, abovementioned: Which Sum should have
past in his Account, upon condition that he were more diligent to reckon with
the present Synod; and therefore to give us satisfaction, he tendered an
Account, whose Receipt amounted to an hundred sixty and nine thousand, eight
hundred forty and two Livers, two Sous, and two Deniers. Moreover, there was
one Article of eight hundred twenty and five Livers, for the complete payment
of October-Quarter, in the Year 1619, there having been, through inadvertency,
no Receipt made for the aforesaid Account, when it was brought into the last
Synod of Charenton. And those Sums altogether, amounted to an hundred and
seventy thousand, six hundred sixty and seven Livers, two Sous, and two
Deniers: And the disbursment on the said Account, amounted to an hundred
seventy and one thousand, one hundred and sixty Livers, two Sous, and five
Deniers: Wherefore there remains due unto this Accomptant, the Sum of four
hundred fourscore and thirteen Livers, and three Deniers. Of which Sum, he
shall reimburse himself on the Reprisals of the said Account, or from the first
Moneys of the Years ensuing. And the Accomptant is charged to continue his Care
and Diligence in the recovery of one hundred ten thousand, eight hundred and
thirteen Livers, six Sous, eight Deniers, employed in reprisal on the aforesaid
Disbursment, that so he may give account thereof unto the next National Synod:
and there passed also in the Disbursment, thirteen thousand nine hundred
Livers, under the Names of the Receivers of Xaintonge and Vivaretz; whose
Acquittances he is ordered to produce in the next National Synod.

3. Mr. Cooper presented an Account for the Lord of Candall, for the Years
1623, and 1624, whose Receipt amounted to four hundred and forty three thousand
four hundred Livers, three Sous, and three Deniers; and the Disbursment to four
hundred fifty seven thousand four hundred seventy four Livers, three Sous, and
three Deniers; so that there is due unto this Accomptant, fourteen thousand
seventy and four Livers, three Sous, and three Deniers: of which Debt he shall
be reimbursed on the first and clearest Moneys of his Reprisal. Moreover, the
said Accomptant is charged to use all possible diligence for recovering the Sum
of one hundred and fourscore thousand five hundred thirty and six Livers, seven
Sous, included in the said Reprisals, and shall give an account thereof unto
the next National Synod. And he is again charged by the same Account to bring
the Acquittances for two thousand six hundred and sixteen Livers, which are in
three Parties defective, under the Names of the Sieurs de la Cost, and of the
Syndicks, Administrators of the College of Bergerac.

4. Mr. Cooper having remonstrated, that by his Account brought in for the Lord
of Candall to this Assembly, for the Years 1623, and 1624, he has made
received for the Year 1624, one part of fifty thousand six hundred and thirty
nine Livers, fourteen Sous, and six Deniers, there having been an Assignment of
them under the Hand of the Lord Phillippeaux Treasurer of the Exchequer, upon
the Moneys coming in from the Offices of Lieutenants and Comptrollers of the
Measures of Salt in Burgundy; of which Sum he has made Reprisal in ready
Moneys, and Moneys not as yet received, the Sum of fifty thousand threescore
and nine Livers, fourteen Sous, six Deniers: And not being able to recover any
thing, and yet desirous to secure the payment of the rest with the Creditors of
Mr. Payen deceased, who had a Share in those Offices, and upon which he was
assigned, he took up from those Offices, as if they had been ready Money for
the Churches, of Profit, even to the like Sum, because of the eminent danger of
losing that part which he proved by an authentic Act passed before a Public
Notary at Paris, the third of July, One thousand six hundred and twenty six; of
which Offices now belonging to the Churches, and which lie in composition
betwixt Debtor and Creditor, he cannot make any disposal, nor of himself sell
it, though the Synod desired him to get a Purchaser for them. The Council very
much approving and applauding the Prudence, Faithfulness, and Diligence of the
Lord of Candall, does give Orders to him and the Sieur d' Huysseau, deputed to
this purpose to act conjointly together, and to treat or compound for the
whole, or part of those Offices, either with one or more Persons, at such a
Price and Terms, as they shall judge best for the common Profit of the Churches;
promising and engaging our Words, that we will approve and accept whatever
shall be done by them in this Affair, provided the said Lord of Candall do
yield Account of the said Composition unto the next National Synod.

5. The Council having heard the Report of the Sieurs Bouterove and de
Baleines, whom they had deputed unto his Majesty, that there were two hundred
thousand Livers given by his Majesty, unto his Subjects of the Reformed
Religion, toward the maintenance of their Pastors. Which said Sum of 200000
Livers, his Majesty, and the Lords of his Council, promised should be paid very
speedily. Thereupon a Decree past, That if the said Sum, or any part of it were
received, the Lord of Candall should pay it in unto the Churches and
Universities for the Years 1625, and 1626, according as it came in, and
according to the Portions given, and the Dividend made in the last National
Synod held at Charenton in the Year 1623, deducting only out of it those
particular Sums which have been employed on the Service of this present Synod,
and which he was desired to advance beforehand out of such Moneys as might be
lying by him, by virtue of his Office as Treasurer of our Churches.

6. Mr. Cooper representing that some Receivers of the Provinces might scruple
the taking, as ready Money, the Promises of the Deputies unto this Synod, for
those Sums he had paid in unto them. This Synod being very well satisfied that
the said Moneys were paid in by way of Advance by the said Mr. Cooper for the
Lord of Candall, decreed, That every Receiver of the Provinces should be
accountable unto the said Mr. Cooper, of all and every particular Sum and Sums
which have been furnished and given unto the said Deputies for the Charges of
their Journey, and to give him all necessary Acquittances and Discharges,
without making any the least Difficulty or Scruple, upon any account, score, or
reason whatsoever.

7. There were chosen, by plurality of Suffrages, the Sieurs Blondell and
Banterne, to tender unto his Majesty the Names of those Persons whom the Synod
had pitched upon to be their General Deputies, that so out of their Number his
Majesty might choose whom in his great Wisdom he best approved: And these
two-mentioned Pastors had Letters also from the Synod unto the King's most
excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, and to the Lord
of Herbaut.

CHAP. XXXIII. 1626. The 25th Synod.
The Copy of that written Letter by the Synod unto the King, concerning the
Nomination of our General Deputies.
N.B. IN all the Councils and Synods, their Letters and Acts are written and
drawn up by their Officers, either the Moderators or Scribes: but in my best
Copy, out of which I have this ensuing Letter, it is said to be writ by
Monsieur le Faucheur, Pastor of Montpellier. It Is true, he was Con-deputy for
the Province of Lower Languedoc, with the Moderator in this Council.

SIRE,
BEing informed by your Majesty's Writs, and by Word of Mouth from the Lord
Galland your Majesty's Commissioner unto our Synod, of your Majesty's Pleasure
about the Nomination of General Deputies for our Churches to reside at Court.
Although this be a Matter no ways belonging to our Vocations, and that hereby,
to our very great grief, we are disappointed of those Hopes, which your
Majesty's Declarations and former Writs had given us, that we should shortly
enjoy a General Assembly: Yet nevertheless, that we might in this, as in all
other our Actions, express that profound Deference and perfect Obedience we
yield unto your Majesty's Commandments, we have proceeded unto this Election,
confiding in your Majesty's Royal Promise, That whenas your weighty Affairs of
State will bear it, you will then accordingly issue out your Royal Warrant and
Order, for the summoning a General Politic Assembly. Wherefore we have
nominated the Lords de la Suze, de Clermont and de Beaufort, and the Lords
Bazin, Texier and du Puy, Persons well known to us for their singular and
unstained Loyalty, Fidelity and Affection to your Majesty's Government and
Service, and to the Public Peace of your Kingdoms. And we have ordered the
Sieurs Blondel and de Banterne to wait upon your Majesty, and to give your
Majesty a most faithful account hereof, that so your Majesty having pricked out
two of them whom your Majesty best likes, our Churches may have notice of it,
and make their Applications to them, and by their Mouths declare unto your
Majesty our just and real Grievances, which shall ever be attended with
Protestations of our most loyal and cordial Obedience unto your Majesty: And we
most humbly supplicate your Sacred Majesty to grant them a favorable Audience,
and to extend your Royal Compassions unto the best and most innocent of all
your People; who though they serve your Majesty with greater ardor and
cheerfulness than any other of your Majesty's Subjects; yet notwithstanding
shall never enjoy the Sweets and Happiness of your Government, in case those
bitter Pressures and Calamities, under which they be now laboring and
groaning, should be but of a little longer duration and continuance. And as for
our selves, Sire, we do in the most solemn manner profess unto your Majesty,
that let our Condition be what it will, Happy or Miserable, yet are we, through
Grace, resolved to live and die in a most inviolable Fidelity to your Majesty's
Person and Government. But we hope, that whenas your Majesty shall be truly
informed of the sincerity and willingness of our Obedience, and of those
unworthy Treatments we have received from the Malice of our Enemies, your
Majesty will not only remunerate us here or there, but in all the Provinces of
your Kingdom, and you will judge us rather worthy of your Protection, and to be
shielded by your Royal Justice and Goodness, than to be exposed any longer unto
our sore Oppressions, and exceeding great Miseries.

In confidence of this, Great Sir, we address our selves unto our God, (to
whose Throne of Grace, Night and Day, the Sighs of our Souls under our deep
Afflictions are ascending) that he would be pleased to preserve your Majesty's
most Sacred Person, and to establish the Glory of your Scepter, and to inspire
your Royal Heart with motions of Pity and Compassions for us, which may afford
us farther occasion of blessing his great and glorious Name, and give us ever
to live under so just and merciful a Monarch; and that he would pour upon your
Crown, the richest and choicest of his Heavenly Benedictions.

From the City of Castres, Nov. 5. 1626. These, SIRE, Are the Vows and Prayers
of your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subjects and
Servants, the Pastors and Elders of the Reformed Churches in France, assembled
in their National Synod, and for them all, Chauve, Moderator. Bouterove,
Assessor.
Scribes.
Blundel and Petit




CHAP. XXXIV. A Dividend made between the Provinces, of the Sum of two hundred
five and twenty thousand Livers, granted by his Majesty to the Reformed
Churches of France, for the Year 1627, and the following Years until the next
National Synod. According to which Dividend, the Lord of Candall shall make
payment of the said Sum of 225000.l. in pursuance of that Agreement tranasacted
betwixt him and the National Synod of Gap.
OUT of the three first Quarters of the said Sum, amounting to one hundred
sixty eight thousand seven hundred and fifty Livers, these Sums following, in
their respective order, are thus to be distributed. First, To Universities and
Colleges. Secondly, To the Lords General-Deputies, completing their Pension.
Thirdly, To our Pastors and Churches in the fifteen Provinces. Fourthly, To the
Pastors extraordinarily assisting in this Synod.


First, To Universities and Colleges there shall be paid, l. s. d. 1. To the
University of Sedan 4000 00 00 To the Colloquies of Gex for their College,
including the 3600. l. ordered them by the King, and an hundred Livers for the
College, in all 4400 00 00 To the Inhabitants of Bergerac for their College
0400 00 00 The total Sum is 8800 00 00 l. s. d. 2. To the University of
Montauban, 1626 The 25th Synod.
for two Professors in Divinity, one of Hebrew, another of Greek, and two of
Philosophy, 3000 00 00 More 850 Livers to them, until the next National Synod,
0850 00 00 The total Sum is 3850 00 00 3. To the Universities of Nismes, for
two Professors in Theology, one in Greek, another in Hebrew, 2200 00 00 4. To
the University of Saumur, for two Professors in Theology, one in Hebrew,
another in Greek, and two in Philosophy 3000 00 00 To the Principal of the
College, an hundred Livers 0100 00 00 To the first Regent, four hundred Livers,
0400 00 00 To the second three hundred Livers 0300 00 00 To the third two
hundred and fifty Livers 0250 00 00 To the fourth two hundred and ten Livers
0210 00 00 And to him of the fifth and sixth Classes, two hundred and ten
Livers 0210 00 00 For the Doorkeeper and Beadle, sixty Livers 0060 00 00 The
total Sum for the University of Saumur, is 4530 00 00 5. To the University of
Die, six hundred Livers 0600 00 00 Secondly, To make up the Pension of the
Lords General-Deputies, three thousand three hundred Livers 3300 00 00 The
total Sum of these six Particulars, is 23280 00 00 Thirdly, To the Pastors and
Churches in the fifteen Provinces of this Kingdom, and to those in the
Principality of Bearn. 1. To the Province of Xaintonge, for fourscore and six
Portions, and one half Portion, viz. for fifty nine Pastors in actual Service,
taking in Monsieur Ferrand's half Portion, four Churches to be supplied, five
Proposaus, three Pastors Emeriti, i. e. discharged, 3 Emeriti.
fifteen supernumerary Portions; more, 400 l. for a College. In all, the Sum of
twelve thousand two hundred sixty and seven Livers, two Sous, and three
Deniers. 2267 02 03 2. To the Province of Normandy, for 59 Portions, to wit,
two and forty Pastors in actual Service, three Pastors Emeriti discharged, 3
Emeriti.
six Proposans, five vacant Churches to be supplied, two supernumerary
Portions. A free Portion for Quillebaeuf, and four hundred for the College. In
all, the Sum of 88351 18 00 3. To the Province of Higher Languedoc, for 132
Portions, to wit, for sixty five Pastors in actual Service; two Professors in
Theology, each of them an half Portion free; for the ease of their Churches, 5
Emeriti.
five Pastors discharged, among whom Monsieur Bicheteau is counted as a
Professor; seven Proposans, seventeen vacant Churches to be supplied; six and
thirty supernumerary Portions, which shall be distributed among the desolated
Churches, and impoverished Pastors; of whom in particular these four, Mr.
Moynier, Tolosain, Cuhusac, and Baulx the younger, shall each of them receive a
free Portion, the Church of Minerbois another free Portion, and four hundred
Livers for the College of Castres; is in all the Sum of eighteen thousand three
hundred and thirty six Livers, six Sous, eleven Deniers. 18336 06 11 4. To the
Province of Sevennes, for 77 Portions, to wit, fifty seven Pastors in actual
Service, among whom Monsieur Rossell shall be reckoned till the next National
Synod; 1 Emeritus.
one Pastor discharged, three Proposans, two vacant Churches to be provided
for; fourteen supernumerary Portions, five of which shall be free of all
Charges; for the Churches of Auvergne, to Mr. Paulett one, to the Church of
Courban one, to Nuega one, to St. Andrews one, to the Church of Serverette one,
to the Church of Quissac one, to Lantrize one, and four hundred Livers for the
College. The whole Sum is, ten thousand seven hundred fourscore and four
Livers, nine Sous, six Deniers. 10784 04 06 5. To the Province of Dolphiny, for
110 Portions; to wit, for threescore and fifteen Pastors in actual Service, 4
Emeriti.
four Pastors discharged, eight Proposans, seven vacant Churches to be
supplied; sixteen supernumerary Portions, of which these following shall be
delivered free of all Charges, to the Church of Ambrun one, to Barraux one, to
Vares one, to Romans one, to Guillestre one, to Loriol one, to Tullette an half
Portion; two to Monsieur Chamier, one to Monsieur Piotay, and four hundred for
the College. The whole Sum is, fifteen thousand two hundred thirty five Livers,
and three Sous. 15235 03 00 6. To the Province of Berry, for 42 Portions; to
wit, for eight and twenty Pastors in actual Service, 2 Emeriti.
two Pastors discharged, three Proposans, four vacant Churches to be provided
for; five supernumerary Portions, whereof two shall be paid in, free of all
Charges, unto Mr. Guerryn, and four hundred Livers for the College; is in all,
six thousand sixty and four Livers, ten Sous, and four Deniers. 6064 10 04 7.
To the Province of Anjou for 36 Portions; to wit, for two and twenty Pastors in
actual Service, 3 Emeriti.
three Pastors discharged, three Proposans, four Churches to be provided for,
four Portions supernumery; is in all, four thousand five hundred fifty and five
Livers, one Sous. 4555 10 00 8. To the Province of Vivaretz, for 51 Portions;
to wit, for four and twenty Pastors in actual Service, 3 Emeriti.
three Pastors discharged, among whom is Monsieur Desmaretz, three Proposans,
four vacant Churches to be provided for, seventeen Portions supernumerary,
whereof these following shall be paid in free, one to Monsieur de la Motte, one
to Monsieur de Vinay, one to the Church of St. Stephen, one to that of Cheilas,
one to Velleneufve in Berg. There shall be also taken out of the aforesaid
Portions three hundred Livers, which were granted unto the Sieur du Bois, and
four hundred Livers for the College; which amount in all, to the Sum of seven
thousand two hundred seventy and seven Livers, nineteen Sous, and three
Deniers, 7277 19 07 9. To the Province of Burgundy, for 41 Portions, viz. two
and twenty Pastors in actual Service, 2 Emeriti.
two Pastors discharged, four Proposans, three vacant Churches to be provided
for; and ten Portions supernumerary, two of which shall be given unto Bourg
free of all Charges, two to Paillac, two to Maringues, one to Moulins, and four
hundred to their College. In all, five thousand nine hundred twenty and nine
Livers, six Sous, and five Deniers. 5929 06 05 10. To the Province of the Isle
of France for sixty two Portions, to wit, three and forty Pastors in actual
Service, three 3 Emeriti.
Pastors discharged, four Proposans, twelve Portions supernumerary, and four
hundred for the College: The whole makes up the Sum of eight thousand seven
hundred sixty and one Livers, fourteen Sous, and three Deniers. 8761 14 03 11.
To the Province of Poictou for sixty three Portions, to wit, seven and forty
Pastors in actual Service, two Pastors out of Employment, 2 Emeriti.
two more discharged, two vacant Churches to be supplied, three Proposans,
seven Portions supernumerary, upon condition that they satisfy Demand of
Quentin Marshall, according to what had been decreed before in the eighteenth
Article of Particular Matters, and to pay in to Monsieur Ferrand one half
Portion, and four hundred for the College. The whole amounts to the Sum of
eight thousand nine hundred sixty and three Livers, sixteen Sous, and eleven
Deniers. 8963 16 11 12. To the Province of Lower Guyenne for 115 Portions, to
wit, sixty and five Pastors in actual Service, one Pastor discharged, 1
Emeritus.
five Proposans, ten Churches to be provided for, two Portions free to the
Church of Souls, twenty two Portions supernumerary, and four hundred Livers
for the College of Nerac, make up in all the Sum of sixteen thousand three
hundred and twelve Livers, seven Sous, and ten Deniers. 16312 07 10 13. To the
Province of Provence for four and twenty Portions and an half, viz. fifteen
Pastors in actual Service, one Pastor discharged, 1 Emeritus.
three vacant Churches to be supplied, three Portions and an half
supernumerary, whereof one shall be given to the Church of Forcalquier, an
half-one to Monsieur Mercurin, and four hundred Livers for the College, do
amount in the whole to the Sum of three thousand six hundred thirty and six
Livers, eighteen Sous. 3636 18 00 14. To the Province of Britain for two and
twenty Portions, to wit, eleven Pastors in actual Service, two Proposans, two
vacant Churches to be supplied, seven Portions supernumerary, and four hundred
Livers for the College: In all, three thousand three, hundred sixty and seven
Livers. 3367 00 00 15. To the Province of Lower Languedoc for 104 Portions,
viz. two and forty Pastors in actual Service, five Pastors discharged, two
Professors, 5 Emeriti.
three Proposans, nine vacant Churches to be provided for, one and thirty
Portions supernumerary, of which these following shall be paid out free, to he
Church of Aiguemortes one, to that of Sommieres two, to that of Aymargues one,
but on this condition, that their Pastor do help the Church of Sommieres when
and as often as he shall be desired, two to Gignac, one to Pignan, one to
Bazinargues, one to Peremalt, one to St. Giles, one to Monsieur Banzillon, and
four hundred for the College of Bezieres: which amounts in all to fourteen
thousand four hundred and twenty four Livers, eleven Sous, and six Deniers.
14424 11 06 Fourthly, To Pastors extraordinarily assisting in this Synod. 1. To
Mr. Constans Pastor of Pons, according to the forty second Article of
Particular Matters, for three Portions, four hundred and four Livers, twelve
Sous, six Deniers. 404 12 06 2. To Monsieur Bellott, Pastor of the Churches of
Chalais and la Roche, according to the forty third Article of Particular
Matters, for one Portion and an half, 202 06 03 3. To Monsieur du Bois a
public Notary, according to the twenty seventh Article of Particular Matters,
for one Portion, 134 17 06 4. To Mr. Guillemin, Pastor of the Church of Labor,
for that Church and a young Scholar, three hundred sixty Livers, according to
an Article in that Chapter of Particular Matters before mentioned. 360 00 00
The total Sum of the Portions for Pastors and Churches in the fifteen
Provinces, and of these four last Articles, is, 145470 00 00 The total Sum of
the three first Quarters of the Year 1627, out of the two hundred and twenty
five thousand Livers given by the King, is, 168750 00 00 A Dividend of
October-Quarter, being the last Quarter for the said Year, out of the Sum of
six and fifty thousand two hundred and fifty Livers.
l. d. s. To the Province of Xaintonge, 4718 06 02 To Higher Languedoc, 7253 09
00 To Sevennes, 4198 17 02 To Berry, 2290 02 04 To Normandy, 3217 04 00 To
Dolphiny, 5997 14 06 To Anjou, 1963 02 00 To Vivaretz, 2781 04 00 To Burgundy,
2235 l6 00 To the Isle of France, 3380 16 06 To Poitou, 3462 11 00 To the Lower
Guyenne, 6273 07 00 To Provence, 1307 15 00 To Britain, 1199 14 06 To Lower
Languedoc, 5670 08 00 More To Mr. John Constans Pastor of Pons, 0160 12 03 To
Mr. David Bellot a Pastor, 0081 16 02 To Mr. Du Bois a public Notary, 0054 04
03 The total Sum is 56250 00 00 The total Sum of the four Quarters before
mentioned, is 225000 00 00 A Divided made unto the Churches of the Sum of ten
thousand Livers, given by his Majesty for defraying the Expenses of this
present National Council, and for the Ease and Discharge of all the Provinces.
l. s. d. To the Province of the Isle of France for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To
Normandy for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To Anjou for two Deputies, 384 12 03 To
Berry for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To Burgundy for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To
Dolphiny for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To Vivaretz for four Deputies, 769 04 04
To Lower Languedoc for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To Sevennes for four Deputies,
769 00 00 To Provence for two Deputies, 384 12 03 To Higher Languedoc for two
Deputies, 384 12 03 To Lower Guyenne for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To Xaintonge
for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To Poictou for four Deputies, 769 04 04 To
Britain for two Deputies, 384 12 03 The total Sum is 10000 00 00

CHAP. XXXV. The Roll of deposed Ministers, cast out of their Office and
Churches by this present Council, for Apostasy, Vagrancy and other Crimes and
Misdemeanors.
1. STephen Giraud, formerly Minister of the Gospel in the Church of Barbezieux
in the Province of Xaintonge, tall of stature and slender, black Hair, Eyes
deep sunk in, bold and ready of Speech, knitting his Eyebrows whenever he
speaks of any Matters of importance; of a smiling Countenance whenas he
discourses of slight Matters, between thirty five and forty Years old; deposed
for diverse horrid Crimes, particularly for Adultery.

2. P^^er Peris, formerly Minister of the Church of Estree near Rochel in
Aunix, by Birth a Provencal, middle-statur'd, and well formed, about sixty
Years old, his Hair waxing gray, a little bald, of a smiling Countenance, both
Eyes alike, high-eagle-nos'd; deposed by this Council for desertion of his
Ministry, haunting and keeping company with the most envenomed Enemies of our
Churches, a profane vainglorious Boaster, proud and insolent, inventing
Calumnies against the Churches and their Members.

3. Noel Gautier, formerly Minister of the Gospel in the Church of Chastillon
upon the Seine in the Province of Burgundy; he is short of stature, his Eyes
sunk into his Head, and looking downward; a sour illlook'd Fellow, gray headed,
about fifty two Years old; deposed by the Synod of the said Province, for
Schism and Rebellion against the Order and Discipline of the Church.

4. Hugh Babinet, formerly Pastor of the Church of Bezu in the Province of the
Isle of France; a dwarfish brown Fellow, chesnut-colour'd Hair, great Eyes and
great Lips, short Neck, somewhat crook-back'd, about twenty eight Years of Age;
deserted his Ministerial Calling, and is since turned Apostate.

5. Nicolas Jacornais, formerly Pastor of the Church of Cheilary in the
Province of Lower Languedoc; a little brown Fellow, chesnut-colour'd Hair,
high-eagle-nos'd, short Neck, somewhat crook-back'd, deserted his Ministerial
Calling, about thirty five Years old.

6. John Garsin, Pastor of the Church of Grave in the Province of Dolphiny, but
a deserter of it, and now an Apostate, about forty Years of Age, of a middle
Stature, red-favour'd and frowning, holding his Head a little side-ways, red
Hair, his Eyes deep sunk into their Holes, very rude in his Discourse and
Carriage, quarrelsom, conceited hugely of himself, and totally incorrigible; he
was deposed by the same Province.

7. Paul Puy, formerly Pastor in the Church of Chastean Queyras; having been
two Years suspended, he was at last finally deposed from the Sacred Ministry by
the Province of Dolphiny, for Adultery proved upon him, 1626. The 25th Synod.
and Perjury, lying Calumnies, and diverse other atrociou he is now an Apostate,
a^middle-statur'd black and dead-look'd Fellow, high Eyebrows, wide open
Nostrils, flat Nose, sharp-picked Heard, very proud and stately in his Gate,
aged about thirty six Years.

8. George Arbaud, formerly Pastor of the Church of Boicoiran in the Province
of Lower Languedoc, deposed by the Synod of his Province for Usury, Theft,
contempt of his Calling, writing of disfamatory Libels and Batteries: he is a
short thick Fellow, brown-favour'd, bald-headed, cagle-nos'd, meagre Face, and
black Beard, about fifty Years old.

9. James Joly, formerly Pastor in the Church of Millaud; deposed by the
Province of Higher Languedoc, for attempting to commit Adultery, for impious
and profane Discourses, and designing to revolt from the true Religion, for
soliciting (like the Devil) other Pastors to apostatize with him, for
Rebellion against the Order and Discipline of our Churches: he is tall of
Stature, a little small Head and bald, red weeping Eyes, about fifty five Years
old, his Beard beginning to turn gray.

10. Cousins, Vagrants.
who was born in Haynault, heretofore Regent at St. Lo, a middle-statur'd
meagre-fac'd Fellow, his Hair and Complexion black, little Eyes and sunk into
his Head, about thirty five Years old; a Vagrant.

11. Beauvillier, wandering from one Church unto another, intruding himself into
the Ministry of the Gospel wherever he has opportunity: he says he was born
at Negrepelisse, and Son-in-Law to Monsieur Reynault deceased, who was late
Minister of Bourdeaux; by Profession an Advocate, a short Fellow,
chesnut-colour'd Hair, meagre Face, his Eyes deep sunk into his Head, lame of
his left Arm, about thirty six Years old; a Wanderer.

12. Bonitons, heretofore Pastor of St. Afric; a red-hair'd Fellow half gray,
his Face and Hands spotted all over with black Morphew, a big out-bending
Belly, low of Stature; having been by the Consistory and Neighbour-Pastors of
St. Afric, deposed from his Ministry, he afterward turned Apostate, and is
about fifty five Years old.

CHAP. XXXVI. An Act for calling of the next National Synod in Normandy.
THE Provinces of Normandy and Burgundy craving they might obtain the Privilege
of calling the next National Synod, it was, by plurality of Suffrages, granted
unto the Province of Normandy, with Order to issue out Letters of Summons unto
the Provinces in May, 1629.

All these Acts and Canons were done and decreed in the National Council of the
Reformed Churches of France, assembled at Castres, the 15th day of September,
and which continued till the 5th of November, 1626. and signed thus in the
Original:

Chauve, Moderator. O. Blondell and Petit Scribes. Bouterove, Assessor. O.
Blondell and Petit Scribes.
And by all the other Deputies, both Pastors and Elders, who were sent unto the
Council.

CHAP. XXXVII. 1626. The 25th Synod.
A Catalogue of all the Churches Reformed in France, and Principality of Bearn;
together with the Names and Sir-names of their Pastors, regularly disposed
according to the Order of the sixteen Provinces, making up so many distinct
Provincial Synods, and brought by the Deputies of their respective Provinces
unto this present National Council held at Castres.
First, The Province of Burgundy.

THE Province of Burgundy is divided into four Colloquies, having thirty two
Churches, and thirty four Pastors.

1. The Colloquy of Chaalons.

1. The Church of Chaalons has for its Pastor Theophilus Cassegrini 2. The
Pastor of Bourbon is Bartholomew Garnier. 3. Bussy has Heliodorus du Noyer. 4.
At Coursac is Jeffery Bruy. 5. At Paras is John Veridet. 6. At Maringues is
Jews Romph. 7. At Cheirac is Paul Canett. 8. At Mouleas is Noel Leslege.

2. The Second Colloquy of Burgundy is Lions.

9. Esajah Baille and Alexander Romph are Pastors of the Church of Lions. 10.
The Church of Mascon has Peter Belior. 11. Pont de Velle, Jacob Textor. 12.
Belleville, Peter Tannol. 13. Bourg, Peter Pelet.

3. The Third Colloquy is at Dijon.

14. At St. John Delesme is David Roy. 15. Cinallin has Peter Balenat. 16.
Dijon has Stephen Gautier. 17. Issurtille injoyeth John Durand. 18. At Beaune
is Francis Renaud. 19. At Chastillon upon the Seine is Samuel Rondot. 20. At
Rene le Duc is Francis Manget. 21. At Noyers is John Compere.

4. The Fourth Colloquy is at Gex.

22. At Chalais is John Japes. 23. At Versoy is Francis Perreau. 24. At
Crassett is Peter de Preau. 25. At Lesly is James Clerk. 26. At Gex is James
Goutier and Daniel Sauret. 27. At Toiry is John Vauralongue. 28. At Farnex is
Joseph Prevost. 29. At Saconey is Francis Borsat. 30. At Farges is Amand de
Bore. 31. At Colonges is Joseph Aubery. 32. At Divonne is Paul Bacuett.

The Second Province and Provincial Synod is the Isle of France, divided into
four Colloquies, having thirty six Churches, and forty one Pastors.

1. The First Colloquy is that of the Isle of France.

33. Wherein is the Church of Paris, and its Pastors are Peter du Moulin, John
Mestrezat, and Charles Drelincourt. 34. Chasteauthierry has Mr. Noyensel. 35.
At Claye is Mr. Jacobe. 36. At Fountainbeleau is Depresse. 37. At Senlis is Mr.
le Blanc. 38. At Meaux is Carre. 39. At Touguin is Migneau. 40. At Lisy and
La-Ferte and Spenay, is Danois.

2. The Second Colloquy is of Champagne.

41. At Chaalons is Massin. 42. At Vitry is Courselles. 43. At Sesannechaltazay
is Boucher. 44. At Velmora is Beaune Becud. 45. At Bar on the Seine is Bilet.
46. At Espinet is Rasquett. 47. At Netancour is Campdemer. 48. At Vassy is
Juigne. 49. At St. Mars is Alpez. 50. At Falaise and Royencour is Richard. 51.
At Passavant is Rouuel.

3. The Third Colloquy is of Picardy.

52. At Clermont and its Annexes, viz. Compiegne, Mondisier, and Omecrcour, is
Mr. Maillard. 53. At Chanvierassy is Tricottell. 54. At Lain is Icoriges. 55.
Le Balgensy has Rambours. 56. At St. Quentin is Mestayer. 57. At Oysemond is
Blanchard. 58. At Amiens is Delacloche. 59. At Establet is Blondel. 60. At
Calais are Buguet, Laulier and Berard.

4. The Fourth Colloquy is of Beausse.

61. At Beneville is Peloguin. 62. At Baillolet and Oux is Braud. 63. At Houdan
is David Blondell. 64. At La-Ferte and Laons is ^^anett. 65. At Plessis
Norville is Delevereau. 66. At Chartres Favieras is Aubertin. 67. At Mante
Averne is Chorin. 68. At Auson is Couronne.

The Third Province and Provincial Synod is the Province of Britain, having
but one Colloquy, ten Churches, and eleven Pastors.

69. Vielle Vigne, wherein is Pastor Mr. Ferguson. 70. At Sion is de la Plate
the Elder. 71. At Rennes is de Souvigny. 72. At Plouer, Richelieu. 73. At Blain
is Andrew le Noir. 74. At Roche Bernard is Guido le Noir, Lord of Crain, and
Brother of Andrew, Pastor at Blain. 75. At Trignier is Lowis Prichel, Lord of
la Hay. 76. At la Moussaye is de la Place the Second Tr^^e were three or sour
de la Places at this time in the Ministry, and I think all of them Sons of ^^e
Minister.
77. At Vitre are Depestre and Peter Ortin a Rocheller. 78. At Nantes is de la
Place the Younger.

The Fourth Province and Provincial Synod is the Province of Touraine, Anjou,
le Maine, Vaudomois, and Great Perch; and is divided into three Colloquies,
having one and twenty Churches, and twenty five Pastors.

1. The Colloquy of Touraine.

79. Tours, in which officiates Matthew Cottier. 80. At Chas^illon upon Eindre,
and at Lorsat and Busanois, is Peter de la Comb. 81. At Preuilly is John
Rogier. 82. At L'Isle Bouchard is Philip Vincent. 83. At Montoire is eter de la
Comb. 81. At Preuilly is John Rogier. 82. At L'Isle Bouchard is Philip
Vincent. 83. At Montoire is Paul Salomear. 84. At Vandosme is Isaac le
Pelletier.

2. The Colloquy of Anjou.

85. At Mirebeau is John Gourdry. 86. At Lowdun is Daniel Conpe, Lord of
Desloges. 87. At Saumur are Samuel Bouchereau, Moses Amyrand, and Lewis Cappel
Hebrew Professor. 88. At Angiers, Stephen le Bloy the Youngest. 89. At Chasteau
Gontier, Cracu, and les Landelles, is Stephen Besnard. 90. At Bauge is John
Pyneau. 91. At Bourgueil is Francis de la Galere.

3. The Colloquy of Moine.

92. At La Bar is Daniel Petit. 93. At Laval is Stephen L^bloy the Younger.
94. At Lassay is Rene Conscil. 95. At Bel^sme is Rene Alain. 96. At Minhay and
St. Aignan is Abel Amiraud. 97. At Le Muns and Ardenay is John Vigneux. 98. At
Pringe is Abel Charles. 99. At Chasteau du Loir is Tricot. In this Colloquy
lives Mr. Anthony du Mont, a Minister without a Church, and unimployed.

The Fifth Province and Provincial Synod is the Province of Poictou, divided
into three Colloquies, having forty seven Churches, and fifty one Pastors.

100. At Poyre and Belleville is Anthony Brail. 101. At St. Hillary and Foussey
is Peter Mallett. 102. At Basanges and Manvilleron is Anne Savonnet. 103. At
Montague is Samuel Fleury. 104. At Brevil, Bamett and Lezay, is Thomas Johnson.
105. At Vandore is Francis Savonnett. 106. At Chantannay and Puybeliard is
Jozian Ollivier. 107. At la Chastaigneray is Jews la Varmiere. 108. At
Mouschamp is Rene de Losses, Lord of la Tousche. 109. At la Chaise and
Bournezeaux is Abraham des Ports. 110. At St. Fulgent and les Herbrieres is
Gabriel Boucquet. 111. At Poupere and Ponzange is John de la Place. 112. At la
Garnuche is Daniel Taillard Lord of Rosefleur. 113. At St. Giles Survie is
Charles Malet. 114. At Talmond upon Jard is James Prunier. 115. At St. Benoist
and le Giare is Daniel Guerman a Rocheller. 116. At Marevil is James
Ranconnett. 117. At St. Hermine and la Chappelle is James Papin a Rocheller.
118. At Coulonges les Royaux is John Vatable. 119. At Fontenay le Conte is
Peter de la Vallade.

2d Colloquy of Middle Poictou.

120. At Chandeniers is Peter Pasquier. 121. At St. Gelais and Cherveuy is
Benjamin de Launay, Lord of Gravier. 122. At Mougon is John de la Blachiere.
123. At Chef Boutonne is John Chalmott. 124. At Melle is Mark Fossa. 125. At
Murcillac and Aigre is Theophilus Lesnier. 126. At Niort are John Chauffepied
and James de Longnac. 127. At St. Maixant is Samuel le Blanc. 128. At la Motte
St. Heraye is Isaac de la Fourcade. 129. At Exoudun is Nathaniel Monastier.
130. At Chisay and Aulnay is James Chagneau.

3d Colloquy of Higher Poictou.

131. At Chauvigny is John Forand. 132. At le Vigean is Vincent Paure. 133. At
Cuiray is John Masson. 134. At Lusignan is Isaac du Soul. 135. At Core is Isaac
de Cuville. 136. At Montreuil Bonnin is Josua de Artois. 137. At Partenay is
Nicolas Belin. 138. At Touars is Paul Geslin Lord of la Pillaticre. 139. At
Poitiers are James Clemenceau, and James Cottiby a Rocheller. 140. At
Chastel-Heraud are John Carre and Daniel Pain. 141. At Aulbaine and Saubse is
Isaac Vergnon. 142. At Champagne Mouton is Ferrand.

Churches destitute of Pastors in Poictou, which must be supplied.

143. Les Sable d' Olonne, and la Chaulme in Lower Poictou. 144. Bennet in the
Middle Poictou. 145. Rochechouard in the Higher Poictou.

Churches interdicted.

Cardinal Richelieu was Bishop of Luson.
146. Lusson in the Lower Poictou.

Pastors destitute of Churches in Poictou.

John Bomaud Pastor in the Church of Lusson, interdicted in Lower Poictou.
James Artuys Lord of Villesaison, formerly Pastor of Bennet in the Middle
Poictou.

Pastors i. e. Emeriti.
discharged in Poictou.

Gourdery, alias de I'stang, herofore Pastor of Chisey and Aulnay, in the
Middle Poictou, Emeritus, because of Sickness. John Brun.

The Sixth Province and Provincial Synod is that of Xaintonge, Aunix, and
Augoulmois, divided into five Collequies, having fifty four Churches, and fifty
seven Pastors.

1. Colloquy of St. John d' Angely.

147. St. John d' Angely has for Pastors John Guillelmy, and Japhet du Vigier
Lord of Montier. 148. Talleburg, William Rivet Lord of Chamvernoun. 149. St.
Savenian, William Lundy a Scots-man. 150. Tors, Fresneau and Mutas, Philip
Pascard junior. 151. Soubize, Rene Chesneau a Rocheller. 152. Thomas Guyot a
Rocheller. 153. Tonnay-Boutonnay, Peter Charron. 154. Mauze, Samuel de la
Forest. 152. Fontenay-Labatu, Sebastian Baudouin. 156. Tonnay Charante, Abraham
Joyeux.

2. Colloquy of the Islands:

157. Marennes has Zacharias Crispin, Chabassolaye, Peter Richier, and
Vandelincourt for Pastors. 158. St. Just, James Toulouze of Rochel. 159. St.
Denis in Meron, Isaac de la Jaille. 160. Le Chasteau D'olleron, Peter Moses.
161. St. Peter's in Olleron is deprived of the Ministry of Mr. John Guillelmy,
who is sent to St. John d' Angely. 162. Meschiers, John Gruell. 163. Saujon,
John Perreau a Rocheller. 164. Mornac, Peter Poulinies. 165. St. John d' Angle,
Leonard Thevenot. 166. Aruert, Olliver le Cercler, Lord of Lamonnerie. 167.
Cozat, Claudius Heraud a Rocheller. 168. Royan, James Fountain a Rocheller.
169. La Tremblade, James Papin.

3. Colloquy of Aunix.

170. Surgeres, John Tagaud. 171. Rochel has for Pastors Samuel L'hommeau, and
Hierome Colomies of Bearn, Jews le Cercler, Lord of Chapeliere, John Salben a
Rocheller, Peter Bosquillon, to whom by this National Synod was also added
Philip Vincent, formerly Pastor of Isle Bouchard in Anjou. 172. Nieul and
Laleu, Peter Menanceau a Rocheller. 173. St. Martins in the Isle of Re has
Louis Aubineau a Rocheller, and John du Cray of Nismes. 174. La Flotte in the
Isle of Re, John le Chantre a Rocheller. 175. Ars and Lois in the Isle of Re
are deprived of Daniel Chanet, who is sent to Marans. 176. La sarre, Sales and
Tairel, Isaac Cotant of St. Martyns in the same Island. 177. Marans, Daniel
Chanet a Rocheller. 178. Bourgnauf and Angoulins, Solomon le Feure.

4. Colloquy of Xaintonge.

179. Xaintes, Theophilus Rossel. 180. Pons, John Constans. 181. Gemozat and
Lions destitute. 182. Baigne, John Marcon. 183. St. Severin, Peter Chase. 184.
St. Fort and Mortagne, John de Clave the Elder. 185. Clambois and Plassac,
Charles Chocquett. 186. Jonzac Elizeus Prioleau, Lord of Vienerie. 187.
Barbezieux, Samuel de la Garie. 188. Archiac, Ezechiel Saget a Rocheller. 189.
Roche and Chalais, David Bellot. 190. Ozillac, Montendre and Fontaynes, John
Hamilton a Scotchman. 191. Mirambeau, vacant.

5. The Colloquy of Augoumois.

192. La Rochefoucaud and Aindois, Thomas Hog a Scotchman. 193. Angoulesm,
Abraham Hyver. 194. Cognac, James Gaultier. 195. Villefagnan, Stephen Tixcul.
196. Vertueil and Ruffett, John Commarc. 197. La Rochebeaucourt and Sales,
Isaac de Claux junior. 198. Segonsac and Limieres, Stephen de Boyenvall. 199.
Jarnac and St. Mesmes, Isaac Patrus. 200. St. Clos, Champagne and Courteillas,
John Ferrand.

The Seventh Province, and Provincial Synod.

The Province of Lower Guyenne, divided into five Colloquies, having seventy
one Churches, and seventy five Pastors.

1. The Colloquy of Higher Agenois.

201. Tonneins has for Pastor Monsieur Tinell. 202. Clariac has Riccottier
the Father. 203. La Fit, Favieres. 204. Grateloup, Denis. 205. La Parade, de
Betouille. 206. Montsanson and Lussac, Belon. 207. Puymirol, Lamoureux. 208.
Castlemoron, Bout. 209. Montflanquin, Persy. 210. St. Berthommiou has
Renerville. 211. Montaud and Castlenaud, Maturin. 212. Govaudan, de la Maul.
213. Again, John d' Alba. 214. Galapian, Decongueres. 215. Tournon, de la
Fresnaye.

2d Colloquy of Lower Ageuois.

216. Eynuise, de Maulans. 217. St. Foy, Hesperian and Mizaubin. 218. La
Souvelat, Claude. 219. Pujols, Dulou. 220. Pelegru, Augier. 221. Moncaret,
Bessotis. 222. Saussignac, Planteau. 223. Castelmoron and Montsegur, Renaud.
224. Bourdeaux, Daniel Ferrant. 225. Courtras, Monceau. 226. Bazas, le Vineaux.
227. Teobon, Salettes. 228. Castillon, Private. 229. Duras, James Bertolin. 230.
Jensac, Pornezac. 231. Castles and Gironde, Ricottier the Son. 232. Miremont
has Bernardin. 233. La Rocquette St. Andre, Bauduell.

3d Colloquy of Perigord.

234. Bergerac has for its Pastors, Messieurs, Pyneau and Beaujardin. 235.
Pomport, Langlade. 236. Limeuil, Baisselance. 237. La Linde, Castabadie. 238.
Aymett, Potet. 239. Langnay, David Hesperien. 240. Mussidan, Latane. 241.
Sigoules, Chauveton. 242. La Forcy, du Puys. 243. Salignac, Debordat. 244.
Baynac, Freron. 245. Ysfigeac, Goyon. 246. Berbignieres, Laffon. 247. Mont
Passier, Bertau. 248. Figeac, Gast. 249. Cour and Montbazillac, Pagez.

4th Colloquy of Limousin.

250. Limoges, de Barte senior. 251. Chasteauneuf, de Barte junior. 252.
Argentat, Batul. 253. Turenne, Vition. 254. Beaulieu, Perecy.

5th Colloquy of Condonnois.

255. Casteljaloux, Dubue. 256. Nerac has these three, Monsieur Lanusse, and
Charles, and D' Aubus. 257. La Bastide and St. Justin, du Fort. 258. Leyrac,
Sylvius. 259. Montrignac, Cazaulx. 260. Vic and Montreal, Brageme. 261.
Caumont, Chardavenne. 262. Puch, Laguehaye. 263. Labardac, Monjoux. 264.
Espignet and Calignac, Sassin. 265. Mont de Marsan and Geauve, du Fay. 266.
Vastingues and St. John de Lux, Lafite Solone. 267. Pigone, la Fit. 268.
Venga, Castilnau and Viellac, Bordenave. 269. Monserot, Faillode. 270. Cuse,
Nadal. 271. Montraveau, Bedat.

The Eighth Province And Provincial Synod.

The Province of Higher Guyenne and Higher Languedoc, divided into seven
Colloquies, having seventy four Churches, and sixty six Pastors.

1st Colloquy of Castres.

272. Castres has for Pastors John Josion and Peter Savoys, and Jonas Daneau.
273. Realmont, Peter Testas. 274. Castelnau, John Gerard. 275. Viane, Samuel du
Fresne. 276. Coustat and Fevrierax, Francis Rigal. 277. Prouthes, Peter
Cahuzat. 278. Brassac, John Stephen Baberan. 279. La Caze, Theocryse Gau. 280.
Poul de Lain, Phillip Maroul. 281. La Can, Francis Fabry. 282. Vtabre, Peter
Comberasse. 283. Angles, John Balerand. 284. Roque Courbe, David Vic. 285.
Sestigan and its three Annexes, Paulin, Teillet and Jeannes, John Tremblay.
286. Montredon, Phillippes Rautonnier. 287. Cabarade, Stephen Carry. 288.
Briteste, Joseph Grass the Elder. 289. Lombez destitute of a Pastor.

2d Colloquy of Rouergue.

290. Milliau, Isaac du Tail and Peter Bonnefoux. 291. Cormu, Samuel Jacques.
292. St. Lever, Peter Bachet. 293. Aissence, Jacob Aidebert. 294. St. Rome,
Peter Melacarre. 295. St. John du Breuil, Balthazar Jacques.

Churches reduced to utter Poverty, and thereby wholly deprived of Pastors in
the same Colloquy.

296. St. Afrique without a Minister. 297. Le Pont de Cameretz without a
Minister. 298. St. Felix without a Minister. 299. Severac without a Minister.

3d Colloquy of Foix.

300. Pasmiers, Paul Gailliard. 301. Mezeras, Paul Gautbyde. 302. Saverdun,
Peter Violas. 303. Caumont, Joseph de la Fontayne. 304. La Bastide, de Leran
and Belesta, James Molineri. 305. Carla, David Bourgage. 306. Savarac and
Camarade, John Morsolan. 307. Mas d' Azill, John Ollier. 308. The Church of
Fouy is destitute of a Pastor.

4th Colloquy of Lauraguis.

309. Sourexe, Andrew Barangier. 310. Puylaurens, Paul Gauside. 311. Mazamet,
Peter Violas. 312. Revel, Joseph de la Fontayne. 313. Carojang, James Molineri.
314. St. Amand, David Bourgage. 315. St. Paul Damiate, John Villemur. 316.
Auxillon with its Annexes of Aignesfond and St. Albans, Abel Violas. 317. Cug,
Peter Baulx.

Churches destitute of Pastors in this Colloquy.

318. Mas vacant. 319. Stes Puelles vacant.

5th Colloquy of Higher Quercy and Higher Auvergne.

320. St. Cere. 321. Glenat and Calumet in the Bailywick of Aurillac in the
Higher Auvergne, John le Voyer. 322. Cazzare, Anthony Peers. 323. Tronguier as
and its Annexes, Stephen Candis. 324. Figeac destitute. 325. Cardillac
destitute. 326. Servienne destitute.

6th Colloquy of Armagnac.

327. Mauvezin, Matthew Texier. 328. Lisle Jourdain, John Grasset. 323.
Leystoure, John Doze. 330. Montfort and Puygasque with their Annexes,
destitute. 321. Masgravier, John du Mas.

7th Colloquy of Lower Quercy.

332. Montauban has for its Pastors Peter Ollier, Peter Charles, Timothy
Delon, and Peter Berauld, all three Natives of the City. 333. Negrepelisse.
304. Le Bois, de Realville. 335. Caussade. 336. St. Antonin. 337. Campagnac.
338. Bruniquel. 339. Berlaic. 340. St. Leophaire has Corbarieux and Reyniers.
341. Villemur. 342. Meusac, Villemade and la Guard. 343. Moneng and Ravis
destitute. 344. Verseil destitute, and seven Churches from Negrepelisse to
Villamur, all destitute.

The Ninth Province and Provincial Synod.

The Province of Lower Languedoc divided into three Colloquies, having forty
seven Churches, and fifty seven Pastors.

1st Colloquy of Vsez.

345. Vsez has for Pastors Anthony Noguiers and Monsieur Manuel. 346.
Navasselles, Castagnier. 347. St. Venies, Isaac Espagnac. 348. Vaulx, Bouton.
349. Fons, Arnaud. 350. Montfrein, Villaret. 351. St. Ambroies, Andrew Cosnay.
352. Blansac, du Bros. 353. Boycoiran, Corniers. 354. St. John Railli the
Father. 355. Bagnols, I suppost he was the Father of Peter Ravanell, who writ
the Bibliotheca Sacra.
Ravanell. 356. Genouillac, Artis. 357. Lussan, Theodorus Brunier. 358.
Montelin, John Davin. 359. Baresac, Sorbier. 360. Montarin, Jameshalli the Son.

2d Colloquy of Montpellier.

361. Montpellier has for Pastors, Michael le Faucheur, Daniel Perol, de
Vidrines, and John Gigord. 362. Bezieres, John de Croy. 363. Pignan Prudhomme.
364. Bedarieux, Lavil. 365. Floransal, Masseuvrain. 366. Lunel, Escoffier. 367.
Montagnac, Hospital. 368. Poussain, Carnezac. 369. St. Pargcoire, Second. 370.
Mesneil, Codur. 371. Gignac, la Faye.

3d Colloquy of Nismes.

372. Nismes, its Pastors are, John Faucheur Pastor and Professor, Rosselet,
Samuel Petit, Philip Codur. 373. Calvisson, Quantin. 374. Aiguesmortes,
Banzillon. 375. Marsillargues, Chanall. 376. Sommieres, John Chauve. 377.
Vauvert has two Pastors, Instammond and Solomon Crubelier. 378. Galarguat
Durand. 379. Mellau Gassaguier. 380. Vastrie, Bertrand. 381. Nagier, le Sage.
382. St. Laurens, Roux. 383. Aulbais, Richere. 384. Armargues, Sigilori. 385.
Claransac, Fournier. 386. Vargesais, Pierre. 387. Aichar, Gaultier. 388. St.
Giles, Brun. 389. Angjargues, Rodes. 390. Bulignargues, Saurin. 391.
Bellegarde, Fillon.

The Tenth Province and Provincial Synod of Seventies, divided into three
Colloquies, having fifty four Churches, and fifty six Pastors.

1st Colloquy of St. Germain.

392. Monjoux, Stephen Rouset. 393. Severiette, Simon Velares. 394. Florac,
James Gustard. 385. St. Julian, John Corrigis. 396. Bar, Nicholas Blun. 397.
Pontvan, Poltieve. 398. Castagnols, Isaac Pontier. 399. Private, Moses de la
Comb. 400. St. Martyn de Boudant, Daniel Roussell. 401. St. Germains, Andrew
de la Faye. 402. St. Estienne, Peter Barjou. 403. St. Andre, Anbrose Deyrales.
404. Valfrancesque, Francis Walnager. 405. St. Croix, John Gaysar. 406.
Malezin; Peter Tulet. 407. Saulmare, John de la Bastide. 408. St. Marnel, John
Laurens. 409. Vebron, John des Essers, 410. Le Collet, John Guyon. 411. St.
Andre de la Nusse, Bartholomew Rommiere. 412. Issoire, Moses Blacon. 413.
Chavagnus, Moses Boler.

2d Colloquy of Anduze.

414. Anduze, Francis Horlay. 415. Alez, Esaiah des Muretz, and Jews Courand.
416. St. John de Gardonengues, John Bony. 417. Paul Paulet is Minister of
Vezenobre. 418. Canobet, Anthony de Sienne. 419. Lezan, Lawrens Vimur. 420.
Toyras, John Boussard. 421. La Salle, Antony Rudavel. 422. Brenonis, John
Ribochier. 423. Lorgues, James de Bergues. 424. Rivalet, Daniel Guerin. 425. Le
Dagnan, Antony Imbert. 426. Guenerargues has two Pastors, Guy Chavanon and
Peter Barn.

3d Colloque of Saulve.

427. Vigeay, Daniel Vouturin. 428. Malanez, John Surviulle. 429. Alaz, John
Monxa. 430. Breu, James Berle. 431. Auruelas, John Solcil. 432. Merneys, Antony
Vincent. 433. Vallenarguas, John Gillaret. 434. Sumeue, Lewis Guychard. 435.
Mandegas, James Tuber. 436. St. Laurence, Peter Guillammeine. 437. Ganges,
Lewis de la Casse. 438. Colognas, Abraham de St. Loup. 439. St. Hyppolite, Abel
Merndys. 440. Ponpignan, Henry de la Comb. 441. Sauve, Joshua Rossell. 442.
Quissac, Peter Barbat. 443. Combas, James Alegre. 444. Durefort, Esaiah
Laurens. 445. Monoblet, Paul Tugurolles.

The Eleventh Province, and Provincial Synod, is the Province of Dolphiny,
divided into eight Colloquies, having seventy four Churches, and seventy five
Pastors.

1st Colloquy is of Ambrunoys.

446. Ambrun, John Conel. 447. Guillestre, Daniel Paschat. 448. Sfreillas and
Serrat, Daniel Be. 449. Chasteau, Queyras, and Arajeu, Raphael Gabet. 450.
Abnez, Aiguillot, and Riostolas, Jacob Chaglier. 451. Moulines, Daniel du
Protay. 452. Chastean Dauphin, Isaac Ferrand. 453. Voret is destitute. 454.
Charges is destitute.

2d Colloquy of Gappensois.

455. Serrat, John Paul Perrin. 456. Valdronnat, Josua Ripert. 457. St. Bonnet,
James d' Es^ienne. 458. Caprivre, Charles de la Croix. 459. Asprat, James
Matthieu. 460. Rosans, Isaac Ferrand. 461. Lareigne, John Conebier. 462.
Orcierat, John Bonnet. 463. Gap, Samuel Kerlet. 464. Veins, Esaiah Matthieu.

3d Colloquy of Valleluson.

465. Mantoulat, Bernardin Guerin. 466. Vscana, Thomas Comte. 467. Villaret,
Samuel Clement. 468. Fenestelles, David Jordain. 469. Mean, James Gilles. 470.
Pragueleu, Daniel Pastor. 471. Briancon, Francis Guerin. 472. Chaumunt,
Philibert de Joux. 473. Sale Bertrand destitute.

4th Colloquy of Diois.

474. Chastillon, Peter Apex. 475. Ponteys, David Magnet. 476. Quirac, Antony
Janel. 477. Die, Stephen Blanc. 478. Beaufort, Gaspar Martin. 479. La Mote,
John Scharpius a Scotsman. 480. Beourietat, John Cherubin, and John Mauve. 481.
Saillans vacant.

5th Colloquy of Viennois.

482. St. Marcelin. 483. Pont in Royans. 484. Beaumont. 485. Chasteaudouble.
486. Romans. 487. Larbin. 488. Beaurepaire. Whether all these Churches were
vacant I cannot tell; none of their Pastors were named in the Catalogue.

6th Colloquy of Guezmodan.

489. Misoen, Henry d' Espagne. 490. Grenoble, Daniel Bouterove. 491. Bessat,
Francois Murat. 492. La Mure, John Baruet. 493. Mons, David Eustache. 494.
Barroux, Abraham Colignat. 495. St. John d' Herans, Pater Piffort. 496.
Tresmini, Andrew Dhelis. 497. Cous, Daniel Beuger and John Tudelle. 498.
Clermont, Hugh Rostin. 499. Cellat destitute.

7th Colloquy of Valentinoys.

500. Bourdeaux, John Giliars. 501. Crest, John Petit. 502. L'orial, John
Toussaincts. 503. Vest, Sebastian Gay. 504. Dieu le fit, Paul Guyon. 505.
Livron, Gervass Alexis. 506. Montlimard, John Vulson and Coulon Badie. 507.
Manas, Adrian Chamier. 508. Daussenes, John Dragon Lord of Chavienne. 509.
Sauzet, Abraham Jourdan and Peter Bacheler.

8th Colloquy de Baronnies.

510. St. Euphemie, Bartholomew Durand. 511. Oranges, James de Chambrun and
David Sylvius. 512. Courtoison, John Dragon. 513. St. Paul Trois Chasteaux,
John Armin. 514. Montbrun, John Cardel. 515. Vantenol and Mons, Isaac Chelier
and Oliver de Polefix. 516. Tublette, George Maugras. 517. Vinsobre, Gabriel
Boule. 518. Tuilignan, Francis Valemon. 519. Condorset, James Bonnet.

Twelfth Province and Provincial Synod of Vivaretz, divided into three
Colloquies, having twenty four Churches, and twenty four Pastors.

1st Colloquy of Privas.

520. Privas, Solomon Favre. 521. Tournon, James Decanchet. 522. Alissas,
Andrew Zullon. 523. Vivaretz, Peter Roboult. 524. Bays, John de la Faye. 525.
Marleaux, Anthony la Motte. 526. St. Fortunat, Simeon Dodet. 527. St. Albon,
Daniel Chanforin.

2d Colloquy of Annonay.

528. Annonay, Alexander de Vinay. 529. Cheilot, Daniel Richard. 530. Glurare,
Peter Merchat. 531. Sojon, David Agard. 532. Desagne, Marcelin Cardin. 533.
Chasteauneuf, David Blanc. 534. Bottre, Peter de Pierre. 535. St. Estienne,
Isaac Degusize. 536. Chamboy, Joseph Vil^on. 537. Barulieu, Isaac du Gua. 538.
Taleuron, John Laurens.

3d Colloquy of Aubenas.

539. Aubenas, Paul Accourat. 540. Valoty, Daniel Chanal. 541. Mirabel, Antony
Faucher. 542. Valet, John Imbert. 543. Villeneufve de berg, Antony Gevaudan.

Thirteenth Province and Provincial Synod of Provence, having but one Colloquy,
sixteen Churches, and sixteen Pastors.

544. Esquierres, Paul Maurice. 545. Seine, Peter Challier. 546. Velaux,
Bartholomew Ressent. 547. La Motte, Antony de Creze. 548. Curban, Claudius
Marshall. 549. Joran, Andrew Guerin. 550. Lormarin, Peter Maurice. 551. Riez,
Andrew Genoyer. 552. La cost, James Bailey, 553. Merindol, James Malat. 554. La
Charce, Andrew Beruard. 555. Grass, Peter Mercurin. 556. Luc, John Durier.
557. Soderon, John Bernard. 558. Manosques, Paul Guardinar. 559. Velaux, James
Rescent.

Fourteenth Province and Provincial Synod of Orleans and Berry, divided into
three Colloquies, having twenty nine Churches, and thirty Pastors.

1st. The Colloquy of Sancerre, Gien and Nivernois.

560. St. Leonard near Corbigny, Stephen Monsanglard. 561. Chastillon on the
Loing, Simon Jurieu. 562. Gien upon the Loir, Daniel Jamet. 563. Chastillon on
the Loir, Louis Margone. 564. Bruion, Bennet de la Roche. 565. Henry Chemont
Dantigny enjoys the Ministry of Isaac Babaud 566. Sawerre, Paul Alard a
Rocheller. 567. La Charity, John Taby. 568. La Scelle and Dolat, Anne Poat.
569. Despueilles, Elijah Semeele.

2d Colloquy of Orleans and Blaisois.

570. Blois, Nicholas Vignier and Paul Testard. 571. Romorantin, Jacob Brun.
572. Cheleure and Boudara, David Horace. 573. Boisgency, John Guerin. 574.
Basoches and Denouville, Jerome Belon. 575. Orleans, James Imbert and Durand.
578. Chasteaudun, James Lancy. 579. Dangeau, Jews Tuissard.

3d Colloquy of Bourbonnois.

580. Argenton, Bliseus Saluon. 581. St. Amand and Belet, Lewis Scoffier. 582.
Delise, Peter Falquet. 583. Moudun, Rene. Bid. 584. Ambusson, William Vignon.
585. Gergeau destitute. 586. Bourges destitute. 587. La Chastre and St. John
Verin destitute. 588. Suilly destitute.

Fifteenth and last Province and Provincial Synod of France, is the Province of
Normandy, divided into five Colloquies, having thirty five Churches, and forty
Pastors.

1st Colloquy of Roan.

589. Roan has John Maximilian de L'angle, Peter Erondelle and David Primrose.
590. Orbs, Abraham le Seneschal. 591. Quillebaeuf, William Cacherat. 592.
Saucourt, Charles De lossat. 593. Pont Levesque, Stephen Fudes. 594. Eureax,
Peter le Tellier.

2d Colloquy of Caux.

595. Dieppe, Abdias de Mondenis and Moyse The Son of this Cartaud s^^^^^ed his
Father, and in the Year 1685 he turned Apostate.
Cartaud. 596. Boislebec, James de Larrey. 597. Luncrey and Basqueville, Isaac
de la Balte. 598. Seintet, Isaac de la Motte. 599. Fescum, David Guellode. 600.
Haure de Grace, John Baudowin.

3d Colloquy of Caen.

601. Caen, John le Boniver Lord of la Fresnay, John de Ballehache, and Samuel
Bochart. 602. Baali, Samuel Bajeux. 603. Bayeneux, John le Breton. 604. St.
Vast, Stephen le Sage. 605. Trencens, Antony le Genevois. 606. Geffosse, David
Chanduret. 607. Les Essars, John Tappin.

4th Colloquy of Falaise.

608. Atis, Peter Morin. 609. Presnat, David Bourgat. 610. Mezieres, Peter
Baulran. 611. Vire, William Blanchard. 612. St. Silvain, Noah Gallot. 613.
Conde upon Noireau, John Blanchard. 614. Falaise, Peter Baycux.

David de Caux, a Pastor without a Church.

5th Colloquy of Constantin.

615. Ste mere Eglife, Benjamin Banage and Antony de Lassleur. 616. Dule, Mark
Maurice. 617. St. Lo, Vincent Soler. 618. Groussy, Jeremy Charitier. 619.
Gaure, Jehoiachin le Moyne. 620. Cheffresne, Isaac de Vennes. 621. Chassagne,
Luke Boquet. 622. La hay dupuy destitute. 623. Serizi destitute.

There is in this Province a sixth Colloquy, viz. the Colloquy of Alencon, but
it and its Churches are both omitted in this Catalogue.

Sixteenth Province and Provincial Synod, is the Province of Bearn.

Which Province being in the Principality of Bearn, did always appear by two
Deputies chosen by their Synod, in the National Synods of the Reformed Churches
of this Kingdom, and were in this of Castres represented by the Lords Peter de
Rival Pastor in the Church of Nay, and John de Pommerede Advocate in the
Parliament of Navarre, Elder in the Church of Morlas; but the said Deputies did
not bring with them the Roll of the Churches and Pastors in their Province, so
that they could not be registered.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A Letter of the Church of Geneva to the National Synod of
Castres.
Most Reverend, Honored and Dear Brethren;
THere has not been a National Synod of the Churches for these many Years last
past held in France, but that we have made tenders of our Duties to them,
because of that strict and intimate Communion we have with them all in our
common Lord. We have also new Engagements unto Thankfulness, and to abound in
Thanksgivings for the infinite Mercies of our God, which are Day by Day, and
from one Year unto another accumulated upon, and continued to his Churches; the
Lord renewing his tender Compassions so miraculously in their Preservations.
But if ever we had any cause for so doing, it is now that we are in a most
extraordinary manner obliged to it; for his gracious Providence shines forth
with a most admirable Luster in the defense of your Churches, and particularly
in the free enjoyment of your Religious Assemblies; so that at the many strange
Accidents which have befallen you for diverse Years together, and the Tempests
with which the Kingdom of France has been assaulted and battered, the sore and
grievous Afflictions of many of our Brethren having astonished our Souls, and
overwhelmed our Hearts with Sorrows, had made us almost despair of ever seeing
the comfortable returns of Peace unto your Realm, and of Repose and Settlement
for your poor afflicted Churches, and the Exercise of your most excellent
Discipline, than which a better was never practiced in the Christian World. And
now in this Calm the Divine Wisdom gathers his Children, as the Hen does her
Chickens, under his Wings, and renews the Face of his Church in your
Congregations, as the Eagle does his Youth. And this Mercy should be the more
prized and esteemed by us, because it is not in this Day a common Favor and
Benefit vouchsafed of God unto all those whom he had once honored with the
knowledge of himself in the Gospel. For besides that the subversion of so many
Provinces, the dismal Desolations or those sometimes flourishing Churches in
Germany, Bohemia, Moravia, and the Valtoline, are yet continued, and the
Dissipations and Dispersions are still growing and augmenting, and the
Judgments of God from Heaven are following one upon the neck of another, one
dreadful Ravage calling upon another to make haste: Therefore we lie prostrate
night and day at the Feet of our Heavenly Father, adoring his rich Grace in
Christ Jesus, for setting bounds unto the Fire of his Wrath, so that all his
Churches are not totally devoured by it. And we most ardently beseech his
Divine Majesty, that as he keeps the Hearts of Kings in his own Hands, so he
would be pleased to inspire your King with Counsels of Favor and Peace for his
People, and tender Love unto your Churches; that under his Government and
Authority, the Name of God may be celebrated with Liberty of Conscience, and
Truth may bring forth Faith in the World, and Righteousness from Heaven may
yield the Fruit of True and Saving Peace. Moreover, we do also carry upon our
Hearts unto the Throne of Grace, all other our Brethren, who he groaning under
the heavy Yoke and Burden of Afflictions, that he would restore unto them the
Consolations of his Spirit, and put an end in his appointed Time, according to
his own good Pleasure, unto all their Anguish and Sufferings. Those many and
sad Objects which are daily presented to our Eyes, of a multitude of Refugees,
who were once themselves a Refuge unto the Faithful from the Storm, and a
Covert from the Tempest, but being now saved by a mi^aculous outstretched Arm
from a most calamitous Shipwreck, are wandering up and down, seeking an Ark and
Retreat from this overflowing Deluge, and sheltring themselves, as in a
Sanctuary, in this our poor City, will not permit us to leave our God alone,
nor to give him any Rest, till by our most importunate Prayers we have
prevailed with him, to stir up the Bowels of his Compassions for the
deliverance of his Children. And we also pour into your Bosoms the Sentiments
of this Grief, which as on the one hand it cannot but move our Sympathies, so
on the other hand it does make us seriously reflect on God's Methods and
Dealings with his Churches, and principally to consider his exquisite Trials of
Church Officers, who be constituted by him Overseers in his House and Service,
and were bound to sanctify his Name in their Performances, lest he should
sanctify himself upon them by his Judgments. This was what he had denounced
against all that draw near unto him, and they have seen it executed in its
Perfection. Besides, we cannot in these last Troubles of the Church, but
observe how poor and feeble a thing an Arm of Flesh is, and how very perilous
thole Succors and Assistances are which Men receive from it: Whereas the true
Shields and Bucklers of Salvation do belong to God, who only has the
Privilege, and deserves the Glory of his Churches Protection and Deliverance.
And in this Confession the Faithful (knowing that the Assistance of Heaven is
promised unto those who do patiently wait for it, as you your selves, most
honored dear Brethren, have frequently sensed and experienced in your Trials)
do always prefer the Resolutions and Weapons of the Spirit of God to the
Counsels of the Flesh, that so there may not be the least pot reflected or
fastened upon the Gospel. And those who despise Dignities, and subject them to
the Power of that Man of Sin, to be trampled under foot by him, may be ashamed
and confounded at their Lies and Calumnies cast upon us, from those evident
Testimonies of our Loyalty and Fidelity, which, according to the Gospel, is
rendered unto God, and unto those, to whose Authority he has subjected our
Persons and Estates in this World. And this will be most clearly owned and
acknowledged, even then whenas Pastors shall intend the interior Service of
the Sanctuary, which is the Edification of precious and immortal Souls, and do
not walk according to the World, nor fear their Fear, but glorify God in the
Day of their Tribulations, by an absolute and entire resignation of themselves
to him, and dependence on him, whom they must need know can never divest
himself of that Care and Charge of them, which he has once took upon him so
expressly and particularly, as to be their Guardian, their Fortress, their
strong Tower, and a Wall of Fire and Brass round about his Church, marching as
their Captain General in the Van and Front, and bringing up the Rear-guard of
his Israel, whilst that the Priests are wholly busied and employed in carrying
the Ark of his Covenant. And we do not speak this, as taking upon us to be the
Judges of any one's Work, but with all due Respects communicating to you the
Sentiments of our Consciences, which we hope will be approved also by your
Reverences, we do hereby express the most affectionate Desires of our Souls,
that the Breaches in the Temple of God may be repaired, and that the Face of
our Lord Jesus Christ may shine forth more gloriously upon our Brethren and our
selves unto Salvation, by the Spirit of his Power in the Gospel of his Glory,
waiting always for that blessed Hope of his last Coming; whose near Approaches
are notoriously visible and conspicuous from those frequent Travel-Pangs of the
Church, and general Convulsions and Shakings of the Nations, infallible
Harbingers and Forerunners of his glorious Appearance: before which, we
comfortably hope, that having chastised his Church, he will turn the fiery
Stream and Current of his Judgments upon the Enemies of his Truth and Glory,
and will most effectually by the Spirit of his Mouth destroy the Son of
Perdition. True indeed, there is one thing which cuts the Sinews of our Hopes,
and obstructs the Progress of this Divine Work, and exceedingly damps and
saddens our Hearts, to wit, that incredible and astonishing Stupidity of vast
Numbers of Persons, who harden themselves in their Sins under the Rods of God's
Wrath, and do sottishly yield unto the Temptations of the Devil in the Hour of
their Trials. Yet notwithstanding, we be greatly comforted, most Honored Lords
and Brethren, at the glad Tidings of those excellent Fruits which the Lord's
Visitation has produced in many of your Churches, once again bringing into use
and exercise those Graces and Virtues so necessary for the Faithful, and so
difficult to be exerted and practiced in Times of Prosperity, such as the love
of God's Word, contempt of the World, and kindling again a Fire of holy Zeal,
by the Spirit of God, upon the Altar of the Sacred Ministry, to the conviction
of Sins and Errors, and the reformation of Life and of former Miscarriages, and
the strengthening of the infirm and weaker Christians. This is a demonstration
of the Spirit and Power of God, who is not only magnified in rescuing of his
Church whenas the World gave her up for lost, but also, as we are from all
Parts credibly informed, and for which we rejoice together with you in our
Lord, in manifesting the Power of his Truth; whenas the Adversaries taking
occasion from your Afflictions, believed that it was as easy for them to
triumph by their Sophistry over the Doctrine of the Gospel, as to throw down
your sorry Ramparts of Earth: but they have in truth sound the Rock of God's
Word to be then inexpugnable, whenas there was least of the Work of Man; and
the Truth then most prevalent and invincible, when discovered in its primitive
native Beauty and Simplicity.

Whence we ground our Hopes and Considence, that God, who has poured out his
Blessing upon your Labors, will not begin and advance his Work to destroy it,
nor will he build his Sion with your Hands, and at last abandon it unto those
of his most cruel Enemies. Wherefore, most honored Lords and Brethren, The Joy
and Crown of God's Churches, be you encouraged in the Lord, and whatsoever
Difficulties may befall you from without or from within, by those who suffer
themselves to be debauched by this evil World, do you be fortified in your Holy
Work; and as you have been made a Spectacle to Men and Angels, so do you
persist to hold forth the Light of the Gospel in all Pureness, and to fight the
good Fight with the Weapons of Righteousness on the right Hand and on the left,
taking all possible Care that no Root of Bitterness do spring up, which under
the Shadow and Pretext of subtle Questions may weaken or diminish the Union of
all your Members, and whom it is most indispensably needful you should firmly
cement in an Uniformity of Confession, to avoid those dreadful Distractions
which will infallibly arise from a Diversity of Opinions and Affections. All
the Reformed Churches, as far as ever we could learn, were filled with Joy at
those solid Declarations made in your National Synods against revived
Pelagianism, and at that singular Care taken by those venerable and Holy
Councils to exclude it out of your Churches. Now he that lowed those Tares in
God's Field is not asleep, but is still at Work: wherefore there is need of
continual Watchings, there must be no relaxing of your Circumspection, lest you
should lose the things which you have wrought. But we may forbear insisting any
longer on this Argument; nor is there any reason that we should exhort you to
continue in your godly Purposes and Resolutions. Since your great Zeal is a most
powerful Example to excite others: It Is enough that we have thus opened our
Hearts unto your Reverences, and have largely experienced the harmonious
Uniformity of your Holy Thoughts and Intentions. And forasmuch as by these late
Troubles some famous Universities have to our unspeakable Grief suffered very
sad Eclipses and Interruptions, we shall do our best and utmost Endeavor to
keep burning that little Candle which the Goodness of our God has lighted up
in our poor Candlestick. And our most honored Magistrates have resolved to
continue their Encouragement and Maintenance of our School and University,
which from its first Foundation had none other Design or End, than to prepare
Instruments who might be another Day capable of edifying God's Church. And they
conceive themselves at this time more especially concerned and obliged to serve
your Churches, because it is but the Repayment of an old Debt, We owing the
Original of our Academy unto the worthy Labors of some of your most eminent
and famous Ministers; besides, your favorable Respects have been exceeding
serviceable to it in its Growth and Progress, and they do receive with singular
Consolation the Assurances of your good Will, both from the Letters of the last
Synod at Charenton, and from your sending of Students hither, to whose
Advancement in Learning and Godliness we shall most willingly contribute
whatever God has imparted to us, that so we may return them to you well
improved and furnished with those requisite Talents for the Ministry in the
Temple of the Lord. Moreover, we do return you our most hearty Thanks for your
kind Remembrance had of our Church in times past, and we do bless the Lord for
the Expressions of his Majesty's Love and Kindness toward our City, which is a
Continuance of those Royal Favors we have ever received from the Crown of
France, and consonant to his former Declarations, that he would not exclude the
Natives of this Town, in case, according to your excellent Discipline, they
should be called out unto the Ministry, in the Churches of his Kingdom. And we
are so very well satisfied of your Love unto us, that it the aforesaid
Declaration should not be notified unto some of the Churches, yet by your means
it shall be so for the future, and this will be a renewed Pledge and
Confirmation of your ancient fraternal Charity and Affection to us. Whereupon
we do most affectionately salute in the Lord, your Holy Synod, and tender you
our most humble Service, entreating the Continuance of your good Will unto us,
and that you would strive together with us in your Prayers for us, as we do
continually recommend you unto our God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the Word of his Grace, and to his Spirit of Consolation; and all your
Churches, Persons, Labors, and your whose sacred Assembly to his most blessed
Protection, beseeching the great Shepherd of Souls, that he would daign to
preside in the midst of you, and make you perfect in every good Work to do his
Will, working in you what is well pleasing to him, and accumulate upon you his
best and most Heavenly Benedictions, to the Glory of his Holy Name: And
subscribe our selves,

Most Honored Lords and Brethren, Your most affectionate Brethren, and most
humble Servants in the Lord, the Pastors and Professors in the Church and
University of Geneva, and in the Name of them all; Prevost. Diodati. B.
Turretin. Du-Pan.

The Superscription was thus, To our most Honored Lords and Brethren, the
Pastors and Elders of the Reformed Churches of France, assembled in their
National Synod at Castres.

The Answer of the Pastors and Elders in the National Synod of Castres, unto
the Letter of the Right Reverend Pastors and Professors of Geneva.
Most Honored Lords and Brethren;
AMong the Consolations which the Goodness of our God has granted us in this
Place, this which we have received from your Communion in Spirit with us, and
those cordial Affections which you have expressed to us, have been therefore
the more acceptable, because that as we rejoice in the Lord, so we cannot but
be thankful to him, for that after so many Troubles and Desolations, we be yet
permitted to assemble from all Corners and Quarters of this Kingdom, to the
upholding, settling and confirming of his Holy Worship. You also are come in by
your Letters to bear your Parts in this sacred Harmony, augmenting by the Union
of your Hearts with ours, the rich Blessing which the Prophet has compared to
that precious Oil, poured out upon the Head of Aaron, and to the Dew which
descends from Mount Sion, and this too with such an Efficacy, that the bare
hearing of your sweet Consolations, and Holy Counsels, has by a most secret
and powerful Motion, sensibly operated upon us, and raised up the Spirit of
Jesus Christ (our Head) in us, who does unite us, though many Members, into one
Body in the Lord. We do therefore embrace you in our God, and accept thankfully
of your Prayers and Holy Affections, giving Thanks unto our Heavenly Father,
that (as you have piously confessed it) he made us an Example of his
Compassions, and having saved us out of diverse Perils and Distresses, he has
preserved us our Lives (by no less a Miracle than that of old, when as he
preserved the Bramble-Bush from being consumed) in the midst of those Flames of
War which ravaged our whole Country. Nor can we sufficiently adore his singular
Loving Kindnesses, that although the Sins of his People had so far provoked his
Wrath, as to throw down all our Fences, and to demolish all our Fortresses, and
to wither that Arm of Flesh in which we had so very much confided, yet he has
supported, and does still support by his own Almighty Arm the People of his
Covenant, confounding their Hopes, who promised themselves no less than the
utter Ruin of all our flourishing Churches, upon the Change of their temporal
Estate; they not considering that the true Religion is kept up in the Hearts of
God's Elect by the Efficacy of that Spirit of Life, which having raised Jesus
Christ from the Dead, does give Power and Virtue to the Faithful, to triumph
over all the Forces and Assaults of the World, yea, and of Death it self. To
this Occasion of Thanksgiving, we will add another which is more particular,
viz. That since the Peace was ratified, God has filled our Hearts with
Gladness, by saving his Majesty, (to whose Clemency we owe our Peace) from a
great and horrid Conspiracy, plotted against him by his perfidious Enemies, and
ours also. The Lord grant that the lively Sense of his Benefits may make us
groan for having sinned against him, and inflame us with his Love, and that we,
to whom he has committed the Government of his House, may be Pattners of Zeal
and of every Christian Virtue, and by the Light of sound Doctrine and of an
Holy Life, we may dissipate and drive away those black and dark Vices wherewith
our Flocks have provoked his Anger; for certainly we have very great Cause of
Humiliation, being as yet under the Cross, and his Majesty's Edict in diverse
Points and Articles, being not as yet executed, observed or performed, and the
Malice of our Enemies increasing the Number of those Infractions, and thereby
the Measure of our Sufferings, all which is ordered by the most holy wise
Providence of our God for our Correction. For as of old, when he extended Mercy
unto Jacob wrestling with him, yet with a Blow from his own Hand he made him
lame and halt ever after; even so also now in these Deliverances from our past
Miseries and Confusions, which it has pleased his Divine Grace to vouchsafe
us, yet has he left diverse Wounds on the Body of our Churches, whereby to
provoke us unto Repentance, and to quicken us unto more Intenseness and Fervor
in our Prayers and Supplications for the exciting of his Bowels of Compassion
toward us. We do acknowledge the free Grace of our God to be our truest Refuge
and Sanctuary, and that a Christian Patience and submissive Waiting for the
Effects of his wise Providence, will be our most assured Remedy against all the
Evils that can befall us. And we have this Consolation, (got by long Experience
of the Vanity of all human Means and Aids) that it is in our Days as it was in
ancient Times, when God saved and restored his People, it was not done by Might
nor Power, not by Arms, nor by Swords and Bows, but by his Spirit. This
self-same Spirit which levelled the great Mountains before Zorobabel, and
brought them into Plains, works as powerfully now as heretofore, so that we
often see those very Mountains of Dangers and Difficulties which were raised up
against his People, reduced unto nothing, giving us therefore a clear and full
Knowledge of his great Name, that he is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in
Working.

Moreover, we do give you farther assurance, that it is our Intention, That
those who are called of God to serve and Minister before him in his House,
shall wholly and absolutely attend thereunto: We well knowing, that whilst,
with Moses in the Mount, they give themselves to Prayer, and apply themselves
wholly to their Ministerial Work and Duty, they will attract upon their People
the Blessing of the Lord, and they will be mighty with God for the throwing
down of strong Holds, and of every high thing that exalts it self against the
Knowledge of God. And whereas you remind us of that great Contentment you
received at the sight of that Universal Harmony of our former Synods in Points
of Doctrine, and rejection of Errors, which had troubled diverse Churches; we
conceive our selves bound to promote the continuance of your holy Joys and
Thankfulness unto God, forasmuch as in this Assembly there was found but one
Heart, and one Soul to maintain the Confession of Faith, and the Discipline of
our Churches, by which we know that the Lord will preserve his Heritage in this
Kingdom, he himself keeping up this Sacred Mound and Hedge by his own special
Benediction, whilst he has broke to pieces that which was Terrene and Carnal
in sundry places: Yea, it is our hope, that as heretofore he made his Ark
triumph in Captivity, and Dagon to fall down prostrate before it, even then
whenas Israel was most despicable; so also in the midst of the Churches
Sufferings shall his Gospel triumph over Superstition. And as the Cross of his
Son, the Lord Jesus, got the Victory over the World; so shall the Cross of his
Children (which is also that of Christ) be the Confusion of their Enemies. This
is, most honored Lords and Brethren, our Consolation, amidst the Ruins and
Desolations of the Church of God in diverse Regions of Europe, which is
intimated to us in your Letters. Let us therefore lift up our Hands and Hearts
unto our God, that he would be pleased to take pity on the great and sore
Afflictions of Joseph, and that he would make Jerusalem a Praise and Renown in
the whole Earth, for his own Name's sake. Of which we have the more and greater
Hopes, because those great and violent Attempts of Satan do learn us, that the
time of his Confusion draws near; and we know that the Lord never humbles
nor casts down his poor Church, but with a design of exalting it; and he
lays his Children, as it were, dead in their Graves, that he may confound the
World by raising them again from the Dead. And inasmuch as, amidst such
horrible Afflictions, God has made your Church and Commonwealth a glorious
Example of his Protection, and of the Miracles of his Providence, we render to
his Divine Majesty, from the bottom of our Hearts, all possible Thanks and
Praises; and particularly for this, that as your Golden Candlestick has never
wanted burning and shining Lights, so also your University cease not to
educate and prepare for the Service of many Churches, many fit and
well-furnish'd Instruments for the Work of the Ministry: In which we own and
acknowledge the Zeal and Piety of our Lords your Magistrates; to whom we do
wish, from the Lord of Lords, all sorts of Benedictions: And we praise God,
that through the goodness of our King, we enjoy our ancient Privileges of
serving and building up the Churches in this Realm by their Ministry, who owe
their Education to your worthy Labors and Instructions; and all our Provinces
shall be as to their Profit so to your Contentment, fully and sufficiently
informed hereof at the return of their respective Deputies. And in the mean
while, we most affectionately thank you for your singular care in cultivating
and improving those many young and tender Plants which have been sent you from
diverse Provinces of this Kingdom, that through your well-deserving Pains and
Counsels, they may be prepared and made fruitful Ministers of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus. And to these our Thanks, we shall add our most ardent Prayers unto
God, that he would pour out upon you his most precious and saving Blessings;
and that he would always make you a most eminent Example of his Grace and Mercy
in the Churches of his dear Son, covering you, and your Commonwealth wherein
you live, with the Wings of his Protection, to the Glory of his Providence, and
to the Honor of his Holy Name, as also to the Consolation of our Churches; In
whose Name we are,

From Castres this 6th of September 1626. Most Honored Lords and Brethren,
Your most humble, and most affectionate Servants in the Lord, the Pastors and
Elders of the Reformed Churches of France, assembled in our National Synod, and
for them all, The Superscription was thus, To our Lords, the Pastors and Elders
in the Church of Geneva, at Geneva. Chauve, Moderator. Bouterove, Assessor.
Scribes of the Synod.
O. Blondel and Petit,




A Letter from the Church of Paris, to our most Honored Lords, the Pastors and
Elders assembled in the National Synod at Castres.
Most Reverend and very Honored,
IT IS with very great regret on our part, that we are enforced to complain unto
you against our Province; but we have too just cause for out so doing. We have
ever held a fair and Christian Correspondence, and Fraternal Union with it. And
indeed, Sirs, if it had been only our own particular Interest that was
concerned, we should much rather have chosen to suffer all manner of ill
Usages, than to have interrupted you in your most holy and important
Occupations. But the Honor of our Functions, and the Glory of our God, and the
Advancement of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, are all concerned.
Therefore we implore, with the greater freedom, the Assistance of your Charity,
and the Help of your Fatherly Protection, because we are well assured of your
Zeal to the Well-being and Edification of our Church. You know, Sirs, that
great Affliction wherewith our ^od has of late visited us, in calling unto
himself that most excellent Person Monsieur Durant, whose Gifts and Graces, and
singular ministerial Abilities, were universally known throughout the whole
Kingdom. During his Sickness, which lasted near sour Months, and six Months
since his Decease, those two astors which were left us, were so surcharged with
hard Labor, that they both fell dangerously Ill; and must have infallibly funk
under the weight of their Burden, had they not been extraordinarily assisted
and supported by God. As soon as God had took into his Joys our late famous
Pastor, we faw immediately the great necessity we had to relieve and ease those
two which survived; and this was the unanimous Prayer and Desire of the whole
Church. It was utterly impossible for us to find in our Colloquy, a Minister
every way qualified for us; for besides, that none of those Pastors had a Voice
strong enough for our Auditory, and those other Abilities requisite for the
edifying so great a People: There were some afflicted with Sickness, and diverse
Churches were destitute of Pastors; and so far were we from being helped by
them, that several of the Neighbour-Churches have importuned us to lend them
our help. To assemble a Synod for their and our Relief, was out of our Power.
For besides the bitterness of the Season, the rigor and sharpness of the
Winter, we were then in the very hottest and deepest of the late Trouble, and
without any hopes of Peace; which since our good God, out of his infinite
Mercy, has bestowed upon us. Being then obliged to provide for our selves
elsewhere, we were not in any great trouble on whom to sasten our Eyes; for so
had the gracious Providence of God ordered it, that in the extremity of
Monsieur Durant's Sickness, Monsieur Daille preached three Sermons to us; which
so much affected our whole Church, that from that instant it was the common
Discourse, that as God afflicted us on the one Hand, so did he seem to comfort
us on the other, by pointing out unto us such a Person as might he easily and
speedily obtained by us; because the Province of Anjou was well enough provided
of able Pastors, and of diverse Proposans of very great Hopes. Monsieur Durand
resting from his Labors in Abraham's Bosom, we believed it our Duty to concur
with those ardent Desires that many of our Members had expressed for Monsieur
Daille, and the rather, because we were well informed of his singular Piety,
Probity, and rare Learning; who, by reason of those excellent Gifts and Graces
of God's Holy Spirit in him, had been already sought after, far and near, by
many of the greatest and most famous Churches in the Kingdom. But the Lord, out
of his abundant Goodness, had reserved him for us: And that we might handsomely
and regularly proceed in giving him a Call to the Pastoral Office in our
Church, we resolved at first to demand him by way of Loan, as we can easily
prove by our Letters written unto the Church of Saumur, and to the said
Monsieur Daille, and by the Acts of our Consistory. But the Person whom we
deputed to Saumur, and to whose Prudence and wise Conduct we had confided this
Affair, having been refused as to the Loan, advised us, by an express
Messenger, that there was more hopes of gaining him as an absolute Gift;
because the Church of Saumur could more easily procure it self a fettled
Pastor, than borrow one for a few Months. Whereupon he demanded of us new
Letters, and a more ample Commission. The Quality of the Person employed by us
in this Negotiation, and our most pressing urgent Necessity, made us resolve to
demand the Ministry of Monsieur Daille purely and absolutely: We in the mean
while taking it for granted, that our Synod would have approved and consented
to what we had done, as we on our parts were disposed to break off the whole
Treaty, in case they could make it appear that we were out, and mistaken in our
Choice, and that there could be any thing opposed against the Doctrine, Life,
and Conversation of him, to whom we had sent our Call. As soon as we had notice
that our Synod should be assembled, we, to render all due Honors to it,
delegated the Sieurs Mestrezat, Bigot, and d' Huysseau to it, and charged them
to make report of our Conduct in this Affair, and to petition that Assembly to
approve of the calling Monsieur Daille into Office among us, though at that
time we had no promise of him made us by the Church of Saumur. We well hoped
that those Reverend Gentlemen would have considered the great importance of our
Church, and the Kindnesses they continually receive from it, and that they
would have comforted us in our Affliction, and would have praised our
Proceedings, or at least would have suffered us to have finished what we had
begun, since we had entered upon it: But contrariwise, we were censured by them,
and they rejected our Call of Monsieur Daille, without ever giving us any
reason for it. This, most honored Sirs, did exceedingly astonish us, and is
very bitter to us, that after so many Travels we should be blamed for that
Action, of which, we protest before God, Angels, and your Holy Assembly, we had
none other end than the Glory of God, and the Advancement of his Kingdom; nor
durst we believe that our Synod could have been guilty of such an Excess,
unless the Interests and Pretensions of some particular Persons had not been
predominant. For we are not convinced of having violated any Canon of our
Church Discipline: whereas, on the contrary, those Gentlemen, under the pretext
of establishing it, do sap and undermine its very Foundations: For the
Discipline having prudently ordained, that no Church may call a Pastor from
another Province, till it have first communicated it unto the Provincial Synod,
has thereby provided for two things; first, For the public Edification of our
Churches, and for the maintaining of an holy Union between all the Churches of
this Kingdom, it does permit a Church to choose and call a Pastor to it from out
of another Province. And if this be permitted unto all the Churches, and many
of them have made use of this Privilege, it ought more especially be allowed
unto this Church of Paris, whose Importance is sufficiently known: This has
been our practice ever unto this day, nor till now was it contradicted by any
Person. For thus was Monsieur du Moulin called off from the Service of her
Royal Highness the Duchess of Bar deceased, and thus did we call Monsieur
Durant from her Highness the Duchess of Deuxponts. The other is, that the
Discipline would hinder Churches from calling rashly and unadvisedly such
Persons, whose Doctrine was unsound, or Lives scandalous, or in whom there was
an Insufficieney: So that if any Church should call such Persons, the
Provincial Synod might very justly and warrantably obstruct and hinder it. But
when as nothing can be urged against the Person called, the Synod has no power
to hinder that Call, such an absolute Power being condemned by the Word of God.
And it is very improbable that the Composers of our Discipline should ever
harbor such a Thought or Intention, as to impose this Yoke upon our Churches,
or that they would place Pastors of Churches in worse Circumstances than
Scholars; who being sought after by Churches, and presented unto Synods, cannot
be rejected, whenas they have those Qualities which are requisite for their
employment in the Sacred Ministry. Therefore in our Opinion, we have not in the
least swerved from the Canons of our Discipline: For we have called a Person
admitted into the Pastoral Office already in our Churches, and who has
discharged his Duty with Applause and Commendation, and not a Stranger utterly
unknown to us. And we gave notice of it unto our Synod as soon as possibly we
could, and craved their Approbation: But contrariwise, our said Synod breaks
the Links in the golden Chain of Communion between us and our Churches, and
would deprive us of that Blessing and Franchise wherewith our Discipline has
endowed us, and of which we have had the Possession and Enjoyment to this
present Day, and this without alleging of any other Reason besides their mere
and bare Will and Pleasure. For in case these Gentlemen should pretend
Ignorance of Monsieur Daille, and that they do not in the least know him: We
answer, that they might better have been acquainted with him, and informed
themselves concerning him, than to have deprived us of so great a Blessing, and
to reject a Person, whom having once the happiness of his Acquaintance, they
would most highly caress, esteem and value. Besides, were there any force in
this Argument, all Pastors might be rejected who are called from out of the
Province. But should they say, the Synod disapproved absolutely of this Call,
because we were overhasty in it; and that we did not in the first place
consult with them about it. We answer, That we imparted this Affair unto them
as soon as possibly we could; and in case we did it not sooner, it was not out
of any disrespect unto them. These Gentlemen do very well know, with how much
Humility and cordial Affection we are wont to treat and deal with them: But
this must be imputed to the unhappiness of the Times, and that Affliction
wherewith God had visited us: And suppose we had failed in this Particular,
(which yet they will never be able to convince us of); What Zeal, what Charity
is this! to punish our Miscarriage with the loss of God's Glory, and the
Edification of so considerable a Church as ours is! And if God had not, out of
his great Goodness, excited the Charity, and moved the Compassions of Churches
far distant from us, the Condition of our Church had been most lamentable; for
our Synod made no better Provision for us, than to send us unto our Colloquy.
And whenas we thought of addressing our selves to it, the very first Church
from whom we demanded help, gave us this answer, That it could not afford us
any, till such time as the Colloquy had prescribed them the manner How; thereby
deluding our very Demand. For you know, Sirs, how rarely our Colloquies are
held, and the trouble we have now-adays to assemble them. Therefore, whenas the
Church of Saumur had the Charity to consent that Monsieur Daille should come
and serve us; and the Synod of Anjou imitating their Zeal, agreed to this
Removal; we did not make any scruple of calling Monsieur Daille to our
Assistance, in which also the Blessing of God is very visible: For this Church
receives a most singular Edification by his Ministry, and we are full of hopes
that it will be continued, and be daily more and more useful and fruitful; and
that we have exceeding great cause of praising God for putting it into our
Hearts to make such a Choice. We beseech you then, most Honored Sirs, that
considering our Sincerity and Zeal in this Affair, but above all the Glory of
God, and the Edification of our Church, you would be pleased to confirm this
our Choice, and to roll away that Reproach wherewith some would blast our
Honors and Office, and to take off that Censure which has been denounced
against us, and to admonish our Province to carry it with more Love toward us.
In doing whereof, you will inspire us with new Courage in the midst of those
Travels sustained by us for the Service of our Church, and of many others, to
whom, upon all Occasions, we are ready to perform all kind of good Offices. And
we beseech God, most Honored Sirs, to preside in your Council by his Holy
Spirit, to preserve your Persons, and to shower down his Blessings upon your
Labors. Being

Paris, August 20.1626. Your most humble and most obedient Brethren, the
Pastors and Elders in the Reformed Church of Paris, and for all, Drelincourt,
Pastor. Bigot, Tardif, Dinets, Massanes, Millet, Raillard, and Mandat, Elders.

And in the Margin, We most earnestly beseech you to give Audience to Monsieur
Mestrezat, who is ordered more particularly to report this Affair unto you.

The End of the Synod of Castres.
SYNODICON IN Gallia Reformata; OF THE Acts, Canons, Decisions, and Decrees, OF
THE Four Last National Synods OF THE Reformed Churches OF FRANCE.

The Second Part of the Second Volume.

By JOHN QVICK, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Thomas Parkhurst and Jonathan Robinson, 1691.

THE Acts, Canons, Decisions and Decrees, OF THE Twenty sixth Synod, HELD BY
The Reformed Churches OF FRANCE and BEARN, The second Time at CHARENTON, Under
the Authority and Permission of LOUIS XIII King of FRANCE and NAVARRE;

In the twenty second Year of his Reign, begun September the 1st, and ended
Friday the 10th of October.

In the Year of our Lord, 1631.

The General CONTENTS of these Synodical Acts, in several Chapters.
Chap. I. THE Lord Galland the King's Commissioner. The King's Writ for calling
the Synod. Deputies Names. Election of Synodical Officers. Chap. II. The King's
Letters Patents, and Commission to the Lord Galland. Chap. III. The Lord
Galland's Speech to the Synod. Chap. IV. The Moderator's Reply to this
Harangue. Chap. V. Deputies and a Letter sent from the Synod unto the King.
Chap. VI. The Cahier or Bill of Grievances sent by the Synod to the King. Chap.
VII. The Deputies Return from Court, with the King's Answer and Letter to the
Synod. Chap. VIII. Election of General Deputies. Chap. IX. Monsieur Beraud
admitted at Deputy to sit and vote in the Synod. Chap. X. A second Letter from
the Synod unto the King. Chap. XI. The General Deputies make Report of their
Audience, and the King's Answer to that Letter. Chap. XII. The Sieurs Bouteroue
and Basnage admitted as Deputies to sit and act in the Synod. Chap. XIII. The
King's Letter unto the Lord Galland about it. Chap. XIV. Approbation of the
Confession of Faith. Chap. XV. Observations upon the Discipline. Chap. XVI.
Observations upon the National Synod of Castres. Chap. XVII. A great Debate
about incorporating the Churches of Bearn with those of France, opposed by the
Lord Commissioner. Chap. XVIII. The Synod's Reply unto his Lordship. Chap. XIX.
The Synod's Protestation upon this Conjunction of the Churches of Bearn, with
those of France. Chap. XX. General Matters. Chap. XXI. An Act for a public
National Fast: Chap. XXII. An Act in favor of the Lutheran Brethren. Chap.
XXIII. Particular Matters. Chap. XXIV. Of Universities and Colleges. Chap.
XXV. An Act for an Assessment upon the Provinces for maintaining the
Universities. Chap. XXVI. A Dividend of our borrowed Charities to maintain the
Universities. Chap. XXVII. The Provinces Accounts about their Maintenance
exhibited to the Colleges and Universities. Chap. XXVIII. The Lord of
Candall's Accounts. Chap. XXIX. A Dividend of sixteen thousand Livers among the
Provinces. Chap. XXX. A blank Dividend. Chap. XXXI. Roll of Apostate and
deposed Ministers. Chap. XXXII. An Act for calling the next National Synod at
Alanson. Chap. XXXIII. Remarks upon three of the Deputies.
The Second Synod of CHARENTON. 1631. the 26th Synod.

SYNOD XXVI. 1631.
In the Name of God. Amen.
Acts and Decrees of the twenty sixth National Synod, held by the Reformed
Churches of France and Bearn the second time at Charenton, St. Maurice near
Paris, in the Province of the Isle of France, under the Authority and
Permission of Jews the Thirteenth King of France and Navarre, in the twenty
second Year of his Reign, begun September the 1st, and ended Friday the 10th
Day of October, in the Year 1631.

CHAP. I. The Lord Galland the King's Commissioner. The King's Writ for calling
the Synod. Deputies Names. Election of Synodical Officers.
Article 1. AT the opening of this Assembly, the Lord Galland, Counselor to
his Majesty in his most honorable Privy Council, and Council of State, and
Attorney General for his Dominion of Navarre, appeared in Person as
Commissioner deputed by his Majesty unto it, and presented his Majesty's
Warrant, signed with his Sign Manual for the convocating of it. 2. This 29th
Day of January, in the Year of our Lord 1631.
The King being at Paris, upon the most humble Petition of his Subjects of the
pret. Reformed Religion, that they might be permitted to meet and assemble in a
National Synod, there not having been one held since that of Castres, in the
Year 1626. His Majesty being very willing to gratify those his Subjects
aforesaid, and to give them some Marks of his Royal Favor, has granted and
permitted, and does grant and permit unto those his aforesaid Subjects, the
Power and Privilege of holding a National Synod the first Day of September next
at Charenton near Paris, but with this Condition, that none other Matters shall
be debated in it, but such as are allowed them by his Majesty's Edicts; and
that the Lord Galland, Counselor to his Majesty in his Privy Council, and
Council of State, and Attorney General for his House of Navarre, shall assist
personally in the said Synod as his Majesty's Commissioner, as has been
accustomed and practiced heretofore. In Testimony whereof his Majesty has
commanded me to issue out this present Writ, which he was pleased to sign with
his own Hand, and commanded it to be countersigned by me his Counselor and
Secretary of Estate, and of his Commandments, and of his Treasury.

Signed in the Original, LOVIS.
And a little lower, Phillippeaux.

3. There appeared on Behalf of the Churches in the several Provinces of this
Kingdom, the Pastors and Elders, whose Names are hereafter mentioned. For the
Province of Burgundy, the Sieurs Peter Boullenat Pastor of the Church of Vaux,
and Alexander Rouph Pastor of the Church of Lions, together with the Lords
Timothy Armet, Advocate in the Privy Council, Elder in the Church of Conches,
and Lazarus du Puy, Counselor for the King, in the Presidial Court of Bourg,
and Elder of the Church gathered in that Town.

4. For the Province of Provence, the Sieurs Paul Maurice, Pastor of the Church
at Aiguires, and Peter de Peyre Lord of Retardet, Elder in the same Church. 5.
For the Province of Orleans and Berry, the Sieurs Daniel Jamett, Pastor the
Church of Gien upon the Loir, and James L'amy Pastor of the Church of
Chasteaudun, accompanied with Master Claudius Bernard, Elder in the Church of
Chastillon upon the Loir, and Bailiff of the said Town; and Henry du Four,
Doctor of Physic, Elder in the Church of Blois. 6. For the Province of
Poictou, the Sieurs Isaac de Cuville, Pastor of the Church in Couhe, and John
le Masson, Pastor of the Church of Civray, together with the Lords Rene de
Lauvrignac, Esquire Lord of Miauvray, Elder of the Church of St. Maixant, and Giles
Begaut Lord of la Begaudiere, Elder in the Church of Montague. 7. For the
Province of Xaintonge, the Lords William Rivet Lord of Champrernown, Pastor of
the Church of Taillebourg, and Peter Richer Lord of Vaudelincourt, Pastor of
the Church of Marennes, accompanied with the Lords Denis Pasquett Esquire Lord of
Large Baston, Elder in the Church of Angoulesme, and Charles Constant,
Comptroller for his Majesty in the Election of St. John d'Angely, and Elder of
the Church in that City. 8. For the Province of Britain, the Sieurs Josua de
la Place, Pastor of the Church of Nantes, assembling for Religious Worship at
Suffe, without an Elder; for the Lords Daniel de la Tousche, Lord of la
Ravardiere, Elder in the Church of Ploer, and Daniel Chastaigner Lord of la
Grolliere, Elder in the Church of Vielle vigne, who was substituted in his
Place, did both send their Letters of Request, that they might be dispensed
with for their non-Attendance at the Synod, and their Excuses were admitted and
accepted. 9. For the Province of Lower Guyenne, the Sieurs James de Berdoline
Pastor of the Church of Duras, and Charles d'Aubus Pastor of the Church of
Nerac, accompanied with the Lords John de Mazilieres, Advocate in the High
Court of Parliament of Bourdeaux, Lord of Grave, and Elder in the Church of
Nerac; the Lord John Aim de Friginet, Advocate also in the same Parliament,
and Elder of the Church of Bergerac, was chosen, but fell sick, and therefore
was excused; and in his stead there appeared Isaac de Geneste, Lord of la Tour,
Advocate in the same Parliament, and Elder in the Church of la Sauvetat, who
was substituted by the Suffrages of the Provincial Synod in his stead. 10. For
the Province of Vivaretz, the Sieur Daniel Richard, Pastor of the Church of
Cheilar, and Louis Santel, Advocate and Elder of the same Church. The Province
excused it self for sending but two Deputies, and their Excuses were admitted
for this time; and they were injoined for the future never to omit the Clause
of Submission, which was not sound in their Letters of Deputation, tendered by
them unto the Council. 11. For the Province of Sevennes, the Sieurs Moses
Blasehon, Pastor of the Church of St. Andrew de Valborgne; and Antony Vincent,
Pastor of the Church of Merneys; together with Stephen de Billanges, Lord of
Blanqfort, and Elder in the Church of Vigan; and Claudius d'Airebeldoze Esquire
Lord of Clairan, Elder in the Church of Canoblet. 12. For the Province of
Anjou, the Sieurs Matthew Cottiere, Pastor of the Church of Tours; and Moses
Amyraud, Pastor of the Church of Sanmur, and Professor of Divinity in that
University; together with the Sieurs Philip Niett, Counselor of the King, and
Warden of his Majesty's Salt-garners in the said City of Saumur, and Elder of
the Church there; and Josiah Poize, Advocate in Parliament, Elder of the Church
at Previlly. 13. For the Province of Dolphiny, the Sieur Peter Pittard, Pastor
of the Church of Alben; with the Sieur Francis de Montauban de Rambault Esquire
Lord of Villars, Elder in the Church of Gap; and the Sieur Stephen Gilbert
Advocate, Elder in the Church of Die; the Sieur Denis de Bouteroue, Pastor of
the Church of Greenoble, though chosen, ^id not appear, because of his
Majesty's Prohibition, yet afterward he obtained leave to assist in this
Council, as will appear by its Acts and Records. 14. For the Province of Lower
Languedoc, the Sieurs Michael le Faucheur, Pastor of the Cuurch of Montpellier,
and John de Croy, Pastor of the Church of Bezieres, together with the Sieurs
Peter Cheyron, Advocate and Elder in the Church of Nismes, and Andrew Bruneau
Advocate and Elder in the Church of Bagnols. 15. For the Province of Higher
Languedoc, the Sieur Timothy Delon, Pastor of the Church of Montauban; with the
Sieurs Peter de Villette, Lord de la Jongniere, Elder in the Church of St.
Antonine; and Paul Constans Counselor for the King, and Elder in the Church of
Montaubon; Master Peter Beraud, Pastor of the aforesaid Church of Montauban,
and Professor of Divinity in that University, did not appear at first, because
of his Majesty's Prohibition, but afterward, when it was taken off, he did
accordingly take his Place in this Council. 16. For the Province and
Principality of Bearn there appeared the Sieurs Peter Labadie, Pastor of the
Church of Pau; and John de Pommerade, Advocate in the Parliament of Navarre,
Elder of the Church in Morlas. 17. For the Province of Normandy, the Sieurs
Abdias de Mondenis, Pastor in the Church of Dieppe; together with Laurence le
Fevre, Advocate in the Parliament of Normandy, and Elder in the Church of
Rouan; and John Cardell Lord of Marettes, Counselor of the King, and his
Comptroller in the Election of Alencon, and Elder of the Church in the same
Place: and the Sieur Benjamin Basnage, Pastor of the Church of Quarentin,
though chosen, yet did not at first appear, because of his Majesty's
Prohibition; but as soon as it was taken off, he came and took his Place in the
Synod, as will appear in the following Acts. 18.. For the Province of the Isle
of France, the Sieurs John Mestrezat, Pastor of the Church of Paris, and David
Blondell, Pastor of the Church of Roussy; together with the Sieurs John de
Gravelles Esquire Lord of Banterne, Elder in the Church of Houdan; and Charles
Mayland Advocate, Elder in the Church of Montdidier. 19. The fifteenth Day of
September, the Lord Marquess of Clermont, General Deputy for the Churches of
this Kingdom unto his Majesty, came according to the usual Order of these
National Synods, and took his Place in it, having Precedence given him
according to his Degree and Quality, and as it was afterward decreed in the
eleventh Article of General Matters. 20. Prayers having been offered up unto
God, Monsieur Mestrezat, Pastor of the Church of Paris, was by Plurality of
Votes chosen Moderator; and Monsieur Jamet Assessor; and Monsieur Blondel
Pastor, and Monsieur Armet an Elder, Scribes of the Synod.
CHAP. II. The King's Letters Patents.
21. AS soon as the Officers of the Synod were chosen, his Majesty's Letters
Patents were read, a true Copy whereof is here inserted. 22. Louis by the Grace
of God King of France and Navarre,
to our beloved and trusty Counselor in our Privy Council and Council of State
and Attorney General for our House of Navarre, the Lord Galland, Greeting:
We having given leave unto our Subjects professing the pret. Reformed
Religion, to hold a National Synod at Charenton, near our City of Paris, the
first Day of September next, in which the Deputies of all the Provinces in this
our Kingdom shall meet, and consult about Matters concerning their Religion;
and we being to choose a Person sufficiently qualified, and of approved
Loyalty, who may be present in the said Council as our Representative and
Commissioner, and calling to Mind the many Services you have done us in sundry
and very weighty Employments, with which we have entrusted you both at home and
abroad, within and without the Kingdom, all which you have most worthily
discharged; yea, and in those very National Synods which we have permitted to
be convocated by our Subjects of the said Reformed Religion at Charenton
aforesaid, in the Year 1623, and in our City of Castres, in the Province of
Albigeois, in the Year 1626. We therefore conceived we could not make a better
choice than of your self, being well satisfied that you will continue to give
us the Proofs and Testimonies of your Affection to our Service. For these
Causes we have commissionated and deputed, and we do commissionate and depute
you, the said Lord Galland, by these our present Letters Patents signed with
our own Hand unto the said Synod, and order you forthwith to transport your
self unto the said Synod in the Town of Charenton, and therein to assist in
Person as our Representative, and to propose and resolve on such Matters as
have been commanded you, according to the Memoirs and Instructions we have
delivered into your Hands; taking special Care that none other Businesses be
then or there treated and debated, but such as of right ought to be consulted
and determined on in those Assemblies, and which are permitted by our Edicts:
and in case they should attempt any thing contrary thereunto, you shall hinder
it, and by Interposal of our Authority, suppress and stifle it, and speedily
give us Notice and Advice thereof, that we may immediately apply such Remedies
as will be most needful. And for doing hereof, we do now empower you by this
our Commission and special Commandment, in these our present Letters Patents;
For such is our Will and Pleasure.

Given at Monceaux the sixteenth Day of August, in the Year of Grace, one
thousand six hundred thirty one, and of our Reign the two and twentieth. Signed
in the Original, LOVIS.
And a little lower, by the King, Phelippeaux.
And sealed with the great Seal in yellow Wax.

CHAP. III. The Lord Galland's Speech to the Synod.
23. THE aforesaid Letters Patents having been read by the Lord Galland, his
Majesty's Commissioner, he made this Speech unto the Synod.

That the King having buried in the Grave of Oblivion all former Actions, which
had fallen out in the last Troubles to the great Affliction of the Kingdom, his
Majesty gave him in charge to assure his Subjects of the Religion of his Royal
Affection and good Will toward them; and that whilst they continued within the
Bounds of Duty, and abstained from all bitter Reflections against the
Government, and Repose of the Public, and from all Intelligences and
Correspondencies, either with Natives or Foreigners, and were sorely addicted
to the Service of his Majesty, they should experience the Kindnesses of a good
Father, and of a good King in his Majesty, and enjoy the free Exercise of their
Religion, and the Liberty of calling and holding their Synods Provincial and
National. But whereas in diverse Years last past, the Orders given by him, and
accepted of by his said Subjects, have been differently interpreted; His
Majesty desires by reviving them, to take away for the future all Grounds of
Misconstruction and Misunderstanding.

24. Therefore in the first Place, His Majesty requires, that whereas
Commissioners were established in all Synodical Assemblies, both National and
Provincial, by his Letters Patents in the Year 1623, founded upon the Practice
observed in the Primitive Church, and the Government of the best-ordered
Kingdoms, there shall be an entire and absolute Obedience yielded hereunto by
his said Subjects of the Reformed Religion, and that they do refrain and
forbear all Protestations and Remonstrances to the contrary.

25. In the second Place, By those aforesaid Orders, and agreeable to the Laws
of the Kingdom, it was decreed and enacted, That no Strangers should be
admitted into the Pastoral Office in any of the Churches which are reserved for
natural Frenchmen and Ancients of the Kingdom, in bar of whom, and to whose
Prejudice diverse Strangers have been received. Wherefore his said Majesty
renewing his Ordinance aforesaid, does inhibit his said Subjects to admit into
the Ministry any one except a Frenchman born; and as for others who have been
admitted since the Year 1623, contrary to it, his Majesty promises to dispense
with them, provided Application be made unto him for that Grace. And whereas
some have made Exceptions against this his general Resolution, on behalf of
those Ministers, who are born in those Kingdoms and Commonwealths, or Cities,
which are the Allies of his Majesty, or under his Royal Protection, the said
Lord Commissioner declared, That by Strangers we were to understand all sorts
of Persons without Exception, who were not born in the Kingdom, or out of his
Majesty's Dominions and Government, although they were Natives of such
Kingdoms, Commonwealths and Cities as were his Majesty's Allies, or under his
Protection.

26. In the third Place, All Ministers are forbidden to depart the Kingdom
without his Majesty's License; and particularly Monsieur Salbert, Minister in
the Church of Rochel, has not only gone out of the Kingdom without his
Majesty's Permission, but in Contempt of his Royal Authority. Wherefore the
said Prohibitions are once more reiterated and reimposed, and the said Salbert
is injoined by his Majesty to reside in that Place appointed him, and he is
expressly forbidden all Exercise of his Ministry, either in public or private;
nor may this National Synod put him upon the Roll of Ministers to be presented
by it unto vacant Churches.

27. In the fourth Place, By the National Synods of Charenton and Castres, all
Ministers were expressly forbidding to intermeddle with State-Matters; yet
notwithstanding Monsieur Beraud, Minister of Montauban, and Professor of
Divinity in that University, did not only intermeddle with State, but military
Affairs, and was so bold as to maintain by a Book, which he read unto his
Auditory, That Ministers have a Call to bear Arms, and to shed Blood; which is
a Doctrine quite contrary to the Word of God, the Decrees of Councils, and the
Laws of the Kingdom, and the more dangerous in this Doctor, because he instills
these his wicked Notions into the tender Minds of Youth committed to his Charge
and Education; and it is much to be feared that he will continue to poison them
by such or the like Instructions, which are foreign and contrary to the public
Peace and Tranquillity. And therefore the said Manuscript is judged unworthy of
public View, as being cross to the Word of God: And his Majesty has ordered
its Suppression, forbidding all Printers and Booksellers either to print or
sell it, and commands all the Members of this present National Synod, to
censure and condemn both it and its Author.

CHAP. IV. The Moderator's Reply to this Speech.
28. THE Lord Commissioner having finished his Speech, Prayers were offered up
to God for the Preservation of his Majesty's Sacred Person, for the Prosperity
of his Government, for the Settlement of the public Peace of the Nation, and
for the Glory of his Crown: And most humble Thanks were rendered unto his
Majesty for the Continuance of his Favor and Royal Benignity toward the
Churches, who have none, nor desire to hold any Intelligence or Correspondence
with Strangers, but do protest unanimously, that they will next and immediately
under God depend wholly and solely on his Majesty's Protection and Sovereign
Authority. And it was resolved, that as to the first Particular propounded by
the Lord Galland his Majesty's Commissioner, that although the Cause of sending
those Royal Commissioners into our Ecclesiastical Synods, was from diverse false
Reports spread abroad and taken up against those Synods most unjustly, and to
their great prejudice and damage, and that it had occasioned the former
National Synods most humbly to petition his Majesty, that he would be pleased
to leave the Churches in their ancient State of Liberty: yet forasmuch as his
Majesty has ordained that no more Petitions should be presented him to this
purpose, the Churches do acquiesce in his Majesty's Pleasure, since he will have
this his Ordinance inviolably observed: and this Synod does yield an entire
Obedience to the King's Will, and the Order prescribed by his Majesty, whereof
the Churches hope to reap the Fruits promised them, in their Establishment and
better Subsistence for the future, and approbation of their Innocence; and the
rather because the last National Synods of Charenton and Castres have already
tasted of them, and been in a more especial manner aided by the Prudence,
Equanimity and good Conduct of his Lordship the Lord Galland. Therefore a
Decree past, That conformably to his Majesty's Intention, our Synodical
Assemblies should subject themselves to a precise observation of his Majesty's
Declaration made in the Year 1623, about sending Commissioners unto Synods and
Colloquies: And his Majesty shall be most humbly petitioned to enjoin those his
Commissioners whom he shall be pleased to send into the Provinces, not to abuse
his Majesty's Name or Authority, to the raising of new Difficulties which may
deprive the Churches of the Effects of his Royal Bounty.

29. And whereas his Majesty, by his Declaration of the Year 1623, has
forbidden our Churches to receive into the Pastoral Office such Persons as are
born in foreign Countries, out of his Jurisdiction; and diverse Provincial
Synods conceived that those Persons were excepted who were born in those States
allied unto his Majesty, and under the Covert of his Royal Protection; wherein
also they were confirmed by the Commissioners, in whose Presence, and no where
else, some few of those Ministers had been received. Now our said Lord
Commissioner having at this instant assured us, that as it was his Majesty's
Intention to comprehend under the name of Strangers, all Persons born out of
the Kingdom without exception; so also that he is pleased to deal favorably
with all those who have been admitted since the Year 1623, and to repute them
as his natural born Subjects: this Assembly entreats the said Lord
Commissioner to continue his good Offices unto our Churches, and charge the
Deputies which shall be sent unto his Majesty, to present him our most humble
Requests, that those aforesaid Pastors may be comprised in that his Act of
Grace, and that for the future all others so born may be instituted, and
inducted into the Pastoral Cure of our Churches, in the Presence of his
Commissioners, as if they had been natural born Frenchmen.

30. And as for the third and fourth Articles in his Lordship's Speech, the
Synod has, upon very just Grounds, entreated his Lordship to assure his
Majesty, that the Churches sixing themselves more and more in the observation
of those Reglements taken up in the two last National Synods, and with which
his Majesty is fully satisfied, will take all possible care, that no Complaints
upon those Accounts may be ever hereafter brought unto his Majesty. And as for
that particular Business of Monsieur Salbert, this Assembly, deferring all
Obedience to his Majesty's Pleasure, and leaving the said Salbert in that
Estate wherein he is at present, does yet notwithstanding judge themselves bound
by the Laws of Charity, to have recourse unto his Majesty's Goodness on his
behalf: And therefore we most humbly beseech his Majesty, out of his innate
Clemency, to remove the Tokens of his just Indignation against him, and to let
him share and participate in that same Royal Favor, which he has vouchsafed
and extended unto others, involved with himself in the Miseries of the late
Troubles.

31. And whereas a certain Book has been seen by us, bearing Monsieur Beraud's
Name, whose Preface is already condemned by the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, and that we are required to examine and censure both
it and him: After hearing of the said Professor Beraud, he did ingenuously
acknowledge himself the Author of it, but also that it was extorted from him by
mere Force, and through the Malignity of the Times, in the late Confusions; and
that it was never in his Thoughts or Intention to grant a License unto
Ecclesiastical Persons to shed Blood; and those Words of which he is accused,
having occasioned an Exposition quite contrary to his Judgment, he declares
with all possible Sincerity, and as in the Presence of God, that he
disapproveth of the Ambiguity in which those Expressions are there couched, and
detesteth from his very Soul the Consequences which are thence deduced,
protesting that his Belief is entirely conformable to that of the Reformed
Churches in this Kingdom, which have, according to the holy Scriptures, decided
in our former National Synods, that Pastors should in no wise intrude
themselves into the Administration of State-matters, because they he wholly
alien and foreign to their Profession: and therefore the Argument is more
valid, that they cannot, without contradiction to God's holy Word, and the
Confession of our Churches founded upon it, stretch out their Hands to draw
Blood from any one, or engage in any military Factions. This Assembly therefore
confirming the Decrees of former National Synods, and grievously censuring the
said Beraud for having rashly and to ill purpose used those scandalous
Expressions, tending to establish an erroneous Doctrine, declared once again,
That it does reject and condemn that Proposition extracted out of the Book of
the said Beraud, and forbids him and all other Professors in our
Universities, and Ministers in our Churches, to teach or write any such
Doctrine for time to come, upon pain of incurring all Ecclesiastical Censures.

32. And as for those sharp Words mentioned by his Lordship the Commissioner,
the Churches are utter Strangers to them, having declared the Word of God with
all Modesty and Meekness, however they have been ill handled in diverse Places,
and tho oftentimes our Adversaries have most licentiously perverted the most
innocent Expressions of our Faith, to render us more odious and criminal.

33. The Lord Galland, his Majesty's Commissioner, requiring that Monsieur
Bastide may be removed from the Church of St. Africa in the Province of Higher
Languedoc, because his Deportments in the said Church have been destructive to
the Public Peace and Tranquillity: The Assembly being informed that the said
Bastide was at present a Prisoner, resolved, That his Majesty should be most
humbly petitioned to grant unto him, as well as to all other his Subjects of
the Reformed Religion, the Enjoyment of the Benefit of his Edicts, and to send
him before his proper Judges; and in the mean while it decrees, that he shall
be removed from the Province of Higher Languedoc, and that from this very
Instant the Exercise of his Ministry shall cease, and be at an end in the said
Church of St. Africa; and the said Province is commanded to provide out of hand
another Pastor for it.

CHAP. V. Deputies and a Letter sent from the Synod unto the King.
34. MOnsieur Amyraud a Pastor, and de Villars an Elder, were chosen, by
plurality of Suffrages, to lay at his Majesty's Feet the most humble and
thankful Acknowledgments and Petitions of the Churches; and they had their
Instructions given them, and Letters unto his Majesty, and to our Lords, the
Principal Ministers of State.

35. A Copy of the Letter written by the Synod unto the King.

SIRE,
Mr. L'abadie was ordered, and did accordingly draw up this Letter.
YOUR Majesty having graciously permitted us to assemble in this Place, as soon
as we had lifted up our Hands to God in Thanksgivings, for giving us to find
Favor in your Majesty's sight, our next Care was to render unto your Majesty,
as to the most lively Portraiture of God in Earth, our most humble and thankful
Acknowledgments: and we hope that as God, whom your Majesty represents, does
hear the Prayers of his Children, and compassionateth them in their Afflictions
and Complaints, and mitigateth their Dolours; so your Majesty will be pleased
to receive, together with the most humble Acknowledgments of our Duty, the
Petitions of your poor afflicted Subjects, afflicted in very many and sundry
Ways; and who using none other than these innocent Means of Petition, do betake
themselves for Sanctuary unto your Majesty's Royal Goodness, and confide wholly
in your Majesty's most Royal Clemency. May it therefore please your Majesty to
suffer the Sieurs Amyraud and de Villars to throw themselves at your Feet, and
to repeat in your Majesty's hearing the sincere Protestations of our most
humble Fidelity and Subjection to your Service, and to acquaint your Majesty
with the manifold Violations of your Edicts almost in all the Provinces of your
Kingdom; whilst we in our own Names, and of many thousands of devout Souls
professing our holy Religion, and on whose behalf, through the Favor of your
Majesty's Paternal Bounty, we are now assembled in this National Synod, do
continue our Vows and Prayers unto God for the Prosperity of your Sacred
Person, the Stablishment of your Scepter, the upholding of your State, the
Triumph of your Armies, and his Benediction upon your Royal Bed, as being,

From Charenton, September 13, 1631. SIRE, Of your Majesty The most humble, the
most obedient, and most faithful Subjects and Servants, The Deputies of the
National Synod assembled by your Permission at Charenton, and in the Name of
them all, Mestrezat, Moderator of the Synod. Jamett, Assessor. Blondell Scribe,
and Armet Scribe.



CHAP. VI. A Copy of the Cahier of our Complaints, and of the Infractions of
his Majesty's Edicts, presented to his Majesty from the Synod, by the Sieurs
Amyraud and de Villars.
To the King.
SIRE,
YOUR most humble and most obedient Subjects of the Reformed Religion,
assembled by your Majesty's Permission in the National Synod at Charenton, do
freely acknowledge that we want both Conceptions and Expressions by which we may
sufficiently and worthily express our just sense and feeling of those many and
illustrious Testimonies of your Majesty's Paternal Affection to us: and
therefore we do pour out incessantly our most fervent and devoutest Prayers
unto the Throne of Grace, that the Lord our good God would be graciously
pleased to preserve your Majesty's most Sacred Person, and the Tranquillity of
your Dominions: And we do absolutely consecrate our Lives and Fortunes unto
your Majesty's Service, according to the Duty taught us by our most holy
Religion, and our Birth, which is to expose them for the Honor of our
Sovereign upon all Occasions.

2. And forasmuch as it has pleased your Majesty to confirm by diverse
Declarations those Edicts made in our Favor, yea and to place them in the Rank
and Classis of Fundamental Laws of your Kingdom, we most: humbly supplicate
your Majesty to ordain, that they may be as exactly observed, and punctually
executed.

3. Particularly for what concerns the Establishment of our Churches in those
Places, where hitherto we could never obtain that Benefit, notwithstanding all
our Care and Diligence to get it executed; and that those which are desolated,
through the Infelicities of the late Troubles, and the Rigors of that Decree
made in your Majesty's Council, the last May, out of favor to the Lord Bishop
of Valence and his Accomplices, may be once again re-edified. For the Execution
of such Decrees causes many thousands of devout Souls, deprived of the
Exercise of their Religion, to mourn and groan before God continually.

4. This Desolation, Sire, is therefore the more worthy of your Royal
Compassions, because it is extreme: for in Vivaretz there be nine and twenty
Churches wholly destitute of all Religious Worship, and in Sevennes nineteen,
and in the Land and Isles of Re and Olleron, there be twenty four, besides
those which decay, through the many cunning Obstructions brought against the
rebuilding of the demolished Temples in Xaintonge, Burgundy, Britain, Berry,
Normandy, Poitou, and the Lower Guyenne, whose Number indeed is not so great,
but however their Damage is inestimable. And, Sire, all the Provinces demand no
new Favor of your Majesty, but only what has been formerly granted them by
your Edicts.

5. Therefore is it that your Majesty is most humbly requested to revoke those
Decrees aforesaid, and to ordain that nothing may be innovated against ancient
Practice and Possession, and that our Ministers may preach in all Places where
they shall be called, according to the Duties of their Office, and that they
may serve in diverse Churches at the same time, which shall be all established
or re-established conformably to the Edicts and Declarations of your Majesty.

6. And forasmuch as very many Ministers, in diverse Provinces, particularly in
that of Languedoc, are troubled, not for uttering any undutiful or
disrespectful Words, but for Preaching (though with the greatest Moderation,
and according to that Liberty of Conscience which is our Privilege and
Property) conformable to our Confession of Faith, and the Discipline of our
Churches; your Majesty is therefore most humbly entreated, that all
Prosecutions commenced against them may cease, as having none other Foundation,
than the groundless Passions of the Commissioners and Officers; and that upon
this account your Attorney General may be silenced, and a Prohibition may be
granted out against them from ever troubling any of our aforesaid Ministers in
discharging the Duties of their Calling, and Exercise of our Discipline.

7. And forasmuch as the Order and Discipline of our Churches cannot subsist
without the being and sitting of Colloquies and Synods, your Majesty is most
humbly requested to give leave, that our Colloquies and Provincial Synods may
be assembled in the presence of your Majesty's Commissioners and Deputies,
according to the ancient Order, because the Governors of the Provinces do very
much oppose the holding of them, and defer their Sessions for a long time
together, and have hindered diverse Provinces from Synodical Assemblies three or
four Years together.

8. Your Majesty having formerly declared, with your own Mouth, whenas the
National Synod was held last at Charenton, in the Year 1623, That it was your
Pleasure that those Pastors who were born in other Countries, not under your
Majesty's Jurisdiction, should continue in the Exercise of their Office in
their respective Churches, without ever being disquietted or molested: We most
humbly beseech your Majesty, on their behalf, that you would be graciously
pleased to grant them your Declaration to this Purpose; and also to gratify
with the same Favor such as have been received into the Sacred Ministry since
the Year 1623, in the presence of your Majesty's Commissioners and Deputies.

9. And the Lord Galland having informed this Synod, that for the future your
Majesty intended to restrain this Favor, and only to vouchsafe it to your
Majesty's natural born Subjects, none others being to be received into the
Ministry among us: We most humbly beseech your Majesty that this Restriction
may be taken off, and that your Majesty's wonted Favor may be continued to us
in this Particular.

10. May it please your Majesty also to repeal those Prohibitions issued out
against those very worthy Ministers of the Gospel, Mr. Bouterove, Banage, and
Beraud, forbidding their personal Presence and Attendance in this Synod; and
that with your Majesty's License they may, having been duly chosen thereunto,
come into it, and take their Place and Vote in it, according to their
Deputations from their respective Provinces.

11. And whereas such as make profession of our Religion, are for the most part
excluded and deprived of all Offices, Charges, and Public Dignities, of being
Doctors, and incorporated into the Colleges of Physicians, and of all
Employments; yea, and are not so much as suffered to be Masters in those very
Mechanical Arts and Trades in which they had been educated, and in which they
had served their Apprentiships; May it therefore please your Majesty graciously
to ordain, that they may be indifferently admitted unto those aforesaid Charges
and Employments, with your other Subjects of the Romish Communion.

12. And whereas the Triumphs of your Victorious Arms do proclaim your
Majesty's Glory, We most humbly beseech your Majesty to augment your own Glory
yet a great deal more, by extending your Clemency and Pardon unto those many
miserable Persons who have been detained, for a long time together, upon no
other score than that of the past Troubles, in Chains and Slavery aboard your
Galleys; and to give forth your Royal Order and Command, that they may be
delivered and enlarged.

13. It has pleased your Majesty in all those Declarations made by you, in
favor of your Subjects of the Reformed Religion, to promise the Continuance of
that Bounty granted us by the late King Henry the Great of glorious Memory, and
diverse times since confirmed by your Majesty, to contribute toward the
Maintenance of our Pastors and Universities, as a Compensation for the Tithes
paid by them unto the Curates. Yet nevertheless for several Years together we
have been totally deprived of this Gratuity; and whereas diverse Sums of Money
had been assigned us for the former Years, there yet remains due and unpaid a
very considerable Sum, amounting to six hundred twenty one thousand, eight
hundred and twelve Livers. And although we have been again and again promised
this Grace and Favor, and particularly upon the Reduction of the Towns of
Lower Languedoc, in the Year 1628, and afterward confi^med by your Majesty's
Answer to our Bill of Grievances at Montauban; Yet notwithstanding, those very
Assignations given us in the Year 1627 have been revoked, and those of the
three next following Years 1628, 1629, and 1630, and for this present Year
1631, are not at all paid in unto us. Wherefore we most humbly beseech your
Majesty, that according to your Royal Promises, they may be effectually
continued to us, and that your poor Subjects of the Reformed Religion may enjoy
these Gratuities, and be fully satisfied for all the Arrears.

14. And whereas your Majesty was pleased, upon the restoring the Church Lands
in the Principality of Bearn, out of which our Ministers received their
Sallaries, to assign them a continual Stipend out of the Exchequer and Treasury
there, and this by the Edict of Restitution, which was followed by the
Declaration made at Montpellier, when you gave Peace unto your Subjects; yet
nevertheless, in prejudice of your Royal Words, without any Edict revoking that
Assignation past in the making up the Accounts, and local Charges of the said
Principality, the Ministers of the Gospel there have been retrenched from four
hundred and fourscore Livers, which they did each of them receive yearly, to
two hundred and thirty four Livers only; yea, and this very last Year, four
thousand Livers more have been taken from them. Wherefore may it please your
Majesty, conformable to your Will declared in your Royal Edicts, to stop the
course of such Diminutions, and to reestablish the aforesaid four thousand
Livers which have been retrenched, and to continue the payment of their
Sallaries unto the Ministers, without ever suffering them to be diverted to any
other Uses, besides those to which they were designed and appointed in that
first Institution made by your Royal Bounty.

15. The Deputies who are now sent unto the King, are expressly charged most
humbly to petition his Majesty, that Silence may be imposed on his Lieutenant
General in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, who has commenced a Suit against the
Lord of Vandelincourt, Minister in the Church of Marennes, and his eldest Son,
for that their Cause is depending in the Court of the Edict sitting at Again.

CHAP. VII. The Deputies return from Court, with the King's Answer and Letter
to the Synod.
16 THE two and twentieth day of this Month, those aforementioned Deputies unto
his Majesty, Monsieur Amyraud and de Villars, returned with Letters from his
Majesty unto the Synod, the Tenor of which followed.

A Copy of his Majesty's Letter unto the Synod.
By the KING.
Dear and Well-beloved,
WE have seen, by your Letter of the 13th Instant, and farther understand, by
word of Mouth, from your Deputies, and by the Memoirs presented to us, the
Demands which you have to make us on those Matters debated in your Synodical
Assembly, and now called by our Writ of License, to sit at Charenton. And
forasmuch as we have informed the said Deputies of our Intentions on the
greater part of your Demands, and that we have given a more particular notice
of them unto the Lord Galland; we will not therefore detain you any longer,
than to acquaint you, that you may give an entire Credit to whatsoever the Lord
Galland shall in out Name declare unto you. Moreover we do assure you, that as
we are very well satisfied with the Carriage and Conduct of your Synod, and of
your Deputies to us, you shall, upon all Occasions that occur, receive the
sensible Pledges of our Good Will.

Given at Monceaux this 21 st of September 1631. Signed in the Original, Louis,
and a little lower Philippeaux;
and subscribed, To our Dear and Well-beloved, the Deputies of the National
Synod of our Subjects professing the pret. Reformed Religion, assembled by our
Permission at Charenton.

18. His Majesty's Letters being read, the said Deputies made report, That when
they were called into his Majesty's Council, and the King having heard them, he
answered them in these words; I have heard and understood all that you have
said, and you may rest assured, that I will preserve you according to my
Edicts. Give me the Cahier, and I will peruse it with my Council.

After which his Eminency the Lord Cardinal told them, That his Majesty was
exceedingly satisfied with the Conduct of the Synod, and particularly with them
their Deputies: And it was his Majesty's Intention to maintain his Subjects of
the Religion, in their Liberty granted by his Edicts, and to give them the
enjoyment of his Favors, and the Fruits of his Royal Good Will; and his
Majesty had prevented the Petitions of the Churches, having already ordered a
certain Sum of Money to be delivered unto the Lord of Candall to be distributed
among them. And his Majesty, in token of his accepting the Synod's Petition,
had taken off the Prohibition laid upon those two Ministers, the Sieurs Banage
and Beraud, and has permitted them to assist according to the Trust reposed in
them by their Provinces in the Synod. And as for the Sieur Bouteroue, his
Majesty has not been as yet informed of the Contents of the Book written by
him, nor of the Contents of the Decree denounced against him by the Parliament
of Grenoble; but as soon as he shall have the knowledge thereof, he will write
unto the Lord Galland his Commissioner, and by advising with him, will take
some effectual course to answer the Request of this Assembly, about admitting
the said Lord of Bouteroue. And as for the rest of their Petitions mentioned in
the Cahier presented by them the Deputies unto the King, his Majesty was
resolved to deal with his Subjects in a manner suitable to his Sovereign
Dignity, and the Sacred Authority of his Royal Word, and would give them most
favorable Answers after the breaking up of the Synod, and not otherwise.

19. Whereupon the Assembly approving the Conduct of their Deputies, did give
them its hearty Thanks for their Care, Faithfulness, and Dexterity manifested
in the discharge of that Trust committed to them. And afterward his Majesty's
Commissioner, the Lord Galland, acquainted the Synod, That by the Letters which
he had received from his Majesty, and the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
the Lord de la Vrilliere Secretary of State, that his Majesty was very well
pleased, yea, highly satisfied with the Conduct and Moderation of this
Assembly, and with those Testimonials and Expressions rendered by them of their
Affection and Obedience to his Majesty; and that within a few days this Synod
should receive the Effects of this his Good Will in a very considerable Sum of
Moneys, his Majesty resolving to gratify them so far, as to defray the Charges
the Assembly must needs be at, out of his own Treasury, and to bear the
Expenses of all the Deputies in their Travel and Sojourning here. And he
farther exhorted the Synod, and all the Churches in general, to continue in
their Duty, upon which depended their Preservation, and that it would give them
a most solid ground to expect and hope for his Majesty's most speedy and
favorable Answer unto their Cahier which they had sent unto him, and which
would be dispatched as soon as the Synod was broke up; and he desired that they
would not be overlong nor tedious in their Sessions, for many Reasons that he
could give. And whereas his Majesty, for diverse very great and weighty
Considerations and Motives, had, by his Writ the eleventh of August last,
interdicted the Sieurs Beraud, Banage, and Bouteroue, from being Members of
this National Synod, and by his express Injunction had ordered their removal
out of their respective Provinces; and that they should in no wise exercise
their Ministry, either in Languedoc, Normandy, or Dolphiny: Now out of his mere
Grace and Respect had to the most humble Petition of this Synod, presented him
by their Deputies, it has seemed good unto him to restore those Reverend
Persons, Mr. Banage, Beraud, and Bouteroue, unto their respective Churches, and
given them leave to sit, according to that Trust reposed in them, as Deputies
in this very Synod; but charge them withal to use, for time coming, more and
greater Moderation in their Writings and Sermons, in which it is his Majesty's
Pleasure that they should be more circumspect and reserved, and to keep
themselves within the Bounds prescribed them by the Discipline. And as for the
Sieur de Bouteroue, before his Majesty will ordain his Restoration, his Majesty
desires to be informed of the Sentence past against him in the Parliament of
Grenoble, because it relates unto a certain Book written by the said Bouteroue.

20. Upon this Declaration, made by the Lord Commissioner of his Majesty's
Good Will, and of his favorable Inclinations unto the Churches, it was
unanimously voted and decreed, That most humble Thanks should be returned unto
his Majesty for the Grant of his Gracious Favors; and that a new Address
should be made him by this Assembly, with an humble Petition for the
restoration of the Sieur de Bouteroue; and that the Synod might have License
given it to sit, without a Dissolution, till such time as the Moneys destined
by his Majesty's Liberality for the defraying of its Expenses be paid in, and
distributed according to he Intention of his Majesty by the Synod it self,
conformably to that Order which has been always observed in the Dividend of
Moneys granted us by his Majesty.

CHAP. VIII. Election of General Deputies.
21. SEveral Provinces requesting that his Majesty should be pleased to grant
out his Royal Writ of License for the Election and Nomination of General
Deputies; the Lord Commissioner declared, That it was his Majesty's Pleasure
that this Assembly should agree with him in the choice of two Persons
acceptable unto his Majesty, who might exercise the Office of General Deputies,
and reside near his Person, and attend the Court in all its Progress and
Motions. The Synod having conferred in private, by its Commissioners, with the
forementioned Lord, did nominate the Lord Marquess of Clermont, and the Lord
Galland, Lieutenant General in the Bailiwick of the Artillery, and of the
Louvre, hoping that his Majesty will so far condescend as to approve of the
Obedience of our Churches, and hereafter to resertle them in the practice of
their ancient and accustomed Order.

CHAP. IX. Monsieur Beraud admitted as Deputy to sit and act in the Synod.
22. THE three and twentieth day of September, the Sieur Beraud, Pastor of the
Church of Montauban, and Professor of Divinity in that University, came unto
the Synod, petitioning that he might be restored, and take his place in it,
according to his Majesty's Intention expressed in his Letters written to the
Lord Commissioner; who directing his Speech unto the said Dr. Beraud, told him,
That his Actions and Writings had formerly given unto his Majesty very many and
just Reasons of being dissatisfied with him, and great occasion of Scandal and
Complaint against those of the Reformed Religion. For which cause his Majesty,
by his Writ of the sixteenth of August last, had excluded him out of the Synod,
and destined his Abode and Ministry somewhere else than at Montauban: But his
Majesty having a favorable Respect unto the Petition of the Synod, had, of his
special Grace, restored him unto his Church, and permitted him to assist the
remainder of its Sessions, as a Member of it in this Synod, because he hoped
that he would, as he now commanded him to, govern himself in all his Actions
and Writings, with a Moderation well-befitting his Profession. Whereupon the
said Dr. Beraud took his place in quality of Deputy for the Province of Higher
Languedoc and Guyenne, according to that Commission he had received from his
Province.

23. The Lords Clermont and Galland, who were nominated unto the Office of
General Deputies for the time coming, were entreated to carry unto his Majesty
the Act of their Election by this Assembly; and its most humble Petition, both
for the restoration of the Sieur de Bouteroue, and the payment of the Moneys
designed to defray the Expenses of this Synod, and to procure an Answer unto
that Branch of our Cahier, concerning the Moneys granted us by his Majesty's
Liberality, that so the Dividend may be made before our departure. And the Lord
Commissioner was also entreated to accompany the Petitions of the Synod with
his Lordship's Letters, and by his Mediation to facilitate their Acceptance,
and the getting of a Decree upon them.

CHAP. X. A Copy of the second Letter written by the Synod unto his Majesty.
To the KING.
SIRE,
WE had no sooner knowledge of your Majesty's Intentions about the Election of
our General Deputies, who are to reside near your Majesty's Person; but we
immediately concurred with the Lord Galland, your Majesty's Commissioner in
this Assembly; and we nominated to the exercise of this Office, the Lord
Marquess of Clermont, and the Lord Galland, eldest Son of the Lord
Commissioner; who were no sooner chosen, than we commissionated them to wait
upon your Majesty, and to present, and tender together with the sincerest
Protestations of our most inviolable Fidelities, and immovable Resolutions, to
live and die in that Devotion, (which we all owe unto your Majesty's Service)
our most humble and thankful acknowledgments for the favorable Promise
vouchsafed us to defray the Charges of this Assembly; as also our most humble
Petitions, That it would please your Royal Goodness, in which only next unto
and after our God, lies all our Consolation: And it is our hope, that you will
continue your Royal Benefits unto us, as to your dutiful and most faithful
Subjects; and that you will always under this Quality, shroud us with the
Sacred Covert of your Majesty's Protection. Wherefore, with all reverence, we
beseech your Majesty to give them a favorable Audience, as well for the
present in this our Request, that you would daign to shower down upon our
Churches the Streams of your Majesty's Liberality and Bounty, which we have
formerly enjoyed: as also that hereafter, in all those Remonstrances and
Petitions which our urgent and extraordinary Necessities shall oblige us to
make unto you, we may experience the natural Inclination of your Majesty to
cherish and comfort your People; and we shall always study, and zealously
endeavor to render our selves worthy of the Fruits and Effects thereof, by all
Acts of Duty, Obedience, and imaginable Submissions. Which give us, Sire, to
hope, that you will not refuse to cast the Eyes of your Compassions upon our
Miseries, and to open your Ears to the groanings of thousands of Souls, who
under all their Grievances and Oppressions suffered by them, do yet
notwithstanding breath nothing else but a most profound Obedience and unshaken
Loyalty unto your Majesty. And this makes us the more devout and zealous in our
Addresses unto the Throne of the King of Kings, ardently and most importunately
beseeching him for the preservation of your Majesty's most Sacred Person, for
his Benediction on all your Designs and Undertakings, for the Glory of your
Crown, for the Fidelity of your People, and for the long Continuance of your
Reign, because, Sire, we are,

From Charenton, Sept. 23. 1631. Your Majesty's most humble, and most obedient,
and most faithful Subjects and Servants, The Deputies of the National Synod
assembled by your Permission at Charenton, and for them all, Mestrezat
Moderator. Jamett Assessor. D. Blondell Scribe. Armett Scribe of the Synod.



CHAP. XI. The General Deputies make Report of their Audience; and the King's
Answer to that Letter.
1. THE fourth Day of October, the Lords General Deputies being returned, and
making Report of their kind Reception from the Ministers of State, who also
informed them that his Majesty had granted sixteen thousand Livers for
defraying the Expenses of this Synod, and that he permitted Monsieur Bouteroue
to take his Place with the other Deputies in the Synod; and that his Majesty
did judge meet that this Synod should break up of its own Accord as soon as
possible it could, and that after their Departure the Cahier presented by the
Sieurs Amyraud and de Villars should have a favorable Answer, and that without
Delay. And the Lord Commissioner added that his Majesty expressed in his
Letters written to him, his singular Satisfaction in the Synod, to which he
granted three Days more for the perfecting and strengthening of their remaining
Affairs; and that they should be no sooner separated, but he would answer their
Cahiers, and that in the most favorable manner, particularly in what relates
unto the Maintenance of the Ministers; that the Choice of Deputi^^ was very
acceptable to him, though they could not enter upon their Office till after the
Separation and Departure of this Synod. Upon which, the Assembly having
returned their most hearty Thanks unto the Lords Deputies aforesaid, for their
singular Affection and Diligence in promoting the Weal of our Churches; They
entreated the Lord Commissioner to continue his wonted good Offices unto the
Churches, and by his daily Intercession for them with his Majesty, to be more
and more useful and beneficial to them: And inasmuch as he was near his
Majesty, and one of his Privy Council, he was earnestly entreated most humbly
to petition his Majesty to add unto those Favors which he has already
vouchsafed us, the Grant also of those which we expect and wait for from his
Royal Clemency and Goodness.

CHAP. XII. The Sieurs Bouteroue and Basnage admitted as Deputies to sit and
act in the Synod.
2. THE same Day the Sieur Benjamin Banage, Pastor of the Church of Quarentin,
and one of the Deputies for the Province of Normandy, presented himself unto
the Synod, craving leave that he might be admitted as a Member into it. The
Lord Commissioner bespake him, that the King for diverse Considerations had
thought good to debar him Entrance into this Synod, and to remove him from his
Church and Province of Normandy: But having a particular Respect unto the most
humble Petitions of this Assembly, he gave him leave to take his Place and Vote
in it during the remaining Sessions thereof, and permitted him to continue the
Exercise of his Ministry in his own Church, upon condition that he ordered his
Words and Actions with that Moderation and Reservedness which became his
Calling and Profession.

3. Monsieur Denis Bouteroue, Pastor of the Church of Grenoble, and Deputy for
the Province of Dolphiny, coming also in like manner, and desiring to be
admitted into the Synod, according to his Majesty's Permission; the Lord
Commissioner told him, That he had given the King occasion to be displeased
with him, because of a Book which he had printed in June, 1628, and was
condemned by Decree of the Parliament of Greenoble; but that the Prosecution
which was against him for being the Author of it, and for which he deserved to
be put out of the Synod and Province of Dolphiny, was remitted by his Majesty's
great Goodness, in Confidence that for the future he would comport himself with
all Moderation, and keep within the due and proper Bounds of the Discipline, as
appeared from the Charge and Letter Missive of his Majesty unto the said Lord
Commissioner; the Tenor whereof is as follows.

CHAP. XIII. A Copy of the King's Letter unto the Lord Galland, for restoring
the Lord of Bouteroue unto his Place in the National Synod.
My Lord Galland;
HAving seen by your Letter written unto the Lord de la Urilliere, what you
report concerning the Minister de Bouteroue, whose Restitution I desired might
be respited till such time as I was informed of the Decree given against him in
my Court of Parliament of Grenoble, for a certain Book made by him, containing
very many injurious and slanderous Discourses. I have since reflected on the
Reasons alleged by you, and those Assurances you have given me, that for the
future he will carry himself better; therefore I now send you this Letter, to
acquaint you, that I have thought good to extend the same Favor to him, which
I have unto those two other Ministers, Banage and Beraud, and to restore him
unto his Function, permitting him, as I have also done those now mentioned
Ministers, to assist in that Synod the Remainder of its Sessions, upon
condition, that hereafter he contain himself within the Bounds of their
Discipline, which you shall notify unto all the Members of that Assembly, that
thereby they may be convinced of my Goodness to them, and that I shall always
be glad to extend the Fruits thereof unto the whole Body, and every particular
Member of that pret. Reformed Religion, provided they render themselves worthy
of it by an entire Obedience to my Royal Authority. And I beseech God to take
you, my Lord Galland, into his holy keeping.

Written from Vandosme, the 20th of September, 1631. Signed in the Original
Louis, and a little lower, Phelippeaux:
And superscribed, To my Lord Galland, one of his Majesty's most honorable
Council of State.

5. After that those Remonstrances had been made unto them, those aforesaid
Ministers Banage and Bouteroue took their respective Places in the Synod,
according to the Commission given them by their respective Provinces.

6. The Lord Commissioner having declared that it was his Majesty's Pleasure,
that for the future no Strangers, but only the proper Members of the
Consistories in each particular Church should assist at all their
Church-Sessions and Consistorial Actings. The Assembly represented unto his
Lordship the many Difficulties which did daily occur in the Management of
Church Affairs, and which did necessarily require the Assistance, Advice and
mutual Communication of other Churches. Whereupon his Lordship promised to
write unto his Majesty about it, and to petition his Majesty that he would be
pleased in Cases of Necessity, to grant that three other Pastors, and as many
Elders from the neighboring Churches might be allowed to meet and consult
together in the Consistory.

CHAP. XIV. Approbation of the Confession of Faith.
THE Confession of Faith was read word by word, and every Article posedly and
in its proper Order, approved and signed by all the Deputies who were sent and
commissionated by the Provinces; and they did all of them in their own personal
and relative Capacities both for themselves and for their Principals, who had
entrusted them, and whom they represented, and who had given them express
Charge so to do, protest that they would live and die in the Confession of that
Faith, that they would teach it unto their Churches, and put to their helping
Hand, that it might be inviolably kept and preserved to Posterity.

CHAP. XV. Observations on Reading the Church Discipline.
1. THE Provinces of Anjou, Xaintonge, and Lower Guyenne, requesting that the
4th Article of the 1st Chapter might be explained; This Assembly decreed, that
the said Article should be thus expressed: A Minister of the Gospel (unless in
times of Difficulty, and cases of very great Necessity, in which he may be
chosen by three Pastors together, with the Consistory of that Place) shall not
be admitted into this Holy Office, etc So that those Lines from the Verb are
unto the Adjective national, must be taken away. And Consistories are required
not to forsake the wonted Order, particularly that of calling in diverse Pastors
from one and the same Church, to ordain their Ministers, unless they should be
enforced by an extreme Necessity to do otherwise: of which, as of all other
extraordinary Occurrences, they shall render an Account unto the Provincial,
and the Provincial unto the National Synods. And as to what has been done in
the Province of Anjou, this Assembly does confirm it, without allowing of it as
a Precedent for the future.

2. In case of Difficulties that a Church be constrained to have Recourse unto
an University or Neighbor Province, to be provided of a Pastor, it shall not
for the future serve it self of this Expedient, nor may the Neighbour-Province
or University grant that Church its Demand, unless there be an unanimous
Consent of all the Churches of the same Colloquy, which they shall notify by
their Letters, approving the Choice of the elected Pastor.

3. On the 33d Article of the 1st Chapter, and 8th Observation of the National
Synod of Rochel (the 18th in order, held in the Year 1607.) on the Discipline,
by which at the Request of the Province of Dolphiny, the said Article had been
explained: The Assembly gave leave unto Provincial Synods to extend the Loan of
Pastors unto the term of a full Year, notwithstanding the Churches from whence
those Pastors were borrowed, had entered their Appeal against it.

4. Upon the 4th Article of the 2d Chapter, the Province of Poictou was advised
to observe that Canon framed by the 24th National Synod, held at Charenton in
the Year 1623, which had ordained, That the Children of Ministers should not he
preferred (unto the Pensions) unless caeterus paribus, they were equal in
Merits with the other Competitors.

5. After those Words in the 8th Article of the 5th Chapter (As also all
Sentences of Suspension) those shall be added, which were given by the
Consistory, and were not declared before the Congregation, shall be binding,
although the suspended Person had made his Appeal either to a Colloquy or
Provincial Synod.

6. In Obedience to those Remonstrances made by his Lordship the Lord
Commissioner, the Provinces are exhorted to come prepared to the next National
Synod, in which it will be debated, whether any thing shall be changed in the
19th and 20th Articles of the 5th Chapter before mentioned.

7. The Word Gypsys (the French call them Bohemians) shall be razed out of the
eleventh Chapter, because the two others do sufficiently explain it.

8. Those Words (as also the Names of Office, such as Baptist, Angel, Apostle)
shall be struck out of the 4th Article of the forementioned 11th Chapter, as
being useless, and now not practiced in the Churches.

9. The Deputies of Xaintonge upon that same Article, reporting that diverse
Persons, according to the Custom of the Country, did give Names unto Children
in Baptism, which occasioned ridiculous Raillery and foolish Jesting, and that
it would be needful to redress it: The Synod gave Liberty unto that Province to
use such Means as they judged best and most expedient to effect it.

10. The Lord Commissioner remonstrated on the 18th Article of the same 11th
Chapter, that the Register of Baptisms, Marriages, and Interments of the
Members of all the Churches should be yearly brought into those Courts of
Judicature, whereunto our respective Churches do belong: The Synod unanimously
concurred with his Lordship, and injoined all the Provinces to see that it be
accordingly observed and performed.

11. Upon the Remonstrance of the Lord Commissioner, instead of those Words at
the close of the first Article of the 13th Chapter, Shall give such Advice unto
the Parties as may be convenient, there shall be inserted (according to the
Intentions of the Synod of Vertueil, in the Year 1567, and of Montauban in the
Year 1594) these Words, The Consistory shall advise the Parties to apply
themselves unto the Civil Magistrate.

12. These Words ( Nevertheless, the Parties shall be exhorted not to depart
from the Words and Promises de futuro, without great and lawful Causes) shall
be inserted into the fifth Article of the same 13th Chapter, and the Clause
beginning thus (All Promises) shall be razed.

13. At the Request of the Lord Commissioner, this Clause was added to the end
of the 13th Article of the 13th Chapter, Unless that such a Marriage were
authorized by the Civil Magistrate.

14. Upon the Remonstrance of the Province of Xaintonge, the Synod decreed,
That such as in conformity to the 18th Article of the same 13th Chapter, did
cause their Banes to be published in the Temples of the Popish Religion, should
carry a Certificate of their being of the Reformed Religion, unto that Church
which was nearest the Place of their Abode, and where their Banes also shall be
proclaimed; that so all Surprizals may be prevented.

15. These following Words shall close up the 22d Article of the same 13th
Chapter, Unless the Magistrate has interposed with his Judicial Sentence to
the contrary.

16. Upon the 2d and 11th Articles of the 14th Chapter, the Synod approved of
that Sentence given by the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, which judged that the
Faithful ought not to desire their Parties of the contrary Religion to swear by
the Te igitur and Cross.

17. The Assembly not being able to add or change any thing in the 4th Article
of the 14th Chapter, gives License unto the Province of Normandy to establish
for its own particular Service such Orders as it shall judge most fitting for
the Edification of the Churches in their Division.

18. The Lord Commissioner requiring, that for the future no Book might be
published till it had been first examined by Divines appointed unto that very
purpose; this Assembly did thereupon ordain, That the 16th Article of the said
14th Chapter of the Discipline, shall be couched in these Terms; Ministers, nor
any other Members of these our Reformed Churches, may not cause any Books
concerning Religion, which are either made by themselves or any others, to be
printed or published, till such time as they have first communicated the
Manuscript Copy unto the Colloquy, or, if Occasion so require, unto the
Provincial Synod; and in case the Matter be urgent, unto the Universities, or
unto two Pastors nominated by the Synod, who shall give an Attestation under
their own Hands, that they have examined the said Manuscript.

19. The Lord Commissioner acquainted the Synod, that his Majesty had sent him
diverse Books and Treatises on several Subjects, fraught with injurious and
intolerable Expressions, and therefore required that they should be censured
according to their Deserts. Whereupon, the Synod requested the said Lord
Commissioner, that those Books might not be at all looked into, because they
were printed many Years ago, and the greater part of them, when their Authors
were enforced to it by the bitter Provocations of others professing a contrary
Religion. And the Synod having, together with his Lordship, took all possible
care in the foregoing Canons to prevent the printing of all offensive Books for
the future, the Provinces shall use all possible Care and Circumspection, that
his Majesty should not have any the least occasion to complain of us. With
which Answer his Lordship remained satisfied, and judged it not meet that any
particular Censure should be applied unto those Books, as he had at first
demanded.

20. The whole Book of Church Discipline having been read over, the Deputies of
the Provinces did, in their own Names, and in theirs who had commissionated
them, sign it, promising solemnly that they would observe it, and see it
exactly observed by their respective Provinces.

CHAP. XVI.
Observations made in reading the Acts of the 25th National Synod held at
Castres in the Year 1626.

CHAP. XVII. A great Debate about incorporating the Churches of Bearn with
those of France, opposed by the Lord Commissioner.
Article 1. THE Province of Bearn having charged its Deputies to submit it unto
the Discipline of the Churches of this Kingdom, and to the Authority of our
National Synods, as the rest of the Provinces, but with these Conditions:
First, That they be not bound to send more than two Deputies unto our National
Synods. Secondly, That Judicial Sentences past by and in the Province until
now, shall not be revoked nor reversed. Thirdly, That Pastors serving in the
said Province, shall not be translated into another Province. Fourthly, That
the Appeals of private Persons may not be received in these National Synods.
The Synod absolutely granting the two first Conditions, does nevertheless
exhort the said Province to send equal number of Deputies with the other
Provinces, unto the National Synod, whenas his Majesty shall be pleased to
permit one to be held in the Provinces bordering on that of Bearn: And as for
the two other Conditions, provided that the said Deputies shall promise, on
behalf of their Province, to own the Authority of our National Synods, and to
take out their Appeals in the Form specified, Canon the 10th of the 8th Chapter
of our Discipline, the Synod yields unto their Demand, assuring them, that it
will take a most particular Care of their Edification: and as it intends not
to lose its Right unto diverse Pastors born in the Provinces of the Higher and
Lower Guyenne, who are now actually employed in that of Bearn; so also it will
never use it to their evident Prejudice, but in every Matter, and especially in
that of removing Pastors either from the Churches they are now serving, or from
out of the Province, the National Synod will give full proof of their fraternal
Charity and Affection. Article 2. Upon this Debate, the Lord Galland, his
Majesty's Commissioner, remonstrated; That the Conjunction of the Churches of
Bearn with those of this Kingdom, and particularly their Submission unto the
Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France, and the Power of appealing from
Bearn unto the National Synods here, were Matters of that Nature, that they
could not be done without the King's Permission; because such Conjunctions
depend upon Sovereign Authority; that the late King Henry the Fourth of happy
Memory, had already determined this Question, having in the Years 1602, and
1604, permitted the Churches of Bearn to assist at the National Synods of
France, hereby to conserve an Union in Doctrine: but he also decreed, that they
should bring in their Cahiers of Complaints distinct from those of France. And
in the Year 1615, whenas the Political Assembly of Grenoble demanded this
Union, it was denied in that Answer given to the 22d and 23d Articles in these
Words, That the late King did never permit nor approve of the Union of the
pret. Reformed Churches of Bearn with those of France, nor will his Majesty now
permit it, until such time as the said Principality shall be reunited and
re-incorporated with the Crown of France. But yet in the mean while, the
Deputies of Bearn may bring in their Petitions by themselves, which shall be
answered according to Reason. Against which Answer the Assembly of Rochel
having took great Exceptions, and in a particular Article at the Conference of
Loudun in the Year 1616, there was returned an Order little differing from the
Cahier of Grenoble: so that the Land of Bearn not having since had any
Permission from the King to join it self unto the Churches of France, it cannot
be done, but must be confined to the plain and simple terms of Petition.
Besides, the Consequences of this Union have been formerly resented; for the
Churches of Bearn, shrouded with the shadow and hope of a powerful Assistance,
were transported to such dismal Excesses, as make a very mournful History in
that of our Times. And all Authors are agreed, that the Land of Bearn was
originally a Member of the Kingdom of Navarre, lying on the other side of the
Pyrenean Mountains, though subject to our Kings of the Merovingian Line; as is
evident from Gregory of Tours, who relates, that the Bishops of the said
Territory came unto the Council of Agde in the Year 506, and to that of Mascon
in the Year 588. And the Lord of Bearn acknowledged the Kings and Kingdom of
France for his supreme Lord, and did Homage to them and to their Sovereign
Authority. But in the Year 1512, Louis the twelfth, King of France, to make
some Compensation for, and to sweeten the Loss of the Kingdom of Navarre,
usurped by Ferdinand King of Arragon, granted unto John of Albret and Katharine
of Navarre his Wife, that the Land of Bearn should enjoy its Charters and
Privilege of Sovereignty, until such times as it should be otherwise determined
by meet and competent Judges. And since that the Country of Bearn has been
accounted a Principality, distinct from the Kingdom, and independent without
any reservation. That in the Year 1571, Jane Queen of Navarre set up a
Church Discipline, whose Execution is limited within the Bounds of that
Principality; and the Laws are all enacted and sworn to by the States of the
Country, and maintained to this very day, from the observation whereof the
Subjects cannot withdraw themselves, nor, without the permission of their
Prince, may they take upon them to constitute Judges in Church or State, much
less to enlarge the Bounds of Appeals, whenas by the Laws of Bearn they are to
be terminated by its Provincial Synods, and within the Country it self; as is
in like manner done in the City of Metz, and Principality of Sedan. And should
this Conjunction be admitted, Causes would be drawn out of the Province, which
would be an Innovation of dangerous Consequence to his Majesty's Authority, and
to this little Province, and contrary to its Union, which has preserved the
Country in its Laws, Forts, Customs, and domestic Prerogatives. The Deputies
of Bearn, to give some color unto this Union, say, That this Union was
permitted by the King, that it has been exercised by his Majesty since the
uniting of Bearn with the Crown of France, that it was approved by the said
Lord Commissioner in the National Synod of Castres in the Year 1626. But here
are diverse Mistakes. The Truth is, that Henry the Fourth of happy Memory, and
the King now reigning most gloriously, have not permitted nor promised the
Union of the said Churches, nor was it permitted by the Cahier of the Year
1615. But the Answer unto the Union demanded, was deferred till after the
Country was united with that of France: so that the victorious Arms of his
Majesty having subjected the Land of Bearn to his Obedience, and the Union of
the Country made by his absolute Authority, notwithstanding all former Grants
and Privileges, the Subjects are bound to have recourse anew unto his Majesty.
And although by the Cahiers of the Year 1615, the Union of the Churches was put
off till the Union of the State; yet none may therefore assert, that because
the State is united with the Crown of France, the Union of the Churches must
therefore of Right be made also; but that it may be obtained, there is need of
a new Address unto his Majesty, that he would by his Sovereign Authority be
pleased to enact such Laws about it, as will be most agreeable to him: And the
Synod wanting this Sanction of Royal Authority, the Union now desired is null;
nor can the said Lord Deputies gather from any one act of his Majesty, that he
approves of the Union of the said Churches since the submission of Bearn.

And if in any Cahiers presented by the Churches of France since the Union of
that Country, the Petitions of those of Bearn have been made use of against the
reservation set down in the Cahier of 1615. This Error must not be drawn into
practice, because the Churches have not to this very day made any absolute
Declaration of Union; and such important Actions require Concessions and solemn
Declarations, and Preliminaries animated by Verifications in the Parliaments of
Paris, and of Pau.

Nor ought the presence of the Deputies of Bearn, in the political Assemblies
of this Kingdom, where they laid the first Foundations of their Attempt against
his Majesty's Authority, and which has been since most exemplarily chastised,
be made a Precedent; nor ought the appearance of the Ministers of Bearn, in the
National Synods of France, before and since the establishment of Commissioners,
who were imposed in the Year 1623, be took as an advantage to them in any-wise,
because they appeared upon doubtful and uncertain Conditions, not as to the
Point of Submission to the Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France, or
unto the National Synods, or for the drawing of Appeals without the Limits of
that Principality: all which were contrary to the Laws made by Jane Queen of
Navarre, but only to testily their Union in Doctrine, which is evident by
perusing the Acts of those Synods. The first Synod unto which the Deputies of
Bearn presented themselves, was that of Rochel in the Year 1607, and the
Quality of the Times gave an occasion for it: And as that Introduction was a
mere Novelty, there being but one Minister sent, so they were enjoined for the
future to commissionate together with him an Elder. In the Year 1612, four
Deputies assisted in that of Privas; but this their Presence was floating and
wavering; nor had it any other end, than to testify their Consent and Union in
Doctrine, as his Majesty had willed them so to do in the Year 1602, and 1604.
They came also unto that of Tonneins, in the Year 1614, under the same
Conditions; and they then had granted to them the privilege of calling the next
National Synod, which was a great expression of Love unto that Principality,
and an oblique Means to bind them more strictly to the Discipline of France:
And because the Churches of Bearn would not submit themselves thereunto, they
resigned their right of Convocating the National Synod unto the Church of Vitre
in Britain, where also it convened accordingly in the Year 1617. And in the
six and thirtieth Article of General Matters, there passed this Decree; This
Assembly does not conceive it meet, considering their present Circumstances,
that the Churches of Bearn should subject themselves to the Church Discipline
of this Kingdom, nor that they should depend upon these National Synods: But
nevertheless they shall give in their final Resolutions, what they intend to
do, unto the next National Synod; and in case they be of the same Mind then, as
they are now, this Assembly declared, That their Deputies may have the
privilege of sitting and voting in the National Synods of this Kingdom, upon
this condition, that they shall first have leave given them, by the Provinces,
to give in their Suffrages in such Cases as concern the Churches of this
Kingdom; which Terms are totally contrary to the Pretensions of the said
Deputies, and evidently prove, that their admission into the Synod was wholly
precarious, and only to testify their mutual Church Fellowship. And in the
Synod of Alez, called in the Year 1620, whenas the Deputies of Bearn had
remonstrated, that they could not wholly subject themselves to the Discipline
of the Churches of France, because of the present juncture of Affairs, they
were admitted under that restriction of the Synod of Vitre, That they shall
first have leave from the Provinces to vote, in certain Cases, concerning the
Churches of France; and this too with this Proviso, that it should only be till
the next National Synod. An Argument unanswerable of the Difference between the
Church Discipline of Bearn, and that of this Kingdom, although the Deputies, to
ingratiate themselves with this Synod, do urge, that they be both alike one and
the same. Thus I have given you the true History of this Union, till the
Conquest and Submission of Bearn; at which time, by special Letters Patent,
his Majesty granted unto the said Principality, that they should be maintained,
and live under their own particular Laws: Which Laws are partly made up of the
Constitutions of the Lady Joan Queen of Navarre, who had enacted, That all
Differences in Church Matters should be finally determined within the Province.
Since the Submission of Bearn, the Churches have lived under the same form, and
never pretended to be united to those of France, but by virtue of his Majesty's
Answer to the Cahier of the Year 1615, or some others of a later date: For in
the Synod of Charenton, September the 2d, in the Year 1623, upon the appearance
of the Deputy of Bearn, an Ordinance passed as formerly, That according to the
Restrictions of former Synods, the Provinces have liberty to demand, that the
Deputy of Bearn shall not have power of voting in some certain Cases concerning
the Churches of this Kingdom; and that before the Separation of this Synod, he
shall produce the Reasons for which they defer their plenary Submission to the
Church Discipline of France: And this is another certain Mark of the Difference
between the Discipline of France, and that of Bearn. In the last National Synod
held at Castres, in the Year 1626, which was four Years after that of
Charenton, because in their Letters of Commission there was wanting the Clause
of Submission required by the foregoing Synods, the Deputies of Bearn were
told, in open Synod, that for this time they were admitted, but for the
Conditions expressed in the Acts of the last National Synod, they should not
for the future have a consultive Vote in the National Synods of this Kingdom,
excepting only at the reading of the Confession of Faith, in which they were
united with the Churches of France. Until that time the Churches of Bearn
neither pretended nor demanded Union with the Churches of France; nor till then
did his Majesty's Commissioners contend with them about it; but now whenas
against so many preceding Instances to the contrary, they demand, without his
Majesty's permission to be admitted, it cannot, it ought not to be granted to
them.


CHAP. XVIII. The Reply made by the Deputies of Bearn, unto this Opposition of
the Lord Commissioner.
3. BUT the Deputies of the Province of Bearn returned this Answer; That the
Union of the Churches with those of this Kingdom, in respect of Doctrine and
Discipline, was not only granted to them by his Majesty's Goodness, but also by
his own express Consent, done and executed with his actual Approbation. For
although by the Answers set in the Margin of the Cahiers, in the Years 1602,
1604, and 1611, his Majesty has thought good to suspend and put off the filing
of it, till after the uniting and incorporating of Bearn with the Crown of
France; yet nevertheless, through the most humble Petitions of his Subjects,
his Majesty anticipated this Matter, and granted that for Doctrine, Confession
of Faith, and Church Discipline, they should be joined and united with the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom; yea, and his Majesty permitted them to send
their Deputies unto those Ecclesiastical Assemblies convocated in it according
to his Edicts: And this is undeniably proved by that Answer given unto the
Cahier, at the Intercession of the Assembly of Loudun, and pursuant to that
Grant the said Province has from time to time sent their Deputies unto the
National Synods, and particularly to that of Tonneins, Vitre, Alez, the first
of Charenton, Castres, and unto this present Synod, who had privilege of
sitting and voting in them, and were therein supported even by his Lordship the
Commissioner. And in execution of the said Union, their Remonstrances
concerning the well-being of their Churches were presented unto his Majesty by
the General-Deputies, inserted by them into their Cahiers, jointly with the
Demands and Petitions of the Churches of this Kingdom, and through the Clemency
of his Majesty received a gracious Answer. As for Instance, Those relating to
the Restoration of the Pastors Wages, and the Maintenance of the College of
Ortez, which will be justified by the Cahier presented in the Year 1625, after
that Bearn was united with France, yea, and after his Majesty's Journey into
that Country; from which it will be manifested that his Majesty was pleased
with, and granted that we should be united, and he favored, in the execution
of it, his poor Subjects inhabiting the said Province with his Royal Promises.
Nor should the incorporating of our Churches with those of this Kingdom, be
envied to us, nor be reputed a general or particular Grievance; for the
Censures which some private Persons may deserve, will be issued forth against
them by the Consistories and Colloquies; and in Cases of Appeal, they will be
confirmed and executed in the Province by the Sentence of the Provincial Synods
only: And as for our Pastors, their Appeals cannot be received out of the
Province but in some particular Case, as of Suspension and Deposition from the
Ministry, and their removal from one Church unto another, or from one Colloquy
unto another. In which case it is but just and reasonable that they be subjected
to, and judged by the Synod of that whole Nation, into which Bearn is now
incorporated by his Majesty's Edict; and that the Ministers residing in it,
should be governed in the same manner as those of France. And therefore the
said Union having been promised by his Majesty, approved by his Grants, and
executed in the Presence of his Commissioners, as not derogating in the least
from his Authority, nor to the Public Weal, it could not but be reputed
sufficiently authorized; and therefore we do once again most humbly petition
his Majesty that he would be pleased to allow of it: and this National Synod is
most importunately desired to espouse and uphold it, and the rather, because
that the Province of Bearn and their Churches do submit themselves to the
Discipline of the Churches of this Kingdom, acknowledging that it does most
entirely accord and agred with theirs, and that both of them are extracted out
of God's Holy Word. But whatever the Result and Issue of this Affair may be,
they resolved to make a faithful Report of the whole unto their Province, as
well for their own Discharge as for the great Importance of the matter.

CHAP. XIX. The Protestation of the National Synod upon the Conjunction of the
Churches of Bearn with those of France in Church Discipline, and their
Submission to the Authority of our National Synods.
4. IN like manner the Synod did solemnly protest, that they never had any such
Intention or Design, as to withdraw his Majesty's Subjects from their
Obedience, either to the Laws of his Majesty, or of his Royal Predecessors, nor
to ordain any new Judges or Degrees of Appeals, nor to make any Innovations in
the least Jot or Tittle to their Prejudice; much less was it in our Thoughts to
conjoin the Churches of Bearn to these of France, without his Majesty's
Permission; but we did, as in Duty bound, believe it a thing already granted by
his Majesty; His Majesty having expressly declared in his Answer to the Cahier
from the Assembly of Grenoble, and renewed in the Conference at Loudun, that he
would allow and be well-pleased with the said Conjunction, as soon as Bearn
should be reunited unto the Crown of France, which was actually effected in the
Year 1620.

5. Upon Report made by the Deputies of the Isle of France, of their Care and
Pains taken to recover the manuscript Works of Monsieur du Tilloy deceased,
from them into whose Hands they are now fallen, and the Unlikelihood of their
ever being published: The Assembly was well satisfied with the Endeavors and
Inquiries of the said Province.

6. Upon the Remonstrance of the Province of Anjou, the Printers of Geneva,
Sedan and Saumur are advised to print most correctly the Catechisms, Confession
of Faith, and Liturgy of our Churches, and to see that all the Editions of them
do entirely agree one with another, that so we may have no more Complaints
against them for the future, about their Omissions and Negligence herein.

7. Although the Church of Rochechouard does of right belong unto the Province
of Poictou, yet because of the Weakness of the Colloquy of Limouzin, which
requires that the said Church be joined to it: This Assembly ordains, that
the Decree made in the 25th National Synod held at Castres, shall be observed;
and that the Deputies of Bearn, as they return homeward by the Way of Limoges
and Rochechouard, shall take Cognizance of the Differences which have happened
between Monsieur Barthe and the Consistory of Limoges, of which they shall give
an Account unto the next National Synod.

8. Whereas by reason of the late Troubles, and the Difficulties of the present
Day, the Sieurs Chauve and Bouteroue, (who were commissionated by the National
Synod of Castres, to pass over unto the Provincial Synod of Provence) have not
been called to it: This Assembly ordains that that particular Pastor of
Provence, who is charged with the Power of summoning the next Synod in that
Province, shall give seasonable Notice of the Time and Place of its Meeting,
that so they may assist at it, and execute the Commission which was given them.

9. The Synod of Sevennes shall give account unto the next National Synod of
the Conduct of Mr. Repasseau, and of his Carriage and Actings in the Church of
Paillac, which he quitted and forsook during the times of the late Commotions.

10. The Province of the Isle of France and Church of Paris, having related
their Proceedings with Monsieur Richer, formerly Pastor in the Church of
Vandieres: This Assembly applauding the Charity of the said Province, and
particularly of the Church of Paris toward him, does confirm the Judgment
denounced against him by the said Province for his Levity and evil
Conversation, notwithstanding the long-continued Indulgence of that Province to
him.

11. Forasmuch as the Colloquy of Ambrun was not in a Capacity of taking
Cognizance of the Cause of Mr. Genoyer, which was recommended to them by the
National Synod of Castres: This Assembly commissionates the Colloquy of
Gapensois, finally to determine that matter.

12. This Assembly having read the Censure past on Monsieur Persy, and ordained
that it should be razed out of the Acts of the National Synod of Castres, does
commissionate the Provincial Deputies of Higher Languedoc in their Return
homeward, to pass by Monflanquin, and to take Cognizance of the Fact mentioned
in the Acts of the Synod of Lower Guyenne: And in case the said Deputies cannot
execute their Commission, they shall give notice of it unto their Province,
which is empowered in that case to pronounce a final Sentence.

13. Although the Deputies of Lower Languedoc have faithfully informed this
Assembly how that through the rich and sovereign Mercy of God, Monsieur Peyrat
was preserved from the very Brink and Precipice of Destruction, unto which his
many Infirmities and sore Temptations had most lamentably exposed him, and
declared the Course which the Synod of the said Province had took with him in
order to his Recovery, and Re-establishment in the Exercise of his Ministerial
Office; yet does it nevertheless grievously censure the Provincial Synod for
proceeding to his Restoration contrary to the usual and accustomed Forms, and
Neglect of the Canons of our Church Discipline.

14. Monsieur Aymard, Deputy of the Province of Sevennes unto the National
Synod of Castres, having not discharged the Commission given him by the said
Synod: This Assembly censuring both the said Aymard for his Neglect, and the
Province of Sevennes for not calling him to an Account for it, does confirm the
Judgment passed by the Provincial Synod of Lower Languedoc against Mr. Tustan.

15. This Assembly judging the Neglect of the Province of Sevennes worthy of a
most grievous Censure, ordains, that the Act made in the National Synod of
Castres against Monsieur Bony, shall abide in full force: And whereas the
Colloquy of Montpellier has took Information of the Facts proposed, but not
decided in the aforesaid Synod; it is now fully empowered to proceed against
the said Bony, according to the Discipline, in case he be found guilty; and if
hereafter there be a Default of rendering an account of Commissions given to the
said Province by the National Synods, the Moderators of those Provincial Synods
shall be suspended from their Office.

16. The Province of Berry had Audience given them as to those Matters of their
Complaints and Petitions. And this Assembly ordains, that the Decree of the
National Synod of Castres shall stand good, and that the other past in the
Provincial Synod held at Chastillon upon Loir; shall be razed out of the Body
of their Synodical Acts.

17. The Synod not being able to change any thing in that Canon of the National
Synod of Castres concerning Monks, exhorts the Provinces to practice it with
all possible Prudence and Charity.

18. The Printers of Geneva and Sedan shall be informed by the Church of Paris
exactly to observe the Citations already added, or that may be hereafter added
to the Margents of our Confession of Faith.

19. Forasmuch as diverse Difficulties are started about the observation of that
Canon made in the last National Synod of Castres, which ordered that ancient
Pastors should always be preferred before Scholars, who were demanded by
particular Churches to be ordained Ministers unto them: This Assembly taking
off the Commination pronounced, in case of Disobedience to that Canon, against
the Moderators of Colloquies and Provincial Synods, and mollifying it in that
part thereof, which imposes a precise necessity of giving the Preference unto
Pastors, does yet notwithstanding exhort the Provinces to observe this
Ordinance as much as possibly they can, and not to quit it but at such times
whenas they shall be constrained by an evident and most urgent Necessity so to
do.

20. Another Copy writes Noel.
Noah Gaultier deposed by the Synod of Burgundy, appeared in Person before this
Assembly, and demanded his Restitution unto the Sacred Ministry, presupposing
that he had appealed hither, but could not get out his Appeal which he designed
against the Sentence past upon him: The Assembly being fully informed as well
of the Causes for which he was put into the Roll of the Deposed, as of his
Actings against the said Province, rejected his Petition.

21. George Arband presenting himself before this Assembly, and importunately
desiring to be restored unto his Ministry, from which he had been deposed by
the National Synod of Castres: he was told by the Moderator in open Synod, that
there would be nothing altered in the Sentence past upon him, but that it
should abide still in force against him.

22. Now that according to the Decree of the last National Synod of Castres,
this Assembly proceeded to examine the Reasons brought by the Deputies of the
Provinces upon that Question, Whether it be lawful and expedient to administer
Baptism on Days of ordinary common Prayers, whenas there is no Sermon preached,
and all of them had been duly pondered and debated; the Assembly did at last
conclude, That a Sermon preached either before or after Baptism, was not of the
Essence of that Sacrament, but only a Matter of Order, whereof the Church might
determine; and therefore the respective Churches and Provinces are left unto
their respective Usages and Customs, provided that they be such as, in their
best and maturest Thoughts, will most contribute unto their edifying.

23. This Synod ratifying the Judicial Sentence past by the Colloquy of Anduze
in the Cause of Mr. du Cross and Raill, does yet condemn those bitter
Expressions used by Mr. du Cross in his Letter written against George Arbaud,
after his Reconciliation with him.

24. The Lord Malet reporting the State of the Process against the Sieur Palot,
was entreated to continue his Prosecutions vigorously, and not to suffer the
Cause to be heard before any other Judges than the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, because of the great Prejudice that would otherwise
redound unto the Churches.

25. Although the Churches of this Kingdom have little cause of Satisfaction
from the Province of Bearn, by reason of their dilatory Proceedings in the
Business of Mr. Mainuelle; yet forasmuch as it was granted the said Province,
that all Judicial Sentences past by them to this day, should be valid and not
liable to any Retraction; and for that the Church of Geneva does not renew its
Suit against the said Mainuelle, and seems thereby to have buried the Memory
of that Fact, of which he was accused, in Oblivion; The Synod leaving the said
Mainuelle to the Judgment of his own Conscience, does injoin him for the future
so to order his Conversation, that there may be no just Occasions given of new
Complaints against him.

26. All the Provinces are injoined carefully to observe and practice the 6th
Canon in the Observations of the 24th National Synod held at Charenton in the
Year 1623, upon our Discipline, and that 5th Canon in the Chapter of Particular
Matters in the Synod of Castres; and by all lawful and possible means to reduce
them unto their Duty, who cause their Children to be instructed by the Priests
of the Romish Church, or send them to the Colleges of Jesuits.

27. In case his Majesty shall be pleased to continue the Grant of his wonted
Liberality unto the Churches, out of the Dividend of the Province of Provence,
there shall be first taken out the Moneys granted unto Monsieur Durie by the
National Synod of Castres; and the said Province shall be accomptable to him
for it from the very first day of his Establishment in the Church of Beauvoysin.

28. The Difference between the Provinces of Xaintonge and Poitou, shall be
referred unto the next Colloquy of the Synod of Anjou, which is also empowered
to conjoin the Church of Saveilles with that of Villefaignan, in case they
shall judge that of Chefboutonne, whereunto the said Church of Saveille is now
joined, may subsist of it self.

29. Forasmuch as since the Decree of the National Synod of Castres concerning
Monsieur Casaux, five Years are now lapsed, and the Province of Higher
Languedoc has not in all this time re-demanded him; this Assembly bestows
the said Casaux upon the Province of Lower Guyenne; and he shall continue his
Ministry in that Church in which he has hitherto served, as their own
appropriated Pastor.

30. According to that Decree of the National Synod of Castres, the Churches of
Auvergne shall carry their Declaration unto the next Synod of Higher Languedoc,
who shall determine whether they be able to compose a new Colloquy: And in the
mean while, the Province of Burgundy shall continue their Care and Charity to
the Church of Paillas, in like manner as it has done in Times past.

31. The Colloquy of Albigeois shall exert all their Power, that the Decree of
the National Synod of Castres be executed against those Ministers in the
Province of Higher Languedoc, who reside not in their Churches, and shall apply
meet Censures to the Transgressors of the 13th Canon in the first Chapter of
our Discipline, and that by the Authority of this Assembly.

32. The Moneys promised unto Monsieur Chamier, Pastor of the Church of
Montlimard, by the National Synod of Castres, toward the printing of those
excellent Works of his most learned Father, now with God, shall be effectually
paid in unto him; but I fear it was never done.

33. The Provinces are exhorted to revise their Collections, who have compiled
the Articles of our National Synods into a Body, that so there may be out of
them made an Extract of such important Matters as explain the Canons of our
Church Discipline; and they shall make Report hereof unto the next National
Synod.

34. Letters shall be written to Monsieur de Sommaise (Salmasius) to entreat
him, that he would devote his Studies and Pains to the Service of God's Church,
and that he would travel in the Examination and Confutation of the Annals of
Cardinal Baronius.

35. That Act promoting Monsieur de Garissoles to the Profession of Divinity in
the University of Montauban, having been presented by the Deputies of Higher
Languedoc, was confirmed: And this Assembly confirms the said Mr. Garissoles
in his Professorate, and entirely approved of what was done in this Matter by
the Commissioners who did examine him.

36. This Assembly ratifying the Judgment passed by the Consistory of Alez in
the Cause of Monsieur Desmarais, which was dismissed to them by the National
Synod of Castres, decrees, That out of the first Moneys belonging to the
Province of Vivaretz, shall be retained part of the Sum due by the said
Province unto the said Desmarais, that so he may be so far satisfied.

37. According to the Decree of the National Synod of Castres, out of the first
Moneys to be received by the Churched for three Years, there shall be reprised
by the Province of Xaintonge the thirteen Portions and an half granted to Mr.
Bellot and Constans, and the Acquittances of those two Ministers shall be
brought in, and delivered unto the Lord of Candall.

38. Complaint being made of the non-Execution of the 13th Canon, enacted in
the 23d National Synod held at Alez in the Year 1620, about delivering the Cup
at the Lord's Table by Pastors only, This Assembly judges the Province of
Lower Languedoc to have incurred a Censure, for their overmuch Indulgence unto
the Churches of Montpellier and Nismes, who have not to this very day conformed
to it: And it does grievously censure the Consistories of those Churches, and
enjoineth them for the future not to quit the Practice of the other Churches of
this Kingdom, on pain of being prosecuted with all Ecclesiastical Censures.

39. Monsieur d'Huysseau craving the Execution of that Decree made by the
National Synod of Castres, which had given him the Sum of two thousand five
hundred Livers in compensation of his great Expenses disburs'd in the Suit
against Monsieur Palot; The Assembly orders the Lord of Candall to pay him in
the said Sum out of the first Moneys which shall be divided among the Churches,
who shall be accomptable to him for it, and deliver up unto him the Acquittance
of the said Sieur d'Huysseau.

40. Forasmuch as Mr. Roques has not presented himself before this Assembly,
to render account of the Moneys received by him out of the Collection permitted
by his Majesty for the Cities of Rochel, Montauban and Castres; the Province of
Lower Guyenne is charged to cite him unto their next Synod, and to examine and
finish his Accounts by the Authority of this Assembly.

41. The Memoirs sent by the Sieurs Mizauban and Grenouilleau, Commissioners
appointed by the National Synod of Castres to visit the Churches of Souls and
Labor, being read, and Mr. Guillemin Minister in the said Church of Labor,
and the Provincial Deputies of Lower Guyenne and Bearn being heard; The
Assembly ordains, That till such time as it shall please his Majesty to grant a
settled Place for Religious Worship unto the Faithful dwelling in the Land of
Labor, that the said Church shall continue joined to the Province of Bearn,
that so it may be regularly visited: and till such time as it can subsist of it
self, instead of three hundred Livers which were granted by the former National
Synods unto the said Mr. Guillemin, he shall receive the yearly Sum of an
hundred and fifty Livers: and the Scholar named Martill, having been examined
in the last Synod of Bearn, and found meet and qualified to serve the Church of
God in the Sacred Ministry, shall receive for his yearly Portion sixty Livers:
and the Sum of seventy five Livers shall be paid in to the said Mr. Guillemin
in Consideration of his Sickness only, by the Lord of Candall; this Synod not
being able to charge it self with the reimbursment of his Expenses; because it
judges it an unreasonable thing that Pastors should take long Journies upon
none other Errand, than to present their Petitions unto the National Synods,
which might as well, if not been better done, by inserting them into the
Memoirs of the Deputies of those Provinces of which they be Members.

42. The Complaint of Stephen du Mas against Mr. Scoffier Pastor in the Church
of Lunell, is dismissed over to the Consistory of Montpellier, which having
heard both Parties, shall within one Month after the signification of this
present Act by that Consistory, judge of the pretended Right of the said du Mas
by Authority from this Assembly.

43. This Assembly ratifying the Decree of the National Synod of Castres,
concerning Mr. Bicheteau. Pastor in the Church of Vrillac, and Prosessor of the
Hebrew Tongue in the University of Montauban, judges concerning his Demands
notified by his Letters, as also by his Son declaring them by word of Mouth,
that they are not of their nature, which ought to be tendered unto the National
Synods; yet in Consideration of his great Necessities and Losses, it was
resolved that he should have a Token of this Assembly's Affection and Charity,
which should be given him, whenas the Moneys appertaining to the Churches came
to be divided.

44. The Letters of Dr. Andrew Rivet, Pastor and Professor of Divinity in the
famous University of Leyden, being read, a Decree past, That in the Answer
which should be returned unto him, he should be entreated to continue his Care
and Kindness to the Weal of our Churches. And whereas the laid Reverend
Professor is upon the point of being settled in the House of his Excellency the
Prince of Orange, and his Lordship the Lord Commissioner having remonstrated,
that he could not be there established without his Majesty's License, the Lord
of Champvernon his Brother is entreated to give him notice thereof.

45. The Reverend Pastors of Xaintonge and the Lower Guyenne, who were
appointed to examine the Works of Monsieur Blondell, having made an honorable
Report of them, this Assembly commended the said Monsieur Blondell for his
great Labor, Care and Exactness in so painful and important a Subject; and
exhorts him continually to employ those excellent Gifts and Talents, which God
has so abundantly bestowed upon him, in clearing up the History of the five
first Centuries: And whereas the last Synod of Castres had promised to bear the
Charges of the Impression, this Synod does now assure him, that he shall be
fully satisfied in this Particular. And that the after-Writings of the said Mr.
Blondell may be strictly perused and examined, the Provincial Synod of the Isle
of France is commissionated to do it, and to give their License and
Approbation, that so they may be printed.

46. Upon hearing the Report of those Commissioners who were appointed to audit
the Receivers Accounts of the Moneys collected by his Majesty's Permission, the
7th of February 1626, for relieving the Necessities of the Cities of Rochel,
Montauban and Castres, they declared, that they had seen and examined that of
Monsieur d'Huysseau for the Provinces of the Isle of France, Normandy, Berry,
Anjou, Poitou, Britain and Xaintonge; and his Receipt amounted to the Sum of
sixty nine thousand seven hundred and thirteen Livers, nineteen Sous, and six
Deniers; and the Disbursment to sixty eight thousand six hundred and thirteen
Livers, five Sous, and eight Deniers; so that there remains in the hands of the
said Monsieur d' Huysseau, eleven hundred and forty Livers, thirteen Sous, and
nine Deniers. The Assembly approving the said Audit, orders that Monsieur d'
Huysseau do pay in the said Debt unto the Lord of Candall, who shall divide it
between the Churches of Montauban, Castres, and Rochel, proportionably to what
they have already received, and may hereafter receive, according as it was
regulated in the National Synod of Castres; in doing of which he shall be
sufficiently acquitted and discharged of the Moneys so received and disbursed
by him; as he also is now thanked for his great Care, Pains and Diligence in
his management and execution of the said Office of Receiver. And it was farther
voted, that all his Acquittances sent unto the Churches, shall be restored to
him, if possible it can be done; but if it cannot be, they are then declared
Null and Void.

47. Report being made unto this Assembly, by those Reverend Divines who were
commanded to peruse diverse parts of that Treatise upon the Eucharist made by
Mr. Faucheur; and how exceeding profitable this most Elaborate Work would be
unto the Public, by reason of its deep and curious Learning, the most worthy
Author received the Thanks of the Synod for his singular. Diligence and Zeal
for God's Glory, and Affection to the edifying of God's Church: And Messieurs
de Croy, and Gigord, Pastors of the Churches of Beziers and Montpellier, are
ordered to revise it; that as soon as it has past their Examination and
Approbation, it may be immediately printed at the Costs of the Churches,
according to the Intention of the National Synod of Castres.

48. Mr. Charron, Deputy from the Church of Bergerac, related the Causes which
obstructed the restitution of their College: Whereupon this Synod voted a
Continuance of that same Supply which had been formerly granted them for its
Support by the last National Synod of Castres, and exhorted them to use their
best and utmost Endeavors that it may be restored betwixt this and the next
National Synod. And in case they can effect it sooner, the Provincial Synod of
Lower Guyenne is ordered to acquaint the Lord of Candall with it, who shall pay
in unto them the Moneys granted by the Churches for the Maintenance of the said
College, proportionably to what he shall receive from the Moneys of his
Majesty's Liberality. The Synod likewise ordains, that till the said College
be restored, the four hundred Livers attributed to the Province of Lower
Guyenne for its College, and applied by the last National Synod to that of
Nerac, shall be paid out of the same Fund, according to the Intention of the
said Synod.

49. The Synod of Burgundy is ordered to examine the Accounts of Mr. Gros, who
was commissionated to receive the Collection granted by his Majesty for the
Cities of Rochel, Montauban and Castres; that so, upon the closing of them,
they may send the residue of the Moneys in his Hands unto the Lord of Candall;
who, according to the Sum, shall divide it among those Churches, in the same
manner as he did that of Monsieur d' Huysseau, and conformable to the
Regulation made in the last Synod of Castres.

50. Mr. Du Bois, a Pastor discharged by the Province of Normandy, complaining,
that contrary to the Decree of the National Synod of Castres, the said
Province, instead of reckoning with him for his Portion assigned by the 24th
National Synod held at Charenton in the Year 1623 unto him, had ordered that
the free Portion granted him by that of Castres in the Year 1626, should be
paid in unto him by the Receiver of the said Province. The Assembly having
heard the Report of the Commissioners nominated by it to examine his
Pretensions, does condemn the said Province, for not having followed the
Intentions of the said National Synod of Castres, and ordains, that out of
the best and clearest Moneys belonging to the said Province, there shall be
detained the Sum of eight and fifty Livers, and fourteen Sous, in the hands of
the Lord du Candall, who shall pay it unto the said Mr. Du Bois, he giving an
Acquittance for it. And whereas he has not touched a Denier of his free
Portion given him by the National Synod of Castres, it shall be paid unto him,
either by the Lord of Candall, or his Deputy in the Province of the Isle of
France.

51. Whereas the first National Synod of Charenton in the Year 1623, had
ordained four hundred Livers to be paid in to the Province of Higher Languedoc,
now the Lord of Candall out of the first Moneys that shall be distributed among
the Churches, shall reimburse the said Province of that Sum.

CHAP. XX. APPEALS.
1. MR. Nonis, Pastor in the Church of Aulas, appearing to defend that Appeal
brought by the said Church from the Judgment of the Province of Sevennes, which
had ordered the Inhabitants of La Breauvaise to be incorporated for the future
with the Church of Breas. After hearing the pretended Grievances of the Church
of Aulas, and the Petition brought by the Deputy of the Inhabitants of La
Breauvaise, confirmed by their Letters, and by the Letters of the Church of
Breaus, and the Reasons given in by the Deputies of the Province for their
Judgment, whereby it was manifest that the Differences between those two
Churches of Aulas and Breas, are rather bottomed on the Passions of some
particular Persons, than on any real Interest of either. And whereas by the
Canon of the National Synod of Castres, the Province of Sevennes was
sufficiently empowered to pass a final Sentence in this Affair; this Assembly
condemns Monsieur Nouis for quitting the exercise of his Ministry in his
Church, and taking upon him the Office of a Solicitor, which might have been
better discharged by another; and enjoineth the Deputies of the Province of
Sevennes to labor a Composition in the most amicable manner of the Differences
between both thole Churches of Aulas and Breau; and in case they should not be
able to compose them, then they shall acquaint the Synod of Lower Languedoc
therewith; before which the Deputies of both those Churches shall appear, and
receive their final Judgment. Moreover, the Synod of Sevennes is injoined to
see to it, that Mr. Berle, Pastor of the Church of Breau, and all other
Ministers of the said Province do actually and personally reside with their
Flocks. And forasmuch as the National Synod of Castres had given full Power
unto Provincial Synods to judge finally in the Case of Conjunction and
Separation of the Churches and their Annexes, this Assembly confirming that
Canon, ordains, That in case any Difficulties should arise, and hinder the
Provincial Synods from coming to a final Judgment, then those Causes shall be
dismissed over to the Synod of the Neighbor Province; nor shall they be
brought hereafter unto our National Synods.

2. This Assembly approving the Zeal of the Province of Burgundy, and the
Motives inducing them to give Sentence on Monsieur Durand, Pastor of the Church
of Issurtille, does however take off that Censure of Suspension from him, and
restores him with Honor unto the exercise of his Ministry; and orders, that
the Act from which he appealeth, and that which follows it, shall be suppressed,
because it is very clear the said Durand had no Design to execute the Sentence
denounced against himself, but that he proceeded in that Business with all
simplicity and uprightness; wherein he is exhorted to continue, and to walk
with more prudence and circumspection, according to the Counsel of his Brethren.

3. This Assembly revising the Judgment given by the Province of Burgundy
against Paul Sarazin, heretofore Pastor in the Church of Vison, declares, That
the said Province proceeded in that Matter with excessive Severity; and for the
future enjoineth, that they never insert into the Causes of their Censures,
Facts not verified; and that in no wise they depart from the wonted Forms. And
farther, the said Sarazin is judged worthy of the greatest Censures, for
abandoning his Church without leave first had and obtained; and for being
negligent in conserving the Honor of his Vocation, whereunto he had been
called by God, and amending the Sentence from which he does appeal; this Synod
removes him, the said Sarazin, from his Ministry, which he shall not any more
exercise.

4. The Judgment past by the same Province against Joseph Aubery, formerly
Pastor in the Church of Coulonges in the Colloquy of Gex, is confirmed in every
Point and Article thereof.

5. Mr. Chacerat, Pastor of the Churches of Ponteau de Mar and Quillebeaf,
having made his Complaints unto this Assembly, and praying that Right and
Justice might be done him, the next Synod of Normandy was ordered to take
special care of him, and with all love to provide for the Safety of his Person,
and that his Life may be made comfortable to him. And the said Cacherat is
exhorted to continue in the Exercise of his Calling, with that Zeal and
Conscientiousness he has ever manifested. Yet afterward he revolted.

6. The said Mr. Cacherat appealing from the Judgment of his Province, and
declaring the Grievances pretended to have been sustained by him: The Assembly
representing to him, that his Cause was not of their Nature, which should be
brought before the National Synods, did exhort him to rest satisfied with the
Testimonial given him unanimously by his Province, of his Probity and Fidelity
in the discharge of his Ministry; and the rather, because these Persons, whom
he accuses to have done him Wrong, being dead, it is utterly impossible that
his Province should procure him a more ample Satisfaction.

7. Although the Appeal brought by Monsieur Pejus from the Judgment of the
Commissioners of the Province of Berry, be not of their Nature, which are to be
brought unto these National Synod: Yet nevertheless this Synod taking to it
self the cognizance thereof, does confirm that Judgment given by the said
Commissioners in all its Articles, and censureth the said Mr. Pejus for not
acquiescing in it, and enjoineth him to yield full satisfaction to it, on pain
of being suspended from the Ministry.

8. Mr. Vinieux, Pastor of the Church of Bazars, complaining, That the Decree
of the National Synod of Castres relating to him, had not been executed. This
Assembly ordained, that out of the first Moneys belonging to the Province of
Lower Guyenne, the Lord of Candall shall keep by him that very Sum promised
unto the said Vinieux. And he farther praying to be freed from the Service of
his Church and Province: He was ordered to apply himself unto his Province, who
should take into their serious Consideration his necessitous Condition, and the
great Importance of his Request and Appeal.

9. The Letters of Mr. Baux, appealing from the Judgment of the Province of
Higher Languedoc, were read. Whereupon the Synod enjoineth the said Province to
present him unto a Church that may comfortably maintain him, and the Church of
Mazemet is also enjoined to give him full Satisfaction for all his Arrears, on
default whereof they shall be deprived of the sacred Ministry, according to the
Rigor of our Discipline.

10. In explaining that Canon of the National Synod of Tonneins, held in the
Year 1614, and which is the seventh Observation on the foregoing Synod of
Privas, whereby the Provinces were charged to defray the Expenses of those
Churches whose Pastors should be deputed unto General Assemblies both
Ecclesiastical and Political: This Assembly declares, That whatsoever. Charges
particular Churches may be at, in procuring Ministers to serve them during
their Pastors Absence, ought to be reimburst them, not by their Pastors out of
their Sallaries, but by the Province which had deputed them, and this out of
the Moneys appertaining unto all the Churches of their Division; and therefore
disannulleth the several Appeals of the Churches of Vignan, Sauve, Breau,
Aulas, Castagnoles, St. Julian, and St. Private to the contrary.

11. Whereas the Church of St. German has refused to pay unto the Widow of
their deceased Pastor Monsieur de la Faye, the Pension of the Year of her
Widowhood, and appealed unto this Synod against her: this their Appeal is cast
out, because we do not judge it equitable to invalidate the Canons made by the
Provinces of both the Languedocs and Sevennes, for Payment unto the Widows of
their late Pastors without Exception, the Pension of the said Year of their
Widowhood, as also all Arrearages of Stipend owing unto their Pastors at their
Death by the Churches in which they ministered.

12. The Appeals of the Churches of St. Julian and St. Andre, for the same
reasons are declared null and void.

13. The Appeal brought by Monsieur Perrynet, on behalf of the Church of Die,
appealing from the Judgment of the Synod of Dolphiny, by which Monsieur Aymin
had been lent unto the said Church, was declared null.

14. Monsieur Belon appealing from the Judgment of the Province of Lower
Guyenne, for confirming Mr. D'oze in the Ministry of the Church of Tournon, and
not appearing to prosecute his Appeal, the Synod declared it null, and the
Appealant worthy of Censure, for commencing such an unjust Action.

15. The Church of Sommieres not prosecuting their Appeal from the Judgment of
their Province, the said Appeal was declared null, and the Judgment of the
Province ratified, yet that Province is required not to let that important
Church, nor any other of the same Nature to lie long vacant, but to see that it
be speedily furnished with an able Pastor.

16. Whereas it evidently appears that the Church of Baisly is much indebted
unto their Pastor Monsieur Bayeux, more through the Ingratitude of sundry
private Persons than their Poverty and Inability: This Synod disanulling their
Appeal, and condemning their Defect of Duty, injoineth them to give full
Satisfaction unto the said Mr. Bajeux, and this without applying a Denier of
those Moneys given by Monsieur Lasson, for the Maintenance of a Proposan to
this Purpose, which shall not for the future be at all diverted from that Use
unto which it was at first appointed; without very great Necessity, and the
Consent of their Provincial Synod, unto whom the said Mr. Bayeux is recommended
from us, that they would be pleased to procure him a competent and comfortable
Supply unto his Necessities.

17. The Appeal brought by the Church of Orbec, separated by the Synod of
Normandy from that of Mesnil Imbert, according to the Canon of the last
National Synod of Castres, under that Article of Annexations, is remanded back
unto the next Synod of the said Province, which, having heard the Reasons of
the said Church, shall proceed to a final Judgment in the case.

18. Monsieur Morris, Pastor of the Church of Fontaines and of Cressy, was
heard, unfolding the Grievances, of which he complained in his Appeal, and the
Deputies of Normandy in the Declaration of the Reasons of their Proceedings
against him. Whereupon the Assembly ratified the Judgment of the said Province,
and jointly commissionated the Sieurs de la Naux, da Buisson, de Beauvais, and
Herault, together with four Elders from the Churches of Montgobert, Sees,
Alenson, and the Consistory of Fontaines and Cressy, within one Month after the
Return of the Deputies of the said Province unto their Churches, to take new
Informations in this Affair, and after exact Inquiries made about it, to give a
final Judgment on Monsieur Morris for the Fact of which he stands accused.

19. The Memoirs and Acts of that Appeal sent by the Consistory of Montagnac
being read, the Synod gave Judgment, that the said Appeal ought not to be
admitted, and those who first moved for it were worthy of a severe Censure. And
forasmuch as the Differences betwixt Monsieur Perery Pastor in the Church of
Calignac, and the Consistory of Montagnac, are sprung from the Licentiousness
of his Discourses, and his frequent absenting himself from his own home, he is
expressly injoined to be more moderate in his Discourses, and to settle his
Abode in the midst of his Flock; and on Default hereof, the Province shall
proceed against him according to the Discipline.

20. The Churches of Montdidier and Montagoux refusing Payment of threescore
Livers, ordained by the Synod of Sevennes, unto Mr. Jubert, for Augmentation of
his Wages, their Appeal was rejected, and the Judgment of their Province
confirmed.

21. The Letters and Memoirs of Monsieur Chavanon, appealing from the Judgment
of the Synod of Sevennes, and of Mr. Rouvre, and of the Commissioners who were
sent by the said Synod unto the Church of L'edignan, having been read, and the
Deputies of the Province being heard: This Assembly exhorts the said Province
not to use its Power in lending Pastors of Churches within their Division, till
they have first consulted with their Churches, and seriously to consider of
their Importance; and it censureth the said Chavanon for those sharp and bitter
Expressions couched by him in his Letters: and as for those Facts mentioned in
the said Memoirs, the Cognizance and Judgment of them is reserved and dismissed
over unto the next Provincial Synod, which having maturely and exactly examined
and debated them, shall pass a befitting Censure upon the guilty and delinquent
Persons.

22. Although the Appeal of the Church of Sumaine was judged unworthy of our
Acceptance, yet the Province of Sevennes is exhorted to take into their
Christian Consideration the Necessities of the said Church, and to establish
such Officers in it, as are most capable of promoting its Edification, and not
to suffer Churches of such great Importance to be left any long time destitute
of Pastors, but that they be immediately supplied either from within or without
the Province.

23. Monsieur de Fabas, Pastor of the Church of Morlans, declared his
Grievances in his Appeal; and the Deputies of the Province of Bearn produced
the Reasons inducing their Synod to pass Censure upon him. After that both
Parties had promised Subjection to the Judgment of this Synod, Monsieur de
Fabas was censured by this Assembly for his extraordinary and irregular
Proceedings; and his Appeal being admitted, the Province of Bearn was exhorted
tor the future never to remove any Pastors from their Churches, till they had
first consulted their Churches, according to the Canons of our Discipline; and
it ordains, that since the Sentence of the Provincial Synod was barely
provisional, it shall stand and be in force till the Meeting of the next Synod,
by which the said Monsieur de Fabas shall be restored unto his Church of
Morlans, and Monsieur Rivas, who serves it at present, shall be provided of
another Church which may be more to his Convenience and Comfort. And till the
sitting of the said Provincial Synod, the said Monsieur de Fabas may live where
he does, and serve the Church of Nay; and in case the time of holding the said
Synod should be prorogued beyond the term of one Year, beginning from the time
of calling the said Synod, that then the said Monsieur de Fabas is declared to
be restored unto the said Church of Morlans.

24. This Assembly Censured the Church of St. Hyppolit, for those tart and
injurious Expressions used in their Letters against the Pastors of the Province
of Sevennes; and disannulling their Appeal, does confer Monsieur Buera upon
that Church to be their Minister, whom they formerly requested with a great
deal of Love and Importunity; and it sets the said Mr. Buera free and at
Liberty from his Province; the Deputies of the Province of Lower Languedoc
having thereunto consented: and Monsieur Bell is licensed to exercise his
Ministry at St. Hippolyte in Conjunction with Monsieur Buera, until the next
Provincial Synod, which shall provide another Church for Monsieur Bell; and
Monsieur Falgueroles is commanded to depart from St. Hippolyte, and to reside
in the midst of his own Flock, on Pain of being Censured according to the 13th
Canon in the 1st Chapter of our Discipline. And whereas the said Falgueroles is
accused by diverse Memoirs brought into this Assembly, all those Papers were
deposited into the Hands of the Deputies of Sevennes, with an express Charge
and Injunction unto the Synod of the said Province, that the said Synod do make
Inquiry into the Truth of them, and then to proceed to Judgment; and to bring
an Account hereof unto the next National Synod.

25. Although Mr. Benoist has just Cause of appealing from the Sentence of the
Synod of Anjou, which had invalidated the Judgment of the University-Council of
Saumur, for dividing the Profession of the Greek Tongue between Monsieur Duncan
and the said Mr. Benoist, who having exercised the said Profession before its
being suppressed, might warrantably demand to be restored to it: yet
nevertheless, because both these Gentlemen are frequently hindered and diverted
by their Practice of Physic from the said Profession, and for that the public
Interest requires all University-Offices should be conferred upon unincumbred
Persons, who may be free and at Liberty regularly to discharge them without any
Interruption by other Functions and Business: This Assembly disannulleth those
Appeals of the said Benoist and Duncan, and confirms that Sentence of the
University-Council, and of the last Synod of the said Province, and ordains,
that the Deputies of the said Province of Poictou, in their Return homeward,
shall visit the City of Saumur, and endeavor to accommodate and reconcile the
divided Parties, who are exhorted to live in all good Concord and Friendship,
and to give public Evidence of their having buried in oblivion all Resentments
of past Differences.

26. The Provincial Deputies of Bearn made, report, that they had received
Letters from the Deputies of their, Synod, and from Mr. Belard Elder of the
Church of Morlans, containing diverse Complaints against Monsieur de Fabas:
Whereupon, the said de Fabas was called in, and answered unto all the Articles
mentioned in the said Letters: And the Assembly persisting in their former
Judgment noted in the 23d Appeal, where the said de Fabas had purged himself
from all Matters objected against him, did farther ordain, That there should be
delivered to him, and to the Deputies of Bearn, Copies exactly collationed of
those Letters produced against him. And as for the Original, as soon as it
shall have been marked, it shall be carried by the Lords of Aubas and
Masselieres, Deputies of the Lower Guyenne, unto the Colloquy of Condommois,
which is expressly charged to make inquiry into that Accusation so obliquely
brought in against the said de Fabas, and raising Suspicions of him, as if he
intended to revolt from the true Religion, and had received to this purpose
Letters from the Monks of Morlans; that in case he be found guilty of this
Wickedness, he may be prosecuted according to the Canons of our Discipline; but
if not, that his Accusers may be condemned to give him all befitting
Satisfaction. And whereas in the Margent of one of the said Letters it is said,
that the Colloquy of Nay has begun its Process against the said de Fabas, upon
supposition of having deserted his Church; this Assembly being not able to
believe that the Churches of Bearn would be so extremely weak as to proceed
against them, who had appealed from the Judgment of their Synods unto this,
decrees, That Letters shall be written both to the Colloquy of Nay, and to the
Synod of Bearn, to advise them to be very careful, that the Union of the
Churches in their Province with those of this Kingdom, be not wounded directly
nor indirectly by any Actions contrary to Christian Charity. And whereas
extraordinary Processes have been managed and carried on against the said Mr.
de Fabas, or may be now begun or finished, they be all declared to be in very
truth and deed, as this Synod does now declare them to be, null and void, and
undertaken contrary to our Church Discipline.

27. The Appeal of the Church of Bergerac, opposing the Incorporation of the
House of Tiraqueau with the Church of Course, was rejected, and the Judgment of
the Province of Lower Guyenne confirmed, according to the Canon of the Synod of
Castres, which dismisseth such and the like Causes over to the Provinces, to be
finally decided by them.

CHAP. XX. General Matters.
Article 1. IT having been reported in this Assembly, that the Magistrates in
diverse Places have commanded the Professors of our Religion to hang their
Houses, and light out Candles on that Festival that goes by the Name of the
Holy Sacrament, and that several Persons through a deplorable Infirmity have so
much forgotten themselves, as to observe an Ordinance which obliges their
Consciences to yield unto the Creature that self-same Honor which is due unto
the Creator: This Assembly wanting Words with which it may express its just
Grief and Resentment for such an inexcusable Cowardliness, does adjure the
Consciences of those Persons, who have fallen into Sins so repugnant unto true
Piety, by the Fear of the Living God, by the Zeal of his Glory, by the Bowels
of his Mercy in the Son of his dearest Love, and by that special Care the
Faithful ought to have of their Salvation, that they would revive their Zeal,
and show themselves Loyal Followers of the Faith and Constancy of their
Fathers, and testify by their Perseverance in Well-doing, the Sincerity and
Soundness of their Repentance, and of their Affection to the Service of God.
Moreover, the Consistory of those Places where such Scandals do fall out, is
injoined to rebuke them with an holy Vigor, who give such an evil Example; and
all Synods are to proceed against them with all Ecclesiastical Censures; and if
they be Pastors and Elders, who by their Connivance and Dissimulation have, or
for the future may favor such Offenders, they shall not only be suspended, but
deposed also from their Offices.
CHAP. XXI. An Act for a Public National Fast.
2. FOrasmuch as after a most desolating Drought, which has reduced the
greatest part of the Provinces of this Kingdom to an extreme Famine, the Hand
of God lifted, up against us is not yet called back, but continues to visit
his People by contagious and mortal Diseases, which have overspread the whole
Land, and are every day more and more growing upon us: This National Synod of
the Reformed Churches of France, assembled by his Majesty's Permission at
Charenton, (acknowledging that the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, and
poured but upon the Face of the Earth, because of the Ungodliness of Men, and
of the Impenitency and Hardness of their Hearts) to prevent the dreadful
Judgment of this great and righteous Judge, who resists the Proud, and gives
Grace unto the Humble; and to turn away the Floods of his Vengeance, and to
excite the Bowels of his fatherly Compassions, and to impetrate from his Divine
Bounty the continuance of his gracious Favors for the Prosperity and Repose
both of Church and State; does exhort all the Faithful to bring forth Fruits
worthy of Repentance, and to cast off the unfruitful Works of Darkness, and to
return unto the Lord with broken, humble and contrite Hearts. And to this
purpose it ordains, That a Fart shall be celebrated in all the Churches of
this Kingdom, the first Day of January next following, which shall be signified
by the public reading of this present Act.

3. Forasmuch as diverse Provinces have craved Advice how we shall proceed
against those Persons who occasion scandalous Reports, prejudicial to the Peace
of the Church, and may hereafter propound Terms of Accommodation, by mingling
and blending of both Religions into one: This Assembly recommendeth unto all
the Churches, the observation of that Canon which was made two and thirty Years
ago, in the National Synod of Montpellier, whose Tenor follows. Syn.
Montpel. genesis mat. v. Forasmuch as it is the Duty of all the Faithful, heartily
to desire the Reunion of all the Subjects of this Kingdom into the Unity of
Paith, for the greater Glory of God, for the Salvation of millions Souls, and
the singular Repose of the Commonwealth; yet because of our Sins, this being a
Matter rather of our Desires than Hopes; and that under this Pretext, diverse
profane Persons do openly attempt to blend and mingle both Religions together:
All Ministers shall admonish seriously their Flocks not in the least to hearken
unto any such Notions, it being utterly impossible that the Temple of God
should hold Communion with Idols; as also for that such Wretches design only by
this Trick to debauch easy credulous Souls from the Belief and Profession of
the Gospel. And whoever attempts such a Reconciliation, be it either by Word or
Writing, shall be most severely censured.

CHAP. XXII. An Act in favor of the Lutheran Brethren.
4. THE Province of Burgundy demanding, Whether the Faithful of the Augustane
Confession might be permitted to contract Marriages in our Churches, and to
present Children in our Churches unto Baptism, without a precedaneous
abjuration of those Opinions held by them, contrary to the Belief of our
Churches? This Synod declares, That inasmuch as the Churches of the Confession
of Ausbourg do agree with the other Reformed Churches, in the principal and
fundamental Points of the True Religion, and that there is neither Superstition
nor Idolatry in their Worship, the Faithful of the said Confession, who with a
Spirit of Love and Peaceableness do join themselves to the Communion of our
Churches in this Kingdom, may be, without any abjuration at all made by them,
admitted unto the Lord's Table with us; and as Sureties may present Children
unto Baptism, they promising the Consistory, that they will never solicit
them, either directly or indirectly, to transgress the Doctrine believed and
professed in our Churches, but will be content to instruct and educate them in
those Points and Articles which are in common between us and them, and wherein
both the Lutherans and we are unanimously agreed.

5. If any Persons shall be hereafter deputed unto the Court by the National
Synods, during their sitting, they shall be accountable for all Moneys received
by them for the defraying their Expenses, whether those Sums do arise from
their respective Churches, or from his Majesty's Liberality; that so whatever
good Moneys come in clearly unto the Churches, being remitted into their common
Stock, may be disbursed to their common Profit and Advantage by Order of these
Synods.

6. Whereas, contrary to his Majesty's Royal Word given unto the Deputies of
the National Synod of Charenton, in the Year 1623, That Strangers employed in
the Service of the Churches of this Kingdom, should be continued: those
Reverend and Learned Pastors, Mr. Martinius, and S. Sharpius are commanded to
depart the Province of Dolphiny. The Lord Commissioner is entreated immediately
to issue out Letters Patents, that may effectually hinder the execution of
those new Orders, and that all Foreigners received into the Ministry among us,
both before that time and since, may not in any wise be molested or obstructed,
in performance of the Duties of their Charge and Calling.

7. The Lord Commissioner declaring, that it was his Maiesty's Intention, that
for the future our National Synods should beheld in this Place, and nowhere
else; This Assembly in all humility submitting to his Majesty's good Pleasure,
and hoping that he will be graciously pleased to permit our ancient established
Order to take place, does earnestly entreat the Lord Commissioner to present
our most humble Petitions unto his Majesty, that he would be pleased to grant,
that our next National Synod may be held at the end of three Years, in the Town
of A^anson in the Province of Normandy.

8. Hereafter no Moneys belonging unto the Churches shall be diverted to the
printing of any Books, unless such as shall be written by express Order of our
National Synods.

9. The Deputies unto this Synod having been on their Journey hither put unto
extraordinary Expenses, by reason of the Contagion which reigns universally
in all parts of the Kingdom; this Assembly exhorts all the Provinces to have
respect unto it, and therefore have rated the Charges of every day's Travel,
going and coming, at an hundred Sous, which is eight Shillings and eight Pence
per diem.

10. The Province, of Burgundy having made report of the deplorable Necessities
whereunto the Ministers and Pastors of Churches in the Colloquy of Gex are
reduced, for want of the Moneys granted heretofore by his Majesty's Bounty for
their Maintenance, not one of their People contributing any thing toward their
Subsistence: This Assembly touched with a just Resentment of such base
Ingratitude, does injoin all the Churches of that Colloquy to return unto their
Duty, and maintain their own Pastors, or else they shall be deprived of the
Ministry of the Blessed Gospel of our Lord Jesus; and this according to the
34th Canon in the first Chapter of our Discipline.

11. Whenas the Lords General-Deputies shall assist in Person in these National
Synods, they shall take place above all the Deputies of the Provinces.

12. The Synod enjoineth all the Provinces to distribute, with their wonted
Charity, those supernumerary Portions attributed to them, that they may redound
unto the Benefit of the poorer Churches, and of the more necessitous Ministers.

13. The Consistory of the Church of Paris is ordered to administer the
accustomed Oaths unto the Lords General-Deputies, immediately upon their being
accepted by his Majesty, and to keep by them a Copy of their Warrant.

14. The Lord Commissioner remonstrated, that through the Prerogatives of
Precedence claimed in the Churches of Noblemens Houses, diverse Quarrels had
arisen, and several Murders had been committed: therefore his Majesty has
ordained, That in such Places where the Public Worship of God, according to
our Religion, is exercised, the Proprietors of those Houses may not, under
color of that Propriety, pretend to any Place of sitting than is otherwise due
unto them, by reason of the Dignity of their Birth, or the Honor of their
Offices; and forbids all Ministers to pray for them in Public by their
particular Names or Qualities. Whereupon his Lordship the Commissioner being
entreated, that after we had prayed for his Majesty, it might be lawful for us,
in general terms, to pray for those Lords, under whose Justice the Church of
that Place was gathered: He replied, that he would in no wise hinder it.

15. The Deputies for the Province of Sevennes, may receive their part of the
Moneys granted us by his Majesty's great Liberality for the defraying of our
necessary Expenses in this Synod, without their having recourse unto the Lord
of Candall's Deputy for it, provided that they be accountable for that Sum so
received unto their Province. And all the other Provincial Deputies may
likewise do the same if they please.

16. After many and diverse Delays and Shiftings, this Assembly being at last
come to a Treaty with Sir John Palot, Counselor and Secretary to the King,
about the Moneys claimed by the Pastors of the Reformed Churches in this
Kingdom, from him the said Palot; for which a Suit was brought against him
before his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and diverse preparatory
Decrees had out against him: This Assembly has commissionated and deputed the
Lords, Marquess of Clermont and Galland, General-Deputies of our Churches; the
Lord of Candall Receiver-General of the Moneys granted by his Majesty's great
Bounty unto these Churches; the Lords Banage and de Champvernon, Pastors; De
Maschelieres, Dupuy, Gilbert and Beraud, Elders; and have given them full Power
to treat with the said Sir J. Palot, about the Moneys so claimed by our
Pastors, on such Conditions and Clauses as they shall judge most advantageous
unto our Pastors aforesaid, and to sign Contracts and Articles of Agreement
before Public Notaries; this Assembly promising, that they will stand to,
approve and ratify whatever shall be so determined by the said Lords
Commissioners.

17. This tenth day of October, in the presence of the said Lords Commissioners
before-named by this Assembly, to treat with the before-named Sieur Palot, upon
the Suit commenced against him for Moneys claimed by our Churches from him.
After that the Contract passed by the said Lords was read in the Assembly, it
was agreed to, approved, and signed by the Moderator, Assessor, and Scribes
thereof. And there having been a thousand Livers promised unto the Lord Malat
by a separate Act, and with which he remained fully satisfied, he was duly
discharged of those Powers formerly given him for prosecution of the said
Palot; and lie shall deliver into the Hands of the Lords General-Deputies, all
the Papers, Decrees, and Memoirs in his custody concerning this Affair.

18. The Lord of Candall having received from the said Sir John Palot the Sum
of eight thousand Livers, in pursuance of the Agreement made with him, the said
Sum shall be paid out in that manner as has been ordered by this Assembly: Nor
may the Deputies of the Provinces lay any Claim or Pretense whatsoever of Right
to the receiving of the said Moneys.

19. This Assembly authorized the Consistory of the Church of Paris, to treat
with the Lord Mallet, and to discharge him from all Prosecutions of the Sieur
Palot, and to satisfy him for his past Travel and Pains, to the Sum of thousand
Livers, which shall be paid him by the Lord of Candall; and this in full of all
Demands, Debts, Dues, or Pretensions whatsoever, either for himself, or his
late deceased Uncle the Lord Mallet, the said Mallet bringing in an Inventory
unto the Lords General-Deputies, and depositing it with them, of all Papers,
Decrees, and Memoirs in his keeping, concerning this Affair.

CHAP. XXIII. Particular Matters.
Article 1. MR. He is called in another Copy Lavent, in a third Lavand.
Laurence, heretofore Pastor in the Province of Bearn, presenting himself in
this Assembly with an Attestation of his Life, Carriage and Conversation, for
these two Years now last past, and most humbly and importunately petitioning to
be restored unto the Holy Ministry. This Assembly did not judge his Request meet
to be granted, but advised him to apply himself to some other Calling than the
Ministry of the Gospel, and to use such means for a Livelihood, as the
Providence of God may trace out and direct him to. Article 2. Forasmuch as
Monsieur Eymard abusing the Leave granted him by his Church of Vein in
Dolphiny, has for several Months withdrawn himself into the Province of Lower
Guyenne, and is there since employed in the Holy Ministry: This Assembly
censuring the Church of Berbignieres for calling him unto their Service, and
condemning the said Province for their too great Facility in admitting and
supporting him, does injoin the said Eymard to appear before the Synod of
Dolphiny, which if the good Providence of God do permit, will be assembled the
next Year; and he shall give an Account unto them of all his Actions and
Deportments: and in case he refuse Obedience and Submission unto their
Judgment, he shall be then, as he is now at this Instant, denounced suspended
from the sacred Ministry. Article 3. Mr. Harvey, Deputy from the Church of
Bourdeaux, presented himself to this Assembly with Letters and Memoirs from the
said Church, petitioning that Monsieur Vignier might be conferred upon them for
their Pastor, There was read also an Act of Opposition made against this Call,
by several Heads of Families of the said Church, and diverse Letters also of the
said Mr. Vignier, and Letters from the Church of Nerac. There were heard also
the Lords of Aulous and of Massilieres, petitioning on behalf of the Church of
Nerac, that the said Mr. Vignier might be bestowed on them for their Minister;
and the Lord Berdolin also spoke in behalf of the Province. Whereupon, the
Assembly bestowed Monsieur Vignier upon the Church of Nerac to be their
peculiar Pastor, and ordered the Church of Nerac to reimburse that of Bourdeaux
of those just and reasonable Expenses they had been at in their Endeavors for
the getting of the said Mr. Vignier; and the Church of Bourdeaux has leave
given it to provide for it self either within or without the Province,
according to the Forms prescribed by the Discipline; and in case the said
Church should meet with any Pastor at Liberty, and one who may contribute
beneficially to their Edification, the said Church is now empowered to treat
with him. Article 4. The Church of Valance shall carry its Declaration unto the
Synod of Lower Languedoc, which shall judge whether the said Church ought to be
rejoined to that of Soyon and the Province of Vivaretz. Article 5. For the
future the Church of Sr. Estienne in Forest, shall be reputed a Member of the
Synod of Vivaretz. Article 6. Mr. Constantin, Pastor of the Church of
Rochefoucauld, presented himself unto this Assembly, with Letters from his
Mother, petitioning that he might be discharged the Service of the said Church,
and drawn out of the Province of Xaintonge; and a Letter also was read from the
Consistory of the Church of Nismes unto the said Province, to the same purpose;
and the Act of Dismission granted the said Constantin by the Church of
Rochefoucauld. After hearing of the Deputies of Xaintonge, and a mature Debate
of all Arguments pro and con, this Assembly did consent that the said Mr.
Constantin should be set at Liberty, but did exhort him to make Conscience of
keeping to his Calling, and readily to embrace all Opportunities of serving the
Church of God. Article 7. The Deputies of the Province of Bearn having moved
that their Right unto diverse Scholars, whom they at their own Charges had
educated for the Ministry, and were now employed in the Pastoral Office in
Churches of this Kingdom, might be conserved: This Assembly did assure them,
that the Interest of the said Province should be equally regarded with that of
the other Provinces, and that the Churches of this Kingdom should be always
ready upon all Occasions to communicate unto them the sensible Effects of their
Charity and Affection to their Preservation. The Commissioners nominated by the
Synod to examine that Book made by Monsieur d'Aubus, entitled, Bellarmin
Reformed, having made their Report of it, the Assembly considering that it
would do good Service, and contribute greatly to the Edification of the
Readers, approved the printing of its first Part, and exhorts the said
Monsieur d'Aubus to employ those excellent Gifts which God has so abundantly
poured out upon him, to the Advancement of his Kingdom; and promised that if
God did enable the Churches with a Supply of Moneys, they would be at the
Charges of the first Impression.

But this Act, as Monsieur Bollenat, one of the Deputies unto this Synod,
relates in his Copy of its Acts, was afterward razed out; and that also by
Order of the very Synod.

Article 8. Because of the great Importance of the Church of Nismes, and its
present urgent Necessities, and for that the Provincial Deputies of Lower
Languedoc have yielded their Consent unto their Petition: This Assembly permits
the Lord Cheyron, Elder of the said Church, to discover to it any Pastor by
whose Ministry the said Church may be edified, that so it it be possible they
may be provided of a third Pastor during the Session of this Synod; and in case
he cannot find one, Leave is given unto the said Church to get it self a Pastor
any where, either within or without the Province. Article 9. Because of the
Inability of the Colloquy of Rovergue, and of the small Numbers of its Pastors,
the Colloquy of Albigeois is ordered to take care that the Church of St.
Affrique be supplied till the Meeting of the next Provincial Synod of Higher
Languedoc. Article 10. Leave is given by this Assembly to Mr. Bastide, a
Minister, freed from his Service in the Church of St. Affrique, and Province of
Higher Languedoc, to address himself unto any other Church or Province in this
Kingdom, in which he may exercise his Ministry, and make his Abode, as may be
best for his Advantage. Article 11. The Synod being informed of the Innocence
of Monsieur de Monbreueil; and touched with a deep Sense of his many and great
Sufferings, does order the Lords General Deputies to take a most especial Care
of his Concern, and to solicit the expediting and ratifying of those
Attestations given him by the Churches of Paris, Nantes and Rennes, who have
had a perfect Knowledge of his Life and Deportments, that so he may be fully
justified and discharged. Article 12. The Sieur Cottiere having presented a
Summary of Books composed by him, and of one especially treating of the ancient
Faith of the Churches in the three first Centuries: This Assembly being fully
informed of those many excellent Gifts with which God had endowed him, and
applauding his Zeal and great Affection for the Advancement of Christ's
Kingdom, does exhort him to continue the devoting of himself and Labors to the
Defense of God's Truth, and to carry his Writing unto the Synod of Anjou, which
is expressly ordered to peruse them, and having approved of them, to take care
about their Impression, and the Churches shall defray the Charges thereof.
Article 13. Mr. Perrier, formerly Receiever of the Moneys given by his
Majesty's Liberality unto the Churches in the Province of Vivaretz, making
Report that the said Province was indebted to him the Sum of two thousand one
hundred Livers paid by him beforehand unto the Churches for the Relief of
their Pastors, as is manifest from the Finito of his Account rendered unto the
Synod held at Mirabel in the Year 1625. This Assembly, to do him Justice upon
his Complaint, decreed, That if he will be pleased to quit his Expenses,
Damages and Interest, for Forbearance claimed by him, and the Province of
Vivaretz restoring him to his Office of Receiver, upon the same Conditions that
were accorded unto the present Possessor of it, that then he shall pay himself
the whole Principal in the two next ensuing Years; and as for the Arrearages
due unto him, provided he do make them appear to be real Debts, and that he
has not been satisfied for them out of the Obligation given him by the said
Province upon the Lands of Toulant and Baffre, they also shall be put upon
Account in Order to his Satisfaction. Article 14. The Province of Higher
Languedoc, and Monsieur Berauld one of its Deputies, were censured for
violating the Canons, which had taken Care that the Pastors of particular
Churches should be deputed unto Synods alternatively, and that none should be
received into Provincial Synods without Letters of Commission, and that no
Professors of Divinity should appear in Synods, although they were Pastors,
without being sent thither by their Churches, or called by the Synods, whenas
Matters relating to their Universities, or important Points of Doctrine, were
handled and debated. Article 15. The Lords General Deputies are ordered to
assist the Churches of Bearn in their Petition presented unto his Majesty for
the re-establishing of their College. Article 16. Mr. Robertson, Principal of
the College of Rochefoucauld, reporting the considerable Sums he had advanced
out of his own Pocket, toward the Maintenance of the said College: This
Assembly ordained, That out of the Moneys belonging to the Province of
Xaintonge, upon the Account of that College, the Lord of Candall shall keep in
his own Hands so much as shall be found due unto the said Mr. Robertson, who
was praised for his Angular Affection unto the public Weal of the Churches,
and is entreated to continue his Affection, good Service, and Faithfulness
therein as formerly. Article 17. This Assembly ratifying what was done by the
Consistory of Montpellier, in the Cause of Monsieur Ginmoux, which had been
turned over to them by the Synod of Castres, in the Year 1626, judges that the
Complaints of the said Ginmoux were groundless; and this shall be signified to
him by Letters. Article 18. The Deputies of Normandy and Xaintonge petitioning,
that some certain Sum of Moneys taken out of the Churches Stock, might be
employed toward the Redemption of many poor Protestants kept in hard Captivity
by the Turks: This Assembly having no Power to grant them their Request,
because of that small Stock which is at its Disposal, does advise them to
petition all the Churches in those and the Neighbor-provinces, to contribute
their Alms liberally for the Comfort and Deliverance of those poor afflicted
Christians, whole Misery is extreme, and cries aloud for the Bowels of our
Compassion. Article 19. The Lady Duchess of Tremouille having by Letters
recommended Mr. Jouars unto the Care of this Assembly, and demanded that the
Call she had given him to be her Pastor, might be ratified by our Authority: A
Vote passed, that the said Lady should be commended for her Piety, and exhorted
by Letters more and more to continue her Zeal for the Glory of God, and the
Advancement of his Kingdom. Article 20. Mr. Godfroy, the Civilian Professor of
the Laws in the University of Geneva, having writ unto this Assembly, that he
would compose a Body of Church History, which would discover the Untruths in
the five first Volumes of Cardinal Baronius, and this in Compliance with that
Motion made him by the National Synod of Castres, in the Year 1626. A Vote
passed, that the Thanks of this Assembly should be returned him by Letters, and
that he should be entreated to bless the Churches with the Fruits of his
Promises as soon as possible. Article 21. Report being made in this Assembly of
the grievous Persecutions undergone by Monsieur de Surville, Pastor of the
Church of Vigan; the Sum of three hundred Livers was immediately voted him for
his present Subsistence, and to be paid in to him by the Lord of Candall out of
the best and clearest Moneys in his Hands, and out of the rest, which we hope
to recover, another Sum of three hundred Livers more, and that one
supernumerary Portion out of the Dividend for the Province of Sevennes, shall
be offered to him free of all Taxes and Charges. Article 22. This Assembly
considering the Expenses that Mr. Chambauld has been necessitated unto by
means of the Accusation brought against Mr. Louis du Bois, Order was given unto
the Province of Vivaretz, to inquire into the Truth of his Complaints, that in
case they be made good and verified, the said Province shall betwixt this and
the next National Synod, give him one free Portion more to be added unto those
supernumerary ones already assigned to him. Article 23. The Lord of Candall
having freely remitted the Sum of eight hundred Livers, which were his proper
Right, and due unto him from the Sous in a Liver, out of the Sum of sixteen
thousand Livers granted by his Majesty unto the Churches for defraying the
Expenses of this Assembly; and he having also quitted out of the Reprisals,
which he might have taken in his Account, the Sum of fifteen hundred Livers:
This Assembly did unanimously render his Lordship their most hearty Thanks for
his generous and Christian Charities to our poor Churches: And there was voted
out of the said Sum of fifteen hundred Livers, three hundred Livers to be given
unto Monsieur de Tremblay, Pastor in the Church of Paulin; and three hundred
Livers more were to be delivered unto Monsieur de la Fon, Pastor of the Church
of Glenat and Calvinat, in Consideration of their pressing Wants; and fifty
Livers to Daniel Chabord for his Assistance, who came on purpose to this Synod,
to implore our Help toward the Redemption of his Son, who has been ever since
the last Troubles kept in Slavery aboard the Galleys: and the other eight
hundred Livers remaining of the said fifteen hundred, shall be paid in to the
Lord Ramboullet, Elder of the Church of Paris, to be employed by his Agent at
Marseilles, for the Comfort and Deliverance of the Faithful, who for Religion,
and a good Conscience Kept by them, have been there detained in Chains ever
since the last Commotions. Article 24. Forasmuch as Mr. Duncan has served in
the Profession of the Greek Tongue in the University of Saumur, by Order of the
Provincial Synod of Anjou, which had divided the said Profession betwixt him
and Mr. Benoist, who did formerly enjoy it: This Assembly ordainineth, that one
half of the Wages belonging unto, the Professors of the said Language, shall be
paid him in Consideration of the Service actually performed by him. Article 25.
Mr. Savoix, Pastor of the Church of Castres, having complained by Letters unto
this Assembly, of his being interdicted the Ministry: and that Act of the
Consistory of the Church of Castres being read, attesting, That he had preached
none other Doctrine but what was agreeable to our Confession of Faith and
Church Discipline: This Assembly ordered the Lords General Deputies to
prosecute in his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, for the disannulling
of the Decree of Interdiction past against him in the Court of Castres, and to
bestir themselves in this Affair with that Vigor as becomes them, it being a
Case of great and general Importance to all the Churches. Article 26. Those
free Portions which were granted the Churches of Auvergne by the 24th National
Synod of Charenton, in the Year 1623, shall be detained in the hands of the
Lord of Candall's Deputy, and be distributed by him among all the Pastors,
which have been sent by the Province of Sevennes, proportionably to the Service
performed by them, of which they shall bring good and valid Attestations.
Article 27. Out of the first Moneys that shall be distributed to our
Universities, the Lord of Candall shall pay in four hundred Livers unto Mr.
Robertson, Principal of the College of Rochefoucauld, to reimburse him in part
of his own Moneys advanced by him toward the Maintenance of the said College,
but with this Condition, that he do give them satisfaction, who have had
reciprocal Promises from him. Article 28. The Synods of Lower Guyenne are most
strictly charged to call unto an Account Mr. Bustanoby, for the Sum of three
hundred Livers delivered unto his deceased Father, and to deduct from the said
Sum the Charges of his Impression of the Catechism in the Biscayan Language,
according to that Promise made by the said Mr. Bustanoby some time before his
Death, unto the former National Synods. Article 29. Mr. Froger presenting
Letters from the Church of Pammiers, and declaring the deplorable Condition
whereunto that poor Church is now reduced: This Assembly did, in a more
especial manner, recommend the Concerns of that afflicted Church of Christ,
unto our Lords the General-Deputies; and to help defray the Charges of the said
Froger, there was ordered the Sum of one hundred Livers to be paid unto him
immediately by the Lord of Candall. Article 30. The Portion of Moneys accruing
from the Composition made with Mr. Palot, and appertaining to the Province of,
Sevennes, shall be deposited into the hand of Mr. Blachan, one of the Deputies
of the said Province, who having paid himself what he had advanced beforehand
for the Churches of Auvergne, shall be accountable for the Remainder unto the
next Provincial Synod.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Universities and Colleges.
Canon 1. THE ninth Article of general Laws for the Universities made in the
23d National Synod at Alez, shall be couched in these words; The Doctors and
Professors of Divinity, having been first chosen by the extraordinary Council
of the University, the said Election shall be brought unto the Provincial Synod
to judge thereon; and in case it be approved by them, then Order shall be taken
for the examination and reception of the Elect Professors, according to the
third Canon in the second Chapter of our Church Discipline. Canon 2. Forasmuch
as hitherto our Professors of Philosophy, in the Universities of this kingdom,
have not publicly taught Metaphysics, when they read their Course of
Philosophy, although that be one of the most principal Sciences, and which
demonstrateth the Principles of all the rest, and that it is now more needful
than ever to restore it unto its true Luster and Purity, because it has been
for so long a time exceedingly corrupted by the evil Artifices of the Doctors
in the Romish Church who have abused its Maxims to the depravation of Theology,
and have blended with it their false Principles, which they endeavor to the
utmost of their Power, daily to establish, to the great prejudice of Divine
Truth: Wherefore this Synod enjoineth all Professors of Philosophy to teach,
during their Course, together with the other parts of Philosophy, the said
Science: And all University-Councils are ordered to exert their Authority, that
the first Elements of Logic be taught in the first Classes, that so whenas
Scholars depart the Colleges, they may be prepared for higher Learning: And
that Professors of Philosophy do look to it, that they do not in the least
invade the Profession of Theology, but do contain themselves within their own
Bounds, without roving abroad in the handling of unprofitable Questions. Canon
3. And since the knowledge of the Greek Tongue is absolutely necessary for all
Proposans, who aspire unto the Sacred Ministry, and for that the profession
thereof is a singular Ornament unto Universities, we therefore wish it might be
continually upheld in them: but because the present Wants of our Churches are
very great, and our deep Poverty will not permit a Maintenance to be now
allowed unto the Professors of that Language, this Synod leaving the Care
thereof unto the next National Synod, that so the Instrustion of our Youth may
not be retarded, does order all University-Councils to have a careful Eye upon
the Regents of the first and second Classes, that the Greek Tongue be taught
diligently by them; and that our Scholars, when they are promoted unto the
Public Lectures, may be of sufficient capacity to read and understand Authors
in their Original Language, and be able to give a satisfactory account of them.
Canon 4. This Assembly being not in the least able to approve the Actings of
the Provincial Synod of Lower Languedoc, which instead of proceeding to examine
Mr. Codur, according to the requisite Solemnities and Forms prescribed by our
Church Discipline, had satisfied themselves with a bare Confirmation of him in
that conditional Settlement, which was done by the Colloquies of Nismes and
Vsez, who called him to exercise the Profession of Theology in the University
of Nismes; does injoin all the Provinces for the future to keep themselves to a
precise observation of so necessary a Canon; and especially it injoineth the
Province of Lower Languedoc punctually to perform what has been omitted with
respect to Monsieur Codur; as also to exert their Power, that his Successor in
the Hebrew Tongue be duly examined, and all Formalities most accurately and
exactly observed. Canon 5. After that the Opinions of all the Provinces had
been taken upon that Article charged on them by the last National Synod of
Castres, Whether it were expedient to lessen the number of our Universities at
present? This Assembly unanimously resolved to maintain them all, as also those
Colleges which are already established in every Province, because they be the
Seed-plot and Nursery of the Church of God, and that without their subsistence,
it will be utterly impossible to provide for the Instruction of our Youth, and
the growing Wants of our destitute Flocks, through the death of their Aged and
Learned Pastors. Canon 6. And whereas for diverse Years last past, the
Necessities of the State would not permit our Churches to enjoy, as formerly,
the Effects of his Majesty's Bounty, and for that the Universities and
Colleges in the Provinces have not received any regular Maintenance; and that
through the withdrawing or diverting of Pensions and Assignations, and other
Hindrances, they may hereafter fall into the like Inconveniences, which may
plunge them at last into a total Ruin. This Assembly, till such time as the
Churches can reap the usual Fruits of his Majesty's Liberality, has decreed,
That the fifth Denier of all Alms received in all the Churches being set by, a
certain Sum shall be extracted and employed toward the Maintenance of our
Universities and Colleges, by way of Advance and Loan only, until the Moneys
granted us by his Majesty being received, Restitution be made of these borrowed
Sums, to the Comfort and Benefit of the Poor. Canon 7. Every Provincial Synod
shall to this purpose appoint a Consistory, which shall be charged to receive
those extracted Sums, from the Fifth of all Alms in every Church, and to send
them unto those Universities which shall be mentioned to them, according to the
Dividend which shall be hereafter made, as well of the Universities as
Colleges, and to take an Acquittance from the Council of those Universities;
and by virtue thereof, to draw out of the Hands of the Lord du Candall, or his
Agent, or Deputy, the Sums advanced by them, who shall make good payment out of
the clearest Moneys unto those particular Churches, according to the Rates
which they had furnished, quarterly, and the first Quarter to begin the first
of October in this present Year.
CHAP. XXV. An Act for an Assessment for the Universities.
8. ACcording to this Order the Provinces having been assessed their respective
Quota's for the Universities and particular Colleges, it was thus resolved:

1. That the Province of Burgundy should contribute upon its Fifths, to the Sum
of five hundred thirty one Livers, and eight Sous. 2. The Province of Berry,
seven hundred forty three Livers, fifteen Sous. 3. Poictou, twelve hundred
seventy and five Livers. 4. Higher Languedoc, nine hundred fifty six Livers,
fifteen Sous. 5. Lower Languedoc, twelve hundred seventy and five Livers. 6.
Normandy, two thousand one hundred twenty and five Livers. 7. The Isle of
France, fifteen hundred ninety five Livers, and fifteen Sous. 8. Britain, five
hundred Livers. 9. Lower Guyenne, twelve hundred seventy and five Livers. 10.
Sevennes, six hundred fifty and seven Livers, ten Sous. 11. Anjou, eight
hundred and fifty Livers. 12. Dolphiny, one thousand sixty two Livers, and ten
Sous. 13. Xaintonge, twelve hundred seventy and five Livers. 14. The Province
of Provence gives nothing, as shall be declared in the tenth Article. 15. The
Province of Vivaretz gives nothing also.
All which Sums amount to fourteen thousand one hundred twenty and two Livers,
thirteen Sous.

9. And whereas the Province of the Isle of France has not as yet erected its
College, till such time as it can conveniently reestablish it: This Assembly
conserving their full Right and Privilege, does exhort them to cast in, by way
of Addition, unto the Stock of Moneys destined for the Maintenance of our
Universities, two hundred Livers, which they be charged to levy upon the
Churches of their Division, for the upholding of their College; and to continue
unto the Province of Berry, the grant of two hundred Livers, to help maintain
more easily the College of Chastillon upon the Loir; but with this Condition,
that the Province of Berry does bring in yearly Evidence, how they have
employed the laid two hundred Livers; and also whether they have disbursed
their own Moneys, as they were bound, toward the maintenance of their College.

10. As for the Provinces of Provence and Vivaretz, Report being made of the
Desolations befallen them through their being made the Seat of War; and both of
them having declared, that by reason of their Poverty they could not maintain
their Colleges at present, nor contribute any thing to the Subsistence of our
Universities, as the other Provinces did in the 8th Article but now mentioned;
this Assembly does for this time bear with their Failure, and in the mean while
does enjoin them to levy, as the other Provinces do, the fifth Denier of their
Alms to be employed toward the maintenance of their Scholars destined for the
Ministry, according to the import and meaning of the third Article in the
second Chapter of our Church Discipline: and they be charged to bring in a
clear and evident proof of their Obedience in this Particular unto the next
National Synod.

11. The Synod also having been informed of the Prejudice done unto the College
of Montauban, by retrenching the Sum of six hundred Livers, which was wont to
be imposed on the County of Querey: To prevent the utter Dissipation of the
said College, a Decree was made, That out of the fifth Denier in the Province
of Higher Languedoc, there should be assigned to it four hundred Livers every
Year until the next National Synod, upon condition that they be accountable for
the said Sum, as had been before ordained.

CHAP. XXVI. A Dividend of Moneys borrowed on the fifth Denier of all the Alms
of our Churches, for the maintenance of our four Universities at Montauban,
Saumur, Nismes and Die.
1. TO the University of Montauban for two Professors in Divinity, one in
Hebrew, two in Philosophy, and for the College, three thousand Livers: Whereof
the Province of Higher Languedoc shall furnish nine hundred fifty and six
Livers; and Normandy a thousand one hundred Livers; and the Isle of France six
hundred twenty and five Livers; and Xaintonge three hundred and nineteen Livers.

2. To the University of Saumur for two Professors in Theology, one in Hebrew,
and two in Philosophy, two thousand six hundred Livers: More for the Principal
of the College one hundred Livers, for the first Regent four hundred Livers,
for the second three hundred Livers, for the third two hundred and fifty, for
the fourth two hundred, and for him that governs the fifth and sixth Classis
two hundred and ten Livers, for the Doorkeeper and Beadle sixty. The total Sum
is four thousand one hundred and twenty Livers; of which the Province of
Normandy shall furnish six hundred five and twenty Livers, the Isle of France
seven hundred sixty eight Livers, and fifteen Sous; Xaintonge fire hundred
fifty and six Livers, Poictou eight hundred seventy and five Livers, Berry
three hundred forty and three Livers, seventeen Sous; Anjou eight hundred and
fifty Livers, Britain one hundred and six Livers, five Sous.

3. To the University of Nismes for two Professors in Theology, and one in
Hebrew, eighteen hundred Livers; whereof the Lower Languedoc shall furnish
eight hundred seventy and five Livers, the Lower Guyenne eight hundred seventy
and five Livers, and Sevennes fifty; In all, 1800 l.

4. To the University of Die nine hundred eighty one Livers, five Sous; of
which Dolphiny shall furnish six hundred sixty two Livers, and ten Sous;
Burgundy one hundred thirty and one Livers, seventeen Sous; Sevennes one
hundred eighty seven Livers, ten Sous.

5. And lest our Universities should fall into an utter Desolation, through the
Provinces neglect of the before-ordained Contribution, their Deputies now being
in this present Synod, are expressly charged to see this very Canon punctually
executed, and all Provincial Synods to censure the delinquent Consistories, and
to quicken every particular Church within their Division, to a revival of their
ancient Zeal, and to an augmentation of their Alms, which are to be employed to
so sacred and necessary a Business.

6. This Assembly being informed how carefully the University-Council of Saumur
have performed their Duty in maintaining the Profession of Divinity in their
University, especially since the last National Synod held at Castres,
applaudeth the Zeal of their Professors, which being entrusted with so holy and
laborious a Calling, do discharge it with singular Fidedelity and Diligence, in
which they shall be confirmed, after they have undergone their Examen,
according to the Canons of our Church Discipline.

7. The Council of the University of Saumur remonstrating their great want of
another Professor in Divinity, and that they had pitched upon Mr. Blondel, a
Man endowed with Gifts every way fit for such an important Charge: but the said
Mr. Blondel excusing himself upon many and diverse accounts from accepting of
it, and principally for that he has been requested to write the History of the
Church for the first five hundred Years: The Provincial Deputies of the Isle of
France being heard, and Letters from the Earl of Roussi, and the Church
gathered in his House, having been perused, who did all unanimously petition
that the said Mr. Blondel might be continued to them, because of the great
Success of his Ministry, and their Edification by it: Hereupon the Assembly
declared, That for sundry and weighty Reasons the said Mr. Blondel could not be
granted unto that University, although he might be very beneficial to it; and that
therefore the Council of the said University must seek after some other Person,
from whose Labors they might reap the Advantages desired by them for their
University.

8. The Assembly yielding to the Importunities of the University of Saumur,
does from this instant accord, that Monsieur de la Place, Pastor of the Church
of Nantes, notwithstanding all his Excuses and Arguments urged by him to the
contrary, shall take upon him the Professorship of Divinity, after that he has
undergone the Examination prescribed by our Canons. And the Lord Commissioner
is entreated to procure leave for the Province of Britain to meet in a Synod
within six Months, that so the University of Saumur may present their Request
as soon as possible unto the said Synod, which is ordered to give their
Consent, and to provide the Church of Nantes of another Pastor, who may as
successfully serve and edify it as the said Mr. de la Place has done. And the
Province of Anjou is seriously to consider the Necessities of that Church; that
in case, through the Advice of the Synod of Britain, it should seek for a
Pastor from among them, they may obtain full Satisfaction and Consolation. And
in case the said Synod of Britain cannot be held within the space of six
Months, yet the said Mr. de la Place shall remove by virtue of this Act unto
the said University.

CHAP. XXIX. Accounts brought in by the Provinces about the Maintenance and
Subsistence of their Colleges and Universities.
9. THE Province of Anjou tendering in two Accounts, one brought unto the Synod
of Saumur, in the Year 1629, and the other unto the Synod held at Loudun, in
the Year 1631, for the Years 1625, 1626, 1627, 1628, 1629, 1630, and 1631 until
the last September, they were allowed and approved.

10. The Province of Lower Languedoc brought in no Account for their University
of Nismes, nor for the College of Beziers, because they had received nothing
neither for the one nor other, since the last National Synod of Castres, held
toward the End of the Year 1626.

11. Nor has the Province of Higher Languedoc brought in any Account for their
University of Moutauban, nor for the College of Castres, they not having
received one Farthing since the sitting of the last Synod.

12. There were five Accounts exhibited by the Province of Dolphiny, of their
Receipt and Disbursment for the University of Die, beginning in July 1626, and
ending the 1sf of July 1630, all which were allowed and approved.

13. The Province of Berry brought in three Accounts for the College of
Chastillon upon Loir, two whereof were tendered to the Synod held at Chastillon,
the first on the 22d of February, 1629; the other the 22d of March next
immediately following; the third and last was to tho Consistory of Gien,
authorized to examine it by the Synod held at Mer the 18th of June, 1631, for
the Year 1628, 1629, 1630, and 1631; and the said Accounts were allowed and
approved.

14. The Province of Xaintonge brought in the Account of the College of
Rochefoucauld, rendered by them the Year 1630, on the 11th of June, unto the
Synod held in the same Place, and the said Account was allowed and approved.

15. The Province of Britain exhibited also an Account of the College of
Vitre, the 21st of June, 1628, concluded and determined by two Elders of the
Consistory of that Church, which was allowed and approved.

16. The rest of the Provinces brought in no Accounts about the Maintenance of
their Colleges, they not having received any thing for them since the 25th
National Synod held at Castres in the Months of September, October and
November, 1626.

CHAP. XXX. The Accounts of the Lord of Candall, Receiver General of the Moneys
given by his Majesty's Liberality unto the Reformed Churches of France.
1. THE Assembly having taken notice of those great and notable Sums brought in
by Reprizal in the Account of the Lord of Candall, ordained, That the Lords
General Deputies of our Churches unto his Majesty shall be charged most humbly
to petition his Majesty, that he would vouchsafe some better Assignations in
lieu of those Sums so reprized by the Lord of Candall, and particularly for
those Assignations given for the Year 1627. And whereas in the Reprizals of the
foregoing Years, there be diverse Offices took as Payments of some of those
aforesaid Assignations, which it is needful they should be sold at any Rate or
Price whatsoever; that out of the Moneys arising from their Sale, there may be
some Relief afforded to our poor Pastors: This Assembly commissionated the
Sieur Mestrezat, Pastor of the Church of Paris, the Sieurs Marbaud and
Rambouillet, Elders of the said Church, together with the said Lords General
Deputies, conjointly with the Lord of Candall, to treat, compound and agree
about the Sale of the said Offices, either in whole or in part, to one or more
Persons, at such a Price and on such Conditions as they should judge most
advantageous for the Churches. Moreover, in case they should meet with any one
or more, who would deal with them for all those Sums, or any part of them which
are employed in Reprizal by the said Lord of Candall, this Assembly does
empower and authorize the said Sieurs Mestrezat, Marbaud, and Rambouillet,
together with the Lords General Deputies and the Lord of Candall, to compound
and agree with them for such a Sum or Sums of Money, as they shall judge most
conducing to the Benefit and Profit of our Churches.

2. The Sieurs L'amy and de Croy, Pastors, together with the Lords de Balterne,
and Large Baston, Gilbert, Mazilieres, and Cheyron, Elders, having been deputed
and commissionated by this Synod to audit the Accounts of the Lord du Candall,
they made Report, That in their examining and Perusal of them, they found the
said Lord of Candall to charge himself with the Receipt of four hundred forty
one thousand, three hundred forty one Livers, and with the Disbursment of four
hundred thirty four thousand, two hundred fifty nine Livers, for the Years
1625, 1626, and 1627. And therefore the said Accomptant is indebted the Sum of
seven thousand fourscore and one Livers, six Sous, and six Deniers, which will
be distributed by and according to the Order of the present Synod. Upon which
there is this remarkable, That the said Accomptant owes an Acquittance of Mr.
Grass and Mouschamp, of eight hundred fifty and one Livers, sixteen Sous, and
three Deniers, which he shall be obliged to produce, and that under the Article
of Moneys accounted for, but not received, he must give a Receipt in his next
Account, which he shall make of the parts of seventy seven thousand, seven
hundred forty three Livers, twelve Sous, and six Deniers, of one part, and of
four thousand three hundred Livers of another, for the Offices of
Commissioners, Receivers of the real Possessions, or of the Products of the
Sale of those Offices.

3. And as for that part of two hundred twenty one thousand three hundred forty
and one Livers, out of the Assignations given for the Year sixteen hundred
twenty and seven, the said Accomptant is discharged from giving any more
Receipt in those Accounts he shall bring in for the future, unless his Majesty
shall be graciously pleased, in Answer to our most humble Petitions presented
to him by the Lords General Deputies, to make the said Sum of two hundred
twenty and one thousand, three hundred forty and one Livers, contained in the
Tallies of the Exchequer, to be of good Value, and to re-assign them
elsewhere; and then these Tallies which are now in the Hands of the said Lord
of Candall, the present Accomptant, shall be produced, yielded up and resigned
by him unto such Person or Persons as he shall be appointed so to do by this
present Synod, or by any other that shall be held hereafter.

4. The said Lord of Candall tendered an Account of the Parts employed by him in
Reprizal, in the Accounts rendered by Mr. Cooper his Deputy, unto the National
Synod of Castres, held in the Year 1626, the Receipt of which Account amounts
unto three hundred and one thousand, three hundred and fifty Livers, two Sous,
and eight Deniers, and the Disbursment unto two hundred fourscore and eight
thousand, four hundred twenty and three Livers, fifteen Sous, four Deniers: so
that the said Accomptant owes the Sum of twelve thousand nine hundred twenty
and six Livers, seven Sous, and four Deniers; which Sum he will distribute
according to the Order of the Synod.

5. Upon which it must be observed, that for part of the aforesaid Disbursment
the said Accomptant owes one Acquittance of Mr. Gras and Mouschamp of two
hundred forty two Livers, sixteen Sous, which he shall be bound to bring forth,
and that from the Contents in the Reprizals of the present Account, he is to
make Receipt in his next Account of part of thirteen thousand two hundred forty
seven Livers, sixteen Sous, and nine Deniers, which was employed under the Name
of Monsieur Morineau, Receiver General of Bourdeaux; and of eleven thousand
seven hundred Livers of Mr. Aubert, who was Security in bailing of Rene Brunet;
and of twenty four thousand two hundred fifty and nine Livers, and twelve Sous,
for the Offices in La Beausse, because the said Accomptant is charged to use
all possible Diligence in recovering of those parts aforesaid.

6. And as for those going under the Name of Farmers of the Convoy and
Constableship of Bourdeaux, and of Mr. Claudius de Ragois, Receiver General of
Limoges, of de Bascles, Farmer of the Bargains of Anjon, of de Malbranche,
Treasurer of the Farms, and Loriol, Receiver General of the Exchequer of
Languedoc, amounting in the whole unto the Sum of two hundred and seventeen
thousand, two hundred fourscore and seven Livers, seven Sous, seven Deniers,
the said Accomptant is discharged from making any more Receipt in his Accounts,
which he shall render for the future, unless through some extraordinary
Occasion he should receive any thing, but he shall remain charged with the
Tallies of the Exchequer, and the Certificates of the Receivers and Farmers who
are Debtors of the said Sum of two hundred and seventeen thousand, two hundred
fourscore and seven Livers, seven Sous, and seven Deniers, to tender, yield up
and deliver him to such Persons, and in such manner as he shall be appointed
either by this present Synod, or by any other which may be held hereafter.

A Dividend of the Sum of Sixteen thousand Livers granted by his Majesty, for
defraying the necessary Charges of this Synod, and to the easing of our
Provinces.
l. s. d. To the Province of Burgundy, for four Deputies 1141 16 04 To the
Province of Provence, for two Deputies 570 18 02 To the Province of Berry, for
four Deputies 1141 16 04 To the Province of Poictou, for four Deputies 1141 16
04 To the Province of Xaintonge, for four Deputies 1141 16 04 To the Province
of Britain, for one Deputy 280 09 01 To the Lower Guyenne, for four Deputies
1141 16 04 To the Province of Vivaretz, for two Deputies 570 18 02 To the
Province of Sevennes, for four Deputies 1141 16 04 To the Province of Anjou,
for four Deputies 1141 16 04 To the Province of Dolphiny, for four Deputies
1141 16 04 To the Province of Lower Languedoc, for four Deputies 1141 16 04 To
the Province of Higher Languedoc, for four Deputies 1141 16 04 To that of
Bearn, for two Deputies 570 18 02 To the Province of Normandy, for four
Deputies 1141 16 04 To the Province of the Isle of France, for four Deputies
1141 16 04 For the Charges of Deputies sent unto the Court 300 00 00

The Sum should be 16000 l. but the negligence of the Copyists of these Acts
has been unexcusable: None of them agree, in several which I have perused and
compared, in their particular Sums set down by them; so that I beg the Reader's
pardon for these Mistakes, which are none of mine, nor can I tell how to
rectify.

CHAP. XXXII. A Blank Dividend. A Dividend made among the Churches, of the Sum
of -- granted by the King unto the Reformed Churches of France, for the support
of them, of their Universities and Colleges; and this for the Year now current
l631, and for the ensuing Years, until the sitting of the next National Synod:
According to which Dividend the Lord of Candall shall make payment of the said
Sum, as it was agreed betwixt him and the National Synod of Gap, in the Year
1603.
Article 1. OUT of the three first Quarters of which Sum of -- for the said
Year 1631, which amounts to the Sum of -- there must be distributed these Sums
following. Article 2. To the Universities, as was before ordained, the Sum of
nine thousand nine hundred and eleven Livers for one whole Year. To the
University of Montauban three thousand; to that of Saumur four thousand one
hundred and twenty Livers; to that of Nismes, eighteen hundred Livers; to the
Universities of Die, nine hundred eighty and one.

Article 3. To the Colloquy of Gex, taking in the 3600 Livers ordered them by
the King, and 100 Livers for the College 44000000 Article 4. To the Inhabitants
of Bergerac for their College, the Sum -- Article 5. For Supply of the Lords
General-Deputies 33000000 Article 6. To the Province of Burgundy, for forty one
Portions, viz. nineteen Pastors in actual Service, five Churches to be
provided, three Proposans, fourteen supernumerary Portions, four hundred for
the College: in all, the Sum of -- Article 7. To the Province of Provence, for
twenty Portions, to wit, eleven Pastors in actual Service, five Churches to be
provided for, two Proposans, and two Portions supernumerary, and 400 l. for the
College: in all, the Sum of -- Article 8. To the Province of Berry, for 41
Portions, viz. 26 Pastors in actual Service, two Pastors discharged, one Pastor
to be provided for, five Churches to be supplied; four supernumerary Portions,
whereof one shall be delivered free of all Taxes and Charges unto Monsieur
Falquet, and 400 l. for the College: in all, the Sum of -- Article 9. To the
Province of Poitou, 63 Portions, to wit, 38 Pastors in actual Service, five
Pastors destitute of Churches, eighteen Churches to be provided for, four
Proposans, and 400 l. for the College: in all, the Sum of -- Article 10. To the
Province of Xaintonge, 86 Portions, to wit, 56 Pastors in actual Service, one
Pastor discharged, eighteen Churches to be provided for, five Proposans,
sixteen supernumery Portions, and 400 l. for the College: in all, the Sum of --
Article 11. To the Province of Britain, eighteen Portions, to wit, ten Pastors
in actual Service, three Churches to be provided for, two Proposans, and three
Portions supernumerary, and 400 l. for the College: in all, the Sum of --
Article 12. To the Province of Lower Guyenne, 110 Portions, to wit, 69 Pastors
in actual Service, one Pastor discharged, and one to be provided for, five
Proposans, 28 Portions supernumerary, and 400 l. for the College: in all the
Sum of -- Article 13. To the Province of Vivaretz, 57 Portions, to wit, 18
Pastors in actual Service, three Proposans, fifteen Churches to be provided
for, -- Portions supernumerary, one of which shall be for Mr. Bois, and another
for Mr. Chambaud, and 400 l. for the College: in all, the Sum of -- Article 14.
To the Province of Sevennes, 57 Portions, to wit, 56 Pastors in actual Service,
one Pastor to be provided for, three Churches to be provided for, three
Proposans, fifteen supernumerary Portions, five of which shall go free of all
Charges unto the Churches of Auvergne, and another free to Monsieur de
Surville, and 400 l. for the College: in all, the Sum of -- Article 15. To the
Province of Anjou, 36 Portions, to wit, twenty Pastors in actual Service, one
Pastor Emeritus.
discharged, 3 Churches to be provided for, three Proposans, and eight Portions
supernumerray: in all, the Sum of -- Article 16. To the Province of Dolphiny,
110 Portions, to wit, for 62 Pastors in actual Service, one Pastor discharged,
another resugied, thirteen vacant Churches to be supplied, eight Proposans, 25
Portions supernumerary, and 400 l. for the College: in all, the Sum of --
Article 17. To the Province of Lower Languedoc, 90 Portions, viz: 53 Pastors in
actual Service, four Pastors discharged, seven vacant Churches to be supplied,
three Proposans, 23 supernumerary Portions, and 400 l. for the College, in all
the Sum of -- Article 18. To the Province of Higher Languedoc, 132 Portions,
viz. 60 Pastors in actual Service, five Pastors discharged, thirteen Churches
to be provided for which arc vacant, six Proposans, 58 Portions supernumerary
for ruinated Pastors and Churches in the late Troubles: in all, the Sum of --
Article 19. To the Province of Normandy, 59 Portions, viz. 46 Pastors in actual
Service, six Churches to be provided for, six Proposans, one Portion
supernumerary, and 400 l. for the College, is in all the Sum of -- Article 20.
To the Province of the Isle of France, 62 Portions, viz. 41 Pastors in actual
Service, two Pastors discharged, three Churches to be provided for, six
Proposans, nine Portions supernumerary, whereof one for Mr. Richard, and 400 l.
for the College: in all, the Sum of -- Article 21. To Mr. Guillemin, for the
Church of Labor, and a Scholar 210 00 00 A Dividend if October-Quarter, for
this present Year 1631, and for the Years ensuing, of the Moneys granted by bis
Majesty unto the ^^^^ches.
Article 22: 1. To the Province of Burgundy -- 2. To the Province of Provence
-- 3. To the Province of Berry -- 4. To the Province of Poictou -- 5. To the
Province of Xaintonge -- 6. To the Province of Britain -- 7. To the Province
of Lower Guyenne -- 8. To the Province of Vivaretz -- 9. To the Province of
Sevennes -- 10. To the Province of Anjou -- 11. To the Province of Dolphiny --
12. To that of Lower Languedoc -- 13. To that of Higher Languedoc -- 14. To
that of Normandy -- 15. To the Province of the Isle of France --

Article 23. The Committee which was ordered to close up the Accounts of the
Colleges and Universities, having made their Report, and the Synod having took
notice of them to whom any thing was owing, gave in a List of their Names and
Sum unto the Lord of Candall; which including several Sums ordered unto several
particular Persons, amounted to the Sum of -- Which said Sum he was ordered to
make payment of out of the residue of the Money in his Accounts, according as
he shall receive them, deducting for himself a Sous in the Liver, as it is more
amply and particularly expressed in the forementioned List of Names, and
Account of Moneys affixed to them. Article 24. The Provincial Deputies of
Sevennes shall receive their part of the Moneys granted by his Majesty for
defraying the Charges of this Assembly, before it comes through the hands of
the Lord of Candall's Deputy, but with this Proviso, that they be accountable
for it unto their own Province; and this may be done also by the other
Deputies. Article 25. The Sum of eight thousand Livers paid in by Mr. Palot
unto the Lord of Candall, shall be delivered out in that manner as this
Assembly has appointed, without any Diversion or Diminution of it, or Rights
for receiving it by him or his Deputy. Article 26. This Assembly impowereth the
Consistory of the Church of Paris to treat with Mr. Malat, and to discharge him
from all further prosecuting of Mr. Palot, and to content him for his past
labor, by paying him the Sum of one thousand Livers; which said Sum shall be
paid him down by the Lord of Candall, in full of all Demands, either for
himself or his deceased Uncle Mr. Malat; and the said Malat shall yield up into
the Hands of the Lords General-Deputies, an Inventory of all Papers, Decrees,
and Memoirs relating to this Affair, and which are now lying by him.
CHAP. XXXIII. The Roll of Deposed and Apostate Ministers.
Article 1. JOseph Aubury, formerly Pastor in the Church of Coulonges, in the
Colloquy of Gex, a Fellow of low Stature, long Visage, his Eyes deep sunk into
his Head, of fierce Look, great Nose, Chesnut-colour'd Hair, his Legs and Feet
crooked turned in, halting on both sides, deposed by the Province of Burgundy
for Forgeries, Perjuries and other Scandals, aged about thirty eight Years.
Article 2. Anthony Dumont, formerly an Augustinian Friar, but since Minister at
St. Aignan and Myntre, in the Land of Mayn, deposed for diverse Crimes by the
Synod of Anjou, in the Year 1629, and is since turned Apostate; he is low of
Stature, his Hair almost white, roving Eyes, high Eagle nosed, short Neck,
shrub shouldered, haggardly, froward, and unsociable in his Discourses. Article
3. Andrew Peloquin, formerly Pastor of the Churches of Houdan and Fontaines, in
the County of Chartres, but now an Apostate; a short Fellow, Chesnut-colour'd
Hair, little Eyes, and sunk into his Head, flat Nose, and a great fat Tongue,
about eight and thirty Years of Age. Article 4. -- Tussan, formerly Minister at
Manduel in the Colloquy of Nismes, about fifty Years old, a Fellow low of
Stature, Chesnut-colour'd Hair, deposed from the Ministry for his Contempt and
total Desertion of it, and for abandoning himself to base and most unworthy
Occupations. Article 5. Pompey de Romerville, formerly a Monk, but since Pastor
in the Church or Gontault in the Colloquy of Agenois, but now an Apostate, a
middle-siz'd Olive-colour'd Fellow, disfigured with the small Pox, having a
Pearl in one of his Eyes, his Hair and Beard exceeding black, he has lost his
Voice; after his Revolt he betook himself to sell Wine by Retail in a Tavern;
but not thriving at that Trade, he is now at present the third Regent in the
College of Bourdeaux. Article 6. Jacob Chaslier, formerly Pastor in the Church
of Queivas, a Fellow not only infected with Arminianism, but with diverse other
monstrous Errors, which he has endeavored to diffuse abroad clandestinely;
and being upon the Point of Deposal from the sacred Ministry by the Colloquy of
Ambrunois, he prevented the Sentence of the said Colloquy, by telling them,
that he quitted both his Robe and Religion; he is short of Stature, but well
compacted, Chesnut-colour'd Hair, and staring up like Hogs Bristles, great Nose
and Eyebrows, his Eyes deep sunk in, and looking down-ward, high Forehead,
large Shoulders, hasty in his Gate as if he were running, very rude in his
Discourse. Article 7. David Bourgade, aged about fifty five Years, low of
Stature, grayhair'd, great Eyes, a pur-blind squinting Fellow, great Nose, and
somewhat high, very violent, covetous, voluptuous, and undisciplinable,
formerly Pastor in the Church of Carlat in the Colloquy of Foix, but since an
Apostate. Article 8. John Durant, alias D'avant, heretofore Minister of
Araiquson in Bearn, being accused of the Crimes of Adultery, he turned
Apostate; a middle-siz'd Fellow, having a plain long bald Head, pale of Color,
a staggering trembling Voice, rotten Teeth, ready to laugh upon any occasion,
looking downward, black Hair waxing gray, disorderly in his Carriage. Article
9. Francis Langelot, sometimes Minister of Audaulx in Bearn, but now an
Apostate, low of Stature, flat and bald-headed, high Forehead, great flat
Nose, a little Beard, and that mixed, white Teeth, Voice and Hands trembling,
roaving wandering Eyes, and high looked, great Neck, and hunch-back'd on one
side, precipitant in his going. Article 10. Theophilus Casamajor, Minister of
St. Gladie in the aforesaid Province of Bearn; mean of Stature, little Head,
few Teeth, hoarse Voice and effeminate, his Beard red and mingled, sad of
Countenance, and ready on any occasion to laugh, he is now an Apostate.
CHAP. XXXIV. An Act for calling the next National Synod.
11. THE next National Synod is assigned to the Town of Alanson in the Province
of Normandy, three Years hence, as was before appointed in the 7th Article of
general Matters.

12. All these Acts abovementioned were done and decreed at Charenton St.
Maurice near Paris, by the Deputies of the Reformed Churches of France and
Bearn, in the twenty sixth National Synod of the said Churches, assembled by
his Majesty's Permission at Charenton aforesaid, the second time; and their
first Session was on New-year's-day, in the Year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred thirty one.

Signed in the Original, Mestrezat, Moderator. Jamet, Assessor. D. Blondel,
Scribe. Armet, Scribe.
Also by the Lord Galland, Commissioner for his Majesty, and by all the Pastors
and Elders, Deputies for the Provinces unto the said Synod.

CHAP. XXXV. Remarks upon the Deputies.
1. MR. John Mestrezat, Moderator in this Synod, was born of an eminent Family
in Geneva, which were originally seated at Verona, a great and ancient City in
Italy, but forsaken by them for Religion. This famous Divine came young as a
Traveller into France, about twenty two Years of Age, in the Quality of a
Proposan or Student of Divinity, to visit the Protestant Universities; which
having done, he came to Paris; and the Reformed Church there having heard him
make a Proposition, immediately demanded him for their Minister, unto which he
consented with this Proviso, that they would let him reside two Years at Saumur
to complete his Studies. And that term being expired, he returned back to
Paris, and served the Church of God there with a great deal of Pains and
Fidelity forty two Years, and departed this Life in the Year 1657, being sixty
six Years old. He had a Conference with a Jusuit of great Reputation, called
Regourd, by express Order of the Court, and in its Presence, to the Confusion
of the Jesuit, and the great Advantage and Honor of our Holy Reformed
Religion: I have seen a piece of his concerning the Church: what other Works
were published by him, I am sorry that I cannot inform my Reader of them.

2. Monsieur Michael le Faucheur was also born of godly Parents in the same
City of Geneva, and recieved into the Holy Ministry in the Provincial Synod of
Vivaretz, and presented by that grave Assembly to the Pastoral Office in the
Church of Annonay, though he was then but eighteen Years of Age; and Annonay
was a Church of no mean Consideration; but what he wanted in Years, he made up
in Merit. In the Year 1612, he was removed to the Church of Montpellier, in
which he served full twenty Years: He was one of the Scribes in the National
Synod held the first time at Charenton, 1623. The Parliament of Toulouse having
made a Decree, that no Foreigner should be a Minister, or preach within their
Jurisdiction, in the Year 1632. he came to Paris, and solicited the Court for
his Restoration: He had in that City a Brother very rich, and one who followed
the Law. Whilst he resided here, the University of Lansanna in Switzerland,
earnestly invited him to be Professor of Theology in it, but he very civilly
declined that Motion, though he was a most accomplished Scholar and Divine. In
the Year 1636, a Franciscan Friar, who was the great Favorite of Cardinal
Richelieu, and of his Cabinet-Council, meeting him in an Apothecary's Shop in
St. James's Street, demanded his Name, and he telling him who he was, and the
Reason for which he was driven away from Montpellier, he bespoke him; Monsieur
Faucheur, do you tarry here, and preach at Charenton, and I will engage my Word
for it, that the King shall never trouble you. He communicating this Relation
to his Brother, his Brother communicated it unto the Elders of that Church, who
discoursing with him, entreated him to preach the next Lord's Day in their
Temple, which he did, to their and the Churches very great Satisfaction: And
here he continued in their Service, preaching and dispensing the Word and
Sacraments among them unto the Day of his Death.

3. Monsieur Amyraut, of him I shall speak in the Catalogue of the Churches and
Ministers hung upon the File in the last National Synod, where my Reader will
meet with a Multitude of Remarks upon the Pastors that were then actually
employed in the Service of those-once flourishing Churches.

The End of the Second Synod of Charenton.
THE Acts, Canons, Decisions; and Decrees, OF THE Twenty seventh Synod OF The
Reformed Churches OF FRANCE, Assembled under his Majesty's Authority and
Permission, AT ALANSON, IN THE PROVINCE of NORMANDY, On Wednesday the twenty
seventh of May, and ended Thursday the ninth of July.

In the Year of our Lord God, 1637.

Being the twenty eighth Year of the Reign of LOUIS XIII. King of FRANCE and
NAVARRE.

The CONTENTS of the Synodical Acts, in several Chapters.
Chap. I. THE King's Writ for calling the Synod presented by the Marquess of
Clermont, General Deputy. Monsieur St. Mars Commissioner for the King. Names of
the Deputies. Election of the Synodical Officers. Chap. II. The King's
Commission to Monsieur St. Mars, to represent hit Royal Person in the Synod.
Chap. III. The Lord Commissioner's Speech, and a very long one, unto the Synod.
Chap. IV. The Synod's Replies and Answers unto the Contents of it. Chap. V.
Three Deputies sent with a Letter from the Synod unto the King. Chap. VI. A
second Letter to the King. Chap. VII. Approbation and Confirmation of the
Confession of Faith. Chap. VIII. Observations upon the Discipline. Chap. IX.
Observations on the last Nati^^^^ Synod Chap. X. A peni^^n^ (...), after t^^
Yo^^s Deposition and Pena^^^, i^ at last restored to the Exercise of his
Ministerial Office. Chap. XI. The Snappishness of the Commissioner, the
Prudence and Patience of the Synod. Chap. XII. A penitent Minister petitioning
for Restoration unto his Ministerial Office, refused; and why. Chap. XIII. The
Churches of ^earn incorporated with the Reformed Churches of France. Chap. XIV.
Appeals. 3. A Lady appealeth. 4. Des Champs a factious Minister. 11. An Appeal
about a Legacy. Chap. XV. General Matters, 1. An Action indifferent, so left by
the Synod. 4. Whether Slaves may be purchased. 5. No Minister to be ordained
without a Title. 7. An Act for a National Fast. 8. An Expedient to preserve
Peace among the Ministers, Professors, and Churches. 9. A Petition to the King
opposed by the Commissioner. 10. A Letter from the King unto the Synod. The
Synod's Letter to the King. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. A Determination of the Controversies moved by Amyrald
and Testard. 31. The Deputies in the Synod to receive an hundred Sous par diem.
Sallary from their Provinces. 32. Professors of Divinity designed. Chap. XVI.
4, 5. Two poor Ministers in great Wants. 7. An Expedient to compose Differences
in a Church and Province* 9. The Case of La Milletier^ the Reconciler. 11.
Complaints of two Books, L'Antidote, and Les Ombres d'Arminius. Chap. XVII. Of
Universities. Order taken for upholding and maintaining the Universities. Chap.
XVIII. Arrears of Moneys due unto the Universities. Chap. XIX. Accounts of the
Universities. Chap. XX. Lord of Candall's Accounts. Chap. XXI. A Dividend of
16000 Livers. Chap. XXII. Roll of deposed and revolted Ministers. Chap. XXIII.
Catalogue of the Churches and Ministers. Chap. XXIV. Monsieur Ferrand's Speech
unto his Majesty. Chap. XXV. Instructions given unto Monsieur Ferrand, etc.
deputed to the King. Chap. XXVI. Monsieur Ferrand's Speech to Cardinal
Richelieu. Chap. XXVII. The Bill of Grievances. A Book styled, Le Proselyte
Evangelique. Chap. XXVIII. Letters from the Pastors and Professors of Geneva.
Chap. XXIX. Testimonials unto Dr. Rivet's Treatise against the Books of the
Sieurs Amyraut and Testard. Chap. XXX. Two Letters, one from Mr. du Moulin,
another from Monsieur Diodati to the Synod.
The Synod of Alanson. 1637. The 27th Synod.

SYNOD XXVII. 1637.
In the Name of God. Amen.
Acts of the twenty seventh National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France,
held in the Town of Alanson in the Province of Normandy. It was opened by his
Majesty's Permission, Wednesday the 27th of May, and ended Thursday the 9th of
July, in the Year of our Lord God 1637, and the 18th Year of the Reign of our
Dread Sovereign Louis the Thirteenth, King of France and Navarre.

CHAP. I. The King's Writ presented by the Marquess of Clermont for calling the
Synod. Mr. de St. Mars Commissioner. Deputies. Officers chosen.
Article 1. THE Lord Marquess of Clermont General Deputy of the Reformed
Churches of France, at the opening of the Synod presented his Majesty's
Warrant, expressly given by him under his own Hand for the calling of it; the
Tenor of which is as follows.
This sixth Day of Jannary, in the Year Sixteen hundred thirty and seven, the
King being at Paris, upon the most humble Petition of his Subjects of the
Reformed Religion, who craved his Royal Permission for the calling and
assembling of a National Synod, there not having been one held since that of
Char^nton in the Year 1631. His Majesty being desirous to gratify those his
Subjects, and to deal favorably with them, has permitted, and does permit the
Convocation of a National Synod, the 27th day of May next following the date
hereof, in the Town of Alanson; but on this condition, that there be none other
Matters debated in it excepting those only which are allowed by the Edicts; and
that the Lord of St. Mars, Counselor to his Majesty in his Council of State,
be Personally present in the said Synod, in Quality of his Majesty's
Commissioner, as has been usual and customary in such Assemblies. In Testimony
whereof his Majesty bath commanded me to expedite this his present Writ, which
he has seen and signed with his own Hand, and caused to be countersigned by me
his Counselor and Secretary of State, and of his Commandments.

Signed, LOVIS: And a little lower, Phelippeaux.

Article 2. There came unto the said Assembly, on behalf of the Provinces and
Churches, these Pastors and Elders deputed by them, whose Names follow. Article
3. For the Province of Normandy, the Sieurs Benjamin Basnage Pastor of the
Church of Ste Mere, and John Maximilian de l'Angle Pastor of the Church of
Rouen; together with the Lords John Richer Lord of Cerisy, Elder of the Church
of Gaul; and Lawrence le Febure, Advocate in the Parliament of Normandy, and
Elder in the Church of Rouen. Article 4. For the Province of Dolphiny, the
Sieurs Paul Guyon Pastor of the Church of Dieu le fit, and Stephen Blanc Pastor
and Professor in the Church of Die; together with the Sieurs James de
Beaucastell Esquire Lord of Auges, Elder in the Church of Courtezon, and Gaspard du
Baeuf Advocate in the Parliament of Dolphiny, and Elder in the Church of
Grenoble. Article 5. For the Province of Burgundy, the Sieurs Aymedee de Bons
Pastor of the Church at Chaloons, and Heliodorus du Noyer Pastor of the Church
at Bussy; together with the Sieurs John Roy Advocate in the Parliament of
Burgundy, Elder in the Church of Arnay le Duc; and Charles Perreau Advocate in
the said Parliament, Elder in the Church of Autun and Couches. Article 6. For
the Province of Lower Languedoc, the Sieurs Samuel Petit Pastor and Professor
in the Church of Nismes, and John Gigord Pastor of the Church of Montpellier;
together with the Sieurs Francis de Fonfrede, Counselor to the King in the
Presidial Court of Nismes, and Deacon of the said Church; and John Browns Lord
of Roussares, Elder in the Church of St. Ambroise. Article 7. For the Province
of Xaintonge, the Sieurs Daniel Chesnel Pastor of the Church of Marans, and
There be two of his Sons Ministers, and Exites here in England.
John Commarc Pastor of tie Church of Vertueil; together with the Lords Rene de
Saint Ledger Esquire Lord of Boiscond, Elder in the Church of Clan; and Mr. George
Reveau, Counselor to the King, and his Advocate at Rochel, Elder of the Church
in that City. Article 8. For the Province of Provence, the Sieurs Paul Maurice
Pastor of the Church of Aigueres, and John Monestier Elder in the Church of
Lormarin. Article 9. For the Province of Sevennes, the Sieurs John Bony Pastor
of the Church of St. John de Gardonengue, and John Surville Pastor of the
Church at Vigan; together with the Sieurs Peter de Fons Lord of des
Sabbatieres, Elder in the Church of Quissac; and Thomas Serre Esquire Elder in the
Church of Sauve. Article 10. For the Province of Higher Languedoc, the Sieurs
Peter Charles Pastor of the Church of Montauban, and Matthew Tissier Pastor of
the Church of Mauvoisin; together with the Sieur Sebastian de St. Fauste Elder
in the Church of Mauvoisin, and the Sieur David Fournes Advocate and Elder in
the Church of Montauban, who was absent, having fallen sick on the way. Article
11. For the Province of Anjou, the Sieurs Daniel Couppe Pastor of the Church of
Loudun, and John Vigneux Pastor of the Church du Man's; together with the Sieurs
George Rabbotteau Advocate in Parliament, and Elder in the Church of Pruille;
and Peter de Ceriziers, Counselor of the King in the Borough of Loudun, and
Elder of the Church in the same Town. Article 12. For the Province of the Isle
of France, the Sieurs David Blondell Pastor of the Church of Roussy, and John
Daille Pastor of the Church of Paris; together with the Sieurs Peter de L'aunay
Lord of La Mote, and Peter Marbault Counselor and Secretary to the King, Elder
in the Church of Paris. Article 13. For the Province of Britain, the Sieurs
Daniel Sauve Pastor of the Church of Villevigne, and Giles Lovyer Esquire Lord of
la Grestiere, Elder of the same Church. Article 14. For the Province of
Orleans; the Sieurs Jacob le Brun Pastor of the Church at Romorantin, and John
Taby Pastor of the Church at la Charity; together with the Sieurs Claudius
Bernard Bailiff of Chastillon upon the Loir, and Elder of the Church there; and
Timothy Baignoux Elder in the Church of Mer. Article 15. For the Province of
Poitou, the Sieurs Samuel le Blanc Pastor of the Church at St. Maixant, and
Daniel Pain Pastor of the Church of Chastelheraut; together with the Sieurs
Charles de Gourgeaud Esquire Lord of Pannieure, Elder of the Church of Mougon, and
Francis Mauclere Esquire Lord of la Mezanchere, Elder in the Church of la
Jandouiniere. Article 16. For the Province of Vivaretz, the Sieurs Alexander de
Vinay Pastor of the Church of Annonay, and Simeon de Hosty Pastor of the Church
in St. Fortunate; togethe^ with the Sieurs Andrew Paget Elder of the Church of
Couxnear Privas, and Anthony Regnet Doctor of the Laws, Advocate and Elder in
the Church of Aubenas. Article 17. For the Province of Lower Guyenne, the
Sieurs John d' Alba Pastor of the Church at Again, and Daniel Ferrand Pastor of
the Church of Bourdeaux; together with Daniel Descayrac Lieutenant in the Court
of Justice at Pugeols, Elder of the Church in the same place; and James Charron
Advocate in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and Elder in the Church of Bergerac.
Article 18. For the Province of Bearn, the Sieurs Simon Fuget Pastor of the
Church of Carresse, and Peter Margendie Doctor of Physic, and Elder in the
Church of Orthez. Article 19. After Invocation of the Name of God, the Reverend
Mr. Benjamin Basnage was, by plurality of Votes, chosen Moderator, and Mr.
Couppe Assessor, Mr. Blondel and Mr. Launay Scribes.
CHAP. II. The King's Commission to the Lord of St. Mars.
AS soon as the Officers of the Synod were chosen, his Majesty's Letters
Patents were read, giving a Commission to Monsieur de St. Mars, Counselor in
his Council of State, to represent his Person in it; the Form and Tenor of
which was inserted into the Acts of this Synod.

A Copy of his Majesty's Letters Patents.
Louis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
To our beloved and trusty Counselor in our Council of State, the Lord of St.
Mars, Greeting.
WE having permitted our Subjects of the pretend. Reformed Religion, to hold in
our Town of Alanson, the 27th of May next ensuing the Date hereof, a National
Synod, composed of all the Deputies of the Provinces of our Kingdom, to treat
of Matters concerning their Religion: And being to choose a Person of sufficient
and requisite Abilities, and of approved Loyalty to Us, to be present in our
stead; and to act in quality of our Commissioner in the said Assembly: Now, we
being well acquainted with those Services you have done us in sundry and
honorable Employments wherewith you have been entrusted by Us, and of which
you have acquitted your self most worthily, we judged that we could not make a
better choice than of your Person, being well assured of the continuance of
your Affection to our Service. For these Causes we have Commissionated and
deputed, and do commissionate and depute, by these Presents, signed with our
own Hand, you my Lord of St. Mars, for Us, and in our stead, to go and sit in
Person, on our behalf, in the said Synod, convocated in the said Town of
Alanson, there to propose and resolve whatsoever shall be commanded you by us,
according to the Memoirs and Instructions we have to this purpose put into your
Hands, taking heed that none other Matters be there proposed, but such as ought
to be treated in such Assemblies, and are permitted by our Edicts: And in case
they should attempt any thing to the contrary, you shall hinder them by the
interposal of our Authority; and you shall speedily give us advice thereof,
that we may apply those Remedies which are convenient in ^^uch cases. And for
the doing hereof, we give you Power, Commission, and special Command by these
presents, for such is our Pleasure.

Given at Paris the sixth Day of January, in the Year of Grace, One thousand
six hundred thirty and seven, and of our Reign the seven and twentieth. Signed
Louis, and a little lower Phelippeaux.
And sealed with the Great Seal of yellow Wax.
CHAP. III. The Commissioner's Speech.
THE said Letters Patents being read, the Lord Commissioner acquainted the
Synod with what his Majesty had given him in charge to them, in these very
words.

SIRS,
I Am come into your Synod, to declare unto you his Majesty's Pleasure; you all
know it, and have preached and taught Obedience unto the Higher Powers. All
Authority is of God, and therefore by consequence, on this immovable
Foundation, you must needs be infallibly obedient: besides, you are obliged to
it by his Majesty's Bounty, and by that Care he takes of you, the favorable
Effects whereof you shall always experience, whilst you be obedient. His
Clemency and Power are your two firmest Supporters. And as touching the former,
his Majesty has charged me to assure you of the perpetual continuance of his
Affection to you, and of his maintaining his Edicts, as long as you continue
faithful Subjects. And as for his Power, Strangers themselves have felt it, and
do every day more and more feel and experience it. We have with our Eyes seen
those Successes of his, which are more than Human; by which God publishes to
the World, that he upholdeth our King with his own Hand, and makes him a
Terror to all about him. I shall not remember those many Fortresses and Places
of Surety which once you had, and where you reposed too much Confidence, all
which are now reduced to nothing; whereas since you depended on the sole Favor
of his Majesty, your Condition is much more happy, and your Security much more
fixed and stable. I doubt not in the least but that you have often reflected
upon that admirable Providence of God, in making his Majesty's Royal Authority
to be your Preservation. You be destitute of all Support, yea, you have in the
midst of you against you a World of People, subject, as the Sea, unto various
Troubles and Commotions; and yet notwithstanding the King upholds you in the
Liberty of your Consciences, and in the peaceable exercise of your Religion.
The fixedness and stability of the Earth, balanced in the Air, is as great a
Miracle as the Creation and Subsistence of the Universe. God sustains it by the
self-same Power with which he did at first create it; and you also in like
manner are preserved by the Word of his Majesty's Power. Therefore, Sirs, you
that are Ministers should shine in Wisdom and good Conduct in your respective
Stations and Churches. Among many signal Effects of his Majesty's Goodness
received by you, this is not the least, yea, it is a most remarkable one, that
you can meet in this Assembly, and that too in a time of War. All the Provinces
of the Kingdom, like so many Lines drawn from the Circumference, can center in
this Synod in Peace. Could you ever demand a greater Testimony of his Majesty's
Goodness, than this Confidence he reposeth in your Loyalty and Fidelity? This
should engage you to submit your selves, with greater reverence than ever, unto
his Royal Pleasure. And I in no wise doubt, but you will so govern your Words
and Actions, and chiefly your Affections, that his Majesty shall have a most
entire, and perfect, and dutiful Obedience from you.

2. And that you may depend on the Protection and sovereign Authority of the
King, and may be wholly and solely fixed to his Service, his Majesty does, in
the first place, forbid you all Intelligence and Correspondence, whether
Foreign or Domestic. And his Majesty being informed, that the Synod of Nismes,
and Mr. Rousselet a Minister, have received Letters from the Canton of Bearn,
they are admonished not to commit the like Offense for the future: For the
Statutes positively forbid the King's Subjects to receive Letters from Foreign
States; yea, they are not so much as to see any Foreign Ambassadors, though
residing near his Majesty; much less should our Synods, or private Ministers,
receive Letters, or hold Correspondence with Foreign Synods or Provinces. The
Lords of Bearn are Allies of the Crown, and are of the same Religion with you,
united in Religion with you; but there must not be any Union betwixt you and
that Commonwealth: for the least Correspondence, even in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, with Foreigners, though Confederates of the King, does raise a
Suspicion, and beget a Jealousy of Designs against the State. The said Synod,
nor the said Minister Rousselet, ought not to have received those Letters; or
if they had, before they had opened them, they should have communicated them to
the Governor of the Place; or the said Synod should have delivered them to his
Majesty's Commissioner, who was then present in it.

3.And as for Domestic Correspondence within the Kingdom, you must know, that
inasmuch as Provincial Councils are forbidden you, therefore consequentially
all sort of Communication, by which such a Council might be promoted, is
expressly forbidden also. His Majesty forbids you to nominate any Ministers,
or other extraordinary Deputies, whereby one Province may communicate with
another about Political Affairs, because you be no Body Politic; no, nor at
this time, whilst you are assembled in a National Synod, may you communicate
with another about Ecclesiastical Affairs, though relating unto all the
Provinces in general, as it has been of late practiced by the Synod of Nismes,
who entered into a Correspondence with that of Dolphiny, and the Church of
Montlimart, about the Ministry of Monsieur Creguts; and with that of Sevennes,
and the Church of Anduze, for the Ministry of Monsieur issue out Orders
relating to the general State of the Churches; and for the same Reason his
Majesty forbids the Provincial Synods the Indiction of public National
Fasts.

4. In the second Place, that there may be a more firm Peace established in the
State, it is his Majesty's Pleasure that all Ministers do preach unto his
Subjects that Obedience which is due unto him, and to his Authority and
Commandment, by the Word of God, and that it is no wise lawful for them,
whatever Causes or Occasions may induce them to it, to revolt from, nor take up
Arms against their Sovereign. And since it may so fall out, that some things may
be enacted by the Government and Civil Magistrate, which for want of knowledge
of their true Springs and Motives, may seem prejudicial to the Liberty of your
Confidences, (although it be his Majesty's Intention to uphold and conserve it
for you) therefore his Majesty does expressly forbid all and every one of you,
to tax or condemn his Government for any evil Designs against your Religion:
And farther, that in none of your Sermons or Writings you make use of those
Expressions of Torments, Martyrs, and Persecutions of the Church of God.

5. Also that the Blessing of Peace may be promoted, whenas you shall have
occasion to speak of the Pope, and of those of the Roman Catholic Religion, of
its Sacraments and Ceremonies, you are not to call him Antichrist, nor them
Idolaters, nor to use any unbecoming Words that may offend or scandalize them,
upon Pain of Interdiction, i. e. of silencing the Ministers, and dissolving the
religious Church-Meetings, and of greater Punishments. You be also prohibited
all injurious Words and Proceedings against such Ministers and other Persons
who shall have quitted your Religion tor that of his Majesty.

6 Finally, That the Public Peace may not be disturbed by any Writings or
licentious Discourses, no Books treating of your Religion, whether printed
within or out of the Kingdom, shall be sold, till they have been first examined
and approved by two Ministers authorized thereunto; otherwise they shall be all
seized and confiscated.

7. Moreover; forasmuch as to resist the Orders of inferior Magistrates,
deriving their Power, as Beams from the Sun of Sovereign Royal Authority, is to
resist his Majesty himself, and to subvert the very Publick-Weal; his Majesty
being informed that a Proposition was set on foot in the Synod of Andusa, that
the Marriage of a certain Person called Audebert (who had remarried after a
Divorce obtained from and decreed by the Judge there) should not be celebrated,
his Majesty enjoineth you all, now that you be assembled in this National
Synod, to resolve on it, that all your Churches shall acquiesce in, and conform
unto all Orders of the Civil Magistrate in this Particular, about the
disannulling of Marriages, and to take an especial care for the future, that
this Default be repaired.

8. Thirdly, It being his Majesty's Desire and Purpose to continue unto you the
Possession and Enjoyment of his Edicts, which are granted and accorded to you,
and it being but just and equitable that you also on your part should observe
them, and not in the least infringe or violate them: His Majesty injoineth all
Ministers, that in Obedience to the 10th Article of the Edict of Pacification,
made in January 1561, and those Letters Patents duly obtained thereupon, and
enrolled, that they do preach only, as in Duty they are bound, in those Places
where they make their actual residence; and he forbids them all Excursions
from thence to preach in those Places, which they call Annexations. And his
Majesty being informed of the manifest Contempt and Violation of this his
Ordinance, has given me in charge to reiterate this his Prohibition, and
commands you to obey it upon the Penalties imported in the said Letters, and in
the Decree of his Council, and threatens you, in case of Noncompliance, with a
total Forfeiture and Deprival of all the Privileges and Benefits of his Edicts.

9. And whereas also you are permitted by the forty fourth Article of
Particular Matters in the Edict of Nants, to assemble your selves before a Judge
Royal, and by his Authority to make an equal Tax, and to levy Moneys necessary
for defraying all Synodical Charges, and the Maintenance of your Ministers in
the Exercise of your Religion, his Majesty does forbid your said Ministers to
take the Moneys out of the Poors Box, or of Legacies bequeathed to pious Uses,
for the Payment of their Sallaries, or the fifth Penny out of that Fund for the
Maintenance of your Universities, and this upon very good and considerable
Grounds; because it is not any ways reasonable, that the Moneys given and
destined to the Poor, should be diverted and employed to any other Usage.

10. And farther; since it cannot be imagined that any Person could be guilty
of such extreme Baseness and Ingratitude as to refuse a Contribution to the
Support and Maintenance of his own Pastor: however, lest there should be such
an one, and to prevent it for the future, his Majesty explaining the 44th
Article beforementioned, does permit you every New-year's-day, or in one or
some of those twelve Days in the beginning of the Year, to make an Assembly of
the principal Inhabitants of every Town or Church in the Nature of a
Consistory, to consult about their Pastors Wages, Charges of Journies unto
Colloquies and Synods, and for the Maintenance of the Professors and Regents in
your Universities, and for the Reparation and upholding of your Temples, and to
make an Account and List of all Persons able to contribute unto the said
Charges; which being brought before a Judge Royal, shall be authorized by him;
and then every one so taxed and assessed by him, shall be compelled to pay in
his Part and Quota; and in case of his Refusal, it shall be levied by Distress
and Fine, notwithstanding his Opposition or Appeal, as is done in the
ingathering of his Majesty's Revenues: And therefore his Majesty forbids all
Ministers to beg from Door to Door for their Maintenance.

11. And his Majesty being informed that the said Synod of Nismes has granted
unto Mr. Petit, Minister of the Gospel, as Professor of Divinity, the Sum of
seven hundred Livers; he does now decree, that the said Sum shall be paid out
of the Moneys destined to the Maintenance of Universities by the last National
Synod, and is to be taken out of the Dividend belonging to those three
Colloquies which compose the said Synod; and his Majesty commands and
injoineth you to observe and keep those aforesaid Canons, as well for the
Payment of your Pastors, as for the railing of the Moneys.

12. I have but one Word more, and having added that, shall conclude: The Synod
of Nismes decreed, That Baptism administered by one who had neither Call nor
Commission, was null; and injoined Pastors not in the least to scruple the
baptizing such Children who had Water poured upon them by Women or any other
such Persons, without Call or Commission to baptize. It Is his Majesty's
Pleasure that this Article be amended for such reasons, as I shall recite unto
you in their very Words from the Original Order.

Because from hence springs the Opinion of Re-baptizing, for from the Doubt
which they make about a Call, they oblige themselves to re-baptize all those
who were baptized by such Persons, whose Call they cannot approve of, and of
whose Call they make themselves the sole Judges and Arbitrators; although the
Catholic Church not approving their Call, yea, not in the least hesitating to
declare they have none, does yet notwithstanding, approve of their Baptism;
because it is a Sacrament whose Virtue and Efficacy is ex opere operato, and
not ex opere operantis: so that the Synod did that which did not belong unto
them, when they invalidated this Sacrament by whom-soever it was administered;
since the Catholic Church, in which they cannot say there has been a Want or
Failure of any Call, has decided this Point, and in Case of Necessity has
judged probably of the Infants Disposition; therefore all Persons are called,
and the Word and Water intervening, the Church will not have this Act to be any
more repeated.

CHAP. IV. How follow the Synod's Replies and Answers unto the King's
Propositions.
Article 13.

THE Commissioner having finished his Discourse, which was patiently and
attentively heard by the Synod: The Synod by the Mouth of its Moderator did
praise and bless God, with their most hearty and humble Thanksgivings, for his
infinite Goodness and Mercy in hearing the Prayers of his poor Servants, and
inclining the King's Heart to grant us this Meeting, and to promise us the
Continuance of his Favors; and Thanks also were returned unto his Majesty, for
that according to his usual and wonted Kindness he has vouchsafed us new
Expressions of his paternal Affection in his Letters and Writ for our Assembly;
and in choosing and sending, and honoring us with such a Person for his
Commissioner, as is universally famed for his singular Integrity, Prudence and
Piety. And the said Lord Commissioner was most humbly entreated to assure his
Majesty, that as the Churches did never in Thought or Deed depart from that
Obedience, Fidelity and Subjection, unto which by the Word of God they stood
obliged, so for the future they will never aim at any other Mark than their
Continuance in it, and daily give in new Evidences unto his Majesty, and our
Lords of his most honorable Privy Council, of the Innocence of our
Conversation.

15. And whereas diverse Reports and Informations have been brought in against
some Provincial Synods, and sundry particular Persons have been taxed for
violating of his Majesty's Ordinances, his Majesty is most humbly entreated to
consider that the Synod of Nismes is in no wise blameworthy, for it never
received any Letters from the Lords of Bearn: and as for our Reverend Brother
Monsieur Rousselet, who is a Native of New Castle, a City belonging to that
Canton, and subject to those Lords, he was invited by their Letters to return
unto his own Country, and to exercise his Ministry there, and to accept of the
Professor's Place in Theology, then vacant in their University of Lausanna; yet
did he of his own Accord, as soon as he had received those Letters of Call,
produce and tender them unto his Majesty's Commissioner then present in that
Synod of Nismes, and also unto several other Officers of his Majesty, who all
unanimously declared, that he did not in the least Tittle or Punctilio decline
from his Duty.

16. And although his Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom may resolve what they
please as to their own personal Forbearance of Communications and
Correspondence with Foreigners; yet since they cannot tie up their Hands, who
live abroad out of his Majesty's Dominions and Authority, from writing what
they please, and sending it where they please into this Kingdom: Yet that it
may appear to the whole World, that our Churches do not court, nor are
ambitious of their Familiarity, we promise before God for the future, that
whatsoever Letters are addressed unto the Colloquies and Synods of this
Kingdom, from any foreign Prince, State, City or Churches, or ever they be
opened, shall be first of all delivered into the Hands of his Majesty's
Commissioners, that so by them, and from their own Mouths, his Majesty may be
fully informed of their Contents, that so all and every individual Person
professing the Reformed Religion, and in Communion with us here at home, may be
discharged and acquitted from all imputation of Faction and Disobedience
whatsoever.

17. Moreover, whereas by our Discipline, Colloquies and Provincial Synods are
obliged to take care that particular Churches, destitute of Pastors, be
provided for; and Causes of this nature are never transmitted to our National
Synods, unless upon extraordinary Occasions, and by way of Appeal. And whereas
particular Churches are sometimes necessitated to seek abroad out of their
Provinces for a Supply of Pastors, whenas they cannot be furnished at home; yet
are these their Researches regulated by the Canons of our Discipline: And
therefore it was in Obedience and conformity to them, that the Synods of
Dolphiny and Sevennes did bring their Demands for the Churches of Montlimart
and Anduze unto that of Nismes, requesting that the Sieurs Cregut and Arnaud
might be conferred upon them for their Ministers. Wherefore his Majesty is most
humbly petitioned to take it into his Royal Consideration, that they have not
in the least swerved from, nor transgressed the Orders authoritatively imposed
by his Edicts. In the mean time, forasmuch as the Churches cannot, without
violating their own Discipline, and opening a large Gap unto infinite Disorders
and Confusion, suffer that Colloquies and Provincial Synods should attempt to
prescribe Laws unto one another; this Synod does therefore forbid and interdict
all such Assemblies the making of any General Orders, whether for Days of
Fasting, Humiliation and Prayer, or for any other Consideration or Account
whatsoever, excepting what shall be of concern and relating to their own
District and Division.

18. Moreover, we do likewise acknowledge that that Reverence and Obedience,
which is in all well-governed States the proper Duty of its Subjects, can never
be too carefully recommended to the People; and on the other hand, that impious
License of blaming the Public Government, and Supreme Authority, cannot be too
severely reproved and decried: This Synod does in join all Pastors in their
Sermons and Exhortations to press it home upon the Consciences of their
Auditories, and particular Flocks, that they do not in any manner of wise,
directly nor indirectly, depart from that Obedience, Fidelity and Respect,
which are inviolably due unto his Majesty, and to our Lords his Ministers; but
that they repose themselves firmly on his Royal Word, trusting always in his
Majesty's Goodness, that he will hinder and prevent the Designs and Attempts of
ill-minded Men, who would, contrary to the Tenor of his Edicts, persecute his
poor Subjects, because they be of the Reformed Religion.

19. And to the intent that our Churches may never be impeached of contributing
unto any Alterations and Changes, whereby the Public Peace should be broken:
This Assembly recommends unto all Pastors an exacter Observation of our
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and of the Style of God's holy Word, and of our
Confession of Faith, than heretofore; and does, according to our Canons in all
these Articles, expressly interdict and forbid them the utterance of any bitter
Words or Expressions (whenever they declare their Faith and Hope) against any
Person or Opinion whatsoever: And it does also most humbly supplicate his
Majesty to interpose his Royal Authority, that those of the Romish Religion,
who do licentiously depart from their Duty, may be reduced to the Obedience of
his Edicts; and that his poor Subjects of the Reformed Religion may not for the
future, as they have been upon all Occasions hitherto, be laden with the most
outrageous and atrocious Abuses and Reproaches. And we do farther recommend
unto all our Churches, and their respective Members, the observation of our
Discipline; and particularly, that no one do publish any Book till it have been
first perused and examined, and approved by them who are commissionated
thereunto; and that none take upon them to violate the Judicial Sentences of
the Civil Magistrate concerning Divorces. And the Province of Sevennes has and
does protest, that it had never any such Design or Purpose for so doing.

20. And whereas there is a Crime imputed unto our Churches about the Residence
of their Pastors, and the Exercise of their Ministry, as if some of them had
acted contrary to the tenth Article of January 1561, which yet is very false;
for not one of them has ever attempted to preach forcibly in any Place. Yea
and secondly, that Edict of January was only provisional, made for that time,
and has been since abrogated by the subsequent Edicts, particularly by the one
and fortieth Article of that Edict made in the Year 1570, and by that of Nants
made in the Year 1598; and which by his then Majesty was declared to be a
clear, plain, general and absolute Law, by which it was his Will and Pleasure
that all his Subjects should be governed. And thirdly, The Pastors do not
exercise the Duties of their Calling in any other Places besides those which
are allowed them by the 78th, 79th, 80th, and 81st Articles of the Edict last
mentioned. And fourthly, Our Lords of the Council, and the Parliaments, and the
several Commissioners for the Execution of that Edict, have from the beginning
made out Orders where and in what Places the public Exercise of our Religion
should be established and performed, and did always consider that the most part
of those Places were but so many Quarters and Members of one and the same
Church, served by one and the same Pastor. And fifthly, That the Pastors never
preach out of those Quarters, unless in the case of Absence, or Sickness, or of
some other lawful hindrance of their Brethren. And lastly, By the sixth Article
of the Edict of Nants, explained by the first of the secret and particular
Articles, it is granted that our Ministers may reside in any Places of the
Kingdom indifferently. Wherefore we most humbly petition that his Majesty would
maintain them in that Liberty granted them by his Edicts, and revoke all Orders
and Decrees of his Privy Council which are derogatory to them.

21. Moreover; forasmuch as our Pastors do not receive their Maintenance in a
way of begging, nor from the Poors Box, nor from Legacies bequeathed to pious
Uses, and destinated for the Relief of the Poor, but only from a voluntary
Contribution of their Flocks, or by an Assessment made upon them according to
the forty fourth Article of Particular Matters, conformably to those Agreements
past between them and their Pastors at their first coming: And that according
to the Discipline, the fifth Penny of all Alms is particularly assigned to the
maintenance of our Professors, Regents, Scholars, and other such like Persons,
whole Poverty renders them meet and proper Objects of those Charities, without
ever diverting the Moneys of this natu them but according to the Order of
Provincial or National Synods: His Majesty is most humbly beseeched to keep up
in our Churches the Observation of this ancient Order, established by the
Discipline, and authorized by his Edicts, and whereof there was never any
Complaint yet formed; and that he would be pleased to interdict his Officers
the disannulling or changing of Agreements past and made between the Pastors
and their Churches about their Salaries, when they first took upon them the
Cure and Charge of their Souls.

22. And since what has been done in the case of Mr. Petit, relates to the
Execution of this Order, and to the Canons of former National Synods, his
Majesty is most humbly requested to approve thereof.

23. Finally; forasmuch as the Declaration made by the Synod of Nismes is,
neither as to its Substance nor Terms in which it is framed and expressed, any
other Matter than the first Article of the eleventh Chapter of our Discipline,
bottomed upon our Confession of Faith, Catechism, and other Expositions of the
Belief of our Churches; and for that the Arguments produced on behalf of the
Opus operatum, and the Decision made by the Church of Rome, (which is directly
opposite unto our Faith aforesaid) do formally condemn it; his Majesty, having
by his Edicts allowed of it, is most humbly entreated to grant that his
Subjects of the Reformed Religion may still enjoy, and be always secured in the
full enjoyment of the Liberty of their Consciences, according to his Sacred and
Royal Promises, that so they may all unanimously, with one and the same Heart,
and the self-same Vows and Prayers, unanimously employ themselves in the
Service of God, and of his Majesty.

CHAP. V. Deputies sent with a Letter unto the King.
24. THere were chosen, by Plurality of Voices in the Assembly, the Sieurs
Ferrand, Gigord and Cerizy, to carry unto his Majesty the most humble Thanks
and Petitions of the Churches, who were furnished with their Instructions and
Letters unto his Majesty, and to our Lords the Ministers of State.

25. A Copy of the first Letter written by the Synod unto the King.
SIRE,
THE Great God, whose lively Image you are, accepting indifferently and
irrespectively the Prayers and Homages of all his Creatures, we believed that
your Majesty would not he displeased with our Boldness in laying ours at your
Feet, your Majesty having granted us the Privilege of assembling our selves in
this Place. And it is to acquit our selves of this necessary Duty, Sire, that we
have sent the Sieurs Ferrand, Gigord and Cerizy, unto your Majesty, most humbly
petitioning, that your Majesty would daign to behold them with the Eye of your
Favor, and to hear with your wonted Benignity from their Mouths, the
Protestations of our Fidelity, and our just Supplications and Requests for the
continuance and confirmation of that Liberty granted us by your Majesty's
Edicts: That being delivered from all Fear, we may live quietly under the
Shadow of your Goodness and Power, having none other Care than continually to
call upon God our Maker for the Health of your Majesty's Sacred Person, and his
Divine Benediction upon your Royal Family, the Prosperity of your Estate, and
the Glory of your Crown; yielding joyfully and unweariedly unto your Majesty
that most humble Obedience and Subjection, which is the bounden Duty,

From Alanson, this fourth of June, 1637. SIRE, Of your most humble, and most
obedient, and most faithful Subjects and Servants, The Ministers and Elders
assembled by your Permission in the National Synod at Alanson, and in the Name
of them all, by Basnage, Moderator of the Synod. D. Coupe, Assessor. D.
Blondel, Scribe. De Launay, Scribe.



26. The Provinces having entrusted their Deputies with diverse Memoirs
concerning the Violations of the Edict, to be tendered unto his Majesty; as they
began to read them, the Lord Commissioner remonstrated, That it was his
Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that in his Presence none other Matters, saying
what related unto the Exercise of the Church Discipline, should be debated; and
that the Title of the said Cahier or Memoirs should be thus qualified, The
Cahier and Memoirs of the Pretended Reformed Religion. Whereupon, the Assembly
requested his Lordship to consider, that it was never in their Minds or
Intentions to treat of Political Affairs, or any State-matters, but only to
make a plain and naked Report and Presentment of our Complaints, none of which
need to fall under Deliberation, all and every of them being most apparently
and undeniably true, just, and expressly grounded on his Majesty's Edict.
Besides, his Majesty never took it in any sort ill, that we should address unto
him our most humble Remonstrances for repairing the Violations of his Edicts,
nor that his Subjects, speaking according to their Consciences, should,
contrary thereunto, style and qualify themselves of the pretended Reformed
Religion.

27. The Lord Commissioner making report, that by his Instructions he was
charged to acquaint the Synod, That in case they would agree with him about two
Persons meet and fit to exercise the general Deputation for the Weal and
Service of the Churches, his Majesty would approve of them, but if not, that
then the Lord Marquess of Clermont should be continued in the Functions of the
said Office, and another from out of the third Estate should be chosen and
joined with him. The Assembly nominated out of every Province, one Deputy, to
confer with the said Lord Commissioner about this Matter: and these Deputies
accorded with his Lordship, that the said Lord Marquess of Clermont and the
Lord Marbaut should be the Persons, whose Names should be immediately presented
unto his Majesty, most humbly also requesting his Majesty to allow and approve
of this their Election. And to this purpose there was this following Letter
written unto the King.

CHAP. VI. A Copy of the second Letter written by the Synod unto th King,
concerning the General Deputies.
SIRE,
AS soon as your Majesty's Intentions were notified unto us about our choice of
General-Deputies to reside near your Majesty's Person at Court, we immediately
and unanimously agreed with the Lord of St. Mars, your Majesty's Commissioner
unto this Assembly, and have elected into that Office the Lords Marquess of
Clermont and Marbaud. And we most humbly beseech your Majesty to allow and
accept of them, and to give your favorable Ear unto all our Supplications,
which by their Mouth our urgent and extraordinary Necessities shall oblige us
to tender to you. That Inclination which is natural unto your Majesty to ease
and comfort your People, does raise our Hopes, that you will vouchsafe to cast
the Eyes of your Compassion upon the Miseries of a vast multitude of Souls, who
are breathing, and will never breath any thing else but a most profound
Obedience, Subjection, and Service unto your Majesty; and that you will cause
graciously to dart down upon our Churches, the Beams of your Royal Favor and
Benificence, the Effects whereof they have comfortably resented: And which
makes us the more ardent and zealous in our Prayers and Devotions to Almighty
God, for the Preservation of your Majesty's Sacred Person, for the Glory of
your Crown, and for the long Continuance of your Majesty's Reign. As being,
Great Sir, of your Majesty,

From Alanson, June 1637. The most humble, the most obedient, and most faithful
Servants and Subjects, The Ministers and Elders assembled, by your Majesty's
Permission, in the National Synod of Alanson, and in the Name of all, Banage,
Moderator of the Synod. D. Coupe, Assessor. D. Blondel, Scribe. De Launay,
Scribe.


CHAP. VII. Observations upon, and Confirmation of the Confession of Faith
received in the Churches of this Kingdom.
THE Confession of Faith was read, word by word, one Article after another;
approved and subscribed by all the Deputies of the Provinces, who did, as well
for themselves, and in their own Names, as in the Names, and on behalf of their
several and respective Synods that had commissionated and sent them, and given
them express and particular Charge for so doing, protest, t hat they would live
and die in the Profession of this Faith, that they would teach it unto their
Churches, and put to their helping Hands, that it should be inviolably
maintained and conserved.

CHAP. VIII. Observations on reading of our Church Discipline.
Article 1. THose Churches which have exhibited unto Scholars a Pension and
Maintenance for their Studies, in order to fit and prepare them for the Sacred
Ministry, shall have a Right and Preference above all others to use and employ
them. And all the Churches are exhorted to be mutually helpful and assisting
unto each other in Love. Article 2. Sinners publikly suspended from the Lord's
Supper, shall make Public Acknowledgment of their Offenses for which they had
been censured. And the Church of Alanson is admonished to see this Canon put in
execution. Article 3. The better practice, and stricter observation of the 12th
Canon in the 8th Chapter, is recommended unto all the Provinces: and that of
Britain in particular is advised not to omit it for the future. See this
Article in the Book of Discipline. Article 4. This Assembly does once again
enjoin the Church of Nismes, to submit and conform themselves unto the 9th
Canon, in the 12th Chapter of our Discipline, according to the Intention of
former Synods. The Article is this; The Churches shall be informed, that it
belongs unto Ministers only to administer the Cup, and this for the avoiding
many evil Consequences. Article 5. Without suffering any new Customs to be
introduced at Funeral-Solemnities, and that the Parents of the Deceased may be
comforted, the practice and observation of the 5th Canon in the 10th Chapter of
our Discipline, is recommended to all the Churches: Moreover, in case any one
of our Churches has had, for a long time, any particular Form, which it has
used to its Edification, that Church may retain the observation of that their
Order, even by the Allowance of this Assembly. Article 6. Forasmuch as the 12th
Canon, in the 13th Chapter of our Discipline, seems to contradict the 16th
Observation of the National Synod of Montpellier upon the Discipline; All the
Provinces are exhorted to bring with them, unto the next National Synod, their
several and respective Opinions, whether the said Article shall be razed, or
receive any Change or Emendation. Article 7. Though all the Provinces do keep
and observe most exactly the 16th Canon in the 14th Chapter of our Discipline;
yet shall every one of them carefully make use of such Expedients as they, in
their own particular Judgments, do conceive to be most meet and proper for
their better Observation, and the avoiding of all Inconveniences. Article 8.
The Church Discipline having been read, all and every one of the Provincial
Deputies did, both for themselves and their respective Synods, promise to
observe it, and see that it be exactly observed by their Provinces.
CHAP. IX. Observations on reading the Acts of the former Synod, held for the
second time at Charenton, in the Months of September and October, 1631.
Article 1. THE Provinces bringing in their respective Judgments upon the
Matters commended to their Deliberation by the last National Synod; This
Assembly decreed, that nothing should be changed in the 19th and 20th Canons of
the 5th Chapter of our Discipline. Article 2. The Colloquy of Montpellier,
which was commissionated by the Synod of Charenton, in its Name, and with full
Authority, to judge of the Charge brought in against the Sieur Bony, making
Report of their Execution of the said Commission; and the Provincial Synod of
Sevennes, whereof he is a Member, giving him a very honorable Testimonial;
This Assembly ordains, that the Articles which concerned him shall be razed
out of the Acts of the first and second National Synods of Charenton, and of
that of Castres.
CHAP. X. A penitent Minister, after ten Years Penance, restored.
3. MR. George Arbaud, who was formerly deposed from the Sacred Ministry, by
the National Synod of Castres, appearing now in Person, and humbly petitioning
that he might be restored again unto it; and the Provincial Deputies of Lower
Languedoc, testifying to his godly Life and Conversion for ten Years last past;
This Assembly considering the Sincerity of his Repentance, confirmed by so long
a trial, and condescending both to his Supplications, and the Attestations
given him by his Province, and having very seriously exhorted him to be more
strict and religious in his future Actions than formerly, and to grow in Grace
and true Godliness, did grant him his Request, and left it to the Care of the
Synod of Lower Languedoc, or of the Consistory of Nismes, to provide a Church
for him.

4. Whereas the Sieurs Bony and Donadiu, deputed by the Synod of Sevennes to
execute a Commission given them by the last National Synod; had born all the
Charges thereof themselves; it was ordained, that the Province of Lower
Languedoc should see them reimburs'd and satisfied.

5. All the Provinces are strictly charged to see, that the 14th Canon of the
14th Chapter of the Discipline, be very carefully practiced and observed, and
that they bring in an Account of their Obedience to this Canon unto the next
National Synod.

CHAP. XI. The Snappishness of the Commissioner, and the Prudence and Patience
of the National Synod.
6. LEtters were read from Monsieur Privas, Pastor of the Church of Chastillon,
detained Prisoner in the Jail of Again, humbly petitioning this Synod to
endeavor his Enlargement; and the Lord Commissioner demanding, Whether the
Synod intended to make his Affair their own, and to interest themselves in it?
The Assembly considering that the said Monsieur Privas was before his natural
and proper Judges, declared, that, as his present Circumstances were, they
could do nothing for him, except the recommending him to the good Providence of
God, and exhorted him to wait and suffer patiently whatever should be decreed
against him by the Court of Again.

7. This Assembly remembering the Promise made by the last National Synod unto
Monsieur Chamier, decreed, that it shall be performed as soon as God shall
bless the Churches with Ability. So that Monsieur Chamier had never a Penny of
Moneys granted him for his Father's Works.

8. The Moneys granted unto Monsieur Bellot and Constans, shall be faithfully
paid them, as soon as the Churches may recover their Assignments granted them
by his Majesty.

9. All the Provinces are ordered to get for themselves the Acts of all our
National Synods, that so they may comfortably discharge the Duty laid upon them
by the National Synod of Charenton.

10. The Church of Montpellier informing this Assembly, that the Design and
Intendment of the National Synod of Castres was not satisfied; the Consistory
of the Church of Nismes is ordered to exhort the Widow of Mr. Scoffier to
account with them, how that Sum of Money has been employed, which was given by
the said National Synod for the Relief of Mrs. Blandina Scoffier her Sister,
that in case the said Moneys be yet in her Hands, they may be restored unto the
Heirs of Mrs. Jacquelina Scoffier, by whom she was actually maintained.

11. The Judgment of the Synod of Anjou having been perused, to whom the last
National Synod had turned over the Cognizance of that Difference risen between
the Provinces of Xaintonge and Poictou, about the Conjunction of the Church of
Saveilles with that of Villefaignan; and several Letters, Memoirs, and Articles
of Agreement between the said Churches since the said Judgment, having been
read, and the Deputies of the two contending Provinces being heard, this
Assembly disallowing the Proceedings of the Colloquy of Augoulmois, which had
actually united the said Churches, in prejudice of the Judgment given to the
contrary by the Province of Anjou, does ordain, that the Churches of
Chefboutonne and Saveilles, shall continue joined together as heretofore.

12. The National Synod of Charenton having charged the Province of Burgundy to
shut up the Account with Monsieur Grass; which yet could not be performed, this
Assembly commits the execution thereof to the Consistory of the Church of Lion.

CHAP. XII. The Restoration of a penitent Minister deferred.
13. JOseph Obery, deposed by the last National Synod, and residing at present
in the Canton of Bearn, wrote Letters unto this Assembly, petitioning for his
Restoration unto the sacred Ministry; which before they were opened, were
presented unto the Lord Commissioner, who having read them, declared that they
contained nothing but Matters purely Ecclesiastical: And after they had been
seen and perused by the whole Synod, and the Testimonial given him by the
Consul of Aubonne in the County of Vaux, and that the Provincial Deputies of
Burgundy had delivered in their Opinion concerning him; this Synod could not
grant him his Request; yet nevertheless received with Joy the good News of his
Repentance and Conversion unto the Lord, and he was exhorted to confirm himself
more and more in it, and to continue in the Grace of God.

14. The Province of Lower Guyenne is injoined to make use of their Authority
upon Monsieur Perery, and to see that he do actually reside with his Flock; and
in case he continue refractory and disobey their Order, that they do then
immediately censure him according to the utmost Rigor and Severity of our
Discipline.

15. The Practice of the 3d Article of General Matters in the last National
Synod, is recommended unto all the Churches.

16. Complaints having Been brought against diverse, Pastors Non-Residents in
the Colloquy of Lower Quercy, unto the last National Synod, and those
Complaints together with the Letters of those Ministers apologizing for
themselves, having been dismissed to the Colloquy of Albigeois, and the Synod
of Higher Languedoc to judge of their Case; now the Sentence passed upon them
was revised in this present Synod; and this Assembly being willing to support
and encourage them in their Ministry, did once more ordain the Colloquy of
Albigeois to renew their Informations, and to examine afresh the pretended
Inability of those Churches, and to urge and induce them by all kind of
Arguments, and those the most forcible, to perform their Duties, and to bring
in an Account hereof unto the next National Synod.

17. The Appeal of the Church of Nerac, which refused to defray the Charges the
Church of Again were at in the Removal of Monsieur Vignier, is dismissed over to
the Judgment of the Province of Lower Guyenne; because it is not of the Nature
of those Affairs which do depend upon National Synods.

18. That Judgment given by the Province of Dolphiny in the Cause of Monsieur
Aymier, is ratified by this present Synod.

19. Forasmuch as the Province of Vivaretz has given their Consent unto it,
this Assembly permits for this time, that the Church of St. Estienne in
Forest, be incorporated with the Province of Burgundy.

20. The Promise made by the last National Synod unto the Province of Bearn,
about the Ministers born in it, and employed in diverse Churches of this
Kingdom, is again confirmed, and the said Province is exhorted to acquiesce and
rest satisfied therewith.

21. Whereas the Adjunction of the Church of Valence unto that of Soyon, is
indispensably needful for the Subsistence of this latter; the Synod injoineth
the said Church to incorporate it self with it, as it has done formerly; and
this Act shall be notified unto them by the Deputies of Lower Languedoc, of
Sevennes and Provence, as they return in their way homeward.

22. The Deputies of Vivaretz, remonstrated, that the Article concerning
Monsieur Perrier's Account was left out in that Copy of the last National
Synod, which was brought down unto their Province, and that it were sit the
said Account should be revised. This Assembly ordains, that the said Province
do apply it self unto that of Dolphiny, which shall summon the said Perrier
before them, and judge finally of the Merits of the said Remonstrance.

23. The Synod of Lower Guyenne shall cite Monsieur Bustanoby before them, that
he may account with them about the Employment of the three hundred Livers
delivered unto his deceased Father by the National Synod of Castres, and they
shall make Report thereof unto the next National Synod.

A penitent Minister seeking and petitioning to be restored, is denied, but
with Advice to betake himself to some other Calling.
24. SAmuel du Fresne, deposed from the sacred Ministry by the Consistory of
Vienna, and Synod of Higher Languedoc, presenred himself unto this Assembly,
and with a Shower of Tears implored the Pardons and Bowels of the Church, whom
he had offended by his Fall. But upon Perusal of the Acts of his Deposition,
and the 51st Article of the Discipline, which depriveth them of all Hopes of
Restoration, who are fallen into such Crimes of which he stands convicted: The
Assembly advised him to betake himself to some other Calling, and to repair the
Scandal he had given, by his Perseverance in true Repentance and the Practice
of Godliness.

25. Forasmuch as in that Information brought in against the said du Fresne,
there were several overcurious Questions, and very ill-becoming the Gravity of
Ecclesiastical Persons; the Province of Higher Languedoc is charged to make
Remonstrance thereof unto the Parties who drew up those Articles of Information
against him, and to put to their helping-Hand, that no such Matters be done for
the future.

26. Whereas the Holy Apostle in the 8th Verse of the 3d Chapter to the Romans,
says expressly, that their Damnation is just, who say, Let us do Good that Evil
may come thereof; and that it is neither consisting with Reason, nor the
Integrity of our Christian Profession, to prefer the Consideration of our
little temporal Losses and Concerns unto the Duties of Conscience: This
Assembly cannot therefore admit of those Excuses alleged by the Consistory of
the Church of Rochel, for neglecting the Execution of the first Article of
General Matters in the foregoing Synod; and therefore does once more renew its
Injunction, that all the Churches do conform themselves unto the Practice
thereof, and judges the Consistory of the said Church of Rochel worthy of the
sharpest Censures; and farther ordains, that Letters be written unto the
Faithful in the said City, to convince them of the Greatness of their Sin, and
of the Scandal which their Connivency and unsufferable Cowardice has given
unto all the Churches of this Kingdom; and they be adjured, by the Compassions
of the Living God, and the Religious Resentments of sincere and devout
Christians, to hold, keep and observe strictly, precisely and inviolably the
sincere Profession of God's Saving Truth in its Purity and Power, without
swerving or derogating from it by any Actions, either directly or indirectly,
contrary thereunto.

27. All our Universities are exhorted to conform themselves, as much as in
them lies, unto the Observation of that Article of the last National Synod,
which recommended the Profession of Metaphysics to the Professors of
Philosophy.

CHAP. XIII. Bearn incorporated with the Churches of France.
28. THE Deputies of the Province of Bearn having declared, that their Synod
does accept the Union of the Churches of this Kingdom, under the Conditions
granted them by the National Synod of Charenton, in their Observations upon the
first Article of that of Castres, and that they do from this Instant submit
themselves unto all our National Synods that shall be held hereafter; and they
promise also, that they will allow of all Appeals brought by the Pastors,
Elders and Churches of their Principality unto these our National Synods; and
farther, that they consent for the future to exercise their Discipline in all
Points; according to the Canons of the Discipline established in the Churches
of this Kingdom, and enacted by our National Synods, over and besides what has
been determined and decided in the Provincial Synod of Bearn. Whereupon, the
Assembly granted that their Appeals should be judged according to the
Discipline framed for the Churches of Bearn, by the Command of their famous
Princess Jane Queen of Navarre, and ratified by the Parliament of Pau, a Copy
whereof, faithfully collationed with the Original, shall be deposited in the
Hands of that Province, which shall be charged with the Convocation of the next
National Synod, by the Provincial Deputies of Bearn, signed, subscribed and
attested by their own Handwritings. And also it is farther granted them as
their Privilege, that whatever Pastors are now actually employed in the
Ministry of the Churches of that Province, shall not be removed unto the
Service of other Churches in this Kingdom, unless their aforesaid Churches do
yield a plenary and explicit Consent thereunto.

29. Mr. Richard, formerly Pastor of the Church at Saponnay in the Province of
the Isle of France, presented himself unto this Assembly, humbly petitioning
that they would be pleased to give him some Employment in the said Province,
according to the Discipline. The Assembly informed him, that the Honor of his
Ministry had not been blemished by them, and therefore if he were not in actual
Service as he desired, none could be blamed for it but himself, and his
imprudent Management of his own Affairs; and forasmuch as there was not at
present any vacant Church in that Province, he was advised to depart unto his
native Country the Land of Vaux, there to pass the Remainder of his Days; and
the Province whereunto he last belonged, is exhorted to continue to him their
wonted Charities, and to help him with Moneys to defray the Expenses of his
Journey homeward.

30. Without making any Reflections on the Prohibition of the Province of
Vivaretz, this Assembly, doing Right upon the Complaint of Monsieur des Maretz,
ordains, that the Decree of the last National Synod shall be executed
according to the Form and Tenor thereof.

CHAP. XIV. Appeals and Complaints.
1. THE Complaints of the Sieur Genoyer against the Synod of Provence, and
Monsieur Maurice his Brother, having been examined, and the said Maurice heard
speak in his own Defense on each of the Articles brought against him: This
Assembly judged that the said Genoyer ought not to have troubled them about
such mean and slight Matters, and which also are not proved; and therefore from
hence-forward interdicts him all such manner of Proceedings; and in the mean
while exhorts the Provincial Synods to read over the Acts of the National,
that so whatever Matters have been decided in them, may not be concealed from
the Churches.

2. This Assembly conserving the Honor of Monsieur Pascard, permits him to
exercise the Duties of his Ministry, whenas ever he shall be requested
thereunto by the Pastors and Consistories in the Province of Xaintonge, and
this according to the Discipline.

3. Although the Appeal of my Lady de Juigne is not of the Nature of those
Matters which ought to be presented unto the National Synods, yet the Assembly
taking Cognizance thereof, and weighing the Reasons urged by the said Lady, and
the Motives oh which the Consistory of Pringey has founded its Censure,
confirmed by the Judgment of the Synod of Anjou, it decrees, That the said
Censure shall be taken off; and the said Lady is exhorted to give unto the
Church of Pringey the generous Fruits of her Christian Charity and Bounty; and
that she would as liberally contribute to the Subsistence of that Church, and
of the Gospel there, according to that large and plentiful Estate with which
God has blessed her, as she has done formerly, etc. to continue it for the
future, although she may for her greater Convenience join her self in Communion
with any other Church nearer to her.

4. The Sieurs le Mousnier, de Caux, and de Bures, appealing on behalf of
sundry private Persons, Members of the Church of Dieppe, the Appeal brought by
them from the Judgment given by the Provincial Synod held at Caen, and the
Provincial Deputies of Normandy, and the Acts of those particular Persons
aforesaid, and of the aforementioned Synod, and of their Commissioners, and of
the Consistory of Dieppe, together with the Letters of the said Synod to the
Church of Dieppe, and of their Commissioners sent unto the said Church, to see
their Sentence executed in it, having been all read: This Assembly passing by
the Defects in the Deputation of Monsieur le Mousnier, and his Companions,
which are contrary to the Forms usually required and received in all Appeals,
and commending their Love and godly Zeal, does confirm the Judgment of the
Synod of Normandy, as being grounded upon Prudence and Charity; and forbids
the Church of Diep, and all other Churches of this Kingdom, to receive unto the
Exercise of the Ministerial Office among them one called Deschamps, who by his
fastious Pranks and Practices, yea, and since that the Synod of Caen had
notified it by their judicial Decree, has himself publicly demonstrated, that
his Ministry can never edify nor profit that Church; and the Consistory of that
Church is blamed for their Imprudence, for admitting him to preach among them,
without ever demanding or perusing his Attestations from the Churches in which
he formerly served, and from the Colloquies and Synods of which he was a
Member, whereby they have suffered him very inconsiderately to insinuate
himself into the Affections of the People, who demanded him to be their Pastor
before they had any Knowledge of him. And farthermore, the Consistory of that
Church is forbidden hence forward, all Deliberations about either the Reception
of any new, or Exclusion of any old Pastor, without having first consulted the
Heads of Families belonging to their Church: and according to the Canons of our
Discipline, it condemns the Proceedings of the said Consistory, who through
an Excess of Rigor, refused to grant unto the Plaintiffs their Liberty and
Privilege of Appeal, whereby they were, contrary to the Discipline, reduced to
a Necessity of making a tumultuous Deputation. And whereas the Provincial
Synod, in decreeing the Exclusion of the said Des Champs, did omit what would
have principally contributed to their Satisfaction, who demanded him for their
Minister; this Assembly taking the Church of Dieppe into its most particular
Consideration, does promise the said Church of Dieppe to provide for them a
third Pastor, either within or without the Province, yea, and to engage them to
proceed unto the Reception of the Sieur du Bures, recommended by the
Testimonial of their Deputies, and of the Province; and this according to the
Canons of our Discipline, unto which that said Church is advised to conform it
self, and by its Union with their Consistory, to preserve that Peace and
Charity which ought to be among all Christians; to the maintaining of which the
said Sieurs le Mousnier, de Caux, and de Bures, have promised to lay themselves
out unto the utmost.

5. The Church of Plessis appealed, requesting that their Pastor Monsieur de
Montigny might actually reside in the Town of Plessis, according to the
Discipline and the Canons of our National Synods; and that the Sentence of the
Isle of France which had dispensed with him, might be disannulled and reversed.
This Assembly judged that, the said Sieur de Montigny was of right obliged to
reside at Plessis, and ought not to be dispensed with: yet nevertheless his
Church is entreated to allow him four Months in the Year to attend his private
Affairs at his House of Albon, provided he do not discontinue the Exercises of
his Ministry.

6. Monsieur Fabas was heard in his Complaint about the non-executing of that
Decree of the last National Synod, which had authorized and commissionated the
Colloquy of Condommois to take Informations, and pass a Judgment of the
Contents in the Letters written by those Gentlemen, Mr. de la Fit, Gillot and
Belard, unto Monsieur D' Abadie and Pommarede, during their Abode at Charenton,
and the Defense of Monsieur Rival, upon whose Report those Letters were
written, and to the Remonstrance of the Colloquy of Condommois, who have not
acquitted themselves of the Commission given them, because the said la Fit
and Gillot refused to submit unto their Judgment, and to the Excuse of the
Province of Bearn, that their Union with the Churches of this Kingdom was not
at that time ratified, and that they were not obliged to defray the Expenses of
the Deputies charged by the said Colloquy of Condommois, to inform themselves
of the Facts of some particular Persons, but only those Persons who were
concerned. This Assembly declares those Accusations brought in by the said
Rival and Belard against the said Fabas, to be null; and for this Reason,
because the first was grounded upon a Report spread abroad from a pretended
Accusation brought by a particular Person, who afterward denied it, and was
proved to be false by all the Persons mentioned in it. And the second consists
of an ill-taken Equivocation, alleged by one only Witness, who ought not in
any wise to be admitted, it being expressly against the Prohibition of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.5, 19. Nor had the Colloquy of Pau any reason to grant a
Commission unto Monsieur Rival, to take Information against Monsieur Fabas,
who opposed his Institution and Induction into the Church of Morlas, and by
consequence was a professed Party against him; and Mr. la Fit and Gillot have
to no good purpose, and only upon the single report of the said Rival, spread
abroad a groundless and unproved Accusation against a Minister of the Gospel:
Nor should the Province of Bearn have tolerated such Proceedings, nor have
permitted the Church of Morlas to be divided, whenas they could have remedied
it by fair and gentle Means, according to the Word of God, and the Order of our
Discipline. And whereas Mr. Rival and Bellard have defamed a Minister of the
Gospel, and occasioned, by their manner of Proceedings, a great deal of unjust
Reproach to be laid upon him, which cannot in the least be justified; the said
Fabas, Rival and Bellard, are all enjoined to live in Peace and Brotherly
Union, and to forbear all Civil and Criminal Prosecutions made, or hereafter to
be made before the Magistrate upon the score of their Differences, and to put a
period and final issue unto those which are already begun; whereunto the said
Fabas and Rival have promised submission respectively, and entered already into
mutual Articles and Bonds for so doing.

7. The Province of Bearn complained of, and accused the said Sieur Fabas of
rebellion against the Canons of our Discipline, and of unlawful Proceedings,
whereby he designed to invalidate the Censures of the Church; and that he did
de facto most odiously traduce them before the Civil Magistrate. Whereupon, the
said Mr. Fabas was heard, complaining to the contrary, and accusing the
Province of Bearn, for that they did, without any lawful Cause, remove him from
his Church, and deprive him of his Ministry in it, and have not assigned him
any other, and have since suspended him the Exercise of his Ministry, because
he had appealed from their unrighteous Censure. And secondly, for that diverse
particular Members of the Church of Morlas, after they had unjustly reproached
him, had divided that poor Church, and abstained schismatically from the
Exercises of Religion performed in it. Whereupon, the Acts of the Synod of
Bearn, and of the Colloquy of Pau, were perused, as also the Proceedings of the
Lords in the Parliament of Navarre, at the Petition of the said Fabas, and of
sundry others belonging to the Church of Morlas, and the Inquisition made by
the Commissioners of the said Parliament, who were sent to Morlas to learn and
sift out the Sentiments and Opinion of the said Church; there were read also
the Letters of the Consistory of the Church of Morlas, humbly requesting that
Monsieur Fabas might be continued in his Ministry among them, and those of Mr.
Bellard, and other Elders and particular Persons, demanding of the Consistory
that he might be removed elsewhere. This Assembly confirming the Ministry of
the said Mr. Fabas in the Church of Morlas, judges that the Province should
not by its Rigor have enforced him to make use of those extraordinary Courses
which he did in his own just Defense, nor should it have favored by its
connivency the Disunion of those particular Persons, who have separated
themselves from the Body of the Church of Morlas; whereas they should have,
according to their Duty, reconciled them with the rest of their Brethren; much
less ought they to have took that Course they did to suspend the said Fabas,
after he had appealed. And the said Mr. Fabas ought not in Duty to have
departed from the Forms prescribed by our Discipline; because the way of
appealing unto superior Ecclesiastical Assemblies was wide open to him. And
therefore the said Province is injoined for the future to refrain all violent
Proceedings contrary to the Discipline, and to apply out of hand suitable
Remedies, whereby the Schism in the Church of Morlas may be cured, and the
Members thereof reconciled among themseives, and with their Pastor Mr. Fabas;
and all others are to acquiesce and rest contented with the Ways prescribed by
the Discipline, forbearing all Proceedings contrary to it, and bringing those
their Differences into Ecclesiastical Assemblies, there to be composed. And
whereas some particular Members of the Church of Morlas have complained against
the said Mr. Fabas, their Passion and bitter Expressions are condemned, and
they be exhorted to mind their present Duty, which is by a mutual
Reconciliation to heal the Breaches, and restore the Peace of the Church of
God. All which shall be signified unto them by Letters from this Synod.

8. Monsieur Chorets, a Member of the Church of Paris, complained unto this
Assembly of a Judgment past against him by the said Church, which was also
confirmed by the Synod of the Isle of France; as also for that they refused him
an Attestation which he would have used for diverse Ends and Purposes. The
Assembly having heard the Deputies of that Province, told him, that his Affair
was not of that nature as to be brought before a National Synod; however, out
of special Favor to him, they did permit him to discover his Grievances, which
being unfolded by him, and considered, occasion was thereby given of
remonstrating to him his Offenses committed by Words and Deeds, and Proceedings
against the Pastors and Consistory of the Church of Paris. And farther, it was
declared to him, that the Censures of the said Church had been inflicted on him
by reason of his ill Deportments. And farther, he was exhorted to pay all
Respect and Obedience unto his spiritual Guides and Rulers? and to subject
himself unto the Discipline of our Churches. And finally, he was injoined to
acquiesce in what had been decreed concerning his Matters both by the said
Church, and the Provincial Synod. All which he did immediately.

9. The Judgment of the Province of Sevennes, concerning the Ministry of
Monsieur Soleil, having been confirmed, the Appeal brought by Mr. Vignolles and
Roux was declared null, and the Appellants worthy of Censure, for their
unreasonable Misconstruction of it.

10. The Appeal of the Church de la Fit was rejected, because it ought not to
be brought unto, nor received in this Assembly: Wherefore they were injoined to
acquiesce in the Judgment of their Province.

11. On reading that Clause, in the last Will and Testament of the Lord de la
Fon, relating to the Legacy bequeathed by him for the educating a young Scholar
in Humanity and the Arts, who may one day serve the Church of God in the Sacred
Ministry, and the Judgment given by the Synod of Normandy upon it, and the
Memoirs of the Church of Baaly: This Assembly disannulled that Judgment of the
said Provincial Synod, as also the Appeal of the Church of Baaly; and confirmed
the Decree of the last National Synod; and now declares and ordains, That
the said Church has only, nor ought it to have any other Interest in the said
Legacy than its bare Administration; for so the Lord de la Fon disposed of it
in his Testament aforesaid, for the maintenance of a Scholar: and that it is
the proper and special Duty of the said Church to be accomptable for it unto
the Colloquy of Caen, according to the Intention of the deceased Donor,
expressed in that Clause of his Will, wherein he mentions the said Legacy. And
the said Colloquy, or the said Church of Baaly, are necessarily to be called in
at that time, when the Election of the Scholar is to be made, and to be present
at his Examen, to judge of his Progress; and the said Church, if they please,
and have need of him, may and ought, before any other, have the choice of him
to be employed in the Service of their Souls, in the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments.

12. The Deputies of Sevennes complained, that the Synod of Lower Languedoc had
several times attempted to provide for their vacant Churches out of their
Province, which is directly contrary to the Canons of our Discipline, and have
thereby reduced those two Reverend Ministers Mr. du Mas and de la Cosle, to
remain without employment. This Assembly, condemning such Proceedings, does
recommend unto the Province of Lower Languedoc the Practice of the twenty
fourth Canon made in the National Synod of Charenton in the Year 1623,
Observation the second upon the Discipline. And it being the desire of the
Church of Alez, as also of the Synod of Sevennes, whereunto that of Lower
Languedoc does freely consent, that Monsieur Button should be assigned to the
Ministry of the Church of Alez, he is, by the Authority of this Synod, given
and confirmed to them for their Pastor.

13. The Appeal of Monsieur Rouse, and of the Church of St. Andrew de l'
Ancize, was disannulled, because the Affairs of their annexed Congregations
ought to be soveraignly and finally determined by their own of the
Neighbor-provinces. And this Assembly recommends the said Mr. Rouse to the
care of the Synod of Sevennes, to provide for his comfortable Subsistence,
according to the Rules of Christian Charity.

14. This Assembly passing by the Appeal of the Province of Xaintonge from the
Judgment of that of Poitiers, according to the Decree of the National Synod of
St. Maixant held in May, 1609, (Article the nineteenth about ^ppeals) leaves
the Family of the Lord du Brueil Goulard at liberty to join themselves unto the
Church of Annay.

15. To regulate that Contest between the Provinces of Xaintonge and Poictou,
the latter of these pretending to reunite the Church of Champagne Mouton with
their Synod: This Assembly, confirming the Decree of the first National Synod
of Charenton, ordains, That, the said Church shall continue incorporated, as
it has been to this day, with that of St. Claud, until the next Synod of
Xaintonge, which shall make some Provision for Monsieur Ferrand, and, by all
fitting Means, for the Subsistence of the Church of St. Claud: and immediately
after the breaking up of the said Synod, the Church of Champagne Mouton shall
be joined unto that of Courteilles, and provided for, to its liking and
content, by the Synod of Poictou: and that said Synod shall take a most
particular care that the Church of Vigean be not left destitute of a Pastor.

16. This Assembly ratified the Judgment of the Consistory and Colloquy of
Caen, approved by the Synod of Normandy, who declared the Appeal of Monsieur
Fourneaux null, and not receivable; and ordains, That the said Judicial
Sentence be fully executed according to its purport and tenor, in due form, as
to the deposing of the said Fourneaux. And whereas he had been publicly
suspended from the Lord's Supper, and since he has acknowledged his Offense
(for marrying his Daughter unto one of a contrary Religion) publicly before a
whole National Synod; and he having been kept back from communicating at the
Lord's Table this last Easter, the said Suspension shall be taken off both from
himself and Wise, after that he shall have confessed in the Consistory his
Sorrow for the Sin which his Con^^vency has brought into his Family.

17. Upon perusal of the Judgment past in the Synods of Sevennes and Lower
Languedoc, and of the Letters of Monsieur Horle's Widow, and the Memoirs of the
Church of Anduze; this Assembly declares the said Church to have well deserved
the sharpest Censures, and therefore rejects their Appeal, and confirms the
judicial Sentence of both those Synods, and enjoined that said Church to give
full Satisfaction unto that poor and afflicted Widow.

18. This Assembly receiving the Appeal of the Lord Chabassier Judge of Anduze,
and of Monsieur Couraut Pastor of the Church of Quissac, and condemning the
Facility of the Synod of Sevennes held at Sumene, who without hearing of the
said Lord Chabassier, had decreed, That the Censure justly pronounced against
Mr. Poujade, Minister in the Church of St. Hippolyte, should be razed out of
the Acts of the Provincial Synod held at Alez, ordains, That the said Censure
shall be again inserted into the Body of the Acts of the said Synod; and that
the Contents of this Ordinance may be ratified, and become more valid, all
Pastors, who extraordinarily assist any vacant Churches, are enjoined to rest
satisfied with the defraying of the Charges of their Journey, and sojourning in
it, as has been hitherto constantly practiced in all the Provinces; and they
be strictly and expressly forbidden to exact so much as one Farthing from any
one of those Churches, because they receive their Maintenance and Sallaries
from their own particular Churches, unto which they stand related. And whereas
the said Poujade has appealed from the Synodical Decree made at Anduze, this
Assembly declares, That the said Synod had most just occasion to charge the
Consistories of Sauve and Manobles to watch over the Deportments of the
Consistory of Nismes; and the said Consistories shall be assisted and
strengthened, if need be, with the Presence of the Neighbour-Pastors; and they
be authorized to cite the said Poujade before them, that he may give in Answer
unto all Articles which shall be brought against him, and to prosecute him
according to the nature of the Facts whereof he shall be found guilty, even
unto Deposition from the Sacred Ministry; and it shall be denounced to him,
that in case he refuse to appear before the said Consistory, that he is now
this very instant suspended his Ministerial Function.

19. In explaining the Sense of that Judgment past upon Monsieur Deschamps
above in the fourth Article of Appeals; this Assembly declares, That Ministers
and Elders may concert among themselves in Consistory, such Matters as they
shall esteem and think to be most needful for the admission or exclusion of any
Pastor of a Church, but they may not come to any final Resolution, till they
have first of all consulted with the Heads of Families duly called, and Members
of that Church; which Resolution of them all shall be determined by plurality
of Suffrages, according to the Order observed in all well-regulated Assemblies,
and under the direction of the Consistory.

20. The Assembly received the Appeal of the Faithful of Boisgency, and
disannulled the Sentence of Suspension from the Lord's Table, pronounced
against them by the Synod Berry, because the Church of Mer, whereunto they had
joined themselves, is well able to subsist of it self, without any Relief or
Assistance from them: And farther it does ordain, That the said Inhabitants
shall have the Privilege of taxing themselves to all Church-Rates and Charges;
and out of that Tax, whatever it be that they do or shall promise to pay
annually unto the Church of Mer, there shall be deducted the Sum of fifty
Livers, which, shall go to the discharging of the Arrears of Wages, owing by
the said Inhabitants of Boisgency unto Monsieur Guerin, who was formerly their
Pastor, till the whole Debt be paid, according to the Account stated and
concluded the 18th day of April in the Year 1632, unless there shoul be a
necessity of revising it.

21. Although the Appeal brought in by the Inhabitants of St. Roman and of Val
Francesque, be not receivable, yet the Assembly, out of special Favor, took
cognizance thereof, and decreed, That Letters should be writ unto them,
exhorting them to mutual Peace and Union in the Worship of God, and the
Ordinances of Religion, with those of Val Francesque.

22. Monsieur Pejus was heard, declaring his Grievances, and petitioning for
his Re-establishment in the Church of Mer, and for payment of his Arrears due
unto him from the said Church. James Martincau, deputed by diverse Members of
the same Church, adhered to his Demands. There was heard on behalf of the
Church of Mer, the Lord de la Bordechabin, sent by the Consistory, as also the
Provincial Deputies of Berry: The Acts of the Provincial Synods from which the
Appeal was formed, were seen and perused; the Judgments of the Commissioners
sent by the Church of Mer and Boisgency, the Letters of Monsieur Jurieu
resigning his Ministry to the Disposal of the Synod, the Memoirs of the Church
of Mer representing the Poverty whereunto they be at present reduced, and
sundry other Considerations which yet did not in the least reflect upon the
Honor of Mr. Pejus's Ministry, and other Memoirs from diverse Heads of
Families, who desire he may be settled again among them, and the Letters and
Memoirs from the Church of Argenton, petitioning that he may be absolutely
given to them for their Pastor. After which the Synod rejecting all the
Appeals, and confirming the judicial Sentences of the Province of Berry,
decreed, That the Censures pronounced against Monsieur Pejus should be razed
out of the Body of the Acts of those Synods, and that his Ministry is now
granted unto the Church of Argenton; and exhorts the Church or Mer aforesaid,
and the Province, to give him all Satisfaction, or to provide better for him;
and all Caballings of particular Members in the Church of Mer, are interdicted
them and forbidden. And whereas the said Monsieur Pejus claims Arrears of
Wages owing to him, forasmuch as the Church of Mer protests, that by Reason
of their deep Poverty for these five Years last past, they are utterly disabled
from maintaining two Pastors, and that they express and restify a more than
ordinary Respect and Affection to Monsieur Jurieu, and that the Province being
obliged by this their Protestation, had provided for him for the present, till
they could do more and better for him, and till such time as the matter of his
Appeal was determined, had lent him unto the Church of Boisgency, which had
exhibited to him as great and good a Maintenance as he could have had from the
Church of Mer; and by his Refusal of such a comfortable Employment, he had
thereby deprived himself of that Assistance and Relief they had so charitably
procured him, his Petition was rejected.

23. Letters being read from James de Valleroux Lord of la Gayerie, and the
Acts produced by him, and the Censures denounced against him by the Consistory
of Vertueil, Colloquy of Augoumois, and Synod of Xaintonge; the Synod approving
of those Censures, r^jected his Appeal.

24. Mr. Daniel Loquet, heretofore Elder and Reader in the Church of
Barbezieux, having sent neither Letters nor Memoirs to defend his Appeal from
the Sentence of the Synod of Xaintonge, the said Appeal was declared null. But
afterward the Letters of the said Loquet, before the Synod broke up, were
presented to it, who dismissed his Cause to be finally judged by the Consistory
of Bourdeaux.

25. None appearing on behalf of the Church of Vangeau, to maintain their
Appeal, opposing the sending of Monsieur Twiscard by the Province of Berry,
unto the Church of Chamerolles and Bandaroy, it was declared null.

26. The Appeal of Monsieur Hommeau, who was designed by the Synod of Anjou, to
be Pastor unto the Church of Lassay in the County of Maine, it was declared
null.

27. Mrs. Judyth Guyot, the Wife of Mr. Laverdan, appealing from the Judgment
pronounced against her by the Commissioners of the Synod of Burgundy, and not
appearing to maintain her Appeal, the Assembly declared it null and void.

28. Whereas some private Persons in the Church of St. Foy had appealed from
the Colloquy of Lower Agenois, who opposed the re-establishing of Mr. Duvall in
his Office of Elder, decreed by the Synod of Lower Guyenne, their Appeal was
declared null.

29. The Synod of Sevennes having censured Monsieur du Mas, and the Church of
Ganges having appealed from that Judgment, but not appearing to defend their
Appeal, it was declared null.

30. Monsieur de Monbonoux, and other Inhabitants of the Town of Anduze,
appealing from a Judgment given by the Synod of Lower Languedoc against
Monsieur Arnaud their Pastor, their Appeal was declared null.

31. Monsieur Talaisac appealing from a Judgment denounced against Monsieur
Preudhomme, Pastor of the Church of Cournontaeuail, his Appeal was declared
null.

32. Although the Province of Normandy had sufficient reason to set Monsieur
Merchant at Liberty, and to bestow his Ministry upon the Church of Gisors; yet
nevertheless, because of the importunate Petition of the Church of Athis, of
Laselle, and les Voutes, and for that they have all jointly promised to give
full and entire Satisfaction unto the said le Merchant, and for that he
expresses a great Inclination to continue his Service unto the said Church of
Athis; the Assembly leaving it to the Care of the Colloquy of Roven to provide
for the Church of Gisors, ordains, That the said Monsieur le Merchant shall
be settled again in that of Athis and its annexed Congregations, who shall make
him a full and complete Payment of all Arrears of Sallary due unto him: And in
Default hereof, the next Synod shall execute upon them that Judgment formerly
denounced against them.

33. On Sight and Perusal of the Acts of the Synod of Dolphiny, as also of the
Letters and Memoirs of Monsieur Aymin, Pastor in the Church of Die; this
Assembly judging his Appeals frivolous, declared on the first, that the
Province of Dolphiny had very prudently judged that they ought not to be
troubled about Sollicitings made in the Years sixteen hundred thirty three and
thirty four, for the Maintenance of the University of Die; that he ought not to
have tarried at Paris after the Revocation of the Powers given for those
Sollicitings, and that he ought now to be accountable to the Council of the
University of Die, who employed him; and in case he were aggrieved, then should
he have carried his Complaint to the Consistory of Lions, who were
commissionated to judge finally of this Affair: And on the second, that he has
well deserved the severest Censures for not acquiescing in the Judgment of his
Province, which is exhorted to oblige him and all others to a personal
Residence with their Flocks, on Pain of having all Church Censures inflicted on
them; and in no wise to suffer the Moneys destinated by the Churches for the
Maintenance of the University of Die, to be diverted contrary to the Intention
of the Donors, unto other Uses.

34. The Memoirs of Monsieur de la Fit, Pastor of the Church of Pau and of de
Mirau, Elder in the Church of Bourdeaux, and the Letters and Memoirs of the
Lords de la Peyrette and du Bois, private Members of the said Church of
Bourdeaux, were all read, and their Appeal also from the Judgment of the
Province of Lower Guyenne, which was reported by the Deputies of that Synod.
Whereupon, the Assembly declared, that the Appellants had not any Grievance at
all upon them, and that their Appeal was therefore groundless, and rejected.

CHAP. XV. General Matters. 1637. The 27th Synod.

Article 1. * THE Assembly leaves the Provinces at full Liberty to keep their
ancient Customs observed by them in singing that Prayer at the End of the ten
Commandments, and which is usually recited by some kneeling, by others
standing, and by others sitting, according to the settled established Order in
every Church; not judging it in any-wise reasonable to oblige them all unto one
only Form in a Matter, which of its own Nature is indifferent. Article 2. The
Province of Berry requesting it, this Assembly ordains, that for the future,
when the Question shall be moved about furnishing our Universities with
Professors in Divinity, that Province in which the University lies destitute
of a Professor, shall invite the four next adjoining Provinces, to depute at
their own Charges some of their Pastors, who may assist in Person at the Examen
of the Candidate for the vacant Professor's Chair. Article 3. The Demand of the
Province of Poictou was granted, that whosoever should hereafter transgress the
16th Article in the 14th Chapter of our Discipline, and the particular Canons
enacted in the Province where he resideth, about publishing of Books, shall be
suspended from the Ministry. Article 4. However Men may have a Right to buy or
keep Slaves, and this be not condemned by the Word of God, nor is it abolished
by the Preaching of the Gospel in the far greatest part of Europe; and though
there has been insensibly brought in a Custom to the contrary, and that
Merchants purchase and dispose of them as of their proper Goods and Chattels,
especially such as traffic on the Coasts of Africa and the Indies, where this
Commerce is permitted, do buy from the Barbarians, either by way of Exchange of
Goods, or for ready Money, Men and Women-Slaves, who being once in their Power
and Possession, they do again openly sell in the Market, or truck them away
unto others. This Assembly confirming that Canon made on this Occasion by the
Provincial Synod of Normandy, does exhort the Faithful not to abuse this their
Liberty contrary to the Rules of Christian Charity, nor to transfer these poor
Infidels unto other Hands besides those of Christians, who may deal kindly and
humanely with them; and above all, may take special Care of their precious
immortal Souls, and see them instructed in the Christian Religion. Article 5.
The Province of Lower Languedoc desiring it, all the Provinces are informed to
take heed that the 9th Article in the 1st Chapter of our Discipline be not
transgressed, which forbids the ordaining of any Proposan without a Title, or
assigning him to some particular Church. Article 6. The Deputies of Lower
Languedoc being expressly charged thereunto by their Province, did represent,
that although the Churches of this Kingdom had in all their Sermons, Prayers
and Thanksgivings, public and private, given evident Proof to the whole World
of that Fidelity and most sincere Obedience which his Majesty's natural-born
Subjects of the Reformed Religion were obliged to yield unto his Majesty; yet
nevertheless, the sworn Enemies of our Religion do never cease railing,
slandering and calumniating us, and by diverse Pamphlets and Libels fraught with
lying Stories, do their utmost Endeavor to make the Loyalty and Fidelity of
our Churches to be suspected and called in question, and that there is an
absolute Necessity we should justify our selves not only by Sermons preached in
the Pulpit, and by Books composed and published from the Press, unto the whole
World, to this very End and Purpose, but also by our most humble Remonstrances
unto his Majesty, that he would be pleased graciously to account all the
Members of our Churches as his most obedient and loyal Subjects, and to have an
entire Confidence in their Fidelity unto his Service, the Welfare of his
Estate, and the Augmentation of the Glory of his Crown. The Assembly embraced
this Remonstrance as a sacred thing consonant to Reason and Justice, and
perfectly correponding with those Propositions tendered us from his Majesty by
the Lord Commissioner; and ordained, That all Pastors in the Churches of this
Kingdom should give all religious and conscientious Satisfaction herein,
according to the Word of God, and the Confession of our Faith, which are
punctual and most express on this Subject. Article 7. Whereas for diverse Years
last past, War and Mortality have overspread with a Deluge of Woes the far
greatest part of Europe, and made the unrepenting Nations sensible, what a
dreadful thing it is to fall into the Hands of the Living God, justly incensed
against those hard-hearted Sinners, who despise the Riches of his Grace, the
Abundance of his Goodness and Long-suffering. The National Synod of the
Reformed Churches of France, assembled by the King's Permission in the Town of
Alanson, beholding, in the continual Plagues with which all the Provinces of
this Kingdom are scourged, evident Threatenings of new impendent Judgments:
Wherefore that those affrightful and approaching Storms may be averted, and the
Bowels of God's fatherly Compassions may be moved, and that we may obtain from
his infinite Mercies and Goodness the Preservation of his Majesty's sacred
Person, a Blessing upon his Armies, the Return and Re-establishment of Peace
and Prosperity in the State, and a quiet Settlement for his poor afflicted
Church, tossed with Tempests, and not comforted: We do exhort all the Faithful
by a deep Humiliation of Soul, and a sincere and serious Conversion of Heart,
to seek after the Help, Grace and Favor of God. And to this Purpose the Synod
decrees, That a public Fast shall be kept and solemnly observed in all the
Churches of this Kingdom, on Thursday the nineteenth Day of November next
co^^ing, which shall be notified unto them by reading of this present Act.
Article 8. That the Purity of Doctrine may be entirely preserved, and all
Misunderstandings between Pastors, Professors and Churches, may be avoided, and
to prevent those many Inconveniences which would thereupon happen, and to tie
and maintain more strictly and strongly the spiritual Bonds of brotherly
Charity and Union among the Faithful: This Synod does most rigorously forbid,
on Pain of all Church Censures, yea, and of Deposal from their Ministry, all
Pastors of Churches, and Professors in our Universities, to treat of in their
Sermons, Lectures or Writings, those curious Questions which may occasion the
Fall or Stumbling either of Students in Divinity, or private Christians; it
being most necessary that both they, their Scholars and Flocks should keep
themselves to the Simplicity and Plainness of the Holy Scriptures, and to the
common Expedition of the Orthodox Creed grounded thereupon, and approved by the
National Synods, particularly by that of Charenton, held in the Year 1623. They
be also forbidden the using of any new Expressions subject to ill Constructions
and Misinterpretations, or contentiously to dispute one with the other, upon
such Questions or Interpretations, or to draw reciprocally the Saw of
Controversy betwixt them in Polemical Writings; nor shall they violate,
directly or indirectly, the Canons made either in this or former Synods, about
printing of Books, for whose Contents the Licensers of the Press shall be
responsible as much as the Authors, unto the Provinces. And those Provinces
within whose District and Jurisdiction our Universities lie, shall take a most
especial Care of them, and see them visited from time to time, by Persons
chosen to that Purpose, and to oblige all Professors both in Philosophy and
Divinity, to send every six Months unto the Examiners of Books, in the
Neighbor-provinces, one or two Copies of the Theses disputed and defended in
the public Schools. And the Neighbor-provinces are empowered with full
Authority, together with those in which our Universities are erected, to take a
particular Knowledge of their Estate: And in case any Pastor or Professor, or
any Member of our Churches, in reading or perusing the Books printed with
License of our Examiners, shall find any matter of Importance, which they shall
count worthy of Reprehension, we order that they apply themselves to the
Authors of the said printed Discourses, or to the Examiners and Licensers of
them, and to demand Satisfaction from them; and in case they refuse to give it,
then they shall address themselves unto their Colloquies and Synods. And that
Church and Province out of which the said Complaint comes forth, is forbidden,
as are also all other Persons whatsoever, from intermeddling with this Affair,
or to take upon them to judge and decide it, or to inflame this Controversy, or
to spread it farther; but according to the Canons of our Discipline, they shall
leave and resign it entirely unto those Assemblies, to whose Jurisdiction the
Authors of these Disturbances do belong, and against whom the Opposition is
formed. Article 9. The Lord Marquess of Clermont our General Deputy, and the
Sieurs Ferrand, Gigord and Cerisy, who were particularly delegated to lay at
his Majesty's Feet the most humble Supplications and Complaints of our
Churches, having immediately after their Return from Court, delivered his
Majesty's Letters, and given an Account of that gracious Audience, and most
kind and favorable Reception they had from his Majesty, and our Lords his
principal Ministers of State, and how well they approved of the Conduct of this
present Synod, and had promised, that as soon as it was concluded and
separated, an Answer agreeable to our Desires expressed in the Cahier presented
to them, should be given us, and that they would assign for the defraying the
Charges and Expenses of this Synod, the same Sum of Moneys as was granted unto
the last National Synod, which was also confirmed by my Lord Commissioner, who
had received Letters concerning it, and required that this Assembly would
dissolve it self speedily. The Synod having testified their great Satisfaction
in the Wisdom, Faithfulness and Affection, manifested by these their Deputies
in their whole Negotiation, and finding that they had Hopes given them by his
Majesty, that his poor oppressed Subjects of the Reformed Religion should sense
and experience the comfortable Effects of his Sacred Royal Promises, and that
according to his wonted Goodness, he would take care that they should not be
compelled contrary to the Tenor of his Edicts, the Liberty of their
Consciences, and the Canons of their Discipline, to adorn the forepart of
their Houses on those Days which are called the Festival of the Holy or Corpus
Christi Day, nor on any other Holy Days; nor that they should be forced to
yield up their Infants to be baptized after the Popish Manner, or by Midwives,
or by any other Persons uncalled, who be not Ministers of the Gospel; and that
his Majesty would ordain a Revocation of that Declaration, and of those Decrees
which forbad our Ministers to preach in Places where they did not inhabit,
because those Decrees were granted on the single Requests of our most
imbittered Enemies, and without ever hearing of us the injured Parties, and for
that they were derogatory to the Royal Grace contained in his Edicts of
Pacification; and by means of those Decrees, a very great Multitude of People
were utterly deprived of all the Ordinances and free Exercise of their
Religion, and of the Peace and Comfort of their Consciences. Wherefore the
Synod resolved once again, and that without delay, to have recourse unto his
Majesty's Royal Grace and Favor, and joined extraordinarily, in Commission
with the Lords General Deputies, some select Persons out of its own Body, who,
immediately after their Separation, should, in conjunction with them, use such
Means for the obtaining and perfecting those Grants and Promises, as they
thought needful. Article 10. But the Lord Commissioner relating how that at the
first opening of this Assembly, his Majesty had by his Mouth made a clear,
express and absolute Declaration of his Intentions, and had charged him to
interdict, as he did once more now interdict all Deliberations contrary
thereunto; the Synod did also again insist upon that Answer which they had
given to those Matters propounded by him the said Lord Commissioner, and did
beseech him, that according to it he would suffer our poor distressed Churches
to present their humble and innocent Petition unto his Majesty, which needed
not any Deliberation, nor had any other Design or Tendency than to preserve the
Privileges of his Majesty's Edicts, and the Liberties of our Consciences to
us, whereof we were in danger of being divested and deprived; and therefore
did, in pursuance thereof, nominate and appoint the Sieurs de l' Angle and
Gigord, together with the Lords General Deputies, to reiterate the most humble
Supplications and Requests of our Churches unto his Majesty, and to the Lords
of his most Honorable Privy Council, and all of them jointly to solicit for
the fulfilling of his gracious Promises, and that they might pass the Seals,
and be confirmed in due Form of Law.
A Copy of his Majesty's Letter unto the Synod.
By the KING.
Dear and Welbeloved,
WE have received, by the Hands of your Deputies, the Letters which yon sent
its the 4th and the 6th of this Month; and we heard delightfully from their
Mouths, what they had to offer us on your Part; and now they be returning to
you, will report unto you those Assurances, which we have given them of our
good and sincere Intentions toward our Subjects of the pret. Reformed
Religion, for their enjoyment of the Privilege and Benefit of our Edicts: and
we persuade our self that you will, by your after-Deportments, render your
selves worthy of our Grace and Favor. And as for what concerns the Cahier of
your Complaints and Remonstrances, which was presented to us, and your Election
of Deputies to reside at Court, and attend upon us in our Progress, as soon as
your Synod shall be dissolved, we shall, as has been ever practiced by us,
consider of the most favorable Answer that may be given you. In the mean
while, it is your Interest to break up as soon as possible, lest your longer
sitting in our Town of Alanson should be imputed to you as a failure of your
Duty to us, and a Transgression of our Edicts and Declarations. We shall not
detain you any longer, but leave you to the Lord of St. Mars, our Commissioner
deputed by us unto your Assembly, from whom you may understand what is our
Intendment and Pleasure.

Given at Fontainbleau, this 24 th Day of June, 1637. Signed in the Original,
Louis; and a little lower, Phelippeaux:
And superscribed above, For our dear and welbeloved the Deputies of our
Subjects of the pr. Reformed Religion, assembled, by our Permission, in our
City of Alanson.

11. A Copy of the Synod's third Letter unto the King.
SIRE,
FOrasmuch as your Majesty has condescended, both by your Letters with which
we are honored, and by the Mouth of our Deputies, to assure us of your
Majesty's gracious and sincere Intentions to maintain those Edicts, by favor
of which we subsist and live in this your Kingdom, and that you have vouchsafed
us your Royal Word, that you will speedily consider the Cahier of our
Complaints and Remonstrances, and grant us a favorable Answer, as also to
gratify us with a Sum of Money for defraying our Synodical Charges; we
believed, Sire, that our Boldness in presenting our selves once more before
your Majesty, would not be unacceptable, because we design, in all Humility, by
the Mouth of the Sieurs de l'Angle and Gigord, whom we have for this very
purpose sent unto your Court, to testify the profound Resentments we have have
of your Majesty s Goodness. And we have also given them in charge, Sire, to
report unto your Majestly the promptitude of our Obedience unto your Commands,
in quitting this Place, and by our Deputies near your Majesty, to solicit and
petition for the Fruits of your Justice, Clemency and Royal Bounty: And we
presume to request your Majesty to grant them a gracious Audience, and to issue
out your Royal Commandment, that those comfortable Effects we have so justly
hoped from the inviolable Firmness of your Sacred Word, may be as favorably
and suddenly as is possible, expedited into your Provinces: And we shall
continue our devoutest and most ardent Prayers unto the Divine Majesty for your
Majesty's Health and Prosperity, and that it may please God, Sire, to crown
your Armies with Victory, to replenish your House and State with Blessings, and
^o enrich you with this Grace, that you may always live the Father of your
People, and Terror of your Enemies, the Arbiter of Christendom, the Love,
Favorite and Darling of the whole World. These, Sire, are our continual Vows,
our most fervent Prayers unto the Throne of Grace for your Majesty: Nor have we
in this Life any other or greater Desire and Duty, than to be always,

From your City of Alanson, July 9. 1637. SIRE, Your Majesty's most humble, and
most obedient, and most faithful Subjects and Servants, The Ministers and
Elders assembled by your Permission in a National Synod in your City of
Alanson, and in the Name of them all, Basnage, Moderator of the Synod. D.
Coupe, Assessor. D. Blondel, Scribe. De Launay, Scribe.



Article 12. The Determination and Decision of that Affair concerning the
Doctrine and Writings of the Sieurs Amyraud and Testard, Pastors, and Professor
of Divinity in the University of Saumur. The Sieurs Testard Pastor of the
Church of Blois, and Amyraud Pastor and Professor of Theology in the Church and
University of Saumur, came in Person unto this Synod, and declared, That they
understood from common Fame, how that both at home and abroad, and by the
Consutations and Proceedings of sundry Provinces, as also from diverse Books
written against them and their printed Labors, they were blamed for that
Doctrine which they had published to the World; that therefore at the first
opening of the Synod they presented themselves before it, not knowing but that
their Cause might be debated whenas the Confession of Faith came to be read,
and that they appeared to give an account of it, and such Explanations of their
Doctrine, as the most Reverend Synod should judge needful; and to submit
themselves unto its Judgment, and consequently to demand its Protection for the
support of their Innocence, hoping that this Favor would not be denied them;
because they were fully persuaded in their Consciences, that they had never
taught, either by Word or Writing, any Doctrine repugnant to the Word of God,
to our Confession of Faith, Catechism, Liturgy, or Canons of the National
Synods of Alez and Charenton, which had ratified those of Dort, and which they
had signed with their Hands, and were ready, to seal even with their
Heart-Blood.

Article 13. And the Sieur de la Place, Pastor and Professor in the Church and
University of Saumur, reported also from the said University, That he was
charged by it to render an account of the Grounds and Reasons which induced him
to approve and license the Works and Writings of Monsieur Am^^aud, which he
did, according to the Privilege granted by the Discipline unto our
Universities. Moreover, the Sieur Ouzan, Elder in the said Church of Saumur,
being admitted into the Synod, declared, that the said Church understanding
that Monsieur Amyraud, one of its Pastors, was brought into trouble for his
Doctrine, though both by it, and and his most exemplary and godly Conversation,
they had been always exceedingly edified, had given him an express Charge to
testify unto it before this grave Assembly, and most humbly to commend unto
their Reverences the Innocence and Honor of his Ministry. Article 14. There
were also tendered unto the Lord Commissioner the Letters, but not opened, which
were sent unto the Synod from the Churches and Universities of Geneva and
Leyden, and from the Sieurs du Moulin Pastor and Professor in Theology at
Sedan, and Rivet Pastor and Professor at Leyden, together with the Treatises
composed by them, and the collationed Copies of the Approbations given by the
Doctors in the Faculty of Theology at Leyden, Franequer and Groningen, unto the
Treatise of the said Professor Rivet: Which Letters being opened by the Lord
Commissioner, and their Contents perused by him, he allowed the reading of them
unto the Assembly. The Assembly did likewise read the Letters writ by Monsieur
Vignier Pastor in the Church of Blois, and by Monsieur le Faucheur Pastor in
the Church of Paris, in which they offer their Sentiments for reconciling the
Controversies arisen about the Writings of the said Testard and Amyraud, and
their Opponents. Article 15. Moreover, the Apologetical Letters of the Sieurs
Vignier and Garnier, Pastors of the Churches of Blois and Marchenoir, were
read, who informed the Synod, that by virtue of a Commission given them by the
Province of Berry to examine the Theological Writings which might be composed
either by the Pastors or others of their Province, they had given their
Attestation and Approbation to the Book of the said Monsieur Testard, and had
given an account of this their Judgment unto the Provincial Synod assembled in
the Year 1634; and the Extracts of those their Writings were produced. Article
16. Those Papers having been all read, and the aforesaid Sieurs Testard and
Amyraud having been diverse times heard, and the Assembly having in a very long
Debate considered the Difficulties of those Questions raised by them, did
constitute the Sieurs Commarc Pastor id the Church of Vertueil, Charles Pastor
in the Church of Montauban, de L'angle Pastor in the Church of Roan, Petit
Pastor and Professor in the Church and University of Nismes, le Blanc Pastor
and Professor in the University of Die, de Bons Pastor in the Church of
Chaalons upon Saone, and Daille Pastor in the Church of Paris, a Committee to
digest and reduce into Order the Explications which had been given, or might
hereafter be given by the beforementioned Testard and Amyraud, and that they
should accordingly as soon as it was finished bring in their Report. Article
17. And the said Committee having discharged their Trust, and made their Report
unto the Synod, the beforementioned Mr. Testard and Amyraud were again
introduced, and did with the deepest Seriousness protest before God, that it
was never in their Thoughts to propound or teach any Doctrine whatever, but
what was agreeable to the known and common Expositions of our Creed, and
contained in our Confession of Faith, and in the Decisions of the National
Synod held at Charenton, in the Year 1623; all which they were ready to sign
with their best Blood. Article 18. And pursuant hereunto, explaining their
Opinions about the Universality of Christ's Death, they declared, That Jesus
Christ died for all Men sufficiently, but for the Elect only effectually: and
that consequentially his Intention was to die for all Men in respect of the
Sufficien^y of his Satisfaction, but for the Elect only in respect of its
quickening and Saving Virtue and Efficacy; which is to say, that Christ's Will
was that the Sacrifice of his Cross should be of an infinite Price and Value,
and most abundantly sufficient to expiate the Sins of the whole World; yet
nevertheless the Efficacy of his Death appertains only unto the Elect; so that
those who are called by the Preaching of the Gospel, to participate by Faith in
the Effects and Fruits of his Death, being invited seriously, and God
vouchsafing them all external Means needful for their coming to him, and
showing them in good earnest, and with the greatest Sincerity by his Word, what
would be well-pleasing to him, if they should not believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, but perish in their Obstinacy and Unbelief; this comes not from any
Defect of Virtue or Sufficiency in the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, nor yet for
want of Summons or serious Invitations unto Faith or Repentance, but only from
their own Fault. And as for those who do receive the Doctrine of the Gospel
with the Obedience of Faith, they are according to the irrevocable Promise of
God, made Partakers of the effectual Virtue and Fruit of Christ Jesus's Death;
for this was the most free Counsel and gracious Purpose both of God the Father,
in giving his Son for the Salvation of Mankind, and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
in suffering the Pains of Death, that the Efficacy thereof should particularly
belong unto all the Elect, and to them only, to give them justifying Faith, and
by it to bring them infallibly unto Salvation, and thus effectually to redeem
all those and none other, who were from all Eternity from among all People,
Nations and Tongues, chosen unto Salvation. Whereupon, although the Assembly
were well satisfied, yet nevertheless they decreed, that for the future, that
Phrase of Jesus Chist's dying equally for all, should be forborne, because that
term equally was formerly, and might be so again, an Occasion of stumbling unto
many. Article 19. And as for the Conditional Decree, of which mention is made
in the aforesaid Treatise of Predestination, the said Sieurs Testard and
Amyraud declared, that they do not, nor ever did understand any other thing,
than God's Will revealed in his Word, to give Grace and Life unto Believers;
and that they called this in none other Sense a Conditional Will than that of
an Anthropopeia, because God promises not the Effects thereof, but upon
condition of Faith and Repentance. And they added farther, That although the
Propositions resulting from the Manifestation of this will be conditional, and
conceived under an if, or it may be; as, if thou believe thou shall be saved;
if Man repent of his Sins, they shall be forgiven him; yet nevertheless this
does not suppose in God an Ignorance of the Event, not an Impotency as to the
Execution, nor any Inconstancy as to his Will, which is always firmly
accomplished, and ever unchangeable in it self, according to the Nature of God,
in which there is no Variableness nor Shadow of turning. Article 20. And the
said Sieur Amyraud did particularly protest, as he had formerly published unto
the World, that he never gave the Name of Universal or Conditional
Predestination unto this Will of God than by way of Concession, and
accommodating it unto the Language of the Adversary: Yet forasmuch as many are
offended at this Expression of his, he offered freely to raze it out of those
places, wherever it did occur, promising also to abstain in from it for the
future: and both he and the Sieur Testard acknowledged, that to speak truly and
accurately according to the Usage of sacred Scripture, there is none other
Decree of Predestination of Men unto eternal Life and Salvation, than the
unchangeable Purpose of God, by which according to the most free and good
Pleasure of his Will, he has out of mere Grate chosen in Jesus Christ, unto
Salvation before the Foundation of the World, a certain number of Men in
themselves neither better nor more worthy than others, and that he has decreed
to give them unto Jesus Christ to be saved, and that he would call and draw
them effectually to Communion with him by his Word and Spirit. And they did, in
consequence of this Holy Doctrine, reject their Error, who held that Faith, and
the Obedience of Faith, Holiness, Godliness and Perseverance, are not the
Fruits and Effects of this unchangeable Decree unto Glory, but Conditions or
Causes, without which Election could not be passed; which Conditions or Causes
are antecedently requisite, and foreseen as if they were already accomplished
in those who were fit to be elected, contrary to what is taught us by the
sacred Scripture, Acts 13. 48. and elsewhere. Article 21. And whereas they have
made distinct Decrees in this Counsel of God, the first of which is to save all
Men though Jesus Christ, if they shall believe in him; the second to give Faith
unto some particular Persons: they declared, that they did this upon none other
account, than of accommodating it unto that Manner and Order which the Spirit
of Man observes in his Reasonings for the Succor of his own Infirmity; they
otherwise believing, that though they considered this Decree as diverse, yet it
was formed in God in one and the self-same Moment, without any Succession of
Thought, or Order of Priority and Posteriority. The Will of this most supreme
and incomprehensible Lord, being but one only eternal Act in him; so that could
we but conceive of things as they be in him from all Eternity, we should
comprehend these Decrees of God by one only Act of our Understanding, as in
Truth they be but one only Act of his eternal and unchangeable Will. Article
22. The Synod having heard these Declarations from the Sieurs Testard and
Amyraud, it injoined them and all others to refrain from those terms of
conditional, frustratory, or revocable Decree; and that they should rather
choose the Word Will, whereby to express that Sentiment of theirs, and by which
they would signify the revealed Will of God, commonly called by Divines
Voluntas Sign. Article 23. And whereas in sundry Places marked in the Writings
of the beforementioned Monsieur Testard and Amyraud, they have ascribed unto
God, as it were, a Notion of Velleity, and strong Affections, and vehement
Desires of Things which he has not, hot never will effectuate; they having
declared, that by those figurative Ways of speaking, and anthropopathical, they
designed, to speak properly, none other thing than this, that if Men were
obedient to the Commandments and Invitations of God, their Faith and Obedience
would be most acceptable unto him, according as was before expressed by them.
The Assembly hearing this their Explication, did injoin them to use such
Expressions as these, with that Sobriety and Prudence, that they might not give
the least Occasion of Offense unto any Person, nor cause them to conceive of
God in any way, unsuitable to his glorious Nature. Article 24. Monsieur Testard
and Amyraud declared farther, that although the Doctrines obvious to us in the
Works of Creation and Providence, do teach and preach Repentance, and invite us
to seek the Lord, who would be found of us; yet nevertheless, by reason of the
horrible Blindness of our Nature, and its universal Corruption, no Man was ever
this way converted; yea, and it is utterly impossible that any one should be
converted but by the hearing of the Word of God, which is the Seed of our
Regeneration, and the Instrument of the Holy Ghost, whole Efficacy and Virtue
only is able to illuminate our Understandings, and to change the Hearts and
Affections of the Children of Men. Article 25. And forasmuch as the Word of God
has always revealed the Knowledge of the Lord our Redeemer, the said Sieurs did
farther protest, that no one Man was ever, nor can be saved, without some
certain Measure of this Knowledge, less indeed under the old Testament, but
greater under the New, the Death and Resurrection of the Son of God being most
plainly and distinctly manifested in the Gospel; and they hold it as an
undoubted Truth, that now under the New Covenant, the distinct Knowledge of
Christ is absolutely necessary for all Persons who are come unto Years of
Discretion in order to their obtaining of eternal Salvation: And they do from
their very Heart anathematize all those who believe or teach that Man may be
saved any other way than by the Merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, or in any other
Religion besides the Christian. Article 26. And whereas diverse Persons were
much offended at the Professor Amyraud for calling that Knowledge of God, which
Men might gain from the Consideration of his Works and Providence (unless their
Corruption were extreme) by the Name of Faith: The said Professor declared,
that he did it, because he reckoned that that Persuasion which some have, that
there is a God, and that he is a Rewarder, may bear that Name; he owning
however that St. Paul did simply and plainly style it the Knowledge of God, 1
Cor. 1.21. The Assembly injoined him not to give the Name of Faith to any other
Knowledge of God, but unto that which is engendered in us by the Holy Ghost, and
by the Preaching of his Word, according as the Scripture uses it, whether
thereby to point out unto us the Faith of God's ancient Saints, or this which
is now under the New Testament, and necessarily accompanied with a distinct
Knowledge of Christ. Article 27. And as for Man's natural Impotency, either to
believe, or to desire and do the things that belong unto Salvation; both the
said Sieurs Amyraud and Testard protested, that Man had none other Power than
that of the Holy Spirit of God, which is only able to heal him, by an interior
illuminating of his Understanding, and bending of his Will by that gracious,
invincible and uneffable Operation, which he only exerts upon the Hearts of
those Vessels of Grace which are elect of God. Article 28. They did farther
declare, that this Impotency was in us from our Birth, for which Cause it may
be called natural; and they have called it physical or natural, nor ever did
refuse so doing, unless when they would signify that it is voluntary, and
conjoined with Malice and Obstinacy; whenas Man despises and rejects the
Invitations of God, which he would receive and embrace, provided his Heart were
well and fittingly disposed within it self. Article 29. And Monsieur Testard
added particularly, that this does not in the least derogate from what he had
asserted concerning two Callings, the one real, and the other verbal, given by
God unto Men, whereby they may be saved if they will, since that he intended
thereby to signify nothing else, but that their Impotency to convert themselves
was not of the same kind with that of a Man, who having lost his Eyes or Legs,
was willing with all his Heart to see and walk, but that this Impotency sprung
from the Malice of the Heart it self. The Assembly having heard him thus
express himself, injoined him to abstain from these terms, and not to use them
unless with very much Prudence and Discretion, and to join with them such
needful Glosses and Explications, as thereby it may appear, that Man is so
depraved by Nature, that he cannot of himself will any Good without the special
Grace of God, which may produce in us by his Holy Spirit both to will and to do
according to his good Pleasure. Article 30. And those aforementioned Minister
and Professor, Testard and Amyraud, having acquiesced in all, as above
declared, and having sworn and subscribed to it, the Assembly gave them the
right Hand of Fellowship by the Hand of their Moderator, and they were
honorably dismissed to the Exercise of their respective Charges.
The Continuation of other General and Ecclesiastical Matters.
Article 31. FOrasmuch as the far greater Part of the Provinces have not took
any Order about the Expenses of their Deputies sent unto this Synod, the
Assembly desirous to provide for their Indemnity without Prejudice to that
Vantage-Assessment they might lay claim unto, or which had been granted to
them, did pass this Decree, That their respective Provinces should pay them
after the Rate of an hundred Sous, being eight Shillings and four Pence
Sterling Money a day, and they shall be accountable to them for those Portions
accruing from the Sum granted by his Majesty toward the defraying of our
Synodical Expenses. Article 32. Henceforward, whenas a Professor's Place in
Theology, in any one of our Universities, comes by his Death to be vacant, that
it may not be any long time void, and that the University-Councils may have fit
Persons ready at hand, whom they may choose and call in to supply the Office of
the Deceased; this Synod desirous to repair so great a Loss, exhorts the
Lords of Chamvernon, de L'angle, Texier, du Soul, Daille, Bochart of Caen, to
separate themselves unto the Profession of Theology, that they may take it upon
them, whenever the Necessities of our Universities shall require it. Article
33. Forasmuch as particular Actions cannot be truly and impartially judged but
from a due Consideration had of all their Circumstances; this Assembly not
being able to enact a Canon concerning Persons accused of Bankerouting, does
leave the whole Affair to the Prudence of Consistories, how and in what manner
to proceed against them as they shall see to be most expedient. Article 34. The
Province of Lower Guyenne having requested it, the Assembly declares, that the
appointing of public Fasts, and of all other Deliberations relating to the
Discipline of our Churches, and the upholding of their Order, ought to be
determined in Ecclesiastical Meetings by the Plurality of Pastors and Elders
Suffrages, without any preferring of one above another. Article 35. Over and
above those Attestations which Scholars are wont to bring with them from the
Professors and Regents of those Universities under whose Direction they have
followed their Studies, the Synod does ordain, that they shall also take out
Attestations from the Pastors and Consistory of their Lives and Conversations.
Article 36. Forasmuch as the Church judges not them that are without, and does
not exercise any Jurisdiction on those who have quitted her Communion: This
Assembly judges it not meet that those Persons should be publicly from the
Pulpit censured, who that they might marry with Parties of a contrary Religion,
have abandoned the true Religion which they formerly professed. Article 37.
Without prejudicing the Rights of the Province of Provence and Burgundy, this
Assembly grants the Power of calling the next National Synod unto that of
Anjou.
CHAP. XVI. Particular Matters.
1. THE Sieur de la Fite Solon, Pastor of the Church of Bayon, having presented
the first part of a Book of Metaphysics composed by him, and dedicated unto
this Assembly, after they were examined about it, who had been commissionated
thereunto by the Synod of Lower Guyenne, this Assembly ordered, that it should
be again perused by some of its Members, who having made their Report, the said
Sieur de la Fite was praised and encouraged to employ those Gifts wherewith God
had endowed him, for the Illustration of the Truth: and the Sum of three
hundred Livers was voted to be given him, which the Lord du Candall should pay
him upon his Debet, and the Moneys so paid should be charged to the Account of
the Churches.

2. Monsieur Maeil, Elder in the Church of Dieppe, being chosen by the common
Votes of the Pastors, Elders and Heads of Families there, and sent unto the
Deputies of the Province of Normandy, to move and entreat them to request that
Mr. Texier, who was freed from the Church of Mauvesin in the Province of Higher
Languedoc, might be given to them absolutely, and the said Lords Deputies
having introduced him into the Assembly to make his Demand, in which also they
joined with him. After that Mr. Texier had been heard on the one part,
declaring, how that for the Ingratitude of his Church he accepted of the Call
given him by the Church of Dieppe, upon Condition that his Province should judge
it reasonable to set him at Liberty, and with Design to oblige his Church by
the Authority of the National Church to give him a full Satisfaction; and on
the other part, the Deputies of Higher Languedoc complained that they were not
in due time and place acquainted with his Intention, and requesting that the
Right of their Province might be entirely secured, it having many Churches to
be supplied, which were destitute of Pastors, and particularly the Church of
Mauvesin, which had sufficiently assured the said Texier that he should be paid
the Arrears of his Wages: The Assembly decreed, that he should apply himself
unto his Synod, which is exhorted to see that he be fully satisfied, and in
case he be set free from his Church, and that he cannot be commodiously
provided for within his Province, that then leave shall be given him to depart
where he best likes.

3. The Assembly conserving to the Province of Berry the Right they have
hitherto had over the Church of la Selle, ordains, that as long as it shall
be supplied by the Pastors of the Isle of France, it shall be under the
Jurisdiction of the said Province, which shall continue their Contributions
toward the Subsistence of the College of Chastillon.

4. Forasmuch as the Assembly is not now in Possession of any Fund, out of
which those who have Recourse unto it, might be relieved by its Charities;
Monsieur Falquet, whose Necessities are very great, is recommended unto the
Province of Berry, to be assisted and comforted by them, either by allowing him
some certain Portion out of their Alms, or by recommending his afflicted
Condition to be relieved by the more rich and populous Churches.

5. The Deputies of the Province of Vivaretz relating the extreme Poverty
whereunto Monsieur Zuccond, a Pastor emeritus, has been for several Years last
past reduced by reason of his great Sicknesses, Losses, Expenses, and
Imprisonments, suffered from the Lord of Chanal and la Motte; and that the
precedent National Synods had in Consideration of his great Afflictions granted
him a free Portion out of the Moneys of his Majesty's Liberality, and requested
this Assembly that they would be pleased to vouchsafe him some sensible Tokens
of their Charity and Compassion: Answer was made them, that forasmuch as the
Churches had no Moneys at all of their own, nor now to be disposed by them, the
said Province was exhorted to take care of him, for his comfortable Subsistence
and Relief from among themselves.

6. Whereas the Province of Sevennes had formed a Complaint against Monsieur
James Pasquier, Pastor in the Church of St. John de Breuil, this Affair was
turned over to the Judgment of the Province of Higher Languedoc.

7. The Deputies of Bearn requesting that the Divisions which have been judged
and condemned in the Church of Morlas, maybe totally and effectually remedied,
and that there may be an End put unto the Complaints brought in by Monsieur
Fabas against his Province, and sundry particular Persons on the one hand, and
of diverse others against him on the other; that therefore some Deputies may be
sent with an express Charge to take Knowledge of, and give a final Judgment on
all those Articles which could not possibly be examined, or clearly inspected
into in this Place, and at so great a Distance: The Assembly accepting the
Offer of the Deputies of the Province of Bearn, promising to bear their Charges
who should to this Purpose be sent unto them, did nominate the Sieurs Ferrand
and Charles Pastors, and Charron an Elder, to receive the Information drawn up
at the Request of Monsieur Rival, by the Lord D'abbadie, the Decrees past in
Parliament against the Lords D'abbadie, Rival, and others, who by Order of
their Colloquy had admitted unto Communion at the Lord's Table some particular
Persons of Morlas, and generally all Papers whatsoever, which have given Birth
and Fuel unto this Fewd and Contention, that so they may proceed to a final
Judgment on the remaining Matters yet under Debate and Controversy: And they
shall bring in their Account hereof unto the next National Synod.

8. To regulate the Pretensions of the Churches of Alanson, St. Aignan and
Man's, about the Donative given for their Benefit by the Lady de la Harangere,
and destined to the Maintenance of some poor Scholars; This Assembly ordains,
that according to the Tenor of the said Legacy, the Administration of the
Moneys arising from it, ought to be left in the Hands of the Church of Alanson,
and those two other Churches shall agree with it about the choice of him to
whom the Pension shall be exhibited; and that the first of these three Churches
which shall be unprovided, may proceed to receive and employ him; and that the
Son of Monsieur Vignier, Pastor of the Church of Man's, who has already
received some Fruits of the aforesaid Pension, shall enjoy it, and be preferred
before all others in the Enjoyment of it.

9. Forasmuch as the Sieur de la Milletiere has sent unto the Pastors deputed
by the Provinces, the first Part of a Book written by him, entitled, Les
Moyens de la Paix Chrestienne en la Reunion des Catholics and Evangeliques
sur les differends de la Religion divise en quatre parties; and the Title of
the first Volume, La Refutation de la procedure de Monsieur Daille en son
Examen; and Letters also, in which he asserts that he is moved hereunto by the
sole Spirit of God for to reconcile the Differences in Religion. He takes for
granted that what he has offered, or may hereafter offer, will be received
without any Contradiction by all the Churches, and presupposes that all our
first Reformers and their Successors were abused, and do abuse themselves
through a Misunderstanding, which cannot be discovered but by them who shall
admit his new conceited Lights. And whereas he has been too long, even for the
space of three Years, tolerated; and that the Church of Paris has used all
Endeavors to reduce him unto his Duty; and that in the Articles contained in
his first Script, he has designedly concealed his Opinions, though under the
very Phrases used by the Doctors of the Romish Religion, and with which they
are accustomed to express their own Sentiments; and that in the second, which
he has sent abroad into the World, under Pretense of producing Methods of
Reconciliation, he has insinuated diverse Novelties, which are of no Concern at
all to our present Controversies, and sided with the Church of Rome. And
whereas Monsieur Daille, who was expressly ordered to refute him, has used him
with a great deal of Equity, and singular Moderation, for which he is generally
approved. And forasmuch as in his third Book he endeavors might and main to
overthrow the Orthodox Doctrine of Justification by Faith, betraying the Cause
unto the Champions of Merits, and of Justification by Works: The Assembly
ordains, that Letters shall be written him to acquaint him with the
Unreasonableness and Injustice of his Presumption, and the Unprofitableness of
his Design, and to threaten him, that unless he do quit and abandon it, and
contain himself within the Bounds of his Vocation, and make Declaration of it
within six Months unto the Consistory of Paris, he shall be cut off from all
Communion with our Reformed Churches.

N. B. The Letter sent him by the Synod bore Date the 6th of July, 1637. but La
Millitiere did afterward revolt unto Popery, and died a Papist.

10. After the Lord Commissioner had opened the Letters of Mr. Diodati, Pastor
and Professor in Theology at Geneva, the Assembly considering the Contents
thereof, and having examined the French Translation of the Books of
Ecclesiastes, and of the Song of Songs, which had been notified to them by him,
ordered that Letters should be written unto the said Mr. Diodati, and to
represent unto him the Reasons why we cannot depart from the Canon of the Synod
held at Alez.

11. The Professor Amyraud petitioned the Assembly, that they would be pleased
to ordain that the Author of two Books, entitled Antidote, and Les Ombres d'
Arminius; in which his Doctrine and Reputation were most odiously traduced, and
the Memory of Monsieur Cameron deceased, is wickedly defamed, might be cited
before them to answer for his Fact; And Monsieur de la Place, in the Name of
the University of Saumur, joined with him in the same Petition. But forasmuch
as the Author of the said Book is unknown and absent, these two aforesaid
Professors were advised to carry the Proofs they have of this Action unto the
Synod of Poictou, which having condemned the Impression of the Antidote, would
do them Justice upon their Complaint.

12. Monsieur de Vinay having remonstrated that the Province of Vivaretz had
not satisfied nor made Payment of those Moneys advanced by the Church of
Annonay, for the defraying of his Expenses during his Deputation unto the
National Synod of Castres, and demanding a Rule and Order for those Charges the
said Church should be now necessitated to be at on the same score; Monsieur
D'Hosty joined with him in the said Request, on behalf of the Church of St.
Fortunate. This Assembly confirming the Decree of the Synod of Tonneins, in the
7th Article of Observations upon the Discipline, ordains, That the said
Province of Vivaretz should conform it self thereunto, both for the present and
what is past.

13. Whereas Monsieur Fabas has been afflicted with Sickness all the time of
his sojourning in this City, the Assembly does freely give him the Sum of an
hundred Livers, to be taken out of the Debet of the Lord du Candall.

14. The Lord du Candall having offered to advance, for defraying the Expenses
of the Sieurs de l' Angle and Gigord deputed unto the Court, the Sum of three
hundred Livers; he is entreated to allow them at the rate of an hundred Sous by
the Day during the time of their Abode, which is limited unto one Month or more.

15. There shall be allowed in the Lord of Candall's Account, the Sum of four
hundred and fifty Livers advanced by him unto the Sieurs Ferrand, Gigord and
Cerizy, who were first deputed by this Assembly unto his Majesty, for the
defraying of their Expenses in their Journey and Attendance at Court.

16. In case his Majesty should hereafter grant any Sum of Moneys for the
maintenance of our Ministers, the Provinces of Lower Guyenne and Bearn shall
agree together in the choice of one Scholar, who may be hereafter fit to serve
in the Ministry in the Land of La Bour, and shall allow him yearly the Sum of
one hundred Livers, and shall pay in unto Monsieur Guillemin the Sum of an
hundred and fifty Livers, according to the Decree made by the last National
Synod of Charenton.

17. Forasmuch as the Professors present in this Assembly, have protested, that
they would inviolably observe the Canon framed in it, beginning with these
Words, For the preserving of, etc. The Deputies of Higher Languedoc and Anjou
are charged to demand and receive the like Protestations from the other
Professors resident in the Universities of Montauban and Saumur.

CHAP. XVII. Of UNIVERSITIES. The Order taken for upholding and Maintenance of
our Universities.
Article 1. WHereas the Universities of Montauban and Saumur have complained,
that by reason one of the Provinces has retrenched part of its Contribution,
they have been deprived of that Assistance which was destined unto their
Maintenance, and requested that some Course might be took herein by an Order of
this Synod, looking forward and backward to what is past and to come. The said
Province was heard speak in its own Defense, which urged for it self, that it
had been over-rated by the last National Synod of Charenton, in the Year 1631.
This Assembly did greatly condemn the aforesaid Province, for attempting to
violate the Canons of that Synod, and for giving an evil Example unto others of
committing the like Crime, and forbids that and all other Provinces of being
guilty for the future of such Offenses, on Pain of forfeiting their Privilege
of entering into these National Synods; and ordains, that they make good and
full Payment of all Arrears due by them unto those beforementioned
Universities. Article 2. The Provinces which are indebted unto our
Universities, are exhorted to use their best Endeavors to pay in unto them
their Arrearages, according to the Rate before made. Article 3. The University
of Nismes demanding her just Dues, and that the Sum granted her by the last
National Synod of Charenton might be actually paid in unto her this very Day,
and requesting that the Sum of sixteen hundred and thirty nine Livers, three
Sous, paid to her Prejudice by the Synod of Lower Guyenne unto that of
Montauban, which applied unto its own particular Profit what belonged unto
another. This Assembly generally condemning all such Proceedings, ordains,
that the Sum of sixteen hundred thirty nine Livers, three Sous, shall be
reprised by the said University of Nismes, out of what is owing by the Province
of Normandy and others, who should have brought in their Contributions for the
Subsistence of the University of Montauban; and the University of Nismes shall
receive its full Maintenance, according to the Number of Professors, who have
been in actual Service there since the last National Synod of Charenton until
now. Article 4. Although it be as clear as the Sun at Noonday, that the
Instruction of Youth, and the upholding of Schools in those Places where they
have been erected, be absolutely necessary for the Churches Subsistence, the
maintaining of Godliness, and the propagating of the Doctrine of eternal Life
in it, and that all the Faithful are obliged by that great Concern they should
have for God's Glory, the Love of his Truth, and their common Edification, to
use their best and utmost Skill and Endeavors to find out the most proper and
convenient means for the promoting and furthering a Design so evidently just
and profitable; yet nevertheless, forasmuch as diverse Persons have been
discouraged either through the Difficulties of the Times, or from their
inordinate Affections to the World, preferring their own private Interest to
the public, and thereby have cooled in their Zeal, and neglected the Execution
of the Canons before enacted for this Purpose. Now that this very great and
prejudicial Defect may be remedied, and that the Ministry of the Gospel may be
perpetuated in the Church of God, and that this most important Trust of Divine
Verity may be religiously conserved among us: The National Synod assembled by
his Majesty's Permission in the Town of Alanson, does exhort all the Churches,
all Lords, Gentlemen, and all Persons in particular to prefer the Service of
God, the Glory of his Holy Name, and the re-established Order of his House,
before all other humane Considerations whatsoever, and every one of them
according to their Abilities to consecrate unto his Divine Majesty their
Free-Will-Offerings, and to levy among themselves those Charges necessary for
the Subsistence of our Universities and Colleges, and to use and exercise
therein their Christian Charity and Piety in supporting those which are more
feeble: And all Provincial Synods, Colloquies and Consistories be in joined to
take among themselves the most proper Expedients for gathering in those Sums
assessed upon them respectively and actually in their own Persons to solicit
the Payment of them, and to put to their helping Hand, that all Professors and
Regents who serve in the said Universities and Colleges, may annually receive
their appointed Sallaries, and so discharge the Duties of their Place and
Calling with Cheerfulness: and this shall be notified unto all the Churches by
reading of this present Act. Article 5. In the Account of the University of
Saumur there was the Sum of one hundred Livers owing by the Province of
Xaintonge, who shall make actual Payment thereof, unless they can produce an
Acquittance. Article 6. The Province of Berry having brought in three Accounts
of their College rendered by them unto their Provincial Synods assembled the 22d
of April, 1632, at Chastillon upon Loir; the 30th of April, 1634, at Mer; and
the 26th of May, 1636, at Chastillon aforesaid; and by the close of the Account
it appearing that the Sum of four hundred and forty Livers is owing unto the
said College: This Assembly injoineth that Province to put carefully in
Execution the Canons made in the last National Synod for the Maintenance of our
Universities and Colleges, as well for the time past as for what is to come.
CHAP. XVIII. An Account of Arrearages due unto the University, which shall be
paid by the Provinces within the space of one year.
Article 7. THe Province of Higher Languedoc stands indebted to the University
of Montauban over and above what it owes for this present year, the Sum of
Seven Hundred Ninety and Eight Livres, Ten Sous, Eight Deniers, and that of
Normandy, besides the Deduction of Sixteen Hundred Thirty and Nine Livres, and
Three Sous re-demanded by the University of Nismes, as well for this year now
current, as for the years past, stands indebted One Thousand Four Hundred
Twenty and Seven Livres, Nineteen Sous; All Errors in the Account excepted.
Article 8. l. s. d. There is due from the Province of Normandy, to the
University of Saumur 1149 05 03 From the Province of Xaintonge 265 02 10 From
the Province of Poictou 1624 11 00 From that of Berry 335 14 00 From that of
Anjou 531 15 00 From that of Britain 041 05 00 Article 9. l. s. d. There is
due from the Province of Sevennes, unto the University of Die, for the years
past, besides what is due for this now Current, the Sum of 0887 10 00 And from
that of Burgundy, taking in the year now Current -- 0262 10 00 Article 10. l.
s. d. There is due from the Province of Lower Languedoc, both for the year now
Current, and those past, unto the University of Nismes, the Sum of -- 4950 But
whereas they have paid to Monsieur Petit the Sum of 300 l. and to some other
Persons, whenas the said Petit and those Persons shall bring in their Accounts,
the said 300 l. shall be deducted, and allowed them in Account.

l. s. d. The Province of Sevennes, owes 0300 00 00 The Province of Lower
Guyenne, deducting the Sum of 1639 l. 3 s. paid by them unto the University of
Montauban, the Sum of 3610 17 00

Article 11. Now this is the true Account of the Payments that are to be made
unto the said University of Nismes, out of the Sum of 1800 l. Decreed unto that
University by the Six and Twentieth National Synod held at Charenton in the
year 1631, for six years, ending the first day of this next October. l. s. d.
Monsieur Petit, Professor of Divinity, shall receive for six years expiring at
the said Term, viz. the last of September, -- 4200 00 000 Monsieur Cadur for
having exercised the Profession of Theology to the first of April, 1634. 1750
00 00 The Heirs of Monsieur Peyrol who exercised the Profession of the Hebrew
Tongue till he Deceased, April 1st. 1634. 1000 00 00

The whole is 6950 Livres three Sous, whereof Sixteen Hundred Thirty and nine
Livres, three Sous, shall be reprised out of the Sum of Two Thousand One
Hundred and Seventy Seven Livres, and Two Sous owing by the Province of
Normandy to the University of Montauban, the said University having employed
the like Sum unto its own usage, which the Province of Lower Guyenne, ought to
have paid in to the University of Nismes. And the remaining Sum of Three
Thousand Eight Hundred and Fifty Livres, shall be laid up in Bank for the
benefit of the University of Die, and to help to maintain it; but with this
express Condition, that they do their endeavor to disengage the Stock of Three
Thousand Livres, which had been granted them by the National Synod of Alez.

And therefore the said University of Die, shall receive from the Provinces of
Lower Guyenne and Sevennes, the said Sum of 3850 l. proportionably to their
Debts for the Subsistence of the University of Nismes, to wit, from the Lower
Guyenne, 3610 l. 10 s. and from that of Sevennes, Two Hundred Thirty and Nine
Livres, three Sous. And what is more owing by the Lower Languedoc and Sevennes,
shall be paid unto those Professors who have served in the University of Nismes
aforesaid.


CHAP. XIX. The Accounts of our Universities.
Article 12. THe Province of Anjou brought in two Accounts for the University
of Saumur, which were past in the Synods held at Chastillon upon the Lindre, in
June 1635. and at Saumur, in April, 1637. for the years 1632. 33. 34. 35. and
for one quarter of the year 1636. which having been Examined, were verified and
approved. Article 13. The Province of Dolphiny exhibited for the University of
Die, five Accounts passed in the Assembly held at Cort, Montlimart, Vinsobres,
Ambrun, and Orpiert, for the years 1632. 33. 34. 35. 36. which having been
Examined, were verified and approved. Article 14. Whereas the Province of
Higher Languedoc has not brought in the Proofs of their Accounts tendered by
them since the year 1631. they shall do it in the next National Synod, that so
they may be verified and approved.
A Dividend of those Moneys which shall be hereafter borrowed from the fifth
Penny of the Alms gathered in our Churches, and to be Employed in the
Maintenance of our Universities and Colleges.
Article 15. That our Universities may be kept up and Maintained, it was
Advised and Resolved on by the Unanimous Consent of all the Provinces, that the
Province of Normandy should Contribute yearly the Sum of Fifteen Hundred
Livres, and the first Payment to be made the first of October now next ensuing.
2. and Dolphiny the Sum of 1500 l. 3. Burgundy 161. 4. Xaintonge, 960. 5. Lower
Languedoc, 975. 6. Higher Languedoc, 1000 l. 7 Anjou, 850 l. 8. Britain, 130
l. 9. The Isle of France, 1600 l. 10. Berry, 345 l. Poictou, 975 l. 11. Lower
Guyenne, 900 l. 12. Seventies, 250 l. 13. Bearn, 50 l. All which Sums amounting
to Eleven Thousand one Hundred Sixty and Six Livres, Five Sous, shall be paid
in, and distributed in manner following. Article 16. To the University of
Montauban, for two Professors in Divinity, one in Hebrew, and two in
Philosophy, and for the College, 3000 l. of which Sum, the Province of Higher
Languedoc shall furnish 1000 l. Lower Guyenne, 900 l. Bearn, 50 l. Xaintonge,
385 l. And Normandy, 665 l. Article 17. To the University of Saumur, for two
Professors in Divinity, one in Hebrew, and two in Philosophy, 2606 l. for the
Principal of the College, 100 l. For the First Regent, 400 l. For the Second,
300 l. For the Third, 250 l. For the Fourth, 210 l. For the Regent of the Fifth
and Sixth Classis, 210 l. For the Doorkeeper and Beadle, 60 l. In all, 4130 l.
of which Sum, the Province of Anjou shall furnish 850 l. Britain, 130 l.
Poictou, 975 l. Xaintonge, 575 l. and the Isle of France, 1600 l. Article 18.
To the University of Nismes, for two Professors in Divinity, whereof one shall
receive 700 l. and another but 400 l. because he has a Stipend also as Pastor;
of which Sum, the Province of Lower Languedoc shall furnish 975 l. and
Sevennes, 125 l. The whole being Eleven Hundred Livres. Article 19. To the
University of Die, as well for the Professors as the College, the Sum of 2936
l. 5 s. whereof the Province of Dolphiny shall furnish 1500 l. Sevennes 125 l.
Burgundy, 131 l. 4 s. Berry, 345. and Normandy, 835 l.
CHAP. XX The Accounts of the Lord du Candall.
MR. Cooper, Agent of the Lord du Candall, having brought in his Account, the
Assembly nominated Mr. John de Survile Pastor of the Church of Vigan, and Peter
Marbaut, Councellor and Secretary for the King, and Elder of the Church of
Paris; Claudius Bernard, Bailiff of Chastillon, and Elder of the Church of the
said Chastillon on the. Loin; Lawrence de Febur, Advocate and Elder in the
Church of Rouen; Gaspard du Beuf, Advocate and Elder in the Church of Grenoble;
John Brun, Lord of Roussais, Elder in the Church of St. Ambrose; Daniel
Descairae, Lieutenant in the Judicature of Pujols, and Elder of the Church of
Gatherde that Town, and Charles Perreau, Advocate, Elder in the Church of
Couches, to be a Committee to Inspect and Examine the said Account; which being
done by them, they Reported unto the Assembly, That it could not be well
Audited as it was now Stated, without a Personal Conference with the said Lord
du Candall, because it was not in the ordinary form of Accounts, which used to
be tendered unto our National Synods.

The Assembly Discoursing with Mr. Cooper about it, ordered the aforesaid
Committee, or any four of them should go unto Paris, and visit the said Lord du
Candall, and thank him for that good Affection he has always born, and
expressed by unquestionable proofs unto the Churches, and to entreat him to
continue and persevere in it, and that he would be pleased to discharge the
Churches of the Sum of 25125 Livres, 12 Sous of the remaining Accounts rendered
by him unto his Majesty, on February the third, 1633. and of all Interest for
Moneys advanced by him, or at least, that he would be pleased to make some easy
and favorable Composition. And in case he shall so do, that then the said
Committee shall, by Virtue and Authority of this Assembly, give unto the said
Lord du Candall an Acquittance, and discharge him of all those Sums, which he
shall make appear to have been paid by him, according to the Account Stated and
Expedited in the last National Synod held at Charenton; Afterward they shall
proceed to the auditing and finishing of his present Account, and allow all
such Sums, as they shall Judge reasonable: And farther they shall treat with
him, or with any other Person, that shall offer himself to Deal with them about
the Rents, Offices, and other Rights, and Reprisals, belonging unto our
Churches, for such a Price, and at such Conditions as they shall Judge meet.
And also, if an opporty should present it self, and they conceive it expedient,
they shall assist at the clearing of the Account of the said Lord du Candall
with the Lords Commissioners appointed thereunto by His Majesty, or else shall
substitute in their stead some other Persons, whom they shall think proper for
it upon the place. And they shall demand also of the said Lord of Candall, to
deliver unto them all the Offices of the Commissioners for Seisures, which are
yet in his hands, that so they may be disposed of to the benefit of the
Churches in such a manner as they shall advise on. And this Assembly does
promise to allow and approve of whatsoever shall be done or performed by the
said Committee in these aforesaid matters, or by any four of them, for which
purpose they give unto them their full Power and Authority; but nevertheless,
without allowing them their Expenses. And in case they should be obliged to
return unto their own homes before they can have dispatched and finished all
that is as before entrusted with them, this Assembly does then Empower and
Authorize them to sub-delegate in their place and stead, such Members of the
Consistory of the Church of Paris, as they shall conceive best able to Manage
the Affair.

CHAP. XXI. A Dividend of Sixteen Thousand Livres, given by the King for
Defraying the Charges of the Synod.
Article 1. THis Dividend of Sixteen Thousand Livres, granted by the King for
the Defraying our Synodical Expenses, was for Easing and Discharging of the
Provinces; and whereas there had been paid 450 Livres by the Lord of Candall,
upon his Debt unto Mr. Ferrand, Gigord, and de Cerisy, who were first deputed
unto his Majesty; there was only distribution made of 360 Livres of that Sum,
because the Assembly had given unto the said Deputies, the Sum of Thirty Livres
for their particular Expenses they were necessitated to be at over and above
the said Hundred Sous allowed them for every day. Article 2. To the Provinces
of Dolphiny, Burgundy, Xaintonge, Sevennes, Anjou, the Isle of France, Berry,
Poictou, Vivarets, for four Deputies each, the Sum of Eleven Hundred Forty and
Three Livres, Seventeen Sous, the whole amounting to the Sum of Ten Thousand
Two Hundred Ninety and Four Livres, Thirteen Sous. Article 3. To the Provinces
of Normandy, Lower Languedoc, and Lower Guyenne, the like Sum of Eleven Hundred
Forty and Three Livres, Seventeen Sous, out of which there is deducted the Sum
of Six Score Livres, received by each of those Deputies, from the Lord of
Candall: therefore there is no more due unto each of those Provinces, than One
Thousand and Three and Twenty Livres, Seventeen Sous, all which put together,
amounts to Three Thousand Threescore and Eleven Livres, Eleven Sous. Article 4.
To the Province of Higher Languedoc for three Deputies, and Sixty Livres
ordered to a Fourth, who lay Sick upon the way, Nine Hundred and Seventeen
Livres, Sixteen Sous, and Nine Deniers. Article 5. To the Provinces of
Britain, Provence and Bearn, for two Deputies, each the Sum of Five Hundred
Threescore and Eleven Livres, Thirteen Sous, in all amounting to One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Fifteen Livres, and Eight Sous, Article 6, All which Sums,
taking in the 360 Livres, received of the Lord of Candall by Mr. Ferrand,
Gigord, and Cerisy, do make up the aforesaid Sum of Sixteen Thousand Three
Hundred and Sixty Livres Tournois.
CHAP. XXII. The Roll of Deposed and Revolted Ministers.
1. Solomon Pijeaut, formerly Pastor in the Church of Douchamps, Deposed by the
Provincial Synod of Berry, for Adultery; a Fellow of mean Stature, Black Hair,
a Tauny Meagre Face, great Eyes, Eagle Nose, a trembling broken Voice, and
about silty years of Age.

2. William Cacherat, formerly Pastor of the Church at Pontean de Mer, in the
Province of Normandy, about Two and Fifty years of Age, a small Taper Fellow;
Chestnut colored Hair, speaking very fluently, he was Suspended by his
Provincial Synod; he abandoned first the Exercise of his Calling, and since the
Profession of his Religion, turning Papist immediately upon his Suspension by
the Synod at St. Loo, He was Deposed for Desertion of his Ministry, and sundry
other Crimes.

3. Leonard Thevenot, formerly a Priest, that quitted his Frock and Monastry of
Poictiers, he was afterward Pastor of the Church at Mallezais in Poictou, and
of St. John d' Angely, and of Bois, Clan, and Plassac in Xaintonge, aged
between 56 and 58 years, he is a Short, Fat, Crookback Fellow, Black Hair,
beginning to wax Gray, a Fair Beard, great Mouth, Lips turned in, large Red
Eyes, Ruddy Face, an Effeminate Tone in Speaking; he turned Apostate from the
Truth in the Month of July, 1634.

4. Paul Falquerolles, formerly Minister in the Church of St. Hippolyte near
Monoblet in the Province of Sevennes, who being Deposed by the Provincial Synod
for his Vicious Conversation, and Desertion of his Charge, did finally Revolt
from the True Religion. This Fellow is about Threescore and Five years old,
Tall of Stature, and Gray Headed.

All these Acts were Passed and Decreed in the National Synod Assembled by the
King's Permission, at Alanson, from the 28th. of May, until the 9th. of July,
1637. And Signed by Basnage, Moderator of the Synod. D. Couspe, Assessor. D.
Blondel, Scribe. D. Launay, Scribe.


CHAP. XXIII. An Account and Catalogue of the Reformed Churches of France, and
Bearn, together with the Names of their Pastors hung up in the National Synod
held at Alanson, in the Months of May, June, and July, 1637. Extracted and
Copied out of the Original.
1. Province. IN the Province of Berry, Orleans, Blesois, Nivernois, and the
Higher March, there be these Pastors and Churches hereafter mentioned.
1. In the Colloquy of Sancerre. Pastors. Churches. 1 Stephen de Monsanglard,
in the Church of Corbigny. 2. Daniel Jamet, Pastor in the Church, of Gien upon
the Loir. 3. John Guerin, Pastor in the Church of Chastillon upon the Loin. 4.
Paul Allard, a Rocheller in the Chapter of Sancerre. 5. John Taby, at La Charity.
6. Aim Pyat, Chastillion on the Loir. 7. Elijah Semele, Grinon and Esparville.
8. Paul Guez, Suilly and Aubiguy. 9. Isaac Babaud, without a Church, La Selle
and 10. Dolot, Destitute of Past. 2. In the Colloquy of Blesois. Pastors.
Churches. 10. Nicholas Vignier, Minister of Blois, 11. 11. Paul Testard,
Orleans, 12. 12. James Imbert Durand, Romorantin, 13. 13. Jacob Brun, Dangeau,
14. 14. John Alix, Marchenoir, 15. 15. Isaac Garnier, Basoches, 16. 16. Jerome
Belon, Chameroll, and. 17. 17. Louis Tuisard, Bouderoy, 17. 18. Daniel Jurieu,
Mer, 18. 19. Cyrus du Moulin, Chasteaudun, 19. 20. Phillip de la Pierre, and
21. Abel d'Argent, both destitute of Churches 3. In the Colloquy of Berry and
Bourbonnois. Pastors. Churches. 22. Louis Scoffier, Belet, 20. 23. Renatus
Bid, Issoudun, 21. 24. Elijah Pejus, Argenton, 22. 25. John Bonneau, Aubusson,
23.

2. The Province of Britain.
Pastors. Churches. 26. Bertrant Avignon, Lord of Souvigny, Pastor of the
Church of Christ. at Hens, 24. 27. Daniel Sauve, Viellevigne, 25. 28. Peter
de la Place, Sion, 26. 29. Peter Bouchereau, Lord of La Manesse, Nants, 27. 30.
David de la Place, Lamussare, 28. 31. Andrew Levier, Lord of Beauchamps, Blain,
29. 32. Pruil, Minister of Rochebernard, 30. 33. and 34. Prestere and Pet.
Jostain, Rochellers of Vitre, 31. 35, Routel, Minister of Ploer, 32. 36.
Delahay, or Delay, without any Church. Triguier, destitute of a Pastor, 33.

3. The Province of Xaintonge, Augoumois, Aunix, and the Islands.
1. Colloquy of Aunix. Pastors. Churches. 37. Jerome Colomnies, and Ministers
of Rochel, 34. 38. Phillip Vincent, 39. John Flane, a Rocheller, Minister of
Surgere and Cire, 35. 40. John Jagaut, Minister of Augoulins, Pont de la*
Pierre, and Aytre, 36 41. John Salber^, Lord of Viliers, a Rocheler Minister of
Rochefort, St. Laurence, and Florrus, 37. 42. Daniel Chavet, a Rocheller,
Marais, 38. 43. Samuel de la Forest, Maze, 37. 44. Samuel de Far, Minister of
Bournivet and Daump. 40. 45. Isaac Coutaut, Pastor of S^les, Taray, and la
Jarrye. 2. The Colloquy of St. John D'Angely. Pastors. Churches. 46. Japhet du
Vigier, Lord of Montier, both Ministers of St. John D' Angely, 45. 47. John du
Croy, 48. Abraham Joyer, Tonnay Charante, 46. 49. Peter Charron, Tonnay
Boutonnay, 47. 50. Rene Chesheau, a Rocheller, Soubize, 48. 51. William Rivet,
Lord of Chamvernoun, Taillebourg, 49. 52. Thomas Guyott, a Rocheller, Pastor of
Moise, 40. 53. Sebastian Baldwyn, Pastor of St. Savinian, 51. 54. Peter
Menauean, a Rocheller of Fontenay Labatu, 52. 55. James Morin, Pastor of Tors
Fresneau, etc. Mata, 52. 3. Colloquy of the Islands. Pastors. Churches. 56.
Peter Richier, Lord of Vandelincour, Marents, 54. 57. And Anthony Chardavoyn of
58. Claudius Herault, a Rocheller, of Cozes, 55. 59. John Perreau, a Rocheller,
of Saujon, 56. 60. John du Menil, of St. Just, 57. 61 Anthony Bugnon, a
Rocheller, Minister of St. John D' Angel, 58. 62. John Papin, At La Tremblade,
59. 63. Oliver le Cercler, Lord of La Monnerie, of Arnot, 60. 64. James de la
Fontayn, a Rocheller, of Royan, 61. 65. John Gruell, Minister of Meschors, 62.
66. Elijah Coustans, the Younger, of Mornoe, 63. There be in this Colloquy,
these Churches interdicted, Saujon, St. Lierre, 64. St. Denis, 65. and the
Castle of Olleroon, 66. 4. The Colloquy of Xaintonge. Pastors. Churches. 67.
Theophilus Rossel, and Ministers of Xaintes, 67. 68. Charles ^^uet, 69. John
Costans, the Elder, of Lons, 68. 70. Elijah Prioleau, Lord of La Viennerie.
Jonzael, 69. 71. John Hamilton, the Father, and Ministers of Montendere,
Fontaynes, and Ozillae, 70. 72. John Hamilton, the Son, 73. James Gaultier, of
Archiac, 71. 74. Peter Bonyot, of Fou and St. German, 72. 75. John Marcon, of
Baigne, 73. 76. John Baduel, of Mizabeau, 74. 77. Peter Chaze, of St. Severin,
75. 78. Louis Aubouieneau, a Rocheller, of Moulieu, and Monhuyon, 76. 79. David
Bellot, of Chalais and la Roche, 77. 80. Francois Majou, of Clanbois, and
Classac, 78. 81. Lazarus Cazaux, of Barbezieux. 79. 5. Colloquy of Augoumois.
Pastors. Churches. 82. John Ferran, Minister of St. Claude and Champagnemauton,
80. 83. Isaac Clave, Minister of La Rechefoucaud, and Lindois, 81. 84. Isaac
Patui, Minister of St. Mesme and Jarnac, Charante, 82. 85. Abraham Hivert, of
Angoulesme and Montignac, 83. 86. Samuel Lagarie, of Cognac, 84. 87. Stephen
Tixueil, of Villefaignan, 85. 88. John Comarc, of Vertuell, Russet, and Castle
Renaud, 86. Elijah Constans, at Numb. 66. now of Bourg, Charante, 87. 89.
Anthony Carrier, of Legonzac and Ligneres, 88 90. Isaac Merchant, of La
Rochebeaucourt, and Sales, 89.

John Pascard, without a Church.

Churches interdicted, Mortaigne, and Lonzac, 92.

Churches Destitute of Pastors, Gemouzac, 73. Rieux, 94. and Niel,95. Hevert au
Beterie, 96. and St. Aulay, 97.


The 4th. Province of Burgundy.
1. Colloquy of Gex. Pastors. Churches. 92. John Tape Minister of Chalais and
Sarconnay, 98. 93. James Clerk, the Father, of Cessy, 99 94. James Clerk, the
Son, Colonges, 100. 95. James Gaultier, of Gex, 101. 96. Dupre. Minister of
Vivonne, 102. 97. Francois Perreaud, Minister of St. Hoiry and Fargues, 103 98.
Peter Despreaux; of Crosset, 104. 99. Joseph Prevost, of Ornez, 105. 100. David
Paget, Minister of Versoy, 106. 2. Colloquy of Dijon. Pastors. Churches. 101.
Joseph Mauvin, Minister of Arnay le Duc, 107. 102. Isaac Durand, of Issurtille,
108. 103. Gideon Guyonnet, Minister of Chastillon upon Seyn, 109 St. John de
Laune, 110. Dijon, 111. 104. Peter Bolenat, Minister of Avalon and Vaux, 112.
105. John Comperat, of Neyons, 113. 106. Peter Heliot, of Baulne, 114. 3.
Colloquy of Chalons. Pastors. Churches. 107. Amed de Bons, Minister of Chalons,
115. 108. John Viridet, Minister of Paray, 116. 109. Noel Angeley, Minister of
Martingues, 117. 110. Peter Jaimot, Minister of Pont des Vaux and Belle Ville,
118. Moulins, 119. Bourbon, 120. 111. Heliodorus de Noyer, Minister of Bussy
and Clugny, 121. 112. Jeffery Bruny, Minister of Antun and Conches, 122. 4.
Colloquy of Lion. Pastors. Churches. 113. Esaiah Bailly, and Ministers of the
Church of Lions, 123. 114. Alexander Rous, 115. Senebriet. 116. Francois
Renaud, L. of Mispillac, Minist. of Mascon, 124. 117. Jacob Textor, Minister of
Bouage, 125. 118. John Marcombes, Minister of Pons de Voyles, 126. Puillac,
127.

The 5th. Province of Lower Languedoc.
1. The Colloquy of Nismes. Pastors. Churches. 119. John Bansillon, Minister of
Aigues Mortes, 128. 120. John Chauvet, Pastors of Nismes, 129. 121. Phillip
Codur, 122 Samuel Petit, 123. Claudius Rosselet, and 124. Josiah Darnieu,
Pastors of 125. (...) Justamen, Minister of Masillargues, 130. 126. Francois
Durand, Minister of Galargues, 131. 127. Quintin Rennoy, and Ministers of
Clavisson, 132. 128. Abraham de Lare, 129. Tobias Roux, Minister of St.
Laurens, 133. 130. Silligorry, Minister of Aimargues, 134. 131. Andrew Basagne,
Minister of Bernis, 135. 132. Tibaud, Minister of Aubars, 136. 133. Allegre,
Minister of Nayett, 137. 134. Fourmer, Minister of Cleronsae, 138. 135. Brun,
Minister of Vauvert, 139. 136. Gaultier, Minister of Sommiere, 140. 137.
Savrin, Minister of Aymargues, 141. 138. Lichicres, Minister of Vergescet, 142.
139. Davin, Minister of Beauvoisin, 143. 140. Bertrand, Minister of
Bussinarques, 144. 2. The Colloquy of Vsez. Pastors. Churches. 141. Rally, the
Elder, Minister of Barjac, 145. 142. Arnaud, Minister of Fons, 146. 143.
Nogueyer, and in the Church of Vez, 147. 144. Manuel, Pastors, 145. Du Cross,
Minister of Blansac, 148. 146. Ravanel, Minister of St. Ginicis, 149. 147.
Bonnier, Minister of Lussan, 150. 148. Chabaud, Minister of BonCoiran, 151.
149. Meinier Castanier, Minister of Navacelles, 152. 150. Paul Cheyron,
Minister of Genouillac, 153. 151. Ponnier, Minister of Les Vaus, 154. 152.
Desmarets, Minister of Chambourrigaud, 155. 153. Rally, the Younger, Minister
of Mouteran, 156. 154. La Say, Minister of Ambroise, 157. 155. Thomas,
Minister of John de Marneiola, 158. 156. Peter Serres, Minister of St. Bagnols,
159. 157. Ancet, Minister of St. Monfond, and St. Quantin, 160. 158. John
Sobier Emeritus. 3. Colloquy of Montpellier. Pastors. Churches. 159. Vedrines,
Ministers of Montpellier, 162. 160. Moses Baux, 161. John Gigord, 162.
Carsenal, 163. John de Croy, Minister of Beziers, 163. 164. Pucis, Minister of
Pinan, 164. 165. Begone, Minister of Clermont, 165. 166. Atge, of Lunel, 166.
167. Preudhomma, Minister of Courvon, 167. 168. Lavit, of Bezarieux, 168. 169.
Second, of Montagnac, 169. 170. Rouse, of Malquel, 170. Lelache, and Vendamman
171. Gignac, 172. Poussan, 173. Forensac, 174. 171. Moses Russel, a Pastor
Emeritus.

6. Province of Poictou.
1. Colloquy of the Upper Poictou. Pastors. Churches. 172. John Foran Pastor of
Chavigny, 175. 173. James Clemanseau Jun. of Courteilles, 176. 174. John
Masson, a Rocheller, of Civray, 177. 175. Isaac du Soul, Minister of Lusignan,
178. 176. Isaac de Civille, Minister of Couke, 179. 177. Nicolas Bellin,
Minister of Parthenay, 180. 178. James Clemanseau, Sen of Poictiers, 181. 179.
James Cottiby a Rocheller, 180. Isaac Chabrol, Minister of Touars, 182. 181.
Daniel Pui, and Ministers of Chastelheraud, 183. 182. John Carre, 183. Daniel
Jaillard, L. of Rosefleur, of Aubanie and Sause, 184. 184. Peter Vinard, a
Rocheller, of Montfermier, 185. 185. Andrew Gourdery. Minister of Montrevil and
Bonnin, 186. 2. The Colloquy of Middle Poictou. Pastors. Churches. 186. Second
Chauffepied, of Champdenis, 187. 187. John de la Blacherie, of Mougon, 188.
188. John Chalmot, of Chesboutonne and Saveilles, 189. 189. John le Chantre, a
Rocheller, of Melle, 190. 190. James de Cognac, of Niort, 191. 191. Jonas
Chasgneau, and of St. Maixant, 192. 192. Samuel le Blanc, 193. John Vatable, of
Issoudin, 193. 194. Nicolas Chagneau, of Aunay and Chize, 194. 195. Theophilus
Lesnier, of Marsillac and Aigre. 195. 196. James Chalmot, Lord of Tiel St.
Gelaise and Cherueux, 196. 197. James Artuis, Lord of Ville Saison La Motte St.
Eraye, 197. 3 The Colloquy of the Nether Poictou. Pastors. Churches. 198. John
Greslant, of La Chaume and les Sables, 198. 199. Joshua d' Artois, of St.
Hillaire and Foussay, 199. 200. Anne Savonnet, of La Joduiniere, Mouilleron and
Bazange, 200. 201. Thomas Johnson, of Sezay and Le Breuilbarret, 201. 202.
Josias Ollivier, of Chantonay and Puibelliard, 202. 203. Louis Rocaer, Lord of
La Bariniere, Minister of La Chastagneray, 203. 204. Rene des Closses, L. of La
Touch, of Mooschamp, 204. 205. Gabriel Bouquet, of La Chaise and Bournezaux,
205. St. Folgent, 206. 206. John de la Place, the Father, of Bouzanges and
Bonpere, 207. 207. James Prunier, of Talmont, 208. 208. James Ranconnet, of
Mareuil and Versoy, 209. 209. Isaac Vergnon. of St. Hermine and la Chappelle,
210. 210. Charles Chauve, Lord of Longechamp, Minister of Montague, La Forest,
Perigne and Vandore, 211.212. 211. Charles Mallet, of S. Giles, Surviers, and
laGanache 213 212. Elijah, Boucherau, of Fontenay le Conte, 214. 213. Peter
Cognart, of Leguire and St. Benoist, 215. Belle Ville and Aysenay, 216. Lusson,
Coulonge les Reaux, 217. Penet and le Vigean, 218.217.220. 214. John Bonnaud,
formerly Pastor of Lusson, but now without a Chapter

7th. Province of Tourain, Anjou and le Maine.
1. Colloquy of Tourain. Pastor. Churches. 215. Matthew Cottiere, and of Tours,
221. 216. John Foran. 217. John Roger, and of Preuilly, 222. 218. Peter Fleury,
219. Peter de Coudre a Rocheller, of Chastillon on the Indre, 223. 220. Isaac
Le Pelletier, of Vandome, 224. 221. Francois de la Gallere, of Montoir, 225.
222. James De Vascher, L. of La Less, of Lisle Bouchard, 226. 2. The Colloquy
of Anjou. Pastors. Churches. 223. Stephen le Bloy, of Angiers, 227. 224. James
Brissac, Lord of Loges, of Loudun, 228. 225. And Daniel Coupe, 226. (...) (...)
227. Moses Amyraud, of Saumur and Bourgneil, 229. 228. Josuah de la Place, 229.
Isaac d' Huysseau, 230. Peter Lassiere, of Mirebeaux, 230. 231. John Pyneau, L.
of LaQuantinage, of Bouge, 231. 3. The Colloquy of Main. Pastors. Churches.
232. John Vigneux, of Man's and Ardenay, 232. 233. Abel Amyraud, L. of
Beausoudan, of St. Agnan and Minbray, 233. 234. Abel Barbier, of Pringe and
Gallerande, 234. 235. Rene Alin, Minister of Belesine, 235. 236. Aim Tricot,
of Chasteau de Loir, 236. 237. Rouveau, of Lassey, 237. Chasteau Gontier, 238.
Craon, 239. La Bar, 240. Pouligny, 241.

8th. Province of Vivaretz, Forest, and Vellay.
Pastors. Churches. 238. Alexander de Vinay, of Annonay, 242. 239. Antony
Faucheur, of Chambon and St. Voy, 243. 240. Antony La Motte, of Chalaucon, 244.
241. Blane, of Vergnoux, 245. 242. Peter Picorre, of Bausse, 246. 243. Marcelin
Jardin, of Desaigne, 247. 244. Laurant, of Vabance and Soyon, 248. 245. Simeon
D' Hosty, of St. Fortunate, 249. 246. Paul Acorat, of Privas, 250. 247. Peter
Marchat, of Glurats, 251. 248. Reboulet, of Tournon, near Privas, 252. 249.
Peter Gueze, of Le Poussin, and St. Auban, 253. 250. Bourset, of Bais, on the
Bais, 254. 251. David Chanat, of Luccon, a Pastor Emeritus. Lagorce and Vallon,
255. Churches Destitute of Pastors. Le Choylost, 256. Aubenas and Vales, 257.
Touch and Metas, 258. Villeneufve, 259. Mirabel and St. Pons, 260. De Berg,
261. Bonlieu, 262. and St. Stephen's in Forest, 263.

9th. Province of Bearne.
1. The Colloquy of Sauveterre. Pastors. Churches. 252. John Capdeville,
Minister of Sauveterrer, 264. 253. Phillip Beque, and of Salliers, 265. 254.
John L'esterneau, 255. Simeon Faget, of Carresse, 266. 256. James Majendu the
Son, of La Bastide, 267. 257. John Estandeau, of Oray and its annexed Churches
268. 258. Raymond Toulouze, of St. Gladie, 269. 259. Benjamin Bourgade, of
Aranjuson, 270. 260 Peter Sabbatier, of Chares, 271. 261. Peter Guillemin, of
St. Palais, 272. 262. Bustanoby, of Mauleon in Soul, 273. Audans and its
annexed Congregations destitute, 274. 2. Colloquy of Orthez. Pastors. Churches.
263. Anthony Vispalie, of Orthez, 275. 264. Bernard Majendu, the Father, of
Masloe, 276. 265. La Fite, of Logor, 277. 266. Samuel Remy, of Pardies, 278.
267. Disserotte, of Gouze, 279. 268. Minuielle, of Artez, 280. 269. La Pouble,
of Castillion, 281. 270. Martyn, of Castetins, 282. 271. John Carsusin, of
Bereuy, 283. 272. Tartan, of Bellock, 284. 273. Codelougne, of St. Susanne,
285. 274. Capelle, of Castenay, 286. 275. Cousture, of Ville Segure, 287. 3.
Colloquy of Pau. Pastors. Churches. 276. John D'abadie, and Ministers of Pau,
288. 277. John de la Fiste, 278. Vidal, of Lescar, 289. 279. Stephen Fabes, of
Morlas, 290. 280. Palobe, of La Seube, 291. 281. Gruyer, of Cescau, 292. 4.
Colloquy of Olleron. Pastors. Churches. 282. Casse Bonne, and Ministers of
Olleron, 293. 283. Casse Major, 284. Andrew Majendu, the Son, of Navarreins,
294. 285. La Tourette, of Castelnay, 295. 286. Chandieu, of Mouveins, 296. 287.
Bedora, of Vieille, 297. 288. La Placette, of Aradi, Valee de Sau, 298. 289.
John D'abadie, Minister in the Town of Aspe, 299. 290. Eusebius Barrubieres, of
Barretons Valle, 300. 5. Colloquy of Nay. Pastors. Churches. 291. Cabanes, of
the Church of. Nay, 301. 292. John Salfranquer, of Arros, 302. 293. Clavel, of
Nostin, 303. 294. La Placette, of Pontac, 304. 295. Cassou, of Assa, 305. 296.
Theophilus Brun, of Asson, 306. 6. Colloquy of Vibil. Pastors. Churches. 297.
John de la Garrigue, of Lambeys, 307. 298. James de la Puyade, of Garlin, 308.
299. Peter Rival, of Noye, 309. 300. David Abadie, of Mouvans, and Couches,
310. 10th. Province of Provence. Pastors. Churches. 301. Paul Maurice, of
Eguieres, 311. 302. Peter Maurice, of Lormarin. 312. 303. Andrew Bernard, of
Merindol, 313. 304. James Recent, of La Cost, 314. 305. James Recent, of
Veleaux, 315. 306. Anthony de Cross, of Cabrieres and La Motte, 316. 307. Paul
Godemar, of Ries, 317. 308. John Bernard, of Auluc, 318. 309. Peter Challier,
of Seen 319. 310. Andrew Genoyer, of Manosques, 320. Gordes, 321. Churches
Destitute. Jocas, and Muett, 322. La Charge Curban, 323.

11th. Province of Sevennes.
1. Colloquy of Anduze. Pastors. Churches. 311. John Soleil, and Pastors;of
Anduze, 324. 312. Arnaud, 313. John Bony, of St. John de Gardonenque, 325. 314.
Paul Paul, of Generarges, 326. 315. Anthony Imbert, of Meclet, 327. 316. John
Reboutier, of La Sale, 328. 317. Daniel Guerin, of Sadorgnes, 329. 318. Laurens
Aymard, of Lezan, 330. 319. Guy Chavanon, of Le Dignan, 331. 320. (...) Robert,
of Vezenobres, 332. 321. (...) Bouton, of Alez, 333. 322. John Poussac, of St.
Paul, 334. 2. Colloquy of Sauve. Pastors. Churches. 323. Louis Guischard, of
Sauve, 335. 324. Louis Couraut, of Lueissoe, 336. 325. Guissart, of Combas,
337. 326. Daniel Lorand, of Dufort, 338. 327. Esaiah Lorand, of Concairal, 339.
328. Joseph Pouyade, of St. Hipolyte, 340. 329. (...) Lelat, of Monoblet, 341.
330. Henry Lacombe, of La Cadiere, 342. 331. (...) Du Bruet, of Granges, 343.
332. Samuel Blare, of Samene, 344. 333. (...) Tubere, of Mandagourt, 345. 334.
John Surville, of Le Vigan, 346. 335. Moses La Comb, of St. Laurence and
Montdardier, 347. 336. John Nouis, of Aulas, 348. 337. (...) Guillaumene, of
Auze, 349. 338. James Berlier, of Breu, 350. 339. Peter de Dieu, of Aumassas,
351. 340. (...) Villaret, of Vallarogues, 352. 341. Anthony Vincent, of
Meirnez, 353. 342. Francois du Mas, and both destitute of Church. 343. La
Cost, 5. Colloquy of St. Germain. Pastors. Churches. 344. Graigner, of St.
Germain, 354. 345. John Barzan, of St. Stephens, 355. 346. (...) Pascal, of St.
Roman and Val Francesque. 356. 347. Henry Guischard, of Le Collet, 357. 348.
(...) Pontier, of Castagnols, 358. 349. Paul Ivo, of Le Pont Montrueil, 359.
350. Sauvage, of Bapre, 360. 351. (...) Guissart, of St. Croix, 361. 352.
Barba, of St. Andrew Valborgne, 362. 353. Pelet de la Carriere, of St. Julian,
363. 354. (...) De la Bastide, of Saumane, 364. 355. Simon de Villars, of St.
Hillary, 365. 356. Tubert, of Le Pompdoux, 366. 357. Repasseau, of Forac, 367.
358. Roux, of Marnejoles, 368. 359. Rouvre, of Cassegnas, 369. 360. James du
Mas, of Vebron, 370. 361. (...) Guyon, of Brenoux, 371. 362. (...) Dumas, of
the Church at Aumegnet 372. 363. Abraham de St. Loup, of St. Marcell, 373. 364.
Des Essars Emeritus, by reason of his great Age.

12. Province of Lower Guyenne.
1. The Colloquy of Lower Agenois. Pastors. Churches. 365. Daniel Ferrand,
Pastors of the Chapter of Bourdeaux, 374. 366. (...) and Goyon, 367. Misaubin, and
Pastors of St. Foy, 375. 368. Constantin, 369. De Monceaux, of Coutras, 376.
370. Bessotis, of Moncard, 377. 371. (...) Denis, of Duras, 378. 372. Ricotier,
of Poujols and Rozan, 379. Castets, 380. Langon, 381. Gironde, 382. 373.
Cartier, of Villeneufve and Theobon. 383. 374. Bordieu, of La Sauvetat, 384.
375. Privas, of Castillon, 385. 376. Pinet, of Miramont, 386. 377. (...)
Renaud, of Castelmoron, 387. 378. Abraham Darnazae, of Gensac, 388. 379 (...)
Augier, of Pellegrue, 389. 380. (...) Gasey, of Libourne, 390. 381. (...)
Planteau, of Faussignac, 391. 2. Colloquy of Condomois. Pastors. Churches. 382.
Vignier, and Ministers of Nerac, 392. 383 Aaron Tinel, 384. D' Aubus, of
Montagnac, 393. 385. La Rivoir, of Cannubin and Meillan, 394. 386. Boutet,
Minister of Coulonges, la Mas d'agenois, Viefensesac and Montreal, 395. 387.
(...) Sauvage, of Labardat and Fauquerolles, 396. 388. Du Luc, of Castle
jaloux, 397. 389. (...) La Guchay, of Monheur, 398. 390. Du Luc, of Puch and
Gontaut, 399. 391. D' Artigues, of Monterabeaux, 400. 392. Duffau, of Geaune,
401. 393. Laffite Solon, of Hastingues, les Lands and Chalosse, 402. 3.
Colloquy of Higher Agenois. Pastors. Churches. 394. John Alba, of Again, 403.
395. Abel Denis, of Grateloup, 404. 396. Eraste de la Cave, of Lasepede, 405.
397. D'aubos the younger, of Monpron and Lustrac, 406. 298. Persy, of
Montflanquin, 407. 399. Bernardin, of the upper Tonneins, 408. 400. Betoul, of
the lower Tonneins, 409. 401. Brinhol, of Laparade, 410. 402. Sallettes, of
Gontaut and St. Berthommeau, 411. 403. Doze, of Tournon, 412: 404. John
Costebadie, of Clerac, 413. 405. Vanquelin, of Pujols, 414. 406. Mathurin, of
Castelsagarat, 415. 407. La Bar, of Castelmoron, 416. 408. Maures, of
Castelgrate, Comb and Montault, 417 409. Testas, of Puymirol, 418. 410.
Jarlan, of Gavaudan, 419. 4. Colloquy of Perigord. Pastors. Churches. 411.
Pyneau, Ministers of Bergerac, 420. 412. Beaujardin, 413. Bereau, 414. Eymer,
Minister of Monpassier, Suirac, and Barbignieres, 421. 415. Bereau, the
younger, of La Mongie, Isigiac and Ponpoit, 422: 416. Potet, Minister of Eymet,
423. 417. DupuyMinister of La Force, 424. 418. Freron, Minister of Benac, 425.
419. Touton, Minister of La Linde, and Badefol, 426. 420. Pages, Minister of
Monbazillac and Piles, 427. 421. La Taken, Minister of Mussidan, 428. 422.
Melan, of Parriere, 429. 423. Boutin, of Langurey and Cleraux, 430. 424.
Chauveton, Ministers of Sigoules, 431. 425. Pelon 426. Barthe, Jun. Minister of
Lisle, 432. 427. Baisse Laned, Minister of Millevil and Bugol, 433. 428.
Borduc, Minister of Montignac and La Tagnac, 434. 429. (...) (...) 5. Colloquy
of Limousin. Pastors. Churches. 429. Peter Huton, Minister of Turennes, 435.
430. Barthe Sen. of Limoges and Rochecouart, 436. 431. Barthe minimus natu,
Minister of Froignac and Chastiauneuf, 437. 432. Claude, Minister of Beaulieu,
438.

13. Province of Dolphiny.
1. Colloquy of Gapensois. Pastors. Churches. 433. Samuel Charles, Minister of
Gap, 438. 434. Hugh Rollin, Minister of Veins, 439. 435. Charles Desnau de la
Croix, of Orpierre, 440. 436. Andrew Serre, Minister of Scoye, 441. 437.
Benjamin Sause, Minister of Laraignac, 442. 438. Mark Felix, Minister of Rozan,
443. 439. Joshua Ripert, Minister of Valpronier, 444. 440. David Piffart,
Minister of St. Bonnett, 445. 441. John Bonnett, Minister of Talard, 446. 2.
Colloquy of Diois. Pastors. Churches. 442. John Aymin, Ministers of Die, 447.
443. David Eustache, 444. Stephen le Blonc, 445. John Manuel, Minister of
Pontaix, 448. 446. John Gros, Minister of Chastillon, 449. 447. James Matthew,
Minister of Beurieres, 450. 448. John Cherubin, Minister of Beaufort, 451. 449.
Raphael Gabet, Minister of La Mote, 452. 450. Benjamin Vacher, Minister of
Quint and Paillant, 453. 3. Colloquy of Viennois. Pastors. Churches. 451. John
Cuchet, Minister of Chasteau Double, 454. 452. Peter Piffart, Minister of
Larbon; 455. 453. Michael Januier, Minister of Beaurepair, 456. 454. Daniel
Maillefand, Minister of St. Marcelin, 457. 455. Peter Murat, Minister of
Romans, 458. 456. Isaac D'herrieu, Minister of Pont in Royans, 459. 457. John
Imbert, Minister of Beaumont, 460. 4. Colloquy of Valle Luson. Pastors.
Churches. 458. Samuel Clement, Minister of Rouvre, 460. 459. Samuel Paschal,
Minister of Montoules, 461. 460. David Jourdain, Minister of Fenestrelles, 462.
461. Peter Savrin, Minister of Vxeaux, 463. 462. David Pastor, Minster of
Praguella, 464. 463. Phillebert de Joux, of Chaumont, 465. 464. Thomas Comte, a
Pastor, Emeritus. 5. Colloquy of Graismaudan. Pastors. Churches. 465. Denis
Routeroue, Ministers of Grenoble, 466. 466. Francis Muret 467. David Millefaud,
of St. John d'Herans, 467. 468. Isaac Feraud, of La Mure, 468. 469. David
Gontier, of Corp, 469. 470. Abraham Jourdain, of Treminy, 470. 471. John
Budelle, of Menet, 471. 472. Bartholomew Durand, of Clelses, 472. 473. Simeon
Cony, of Besses, 473. 474. John Terasson, of Misson, 474. Vif. 475. Barraux,
476. Espagne a Pastor Emeritus. 6. Colloquy of Valentinois. Pastors. Churches.
475. Adrian Chamler, and of Montlimard, 477. 476. Creguts, 477. Paul Guyon, of
Dieu le Fit, 478. 478. John de la Faye, of Lauriol, 479. 479. Gervase Alexis,
of Livron, 480. 480. John de Gilliers, of Bordeaux, 481. 481. Alexander Dize,
of Crest, 482. 482. John Cordel, of Manas, 483. 483. Sebastian Gray, of Vesq,
^84. 7. Colloquy of the Baronny's. Pastors. Churches. 484. James Penichon, Lord
of Chambrun, and of Orange, 485. 485. David Sylvi^s, 486. Solomon Fauvre, of
Nions, 486. 487. Isaac Challier, of St. Euphemia, 487. 488. Gabriel Boulle, of
Vinsohres, 488. 489. James Piolet, of Condorcet, 489. 490. James Bouvier, of
St. Paul trois Chasteaux, 490. 491. Francois Valaneon, of Toillignac, 491. 492.
Gaspar Martin, of Courtezan, 492. 493. George Mauguis, of Tulette, 493.
Monbrun, 494. 8. Colloquy of Ambrunois. Pastors. Churches. 494. James Bailly,
of Ambrun, 494. 495. Daniel Bec, of Mellines, 495. 496. Peter Bouvat, of
Aruyen, 496. 497. John Giraud, of Abries, 497. 498. Daniel Sarret, of
Guillestre, 498. 499. Solomon Jallifier, of Froissiniere, 499. Chasteau
Dauphin, 500.

14. Province of Normandy.
1. Colloquy of Rouen. Pastors. Churches. 500. David de Caux, Minister of
Ponteau de Mer, Quilleboeuf, Bois-roger, Honfleur and Pont L'evesque, 501. 501.
John Maximilian de Lange, of Rouen, 502. 502. David Primrose, and of Rouen,
502. 503. Lucas Jence, 504. Peter Le Tellier, of Eureux; 503. 505. John le
Marchand, of Gisors, 504. 2. Colloquy of Caux. Pastors. Churches. 506. Abdias
de Mondenis, of Dieppe, 505. 507. Peter Laquel, and 508. Louis de
Forquinbergue, 509. James de la Rey, of Bosebec, and Lutd 506. 510. John de la
Motte, of Ivitot, 507. 511. David Guelode, of Fescamp, 508. 412. John
Boudouins, of La Havre de Grace, 509. 513. David Hebert, of Baqueville,
Lislebaeuf and Liveroy, 510. 3. Colloquy of Caen. Pastors. Churches. 514. Peter
Bayeux, of Bussy, 511. 515. Mark Maurice, of Veez, 512. 516. Stephen le Sage,
of St. Vaast, 513. 517. John de Belle Hache, Lord of Beaumont, of Caen, 514.
518. John Bridou, and 519. Samuel Bochart, 520. John Topin, of Frevieres,
Coulombieres and les Effars, 515. 521. Anthony Basnage, of Bayeux, 516. 522.
Peter Basnage, his Son, Destitute of a Church. 4. Colloquy of Constantin.
Pastors. Churches. 523. Benjamin Basnage, of Sle Mere Eglise, 517. 524. Anthony
Philippomeau, and of Pont Oyson and Duse, 518. 525. Charles Giorn. 526.
Ionachin le Moyne, Minister of Gavre and Cerisy, 519. 527. Isaac de Ve^emes, of
Chefresnos, 520. 528. Luke Pavoquett, of Fontenay and Chassanay, 521. 529.
Michael Caru, of St. Loo, 522. 530. James Lohier, of Groussy, 523. 531. David
le Bourgeois, of La Hay du Puy, 524. 5. Colloquy of Alenson. Pastors. Churches.
532. Paul Baudart, of Mongouert, 525. 533. Louis Heraut, and Ministers of
Alanson, 526. 534. Matthem Bochart, 535. Stephen Le Prevost, Lof Buisson, of
Courtaumer, L'aigle and Sees, 527 536. Stephen le Foience, of Croissy and
Fontaine Meinil, 528. 6. Colloquy of Falaise. Pastors. Churches. 537. Peter
Baudrin, of Moulins and Mesuier, 529. 538. Noel Gassat, of St. Silvain and St.
Pierre on the Dine, 530. 539. John Blanchard, of Vires and Conde, 531. 540.
James Tinard, of La (...). 532. 541. Benjamin du Clos, of Fala^^e and la Motte,
533 Peter Morin, Lord of Launay, a Pastor Emeritus.

15. Province of Higher Languedoc, and Lower Guyenne.
1. Colloquy of Lower Quercy. Pastors. Churches. 542. Le Voyer, of Senencrie
and Cajare, 534. 543. La Roche, of Cardaillac and Figeac, 535. 544. Candris, of
La Tronquiere, 536. 545. Bonnefons, of St. Sere and Issenac, 537. 2. Colloquy
of Higher Quercy. Pastors. Churches. 546. Peter Beraud, Ministers of Montauban,
538. 547. Peter Ollier, 548. Peter Charles, 549. Timothy de Long, 550. Anthony
Garissoles, 551. Le Grand, of Caussade, 539. 552. Verdier, of Negrepelisse,
540. 553. Cruniel, of Bourniquel, 541. 554. Moyneer, of St. Lehofaire, 542.
555. Abel Bicheteau, of Mensac, 543. 556. Bardon, of St. Antein, 544. 557. Mark
Montaine, of Albias, 545. 558. Reynault, of Realville, 546. 559. Bourdin, of
Verlac, 547. 3. Colloquy of Albigeois. Pastors. Churches. 560. Peter Sauris,
Ministers of Castres, 548. 561. Paul Charles, 562. Josiah Daneau, 563. Peter
Combelasse, of Realmont, Vene, la Fenasse, and Lombeis, 549. 564. John
Balarand, Minister of La Hangle, 550. 565. John Stephen Balarand, of La Cauve,
551. 566. Nathanael Nadal, of Castelnau and Sableirolles, 552. 567. John
Grassett, of Viaine, Gigomes, and la Capelle, 553. Descroux, 554. Senaux, 555.
568. Joseph Grassett, of Briaste and St. Paul de la Miatte, 556. 569.
David-Vignier, of Rouquecourt, Monpignier and la Bessiere, 557. 570. Tercise
Grau, of Caze, Sengaste and Plaisance, 558. 571. Francois Regail, of Vabres and
Ferrieres, 559. 572. Jacob Audebert, of Brassac and Aubais, 560. 573. Stephen
Carries, of La Cabarede and la Bastide, 561. 574. John Maillebron, of
Montredon, 562. 575. Peter Baschet, of Paulin and Teillet, 563. 576. (...)
Raisart, of La Vaoute, 564. 577. Honorus Ligonnier, of La Croissette, 565. 578.
Philip Nautonnier, of Esperance and Berlatte, 566. 4. Colloquy of Armagnac.
Pastors. Churches. 579. Matthew de Tiffier, of Mauvesin, 568. 580. Stephen
Rigault, of Lisle Joudain, 569. 581. John Tourron, of Puy Casquettes, and its
annexed Congregations, 570. 582. Isaac du Mas, of Masgravier and Lestoure, 571.
5. Colloquy of Rouergus. Pastors. Churches. 583. Isaac du Teil, and Ministers
of Milhaud, Cressel, and Senerat, 572. 584. Peter Bonnefons, 585. John Gerard,
of St. Africque and Vicquion, 573. 586. Samuel de Jacques, of St. Baulise, St.
Paul, Cormis, and St. Phelix, 574. 587. Philip Marroules, of Peaux, and Pont de
Montrodets, Montagnac and Brusque, 575. 588. Peter Marroules, of St. Rome de
Tarn, Auriac, and les Ribais, Roquetaillade, de St. Rome, and Cernon, 576. 589.
Balthazar Jacques, of St. John du Brueil, Montmejeau, and Dourbie, 577. Anthony
Remirol, a Pastor, Emeritus. 6. Colloquy of Lauragais. Pastors. Churches. 590.
Peter Espinasse, of St. Amard, Villemage and Villemoindre, 578. 591. Moses
Baux, of Mazamet, Hautpoul and Pont de Lart, 579. 592. Abel Vialla, of
Auxillon, Aiguefonde, St. Abbey and Cancellare, 580. 593. John Bonnefons, of Puy
Laurens and Pechandier, 581. 594. Paul Gaillard, of Rouvel and Palleville, 582.
595. Peter Cazail, of Goreze and Massaquel, 583. 596. Philip Laraysse, of
Carmaigny, 584. The Church of St. Paul and D'aunnatte, is destitute of a
Pastor. 7. Colloquy of Foix. Pastors. Churches. 597. John Ollier, Minister of
Mas D'azil, Gaure, and la Bour, 585. 598. John Morsallan, of Camebade, 586.
599. Joseph de la Fontayne, of Carlat Savarat, 587. 600. Paul Gausides, of Maze
and Caumont, 588. 601. Laurens Rival, of Saverdun, 589. 602. Charles Bourdin,
of La Bastide Leyreau, Betats, and Limozac, 590.

16. Province of the Isle of France.
1. Colloquy of Paris. Pastors. Churches. 603. Michael le Faucheur, of Paris,
591. 604. John Mestrezat, 605. (...) Aubertin, 606. John Daille, 607. Charles
Drelincourt, 608. Stephen le Blanc, L. of Beaulieu, of Senlis, 592. 609. John
Perreaux, of Meaux, 593. 610. Peter du Prat, of Liesy, 594. 611. Isaac de
Nagentel, of Chasteau Thierry and Sarponay, 595. 612. Ferdinand de Pied, of
Fontayrbleau, 596. 613. David Bloudel, of Rouss^* 597. 614. John Miqueau, of
Toquin and Galandes, 598. 615. Peter Belot, of Amain, Villiers, and Claye, 599.
616. John Sueur, of La Ferte on the Jouaire, 600. 2. Colloquy of Picardy.
Pastors. Churches. 617. John Baptiste, Ministers of Calais, 601. 618. Peter
Cartier, 619. Buguet, 620. Francois Becade, 621. Ezechiel de Avois, of
Boulonois, 602. 622. Peter Poynet, of Amieus, 603. 623. Daniel Boucherel, of
Cifemont, 604. 624. Claudius le Vineux, of Chauny and Coussy, 605. 625. John
Mestayer, of St. Quentin, 606. 626. Paul Georges, of Laon, 607. 627. Peter
Lambour, of Leval and Gercy, 608. 628. John Nicollay, of Compiegne, 609. 3.
Colloquy of Champagne. Pastors. Churches. 629. Benjamin Augenet, Ministers of
Vini in Champenois, 610. 630. Simon Gascher, 631. Benjamin Massin, of Chaalons,
611. 632. John Pasquet, of Espance, 612. 633. Honorius de Candemere, of
Netancour, 613. 634. John Rainet, of Langres, 614. 635. Samuel de la Cloche, of
Aychastelnay, 615. 636. Abraham Jacquelot, of Sezame, 616. 637. Sigebert Alpee,
of St. Mars, 617. 638. Aaron Blondel, of Jinecour, 618. 639. Isaac Juigne, of
Vassy, 619. 640. John Carre, Minister of Heiz le Mauron, 620. 4. Colloquy of
the Land of Chartres. Pastors. Churches. 641. Louis de Forquembergue, of
Houdan, 621. 642. Louis Foul, of Laons and Faviers, 622. 643. Philip
Falbergue, of Chartres and Joinvilliers, 623. 644. Benjamin Tricotel, of Mantes
and Auvergne, 624. 645. Maurice de Lauberaut, of Le Plessis and la Jorville,
625. 646. Dablon de Montigny, 647. James Couronne, of Autun, 626.

The end of the Catalogue of the Pastors of the Churches of France and Bearn,
as it was brought into the Seven and Twentieth National Synod of Alanson, in
the year, 1637.

Hereafter follow diverse Acts and Letters, which were not inserted into the
Body of the Acts of this Synod; but, for the completing of its History, are in
this place Registered and Related.

CHAP. XXIV. The Speech made by Monsieur Ferrand, Pastor of the Church of
Bourdeaux, Deputed by the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France,
Assembled at Alanson, the 27th. of May, 1637. unto His Majesty.
SIRE,
IF the Rivers having their Source from the Ocean, do return again with their
Tribute to it, it is much more Just and Reasonable that Your most Humble and
most Obedient Subjects, the Ministers and Elders Assembled by Your Authority in
a National Synod, should come and render into Your Royal Bosom, the Profound
Resentments and Eternal Thankfulness of their Souls for those numberless
Favors they have received, and do still enjoy by Your Majesty's, most Gracious
Protection, and Royal Liberality; which being superadded to those Duties of our
Birth and Conscience, do so bind us unto Subjection, Fidelity and Obedience to
Your Commands, that no future Events can or will be able to dissolye or cut
them asunder. These, Sire, be the Loyal Protestations of those that sent us,
who desire nothing more, than to Engrave in the hearts of Your most Dutiful
Subjects of our Religion, the Holy Maxims of an inviolable and Religious
Obedience. For we, Sire, are those very Persons who Believe, and Teach, that
the Royal Authority is not of Humane, but Divine Institution, unto which every
Soul ought to be Subjected; and we are those who Believe and Teach the
Sovereignty and Independency of Your Crown, which, resembling those higher
Mountains, whose Lofty Heads being exalted above the middle Region of the Air,
are never frighted with Thunders nor Lightnings. No, Sire, You hold it from God
only, and it is solely depending on him, and You are next in Power unto him,
the Sun of this Heaven, the Soul of this vast Body, the Heart of this Gallick
Monarchy. Yea, Sire, once more, we be those very Persons, who next unto the
Service of our God, have no greater Motive nor Principle, than the Conservation
and Augmentation of Your Majesty's Grandeur; and these are our daily Vows and
Prayers unto God, Your Majesty being his most lively Image: And therefore,
Sire, we are emboldned to hope for Freedom of Access unto Your Majesty, because
our God loves to be importuned with our Supplications, and that Your Majesty
will not reject these most Humble Petitions which are laid at Your Majesty's
Feet, with all imaginable Respect by many thousands of Souls, who desire the
Liberty of their Conscience and Religion, for none other end, than that by
serving God, they may also the self-same instant demand of him in their Prayers
for Your Majesty, a most immovable Prosperity, a long Reign, a most Happy Life,
a most Faithful Council, Victorious Triumphant Armies, and an innumerable
People going and coming at the first beck and motion of Your Majesty. Sire,
This Liberty shall never be abused by Your most Humble Subjects of the Reformed
Religion, unto Licentiousness; no, Sire, they will employ it as they have
always done, in Prayers and Fastings, when as the precious Life of Your most
Sacred Majesty, lay exposed to all Hazards and Dangers (a Life upon which
depends all the Lives of Your Kingdom) and You were Jeoparding it in the high
places of the Field, to acquire unto Your Subjects a durable Repose and
Tranquillity. And forasmuch as Your Majesty's Sword is ever Glorious and
Invincible against Strangers; May it please Your Majesty to suffer us to form
our Complaints against those, who endeavor at home, in the very Bowels of
France, to render Your Edicts Illusory, and do blunt the Point, and dull the
Edge of Your Laws relating to our Liberties and Subsistence, which are all
founded upon the Observation of Your Edicts and Royal Commissions. The
Adversaries envying our Peace, have made an infinite number of Gaps and
Breaches in them. Yet nevertheless, Sire, we persuade our selves, that Your
Edicts will remain Sacred and Inviolable, and that Your Powerful Hand will
cause the words of Your Royal Mouth, to be exactly and punctually performed;
because you be the Judge and Father of Your People, and that in Your Sacred
Person, Justice and Mercy shall Kiss and Embrace each other; that so none may
attempt to put asunder what our God has joined together. This Hope
replenisheth our Hearts with Joy, and does more ardently excite our Affections
to pay unto Your Majesty all the Duties of Subjection and Loyalty; and with
inflamed Devotions we Address our selves to the Divine Majesty, that he would
enlarge the Bounds of Your Empire, and accomplish all the desires of Your Royal
Heart, as being,

Sire, of Your Majesty, the most Humble, and the most Obedient Servants and
Subjects, the Pastors and Elders Assembled in the National Synod, by Your
Gracious Permission, at Alanson, and in the Name of them all. Basnage,
Moderator of the Synod. D. Couppe, Assessor. D. Blondel, Scribe, and De Launay,
Scribe.


CHAP. XXV. 2. Instructions given unto Monsieur Ferrand, Gigord, and Cerisy,
Deputed unto the King by the National Synod Assembled by His Majesty's
Permission at Alanson, 1637.
THe Sieurs, Ferrand, Gigord, and Cerisy, Deputed by us unto the Court,
immediately upon their Arrival, shall wait upon Monsieur de la Vrilliere
Secretary of State, to whom they shall deliver our Letters, and assure him of
our most humble Services; and shall entreat him that by his means, they may, as
soon as possible, have the Honor of waiting upon, and Saluting His Majesty,
and Present Him with the Letters of this Assembly, and shall follow His Orders
when, and after what manner they ought and may speak unto the King, and to the
Lord Cardinal, and to the Lord Chancellor. And having paid their Duties to the
King, the Lord Cardinal, and to our Lord the Principal Ministers of State, they
shall give them to understand with what Respect and Thankful Acknowledgments we
have received from the mouth of the Lord de St. Marc, His Majesty's
Commissioner in this Assembly, those assurances given us in His Majesty's Name
for preserving us the Privilege of His Edicts, and to continue to us His Royal
Favors.

But they shall not conceal, that all the Members of this Assembly were
exceedingly surprised and astonished, that immediately after those aforesaid
Assurances given us by the Lord Commissioner, he made such Proposals to them,
as had no agreement at all with these Promises of His Majesty's good Will unto
us; as when He declared, That he was charged by the King, to forbid all
Ministers to serve their annexed Congregations, which tends to the utter Ruin
of the far greatest part of our Churches, and depriveth a vast multitude of the
Professors of our Religion of their Spiritual Consolation.

As also when he propounded as from the King, That it was his Majesty's desire,
That we should ratisie Baptism Administered by Midwifes, and others, who have no
Call so to do, which is formally contrary to our Belief.

They shall also insist on this, That His Majesty be acquainted, and from their
own Mouths, with that Rigorous Decree of the Council, concerning the hanging
forth of Tapistry, and Adorning of our Houses on that Festival which they call
by the Name of The Holy. This being a matter directly contrary to the Edicts,
made in our Favor.

They shall take care also, to Petition our Lord the Cardinal, and the Lords of
the Council; and especially the Lord de Buillon, That they would be pleased to
supply this Assembly with Moneys for the defraying of our Charges and Expenses,
during the Sessions thereof, as has been always accustomed to be done by His
Majesty. And the rather, because for a very long time, notwithstanding His
Majesty's Promise, we have not received one Farthing of His Bounteous
Liberality.

The Assembly leaves it to the Prudence of these our said Deputies, either to
prolong or shorten their abode at Court, according to the Success of their
Negotiation; and they be ordered to acquaint us upon all occasions, of what is
necessary to be done by us.

CHAP. XXVI. 3. Monsieur Ferrand's Speech made unto my Lord the Cardinal, Duke
of Richelieu.
My Lord,
Since that in our days, and under the Incomparable Wisdom of Your Government,
Peace and Justice are so Gloriously preserved, that the Greatest Monarch of the
Universe, is not only known to be the Just King, but also the King of the Just,
by the strict Observation of His Edicts and Sacred Orders; The Ministers and
Elders Assembled in a National Synod under the Favorable Authority of His
Majesty, and the Good Counsels of Your Eminency, have took the Boldness to send
us unto His Majesty, as to the Common Father of His Subjects, to render to Him
Their most unfeigned Thanks, and to Present Him Their most Humble Requests, and
in all Humility to demand His Royal Protection against those Violences, which
do every day Rob and Spoil us of His Favors; and have most expressly charged
us, to Implore on this Account, the Succors and Assistance of Your Eminency:
And that Experience we have formerly had hereof, fills our Hearts with Hopes
for the future; Because the Stedfastness of God and the King's Word, are
visible in the Face of Your Eminency, You being Their most lively Protraiture.
We cannot be ignorant, My Lord, That Your Eminency is that Intelligence who
moves this admirable Monarchy with the greatest Regularity; That Assistant
Spirit of this Great Body, which heretofore was like one of the Floating
Islands, but now Your most Admired Conduct has bound it so* fast with the
Chains of the Royal Authority, that in the Greatest and most Astonishing
Tempests it abides firm and immovable. And, it will be with France as with the
Land of Licia, which though subject unto Storms, and dreadful Earthquakes, yet no
sooner are those Tempestuous Winds, which caused them, dissipated, but that the
Inhabitants thereof, do enjoy for Forty Days together, (...) most Wonderful
Calm and Tranquillity; but these days of our Tranquillity shall be Prophetical, a
Year for a Day; and may Your Eminency's Life be prolonged to a full Century of
those Years! And we do protest in the Presence of God, that we own our selves
bound Eternally to Obey His Majesty, by the Laws of our Birth, and Conscience,
and for His Majesty's Favors continually accumulated upon us. And therefore we
do Address our Prayers without intermission, unto the Sovereign Lord of Heaven
and Earth, that he would be pleased to keep his Anointed as the Apple of his
Eye, His Majesty being the very Heart and Life of His Kingdom; and that he
would take from our days to add unto His, and to add unto Yours also, My Lord,
whom we reckon next to God and the King, our surest Sanctuary; hoping for some
Rays and Beams of Your Eminency's good Will to be imparted to us, that may
quicken us under those disconsolating Troubles with which we are menaced, and
be a most meet and proper Remedy for those Afflicting Evils, which press in
sore upon us from every part and quarter of the Land; And Your Eminency's
Reward for this signal goodness of Yours, extended to us, will be the
continuance of that Glory You have most justly acquired in all Christendom; and
we shall beg of God in our Prayers, and may the Divine Majesty actually fulfill
them, to pour down upon Your Eminency, an abundant Confluence of his best
Blessings, and that we may obtain this Consolation to be believed by Your
Eminency, that with all sincerity of Heart and Soul, we are,

My Lord, Your Eminency's most Humble and most Obedient Servants, Banage,
Moderator of the Synod, Coupe, Assessor, Blondel and de Launay, Scribes.


CHAP. XXVII. A Copy of the Bill of Grievances presented unto His Majesty, by
the Sieurs, Ferr and, Pastor of the Church of Bourdeaux, Gigord, Pastor of the
Church of Montpellier, and De Cerisy, an Elder Deputed by the National Synod of
Alanson, May the 7th. 1637. unto the King.
SIRE.
THe Deputies of Your Subjects of the Reformed Religion, Assembled by Your
Majesty's Permission, in a National Synod at Alanson, do most Humbly Petition,
That according to Your wonted Goodness and Justice continued to them, You would
be pleased to vouchsafe us the enjoyment of Your Edicts, and Declarations of
Peace, which have to their very great prejudice been broken and violated in
every Article, and particularly in diverse places of Your Kingdom; nor can we
get our Damages repaired, nor Your Edicts, or Declarations executed; although
Your Majesty had granted it for the greater part of them, in those Answers made
by Your Gracious Majesty, unto our most Humble Bill of Grievances, which we
tendered to Your Majesty in the year One Thousand Six Hundred and Twenty Five.

1. And although that by the Edicts of Peace, and the Answers made by Your
Majesty unto our Bills of Grievances in the year 1625. You were pleased to
Grant Your Petitioners, That the Exercise of our Religion should be restored in
all those places in which it had been settled by the Edict of Nantes, and was
in actual being in the year 1620. and that to this purpose, Commissioners had
been appointed to see unto its performance; yet nevertheless, we could never
get their Commission executed, no not in those places hereafter mentioned in
our Bill of Grievances, though they were expressed by name in it, viz. Gergeau,
Bourgueil, Surgeres, Le Poire, Lu^on, Beret, Coulorges, Les Reaux, St. Malxier,
Belleville, Argenton, Beaumont, Letoure, Figeac, Cadenac, Cressol, Foix,
Belestat, Lassegue, Lombais, Arligat, Senerat, Bousse, Villefort, Moulaur,
Vandemian, Villeman, Poussan, Gignac, St. Paragoire, St. Gilles, Geneirac,
Bagnals, Digne, Forqualquier, Monfort, Bourbon, L'auriac, and Autun; In all
which places Your Majesty is most humbly Petitioned, to cause that Your Will be
punctually performed according to Your Answer made and declared upon our Bill
of Grievances, and as it is also most expressly and plainly Promised us by the
5th. and 6th. Articles of Your Edict at Nismes, in the Month of July, 1629.
Your Majesty then Enacting a Speedy and Real Restitution of the Exercise of our
Religion in those places beforementioned.

2. And whereas the Exercise of our Religion has been removed by the
Wickedness and Violence of those Troublesome times, which have intervened ever
since the year 1626, from diverse other places, where it was formerly
Established, and that according to the Edicts, as at Virtuell, Tere, La Jarrie,
Lalea, L'hommeau, Nievil, Marsilly, Rieux, Le Chasteau St. Pie, St. Denis, Le
Chasteau D'Oleron, La Flotte, St. Martin, Ards, Loie, and other places of the
Isles of Oleron and Re, Les Herbiers, Mountagu, La Chaume, Louzac, Mortaigne,
Saujon, L'Isle Bouchard, Le Croisil, Mazin, Mont de Marsan, Saux in Condomois,
Gavandan, Millanen Albret, St. Ledger, St. Bazille, Coutras, Florensac, Pamiers,
Puymirol, Ribaute, Combas, Aubenas, Valz, Mirabel, Vellenefue of Berg, Dijon,
Burg in Bresse, Paray le Moineau, Corbigny, Navarreins, Benejat, and Ossins;
Your Majesty is most Humbly Petitioned, to give Order, That the Exercise of our
Religion may be restored immediately without delay, and that You would be
pleased to prohibit all disturbing of us Your Subjects, who do profess it, for
the future.

3. And forasmuch as it has been a perpetual practice in our Churches, for
diverse Pastors of this Your Kingdom to Exercise their Ministry, as still they
do, in several Neighbor places, where the free Exercise of our Religion has
been Established by Your Edicts, and this by the Authority of Colloquies and
Synods; and for some times of late, even in the very presence of Commissioners
nominated by Your Majesty to assist personally at them, who never made any
Opposition against it. We do most Humbly Petition Your Majesty, That we may be
left in the free Possession of this our Practice, which was never forbidden by
any Edicts of Your Majesty's Royal Predecessors, nor of Your Own; and that all
Prohibitions to the contrary may be revoked, whether made unto us by those
Commissioners, who have of late assisted in our Provincial and National Synods,
or Decreed in the late Extraordinary Sessions by the new Judges, or by Your
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, where none of our Religion could ever
be admitted to Declare and Defend our Right.

4. And whereas Your Majesty was pleased in consideration of our Bill of
Grievances presented to Your Majesty in the year 1625, to ordain that the
Churches and the Yards (wherein we bury our Dead, which have been taken away
from those of our Religion in these following places, Lunel, Sommieres,
Florensac, Le Vigan, Mazillargues, Villemur, St. Antonia, and Puymirol) should
be restored, and that they should be permitted to re-build their Temples in the
same places, which had been accorded us by the Edict; none of which Ordinances
of Your Majesty, have been in the least Executed; yea, since this, it has so
fallen out, that the Churches and Churchyards of Vitte Goudon, of Castres, St.
Afric, St. Gelais, Valz, Vallon, Aubenas, St. Estienne in Forest, Senes, and
diverse other places in Aunix, the Isle of Re, and Province of Burgundy, have
been forcibly taken away and detained from us, and the Building of our Temples,
at La Motte of Argues and Caumont, is quite obstructed; we therefore do most
humbly beseech Your Majesty to continue unto us that Royal Favor You had
before Granted us by Your Edicts, and by Your Gracious Promise upon the Reading
of our aforesaid Bill of Grievances, and that You would according to it Ordain,
that the aforesaid Churches and Churchyards may be rendered and restored in
all those places beforementioned, and that Your Majesty would be pleased to
forbid all Troubling of us in the Re-buildng and Re-establishing of them, and
particularly at Aubenas, where the Inhabitants are constrained to bury their
Dead in the wide Fields, and they will not suffer any more than three persons
to accompany the poor Corpse unto that uncouth Grave neither.

5. Your most Humble Subjects of the Religion in the Town of Alanson, according
to the 9th. and 10th Articles of the Edict, and the Ordinance of your
Commissioners Deputed for its Execution, ratified by Decree of the Council,
July the 4th. 1603, having Built their Temple in the said Town above Thirty
years ago, are yet notwithstanding, troubled and disturbed, partly by the
Clergy, and partly by the Roman Catholic Inhabitants there, who have caused
them to be cited before the Lord Tiersaux, who forbids them to continue the
Preaching of God's Holy Word in that Town, and the Suburbs thereof; as also,
that they shall not bury their Dead in the Churchyard of St. Blazy, nor in the
Suburbs of the said Town; and although Your Majesty was pleased at their
earnest Petition, to cause the said Prosecution to cease, by a Decree of Your
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Dated the 13th. of May last; yet
notwithstanding, they are again Prosecuted by a new Summons to appear before
Your Privy Council; from which appearance Your Majesty is most Humbly
Petitioned to discharge them, and to forbid all persons for the future, to
trouble or disquiet them in the Possession of their said Temple, or place of
Burying.

6. And whereas the Lords, Millette and de Brosses, Commissioners appointed by
Your Majesty, for Executing the said Edict in the Bailywick of Gex, had
ordained places of Burial for those of the said Religion in that Bailywick,
unto which Ordinance the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, and the Roman Catholic
Inhabitants there, did give their free and full Consent, which also was
confirmed by a Decree of Your Majesty's Privy Council, December the 13th. 1612.
yet nevertheless, the Lord Machant, Intendant of Justice in the Province of
Burgundy, without once hearing any of the Parties concerned, has by his own
private Orders of the 15th. of March, 1636. and by some others of another Date,
not only Deprived them of the Burying-place, but also will not so much as allow
those of the Reformed Religion in that Bailywick, to share in any of the Common
Moneys or Hospitals thereof. Wherefore we most Humbly beseech Your Majesty to
cause those Orders of the said Lord Machant to surcease, and to be disannulled,
and to Ordain, that Your aforesaid Subjects in the Bailywick of Gex, may be
supported in the Possession of their Burying-place, and in the Ancient
enjoyment of their Common Moneys, and Common Hospitals, and of all other
Privileges contained in the Edict.

7. In diverse places of Your Kingdom Your Subjects of the Reformed Religion,
are forced and compelled to act many things contrary to the Liberty of their
Consciences, granted them by Your Edicts; particularly to hang out Tapistry
before their Houses, or to adorn them with some kind of Ornaments on some
peculiar Holy Days, although the Third Article of the particular ones in the
Edict of Nantes, does only oblige them to suffer that it be done by others, and
that too by the Authority of the Local Officers; nor are they bound to
contribute any thing thereunto. However, your poor Subjects, for refusing to do
thus against their Consciences, are condemned in very great Fines at Rennes and
Vitre, by a Decree of the Parliament of Britain; and the same was lately
Ordered in a Judicial Sentence given by the Privy Council, and signified to the
Attorney of the Exchequer at Claye. Wherefore Your Majesty is most Humbly
beseeched to Maintain and Preserve Your Subjects of our Religion in the Liberty
of their Consciences as to these matters, according to your Edicts, and to
discharge them of all Fines and Sums of Money, to the payment whereof, they
have been condemned on this account.

8. By the Second Article of particular matters of the Edict of Nantes, and by
Your Majesty's Answer to the Fourth Article of the Bill of Grievances Presented
to You by Your Subjects of the Reformed Religion, in July, 1625. it was
expressly declared, That none of them should be compelled to contribute toward
the Repair, or Building of Churches, Chapels, or Priests Houses, nor to the
buying of Coapes and Surplices, Ornaments of Mass-Priests, Lights, Founding of
Bells, Holy Bread, Rights of Fraternities, nor to the Rent of Houses for
Priests, or Religious persons to dwell in, or such like matters; yet
notwithstanding John Ozier of Harsleur, has been Condemned by a Decree of the
Parliament of Normandy, to pay unto a Fraternity: As also by another such
Decree of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, contrary to that of the Court of Again,
the Heirs of Charles Motty inhabiting in the City of Bourdeaux have been
compelled to pay yearly Contributions unto the Fraternity of the Trade of the
Deceased; And those of the Church of St. Ambroise, to pay for the Rent of that
House, where the Divine Service after the Mode of the Romish Catholic Church
is Solemnized, and those of Souve and Peyrols in the Sevennes, by an Order only
of the Praesidial Court of Nismes, and those of Seynes in Provence, to the
Building of the Vicaridge Houses and Churches there. Your Majesty is therefore
most Humbly Petitioned, to Maintain and Preserve Your Petitioners in. the
Liberty of their Consciences, and to Abrogate and Disannul according to the
Edicts, those Condemnatory Decrees issued out against them on this account.

9. By the 18th. Article of the Edict of Nantes, all persons, of whatsoever
Quality they be, are forbidden to entice, or to take away by force, Children
from their Parents, professing our Religion, that they may be Baptized or
Confirmed in the Romish Catholic Church, on pain of being punished
exemplarily. And yet notwithstanding in diverse quarters of your Kingdom
Children are violently and by main force ravished and taken away from their
poor afflicted Parents, to be Baptized and Educated against their Wills in the
Religion of the Romish Church; and particularly the Daughter of one Redon an
Apothecary, living at Mayniers, and the Child of Giles Connan, being but two
years and eight months old, was by the Nuns of Antrigues enticed away from her
Mother, and by downright violence detained in their Nunnery, notwithstanding
all her cries and importunities to recover her. Wherefore Your Majesty is most
Humbly Petitioned, to cause that Your Subjects of the said Reformed Religion,
may enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences with security, according as it has
been granted them even in this point by Your Edicts, and to cause the Violaters
of them to be punished according to Law.

10. By the 13th. Article of the Edict of Nantes, and by the 38 of particular
Matters, the Professors of our Religion are permitted to have public Schools
in those Towns and Places where the Exercise of our Religion is allowed. Yet
notwithstanding, in diverse places where their Schools and Colleges be
established according to these very Articles, of the Edict of Nantes, they be
disturbed in their Possession of them, yea, notwithstanding that Explication
given of them by Your Majesty, in Your Answer to our Bill of Complaint,
Presented to You by our Deputies, Approved and Accepted by Your Self, July the
13th. 1621, wherein Your Majesty did expressly declare, That by the Edict it is
permitted to those of the said Religion, to establish Colleges in those Towns
and Places where they enjoy the Exercise of their Religion; and Your Majesty
did Grant the very self-same Privileges unto these our Colleges, which are
enjoyed by the Colleges Erected, Received, and Approved in this Kingdom.
Wherefore Your Majesty is most Humbly Petitioned, to forbid all persons
whatsoever, the interrupting or disturbing those of our Religion in the
Possession and Enjoyment of those Schools, Colleges, and Universities
aforesaid, which Your Majesty had formerly Granted by Your Letters Patents, and
Decrees of Council unto the Towns of Nerac and Coignac, and other places,
notwithstanding all Judgments, Orders, and Decrees, and other matters contrary
thereunto. And Your Majesty is most Humbly beseeched, that they may be all
Abrogated and Disannulled.

11. The Lords Carlincas and de Lagett, Commissioners Deputed by Your Majesty,
to divide the Colleges of Languedoc, which are of Royal Foundation, not being
contented to have satisfied the Tenor of their Commission, they would also take
Cognizance of the Theological University of Nismes, maintained by those of the
Reformed Religion: And it so happened, that the Lord of Carlincas a Roman
Catholic, has by a Decree of his own, interdicted it, without so much as
hearing any of the Parties concerned; and on the contrary, the Lord of Lagett
has Judged and Decreed, That it ought to subsist according to the Edicts: All
which Orders and Decrees having been sent unto Your Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council; although we had not the least notice, nor intimation of it,
there is a Decree issued forth simply without any Restriction, confirming the
Decree of the Lord Carlincas, to the Prejudice of that Liberty granted us by
Your Edicts. Your Majesty is most Humbly Petitioned to cause the said Decree to
be Vacated and Repealed, and in Favor of Your Subjects of the Reformed
Religion at Nismes, to Ordain, That their Theological University may stand upon
the same Grounds with that of Montauban, both being of the same nature, and
this according to a Decree of Your Council passed on their behalf.

12. By Your Majesty's Edicts, and as it is always practiced in the Execution
of them; yea, and by Your Answer to the Third Article of our Bill of Grievances
presented to Your Majesty in July, 1625. all Professors of our Religion; yea,
and our Ministers themselves were allowed to dwell and inhabit in any part of
your Kingdom. Yet notwithstanding nowadays, our Ministers cannot be permitted
to dwell in diverse places, as in Aubenas, Mezin, Saux, Villefranque, Corbigny,
and other places, from which our said Ministers have been driven away, which is
contrary to your Edicts. Your Majesty therefore is most Humbly Petitioned, to
ordain according to your Edicts that our Ministers aforesaid, and all others of
our Religion may be suffered to dwell and inhabit freely and quietly in all
places of Your Majesty's Dominion.

13. And diverse others, though not Ministers, are, merely out of hatred to their
Religion, every day vexed and afflicted, as in Your Towns of Bourg, Aubenas, La
Voute, Chaalons in Burgundy, and in sundry other places, from whence poor
Tradesmen are partly by Threats and partly by actual Violence offered to them,
driven away, directly contrary to the Authority and the very Letter, and plain
words of Your Edicts. And Your Majesty is most Humbly Requested to Order, That
they may enjoy the benefit of them, and to enjoin Magistrates and all other
persons, to observe on their behalf, the first of the Particular Articles of
the Edict of Nantes.

14. By the 45. Article of Particular Matters in the Edict of Nantes, and by a
Decree of your Council, Dated July the 17th, 1624. and by Your Majesty's Answer
to the Bill of Complaints of Your said Subjects, July the 23d. 1621. and April
the 12th. 1622. the Ministers of our Religion were exempted from Watching,
Warding, Rounds, Lodging of Soldiers, Assessing and Collecting of Taxes, and
from payment of their Quota to them, or any other Impositions whatsoever on the
account of their Household Goods, Pensions, or Salaries. Yet notwithstanding, in
diverse places of Your Kingdom, they be Assessed to Watch and Ward, to the
Billetting of Soldiers, to pay Forest Money for their Lands there, although
they have none at all in their hands, but Let them out to Farmers, who pay
those very Taxes for them; yea, also in very many places they do compel them
and extort from them round Sums for the Payment of Taxes due by the Parishes,
and in case of Failure or Omission, their Household Goods are Distrain'd, and
their Persons Seized and Imprisoned, and amerced in great Fines; as
particularly the Minister of Previlly has been thus misused. Your Majesty is
most Humbly Petitioned, to grant them the enjoyment of those Immunities and
Exemptions which have been accorded them by your Edicts, Declarations, and
Answers to out Bills of Grievances, and to forbid all Persons to trouble them;
and that the Assessors, Collectors, and Receivers of Taxes may not extort from
them any Payments, the Taxes only excepted for those Immovables enjoyed by them.

15. And whereas there be yet detained many Captives in Your Galleys, who have
been there many years, and for none other account than the past troubles, Your
Majesty is most Humbly Requested, to cause them to be set at Liberty, and to
extend unto them the same Clemency Your Majesty vouchsafed unto others in the
year 1613, by Your Answer to the 5th. Article of our Bill of Grievances, which
was then presented by Your Subjects of the Reformed Religion, unto Your Majesty.

16. By the 34. and 51. Articles of the said Edict, it was Ordained, that the
Courts of the Edict should Judge Soveraignly, and without Appeal from them unto
any other Court whatsoever, of all Processes then in being, or that might be
moved in time to come, and in which those of our Religion are Parties; yea, and
in what concerns the Execution, or Inexecution, or Infraction of the Edicts;
yet notwithstanding, sundry Praesidial Courts, as that of Bourg in Bresse, and
the Intendant of Justice there do every day attempt, and actually do give
Judgment, without admitting of any Appeal from them; as also the Parliaments of
Aix and Rennes, do Issue out their Decrees directly contrary to the Letter of
the Edict, and in such matters as the Cognizance whereof is interdicted them,
and reserved only to Your Mixed Courts. Your Majesty is most Humbly Requested,
to Abrogate and Revoke all those Judgments and Decrees so incompetently given
forth by those aforesaid Praesidial Courts, Intendants, and Parliaments, to the
prejudice of Your Edicts, and particularly that Decree of the Parliament of
Aix, against the Book written by Monsieur Gaillard, Entitled, Le Proselite
Evangelique, and against his Person, and to remand back the matters of Fact
contained in them to the Courts of the Edict, who ought of right only to take
Cognizance, and Judge of them, with a Prohibition unto all other Judges, nor to
intermeddle with any matters properly belonging to your Majesty's Courts of the
Edicts.

17. Although that by the 17th. Article of the Edict of Nantes, Confirmed by
all subsequent Edicts of your Majesty, those who do, or shall make Profession
of our Reformed Religion, are declared to be capable of Exercising all Trades,
of Holding and Enjoying all Dignities, Offices, and Public Employments
whatsoever; yet nevertheless, they be Excluded in diverse parts of your Kingdom,
from all public Charges, Offices, and Dignities, they cannot be received unto
the Degree of Doctors, nor Incorporated into the Colleges of the Faculty of
Physic, nor admitted to the Practice thereof, nor to be Masters of those
Trades wherein they have served their Apprenticeship; nor may they perform the
Functions of those very Offices whereunto they were Privileged by their
Patents; Our Public Notaries and Attorneys of Bailywicks, having been
interdicted the Exercise of their Callings by a Decree of your Council, April
28. 1637. Wherefore your Majesty is most Humbly Requested, that their
Profession of the Protestant Religion, may not be made a Crime, and that whilst
they adventure their Lives and Fortunes in your Majesty's Service, equally with
your other Subjects, they may not be deprived of the benefit of your Edicts:
And we Humbly beseech your Majesty to Ordain, that they may be for the future,
indifferently admitted unto all Charges, Dignities, and Masterships of Trades,
and that such as have a Patent for them, may be maintained in the full and free
enjoyment of their respective Functions, and that your Majesty would be pleased
to Abrogate and Revoke all Decrees and Judgments given to the contrary.

18. In the year 1617. by the Edict of Restoration, made in Favor of the
Reformed Churches of Bearn, Confirmed by Your Warrant for the Peace of
Monpellier, Your Majesty was pleased to maintain those Churches aforesaid of
Bearn, in the Liberty and full Enjoyment both of their Doctrine and Discipline,
without Changing or Innovating of any Article or Canon in either of them; yet
nevertheless, Your Court of Parliament of Navarre, in prejudice of their
Liberty of Ordaining and Deposing, of Continuing, or Removing their Pastors
from those Churches unto others, where they be sent by their Synods, does
forbid them to Proclaim or Celebrate any Fasts without its permission, or to
make Appeals in matters purely Ecclesiastical elsewhere than unto the said
Parliament, or to Toll any Bell at any time for the Convocation of our Church
Assemblies in that Province, as is evident from the Decrees of the said
Parliament. Wherefore Your Majesty is most Humbly Requested to continue unto
those Churches their Liberty granted them in those matters, and to forbid the
said Parliament of Navarre, from intermeddling with such things for the suture;
and that You would be pleased to Abrogate and Disannul all those Decrees which
have been made on this occasion.

19. Your Majesty was pleased by all Your former Declarations made in favor of
Your said Subjects, to promise the continuance of that Bounty granted them by
the late King Henry the Great, of Glorious and Immortal Memory, and diverse
times since Confirmed by Your Majesty for the Maintenance of our Ministers and
Universities, which was in Compensation of the Tithes paid by Your Subjects
aforesaid, unto the Popish Parish Curates. Yet nevertheless, for diverse years
last part, they have been totally deprived of this Liberality. And whereas
several Assignments were made them for the former years, there is yet remaining
due unto them a very considerable Sum: And although this Favor has been again
and again Promised, and was Granted to them in the year 1629. whenas the Towns
of the Lower Languedoc submitted themselves to Your Majesty's Authority, and
the said Promise was since confirmed by Your Majesty's Answer at Montauban, to
our Bill of Grievances we then tendered You; yet nevertheless, those very
Assignations given them for the year 1627. have been revoked, nor have there
been any given them for the following years; therefore Your Majesty is most
Humbly entreated, in pursuance of Your Royal Promises, to continue unto Your
Subjects aforesaid, the enjoyments of those former Favors and Liberalities,
and to ordain, and cause them to be paid all Arrears due for the years past,
and to continue them for the future.

The End of the Bill of Grievances.
CHAP. XXVIII. The Copy of a Letter from the Pastors and Professors of Geneva,
sent unto the National Synod of Alanson, touching the Doctrine and Books of the
Sieurs Amyraud and Testard.
Messieurs and our most Honored Brethren,
THe Return of another Holy Synod to be held by you, gives us a new ground of
adoring the infinite Mercy of our God; who having for diverse Ages, chosen your
Nation above many others, wherein to erect his Kingdom with the Glorious
Ensigns of sundry and long continued Combats and Sufferings, and with the
peculiar Privileges of Purity, Union, and a Holy Discipline, does now also in
these woeful turbulent times, through that Clemency and Equity, which he has
inspired into your Sovereign Lord the King, vouchsafe unto you that excellent
means for your Subsistence, and the Conservation of his unvaluable Gift, the
Blessed Gospel, among you, even your Synodical Meetings, whereby your way and
course may be kept even without stumbling, and your Possession of the Divine
Faith, safe and lasting. And verily all Ages have judged this Ordinance the
only Powerful, Profitable, and most Effectual means for the preservation of the
Church, and the Reducing of it back again, when fallen from, unto its first,
pure, and holy Principles. But yet the best Canons that were ever framed and
established, have not been so constantly practiced nor observed, as among you;
though it is our daily Prayer, and we hope in God, that through his Divine Grace,
those of your Discipline shall be continually observed for many Ages. That part
we have in your Communion, and which we have by reason of your singular
Affection to us, causes us to recognize so great a mercy with thankfulness;
and the rather, because the dangers of the times had left us quite hopeless of
it. And though considering your Eminent Abilities, Prudence, Zeal, Godliness and
Knowledge, we can contribute very little, if any thing, besides our Consent,
Prayers, and Vows unto God for you; yet in as much as you ever accepted kindly
of our Lines, we shall presume once more with our wonted freedom, to unbosom
our selves to you, and to give you the thoughts of our Hearts upon the present
State of your Churches, according to that general knowledge we have of it, and
so leave on Record, as we are persuaded, the mutual Harmony of our Sentiments
and inward motions with yours. This offers it self first unto us, that when we
contemplate your condition, and compare it with that of very many other
Churches, which for a long time together, have been lying and groaning under
deep and extreme Oppressions both Corporal and Spiritual, we cannot but bow the
knee of our Souls before the Throne of the Heavenly Majesty, who changes
Times, and rules Hearts, and turns them as the Rivers of Waters, which way
soever he pleases; who brings into Temptation, supporteth under it, and
grants a joyful issue and deliverance from it; and who has shortened the days
of your Trial, having seen, as it is reasonable for us to believe, the
promptitude of his Gracious Remnant among you for Repentance and Conversion,
and their improvement of the day of their Visitation, and has therefore put a
period to your Desolations, and not suffered the Fiery Trials of some of your
Members to be without seasonable refreshments, nor those terrors which had
generally possessed you to be without the dawnings of some renewed Hopes and
Comfort. And we cannot but unite our Affections and Zeal with yours, whereby to
invite you and our selves to Consecrate this inestimable Mercy of your Peace,
vouchsafed you of God, to the Glory of his Great Name, the Celebration of his
Wonders, and to the renewal, and reinforcement of our Obedience and Service to
him; that as you have been the first in these last General Calamities of the
Churches in deliverance, so you may also have this advantage above them all, to
walk before them in a most illustrious example of a Serious and Holy usage of
it, employing your selves Religiously in all thankfullness unto God, who is the
Sole and Sovereign Author of it, and demeaning your selves, according to your
bounden Duty, in all Obedience and Subjection to the Instruments thereof, and
in an inoffensive, peaceable, and becoming Conversation toward all Men; so
that you may remove all former Jealousies and Suspicions taken up against you,
and whatsoever may provoke them to wrong or hurt you, and acquire unto your
selves that Praise and Applause which is natural and peculiar to your Faith and
Religion, that learns you how to bear and suffer the worst of evils; when God
calls you to it, which else you will never be able, nor know how to practice.
This will be a Fence and Bullwark both to your Persons and Consciences, against
all Accusations, which may be brought in against you before God. We see with
Joy and Admiration, how the good Providence of God has appeared for you in
your Kingdom, and what wonderful Salvations he has wrought out for you in your
greatest necessities, and in what a glorious manner he has owned and blessed
the Fidelity and Virtue of many of our dear Brethren; yea, and those of the
greatest Quality; so that we are fully persuaded, the mercy will be Universal,
and the memory thereof Immortal, and that we shall be suffered to live in
peace. Wherefore we will leave it to the good pleasure of God to effect and
bring about a perfect Union of men's minds in the Faith in his own time, when he
shall cause that great day of his Light to shine forth; and in the mean while,
to make bare his Almighty Arm, in setting bounds unto all Hostilities, and
putting a period unto all Contentions; one only excepted, which will be an
Honor and a Blessing to the contending Parties, to strive most one with
another in all good Offices of Charity, and Examples of Edification. If there
be yet behind any remaining troubles, you are too well fortified in this old
War, to demand any great or singular consolation: Possibly they will be none
other than the foamings of the Sea after a violent Storm, some frightful
impressions upon the mind, when the Ague-fits are over; but whatever they may
be, they shall certainly be none other than the inseparable Marks and Badges of
the word of Christ's Patience; none other than necessary Exercises for our
Faith, than Barriers to rail us in, and guard us from the impure Society of the
World, and Amulets to preserve and save us from its contagion, and a Fire to
purify and refine the good Metal, and to separate the Dross from it: And
indeed though the breaches, which have happened among you by these dispensations,
have demonstrated this last effect in diverse ill-grounded and unsettled
Spirits, yet also has there been daily produced in others, a far greater
abundance of the power of Faith, and of the perpetuity of the true Seed of God
in their hearts. The sad examples of Foreign Nations and Provinces, which lie
rotting in idle and brutish Pleasures, the killing Vices of our Age, should
cause us not in the least to envy them this false and imaginary good, or to
regret and mourn at the bitterness and severity of that Discipline wherewith it
pleased God to exercise us; for he does thus mortify us unto the World, and to
the Concupiscences thereof, and gives us a taste and relish of the Powers of
the World to come, when we shall be fed and satisfied by him with those solid
and substantial Blessings in the Palace of his Glory. Yea, the many
difficulties and oppositions that God encounters with to disengage your hearts
from the World, should cause you to tremble, lest he should remove that hand of
his which seems so heavy and violent upon us: And if he did, we should
infallibly lose our peace with him, and tumble headlong into the deep gulf of
Destruction, from which we were but a little while since most miraculously
delivered. And in as much as by these overturnings of the World, it is visible
that its last end cannot be a far off, and that our long-look'd and long-hop'd
for Redemption in the coming of the Eternal Kingdom of the Son of God draws
nigh, for God's sake, Most Dear Sirs, and Honored Brethren, be not weary of
fighting the good fight, with the Weapons of Righteousness on the right hand,
and on the left, against the Baits and Charms of this present World, and
against that hatred and fury you shall meet withal, for opposing the Torrents
of its general and reigning Corruptions: Revive therefore the Zeal of Elijah;
Preach the words of Life and Wisdom; get the Spirit of Might, of Judgment, and
of Burning; weild the two edged Sword of the Spirit of the word of God, that it
may cut on this side and on that; that it may hew down them, who do actually
deceive and poison Souls with their Erroneous and Seducing Doctrines, that so
the true Faith and Religion which we have received from our Godly and Blessed
Fathers, may be handed down unto our Children; and we recalling into our
personal practice and imitation, that Holiness of their lives, by which they
did so nobly justify their Profession, and exalted to the highest pitch of
Evidence, the power of the Gospel, and made it known unto the World to its
Condemnation, this very Holiness of our Heavenly Father, may appear more
conspicuous in the Holiness of our lives, who are his own sanctified Children.

It would be, not only a rash and needless undertaking in us, to urge motives
whereby you might be quickened and excited to the performance of these Sacred
Duties, in which you are laboring with so much courage and diligence; but it
would be a very inhumane thing also in us, to increase thereby your sorrows,
now whenas you can enjoy but a small part of your Edicts and Privileges, yea
and now when you are so frequently disturbed and affrighted with new Alarms, as
we have heard to our very great grief and astonishment, how you have of late
times been troubled in your own Bowels, by the publishing and spreading of new
Doctrines in the highest and most important Articles and Points of our Common
Creed, the substance whereof seems to be much wounded and altered, and its Face
and native Beauty exceedingly disfigured. This accident has been the worst and
most ill-boding Sign and Token that could befall you; for you had for many years
together retained constantly and invariably that most Holy Faith taught and
established in your Churches in its Purity and Simplicity, the wicked one not
being able, during all that time, to mingle any of his Leaven, nor to sow any
of his Tares among you, you having therein imitated the most Famous Gallican
Church of the best and purest times of Antiquity, which was as free of Heresies
as your Land is of Monsters. And though these Opinions and Speculations may be
reputed slight and venial, by idle, lazy, and unthinking persons, especially if
compared with those more ardent Combats, and serious Disputes of our quarrelsom
Age, managed by persons abstracted from all ties of Duty, and sojourning among
us; yet the faithful Pastors, who know how earnestly their Churches do desire
solid and substantial Food, will like Wise and Prudent Physicians, Minister to
those necessitous Flocks the most Sovereign Antidotes, for the preservation of
their precious Faith, and of their precious and immortal Souls: and like
faithful workmen, who having well nigh finished a great Building, well laid in
its Foundation, and far advanced to the top of its perfection, do account it
absurd and dangerous to rake and dig about the Foundation. Besides, the sad
example of our Neighbor Provinces, who have suffered this Canker to fret into
their Bowels, should oblige us to keep this Poison at the greatest distance
from us. For since we have once agreed, and seriously and sincerely consented
unto the Faith and Canons of the Holy Synod of Dort both by word of mouth, and
our own manual Subscription; it seems to us, that we cannot recede from it,
without offering a most notorious injury to all the Reformed Churches, and
particularly to those of the Netherlands, who have been at vast expense and
trouble to give us those clear lights into, and those Pious and Judicious
Decisions and Determinations of these very Controversies; and it is a great
unkindness in us to thwart and cross them by our contradictions, and to assault
and batter their Buttresses and Foundations.

The first essay and attempt of this nature was about those Opinions, which
like some certain Simples and Drugs, are more wholesome when taken in the Mass,
than when they be minced and subtilized by Discourses, Distinctions, and
Disputes, which deprive them of all respect, and enfeeble their Virtue for the
instruction and comfort of the Soul, and rob God of the greatest part of his
Rights, Glory, and Adoration; and do corrode mortally, producing endless
debates and strifes, in no wise edifying, but hugely embarrassing the
Conscience, to the disturbance of its peace, polluting the heart by rash
Judgments and Discourses about these deep and abstruse points, and cause it to
despise and reject that saving Grace of God, which he would have us accept and
entertain at, the very first sight and tender thereof. Moreover, we are very
much astonished, and our dear Brethren of Switzerland are also extremely
offended, that the Names of the greatest Doctors of our Churches, have been
used for the defense of these Novelties. And would Charity suffer it, we should
believe, that they were persons not in the least to be credited, because the
Novelists do impute and tax them with a very great inconstancy in their
Doctrine, the contrary whereunto, notwithstanding their pretended Allegations
out of them for their darling Opinions, is Universally known: and their
different Sentiments from these new Dogmes, will clearly and sufficiently
justify them before the whole World. However we were somewhat comforted in our
Spirits, by the Advice given us, That these upstarted Opinions were not at so
great a distance from the Truth as was first reported, nor estranged from that
Center of Union in the Churches, as the terms in which they were couched, at
their first public appearance did represent; and for that several persons of
Eminent Piety had used their best endeavors to quench this Sparkle, before it
grew into a Flame, and the Dread and Reverence born your then approaching
Assembly, has happily contributed to the Reduction and Establishment of the
Principal Truth. And we give due Praises unto those Worthy Persons who first
sounded the Alarm, and marched forth against these Tenants; as also unto those
who brought the Waters of Moderation to extinguish the fire of this
Controversy, and who, in the dressing of this Wound, applied proper Lenitives,
whereby they qualified and removed the most dangerous Symptoms, reserving for
the more powerful hand of your Supreme and Venerable Assembly, the total
extinction of this firebrand, and the perfect cure of this Malady. And we
beseech you, to exert your full Authority in and about these matters, saving
all that lies in your power, regaining what is lost, retaining Truth and Love
as much as is possible, without violencing your own Integrity, without
degenerating into any dangerous Connivency, and speedily and solidly repairing
the Breach, which otherwise the common Adversaries will not fail to keep open,
and come in upon you to your utter Destruction. And though we very well know that
your Wisdoms will not be wanting to suggest prudent Advice and Counsel, and to
prescribe wholesome Remedies, yet we take upon us the boldness to acquaint you,
that forasmuch as these questions have been moved without occasion or
necessity, and that it will be very hazardous to let them be spread abroad to
the scandal of the World, to the raising of Disputes and Controversies among
your selves, and to the exasperating of Spirits, who will be exceedingly moved
and imbittered by a formal condemnation of them; especially since they have been
along time revolved in their most secret thoughts by those, who yet protest,
that in the bottom of this business they consent with you; and since they be
persons who are at present, and may be hereafter, serviceable unto the Church
of God, we conceive the safest and most inoffensive Remedy that you can use,
will be this, To enjoin all the Churches and Universities to be wholly silent,
and that neither from the Pulpit nor Press, any of these new Doctrines be
broached nor vended; And farther to Decree, That when occasionally these
matters shall come to be debated, that all persons do keep themselves to the
simplicity of our Confessions, and to the Canons, concluded and made in the
Renowned Synod of Dort, without mingling with them these new Hypotheses,
Phrases, and Distinctions. And so doing, you will calm the now troubled
Spirits, and you will dispose them to a perfect cure, and to join in with you
in a full and uniform consent, and divert them from gazing on an Object, whose
sparkling Luster would attract their Affections, and make them addict
themselves unto others far more profitable and edifying. A Puissant Neighbor
Commonwealth did very happily fleer this course, whenas diverse years ago, they
were troubled with such Alterations, and Scruples raised on the like points,
which were degenerating into profaneness, and would have raised Factions and
Confusions in the State, and Schism in the Church: This evil was nipp'd in the
Bud, and the Wound healed as soon as given, by the sole interdiction of any
farther Disputes; and to prevent such dangers in time to come, we conceive it
very needful, that you Establish, if you have not done it already, an Ordinary
Super-Intendant over your Universities; for it is in those Schools of Learning,
where Leisure, and the Pleasures of Speculation, Variety of Reading, and
curious Inquiries into matters out of the common Road, and the bait of
Singularity, do transport great Wits with too much facileness after these
Novelties; which how tolerable soever they may seem to be in Discourse and
Conference, with Learned and Accomplished Men, yet ought not at any time to be
published, nor thrown into the minds of young Students, who are to be dealt
with all after another way; to wit, by a more careful instilling into them the
choicest and soundest Truths of the Sacred Oracles; lest by the weakness of
their Judgments, and the fervor and instability of their age, which enamours
them of Curiosities; they should be entangled in Debates and Controversies, and
embrace Factions and Partialities. And indeed, the Butt and Mark of well
Educated Students in Divinity, should not be to be the first Authors and
Forgers of Novel and Subtle Opinions, as in the Papacy, where they be plunged
into a gulf of endless Errors; and abastardized by a world of fruitless,
useless, and endless Inquiries; nor is it that they should be wrangling and
worthless Disputants, nor Speculative Doctors without any Savor or Power; but
the true End and Design of these our Theological Students ought be this, That
they may be a Holy Seed-plot of Able and Godly Pastors, Sound in the Faith,
Mighty in Word and Doctrine, Wise unto Sobriety, keeping the great Mystery of
Godliness in a pure Conscience, delivering and dividing the word of Truth
aright: And in fine, to be Men of God, perfect and prepared for every good work
of their Calling; to which Holy and Noble ends, all forts of Subtilties are
utterly unserviceable, and have ever marred the Divine Doctrine by wicked
Errors; or the Broachers of them by Ambition, Contention, Curiosity,
Conceitedness; or the Church by a disgust of Scripture Purity and Simplicity,
or by Factions and Divisions, which never happen when the common Sentiments of
the Church are taught, though by Ministers of meaner Parts and Talents; whereas
these have always happened by means of affected Singularities, which is the
true and genuine Food of the Romish Ambition, which ever labors to subdue
the common Sentiments, because they be its greatest obstacles and most
obstructing its growth and progress. The Lord grant that the Sparkles of this
Fire in the midst of you, may not spring from the same Source! Poor Germany
has sadly felt the direful effects of the flames kindled by it in its frequent
and bitter Schisms. Every Prince would have his University, and every
University admired and exalted its own Doctor, as the most Eminent Professor of
them all; every Doctor had conceived, and must needs broach and vend his new
Notions, and singular Opinions, and these new Opinions are brought upon the
public Stage of the World, where it has met with fierce Antagonists, and
between these doughty Champions, the poor Church of God has been torn all to
pieces. To this consideration let us subjoin another; for God's sake, keep
Philosophy within its due and proper bounds, closely and strictly watched and
restrained, that it may only, if we may so express it, break up the Fallow
ground of the Spirits of our youth; but not in the least to take upon her by
her Maxims and Assertions, to bring in Seed and Food for the Church and House
of God, which must be fed with the pure Manna of the Divine Word, whose Majesty
and Liberty was so happily asserted and recovered by our Godly Fathers from
that Bondage and Captivity whereinto the School-Divines of the Romish Church
had enslaved it, and into which it is very likely it will be again insensibly
reduced, either by a too great fear of their false Weapons, or by a perverse
Emulation of them. And yet in the mean while, the Sacred Scriptures will be
best understood by a diligent reading of them, by comparing one Text with
another, and by Invocation of the Holy Ghost to enlighten our dark minds in the
Knowledge of them; and they will be thus more easily digested, and brought home
with a greater force and efficacy upon Conscience, in a sober sensing of them
according to the simplicity of Faith and Demonstration of the Spirit, than by
the most audacious and curious Applications of these false Lights, new Notions,
and vain Discourses of Philosophy. Pelagianism in the Low Countries, was the
Plant of the Spanish Metaphysics, producing not Pious, and Painful, and
Profitable, but Subtle Pastors and Preachings, an infinite Brood of
Disputants, void of Understanding, and corrupt in Points of Faith. Subtilties
bring forth Thorns, which never leave the Churches nor Consciences at rest, but
scratch and tear them to pieces. And we exhort you to be Jealous and Suspicious
of new Methods, and imaginary Hypotheses, and an affected singular way of
Teaching, and to avoid them. Arminius took his walks at first in these
bypath, till such time as he had gotten a stock of Credit and Reputation, and
had formed for himself a Party, then he pulled off his Vizard, and canvasseth
all Points of Doctrine, even those which were but accessory, with no little
vehemence in his Disputations, and was uneasy till the roots had been searched,
and the most Fundamental Points had been assaulted and shaken. Indeed the one
wounds the other; and it was always known, that they who once changed their
note and language, and the sound Doctrine delivered to them, have been attended
by some secret hidden Vice, or else they do engender it in their Followers.
Discharge therefore, most Reverend and Honored Brethren, your bounden Duty
unto your Churches, and give this Memorable example unto them all, and unto us
this singular Consolation, That you do maintain inviolably the Faith once
Taught, Established, and Sealed among you far more than in any place of the
World besides, by a multitude of Divine Witnesses and Approbations, which have
rendered you a Spectacle of admiration to Men and Angels; grub up by the Roots
every Plant of Heterodoxy, and by your Authority do you reinforce, as you
shall find needful, that Harmony and Agreement of the Reformed Churches, which
was declared in the Synod of Dort, which having been the first General Council
of the Churches in our days, wherein God most evidently presided by his Holy
Spirit, (and there will be difficulties enough to get such another) does
therefore of right deserve the greater Reverence and Submission, because of the
disrespect offered it by the Broachers of these Novelties: And this should be
done, unless we intend to be cried down as a sort of ungovernable persons,
refractary to that Order and Discipline, which God has Sanctified and
Established from the very beginning in the Christian Church. Ponder well how
your past actions have been justified; and may it please you to take that care,
that you may not hereafter be necessitated to make use of this Remedy against
affected Ambiguities and Obscurities. We very well know that some are charming
your Ears with the Reunion of both Religions; but that constancy and firmness
you testified in your last Synod, the nature of the points wherewith you be
tempted, that cannot admit of any reconciliation, and for that you must make
the first Overtures to a Party (which keeps the wound open, and holds the
departure from them intolerable) if ever you hope to get from them clear and
plain Declarations of their Intentions; and finally, the whole set on foot
without any Authority or Warrant, and with apparent marks of very little
sincerity, and for great Worldly Respects and Interests, freeth us of all
fears, that it will ever take with or go down in your Churches or Spirits, and
makes us believe that all these little Projects will be resolved into their
first Principles of wind and smoke, to the sole prejudice of the Vanity of the
Undertakers. Accept, most Reverend and Honored Brethren, in good part, these
thoughts so freely Communicated to you from your Loyal Sister, which owes you
her All, and can pay you but Little, excepting the deep sorrows of her heart
for the general Calamities of the Church, and her continual Sighs and Cries
unto Almighty God for the Peace thereof; and that he would be pleased to return
with his Majesty and Glory unto the many thousands of Israel, and re-edifie his
ruinated Zion, and above all to continue his Grace, Protection and Benediction
upon you All, with whom she is most intimately united and perfectly conjoined
in the firmest and most ancient bonds of an Holy Love, which together with her
most earnest Cares and devoutest Prayers she does continually offer up unto the
Divine Majesty, for the Health and long Life of your Sovereign Lord the King,
for the prosperous success of his Affairs, for the re-establishing of Peace and
Tranquillity in his Kingdom, in which both ye and we are so very much
concerned, and by means whereof we cannot but hope, that our poor afflicted
Brethren in Foreign Provinces, may also through the Grace of God, meet with
Peace and Settlement. May the good hand of the Almighty make your Assembly a
blessed Instrument of your Peace, Union, and Perseverance in the Truth! and
fulfill all our Desires and Prayers for the Consolation of all his Churches!
and that you may be the first, who shall enjoy the Fruit of your Labors, by
the Witness of God's Holy Spirit in your Hearts, and the happy effects of your
Holy and Prudent Debates and Counsels! We conclude all with the tender of our
most Humble, Faithful, and Cordial Services and Affections, and of our most
entire Union with you in Spirit; which we most humbly beg of the Lord to
Sanctify and Consummate in its full and total Perfection in the Kingdom of his
Glory. Your most Humble and most Affectionate Brethren and Servants in the
Lord, the Pastors and Professors in the Church and University of Geneva, and
for them all

From Geneva, April 26. 1637. Diodati. Tronchin. Chabray. Prevost, and
Pauleint.


CHAP. XXIX. The Testimonials of diverse Doctors and Universities, unto the
Treatise of Monsieur Rivett, against the Books of the Sieurs Amyraud and
Testard.
To the most Honored and our most Excellent Colleague, Andrew Rivett Professor
of Divinity.
WE did read with singular delight your Remarks on the Writings of Monsieur
Amyraud, Pastor and Professor at Saumur, which we had seen sometimes before,
and we have found them exactly agreeing, both with the Holy Scripture in all
Articles of Faith, and in those wherein our National Synod of Dort, had
declared its Judgment; and therefore we approve of your Writing as being very
Learned and Moderate, and count it Worthy of Praise from all Orthodox Divines;
and we doubt not in the least, but that this your Labor will be most
acceptable unto the now approaching National Synod of France, and will be
useful and serviceable for the suppressing and putting a period by due and
proper ways, unto these late Controversies, which some certain Pastors,
affected and addicted unto Novelties, have to their shame, raised in the French
Churches, to the great Offense of very many Godly Persons.

From Leyden, March 14. 1637. Your Reverences most Affectionate Colleagues,
Johannes Polyander, Antonius Wallaeus, Antonius Thysius, and Jacobus
Triglandius.


Extracts out of a Letter sent by Mr. John Bogerman, to Mr. Andrew Rivett, from
Franequer, Feb. 7. 1637.
HAving thus concerted that Affair among our selves, we now Write you our
present Judgment, which in this Paper is Transmitted to you, begging of God
with all our heart, That he would bless your Holy Labors, and behold in the
Son of his Love, your distressed Churches of France, which have been hitherto
as a Pure and Chaste Virgin, and have kept inviolably their Oath of Fidelity
unto the Truth; but nowadays begin to be troubled with impure Errors, and of
a very dangerous Heterodoxy. My Colleagues could not read that French Book of
the Professor Amyraud, because they don't understand the French Tongue,
therefore did I most Faithfully make those Extracts, which you see, out of his
Writings. Our ears could not suffer with any Patience, those Novelties of a
double Predestination unto Salvation, and of a certain general knowledge by the
light of Nature of the Mercy of God to all Men, and of another particular
knowledge of the same Mercy unto particular persons; of a double Decree of God,
without any knowledge of Christ. The good Lord be merciful unto these Brethren,
and according to his infinite goodness, grant that they may have but one and
the same Mind, and the same Language with all the Churches of Christ; and may
he ever watch over you to keep and preserve you for many long years yet to
come, to the Glory of his Great Name, and the Edification of his Church.

To that most Excellent Person, our most Dear Brother in Jesus Christ, Master
Rivett, Greeting.
HAving received your Writing, together with the Books of this 21. of January,
we perused them very diligently, and were grieved in our hearts, that the Seeds
of new troubles were sown in your Churches of France: Thus Satan, who is
always the same and like himself, endeavors by vile Errors to obscure the
Luster of the Truth, and continually discovers himself a most mortal Enemy of
the Grace of God. And, Oh that our most Gracious God, whose great Benignity
toward us, deserves our everlasting Praises, would deign to preserve your
poor Churches of France from all their Enemies, and from those woeful troubles
attending on them. These Attacks of the Adversary, are ill-boding signs of some
sad Events, which may betide them, unless they be resisted with singular
Prudence, and an immovable Resolution in their first beginnings, and that they
be stifled in the Birth. For what is it, that Men are hammering out of this
multitude of Errors, but a certain new Arminianism, Pelagianism, and
Socinianism? That odd and ridiculous Opinion of Vorstius, concerning the
changeable Decrees is once again dug out of its Grave, and brought upon the
public Theater; yea, and that spurious Doctrine of the Jesuits, condemned by
the Schoolmen themselves, appears barefaced before the World. Alas! How many
points incompatible one with another, are there to be found in Monsieur Testard
his Book? For his latter Theses subvert the former, and so far are these
Pamphlets from conciliating Peace, that to the contrary, we believe, the
Adversaries are more exasperated by them, animated and strengthened to Combat
with us; and that Saying of Monsieur Beza may be justly applied to this Script,
He would have forged a Peace, but he has forged out Dissension.

Sir, You are very well acquainted with the Man, and therefore we Judge it your
Duty to examine his work, and censure it, and to return it back unto us, that
we also may add our consent unto your performance. What you have already done,
discovers a Holy, Religious, and Charitable Affection to the Service of God,
and to the Edification of the Churches in your Native Country. Your Remarks
upon his Errors are very, clear, your Confutations of them exceeding Solid, and
the Admonitions you have ministered unto our Brethren, express a great deal of
Christian Charity; and what you have done in this matter, is highly pleasing to
us, and we cannot but Esteem, and Honor you the more for your singular care in
defending the Truth, and conserving the Peace of God's Church, and we Praise
and Applaud your Pious Zeal for the Service of God, and of his Church. And what
Man fearing God, but will cherish in you these good Dispositions, and your
Praiseworthy Labors? May our God, who has breathed into you these Divine
Motions and Affections, maintain them in you. And the Lord grant that the
Churches of France may acknowledge with due respects and thankfulness your
Zeal, and approve of your Writing, and may remove those Errors, which you have
detected to them, from among them, and watch over them, that they may not gain
ground in the midst them, for they have a tendency to Exclude our Lord Jesus
Christ, from being a means of Salvation. And further, we do with all our hearts
beseech the God of Bounty and Mercy, that he would lengthen out your days unto
many years, to the benefit of our Belgic Churches, and of those in the Kingdom
of France; that he would preserve you from all evil, and accumulate upon you
his best Blessings. Amen.

From Franequer, this 15. of February, 1637. Your most Affectionate Servants
and Brethren, Johannes Bogermannus, Dr. of Divinity, and chief Professor in
this University. Menardus Sertaunus, S. S. Theolog. Dr. and Professor. Johannes
Majomus, Dr. and Professor.


Letters from Monsieur Altingius to Monsieur Rivett, and the Approbation of the
Church of Groninguen.
SIR.
IT was very late when the Packet you sent me, was received by me; having
opened it, I found therein closed three Books, written by certain Pastors in
France in love with Novelties, the Disciples of Mr. Cameron deceased, together
with your Animadversions upon their Doctrines, briefly Collected by you.
Indeed, as I am exceedingly desirous of the Peace and Concord of God's Church,
which we do more need now than ever; so was I as much sadned and dejected that
those Brethren, and others of their Persuasion, should go about to change the
Doctrine Established in France, and the Netherlands, against Arminius and his
Followers, and trouble the Repose and Tranquillity of all our Churches, and
grieve weak Consciences; especially those who have no insight into these
matters and others of the same Nature. I doubt not but that your Churches of
France will find out a convenient and speedy Remedy in this their approaching
National Synod, that may prevent this growing evil; according to the laudable
Canons of their Discipline, and preserve others from its Infection. I approve
and commend your singular Care and Diligence for those Churches, and that though
you be at a distance from them, yet you do so seasonably assist and help them.
I have Communicated the whole unto Monsieur Gomarus, who was very much pleased
with your Considerations, and who did not only read the Writings you had
stitched with them, but extracted diverse things, as I also have done to be of
use to me, in case I should hereafter be called out to give my Judgment on
these points. You have here added a form of Approbation, brief indeed, but
harmoniously agreeing with that of the Professors at Leyden, and which, as we
hope, will be sufficient enough for the present. If you desire any thing more,
you need only hint it to me, nor use or urge any Arguments with me for so
doing. I pray you to inform me, whether Monsieur Capel is a Partner in these
Novelties, for I have held with him a most entire, sincere and inviolable
Friendship, more than thirty years. I must confess ingenuously unto you, that I
could never well enough understand that Merit of the Covenant of Nature, which
contains the Foundations of Pererius his Faith. Could I have met but with a
Messenger any one day of this last week, I had sent the whole unto Monsieur
Bogerman, which (God willing) I shall do by the very first opportunity. The
Lord preserve you, my most Illustrious and Dear Brother, and whom I Honor with
my whole heart; and the Lord lengthen out your life many a year, for the
Service of his poor Church; and give down his Heavenly Blessing upon your
worthy Labors to the Glory of his Great Name.

From Groninguen, December. 27. 1636. Henricus Altingius.

The Form of Approbation.
WE have Read and Examined in the fear of God, the Theological Considerations
of that most Famous Divine Monsieur Rivett, upon the Abridgement of the
Doctrine of Nature and Grace; which as they do clearly repeat that Orthodox
Consent settled against the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians, by the Synod of Dort
in Holland, and of Charenton in France; so be they also meet and fit for their
singular Prudence, Moderation and Charity, to stop the Progress, yea, and
wholly to suppress those unhappy Controversies which are lately started by some
certain Pastors, who be more in love with Novelties and Subtilties, than with
plain and simple Verity. They have shown a great deal of Imprudence in raising
them, and have also Scandalized the Churches and Universities of France. We
beseech God, through our Lord Jesus, That he would give his Blessing from
Heaven, unto the Designs and Labors of this Man of God, and that he would
Sanctify us all, and keep us in the Truth.

From Groninguen, this 27th. of December, 1636. Francis Gomarus, Doctor of
Divinity, and Professor in that University. Henricus Altingius, S. T. P.

The Original of this present Formulary of Approbation being in my Custody, in
case any one should call in question the Truth of the Copies thereof, I shall
produce it at any time for their satisfaction. I could not get the first Copy
which I took from the Original, and sent back to be Subscribed by those
Reverend Persons, who had Signed the Original to be Subscribed, because some of
them were then absent from the City of Groninguen, and because I was
necessitated to dispatch this second Copy so suddenly, that it could not
possibly be attested by them. But in case the first Copy should not be
delivered to our Reverend Brethren, yet nevertheless, I hope, they will credit
these, which in the presence of God, I do avouch to have been most Faithfully
extracted from the Original.

From the Hague, in much haste, this 17th. of May, 1637. Andrew Rivett.



CHAP. XXX. A Letter of Monsieur du Moulin, Pastor and Professor of Sedan, sent
unto the National Synod of Alanson, in the year 1637. concerning the Books of
the Sieurs Amyraud and Testard.
Messieurs, and most Honored Fathers and Brethren,
UNderstanding from good Hands, That my Pains and Labor in the Defense of the
Truth, is very much blamed by persons of a contrary Persuasion; I believed,
that as that Treatise Composed by me through the occasion of these new
Controversies was submitted unto your Judgment, so it was my Duty to undertake
my own Justification, and to wipe off those Reproaches wherewith I had been
aspersed. They say that I might have done well, not to have meddled with this
Quarrel, and that I am a Fellow who love to be embroiled, and to fish in
troubled Waters, and who do presumptuously take upon me, to prescribe my own
private Notions as infallible Oracles. You know, Sirs, that Messieurs Amyraud
and Testard, have kindled this fire, which has caused all this noise and
hubbub; and that it is they who have filled all our Churches with those Books,
which in a very ill hour, do remove the ancient bounds by their new fangled
Doctrines about the most important points of our Religion, and that Monsieur
Amyraud has sent forth his Book of Predestination, without ever submitting it
to be examined by his Province, or so much as waiting for its Approbation by
them; and that since that time, contrary to the Advice of two Provinces, and
contrary to the Promise made by him unto Messieurs Vincent, and du Soul, he
has caused some certain Sermons of his, containing the very self-same
Doctrine, to be Printed. It was a long time before I stirred, hoping that this
Commotion would have calmed of it self, and have found none to approve it. But
being well informed, That this Distemper grew worse and worse, and that this
Sparkle might cause a great Conflagration, I feared, lest my Silence on such an
urgent occasion, might be interpreted for want of Zeal unto the Truth, and be
taken for an Approbation of their Errors. I have none, nor will I have any
Quarrels with the Persons of those Gentlemen, but only with their Doctrines. It
cannot be but ill resented, that they should be permitted to Publish unto the
World from the Press a new Doctrine, and that it should be a Crime in me to
Refute it in Manuscript. I went about this Work with a great deal of Grief,
having nothing that lay heavier upon my heart, or was more contrary to my
Temper, than to contend with my Brethren in the Work of the Lord; especially
now that my Age calls for Repose, and that I am daily waiting for my
Dissolution. But I saw the Evil to be so great, and its consequences so
dangerous, that I counted my self bound in Conscience to defend the Cause of
God, and to endeavor to discover the very bottom of the Imposture, and the
hidden Nature of it. I very well know that your Assembly is made up of Persons
of clearer and more piercing Judgments than my self, nor would I be so
presumptuous as to take upon me to be your Teacher; but in what I have done, I
have satisfaction from my own Conscience, nor durst I be wanting in my Duty
unto God, and the defense of his Cause. But these Gentlemen, who complain of
me, were not contented to keep within these Limits. For besides the Printed
Books wherein they have spread abroad their Doctrine, they have now very lately
Published a Treatise against me under the Name of Monsieur Vignier, a Copy of
which was sent unto the Provincial Synod of the Isle of France. And I do not
question but that they have dispersed them elsewhere, far and near. I am also
advised, That Messieurs Amyraud and Testard, do complain very much of a little
Script of mine, dictated not in the Public School, but in my private Chamber
unto some few Scholars, wherein I have changed their Names, one of them into
Greek, and the other into Latin, which I did out of fear, lest if it should
fall into the hands of any of the Romish Church, they might understand my
Discourse, and learn out the Persons with whom I disputed; of which little
Treatise I never Communicated a Copy unto any one. And understanding that these
Gentlemen take this exchange of their Names in ill part, I have Composed
another more ample and exact than the former, unto which I have set their
Names, that so I might give them content. You be too Prudent not to observe
that these Gentlemen do play at Tarriers with you, and whilst they amuse you
with Triftes, their design is to take you off from diving into the bottom of
their Doctrines, and to divert you with idle Stories of my Practice and Custom,
instead of maintaining their own Cause. It Is but a small matter to change a
French Name into Latin, if compared with what they have done in changing the
very Nature of God, of the Law, and of the Gospel. I am informed, that they
make great outcries, for that, in certain Letters written by me to Monsieur de
la Millitierre, I told him they endeavored to make a new Religion, a
Hotch-potch of Popery and Cameronianism. But let me not be misapprehended,
'twas never in my thoughts to charge the Doctrine of Monsieur Cameron, who is
now at rest, with Heresy, or that he intended to Model out a new Religion: I
only spoke the Sense and Intention of de la Milletierre, and the mark at which
he aimed. For he endeavors from the Doctrine of Monsieur Cameron, to frame a
new Religion, and never speaks of him but as of an Oracle, as of a most
incomparable Person. When we say that the Lutherans are equally bent, both
against Popery and Calvinism, we do not thereby understand that Calvin was the
Author of a new Religion. I Honor the Memory of Monsieur Cameron, and when
there was need, I defended it. But yet I am truly of that mind, That he had
done very well, if he had never over-turned the Order of God's Decrees, as they
were Explained and Asserted by the Synod of Dort, and Approved by all the
Reformed Churches of Europe, and particularly by three National Synods at home;
which he had never done, if he had soberly and seriously considered the
consequences of his own Tanents. For this new Method of his, is that very
Foundation upon which the Arminians have built all their Doctrines. Nor can any
one deny it, but that one third part at least of all Cameron's Works is spent
in the Confutation of Calvin, Beza, and the rest of our most Famous Doctors.
Yet notwithstanding these his Blemishes, we are not to despise those Gifts and
Graces God had so plentifully bestowed upon him; and when I read his Works, I
cannot find that Doctrine, which is now vented by those, who boast themselves
to be his Disciples and Followers, and cover themselves with the Shield of his
Authority. I cannot find where he says, That the distinct knowledge of Jesus
Christ is not necessary to Salvation, nor that he says, That Jesus Chrict died
equally and alike for all Men; nor does he Teach, That the Reprobates may be
Saved if they will, or that God has Counsels and Decrees which may be
frustrated, and shall never obtain their effect; nor farther can I find where
he says, That God has taken away from Men their Natural Impotency to believe,
and convert themselves to him; nor that he reduces the Efficaciousness of the
Regenerating Spirit to a variable suasion; yea I find most express
Protestations to the contrary, insomuch that these Gentlemen; under pretense of
Honoring, do Defame him, wronging his Name and Memory, in making him the
Author and Father of these wicked Doctrines. But the most grievous Accusation
of all lags yet behind, for these Gentlemen tax me for calumniating them, by
attributing things unto them which they never did, spoke, nor thought. Now
although this their Complaint be unjust, yet have I great reason to give thanks
unto God Almighty, that they be ashamed of their own Doctrine, and that by
disavowing these Points so clearly taught by them, they make Semblance as if
they were about to give Peace unto the Church, which they have so very much
disturbed, and that they were returning once again into the good old way. I
shall be exceeding glad that your Holy Assembly may accept of their
Explanations of their Sentiments, though they will be hard enough, and there be
very little appearance of it, and that their Retractation may be taken for an
Explication, that so their Honor may be secured, provided they do reunite
themselves with you; upon these conditions I would willingly suffer them to
repute me a Liar, so that they might be found honest men and true. However that
I may be cleared from all suspicions of being a Reproacher and Calumniator, I
have extracted with very much Faithfulness, some few passages out of their
Writings, which I now lay open before you, that you may Judge whether I have
Calumniated them, and whether such Doctrines as theirs may be endured. For my
part I am of that mind, That I need not at all trouble my self about these
Accusations, because that many Provincial Synods, and many Professors and
Pastors of Foreign Churches and Universities do join themselves with me, in
making the very self-same Complaints; and do also accuse them of those very
Errors; particularly my Reverend Colleagues, the Worthy Pastors and Professors
in this our City of Sedan, as you will see by this Writing, unanimously
Subscribed by us all, and sent unto you, which we most humbly entreat you to
take into your Godly Consideration. For if you should content your selves with
a mere allaying of these Controversies, and an Imposal of Silence on both
Parties, you will leave the Spirits of Men in suspense, and put Error in the
same Rank and Degree of Reputation with Truth; and Foreign Churches and
Universities, who have been concerned for these new Notions, will take your
Silence, not for a condemnation of Them, but of the Truth. Nor can you hope,
that witty men, who have for diverse years together, labored with an incredible
ardor to maintain and promote their Doctrines, should be kept within bounds by
a poor, simple Exhortation given them in an Assembly, which is no sooner broken
up, but they be freed and delivered from all fear, and will be at liberty to
speak and write whatever pleases them. If Medicines do not cure the Sick, they
make them worse, and do the more irritate and increase the Distemper, We not
knowing when or whether the Lord will ever favor you again with another
National Assembly, it is very needful that before your Dissolution you should
make use of the most Effectual Medicines, which may be useful, and serve as a
Warning and Example to Posterity, and to such as under the Shroud and Covert of
new Expressions, shall attempt to bring in, and set up new Doctrines. When I
consider how that your Assembly is composed of persons endowed with a singular
Zeal for the Truth and Glory of God, and who are richly furnished with Learning
and Prudence, and who will not suffer themselves to be surprised by little Arts
and crafty Solicitations; and hearing no tidings of these Gentlemen's change of
Language, or that they have forsook their principal Propositions, I am full of
hopes that God will give good Success unto your Deliberations, and that he will
use you as effectual Instruments in his hand to corroborate and confirm our
Union, and by the same means to establish Truth and Concord among us all* May
the Lord God of Truth and Peace preside in the midst of you by his Holy Spirit,
and power forth abundantly upon your Persons, and Holy Work, and Ministry his
best Blessings. In him I am, most Reverend, and most Honored Brethren,

From Sedan, April 27. 1637. Your most Humble and most Obedient Brother and
Servant, Du Moulin.

A Letter of Monsieur Diodati, Pastor and Professor in the Church and
University of Geneva, unto Messieurs, the Pastors and Elders of the Reformed
Churches of France, Assembled by Permission of the King, in the National Synod
of Alanson, craving their License and Permission for the Printing of his Latin
and French Translation of the Holy Bible, together with his Annotations upon it.
Messieurs, and most Honored Brethren,
GOd be Praised for the meeting of your Holy Assembly, from which we promise
our selves an Universal Blessing to be derived down upon all your Churches, and
that your Holy Discipline will be preserved and the Union and Purity of your
Churches strengthed. Having now an opportunity presented me, I make bold to
communicate unto you a private Affair of mine own, which has made a great
noise in the World, and according to the diversity of men's minds, has been
entertained with various and different Censures: It is my Labor on the French
Bible, on which having travailed very many years, I have at length, (by the
Grace of God) finished it, and after diverse Revisals of it, and Conferences
about it, have brought it unto Perfection, and do now only wait for a little
freedom from the strong opposition of some persons made against it, that I may
publish it to the World. These Men pretend the sole Judgment of the Synod of
Alez, why it may not be Printed; and therefore their keenness and contradiction
cannot be removed by a less Authority, than that of another National Synod,
equal to it, which may receive full information, and take full cognizance of
the Cause. It Is very true, that this being a Labor of Pure, Innocent, and
Confessed Orthodoxy, of an unreproachable Fidelity, done by a Man who never
ministered the least occasion to have the sincerity of his Faith questioned, and
who for many years has given unto the public, an Essay of his small Talent in
this kind of Work, a Labor only designed and devoted for private Uses and
Studies, and which being the Common Right, and the Practice of the Christian
Church in all Ages and Nations, methinks it should not have met with so many
Oppositions, nor be necessitated to solicit your Assembly for a License;
especially since that the last Translation in 1588. was not only Printed, but
immediately, without passing through those forms of Trial, carried up into the
Pulpits, and was really the Work of one particular person, as mine is, who in
this account had no Prerogative nor Privilege above me, excepting that he was
deputed thereunto by our Consistory; nor was his Labor any other than a slight
Revisal of what was done before, and which he himself esteemed very little, as
is well known and remembered by many persons who are yet alive in this City. I
do also confess unto you, that it is not without some kind of apprehension, that
I bring now this Affair before you, whenas it is laden with Prejudices, and
destitute of those two only means for support of its Dignity, to wit, My
personal presence, and a view of the whole Body of the Work. As to the first,
were I now in your Synod, I could justify the uprightness of my Intentions,
and add weight and force unto my Arguments, and answer satisfactorily to all
Demands and Scruples, resolve Difficulties, acquit and purge my self from all
sinister Opinions taken up against me. But I am utterly disabled from doing
these things now, and at this distance. Moreover, the sight of the Work would,
for its grandeur, have excited Pity and Commiseration for the Workman; and his
faithfulness and diligence therein, would have acquired some favorable respect
unto the Work it self. But my fear of losing in a long Journey that one and
only Copy which I have, detaineth me from sending it; and another unexpected
accident of a very long and dangerous sickness has farther hindered me from
supplying that defect, by Printing diverse pieces of the Old and New Testament
which I resolved to have put into your hands, as an Essay of the whole; so that
I have confined my self to a small Specimen of Annotations on the Books of
Ecclesiastes and Canticles, which I have chosen from among the rest because of
their obscurities, and perplexing difficulties, both in the Original Text and
Sense of it. Yet notwithstanding these considerations, that confidence I have
in my God, the Author and first mover of me to this Undertaking, and who has
enabled me with his special assistance to complete the whole, will undoubtedly
bless me with the means to bring it forth in peace, through your great Prudence
and Justice, which only from you could have obstructed it. I apply my self unto
you on three accounts, first, to give you a full and faithful information of
the State of this Affair. Secondly, to declare unto you the grounds of my
proceedings, and to resolve and answer those Objections that have been made
against me: and lastly to offer unto you a just and modest request; hoping that
you will kindly receive and fully believe the true Narrative of the first, and
that I also shall receive reciprocally from you the effects of the two last,
through the abundance of your Charity, and Experience had of your Prudence, and
Equanimity, which is peculiar unto your Assemblies. I shall therefore tell you,
That the Providence of God having inclined me in the first years of my
Theological Profession; yea, and almost from my very Youth upward, to Translate
and Explain the Italian Bible, I was therein so successful, and the Blessing of
God did so wonderfully follow me in it, that both Jews and Christians; yea,
those of the Romish Church also, and others of all Professions, conceived a
very great esteem for me, and the greatest Persons of this our Age, had my Poor
Labors in singular recommendation, which I mention not without blushing; it is
the Truth which I publish to the Glory of God only. A multitude of People
received instruction by it, and were generally edified; yea, and I am credibly
informed from good hands, That many persons owed their Illuminations, and
sincere Conversions to it; a most blessed Fruit, which never caused any Scandal
or Reproach unto my self, or to any other on my account. I was from that very
time, excited by a most vehement inward impulse, to Consecrate my Studies
wholly unto this self-same Work in two other Languages, the French and Latin,
in which I was equally skilled, and they were, as to their use, both alike, and
as it were natural to me; and Learned Men, with whom I conversed, advised me
unanimously hereunto, because there were very many things to be added, and
amended, notwithstanding the pains and diligence of our Fathers; and that I
should reserve the Latin Version unto my later years, because it demanded a
more Consummate Judgment. Hereupon, I resolved to begin with the French, the
necessity whereof was acknowledged by the National Synod held at Montauban, in
the year 1590. and afterward, by very many Persons of Note and Quality. And not
hearing, nor understanding that any of those Great and Learned Divines of the
French Nation, did betake themselves to expound the Texts of the Sacred
Scripture, or to make Annotations on those places, which did need them,
excepting professed Commentators, who could but be rarely and seldom consulted
with, unless in their Ordinary Lectures; very few of your Pastors having
addicted themselves this way, I therefore at first inclined to frame out some
brief, and solid, and perpetual Annotations, which should discover at noonday
the Treasures, and hidden Sense of the Holy Scriptures, and dissolve the knotty
difficulties, and reconcile the seeming contradictions in it, and to sum up
all, should serve as a guide to the right way of understanding it, and be a
Fence and Barrier against Errors, and a Preservative from Seduction. For I was
taught by experience, and by the example of many great Men in all Professions,
that this was the most assured, shortest, and profitable method of proficiency
in all Sciences, and above all in Theology; the mind being by these brief Notes
fastened, as it were, unto the Spring and Center, and not only habituated to
the comprehension of the purest, highest, and strongest Points, but also to the
limitation and bounding of Conceptions and Expressions. I had not proceeded far
in this Task, before I perceived my labor would be unprofitable, unless I did
with the same hand revise the literal Translation of the Text, that it might be
adjusted suitably to those my Annotations, which according to my best Judgment,
I had Religiously affixed to the Text. And because I was not furnished with
Authority to change what was in common and public usage; and being no ways
willing to concur with others in their Glosses, which would have been soon
visible and apparent to the World, when we should be compared together, and for
that it was easy for me to correct what was amiss in others, and to keep at a
distance, by a free dissent from them, and being much displeased with the
deplorable deformities and botching and patching of the Vulgar Latin, I
resolved to assume unto my self that liberty used by all Interpreters, which
was to form the Letter of the Text into one equal Web and Style, and into a
Sense agreeable to my Explications; being herein fortified by the example of
Blessed Mr. Calvin, who in his French Commentaries, has either added himself,
or suffered additions to be made by his Translators unto the Text, one Text
often differing from that, which was then in common use, which yet had been so
frequently revised by him, that he might be well reputed the Author of it. And
yet I never did thus confine my self, unless in some Contexts, and matters of
lesser moment. I have made no alteration in the New Testament of the best
Translation, nor in that of the Old. A second thing which I note unto you, is,
That I have not at all, or very little intermeddled with those Dogmatical
Passages, which Cotton the Jesuit had so Calumniously impugned, and accused of
falsehood, and were so worthily defended by our late Reverend Brother, Mr.
Turretin of Blessed Memory; and I do expressly mention this, because I would
remove a Bugbear, which if imagined by the World, would affright and deter
them from reading these Annotations. A third thing is, That the most remarkable
Alterations in my Labor, are drawn from the very Margents of our common
Translation, whereof Learned Men, and skilled in these matters, have observed,
that the Margin is more sound than the Text; upon which score, the Overseer of
this Work would not insert those plain, common, and edifying Glosses of
Monsieur Beza, nor of other great Men, who have thrust in their own, though
oftentimes very extravagant, harsh, and unedifying. I should be too tedious and
troublesome, most Honored and Dear Brethren, if that by many words I should go
about to persuade you to believe, that either Avarice or Covetousness, moved me
to undertake this Vast and Laborious Work, or love of Novelty, or affectation
of Singularity, much less had that black and malignant Vice any Influence or
Power over me, viz. to Eclipse and Darken the Glory of our Renowned Fathers in
the Reformation, and to arrogate it wholly to my self. I am at this time of day
too near the direct line of the Sun, and so disabled from ever casting any
great Shadows, or to be wrapped up in such thick Mists; nor can I believe that
such an ill report, though I have been sensibly afflicted with its putrid breath
elsewhere, should ever blast the Credit of my Sincerity with you, which as I
have it imprinted powerfully upon my Conscience before God, so is it much more
easy to verify and make it good before Men, because I have Labored without
Wages, I have Wrought without any Thanks or Favor, my Works have not gotten me
any Honor. I aimed only at this mark, to make clear and limpid this Fountain
of Life; my design was to help poor and needy Souls to drink largely and
comfortably of it, and to make the way of Salvation plain and easy unto all;
and to gather up the stones out of the Lord's Field, out of the Churches
Heritage, and to cleanse the Lamps of this Golden Candlestick, and to render
this strong Meat pleasant to the taste, delightful, and easy of digestion; and
to Consecrate this Heavenly Manna in its pot of Gold. I have Labored to free
the reading of the Holy Scriptures from some certain and yet very common
abuses, which was to read it barely without observing it, or seeking out the
mind of God in it, as is the practice of idle and superstitious persons; others
read it only that they may gather, as in a Garden, the Flowers of some fine
Sentences, without entering into the spacious Field of Truth, where they might
thrust in their Sickle, and reap a full Harvest of entire and continued
Doctrines and Reasonings of the Holy Ghost, to the singular contentment and
satisfaction of their Souls, and by an intent Study and Meditation of them,
they might store up in the Granary of their minds, an abundance of Spiritual
Provisions. I have endeavored to make it plain and easy to the simple, so
that young Scholars might be furnished with solid and substantial conceptions,
and with lively words, and so have their Spiritual Senses exercised, of which
my long and sorrowful experience has found them destitute; and whereas they
were formerly patching together the pieces and labels of Secular Wisdom and
Eloquence, or freezing in the Studies of unedifying Questions and endless
Disputes, it has been an unspeakable Comfort to me to see how many of them,
and those of the best Quality have been rouzed up at the report of my Labor,
and have pursued vigorously this blessed Study, hoping for assistance and
comfort by my poor Travail: I am solicited by them from all parts, to
Communicate it to them as soon as possible, and they will not, as they tell me,
because they love me, leave me at rest, till I have gratified them in their
demands. I have made it my business to detain them within the bounds of that
uniform and unvariable Analogy of Faith, and to secure them upon the guards of
Sobriety and Simplicity, and to furnish them with quick and lively
Explications, and to render the Holy Scripture amiable and venerable without
any loftiness of expression, and to shield it from all contempt through want of
a sensible taste of its great Utility; I have scattered in all parts of this
Holy Field a multitude of Fruitful Instructions, and useful for the Grace of
edifying; nor have I let any corner or quarter of it lie fallow for want of a
familiar exposition; yea farther, I have freed it from that false Opinion of
the Vulgar, That it contained those sublime Mysteries which infinitely
transcended their capacities, and could only be penetrated by the Learned; and
that it was enough for the common people, if they paid them a blind reverence,
and an Ignorant Adoration. I have vindicated it from the Reproaches and
Blasphemies of Profane and Atheistical Wretches, who charge the Sacred
Scripture with unreasonable extravagances, and dull, senceless Discourses,
designed on purpose to bring Men into an horrid Slavery, under the notion of
Divinity. These Monsters are too too frequent in our Age, though they mostly lurk
in dark and secret places, and are afraid to discover themselves openly to the
World. However, that these Doctors of Lies, together with their sorry Sophisms,
might be exposed and confounded, it was necessary to exalt God's holy Word into
the Throne, and to display its meridian Light, Majesty and Glory. These were,
Most Reverend Brethren, my first Intentions, the successfulness of which, I
must leave to be manifested by God and time, the discoverer of all things; and
then the oppositions I have met with, will be largely counterpoised, and my
Designs and Endeavors will meet with Praise, and favorable Acceptance, whenas
my inflexible constancy, and indefatigable perseverance shall have brought my
Work to its last perfection. I have according to your Order, applied my self
unto our Magistrates to gain their License for its Impression, and have
submitted the whole to a strict and careful Examen and Revision by Judicious
and Learned Persons; but with this condition, That if after they had perused
it, it were approved, or should be approved upon their amendments, I may have
the liberty of Printing it. For I could not, without this restriction,
handsomely consent to such an unprofitable formality, which served only as an
entertainment of curiosity and discourse, and to sparkle out new Alterations:
And I farther craved the benefit of two Laws in this our Commonwealth, which do
not only grant a License for Printing, but a Privilege also against all
Occurrences, and new Translations of the Bible, and Annotations on it, provided
that they have been approved. This was plainly understood from that Judicious
Approbation given unto the merit of the Work, and not an Act of Arbitrary
Power, or of Absolute Will and Pleasure. To this so just a demand, and of
common right, some opposed an Article of the Synod of Alez, which others
endeavored to back and reinforce by Letters begged from certain Persons of
great Name and Merit, who were known to be in the same Sentiments with mine
Opponents, and engaged to maintain whatever had once proceeded from them;
especially they would have made this pass for granted with all the World, That
this Work had been generally rejected by all your Churches, not so much for the
substance of it, as for its design; and that therefore it was precisely
prohibited. But I made it appear, that they were very much out in their
reckoning, and produced several Letters from Persons of as great Quality, and
more in number, who highly approved of my Undertaking, and applauded those
Essays, which had gone abroad, and earnestly insisted upon its Impression. I
wave that Article of the Synod of Alez, because there be just exceptions
against it. This Affair was only superficially and overtly treated of in it;
the Provinces came not prepared for it; yea, they had not so much as been
consulted about it: I was never heard, nor any one for me; that my Labor was
but then a mere Embryo, as it were in its first Conceptions; that it could
neither be seen nor examined; That they took for granted on erroneous
supposition, viz. That I designed to eclipse or suppress our common
Translation, a thought of which never so much as came into my mind, and if I
had thought it, I could never do it. And lastly, this pretended Judgment, under
which I and my Work Labored, had no foundation in any Law, neither Ancient nor
Modern, neither Canon nor Civil; and therefore this Article being defective
both in matter and order of Juridical Judgment, could only be admitted as a
simple prudential Counsel, subject to examination by reason and second
thoughts. However our Magistrate bearing a very high respect unto your
Churches, and being jealous of what does any wise relate unto you, would not in
the least grant me my demand, but desire that this Affair might be put off till
the meeting of another National Synod, in which I also acquiesced, but with
this protestation, That after I had paid you my Duties, informed and acquainted
you with my Reasonings, I did take it for granted, that I might freely enjoy
that right, which has been from time immemorial in the Christian Church, to
wit, That it has been permitted to all those who have the gift and faculty to
serve the Church in this kind of Labor, as well as in any other Theological
Writings; and that in case the advantage of the Laws on this account, should be
denied me here, I would seek for it in some other place, where I might
accomplish my design in peace; which would be very easy for me to do,
considering the great number of Friends and Favorers of my poor Labors, which
God has graciously given me. 'Twas at this Post that my Affair stuck in this
City; and I hope the true Narrative I have made you of it, will discharge and
free me from all prejudices taken up against me.

I proceed now to report those Reasons with which I have always armed and
fortified my Spirit* against the many oppositions that have attacqued me. And I
most humbly beseech you* to bear with me in my relating of them, because I was
ever condemned upon mere prudential accounts, without any consideration had of
Law, Reasons, or Examples* which yet ought to be the ground and rule of all
riglit* Judgment in matter of Doctrine, Conscience, Necessity, or where the
great profit of the Church is concerned, as it is in this now before you, in
which it is not permitted to be led and biased by any respects whatsoever.
It Is Lawful indeed and Expedient to endeavor an Accommodation of the whole, by
some fitting Temperament and Reconciliation, if such may be found; but in case
it cannot be had, we must pass over my first Argument. For since it has been
the constant practice of all Ages from the very birth of Christianity, that all
Nations and Languages have not only suffered, but even carefully Collected and
Embraced a Diversity of Translations of the Holy Scripture, as is evident
beyond all possibility of contradiction, they having received some from Jews,
others from Heretics, attested to us by the Famous Hexapla of Origin; there is
then no reason why it should be now prohibited, and that I should be* made the
first Precedent, a new and unheard of instance and example in this old Age of
the World. My second is this, That forasmuch as no considerable inconvenience
has ever risen from this Liberty, Time having suddenly suppressed the vicious
and ill performed, and given Authority unto good Translations, which by their
own strength could bear a Trial; and on the other hand this Liberty having very
much contributed to the growth of Light and Knowledge, and the defects of one
Translation being supplied by the perfections of another, it is unreasonable to
Judge that there should be other manner of effects now than heretofore;
especially when as in this Learned Age, matters of base allay will be soon
discovered, and decried; and what cannot subsist upon the lively roots of
Solidity, will suddenly wither and be mowed down. Antiquity reaped much Fruit
this way, as St. Augustine and diverse others have witnessed; but the Christian
Church in our days, has enjoyed it most abundantly. For the sweet Odors
dispersed abroad by the new Translations of the Bible in diverse Languages,
within these five and twenty or thirty years, is wonderful, and they have
largely contributed to the Edifying, Instruction, and Confirmation of Saints.
The English Translation for its great Fidelity and Clearness wears a shining
Crown of Glory upon its head: Those two German ones of Piscator and Cramerus,
for their Noble Qualities and Conditions, are exceeding useful, and have done a
great deal of good. The new Polonian, made and Printed at the instance of the
Prince of Radzeville, is of that esteem as to allure the present King of Poland
to read it, and to enamour him of it, though he be a Prince of a contrary
Religion. The new Dutch Translation, which is just now coming into the World,
sets persons alonging for it, because of the excellency of its Work, the Number
and Abilities of its Workmen, the time they have spent in the doing of it, and
for the great helps the Lords States General have afforded them to effect it.
And the Old Testament which is now working off at Zurick in the purest Switzer
Language, must needs be of a raised worth, by that taste we had of the New,
which is already Printed. The new Spanish Translation of Cyprian de Vallera,
has produced incredible effects in Spain, no less than three thousand Copies
having penetrated by secret ways and conveyances into the very Bowels of that
Kingdom. Let others publish the Fruit of my Italian Version, both in Italy and
elsewhere. If it were expedient and becoming me, I could bring forth numerous
examples of it, and those also attested by persons of unstained Credit and
Reputation. Now, although these Nations have their infirmities as we have ours,
and as many and perverse Enemies as we have our selves; yet none of them
combined together mutually to deprive themselves of these Divine Treasures: but
using a little patience, the weak were edified and comforted, and the
Adversaries confounded in their Invectives. Should any one reply, That the
greater part of those Translations were framed by the Authority of Superiors,
and by diverse persons associated together for it, which circumstances are all
wanting to this my present Version; I answer that neither the one nor the other
are any thing as to the substance of the work, which may and ought to be
examined according to its merit, and not according to the Titles and Appearance
of Persons; because God may be pleased to bestow as great a Blessing upon the
sole labor of one person singly, as upon that of many; and very many excellent
Interpreters, and above all, St. Hierom was never deputed by Authority to this
Work, nor had he the assistance of any Companions in it; And the deep fixed
Thoughts, settled, continued Meditations, and studious Inquiries of one single
person may not only equal, but also frequently surpass the latitude of many
other men's thoughts, which are oftentimes ill-match'd, and worse digested: and
to say no more, it lay not in my power to get my self deputed, nor to associate
another with me unto this Work. Yea, methinks I might for this very reason
deserve the more favor, especially should my Labor be successful and take in
the World, since that I have alone born the burden of it. And as for those
Authorized Deputations, I account them more hurtful than profitable, unless,
notwithstanding these Commissions, the Church do enjoy her full Liberty, to
spend much time in a mature, and accurate examen of every one of them, before
ever She be obliged to a public Reception of any one Translation, which should
She too hastily embrace, She would as suddenly fall from Her Credit. And if the
first moulding be good, time will be always refining it, that so it may be
finally brought forth unto public use, and to undergo a general Trial.

The third Reason is, That forasmuch as all our Interpreters, as Calvin, and
those of the year 1588. have protested in their Prefaces, that they never
designed by their performances, to exclude and debarr any of their Successors
from attempting such a Work as this; but rather did invite, exhort, and summon
them to contribute what should be in their power for the perfection of that,
which according to their Candor and Modesty they said, they had left imperfect.
None will believe that they amused us with vain and illusive words, or with
Complements and feigned Civilities. So then, we yield them more honor by
following their Counsel effectually, than if through a stupid Reverence of
their persons, we should be afraid to enterprise any such matter after them.

My Fourth Reason is this, That we be now necessitated to use this liberty
because of the great changes which have fallen out in our Vulgar Languages, by
means whereof such Words, Terms and Phrases as were seemly and sounded well in
one Age, yet in the next following hear ill, are barbarous, putid, and
intolerable, and cannot be employed without public offense, and wounding of
the Ears with profaneness. We have experienced enough of this in the
moveableness of the French Tongue.

A Fifth Reason is this, That every Interpreter who explains a strange Author
by Annotations or Commentations has this privilege to Translate the Letter of
the Text according to the Sense he has conceived, and which he gives it.
Otherwise he would be handled unjustly: You would make him put a force and
violence upon his own Judgment, and cause him speak absurdly, and to turn his
Explications into perpetual contradictions and confutations of himself. And on
so Sacred a Subject as this, the peril and scandal would be abominable.

My Sixth is this, Forasmuch as in all Times and Languages there have been
Translations of the Bible for public use Authorized by the common Magistrate,
and ordained at that time and by the Custom of the People, and of others for
private use and service, from out of which bounds they never departed to
check-mate the public Authorized Translations; this self-same course may be
taken with mine, which may be confined to this lower Classis and Condition,
without any complaint of mine, or of any one for me. The example of the ancient
Greek Church is very illustrious in this our particular case, and exceeding pat
unto it. They esteemed the Translation of the Septuagint to be Divine and
Prophetical, and yet notwithstanding suffered several others to live, no fewer
than six or eight, which had been Compiled and Collected into one Body by the
Industrious Origin. The present Romish Church has Canonized the Vulgar Latin,
and yet notwithstanding, tolerates those of Vatablus, of Pagnine, of Arias
Montanus, and of Isidorus Clarius, to be used in the Explication of it. And
truly, Sirs, it would be a most absurd thing in us to overvalue one to the
disparagement of another, we should by such rigorous actings, exercise that
which we condemn in others, to Lord it absolutely over their Minds and
Consciences. The Evangelical Churches in Germany, without distinction of
Lutheran or Calvinist, do use in the Pulpits none other Translation but that of
the great Luther; and yet nevertheless, do not forbear consulting with
Piscator, Cramerus, and Osiander, of whom they make honorable mention, without
any Scandal or Confusion; and the public Discipline may take sufficient care,
that all these be avoided. And I have observed this, because I would satisfy
them who object, That such a diversity of Version would engender a World of
disorders in our Churches, this Pastor choosing one, and that another: Whenas
nothing like this has happened in those aforenamed Churches, nor was any like
it observed when the new French Translation of 1588, was brought into the
public Congregations.

My Seventh Reason is, That all prudentials must give place to the obligations
of Conscience, which are the removing of Stumbling Blocks from the blind and
weak, excuses from the lazy, occasions from the Adversary, and the hindrances
of profitting in the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures from all. And this was
the only mark at which I aimed. And it is no wise just and reasonable, that we
should rest satisfied our selves, or cause others to be satisfied with the
Explanation of some clearer and more substantial passages, and leave all the
rest buried as it were under ground in a voluntary ignorance: but it is
necessary that we should take pains to guide and bring our people into a
general knowledge of the whole, if it may be done. Because all Sacred Scripture
is Divinely inspired for these very ends and purposes. And it is the will of
God that those sparkling Stars of Dogmatical Passages should be as it were
Enshrined, not in a vast and cloudy darkness, but in the midst of that large
and ample, and clear-shining Azure of the Sacred Scripture. And this may be
noted against those, who sleep in this pernicious Error, that in case any
Translation do but give out all our Doctrines in their full nature, its
sufficient enough for any people, though in its other parts it be dark, ruggid
and ill done: They not considering that by these vicious qualities they drive
persons from reading of the whole, or imprint upon their minds sinister
thoughts, whereby they disdain and despise God's Holy Word, or deal something
worse by it. So that they do more hurt than good, destroying by this means all
that they had built up by others.

My Eighth Reason is, That according to our Doctrine, it is expedient for us to
keep possession of this Liberty, for fear lest that the singularity of one
Translation always heard, read, and handled publicly and privately, should
come at length to be Canonized, as it has fallen out in the Church of Rome,
not at first by any public Declarations, but by custom, and length of time the
Vulgar Latin has obtained this Reputation.

The Ninth Reason is, We ought to be very careful by my example, of abating
their courage, who have the Gift and Will to employ themselves in this kind of
Study, for fear lest they should toil and labor in vain, which is the highway
leading unto despair. And a very foolish Opinion it is, to think, that we are
come to such a pitch of perfection, as if nothing among us could be bettered.

The Tenth is, That the permitting of Translations done by Faithful and
Approved hands, is so far from increasing, as is pretended, an endless number
of them, that on the contrary, it is the true means to obstruct and prevent it:
for at last there shall come forth one which will give a stunning blow unto all
the rest, as that of St. Hierom's did. Those innumerable Latin Translations
shall daunt the courage of the boldest, who in so vast a Subject, shall hardly
find Pasture agreeable to the Palate of their Temerity.

In the Eleventh place, Forasmuch as it is profitable and expedient, that we
keep our Liberty in explaining of diverse passages not essential to our Cause in
our Sermons and University Lectures, it is also as much expedient that we
should keep it in our literal Translations of the Bible; lest being too much
captivated by one Translation, we should at last meet with all those Defects,
Obscurities, and Wanderings from the Scripture-Sence, and take upon us to forge
Mysteries at our own wills, which we have justly condemned in the Church of
Rome.

Let me but add one Reason more to those I have already offered, That having
labored with all Faithfulness in my Calling, according to the measure of Grace
received from the Lord, it is not just, that I should be hindered by your
Prohibition, from making my Work public, bcause it would be an irreparable
wound unto my Honor, which would be totally oppressed and ruined by reason of
those sinister Judgments, which even many of our own would pass upon me; as
that I have done nothing of any worth at all; and our Enemies, with whom I have
Fought and Confuted, would rail and bawl at me as they begin already to do it
in their Preachments, that I subvert and overthrow our own Doctrine: Reproaches
which are not only very grievous to me now in my old Age, but also very
injurious to that Degree and Station I hold in the Church of God; yea, and
would redound to the Scandal and Dishonor of the Churches.

Those oppositions of the Synod of Alez, and of others since that, may be
reduced to these two general Heads. 1. To the offense which would be taken by
the weak. 2. To those Reproaches and Troubles we should meet withal from our
Adversaries. But there is no reason that either the one or other should give a
Law unto us in such matters as these are. Our Adversaries will always do their
utmost in opposing our Reception of what is good; the weak will always refuse
the admission and introduction of new things, though they were the best in the
World. But I am very much amazed, when I hear that some are of that Opinion
with reference to the weak, that to instruct, guide, illuminate and strengthen
them, which I do throughout my whole Work, should cause, through their weakness
or viciousness, destruction to some of them, or be a means of staggering and
wandering unto others. I fear no other Scandal, but what is already given them
by so many contradictions as I have met withal: And yet at last it will redound
more to the prejudice of my Opposers, than of my self; because of the many
requests, with which I am continually importuned from people in all parts
Abroad and at Home, who cannot brook with any patience, the delays in
publishing this my Labor; nor are they so much alarmed nor disgusted as is
reported; and I am Ignorant who those weak ones be they so much stand upon; and
I am apt to believe, that some men plead their Cause contrary to their minds
and interests; because it is easy to presume, they will never be so much
Scandalized at those flights, easiness and new sweetness they shall find in
God's Word, as they may be distasted with the Difficulties and Obscurities they
have so long conflicted with. And as for our Adversaries, I am out of the reach
of their shot; for let them do their worst, they shall never allege one Text
in which I have varied from the substance of Doctrine, or of the Dogmatical
Passages; for I have industriously deprived them of all occasion and pretext
against me: nor shall they be able to wound our Cause, because the Work is of a
private person, and done for private uses; unless they should discover a most
shameless Malignity, to condemn that in us, the practice whereof they permit
freely among themselves, viz: The liberty of private Translations, which may be
retorted back upon all their Objections at any time. It Is now too late to have
any regard to them, who would, from the suppression of my Labor, which is now
Universally known, draw out long lines of Invectives, Calumnies, and false,
groundless Suspicions, which they will never be able to extract from its
publication. By which means, I doubt not, but with my Candor to demulce their
humors; and by the representing of the lively Light of God in his Holy Word,
to illuminate them; and by the Celestial sweetness thereof, to allure even some
of the fiercest Spirits amongst them to the good ways of God; for however they
may contradict men, it is difficult for them to contradict the Heavenly Sweets
of God's Word. Which I speak by experience of my Italian Translation: for
having, where I could with a safe Conscience, followed St. Jerome, it was not
unsuccessful. If this happiness might now befall me, which is not to be hoped
for from our Vulgar French Translation, judged by them over partial, there is
no Fear nor Worldly Respect that should weigh down with me. Some tell me the
time is unseasonable; but I answer, It Is never out of season to do good; and to
be too intent upon the times, is the right and ready way to lose all; and these
times of ours, which do stupifie our Souls with the horrors of those woeful
events happened in them, do contrariwise seem the most proper for the slipping
of this Labor into the World; which fears no assault, but what may be given
it in the birth. Besides, my declining years do call upon me to consider the
small time that is left me to give life unto this Fruit; unless I would have it
buried together with me in my Grave, or I must let it come forth into the World
all maimed and disfigured after my Decease. For all these Reasons and
Considerations, most Reverend and most Honored Brethren, I shall conclude with
two most humble and earnest Petitions to you: One is, That you would not in
this Affair make any Reflection upon those Sentiments which are now disputed in
this Church; for though at the bottom, it cannot but have other movements than
you have, yet nevertheless, it cannot subsist but under your Shadow, which if
removed, it must needs fall to the ground. My other Request to you is, That you
would be pleased freely to vouchsafe me what lies in your power to do for me,
which is not an Approbation of a Work never seen by you, and to demand it of
you, would be a very unjust thing in me, much less that you should give it with
the privilege of a public usage, which would be an exorbitant Temerity; but
this only, not to condemn me, nor to hinder this first Edition, which I desire
only to publish unto the World for discovery of Men's Opinions of it, and to be
farther sifted and examined by them. By this Equanimity of yours, you will
consolate me under my Travails and sore Pains, you will renew my Vigor, and
raise my Spirits, and encourage me also to publish my Latin Translation at the
many instances and ardent desires which are made me. But in case you should be
so pre-occupied as to deny me this small favor, I do now beg your pardon, if I
say, with an extreme grief that I shall lock up my self in the Cloister of my
own Conscience, and rest quietly in this confidence, that this work will at
last be more accepted and approved than at first: and I shall imitate St.
Jerome, who out of mere respect to the Union and Charity of St. Augustine with
the African Synods, resolved to displease himself for a short time, that he
might afterward more happily give content unto Posterity: and according to the
example of all good Servants, who even in some remarkable act of their Duty and
Service, do often digest with patience the disdain of their Superiors, and
exceed in obedience that they may give them a more certain and better account
of their Fidelity in the upshot of their Work.

I pray God, that if it be his gracious Will, I may receive from your fraternal
hands, this Fruit of Peace and Consolation, and that from his Fatherly hands,
you may receive his abundant and most powerful Blessing upon all your Holy
Deliberations and Actions. I beseech you, grant me that Honor of being avowed
by you,

Geneva, May 1st. 1637. Messieurs, and most Honored Brethren, Your most Humble
and most Faithful Brother and Servant in the Lord DIODATI.


THE Acts, Decisions, and Decrees, OF THE Twenty eighth Synod OF THE Reformed
Churches OF FRANCE, Held the Third time AT CHARENTON St. MAVRICE, NEAR PARIS,
On Monday the Six and Twentieth Day of December, and ended Thursday the Six and
Twentieth Day of January following.

In the Years of our Lord, 1644. and 1645.

The CONTENTS of the Third Synod of CHARENTON.
Chap. I. THe Synod opened with Prayer. The General Deputy presents the
King's Writ for calling the Synod. The Deputies unto the Synod. Manner of
choosing the Synodical Officers. 16.3. Chap. II. Letters Patents for the Lord
if Boisgrollier to be His Majesty's Commissioner in the Synod. 4. The
Commissioner's Speech unto the Synod. Chap. III. The Moderator's Answer to it,
very smart, close and pertinent. Chap. IV. The Synod's Letters unto the King,
and Lords of the Council. Chap. V. The Return of the Deputies with the King's
Answer. The Deputies Address to the Prince of Conde. His Answer. Letters from
Foreign Churches, Universities, and Divines not suffered to be Answered. 11.
The Old General Deputy lays down his Office; another imposed upon the Churches
by the King. 12. The Bill of Grievances must be drawn up privately by a Select
Committee. 13. Thanks returned by the Synod unto the last General Deputy. 15.
Chap. VI. A Second Letter to the King and the Queen. Chap. VII. Confession of
Faith approved. Chap. VIII. Observations upon the Discipline. An Appellant
shall abstain from the Lord's Table. 2. No Mm shall Marry the Mother of his
Deceased Spouse, without a Dispensation from the Civil Magistrate. 3. The Widow
of a Deceased Brother may be Married with the Magistrates Dispensation. 4. No
Proposans shall get into the Pulpit. 5. The Deputies Letters of Commission unto
the National-Synod, shall be Signed by the Synodcal Officers of their
respective Provinces. 7. Cousin Germans shall not Marry without the King's
Dispensation. 8. Chap. IX. Form of Baptizing Pagans, Jews, Mahometans,
Anabaptists, and Adult Infidels, now embraceing the Christian Religion.
Ministers to give the Cup at the Lord's Table. 11. Order about Catechizing. 12.
The Memoirs sent by the Provinces, must be Signed by the Moderatiors in their
Synods, or they will be thrown out of the National. 15. The Moderator to Vote
last. 16. Chap. X. Observations upon the Synod of Alanson. The last Will of a
Deceased Minister not fullfilled. 4. The Business of Monsieur Amyraud revived,
and immediately stifled by the National Synod. 6.7. Chap. XI. Of Appeals. A
Minister made Emeritus. 3. Discipline Exercised upon one who had Married his
Wifes Niece, and other Delinquents. 13. Monsieur Codur an Ancient Minister and
Professor of Divinity, Censured for attempting to Reconcile the Reformed
Churches of France with the Church of Rome in the Article of Justification. 17.
The Duchess of Tremoville appears in the Synod. Differences between two
Pastors and a Church made up. 21. A Church Projector Censured. 27. Chap. XII.
Of General Matters. A Decree against Swearing of young Scholars. 2. All Deeds
and Evidences belonging to particular Churches, carefully to be preserved. 3.
No Canon to be made about things indifferent. 6. Care for the Redemption of
poor Captives in Turkey. 7. A Canon against Independents. 9. Chap. XIII. The
Heads and Articles of Agreement between the Presbyterians and Independents.
Chap. XIV. Books and Manuscripts against Original Sin Censured. Act 10. Of
General Matters. An Act against any manner of Worship yielded to the Popish
Host, when carried in Procession. 11. An Act for a National Fast. 12. Chap. XV.
Millitiere and his Business before the Synod. His Excommunication; Particular
matters. 1. The Province of Normandy may not be divided into two. 11. Mr.
Drelincourt has the Thanks of the Synod for his Book against the Worship of
the Virgin Mary. 18. A poor Minister and Emeritus relieved, but with a Check.
23. The Case of Mr. Arnaud a Persecuted Minister. 24. An Account of Mr. Blondel
his Works, Office, and the Synod's Honor for him. 26. Monsieur Gauter Compiles
the Canons of the National Synods into one Body, and applies them to the
Canons of the Discipline. 28. Monsieur Catelon does the same. 29. Chap. XVI. Of
Universities. Care taken for the University of Montauban, and the other
Universities. 1. The Province of Bearn, Exposed for neglect of their Duty and
Promise. 2. The Generosity of a Professor in Divinity, 10. An Ordinance of the
Synod to several Ministers and Professors, to complete Monsieur Chamier's
Works, and to Publish their own. 23. The Contribution of the Provinces to the
several Universities. 25.6.7.8. Chap. XVII. Accounts of the Universities. Chap.
XVIII. An Act for calling the next National Synod. Chap. XIX. A Decree about
the Validity of the Synodical Acts. Chap. XX. The Roll of Apostate and Deposed
Pastors. Chap. XXI. Remarks upon some of the Deputies to this Synod. D.
Blondel, etc.
THE Synod of Charenton. 1644. and 1645. The 28th. Synod.

SYNOD XXVIII. 1644. 1645.
In the Name of God. Amen.
Acts of the Eight and Twentieth National Synod of the Reformed Churches of
France, Assembled by His Majesty's Permission at Charenton St. Maurice, near
Paris, on Monday the Six and Twentieth Day of December 1644. and ended Thursday
the Six and Twentieth Day of January, 1645.

CHAP. I. 1. Monsieur Drelincourt Pastor of the Church of Paris, opened the
Sessions with Prayer, and then the Lord Marquis of Clermont, General Deputy,
Presented the Writ given forth by His Majesty's Command for calling the Synod.
The Tenor of which is as follows.
THis day being the Twelfth of February, 1644. The King being then at Paris,
upon the most humble Petition of his Subjects of the pretended Reformed
Religion, to permit them the Calling and Holding of a National Synod, there
having been none since that of Alanson, in the year 1637. His Majesty by the
advice of the Queen-Regent, His most Honored Lady and Mother, desiring to
Gratify and Treat Favorably His said Subjects, has permitted, and does
permit them the Convocation of a National Synod in December next at Charenton,
but with this Condition, that they Treat in it of none other matters, but of
those which be allowed them by Their Majesty's Edicts; and that the
Commissioner, whom His Majesty shall please to appoint, be Personally present
in the said Synod, as has been accustomed. In Witness whereof, His Majesty
has Commanded me to Issue out this present Writ, which he has Signed with His
own Hand, and caused to be Counter-signed by me His Councellor, and Secretary
of State, and of His Commands.

Signed in the Original, LOVIS: And a little lower, Phelippeaux.

2. There met in the said Assembly with Letters of Commission, which were read
by my Lord le Coq, Elder in the Church of Paris, sitting at the Table together
with another Elder, the Sieur Caillard (who were both Chosen by Common
Suffrages unto this Office) these Persons hereafter named.

Article 1. For the Province of Anjou. Monsieur Isaac Pelletier, Pastor of the
Church of Vandome, and Stephen le Vacher, Pastor of l' Isle Bouchard, together
with the Sieurs George Raboteau, and Joseph Roisay, Advocates and Elders in the
Church of Previlly. Article 2. For the Province of the Isle of France, Monsieur
David Blondel, Minister of God's Holy Word, and formerly Pastor of the Church
of Houdan, but now residing in Paris, by express Order of his Provincinal
Synod, and of this Assembly, and Charles Drelincourt, Pastor of the Church of
Paris, and Theodorus le Coq, Elder of the said Church. He was alone, because
the Lord had called home unto himself the Sieur John Bazin, Elder of the said
Church, who was joined in Commission with him. Article 3. For the Province of
Normandy, the Sieurs Benjamin Basnage, Pastor of the Church of Ste. Mere
Eglise, John Maximilian de L'Angle, Pastor of the Church of Rovan, Daniel
Guesdon, Elder of the same Church, and Isaac Caillard, Elder in the Church of
Alanson. Article 4. For the Province of Dolphiny, the Sieurs Francis Murat
(another Copy calls him de Maras) Pastor of the Church of Grenoble, Simon Coin,
Pastor of the Church of Bessey, Peter du Clog Esquire Lord of Chastillon and du
Serres, Elder in the Church of Vein, and David Albert, Elder in the Church of
Brian^on. Article 5. For the Province of Sevennes, the Sieurs Nicholas Blane,
Pastor of the Church of Sumaine, Anthony Button, Pastor of the Church of Alez,
the Noble John de Bringniere, Lord de la Roque, Elder in the Church of la
Salle, and David Rouviere, Doctor of Physic, Elder of the Church of Alez.
Article 6. For the Province of Bearn, the Sieurs John de la Fit, Pastor of
the Church of Pau, and the Noble Alexander de la Fiber, Baron of Riquam, and
Lord of Cadellon, Elder in the Church of Couches. Article 7. For the Province
of Lower Guyenne, the Sieurs James Privas, Pastor of the Church of Ste. Foy,
Simon de Goyon, Pastor of the Church of Bourdeaux, the Sieurs de Cazes and de
Sauvage, though they were Deputed by their Synod, appeared not, the Cognizance
whereof was remanded back unto that Province. Article 8. For the Province of
Xaintonge, the Sieurs Philip Vincent, Pastor of the Church of Rochel,
Theophilus Rossel, Pastor of the Church of Xaintes, Stephen Soulard, Advocate
in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, Elder in the Church of Xaintes, and Daniel
Texeron, Lord of Cresper, Counselor nominated by His Majesty for the Circuit
of St. John d' Angeley, and Elder of the Church in that Town. Article 9. For
the Province of Vivaretz, the Sieurs Alexander de Vinay, Pastor of the Church
of Annonay, Paul Annard, (another Copy calls him Accaurat) Pastor of the Church
gathered near Privas, James Gautier Esquire Lord of Gourdanel, Elder in the Church
of Beaulieu, and Abraham Homel, Elder of the Church of Soyon. Article 10. For
the Province of Berry, the Sieurs John Taby, Pastor of the Church of la
Charity, Daniel Jurieu, Pastor of the Church of Mer, Henry de Chartres Esquire Lord
of Clebes, Elder in the Church of Marchenoir, and Simon Milhommeau, Lord of
Barandieres, Bailiff of Chastillon upon the Loin, and Elder of the Church in
that Town. Article 11. For the Province of Poictou, the Sieurs James Cottiby,
Pastor of the Church of Poictiers, John Chabrol, Pastor of the Church of
Touars, Sir Charies Gourjaut Knight, Lord of Panieure, Elder in the Church of
Mougon, and Peter Pesseurs, Attorney Fiscal of the Duchy of Touars, and Elder
of the Church in that City. Article 12. For the Province of Bretaign, the
Sieurs John Boucherean, Lord of La Masche, Pastor of the Church in Nantes, and
Samuel de Goullaines Esquire Lord of the Landoviniere, Elder in the Church of
Viellevigne. Article 13. For the Province of Higher Guyenne and Higher
Languedoc, the Sieurs Anthony Garrissoles, Pastor of the Church of Montauban,
and Professor of Divinity in that University, Peter Ollier, Pastor of the said
Church, Substituted in the place of Monsieur John Grasset, Pastor of the Church
of Viane, who was hindered by reason of Sickness, Anthony Ligonuiere,
Councellor and Secretary to the King, Elder in the Church of Castres, and John
Darassus, Councellor for the King in the presidial Court of Montauban, and
Elder of the said Church. Article 14. For the Province of Lower Languedoc, the
Sieurs John de Croy, Pastor of the Church of Beziers, Abraham de Lare, Pastor
of the Church of Cauvisson, the Noble Mark Dardouin, Lord of la Caumette, Elder
of the Church of Nismes, and the Noble. James de Brueis, Lord of Bourdie, Elder
in the Church of Blanzac. Article 15. For the Province of Burgundy, the Sieurs
Peter Bollenat, Pastor of the Church Assembling at Vau; Solomon Roy, Advocate
in the Parliament of Dijon, and Elder of the Church of Bussy, and Francis
Armet, Advocate in Parliament, and Elder of the Church of Loches, the Sieur
John Viridet, was hindered by a very sore Sickness from coming unto the Synod.
Article 16. For the Province of Provence, the Sieurs Francis Vallanson, Pastor
of the Church de la Cost, and the Noble John de Castellane, Lord of Caillez,
and Rigan, Elder in the Church of Manosques.
3. The Sieurs Drelincourt Pastor, and le Coq, Elder of the Church of Paris,
were chosen together with the Sieur Caillard, Elder of the Church of Alanson,
and the Lord Deputy-General to gather the Suffrages of the Deputies in this
Assembly, which were taken in written Billets by each of them, for Electing the
Moderator, Assessor, and Scribes, which was done Successively, those Officers
being Chosen one after another, and by plurality of Billets, Monsieur
Garrissoles was chosen Moderator, Monsieur Basnage Assessor, and Monsieur
Blondel, and Monsieur le Coq Scribes, and took their Seats in Order as they
were Chosen.

CHAP. II. As soon as these Officers, of the Synod were chosen, the Lord of
Cumont, Councellor for the King in His Council of State, and Parliament of
Paris, Deputed by His Majesty, presented Letters Patents, which did
Commissionate him to Represent His Majesty in this Synod. These being read,
were inserted into the Register of the Acts of this Synod; The Tenor and Form
of which, is as follows.
4. A Copy of the King's Letters Patents, containing His Majesty's Commission
to Monsieur de Cumont, Lord of Boisgrollier.
LOUIS, BY the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
To Our Beloved and Trusty Councellor in Our Council of State and Court of
Parliament at Paris, the Lord of Cumont Greeting.
We having Granted our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, to hold a
National Synod in the Town of Charenton near Paris, on the Six and Twentieth
day of December next coming, Composed of all the Deputies of the Provinces of
Our Kingdom, to Treat of Affairs concerning their Religion; and being to make
choice of a meet Person, and of approved Fidelity to Us, who may preside in the
said Assembly as Our Commissioner, and Represent Us in it, We knowing the
Services you have rendered Us in sundry Honorable Employments, with which We
had entrusted you, which you have most Worthily and Faithfully discharged, We
thought We could not choose a fitter Person than your self, being well assured,
that you will continue the Testimonies of your Affection unto Us and Our
Service as aforesaid. Wherefore by Advice of the Queen-Regent, Our most
Honored Lady and Mother, We have Commissionated and Deputed you, and We do
Commissionate and Depute you by these Presents Signed with Our Hand, to go unto
the Town of Charenton, and to sit in the said Synod there Assembled, and to
Represent Our Royal Person in it, and to Propose and Determine whatever matters
We shall give you in Command, according to those Memoirs and Instructions We
have now delivered unto you; and you are to take heed that none other Affairs
be there debated, but such as ought to be in those Assemblies, and which are
permitted by Our Edicts. And in case the Members of the said Synod should
attempt to do any thing contrary thereunto, you shall hinder them, and
interpose therein with Our Authority, and give Us speedy and timely notice of
it, that such course may be taken to prevent those inconveniences which would
arise, as We shall Judge to be most convenient. For the doing whereof We give
you Power, Commission, and special Commandment by these presents.

Given at Paris the 28th of November, in the year of Grace, One Thousand Six
Hundred and Forty Four, and of Our Reign the Second. Signed in the Original,
LOUIS: And a little lower, Phelippeaux.

The Speech of the Lord Commissioner unto the Synod, together with his
Propositions and Complaints made in Their Majesty's Name, against diverse
Churches.
Messieurs,
AS it is a very great Honor to me to be Commissionated by His Majesty to
assist in your Synod, and to acquaint you with His Will and Pleasure; so also
have I a great deal of Joy and Satisfaction to behold this Illustrious Assembly
chosen out of all the Provinces of this Kingdom, and that I can tell you by
word of Mouth, what was expressly Charged and Commanded me by the King, and the
Queen His Mother, which is to assure you of Their Good Will unto you, and
Protection of you, and of all your Churches, and of the entire Execution of the
Edicts of Pacification, so long as you continue your selves within those bounds
of Duty, Subjection, and Fidelity which you owe unto Their Majesty's, they
being the Higher Powers set over you by God, entrusted with the Supreme
Authority; and your Lot and Portion being the Honor of Obedience to Them,
whereunto you stand Obliged by your Birth, the Dictates of your own Conscience,
and the Favors you continually receive from Their Majesty's, and by all kinds
of Considerations both General and Particular.

After that doleful Providence which deprived us of our late King Louis the
Just of most glorious Memory, there was no Man but did believe that the end of
his Life, would have been the end of our Happiness; but God who loves France,
and has so often raised it from Falling, has not permitted this Loss to issue
in such Mournful Consequences. The Sun never Sets but to Rise again, and to
make us see a Shining Day of the Kingdom of Grace; we saw it, as the dawning of
our Happiness; His Majesty keeping his Court of Justice, attended by the
Princes of his Blood, and of all the Grandees of the Realm, and the Queen
declared Regent of this Kingdom by the Joint Suffrages and Solemn Decrees of
Parliament. Immediately hereupon, their Majesty's opened their Treasures of
Mercy and Clemency, and gave Satisfaction to all sorts of Interests, and
Reconciled a Multitude of Malcontents unto the Government: They enlarged
Prisoners, they Licensed the Absent to return unto their Houses, they gave
leave unto the Accused, to endeavor their own Justification; they restored the
Innocent unto their Offices, and to Places of Trust in the State; they
confirmed the Conduct and Generalship of the Armies unto his Royal Highness the
Duke of Orleans, who caused his Orders and Commands at the Siege of Gravelin to
be admired, and in sight of the Enemy's Troops, took that most Important Place,
which will serve unto Posterity as a lasting Monument of his Valor and
Generosity. We may add unto this propitious Success the Victory of Rocroy, the
taking of Thionville, Spires, Worms, Mentz, Phillipsbourg, and the Defeat of
the Bavarian Army, even in their very Trenches. These great and Signal
Advantages, followed with sundry others, have rendered the Name of our King
August and Venerable among the Nations, and his Power Terrible unto his
Enemies, who are constrained to confess it to be Unparalled, and that God
does from Heaven visibly Bless and Favor his Armies and Undertakings. We have
also another very Comfortable Sight, that whilst all the Neighbor Nations
round about us are in the Flames of War, France enjoys a profound Peace,
reposing it self upon the continual Travels of the Queen Regent, (who may be
most justly styled the Mother of our Country, and the Mother of our Armies,)
and upon the Wise and Prudent Counsels of his Royal Highness the Duke of
Orleans, and of his Highness the Prince, and of his Eminency my Lord Cardinal
Mazarin, and that perfect Union and good Understanding which is between them,
and the Fidelity and Experience of my Lords the Ministers of State; which raise
our Hopes that we shall see in these our days a general Peace, the very Crown
and Perfection of our Happiness.

Besides these Considerations which are common to you and to all Frenchmen,
there be some others which be special and peculiar to those of your Profession
and Religion.

You may very well remember, that no sooner did the King begin his Reign, than
that their Majesty's were pleased to Issue forth a Royal Declaration, wherein
they Confirmed all former Edicts, and permitted you the Exercise of your
Religion, the Liberty of your Consciences, the safety of your Persons, the
secure enjoyment of your Goods and Churches, which subsist most Happily under
the Wings of their Royal Goodness and Authority. And observe it I beseech you,
as a Singular Mark of their Majesty's Favor to you, that there be of your
Religion in the Kingdom, Persons of the Highest Quality; there be among you
most Noble and Illustrious Dukes and Peers, Mareschals of France, Generals of
Armies, Governors and Magistrates, Judges in Sovereign Courts, and their
Majesty's now this very day out of that great Confidence they have in your
Loyalty and Fidelity, have granted you this Assembly at the very Gates of the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, in the very Face and View of all France, and of this
infinite People of Paris, a People vastly different from you in Manners and
Humors, in Inclination and Religion, who will be Severe Witnesses and Judges
of all your Actions.

For these Considerations, I cannot, Sirs, but persuade my self, that you will
all Unanimously and with one Consent, aim chiefly and principally at the Glory
of God, the Service of the King, the Weal and Welfare of your Churches, and the
Comfort of your own Consciences; and that all your Debates and Actions shall be
managed with that Moderation, Prudence and Humility, as becomes such Faithful
Subjects as you are: Which will be a most powerful and effectual means to
derive down upon you, and the Provinces which have Deputed you, the Gracious
Favors of their Majesty's, especially when as the thinking World shall observe
that you breathe nothing more than that profound Respect and Duty which you owe
them.

And that all things may be done in that Order prescribed me by their
Majesty's, I am in their Name commanded to acquaint you, that all Ministers,
who are not their Natural Born Subjects, but Strangers, are to be excluded your
Synod; and that none may assist to Vote in it, who has not Letters of
Deputation from his Provincial Synod; and that during the time it is holden,
you may not have any Communication with Foreigners, or other Suspected Persons,
but you are to abide here, intending those Affairs for which you were sent. And
for as much as your Assemblies are not by any Legal Constitution a Body
Politic, their Majesty's have forbidden you to intermeddle in your Synodical
Sessions with State Affairs, or Matters of Justice; nor to speak any thing
about the Restoration of Foreign Ministers, who have been ejected out of their
Churches by Decrees of Parliaments, or by Letters Signed by his Majesty, in
consequence of them, nor to bring in any Complaints about pretended Infractions
of the Edicts, seeing you have the Mixed Courts, and other Courts of Justice
established by the Edicts to do you Right and Justice, and to repair those
Violations of the Edicts, if any there be; for which you may get a Remedy by
applying your selves unto his Majesty's Council, unto which you may present
your Petitions in the usual Form; because your Synod has no Power to judge of
such Matters, but only to treat of Points of Doctrine, and Articles of
Church Discipline.

You are forbidden also to nominate any Pastors, or other Extraordinary
Deputies, to receive Letters, or return Answers to those, which shall be
directed unto their Provinces, or to consult of such Affairs in the Intervals
betwixt one Synod and another; because such Counselors and their Consultations
are expressly forbidden by that Edict of the Month of December, One Thousand,
Six Hundred, Twenty and Two; and by the Declarations that followed after it.

Moreover their Majesty's do forbid you to Print any Books in any Place
whatsoever concerning your Religion, which are not attested by the Manual
Certificates of Two Ministers at least, and those in actual Office in some of
the Churches of this Kingdom, under pain of Confiscation of the whole
Impression. Nor may you denounce any Excommunication against Ministers and
others, who shall change their Religion for that of the Roman Catholics, nor
to treat them reproachfully either by Word of Mouth, or Writing, or any other
manner of way whatsoever. Nor shall you admit for the future any Foreigner into
the Ministry among you. And therefore you be commanded to insert into the
Attestations of Proposans, who are to be Ordained, and of Ministers, who are to
be received into any Church, the Names of the Place of their Birth.

And farther, Provincial Synods are inhibited to Call or Proclaim any General
Fasts.

And that the Public Peace and Tranquillity may be Secured, his Majesty
injoyneth Ministers, according to the Command of God, to Preach unto his
Subjects that Obedience which they owe unto him, and that it is not lawful for
them to take up Arms against their Sovereign upon any Cause or Account
whatsoever. Moreover they be forbidden to make use of in their Sermons, or
Writings the Words, Scourgings, Martyrdoms, and Persecution of their Religion,
or as if their Churches were the only True Church of God, and are thus Misused.
Moreover whenever they speak of the Pope, they shall not call him Antichrist,
nor treat him disrespectfully; nor shall they Tax the Roma Catholic,
Apostolic Church with Idolatry, nor the Sacraments and Ceremonies thereof as
Human Inventions and Idolatries, upon pain of Interdiction to themselves and
others for so doing.

Furthermore, they be forbidden to make any Private Collections from House to
House; nor to take a Farthing out of the Poor's Box, or from Legacies
bequeathed to them, or the Fifth Penny of those Moneys; nor to Cite any One
before the Justice for Non-payment of their Sallaries and Wages, nor for their
Charge in Riding unto Colloquies and Synods; nor for Repairing and upholding of
their Temples. In these Matters, it is his Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that
Forty Fourth Article in the Edict of Nantes be punctually Observed and
Performed.

And whereas their Majesty's be informed that you, send your Children to Study,
and to be Educated in Learning at Geneva, in Switzerland, Holland and England,
which are Nations and Republics averse to Monarchy, and who may imbue them
with Corrupt Principles about Secular and Political Affairs; the Consequence
whereof is very great, and the Effects flowing from them very dangerous; That
these may be in time prevented, their Majesty's desire of you, that this
Article may be Inserted into your Discipline concerning Proposans; and that it
be most strictly for the future observed in all your Provinces, That no
Proposans nor Divines shall be Ordained Ministers, nor admitted Pastors into
any of the Churches, if they have Studied in any of those Countries, or in any
of their Universities. And they have commanded me to assure you, that your
Conformity to their Intentions in such an Important Affair, will be a thing
most acceptable unto them, and very advantageous to all the Professors of your
Religion.

I am also charged to let you understand, that their Majesty's are much
displeased, that contrary to that Amnesty, so much recommended by the Edicts,
in the Calendars of Psalms, imprinted at Geneva, 1635, these very Words are
Inserted, That on the Fifteenth Day of March, 1545, was Assembled that
detestable Council of Trent. And there be also in them other such like
Offensive Matters; and that in the Twenty Fourth Article of your Confession of
Faith, the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion, is styled An Abuse and
Deceit of Satan; and that Purgatory is a mere Cheat, and the Shop out of which
are sprung Monastic Vows, Pilgrimages, and other such Corruptions. And in the
Twenty Eighth Article, you use these Words; We Condemn those Assemblies in the
Papacy, where all these Superstitions and Idolatries are in Vogue. Their
Majesty's cannot suffer that such Words should be Sworn in a National Synod,
they accounting them scandalous and injurious to their Religion, and to that
Church, whereof his Majesty has the Honor to be the Eldest Son; and injurious
to the Pope, whom his Majesty believes to be the Head of the Church, calling
him, Holy Father, and with whom he is in a strict Alliance and Amity. Their
Majesty's Desire, that in a matter so near their Heart as this is, you would
yield them that Respect and Observance which shall be Enjoined you, and is now
more particularly from their Majesty's propounded to you.

Let me add One thing more which their Majesty's commanded me to acquaint you
with, that they very just cause to Complain of you, that since his Majesty
began his Reign, those of your Religion have took upon them to set up
Preaching, and the Exercise of your Worship in Languedoc and elsewhere, in an
Open, Violent Manner, contrary to the Public Peace, and the general Laws of
the Kingdom, which do equally forbid the Subjects both of the one and the other
Religion, to be their own Judges, and to carve out Right unto themselves,
although they had been Wronged, and Justice was on their Side. And for that
they durst make Acts, and Pass them Resolutely, after they had once Debated
them in their Colloquies and Provinces, and Confirmed them at a Meeting in the
Consistory of Anduza; and had returned Thanks to them who Executed that Riot,
and began to Revolt, that so it might be done with more and greater Authority.
And those of Vsez also have placed Bells in their Temple, without any leave
first had or Obtained, and contrary to the Articles upon which they Capitulated
and Surrendered.

Their Majesty's also are yet farther displeased, that those who Profess your
Religion in Languedoc, have enterprized the Reviving of Deputations unto the
Court of Monpellier, Nismes, and Vsez, which had been Suppressed ever sine the
Year 1622, even when the Capitulation of the City of Monpellier was made; and
that the Sieur, Peyrol, Vestrie, and Fournier did get themselves to be Deputed,
when there was no Synod, and are become Partisans contrary to his Majesty's
Prohibitions. And that Preaching, and the Exercises of your Religion, are set
up in diverse Parts, by a mere Private Authority, and beyond those Bounds
appointed by his Majesty's Commissioners to execute the Edict of Nantes, yea,
and contrary to the Words of that self same Edict, they continue Preaching in
those Places, where the Churchmen are Lords of the Soil; and of this his
Majesty has been fully informed.

And besides all this, certain Ministers have taken unto themselves that
Unbounded Liberty, as to vent in their Pulpits Seditious Discourses; and have
cut off from Communion with them, those Parents who send their Children to the
Colleges of Regents, who are of the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion.
And they have given me in Charge to tell you, that these be Notorious
Infractions of the Edicts, contrary to your Duty, to the Prejudice of the King,
and of the Public Tranquillity, the which his Majesty has been so careful to
conserve on his Part, that he neither can, nor ought, as the Common Father of
his People, to suffer such Actings, when as he can hinder them. But he hopes,
that for the future, you will use more Circumspection, and carry your selves
better, and avoid all just occasions of displeasing his Majesty, though they
may occur unto you.

CHAP. III. The Moderators Answer.
6. THE Lord Commissioner having finished his Speech, the Deputies returned
their Answer by the Mouth of the Moderator, Monsieur Garrissoles; who
thankfully acknowledged the grew Goodness and Mercy of Almighty God, in
answering the Prayers of his poor Churches with his Heavenly Blessing: So that
the General Loss which the whole Nation sustained in the Death of the Late King
of most Glorious and Immortal Memory, is now most abundantly made up and
recompensed in the Succession of his present Majesty. For though the Sun of
this Kingdom did set under a most sad and black Eclipse, and was likely to have
been Buried in the everlasting Darknesses of an Unconsolable grief of an
irremediable Confusion; yet we have all seen to our Incredible Joy and
Admiration, the Peace and Happiness France to shine out again in a New Bright
Star from the East, who has revived the Hopes of all his Faithful Subjects,
and filled Christendom with Wonder and Astonishment, when they consider that
the good Hand of God has not only exalted his Majesty from the Cradle, to his
Father's Throne, (whose Birth was so long Desired, They need not be Proud of it.
and at last obtained by the Joint Prayers of his People, and most especially
of the Churches,) but also has put the Reins of the French Empire into the
Hands of the Queen Regent, a Princess whose Glorious Birth and Extraction seems
to serve for no other end, than to place her Virtues on the highest Theater of
Glory.

Secondly, the beginnings of his Majesty's Reign, are under most auspicious
Stars; for Success, Victory, and an uninterrupted Series of Prosperities upon
his People, have mutually contended how they might most advance the Reputation
of his Crown; and have combined together in Strengthening those rightful Arms
employed by his Majesty for Defense of the State, and Protection of his Allies.
The Designs of his Royal Highness, and of other Chieftains have every where
succeeded with Happiness and Glory.

His Majesty was no sooner Seated on the Throne, but he gave out Marks of his
Royal Authority; his first Declarations were to ratify and Confirm the Edicts
of Pacification, and to assure all the Churches in his Kingdom of their being
Protected by their Sacred Majesty's; and that as those Edicts had been made in
favor to us, so also should they be conserved for us.

That glorious approvement of the Services of Marshall Turenne, and Marshall
Gassion.
Two Great Men, bred up in our Bosom and Communion, and raised so far above the
reach of Envy, that the Staff of Marshall of France, together with the Conduct
of Royal Armies, were put into their Hands, without the least coffeehouse of
any Person in the State. And their Majesty's Condescension in accepting kindly
of our most Humble Petitions, presented them by the Hands of our General
Deputy, and granting us the Privilege of holding this Synod, and committing
the Inspection of it unto a Person most Illustrious for his Virtues, and well
deserving that high Place of Dignity and Honor he enjoys in the First and
Chiefest Parliament of the Kingdom. All these, and many other Considerations
more, do enforce our Souls with a Sweet and Pleasing Violence to break forth
into enlarged Praises and Enflamed Thankfulness unto their Majesty's (for such
signal Favors and Benefits vouchsafed to us, which we account the First Fruits
and Pledges of a greater Harvest;) yea, and in most ardent Supplications unto
our God for the Preservation of their Sacred Persons, his Benediction upon
their Government, the Glory of their Crowns, under whose Comfortable Shadow the
Churches enjoying a Sweet Peace, will never have any other Desire nor Thought,
than to practice Faithfully and Conscientiously that most express Command of
our Lord and Savior, by his Apostle St. Peter, to Fear God, and Honor the
King, and that with a most entire and sincere Obedience. And as we have no
design to do it, so neither shall we ever admit any Person to sit as a Member
of our National Synods, (it being contrary to our Ancient Custom,) who has not
a Deputation from the Provinces; nor shall we hold any Foreign
Correspondencies; nor shall we Receive or Read any Letters coming from
Foreigners, nor return any answer to them, unless that my Lord Commissioner,
who Represents his Majesty's Person, shall have first Perused them, and
approved of our so doing. Nor will we debate about State Matters, nor make any
Orders in relation to them. Nor shall we present unto the Pastoral Office in
our Churches, any Foreign Ministers, who be not Natives of this Kingdom, nor
set up Provincial Councils in Opposition to his Majesty's Will; nor as his
Majesty has demanded to us, will we suffer those Canons of our National Synods
concerning the Approbation of Books that shall be Printed on Matters of
Religion to be Violated. Nor shall we Excommunicate any of those Persons who
quit the Communion of our Churches, for we do not arrogate unto our Selves any
Jurisdiction over them from that Moment in which they left us: Nor shall we
tolerate any Sermons fraught with Injuries and Reproaches, against the Members
of the Church of Rome, whether in general or particular; or that may Excite the
People to Insurrections, Tumults, or Rebellions; or taking up of Arms against
the Sovereign Authority of their Majesty's. Nor shall any single Province have
an Absolute Power of indicting General and Public Fasts; nor suffer that
Moneys be Collected from Door to Door; nor that the Poor's Moneys be diverted
from their proper use; nor that the Forty Fourth Article of particular Matters
in the Edict of Nantes be broken: It being our Sincere and most Fixed
Resolution, to observe in the precisest and strictest manner their Majesty's
Edicts, and under the benefit of them to lead a Quiet and a Peaceable Life in
all Godliness and Honesty.

But my Lord, we do most humbly beseech their Majesty's in the First Place,
that by the Interposal of their Sovereign Authority, they would stop the
violent Attempts and Practices of such Persons, who being instigated by a false
Zeal, or by reason of their Employments, do trouble the Public Peace and
Tranquillity, by an infraction of the Edicts, and by actual Enterprises against
the Professors of our Religion both in general and particular; that so none of
them contrary to the principal end, the formal and express intention of the
said Edicts, may be exposed to Sufferings, upon the Account of their Religion,
or be enforced by reason of them, to draw up a Bill of Complaints and
Grievances sustained by them for a good Conscience toward God, the very title
of which is so displeasing unto their Majesty's.

Secondly, We most humbly beseech their Majesty's, to take it into their Royal
Consideration, that our Confession of Faith was framed about an Hundred Years
ago, before any Edict was granted in favor of our Religion, and was presented
by them unto Francis the Second, who then Reigned, to give his Majesty a reason
of their Hope, and account of those Corruptions, which they firmly believed to
be in that Faith professed and Retained by the Church of Rome, and that
therefore it needed Reformation: Insomuch as none of out French Protestants did
at first, nor can they now, without being guilty of gross Prevarication, change
that form of Expression, which has from its very beginning been inserted into
our Confession, whereby to declare sincerely and in truth their common Belief
authorized in the Year 1561, by the Edict of January; and since by that of
Nantes, granted us by Henry the Great, and Confirmed by the Late King, and his
Majesty now reigning.

Thirdly, The whole Roman Catholic Creed was never, nor can ever be truly
qualified an Abuse and Deceit of Satan, seeing that both the Church of Rome and
the Protestants have no difference about the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of the
Incarnation of our Lord Jesus, which are the principal points of Christianity;
yet together with these Fundamental Verities, and owned by all Christians in
France, Germany, and elsewhere, there have been diverse other Articles of Faith
brought into the Romish Creed, to which we cannot yield any Assent or Consent;
such are those of the Intercession of Saints, of Purgatory, of the Pope, and
sundry others, which though they have been in Vogue in that Church for many
Ages, have notwithstanding been constantly opposed and contradicted by all
Protestants, both in France and other Countries. So that should we abandon the
Profession of our Faith, permitted us by the Edict, and that Confession we have
made and declared of it with all Imaginable Sincerity and Truth in the Presence
of God, who searches our Hearts, and cannot endure Hypocrisy nor an Evil
Conscience, we should render our Selves Guilty of a most inexcusable Imposture;
we should dissemble and Counterfeit in Religion, and utterly ruin all our Hopes
of Heaven and Everlasting Life, by means of a Sacrilegious Profession not in
the least believed by us. Wherefore it is the hope of our pour Churches, that
his Majesty imitating the Examples of his Predecessors, who granted to their
Faithful Subjects the Liberty of their Consciences, will the rather favor us
with his Royal Support and Protection for that open Profession we do make of
our Faith, than if we had dissembled it, or kept it secretly and close in our
own Bosoms, or uttered it in Ambiguous and Equivocating Expressions, which
would have turned our Religion into a Cheat, and through a Fallacious
Compliance, full of Fraud and Imposture, would have perfidiously Betrayed the
Holy Faith of our Fellow protestants, and be the Bane of our own Consciences.

Fourthly, As to the Printer of Geneva, he does not depend on the National
Synods of this Kingdom, nor has he any Orders from us, nor received any
Command from his Superiors, to use those Terms which he did, and we wish he had
forborne them; though yet he Speaks and Prints nothing but what is the common
Sense and Opinion of all Protestants in Europe, who have all unanimously from
the very first, with One Consent, impugned that Council of Trent, as to the
form of its Convocation, the Proceedings, Decrees, and Anathema's thereof;
which also sundry Roman Catholic Princes have done, who by their Ambassadors
made and entered their Solemn Protests against it, and its Decrees. So did the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, from whom our King is Descended by his Mother's
Side, by the Lord of Mendoza: So did Henry the Second, by the then Lord Abbot
of Bellozonne, who was afterward Bishop of Auxerre: And so did Charles the
Ninth, by Monsieur Ferrier, who describing this Famous Assembly, resembled it
to a Scorpion, pricking the French Church; and used an Expression every way at
Emphatical, as that of the Geneva Printer, whose Liberty is yet so displeasing
unto their Majesty.

Fifthly, Nor have our Churches been ever so unmindful of their Duty and
Subjection, as audaciously to assume unto themselves a power of being Judges in
their own Cause, and doing themselves right. But the naked truth of the matter
is this, that being favored with his Majesty's Declaration, which ratified the
Edict of Nantes, and those secret Articles and Concessions included in it,
which had been granted by our former Kings, several particular Churches being
restored unto their Ancient Right, fully and completely, they believed, that it
was no Crime on their part to make use of them according to the Intention of
his Majesty.

Sixthly, And it was upon this Innocent Supposition, and which had not in it
any the least tendency unto Disobedience against the Public Government, that
the Exercise of our Religion, accustomarily performed at Ribaute for Seventy
Years together, without any Interruption, being violently hindered by the Lady
of that Place, and Monsieur Arnaud, Pastor of Anduze, who was invited by the
People, offering himself to Minister to them for their Edification, according
to the ancient Practice, was driven away by mere Force by a Company of
Soldiers, commanded thither by the said Lady; and he thereupon was imprisoned
by Order from the Lord Lieutenant of Languedoc; and notwithstanding his Appeal
unto the Court of the Edict, yet he was actually Condemned; for which
Grievance, he is now prostrate at his Majesty's Feet, humbly imploring his
Majesty's Clemency and Justice, according to the Edict.

Seventhly, The Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc, for the acquitting and
discharge of their Churches, which has sent them, do maintain, that those
Three Cities of Nismes, Vsez, and Montpellier, having deputed the Sieurs
Peyrol, Vestrie, and Fournier, to tender in their Names with all possible
speed, their First and Bounden Duties unto his Majesty, and their most Humble
and Unfeigned Thanks for the grant of his Declaration. They did also Petition
for his Majesty's Protection and Justice, and with the lowliest Submission and
Respect they demanded also a Reparation of the Infractions of the Edict,
according to the constant practice of our Churches; so that they cannot be
persuaded that those said Cities are fallen from the Duty which becomes good
Subjects, and whereunto they are obliged by their Consciences: Nor are they at
all to be blamed for Addressing themselves unto his Majesty against the
Prohibition of the Lord Intendant, though he used his Majesty's Name directly
contrary to his Majesty's Intention, notified to us, and to the World by his
public Declaration.

Eighthly, Nor is the City of Vsez guilty of violating the Edict, no not in
that particular Capitulation with his Majesty; nor does it need a new Grant for
an ancient Usage, which was never taken from them by any Previous Inhibition.
That Bell of which there is so much Noise, and so loud Complaints made unto his
Majesty, was ever placed in the Steeple of the Temple from its first
Foundation, and continued there till a little before the Capitulation; when the
Tower being likely to fall, it was removed to one of the Corners of the Temple;
and no sooner was the Steeple Repaired, but that the Bell was returned into its
ancient Place.

And in all that Province, the Word of God is Preached in none other Places but
what are allowed by the Edict, which Confirmed our Churches in their
Possessions enjoyed by them, for above Fourscore Years; and it were better for
them to suffer Death, than to loose this their Right.

Tenthly, Nor have there been in the Churches of that Province, any Parents for
sending their Children to the Colleges of Jesuits suspended from the
Sacraments, but according to the Discipline, which is allowed us by the Edicts.
Nor may the Professors of our Religion for observing this Canon, which
contributes so much to the Peace of their own Consciences, and the Morals of
their Children, with any the least show of Reason, be Impeached or Condemned,
because they be bound to Train and Educate them by all fitting Means and
Instructions in the Fear of God, and Obedience to the King, and an Abhorrency
and detestation of those Cursed Principles, which having been once instilled
into the tender Minds of young Scholars, by the Regents of the Jesuits
Colleges, have plunged this Kingdom once and again into a Sea of Tears and
Sorrows. Nor are we guilty of Violating the Edict as before, because, not only
the Sorbonne, but the whole University of Paris, which is the most ancient in
the Kingdom, and of Europe it self, has now this very day commenced, a Suit at
Law against the Jesuits, for Debauching our Youth, and poisoning them in their
Morals: A thing never to be endured by Church or State, because contrary both
to sound Policy, and true Theology.

And whereas we are prohibited to send our Scholars designed for the Ministry,
to study Divinity either in Geneva, Switzerland, the Confederate Netherlands,
or England, we most humbly beseech his Majesty, that our Churches may enjoy
their Liberty granted us by the former Kings his Royal Predecessors, as unto
all other his Subjects, without any distinction of Religion: Because Geneva
has been, for these Fifty Years and more under the immediate Protection of
this Crown, and that it has always embraced the Interests of France; and all
those other Estates are allied unto this Kingdom, and conserve themselves much
more inviolably in their Alliance with his Majesty, than any other Princes of
Christendom whatsoever: Besides, these very Nations from whose Universities we
are debarred Studying in, do send their own Youth into France, to Polish and
Refine their Manners, to be instructed in good Learning, and thereby do give a
most Valid Testimony, that they are so far from being Enemies to France, that
they be very much in Love with the Order and Government thereof. Besides, many
who are now Pastors in the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, and have studied
in some, or all of those Foreign Universities, did never withdraw themselves
nor others from that Obedience owed by them unto his Majesty; nor have hinted
any the least show or dislike, or aversion for Monarchy, under which the French
Nation have subsisted, and by which they have been ruled Successively from
Father to Son, for above 1200 Years. And forasmuch as his Majesty does not
think good to forbid the Youth of this Kingdom, who are Students in Philosophy,
Law or Medicine, to travel into Foreign Parts, no nor into Commonwealths, as
Venice, etc. where there is, and at Padua also, a very great Confluence of our
Nation, diligently following their Studies in all those Faculties; we do once
more Repeat our most Humble Request, that our Churches may enjoy their Former
and Ancient Liberty in these Matters.

CHAP. IV. A Deputation from the Synod unto their Majesty's, and the Lords of
the Privy Council.
7. THe Assembly Nominated the Sieurs Vincent and Chabrol Pastors, and the
Sieurs de Panieure and de Clesles Elders, to wait immediately upon their
Majesty's, and to lay at their Majesty's Feet our most humble Submissions and
Thanks, and to deliver our Letters to the King, Queen Regent, the Duke of
Orleans, to the Prince of Conde, to the Lord Cardinal Mazarin, to the Lord
Chancellor, to the Lord Treasurer, to Monsieur D'Emery Comptroller General, and
to Monsieur de Vrilliere, Secretary of State, to whose Division the Professors
of the Reformed Religion appertained.

A Copy of a Letter Written by the Synod unto the King.
Sire,
THis our Assembly was no sooner formed, but we applied our Selves unto the
Divine Majesty for his Blessing upon it; and the First Thought that came into
our Souls was to acquit our Selves conscientiously of our Duty to your Majesty,
who are the most Lively Portraiture of our God; and to this purpose, we
immediately dispatched the Sieurs Vincent and Chabrol Pastors, de Panieure, and
de Clesles Elders, to lay at your Majesty's Feet our Homage and Submissions; as
likewise to render to you our most Humble Thanks, for that singular favor we
have received from your Majesty, in granting us this Privilege of Meeting
together in this Synod, in which we labor Zealously to Serve our God, to
Confirm and Strengthen our Selves in his Service; and in all Duty and Obedience
to your Majesty. And being so near your most Excellent Majesty, and those
Glorious Intelligences which do inviron you, and well knowing that your
Majesty's Eyes are upon us, and that we be equally under your Majesty's
Inspection and Power, we are encouraged to discharge our Selves worthily of our
Duty, and to persist in that Fidelity which is Natural and Hereditary to us,
and shall be Entailed by us upon our Posterity. But Sire, the principal end of
our Deputing these Gentlemen unto your Majesty, is to testify the Triumphant
Joy of all our Churches, and that unspeakable Satisfaction we feel in our
Souls, to see your Majesty advanced unto the Throne; a King whom with
Multitudes of Prayers, reiterated with the greatest Ardor and Importunity we
had demanded of our God for many and many a Year together. We believe Sire,
that God has given you out of the Treasures of his Mercy, out of the Riches of
his Grace unto your France, to bring back unto us the Golden Age, and to be the
Glorious Instrument of his Choicest and most Exquisite Favors; because that he
Crowns your first Entrance upon the Government with wonderful Success, and
unexpected Victories, which render your Majesty formidable to your Enemies, and
make your People to consider you as a precious Bud of Infinite Prosperities,
which the Providence of God has kept in store for poor France under your
Government. We believe, Sire, that it will be very pleasing to you, that we
should share and participate with your other Subjects in those Blessings which
God dispenses through your Hands, since that we labor, and shall by the most
Signal Characters of Fidelity, always labor to render cur Selves worthy of
them; and for that our Lives, Fortunes and Honors shall be all Sacrificed with
the greatest Cheerfulness in your Majesty's Service, as often as we shall have
the Honor of your Commands and Summons. It Is in this posture Sire, that we
desire to Live and Die, being not only by our Birth and Obligations, but by our
most Ardent Affections,

From Charenton, December 28th, 1644. Sire, Your Majesty's most Humble, most
Obedient, and most Faithful Subjects and Servants, the Pastors and Elders,
Assembled by Permission of your Majesty in the National Synod at Charenton, and
in the Name of them all. Garrissoles, Moderator, Banage, Assessor, Blondel,
Scribe, and Le Coq. Scribe.



A Copy of the Letter Written by the Synod, unto the Queen Regent.
Madam,
WE cannot but esteem this Day, in which we lie prostrate at your Feet, in the
Persons of our Deputies, as one of the most Happy Days of our Life. No sooner
had God entrusted your Majesty with the Government of this Kingdom, but you may
well remember how very diligent our Churches were to obtain this Honor,
whereof we stand now Possessed, to signify in your Majesty's Presence, that
exceeding Joy with which we were transported, to see how the Providence of God
was particularly concerned for the Weal of France; and that when we had so sad
an Occasion of Weeping and Mourning at the Death of our late King of Glorious
Memory, yet even then our Sorrows were Converted into Joys, for your Majesty's
most Happy Exaltation unto the Regency, which has made us almost forgetful of
our Loss, the Sun now shining forth with greater Brightness than ever. Only
some cross Accidents interposed, and deprived us of this Honor at that time;
and it was, Madam, the Will of God, that before we appeared in your Majesty's
Presence, we should join our then Hopes and Prejudices to those Experiences we
all now have of the Blessings of God upon your most prudent and prosperous
Government; that so the Testimonies of our Joy might be the more Stately, and
Expressed in Terms far more Magnificent: And that our Thankfulness might be
Combined with our most Loyal, most Humble, and Dutiful Submissions: Therefore
Madam, have we deputed unto your Majesty the Sieurs Vincent and Chabrol
Pastors, and de Panieure, and de Clesles Elders, to assure your Majesty on
behalf of all the Churches, of our deep Sense and Gratitude for all your
Majesty's Favors to us. You have, Madam, continued to us, his Majesty's
Favors, and those of his Royal Predecessors; you have confirmed the Edicts
granted us by your own Royal Declaration; and which is more, Madam, it is from
your great Bounty, that we now have the Liberty and Privilege of this
Assembly, which we beseech your Majesty to repute as the most Uniform Meeting,
and most Harmonious Concourse of all the Hearts of your Subjects professing The
Reformed Religion for the Service of your Majesty's. We Madam, shall Love and
Obey your Majesty Eternally, nor shall any one be your Rival or Competitor with
you for our Affections; and we shall transmit this our Loyalty unto our
Posterity after us, as a most Essential part of our Religion. And we beseech
the Great God, by whom Kings Reign, and who has hitherto caused the Lilies of
your Crown to flourish so Gloriously, that he would, Madam, be pleased to
preserve you for the King our common Master, and the King for your Majesty, and
both of you a long time for France and our Churches, that so in the meeting and
perpetual Conjunction of both those Luminaries, this Kingdom may enjoy the most
Auspicious and most Beneficial Influences. And that, Madam, your Regency may
raise an Emulation in the most Accomplished and Consummate Monarchie's, and
that hereafter it may he a Domestic Pattern unto our King, whereunto he may
conform his Glorious Actions. These Madam, are the Vows and most ardent Prayers
of your Majest's,

From Charenton, December 28th, 1644. Most Humble, most Obedient, and most
Faithful Subjects and Servants, the Pastors and Elders Assembled by your
Majesty's Permission in the National Synod at Charenton, and for them all.
Garrissoles, Moderator, Banage, Assessor, Blondel and Le Coq. Scribes.



CHAP. V. The Return of the Deputies with the Kings Answer.
8. ON Thursday the Fifth of January, the Sieurs Vincent, Chabrol, de Panieure,
and de Clesses, returned unto the Synod with Letters from his Majesty, and
acquainted us with that favorable Audience and Reception they had from the
King, the Queen Regent, his Royal Highness the Duke of Orleans, the Lord
Cardinal, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Comptroller, and from
the Secretary de la Vrilliere. Which obliged all the Churches to bless God for
the good Success of their Deputation, and seems to promise us a speedy
Redress of our Grievances; yet nevertheless, according to our Bounden Duty, all
the Churches are enjoined to offer up their most Ardent Prayers unto God for
their Majesty's Preservation in Health and Life; for his Royal Highness the
Duke of Orleans; and for our Lords the Ministers of State. And whereas the said
Deputies had not the Honor of Waiting upon the Prince, he being then out of
Town, the Synod ordered them immediately to return to Paris, as soon as they had
News of his Arrival, and to deliver him his Letters; and to assure his Highness
that our Churches were his most Humble Servants.

A Copy of the King's Letter unto the Synod.
By the King.
Dear and Well-beloved,
9. WE have Received your Letters of the Eight and Twentieth Day of the last
Month, and understand by them to our great Contentment, and by your Deputies,
the Good and Sincere Intentions of your Assembly, (held by our Permission at
Charenton,) to continue in that inviolable Fidelity and Obedience to us, which
is your indispensable Duty; the which has given all desirable Satisfaction,
both to us, and to our most Honored Lady and Mother, the Queen Regent:
Wherefore we were willing you should be informed by this our Letter; and we
exhort you to persist in this your Resolution; and that you would upon all
Occasions, render us the undeniable Tokens of it by your good Conduct, and by
your strict Observance of those Orders we have prescribed you, about the
holding if your National Synod, and on all other occurrences whatsoever, which
may offer themselves for upholding the publicly Tranquillity of this Kingdom.
And thus performing your Duty to us, as we trust you will, you may be assured,
that you shall receive from our Bounty, and from that of our most Honored Lady
and Mother the Queen Regent, all sort of Protection, and favorable
Entertainment, and shall be supported and preserved under the benefit of our
Edicts; your Enjoyment of which, in all Liberty and Safety, under our Reign, as
during that of our most Honored Lord and Father the late King, will be a
singular Pleasure and Delight unto us: Of which your Deputies who are now
returning to you from us, will give you a more full and particular Knowledge.

Given at Paris, this Fourth Day of January, 1645. Signed in the Original,
Louis. And a little lower, Phelippeaux.
The Superscription was, To our Dear and Well-beloved, the Pastor's and Elders,
Deputies of the pretended Reformed Religion, Assembled by our Permission in a
National Synod at Charenton.

10. On Tuesday the Tenth Day of January, the Assembly being informed that his
Highness the Prince was arrived, immediately dispatched the Sieurs Vincent,
Chabrol, Panieure, and de Clesle unto Paris, and to pay their Reverence unto
his Highness; who returning the next day, made Report how Kindly they were
received by his Highness; who graciously Offered his best Services for the
Maintenance of the Edict made in favor of the Churches; which was a most
particular Joy unto the whole Assembly, and obliging us to Hope well from the
Favor of that great Lord.

11. The Letters written by the Pastors and Professors of Geneva, from their
Church and University, to Congratulate the good effects of the last National
Synod, and the Convocation of this now Sitting; as also another particular, one
from Monsieur Diodati, about the Edition of his French Translation of the Holy
Bible; and one from Dr. Andrew Rivet, Pastor and Professor of Divinity at
Leyden, then residing at the Hague, in the Court of his Highness the Prince of
Orange, and from the Three Professors of Divinity, in the aforesaid University
of Leyden, concerning the Conformity of Doctrine, Taught and Professed in the
Churches of the Low Countries, to and with that Preached and Confessed in the
Churches of this Kingdom, were all delivered unto the Lord Commissioner Sealed,
who having first Opened and Perused them, permitted the Reading of them; but
then immediately retained the Originals to be sent unto the King, and in his
Name declared, that it was his Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that no Answer
should be returned unto them by the Synod; which was Obeyed accordingly.

12. The Lord Marquess of Clermont having exercised the Office of General
Deputy for the Churches ever since the Year 1627, did now Petition his Majesty
to be Discharged by reason of his Indisposition, and his Majesty having granted
him his Request, and appointed the Lord Baron of Argiliers to Succeed him, and
Ordered the Lord Commissioner to acquaint the Synod with it, and with his
gracious Intentions for the Weal of the Churches. The Synod was filled with
great Joy, for that his Majesty had Committed this Important Trust of our
General Deputy, unto so well an accomplished Person, whose Noble Birth, Virtue
and Piety, did every way qualify him for it. But it having been ever since the
Year 1631. customary for the Churches to present Six Persons unto the Ring,
Three out of the Nobility, and Three others of the Commonalty, out of which
number his Majesty might prick and choose any Two, who were best pleasing to
him; and that now this Office of Soliciting at Court the Affairs of our poor
Churches is devolved upon one Person only, who may be disabled from attending
it by Sicknest, or some other Accidents, which may intervene and hinder it; the
Assembly yielding a profound Deference, a most entire Submission and Obedience
unto his Majesty's declared Will and Pleasure, did yet notwithstanding most
humbly Petition his Majesty to grant us the Restitution of our ancient
Practice, approved by the Kings his Predecessors, that another Person from
among the Commons might be constituted in case of the Lord Baron of Argilier's
Sickness, or of any other Impediment that might happen on his Part, to take the
care of, and solicit the Affairs of our Churches.

13. As the Synod was drawing up a Bill of the Churches Grievances, and
particularly of the Infractions of the Edict in all the Provinces, both before
and since its Convocation, the Lord Commissioner informed them, That though it
was his Majesty's Pleasure this Assembly should not in the least deliberate of
any State-matters publicly, yet he would not hinder them from drawing up such
a Bill, by a select Committee chosen thereunto, who might do it in private, out
of the Memoirs with which the respective Deputies were charged by their
Provincial Synods at their Departure, or that since their Arrival at this Town,
they might have received either from the Churches, or from particular Persons,
who were concerned, and had notified those Wrongs that were done them by
Letters. Whereupon the Synod did plenarily submit unto this Order prescribed
them by the Lord Commissioner.

14. The Lord Commissioner acquainting the Synod, how that the Lord de la
Vrilliere, Principal Secretary of State, had assured him, that the Decree for
remanding all Causes concerning the Professors of our Religion unto the Courts
of the Edict was dispatched, and that a Fund of 16000 Livres for defraying the
Expenses of this Assembly was also assigned, he had the most humble and hearty
Thanks of the Assembly rendered to him; and he was farther entreated to continue
more and more to do all good Offices unto the Churches, and to get expedited a
Decree of Supersedeas, which may stop the Violence of our Ill-Wishers, and may
secure us some Repose, till such time as his Lordship the General Deputy do
take into his Hands the management of our Affairs, which was readily granted by
the Lord Commissioner.

15. The Sieurs de L' Angle and Cottiby Pastors were joined in Commission with
the Sieurs de Morande and Pellue, to present unto their Majesty's the Bills of
our Churches Grievances; and they had Letters also to the King, and the Queen
Regent, to my Lord the Duke of Orleans, to my Lord Chancellor, to my Lord High
Treasurer, and to my Lord Emery Comptroller General, and to the Lord de la
Vrilliere Secretary of State.

And this Committee are ordered to give the most hearty Thanks of all the
Churches unto the Lord Marquess of Clemont, and to assure him of our perpetual
Gratitude, arid that we shall always remember the great Care and Pains he took
for us during his Office of General Deputy, and that we will never be wanting
in our Prayers unto God for him, and his best Blessings upon him. And the said
Committee were ordered to receive the Sum of 1600 Livres assigned by his
Majesty for the defraying our Synodical Charges.

After that this Committee shall have paid their Duties in the Name of this
whole Assembly to both their Majesty's, and their most Honorable Privy
Council, the Sieurs of Morande and Pellue shall remain at Paris, waiting the
coming of the Lord General Deputy, and Salute his Lordship from the Assembly,
and consign unto him the Conduct of our Affairs; and in the mean while they
shall employ themselves wholly in soliciting the speedy Dispatch of those
which are most urgent, and admit of no Delay. And in case his Lordship our
General Deputy do not come to Paris within a Fortnight, they shall tarry there
till he do. And it being in no wise just or equitable that they should lie
there upon their own Charges, the Assembly grants, that out of the Sum of
1600 Livres assigned by his Majesty for defraying of out Expenses, they shall
draw out for their own Service the Sum of Two Hundred Livres, but with this
Proviso, That in case the Lord General Deputy shall come to Town within the
Fortnight, that then they pay in the said Two Hundred Livres to the Consistory
of the Church of Paris, who are to dispose of it toward the Redemption of our
poor Captives in Barbary; and in case they should be necessitated to sojourn
there any longer time than the Fortnight, the Remainder of the Moneys allowed
them for their Expenses, in their Hands, shall be conscientiously restored by
them.

16. The Lord Marquis of Clermont, who was entrusted with those Assignations
made unto our Churches out of certain Offices belonging to the Commissioners of
real Seisures, having brought them by Mr. Cooper unto this Assembly, an Order
passed, that the Sieurs de L' Angle and Cottiby, Joint Deputies, with the
Sieurs Morande and Pellue, or any of them, who should remain at Paris to
receive the Lord General Deputy, should remit them into his Hands, and entreat
his Lordship to deal in them, and compound on such Terms, as he, together with
the Consistory of Paris, shall judge to be least disadvantagious unto the
Churches.

Moreover the foresaid Committee are empowred by this Synod to give whatever
Acquittances or Discharges may be meet and necessary on those Accounts, which
were formerly brought in by the Lord of Candall, whether arising from the
Debets of Acquittances, which may or shall be produced, or from those of
Commissioners for real Seisures, which were used in Reprisal, and left in the
Hands of the Lord Marquis of Clermont. And as for what is clearly owing unto
the said Lord of Candall upon his last Account, in case Satisfaction may be
given him out of any other part of Reprisal, the said Committee are ordered and
empowred to see it done.

The Lord General Deputy upon his Arrival shall, according to Order and Custom,
take the usual Oath, which shall be administered to him by the Consistory of the
Church of Paris.

CHAP. VI. A Copy of the Second Letter writ unto the King.
Sire,
17. WE have deputed the Sieurs de L' Angle and Cottiby Pastors, and de Morande
and Pellue Elders, to lay at your Majesty's Feet our most humble Thanks for
your great Goodness, (we having, opened and finished our Synod under your Royal
Authority) and to petition your Majesty, as we do from the very bottom of our
Souls, that you would hear graciously the most humble Requests of your most
faithful and most obedient Subjects of our Religion, who in diverse parts of
this Kingdom are mourning and groaning for being deprived of the means of
serving God according to the Dictates of their Consciences, and that Liberty
which has been granted by the Kings, your Majesty's Predecessors, of most
glorious Memory, and confirmed by your Majesty, at your first coming to the
Crown, unto them. They do also sorrowfully complain, that through the Rigor of
some of your Officers, they be excluded all Employments; and cannot, though
they have served Apprenticeships, be admitted to set up as Masters for
themselves in any one kind of Trade whatsoever: Such injurious Actions as
these, quite contrary to the intention of your Edicts, depriving them of all
honest ways of gaining their Livelyhoods, as your Majesty's other Subjects do.
These things, Sire, shall be more particularly reported in our Bill of
Grievances, which we presume to present unto you, and to which we hope your
Majesty will vouchsafe us a favorable Answer: That so your Throne being
supported by Piety and Justice during your Majesty's most happy Reign, Mercy
and Truth may meet together, Righteousness and Peace may kiss and embrace each
other, and all sorts of Virtues may abound and flourish, and Heaven may pour
down its most precious Benedictions upon your Sacred Person and People: And
after you have lived many a long Year, enjoyed the Glorious Victories, and
magnificent Triumphs of David, the continunl Peace, Felicity and Riches of
Solomon, we may end our days praising God, and blessing your Majesty, and leave
unto our Posterity after us this Title, in which, Sire, we do most and
principally glory, of being for ever,

From Charenton, January 26th, 1645. Sire, Your Majesty's most Humble, most
Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and Servants, the Pastors and Elders
assembled in our National Synod by your Majesty's Permission at Charenton, and
in the Name of all. Garrissoles Moderator. Basnage Assessor.
Scribes.
Blondel and Le Coq.




A Copy of the Second Letter written by the Synod unto the Queen.
Madam,
AS we began this Assembly with most sincere Professions and Protestations of
our inviolable Loyalties, so do we now conclude it with our most humble Thanks
and Acknowledgment for your Majesty's Bounty and Clemency extended to us. We
should, Madam, be taxed with Ingratitude, if we had not a deep Sense of the
King's and your Favors, because it was through your Majesty's gracious
Permission that we obtained the Privilege of Convening in this Synod.
Incomparable is the Wisdom of your Regency, who now sit at the Helm of the
French Empire, and govern it with such Happiness, that whilst the Neighbor
Kingdoms are shattered to pieces with the dreadful Stems of War, France only
enjoys a most happy Calm, a most blessed and peaceful Tranquillity. We have
had the Happiness to follow our Business quietly, and to meet with no
disturbance during the whole Session, under the Covert of your Royal
Protection. And your Majesty has deigned another Addition to your former
Favors, in granting us a General Deputy, by whose mouth our most humble
Petitions may come into your Sacred Presence; and you have from the Fountain of
your Liberality poured out so many Illustrious Tokens of your Grace and Bounty
upon us, that our Hearts are most sensibly affected with Gratitude unto your
Majesty. And therefore have we once more presumed to send the Sieurs de L'Angle
and Cottiby Pastors, together with the Sieurs de Morande and Pellue Elders, to
tender unto your Majesty our most humble and repeated Thanksgivings, and to
implore the Protection of your Sovereign Justice for all those, who living in
Communion with us under the benefit of your Edicts, confirmed by his Majesty at
his first coming unto the Crown, do yet suffer, contrary to your Intention, and
to your Royal Clemency, very many and sore Troubles in all the Provinces of the
Kingdom. If, Madam, an assurance of having numberless Hearts at your Devotion,
Hearts burning with Zeal and Love for the Service of our lawful Prince, and who
be rooted through an inviolable Fidelity in this Generous Design, never in the
least to yield to any of your People in any Points of Duty, in the most
absolute and most entire Obedience, and who are immovably resolved to live and
die in your and his Majesty's Service, be capable of exciting our just Hopes,
We, Madam, will live in this Persuasion, that we shall gain and merit the
continuance of your Favor, which will be an universal Remedy for all our
Maladies; that so to the natural Obligations of Loyal Subjects, of truly Godly
Christians, we may have these also superadded, of Servants, laden and enriched
with your Royal Favors and Benefits, and who desire only to enjoy our Lives,
that we may spend them in most ardent Prayers, for the preservation of the
Sacred Person of our King, the dear Son of your Majesty, a King obtained of God
by the common united Supplications of all France, that the Divine Blessing may
be upon his blooming Youth, that his Scepter may be established, which is now
supported by your Majesty's Hands, to the perpetual Glory of your Majesty. We
being for ever,

From Charenton, January 26th, 1645. Madam, Of Your Sacred Majesty, The most
Humble, the most Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and Servants, the Pastors
and Elders assembled in the National Synod at Charenton, and in the Name of
them all. Garrissoles Moderator. Basnage Assessor.
Scribes.
Blondel and Le Coq.




CHAP. VI.
18. THE Confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom was read,
and Signed by all the Deputies, and they did all of them unanimously for
themselves, and for their Provinces, make this Solemn Protestation, that they
would immovably persist to their last Gasp in the Profession of it.

19. Observations upon Reading of the Church Discipline.

ARTICLE 1. THE strict Observation of the Thirteenth Canon, in the First
Chapter of our Discipline, concerning the Residence of Pastors in their
Churches, is recommended unto all the Provinces, who shall mutually inspect one
the other, and shall be responsible respectively for their Obedience unto this
Order in the next National Synod. Article 2. For the better Understanding of
the Ninth Canon in the Second Chapter of our Discipline, and the Second
Observation of the Synod of Alez, on the immediate foregoing Synod of Vitre,
That when a Church is served by several Pastors, and an Appeal shall be made
from One of them, this Business shall be decided by his Colleagues, in
conjunction with the Consistory; and in such Churches where there is but one
Pastor only, a Neighbor Minister shall be entreated to come unto that
Consistory, to consult about the Appeal from him, and to give Judgment in that
case; and till it be Pronounced, the Appellant shall abstain from Communion at
the Lord's Table. Article 3. The Tenth Canon of the 13th Chapter of our
Discipline, shall be understood in this Sense, That no Man may Marry the Mother
of his Deceased Spouse, unless the Civil Magistrate shall Authorize it by his
own Ordinance, which shall be expected, both by the Pastor, and the Parties
contracting Marriage. Article 4. The Twelfth Canon shall be couched in these
Words, That however Civility and Decency may oppose a Man's Marriage with the
Widow of his Wives Brother, yet in case the Civil Magistrate will authorize the
Contract, our Churches shall make no difficulty at all to Bless it. Article 5.
In ratifying the Canons of the National Synods of Gergeau, Gap, and the Third
held at Rochel concerning Proposans, who presume to get into the pulpits, and
from thence to hold forth their Propositions, which can be none other than an
Authoritative Preaching unto the People, especially if it be on the usual Days
and Hours of their Public Meetings; this Assemby at the Request of the
Province of Xaintonge, does forbid all Pastors and Consistories, to suffer this
Practice to creep into any of their Churches; nor shall they of their own Heads
introduce it. Article 6. By reason of that defect which occurs in some Letters
of Commission from the Provinces unto their Deputies, it is now Decreed, That
the Proper Names and Surnames of their respective Deputies shall be inserted in
them. Article 7. The Province of Provence, is admonished to cause the Letters
of Commission given unto their Deputies to be signed in their Provincial Synod
by the Moderator and Scribe, that it may be known who they be that are chosen
by them; and they shall also insert into them the Clause of Submission unto the
authority of the National Synods, even as it is expressed in that particular
Canon of our Discipline relating to it. Article 8. The Province of Britain
demanding by their Deputies, whether Pastors may be permitted to Bless the
Marriages of Cousen Cermans, before they have obtained his Majesty's
Dispensation; This Synod does most strictly forbid any one of our Ministers to
attempt such a matter, because the very contrary is expressly enjoined us in
those particular Articles, which explain the Edict of Nantes. See Art 41.
Article 9. Whereas the same Province demanded, that this Assembly would frame a
particular form for Baptizing of Adult Persons, which are Converted from
Paganism, Mahometism, and Judaism unto the Christian Religion; It was thereupon
Ordered, that this ensuing Form should be particularly used on those Occasions,
when as God shall be graciously pleased to make any Additions unto his Church,
of such Converts.
CHAP. IX. The Form and Manner of Baptizing Pagans, Jews, Mahometans and
Anabaptists Converted to the Christian Faith; Composed by the National Synod of
the Reformed Churches of France, Assembled at Charenton, in the Year 1645.
10. THE Catechumen having been sufficiently instructed in the Christian
Religion, and able to give an Account of his Faith and Hope in God, and the
Lord Jesus, to the good Contentment and Satisfaction of the Church, and they
being very well satisfied of the Purity and Integrity of his Life and
Conversation by Credible Witnesses, he shall by those self-same Witnesses be
presented publicly to the whole Assembly of the Faithful to be Baptized; and
the Minister before all the Congregation shall thus bespeak him.

Quest. 1. Do you not acknowledge your self by Nature to be a Child of Wrath,
worthy of Death, and Everlasting Malediction?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 2. Are you not Sorry and Displeased for all the Sins of which you are
Guilty ever since you were Born; and do you not promise that you will forsake
them for ever more?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 3. Do you not from your very Heart, renounce all intermedling with the
Temptations and Seducements of the Devil and of his Angels, all the Pomps and
Vanities of this present World, and all the Affections and Concupiscences of
the Flesh?

Answ. Yes.

If he be a Pagan, the Minister shall thus bespeak him.

Quest. 4. Do not you believe that there is but one God only, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, who by the Word of his Power sustaineth all things, and in
whom we Live, Move, and have our Being?

Answ. Yes.

After this, they shall proceed unto the next Question, which shall be common
to them all. And here the Reader must be admonished, that all those Questions
which are in the Small Roman Character, are to be propounded to all the
Chatechumens indifferently; but those in the Italian Character, do either
belong distinctly and severally to the Jews or Pagans, to the Mahometans or
Anabaptists, according as their respective Titles do demonstrate. And then they
return unto their General Questions in the Lesser Character, which are to be
made in this Ensuing Order.

Quest. 5. Do not you believe that this great God who has Created Heaven and
Earth, is one in Essence, though distinguished into Three Persons Equal and
Coeternal; The Father, the Son begotten of the Father from all Eternity; and
the Holy Ghost proceeding Everlasting from the Father and the Son?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 6. Do not you believe that this Great God who never left himself
without Witness, has manifested himself unto Men, not only by his Works, which
ever since their first Production, do uncessantly declare his Praise and Glory,
but also by the Revelation of his Counsel, for the Salvation of Mankind,
contained in the Holy Scriptures, called the Old and New Testament?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 7. Do not you believe that all those Holy Scriptures are of Divine
Inspiration, and contain the perfect Rule of our Faith and Life.?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Do not you profess, that you will even to the last Moment of your Life,
resist the Devil, whom you have hitherto adored, serving Idols made with hands,
or the Host of Heaven, or those which by Nature are no Gods?

Answ. Yes.

If the Catechumen be a Jew, these Five following Questions shall be propounded
to him, omitting those Four above mentioned, as properly belonging to the
Heathen.

Quest. 1. Do you not detest the Rebellion and Obdurateness of the Jews, and do
you not most humbly beg Pardon of God, that you have been so long a time
detained under it?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 2. Do not you believe that the whole of God's Will, which it has
pleased him graciously to reveal unto us, is not only contained in the Books of
the Old Testament, but also in those of the new?

Answ. Yes.

Quest 3. Do not you believe that Jesus the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary, who
was Conceived in her by the uneffable Power of the Holy Ghost, and afterward
Condemned to the Death of the Cross, upon the malicious Accusation of the Jews,
by the Unrighteous Sentence of Pontius Pilate, and Raised from the Dead the
Third Day, and now exalted in Glory, is God manifested in the Flesh, the
Eternal word of the Father, by whom he Created and Sustaineth the whole World,
that blessed Seed promised unto Adam immediately upon his Fall, by whose Power
and Virtue the Head of that Old Serpent was Bruised, whose coming in the Flesh
all the Patriarchs believed and hoped for; that great Prophet, and true Messiah
foretold by Moses and all the Prophets that lived after him?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 4. Do not you believe that the Lord Jesus is the end of the Law for
Righteousness unto all Believers, the Truth and Substance of all his Types and
Shadows, the true Lamb of God, who takes away the Sins of the whole World, and
in whom all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 5. Do not you believe that the Observation of the Ceremonial Law is now
not only needless and Superfluous, but also every way pernicious unto
Conscience?

Ans. Yes.

If the Catechumen be a Mohammedan, the Minister shall propound unto him these
Six following Questions, omitting those above mentioned, which properly belong
unto the Jews and Pagans.

Quest. 1. Do you not believe that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
be inspired of God, and contain his whole Counsel for the Salvation of Men, and
are the only perfect Rule of Faith and Life?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 2. Do not you believe that Jesus the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
who was Conceived in her by the Virtue of the Holy Ghost, and Formed as to the
Flesh out of her own Substance, is God and Man, Blessed for evermore, perfect
God, and perfect Man; Man born of a Woman in due fullness of time, and God
begotten of the Father from Everlasting?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 3. Do not you believe that the Lord Jesus, from his first Conception
after the Flesh, was Holy, Innocent, without Blemish, and separate from
Sinners; and that he did not suffer Death for his own Sins, but for ours only?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 4. Do not you believe that his Death is the Propitiation for our Sins,
yea, and for the Sins of the whole World; and that this Propitiation is
infinitely Meritorious, through which Everlasting Glory and Salvation were
purchased for us?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 5. Do not you believe that Mahomet was an Impostor, and that his
Alcoran is a Sacrilegious Heap of Idle Fancies, full of Absurdities, broached
on design to set up a False and Abominable Religion?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 6. Do not you believe that the Gospel of our Lord Jesus is the power of
God unto Salvation, to every one that believes; and that in the Christian
Religion, only God the Father has revealed his good Will and Pleasure for the
Salvation of Men, until the End of the World, and that since its Revelation,
there is not any new Religion to be expired, for that the Lord Christ is the
only great Prophet promised unto the Faithful of the Old Testament; and that
God having formerly spoken at sundry times, and in diverse manners unto Men,
before the Law, and under the Law, has spoken to the Church of the New
Testament, by the Mouth of his only Son the Lord Jesus?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Give an Account of your Creed.

Answ. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of, etc.

In case the Catechumen be an Anabaptist, the Minister having made all those
Demands Printed in the Roman Character, and omitted those in the Italian, which
more particularly belong either to Pagans, Jews, or Mahometans, he shall thus
proceed.

Quest. 1. Do not you believe that the Lord Jesus is and shall be true God, and
true Man in those Two Natures everlastingly; that he was according to his Human
Nature like in all thing unto other Men, Sin only excepted, insomuch that he
was the true Son of Abraham, of David, and of the Blessed Virgin, descended
from their Seed and Blood, and that the Substance of his Body was not only
formed in the Virgin, but also out of the very Substance of the Virgin,
conformably to that Saying of the Apostle, that he was of the Seed of David,
according to the Scriptures, that he was born of a Woman, and partaker of Flesh
and Blood, as all other Children?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 2. Do you not believe that Infant Baptism is grounded on the
Scriptures, and the perpetual Practice of the Christian Church?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 3. Do not you renounce with your whole Heart their Error, who reject
Baptism? And are you not penitent for your so long refusal of it?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. 4. Do not you believe the Authority of Magistrates to be an Ordinance
of God, unto which whosoever will not yield Subjection, do bring upon themselves
Condemnation, and that all kind of Obedience is due unto them?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Do not you believe that this good God, who calls all of us by the
Ministry of his Word unto Life and Salvation, has appointed certain Signs and
Sacraments in his Church, which do Seal and confirm the Covenant of Grace,
propounded to us in the Gospel Ministry?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. How many Sacraments do you believe that there be in the Christian
Church?

Answ. Two, Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Quest. Do you desire to be instructed in the Nature and Use of Baptism, which
you now demand of this Church of Christ?

Answ. Yes.

Then the Minister shall say,

Our Lord shows us in what Poverty and Misery we are all born, when he
tells us, that we must be born again. For if our Nature must be renewed, that
it may enter into the Kingdom of God, then it is evident that it is universally
depraved and accursed, whereof he admonishes us, that we may be humbled and
displeased with oar selves; and by this means does he prepare us earnestly to
petition for his Grace, by which all that Corruption and Malediction of our
first Nature may be abolished. And we are not capable of receiving it, till we
be first emptied of all Confidence in our own Virtue, Wisdom and Righteousness,
that so we may pass Sentence of Condemnation upon all that is in us.

And look as he remonstrateth unto us our miserable Estate, so also does he
comfort us with his Mercy, promising to regenerate us by his Holy Spirit unto
newness of Life, which will be the earnest of our entrance into his Kingdom.
This Regeneration consists of two Parts: First, that we deny our selves, not
following our own Judgment, Will and Pleasure, but resigning our Hearts and
Understandings to be led Captive by the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, and so
mortifying our selves and all our fleshly Members here below, we do then follow
the Divine Light, and take up our Complacency in Obedience unto his good Will
and Pleasure revealed to us in his Holy Word, and subject our selves to the
Guidance and Government of his Holy Spirit.

Now the Accomplishment of both these is in our Lord Jesus, whose Death and
Passion is of such Virtue, that by communicating in it, we are as it were dead
to Sin, that so our carnal Affections, and the Desires of our Flesh may be
mortified. In like manner by the Virtue of Christ's Resurrection, we rise up
unto newness of Live, which is of God; in^smuch as his Holy Spirit does guide
and govern us, and work in us those Works which are well-pleasing to him. Yet
the first and chiefest Point of our Salvation is, that by his Mercy he freely
pardons all our Sins, not imputing them unto us; and blotteth out the
remembrance of them, that so they may not be brought in Judgment against us.
All these Benefits are conferred upon us, when he is pleased graciously to
incorporate us into his Church by Baptism; for in this Sacrament he testifies
unto us the Forgiveness of our Sins. And to this purpose has he ordained the
Sign of Water, thereby to signify unto us, That as this Element cleanses away
the Filth of the Body, even so will he wash and purify our Souls, that there
may not appear the least Spot upon them.

In the next place it holds forth unto us our Renovation, which stands, as
was said before, in the Mortification of our Flesh, and in that Spiritual Life
which he effects in us.

So that we receive a double Grace and Benefit from God in our Baptism,
provided we do not disannul the Virtue of this Sacrament by our Ingratitude.
First, That we have a most certain Token and Testimony, that God will be a
propitious Father to us, not imputing our Sins and Offenses to us. Secondly,
That he will assist us by his Holy Spirit, that we may be enabled to combat
with the Devil, Sin, and the Desires of our Flesh, until we have won the
Victory; and so enjoy the Liberty of his Kingdom, which is a Kingdom of
Righteousness.

For as much then as these two things be accomplished in us by the Grace of our
Lord Jesus, it follows that the Virtue and Substance of Baptism is treasured
up in him. And indeed we have no other Laver but that of his Blood; nor any
other Renovation, but what is in his Death and Resurrection, which, as he
communicates his Riches and Benedictions to us by his Word, so also does he
distribute them abroad among us by his Sacraments.

And in this appears the wonderful Love of God toward us, that these Graces
bestowed on us, having (before the Incarnation of our Lord Redeemer) been as it
were, locked up among the Jewish People, and the Partition Wall, which
separated between Jews and Gentiles, being broken down by his Death, he has
and does shed abroad upon Mankind the saving Waters of his Grace in such
abundance, that now there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither Male nor Female,
neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, nor any outward Condition of Men, that
can exclude them from that great Salvation, which is in him, and which the Lord
Jesus will have preached unto all Nations: And the Covenant of his Peace is now
ratified by Baptism, according to the Commission, which he has given unto his
Apostles, saying, Go ye and preach unto all Nations, baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Quest. And is it not true, my Brother, that you desire to be Partaker of this
Grace by Baptism?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. But forasmuch as he that enters into the House of God must look unto
his ways, lest he should profane the Sanctuary, and presume, according to that
Saying of the wise Preacher, to offer the Sacrifice of Fools and ungodly
Persons, and that he ought to be clean purged from all Leaven of Error and
Malice, do you not detest from your Heart all Errors contrary to that sound
Doctrine taught in our Churches?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Forasmuch as we are now about to administer the Sacrament of Baptism
unto you, do you not protest to live and die in the Faith of our Lord Jesus,
which you have now confessed before us, and to adorn it with an Holy Life and
Conversation, and to direct all your Thoughts. Words and Actions to the Glory
of God, and the Edification of your Neighbor, and to submit your self to the
Order and Discipline of our Church, in Conformity whereunto this Holy Ordinance
must be inviolably maintained?

Answ. Yes.

This being done, the Minister shall add, Let us call upon God, that he may be
entreated to give his Blessing to this present Holy Ministration.

O Lord our God! The most wise and merciful God! We praise and bless thy Holy
Name for that Grace, which thy good Hand has deigned to bestow upon this thy
Servant, who lay in the profound Darkness of the Shadow of Death, but is now
enlightened by thee, thou having caused the Dayspring from on high with his
quickening and saving Brightness to arise and shine in upon him, drawing him
from a most deplorable hardness of a stony Heart to mollify and soften him,
delivering him from the Bonds of Death, and restoring Life unto him. Lord! as
thou have took away the Veil that was upon his Face, and called him to the
Knowledge of thy self the only True God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent,
and animated him with a Spiritual Courage to make a public Confession this Day
of thy Holy Faith, and that Hope which thou have begotten in his Soul, and
granted him this Grace to offer himself in thy Presence unto this Holy
Sacrament of Baptism, the Seal of thy Covenant, the Pledge of the Remission of
our Sins, and the Token of our Admission into thy House by a Supernatural New
Birth: So, most blessed God, we beseech thee, to dart in upon him more and more
the Beams of thy Mercy, to forgive him all his Sins, to purge his Conscience
with the precious Blood of the Lamb without Spot, who takes away the Sins of
the World. O cause him, Lord, to feel the Almighty Virtue of his Propitiation.
Let thy Holy Spirit sanctify him, and make him a new Creature, that he dying
unto Sin may live unto Righteousness, and putting off the Old Man with his
Works, he may put on the New Man, who is renewed in Righteousness and true
Holiness. And as we are now pouring upon his Head the Waters of thy Sacrament,
so we beseech thee more especially to pour down upon him the Gifts and Graces
of thy Holy Spirit. Receive him into the Number of thy Domestics, and honor
him with the Adoption of thy Children. Give him Grace, that during his whole
Life he may devote himself entirely unto thy Service, and yield that Obedience
and Religious Worship to thee, which is thy Due and his Duty. And let him
persevere faithfully in thy Holy Covenant for ever-more; that as we do now
receive him in thy Name into the Communion of thy Church Militant, so thou
may another Day exalt him into the Bosom of thy Church Triumphant, and
gather him at his Death unto that general Assembly of the Firstborn, whose
Names are written in Heaven. Hear us, O merciful Father, that this Baptism,
which we do now administer to him according to thy Sacred Ordinance, may
produce its Fruit and Virtue in him, as thou have declared in thy Holy Gospel
to us, for the sake of thy dear Son, in whom thou art well-pleased, even our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has commanded us to call upon thee, saying, Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc.

Then the Minister addressing himself to the Sureties, who present the
Catechumen, shall say,

My Brethren, As you have charitably employed your selves in the Instruction
and Edification of this our Brother, and are Witnesses of tha Baptism, which he
shall now receive through our Ministry; so, do you not promise before God and
this Sacred Assembly to continue more and more to strengthen and confirm him in
the Faith, and to stir him up unto all good Works?

Answ. Yes.

This done, the Minister speaking unto the Catechumen, who upon his Knees
waits for Baptism, shall say,

Forasmuch as we have received these Evidences of your Faith, [pouring Water
upon him] N. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Amen.

The Conclusion of the Form of Baptizing Strangers from the Covenant of God,
whether Pagans, Jews, Mahometans, Anabaptists, or any other Infidels, who had
not been before baptized.

11. If in Churches served by diverse Pastors, any one of them be disabled
either through Age, or some other Infirmity, from administering the Cup, yet
shall he always distribute the Bread in the Lord's Supper unto the
Communicants, and this Canon shall be observed in all the Provinces without
exception.

12. Whereas in many of the greater Churches of this Kingdom it has been found
requisite for their more general edifying, to handle the Sunday's Catechisms by
way of Common-Places in Divinity, and not by familiar Questions and Answers:
And to promote their Instruction, who are well grown in years, they have
substituted extraordinary Catechisings on certain Days immediately preceding
the Lords Supper, we approving their Practice, do notwithstanding exhort the
rest of the Churches to conform themselves unto the Order prescribed by the
Discipline as much as possibly they can. And in case they cannot every Lords
Day Catechize their Children, yet shall they choose out some days of the Week
peculiarly for this Exercise, especially before the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is to be administered, and the Provincial Synods are ordered to see this
punctually observed in every Church of their Jurisdiction, and to give an
Account thereof unto the next National Synod.

13. To explain that Canon of our Discipline, which binds Pastors in their
ordinary Course of Preaching to expound some one particular Book of Holy
Scripture from the beginning to the end thereof, this Assembly declares, that
the Intention of the National Synod, which decreed that Canon, was not thereby
to debar or hinder any Pastors from edifying their Churches by expounding of
any Books or Texts of Scripture particularly chosen on extraordinary occasions,
as of the Lords Supper, etc. nor to impose upon them any necessity of
prosecuting the Exposition of the same Book, which was the Subject of their
Lord's Day Sermon upon the Week Days, in which the far greatest Part of the
People are taken up with the Occupations of their Secular Callings and
Families, that they cannot attend upon such Sermons, and so would be deprived
of their chiefest Edification, but in this respect to leave all Pastors to
their Liberty.

14. Henceforward the Moderators in Synodical Assemblies, and the Deputies
which shall be sent from the Provinces in their Name to assist in National
Synods shall be chosen, as the Canons of our Discipline have determined, not by
the Churches, but by Plurality of Suffrages of the Provinces. And in case any
absent Person should be elected, yet this shall not abridge the Pastors of
their Liberty in Voting.

15. For the better Understanding the Third Canon of the Ninth Chapter of the
Discipline, This Assembly declares, that the Memoirs wherewith every Province
intrusteth their respective Deputies, ought to be resolved in their Provincial
Synods by plurality of Votes, and signed in the said Assemblies by the
Moderators; and in case this be omitted, there shall be no more regard had unto
them, than unto Motions made by Private Persons who had no Order nor
Commission, and propounded such matters of their own Head.

16. Upon the Eighth Canon of the Ninth Chapter of the Discipline, it was
decreed, that the Moderator of the Synod having propounded the Matters of
Discipline, which are to be debated, shall defer the giving of his Suffrage
till all the Deputies have given theirs; and he having gathered their Votes,
shall then at last have the Casting Voice.

CHAP. X. Observations made on Reading the National Synod of Alenson, held in
the Year 1637.
1. IN compliance with that Petition of the Deputies of Vivaretz, and of the
Church of St. Stephen in Forest, which had agreed in a particular Treaty made
with the Church of Bonlieu, and by Consent of the Province of Burgundy, that
the said Church should be united as it has been for diverse Years last past
with it; this Assembly does approve both of their Reunion with the said
Province of Vivaretz, and of its being incorporated with that of Bonlieu.

2. In Confirmation of the promises made by the National Synods of Charenton,
held in the Year 1631, the Second time at that Place; and of Alenson, in the
Year 1637, unto Monsieur Chamier, this Assembly resolves steadfastly as soon as
God shall have enabled the Churches, that they shall be punctually performed.

3. A Decree past, that the Sieurs Constant and Bellot should be effectually
paid what had been promised them by the foregoing Synods, as soon as ever the
Churches may recover a Fund for it; and it shall be returned unto the Province
of Xaintonge, who had advanced before-hands the said Moneys.

4. For as much as the whole written Will and Testament of Monsieur Scoffier,
the Father produced in this Assembly, has not been in the least fulfilled,
although the National Synod of Alanson had strictly enjoined his Executors to
perform it; the Consistory of the Church of Nismes is ordered once again to
call before them the Widow of Mr. John Scoffier Deceased, who had applied to
his own private uses, the Moneys belonging to Jaquemine his Sister, tho she was
by their own Father made Joint-heir with him, that so she may make Restitution
of what she had unjustly taken to her self, and that by a false Information
brought in by her unto the National Synod of Castres: And in case she refuse to
Discharge her Conscience in this particular, then shall the said Consistory
prosecute her with all the Censures of the Church according to the Discipline.

5. Monsieur du Fresne producing Testimonials from the Province of Higher
Languedoc, of his Godly Life, and most exemplary Conversation ever since the
last National Synod, and out of respect to his most Humble and Importunate
Petition, this Assembly grants him his Desire, and restores him to the
Honor and Exercise of his Ministry, of which he had been deprived these
Fourteen Years. And it was farther Decreed, that the Act of the National Synod
of Alanson relating to him, shall be Rased; and whereas his Name was enrolled
among the Deposed, it shall be now taken off the File, and he shall be sent
unto the Churches of Issoire, Paillac, Chazelle, and Gazelle, to serve them as
their Ordinary Pastor. All which shall be signified unto him by Letters.

6. Complaints being brought in against Monsieur Amyraud, Pastor and Professor
in Theology, at Saumur, for Violating the Canons of the National Synod of
Alanson, by Printing his Book of Reprobation, and some other of his Works; and
the Province of Anjou, and the said Monsieur Amyraud, who was deputed by the
said Church and University of Saumur, and charged with the Delivery of their
Letters, having remonstrated unto this Synod many and sundry Transgressions of
those very Canons, by several Provinces. And the Provincial Deputies of Poictou
being heard, and also the said Amyraud, both as to the Publishing of his Books,
and the Doctrine contained in them, this Assembly being very well satisfied with
his Explications and Sense given of his Doctrine agreeable to that of the Synod
of Alanson; and judging it best to bury in the Grave of Oblivion all those
reciprocal Complaints brought in from all Parties, has, as formerly, dismissed
the said Sieur Amyraud, with honor to the Exercise of his Professorship,
wherein he is exhorted to employ himself with Courage and Cheerfulness.
Moreover this Synod desirous for the future to settle a good arid lasting Peace
in all the Churches, and to satisfy the Requests of all the Provinces, which
have unanimously demanded the strict and punctual Confirmation and Observation
of the Canons of the National Synod of Alanson, does most expressly forbid on
pain of all Church Censures, yea, and of being deposed from their Offices all
Pastors and Professors to go beyond those bounds in Writing, Preaching or
Disputing one against another upon those points declared and explained in the
said Synod of Alanson, or to publish any Books on those Subjects. Moreover the
said Professors shall be responsible for all their Lectures, Theses and
Disputations; and their Provincial Synods shall be accomptable for them onto
the National. And all Students in Divinity are most expressly enjoined, upon
pain of being declared unworthy of ever serving in the Sacred Ministry, to
raise any Stirs or Debates about unnecessary Questions, as concerning the Order
of God's Decrees, of Universal Grace by the Preaching of Nature, which may lead
and bring Men unto Salvation, Points only propounded and advanced by pure
Curiosity, and for the Exercise of Men's Wits. And all Examiners of our
Proposans in order to the Ministry, shall proceed in that business with very
much Charity, exacting from them nothing but what is demanded by the Canons of
our Discipline; and provided they give that Satisfaction which is requisite, by
signing the Confession of Faith, the Liturgy of our Churches, and the Canons of
Alez, Charenton, and Alenson, and this present Act, they shall be approved and
admitted.

7. After Reading of this Canon, which Monsieur Amyraud promised to observe and
obey, he petitioned the Synod, that in case his Works might be opposed by Books
printed in Foreign Parts, without the Kingdom, to the blasting of his
Reputation, License might be given him to defend his own Innocence, and to make
use of his Natural right in repelling injury, and purging himself from all
Blame and Reproach. An Order passed, that if any such thing fell out, he should
demand leave to vindicate himself from the Provincial Synod of Anjou, who shall
consider whether it will be expedient for his Consolation, and the Churches
Edification.

8. Monsieur Grace producing his Accounts of Moneys received, and distributed
to the Churches of Rochel, Montauban and Castres, shall carry them to the next
Provincial Synod of Burgundy, where upon his Bringing forth of the
Acquittances, this Account shall be concluded and past by the Authority of this
Assembly.

CHAP. XI. APPEALS.
1. THE Churches of Divonne and Grilby, in the Land of Gex, appealing from a
Judgment in pecuniary matters, their Appeal is according to the Discipline sent
unto the Province of Burgundy: And the Deputies of that Province, are Ordered
to take into their Custody all Papers of both Sides relating to it.

2. That right may be done the Church de la Fite upon their Appeal, this
Assembly judges, that the Province of Lower Guyenne has exceeded the stated
Rules. First, In removing Monsieur de Bourdieu from the Church in that Town,
unto which he was by a particular Covenant obliged, and without hearing the
Church, as is evident from the Acts of the said Provincial Synod. 2. For fixing
the said Monsieur de Bourdieu, absolutely in the Church of Bergerac,
notwithstanding the Appeal of that of La Fite. 3. That when the said Church of
La Fite re-demanded their ancient Pastor, they provided for them Monsieur
Belon, a Person never desired by them, and against whom very many Members of
the said Church made their Exceptions, as being one by whom they could not
profit. Wherefore that said Province and all others, are forbidden for the
future, to use any such manner of dealings; and the said Province is enjoined
to comfort and accommodate the said Church of la Fite, as soon as possibly they
can, by providing a Pastor for it, who may be more pleasing and acceptable to
them than Monsieur Belon, and to settle the said Belon in some other place,
where he may employ his Gifts more usefully. And whereas Bergerac is a Church
of no small importance, and its Necessities are very great and urgent, and
Monsieur de Bourdieu is exceeding Successful in his Ministry there, this Synod
does approve of his being in that Station, and confirms him in the Pastoral
Office of that Church. And whereas the Lord of Rabas, his Majesty's
Commissioner in the Synod of St. Foy, who made this Change, has complained by
Letters, that the Act of Monsieur de Bourdieu's Removal was passed before a
Public Notary, an Answer was Voted to be returned, assuring him how great
Deference this Assembly has for his Lordship's Person and Quality, and to the
truth of that Testimonial rendered by the Deputies of Lower Guyenne concerning
what was transacted in their Provincial Assembly, and that whilst Judgment was
passed upon the said Appeal, that Act was not in the least regarded.

3. Upon Hearing the report of the Committee, who were ordered to inspect the
Appeal of Monsieur Reynault, Pastor of the Church of Realville, and the
Proceedings against him by the Synods of Mauvezin and Realmont, this Assembly
conserving the Honor of his Ministry untainted, and confirming the Judicial
Acts of the Province, to whose care and kindness, he is yet notwithstanding
particularly recommended, does exhort him to enjoy his Quietus the remainder of
his Days, that in case his many and frequent Sicknesses shall not permit him to
go through with the Duties of his Calling, yet he may Edify the Church of God
by his Exemplary Life and Conversation.

4. Report being made by the Commissioners, appointed to examine the Letters
and Memoirs of Monsieur Moysnier, who appealed, because the word of Censure was
not inserted into the Act of the Synod of Higher Languedoc, and had formed a
Complaint against the Sieur Crubel: This Assembly, as to the first Article
judges, that his Appeal was ill grounded. And as for his Complaint, in as much
as he never gave notice of it unto Monsieur Crubel, it shall be carried unto
the Consistory of the Church of Montauban, to whom the care of restoring him
unto his charge is particularly recommended.

5. The Colloquy of Condommois appealing from the Synod of Lower Guyenne, for
taking to themselves the Cognizance of Monsieur Rival's Complaint, and of that
of the Province of Bearn, and not having ordered any Person to appear for them,
nor sent any Memoirs whereby to sustain their Appeal, this Assembly declares
the said Appeal null and void, and the Appealers worthy of the greatest
Censures, for having by a kind of Chicanery of Law, obstructed the final
Decision of that Affair; and requires the very next Synod of that Province to
give Judgment on it, and not only to denounce the Censures, but to see them as
zealously executed, and to exert their Authority; that whatever Legacies have
been heretofore, or may be hereafter bequeathed unto the Church of Marsan, be
punctually and faithfully applied according to the Intention of the Testators;
and that the right of Alternation expressly declared in this Testament, be kept
inviolably for the Province of Bearne.

6. Memoirs sent from the Church of St. Hippolite were read, in which they
maintained their Appeal from the Decree of the Synod of Sevennes, who had
forbidden them to seek after Monsieur Poujade, now in the Ministry of the
French Church of Canterbury in England. And the Deputies of the Province
produced and alleged the Reasons of their Prohibition; and the whole affair
having been maturely considered and debated, this Assembly confirms that
Decree from which they have Appealed, and forbids that Church of St. Hippolyte
of ever any more entertaining a Thought for the said Poujade; and this also
shall be observed as a standing Rule by all the Churches of that Province.

7. Although the Appeal of the Consistory of the Church of St. John de
Gardonengues be not of the nature of those things which are to be brought unto
these Assemblies, yet nevertheless this Assembly desirous of the Peace of that
Church, and for the procuring and effecting of it, has took cognizance
thereof; and vacating the Judgment of the said Synod of Sevennes, which had
approved that Monsieur Bony the Younger, should erect a Seat for himself in the
Temple, directly contrary to the advice of the Consistory, retaining the
ancient Custom of that Church. It Declares, that excepting the Lords and
Magistrates, and Judges of that Place, every one should be at liberty to sit
where they pleased. And it is farther Ordained, that in all such like cases,
every Consistory shall have full Power to Act and Provide what will be most for
the Peoples Edifying, without any Appeal at all from them. And that for the
future, no Appeals of this kind shall ever be admitted into the National Synods.

8. The Acts of the Synod of Sevennes, and a Letter written from Monsieur
Tubert, complaining of his being Deposed from the Holy Ministry, without ever
confronting of the Witnesses, being all read, and the Deputies of that Province
heard, who had no Memoirs given them by their Principals for justifying of
their Judgment, the Assembly dismissed this Cause to the Cognizance of the next
Synod of Lower Languedoc, and enjoyneth the Parties to appear in Person before
it, and to bring with them all their Acts and Evidences that may serve to the
clearing up of this matter, and impowereth the said Synod to give forth a final
Judgment on it.

9. The Appeal of the Church of Brenoux, concerning their Conjunction with that
of Laval, is disannul'd; because that such Matters as these about Uniting one
Church unto another, are to be judged Sovereignly without Appeal, by every
Provincial Synod.

10. The Church of Vixan Appealed from the Synod of Sevennes, for rejecting
their Petition, when they craved leave to get for themselves a Second Pastor.
This Assembly disannulleth their Appeal, because that the said Church had not
sent any Memoirs for the upholding of their Appeal, and because the Ground of
it is now wholly removed.

11. That Sentence pronounced by the Provincial Synod of Lower Guyenne is
confirmed in all its Branches and Articles, and the Consistory of Tonneins has
incurred the greatest Censure, for having (under the pretext of a particular
Counsel offered by the same Synod unto the Church of Bergerac, and propounded
by them as an Example to be followed by all others in the Province,) deprived
Monsieur Fevron (who now Appealed) of a Right acquired by him through a long
and uninterrupted Possession, without any Complaint brought in against him. 2.
For Suspending Monsieur Fazas the Younger, maintaining his Father's Right; yea,
since he had entered his Appeal, without any the least regard had unto his
Father's unjust Deposal from his Office in the Eldership. 3. For refusing to
notify unto the Church, the Restitution of the said Monsieur Fazas, unto his
Office, whom they had Deposed, although the Provincial Synod had ordered them
so to do, and that according to the Canons of our Discipline. Moreover this
Assembly Decrees, that the Judgment of that Provincial Synod shall be fully
and most effectually performed; and that the Pastors and Elders of the Church
of Tonneins, who shall not acquiesce in it, shall be Censured and Suspended
from their Offices by Monsieur Brignos, (another Copy has Brinol) Pastor of La
Parande, who was ordered by the Provincial Synod to inflict the Censures on
them. And the Lord of St. Blancard, by reason that his House is Situated on the
other side of the River, shall be at liberty to join himself unto that Church
which is nearest to him. And farther, all Consistories are strictly forbidden
to bring any Appeals of this Nature unto these National Synods; and although it
be not our Intention to trouble our Selves with particular Customs, which have
obtained in the Churches, about seating of Persons in our Temples, yet we do
declare our Judgment, that there are less and fewer Inconveniences in leaving
them free to all Comers, than to assign them unto particular Persons of a
Private Condition, who have no Right nor Privilege to arrogate and claim unto
themselves a pre-eminence above any others.

12. This Assembly desiring to preserve those Lords who have the privilege of
high Justice, and other Gentlemen in the possession of those Advantages granted
them by the Edict, and doing right unto the Lord of Marcassargues, upon his
Appeal, Ordains, that the Province of Sevennes shall yield unto his
Lordship's Demand, upon those Conditions expressed in his Memoirs, and produced
by him in this Assembly, to wit, that the Pastors shall come unto his House at
his Charges, and without prejudice to those Religious Exercises, which are to
be performed formed on certain Days of the Week; and that there be the like
Consideration had for Persons of the same Quality and Character.

13. A Man going by the Name of Michael, dwelling at St. Stephens de val
Franscisque being Condemned by the Provincial Synod of Sevennes, to separate
himself from the Niece of his Deceased Wife, whom he had espoused, Appealed
unto this Assembly; who having considered the Case, judged that Monsieur
Sauvage the Pastor, and the whole Consistory of St. Stephen's, had deserved the
greatest Censures for their Disrespect shown unto the Laws of the Land, and the
Canons of our Discipline, in publishing the Banes of the said Michael, and
afterward for having given him a Certificate of their Publication. The Synod
also of Sevennes was justly blamed for admitting a Fellow so deep in Guilt, and
engaged and resolved to continue in his Sin, to take an Oath in their Presence.
And the Sieur Ausez is ordered to appear before the Provincial Synod of Lower
Languedoc, and to be accountable unto them for what he has done in this
business. And the said Michael and his Wife are commanded to give Glory unto
God, and to refrain each others Company, and no more to wound their
Consciences, by continuing in a Life so Scandalous, Condemned by the Word of
God, and the Statute Laws of the Kingdom. And whereas the said Consistory of
Saint Stephens, have took upon them by their Letters to maintain the Cause of
these Delinquents, and that there is very much reason to suspect, that the
Signature of Monsieur Barjon, affixed to the Lower end of the said Letters is
Counterfeited, they shall be all carried to the next Synod of that Province,
which shall inform themselves of the matter of Fact, and in case the Suspicion
be found to be well grounded, they shall immediately proceed to censure the
Person or Persons guilty of this Forgery.

14. The Acts and Memoirs sent from the Sieur de Combalasse, and those Joining
with him on the One Party, were read in this Assembly; and on the other, the
Deputies of the Province of Higher Languedoc were heard, giving in the Reasons
of that Judgment, which the Provincial Synod held at Mauvezin, had prononuced,
both against the said Sieur de Combalasse, and those who had Accused him.
Whereupon the said Judgment was Confirmed in all its Articles and Members. And
forasmuch as there have been very many Defaults in the Proceedings on all
Hands, which deserve a Censure, it was Decreed, that since the Ministry of the
said Sieur de Combalasse can be no longer Edifying to the Church of Realmont,
he shall be removed from it, and another Pastor Substituted in his Stead. And
whereas upon Reading those Acts produced, diverse Articles of Accusation
appeared, which were not sufficiently cleared nor proved, the Colloquy of
Albigeois is charged at their next Meeting; as also the Synod of higher
Languedoc, to revise this matter, and to take new Information thereupon; and as
things alleged, shall be averred and proved, to apply the Censures appointed
by our Discipline.

15. Monsieur Guyonnet, Pastor of the Church of Chastillon upon Seine, having
Appealed unto this Synod, that right might be done him, a Decree past, that he
should continue to serve the said Church one Year however, until the Meeting of
the Provincial Synod of Burgundy; upon the breaking up of which, he shall be at
full Liberty. And the Sieur de Carouge shall be sent unto the Church of Beaune,
to continue there for a time, and at the departure of the said Monsieur
Guyonnelt, he shall be settled in the Church of Chastillon, as its peculiar
Pastor.

16. That Judgment pronounced by the Province of Berry, upon the Sieur de la
Galere, was Confirmed, and his Appeal from it disannulled; yet forasmuch as the
said Province, and that of Anjou, in which he has heretofore exercised his
Ministry, have given him an Honorable Testimony; this Assembly Decrees, that
he shall be left upon the Roll of Pastors, who are by the National Synod to be
distributed among the Churches, and shall be employed in such an One as the
good Hand of God shall direct him to.

17. The Sieur Codure, formerly Pastor and Professor of Divinity in the Church
and University of Nismes, having sent Letters with a Diatribe of his, Dedicated
unto this Assembly, in which he pretends to reconcile the Differences between
the Protestants and the Church of Rome concerning Justification, and demanded
Audience of it: According to his Request, he was admitted to propound the
Reasons and Motives of his Design. Which having done, there was a most serious
Remonstrance made him of the great wrong he had done; First, Unto the Truth of
God, in taking upon him to reconcile Contradictory Opinions, and utterly
inconsistent one with the other. And then Secondly, How injurious he was unto
the Protestants, in oppugning as erroneous their common Confession, that so to
their prejudice he might advantage the Romish Church, which does notoriously
confound Two of the greatest Blessings of God, and inseparable one from the
other, though yet always distinct in themselves; to wit, The Sinners Absolution
before the Tribunal of God, upon the account of the Merits of Christ Jesus, his
Obedience imputed to him, and Regeneration wrought in the Heart of Man, by the
Sanctifying Operation of the Holy Ghost. And Lastly, how much an Enemy he was
unto himself, in Forsaking his Ministry, and the Cure of Souls, to become an
Advocate of such a Vile and Ungodly Cause as is this of the Papacy, which is
altogether unreasonable in him, for that he undertakes things impossible. But
he still protesting that he never intended to, and never would depart from the
Orthodox Creed professed in our Churches, and offered to purge and acquit
himself from all Suspicions that might be had of him by his Voluntary
Subscribing the principal Articles of the Doctrine of Truth, from which he was
supposed to have swerved and declined: They were thereupon offered to him;
which when he had as freely and in general Signed and Subscribed, as he had
offered to do it, yet it being done with hesitation for some time, and this
also attended with ambiguous Expressions, the Assembly was constrained to doubt
of his Sincerity; and it was the rather feared, for that after the Subscription
required, he resolutely refused to follow his Vocation, and the Counsel of his
Brethren, discovering an unworthy Disdain and Scorn of that Holy and Honorable
Employment in the Ministry of the Gospel, whereunto in his Younger Days he was
called by God. All which considered, the Synod interdicted him all the Offices
of the Sacred Ministry, and of the Profession of Theology, and enjoined both
the Province, and that particular Church where he constantly Resideth, to Watch
over his Deportments, and to give an account of him and his Conversation unto
the next National Synod, which may, according to what Testimonials they shall
receive of him, and his future Carriage, proceed unto his Restoration.

18. The Sieur Roux, coming with Letters and Memoirs written by Twelve Persons
(or thereabout,) in the Name of the Consistory of Aymargues to sustain their
Appeal, which he and others who had Deputed him, had made from the Judgment
past against them in the Synod of Lower Languedoc; and on the other side, an
Appeal of Monsieur Sigillory, Pastor of the Church of Aymargues being read, and
the Deputies of that Province heard, giving an Account of the Reasons of their
Judgment; this Assembly Declared, that those Appeals ought not to have been
brought unto it, nor should the Provincial Synod have suffered it, and does
therefore dismiss the Cognizance of their Affair, to the Provincial Synod of
Sevennes. And whereas diverse matters have been alleged, but not proved against
Monsieur Sigillory, concerning violent Actions pretended to have been done by
him, bitter and injurious Words uttered in his ordinary Talk and Discourses,
Sermons fraught with Invectives, Perverse and Unworthy Wrestings of the Word of
God; the Consistory of Sauva is Commissionated to send Deputies unto his
Church, and to inquire and inform themselves of these things, upon the Places
where they have been said to be uttered and acted, and to make report of the
whole unto the said Synod, which shall have full power to dispose of the
Ministry of the said Sigillory, according as will most contribute to the
Edification of God's Church.

19. The Church of Duras having demanded of the Province of Lower Guyenne, that
Monsieur Thoroud might be bestowed upon them for their Pastor; and being denied
their Request, they brought in an Appeal from them unto this Assembly, but sent
no Memoirs at all for the upholding of it. The Church of Leyras also opposed
their Petition, and requested of that Provincial, and of this National Synod,
that it might not be deprived of the Ministry of their Pastor, the said
Monsieur Thoroud. Upon the whole, the Judgment of the Provincial Synod was
Confirmed, and the Sieur Thorold fixed in the Pastoral Office of the Church of
Leyras, and the Appeal of the Church of Duras declared null and void.

20. Whereas the Lord de la Baume complained by Word of Mouth, and produced
Letters and Memoirs from Four Elders, and a great many Heads of Families living
at Saint Foy, and who were Appellants with him, opposing the Settlement of
Monsieur Private, in the Pastoral Office of their Church, and petitioning that
Monsieur Alba (who was set at Liberty by the last Synod of Lower Guyenne, to
officiate in his Majesty's Army in Germany, under the Conduct of his Excellency
the Lord Marshall de Turenne as his Chaplain,) might be given to them as their
Pastor. And the Sieur Guyon Pastor of the Church of Bourdeaux being heard speak
on behalf of his Province, and the Sieurs Private and Alba for what particularly
concerned themselves: And the Assembly being well assured of the Consent of
Mademoiselle de Bouillon, (who remitted in her Brothers Name the Lord Marshall
of Turenne, whatever right he could lay claim unto in the Ministry of the said
Alba,) and condescending to the desire of the Plaintiffs, and to put a final
end to all their Complaints, did Ordain, that those Ministers aforesaid, the
Sieurs Private and Alba should serve jointly the said Church of St. Foy; and
that the said Church may be fully settled, and its divided Members mutually and
perfectly reconciled among themselves in a cordial Peace and Union, the Sieurs
Garrissoles and Darashus are Commissionated and Expressly ordered as they return
unto their own Province to ride over unto St. Foy, and to use all possible
means for the Peace and Repose of the said Church; and in case they be not able
to remove all the Obstructions, and to surmount all the Difficulties which may
occur, the Synod of higher Languedoc is nominated and appointed to hear all
Parties, and to put a final Period to their Contentions, by his last Judicial
Sentence from which there shall be no Appealing.

21. The Sieur Pejus Appealed from diverse Judgments past upon him by Synod of
Berry, in pursuance of an Act made on his Account, in the last National Synod
of Alanson. This Assembly declares his Appeal not admittable, and ordains
that the next Synod of Berry shall exert their Authority, and see that all his
Arrerages due from the Church of Argenton be paid him Honestly, and without
delay at the rate of Three Hundred and Twenty Livers a Year; and that for the
future they do constantly furnish him with Three Hundred and Fifty Livers
Yearly. And in case of any default herein, that then the said Pejus shall be
set at Liberty, to provide for himself in any other Church either within or
without the Province.

22. The Lady Duchess of Trimouille, having desired Audience of this Assembly,
which was granted her; she proposed, that it was very needful for the Peace and
Welfare of the Church of Vitre in Britain, that the Sieurs Petre and Jortain
its Pastors should be removed from it, because of the Misunderstandings and
Divisions, which have been between them for many Years together. Moreover the
Province of Anjou requested, that the Church gathered at Terchant (which was
only joined for some time to that of Vitre, by the National Synod held there in
the Year 1583,) might be reincorporated with that of Laval, because the said
Church of Terchant lies, and is situated in the County of Laval, and was from
its first Foundation United to, and a Member of that of Laval. The Deputies of
the Province of Britain were also heard speak on behalf of their Synod, who
reported how opposite the Intentions of the Lady of Montmartin were unto this
Separation, because the Discords between the Pastors, had divided the Body of
the Church of Vitre; which being at length tired with their Contentions and
Debates, in which they have been unavoidably engaged through their Means, did
entreat by Letters the Lady Duchess of Trimouille to get them discharged from
their Ministry in it. This Synod Decrees, that according to the desire of the
said Lady Duchess, those Two Pastors who have hitherto served in the said
Church of Vitre, shall be transferred elsewhere. And that Monsieur Jortan shall
be sent unto the Church in the Isle of Gast and Lassay, provided the said
Monsieur Jortane and the Church do Consent unto it; and the Church of Vitre,
shall be provided of a Pastor, adorned with Gifts and Graces meet for their
Edification. And as for that of Terchant and Vieuville, the Sieurs Basnage and
de L'Angle, together with the Sieurs Guesdon and Caillard, or in case of their
Lawful Hindrance, then two other Pastors, and Two Elders, Members of the
Colloquy of Constantin, taking with them the Memoirs and Acts brought hither
unto this Synod from the Church of Vitre, shall pass over to it at the Charges
of the said Church, and shall proceed to Censure those Persons, whom they find
guilty of these Divisions. And they shall send Monsieur Petre to the Church of
Terchant and la Vieuville; and that they may effectually compose the Discords
which do trouble the Church of Vitre, they shall endeavor to gain the Consent
of the Lady of Montmartyn, for the settling of Monsieur Petre, in the said
Church of Terchant, and to yield unto the Dismembring of the said Church from
that of Vitre, and dispose the said Lady to follow the Intention of this
Assembly: And they shall give an Account hereof unto the next National Synod.

23. Monsieur Huron, Pastor of the Church of Barbigneres, sent Letters with his
Appeal from the Synod of Lower Guyenne, which had interdicted him the
publishing of some certain Discourses of his about State Affairs, because they
did not conceive them to be any wise Edifying unto the Church of God. This
Assembly Declares, that the said Appeal ought not to be admitted, nor can it
be of right brought before it; and farther, the said Huron is enjoined to
acquiesce in the judgment of his Province.

24. Monsieur Charron Advocate in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and Elder of the
Church of Bergerac, Complained and Appealed from the Synod of Lower Guyenne, by
the Mouth of the Lord of Pyrarede, with whom he had deposited his Memoirs. This
Assembly reversing the Judgment of that Provincial Synod, takes off the
Censure which was inflicted on him by the Colloquy of Perigord, there being an
Error in it, and declares that the Consistory of Bergerac has acted very ill
in their Proceedings; and that the Sieur Jacob Tourneau having carried himself
so unnaturally and unhumanly to his own Father, as is publicly and notoriously
known to the whole World, ought not to have been chosen unto the Office of an
Elder in that Church of Christ.

25. The Synod of Higher Languedoc shall judge finally of that Appeal brought
by the Church of Saint Foy, which was condemned by the Synod of Lower Guyenne,
to pay the Arrerages due unto the Heirs of the Sieurs Hesparian and Mizaubin
their Deceased Pastors for their Work and Service in the Ministry among them.

26. The Appeal of Monsieur Crane shall be signified unto the Consistory of St.
Maixant, and by them carried unto the Synod of Xaintonge, who shall by the
Authority of this Synod pass a final Judgment on it.

27. Mr. Giles Marchand, Advocate in the Parliament of Rouen, presented a
Petition unto this Assembly, requesting that there might be some Alteration
made in the Government of the more Populous Churches of this Kingdom; and he
Complained, that because he had insisted on such like Proposals, he was
Suspended from the Lord's Supper by the Consistory of the Church of Rouen; and
this Sentence of Suspension was Ratified by the Authority of the Provincial
Synod of Normandy. Answer was returned him in these Words, that the National
Synod enjoined him to abandon these his Designs and Fancies which could never
be effected according to his Intentions. And inasmuch as he has promised to
acquiesce in what shall be here Ordained; if he do, let him be again admitted
to Communion with the Church at the Lord's Table.

28. The Sieur de Coutures Appealing from a Judgment given by the Isle of
France; and not sending any Memoirs to abet and maintain it, his Appeal is
declared null and void.

29. Le Sieur Toussaints de Roussannes Appealing from the Synod of Lower
Guyenne, for giving leave to the Sieur de Blancard, to sit ordinarily among the
Elders in the Church of la Fite, (which they did out of respect to his Old Age,
and many Infirmities; and because of those considerable Services he had done
the Church of la Fite;) and not sending any Memoirs to sustain his Appeal, it
was declared null.

30. Those Appeals of the Churches of Navarrins and Ortez from the Judicial
Sentence pronounced in the Synod of Bearn held at Lambeze are declared null.

31. Monsieur Rondel who had been Deposed from his Office of Elder by Sentence
of the Consistory of Vitre, which also was Confirmed by another of the
Provincial Synod of Britain, having Appealed from them, shall declare his
Grievances unto the Sieurs Basnage and de L'Angle, who are Commissionated by
this Assembly to remedy those disorders in the Church of Vitre, and to judge
finally of those matters, without any Appeal from them.

32. The Sieur Aymin, at present Pastor in the Church of Manosques Appealed
from the Synod of Dolphiny, held in the Year 1642, at Nyons, which had by their
Decree removed him from his Ministry in the Church of Die, and given him
liberty to provide himself elsewhere, either within or without the Province,
according as the good Providence of God should direct him. The Assembly having
heard him open particularly his Grievances, and the Answers made unto them by
the Deputies of that Province, does Confirm the Decree of the said Synod of
Nyons, and at the request of those aforesaid Deputies, does in compliance with
the said Province and Church of Die, now settle him in the Church of Manosques;
nor may he on pretense of any Bargain and Agreement made betwixt him and the
Church of Die, demand or claim a Farthing from them for the time in which he
has exercised his Ministry among them. And farther, License is given unto the
Church of Manosques, to provide themselves of another Pastor, as God shall give
them Ability and Opportunity for so doing, either within or without the
Province, in case the said Aymin shall leave them destitute and unsupplied, to
follow his Suits at Law, which he has already, or may hereafter Commence, or
in case he shall Abandon them without their Consent first had and obtained.

33. The two Synods of Poictou and Xaintonge, having agreed and jointly
consented to the Uniting of the Churches of Champagne-Mouton and St. Claud, and
after reading those Letters sent from the Right Honorable the Earl of Roussy
(by whose Contribution the said Church of Champagne-Mouton is principally
maintained,) and who requested that Monsieur Ferrand might be continued in his
Ministry there, notwithstanding the means used by the Church of Courtelles to
remove him thence, and gain him for themselves; as it appears by their
Letters, Appeal and Memoirs sent unto this Synod for this very end and purpose.
This Assembly confirms the Union of those said Churches of Champagne and St.
Claud, and Ordains the Synod of Poictou to take all possible care for the
speedy supply of the Church of Courtelles, by some able and worthy Minister,
who may be for its Edification. And on default hereof, the Church of Courtelles
shall be reincorporated with that of Champagne and St. Claud, and shall be
served alternatively by the said Monsieur Ferrand, who also shall assist
alternatively at the Synods of Xaintonge and Poictou.

34. Monsieur Homel, Deputy for the Province of Vivaretz, came charged with the
Memoirs of the University of Die, and declared in the audience of this Synod,
the Grievances they had sustained by Judgments past upon them the 21st Day of
March, 1638, and the 7th of March, 1643, by the Consistory of Lion, to whose
Cognizance the Difference betwixt the said University and Monsieur Aymin had
been remitted, upon occasion of an Account which should have been rendered by
him of a certain business, with the management whereof he was entrusted by that
University: And the said Mr. Aymin was heard in his Answers to them. Upon the
whole, this Assembly amended these Judgments aforesaid, and has regulated and
reduced the Payments to be made unto the said Aymin, to Sixty Sous by the day
for his Journeys, and those Days to the Number of Six Hundred, Fifty and Nine;
so that the Sum due for them, amounts to Sixteen Hundred Forty and Seven
Livers, and Ten Sous. Moreover it is Ordained, that those aforesaid Judgments
of the 21st of March, 1638, and the 7th of March, 1643, shall stand good for
those other Sums, which have been adjudged him, arising to Seven Hundred, Forty
and Seven Livers, Seven Sous; out of which there shall be deducted the Sum of
Two Hundred and Ten Livers received by Monsieur Aymin, and couched by himself
in his Account of the 4th of January, 1638. And the Sum of an Hundred and
Thirty Livers, Five Sous, which he received of the Consistory of Lion, March
the 27th, 1634, together with the Sum of Eight Hundred, Thirty and Four Livers,
Sixteen Sous, owned by him on account of the 17th of January, 1642, all those
Payments amounting to the Sum of 2982 l. the said Mr. Aymin shall restore and
make Payment out of them the Sum of Five Hundred Eighty and Seven Livers, Four
Sous, unto the said University; and of all other Sums received by him, which he
never charged, nor brought in himself Debtor for on his Account; as also all
Papers, Deeds, and Instructions belonging to the University of Die, and lying
by him and in his Custody, he shall Surrender to them.

35. Whereas the University of Saumur, have brought in an Appeal, upon a
business of Monsieur Forbes their Professor of Eloquence, it is declared null.

36. The Appeal of the Church of Lassay about their Pastor Monsieur Rouvean is
declared null.

CHAP. XII. General Matters.
ARTICLE 1. IF any Pastors being removed from their Churches by Ordinance of
their Provincial Synods, shall endeavor to obstruct the Execution of that
Ordinance, by entering of their Appeals unto the National Synod, and thereby as
much as in them lies, promote Disorders and Confusions in the House of God,
and render our Discipline useless, and the Cure of the Church remediless: This
Assembly decrees, that the said Appellants shall be subject to the Judgment of
their Neighbor Provinces, which shall first hold their Synod; and that
Provincial Synod shall take Cognizance of their Appeal, and give Sentence in it
till the meeting of the next National Synod. ARTICLE 2. This Assembly
forbids all the Provinces to Cause their Young Scholars make Oath, that they
will never quit the Service of those Churches and Provinces in which they shall
be first admitted unto the Ministry of the Gospel; because this is prejudicial
to the Rights of our National Synods, and very much impedeth the common
Edification of the Churches. ARTICLE 3. It being moved by the Deputies of the
Isle of France, all the Churches are enjoined to conserve most Charily the Acts
of Settlements made in the Years 1599, and 1600, by those Lords Commissioners,
who were deputed by his Majesty King Henry the Fourth, to execute the Edict,
and to give notice thereof in all Places where it has not been observed; and
to take a most special care of all their Deeds, Acts and Evidences which prove
the Exercise of our Religion in those Places, where it was in the Years 1576,
and 1577, and 1596, and 1597. ARTICLE 4. When as Pastors and Elders for the
Conscientious Discharge of their Duties, shall be Prosecuted at Law, provided
they have acted therein according to the Canons of our Discipline, and the
Rules of the Edict, the Churches are bound to see them indemnified; and in case
their particular Church be overburden'd, the other Churches of that Colloquy
and Province, ought in Conscience to help bear the Charges with them. Wherefore
this Assembly cannot but judge those Churches guilty of a most inexcusable
ingratitude, who have forsook their Pastors and Elders, leaving them to shift
for themselves, when as they have been Sued at Law, and Imprisoned for
following the Duties of their Places and Callings. ARTICLE 5. At the Request or
the Province of Sevennes, this Assembly explained the First Article of General
Matters, passed in the National Synod of St. Maixant, and did thereupon
declare, that no particular Church could seek after a Pastor, till it have
first obtained permission from their Colloquy, or Provincial Synod; and when as
they have procured him, they may not effectually settle him, without the
Consent of the whole body of that Synod, or of the Neighboring Pastors, 'till
such time as the Synod shall be agreed, and approve thereof. ARTICLE 6. The
Province of Lower Guynne, moved that all the Churches might be enjoined to
conform unto their Custom, who as soon as they come into the Temple, humbling
themselves upon their Knees, do each of them privately by themselves, offer up
a short Prayer unto God, craving in it his gracious assistance, in hearing of
the Word Preached. But it was the Judgment of this Assembly, that no Canon
should be made about a matter in itself indifferent; and that the Churches
should be left at liberty to use their own ancient Customs; and they be all
exhorted respectively to seek after those things which will make for their
Edification, and to avoid and shun all kind of Ostentation, Affectation, and
Superstition. ARTICLE 7. The Maritime Provinces making great Complaints of the
vast number of Captives detained in Algier, Tunis, Salle, and other Places of
Barbary and Morocco, and of their sad and woeful Condition, and that they do
indispensably need the Charitable Assistance of all the Faithful, to redeem
them out of Misery: This Synod adjureth by the Bowels of Compassion of the
Living God, and by that Fellow-feeling which all Members of our Lord Jesus
ought to have of one another Straits and Necessities, all the provinces, and
all the Churches, and every particular Individual Professor of our Religion, to
yearn with Bowels of Pity over the Affliction of these our poor Brethren, and
to contribute liberally toward their Redemption; and the Alms which shall be
Collected to this purpose from the Provinces of Xaintonge, Poictou, Lower
Guyenne, Bearn, Higher Languedoc, shall be paid into the Consistory of Rochell;
and those Alms which shall be Collected from the Provinces of Lower Languedoc,
Sevennes, Vivaretz, Dolphiny, and Burgundy, shall be paid into the Consistory
of Lions; and those Alms which shall be Collected from the Provinces of
Normandy, Britain, Anjou, Berry, and the Isle of France, shall be paid into
the Consistory of Paris; and every Province shall send unto the Consistory of
Paris, a List of their Captives, and an Account of their Alms; that so these
Moneys may be employed in the Redemption of those Captives, who are Natives of
Provinces before any others, and after them as a Supplement of Charity for
others also: That so this whole work of Love may redound to the Glory of God,
the common Edification, and particular Consolation of these our Poor Afflicted
Brethren. ARTICLE 8. The Provinces of the Isle of France and Anjou moving it:
All those Churches who enjoy the privilege of a Printing Press, are strictly
charged, that they do not suffer any Alteration to be made either in the
Translation of the Bible, or Book of Psalms, or in the Text of the Confession
of Faith, Liturgy, and Catechism, without an express Order from that
Consistory, which is authorized thereunto by the Provincial Synod. ARTICLE 9.
Upon report made by certain Deputies of the Maritime Provinces, that there do
arrive unto them from other Countries some Persons going by the Name of
Independents, and so called, for that they teach every particular Church should
of right be governed by its own Laws, without any Dependency or Subordination
unto any Person whatsoever in Ecclesiastical Matters, and without being obliged
to own or acknowledge the authority of Colloquies or Synods in matters of
Discipline and Order, and that they settle their Dwellings in this Kingdom: A
thing of great and dangerous consequence, if not in time carefully prevented.
Now this Assembly fearing lest the Contagion of this Poison should diffuse it
self insensibly, and bring in with it a World of Disorders and Confusions upon
us; and judging the said Sect of Independentism not only prejudicial to the
Church of God, (because as much as in it lies, it does usher in Confusion, and
opens a Door to all kinds of Singularities, Irregularities and
Extravagancies, and barreth the use of those means, which would most
effectually prevent them,) but also is very dangerous unto the Civil State; for
in case it should prevail and gain Ground among us, it would form as many
Religions, as there be Parishes and distinct particular Assemblies among us.
All the Provinces are therefore enjoined, but more especially those which
border upon the Sea, to be exceeding careful, that this Evil do not get footing
in the Churches of this Kingdom; that so Peace and Uniformity in Religion and
Discipline may be preserved Inviolably, and nothing may be innovated or changed
among us, which may in any wise derogate from that Duty and Service we owe unto
God and the King. N. B. whether the Persons thus qualified by this Reverend
Assembly came from the Old or New England, I cannot tell; at this time it is
certain the Divisions about Church Discipline flew very high here at Home, to
the great hinderance of Reformation, and the letting in upon us a Deluge of
Sects and Pestilential Heresies, the sight of which grieved the Hearts of all
that truly feared God, and exasperated very many Eminent Divines and Ministers
against the Congregational Brethren; which terminated in a most lamentable
Schism, and of above Forty Years continuance. But it pleased God at last to
have Compassion upon us, and to touch the Hearts of the Godly Ministers of the
Presbyterian and Independent Persuasion with a deep sense of this great Evil,
in separating so long one from the other. Whereupon several Learned and Pious
Pastors of Churches in the City of London of both ways met together diverse
times, and Conferred each with other about the healing of this Breach; and
having frequent Consultations about it, and poured out many Mighty and Fervent
Prayers unto the God of Grace and Peace to assist, direct and prosper them in
it, upon Friday the Sixth Day of March, 1690, according to our Computation,
most of the Dissenting N.C. Ministers in the City, and many others from the
Adjacent parts of it, met together, and there was then read unto them the Heads
of Agreement prepared by the Committee, and which had been seen and perused by
many of them before; and their Assent unto them being demanded, it was readily
accorded, and afterward near an Hundred gave in their Names unto this Union.
This Example was taking and leading to all other the N. C. Ministers of
England, who in many of their respective Counties had their Meetings to compose
this Difference, and by the Blessing of God upon those their Endeavors, it was
also upon the sight and consideration of the Printed Heads of Agreement among
the United Ministers in London, effected, whereof Notice was sent up unto the
Brethren here in London. When the London Ministers first signed this Union,
they agreed unanimously to bury in the Grave of Oblivion those Two Names of
Distinction, viz. Presbyterian and Independent; and to communicate these
Articles of Union unto all Members in Communion with them in their particular
Churches the Lords day come Sevennight after, and that they would at the next
Meeting acquaint the United Brethren what Entertainment and Acceptance the
Reading of it had with their respective Assemblies; which was done accordingly,
and to general satisfaction.

And because the Reader of the Acts of this Third National Synod of the
Reformed Churches in France held at Charenton, may not have seen, and may be
desirous to see what this Syncretism was between those Brethren in England, I
have here inserted them from my own Manuscript and printed Copies.


CHAP. XIII. Heads of Agreement Assented to by the United Ministers in and
about London, formerly called Presbyterian and Congregational.
Preface to the Reader.
Endeavors for an Agreement among Christians, will be grievous to none who
desire the flourishing State of Christianity it self; the success of these
Attempts among us, must be ascribed to a presence of God so signal as not to be
concealed; and seems a hopeful pledge of further Blessings.

The favor of our Rulers in the present established Liberty we most thankfully
acknowledge; and to them we are studious to approve our selves in the whole of
this Affair; therefore we declare against any intermedling with the National
Church-Form. Imposing these Terms of Agreement on others is disclaimed. All
pretense to Coercive Power is as unsuitable to our Principles, as to our
Circumstances. Excommunication it self in our respective Churches, being no
other than a declaring such Scandalous Members as are irreclaimable to be
incapable of Communion with us in things peculiar to visible Believers. And in
all we expressly determine our purpose, to the maintaining of Harmony and Love
among our Selves, and preventing the inconveniences which Human Weakness may
expose to in our use of this Liberty.

The General Concurrence of Ministers and People in this City, and the great
Disposition thereto in other Places, persuade us, this happy work is undertaken
in a Season designed for such divine Influence, as will overcome all
Impediments to Peace, and convince of that Agreement, which has been always
among us in a good degree, though neither to our Selves nor others so evident,
as hereby it is now acknowledged.

Need there any Arguments to recommend this Union? Is not this what we all have
Prayed for; and Providence by the directest Indications has been long Calling
and Disposing us to? Can either Zeal for God, or Prudent Regards to our Selves,
remisly suggest it, seeing the Blessings thereof are so important, and when its
become in so many respects even absolutely necessary; especially as it may
conduce to the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Kingdoms Weal;
a Subserviency whereto shall always govern our United abilities with the same
disposition to a concurrence with all others, who are duly concerned for those
National Blessings.

As these considerations render this Agreement desirable, so they equally urge
a watchful care against all Attempts of Satan to dissolve it, or frustrate the
good effects thereof so manifestly destructive to his Kingdom. Therefore it is
incumbent on us to forbear Condemning and Disputing those different Sentiments
and Practices we have expressly allowed for; to reduce all distinguishing Names
to that of United Brethren; to admit no Uncharitable Jealousies, or Censorious
Speeches; much less any Debates whether Party seems most favored by this
Agreement. Such Carnal regards are of small moment with us, who herein have
used Words less accurate, that neither side might in their various Conceptions
about lesser matters be contradicted, when in all substantials we are fully of
one Mind; and from this time hope more perfectly to rejoice in the Honor,
Gifts and Success of each other, as our common good.

That we as United, may contribute our utmost to the great Concernments of our
Redeemer, it is mutually resolved we will assist each other with our Labors,
and meet and consult without the least shadow of separate or distinct Parties:
Whence we joyfully expect great Improvements in Light and Love, through the
more abundant supplies of the Spirit, being well assured we herein serve that
Prince of Peace, of the increase of whole Government and Peace there shall be
no end.

HEADS of AGREEMENT.
These following Heads of Agreement have been resolved upon by the United
Ministers in and about London, formerly called Presbyterian and Congregational;
not as a Measure for any National Constitution, but for the Preservation of
Order in our Congregations, that cannot come up to the common Rule by Law
Established.

1. Of Churches and Church Members.
1. We acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ to have one Catholic Church or
Kingdom, comprehending all that are united to him, whether in Heaven or Earth:
And do conceive the whole Multitude of Visible Belieers, and their Infant Seed
(commonly called the Catholic Visible Church) to belong to Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom in this World. But for the notion of a Catholic Visible Church here,
as it signifies its having been collected into any formed Society, under a
visible human Head on Earth, whether one Person singly, or many collectively,
we with the rest of Protestants unanimously disclaim it.

2. We agree that particular Societies of Visible Saints, who under Christ
their Head, are statedly joined together for ordinary Communion with one
another in all the Ordinances of Christ, are particular Churches, and are to be
owned by each other as Instituted Churches of Christ, tho differing in
apprehensions and practice in some lesser things.

3. That none shall be admitted as Members in Order to Communion in all the
special Ordinances of the Gospel, but such Persons as are knowing and sound in
the Fundamental Doctrins of the Christian Religion, without scandal in their
Lives, and have a Judgment regulated by the Word of God, and are Persons of
visible Godliness and Honesty, credibly professing cordial Subjection to Jesus
Christ.

4. A competent number of such visible Saints (as before described) do become
the capable Subjects of stated Communion in all the special Ordinances of
Christ, upon their mutual declared Consent and Agreement to walk together
therein according to Gospel Rule: In which Declaration, different degrees of
Explicitness shall no way hinder such Churches from owning each other as
Instituted Churches.

5. Tho parochial bounds be not of Divine Right, yet for common Edification,
the Members of a particular Church ought (as much as conveniently may be) to
live near one another.

6. That each particular Church has right to choose their own Officers; and
being furnished with such as are duly qualified and ordained, according to the
Gospel Rule, has authority from Christ for exercising Government, and of
enjoying all the Ordinances of Worship within it self.

7. In the Administration of Church Power, it belongs to the Pastors and other
Elders of every particular Church (if such there be) to rule and govern; and to
the Brotherhood to consent, according to the Rule of the Gospel.

8. That all Professors as before described, are bound in duty, as they have
opportunity to join themselves as fixed Members of some particular Church;
their thus joining being part of their professed Subjection to the Gospel of
Christ, and are instituted means of their Establishment and Edification,
whereby they are under the Pastoral Care; and in case of Scandalous or
Offensive Walking, may be authoritatively admonished or censured for their
Recovery, and for vindication of the Truth, and the Church professing it.

9. That a Visible Professor thus joined to a particular Church, ought to
continue steadfastly with the said Church; and not forsake the Ministry and
Ordinances there dispensed, without an orderly seeking a Recommendation unto
another Church; which ought to be given when the case of the Person apparently
requires it.

2. Of the Ministry.
1. We agree, that the Ministerial Office is instituted by Jesus Christ, for
the gathering, guiding, edifying, and governing of his Church; and to continue
to the end of the World.

2. They who are called to this Office, ought to be endued with competent
Learning, and ministerial Gifts, as also with the Grace of God found in
Judgment, not Novices in the Faith and Knowledge of the Gospel; without Scandal
of Holy Conversation, and such as devote themselves to the Work and Service
thereof.

3. That ordinarily none shall be ordained to the work of this Ministry, but
such as are called and chosen thereunto by a particular Church.

4. That in so great and weighty a matter as the calling and choosing a Pastor,
we judge it ordinarily requisite, that every such Church consult and advise
with the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations.

5. That after such advice, the Person consulted about, being chosen by the
Brotherhood of that particular Church over which he is to be set, and he
accepting, be duly ordained, and set apart to his Office; wherein it is
ordinarily requisite that the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations concur with
the Preaching Elder or Elders, if such there be.

6. That whereas such Ordination is only intended for such as never before had
been ordained to the Ministerial Office; if any judge, that in the Case also of
the removal of one formerly ordained, to a new Station or Pastoral Charge,
there ought to be a like solemn recommending him and his Labors to the Grace
and Blessing of God; no different Sentiments or Practice herein, shall be any
occasion of Contention or breach of Communion with us.

7. It is expedient, that they who enter on the work of Preaching the Gospel,
be not only qualified for Communion of Saints, but also that except in Cases
extraordinary, they give proof of their Gifts and fitness for the said Work,
unto the Pastors of Churches of known abilities, to discern and judge of their
Qualifications; that they may be sent forth with solemn Approbation and Prayer,
which we judge needful, that no doubt may remain concerning their being called
to the Work; and for preventing (as much as in us lies) Ignorant and Rash
Intruders.

3. Of Censures.
1. As it cannot be avoided, but that in the purest Churches on Earth, there
will sometimes Offenses and Scandals arise by reason of Hypocrisy and
prevailing Corruption; so Christ has made it the duty of every Church to
reform it self by Spiritual Remedies, appointed by him, to be applied in all
such Cases; viz. Admonition and Excommunication.

2. Admonition being the Rebuking of an Offending Member in Order to
Conviction, is in case of private Offenses to be performed according to the
Rule in Matthew. 18. ver. 15, 16, 17. and in case of Public Offenses openly
before the Church, as the Honor of the Gospel, and nature of the Scandal shall
require: And if either of the Admonitions take place for the Recovery of the
fallen Person, all farther proceedings in a way of Censure are thereon to
cease, and Satisfaction to be declared accordingly.

3. When all due means are used, according to the Order of the Gospel, for the
restoring an Offending and Scandalous Brother, and he notwithstanding remains
impenitent, the Censure of Excommunication is to be proceeded unto; wherein the
Pastor and other Elders (if there be such) are to lead, and go before the
Church; and the Brotherhood to give their consent, in a way of Obedience unto
Christ, and unto the Elders, as over them in the Lord.

4. It may sometimes come to pass, that a Church Member not otherwise
Scandalous, may sinfully withdraw, and divide himself from the Communion of the
Church to which he belongs: In which case when all due means for the reducing
him prove ineffectual, he having hereby cut himself off from that Churches
Communion, the Church may justly esteem and declare it self discharged of any
further inspection over him.

4. Of Communion of Churches.
1. We agree that Particular Churches ought not to walk so distinct and
separate each from other, as not to have care and tenderness toward one
another. But their Pastors ought to have frequent Meetings together, that by
mutual Advice, Support, Encouragement and Brotherly Intercourse, they may
strengthen the Hearts and Hands of each other in the ways of the Lord.

2. That none of our particular Churches shall be subordinate to one another,
each being endued with Equality of Power from Jesus Christ. And that none of
the said particular Churches, their Officer or Officer, shall exercise any
Power, or have any Superiority over any other Church, or their Officers.

3. That known Members of particular Churches, constituted as aforesaid may
have occasional Communion with one another in the Ordinances of the Gospel,
viz. the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Singing Psalms, dispensed according to the
Mind of Christ; unless that Church with which they desire Communion, has any
just Exception against them.

4. That we ought not to admit any one to be a Member of our respective
Congregations, that has joined himself to another, without endeavors of
mutual Satisfaction of the Congregations concerned.

5. That one Church ought not to blame the Proceedings of another, until it
has heard what that Church charged, its Elders or Messengers can say in
Vindication of themselves from any Charge of irregular or injurious Proceedings.

6. That we are most willing and ready to give an Account of our
Church-Proceedings to each other, when desired, for preventing or removing any
Offenses that may arise among us. Likewise we shall be ready to give the Right
Hand of Fellowship, and walk together according to the Gospel Rules of
Communion of Churches.

5. Of Deacons and Ruling Elders.
We agree, the Office of a Deacon is of Divine Appointment, and that it belongs
to their Office to receive, lay our, and distribute the Church's Stock to its
proper Uses, by the Direction of the Pastor, and the Brethren if need be. And
whereas diverse are of Opinion, that there is also the Office of Ruling Elders,
who labor not in Word and Doctrine; and others think otherwise: We agree, That
this difference make no Breach among us.

6. Of Occasional Meetings of Ministers.
1. We agree that in order to Concord, and in any other weighty and difficult
Cases, it is needful, and according to the Mind of Christ, that the Ministers
of several Churches be consulted and advised with about such matters.

2. That such Meetings may consist of smaller or greater Numbers, as the matter
shall require.

3. That particular Churches, their respective Elders and Members ought to have
a reverential regard to their Judgment so given, and not dissent therefrom,
without apparent Grounds from the Word of God.

7. Of our Demeaner toward the Civil Magistrate.
1. We do reckon our selves obliged continually to pray for God's Protection,
Guidance and Blessing upon the Rulers set over us.

2. That we ought to yield unto them not only Subjection in the Lord, but
support according to our Station and Abilities.

3. That if at any time it shall be their pleasure to call together any Number
of us, or require any account of our Affairs, and the state of our
Congregations, we shall most readily express all dutiful regard to them herein.

8. Of a Confession of Faith.
As to what appertains to soundness of Judgment in matters of Faith, we esteem
it sufficient, That a Church acknowledge The Scriptures to be the Word of God,
the perfect and only Rule of Faith and Practice; and own either the Doctrinal
Part of those commonly called the Articles of the Church of England: Or, The
Confession, or Catechisms, Shorter or Larger, compiled by the Assembly at
Westminster, or the Confession agreed on at the Savoy, to be agreeable to the
said Rule.

9. Of our Duty and Deportment toward them that are not in Communion with us.
1. We judge it our Duty to bear a Christian Respect to all Christians,
according to their several Ranks and Stations, that are not of our Persuasion
or Communion.

2. As for such as may be ignorant of the Principles of the Christian Religion,
or of Vicious Conversation, we shall in our respective places, as they give us
opportunity, endeavor to explain to them the Doctrine of Life and Salvation,
and to our utmost persuade them to be reconciled to God.

3. That such who appear to have the Essential Requistes to Church Communion,
we shall willingly receive them in the Lord, not troubling them with Disputes
about Lesser Matters.

As we assent to the forementioned Heads of Agreement, so we unanimously
resolve, as the Lord shall enable us, to practice according to them.

CHAP. XIV. 10. Article of General Matters.
THere was a Report made in the Synod of a certain Writing, both Printed and
Manuscript, holding forth this Doctrine, Mr. De la Place
that the whole Nature of Original Sin consisted only in that Corruption, which
is Hereditary to all Adam's Posterity, and residing originally in all Men, and
denies the Imputation of his first Sin. This Synod condemns the said Doctrine
as far as it restrains the Nature of Original Sin to the sole Hereditary
Corruption of Adam's Posterity, to the excluding of the Imputation of that
first Sin by which he fell, and interdicteth on pain of all Church Censures all
Pastors, Professors, and others, who shall treat of this Question, to depart
from the common received Opinion of the Protestant Churches, who (over and
besides that Corruption) have all acknowledged the Imputation of Adam's first
Sin unto his Posterity. And all Synods and Colloquies, who shall hereafter
proceed to the reception of Scholars into the Holy Ministry, are obliged to see
them sign and subscribe this present Act.

11. Forasmuch as that Religious Adoration given by the Church of Rome to their
pretended Consecrated Host, has in its Public Service, and whenever it is
carried in Procession unto the Sick for its sole Foundation, this false
Supposition, That it is by the Priests Consecration properly made the self same
Body, which was taken out of the Womb of the Blessed Virgin by the Eternal Son
of God, and united unto his Divine Person, unto which belongs both before and
since his Incarnation the Empire of Glory, and Religious Worship most strictly
and properly so called, and not unto his Humanity separated from it: That the
Church of Rome neither renders to, nor requires for its Consecrated Host any
other Adoration than that of Latria; and the Professors of our Religion are in
this Point of another Faith, believing this Host after Consecration to be that
very self-same insensible and inanimate matter which it was before, and cannot,
if they will follow the Dictates of their own Consciences, and the prime
Fundamental Verities of Christianity ascribe Divine Adoration unto a thing
which by Nature is not God, nor transfer the Glory of the Eternal God from him
unto the basest of Creatures.

This Synod therefore does adjure all of them, by that Profession they make of
serving the Lord in Purity and Sincerity, and by that irreparable Prejudice
they do the truth, by their rash and inconsiderate oppugning of it; and to
their own Consciences, which are shamefully betrayed by them; and to their
Countrymen of the Romish Communion, whom they confirm in their Superstitions;
and to the weaker Christians among our selves, whom by such a vile Example,
utterly unbecoming that worthy Name that is called upbri them, they learn to
prevaricate in Religion, that they would once again return unto themselves, and
mourn bitterly in the Presence of the Great God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ, for that by this Sin of theirs they have profaned his Glory. And the
Synod ordains, that when as the Host shall be carried in Procession, or to
the Sick by those of the Romish Church, every one do withdraw himself from the
sight of it, that so no Scandal may be given unto their Neighbors. And whereas
some, who do not step out of the way, do feed themselves with this frivolous
Imagination, that they may tarry and see it, tho they do not, as those of the
Romish Church, let out their Thoughts to a Religious Adoration of the Host; yet
if their bodily Presence be voluntary at it, it is a kind of Approbation of it.
And whereas some, out of a sordid, servile Spirit, do comply with the received
Custom in taking off their Hats when as the Host passes by, which, say they,
is not for its sake, or any Reverence to it, but only out of Respect and Honor
to the Curate or Vicar who carries it, or of the Persons which accompany it;
this is sinful, because they do not conform themselves to their Intention whom
they pretend to gratify; and they yield only a Civil Salutation, where the
Romish Church ordains Religious Worship to be paid and performed, bestowing
it on another Object besides that proposed by her; which Acts of theirs are
directly contrary to the received Maxims of Civility among all Men, in that
they honor, tho not as the Church of Rome professes to do, the Lord of Glory,
but in his Presence, and to his Contempt, a Priest, who says he is called to
serve him, and this in that very proper Act of Worship, yielded by him as he
pretends unto his God. Besides, this is contrary to all Christian Sincerity,
which requires our Actious to be true Copies and Transcripts of our Hearts,
and not fallacions Feignings of that which is not only not in our Intentions,
but is formally contrary to them, which is a most mischievous trick and abuse
put upon those who see and converse with them. Yea lastly, this is contrary to
those glorious Patterns and Examples of the Primitive and Ancient Christians,
who being in no wise able to brook such Disguises, did repute and esteem them
most Sacrilegious Impieties, and would rather expose themselves to many Deaths,
than to swerve from the least Tittle of that Fidelity and Allegiance they had
sworn unto God in their Baptism.

Wherefore this Synod ordains, that such Offenders be strictly and carefully
admonished not to persist in this their Hypocrisy; for with whatsoever glosses
and fine pretexts they may color it over, it is an open Mockage and Scorn both
of God and Man, a grievous Scandal unto their Brethren, and a Mortal Wound unto
their own Consciences. And in case they shall obstinately abide in their
Impious Resolution, then all Consistories are enjoined to pursue and prosecute
them with all Church Censures, as being Persons utterly unworthy of Communion
with the Saints of God. And that none may pretend Ignorance of this Act, let it
be Read and Notified publicly in all Places and Congregations where it may be
judged needful.

An Act for the National Past.
12. Forasmuch as the Patience and Long-suffering of God which leads Men unto
Repentance, has been horribly despised by them, so that his just Wrath and
Indignation has burnt like Fire against them for their great Ungodliness in
every Nation and Country of Christendom, and yet this fierce Anger of God is
not turned away, but his Almighty Arm is stretched out still; and that
Devouring Wars by reason of the Obdurateness and Impenitency of Sinful Men, do
menace them with utter Ruins and Desolations: The National Synod assembled by
his Majesty's Permission at Charenton, considering that the only means for
removing so great and sore Judgments, is the Conversion of Sinners, and the
humbling and abasing of their Haughty Hearts before the glorious Tribunal of
that great God whom they have so much provoked unto Jealousy: And whereas it
is the indispensable duty, and should be the perpetual practice of all
Christians to become new Creatures, to purge themselves from Dead Works, and to
serve the most holy God in all Holiness, Righteousness and true Godliness: The
National Synod exhorts all the Faithful in general and particular, to offer
unto the Lord of Glory, whom they have exceedingly dishonored, the reasonable
Sacrifice of a contrite and a broken Heart, and to lie prostrate in all
Humility and Sincere Repentance, at the Feet of his Divine Majesty. And
Provincial Synods are all of them required to proclaim public and solemn Fasts
in their respective Divisions, according as their public or private
Necessities may demand. And now that the Grace and Mercy of our Infinite and
Almighty God may be implored, and his Blessing and favor obtained for the
establishing of an Universal Peace, for the setting of the Kingdom, for the
conservation of his Majesty's Sacred Person, for his Divine Benedictions upon
his Youth, for the glory of his Crown, and the happy Success of his Armies
under the lawful Government of the Queen Regent, and for the prosperity of the
whole Royal Family; it is decreed, that a solemn Day of Fasting and Prayers
shall be Observed and Celebrated in all the Churches of this Kingdom upon the
Fourth Day of May now next ensuing; and that the Faithful may be prepared for
the Religious Observation of it, public Notice shall be given to them by all
Pastors from their Pulpits, by reading of this present Act.

CHAP. XV. Particular Matters.
ARTICLE 1. ON the First Day of January, being the Seventh after the opening of
the Synod, the Sieur de la Milletiere having distributed some certain Copies of
a small Script of his just then Published, in which he acquainted the World
with the Reasons moving him to print another of greater bulk (whereof he
presented Two Copies unto this Assembly,) Entitled Instruction a la Foy
Catholic, and farther demanded, that the Letters written by him unto this
Assembly, and left in the Hands of the Scribes might be read; but they were not
read, the Lord Commissioner having desired the Tuesday following that they
might be deposited with him, to be sent unto his Majesty. And the said Sieur de
la Milletiere having on Monday the Eighteenth Instant, obtained his Majesty's
leave to be present at this Assembly, he was admitted into it, when and where
he discoursed of his Design, and of the Subject of his Book, and demanded that
Commissioners might be appointed by the Synod for its examination, which was
absolutely refused him. The Synod remembered the Judgment past against him by
that of Alanson, which had Seven Years ago expressly ordered the Consistory of
Paris to threaten him, that unless he abandoned his Opinions and Designs so
very contrary to the Peace of our Churches, to his own Conscience, and to God's
Truth, he should not be owned as a Member of these our Reformed Churches.
Besides, the Synod conceived that it was not reasonable to take off any of the
Deputies from their Service, and to employ them in such an unprofitable
Occupation; or that they should contest with a Fellow who would not submit
himself unto their Judgment and Authority, and who has told the World that for
these Two last Years he had no other Intention than to incorporate himself into
the Communion of the Church of Rome, and to form a Party against all the
Reformed Churches, impugning with might and main the common Confessions of all
Protestants, perpetually accusing them of contemning the Catholic, that is,
his Romish Church, and of Schism from it, and propounding to them for the Rule
of their Faith, the Acts and Canons of the Council of Trent; against which they
have all unanimously protested, and do to this very Day protest against, both
them and it. But the said de la Milletiere having given it under his own Hand
in Writing that he would submit himself unto the Judgment of this Synod; when
as the Commissioners, whom he himself had nominated, brought in their report,
and the result of all their Conferences and Discourse had been read, he changed
the form of his Petition, and varying from what he promised of receiving a
Charitable Instruction, he fell into a Contentious Dispute full of Wranglings,
upon the points in Controversy, particularly upon that of Justification, and
would needs have two whole Days allowed him for this Debate with them. However
the Synod pitying his Weaknesses, and desirous by all means possible to
reclaim him back unto his Duty, yielded to his desires, and ordered the Sieurs
de Croy and de Langle Pastors of the Churches of Beziers and Rouan to confer
with him. And whereas the said de la Milletiere had begun to debate the point
of Justification with Monsieur Amyraud, Pastor and Professor of Divinity at
Saumur, the Synod thought meet that their Conference should be continued in
presence of those Two forementioned Commissioners the remaining Thursday, and
part of the Day following; When the said de la Milletiere importunately
demanding that now in his turn he might oppose and produce the Arguments in
defense of his Opinions confirmed, as he pretended by the Council of Trent; tho
this was far wide from what he at first requested, yet was it freely granted
him: And he having continued Writing till Evening, and for that it was needful
he should be answered, Monsieur Amyraud spent a great part of the Friday night,
and of the Saturday Morning in making a Reply unto him. Whereupon the said de
la Milletiere finding that the time allotted him was expired the Friday
Evening, he came and demanded a longer time for continuing the Conference:
Which the Synod did once more refuse him, especially, because that he had fully
opened his Intentions, and in formal Words declared, that by that Writing
subscribed with his own Hand, he never promised to submit his Doctrine, but
Himself and Person to the Judgment of the Assembly; who taking, as in truth
they could not but take this distinction, such an one as it was, in any other
Sense than a notorious Scorn of their Just and Charitable Endeavors for his
Eternal Welfare; They told him plainly, that neither they nor any of their
Commissioners would waste a moment more of their precious time about him, and
adjured him by the Mouth of the Sieur Garrissoles their Moderator, to give
Glory unto God, and to relinquish his most impious Designs; and added farther,
that they did as the National Synod of Alanson had done before them, declare,
that for diverse Years past he was not to be reputed a Member of our Reformed
Churches. After which, the said de la Milletiere, demanded a Copy of the
Conference, collation'd with the Original, and Signed by Monsieur Amyraud, and
the Two other Commissioners, that he might make such Reflections on it, as he
thought best; which was readily accorded him by the Synod. But before the said
Copy was finished, on Monday the 23d of January, the said de la Milletiere
accompanied with one de Nardeau Huisser des Eaux and Forests de France,
Overseer of the Waters and Forests, of France, living at Paris, came unto
Charenton, and applying himself to Monsieur Blondel, one of the Scribes
delivered to him by the Hands of the said Nardeau an Act subscribed with his
own Hand, summoning the Synod to cause the said Conference began at Charenton
(by their Commissioners, whom he all accused, but especially Monsieur Amyraud
of Ignorance and False Dealing,) to be continued in Paris: And Secondly, in
case of Refusal, that then they consign unto them the Acts signed by the said
Commissioners, that he might examine them at his leisure and pleasure. Which
said Summons being brought in, and reported to the Synod by Monsieur Blondel, a
Vote past, that Copies of those Acts Collationed and Subscribed by the said
Commissioners, and by Monsieur Amyraud, should be delivered unto the said de la
Milletiere according to his desire: And that Monsieur Amyraud should be in
readiness to refute him, in case he should attempt, as he threatened, to make
any further opposition by his Scribbles against that sound and saving Doctrine
of Justification professed in all the Protestant Churches. And whereas by these
last actings of his, the said de la Milletiere has discovered himself to be
immovably fixed in his Designs, of impugning the Truth professed in all the
Churches of this Kingdom, which he now treats as his avowed Adversaries; and
that for these Twelve Years last past, notwithstanding all Admonitions and
Remonstrances made him, he has wholly estranged himself from our Communion,
although he has frequently assisted at the Sermons which have been during all
that time, and still are Preached at Charenton. This Synod confirming the
Decree of the last National Synod held at Alanson in the Year 1637. does now
ordain, that on the next Lord's Day, being the Nine and Twentieth of this
Instant January, after the Morning Sermon is ended, and before the last Prayer
is poured out before God, the said Sieur de la Milletiere shall be denounced by
the Pastor from the Polpit in the Face of the whole public Assembly an
Excommunicate Person, and cut off from the Body of our Reformed Churches, and
not at all to be reputed a Member of them.
A Copy of the Act of Excommunication, to be Published the 29th of January,
1645. against the Sieur De la Milletiere.
Most dear Brethren,
YOU have seen with very much Regret, how Theophilus Brachet Sieur de la
Milletiere has made it his business for several Years by his Public Writings
to combat the Faith professed in all our Churches, and you have been a long
time grieved in your Souls for his scandalous Actings and Proceedings, which
are directly contrary to the bounden Duty of a Person educated from his Cradle
in the knowledge and profession of the True Religion, now utterly despised by
him. He had rather abound in his own Sense, and suffer himself to be seduced by
his own Prejudices, than yield the least tittle of Deference and Respect unto
those Remonstrances and Admonitions, which the Christian Charity of the
Consistory of this Church did in the first place make him, and which were again
and again repeated to him by the express Order of the National Synod of
Alanson, held in the Year 1637. and with this particular Clause, That in case
he did not return unto himself, and give Glory unto God, within the space of
Six Months, by renouncing of his corrupt Opinions, and desisting from his
sinful Practices, that he should be no more owned nor acknowledged for a Member
of our Reformed Churches, those just and needful Admonitions having wrought no
Impressions upon his Heart, nor hitherto produced their long desired and much
expected Fruit and Effect, but that he is since the more hardened, obstinate
and inexcusable. The National Synod of the Reformed Churches in this Kingdom,
which is now breaking up in this place, desirous to apply a proper Remedy to so
long a continued Scandal, and as much as in it lies to procure your
Edification, does now ratisie and confirm that Decree of the former Assembly
held at Alanson, and declares to you by our Mouth, that the said Sieur De la
Milletiere, who has been for Ten Years together suspended from the Lord's
Table, and Communion with the Church of God in that most holy Sacrament, and
has been ever since the Year 1638. cut off from the Number of the Faithful of
our Confession, ought not any longer to be reckoned or reputed by you as a
Member of the Reformed Amen.

This very Act was accordingly pronounced at the Close of the Morning Sermon
upon the Lord's Day, January 29. 1645. by Mr. Theophilus Rossel, Pastor of the
Church of Xaintes, in the Church of Charenton, before that great and numerous
Congregation.

ARTICLE II.The Petition of Monsieur du Mais, upon the account of his Services
unto the Churches of Auvergne, is dismissed over to the Province of Sevennes,
who are to see him satisfied. ARTICLE 3. The Petition of the Province of
Sevennes concerning the Church of Dourbiez, shall be brought before the next
Synod of Higher Languedoc, which is entreated to take it into their particular
Consideration. ARTICLE 4. This Assembly declares, that those free Portions,
which were by the National Synod of Castres put upon the Dividend of the
Province of Sevennes to be distributed among the Churches of Auvergne, having
not been paid into the said Province, it is not at all accountable for them.
ARTICLE 5. Whereas the Widow of Monsieur Garnier deceased, complains, that
the Wages of her late Husband were not paid him by the Church of Lorges: The
Sieur de Clesles Elder of that Church, and Deputy of the Province of Berry,
answers, That there was a course already taken for the discharge of that
Debt; and he promised that the Quarter of Messac should bring in their portion
without delay unto the next Synod of Berry? and the said Synod is enjoined to
see this Widow fully and entirely satisfied. ARTICLE 6. The Sieur de la Lause
petitioned by Letters, that his Son-in-law the Sieur Boronet might be set at
Liberty from his serving the Churches in the Province of Xantonge, because of
his great Age, and that he needs him to look after the Concerns and Affairs of
his Estate and Family: An Order passed, that this Petition of his should be
carried unto the next Synod of Xaintonge, which is charged to take it into
their Godly Consideration, and to deal with him according to the Rules of
Charity and Equity. ARTICLE 7. The next Synod of Berry shall take Cognizance of
the Petition of the Sieur Gueren, and in case he be oppressed, the Province of
Burgundy is ordered by their final Judicial Sentence to redress his Grievances.
ARTICLE 8. Letters written by Monsieur Percy, Pastor of the Church of
Monflanquin, and Deputy for the Province of Lower Guyenne were read, in which
he gave an Account of those Causes which hindered him from attending on this
Synod, as also the Titles of those Works begun by him in defense of the Truth.
This Assembly admitted his Excuses, and ordered him to carry the Manuscript
Copies of his Works unto the Provincial Synod, which shall carefully examine
them, that so with their Approbation they may be published. ARTICLE 9. The
Sieur Daubus, Pastor of the Church of Nerac, Petitioned by Letters, that this
Assembly would be pleased to constitute some certain Commissioners to examine a
Book written by him, and presented to the Synod of Lower Guyenne, and which was
now brought hither unto this Nationa Synod. It was Voted that the said
Manuscript Book of his should be examined by Commissioners chosen in the Synod
of that Province, who having approved of it, should take Care about it is
Impression and Publication. ARTICLE 10. This Synod being well informed both by
the Letters of Monsieur Falquett a Pastor Emeritus, and by the Speech of
Monsieur Taby, of the deplorable Estate whereunto he is reduced: An Ordinance
passed, That the said Falquett should be recommended to the Charity of the
Churches, who have hither relieved him; with oar desire, that they would be
pleased to continue their Offices of Love and Christian Kindness to him. And
this Ordinance shall be sent unto the Church of Maringues, whether the said Mr.
Falquett is ordered to retire. ARTICLE 11. According to those respective
Letters written by the Pastors and Consistories of the Colloquies of Rouan and
Caux, the Si^urs de L'Angle and Guesdon having petitioned that those two
aforesaid Colloquies might be sundred, to make up each of them a particular
Synod; the Sieurs Basnage and Caillars, who spoke for the four Colloquies of
the Lower Normandy, which opposed this Separation, being also heard; The
Assembly, after a mature Debate and serious Consideration of the Reasons pro
and con, of the Conveniences and Inconveniences which might ensure upon this
dismembring, and for denying or granting their Request, made this Decree, That
the Separation demanded by them could not be allowed. And whereas the said
Sieurs Basnage and Caillard have on their side requested, that without any
respect had unto that distinction of Higher and Lower Normandy, this Assembly
would be pleased to ordain, that whenever an Election should be made of
Deputies unto the National Synods, that it might he carried by Number of
Persons and Plurality of Suffrages, and not by that Custom of deputing one tor
the Higher, and another for the Lower Normandy: It was again resolved, that the
ancient Custom should not be abrogated, nor that any thing should be innovated
in the Form and Manner of their Elections. ARTICLE 12. The Complaint of
Monsieur des Marez in his Letters, was brought hither by the Deputies of the
Lower Languedoc, and exaggerated by their Remonstrances in this Synod,
whereunto the Deputies of the Province of Vivaretz also did make Reply in their
own Defense. Upon hearing of both Parties, the Consistory of Montlimard (which
was accepted by both Parties for their Umpire) was empowered with Authority
from this National Synod to determine finally of this Affair. ARTICLE 13. Report
was made by the Deputies of Normandy of a Suit at Law commenced by a certain
Head of a Family belonging to the Church of Rouen against a Woman espoused,
without their Permission, or the Consent of his Parents, unto his Son. This
Assembly decreed, that the Son, who by reason of this difference had been
suspended the Lords Table, should humble himself unto his Father, and by all
the Ways and Duties of Submission and Reverence endeavor to regain his Favor
and Blessing; and the Father shall be entreated and conjured by the Consistory
to limit a certain time when he will put an end unto this Process. Which term
being lapsed, the Son shall be received unto Communion at the Lord's Supper.
ARTICLE 14. The Complaint of Monsieur Gravier shall be brought before the next
Synod of Burgundy, who shall take Care about it. ARTICLE 15. Whereas Monsieur
de la Fite has represented, that there was a Clause inserted into the Act of
the Synod of Alanson, framed upon the Account of the Sieur Fabas, and which
concerned both him the said La Fite, and the Sieur Gillott Advocate in the
Parliament of Navarre, this Assembly decrees, That the said Sieurs shall
appear before the Provincial Synod of Lower Guyenne, which is to determine
finally of this their Affair. ARTICLE 16. That Act made in the Synod of Lower
Guyenne, held at St. Foy, on behalf of Monsieur Larigorrie, shall be executed
according to its Form and Tenor; and the said Sieur Larigorrie is according to
the Intention of that Synod, recommended to the Charity of the Churches of
Lower Guyenne, that from them he may receive the assistance promised to him.
ARTICLE 17. Till the Meeting of the Provincial Synod of Berry, unto which the
Sieur L'Eufant shall present himself to be examined, the Church of B^^^^e shall
be supplied by the Pastors of Orleans, Blois, Chasteaudun, M^^^^^noir,
Chillieure, D'Angeau and Mer, who shall take care of its Co^^^^ and
Edification. ARTICLE 18. Monsieur Drelincourt, one of the Pastors of the Church
of Paris, and Deputy for the Isle of France, having presented to this Assembly
the books written by him upon that great Question, about the Religious Worship
paid by the Church of Rome unto the Blessed Virgin, and maintained by the
Bishop of Bellay, received the Thanks of the whole As^^mbly for his Deference
and Respect given to it; his Zeal also in d^^^nce of God's Truth was praised
and applauded by all the Members, and he was entreated to consecrate the
residue of his Labors and Studies to the common Edification of God's Church,
and the Confutation of its Adversaries. ARTICLE 19. The Sieur de Morande Deputy
for the Province of Burgundy, petitioned on behalf of the Church of Bussy, that
this Assembly would be pleased to direct them what Course they should take to
recover diverse Legacies bequathed to it, and to cause several Persons, which
owe the Moneys, to make payment of those Sums assessed on them for the
Maintenance of the Holy Ministry among them. A Decree passed, That he should
carry his Petition unto the next Synod of his Province, who shall advise them
to use their best Prudence in choice of those Means which will be most
effectual and expedient for them in their present Circumstances. ARTICLE 20.
The Complaint of Monsieur Ramet, Pastor of the Church of Pontigny, about
certain Letters very injurious to him, and written by an unknown Person under
the feigned Name of Philarque, is dismissed over to the Cognizance of the
Sieurs Basnage and de L'Angle, and of the Commissiones their Colleagues,
nominated by this Assembly, to pass over unto Vitre, and there to labor
conjunctly in the settling and restoration of Peace and good Order in the Church
of Chirst gathered in that Town. ARTICLE 21. The Provincial Deputies of Poictou
having presented the first Tome of reconciling those Texts of Scripture which
seemingly differed and disagreed, written by the Sieur D'Artois Pastor of the
Church of St. Hillary, and Dedicated by him unto this Assembly; and the Letters
of the said Sieur D'Artois being read, in which he requested, that by Order of
this Assembly his Book might, be examined and approved, and then in consequence
thereof printed and published, it was resolved that Letters should be written
him in commendation of his Zeal and good Affection toward the clearing up of
God's Truth. But inasmuch as he had been already prejudiced by the Sieurs de
Persy and D'Aubus, who had offered to communicate their Labors on this Subject
to him, and that the Straits of Time, and multitude of Business could not
permit this Assembly to examine and revise his Book, the Province of Poictou was
charged to deliver the Message of this Assembly to him, and praising him for
his great Pains and Undertaking, to assure him, that when they had examined and
approved of this Work of his, they would take care for its Impression and
Publication. ARTICLE 22. The Sieur Bernardin, Pastor of the Church of Cartays,
petitioned this Assembly by his Letters to assist him in the purchase of Books
needed by him in prosecution of his great Design of refuting the Annals of
Cardinal Baronius; a Work which he has undertook from that Evidence and
Knowledge God has given him of the many Weaknesses and Failures in the
Adversary. An Answer was Voted to be sent him, That forasmuch as the Churches
had no Fund at their Disposal, this Assembly was not in any condition to
satisfy his Demand. And touching his Work, if he pleased to go on with it, he
should render an account of it unto the Province of Lower Guyenne, who are to
judge how useful and serviceable it may be unto the Churches. ARTICLE 23. The
Sieur Richard was upon his Petition admitted to be heard give the Reasons why
he had varied from that Act, made on his Occasion in the last National Synod of
Alanson; and the Assembly allowing his Plea of Bodily Indisposition, which did
not suffer him to perform any Duties of his Ministerial Calling, has
absolutely discharged him from it, and freeing him from that necessity of
returning to the County of Vaux, does again recommend him to that Charity,
which has been usually extended to him by the Isle of France, and that he
might be enabled to return unto his own House, there were some Effects of their
Bounty imparted to him by this Assembly, with an express Injunction laid upon
him, that he should never for the future trouble these Synodical Meetings with
Complaints of his Poverty and Necessities. ARTICLE 24. The Sieur Arnaud came in
Person unto this Assembly, and demanded its assistance and advice in his
perplexed condition; and he was directed to steer this course, that if he
intended to have his Majesty's Interdiction removed from him, he should solely
address himself unto his Majesty's Courts of Justice; and in case the King
should be pleased to release and acquit him, and restore him once again unto
his Ministry, that then he should go unto the Consistory of Nisms, who having
sent their Deputies upon the Place to take cognizance of the Carriage of the
Church of Andusa toward him, and of the Sieur Bouit, who was since inducted
into it, and calling in to their assistance, for the confirmation and
strengthening of their Act, four of their Neighbor Pastors, they shall by
Authority of this present Synod proceed unto the Restoration of the said Sieur
Arnaud, and to censure those Persons who have so basely and unworthily forsook
him in his Troubles; and they shall censure the Sieur Bouit, who is since
gotten into his place: And if upon a strict Examination, they find him to have
intruded himself into the Church of Andusa, they shall deal with him according
to the Rigor of the Discipline. And the Expense and Charges of those Deputies
from the Consistory of Nisms shall be defrayed both by the Church of Andusa,
and by the Sieur Bouit. ARTICLE 25. The Expenses which the Sieurs Arnaud,
Bland, and others, have been necessitated to make through the Wiles and crafty
Practices of their Adversaries, shall according to the Order passed in this
Assembly, be repayed them by the Churches of Sevennes, and those Churches,
which had called them, shall every one of them bear their proportions of one
Third, and the Colloquies in whose Division they are another third, and the
Province the last third. ARTICLE 26. Mr. Blondel, who when he was chosen Deputy
for the Isle of France, stood related as Pastor to the Church of Houdan, and
has been since removed by the last Synod of the Province, who permitted him to
reside in Paris, that he might with the more convenience intend his Studies, as
appears by the Act of that Synod, which was now read, did petition the Synod
to determine the Nature and Quality of his Function by some particular Act made
by it, and to be inserted into the Body of the Acts of this National Synod, and
to take it into their Consideration, whether they do approve of his Residence
at Paris. Secondly, That inasmuch as he has frequent Intelligence given him
from diverse parts, that there be some at work to answer his Treatise De
Primatu, whether it would be proper for him to be ready to defend it, or
whether they would lay that Task upon another, which he leaves, as he does all
his Concerns, to the disposal of the Churches. And he desired that the Synod
would be pleased to order those Persons who made any Remarks upon the said
Treatise to communicate it to him for his better Information. Thirdly, Whether
those Treatises composed by him on several Subjects both in Divinity and
History, the Catalogue of which he now produced, might be any ways useful and
serviceable to the Public. Fourthly, and in case those Helps and Assistance
which he has hitherto had at Paris should come to fail him, or he should be
too much diverted, from his Studies, by looking after a Maintenance, he might
not be licensed to accept of (...) Call in a Foreign Land, and to quit his
Pastoral charge, that so he might be the better enabled to attend upon that
great work of defending the Truth, a Province conferred upon him by Decrees of
the National Synods of Castres, Charenton and Alanson, and to spend the
remainder of his Life in serving God and his Church in this weighty Employment.
The Synod acknowledging the great (...) the Public received by his Learned
Labors, and that they might be perfected, he could not be settled in a more
convenient place than in Paris, because of the great confluence of Learned Men,
and the oppo^^^ (...) of corresponding with Learned Foreigners, and for that
the cho^^^ (...) braries of all France are in this City, did judge, that it was
best for (...) that according to the decree of the Synod of the Isle of France,
he do continue his Residence here, and that he retain his Quality of Minister
of the Gospel, which is so justly due unto him. And he was enjoined to be in
readiness to reply unto such as should undertake to answer his Book de Primatu,
as being the fittest Person in the World to do it, and who will acquit himself
most worthily thereof to general satisfaction. And he was exhorted to Publish
as soon as possible he could these Treatises in Divinity and History, whose
Catalogue was (...) Assembly, which we are fully persuaded will very much
contribute to the Edification of Gods Church. And in particular he is ord^^^ to
hasten the publication of his Treatise concerning Bishops and P^^^sts, and of
that also wherein he proves, that there is little or no Evidence that St.
Peter was over at Rome. And because we are well acquainted with his great
Abilities, excellent Gifts and Talents especially with his vast knowledge in
the Antiquities of the Christian Church, for which he is most highly valued by
all our Churches, we cannot in any wise consent that he should depart the
Kingdom; and therefore we do most earnestly exhort him to take up his Dwelling
in Paris, and there he may enjoy those helps which the good Providence of God
does afford him for the accomplishment of his designs. And since it is
unreasonal so that he should always work for the Public, and lay himself out
to painfully and laboriously upon a tails imposed on him by the ^^at^^^al
Synods, without ever receiving any benefit, this present Synod considering him
as an Honorary Professor, have by the ^^ammous consent of all the Deputies of
the Provinces, over and above what is paid him by the Province of the Isle of
France, decreed to him the ^^^ual Pension of a Thousand Livers, which shall be
carefully paid in unto him by the Provinces, according to that account
hereunder couched, and in the same manner and proportion as they pay our
Universities; and they shall be obliged all and every of them to send in their
respective Quota's Yearly unto the Consistory of the Church of Paris, The Synod
being exceeding sorry that they cannot gratify him suitably to their own
Desires, and his great Deserts by those many excellent Endowments he is Owner
of, and those incomparable Works that he has given to the Public. A Dividend
of the Sum of a Thousand Livres granted by the National Synod to Monsieur
Blondel, Minister of the Holy Gospel, to be taken from these Thirteen Provinces
hereafter Named.
l. s. d. From the Province of Normandy, the Sum of 157 03 00 From the Province
of Dolphiny, the Sum of 157 03 00 From the Province of Burgundy, the Sum of 013
04 00 From the Province of Lower Languedoc, the Sum of 102 03 00 From the
Province of Xaintonge, the Sum of 100 12 00 From the Province of Higher
Languedoc, the Sum of 104 14 00 From the Province of Anjou, the Sum of 089 10
00 From the Province of Britain, the Sum of 013 02 00 From the Province of
Berry, the Sum of 036 13 00 From the Province of Poictou, the Sum of 102 03 00
From the Province of Lower Guyenne, the Sum of 094 04 00 From the Province of
Sevennes, the Sum of 026 02 00 From the Province of Bearn, the Sum of 006 02 00
1022 15 00 There be Two and Twenty Livers, Fifteen Sous more than the Thousand
Livers ordered to Monsieur Blondel, which are to be laid by in Stock.

ARTICLE 28. Monsieur Gautier Pastor of the Church of Archiac, having in
Obedience to that order given to all the Provinces by the National Synod of
Alanson, compiled the Canons of our National Synods into a body, and applied
them to the respective Canons of our Discipline, presented his work unto the
Synod of Xaintonge, which charged their Deputies to tender it unto this
Assembly, together with the Letters of the said Gautier. The Synod ordained
that his Letters should be answered, and his Godly Zeal for the Public Service
of the Church commended, and that his Province which has first experimented
the utility of his Labor, should be exhorted to express before all others
their gratitude unto him. ARTICLE 29. Monsieur Catelon having labored in the
explication of the Canons of our Discipline, by applying to them the Canons of
our National Synods, which expounded and confirmed them; and this in pursuance
of that Counsel given by the last National Synod, presented his Collection unto
the Synod of Vivaretz, who caused it, together with the Authors Letters, to be
brought unto this Assembly by their Deputies, and craved that the said Catelon
might be reimbursed of his Charges. The Assembly judged that the said Province
who employed him in this work for the Public Service of the Churches in their
Division, should give him all Satisfaction; and in the mean while he should be
applauded for contributing his good Intentions to the edifying of the Faithful,
and promoting the exercise of our Discipline. ARTICLE 30. The Church and
University of Sedan having represented by their Letters how gracious and
favorable their Majesty's have been unto them ever since they incorporated the
Principalites of Sedan and Raucourt with the Crown of France; and that this
Assembly would be pleased to give forth their Order, that our Scholars might
study in their University, as well as in others of this Kingdom. A Decree
passed, that an Answer should be returned them, expressing the Joy of all our
Churches at their Prosperity; and to assure them that there shall be an equal
respect had unto their University, as unto the Four others erected in this
Kingdom. ARTICLE 31. That Complaint made by Monsieur de la Fonds, formerly a
Minister, but now a Schoolmaster at Cajare, against his Sister, and Monsi^^e de
la Roche Pastor of the Church of Card^illac, shall be carried by him unto the
Consistory of Montauban, which shall summon the Parties before them, and judge
finally of the difference between them, by the Authority of this Assembly.
CHAP. XVI. Of Universities.
ARTICLE 1. IT being evident, that through the Ill Will of diverse Churches in
the Lower Guyenne, the said Province is indebted in very great Sums unto the
University of Montauban, which has been exceeding prejudicial to it; this
Synod Ordains, that the Arrearages owing by the said Province, and by all
others, indebted to the said University, shall be paid by equal Proportions,
without any the least abatement, within the space of Six Years; and that in
every Colloquy there shall be constituted a Receiver, to whose Hands the Quota
assessed upon every particular Church, shall be directed, and from them unto
the General Receiver for the Province, who shall deliver in the full and
complete Contribution of that Province, unto that University to which it was
appointed. And all Pastors and Elders shall put to their helping Hand, that the
Canons and Decrees made on this occasion, be punctually and faithfully executed
in their Provinces. And the Contribution of particular Churches for our
Universities shall be raised with as much exactness, care and Fidelity as for
the Pastors. And the Provincial Synods are charged to call every Church within
their District unto an Account how they have performed their Duty in this
particular, and to punish all Pastors and Elders, who shall be found to have
been remiss, negligent and careless herein, and to censure them even with
suspension from their Charges. ARTICLE 2. The University of Montauban, having
remonstrated that the Province of Bearn has been so far from paying the poor
Sum of Fifty Livres of Annual Contribution, which they freely offered by their
Deputies in the National Synod of Alanson, for the Subsistence of the said
University, that they have in diverse of their Synods since positively resolved
not to contribute so much as one Denier. The Sieur de la Fite was heard what he
had to say in excuse for his Province, it being a most notorious default,
because the Contribution which was offered by their Provincial Deputies, is so
very inconsiderable, and easy to be paid; and that the refusal of its payment
will give an open Scandal to all the Churches. So that the Assembly judged that
Province to have incurred the most grievous Censures; and that the said Sieur
de la Fite was consequentially ill-grounded in his Excuses. And farther
Decrees, that the Sum of Fifty Livres due for this present Year, without
prejudicing of the time running on, shall be immediately paid down by the said
Sieur de la Fite, according to his Promise; and as for the Arrears owing by
them, they shall be paid in by equal proportions within the prefixed term of
Six Years. And in case that, or any other Province should make default o^
Payment, they shall be dealt withal as Desertors of the Churches Union, and
shall lose their Privilege of sitting and voteing by their Deputies in our
National Synods. And whereas the said Sieur de la Fite did offer to lay down an
Hundred Livres for the Two last Years, provided his Province might be fully
discharged of all Arrears, it was utterly rejected. ARTICLE 3. The Council of
the University of Montauban, is it powered to take what they can conveniently
spare out of the Minerval (the Entrance Money) paid by Scholars unto their
Regents, and to pay it in to the common Purse, for defraying the Charges they
must be necessarily at in recovering the Contributions due from the Neighbor
Provinces: And it is recommended to the Care of the said Council, that upon this
Pretext, they do not surcharge the poor Scholars, nor absolutely discharge the
Provinces. ARTICLE 4. Whereas the Province of higher Languedoc, has chosen
Monsieur Crumel a Pastor in actual Service of the Church of Reniers and
Courbaniers, to be Professor of Philosophy in the University of Montauban, and
given in to this Assembly the Reasons and Motives inducing their Synod unto
that Choice; what they had done was Authorized and Approved. ARTICLE 5. At the
request of the Province of Higher Languedoc, Monsieur Verdier is exhorted to
fit and qualify himself, together with those other Ministers nominated by the
Synod of Alanson, for the profession of Theology. ARTICLE 6. The Canon made in
the Synod of Alanson, concerning the Maintenance of our Universities, and
beginning with those Words, Although it be notorious, etc. shall be again read
in all the Churches. ARTICLE 7. To sacilitate the payment of Arrerages due unto
our Universities by the Province of Normandy; This Assembly Ordains,
according to the Expedient propounded by them, that in the Lower Normandy there
shall be established One common Receiver, and Four particular Ones for its Four
Colloquies, who shall deliver into the Hands of the common Receiver their
respective Contributions; and he shall after send it to the Receiver General
residing at Rouen, to whom shall be sent the State of the Quota as it is
assessed in every Provincial Synod, which shall serve for the regulating and
clearing of his Accounts, and the Churches depending on them. That so all of
them may in case of failure be reduced with more ease and commodiousness unto
their duty. ARTICLE 8. This Assembly ratifying that injunction formerly laid
upon our Professors of Philosophy, to lay by many needless questions of Natural
Philosophy in their handling of Meraphysicks, does also over and besides it,
Ordain, that they shall leave also those Questions in Logic which are
Superfluous, and instead of them, subjoyn unto it a short Compend of Ethics,
that so their Scholars may be acquainted with the first Rudiments of Moral
Philosophy. ARTICLE 9. Whereas there is the Sum of Three Thousand Livres
Ordained for the Yearly Maintenance of the University of Montauban, and when
the Professors have been paid their respective Sallaries, there will remain
Four Hundred Livres in stock: This Assembly Ordains, that hereafter in all
Dividends of the said Moneys, out of those Four Hundred Livres remaining in
stock, there shall be equally distributed among the Three Regents, who Instruct
and Teach the Scholars of the Reformed Religion in the College of Montauban,
One Hundred and Fifty Livres; and to the Doorkeeper of the said College
professing the Reformed Religion, Fifty Livres. And as for the other Two
Hundred Livres, the Sieurs, Garrissoles and Charles, Professors in Divinity,
shall receive them Yearly by equal Portions, over and above their Wages
assigned to them, as the Contributions of the Churches and Provinces shall come
into their Hands: It being but just and reasonable, that their continual
Labors and Cares for the public should be recognized by this slender
gratuity; nor will this in the least prejudice the Regents or Door-Keepers,
whose Vails and Emoluments will come in unto them from the Minerval Moneys, by
the Scholars paid at their Matriculation; as was before granted in another
Article. ARTICLE 10. Out of an old Sum of One Thousand and Twenty Seven Livres
of Arrears owing by the Province of Normandy, to the University of Montauban,
the Sieur Harrissoles Professor in Divinity, shall receive by way of Advance,
and without any prejudice to his Portion, owing to him out of the Sum of Three
Thousand Livers, in consideration of his great Pains and Services performed by
him for these Eighteen Months, ever since the Decease of his Reverend Colleague
Monsieur Beraud, until the Settlement of his Successor Monsieur Charles, the
Sum of Three Hundred Livres. And whereas that Province is indebted for those
Arrears aforesaid, until the settling of the succeeding Professor, it is obliged
to make good payment of it in the manner before appointed, and particularly to
see that the said Monsieur Garrissoles be fully content and satisfied; who only
when all others for want of their Sallaries quitted their Employments,
continued diligent in his station, and followed hard the Duties of his Calling
and Profession. ARTICLE 11. That all Complaints may be prevented about the
Non-Execution of the Canons concerning the Promotion of Scholars; this Assembly
leaves it to the prudence of the Rectors and Councils of our Universities to
judge of the proficiency made by them in their several Classes, and so either
to advance them from the Lower to an Higher Degree, or to promote them unto the
public Lectures. Nor shall they ever use any Indulgence herein, but on special
grounds, and for very good reason and consideration. ARTICLE 12. The Judgment
of the Province of Anjou, in preferring the Professors of Philosophy before the
Professors of Eloquence is ratified and confirmed; and until such time as the
Provinces can make a Fund for the Maintenance of a Greek Professor, this
Assembly does greatly approve, and joyfully embrace the offer of that Gentleman
who promises to exercise that Profession freely, and without any Charge unto
the Churches. ARTICLE 13. The Pastors of those Towns and Cities in which our
Universities are Erected, having been Incorporated by the Canons of the
National Synod of Alez, in the Year 1620, into the Councils of those
Universities, shall be ordinarily and in their own persons present at them,
unless there be some lawful cause impeding them. ARTICLE 14. According to the
Received Custom for diverse Years in the Church of Saumur, our Proposans shall
come up unto the Lord's Table immediately after the Professors, and shall
precede all the Regents of the Classes. ARTICLE 15. According to that Canon
made at Alez, those Pastors in whose Churches our Universities are situated,
shall in their turns preside with the Professors of Theology at all
Propositions both French and Latin. ARTICLE 16. At the Request of the
University of Saumur, the Province of Normandy shall bring before September
next unto the Consistory at Paris the Acquittances of those Payments, which
they pretend to have made unto the said University, of the Sum of Six Hundred
and Five and Twenty Livres, which the said Province stood indebted to it for
the Year 1637. on default whereof they shall be condemned to pay the said Sum,
as also the Sum of Nine and Forty Livres, which are owing by them upon another
Account. And the Consistory aforesaid is fully empowered by this Assembly to
judge finally, without any Appeal in this Case. ARTICLE 17. His Excellency the
Lord Marshall of Chastillon having writ unto this Assembly, and by his Letters
given us to understand that he designed to set up again the College of
Chastillon in the same Estate in which it was in his Fathers Life, and the
Sieur des Baraudieres Deputy for the Province of Berry, having offered for the
Lady Marshall of Chastillon, according to that express Order he had received
from her, to contribute yearly the Sum of Five Hundred Livres toward
maintenance of a Professor in it: The Assembly Voted, That the said Lord and
Lady should be most humbly thanked for their charitable Offers, and entreated
to continue always their Kindnesses unto the Churches; and in compliance with
their laudable Designs, the Sieurs Drelincourt and Le Coq, Deputies of the Isle
of France, have assured this Assembly, that the Church of Paris will add
Annually the Sum of Four Hundred Livres more, which they had not given
hitherto, because they waited for the sitting of this Synod. And the Sieur de
L'Angle, and the other Deputies of Normandy, did voluntarily offer in the Name
of their Province, to contribute yearly the Sum of sixty Livres. The Sieur de
Croy and the other Deputies of Lower Languedoc have consented to pay the like
Sum of sixty Livres. The Sieur Bollenat and his Colleague, Deputies for the
Province of Burgundy, consented also to make paying yearly the Sum of Fifty and
Nine Livres, over and above the Sum of Four Hundred Livres assessed upon them
in the foregoing Synods. And forasmuch as these Contributions are not
sufficient, the Synod ordains, That the Churches of Rochel and Lions shall be
entreated to contribute unto so good a Work, according to their Piety and Zeal
for the Glory of God. ARTICLE 18. The Church of Loudan petitioning this
Assembly to be assisted and enabled with some Supplies for the better
Maintenance of their College, and that they might be forgiven their
Contribution, which they have hitherto paid into the University of Saumur, and
that the said Sum might be levied elsewhere: It was Decreed, That their
Contribution should be paid in as formerly unto the University of Saumur, and
the Church of Loudan should receive Yearly the Sum of Threescore and Ten
Livres, to be paid in unto it by the Province of Britain, which is exhorted
and entreated to enlarge their Charity as much as possible unto the said
College of Loudan, and that they would not hereupon abate or defalk any thing
of their wonted Contribution to the University of Saumur. ARTICLE 19. The
Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc having represented, that since the Death
of Monsieur Petit, Pastor and Professor of Theology in the University of Nisms,
that the Four Pastors of that Church have read Lectures unto the Students, and
kept up the other Exercises of Propositions and public Disputations; and that
the Synod held at Montpellier in December last, had charged them to continue
these Academical Exercises until such time as this present National Synod
should by its Authority make other and farther Provision; and they did now
petition, that some Persons might be nominated and appointed to the Profession
of Theology and the Hebrew Tongue, or else to Authorize the Synod of that
Province so to do. This Assembly confirming the said University of Nismes, and
accepting the Offers of the Provinces of the Lower Languedoc and Sevennes, who
have took upon them to bear the greatest and principal part of its Charges and
Maintenance, does exhort the Sieur de Croy, on whom the whole Province of Lower
Languedoc have cast their Eyes, to fit and betake himself to the Exercise of
the Profession of Divinity, whenever he shall be called to it by the Authority
of that Provincial Synod, they strictly observing all the Forms prescribed by
our Discipline. ARTICLE 20. Approving that just Petition of the Provinces of
Lower Languedoc and Sevennes for the re-establishment of their common College
in such a place as they should agree unto, and conserving to the University of
Die its yearly Contribution from the Churches of Sevennes: This Assembly
exhorts the Provinces of Provence and Vivaretz, that because the
Neighborhood of the College of Sevennes must needs be exceeding profitable
unto them, that they would be pleased to contribute, according as God shall
have enabled them, toward its establishment and maintenance; and the rather,
for that they never did contribute any thing unto our Universities. Moreover it
is ordained, that Letters shall be written unto the Consistory of Marseilles,
entreating them to afford all the Fruits of their Charity that possibly they
can unto this College; and those Offers made by the Sieur de Caille, who
promised to contribute liberally unto it, were accepted; and he was entreated
to get the Lord Marquis of Senars, and the other Noblemen and Gentlemen of that
Province to express also on their parts then Kindness and Liberality. ARTICLE
21. When as the Provincial Synod of Dolphiny shall have examined the Works of
Mr. Rhodon Professor of Philosophy at Orange, and shall have considered of
their Usefulness, they may be licensed for the Press, and published to the
World. ARTICLE 22. The Deputies of Dolphiny petitioned on behalf of the
University of Die, that this Assembly would be pleased to ordain, that the
Province of Guyenne do pay in unto the said University the Sum of Three
Thousand Six Hundred and Ten Livres, Seven Sous, which they owed to it, and
which the Synod of Alanson had given as a Fund unto the said University. The
Deputies of Lower Guyenne were heard, who very much questioned the Truth of the
said Debt. This Synod dismissed them both unto the Consistory of Paris, who
shall inspect and revise those Accounts within six Months, and that term being
passed, they shall proceed to a final Judgment on those Accounts and Papers
brought in by the Deputies of Dolphiny; and till that final Sentence be given,
the Province of Lower Guyenne shall pay what shall be found due on their part,
according to that general Canon before established for payment of Arrearages
owing by the Province unto our Universities, that so these Sums thus paid in
may be disposed to the best advantage, according to the Intention of the
National Synod of Alanson. ARTICLE 23. To finish that great Work of Monsieur
Chamier Deceased, upon the Controversies of Religion, the Sieurs Garrissoles
and Charles were chosen and appointed to write De Reali Prasentia and
Transubstantiatione, to handle the Questions De Ecclesia and Consiliis;
Monsieur Amyraut to treat De Manducationo Spirituali, and de Sacrificio Missa;
Monsieur de la Place and the aforesaid Sieur de Garrissoles is entreated and
exhorted to publish his Work de Christo Redemptore. And the Sieurs de
Chanvernoun, Mestrez^^; da C^^y, Aubertin and Daille are also desired to print
their Works, which they have undertook and performed for the common Edification
of the Churches ARTICLE 24. The Province of Normandy shall produce within six
Months before the Consistory of Paris those Acquittances which they received
from the University of Saumur for the Sum of Six Hundred and Five and Twenty
Livers; and in case they omit the doing hereof, the said Province shall be
condemned, as it is from this very instant to make payment of it. l. s. d. 25.
From henceforward the University of Montauban shall receive Contribution from
the Isle of France the yearly Sum of 800 Livres, from the Higher Languedoc 1000
Livres, from the Lower Guyenne 900 Livres, from the Contribution of Normandy,
besides what that Province is to pay into the University of Die 250 Livres, and
from Bearn 250 Livres, in all 3000 Livres. 3000 00 00 26. The University of
Saumur shall receive of the Contribution from the Isle of France 800 Livres,
and from that of Normandy 800 Livres, and from that of Poictou 975 Livres, and
from Anjou 850 Livres, and from Britain 130 Livres, and from Zantonge 575
Livres. In all 4130 Livres. 4130 00 00 27. The University of Die, over and
besides the Contribution brought in by the Province of Dolphiny, amounting to
1560 Livres, it shall receive from that of Berry 345 Livres, from that of
Burgundy 131 Livres, from the Sevennes 125 Livres, from that of Xaintonge 385
Livres, from Normandy 450 Livres. The whole 2996 Livres. 2996 00 00 28. The
University of Nisms shall receive the Contribution of the Lower Languedoc,
which amounts to the Sum of 975 Livres, and out of that of Sevennes 120 Livres.
In all 1100 Livres. 1100 00 00 29. The Total Sum of what is Levied for the Four
Universities of Montauban, Saumur, Die and Nisms, amounts to 15800 Livres.
15800 00 00

ARTICLE 30. A Dividend of the Sum of 15800 Livres, being the remainders of the
Sum of 1600 Livres granted by his Majesty unto this Synod, for defraying the
Expenses of Four and Fifty Deputies, who received each of them 292 l. 11 s. 6
d. l. s. d. 1. To Anjou, for 4 Deputies 1170 07 06 2. To the Isle of France,
for 3 Deputies 0877 15 04 3. To Normandy, for 4 Deputies 1170 07 06 4. To
Dolphiny, for 4 Deputies 1170 07 06 5. To Sevennes, for 4 Deputies 1170 07 06
6. To Bearn, for 2 Deputies 585 03 06 7. To the Lower Guienne, for 2 Deputies
585 03 06 8. To Xaintonge, for 4 Deputies 1170 07 06 9. To Vivaretz, for 4
Deputies 1170 07 06 10. To Berry, for 4 Deputies 1170 07 06 11. To Poictou, for
4 Deputies 1170 07 06 12. To Britain, for 2 Deputies 585 03 06 13. To Higher
Guienne, for 4 Deputies 1170 07 06 14. To Lower Languedoc, for 4 Deputies 1170
07 06 15. To Burgundy, for 3 Deputies 877 15 04 16. To Provence, for 2 Deputies
585 03 06

ARTICLE 31. The Two Hundred Livres, which remained to complete the Sum of
Sixteen Hundred, were employed in defraying the Charges of two Deputies, who
were sent unto Paris, about the Business of the Churches, and to attend some
time at Court, that so in case they should need those Moneys, they might,
according as was before ordered, receive them. By reason of the dearness of
Provisions, the Journies of the Deputies were taxed at the desire of several
Provinces at the rate of Six Livres a Day.


CHAP. XVII. The Accounts of our Universities; and, The Debt of every Province
unto each of them respectively.
l. s. d. 33. THE Province of Xaintonge owes, and is indebted unto the
University of Saumur for Arrears liquidated in the Synod of Alanson for the
year 1636, the Sum of 265 Livres, one Sous, and Six Deniers more for the year
1637, ending the first of October, amounting to 556 Livres, and for other Seven
years since that, ending the first of October, 1644. at the rate of 575 l. a
year, the Sum of 4025 Livres, out of which three several Sums, amounting in all
to 4846 Livres, one Sous, and ten Deniers, there has been paid by the said
Province the Sums of 3908 Livres, and 9 Sous, which being deducted from the
great Sum, the said Province of Xaintonge is indebted unto the said University
of Saumur the Sum of Nine Hundred Thirty and Seven Livres, Twelve Sous, and Ten
Deniers. 937 12 10 34. Secondly, The Province of Poictou stands indebted for
old Arrearages and new ones to the first of October 1643. according to the
Account audited and stated in the Provincial Synod held at St. Maixant the 8th
day of July, in the said year 1643. the Sum of Thirteen Hundred Forty and Four
Livres. 1344 00 00 More, Nine Hundred thirty and five Livres for the year 1644.
ending the first of October, out of which two Sums multiplied together, and
amounting to Two Thousand Three Hundred Four and Twenty Livres, and Six Sous,
there have been paid One Hundred and Sixty Livres; so that deducting that Sum,
there remains due from the said Province of Poictou, unto the said University
of Saumur, the Sum of Two Thousand One Hundred and Seventy Four Livres, Nine
Sous, and Six Deniers; excepting always, that the said Province do produce
their Acquittances for the great Sum, and that the said University do not
discover Errors in the said Account audited at St. Maixant. 'Till which time
the Province of Poictou owes the said University the Sum of 2174 05 06 35. The
Province of Britain owes the Sum of One Hundred and Thirty Livres for the
Year 1644, ending the First of October, having produced their Acquittances for
the former Years. 0130 00 00 36. The Province of Berry is indebted to the
University of Saumur, the Sum of Sixty and One Livres, upon an old Debt made
out in the National Synod of Alanson, and which that Synod ordered the Payment
of 0061 00 00 37. Fifthly, The Province of Anjou is also indebted the Sum of
Two Hundred Fifty and Two Livres, which was made appear in the said Synod of
Alanson. 0252 00 00 38. The Province of Normandy is also indebted Nine and
Forty Livres, Five Sous, and Seven Deniers, the remaining part of a Sum of
Eleven Hundred Forty and Four Livres, Five Sous, and Seven Deniers, which the
said Province was in Arrears at the said Synod of Alanson: The Sieur Daniel
Guesdon, Elder of the Church of Rouan, producing Acquittances for payment of
the Sum of Eleven Hundred Livres, paid with his own Hands unto the said
University. 0049 05 07 39 The Province of Anjou tendered in Four Accounts,
stated in so many Synods, assembled first at Balesme, in the Month of June,
1639; the Second at Previlly, in the Month of October, 1640; the Third at
Loudun, in the Month of May, 1643; the Fourth at Pring^y, in the Month of July,
1644; for Three Quarters of the Year 1636; and for the Years 1636, 1637, 1638,
1639, 1640, 1641, 1642; and for Three Quarters of the Year 1643. All which were
verified, approved and accepted. 40. The Province of Higher Languedoc, is
indebted to the University of Montauban, the Sum of One Thousand, Five Hundred,
Fifty and Eight Livres, Ten Sous, and Six Deniers, until the First Day of
October, 1644; as appeared from their Account audited in the Synod held at
Mauvezin, in the Year 1643, deducting what had been received till that Day by
the said University. So their Debt stands thus, 1558 10 08 41. The Province of
Lower Guyenne is indebted the Sum of Two Thousand, Six Hundred and Forty
Livres, according to the Account stated and rendered by several Deputies of the
said University: So that some particular Churches in that Province, together
with it do owe 2640 00 00 42. The Province of Normandy owes the Sum of One
Thousand and Twenty Seven Livres, Ninteen Sous, being the remainders of the Sum
of One Thousand, Four Hundred Twenty and Seven Livres, Nineteen Sous, which was
made appear at the National Synod of Alanson, that they owed on Arrears, the
Sieur Daniel Guesdon, Elder of the Church of Rouen having produced Acquittances
of the Sum of Four Hundred Livres paid on the said Sum; he also produced
Acquittances of Payments made unto the said University for the Years 1638,
1639, 1640, 1641, 1642, 1643; and for the First Quarter of the Year, 1644, at
the rate of 665 Livres every Year; so that there remains due from the said
Province of Normandy, no more than the Sum of 1027 00 00 43. The Province of
Xaintongue is indebted the Sum of Three Hundred Sixty, and Six Livers, Eight
Sous, and Two Deniers, for the residue of the Year 1644, ending the First of
October. 0366 08 02 44. The Province of Bearn is indebted since the said Synod
of Alanson, for Seven Years, expiring the First of October, 1644, the Sum of
Three Hundred and Fifty Livres, at the rate of Fifty Livres per Annum. 0350 00
00 45. The University of Montauban presented no Accounts nor Acquittances how
they had disposed the Moneys received by them from the Provinces. 46. There is
due unto the University of Nismes from the Province of Sevennes, the Sum of
Three Hundred Livres, which were ordered to be paid it out of the Arrears of
Accounts, liquidated in the Synod of Alanson; more 874 Livres for Seven Years
ran out since the said Synod unto the first of October 1644. at the rate of 125
Livres per Annum, to the payment whereof the said Province was obliged unto
this University. All which Sums put together do amount to 1175 Livres, out of
which the said Province has paid the Sum of 400 Livres into the Hands of the
He afterward turn^d Ap^state in his ^le Age.
Sieur Codur, one of the Professors of that University; so that there is no
more due than Seven Hundred Seventy and Five Livres. 775 00 00 47. The Province
of Lower Languedoc is indebted by Account passed in the National Synod of
Alanson unto the University of Nismes the Sum of 4050 Livres, and for Seven
Years ending the first of October 1644. at the rate of nine hundred seventy and
five Livres yearly, to which they had been taxed by the said Synod unto that
University the Sum of six thousand eight hundred and twenty five Livres: Out of
which two Sums, amounting to 11775 Livres, the said Province has not produced
any Acquittances of Payments made by it, and therefore is still indebted unto
the said University the Sum of 11775 l. 11775 00 00 48. There is due from the
Province of Normandy the Sum of 1639 Livres, and 3 Sous, as appeared upon
Accounts stated before the National Synod of Alanson in the year 1637.
Whereupon Mr. Daniel Guesdon, Elder of the Church of Rouen, produced an
Acquittance of the Sum of Three Hundred Livres paid out of the said Sum by
virtue of a Letter of Attorney from the Sieurs Petit and Codur unto Mr. de
Launay Counselor and Secretary for his Majesty, bearing date the 10th of
November 1639. So that there is due from the Province of Normandy unto the said
University of Nismes the Sum of 1139 00 00 49. The University of Nismes
produced no Accounts nor Acquittances of their employing the Revenues belonging
to their Professors. 50. There is due unto the University of Die from the
Province of Normandy, the Sum of 5845 Livres for 7 Years, ending the first of
October 1644. at the rate of Eight Hundred Thirty and Five Livres a year, out
of which Sum Mr. Daniel Guesdon Elder of the Church of Rouan, proved by his
Acquittances, that he had paid the Sum of 4800 Livres; so that there is owing
unto the said University from that Province no more than 1035 Livres. 1035 00
00 51. The Province of Sevennes stands indebted unto the University of Die in
the Sum of 887 Livres, and Ten Sous, as it was made appear by the Account
audited in the National Synod of Alanson, and more 125 Livres for the year
1637. ending the first day of October, and more 887 Livres for seven years, at
the rate of 125 Livres a year, out of which Sums in the gross amounting to 1899
Livres, 10 Sous, deducting two hundred thirty and four Livres, which the
Deputies of the said University acknowledged to have received from that
Province, there remains due unto the University the Sum of 1665 10 00 52. The
Province of Burgundy is indebted unto the same University of Die the Sum of 264
Livres upon account in the Synod of Alanson, and for seven years Contribution,
ending the first o^ October 1644. at the rate of 131 Livres yearly, the Sum of
987 Livres, which being added unto the former, amounts to 1249 Livres, out of
which Debt there has been paid by the said Province, as appears by Receipts,
the Sum of 226 Livres; so that it stands still indebted to that University the
full Sum of 1023 00 00 53. The Province of Berry owes unto the University of
Die the Sum of 241 Livres, and for seven years, beginning at the first of
October 1637. to the last day of September 1644. the Sum of 1687 Livres, the
whole Debt amounting to 1928 Livres, of which there has been paid, as appears
by Acquittances, the Sum of 1467 Livres; so that there remains due from the
said Province the Sum of 0461 00 00 54. The said University presented by the
Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny seven Accounts, two of which were examined and
passed at the Synod of Chabres the 7th of November 1639. for the year 1638. and
1639. and another for the year 1640. examined in the Synod held at Dieu le fit
on June the 9th, in the year 1641. and three others examined in the Synod of
Sevre in the year 1643. to wit, that of 1641. on the 4th of August in the same
year, and that of the year 1642. on the 10th Day of the same Month of August,
and that of the year 1643. on the 19th day of the same Month, and of the same
Year; and that of the Year 1644. at the Synod of Saillans the 29th day of
August 1644. all which were now verified and approved.

CHAP. XVIII. An Act for calling of the next National Synod.
THE Province of Anjou petitioning, that the Privilege of calling the next
National Synod might be conferred upon them: This Assembly did freely grant it,
and ordered, That as soon as his Majesty's Writ should be signed and
dispatched, that Province should give notice of the time and place of Meeting,
which should be in the Town of Loudun.

CHAP. XIX. A Decree about the Validity of the Synodical Acts.
A Decree was made, That the Acts Signed by the Scribes of this Synod should be
of as much Credit and Validity, as if they had been Signed by the Moderator,
Assessor, Scribes, and the whole Body of the Synod.

The Black Roll of Deposed and Apostate Pastors.
1. Abel D'Argent, formerly Minister in the Province of Berry, about Five and
Forty Years old, of middle Stature, Black Hair, a melancholy Man. He changed
his Religion. 2. Esaiah Laurens, heretofore Minister of the Church of Coqlerac
and Villesque, deposed for Simony, and rebellion against the Discipline; he is
about Fourscore years old, and has a fair clear Beard. 3. James Repineau,
Minister of St. Laurens Lesminures, deposed for enormous Crimes, and Desertion
of his Ministry; he is Seventy Years old, middle Stature, red Visage, sore
weeping Eyes. 4. Gabriel Bouslay, formerly Minister in the Church of Vezinobre,
deposed by the Province of Dolphiny; he is tall of Stature, Chestnut colored
Hair, a little bald, rude in his Gate, and high colored. 5. John Coultere,
about 67 years old, or thereabouts, low of Stature, meager Visage, little Head,
formerly Pastor of the Church at Segure in Bearn, deposed by the Province of
Bearn, and afterward revolted to the Church of Rome. 6. Daniel Martyn, about
Sixty Two Years old, a tall square Fellow, full Visage, swarthy Color, great
Eyes, black Hair on his Head and Beard, formerly Minister of Castel-Tisy, near
Orthez, in the Province of Bearn, deposed by the Synod of that Province for
very great Sins, and then revolted to the Romish Religion. An impious
Protestant will make a very godly Papist.
All these Acts and Decrees were done and passed at Charenton St. Maurice near
Paris, on Thursday the 26th day of January, in the year One Thousand Six
Hundred Forty and Five.

Signed by Garrissoles Moderator of the Synod. Basnage Assessor.
Scribes.
Blondel and Le Coq.



CHAP. XX. Remarks upon some of the Deputies.
1. MR. David Blondell, born at Chalons, called to the Ministry in the Church
of Houdun, a very Learned Man, who had dived deep into the Ocean of
Ecclesiastical Antiquities. He has published many things, his Pseudo Isidorus
and Turrianus Vapulantes. De Joanna Papissa, answered by Des Maretz Professor
at Grouinguen. Modeste Declaration de la Sincerite and Verite des Eglises
Reformees de France, An Answer to Cardinal Perron, and diverse other Works. He
was made Honourary Professor by this National Synod, and had an Annual Stipend
paid him by his Province of the Isle of France, and another assigned him as a
mark of their Esteem and Favor by this very Synod. But being invited to the
Profession of History in the Illustrious School of Amsterdam, he left his
Native Country, accepted of the Employment, and died in that City.

2. Monsieur Drelincourt, Pastor of the Church of Paris, a very learned and
holy Man of God, of him and his Works I say more in my Icones.

3. Monsieur Basnage. He was in high Esteem with their Churches; he has a very
Learned Son now living in Exile at Rotterdam.

4. Monsieur de L' Angle, a most eloquent Preacher. His Son is one of the
Prebends of Westminster.

5. Monsieur Vincent, Pastor of the Church of Rochel, the Jesuits called him
Two Thousand. He perpetually mawl'd them in the Pulpit.

6. Monsieur Jurieu, his Son is that worthy Pastor of the French Church, and
Professor of Divinity at Rotterdam.

7. Monsieur Garrissoles the Moderator, was a Person of Eminent Learning and
Piety. When all the other Professors in the University of Montauban quitted it
for want of their Stipends, he alone continued in the Discharge of the Duties
of his Professoral Office, doing his Work faithfully and painfully, trusting
God for his Wages.

8. Monsieur de Croy was nominated by this National Synod to the Professors
Chair of Divinity in the University of Nisms. Mr. Amyraut had a very great
Esteem for him, and Dedicated his Treatise De Libero Hominis Arbitrio unto him.

The End of the Twenty Eighth Synod.
THE Acts, Decisions and Decrees Made and Done in the XXIX. National Synod OF
The Reformed Churches OF FRANCE,

Held in The Town of Loudun, and Province of Anjou, The Tenth Day of November,
1659.

The CONTENTS of the Synod of Loudun.
Chap. I. THE Kings's Writ for calling the National Synod. Names of the
Deputies. Election of Synodical Officers. Chap. II. The Kings Letters Patents
to Monsieur de Magdelaine to be his Commissioner in the Synod. Chap. III. The
Lord Commissioners Speech to the Synod. Chap. IV. The Moderators Answer to that
Speech. Chap. V. The Marquess of Ruvigny, sworn General Deputy. 2. His
Commission from the King unto that Office. 3. A Limitation of his Votes. 4.
Deputies from the Synod to the King. 5. The Synods Letters to the King, Queen,
and his Eminency the Cardinal Mazarin. 6. Return of the Deputies from the Court
unto the Synod, with the King and Cardinals Letters. 7. Three Persons presented
to the King, out of which, One to be pricked by him for another General Deputy.
8. Letters from Foreign Churches to the Synod, but not suffered to be answered.
9. Another Letter of the Synod unto the King and Cardinal. Chap. VI. Notes upon
the Confession of Faith. Chap. VII. Observations upon the Discipline. 1.
Churches not to be too hasty in admitting Converted Priests into the Ministry.
2. Proposans must be examined in Colloquies and Synods. 4. Imposition of Hands
in Ordination. The Discipline sworn. Chap. VIII. Observations upon the Synod of
Charenton. 1. About Seats in the Temples. 2. A Canon about Catechizing. 4. A
Pragmatical Minister censured. 6. An incestuous Couple not to be admitted to
the Lord's Table till Six Months after their Separation. 11. The Canons about
the Imputation of Adam's Sin not to be altered. Chap. IX. Of Appeals. The Case
of a poor Minister. 6. A Minister impeached in the Synod for practicing
Physic, 10. An Intricate Appeal. 18. The Business of Mr. Morus. 21. The
Business of Mr. D'Hysseau and Amyraut. Chap. X. General Matters. An Act against
the Profanation of the Lords Day. 4. A Canon against Duels. 6. An Observation
about the Lutherans. 8. Whether the Lord's Supper may be administered upon a
Working Day. 9. The Consistory of the Church of Paris are to take care of a
more correct Edition of the Bible, Psalms, Liturgy and Catechism. 13. Baptism
of Infants not to be delayed. 1^. Errors to be confuted in the Latin Tongue.
17. No Sermons to be Printed without Approbation. 21. Method for Voting in the
National Synod. 23. Complaints against Mr. Daille and Amyraut about their
Writings. 24. Articles of Peace extracted out of the Acts of N. Ss. of Alanson
and Charenton. 25. Manner of determining Appeals. 25. An Act against Blasphemy.
26. Care taken to preserve the Annexed Congregations, a kind of Daughter
Churches. 27. The Generosity, Self-denial, and great Affection to the Churches
of Mr. Loride des Gallnieres. 28. Chap. XI. Particular Matters. Orders about
the Election of a Proposan to a Pension. 11. Care had of a Worthy Minister. 14,
15. Of a Ministers Widow. 21. Of another Minister. 22. Of a Learned Lawyer
writing in Defense of the Truth against Cardinal Baronius his Annals. 27. About
an accused Minister. 29. Chap. XII. Of Universities. The Corruptions got
amongst Students in the V;niversities corrected and reformed. 2. Excessive
Rates for Lodging and Commons in those University Towns retrenched and
redressed. 3. Prizes given unto Scholars in the University of Die. 4. Provinces
censured for their neglect of the V;niversities. 7, 8. Care of Professor's
Widows. 9, 10. Chap. XIII. Accounts of the Lord du Candal. Chap. XIV. An Act
for the National Fast. Chap. XV. A Dividend of Sixteen Thousand Livres. Chap.
XVI. The Roll of Deposed and Apostate Ministers. Chap. XVII. An Act for Taxing
the Expenses of the Deputies. Chap. XVIII. An Act for calling the next National
Synod. Chap. XIX. An Act for the Validity of all Acts which shall be Delivered
and Signed. Chap. XX. Commissions given by the Synod executed, and the
Commissioners Speeches unto the University and Consistory of Saumur. Chap. XXI.
A Letter to Martyn the Apostate. Chap. XXII. Remarks upon the Deputies unto the
Synod. Chap. XXIII. Catalogue of the Churches and Ministers.
The Synod of Loudun. 1659. The 29th. Synod.

SYNOD XXIX.
In the Name of God. Amen. The Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed
Churches of France, Assembled by his Majesty's Permission in the Town of
Loudun, the Tenth Day of November, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Fifty and Nine,
and continued Sitting full Two Months; viz. till the Tenth Day of January, 1660.

CHAP. I.
MOnsieur Desloges Pastor of the Church of Loudun, opened the Synod with Prayer
the next day after their Meeting, viz. the Eleventh of November; and then the
Lord Marquess of Ruvigny, who was General Deputy of the Churches, presented his
Majesty's Writ for calling this Synod, the Tenor of which is as follows.

This Sixth Day of September, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Fifty and Nine, the
King being at Bordeaux, upon the most humble Petition of his Subjects of the P.
R. Religion, tendered unto his Majesty, that he would be pleased to permit them
to Call and Assemble a National Synod, because there had not been one held
since that of Charenton, in the Year 1644. His Majesty being willing to gratify
and treat favorably those his said Subjects, he has permitted, and does
permit them to convocate a National Synod on the Tenth Day of May next, in his
Town of Loudun; but on this condition, that there shall be none other Affairs
debated in it, than such as are warranted by the Edicts, and that a
Commissioner whom his Majesty shall be pleased to appoint, do assist in Person
in the said Synod, as has always been practiced. In testimony hereof his
Majesty has commanded me to expedite this present Writ, which he was pleased
to sign with his own Hand, and caused to be conntersigned by me his Counselor,
and Secretary of his Commandments, and of his Treasury.

Signed LOVIS. And a little Lower, PHELIPPEAVX.

There appeared in the said Assembly with Letters of Commission from the
Provinces, which were read by the Sieur Des Loges, and the Sieur de Fresnay
Elder of the Church of Loudun, and the Sieur de M^^son^als, these Persons
following.

1. For the Province of Normandy the Sieurs John Manimilian de L' Angle, Pastor
of the Church of Rouan, and Samuel Boschart, Pastor of the Church of Caen,
accompanied with the Sieurs Daniel Guesdon, Elder of the Church of Rouan, and
Peter de la Musse, Esquire Lord des Roquettes, Elder of the Church of Caen.

2. For the Province of Higher Guienne, and Higher Languedoc, the Sieurs John
Louis Joussauld, Pastor of the Church of Castres, and Theophilus Arbussy,
Pastor of the Church of Milhaut, accompanied with the Sieurs John de Besnes,
Esquire Lord of Laseron, Elder of the Church de Beraux, and Master John Brassart,
Advocate in Parliament, and Elder in the Church of Montauban.

3. For the Province of Burgundy, the Sieurs Amedeus de Chandieu Pastor of the
Church at Pont de Velles, and Peter Mussard, Pastor of the Church of Lion,
accompanied with Master Samuel Gentis (D'anthial) Advocate in Parliament, Elder
in the Church of Chaalons, and Master Phillebert de Sage, Advocate also in
Parliament, Elder in the Church of Autan.

4. For the Province of Lower Languedoc, the Sieurs David Eustache, and Isaac
de Bourdieu Pastor in the Church of Montpellier, accompanied with the Noble
Francis de Toulonge, Lord of Foissac, Elder in the Church of Vsez, and Master
Philip Besse, Doctor of the Civil Laws, Advocate, and Elder in the Church of
Beziers.

5. For the Province of Orleans and Berry, the Sieurs John Per^^ult, Pastor of
the Church of Orleans, and John Taby, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of the
Church de la Charity, accompanied with the Noble Denis Papin, Counselor to his
Majesty, and Receiver General for the Demeans of the County of Blois, and
Master Paul Tonnois, Lord of Champs, Advocate in Parliament, Elders in the
Church of Orleans.

6. For the Province of Sevennes, the Sieurs Henry B^udan, Pastor of the Church
de la Salle, and Stephen Broche, Lord of Mejannes, Pastor of the Church of St.
Hippolite, accompanied with Edward de Charlot, Esquire Lord and Baron of S. John de
Gardonenque, Elder in the Church of the same Place, and Peter de Gallieres, Esquire
Lord of Pont d' Arti, Elder in the Church of Merveil.

7. For the Province of Britain, the Sieur Isaac Guitton, Pastor of the Church
of Sion, accompanied with Monsieur John de la Rochelle, Lord of Mornay, Elder
in the Church of Roche Bernard.

8. For the Province of Poictou, the Sieurs Stephen le Blois, Pastor of the
Church of Fontenay le Compte, and John Chabrol, Pastor of the Church of
Thouars, accompanied with Sir Peter Prevost, Knight, Lord of La Javeliere,
Elder in the Church of Chantonnay and Puybelliard, and Charles Prevost, Esquire
Lord of La Simonie Elder in the Church of Champagne and Mouton.

9. For the Province of Provence, the Sieurs John Bernard, Pastor of the Church
de Velots and Marvelle, and John Morius Esquire Lord of Espasson and of La Bastide,
Elder in the Church of Manosque.

10. For the Province of Anjou Touraine, Le Maine, Loudunois, Vandosme, and the
Greater Perch, the Sieurs Moses Amyraud, Pastor and Professor of Divinity in
the Church and University of Saumur, and James de Brissac Lord des Loges Pastor
of the Church of Loudun, accompanied with the Sieurs Daniel de Goyett, Doctor
of Physic, Elder in the Church of Angiers, and Master Stephen des Lands,
President in the Extraordinary Assizes of Vaudomois, and Elder in the Church of
Vandome.

11. For the Province of the Isle of France, Brie, Picardy, Champagne, and the
County of Chartres, the Sieurs John Daille, Pastor of the Church of Paris, and
Benjamin Tricotell, Pastor of the Church of Calais, accompanied with Master
Thierry de Marolles, Advocate in Parliament, and Judge in the Praesidial Court
of Vitry, Elder of the Church in that Town, and Peter Loride Lord of Galiniers,
Advocate in his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Elder in the
Church of Paris.

12. For the Province of Xaintonge, Aunix, and Augoulmois; the Sieurs John
Gommarc, Pastor in the Church of Vertueil, and Isaac Marchand, Pastor in the
Church of St. John d' Angely, accompanied with John de Morell, Esquire Lord of
Thiac, of Vigier, and of Salle, and Francis Lacons, Esquire Lord of Courelles, and
Elder in the Church of Cognac.

13. For the Province of Dolphiny, the Sieurs Adrian Chamier, Pastor of the
Church of Montlimard, and Alexander Dize, Pastor of the Church of Grenoble,
accompanied with Master Francis Goudran, Advocate in the Parliament of
Grenoble, and Elder in the Church of Grenoble.

14. For the Province of Lower Guienne, the Sieurs John Riccotier, Minister of
Bourdeaux, and Jeremiah Viguier, Pastor of the Church of Nerac, accompanied
with Master Jacob Maysonnais, Advocate in Parliament, and Elder in the Church
of Bourdeax, and with Sir James de Laumont, Knight, Marquess of Baisse Caumont,
Elder in the Church of Nerac.

15. For the Province of Bearn, the Sieur Arnald de Cazamajore, Pastor of the
Church of Olleron.

16. For the Province of Vivaretz, Velay and Forest, the Sieurs Isaac Homel,
(he Died a most constant Faithful Martyr) Pastor of the Church of Sajon and
Valance, and Peter January, Pastor of the Church at La Gorse, accompanied with
Sir James D' Arlande, Knight. Lord of Mirabel, and Elder in the Church of
Villeneufve de Bergues, and with Master Timothy Baruil, Doctor of the Civil
Laws, Advocate, and Elder in the Church of Privas.

The Provinces of Bearn and Dolphiny, shall inquire into the Causes why the
Sieurs de Labadie, Elder in the Church of Luibeite, and Deputy for the Province
of Bearn, and de Montelar, Elder in the Church of Beaufort, Deputy for the
Province of Dolphiny, have absented themselves from this Assembly, and shall
give an Account thereof unto the next National Synod.

The said Sieurs des Loges, and du Fresnay, Elder of the Church in Loudun, did,
together with the Lord Marquess of Rouvigny, General Deputy, gather the
Suffrages of all the Deputies in this Assembly, in Two Bills in Writing, (each
of them having One,) for the Election of the Moderator, Assessor, and Scribes;
and there were chosen by plurality of Votes the Sieur Daille for Moderator, the
Sieur de L' Angle Assessor, and the Sieurs Des Loges, Pastor, and de Loride an
Elder, for Scribes of the Synod; who being Chosen, did all of them take their
Places accordingly.

CHAP. II.
AS soon as the Officers of the Synod were nominated and seated, the Lord de
Magdelaine, Counselor to his Majesty in his Court of Parliament at Paris, and
Deputed by his Majesty, to sit as his Commissioner in this Assembly, delivered
the King's Letters patents for his Commission; which being Read, they were
Transcribed and Inserted into the Body of the Acts of this Synod, whose Form
and Tenor was as follows.

Copy of his Majesty's Letters Patents given to the Lord Commissioner.
LOVIS by the Grace of God, King of France and of Navar,
To our Trusty and Beloved Consellor in our Courts of Parliament of Paris, the
Lord of Magdelaine, Greeting.
We have permitted our Subjects of the Protestant Religion, to hold in our Town
of Loudun, on the Tenth Day of November next a National Synod, composed of all
the Deputies of the Provinces of our Kingdom, for to treat of matters
concerning their Religion; and being to choose a Person fitly qualified, and of
known Loyalty and Fidelity to us to assist in it, and as our Commissioner to
represent our Person in the said Assembly; we well knowing those Services which
you have rendered us in sundry Honorable Employments, wherein we had
Commissionated you, and which you have most worthily Discharged. We have
therefore judged, that we could not make a better choice than of your self,
being well assured that you will continue to us the Proofs and Evidences of
your Affection to our Service. For these causes, we have Commissionated and
Deputed, and we do now Commissionate and Depute you the said Lord of Magdelaine
by these Presents, signed with our Hand, to pass over unto our Town of Loudun,
and in our place and stead to assist in the Synod there Convocated, that you
may then and there propound and answer all those things which we have given you
in Commandment, according to those Memoirs and Instructions we have delivered
to you. And you are to take special care, that no other matters be there
proposed nor debated, but such as ought of right to be treated of in those
Assemblies, and which are permitted by our Edicts; and in case they should
enterprise any thing to the contrary, you shall hinder it, and by Interposing
of out Authority suppress it; or you shall speedily advise us of it, that we
may by such courses as in our Wisdom we shall judge most fit, obviate and
prevent it. And for so doing, we give you power, commission and special command
by these Presents; for such is our Pleasure.

Given at Bourdeaux, this Sixth day of September, in the Year One Thousand, Six
Hundred, Fifty and Nine; and of our Reign the Seventeenth. Signed LOVIS.
And a little Lower, PHELIPPEAVX.
And Sealed at the lower end, with the Great Seal and Yellow Wax.
CHAP. III.
AFter reading his Majesty's Letters Patents, the Lord Commissioner made this
ensuing Speech unto the Assembly.

A Copy of the Lord Commissioners Speech.
Sirs,
ALthough my many Defects, of which I am very conscious, and my great Age might
have well deterred me from accepting of this Commission, with which it has
pleased his Majesty to grace and honor me, and from coming hither, and
declaring his Will and Pleasure unto this eminent Assembly, made up of the most
able and considerable Persons of the Kingdom, chosen out of the Body of the
Professors of our Religion; yet nevertheless I can boldly speak it, that
according to that Inclination which God has given me for serving the King, and
the Public, unto which I have applied my self along time, I did not in the
least hesitate on this Occasion, but did overlook all other Considerations,
hoping for Supplies from the Supreme Goodness to enable me to the performance
of my Duty, and from yours also, that you will be readily disposed to
facilitate what is desired of you. And hence it is that I conceive with Joy a
good issue of our Affairs even now, when as I begin to speak unto you from his
Majesty; and you also have already took notice of it, in that Grant vouchsafed
you for your Assembling in this place, according to your request, which is a
most remarkable effect of his Majesty's especial Favor to you, which the good
Providence of God has now inspired into him for you, after so many other
signal Acts of his Royal Bounty you have formerly received from him, for which
I do not in the least suspect or question your Gratitude and Duty, nor the
sense of that Obligation which lies upon you on many Accounts of yielding to
him all Obedience, according to the revealed Will of God, who is the Sole and
Sovereign Lord of all Men, and of all things whatsoever. And when I thus speak
of his Majesty, you know very well that we must understand all Persons acting
by Authority from him, according to the same revealed Will of Almighty God; and
the matter being so notorious, we cannot but observe it in this place, even
that kindness and Justice you have upon many and sundry occasions had proof and
sensible experience of from the Hands of his Majesty's first, and Principal
Minister of State, his Eminency the Lord Cardinal Mazarin. Nor need I enlarge
on this Subject; only let me add but one Reflection of my own about this last
Favor, the Convocation of this Synod, which you believed to be at this time so
needful for you, you stand highly indebted unto his Eminency for it, and the
best and chiefest Fruit you can gather from its Consultations and Resolutions
will be this, to be more united among your selves, and to maintain in Peace and
Concord the whole Body of those of our Religion, who are represented by you,
and to terminate and pacify those Differences and Dissentions which are among
you: For since they are produced through the Vice and Weakness of our Humane
Nature and State, and begin in the noblest Parts, where the whole Body
receives an alteration, we may very much fear a Dissipation, if only topiual
Remedies be applied; for these alone do seldom operate, or contribute but a
little to the Union and Conservation of the whole. And whereas all Assemblies
of whit kind soever do depend upon his Majesty, who, as supreme Lord, has a
Right and Jurisdiction over all Persons and Actions, and to ordain even in and
about matters concerning the Church, which was always considered as a Part of
the State; His Majesty was therefore pleased to vouchsafe you this Synod, so
earnestly desired by you, that you might regulate past matters, and
re-establish among you that Order which you ought to keep for the future; and
the rather, because there be many years lapsed since you had an Assembly of
this nature.

Sirs, It is most certain, that your Enemies who design your diminution and
ruin, could never meet with a more favorable means and opportunity to attempt
it, than by maintaining and fomenting your Divisions and Dissentions; for these
will bring you into Confusion: So that you have good reason to admire the
Benignity and Justice of his Majesty, assisted with his Eminency's Counsel in
giving you his Protection, that by means of his Royal Power, so much needed by
you, you may be maintained in all Liberty, and enabled to deliberate and decree
in those Points of Doctrine and Discipline relating to your Religion; although his
Majesty do not in the least wise approve of it, because of its great difference
from that of which he makes Profession, as also does not the far greatest part
of his People, who are his Subjects: So that in case they should take that
advantage they have to abuse you any way, you have not, in these circumstances
under which you are now fallen through past Disorders, any other means for your
Subsistence, but his Sovereign Authority; which only, since you have lost those
Forces and Fortresses in which you formerly confided, can keep you safe; and,
if you will be contented, happy. Besides, you know it by good experience, that
there is nothing more expedient, or advantageous to you, than an entire
Submission unto his Majesty's Commands, and next and immediately after God,
that you should depend upon the King's Sovereignty; nor is any thing more just
and reasonable when you put them both together; for on the one hand, you have
his Majesty's Power and Good Will; and on the other, you have your Duty and
Profit inseparably joined together. And there is yet something more cogent in
the present Juncture of Affairs; for since the Divine Grace has Crowned both
King and Kingdom with so many Victories, God shows you the beginnings of that
Peace, which above all other things you have so very much desired, and so
ardently prayed for, and from which you may hope to participate in those
abundant Blessings that are likely to flow in upon the Nation. And his Majesty
also on his part may hope, that all his Subjects, in thankfulness for this
great Benefit, will be the more Affectionately engaged unto bis Service, and
yield more cheerful Obedience to him, as they be all obliged by their Birth;
but you, Sirs, more than all of them, because of those particular Privileges,
which have been granted to you on this Occurrence.

I am expressly charged in the first Article of my Instructions from his
Majesty, to assure you, that he will preserve you in the full enjoyment of
those Privileges which have been conferred upon you; he declaring this to be
his Intention, that he will carry a Fatherly Affection toward his Subjects of
the Reformed Religion, and continue unto them the effects of his wonted
kindnesses, and that he will maintain, and cause inviolably to be maintained,
his Edicts of Pacification. believes, that you will persevere in that respect
and Duty, whereunto you are obliged. And that you may obtain those Favors
which his Majesty has promised you, his Majesty commanded me to tell you, that
immediately upon the Death of the Lord D' Arzillieres, who exercised the Office
of General Deputy, he appointed the Lord of Ruvigny to succeed him, and to take
care of your Concerns at Court, having an entire Confidence in him, that he
will serve him well; and believing also that you will, as you ought, confide in
him, it being for your own good. Yet his Majesty would not constrain you by
mere necessity to have recourse unto him always, if you have any Arguments of
sufficient strength to exempt you, and which his Majesty may accept and approve
of. And father, his Majesty charged me to acquaint you, that it was his Will,
that you should not in any of your National Synods make a Demand of a Political
Assembly for the Election of a Deputy Commissioner. On which Head I am
particularly charged, that in case any such Motion should offer to be made by
the Deputies, immediately to suppress it, and not suffer it to be debated nor
resolved: And although his Majesty has good Grounds to believe that you are
well content with his Nomination of the Lord Ruvigny, because of those Good
Offices he has already done you, as his Majesty is with all his other
Employments until now; yet am I ordered to declare unto you, that you be left
at your Liberty to deliberate about the Confirmation of him in this Office of
General Deputy, that so after your Debate upon it, his Majesty may provide at
he shall think good: And if you should allow of him, and desire his
Confirmation in this Office, his Majesty will be very well pleased, hoping that
he will continue to acquit himself worthily in it, that so being approved by
you, he may owe his establishment purely to your Consent.

And whereas in the last National Synod his Majesty had declared it to be his
Will, that no Deputy General should assist in it; because no Person can be
admitted a Member of it, unless he be first chosen, and deputed by a Provincial
Synod; and if he was admitted in quality of General Depute, he must be there to
debate of ^ecular Aff^airs, none of which kind and nature are, or ought to be
handled in such an Assembly. Besides, there be not now a days any Political or
mixed Assemblies; yet nevertheless his Majesty, our of mere respect to the Lord
of Ruvigny, does allow him to use that Privilege, which has been ever enjoyed
by his Predecessors in this Office, and that he may come unto and vote in it at
his Pleasure.

Moreover, that such matters as have in these Assemblies been heretofore
represented by his Majesty, may be better executed, according to his Majesty's
Intentions, and also whatever he may order hereafter, I am, according to his
Orders given me, in the first place to forbid you, that you do not on any
account whatsoever treat in this Synod of any Secular or State-matters, or of
Justice directly or indirectly, but only of Church Discipline and of
Reformation of Manners. And to this purpose, that no Assembly be hold, Little
or Great, by Day or by Night, but in my Presence; and that no Persons be
appointed as a Council in the Provinces, in prejudice to those Prohibitions
made by the Edict in the Month of November, 1622. and that no General Fasts
shall be proclaimed by the Provincial Synods.

Moreover, It being his Majesty's desire that all his Subjects should live in
Peace, a Blessing so very needful for them, and recommended to them by his
Edicts of Pacification, which he will have most strictly observed, all
Ministers are enjoined to keep themselves in all their public Discourses
within the bounds of Moderation, and to give no just cause of complaint of
their Conduct; and they be all expressly forbidden in their Sermons or Books, to
mention the Word Antichrist, when as they speak of the Pope, nor to style the
Catholics Idolater^, nor to treat the Catholic Religion with any scandalous
or injurious Term^, such as the Abuse and Deceits of Satan, and other such
like, which are to be found in your Confession of Faith. His Majesty not being
able to suffer that such Words should be Sworn in this Synod; and you be all in
this matter, which lies so near his Heart, invited to testify that respect
and obedience, which you would always render unto whatsoever shall be
propounded and ordained by him.

Moreover, he forbids your reception of Foreigners into the Ministry and
Pastoral Office among you, or their Admission into your Synod^, or that you so
much as speak of their Matters and Restoration, who have been dispossessed and
ejected out of their Churches by virtue of the Decrees of Parliament, and of
his Majesty's Letters, nor that any Stranger be received. And to this purpose
it is his Will, that ^n all Attestations given unto Scholars and Proposans, or
Ministers that are to be received, there shall be inserted the place of their
Birth.

And to prevent that Aversion for Monarchy, which is contracted by them who
follow their Studies in Foreign States and Commonwealths, such as Geneva,
Switzerland, England and Holland, there shall be a Canon expressly made to this
purpose, and shall be accordingly observed* That such Person as have studied in
any of those Foreign Universities, and offer themselves to be ordained, or to
be admitted* Pastors of any Church, shall not at all be admitted. And if you
shall make such non as this, his Majesty assures you, that you will not only
do a thing which will be very pleasing to him, but which also shall redound,
very much unto your Advantage.

And it is his Majesty's Will, that no Letters shall be read to open Assembly,
till they have been first communicated to me, and that I have been acquainted
with their Contents, and that I suffer none to be read, which come from any
Foreigner.

Furthermore, His Majesty enjoyneth all Pastors and Ministers to preach the
Commandments of God, and that Obedience which People owe unto their King; and
that it is utterly unlawful for them to revolt, or take up Arms against their
Sovereign upon any cause or occasion whatsoever, upon which Subject there shall
be one Sermon at least made and preached in my Hearing in one of the Sessions
of this Synod. And you be also farther forbidden, from ever using hereafter in
your Pulpit-Discourses these Words, Scourges, Persecution, or other* such like
Expressions, which are apt to stir up the Minds of his Majesty's Subjects unto
Sedition, and to alienate their Affections from his Majesty, who is most
desirous to maintain and preserve them in Tranquillity. And to prevent those
Disorders which are caused by Books published to the World, it is his Majesty's
Pleasure, that no Books treating of the Protestant Reformed Religion, whether
Printed within or without the Kingdom, shall be vended by any Bookseller or
others, till they have been first approved by two Ministers of this Kingdom.

Moreover, his Majesty gives you to understand, that it is his pleasure that
none of the Deputies shall speak of the Infraction of the Edicts, and leave
those other ways, which are permitted them to have such Infractions, if any,
redressed. Synods have heretofore done so, but this shall not, for it is no
Judge of these matters. Here matters of Doctrine and Church Discipline only are
to be handled. And whereas it is usual for these Synodical Assemblies to
complain of their Grievances, the King commands me to tell you, that he has
far greater cause to complain of the Infractions and Transgressions of his
Edicts, committed by his Subjects of the Pr. Reformed Religion in contempt of
them; for they have dared to proceed unto that high Excess of Insolence even
since his Majesty began his Reign, as to set up Preachings again in Languedoc,
where they* had been suppressed; and not only in that Province, but elsewhere
also, and that in an open and presumptuous manner against the Public Peace,
and the general Laws of the Kingdom, which do impartially forbid the Subjects
of the one or other Religion to carve out unto themselves Satisfaction and
Justice, although they were wronged, and had the right on their side; yea, and
they have also in diverse places by their mere private Authority set up again
Preachings, besides those which were allowed and appointed by the Commissioners
for Executing the Edict of Nantes, particularly in such places where the
Ecclesiastics are Lords of the Manor, which is a grievous violation of the
Edict. Moreover your Ministers do notoriously transgress it, by excomunicating
such Parents as send their Children to study in Catholic Colleges, and have
written You have a Specimen of this in a Letter writ by an unknown Person, to
one Martyn an Apostate Minister, which is added to the end of this Synod.
scurrilously and injuriously of those who have become Converts unto the Roman
Catholic Religion. Moreover there is a practice among you of diverting the
Poor's Money, and Legacies given to Pious uses, by employing those Sums toward
the Maintenance of your Ministers, and to the defraying of Synodical Expenses,
and Reparation of your Temples, which Methods and Courses are contrary to those
prescribed by the Forty Third Article of particular matters in the Edict of
Nants, which His Majesty will have observed. Upon all which Actions, and others
of the like nature done in prejudice of his Majesty's Authority, and the
public Tranquillity, of whose Preservation his Majesty is so careful, he
declares, that being the common Father of his People, he neither can nor ought
to suffer his Edicts to be thus violated; and therefore gives Notice unto his
Subjects of the P. R. Religion, that they reform these their Miscarriages; and
you are to exhort them to it, and that they demean themselves better for the
future; that so his Majesty may have no just occasion of offense, which he will
certainly take at such enterprises as these are, and the non-observation of his
Edicts: And he would believe that you wilfully satisfy him on your part, and
in case you so do, his Majesty assures you of his Royal Protection, and of all
acts of Kindnesses, that you can possibly desire of him for your satisfaction.
Finally, his Majesty having considered that National Synods cannot be held
without very great Expenses, nor without putting such as take long Journeys
hither, to a World of trouble; and whereas many matters and businesses which
are reserved for these general Assemblies, may be terminated with more ease and
less Charges in the Provincial Synods, which his Majesty permits to be held
once every Year, for the Convenience and Discipline of the Churches of the
Protestant Reformed Religion; for these considerations his Majesty thought good
to propound by me unto you Sirs, that for time to come, you should give all
power unto Provincial Synods, for knowing, regulating and terminating of
affairs, which may fall out in all the Provinces of this Kingdom, the
cognizance whereof did only formerly belong unto these National Synods, which
his Majesty is resolved shall never be held any more but when as he thinks meet.

And to conclude, there is a matter of great importance, which is fitting you
should be acquainted with now at the beginning of this Synod, that so it may be
the better ordered, and ended the sooner. I received in my Letters very lately
an Express and particular Order concerning some certain Articles and Orders of
which I before spoke, viz. That there is an Abuse committed by the Provinces,
in sending and communicating by their Deputies Letters from Strangers. This his
Majesty declares to be contrary to his Edicts, and prejudicial to the public
Peace, and his own Service. Wherefore I am commanded to be very careful, and to
provide herein, that among your deliberations, none other matters be debated
but such as ought of right to be so by all the Deputies of the Provinces of
this Kingdom, and those Matters only which concern the Provinces; and that you
neither receive any Letters from, nor hold any Correspondency with Strangers in
any way or manner, or for any cause or business whatsoever; and you be most
strictly forbidden to receive any Writings of what quality soever coming from
Foreign Countries, and not under his Majesty's Jurisdiction; nor may any one
dare during the sitting of this Synod, to publish or spread them abroad in this
Town of Loudun. And in case such a thing should happen, and that such Papers
are found, I am enjoined immediately to suppress them, and to proceed
rigorously against such as vend or distribute them, as is meet I should, and to
inflict such Penalties as I shall judge fit. And farther, I am most expressly
and directly commanded to do what in me lies for the shortning and speedy
ending of this Synod: Which Order I received in the last Dispatch that came
unto this Town.

CHAP. IV. The Answer of Monsieur Daille the Moderator of the Synod, unto the
Speech of the Lord Commissioner.
AS soon as my Lord Commissioner had ended his Speech, Monsieur Daille, who was
Moderator of the Synod, made this Answer following, in the Name of the whole
Assembly unto his Lordship.

My Lord,
THE long interruption of these Holy Assemblies, have made us but too sensible
of their singular usefulness, and how needful they be unto our Churches. And
this has augmented our Joys, to see that God has at last touched the Heart of
his Majesty our Sovereign Lord with that goodness, as to grant us this present
Synod. And without doubt, My Lord, you observed Yesterday upon Reading the
Letters of Commission from the respective Provincial Synods, how deeply they
were affected with the Mercy, for they could not refrain the Expressions of
their Sense and Resentment of it even in their Dispatches. We therefore having
received this singular favor from his Majesty, do own and acknowledge it to be
a mere and pure Act of his Grace and Clemency, and take it as a Pledge and
Earnest of his Majesty's Good Will unto us, and sincere purposes of keeping
inviolate his Edicts. Unto this his Majesty has added another and more
especial favor, in pitching upon your Lordship to represent his Person in this
Assembly, even you, my Lord, who for Piety and Integrity, for Faith and Virtue,
are renowned not only in our Churches, but in the World it self. In so much
that the worst and greatest Adversaries of our Religion being won with the
luster of that Justice and Uprightness which have ever shined forth in your
Administration of that high Dignity and Office possessed by you these many
Years in the first and chiefest Parliament of France, do desire and continually
demand, that your Lordship may be their Judge and Reporter of their Causes, and
do account themselves happy in case they can obtain it.

Certainly, my Lord, his Majesty could never have made a more advantageous
Choice for us; and we render your Lordships our most humble Thanks, that
overlooking your great Age, your many and weighty Affairs, the tedious
incommodities of Travel, and of the Season of the Year, your Lordship has
accepted of this Commission, and closed with this opportunity, which the good
Providence of God has put into your Hands for the Service of his Majesty, and
for doing all good Offices to our poor Churches, which God knows have great
need of so Fast and Faithful a Friend as your Lordship near his Majesty. We
need you, my Lord, and we entreat your Lordship, that you would be pleased to
testify it with all Efficacy imaginable unto his Majesty, and to his
Ministers, the Innocence, the Simplicity of our Conduct, that the Jealousies
which our Ill-Wishers do suggest unto him against these our Assemblies may be
abated and removed. Our National Synods are in no wise prejudicial to his
Majesty's Service; yea, the very contrary is true, for their first and
principal use is to confirm us the more steadfastly in our Religion, the First
and most Illustrious Article whereof you know my Lord, (for you have been
educated in it from your Infancy,) is the belief of the Sovereign Authority of
Kings over all Persons whatsoever, without Exception, in their Dominions, and
of that indispensable Obligation lying upon all their Subjects, to yield them
in all things all Honor, Service and Obedience, (not only out of Fear but for
Conscience sake,) and such an entire and profound Submission, that their
respects are extended and performed unto all Officers acting by and under them
and their Order, and in whose Employments and Ministry there shines forth any
Beam of Royal Authority. This Doctrine the Holy Apostles learnt us, to be
subject unto Kings, and those who be Commissionated by them. This Doctrine we
received from the Primitive Christians, that the King is next and under God,
and that there is no middle power intervening between God's and hi^; and after
that Service we owe unto our God, there is none more Sacred or inviolable than
his. In the very first Sessions of this Synod, your Lordship shall see every
one of us subscribe this Holy Creed, just as we have expounded it in our common
and public Confession, and we trust that God will so enable us by his Grace,
that we shall more and more justify the Confession we now make of it, by a
most constant and inviolable Fidelity in his Majesty's Service. And in the mean
while, we shall offer up our most ardent Prayers unto our God for the Health of
his Majesty's most Sacred Person, for the Prosperity of his Family, for the
happy Success of his Designs, and for the Peace and Glory of the Kingdom. But,
my Lord, forasmuch as by the Orders of your Commission, your Lordship has
presented to us diverse points, and of very great importance, we beseech your
Lordship to give way unto this Assembly, to consider of them distinctly, that
our Answers may be returned with that Humility and Reverence which is owing by
us unto the Will and Pleasure of his Majesty our Dread Sovereign.

And afterward the Deputies did by the Mouth of their said Moderator add as
follows.

My Lord,
WE do acknowledge in the First place, that it was a most signal effect of his
Majesty's Goodness, that when the Office of General Deputy became void by the
Death of the Lord Marquess of Ar^illiers, that his Majesty was pleased to fill
it up with the Person of my Lord Marquess of Ruvigny, a Nobleman endowed with
all Qualities requisite for it, and who will undoubtedly discharge it
faithfully. And if our Churches had chosen for themselves as was accustomed,
they could never have made an Election more advantageous. And we also have
cause enough to be thankful unto his Majesty, for granting us the Liberty of
Deliberating about his Confirmation in this Office, without imposing on us in
this juncture any Force or Necessity. And for as much as our Churches are
entirely satisfied with the care and pains which the said Lord Marquess of
Ruvigny has taken in our Affairs, and that they believe he will always
continue to acquit himself most worthily in this Employment; and because his
Majesty has given us to understand, that it would be very pleasing to him that
he should be Confirmed; this Assembly not knowing how or where to make a better
Choice, do continue him in this Office, and resign into his own Hands the Writ
by which he was Established, and after that Solemn Protestation which he has
made unto this Assembly of discharging his Deputation with all possible care
and faithfulness, we gave him his Privilege of Sitting, and his deliberative
and decisive Votes among us, as all General Deputies his Predecessors have had,
according to his Majesty's desire: And the Act hereof shall be inserted
afterward into the Body of the Acts of this Synod.

As for the rest, This Assembly being purely Ecclesiastical, we know very well
that none other matters, but such as are Ecclesiastical, and which concern the
Religion and Discipline of our Churches, ought to be treated in it, and we are
absolutely resolved, that we will not in any wise swerve or depart from the
Rules of our Duty and Callings; nor will we suffer any other Assembly
whatsoever to be held, wherein any of our affairs shall be debated, or any
Election made of Deputies: And we believe that there is not so much as One Man
among us, who is one of our Members, that has the least inclination thereunto.

And as for the Proclaiming of General Fasts by the Provincial Synods, it being
expressly Ordained by our Canons, that the Province whose right it is to call
the National Synod, may publish a General Fast, if there be a necessity for it,
and the King having permitted us the Exercise of our Discipline, and the
putting of our Canons in Execution: This Assembly hops that his Majesty's
Equity and Goodness will not deprive us of the Power and Liberty to reduce them
into act and practice. And the rather, because our extraordinary humbling of
our selves before God, is not designed only for this end, that we may obtain
from his Sovereign Mercy a peculiar Blessing on those of our Communion; but
also we do then wrestle with our God for the prosperity of the whole Nation,
and for the Preservation of his Majesty's own Person.

And as for that Discreet Carriage required from our Ministers in the Exercise
of their Pastoral Office in their Books and Sermons, printed or preached in
Defense of our Religion, our Fathers before ever the Exercise of our Religion
was permitted by the Edicts, and in the very midst of Fire and Faggot, had
Christian Charity in that great Esteem and Commendation, that they by a most
plain and Express Article of our Discipline, did prohibit the Usage of any
injurious reproachful Terms, which might in the least exasperate Men's Spirits;
so that the Times in which we now live being more calm and peaceable through
the Grace of God, and the Goodness of our King, his Majesty may be fully
assured, that on this Account he shall always find us yielding a most perfect
Obedience, a most exemplary Moderation.

And it were to be wished that the Preachers in the Romish Communion were as
circumspect; then should we not be so much torn in pieces as we are continually
by them both in Print and Pulpit.

But as for those Words Antichrist in our Liturgy, and Idolatry, and Deceits of
Satan, which are found in our Confession, they be Words declaring the Grounds
and Reasons of our Separation from the Romish Church, and Doctrins which our
Fathers maintained in the worst of Times, and which we are fully resolved as
they, through the Aids of Divine Grace, never to abandon, but to keep
faithfully and inviolably to the last Gasp.

Whilst his Majesty's Predecessors were pleased to permit our Churches the
choice of Foreigners for their Pastors, we made use of that Privilege, and
none of our Synods either Provincial or National ever knew one of them to
deport himself otherwise than a Native of this Kingdom, all of them when
invested with the Ministry in our Churches, have lived, and acted, and preached
as natural born Frenchmen: But since that Interdiction made us by the late
King of Glorious and Immortal Memory, we never received any, but have utterly
forborne it; and we have most humbly petitioned his Majesty now reigning, that
he would be pleased to put a distinction between those who are wholly
Strangers, and others who, tho the Sons of Strangers, are yet born in the
Kingdom, and are under the Protection and Government of his Crown, and whom our
Parliaments, in all Questions about Inheritances and Successions to them, and
other Privileges of this Nature, have equalized with all other his Majesty's
Subjects. And although some of them have been Educated in Commonwealths, yet
their Religion learns them to subject themselves with all Reverence to the
Superior Powers under all Forms of Government whatsoever, and that Protection
which they have from this Kingdom does incline their Affections upon Principles
of Gratitude and Interest unto a Monarchical Government. And in case his
Majesty should be pleased to allow them the Exercise of their Ministry among us
in this Kingdom, as we most humbly petition his Majesty so to do, he would have
full, and clear, and sufficient Proof of their Loyalty in his Service.

As for Letters, which may be sent by Strangers unto this Assembly, although
there is none of our Religion in any Nation that does solicit us unto Actions
contrary to our Duty; and in case they should go about to do it, all and every
Individual Member of this Assembly at the first sight of such a Letter, would
reject the Motion with Horror and Execration: And we cannot but acknowledge
that in some respects, as for public Orders sake, the Lords Commissioners
deputed to us, and set over us by his Majesty, are to receive and dispose of
them according to his Majesty's Will* But yet as to matters concerning our
Religion, we hope that his Majesty will suffer us to hold Communion and
Correspondence with our Brethren. For other Letters coming from his Majesty's
Subjects to this Assembly, and relating to Ecclesiastical matters, wherein they
be concerned, his Majesty having graciously permitted us to debate of these
very matters, we doubt not in the least but that he will allow us to receive
those Letters and Memoirs, which contain their Informations and Instructions to
us.

In short, our whole Religion being grounded upon the Word of God, and this
Word teaching us to fear God, and honor the King, we never perform any Act of
Religious Worship to that Great God who created us, in which we do not offer up
a Prayer with our most ardent Vows for the Supreme Power here on Earth, and
particularly for all that are in Authority over us, and upon all occasions that
occur unto us, we do leave Impressions hereof upon the Souls of the Faithful,
who are Members of our Churches, in our Sermons. And we are well assured that
before the breaking up of this Synod, your Lordship, my Lord Commissioner,
shall see not in one single Exhortation only, but in many, those inviolable
Inclinations we have unto the Weal and Happiness of the Government, and that
Obedience which we are all unanimously resolved to render unto the Will and
Laws of our Prince, when as they be not contrary to that of the Law of God, who
is the King of Kings.

And as his Majesty has hitherto been pleased to favor us with our Liberty of
serving God according to that Light we have received, and in the Purity of the
Gospel; and whereas my Lord Commissioner has now declared to us his Majesty's
good Pleasure to uphold us favorably in this Liberty under the Protection of
his Edicts, and to exert that Authority, which God has put into his Hands, to
secure us from their Attempts, who would deprive us of it; and as we have no
ground nor cause to complain of Oppression and Persecution; so also we shall
not make use of any such Terms as are expressive of them, and we shall upon all
Occasions give clear and ample Evidence of that respect we bear unto our
Sovereign, and we shall take a most especial care for keeping the Public
Peace, of which our Actions, Words and Writings (and these Last shall never be
published, but according as we are allowed by the Edicts, and regulated by the
Canons of our Discipline, and by the Decrees of our National Synods) shall, by
the Grace of God, be most valid and authentic Sureties for us as they have
been in times past, so for the future. And as we shall never render our selves
unworthy of his Majesty's favor, so we hope that he will continue to extend
unto us the Honor of his Love and good Will, and that he will ordain all
Governors of his Provinces, Places and Fortresses, and all Officers in
Parliament, and all other Courts of Judicature, where Justice is administered,
to see that his Edicts be carefully executed, that so there being no violation
of them on their parts, we also on ours may never have any occasion for the
future of complaining to his Majesty, who next and after God is our only
Sanctuary, to whom we may betake our selves for Refuge against all Injustices
and Oppressions.

And as for what is past, there being very many Places in this Kingdom where
the good Intentions of his Majesty have not been followed, and where those of
our Religion have been disturbed in the Exercises of it, and have suffered very
great Violences in their Families, in their Children, in their own Persons, and
in their Estates in sundry and diverse ways, contrary to what is granted us by
the Edict: And the inferior Judges have been so far from doing us right, that
even they have been the very Persons who have encouraged the Animosity of many
others against us: Our King being the Image and Vicegerent of God, and who will
undoubtedly endeavor to resemble him, as in the Independency of his Power, and
Glory of his Majesty, so also in his Justice and Clemency. He therefore cannot
but approve, that afflicted persons do make their Addresses to Heaven to be
supported under their Sufferings, and comforted in their Afflictions, so we
also should have recourse unto his Royal Throne for Support under our Burdens,
and Redress of our Grievances, and the Conservation of our Invaded Liberties
and Properties.

And whereas his Lordship, my Lord Commissioner, was pleased to say, That his
Majesty has greater reason to complain by far of his Subjects of the Reformed
Religion for their Infractions and Transgressions of the Edict, as if they had
either in Languedoc, or any where else, attempted to restore the Preaching of
Gods Word by overt Actions, by mere Force and Violence, contrary to the public
Peace, and the General Laws of the Kingdom; we profess, that the hearing of
this Relation was a most sensible Grief and Sorrow to us. We do not complain in
the least of your Lordship, my Lord Commissioner; for you did but follow those
very Orders and Instructions which were given you. We receive with all possible
respect and humility whatever comes from his Majesty, because we reverence his
Authority, and because we have many Pledges and Tokens of his Kindness and Love
unto us. But we are exceedingly grieved and concerned, that those who are near
his Majesty do us very ill Offices, and slander us unto him, representing our
Actions in very odious colors; so that in stead of informing him, that the
Exercise of our Religion has been violently abolished and removed from very
many places, where it was permitted by the Edicts, and that our Temples have
been demolished by main Force, and in an Hostile manner, they have dispersed
wicked false Stories of us at Court, as if we had some new and unlawful
Enterprises and Designs in our Heads. Besides, we have another thing of very
hard digestion, that whereas the Canons of our Discipline do expressly forbid
those of our Communion to send their Children unto Jesuits, and to other
professed and avowed Enemies of our Religion, because that through their fiery
and inconsiderate Zeal for their own, they turn every Stone, and use all sort
of means to prevent them from that Duty they owe unto God, and to their
Parents, yea, and to his Majesty himself; and we being allowed the Exercise of
our Discipline as well as of our Religion, why should we be counted
blameworthy for our care in the Religious Education of our Children, and for
our just Severity in censuring their sinful negligent Parents?

And whereas some of ours are accused for reproaching, and other injurious
Carriage toward such Persons, as have quitted our Communion for that of the
Church of Rome; we are so far from approving of those Actions toward them,
that it is well known we require all our Members to pray for them, and to labor
by all pious means to reduce them into the good way of Eternal Salvation. But
we profess our utter Ignorance of any such Abuses offered unto our Revolters:
And in stead hereof, this we know, that there be open Violences done unto those
godly Persons, who do forsake the Communion of the Romish Church, and join
themselves unto ours. And we hope that his Majesty will not be offended, if we
produce Instances and Proofs hereof, in that Bill of Grievances we intend to
present unto him.

And as for the Poor's Moneys, which they suggest unto his Majesty to have been
diverted from those uses, whereunto they were destinated; We most humbly
beseech my Lord Commissioner to do us that Favor, as to acquaint his Majesty,
that we take so great care of our Poor, that rather than they should want
things needful for them, and wander up and down the Streets, and make a Trade
of begging, our Ministers are of that generous Spirit, they would first suffer
their own Wages to be defalked, and that Abatements should be made of their
slender Stipends. So that his Majesty, in stead of being displeased at our
Conduct, and the pretended Infractions on our part of his Edicts, being better
and more truly informed by your Lordship, my Lord Commissioner, and by my Lord
General Deputy, his Protection will be continued to us, and that he will be
pleased to shroud us from those Violences done us by those, who delight in
breaking of those Edicts, and Spoiling us of those Privileges, which were
granted us by his Majesty's Predecessors.

We do acknowledge that our National Synods cannot be held without a great deal
of Labor and Expense; but their meeting from time to time being absolutely
necessary for us, we undergo the Travail and Burden with a great deal of
cheerfulness. And his Majesty having hitherto enabled us by his Bounty to bear
in some measure the charge of it, we cannot but promise our selves, from his
Royal Goodness, the continuance thereof, and that he will not deprive us of his
Liberality, when as we shall be obliged to come from all parts of the Kingdom
unto these General Assemblies. And could those Affairs, which are brought unto
these Synods, be terminated any where else, we would most willingly spare our
selves the pains and trouble of traveling from one end of France unto another,
and to sit down about other Men's business for some Weeks, at so great a
distance from our own Habitations and Families, as the most of us do. But it
being absolutely impossible that our Religion should subsist without these
Assemblies, and there having been a very long Interval of Years elapsed since
the last held at Charenton unto this present, we having found by sad
Experience, that Delays and Time do multiply Affairs, and cause them to be
dispatched with the more and greater difficulty, we persuade our selves, and
ground our Persuasions and Confidence upon that unparalled Goodness of our
Sovereign, that it will be acceptable to him, that my Lord our Deputy General
should demand and press his Majesty to suffer it to be called, when as the
Necessities of our Churches do require it, for the composing of our Affairs,
according to the Canons of our Discipline, and as has been customarily
practiced every three Years. And as for that Expedient of ending matters in our
Provincial Synods, there is so great a quantity of Affairs of another Nature,
that without a total Subversion of our Discipline, they can never be determined
but in our Triennial National Synods.

And whereas his Lordship, my Lord Commissioner, was pleased to touch at our
holding Correspondency with Foreigners, over and besides what has been said,
and is recorded in the Acts of former National Synods. In answer to this, there
be yet several Persons now present, who can very well remember, that the Kings,
his Majesty's Predecessors, did permit our Churches to hold up a Correspondence
with our Neighbors in matters concerning our Religion and Discipline; yea, and
as occasions offered, that we should send our Deputies to them. And however the
People of Geneva, Switzerland, Germany, and of other Countries, do live under a
Form of Civil Government quite different from ours; yet because those Nations
be Friends, and in League with France; and principally because our Religion is
animated universally by the same Spirit, and that it inspireth all its
Professors with an inviolable Respect and Obedience for the Higher Powers, of
what kind or nature soever they be, in any State, the Kings, his Majesty's
Predecessors, had never any reason to complain, that this Correspondency was in
any wise prejudicial to their Authority. So that if it should please his
Majesty, our Sovereign Lord to give us once again the same Liberty, he might be
fully assured as ever of our inviolable Fidelity.

And as for our Students, when as ever it shall please his Majesty, as we most
Humbly request him so to do, to give them License of Visiting Foreign
Universities, there shall be no cause to fear that their good Inclinations
should be corrupted, or that they should return Home disaffected to the Person
and Government of their Prince.

And as for Letters or Writings from Foreign Parts, we shall not receive nor
peruse any of them, unless his Majesty's Commissioner do approve of it.

There is yet one Word more to be spoken about the duration of this Synod,
which my Lord Commissioner says must be very short, because it is his
Majesty's Pleasure it should be so. To which we reply with all imaginable Duty
and Reverence unto his Lordship, that the length of these Assemblies does
depend upon the multitude of Business, which cannot be dispatched in a trice,
but require time for so doing. It is now Fifteen Years since we had a National
Synod, so that it is an easy matter to judge, that as Businesses are multiplied
extraordinarily, so are their Difficulties together with them. And as it lay
not in our Power to prevent their out-breaking at first, so now is it not in
our power so to shorten the time of the Sessions of this Synod as we would, but
it must of necessity exceed the ordinary term of former National Synods; for
otherwise we must leave many Affairs undecided, or else their Decision must be
precipitated. But in case his Majesty had not declared his Pleasure to us
herein, yet it is the general Interest of our Churches, and of every one of us
in particular, to hasten as much as possibly we can our return to our
respective stations; and therefore consequently, we shall avoid all Delays and
Protractings of Businesses, which if unnecessary, cannot but be very prejudical
to us. But whereas over and besides this Consideration, his Majesty has been
pleased to notify his Intentions to us, we do most humbly beseech your
Lordship, my Lord Commissioner, to believe, that we will not lose one Moments
time, but shall intend our Synodical Affairs with all assiduity and diligence
imaginable. But our principal Request unto your Lordship is, that your Lordship
would be pleased to assure his Majesty, that as we be Natural born Frenchmen,
so have we the Interests and Glory of France lying at our Hearts; and as we are
Christians, so we know our selves inviolably obliged to the Observation of that
Apostolical Precept, To Fear God, and Honor the King. We have already said it,
and we do once again repeat it, that as by the Grace of God we do make
profession of Christianity, and of a purer Reformed Religion, so also do we
hope that God will enable us by his Grace to excel all other his Majesty's
Subjects in a most perfect Loyalty and Obedience. To which, let me but add one
word more, that as we have formerly besieged Heaven with the importunate
battery of our Vows and Prayers for his Majesty who now reigns over us; and
as we upon God's gracious Answering of us, did render to his Divine Majesty
most solemn and abundant Praises and Thanksgivings, so also shall we continue
as long as we live to beg of the King of Kings, that he would be pleased to
preserve our King, and that to the many Victories with which he has favored
his Arms, he would superadd this 'vantage-Mercy, to give him to establish his
Kingdom in a long and profound Peace, to bless his intended Marriage, and that
he may see the happy Fruits and Pledges thereof: And having Reigned many long
Years in all Prosperity and Felicity, he may transmit the Scepter received from
his Fathers unto the Issue of his own Body, who may weild it in all
Righteousness, as long as the Sun and Moon endure.

CHAP. V. The Marquess of Ruvigny Sworn General Deputy.
1. THIS Assembly acknowleding the Kindness of his Majesty, in choosing the
Lord Marquess of Ruvigny, to succeed in the place of the Marquess of Arzilliers
Deceased, and to discharge the Office of General Deputy for the Churches of
this Kingdom, 'till such time as his Majesty should be pleased to grant Liberty
for the Calling and Meeting of this Assembly, unto which his Majesty permits
the Nomination of such Persons as are to be presented unto this important
Charge; and the Lord Commissioner having told us from the King, that this
Assembly had full Liberty to deliberate about what concerned the Office of the
said Lord of Ruvigny, who presented his Majesty's Writ for his Election and
designation to it, offering to resign up his Office unto this Assembly. Now
after that he had received the Thanks of this Assembly for his great care and
pains taken by him for the weal of the affairs of the Reformed Churches of this
Kingdom; this Assembly believed, that they could not make a more advantageous
Choice, than of the Person of the said Lord of Ruvigny, who has been already
so very useful and helpful to them. Wherefore by a most unanimous Consent of
all the Deputies of this Synod, he was appointed; and they do appoint him to
exercise the Office of General Deputy in the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom
near his Majesty. And this Assembly being well assured by the Lord
Commissioner, that it would be acceptable to his Majesty if he were confirmed
in the said Office, they administered unto him the Oath, which is requisite and
accustomed to be taken, and then granted him both his deliberative and decisive
Votes, as all his Predecessors before him, ever had in the said Office; and his
Writ was again returned to him, whose Tenor was as follows.

2. THis Third Day of August, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand, Six
Hundred, Fifty and Three, the King residing then in Paris, and being to provide
a General Deputy for his Subjects of the Protestant Reformed Religion, that
Office being lately void through the Death of the Lord Marquess of Arzilliers;
after that his Majesty had cast his Eyes upon many of his Subjects, he judged
that he could not better fill it up than with the Person of the Marquess of
Ruvigny, Lieutenant General of his Armies, who is a Professor of the said
Protestant Reformed Religion, and endowed with many good and laudable
Qualities, and who has given signal Testimonies of his Fidelity and Affection
on diverse Occasions and of his Abilities and Capacity for his Majesty's
Service; and his Majesty condescending to the most Humble Petition of his said
Subjects of the Protestant Reformed Religion, he has chosen and appointed the
said Lord of Ruvigny to be the General Deputy of those of the said Protestant
Reformed Religion, and is well pleased that he reside near his Person, and
follow his Court in the said Quality, and to present unto his Majesty their
Petitions, Narrations, and most Humble Complaints, that so he may take such
course in it as he shall judge convenient for the Benefit of his Service, and
the Relief and Satisfaction of his said Subjects of the Protestant Reformed
Religion: In testimony whereof his said Majesty has commanded me to expedite
this present Writ unto the said Lord of Ruvigny, which he was pleased to sign
with his own Hands, and caused to be countersigned by me his Counselor and
Secretary of State, and of his Commandments.

Signed LOVIS. And a little Lower by the King, PHELIPPEAVX.

3. The Assembly expounding the Act by which the Lord Marquess of Ruvigny was
constituted General Deputy, declares that their Intention is, that his
Lordship shall give his Judgment in all Affairs whatsoever that shall be
treated and debated in it, excepting those in which he shall be personally and
particularly concerned, or do relate unto his Office of General Deputy.

4. The Sieurs Eustache Pastor, and de Mirabel, were ordered by this Assembly
to go immediately to Court, and to prostrate at his Majesty's Feet our most
Humble Duties, Submissions and Thanks; and they were entrusted with Letters
unto his Majesty, to the Queen, to his Eminency, to the Lord High Treasurer, to
the Lord of Vrillieres, Secretary of State, in whose Division are those of the
Reformed Religion; and to my Lord of Herual, Controller General.

5. A Copy of the Synods Letter sent unto the King.
Sire,
THE Wisest of Kings to his Command of Fearing God, joined that of Honoring
the King; they be Two Duties inseparably linked together. For Kings in this
World do in some Sense hold the very place of God, and are his most lively
Portraitures in Earth, and the steps and degrees of their Thrones do not raise
them above the Generality of Mankind, but to draw them nearer Heaven. These
Sire be the Fundamental Maxims of our Creed; which we learnt in our Infancy,
and endeavor to practice during our whole Life, and to devolve as an
Inheritance unto our Flocks; and those Favors which your Majesty vouchsafes
to pour down upon us every Day, do more abundantly augment our Obligations to
you, among which, we count this the first and chiefest, that your Majesty
assures us by the Mouth of the Lord Commissioner, of your Paternal Affection
to your Subjects of the Reformed Religion; and that you design to continue the
effects of your wonted kindness to us, as also this privilege which you have
granted us of Meeting together in this place, which being a most singular mark
of your Goodness, we want Words great and emphatical enough, whereby to express
our resentments and gratitude, and how deeply we stand engaged by this new
Favor to devote and consecrate unto your Majesty's Service our Lives and
Fortunes. And the rather, because your Majesty has superadded another favor
to your former, which is indeed inlinked with it, to wit, your gracious
permission of us to proceed to the Election of a General Deputy, according to
the privilege granted us by the Kings your Predecessors. But Sire, you having
with your own Royal Hand, conferred upon us the Lord Marquess of Ruvigny, we
were so well provided for, that we most humbly beseech your Majesty to continue
him unto us in this Office. This is Sire, what the Sieurs Eustache and de
Mirabel, are charged to deliver unto your Majesty, and whom pre have nominated
to lay at your Feet our Homages, Submissions, and most, sincere, protestations
of our inviolable Fidelity; together with our continual Prayers unto the Throne
of Grace for the Preservation of your Majesty's most Sacred Person, for the
Prosperity of this Kingdom, for the Establishing of Peace, and for the happy
accomplishment of your Marriage, as being

Sire, Of your Majesty, The most Humble, the most Obedient, and most Faithful
Subjects and Servants, the Pastors and Elders Assembled by your Majesty's
Permission in a National Synod at Loudun, and for all of them. Moderator,
Daille, Assessor, J. M. de Langle, Scribes. John de Brissac Loride des
Galinieres,




A Copy of the Letter written unto the Queen.
Madam,
WHen as during the King's Minority, the Supreme Government of this Kingdom was
put into your Hands, those of our Religion who live dispersed in all parts of
the Kingdom, have received so many marks and Evidences of your Majesty's
Goodness and Protection, that the Remembrance thereof will be perpetually
engraven upon our Hearts in the deepest sense of gratitude and acknowledgments.
And since his Majesty our Sovereign Lord, was declared Major, of Years to
Govern, and his Virtues have outrun his Years, your Majesty, Madam, has so
assisted him with your good Counsels, that we all know and confess, that you
contributed most of all to maintain us in our Repose, and in the enjoyment of
those Privileges which were given us by the Edicts of our Princes. And now the
late Grant of our Assembling in this National Synod is in part the fruit of
those good Inclinations your Majesty has for us, wherewith we are so deeply
affected, that we cannot forbear the Expressions of our Thankfulness, And
therefore, Madam, we have given in charge unto our Deputies, whom we have sent
unto the King, to wait also upon your Majesty, and to assure you not only of
your sincere Dutifulness unto your Majesty wit are here assembled, but also of
all those Persons who have deputed us, and are represented by us; and that the
remembrance of your Benefits shall never be blotted out of our Souls. And we
most humbly Petition your Majesty, that you will be pleased always to engage us
unto Thankfulness, by continuing to us the Fruits of your Royal Goodness, and
that you would daign to enrich us with the occasions of our incessant
publishing your Praises; that as we now do, so we may always wrestle with our
God for the showring down of his best Blessings from Heaven upon your Majesty;
and he will hear us, Madam, for we cry unto him daily, that you may have length
of Days, an uninterrupted Prosperity, that your Glorious Designs of settling
Peace in France, and a perpetual Peace between the Two Crowns, which have been
so long at variance, may be at last achieved. The great God, Madam, will bless
your Care and Labors in getting a Spouse for our King which may bri^^ (...) a
Poste^^^ like unto that your Majesty has given unto the late King his Father,
and which may be the genuine and worthy Offspring of so many Royal Monarchs,
from whose Blood they be descended, and to whom the Empire of France and Spain
may be subjected: And to say no more, Madam, our God will give your Majesty to
see, that by our inviolable Fidelity and Obedience unto your Commands, there
are none among the Subjects of this most populous Kingdom, who are more than
our selves,

Madam, Of your Majesty, The most Humble, and the most Obedient Subjects and
Servants, the Pastors and Elders assembled in a National Synod of Loudun and in
the Name of all. Moderator. Daille Assessor. J. M. de L'Angle Scribes. John de
Brissac Lorile des Galinieres




A Copy of the Letter written unto his Eminency.
My Lord,
ALthough that next and after God it is of his Majesty's Grace and Favor that
we enjoy this Privilege of meeting together in a National Synod, yet also are
we principally obliged unto the Goodness of your Eminency, and to the Wisdom of
your Counsels. For besides that this great Kingdom is governed by them, and
that it is by the Cares of this important Ministry (committed by his Majesty
unto your Eminency) that our Churches do enjoy the Protection of his Edicts, as
we have been informed by my Lord de Magdelaine his Majesty's Commissioner in
our Assembly, and by your Letters written to the Lord Marquess of Ruvigny our
General Deputy, of your Eminency's most favorable Inclinations for us in this
Occurrenc: Therefore, my Lord, no sooner were we met together, but we poured
out our Souls in the presence of the Lord Jesus our Savior, and rendered him
our most Solemn Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, that he had at length inclined his
Majesty's Heart to grant us what we had so ardently desired; and our very next
Thought was, to depute some of our Body unto his Majesty with the most humble
Thanks of our Hearts, and then also unto your Eminency, to testify our
Gratitude unto you. We have therefore, my Lord, given in charge to the Sieurs
Eustache and Mirabel, sent by us unto Court, to throw themselves in our stead
at his Majesty's Feet, to wait also upon your Eminency as from its, and to
assure your Eminency, that all the Churches of this Kingdom, who have deputed
us unto this Synod, will retain an everlasting remembrance of this your Favor,
together with in inviolable resolution of giving you the undoubted Evidences of
our Sense and Resentment of it by our uncorruptible Fidelity in his Majesty's
Service, and in a most respectful Obedience unto those Orders we shall receive
from him by the Mediation of your most excellent Ministry. Moreover we do hope,
my Lord, that your Eminency will give a favorable Audience unto our Deputies
in those most humble Requests they have to tender to you for us, and that you
would be pleased to obtain of his Majesty, that we may sensibly feel the benign
Influences of his Goodness and Royal Protection, and that you would daign
always to accept those Requests which shall be presented to you by the Lord
Marquess of Ruvigny, whom his Majesty has permitted, and his commendable
Qualities and Services have obliged us to confirm in his Office of General
Deputy; and that we may not be denied those Gratifications which these our
National Assemblies have always received from our Kings, and which even your
Eminency its self has procured for us: All our Churches, my Lord, do expect
and wait for this Fruit of your Eminency's great Goodness, and whatever shall
be received by us, it shall be as a most refreshing Shower, that shall cause
our Hearts to fructify more abundantly, yea, and the Hearts of all those of
our Religion in that Love and Affection which they have ever had, and which our
Religion and our Interest inspireth us to have above all other his Majesty's
Subjects for his Service, and to have the Praise of being true Frenchmen,
firmly devoted to the Advancement of the State, and to that respect which all
France owes unto your Eminency. But whatever may be, my Lord, we invocate
incessantly our common Redeemer, that he would preserve your Eminency's Person
in all Prosperity, and bless your Counsels given unto his Majesty, and cause
them for the future, as they have in times past, to succeed to the Advantage of
the State, the Glory of his Majesty, and the immortal Honor of your Eminency.
These are their Vows and Prayers, who will conserve inviolably the Quality,
which they have ever had to be, my Lord, of your Eminency,

The most Humble and most Obedient Servants, the Pastors and Elders Assembled
in a National Synod at Loudun, and for them all, Daille Moderator, etc.


6. The Sieurs Eustache and Mirabel, who were Deputed from this Assembly unto
his Majesty, being returned from their Journey, gave an Account of their
Deputation, and delivered Letters from the King, his Eminency, and the Lord de
la Vrilliere unto this Assembly, and they received the Praise and Thanks of it
for their Care and Labor.

A Copy of His Majesty's Letter.
DEar and Well Beloved,
We were very glad at the Receipt of your Letters, dated the 18th Instant, and
to hear from the Mouths of your Deputies the Sieurs Eustache and de Mirabel,
the Thanks you have rendered us for our permitting you to hold this National
Synod in our Town of Loudun, and the Protestations of your inviolable Fidelity
and Obedience to us, and being well satisfied therewith, we were willing to
give you the knowledge of it by this our Letter, and to exhort you to persist
in your Godly Purposes and Duties, and to afford us upon all occasions, which
may offer themselves for our Service, the Evidences of your good Conduct. And
we farther assure you, that whilst you continue your selves within the Bounds
we require from your Synod, and upon all other Occurrences which you may meet
withal, to maintain as much as in you lies the public Peace and Tranquillity,
you shall also receive from us all good and favorable Usage, and we shall be
delighted to protect you under the benefit of our Edicts, and of those of our
most Honored Lord and Father the late King, as we have done until now, and as
we shall yet again once more assure you more particularly, by your Deputies,
whom we return unto you very much satisfied. In the mean while we do the more
willingly allow the Continuation of the Lord Marquess of Ruvigny in the Office
of General Deputy for your Churches near our selves, because we are fully
persuaded that he will always acquit himself with Care and Faithfulness of that
Employ.

Given at Toulouse, the Tirteenth Day of November, One Thousand Six Hundred
Fifty and Nine. Signed LOVIS. And a little Lower, PHELIPPEAVX.


The Superscription was, To our dear and well-beloved the Pastors and Elders
Deputed unto the Assembly of the National Synod of our Subjects of the
Protestant Reformed Religion held at Loudun.

Copy of his Eminency's Letter.
Sirs,
YOur Deputies delivered me the Letter, which you took the pains to write me. I
owe you Thanks for your Civilities, and the more, because his Majesty being
persuaded, as he is of your inviolable Fidelity, and of your Zeal for his
Service, it is but needless and superfluous to mention any good Offices for you
with his Majesty. I pray you to believe that I have a very great Esteem for
you, as you do deserve it, being such good Servants and Subjects of the King. I
have nothing more, but to leave my self to what shall be related of me by your
own Deputies, and by the Dispatches of the Lord de la Vrilliere.

I remain, Sirs, Your most Affectionate to do you Service, The Cardinal Mazarin.


The Sieur de la Morinaye was Deputed by this Assembly with Letters to my Lord
Chancellor, and to my Lord de Bertueil Comptroler General of the Exchequer, and
ordered to ride unto Paris, and there to take up the Sixteen Thousand Livres
Gratuity, which his Majesty has been pleased to bestow upon this Assembly for
defraying the Expenses of it is Deputies, to which purpose the Orders of the
Accomptants, and the Assignment of my Lord High Treasurer was delivered into
his Hands, which was under Signed by the Sieur Eustache.

7. The Assembly considering that since the Death of the Sieur Bazin General
Deputy of our Churches for the Third Estate unto the King, that there is no one
to supply his Place, so that my Lord Marquess of Ruvigny, our General Deputy,
is even born down with the Duties of his Office at Court, which is a very great
Inconveniency to our Churches, it was decreed, That a most humble Petition
should be tendered unto his Majesty, that he would be pleased to put us again
into the Possession of this Privilege: And the Assembly hoping that this their
Petition would not be unacceptable unto his Majesty, and my Lord Commissioner
not in the least opposing, it was resolved, that we should proceed immediately
unto the Election of such Persons as should be presented unto his Majesty,
according to the usual Forms. Which being done, it was found that the Sieurs
Loride des Galinieres Advocate in the King's Council, and in Parliament,
Jassaud Advocate in the mixed Court of Castres, and des Forges Le Coq Counselor
and Secretary to the King, had the Plurality of Votes. Whereupon it was
decreed, that my Lord Marquess of Ruvigny shall be entreated to notify it unto
the King as soon as possible, together with the most humble Petition of this
Assembly, that his Majesty would be pleased to choose one out of these Three,
according to Custom, and to assign him the Salary, which his Majesty and the
Kings his Predecessors have given unto those who have exercised the said Office
of General Deputy.

8. Letters being Addressed to this Assembly by the Pastors and Professors of
Divinity in the Church and University of Geneva, and other Letters from the
Pastors and Professors of Divinity in the Churches and Universities of the
Cantons of Zurich, Berne, Basil, and Schapheusen, jointly Signed by them, they
were delivered unto my Lord Commissioner, who having first perused them, did
afterward order them to be communicated unto the Assembly, and to be read in
it. The Contents of which were large Expressions of their Affections to the
Peace of the Churches of this Kingdom, and their Joy at the Liberty, which it
has pleased the King to give us, and the Privilege of Assembling in this
Place, their Prayers for the Glory of his Majesty, Prosperity of his
Government, and the Blessings of God upon his Marriage. And my Lord
Commissioner declaring, that he could not permit us to return any Answer to
them, the whole Assembly submitted its self unto his Majesty's Orders.

9. A Copy of another Letter written unto the King.
Sire,
HAving happily concluded the Synod, which your Majesty was pleased by your
Gracious License to permit us convocate in this Town, we have deputed the
Sieure Dize a Pastor, and de Foissac an Elder, to lay at your Majesty's Feet
our most humble Thanks, (...) from us unto your Majesty, and our sincerest
Protestations for continuance of our Obedience and Fidelity in your Service,
who being the Pourtraiture of God, our Religion which commands us to fear him,
does also enjoin us entirely to submit our selves unto your Sovereign
Authority. But over and above these Sentiments which Nature and our Religion
have inspired into us, those Favors, Sire, which we daily receive from your
Majesty are so mighty that we are sensibly obliged and engaged with the
greatest Ardour and Pleasure to devote unto your Service our Lives and
Fortunes. It is true, Sire, that those Edicts which the Kings your Predecessors
were pleased to grant us, and your Royal Goodness to confirm unto us, are
broken in all your Provinces. But, Sire, as we are fully assured of your
Majesty's good Intentions, so we ascribe those Infractions unto their
particular Passion, who do hate us. And we most humbly petition your Majesty to
hear our Complaints presented to you in this Bill of Grievances, which we
presume by our Deputies to tender to you, and hope your Majesty will favor us
with a gracious Answer, we knowing very well, that as your I hrone is glorious
with an infinite number of Triumphs, so is it environed with Justice and
Equity: And these Verities, Sire, are the fairest Flowers in your Crown, and
render you the Father of that People, over whom you are the Sovereign, and give
you a Nobler Dominion, and far more absolute Empire in your Subjects Hearts,
than that which you exercise over your Armies and Provinces, and these oblige
all true Frenchmen to bless God for so just, and good, and glorious a Reign;
and we more than others do bless his holy Name for it, beseeching God in a more
especial manner with all the powers of our Souls to preserve your Sacred
Majesty, to grant a happy Success to all your Designs and Enterprises, and to
maintain your Government in all Peace and Prosperity. These Sire, are the most
ardent Vows of those who he in very Truth and Deed,

Of your Majesty, Sire, The most Humble, the most Obedient, and most Faithful
Subjects and Servants, the Pastors and Elders assemble by your Majesty's
Permission in a National Synod, and for them all. Daille, Moderator, J. M. de
Langle, Assessor,
Scribes.
Loride des Galinieres, And De Brissac,




A Copy of another Letter unto his Eminency.
My Lord,
WE acknowledge our great Debt unto your Eminency, for it is to your Counsels
that we stand obliged for our assembling and holding of this Synod, and for the
time allotted us for the regulating of our Affairs: We send the Sieurs Dize
Pastor, and de Foissac an Elder unto his Majesty, to present him our Bill of
Grievances, and to render unto your Eminency, my Lord, our most Humble Thanks
for your Favors. And we most humbly beseech your Eminency to accept of our
profound Respects, and those Assurances we give you of our Thankfulness. We
hope that your Eminency will continue unto us the effects of your Justice and
Protection; and that we shall always have occasion of publishing to the World
your Goodness, and to beg of God in all our Prayers, that he would accumulate
upon your Eminency his most precious Benedictions. We are

My Lord, Of your Eminency, The most Humble, and the most Obedient Servants,
the Pastors and Elders assembled by his Majesty's Permission in the National
Synod of Loudun, and for them all. Moderator. Daille Assessor. J. M. de L'Angle
Scribes. De Brissac Loride des Gali^^^es




CHAP. VI. Notes on the Confession.
THE Confession of Faith being Read, was signed by all the Deputies, who did
for themselves and their Provinces unanimously and solemnly protest, that they
would persevere in the inviolable Profession of it till Death.

CHAP. VII. Observations on Reading of the Discipline.
THE Deputies of the Province of Xaintonge, demanded that a longer time than
Two Years of Probation might be allotted unto Priests and Monks (who have
renounced their Superstitions and Idolatries, and joined themselves unto our
Communion) before they were admitted into the Holy Ministry, because of the
many Scandals arising from their ill Conduct. The Assembly was of Opinion, that
there needed no longer time of Probation than those Two years determined by the
Second Canon, in the First Chapter of our Discipline. But that all Churches and
Colloquies should be advised not to be precipitant nor over hasty in their
seeking and receiving of such Persons; but yet to get as full and evident
Proofs of their Sincerity as they shall judge necessary, till the time
prescribed by our Discipline be expired, which is the least that in Reason or
Prudence can be demanded.

2. The Provinces of Xaintonge and Poictou demanding that this Assembly would
take some order to prevent those Inconveniences which may fall out in the
examination of Proposans in Fortified Consistories. A Decree was made, that the
Canons in the Second Article of the First Chapter of our Discipline, and the
Acts of the National Synods held at Charenton, in the Year 1631, shall be
exactly observed; and that our Proposans as long as God gives us means and
opportunity, shall be examined in Colloquies and Synods, and no where else,
unless it be upon very great and considerable Grounds and Reasons, and in case
of urgent and indispensable Necessity, for which the Churches shall be
accountable unto the Provincial Synods, and these unto the National; and what
has been done in this matter by the Consistories of Paris and Saumur, is
approved of, as being conformable unto those aforementioned Canons.

3. The Deputies of Provinces of Sevennes and Lower Lauguedoc, proposed op the
Fifth Article of the First Chapter of our Discipline, that the Age of Students
in Divinity might be certainly fixed, before they be by Ordination received
into the Holy Ministry; that so the many inconveniences which have been
observed in diverse Places through the heats and inexperience of their Youth,
may be prevented. This Assembly did not judge meet to make any change in the
Canon of our Discipline: But does seriously advise, all the Provinces to admit
none unto examination, unless such Persons of whose Piety, Gravity and Prudence
they have good and sufficient Testimonials, which shall not be given them by
Pastors and Professors, but with very great Circumspection.

4. That Order in the Seventh Article of the First Chapter of our Discipline,
about the manner of Imposing Hands in Ordination, shall be observed in all the
Churches; and such as do not yield an entire Conformity thereunto, shall be
censured.

5. The Province of Sevennes complained of that of Languedoc, for transgressing
the Ninth Article in the First Chapter of our Discipline, they having admitted
Persons into the Ministry, without assigning them any particular Flock, or
taking care beforehand to secure a Maintenance for those Ministers in those
Places whereunto they send them. This Assembly judges the said Province of
Lower Languedoc to be blameworthy, and ordains that the said Canon be most
exactly observed by all the Provinces; and an account hereof shall be rendered
unto the National Synod.

6. The Province of Berry petitioned this Assembly to exert its Authority, that
all Preachers of the Gospel might be obliged to contain themselves within the
bounds of that Simplicity recommended by the Apostle, and to banish from their
Sermons, whatever may favor of the vanities and affectations of the Writers of
this Age. The Assembly answered, that in their Judgment there could not be a
more Holy nor Judicious Decree framed than that Twelfth Canon in the First
Chapter of our Discipline, nor than those Canons of the Synods of Gap, Rochel,
St. Maixant, Privas, Thonneins and Castres, the exact Observation of which is
recommended unto all Pastors; and all Consistories, Colloquies and Synods are
enjoined to have a strict and watchful Eye over those who do transgress them;
and to employ against them those Remonstrances and Censures which they shall
judge needful; that so the Sacred Depositum of Truth being Religiously
preserved in the midst of us, the Gospel may be Preached in such a manner as
well becomes it is most excellent Majesty.

7. Upon the Twentieth Article of the First Chapter of our Discipline, This
Synod Ordained, That the Canon of the National Synod of Privas, which injoyneth
Pastors to exhort their People to observe Modesty in their Habits, and to go
before them in their own Persons and Families as the best Patterns and
Examples, shall be most strictly observed: And there being made great
Complaints of several Pastors, whose Wives and Children have transgressed this
Canon by their vain Conformity to the World in the new fangled Fashions of
their Habits, contrary to Christian Modesty: All Moderators of Colloquies and
Synods are expressly charged and commanded to reform these Excesses by Censures
and the severest Reprehensions. And it is farther Decreed, that these
Refractory Ministers shall be suspended their Office, till such time as they
have removed the Scandal; and that a stricter Watch than ever may be kept over
these Excesses, all private Persons are permitted according to the method
prescribed in our Discipline, to inform their Consistories of them, and to
demand a Reformation of them, which being refused, they shall apply themselves
unto their Colloquies, that Censures may be issued out against them, and
against all Supporters and Abetters of them: And this Canon shall be
Religiously observed and read in all Consistories.

8. The Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny, complained upon the First Article in
the Third Chapter of our Discipline, That some certain Persons when they were
to be received into the Elder's Office, refused to stand up in the Face of the
Church, although this be required by the said Article, and demanded whether
this part of the Order observed in the Reception of our Elders should be
dispensed with in favor of any Persons, and these in particular should enjoy
their Liberty. This Assembly injoyneth, that the Contents of this Canon be
fully observed by all sorts of Persons whatsoever without distinction; and the
Province of Dolphiny is censured, for that it suffered it to be violated.

9. At the request of the Deputies of Lower Languedoc, upon the same first
Article of the Third Chapter of our Discipline, it was decreed, That those
Persons should be chosen into the Elders Office, who resided within the Bounds
of that particular Church which did Elect them, and who were numbered among
their actual Members, if it were possible to be done; but in case any
Difficulties should occur on this occasion, they were to be decided by the
Colloquy or Synod upon which that said Church has dependence.

10. The Assembly being informed how little care is taken for putting in
Execution the Thirty Third Article of the Fifth Chapter of our Discipline, does
enjoin all Provinces and particular Churches to do it more carefully for the
future, and to keep an exact Record of those Memorable Events concerning our
Religion, and to send them unto the Colloquies and Synods by some careful Hand,
that they may be delivered unto that Person who is appointed to Collect and
Compile them into a just Volume. And that Order made in the National Synod of
Vitre, 1617, is now again revived, and all the Provinces are enjoined in their
respective Synods, to nominate one particular Pastor, to whom the account of
those remarkable Providence may be directed.

11. The Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc, moved upon Reading the Second
Article of the Eighth Chapter of our Discipline, that a Rule might be made for
the future, that no Church in any Province, at least in theirs, should send any
more than One Elder with a Pastor, unto the Provincial Synod: But this Assembly
did not think meet to make any Alteration in the said Article, neither with
respect to that particular Province, nor any other of the Provinces: As also
that one and the same Church, however it be composed of diverse Quarters, and
annexed Congregations, may not depute unto those Synods more than One or Two
Elders.

12. The Deputies of the Province of Xaintonge demanding what course they might
take with those who had Espoused the Neice, or the Great Grand Neice of their
Deceased Wise, and yet demanded to be received into Communion at the Lord's
Table. This Assembly advises, that they direct and govern themselves in this
Affair by the Eleventh Canon of the Thirteenth Chapter of our Discipline, and
the Decrees of the National Synods of Vitre, and of the Second and Third of
Charenton, who have declared such Marriage to be Incestuous; and all Pastors
are forbidden to bless and solemnize the Marriages in those prohibited degrees
upon any pretext whatsoever; and all Consistories are enjoined (without meddling
with the validity of those Marriages, or their effects, the cognizance whereof
does properly belong unto the Magistrate) to declare unto such as be in that
Estate, that they cannot be admitted to partake of the pledges and tokens of
the Remission of their Sins as long as they cohabit together; moreover all
Colloquies and Synods are to exert their Authority, that this present Canon be
duly observed.

13. In the next Edition of our Church Discipline care shall be taken that
Printers do insert the Province of Bearn in the number of those, which do make
up the National Synod.

The Church Discipline being read, all the Deputies of the Provinces did
promise for themselves, and on behalf of their respective Synods whom they
represented, that they would observe it themselves, and see that it should be
exactly observed in their Provinces.

CHAP. VIII. Observations upon reading the last National Synod of Charenton, in
the Year 1644.
1. THE Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc and Sevennes, demanding that
something might be changed in that Decree of the National Synod of Charenton in
the Year 1644. which empowred Consistories with full Authority to judge
Sovereignly and without Appeal of those differences arising upon the Account of
Seats erected in our Temples. And the Consistory of Montpellier having sent
Memoirs, and demanded, quite contrary to them, a Confirmation of the said
Decree. This Assembly waving the Decrees of Provincial Synods made in prejudice
of the Ordinances of the National Synod of Charenton, and which have not been
as yet put in execution by their Consistories, and are now vacated and
disannulled by this present Assembly, it does judge, that there ought not to be
any change made in that Decree of the said National Synod of Charenton, but
ordains only, That in case the Difficulties be so great, as that they cannot
be composed by the particular Consistory, then it may call in the most
considerable Heads of Families belonging to their own Church, or of the
Neighbor Consistories, to be corroborated by their United Counsels, and to
judge Sovereignly without Appeal concerning those Seats, and to prosecute with
Church Censures all such Persons as will not submit unto their Orders, and
particularly those, who shall attempt to remove a business of this nature from
our Ecclesiastical Assemblies. Moreover it declares and judges, as did the
last National Synod held at Charenton, in the 7th and 11th Articles of Appeals;
That there be fewer Inconveniences in leaving all Seats free and in common,
than in affecting them unto particular Persons, who being merely private
Persons, cannot of right lay claim unto any pre-eminence before others. And all
the Churches are exhorted to do what in them lies to make all places common.

2. Forasmuch as True Piety and Holiness depend upon the right knowledge of the
Mysteries of Religion, this Assembly ratifying that Decree made in the last
National Synod of Charenton, which was to this effect, That whereas in several
Great Churches of this Kingdom it was requisite for their general Edification,
that the Sunday's Catechisms should be handled, not by familiar Questions and
Answers, but by Common-places. And that their Instruction might be facilitated,
who were grown in Years, they had substituted extraordinary Catechisings upon
some certain days of the Week preceding the Lord's Supper, their Practice being
approved, all the Churches of this Kingdom are exhorted to conform themselves
to that Order prescribed by the Discipline, as far as God shall enable them;
and in case they cannot Catechize their Children on every Sabbath Day, they
shall then choose out some particular Day of the Week for this Exercise,
especially before the Celebration of the Lord's Supper. And Provincial Synods
are charged to take knowledge, whether every particular Church in their
District do perform their Duty herein or no, and to give an Account thereof
unto the next National Synod. This Decree is again revived, and it is now
ordered, that it shall be exactly observed in all our Churches, which shall
take such care and course in their respective Consistories as they shall judge
will best contribute to the Instruction of the Faithful; and in those Churches
which have two Sermons on the Lord's Day, the Second Sermon shall be turned
into an Exposition of the Catechism by way of Commonplace, adapting their
Discourses to the meanest Capacities. And in those Churches and Towns where
there is more frequent Preaching, as on every day of the Week there is in some,
they are exhorted to exchange one or more of these Sermons into familiar
Catechistical Exercises; and such as be more populous, and dispersed into
diverse quarters, they are exhorted to hire a fit Person n to instruct the
Children in all the Quarters of those Cities, and of the Country; or at least
to choose out in every Quarter such Elders, as are Men able and willing to do
this good Service unto the Church of our Lord Jesus. And all Fathers and
Mothers shall take an especial Care of the Religious Education of their
Children, teaching them themselves, and committing them to Godly Ministers, who
may form their tender years unto Godliness. And all Colloquies and Synods are
enjoined to take Cognizance once a year of the Observation of this Order by
Pastors and Consistories. And in case there should occur any difficulty to
obstruct and hinder this good Design, Provincial Synods are empowred with
Authority to judge of it, and whatever shall be determined and ordained by
them, shall be executed (notwithstanding any Appeal that may be made from them)
and put in practice till the meeting of the next National Synod, unto which an
Account of the whole shall be given. And that Pastors may acquit themselves
more carefully of this most needful part of their Ministry, and may have the
more time for their private Studies, and better prepare themselves for their
public Work in the Pulpit, and give more satisfaction unto their Auditories,
by a clear, judicious and solid Explication of the Sacred Scripture: Those
Churches, whose Ministers are obliged to preach oftener than three times in the
Week, are entreated to discharge them of some part of this Exercise, that they
may be the better qualified for their Work, and may apply themselves more
profitably to the Instruction of the Youth by familiar Catechisings. And Synods
and Colloquies shall see unto it, that Pastors and their Churches do all of
them endeavor the Advancement of their Members Edification, and the Glory of
God, and of the Gospel.

3. Monsieur Drelincourt Pastor of the Chrch of Paris, having given an Account
of his Works, undertook, in Obedience to the Counsel of the last National Synod
held at Charenton, received the Praise and Thanks of this Assembly for those
his Learned Labors already published in Defense of the Truth, and for
Consolation of the Faithful, which have been very beneficial to them; and he is
exhorted to continue his painful Studies, and to print those other Treatises,
as soon as they be finished, which are now in his Hands.

4. There was read an Article of the last National Synod concerning the
Differences of the University of Die with Monsieur Aymin a Minister, and the
Letters also of the Professors in the said University were perused, in which
they complain of the many Troubles he has put them to upon the score of the
Judgments passed in the Consistory of Lion, March 21. 1638. and March 7. 1643.
notwithstanding they had been all repealed in that last National Synod, and
which self-same Decree was Confirmed by a Judicial Sentence of the Supreme
Court of Requests, May 12. 1656. into which the said Aymin had driven them. And
another Report was made, how he threatened them with farther Prosecutions upon
the same Account This Assembly censureth the said Mr. Aymin for drawing the
said Professors, contrary to the Canous of our Discipline before the Secular
Jurisdiction, yea, and contrary to the Decree of the National Synod aforesaid.
And in case he shall hereafter offer to transgress that Decree, the Provincial
Synod of Sevennes is authorized, to take Cognizance thereof, and to censure him
according to his Deserts, either by Suspension or Deposal from his Office as it
may so fall out: And they shall further Question him for what Causes he has
desisted from the Functions of his Ministry; and all this shall be done by the
Authority of this Assembly; nor shall there be any Appeal of his admitted from
that Provincial Synod.

5. The Fifth Article of Observations upon reading of the Discipline in the
Synod of Charenton, 1644. which forbad all Proposans going into the Pulpit at
those Hours destinated unto Sermons, shall be most religiously observed, and
such as violate them shall be censured by Colloquies and Synods.

6. On reading the Thirteenth Article of Appeals in the last National Synod,
the Provincial Deputies of Sevennes made their Report, and the Letter from the
Consistory of St. Estienne was produced. This Assembly blamed the said Province
and Consistory for not having sooner put in execution the Order of the said
National Synod, for separating the Sieur Michel from his Wife. And whereas the
said Sieur Michel and his Wife, that they may avoid the Censures of the Church,
do offer voluntarily, and of their own accord, to separate one from the other,
and so to remove the ground of the Scandal given by them, and taken at them:
This Assembly ordains, that after they shall have evidenced their sincere
Repentance and Submission to the Rules of our Discipline by a real Separation
from each other for the space of Six Months, then, and not till then are they
to be received to the Peace and Fellowship of the Church.

7. The Deputies of the Province of Burgundy were heard speak about that Decree
of the last National Synod, which ordains the said Province to examine the
Accounts of the Sieur John Gras, concerning the Moneys received by him for the
Churches of Montauban, Rochel and Castres. The said Deputies declaring that
those Accounts were audited and closed in the Synod held at Bussi in the Year
1651. and put into the Hands of the Sieurs Cale and Spons, Elders of the Church
of Lion, and Deputies for the said Church. Upon which Relation the Deputies
were very well satisfied.

8. The Colloquies of Roven and Cauz made a Proposal for separating the Higher
and Lower Normandy, and to make out of them two Provincial Synods. After that
Monsieur Bochart was heard speaking for the Colloquies of the Lower Normandy:
This Assembly judged, that the Decree past in the last National Synod should
hold good, without any change at all; and that the said Proposal should be let
die away in silence.

9. The re-iterated Petition of the Province of Sevennes about the Church of
Doubre and D'Auchy shall be tendered to the next Synod of the higher Languedoc,
which is entreated to consider well of the matter.

10. The Assembly revising the eighth Article of General Matters in the last
National Synod, which enjoined the Consistories of those Churches that have
Printers, to take special heed, that there be not any Change made in the
Translation of our Bible, nor in our Liturgy nor Psalms, without express Order
from that Consistory, which is empowred for so doing by the Provincial Synod.
It does also recommend the strict Observation hereof, and declares those
Persons worthy to be censured who do neglect it, and wills that an account of
this be rendered both to the ^rovincial Synods and Colloquies. And farthermore,
all Persons whatso ver be forbidden to print, or bind up with our Liturgy and
Ordinary Catechism any other Catechisms and Prayers whatsoever.

11. On reading that Article of the last National Synod concerning Original
Sin, diverse Provinces demanding with great Importunity, that this Assembly
would be pleased to moderate it; this Decree was made, That for the future all
Pastors and Proposans who should offer themselves unto the Holy Ministry, shall
be only obliged to subscribe unto the Tenth and Eleventh Article of the
Confession of Faith held by all the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom; and in
the mean while all Persons are forbidden to preach or print any thing against
the Imputation mentioned by the said Synod in that Article before named, nor
shall any thing more or less be changed in it.

12. In reading that Article of the same National Synod concerning the
Redemption of Captives: This Assembly took notice, that the Alms collected from
the Faithful on this occasion had been employed most beneficially in this pious
Work, as was made appear by those Accounts brought in and examined; and whereas
there is a great Necessity for the continuance of this noble Charity, this
Assembly recommends the continuance of its Practice unto the Provinces
according to the intent and purport of the said Article.

13. The Deputies of Lower Guyenne gave in an account of what their Synod had
done about the absence of two Elders, whom they had deputed unto the last
National Synod of Charenton, and their proceedure in censuring of Monsieur
Sauvage for his absence was well approved.

CHAP. IX. Of Appeals.
1. MOnsieur Ferrand Pastor of the Church of Bordeaux, appealed, for that the
Synod of Lower Guyenne held at Bergerac, had made a change in their first
Deputation to the National Synod, having put in another Deputy in his stead,
whenas sixteen Members of the said Synod were absent and out of the way, to the
wounding of his Reputation. Whereupon the Deputies of that Province declared,
that this Change was made in pursuance of a Rule made in the Synod held at
Casteljalonx, without any the least suspicion had of the Integrity of the said
Monsieur Ferrand, whose Fidelity and Sincerity was very well known in all the
Province and elsewhere. This Assembly judged, that the Rule established in the
said Province is highly laudable, and its observation very profitable. Yet
nevertheless it were to be desired that the new Election had not commenced in
the absence of so great a number of their Members; and the said Monsieur
Ferrand is entreated to rest satisfied with the Testimony given him by the
Deputies of his Province in this Assembly, that he has always demeaned himself
as a good and Faithful Servant of God.

2. The Churches of Beaune, Thoire, and St. John, appealed from the Judgment of
the Synod of Burgundy, which refused to discharge them of those Sums to which
they were taxed as the other Churches of the Province, for the Colleges and
Universities. After perusal of the Contents of their Memoirs, and hearing the
Deputies of the Provinces, the Assembly judged those Churches aforesaid most
blame worthy for refusing to pay the Sums demanded of them, and injoyneth them
to submit unto that Order.

3. The Sieur Gaultier, Pastor in the Province of Xaintonge, brought his Appeal
from a Censure which he pretended was inflicted upon him by the Synod of that
Province held at Mauze, July 5, 1656, because he refused to Baptize the Child
of the Lord of Cyre, at his Castle on an extraordinary Day. The Assembly
considering the Terms of that Censure which he produced, mentioned no Censure
at all, it could not be persuaded that he had any ground of complaint in the
least, nor that such an Appeal should have been brought into this Assembly;
because Pastors should in all Affairs of this nature be guided by their
Consistories, and the custom of the Provinces. And forasmuch as this Assembly
is informed, that the said Gaultier has been for a long time without a Church,
the Province of Xaintonge was commanded to get him some Employment.

4. Mademoiselle d' Argier, Widow of the Deceased Pastor of that Name,
complained against the Judgment of the Synod of Lower Languedoc, held at Vsez,
in the Year 1659, which had rejected her Petition, and demand of the Annuity of
her Widowhood from the Churches of Cormes and Florensac; but her Appeal was
rejected, because the matters of that nature ought to be finally decided in the
Provinces.

5. The Sieur Bourdieu, Pastor of the Church of Montpellier, having presented
unto this Assembly the Evidences and Memoirs of Mr. Peter Caffarel, (Syndic of
the Inhabitants in the City of Montpellier, professing the Reformed Religion,)
by which he defends himself from the Appeals brought by the Sieur John
Guillard, and Mademoiselle Colomb^, and Esther Thalodiere de Degan, about a
difference between them concerning Seats in the Temple: These Differences were
remanded back again unto the Consistory of Montpellier, there to be finally
determined if they are not so already, according to the Ordinances established
in the last and in this present National Synod of Charenton.

6. There were produced in this Assembly the Memoir of Monsieur David Blanc
(late Pastor of the Church of Vernoux, who departed this Life about Two Years
since,) and presented by his poor Children in behalf of their Dead Father to
defend an Appeal of his from the Provincial Synod of Vivaretz held at Vals, in
April 1650. And they complained that the said Synod had removed him from his
Church of Vernoux, without so much as hearing him speak for himself; so that he
was for sometimes altogether destitute of Employment, and without any
Maintenance or Care had for him or his poor Families Subsistence. After that
the Deputies of the said Province were heard, the Assembly did very much blame
the Province of Vivaretz, for removing the said Mr. Le Blanc from his Church,
without suffering him to defend himself, and for not providing for his
Subsistence all the while he was out of employment; and Ordained that there
should be paid in unto his Children within the space of one Year, the Sum of
Two Hundred Livres by the said Province, and by the Churches of Vernoux, and of
Velay, each of them One Third. And the Synod of Vivaretz is charged to see that
the said Sum be paid in to the Children of the said Deceased Mr. Le Blanc,
within the time prefixed.

7. On sight of the Letters and Memoirs of Monsieur Thubert the Father, Pastor
of the Churches of Cassagnoles and Marnjolles, appealing from a Judgment past
in the Synod held at Alez, in the Year 1658, against him, and for refusing to
restore him unto his Church of Vezenobres, from whence he was removed without
any valid Reason given him; and that because he had a right to re-enter into
his said Church, they to keep him out, would pay him Fifty Livres a Year for
his Life. After that the Deputies of Sevennes had been heard, and that the
Memoirs containing the Reasons and Grounds of the Appeal brought from the said
Judgment by the Church of Vezenobre, which was ordered to pay Fifty Livres a
Year unto the said Monsieur Thubert. The Assembly vacated the said Appeal; and
has also vacated the Judgment past against the said Church, for the Yearly
payment of Fifty Livres, and discharges it from the said Payment, without
Restitution of any part of the said Moneys, to be made by the said Monsieur
Thubert, in case he has received any.

8. There was an Appeal brought by the Church of Xaintes, from an Act of the
Provincial Synod of Xaintonge, held at Cazes, in June, 1659, for that, as they
were informed, they had over and besides the great Catechism, which is
ordinarily used every Lord's Day, ordained another to be used between the
Morning Sermon, and the great Catechism for Children, in a familiar way, by
Questions and Answers; and yet though this be not practiced in any one Church
of the Province, the Church of Xaintes is called upon to conform to Order, and
to keep to Uniformity. This Assembly being obliged to commend the Zeal and
Diligence of the said Church, in providing for their Instruction who are
committed to its care, judges, that it had been much better if the said
Province had left this Church in full Liberty; or that when they gave it their
Advice upon the difficulty, (which was discovered in the Order of the said
Church, and that for a long time has been upheld and maintained in it,) about
the time chosen by them for their Catechisings, the Province it self had found
out some other means more meet, and fit to produce those good effects and
fruits which they have yielded, and which might have been exempted from those
inconveniences which it has found in the said Church, and whereunto it might
have conformed. And therefore exhorts the said Church, and all other Churches
in this Kingdom, to strengthen themselves, and to be encouraged in this
laudable Design, and to promote to the very utmost of their Power, the
instruction of particular Members, according to that Canon made and established
in this present Assembly.

9. The Letters and Memoirs of the Sieurs Vulson, Des Grands Prez, D^ B^^f, and
Calvet, Doctors of Physic, Fellows of the College of Physicians, Fellows of
the College of Physicians at Grenoble, and Professors of the Reformed
Religion, were Produced and Read in this Assembly, by which they complained of
Monsieur Gros, Pastor of the Reformed Church at La Mure, for having
transgressed the 18th Article of the first Chapter of our Ecclesiastical
Discipline, which forbids Ministers to practice Physic, and that the Synod
of Dolphiny held at Vegnes, in September last of this Year, 1659, had not took
an effectual course to restrain him. The Letters also of the Sieurs Gros were
opened and perused, and the Deputies of the Province of Dolphiny were heard
speak on this matter. After all Parties had been heard, this Assembly not
finding any proof against the said Mr. Le Gros, that he had of late
transgressed, nor since that Act of the Consistory of Grenoble, June 17, 1659,
he was only enjoined precisely and exactly to observe the sense and intention
of that Eighteenth Article of our Church Discipline under the Penalties therein
contained.

10. The Sieurs de Billieres, Crumel, Codere, and Durassus, deputed by a great
part of the Inhabitants of Montauban, who style themselves the Directors of the
Heads of Families in the said City, as appeared by a Letter dated the Twenty
Fifth of October, 1659, brought diverse Complaints and Accusations against Mr.
Joseph Arbussy, Pastor of the Church there, and other Letters against the
Consistory, and the Senate of that University; for that he the said Arbussy,
and the Sieurs Le Clerc and Caussade, Advocates Deputed by the Consistory of
Montauban, and the extraordinary Council of that University, (as was evident
from their Letters of Commission, and by an Act bearing date the Twenty Ninth
of October, 1659,) had forbidden those Heads of Families before-named by Mr.
Billieres and his Fellow-Deputies to assemble and act together. The Deputies of
Lower Languedoc and the Sieur Boudet, Pastor of Caussade, were heard all of
them speak for themselves and for those Persons, who opposed the Synod of
Realmont; and all their Assertions and Denials having been patiently heard and
considered; the Assembly did upon the whole, appoint Commissioners to examine
and make good those respective Acts, which were produced by both Parties,
Plaintiffs and Defendants, that so upon a clear and full knowledge of the Cause
Justice might be done. The said Commissioners having made their Report, and
both Parties having been heard once and again, yea, and diverse times upon all
that they had to declare, and many Papers having been read over again and again
in the Assembly, that all the Members of which it was composed might have a
full and clear Idea of the whole Affair, the plain truth of the matter appeared
to be thus; With respect to Mr. Billieres and his Consorts, they have failed in
these following particulars: 1. That they began their Prosecutions of Monsieur
Arbussy, upon very slight and trifling. Accounts, and by a Cabal which is
expressly forbidden by our Discipline. 2. And that they demanded positively in a
peremptory manner of the Consistory, to call an Assembly of the Heads of
Families, that they might bring before them their Articles of Accusation
against Monsieur Arbussy, without ever expecting the Judgment of the Consistory
thereupon. 3. That they have appeared before this Assembly by a Public Notary
contrary to our Canons. 4. That because the Acts demanded by them were not
immediately, nor the next Day delivered to them, they did precipitantly
withdraw themselves from under the Jurisdiction of their Consistory, by
appealing from it unto the Provincial Synod. 5. For that some of them seeing
the said Monsieur Arbussy going into the Pulpit to Preach, went out of the
Church with much irreverence. 6. For that among their Articles against the said
Mr. Arbussy, there were some which in themselves were of no moment, nor worth
the mentioning, and others founded upon conjectures without proof; and one in
particular urged with that Passion and Uncharitableness, as in no wise became
Christians, for they published a Secret to the World that was never known
before, and which when it was thoroughly inquired into, it could not in the
least be proved. And 7. Lastly, That in the management of the whole Affair,
they have discovered more Passion than Zeal for God's Glory. For these causes
the Assembly judges that they have deserved very great Censures, and advises
them that for the future, they do not violate the Rules of our Discipline and
Christian Moderation.

2. As for the Consistory, it is evident they have failed in these points
following: First, Inasmuch as they have not been so careful as they ought, to
extinguish the Fire of this Contention in its first eruptions by some
charitable condescension. Secondly, And that instead of counselling the Sieur
Arbussy to obey the Order of the Synod of Mauvoisin, they concluded on the
contrary. Thirdly, For that they have suffered several Scripts to be Printed,
which are totally prejudicial to our Liberties and Privileges granted us by
the Edicts; and that when they audited their Accounts, who procured the
impression of those Scripts, they allowed them all their Charges. And Fourthly,
That they having given just occasion unto the Commissioners of the Synods of
Vsez and Mauvoisin, to complain of them. Wherefore this Assembly judges, that
all these their Miscariages be remonstrated to them with Life and Power, and
that they be exhorted to discharge that Holy Office and Trust in which they be
employed, with all requisite Charity, Prudence and Integrity.

3. And as for the Senate of the University of Montauban, they also were found
Faulty: First, In that, when as the Ordinary University Council had deputed the
Sieur Crumel to the Synod of Lower Guyenne, the extraordinary Council
assembleth not only without the knowledge and consent of the Ordinary, contrary
to the Canon of the National Synod of Alez, but which is worse, merely in
prejudice, and out of opposition to the Rector. Secondly, And that this
extraordinary Council did depute the said Sieur Arbussy unto the said Synod of
Lower Guyenne, for the self same matter for which Monsieur Crumel had been
Deputed by the Ordinary. Thirdly, Item, And for that several Scholars being
armed with their Swords, and walking up and down the City in this Equippage,
they did not check and restrain them as they ought, with that Severity which
was requisite. And the Assembly passed the same Judgment upon their Proceedings
as upon the Consistory. Fourthly, As for the Provincial Synods of Mauvoisin and
Vsez, and Realmont, this Assembly says, that although that of Mauvoisin might
according to the strictness and rigor of our Discipline, have remanded that
Affair of Monsieur Arbussy aforesaid, unto the Consistory of Montauban, which
had neglected to judge of it; yet is their Prudence applauded, and all their
Proceedings about Monsieur Arbussy approved. But as for that of Lower
Languedoc, it is declared an Incompetent Judge. And as for that of Realmont,
their Act in choosing Monsieur Arbussy for Moderator or Assessor, is
disallowed, not only because he had no Letters of Commission to them, but also
for that he had business of importance in that Synod to be determined. This
also is disapproved, that they never debated nor opined upon that opposition
which was made by sundry Pastors and Elders against the Election of Monsieur
Arbussy to be their Assessor. And farther, this is disapproved, that after the
return of the Opponents, immediately the Affair of Monsieur Arbussy came under
consideration, instead of passing on to some other matters, whereby they might
have reunited the Spirits which were already divided; and for that they chose
another place besides the Ordinary for their meeting separately from those who
were of the opposite Party. And as for Monsieur Boudet, Pastor of Caussade, and
the other Opponents, they are blamed and censured for their departure from the
rest of the Assembly, their Action tending unto Schism.

And as for what concerns Mr. Arbussy, it is evident that he has failed in
these ensuing Articles: 1. In uttering very injurious Words against those who
went cut of Church as he was going to preach. 2. In his uncivil and
uncharitable Carriage toward the Commissioners sent by the Synod of Vsez unto
St. Africa. And 3. For that the Consistory of Montauban having left it to his
Discretion to preach and administer the Lord's Supper in the Old Church,
because that several Counselors and other Gentlemen, Members of the Presidial
Court, had protested that they could not receive the Communion at his Hands,
who was suspended from the Ministry by order of the Synod of Vzez, yet
notwithstanding he would and did preach and administer that Holy Sacrament. 4.
In that he resolved, and was bent upon it, to be Assessor in the Synod of
Realmont, notwithstanding the Opposition made by 19 Pastors and 19 Elders, they
opposing his Election to that Office, because he had not any Letters of
Deputation to them, and because of his Suspension. 5. For that in the same
Synod, whenas the Opponents made some difficulty to withdraw, demanding a
Debate first upon the Election of the said Mr. Arbussy unto the Office of
Assessor, he told his Majesty's Commissioner in that Synod, that it belonged
unto his Place and Office of right, to cause any Persons whom he thought good,
to depart from the Assembly. 6. For that he did in his own Name cause three
things to be published, which were all of a piece, entirely prejudicial to our
Liberties and Privileges granted us by the Edicts, and this too when he was
employed directly about Civil Affairs. 7. For that he being a Member of the
Consistory of Montauban, he did not oppose the Payment of those Charges for the
same Script, when as the Account was brought in unto them. 8. For that by the
Endeavors of his Uncle a Decree of the Parliament of Toulouse, having restored
him to the Exercise of his Office, he expressed not any the least Displeasure
or Repentance for his Sin, which had caused him to be suspended as he ought. 9.
For that he did not submit unto the Order of the Synod of Mauvoisin, till Nine
Months after it had been notified unto him, and still continued the Exercise of
his Ministry at Montauban, whenas he should have done it at St. Africa, unto
which Church he was lent by the Synod for one whole Year. Nor can his Appeal
cover this his Offense, because all our Synods are empowred to lend Ministers
unto Churches for a Year, notwithstanding an Appeal. 10. For that he suffered
diverse Scholars to follow him in the City with their Swords at their sides. 11.
And in short, for that in his whole Conduct he has discovered a very fierce,
haughty Spirit, and who, for the attaining of his ends, will boldly pass over
all the Banks and Fences of Order and Discipline, yea, and the very Bounds of
Christian Moderation, a Virtue well becoming the Ministers of our Lord Jesus;
he having by such Actions as these fomented the Troubles and Divisions in the
Church of Montauban. All these Offenses of the said Sieur Arbussy having been
duly and maturely pondered, the Assembly concluded, that he could not exercise
his Ministry in the Church of Montauban, nor in any other belonging to the
Synod of Higher Guienne, and higher Languedoc, and that he shall provide
himself of some other Church in some other Province, as the good Providence of
God may direct him. Nor shall he exercise his Ministry in any other place,
until such time as he be settled in some particular Church, either by this
present National, or by a Provincial Synod, or by a Colloquy, or by that
particular Church with which he shall agree, and to whom he shall devote and
consecrate his Ministry. Nor shall he exercise the Office of Professor, nor of
Principal in the College of Montauban, and all this for very good Reasons well
known unto this Assembly, who desiring rather to use their Charity than Rigor
in their Dealings with the said Mr. Joseph Arbussy, do declare, that the
Cessation of the Functions of his Ministry and other Offices, shall be without
any Note or Blemish of Deposal from them. And forasmuch as it is very needful,
that there should be a good understanding maintained among the Faithful in the
Church at Montauban, this Assembly has nominated the Sieurs Chamier and
Vignier Pastors, and Pontperdu and Maizomay Elders, Commissioners, who shall
travel unto that City, and labor in this good Work, and in all other matters
that may occur unto them, according to those Instructions which shall be given
them. And in the mean while all the Members of that Church are exhorted to
receive those aforesaid Commissioners with Spirits well inclined unto Peace,
for the Glory of God, the repose of their own Consciences, the Tranquillity of
the Mystical Body of Christ Jesus, and that by this Holy Union they may prevent
those Judgments which their mutual Discord and Animosities will otherwise
infallibly pull down upon them.

11. There came unto this Assembly Mr. Paul Belly a Member of the Church of
Fontenay le Comte, and informed them, that he had appealed from the Decrees of
the Provincial Synods of Poictou held at Coutre, in the Year 1654. and at
Niort, in the Year 1656. By the first of which his Liberty (granted him by the
Synod held at Partenay, in the Year 1649. to communicate at the Lord's Table in
any other Church besides that of Fontenay) was taken from him, and for that the
Sieur Le Blois Pastor of the said Church, was acquitted from all those
Accusations which he the said Belly had brought in against him at the said Synod
of Niort. Whereupon the said Sieurs Jossaud Pastor, and Gondran Elder, Deputies
in this Assembly being ordered to peruse the Acts of both Parties, and the said
Mr. Belly being heard in his Complaints and Demands, and the Sieur Le Bloy in
his Defense: All the Deputies did unanimously decree, because of several
Answers made by him before a Court of Justice on a Civil Law Suit, and for
several other Accusations, all of which were partly decided by the Decrees and
Judgments given in the Civil Judicature in favor of Monsieur Bloy against the
said Belly, and partly rejected by the Provincial Synod of Niort, because they
were vain and frivolous, without Foundation, and without Proof; that the Sieur
le Bloy was absolutely justified, and the said Belly censured for having
persisted so long a time in his unrighteous Lawsuits, and for keeping in his
Heart, and testifying by his Actions so great an Hatred against the said
Monsieur Le Bloy, and so great a Resentment of past matters, by reason of the
Civil Processes which have been between them. And yet notwithstanding this
Assembly making use of its Authority and Charity, has ordained, That the said
Belly should divest himself entirely of all his Resentments, and accept of the
said Monsieur Le Bloy as his Pastor, and be reconciled with him as becomes a
true Christian. And the Sieur Le Bloy is exhorted to embrace the said Belly as
his Brother in Christ, and as one of the Members of that Flock, which God has
committed unto his Charge, and to forget, as becomes a good Pastor, all past
matters. And the Province of Poictou shall take care that they do not grant
unto the said Mr. Belly hereafter a Liberty of Communicating in the Church of
Fontenay, as they had done formerly. Which being declared unto both Parties,
they did reciprocally give each other the right Hand of Reconciliation.

12. The Sieur Hesperian came unto this Assembly, complaining of a Decree of
the Provincial Synod of the Lower Guyenne held at Montpazier, July, 1659. by
which, because of the differences between him and Mrs. Mary Betoulle, there
were Commissioners assigned them, who having examined their Papers, did not
find any reason why they should proceed to a Condemnation of the said
Hesperian, but rather to justify him; yet nevertheless he having been, for
want of a Decree in the Court of the Edict at Guienne forfaulted, and having
two Witnesses, who were never confronted, he referred the whole business unto
the determination of the Province, which had declared, they saw no cause why
the said Hesperian should be condemned; and yet notwithstanding, till a Decree
should be gotten from the Chamber of the Edict, he was ordered to forbear the
Exercises of his Ministerial Calling, until such time as he could be justified
by the Court of the Edict, after which he might warrantably enter upon his
Office; yea, and without wa^^ing till the sitting of another Synod; and that he
might be re established according to our Canons in due Form, the Consistory of
Bourdea^x was dep^ted by the Authority of the said Synod to take care of him in
this Interim, and to provide him the first Church that should be vacant, and
that he should like to accept of; and the said Mrs. Betoulle compl^^^ed of this
very self same Decree by the Mouth of Monsieur Betoulle a Proposan her Brother,
who has presented on her behalf a Letter unto this Assembly, maintaining in
it, that the said Hesperian ought to be deposed from his Ministry. On hearing
the whole matter, this Assembly confirmed the Judgment of the said Synod of
Montpazier: And whereas the said Hesperian complains of Mr. Betoulle Minister
of the Church of Duras, the Assembly has dismissed those Complaints of his
over to the said Province of Lower Guienne, to take Cognizance of, and give
Judgment in them.

13. Whereas the beforementioned Mr. Hesperian desired this Assembly to
interpret their Decree concerning the differences betwixt him and Mrs. Mary
Betoulle, and his Justification in the Court of the Edict in Guienne. The
Assembly declared, that it was none of their Intention to tie up the said Mr.
Hesperian, that he must only obtain his Justification from the said Court of
the Edict in Guienne; but that if it should so fall out, that his Lawsuit
should be removed from the said Court, and brought into another, and there he
should be absolved and justified, i^ should d^ as well, and obtain the same
effect as if it had been ordained in the Chamber of the Edict of Gienne.

14. On perusal of the Memoirs of the Colloquy of middle Poitou, brought in to
defend an Appeal of theirs from a Judgment given by the Colloquy of Lower
Poitou held at Chef-Boutonne, whenas their Synod was assembled in September,
1659. and which refused to dismember the Churches of Collonge and Foussay, that
so the Colloquy of Middle Poictou might be corroborated: This Assembly decreed,
that there should be nothing innovated on this account, but things should stand
as they were.

15. The Committee (appointed to peruse the Memoirs (...) L^tters sent by the
Churches of Montendre, Ozillac, and Fonta^^^^ to maintain their Appeal from the
Judgment of the Synod of Xaintonge held at Marans in the Year 1650. by which
Mr. Hamilton was constituted Pastor of the Church of Jarnac. Having brought in
their Report, and the Deputies of that Province having given in the Reason^
prevailing with that Synod to pass that Judgment which they did. This Assembly
disallowing the precipitate Removal of Mr. Hamilton to the Church of Ja^^^,
done before the time ^llotted him, does confirm the said Judgment, because it
is evident, that the special Grounds and Con^^^^^ it were the knowledge which
that Synod had of Mr. Hamilton's indispositions. And whereas the Church of
Ozillac demands our Advice (...) they (...) remanded back unto their own
Province.

16. The Memoirs of the Church of Pons having been repor^^l, and their Letter
written unto this Assembly read, which was indeed a Defense of their Appeal
from the Judicial Sentence of the Synod of Xaintonge held at Mauze, in the Year
1656. by which Monsieur Prioleau was presented to the Pastoral Charge of the
Church of Rochell; and the Deputies of that Province being heard; this Assembly
confirming the Censure of the said Synod past on the Sieur Priouleau for his
Conduct with reference to the Church of Pons, does blame the said Province for
not admitting the Appeal of the said Church, and for their approving of the
Remittal of those Arrearages due unto the said Priouleau, whereby to facilitate
the Execution of their Judgment in removing a Pastor from his Church, and yet
notwithstanding it does confirm the said Mr. Prioleau in his Ministry to the
Church of Rochel.

17. Report was made of the Letters and Memoirs of Mr. Genoyers, Pastor in the
Province of Dolphiny, appealing from a Judgment of the said Province assembled
at Veins in 1659. which had discharged him of all Employment either within or
without the Province, and had took no care for his present Subsistence, or
future establishment. Upon hearing the Deputies of the said Province, this
Assembly rejected the Appeal of the said Mr. Genoyers, and confirmed the
Judgment of the said Province; yet nevertheless it recommends the said Genoyers
unto the Care of that Province to provide a Church for him according to their
Prudence, and if it be possible; and the said Genoyers is enjoined absolutely
to submit himself to the Orders of his Synod.

18. The Business of Mr. Morus.
My Lord, his Majesty's Commissioner, before the Committee appointed for the
Affair of Monsieur Morus had begun to debate it, and bring in their Opinion
upon it, declared unto this Assembly, that before ever this business was
pleaded, he had permitted both Parties to produce all Evidences that they
should see fitting and needful for them, and having since found in the Hands of
the said Committee Writings, Papers, and Copies which were produced by the
Sieur Papillon, and which the said Lord Commissioner took notice to have been
transmitted from Holland in Defense of the Synods held at Tergow and Nimeguen
against Mr. Morus, which said Writings and Letters he the said Lord
Commissioner had left with the Committee, that they might be the better enabled
to make a Report of the whole matter, without ever detaining any of them in his
Hands, although he had Order from his Majesty to suppress all Letters that were
sent from Holland, or from Foreign Parts without the Kingdom; and that he
should not suffer them to be divulged or sold in this City of Loudun; and this
he did, that neither the Parties concerned, nor the Synod it self should
complain, that without those Paper^, Pieces and Writings, they could not come
to a perfect knowledge of the bottom of this Affair, and to judge aright of it.
In pursuance hereof, and for these Considerations before mentioned, the said
Lord Commissioner declared, that he did now also give full Liberty to all the
Deputies who were in this Synod Judges of this matter, to peruse those
aforesaid Papers and Evidences as they should think meet, and according to the
Privileges granted by his Majesty to his Subjects of the Reformed Religion by
the Edicts, and according to the Discipline received in our Churches, and
approved in France by the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; but without allowing
them to subject themselves to any Foreign Authority, Jurisdictio^^ (...)
Judgments; or to send Monsieur Morus unto any other Judges than ^^ose of his
said Kingdom to be tried by them, and to undergo their Judicial Sentence; this
being contrary and prejudicial to his Majesty's Authority, to his Ordinances
and Edicts, as also to the Weal, and Rights, and Privileges of his Subjects*
All which it was his Lordships Pleasure should be inserted into the Act
containing the Judgment of this National Synod upon this affair.

The Sieur Papillon, Advocate in Parliament, and Elder in the Church of Paris,
being admitted to produce his Arguments in defense of those Appeals brought
both in his own Name, and in that of Monsieur Beauchamp, an Advocate and Elder
also in the same Church, from the Judgments given in the Synod of the Isle of
France held at Ay in May last of this Year now current, 1659, (by which
Monsieur Morus was conferred upon the Church of Paris to be their Minister,)
and from those Members of the Consistory of that Church, who had Ordered the
said Mr. Morus, to be confirmed in it, notwithstanding their Appeal, and for
refusing to give him leave, which he had demanded to pass into Holland
according to his promise, there to justify himself from those Imputations laid
upon him; and for that they censured him the said Papillon for Appealing from
them: He was heard in this Assembly, and the Assembly took notice of what he
urged on behalf of his Appeal, and heard him patiently in whatever he had to
offer against those Judgments aforesaid. And also Monsieur Morus was heard
defend himself, and explaining matters relating to him, as were the Deputies of
the Province of the Isle of France, and those of the Consistory of the Church
of Paris, in defense of their Judgment, and in their demand of the Ministry of
the said Monsieur Morus. And there was heard the Report made by the Committee
appointed for a more exact Reading and Verification of all Papers and Writings,
and what Judgment had been past on the Excuses and Denials of both sides; the
Examination of this important business, ate up several Days. This Assembly
having rightful Authority to judge herein, (and the rather for that the Synod
of Nimeguen, whose Act was now Read, had remitted the whole unto the Prudence,
Discretion and Charity of this Assembly, to do in it what it should conceive
would most contribute to the Glory of God, the advancement of the Kingdom of
Christ, and the upholding of that Holy Correspondence, which has always been
betwixt the Reformed Churches of France, and those of the United Provinces,)
did take and retain the cognizance of this affair unto it self; and declared,
that it found no cause obliging it to condemn the said Sieur Morus, nor to
blast the Reputation of his Person or Ministry; but on the contrary, that it
had sufficient Reasons to dismiss him, justified from all those grievous
Slanders and Accusations which were brought into this Assembly against him.
Wherefore it declares him innocent of those crimes which were imposed on him;
and having perused those advantageous Testimonials given him by the Magistrate,
Pastors, and Professors of Divinity in the City of Geneva, by the Pastors and
Professors of Divinity in the City of Middleburg, by the Burgomasters and
Curators of the City and Illustrious School of Amsterdam, and by diverse
Pastors, and sundry other private Persons, whose Names and Probity are
celebrious, and well known to this Assembly; and considering the great
Edification which the Church of Paris receives from his Ministry, and their
vehement desires urged with the greatest importunity that he may be continued
to them, this Assembly does Establish and Confirm him in the said Church to
discharge the Office, and perform the Duties of an ordinary Pastor in it. And
making Reflections upon what has been transacted in the Synods of La Ferte au
Col, and D'Ay, and in the Consistory of the Church of Paris, on occasion of the
said Monsieur Morus, it censureth that Synod of La Ferte, for having judged the
said Monsieur Morus, when he belonged not unto them, nor was under their
Jurisdiction, and only because an Impeachment against him had been brought
before them, and for that they never exacted of him in order to his Induction
into the Church of Paris, but a simple License of departure from the Curators
of the Illustrious School of Amsterdam, without making mention of his
Testimonial from the Church. And the Synod of Ay is censured for assuming to
themselves a power of judging the competency or incompetency of the Synod of
Tergou, over which they had none Authority; and that in speaking of that Synod,
they used very unbecoming Expressions, and reflected unhandsomly upon their
Judgment, and confirming the Censures issued out by the said Synod of La Ferte
against the Consistory of the Church of Paris, it does ordain that the Canons
of our Discipline about the Election and Confirmation of Pastors shall be
observed with greater exactness than has been done in this Call given unto,
and Reception of Monsieur Morus by the Church of Paris. And as for the Sieur
Papillon, the Assembly has taken off the Censures inflicted on him by the
Consistory of the Church of Paris, and does fully acquit him from it; and
declares that there was no reason for denouncing any Censure against Monsieur
Beauchamp. And after grave and serious Counsels and Admonitions given unto
Monsieur Morus about his Conversation, which was not managed with that
circumspection as was requisite, and advice unto him to be more careful for the
future, that the mouth of Calumny which has been wide and loud open against
him may be stopped, he was enjoined more particularly to look to it, that he
offended no Man by his Words or Writings, and that he labor to the utmost of
his Power to preserve Peace, and to calm and reconcile the Spirits of Men of
all Persuasions to himself, and to regain their Love and Amity from whom he is
departed.

19. It being represented unto this Assembly, that their Act made about Morus,
Mr. has been by some Persons misinterpreted; and that therefore they would be
pleased to explain their Sense and Intentions of it. This Assembly did explain
it self thus; That by those grievous Crimes and Accusations whereof there is
mention made in their Act, they understood all matters whatsoever relating to
the Purity of Life and Conversation of the said Monsieur Morus, of all which he
was absolutely judged innocent. And as to those other points whereof he was
impeached, as some sharp Words spoken or written against his Brethren, the
Assembly declares, that the Remonstrances and Counsels were given him upon
this account; and which having been accepted by him, he was also in this
respect absolved and Discharged.

20. Monsieur Plassay, formerly Pastor of the Church of Niort, presented
himself to this Assembly, complaining that the last Synod of Poictou, held at
Fontenay le Conte, had suspended him without any lawful cause from his
Ministry; and for that a Committee of that Synod, did in pursuance of that
Suspension, most unjustly depose him, notwithstanding the Appeal which he had
brought against his Suspension; and he petitioned that he might be restored
with Honor unto the Exercise of his Office. There joined with him in this his
Complaint and Petition, the Sieurs Bellebat and Tristan, Deputies of the Heads
of Families in the said Church of Niort, and requested that he might be
restored and continued in his Ministry among them, as was more amply specified
in their Appeal from the Decrees of their Provincial Synods held at Lusignan,
in the Year 1657, and at Fontenay aforesaid, in the Year 1658. Monsieur de la
Place, Deputed by a certain number of the Elders of that Church, was heard,
opposing the Demand both of the said Monsieur Plassay, and of those two
beforementioned Deputies; and craved a Confirmation of the Decrees of those
Synods and of their Committee, and complained that the Conversation of the said
Monsieur Plassay did render him unworthy to be received into the Holy Ministry.
The Deputies of the Province of Poictou were heard also speak whatsoever they
thought meet on this occasion. And the Report of the Committee being made, and
Letters and Acts concerning this affair being read, the Assembly judged, that
those who opposed the continuance of Monsieur Plassay in his Ministry to the
Church of Niort, are worthy to be Censured, because they have testified too
much bitterness and passion against the said Mr. Plassay, as also for that they
did not express that tender care which they ought, unto the Edification of the
Church of Niort, who professed that they were very well satisfied with his
Ministry, opposing themselves to the sense and sentiment of the People, and
this too in ways diametrically opposite to Christian Charity, and the
Discipline practiced in our Churches. Moreover the Assembly judged the Province
of Poictou to have deserved Censure, for having in the said Synod of Fontenay
removed Mr. de Coignac from the said Church of Niort, without any cause
alleged; as they did also the Sieur de Plassay from it, without hearing either
him or the said Church; and for that they suspended him from his Ministry with
very much precipitancy, without any reason assigned by the said Synod, yea, and
without so much as citing him to appear before them: And it injoyneth the said
Synod to abstain from such Proceedings as these for the future. And as for
those Inhabitants in whose Names the Sieurs de Bellebut and Tristan have here
appeared; this Assembly disapproving their Rebellion to the Orders and Canons
of our Ecclesiastical Assemblies, (to which all (Church Members owe Submission
and Obedience,) and those extraordinary courses they have taken on several
occasions, by which they have violated the order of our Discipline, and that
Reverence which they were bound to pay unto their Superiors; and more
especially for that to redress their grievance, they did, contrary to the
Canons of our National Synods, apply themselves unto Secular Judges to the
Civil Magistrates, which very fact of theirs is expressly forbidden by our
Discipline; whereas they should have contented themselves with their Appeal
unto the Superior Assemblies, which were allowed them; and therefore these
have incurred the sharpest Censures. And whereas Monsieur Plassay has been
found by this Assembly deeply engaged in the most violent proceedings of those
Inhabitants beforementioned; and among the rest, in that undue recourse unto
Secular Judges; and that he is convicted of Rebellion against our Church
Discipline, having exercised the functions of his Ministry, after that he was
suspended and deposed, directly contrary to our Canons; a fact in it self so
heinous, that it deserves the severest and utmost Censure. This Assembly
cannot but condemn these Actings of the said Mr. Plassay, although it is evident
he persisted but a very little while in his Rebellion, and that he has forborne
the Exercise of his Ministry for about Fourteen Months or thereabout; and yet
being desirous to support him, it Decrees, that he shall be sharply censured
and reproved, but that the Sentence of Deposition inflicted on him shall be
taken off, and that he shall be restored unto the Exercise of his Ministry, but
with this restriction, that he do not for Three Months time perform any of the
duties thereof, which term being expired, he shall enter again upon them in the
said Church of Niort, and in which this Assembly does confirm and settle him,
exhorting him to employ himself with the greatest care and diligence that is
possible, and to look more narrowly unto his ways and deportments, and to show
forth that gravity which becomes his Calling and Profession, and to seek after
their Friendship, who may be averse to him. And finally as to Monsieur de
Coignac, this Assembly confirms him also in the said Church of Niort, and could
do no less, considering what it owes unto his Age and Merit. And that this
present Ordinance may be notified unto the said Church, the Sieurs Marchand and
de la Forest Pastors, and the Sieurs de Thiac, and de Courcelles, Elders in the
Province of Xaintonge, are charged to visit that City, and to endeavor the
Peace of that Church, and to reconcile those particular Members of it, which
are at variance one with another; and these Deputies, together with Mr. de
Plassay are entreated to do their utmost for the effecting of this good work,
and that in the mean while, in the presence of this Assembly, they do give
mutually to each, the Right Hand of Reconciliation.

The business of Monsieur Amyraut and D'Huisseau.
21. The Sieur D'Huisseau, Pastor, accompanied with the Sieurs de Haumont,
Benoist, and Favre, did Petition for themselves, and on behalf of other the
Heads of Families in the Church of Saumur, that Monsieur d'Huisseau might be
confirmed in his Ministry unto the said Church; they Appealed also from the
Decrees of the First Synod held at Beauge, in the Year 1656, and at Saumur, in
the Year 1657, and at Previlli, in the Year 1658, and from the Second held at
Beauge in this Year 1659, and from the Orders of the Consistory of Saumur,
bearing date the 16th and 27th of March, 1659; and they complained of all that
had been done in pursuance of those Synodical and Consistorial Decrees. On the
contrary part, the Sieur Amyrald, Pastor and Professor of Divinity in the said
Church and University of Saumur, together with the Sieurs Druet and Royer, as
well for themselves as for the other Deputies of that Consistory, and of diverse
Heads of Families in the said Church, together with the Deputies of the
Province of Anjou, did abet and maintain all the Acts, Ordinances and Decrees
of those Consistories and Synods before mentioned: These also were heard,
declaring the grounds of their Differences. The Committee also who were
appointed to hear and verisie the Acts of both Parties, brought in their
Report, and at the same time, Monsieur He since turned Apostate.
de Bourdin, Pastor of the said Church, had Audience given him by this
Assembly. Upon the whole Debate, This National Synod censured the Consistory of
Saumur, for that instead of blaming the Deputies of that Assembly of the
greatest part of the Heads of Families held without their Order, the 17th of
September, 1655, they did contrariwise receive them, and at their instant and
earnest Suit, had enjoined the said Sieur D'Husseau to withdraw himself from
the Service of the said Church against his Will, and in contempt of a Decree of
the Synod of Loudun, held in the Year 1655. And it disannuls the Decree of the
Synod of Beauge, in the Year 1656, who upon this very account had confirmed the
Decrees of the said Consistory; yet nevertheless it approves that Order of
Suspending the Sieurs Niot, Perillau and Piger, from their Office of being
Elders in the said Church, which was denounced against them by that Consistory,
and ratified by the said Synod of Beauge. Moreover this Assembly does disanul
that Decree of the Synod of Saumur, in the Year 1657, which confirmed another
made in the foregoing Synod of Bauge, concerning the Ministry of the said Sieur
D'Huisseau, and disapproveth their Act in censuring the said D'Huisseau, for
having put in his Appeal to the Synod of Poictou from the Synod of Beauge, (for
which he had good grounds, no less than a Canon of the National Synod of
Charenton, 1644.) and for other causes mentioned in the Acts of the said Synod.
And this Assembly could wish, that the said Synod of Saumur had not approved
the said Consistories meeting in other places than those in which they were
accustomed. Moreover, this Assembly blames that Consistory, for that in stead
of doing right upon the Complaint of those aforesaid Gentlemen, the Sieurs
D'Huisseau, de Haumont, and their Companions,) which was occasioned by those
Writings of Monsieur Amyrald, that published their Divisions in prejudice of
those Apologies made by the said Synod of Saumur, it censured them, and would
oblige them to demand Pardon; and upon this account it reverseth the Decree of
the Synod of Preuilly, in the Year 1658. which had confirmed the Judicial
Sentence of the said Consistory. This Assembly also could have wished that the
said Consistory, before they had pronounced Sentence of Suspension from the
Lord's Supper against the Sieurs Benoist, Niotte, de Haumont, and Bouchereau,
for being the reputed Authors of those injurious Libels, written both against
them and the Synod of Anjou, and the Sieurs Amyraut, Beaujardin, and others,
that they had took a more exact knowledge, whether the forenamed Persons had
been fully convicted. And yet forasmuch as it has since appeared evidently and
plainly unto this Assembly, that they were the real Authors of them, they be by
this Assembly declared worthy of that Censure of Suspension which was inflicted
on them: However this Assembly being very much grieved at this Division which
has so long a time troubled the said Church of Saumur, and designing to settle
a good, firm and lasting Peace among them for the future, it does take off that
Suspension denounced against the Sieurs Niott, Perilleau, and Mr. Piger
deceased, and restores the said Sieurs Niott and Perilleau to their Office in
the Eldership, and takes off that Censure of Suspension from the Lords Supper
denounced against the Sieurs Niott, Benoist, de Haumont, and Bouchereau; and
notwithstanding that opposition made against the Call of the Sieurs Druet,
Pellet, and Dortonne unto the Office of Elders, this Assembly does confirm them
in it. And as to what concerns Monsieur D'Huisseau, this Assembly wishes that
he had neither written nor printed any Letters on the account of these
Differences; however, it disannulleth that Decree past against him by the
Consistory of Saumur, assisted by the Sieurs Guiraud and La Fay, Ministers of
the Gospel, the 27th of March last, and dismisseth him with Honor back unto
his Church of Saumur, and for six Months time he is to preach unto it as often
as his Strength will suffer him, which time the Assembly has regulated to be
the Work of one half Week when it comes unto his turn, that so it may be known
within that time whether he may be able for the future to perform the ordinary
Duties of his Ministry, as to the full and whole of it, or of a Moiety only.
And whenas that time shall be expired, or if it be before the sitting of the
Provincial Synod of Anjou, he shall then acquaint that Synod fully and plainly
of his Intentions. And in case he shall be then able to exercise his Ministry
either as to the whole, or to a moiety of it, he shall be at that time
confirmed, and paid his Wages proportionably to the Service which he has
performed, decreeing those six Months of Trial: And if that, by reason of his
Bodily Infirmities he cannot perform the whole, or one half of his Work in
Preaching, he shall be from that time discharged; but nevertheless he shall
still be reputed and taken for Pastor of the said Church, without Wages,
according to his own Proposals, in which he shall have Liberty to preach
whenever he shall be requested to it, and may when, and as often as he
pleases, assist at Consistories, and other Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and
shall enjoy both his deliberative and decisive Votes, yet without pretending to
any right of presiding in those aforesaid Consistories, or of being deputed by
the said Church unto their Provincial Synods. This Assembly censureth also the
Sieur Niort and others, who shrouded themselves under the Secular Jurisdiction
of the Civil Magistrate, in contempt of the Canons of our Discipline, and for
taking the whole Consistory for their adverse Party, that so they might be
exempted from its Jurisdiction, for presenting an Act highly injurious against
the said Consistory. Moreover this Assembly does condemn and censure with the
greatest Severity all those Writings and Prints which have been made and
published by both Parties, as most injurious and scandalous; and particularly a
Letter styled Du Provincial, stuffed with diverse Slanders, not only against
private Persons, but also against the Provincial Synod and Consistory of the
said City; and the last Synod of Bauge is very much blamed for permitting the
Impression and Publication of a Book entitled, Les Pieces Authentiques. And
this Assembly confirms the Judgment of the Synod of Saumur in what concerns
the Sieur de Beaujardin, exhorting all Parties to lay by all their Resentments
conceived one against the other upon the score of those injurious Words and
Writings, and to declare that they have no Intention in the least of harboring
them any more, nor of persisting in them; but that contrary wise, they do
acknowledge one another for Persons of Integrity and Honor, and exempted from
all Blame and Reproach, and in this Quality they shall give each other the Hand
of Reconciliation. And to prevent all Differences for the future, the
Provincial Synod of Anjou is enjoined to proceed against the Transgressors
according to the Rigor of our Church Discipline, even to the last Censures;
and in case an Appeal should be entered, the Provincial Synod of Britain shall
take cognizance thereof, and pass Judgment in it, which shall hold good till
the meeting of the next National Synod. And as for those differences in the
University of Saumur, this Assembly gives full Liberty unto the said
University of choosing its Professors in Divinity, proceeding therein according
to its ancient Canons; and Monsieur Royer Doctor of Physic, is confirmed in
his Office of Counselor to the said University, and the Sieur Doul in that of
Professor of Eloquence, without suffering the said Nomination to be made a
Precedent; and on this condition, that the said Professor Doul do every three
Months keep a public Act. And this Assembly has likewise approved and
ratified that Canon of Agreement betwixt the Consistory and the said
University, for taking cognizance of all Affairs depending upon both those
Assemblies. And that this present Decree may be put in Execution, the Sieurs
Guitton and de Bourdieu Pastors, and the Sieur des Champs an Elder, are deputed
to pass over unto Saumur, and to visit the said Church, which is ordered to
defray their Expenses.

22. The Sieur John Nicholas a Bookseller, Deputy from the Company of Merchants
and Burgesses, Members of the Reformed Church of Grenoble having presented to
this Assembly Acts and Memoirs fraught with Complaints against the Consistory
of the said Church, occasioned by reason of a difference risen betwixt them and
the Attorneys in the Parliament and Court of the Edict there about Seats in
their Consistory, and demanded on behalf of their Principles the Merchants
aforementioned, that the 7th Canon in the third Chapter of our Discipline might be
observed, the Substance of which was, That neither Deacons nor Elders should
claim any Primacy or Dominations the one over another, be it either in their
Nomination unto the People, or in their place of sitting, or in their Order of
Voting. And the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny being heard, and the Committee
having made their Report, the Assembly remandeth back this Affair to the
Consistory of that Church of Grenoble, to judge ultimately therein, according
to that Power given it by the Canons of the National Synods, and the said
Consistory is enjoined to see that the said Canon of our Discipline be most
exactly observed, and censureth those Persons who opposed the said Consistory.

23. The Provincial Deputies of Berry having advised the Church of Gergeau of
the calling of this present National Synod, and ordered them to appear before
it, to support their Appeal, entered by them against the Judgment of their
Provincial Synod held at Blois, by which the Sieur la Tanne their Pastor was
licensed to quit both that Church and Province, and no Person appearing for
them, nor sending any Memoirs in Defense of their Appeal, it was declared null
and void.

24. The Sieur du Vals, Pastor of the Church of Aimargues appealed from the
Judgment of the Synod of Lower Languedoc held at Vsez, about the Differences
held between him and the Sieur de Richeres, Pastor of the Church of Vielle
Ville. This Assembly not finding matters as yet ripe for a complete Decision,
has dismissed them over to the Consistory of the Church of Alez, who shall
judge finally therein, and without Appeal from them.

25. There was an Appeal brought by the Consistory of the Church of Arvel from
those Judgments past in diverse Synods of the Province of Xaintonge about some
certain Seats in the Temple of the said Church. And the Deputies of that
Province were heard, who declared, that they never had any notice given them of
the said Appeal, nor that it was to be prosecuted in this Assembly: And that
the Synod of their Province had not any knowledge of this Affair, but only the
contending Parties. This Assembly, without demurring on those Judgments passed
by the said Synod of Xaintonge, remanded back again this Affair unto the
Consistory of the said Church of Arvel, there to be determined, according to
the Canons made in this and former National Synods: And as for other Affairs
mentioned in the Memorial of the said Consistory, relating to the Lady of La
Monerie, and the joining of the Church of Braize to that of Mornac, and that of
the Lord of Forgiris to the said Church of Braize, or of Arvel, this Assembly
has dismissed them over to the Provincial Synod of Xaintonge.

26. Mr. James Collin having sent no Memoirs to uphold his Appeal from that
Judgment of the Provincial Synod of the Isle of France held at la Ferte au Col
in the Year 1657. by which the said Synod declared, that they met with nothing
in that Act of the Consistory of Vitry, dated February the 14th of the same
Year, which might induce that Consistory to censure the said Collin, as he
imagines that they have done, or that he was the Author of those matters
contained in the Memorials produced by him against the Siuer Anguenet, one of
the Pastors of said Church of Vitry; nor could they find in the said Act any
Censure against him the said Mr. Collin, for which Reasons they believed that
his Appeal was needless. All which considered, this Assembly declared, that the
Appeal of the said Mr. James Collin from the aforesaid Judgment of the Synod of
La Ferte au Col, is null and void.

27. Monsieur Paullet, formerly Pastor in the Church of Vsez, but at present
Minister in the Church of Vaux and Province of Lower Languedoc, did exhibit in
his own Name, and on behalf of the Magistrates, Consuls, and Common Council,
and of diverse Heads of Families, Members of the said Church, the Reasons of
their Appeals brought against the Judgments of the Synods of Montpellier in the
Year 1654. and of Vsez in the Year 1659. and of Montpellier in the same Year,
as also why they opposed the Call of Pastors and Elders here undernamed in the
said Church of Vsez. The Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc, and
particularly the Sieur de Foissac, Elder in the said Church of V sez, Agent for
the Consistory, and Assembly of the Heads of Families in the said Church, held
in their Temple the 28th of September last, were heard in their Answers unto
those Appeals and Oppositions before mentioned. The Committee also gave in
their Report of all Matters, Papers and Acts read and perused by them, and
which the said Parties had offered, or would produce. Upon the whole, this
Assembly confirms the Judgment of the Synod of Montpellier, in the Year 1654.
and declares the Reasons and Grounds of that Appeal of Monsieur Paulet to be
null and void, and that he ought not to pretend to be restored unto the Church
of Vsez, unless.......please scan all 6 occurences found he be called according
to the Canons of our Discipline; yet nevertheless it dismisseth the said Paulet
with Honor unto the Service of the Church of Vaux, unto which his Person and
Concerns are recommended; and the Consistory of the Church of V sez is blamed
for having brought against him injurious and unproven matters, as also for
threatening the said Paulet with Suspension, in case he should stand by his
Appeal; and for declaring that all other Synods were incompetent Judges in this
Affair. Moreover this Assembly confirms Monsieur Manuel in his Ministry to
the Church of V sez. And as for the Sieurs Lombard and Railly, they shall abide
in the same condition as they be at present, until the next Synod of the
Province, which may, if it please, either confirm them in the Ministry of the
said Church, or discharge and give them their Liberty; and this however without
approving the Custom of the said Province of sending Pastors unto a Church
destitute for a Year, or a certain time only. And the said Province is enjoined
for the future to conform itself unto the practice of the other Provinces, and
to the Canons of our Discipline. And as for what concerns the Sieurs de Roche,
Ravanel, Licon and Folheri, Elders in the Church of V sez, although the
Consistory have been Faulty in their Call of them unto Office, yet nevertheless
this Assembly does confirm them in their said Office, and the rather, for that
since their Establishment they have discharged the Duties thereof very
profitably, and for sundry other Considerations not now to be mentioned.

28. The Sieur Guenard, formerly Pastor in the Church of Eureux, appealed from
the Judgment of the Synod of Alanson, held in the Year 1651. by which, for his
scandalous Life, he was deposed; but not appearing to make good his Appeal, it
was declared null and void.

29. The Sieur German Gaultier appealed from that Judgment of the Synod held at
St. Lo for suspending him the Holy Ministry: But the said Gaultier, nor any one
else appearing for him to maintain his Appeal, it was declared null.

30. Monsiur Girard having brought Appeals from the Judgments given in the
Synods of the Province of Burgundy, held at Issurtille and Bussy in the years
1649. and 1651. And whenas the the Memoirs of the said Girard were perused, and
the Copy of that Legacy bequeathed by Mr. Heliot, a Master Surgeon deceased,
had been considered, and the Provincial Deputies of Burgundy heard, and the
Committee appointed to examine and verify all Papers produced on both sides had
made their Report, this Assembly, by reason of the present state of the Church
of Beaune does confirm those self-same Judgments from which Monsieur Girard had
appealed.

31. Monsieur de Fauquembergue, formerly Pastor in the Church of Senlis, entered
his Appeal against the Judgment of the Provincial Synod of Charenton, held the
25th of April, 1653. by which he was suspended from the Ministry; and from
another of the Committee assembled at la Ferte Col the 4th of July, 1655. who
met by Authority of the Synod of the Isle of France held at Charenton, the 22d
of April, 1655, by which he was totally deposed, and from another of La Ferte
au Col, in April, 1657, which did not only confirm the said Deposition, but
pronounced and executed a Sentence of Excommunication against him. The said
Sieur de Fauquembergue was heard declare the Grounds and Reasons of his Appeal,
and of its Defense. The Deputies also of the Isle of France, were heard speak
in behalf of their Synod, and the Committee appointed for the examination of
this Affair, and all Pleas on both sides were debated and judged: Wherefore
upon the whole, this Assembly could not approve of several irregularities which
it had observed in diverse Proceedings of the Synods of the Isle of France
against the said Sieur Fauquembergue, and above all in his Excommunication,
which was done without any observation of the Forms prescribed by our
Discipline; and declares, that the said Sieur Fauquembergue had deservedly
incurred a Deposition from the Ministry, for the many Troubles and Scandals
which he has caused by his disorderly conversation, and for continuing the
Functions of his Calling after that he had been deposed, and for seeking
redress from Secular Judges, the Civil Magistrate, whereby he upheld himself in
a notorious violation of the Orders and Canons of our Discipline. But forasmuch
as he has humbled himself in this Assembly, and begged Pardon of God for his
Offenses, and expressed his Sorrow for having spoken and written Calumnies and
Slanders against sundry Pastors and Elders of the Church of Paris, and others
of the said Province of the Isle of France and elsewhere; and for that he has
promised to forsake all his Lawsuits Commenced against some of those Pastors,
Elders, and other Persons, and to prevail with those particular Members of the
Church of Senlis, that had joined with him, to lay down all their Prosecutions:
This Assembly desiring to extend favor to the said Fauquembergue, has taken
off from him his Excommunication, and changed his Sentence of Deposition into a
Suspension of Six Months, at the end whereof he may return to the exercise of
his Ministry, bringing with him a Certificate sufficiently attested from the
Places of his Abode, of his unblamable Conversation, of which the Synod of the
Isle of France shall take cognizance; or in case it should not meet within that
time, the Church of Rouen may do it. And at present this Assembly recommends
the said Sieur de Fauquembergue and his Family, to the Charity of the said
Synod, which is entreated to forgive what is past, and to express their
Kindness to him, by providing him a Church within their Province, excepting
always that of Senlis, or to procure him some Employment elsewhere. And as for
what concerns the Churches of Senlis and Bethizi, this Assembly censuring all
those who have supported the said Sieur de Fauquembergue in his
beforementioned disorders; and yet nevertheless desiring to pacify all
matters, has taken tha^ Sentence of Suspension from the Lord's Supper, which
had been decreed against them. And that this present Act may be put in
Execution, the Sieurs Pages Pastor of the Church of Castle Thierry, and
Sarrau, Pastor of the Church of Meaux, are appointed to visit the said Church
of Senlis, accompanied each of them with an Elder of their respective
Consistories, and the said Church is to defray their Expenses. These things
being thus ordered and dispatched, Monsieur Fauquembergue craved leave of this
Assembly to retire himself unto such a Place as the good Providence of God
should direct him; which was freely granted him, and he was commended to the
Grace of God.

32. John Grillemet came unto this Assembly to maintain his Appeal from a
Judgment of the Consistory of Montauban; and from another given in the
Provincial Synod of Higher Languedoc: After that the said Guillemet and the
Deputies of that Province had been both heard, the Assembly judged that this
affair should not have been brought before it, and therefore does send it back
again to the Synod of that Province, and to the Consistory of Montauban, whose
Judgments are now confirmed by the authority of this present National Synod;
but withal entreats them both to extend their Charity unto this Appellant.

33. The Church of Eyssigeac having appealed from the Judgment of the Colloquy
of Perigord, and from the Synod of Lower Guyenne, assembled at St. Foy, 1645,
about the Titles put into the Bands of Matrimony, of the Sieur de Bequay,
Attorney in the Praesidial Court of Again, and from the Complaints brought
against Monsieur Eymer, at present Pastor of the Church of Mount St. Proy;
which said Complaints were mentioned in a Memorial sent by the Consistory of
the said Church of Eyssigeac: This Appeal of theirs was declared null: And as
for their Complaints, they were ordered to be carried unto the next Synod of
Lower Guyenne, who are to take Cognizance of them. And the said Memorial was to
this end put into the Hands of the Provincial Deputies of Lower Guienne, being
attested by the Signatures of Monsieur Beraud, a Pastor, and of Four Elders.

CHAP. X. General Matters.
1. THE Assembly being informed by the Province of Lower Languedoc, that some
Pastors do read the Texts of their Sermons in other Translations differing from
that which is commonly used in our Churches; this Assembly decrees that no
Person shall dare use any other Version than that which is ordinarily used,
whether in Reading the Scriptures, or taking their Texts out of it.

2. As to that Proposal made by the Deputy of the Province of Burgundy,
concerning the administration of the Poor's Money, and the rendering of Accounts
by those who have had the Management thereof: This Assembly judges, that the
cognizance and direction of this matter belongs unto the Consistory according
to the Order established by our Discipline; and that whosoever does violate
those Canons, by rem^^ing this Affair from our Ecclesiastic Assemblies, ought
to be prosecuted with all kind of Censures, as Contemners of our Canons, and
Rebels to the Consistories.

3. The Provincial Deputies of Burgundy, demanding upon the Sixteenth Article
of the Thirteenth Chapter of our Discipline, how they should judge of their
place of Abode, who contract Marriage, that so they may warrantably publish
their Banes: This Assembly was of Opinion, that there could not be a General
Canon made which should oblige all the Churches, because that the Customs of
particular places, though different one from another, are to be followed.
Therefore the cognizance of this matter is remitted to the prudence of
Provincial Synods, Colloquies and Consistories, which shall observe and follow
the Customs in every particular District.

4. The Deputies of the same Province made report of the little care that was
observed in several parts of their Province, to sanctify the Lord's Day, and
that by very many Persons, it was employed in Worldly Businesses, Sports and
Pastimes, depriving themselves of Religious Exercises and Ordinances, and
suffering themselves to be led aside by Sinful Examples unto Plays and
Dissolutions. This Assembly touched to the quick with a most sensible grief for
so great a Profanation, provoking God to pour down his most dreadful Vengeance
upon the Sons of Men, does exhort all the Faithful to spend this Sacred Day of
Rest in the performances of Holy Duties, and to those divine ends whereunto it
is appointed, by exercising themselves in all public and private Duties of
Religion, particularly in the Reading, Hearing and Meditation of God's Holy
Word and Prayer; and that they do not only Religiously abstain from their
ordinary Weekdays labor, but also from all Companies, Meetings, Sports and
Recreations, which will estrange their Hearts and Affections from the Worship
of God, and from that Devotion which we are most especially obliged to upon
these Holy Sabbaths of Christ's own Institution. And our Provincial Synods are
enjoined upon this occasion, to make such Canons as they shall judge needful;
and every individual Member of our Churches are most strictly commanded
conscientiously to observe and obey them.

5. The Province of Bearn desired, that they might be empowered with authority
to practice those Canons, which they had already established, and which they
might hereafter also, as to the times and places of Celebrating Marriages. This
Assembly granted them their Request, and gave also the same Authority unto all
other Provincial Synods, and forbids all Ministers to Marry any Persons in
their Churches, excepting at the Hours accustomed for such Solemnities.

6. The Two and Thirtieth Article in the last Chapter of our Discipline, which
forbids Duels, under the severest Censures even of Excommunication it self,
shall be read in all the Churches, and reinforced with most close and vehement
Exhortations, that so this Hellish Sin may be banished from out the Hearts and
Societies of the Faithful, as being expressly forbidden by the word of God, and
declared by his Majesty's Edicts to have merited the deepest brand of Infamy;
and all Consistories are enjoined to put forth their Power in prosecuting the
Refractory with all kind of Censures.

7. Whereas diverts Provinces have complained of that great difference which is
observed in the Printed Copies of our Discipline; this Assembly Ordains that
there shall be drawn up another most exact and correct, according to the
Decisions of our National Synods, in whose Margin shall be inserted the Canons
and Observations extracted out of those Synods, which shall be judged most
needful. And Monsieur Amyraud Pastor and Professor in the Church and University
of Saumur is charged with this Task; and he shall use the labors of Monsieur
Blondel, Gaultier, and Catelau, and shall communicate his Work unto the
Consistories of Saumur, Paris and Rochel, and with then Approbation it shall be
Printed.

8. In executing that Article of the National Synod of Charenton, in the Year
1631, when as any Members of the Augustane Confession, commonly called
Lutherans, shall offer Children into Baptism, not having before-time
communicated with us; this Assembly decrees, that the Consistories shall take
a particular notice of their Inclinations, whether they join themselves unto
our Church Assemblies, with a true peaceable Spirit of Charity, as is required
by the said Article; in which case they shall be admitted to stand Sureties.
And the like regard shall be had and observed as to Marriages.

9. The Province of Bearne demanded whether they might suffer the Lord's Supper
to be administered on any other day besides the Christian Sabbath. This Assembly
judges, that although Religious Worship be not tied up to the circumstances of
time and place, yet nevertheless it was needful, because of the Importance of
so sacred a Ceremony, that it be celebrated if possible only upon the Lord's
Day, and not on any other, unless upon very great and weighty considerations,
whereof the Provincial Synods, Colloquies and Consistories shall take
cognizance.

10. That for the future, Deputations unto National Synods may be complete,
over and above those Canons already made, This Assembly Ordains, that such
Persons who being deputed, shall be absent from them, shall inform this Synod
of the causes of their absence, and of that care they had taken to give notice
unto those who were substituted in their Places to appear for them; and the
Synod of that Province shall judge herein. But and if they shall not give this
Notice and Information, the Provinces are enjoined strictly to inspect the
matter, and to proceed against such Defaulters, without sufficient Reason, by
suspending them from their Offices. And an Account hereof shall be given unto
the next National Synod.

11. The Provinces having rendered an Account of the care taken by them, to
oblige their Pastors to reside on their respective Churches, This Assembly
confirms the former Canons on this occasion, and enjoyneth all Synods and
Colloquies to concern themselves in it, and upon an exact knowledge of the state
of their Churches and Pastors, they be charged to proceed against the
Refractory with all kind of Censures.

12. It being reported to this National Synod, that the word Damnation in the
Tenth Section of the Catechism, has been changed in the sundry Editions of our
Psalms into that of Condemnation. The Synod judging those Two Words for
Substance to signify one and the same thing, does leave the Printers at
liberty to use which of them they best like.

13. To prevent that diversity found in the Editions of the Bible, and Psalms,
of our Liturgy, and Catechism, This Assembly Ordains, that every Province
shall remark and observe those Changes which have been made, and what others
may be needful to be done, that they may be sent unto the Consistory of Paris,
which shall choose out of them according to their Prudence, and notify them
unto the Provincial Synod of the Isle of France, which shall issue out those
Orders necessary for a more correct Edition of the Holy Bible, Psalms, Liturgy
and Catechism, unto which the Printers shall conform themselves in their future
Impressions. Moreover the Consistories of those Places where there is a
Printing-Press are charged to be very careful in this matter; and the Sieurs
Bochard of Caen, Jassaud of Castres, De Chandieu, Eustache, Taby, Boudan,
Bernard, De Veloux, Le Blois, Guitton, Amyraud, Daille, Gommare, Dize,
Riccotier, Cazamajor, and Homel, Pastors, are appointed a Committee, to see
this present Act put in Execution.

14. Forasmuch as the Sins of Men, especially of those whom God has separated
from the World by a most Holy Profession, and whom he has honored above all
others with the Glorious Title of his Children, do very often and lowdly summon
the Church of God unto extraordinary Humiliation, Public Prayers, Fastings and
Repentance: This Assembly recommendeth unto the Provinces the Observation of
that Article of our Discipline, which enables the Provincial Synods to proclaim
public Fasts every one of them within their Divisions, according as they shall
judge needful. And ordains that the Province, which has the Privilege of
calling the National Synod, shall take care to publish a National Fast to be
universally observed in all the Churches of this Kingdom, according to the
Intelligence it shall receive from the other Provinces, and especially from
those that border nearest to it, according to the same Article of the
Discipline, that so the fierce Anger and Judgment of God may be prevented and
avoided.

15. Such as defer the Baptizing of their Children shall be sharply censured,
according to the Rigor of our Discipline; and if any Children are come unto
Years of Discretion, and were never Baptized, they shall be first Catechized
and well instructed in the Principles of Christian Religion before they be
admitted unto Baptism.

16. The Deputies of the Isle of France having remonstrated the wicked
Practices of some Professors of our Religion; such be forbidden upon pain of
the last and greatest Censures, to lend their Names unto Persons of the Romish
Communion, that they may draw their Affairs, tho but indirectly, and in which
they have, in effect, no concern at all, before the Courts of the Edict.

17. The Deputies of the Province of Britain requesting it, this Assembly
ordains, that in case Errors be not divulged among the Common People, they
who undertake to refute them shall write in the Latin Tongue.

18. The Provincial Deputies of Normandy petitioning for it, this Assembly
ordained, That all Consistories shall take care that those Portions of the Holy
Scripture be read, and Psalms sung, during the Celebration of the Lords Supper,
which are most suitable to the Nature of that Ordinance, that so the Devotion
of our Communicants may be raised add inflamed, and not flatted nor diverted.

19. A motion was made, that whereas many particular Churches of ours had an
undoubted Right to exercise our Religion by virtue of the Edicts in sundry
Cities, Towns, and other places in the Country, and yet do meet together for
Religious Worship in very ill and unconvenient places; this Assembly exhorts
all the Churches, either to accommodate them better, or to build new Temples,
which may be more fit and commodious, and only to employ them in Religious
Uses, and the Sacred Exercises of our Religion. And all Lords and Gentlemen,
Members of the said Churches, are more particularly exhorted to promote this
excellent Work as much as in them lies.

20. At the Request of the Provincial Deputies of Dolphiny all Colloquies are
exhorted to cause the Acts of all our National Synods to be transcribed, that
so they may be useful to them in their Exercise of Church Discipline.

21. The Provincial Deputies of Xaintonge and Poistou moving it, that that
Canon of our Discipline, and Decrees of our National Synods, (which forbad the
publishing of any Treatise of Religion till it had been first examined and
approved by those Persons, who were appointed to it by the Provincial Synod)
might be extended unto Sermons also, and to any other kind of Writings in
matters of Religion: Their Desire was granted them accordingly.

22. This Assembly being informed, that in certain Provinces Pastors are given
unto Churches for an Year by way of Trial, and that they be removed from their
Cures with too great Facility: This Assembly condemning these Disorders,
enjoyneth all the Provinces to conform themselves to that Canon of the National
Synod of Gorgeau on the Tenth Article of the first Chapter of our Discipline,
which declared, that it was resolved for the future, that when Ministers were
ordained, they should not be sent any more for one Year unto a Church, but that
the Method prescribed in our Discipline should be most strictly and closely
followed. All which shall be notified unto all the Churches by reading of this
present Act.

23. In all our National Synods this Order shall be observed, that after the
Moderator, Assessor and Scribe, who is a Pastor, shall have given their
Opinions on the Question propounded, then the Scribe, who is chosen from among
the Elders, shall give his in the next place, and after him my Lord the General
Deputy, and then the whole Body of Pastors, and next to them the Elders who are
Deputed by the Provinces; and then lastly, the Moderator shall collect the
Votes, and conclude with his own Suffrage; and all Provincial Synods are
likewise to observe and practice this self-same Method in Debates and
Suffrages, without swerving from it in the least.

24. Sundry Provinces complaining that the Sieurs Daille and Amyrald had
violated the Canons made in the National Synods of Alanson, 1637. and of
Charenton, 1644. about the Doctrine of Grace. This Assembly having heard those
two Eminent Ministers of the Gospel Daille and Amyrald speak in their own
Defense, and found that they were clear and sound in their Judgments, and that
they might be well enough discharged from all Blame, for having thwarted and
transgressed the said Canons, and that they had not incurred those Censures
which were decreed against the Infringers and Violators of them: And it being
evident, that the said Book of Monsieur Daille was not only printed without his
knowledge, but also against his Will, which he proved by his express opposing of
it is Publication; and that the said Mr. Amyrald has not written any thing
since those Synods aforesaid, but according to that License which was granted
him by the Synod of Charenton, 1644. in case any one should write against him;
nor have any Writings of his been since published, till others had first
provoked him by clamouring against his Doctrine. For these Causes this Assembly
does unanimously decree, nemine contradicente, that all that is past on this
occasion unto this very Day, shall be buried in the Grave of a deep and holy
Oblivion; and the said Sieurs Daille and Amyrald are exhorted, to continue in
their Faithful Employment of those rich Talents, which God has bestowed upon
them, to the advancement of his Glory, and the edifying of his Church.

25. And whereas the Happiness of our Churches consists very much in their
Peace, and that all kind of Contentions and Divisions may be obviated and
prevented, this Assembly, treading in the Footsteps of their Predecessors, and
that Satisfaction may be given to the Requests of all the Provinces, who have
unanimously demanded a punctual Observation of the Canons made in those Synods
of Alanson and Charenton, does confirm those said Canons, and absolutely
forbids, on pain of the last and greatest Censures of our Discipline, all
Pastors and Professors to transgress them, either by public Lectures, Sermons,
Disputes or Writings, against the Natives of our Kingdom, or the Subjects of
Foreign States; nor shall they suffer any of their Scholars to hold any
Disputations about them. And finally, that a strict Conformity may be upheld
among us. All Colloquies and Provincial Synods, when they receive Proposans
into the Sacred Ministerial Office, shall not use, with respect unto these
points, any particular Forms, but shall acquiesce in the Signing and Swearing
our Confession of Faith and Church Discipline by these Proposans, and in
causing them to protest with Hands uplifted unto Heaven, calling God to witness
upon their Souls, that they do reject all Errors rejected by the Decrees of
those National Synods of Alanson and Charenton about the Doctrine of
Predestination and of Grace, the Tenor whereof is as follows.

Articles extracted out of the Acts of the National Synods of Alanson and
Charenton.
THat the Purity of Doctrine may be entirely preserved, See the Synod of
Alanson, G. M. Art. 8. etc.
and all misunderstandings between Pastors, Professors, and Churches, may be
avoided, and to prevent those Inconveniences which would happen thereupon, and
to tie and maintain more strictly and strongly the Spiritual Bonds of Brotherly
Charity and Union among the Faithful, this Synod does most rigorously forbid,
on pain of all Church Censures, yea, and of Deposal from their Ministry, all
Pastors of Churches, and Professors in our Universities, to treat in their
Sermons, Lectures or Writings of those curious Questions, which may occasion
the Fall or stumbling either of Students in Divinity, or of private Christians.
It being most necessary that both their Flocks and Scholars should keep
themselves to the simplicity and plainness of Holy Scripture, and to the common
Expositions of the Orthodox Creed grounded thereupon, and approved by our
National Synods, particularly by that of Charenton, held in the Year 1623. They
be also forbidden the using of any new Expressions subject to ill Constructions
and Mis-interpretations, or contentiously to dispute one with the other upon
such Questions or Interpretations, or to draw reciprocally the Saw of
Controversy betwixt them in Polemical Writings, nor shall they violate
directly or indirectly the Canons made either in this or former Synods, about
Printing of Books, for whose Contents the Licensers of the Press, shall be
responsible, as much as their Authors, unto the Provinces. And those Provinces
within whose District and Jurisdiction our Universities lie, shall take a most
especial care of them, and see them visited from time to time by Persons chosen
to that purpose, and to oblige all Professors both in Philosophy and Divinity,
to send every six Months unto the Examiners of Books in the Neighbor Provinces
one or two Copies of the Theses disputed and defended in the public Schools.
And the neighbor Provinces are empowred with full Authority, together with
those in which our Universities are erected, to take a particular knowledge of
their Estate. And in case any Pastor or Professor, or any Member of our
Churches reading or perusing the Books printed with the License of our
Examiners, shall find any matter of importance, which they may count worthy of
Reprehension, we give order, That they apply themselves to the Authors of those
printed Discourses, or to the Examiners and Licensers of them, and to demand
Satisfaction from them; and in case they refuse to give it, then shall they
address themselves unto their Colloquies and Synods: And that Church and
Province, out of which the said Complaint comes forth, is forbidden, as are
also all other persons whatsoever, from intermedling with this Affair, or to
take upon them to judge and decide it, or to inflame and spread this
Controversy any farther; but according to the Canons of our Discipline, they
shall leave and resign it entirely unto those Assemblies, to whose Jurisdiction
the Authors of these Disturbances do belong, and against whom the Opposition is
formed.

The Sieurs Testard Pastor of the Church of Blois, and Amyrald Pastor and
Professor of Theology in the Church and University of Saumur, came in Person
unto this Synod, and declared, that they understood from common Fame, how that
both at home and abroad, and by the Consultations and Proceedings of sundry
Provinces, as also from diverse Books written against them, and their printed
Labors, they were blamed for that Doctrine which they had published unto the
World; that therefore at the first opening of the Synod they presented
themselves before it, not knowing but that our Cause might be debated whenas
the Confession of Faith came to be read, and that they came to give an Account
of it, and such Explanations of their Doctrine as the most Reverend Synod shall
judge needful, and to submit themselves unto its Judgment, and consequentially
to demand its Protection for the support of their Innocence, hoping that this
Favor would not be denied them; because they were fully persuaded in their
Consciences that they had never taught neither by Word nor Writing, any Doctrine
repugnant to the Word of God, to our Confession of Faith, Catechism, Liturgy or
Canons of the National Synod of Alez and Charenton, which had ratified those of
Dort, and which they had Signed with their Hands, and were even ready to seal
with their Hearts Blood.

And the Sieur de la Place, Pastor and Professor in the Church and University
of Saumur, reported also from the said University, that he was charged by it to
render an account of the Grounds and Reasons which induced him to approve and
license the Works of Monsieur Amyraud, which he did according to the Privilege
granted by the Discipline unto our Universities. Moreover the Lord Ouzan, Elder
in the said Church of Saumur, being admitted into the Synod, declared, That the
said Church understanding that Monsieur Amyraud, one of their Pastors, was
brought in trouble for his Doctrine (tho both by it, and his most exemplary
Godly Conversation, they had been always exceedingly edified) they had expressly
charged him to testify unto it before this Grave Assembly, and most humbly to
recommend unto their Reverences the Innocence and Honor of his Ministry.

There were also tendered unto the Lord Commissioner the Letters, which were
sent unto the Synod from the Churches and Universities of Geneva and Sedan, and
from the Sieurs du Moulin Pastor and Professor of Theology at Sedan, and Rivett
Pastor and Professor at Leyden, together with the Treatises composed by them,
and the collationed Copies of the Approbations given by the Doctors in the
Faculty of Theology at Leyden, Franequer and Groningen unto that Treatise of
the said Professor Rivett, which Letters being opened by the Lord Commissioner,
and their Contents perused by his Lordship, he allowed the reading of them unto
the Assembly. The Assembly read the Letters writ by Monsieur Vignier Pastor in
the Church of Blois, and by Monsieur Le Faucheur Pastor in the Church of Paris,
in which they offer their Sentiments for reconciling the Controversies arisen
about the Writings of the said Testard and Amyraud, and their Opponents.

Moreover the Apologetical Letters of the Sieurs Vignier and Garnier Pastors of
the Churches of Blois and Marchenoir were read, who informed the Synod, that in
virtue of a Commission given them by the Province of Berry to examine the
Theological Writings, which might be composed either by the Pastors, or other
persons of their Province, they had given their Attestation and Approbation to
the Book of the said Monsieur Testard, and had given an account of their
Judgment unto the Provincial Synod assembled in the year 1634. and the Extracts
of those Writings were produced.

Those Papers having been all read, and the aforesaid Sieurs Testard and
Amyrald, having been diverse times heard, and the Assembly having in a very long
debate considered the difficulties of those Questions raised by them, did
constitute the Sieurs Commarc Pastor in the Church of Vertueil, Charles, Pastor
in the Church of Montauban, De L'Angle, Pastor in the Church of Rouan, Petit,
Pastor and Professor in the University of Nismes, Le Blanc, Pastor and
Professor in the University of Die, de Bons Pastor in the Church of Chaalons
upon Saone, and Daille, Pastor in the Church of Paris, a Committee, to digest
and reduce into order the Explications which had been given by the
beforementioned Testard and Amyraud, and that as soon as it was finished, they
should bring in their Report.

And the said Committee having discharged their trust, and made their report
unto the Synod, the beforementioned Mr. Testard and Amyraud were again
introduced, and protested with the deepest Seriousness before God, that it was
never in their Thoughts to propound or teach any Doctrine whatsoever but what
was agreeable to the known and common Expositions of our Creed, and contained
in our Confession of Faith, and in the Decisions of the National Synod held at
Charenton, in the Year 1623; all which they were ready to sign with their best
and purest Blood.

And pursuiant hereunto, explaining their Opinions about the Universality of
Christ's Death, they declared, that Jesus Christ died for all Men sufficiently,
but for the Elect only effectually; and that consequentially his Intention was
to Die for all Men in respect of the sufficiency of his Satisfaction, but for
the Elect only, in respect of its quickening and saving virtue and efficacy:
Which is to say, that the Will of Christ was, that the Sacrifice of his Cross
should be of an infinite price and value, and most abundantly Sufficient to
expiate the Sins of the whole World; yet nevertheless the efficacy of his Death
appertains only unto the Elect; so that those who are called by the Preaching
of the Gospel to participate by Faith in the effects and fruits of this Death,
being invited seriously, and God vouchsafing them all external means needful
for their coming to him, and showing them in good earnest, and with the
greatest sincerity by his Word, what would be well-pleasing to him; if they
should not believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, but perish in their Obstinacy and
Unbelief, this comes not from any defect of Virtue or Sufficiency in the
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, nor yet for want of Summons or serious Invitations
unto Faith or Repentance, but only from their own Fault. And as for those who
receive the Doctrine of the Gospel with Obedience of Faith, they are according
to the irrevocable promise of God made partakers of the effectual Virtue and
Fruit of Christ Jesus his Death. For this was the most free Council, and
gracious purpose both of God the Father, in giving his Son for the Salvation of
Mankind, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, in suffering the pains of Death, that
the efficacy thereof should peculiarly belong unto all the Elect, and to them
only, to give them justifying Faith, and by it to bring them infallibly unto
Salvation, and thus effectually to redeem all those, and none other, who were
from all Eternity, from among all People, Nations and Tongues chosen unto
Salvation. Whereupon, although the Assembly were well satisfied, yet
nevertheless they decreed, that for the future, that Phrase of Jesus Christ's
dying Equally for all, should be for born, that term Equally was heretofore,
and might be so again an occasion of stumbling unto many.

And as for the conditional Decree mentioned in the aforesaid Treatise of
Predestination, the said Mr. Testard and Amyraud declared, that they do not,
not ever did understand any other thing than God's Revealed Will in his Word,
to give Grace and Life unto Believers, and that they called this in none other
sense a Conditional Will, than that of an Anthropopia, because God promises
not the effects thereof but upon condition of Faith and Repentance. And they
added farther, that although the Propositions resulting from the manifestation
of this Will be conditional, and conceived under an If, or It may be; as if
thou believe thou shall be Saved, if a Man repent of his Sins they shall be
forgiven him; yet nevertheless this does not suppose in God an Ignorance of the
Event, nor an Impotency as to the Execution of, nor any inconstancy as to his
Will, which is always firmly accomplished, and ever unchangable in it self,
according to the nature of God, in which there is no variableness nor shadow of
turning.

And the said Monsieur Amyraud did particularly protest, as he had before
published unto the World, that he never gave the Name of Universal or
Conditional Predestination unto this Will of God, than by way of concession and
accommodation unto the Language of the Adversary; yet forasmuch as many are
offended at this Expression of his, he offered freely to raze it out of those
Places, wherever it did occur; promising also to abstain from it for the
future. And both He, and the Sieur Testard acknowledged, that to speak truly
and accurately according to the usage of Sacred Scripture, there is no other
Decree of Predestination of Men unto Eternal Life and Salvation, than the
unchangable purpose of God, by which according to the most free and good
pleasure of his Will, he has out of mere Grace chosen in Jesus Christ unto
Salvation before the Foundation of the World, a certain number of Men in
themselves, neither better nor more worthy than others; and that he has
decreed to give them unto Jesus Christ to be Saved; and that he would call and
draw them effectually to Communion with him, by his Word and Spirit. And they
did in consequence of this their Doctrine reject their Error, who held that
Faith and The Obedience of Faith, Holiness, Godliness and Perseverance are not
the fruits and effects of this unchangable Decree unto Glory, but conditions or
causes without which Election could not be passed; which conditions or causes
are antecedently requisite and foreseen, as if they were already accomplished
in those who were fit to be elected; contrary to what is taught us by the
Sacred Scriptures, Acts 13.48. and elsewhere.

And whereas they have made distinct Decrees in this Counsel of God, the first
of which is to save all Men through Jesus Christ, if they shall believe in him;
the Second to give Faith unto some particular Persons; they declared, that they
did this upon none other account than of accommodating it unto the manner and
order which the Spirit of Man observes in his Reasonings for the succor of
his own Infirmities; they otherwise believing, that though they considered this
Decree as Diverse, yet was it found in God in one and the self same Moment,
without any Succession of Thought, or order of Priority and Posteriority: The
Will of this most Supreme and Incomprehensible Lord being one only Eternal Act
in him; so that could we but conceive of things as they be in him from all
Eternity, we should comprehend these Decrees of God by one only Act of our
Understanding, as in truth they be but one only Act of his Eternal and
Unchangable Will.

The Synod having heard these Declarations of the Sieurs Testart and Amyraud,
enjoined them and all others to refrain from those terms of Conditional,
Frustratory, or Revocable Decree, and that they should rather choose the Word
Will, whereby to express that Sentiment of theirs, by which they would signify
the Revealed Will of God, commonly called by Divines Voluntas Signi.

And whereas in sundry places marked in the Writings of the beforementioned
Mr. Testard and Amyraud, they have ascribed unto God as it were a notion of
Velleity and strong Affections, and vehement desires of things which he has
not, nor ever will effectuate; they having declared, that by those figurative
ways of Speaking, and an anthropopathical, they designed to speak properly none
other thing than this, that if Men were obedient to the Commandments and
Invitations of God, their Faith and Obedience would be most acceptable to him,
according as was before expressed by them. The Assembly hearing this their
Explication, did enjoin them to use such Expressions as these, with that
Sobriety and Prudence, that they might not give any occasion of offense unto
any Person, nor cause them to conceive of God in any way unsuitable to his
Glorious Nature.

And the same Monsieur Amyraud and Testard declared farther, that although the
Doctrins obvious to us in the works of Creation and Providence do Teach and
Preach Repentance, and invite us to seek the Lord, who would be found of us.
Yet nevertheless by reason of the horrible blindness of our Nature, and its
Universal Corruption, no Man was ever this way converted; yea and it is utterly
impossible that any one should be converted but by the Hearing of the Word of
God, which is the seed of our Regeneration, and the Instrument of the Holy
Ghost, whose efficacy and virtue only is able to illuminate our Understandings,
and to change the Hearts and Affections of the Children of Men.

And forasmuch as the Word of God has always revealed the knowledge of the
Lord our Redeemer, the said Sieurs did farther protest, that no one Man was
ever, nor can be saved without some certain measure of this Knowledge, less
indeed under the Old Testament, but greater under the New, the Death and
Resurrection of the Son of God being most plainly and distinctly manifested in
the Gospel: And they hold it as an undoubted Truth, that now under the New
Covenant, the distinct knowledge of Christ is absolutely necessary for all
Persons who are come unto Years of Discretion, in order to their obtaining of
Eternal Salvation. And they do from their very Heart anathematize all those who
believe or Teach, that Man may be saved any other way than by the Merit of our
Lord Jesus Christ, or in any other Religion besides the Christian.

And whereas diverse Persons were much offended at the Professor, Amyrald, for
calling that knowledge of God which Men might gain from the consideration of
his Works and Providence, (unless their corruption were extreme) by the Name of
Faith; the said Doctor declared, that he did it, because he reckoned that that
persuasion which some have that there is a God, and that he is a Rewarder, may
very well bear that Name, he owning however that St. Paul did simply and
plainly style it the Knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 1.21. The Assembly enjoined him
not to give the Name of Faith to any other knowledge of God but unto that which
is engendered in us by the Holy Ghost, and by the Preaching of his Word,
according as the Scripture uses it, whether thereby to point out unto us the
Faith of God's ancient Saints, or this which is now under the New Testament,
and necessarily accompanied with a distinct knowledge of Christ.

And as for Man's Natural Impotency, either to believe or to desire, and do the
things that belong unto Salvation, both the said Sieurs Amyraud and Testard
protested, that Man had none other Power than: that of the Holy Spirit of God,
which is only able to heal him by an Interior Illumination of his
Understanding, and bending of his Will by that Gracious, Invincible, and
Uneffable Operation, which he only exerts upon the Hearts of those Vessels of
Grace, which are Elect of God.

They declared farther, That this Impotency was in us from our Birth, for which
cause it may be called Natural; and they have also called it Physical or
Natural, nor ever did refuse so doing, unless when they would signify that it
is voluntary, and conjoined with Malice and Obstinacy; when as Man despises
and rejects the Invitations of God, which he would receive and embrace,
provided his Heart were well and fittingly disposed within it self.

And Monsieur Testard added particularly, that this does not in the least
derogate from what he had asserted concerning Two Callings, the one Real, and
the other Verbal, given by God to Men, whereby they may be saved if they will;
since that he intended thereby to signify nothing else, but that their
Impotency to convert themselves was not of the same kind with that of a Man,
who having lost his Eyes or Legs, was willing with all his Heart to see and
walk; but that this Impotency sprung from the wickedness of the Heart it self.
The Assembly having heard him thus express himself, enjoined him to abstain
from these terms, and not to use them, unless with very much Prudence and
Discretion, and to join with them such needful Glosses and Explications, as
thereby it may appear, that Man is so depraved by Nature, that he cannot of
himself will any good, without the special Grace of God, which may produce in
us by his Holy Spirit both to will and to do according to his good pleasure.

And those forementioned Monsieur Testard and Amyraud having acquiesced in all
as above-declared, and having Sworn and Subscribed to it, the Assembly gave
them the Right Hand of Fellowship, by the Hand of their Moderator, and they
were honorably dismissed, to the exercise of their respective Charges.

One of the Provinces having complained against Monsieur Amyraud, Pastor and
Professor of Theology at Saumur, as if he had violated the Canons of the Synod
of Alanson, by printing his Book of Reprobation, and some others, and the
Province of Anjou, and the same Monsieur Amyraud, in the name of the Church and
University of Saumur, who had deputed and charged him with their Letters,
remonstrating that several other Provinces had transgressed those very Canons;
and after hearing the Provincial Deputies of Poictou, and the said Mr. Amyraud,
about his Proceedings, both in publishing those Books of his since the last
National Synod, and the Doctrine contained in them: This Assembly was well
satisfied with those Explications given by the said Mr. Amyrald, agreeing with
the Synod of Alanson, and judging that those mutual Complaints on all sides, of
violating the Canons, ought to be buried in the Grave of an Holy Oblivion, did
dismiss him with Honor to the exercise of his Professorial Office, and
exhorted him to bestir himself in it with Joy and Courage. Moreover the
Assembly coveting to establish a firm and lasting Peace in all and every of our
Churches for the future, and to give content to the Petitions of all the
Provinces, which unanimonsly demanded the Confirmation and punctual Observation
of the Decrees made in the National Synod of Alanson, this Assembly forbids
on pain of all Censures, even of Deposition from their Offices, all Pastors and
Professors, that they do not exceed those prefixed Bounds in Writing, Preaching
or Disputing one against another upon those Points declared and explained in
the said Synod of Alanson, or of publishing any Books about them: And all
Professors shall be responsible for their Lectures, Theses and Disputations
unto their Provincial Synod, who also shall give an Account thereof unto the
National. And all Students in Divinity are more expressly enjoined, on pain of
being declared for ever incapable of the Sacred Ministry, to forbear for the
future all Strifes and Debates about unnecessary Questions, as about the Order
of God's Decrees, of Universal Grace by Nature's Preaching, which may bring Men
unto Salvation, and other Subjects, which may be propounded for Exercise of
Men's Wits and Curiosity. And all Examiners of Proposans who are to be
ordained, shall deal with them according to the Laws of Charity, exacting of
them, as our Discipline demands, over and besides those Gifts and Abilities
requisite, a Confession of Faith from them, conformable to that of our
Churches, and to our Liturgy, and to the Canons of Alez, Charenton and Alanson,
all which, together with this present Act shall be subscribed by them. And that
this present Act may be inviolably observed, all the Deputies of our Provinces,
who composed this Assembly, did swear, that they themselves would keep it, and
see that it should be constantly kept and observed; and they did farther bind
themselves to endeavor, that it should be Sworn by all Pastors and Proposans
in all their Provincial Synods, who are expressly charged to have a strict and
watchful Eye over all that may transgress them, and to prosecute them with all
Church Censures, proceeding herein according to the Method and Form prescribed
and appointed by the National Synod of Alanson.

25. The Province of the Isle of France informed this Synod, that the Judgments
given by Provincial Synods could not for a long time together be executed by
reason of Appeals brought in against them, which occasioned very many and great
Troubles, and it is very needful that some care and course should be taken to
remedy and prevent them. This Assembly reserving unto National Synods the
Cognizance of Point of Doctrine, of the Sacraments, and of the whole Body of our
Discipline, does ordain, that hereafter whenas a Provincial Synod shall have
decreed the Suspension or Deposition of any Pastor or Elder, or pronounced a
Sentence of Excommunication against any person, or shall ordain that a Church
of one Colloquy, or of one Synod shall be translated unto another, or that the
Pastor of one Church shall be removed to another, or that he shall be
separated, no matter how it be, from his Flock; in case an Appeal be made from
this Judgment, that Province which has pronounced it, shall nominate two of
the Neighboring Provinces, and whose Synods are nearest to be held, and shall
give unto the Appellant his Choice pf either of them to bring his Appeal before
it, which shall judge of the Case till further Order. But if the Party
appealing do not choose it, that very Province from whose Judgment the Appeal is
made, shall choose one of the two, before which the Appellant shall be bound to
appear, and subject himself unto its Judgment, which shall be of force till the
meeting of the National Synod: And in case of nonappearance, that Province
which has passed Judgment may proceed to pronounce its Execution,
notwithstanding the Appeal. Nor shall this be in any wise prejudicial unto
Provincial Synods, for in all other matters left undetermined by our
Discipline, the Judgments of those Synods shall be of full and absolute
Authority; nor shall there be any Appeal admitted from them within their
Precincts. And this present Canon shall be universally practiced in all the
Provinces, those only excepted, upon whose Account some special Decrees have
been formerly enacted.

26. Blasphemies being some of the most crying and daring Sins, enflaming the
Wrath of God against the Children of Men, this Assembly being seized with an
Holy Horror to see so great a number of profane Wretches involved in this
Hellish Crime, decrees, That the Four and Twentieth Canon of the Fourteenth
Chapter of our Discipline shall be read publicly in all Churches, and
reinforced with most lively pungent Exhortations, that the Judgments of God
may be prevented by a serious and sincere Repentance, and this horrible Vice
may be banished the Society of Christians; and all Consistories are authorized
to take the best Course they can for putting this present Act in Execution.

27. The Assembly being informed, that in diverse parts of this Kingdom,
contrary to his Majesty's Will, the Exercise of our Religion is prohibited in
those places which are called Annexed, tho by the Edicts in these it was always
permitted and established; and it unanimously judging, and with one common
consent, that this is an Affair of the highest Importance, and strikes at the
very Root and Being of our Churches, and in which the Consciences of all those
of our Profession are Sovereignly concerned, it does enjoin all Pastors and
Churches exposed unto this afflicting and most vexatious Trial, to maintain
themselves constantly in the possession of their Exercises, notwithstanding any
Prohibitions to the contrary: And in case Pastors shall neglect this their
Duty, they shall be deposed from the Ministry, as Deserters of their Flock
committed to their Trust; and if any of those Annexed Churches or Members shall
neglect their Attendance on them, they also shall be deprived of Communion with
us at the Lords Table. And all Churches within the Precincts of that Province,
whereunto these Annexes do belong, are enjoined to assist them with Counsel and
Comfort, and with all other things needful to help defray the Charges of
Travel, and Prosecutions in Courts of Justice, unto which they may be
necessitated and obliged: And all Provincial Synods, in case the ordinary
Pastors of those places should be hindered by any Violence from performing their
Duties, shall take care that they be supplied by other Pastors in such a manner
as they shall judge most convenient, till some other, and more beneficial
course can be taken. Moreover this Assembly commands all the next adjoining
Churches to testify their Zeal unto the Glory of God, and the Communion of
Charity, which ought to be among Christians, by sending and lending their
Pastors to them, that so the Possession of the Gospel preached, and the
Dispensation of the Gospel Ordinances may be conserved in those Annexed
Congregations.

As soon as ever this Proposition was made, and before the Judgment of the
Deputies in this Synod was demanded, my Lord Commissioner declared, and offered
sundry Reasons and Arguments, why an Affair of this nature ought not to be
debated in it, but that according to his Majesty's Permission, this Article was
to be inserted, with others of the like quality, into our Bill of Grievances,
which after the breaking up of this Assembly, was to be presented unto his
Majesty.

In answer whereunto, this Synod receiving in the most respectful manner
whatever came from his Majesty, and from the Mouth of my Lord his Commissioner,
ordained, that this Affair should be set in the Head of those, which shall be
carried unto the King in the Name of this Assembly, and which shall be
solicited with all possible respect, care, diligence and importunity by my
Lord the General Deputy; and we hope in the mean while that his Majesty will
maintain us in those matters, which are granted us by his Edict; nor that he
will be displeased with us for debating about Ecclesiastical Affairs, which are
brought hither unto this National Assembly, and which directly concern our
Religion, and the Exercise of our Discipline; in the nature and number of which
are all Ministerial Offices, and the respective Duties of private Christians.

28. It being judged needful, that some certain Person should be nominated (who
did ordinarily attend his Majesty's Privy Council, and Council of State) to
whom the Churches might apply themselves to take care of their Business, and to
salve them from those vast Expenses, which of necessity must be defrayed in the
frequent Deputations of particular persons employed in the management of their
Law Suits and Differences that our Churches have with their Adverse Parties,
The Assembly cast their Eyes upon the Sieur Loride des Galinieres Advocate in
his Majesty's Privy Council, and Council of State, and Parliament of Paris,
dwelling a la Rue des Anglois, in the English Street, to take upon him this
Trust, which being motion'd to him, the said Sieur Loride assured the Assembly
he accepted of it as of a great Honor, and that he did most readily and
willingly undertake it; nor would he demand a Denier of Costs, Salaries, and
Vacations, not only for those Affairs wherewith he should be entrusted in his
Majesty's Privy Council, and Council of State, but also for those which he
should dispatch as Advocate in the Parliament of Paris and Court of Aids; nor
would he claim any thing, but for what he should himself disburse in the
management of these Affairs for our distressed Churches: The Assembly kindly
embraced his generous Offers, and that he may be indemnified, they voted
presently, that the Provincial Deputies should each of them make report unto
their Provincial Synod the Contents of this present Act, that so in case the
said Provincial Synods shall judge meet, there shall be given the Sum of Three
Thousand Livres a Year by the Provinces, according to the Dividend hereafter
mentioned. And this, that the said Sieur Loride may not be put to the Costs and
Charges of Postage of Letters and Packets, which by Reason of this his
Employment he must of necessity be at, in receiving from, and sending to the
Churches; and with this condition, that the said Sieur Loride shall be bound to
give an Account once a Year unto all the Provinces, by Letters directed to one
of their chiefest Churches of all things concerning them and their Affairs. And
in case the Provincial Synods should not approve of the payment of the said Sum
of Three Thousand Livres a Year, the said Sieur Loride decalred, that he would
be contented with a Moiety of his Salaries and Fees for all Suits and Processes
in our businesses before the Council.

A Tax of Three Thousand Livres assessed upon all the Provinces hereunder
named, to be paid into the Sieur Loride de les Galinieres for managing the
Affairs of our Churches entrusted with him.
l. s. d. The Province of Normandy is taxed the Sum of 400 00 00 The Province
of Higher Languedoc and Guyenne 300 00 00 The Province of Burgundy 060 00 00
The Province of Lower Languedoc the Sum of 300 00 00 The Province of Berry 100
00 00 The Province of Sevennes 150 00 00 The Province of Provence the Sum of
050 00 00 The Province of Poictou 160 00 00 The Province of Britain 060 00 00
The Province of Anjou 100 00 00 The Province of the Isle of France 450 00 00
The Province of Xaintonge 230 00 00 The Province of Dolphiny 200 00 00 The
Province of Lower Guienne 300 00 00 The Province of Bearn the Sum of 060 00 00
The Province of Vivaretz 080 00 00 3000 00 00

All which Sums amount in the Total to Three Thousand Livres, which shall be
paid by each of these Provinces according to this rate, in case the Provincial
Synods shall agree unto it.

CHAP. XI. Particular Matters.
1. THE Deputies of the Province of Berry complained against Monsieur du Prat
Pastor of the Church of D'Angeau, that whereas he has been settled in their
Province for above Six Years, yet in all this times he would never own the
Authority of their Synod, nor submit himself unto it: This Assembly decreed,
that he should appear in person at the next Synod of that Province, and give a
Reason of this his Carriage, and undergo its Judgment; and in case he pretend
any Grievance, he shall appeal unto the Synod of Anjou, who shall by Authority
from this Assembly take Cognizance and give Judgment in it; but till the
meeting of that Synod of Anjou, he shall stand bound by the Judgment of that of
Berry.

2. The Provincial Deputies of Normandy moving, that this Assembly would in
their Wisdoms take some care to remedy those Disorders, which are fallen out in
the Church of Alanson through the long continuance of Elders in their Office:
And a Memoir being read, containing the Requests of some certain Members of the
said Church, that there might be a certain time limited when Elders should quit
their Office, that so they may not perpetuate themselves in it. This Assembly
remanded back their Petition unto the Synod of Normandy, according to the Canon
of the National Synod of Tonneins, which assigned the cognizance of such
matters as these unto Provincial Synods, and that Provincial Synod shall take
care in it according to their Prudence, having first made an exact inquiry into
the true state of the said Church.

3. Monsieur Gualtier, Pastor in the Province of Xaintonge, presented himself
to this Assembly, declaring, that he had finished his work upon the Discipline
of our Church, Monsieur Larroq. did after effect, and Print it.
as he had written the last National Synod held at Charenton; and that he had
another design in Hand, which was a Treatise of the Harmony of the Articles of
our Confession of Faith, Liturgy and Church Discipline, with that of the
ancient Church, and in special with the Decisions of the Councils of the
Gallicane Church. The Assembly applauded his Zeal, and ordered him to apply
himself unto his Province of Xaintonge, to which he shall produce his work, and
they shall dispose of it according to the Canons of our Discipline. And in the
mean while, he and his Labors were recommended unto God, praying that the
Father of Lights would enrich him with all needful gifts to the accomplishing
of his great design, and to shour down his Heavenly Benediction upon his Person
and Undertaking.

4. The Sieurs Priouleau, Pastor of the Church of Rochel, Berual Elder, le
Toncille, and de la Chapeliere, Heads of Families in the said City, appeared as
Deputies from that Church, with a Petition unto this Assembly, requesting that
Monsieur Gilbert, Pastor of the Church of Mesle might be conferred upon them as
their Minister, and they backed their Petition with very many and weighty
Arguments. The Deputies of the Church of Mesle were heard, who did as
importunately Petition that their Minister the aforesaid Monsieur Gilbert might
be continued with them: And the Provincial Deputies of Poicton, persisting in
that Resolve made in their last Synod of their Province, that they did not
judge it any way fit to grant them their Request. Now although this Assembly
does highly value that Church of Rochel and it is Petitions, yet nevertheless,
it does not count it reasonable to deprive the Church of Mesle of a Pastor, who
is so very useful and needful to them.

5. This Assembly did for diverse causes thereunto moving them, without
intending it a Precedent for the future, receive the Informations given by one
part of the Elders and Heads of Families in the Church of Calais, although they
ought according to the Canons of our Discipline to have been carried unto the
Synod of the Isle of France, and took cognizance of those Troubles wherewith
that Church has been agitated about the settling of a Second Pastor in it. The
Sieurs Tricotel and Peter du Croix, a Deacon in the Quarter of Guisnes, and
James Barrizeau, of the Lower Town of Calais, Deputies from another part of
that Church, had audience given them; and there were read Letters and Memoirs
from Monsieur de Montigny Pastor, who was sent unto the said Church by the
Synod held at Ay this present Year. The whole Affair having been heard and
debated, a Decree past that the Sieur de Montigny, shall, if it so please him,
exercise his Ministry in the said Church, till the meeting of the next Synod of
that Province, which will be within Six Months at the farthest: And before that
time, the Church of Calais shall choose a Pastor by plurality of Votes, in a
lawful Assembly, called and directed by their Consistory, according to the
order of our Discipline, either fixing their choice upon the Sieur de Montigny,
who received a most Honorable Testimony in this Assembly, or upon any other,
whom they shall judge most proper for their Edifying. And by The Authority of
this Assembly, one of the Pastors of Dieppe, and Monsieur Pinet, Pastor of the
Church of Amiens, are ordered to take with them an Elder out of their
respective Churches, and as soon as possible, to pass over to the Town of
Calais, (the Church of that Place bearing their Charges,) and to do their
utmost endeavors for the removal of those disorders in it, and for the
sweetning and reuniting of their disturbed and divided Spirits, and to censure
those that are unruly among them, and have incurred Censure according to our
Discipline. And all and every particular Member of the said Church are enjoined
to render unto the Sieurs Tricotell and de Montigny, and to their Consistory
that Respect and Obedience which is due unto them.

6. The Assembly having heard the Sieur Baruel, Elder in the Church of Privas,
speaking for Monsieur Accaurat, Pastor of the said Church, about those
Differences betwixt him and the Province of Vivaretz, for payment of the
Sallary owing to him for his Service done in the Churches of Valz and Albenas
in the said Province; and the Deputies of that Province being heard speak in
its behalf, the Differences betwixt both those Parties were sent unto the Synod
of Dolphiny, as being the next adjoining Province, which shall put a full and
final Period to them by The Authority of this Assembly.

7. The Provincial Deputies of Vivaretz demanding that the Church of La Bastide
de Virac, which was ever annexed unto that of La Gorce, and a Member of their
Synod, but has for some time since separated from them, and incorporated it
self with the Province of Lower Languedoc, might be obliged to rejoyn it self
unto the Province of Vivaretz, and to the said Church of la Gorce. The Assembly
decreed that the Province of Vivaretz should address it self unto that of Lower
Languedoc, and demand it of that Synod; and in case there be any Contestation
about it, the Synod of Sevennes shall by the Authority of this Assembly
determine and put a final period unto those Differences.

8. Although the Church of Valence be situated in the Province of Dolphiny, yet
shall it remain united with that of Soyon, according to that Decree of the
National Synod of Alanson; and to regulate their Contributions for Maintenance
of the Ministry, and other Charges of that Church, they shall apply themselves
unto the Synod of Vivaretz, and shall be discharged of all Contributions
imposed on them by the Province of Dolphiny, that only excepted to the
University of Die, unto which they have voluntarily and of their own accord
yielded.

9. The Churches of Issoire, Paillac, Sirac, La Gazelle, and Joinctes, shall
continue united to the Province of Burgundy. And whereas the Deputies of that
Province, and those of Sevennes, have represented that those Churches are not
of ability to maintain a Minister, and that this Assembly would express a noble
act of Charity to make some kind of Provision for them, a Vote passed that
there should be Yearly given to them for the Encouragement of their Minister,
the Sum of Three Hundred Livres, which shall be thus paid, 50 l. by the Church
or Paris, 40 l. by that of Rouen, 35 l. by that of Lion, 30 l. by that of
Monepellier, 25 l. by that of Bourdeaux, 25 l. by that of Rochel, 20 l. by that
of Caen, 20 l. by that of Castres, 20 l. by that of Grenoble, 15 l. by that of
Nismes, 15 l. by that of Dieppe, and 10 l. by that of Montlimer. And these
Churches are all ordered to send their respective Quot^'s at Easter unto the
Church of Lion, who shall see it paid in unto the Pastor, in actual Service of
those aforesaid Churches of Issoire, Paillac, etc. and the Church of Lion shall
give an account of their Receipt and Disbursment of the said Moneys unto the
Synod of Burgundy. And this Ordinance shall be in force till the Sitting of the
next National Synod.

10. The Deputies of the Church of Rochell having been refused in their Demand
of Monsieur Gilbert for their Pastor, informed this Assembly, that they had
received new Orders to petition for another Minister. And the Assembly having
nominated Two Pastors of their own Body to confer with them, and to find out
some means for their satisfaction, and to provide for them according their
desires; but there occurring insuperable Difficulties, in the way of supplying
them from another Province, and the Committee ordered to confer with them,
making their Report, that they did freely leave it unto the Judgment of this
Assembly to bestow upon them any one of the Pastors in the Province of
Xaintonge, who might be detached with the greatest ease from their Churches,
and Travel most profitably in the Edifying of that of Rochell, which now
declared that they would wholly acquiesce in such a Person as should be chosen
and recommended by this Assembly, they being not inclined to one more than unto
another. The National Synod receiving this their Proposition with great joy,
does now present unto the Church of Rochel, Monsieur Mesnil, formerly Minister
in the Church of St. Just, to be the ordinary and peculiar Pastor of the Church
of Rochell, he being now freed from his former care by the Judgment of this
Colloquy. And this Assembly hops that he will be a very acceptable, useful
Minister unto them. And till such time as that Church of St. Just can be
provided of another Pastor, the Colloquy or Synod of the Province, shall take
special care for their Supply, according to the Order established by the last
provincial Synod.

11. The Assembly having heard Monsieur de Vaussoudan, Pastor of the Church at
Saint Aignan, complaining on behalf of that, and the Church of Man's, of a
Judgment past in the Provincial Synod of Normandy, held at Rouan, the Fifteenth
of May, 1658, and the Days ensuing, which upon Letters written to him by the
Synod of Anjou, and by the Church of Man's, had declared that Election void,
which the Churches of Saint Aignan and Man's had made of Monsieur de L'arpents
Son, to receive the Pension given by the Deceased Lady of La Haerangere, for
maintaining of a Proposan. They also heard the Sieur de la Croix du Val, Deputy
from the Church of Alanson, together with the Provincial Deputies of Normandy
and Anjou, on all those Differences about that Legacy, and about the
pretensions which the said Sieur de L'arpent, and the Sieurs du Val and Alix
had unto it. The Contract also of this Gift passed by the said La Harangere,
the Twentieth Day of June, 1598, together with the Decree of the National Synod
of Alanson, held in the Year 1637, and the Judgments of the Synod of Normandy,
in the Years 1656, and 1658, were all read and perused. Upon the whole, the
Assembly ordained that the Decree of the National Synod of Alanson, in the Year
1637, shall be duly executed according to its form, intendment and tenor. And
when as there shall be any vacancy, and a Proposan is to be chosen, who is to
receive the Pension given by the said Lady, then the Deputies of the Churches
of St. Aignan and Man's, shall go unto the City of Alanson, to agree with that
Church about the Proposan, on whom the said Pension is to be conferred: And in
case of Disagreement between those Churches aforesaid about this Election, in
which those of St. Aignan and Man's, shall have but one Vote, the Election shall
be done alternatively; to wit, the first time by the Church of Alanson, which
shall have the preheminency; but the time the Churches of St. Aignan and Man's
conjoyntly, shall take place before that of Alanson, and thus consecutively one
after another: And in this choice and nomination, those aforesaid Churches
shall see that the Will of the said Lady of La Harangere be faithfully
observed, who expressly ordered, that the Children born in lawful Marriage, of
the Sieurs Bourdieu, de Bloic, de Portevize, and du Hamel, being Proposans and
destinated to the Holy Ministry, should be preferred before all others, whether
those Children born or to be born, were descended from their Sons or Daughters.
Nor may any Proposan chosen to receive the said Pension, enjoy it any longer
than the term of Four Years. And when as the said Proposan shall be found fit
and qualified for the Ministry, and be admitted thereinto, the Church of
Alanson shall have the first choice to retain him in their Service, and next
the Church of St. Aignan, and lastly, the Church of Man's; and in case neither
of these Three should pitch upon him for their Minister, he shall then be
assigned unto one of the nearest Churches. Moreover this Assembly does for
certain Reasons Ordain, that the said Sieur L'arpent shall receive the said
Pension for Four Years, commencing from the Day of his Election; which Term
being expired, they shall proceed unto a new Election, according to the Canon
aforesaid. And this Assembly has discharged, and does now discharge the said
Church of Man's of all Demands, Claims and Pretensions whatsoever that might be
brought against it upon the account of those Sums, which either Mr. Vignier the
Father, or his Son have received for that Pension during several Years,
excepting only what the said Churches may demand of the Heirs of the said Mr.
Vignier. And in case there should be any difference between the Churches of St.
Aignan and Man's about those Elections, which they are bound to make, they shall
be composed and terminated by the Synod of Anjou. And the said Sieur de
L'Arpent, and all other Proposans receiving the said Pension, shall be bound to
give Security, that in case through their default or neglect, they do not
attain to be Ministers of the Gospel, or that they change their purpose, and
divert to some other Studies and Employment, they make Restitution of the
Moneys they have thus received, and this agreeable to the Canons of our
National Synods.

12. This Assembly having heard Mr. Le Croix du Val, Deputy from the Heads of
Families in the Church of Alanson, who declared that he was sent by them to
oppose a Proposition set on foot by some particular Members of the said Church,
and to be tendered unto this Assembly, about changing of their Consistory, and
its ancient Order; and that being come unto this City, he met with the like
Proposition made to their Provincial Synod of Normandy, held in the Year 1655;
and the Assembly having perused the Memoirs of the Deputies of that Province,
had remitted the whole affair unto the Synod of that Province Yet nevertheless
having waited to see if any one should move about this matter, and observing
that none had done it, he that he might discharge the Trust committed to him,
did tender unto this Assembly according to his Duty, the Letters and Memoirs
with which he was charged, and opened before this Assembly the cause of his
Deputation, and the Arguments they had against any such Alteration; and he did
in behalf of those Heads of Families Petition, and does now again Petition,
that the Deputies of the said Province may declare whether they be ordered to
set on Foot that new Proposition, and whether they intend to speak of it; who
answered, that they had no such design, because that Affair had been remanded
back unto their Provincial Synod. The Assembly has dismissed over the Letters,
Memoirs, and the Act now presented by the said Sieur de la Croix du Val,
(Deputed by the Heads of Families in the Church of Alanson) together with the
Cognizance and Judgment of this Affair unto the Provincial Synod of Normandy,
according as was before decreed.

13. The Assembly being informed of the great Disorders in the Church of
Sauvetat, by reason of the difference between the Sieur de Carbon, and the
Inhabitants of that Town, who compose the Church in that place: Letters were
voted to be written unto the Lord Duke of La Force, to entreat his Grace, that
he would be pleased by his Prudence and Authority to terminate those unhappy
Dissentions, which menace that poor Church with no less than its utter Ruin and
Destruction.

14. The Assembly having received honorable Testimonials from diverse parts of
the singular worth of Monsieur Charles, Pastor of the Church of Gap, and taking
into consideration his numerous Family, great Deserts, and low Estate in the
World, and the Inabilities of his Church, does highly applaud his Zeal, Pains,
Care, Diligence and Perseverance in his Masters Service, having served the Lord
and his Churches most faithfully for many years, and eminently in this Church;
wherefore, that he may have a competent Maintenance to supply his Necessities,
this Assembly judges him every way worthy of the Cares and Respects of his
Province, and of his own Congregation, which is commended for the Tokens of
their Love and Affection to him for his own, and his Subsistence. And whereas
the said Church did agree and bargain at first with him to pay him, during his
Life, the yearly Sum of Three Hundred Livres only, they are now most earnestly
entreated to extend their Charity and Thankfulness unto him, and to augment his
Maintenance, by raising it up unto Four Hundred Livres a Year for his Life.

15. The Province of Vivaretz, received the praise of this Assembly for their
fervent kindness to Monsieur Chenat, formerly Pastor of the Church at La Gorce,
but now employed in the Service of that of Charenton; and it is most earnestly
exhorted to continue the yearly Sum of 150 Livres to him for the comfortable
Subsistence of this good Servant of Jesus Christ, whose Labors and Travels
have been very great in the Work of the Lord.

16. The Memoirs and Letters of Monsieur Gabet, Pastor of the Church at
Osselon, having been read and examined in this Assembly, his Affair was
dismissed over to the Province of Dolphiny, which was commended for their
Charity and Support extended to him, and the said Province was entreated to
continue their Cares for the Comfort, and Repose of this poor Minister, and to
hear him in those matters which he shall offer to them, and to judge of them
according to their Prudence and Equity; and also to reprove him for that ill
Language wherewith he has soiled his Papers sent unto this Assembly.

17. The Inhabitants of the Islands of La Voutte, professing the Reformed
Religion, sent Letters Signed by De Bois unto this Assembly, petitioning, that
they might be absolutely separated from the Church of La Voute, and joined unto
that of Livron, and that they might continue to pay in their Contributions to
it: Several Members of the Church or Consistory of Livron abetted them in their
Demand. The Deputies of Dolphiny were desired to give their Judgment in the
case, who replied, they had no order to oppose it: But the Provincial Deputies
of Vivaretz did oppose this Petition of those Inhabitants of La Voute, and of
the Consistory of Livron. Upon the whole Debate, the Synod not finding this
Affair as yet ripe for a Decision, did dismiss it over to the Provincial Synod
of Lower Languedoc, who should pass a final Sentence therein by the Authority
of this Assembly.

18. The Church of Loudun petitioned the Assembly to discharge them from their
Contribution of the Fifth Penny of the Poors Money paid in toward the
Maintenance of our Universities, in consideration of those extraordinary
Charges they are obliged to be at in upholding their Lesser Schools, which have
been of singular Use and Benefit even to the Neighbor Provinces. Whenas the
Provincial Deputies of Anjou were heard, and those also of Britain, who
reported with how much che^rfulness they had contributed their Sixty Livres
yearly for supporting their Lesser Schools, but that at present their Design
was to bestow this Money upon that in the Town of Vitre; the Assembly could not
grant unto the said Church their Petition. But in case the Province of
Britain do satisfy the Synod of Anjou, that they have effectually employed
the said Sum of Sixty Livres as before, toward the upholding the Lester
Schools in the said Town of Vitre; then the Province of Anjou shall allow in
account unto the Church of Loudun the like Sum to be employed to the same use
and purpose.

19. That Book of the Sieur de la Fite Solon Pastor of the Church of Orthez in
the Province of Bearn, entitled, Disputationes de Vindiciis Gratiae, being
presented to this Assembly for its Approbation, was remanded back to the Synod
of the same Province, who should examine and approve it according to the Canons
of our National Synods.

20. In reading the Memoirs sent unto this Assembly (from Monsieur Clerk,
Pastor in the Church of Coulonges in the Baylywick of Gex) about diverse
Contestations between him as Son and Heir of Mr. James Clerk his Father, Pastor
also in the said Bailywick of Gex, and the Widows and Heirs of diverse other
Pastors in the said Bailywick, with and against the Churches in the said
Bailywick and the Provincial Synods of Burgundy, and particularly in that of
Gex, held in the Year 1656. and that of Arnay le Due, in the Year 1658. This
Assembly observing that the occasion of all their Debate was a pecuniary
matter, dismissed it over to the Province of Dolphiny to put a final Period to
it.

21. The Provincial Deputies of Sevennes demanded on behalf of the Widow of
Monsieur Rossel, formerly Pastor in the Church of Sauve, but since presented to
the Family of the late Duke of Rohan by the Natinal Synod of Castres, that he
might receive the same Pension for her year of Widowhood, as was paid her
Deceased Husband yearly during his Life, by Order of the Province of Sevennes:
The Assembly resolved, that a Letter should be written to the Lady Duchess of
Rohan about this business; and the Consistory of the Church of Paris is charged
to apply themselves to the said Lady Duchess, that some Satisfaction may he
given this poor Widow, and to acquaint the Consistory of Anduze with it; and
the Sieurs Daille and Loride des Galinieres, Elder in the Church of Paris, are
ordered to deliver this Letter unto the said Lady Duchess.

22 Monsieur Chamier Pastor, informed this Assembly of the state of the Church
in St. Hyppolyte, by reason of the Departure of Monsieur de Mejannes their
Pastor from it, and of an Order that was made for its being served by another
at the Charges of the said Sieur de Mejannes till the next Synod. The Deputies
of the Province of Sevennes were heard speak unto this matter, who professed
that they were surprised at this Relation, and that any person should attempt
against an Order of their last Synod, which was made upon very good and
sufficient Grounds, and in which Monsieur de Mejannes himself had acquiesced.
And they wire the more affected at this, because the Parties concerned are
neither heard, nor cited to appear and plead for themselves. And they protested
farther, that they had no Commission at all from their Province to intermeddle
in this business; and they humbly desired the Synod, that there might be no
Debate about it. And the said Sieur de Mejannes was also heard, and the Acts of
the Synod of Alez, of Florac, and of Vignan were all read and perused. Upon the
whole, this Assembly disapproved that too great Facility of the Church and
Pastor, in demanding and yielding to such a Separation, which was every way
prejudicial both to the one and other, and of dangerous consequence to our
Churches, if such Examples should be allowed. And the Consistory of Montpellier
is ordered to send Mr. Eustache unto the Church of St. Hippolyte, accompanied
with one of their Elders, to reconcile Monsieur Mejannes with his Flock, and
that it may be effected, they should propound to their Consideration his great
Services, eminent Zeal, and most excellent Gifts with which God has adorned
him; and since that this Assembly does give him such an ample Testimonial, the
said Church shall be obliged according to their wonted Charity to take care of
their Pastor, and to make Provision for his comfortable Subsistence; and
according to former Decrees, they shall allow him a Colleague, for their better
Edification; or else to release him of some part of his Ministerial Labors, as
it has been ordered in the Canons of General Matters by this Assembly. And if
any Difficulties occur, which may obstruct the Accomplishment of this good
Design, this Affair shall be removed unto the next approaching Synod of the
Province of Sevennes, unto whom the Person and Ministry of the said Sieur de
Mejannes are recommended; and till that the said Synod do meet, Monsieur de
Mejannes shall continue to exercise his Ministry in the said Church; and all
Charges and Expenses about this business shall be defrayed by that Church of
St. Hippolyte.

23. Monsieur Thourond, Pastor of the Church of Stofhouse, complained against
the Provincial Synod of Lower Guyenne, for not performing their Promise of
re-imbursing him his Charges, expended by their Order in securing the Peace and
Welfare of their Churches: This Assembly blamed the said Province for their
Remissness in paying so just a Debt, and to a person, whose Zeal, Sincerity and
Diligence have deserved a far more grateful Acknowledgment. And every one of
those particular Churches, which have not satisfied the Orders of their
Province, are enjoined to pay in to the said Mr. Thourond their particular
Assessments before the meeting of their next Synod, upon pain of the greatest
Censures. And in case they should neglect it, the next Synod is commanded to
take the most certain and expeditious course for re-imbursing of the said Mr.
Thourond within three Months after the expiring of that Synod, and to make an
Addition of other Moneys, besides what they had agreed with him, as shall be
found needful to indemnifie him from all Interests, which he was forced to pay
by borrowing of Moneys for the Service of the said Province.

24. Letters were read from the Church of Lanez, gathered within the District
of Hastingues, and the Provincial Deputies of Bearn and the Lower Guyenne, were
heard speak about the matters contained in them: This Assembly having debated
the matter, did decree, that for the future the said Church of Lanez should be
joined unto the Province of Bearn, which shall take an especial care of it. And
the like Judgment was given for the Churches of Mauleon and Moulay. And whereas
the Church of Lanez has petitioned for a share in the Legacies bequeathed by
the Lady Rouly unto the Church of Orthez, this their Petition is remanded back
unto the next Synod of Bearn: And in case the Church of Geaune should desire to
be incorporated with the Synod of Bearn, they shall present this their Petition
unto the Province of Lower Guyenne, which is entreated to consider seriously of
the matter, and to grant them what will be most subservient to their edifying.

25. The Sieurs de L'Angle Pastor, and de Guesdon, Elder in the Church of
Rouen, moved that there might be some Change made in the Distribution of
Offices in their Province of Normandy, and the said Sieurs Bochart Pastor, and
de la Roquette an Elder, seconded them in their Motion, because they found
themselves overcharged as to Rates and Taxes: And that the Distinction of the
Higher and Lower Normandy might be suppressed, especially as to these matters.
The Assembly, having maturely debated this Affair, judged, that it was no ways
fit at present to make any change herein; and ordered, that the Canons of the
National Synod of Charenton in the Year 1644. should be of Force as to all past
matters, and that all Offices shall be born till the next Synod of that
Province, by the Colloquies of Rouen and Caux for one Moiety, and for the other
Moity by the other Classes, who shall choose a particular Receiver to receive
all their Contributions, and to send them unto the Receiver General residing at
Rouen. And in case those Difficulties, (brought unto this Assembly) between the
Higher and Lower Normandy, about their being over-rated on both sides should
continue, then are they for the future to address themselves unto the
Consistory of the Church of Paris, which shall judge thereof by the Authority
of this Assembly, the said Consistory having first well-considered the Ability
and Inability of both Parties.

26. The Sieurs de L'Angle Pastor, and Guesdon an Elder in the Church of Rouen,
requested this Assembly to reinforce by its Authority the Counsels of their
Provincial Synod unto the Churches of their Province, for contributing to the
Subsistence of their College at Quevilly. Whereupon a Decree past, that all
the other Churches in the said Province of Normandy should furnish the Sum of
Three Hundred Livres toward the maintenance of that College.

27. At the Request of the Synod of Higer Languedoc and Guyenne, which had
given a very Honorable Testimony to the Piety and great Learning of Monsieur
Balthuzar (who was formerly his Majesty's Counselor and Advocate in the
Presidial Court of Auxerne) and which has already raised and settled a Fund of
Three Hundred Livres for his Maintenance; and the Assembly having heard that
very advantageous Report, which the Committee of Ministers appointed to examine
those Four Diatrebes presented by the said Mr. Balthazar, had made of them, it
applauded the Zeal of that Province of Higher Languedoc. And that the said Mr.
Balthazar may be enabled to follow his Studies without Distraction, and
prosecute his great Work undertaken against Cardinal Baronius, it decrees,
that the yearly Stipend of Seven Hundred and Fifty Livres shall be settled upon
him, and paid in unto him by these Churches of this Kingdom, to wit, by those
of the Higher Languedoc Three Hundred Livres, by those of the Isle of France
One Hundred Livres, by those of Lower Languedoc One Hundred Livres, by those of
Normandy Fifty Livres, by those of Xaintonge Thirty Livres, by those of
Dolphiny Thirty Livres, by those of Lower Guyenne Thirty Livres, by those of
Poictou Thirty Livres, by those of Berry Twenty Livres, by those of Burgundy
Twenty Livres, and by those of Anjou Fifteen Livres.

28. My Lord Commissioner having received Letters from Monsiur de la Vrilliere,
notifying his Majesty's Pleasure, that the Sieur Gaillard, Pastor of the Church
of Montauban, who is now prosecuted for Criminal matters, might by the
authority of this Assembly be removed from his Church. The Assembly requested
the Lord Commissioner to take it into his consideration, that because the said
Gaillard was absent, and for that this Assembly has little or no knowledge of
his Deportments, it is not at present capable o^ Judging his Case, and that he
would be pleased, that order might be given our Deputies unto his Majesty, to
infor^ ^he^selves punctually of all matters relating to him, and that they,
together with the Church of Montauban, do deliberate and resolve on the best
means for his Majesty'^s satisfaction, and in case he be innoc^^^, to (...) his
Majesty with it, and to demand his Royal Protesting (...) but if through
Levity, or Inadvertency, ^e may h^^^ s^er^ed from his Duty, that then they do
with the profoundest Sub^^issions implore his Majesty's Clemency for him, as
being (...) Person ^o^ altogether unworthy of his Majesty's Grace and Favor.

29 The Sieurs Chamier and * Homel, Monsieur Homel did afterward suffer
Martyrdom.
Pastors, together with the Sieurs de P^^pe^^^ and M^^sonn^^. Elders, shall
ride unto the City of Castres, to compose the differences between Monsieur de
Brugeres, Counselor in the Court of the Edict, and the other Presidents and
Counselors in the same Court of that City, who are of, our Communion* And the
Expenses of the said Deputies from Montauban unto Castres, and during their
Abode in it, shall be defrayed by their respective Provinces.

30. The Assembly remembering that the last National Synod had pro^^sed Monsieur
Chamier Four Hundred Livres, being the Remainders of a greater Sum granted him
by some of the former National Synod^, as also that there had been a like grant
of Three Hundred Livr^^ unto Monsieur de l^ Fit Solon; It was now decreed,
that in case there be any M^^ies in the Hands of the Lord du Candal, that then
the said Minister^ Chamier and de la Fit Solon, shall be paid the Sums
before any other Person whatsoever.

31. This Assembly having an entire confidence in the Consistory of the Church
of Paris, that they will appoint Persons well qualified, to receive and manage
the Moneys which were formerly, entrusted with them, and for which they have a
new Commission given them, and that they will use herein as great
circumspection as might be required from Persons of their Reputation, for
Candor, Prudence and Godliness, and that they will be as careful in this
affair, as if it were their own particular concern, declares, that its none of
its intention^, that the said Consistory should be Sureties and responsible for
their solvability, who are or shall be appointed by them to this effect. And
this Declaration shall hold good for all other Consistories that have the like
Commissions.

CHAP. XII. Of Universities.
1. THE Provincial Deputies of Xaintonge moved, that in every Province there
might be Two Persons ordered to prepare and fit themselves for the Profession of
Divinity, and that our University Councils might be obliged to pitch upon one
of them to fill up the vacant Chairs of Divinity. But this Assembly did not
judge meet to make any Alteration in the former Canons, which left the
extraordinary Councils of our Universities at liberty to choose the Professors
of Divinity, without restraining them to this or that designed Minister; and
therefore they should procure and settle in such important Charges such Persons
as they were directed to by the Canons of our National Synods, and in
particular by those of Alez, Charenion, and Al^^son.

2. All the Deputies of our Provinces, with one common consent, complaining of
the great Corruptions crept in among the Scholars in our Universities,
especially among the Students in Divinity, of their wearing long Hair, Clothes
after the new fangled Fashions of the World, with wide floating Sleeves, Gloves
stuffed with Silk and Ribbans, that they frequented Taverns, haunted the Company
of Women, walked abroad with their Swords, that their Style savored more of
the Romance than of God's Holy Word, and many other Vanities and Excesses of
this Nature. The Assembly touched with a most sensible grief for these great
Disorders, and zealously concerned for the House of God, does most earnestly
exhort the Professors, and all other Governors in our Universities, as also the
Consistories of those Churches in which they are, to exert all their care,
power and authority for the suppression of these Abuses, which redound to the
disgrace of our Religion, and give great Scandal unto Persons fearing God, and
open the Flood Gates to a deluge of Profaneness to break in upon the Sanctuary:
And farther it injoyneth them to suspend the Refractory from the Lord's Table,
and to blot their Names out of the Matricular Book of Students, and to deprive
Proposans of all hopes of ever being admitted to the Ministerial Office. And
all Scholars are most straightly enjoined, and most especially Students in
Divinity, to refrain from all those Abuses beforementioned, and to keep
themselves at the greatest distance from those things which are contrary to
Modesty and true Sanctity, which Virtues should shine forth conspicuously in
their Lives, whom God calls to be Pastors in the Church of Christ: And that
there may be no sinister Opinions conceived of them, they be commanded to
perfume the House of God betimes with the sweet Odours of an early Religious
Conversation, every way becoming that Sacred Employment whereunto they be
designed, upon pain of Exemplary Punishments for their Rebellion. Moreover this
Assembly Ordains, that those Provincial Synods to whose care and charge our
Universities are entrusted, and in which they be erected, shall depute every
Year some Pastors to inspect and visit them, and to take notice what progress
is made by our Scholars in their Studies of Philosophy and Divinity, and by the
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ and of this Assembly, to redress wha^ever
Disorders shall be particularly notified to, or observed by them. And to this
end those Visitors Commissionated by this Assembly, shall as soon as possible
they can, go and visit them; to wit, the Sieurs Gitton and de Bourdieu,
Pastors, and des Champs, an Elder, shall visit that of Saumur; the Sieurs
Chamier and Vegnier, Pastors, de Pontperdu and Maisonnet, Elders, shall visit
that of Montauban; the Sieurs de Boudan and de Messannes, Pastors, and the
Sieurs de St. John Gardonongues and de Pontperdu, Elders, shall visit that of
Nismes; and the Sieurs Homel and January, Pastors, with the Sieurs de Mirabel
and Baruel, Elders, shall visit that of Die. And these Visitors shall give
notice unto all Students in Divinity, that they read the Scriptures publicly
in the Desk before Sermons in all our Church-Meetings.

3. The Deputies of several Provinces complained of the great Rates that
Scholars paid for their Diet, Lodging and Washing in the Towns of our
Universities; and that Professors and Regents did demand of them over and above
their Sallaries, for Lectures and Tuition. This Assembly Ordained, that the
Commissioners appointed about the affairs of the Church of Saumur should
carefully confer with the Directors of that University and the Consistory
there, concerning this matter, and to take the most convenient course they
could for the moderating of Expenses. And all the Provinces are advised to send
unto those Directors of that University their Opinions about it, that so the
grievances complained of may be redressed. And the Directors of that University
are herein to use their utmost care and diligence.

4. That custom practiced in the University of Die, of inspecting the Manners
and Education of their Scholars in the true Religion, and of examining their
proficiency in Human Learning, and of giving them a public Prize, is highly
applauded; and this Assembly exhorts all other Colleges and Universities of
our Communion, to imitate and follow this their most commendable Example.

5. The Sieurs Damiere, Cregut, Verdier, and Martel, Pastors, having been
Elected by the University Councils of Nismes, Die and Montauban, and afterward
established in the Professors Office of Divinity in those Universities, this
Assembly ratifieth those Acts, and confirms them in their respective Chairs:
And orders, that the Canons of our Discipline and National Synods shall be
most Religiously observed about the Examining of them, who shall be chosen to
the Profession of Divinity.

6. The Provincial Deputies of Sevennes moved that the Province of Lower
Languedoc might be obliged to pay Four Hundred Livers a Year toward the
Maintenance of the College of Anduse, from the time of that Treaty held with
them in the Conference at Quissac, in the Year One Thousand, Six Hundred, Forty
and Five; and they offered in case they should so do, that they would deduct
from what they had already paid in. Moreover that this Assembly would be
pleased to discharge them of their Yearly Contribution to the Universities of
Die and Nismes, or to make some other Provision for the Subsistence of the said
College of Anduze. The Letters and Memoirs of the Consistory of Anduze were
Read, and the Provincial Deputies of Lower Languedoc were heard: Upon the
whole, this Assembly dismissed their Demand of Four Hundred Livres from the
Synod of Lower Languedoc to the consideration of the Province of Higher
Languedoc, which shall judge finally thereof without Appeal by The Authority of
this Assembly. And as for their other Requests, it was not thought meet to
discharge that Province of Sevennes of those Contributions to which they stand
obliged (by the foregoing Synods) unto our Universities, and leaves the care
of providing Maintenance for their College of Anduze to their own and
Neigbours Prudence.

7. This Assembly censureth, (as they have too justly deserved it,) the Council
of the University of Montauban, for not having brought in their Account of
Moneys paid in by the Provinces unto that University, and Ordains, that they
do bring them every Year unto their Provincial Synod, there to be audited and
concluded, and from thence to be presented unto the National Synod according to
Rule. And whereas the Provinces of Lower Guyenne and Bearn are indebted
considerable Sums unto the said University of Montauban, they be in like manner
Censured, and are most expressly enjoined to take that care, and to settle that
good order among them for the future, that the public Professors in our
Universities may be statedly and regularly paid; and they shall inflict the
severest Censures upon such as shall refuse or disobey this Canon.

8. And the like Judgment was past upon the Province of Normandy, which was
found indebted in very considerable Sums unto the Universities of Saumur, Die
and Montauban, which this Assembly could not reflect on without a most sensible
Displeasure: And therefore does enjoin it to use all Expedients necessary for
the discharging of this debt, on pain of the greatest Censures.

9. Mademoiselle Charles, Widow of the Deceased Monsieur Charles, late Pastor
and Professor of Divinity in the University of Montauban, Petitioned this
Assembly that it would cause her to be paid the Arrears of Sallaries due unto
her Husband; as also that Pension which had been ordered him by the Synod held
at Saint Antonine, in the Year 1650, for the Maintenance of his Son, till such
time as he should be called unto the Sacred Ministry; as also that Sum of Money
which was adjudged him by the Synod of Pont du Camares, in the Year 1654. The
Sieurs Jassaud, Pastor of the Church of Castres, and Brassart, Elder in the
Church of Montauban, and Syndic of that University, having promised to use
their best endeavors that the said Gentlewoman might be satisfied, the
Assembly Decreed, That both the Church and University of Montauban, and the
Church of Castres, should pay in unto the said Gentlewoman all those Arrearages
owing unto her Deceased Husband, as also whatever Sums besides has been ordered
by the Synods of St. Antonine, and Pont de Camares; which Decrees of theirs are
now ratified and reinforced by this present Ordinance.

10. There shall be paid unto Mademoiselle Bicheteau, the Widow of the Deceased
Mr. Bicheteau, Professor of the Greek Tongue, the Sum of One Hundred Livres,
which had been appointed to him by the Synod of Pont de Camarez.

11. The University of Montauban presented no Account, for which it was
severely Censured; and it was ordered to liquidate their Accounts in the Synods
of Higher Languedoc, who shall bring them in unto the next National.

12. The University of Nismes having brought in no Accounts, is ordered to
carry them unto the Synod of Lower Languedoc.

13. There is due unto the University of Saumur, whose Accounts were brought
in, accepted and approved,

l. s. d. From the Province of Xaintonge, 030 00 00 From the Province of
Britain, 300 00 00 From the Province of Normandy, 1680 18 09

Here must be excepted an Account brought in by Monsieur de L'Erpiniere, which
was never seen by the Province of Anjou, nor approved by this Assembly.

14. There is due unto the University of Die

l. s. d. From the Province of Normandy 2448 16 00 From the Province of Berry
2224 09 00

Always to be excepted Four Hundred Livres paid by them the 19th Day of June,
1642. and Four Hundred Livres more paid unto this University the 27th of May,
1642.

l. s. d. From the Province of Sevennes 3018 07 00

Here must be excepted those Sums of Money in the Hand of Monsieur Eustache.

l. s. d. From the Province of Xaintonge 0839 06 10

Excepting always an Account sent to the Consistory of Rochel by the said
Province.

l. s. d. From the Province of Burgundy 0995 07 00

This said Province of Die shall give an Account unto the Synod of Dolphiny,
and that to the next National Synod of their Receipt and Employment of the
Moneys given them by the National Synods.

CHAP. XIII. The Accounts of the Lord du Candal.
THE Lord of Candal, Counselor to his Majesty in his most Honorable Privy
Council and Council of State, having presented unto this Assembly the Account
of Receipts and Disbursments done by the late Lord of Candal his deceased
Father, and by himself since that given in unto the Deputies of the National
Synod held by his Majesty's permission at Charenton, which was there closed and
settled the 16th Day of February, 1645. And a Committee having been appointed to
examine the said Accounts, and brought in their Report unto this Assembly, it
was observed that the said Lord of Candal gave in no Account of the Arrears of
Rent upon the Chamber of the City of Paris from the Quarter of April, 1651.
unto this present Day; and that there is placed to Account of Receipt the bare
Sum only of Three Hundred Fourscore and Twelve Livres of Emoluments accrewing
from the Commission of Real Seisures in the Sheriffs Court of Soissons, since
the last foregoing Account: Nor also is there any thing charged to Account, as
received from the Emoluments of another such Office in the Presidial Court of
Chasteau Thierry, Noyon, Beauvais and Calais, although it was evident by the
former Accounts, that the said Offices did yield yearly Profits: Nor is there
any thing set down as received for those of La Ferte Milon, Mouchi, Le Castle,
Pierrefonds, Coussy, Chastillon upon Marne, Neuilly, St. Frond, Surene,
Estapes, Vertus, Bulloigne, Magny, Montmiral, Chaumont, and the Provostship of
Augny, Chaalons, Epernay and Fismes; all which joined to the former, make up
the full Number of One and Twenty Offices, whose Revenue amounted to Threescore
and Four Thousand Six Hundred Livres: And the Mark of Gold Provisions, and
Seals, to Fifteen Hundred Seventy and Seven Livres, two Sous, and Six Deniers,
which yield no Product nor Profit unto the Churches; insomuch that it were far
better to sell and dispose of them at any rate, tho much less than their yearly
Value, than to keep them as now they are. For we have no account in whose Hands
they are, nor who does manage them, and receive the Profits of them in any of
those Presidial Courts. Besides, there was one thing more observable in the
Accounts of the late Lord of Candal, that the Churches were indebted to him the
Sum of Seven Thousand Eight Hundred and Eighteen Livres, Four Deniers,
comprizing therein Two Thousand Five Hundred Seventy and Four Livres, Ten Sous
for Interest. Moreover, in that former Account it was said, that the late Lord
of Candal stood obliged to bring in unto this Synod the Acquittances for the
Colleges of Nerac, of Berry, of Rochefoucault, amounting to Three Thousand
Four Hundred Nine and Six Livres, which the said Lord of Candal having not
done, there must be deducted this Sum, together with its Interest, from that
Day in which the said Lord of Candal Deceased was said to have paid it. And
this was allowed in Disbursment. Nor may this be omitted, that the said
Deceased Lord of Candal had placed to the last account of Disbursments, and
would have it allowed him, several Sums of which there was no clear Proof nor
Evidences Moreover it was made appeat, that the said Deceased Lord had
deposited in his Hands that Order granted by his Majesty for Sixteen Thousand
Livres, to defray the Charges of the National Synod held at Alanson in the Year
1637. of which he gave in no account unto the National Synod of Charenton,
1644. nor is there a tittle hereof mentioned in this present Account now
brought in by the Lord of Candal his Son. The Assembly not having that
Information, which of necessity it must have for the clearing up of these
Articles, and so consequentially not being able at present to examine and finish
the said Account, which is now presented by the said Lord of Candal, it does
commissionate and authorize the Sieur Loride des Galinieres, Advocate in his
Majesty's Privy Council and Council of State, and in the Parliament of Paris,
for, and in its Name, and under the Orders of my Lord General Deputy of the
Reformed Churches of France near his Majesty, and with the Advice of the
Consistory of the Church of Paris, and of those Pastors of other Churches which
may then be in the City of Paris, in case any one shall happen to be there
whenas this Affair shall be negotiated to examine the Account presented by the
said Lord of Candal, or any other Account which he shall bring in hereafter,
and to debate and allow the Articles of the said Account, and to give
Acquittances for the Receipts, Disbursments, and Reprizals in it. And to cause
the said Lord of Candal to resign unto them the One and Twenty Letters of
Provision for the Office of Commissioners of real Seizures in those Courts
beforementioned, and to dispose of them at any rate, whether in the Total, or
in Parcels, and this to the use and profit of the Churches. The Moneys of which
Sale shall be received by him, who shall be appointed thereunto by my Lord the
General Deputy, with the Advice and Consent of the Consistory of the Church of
Paris, that so an Account may be given thereof unto the Churches. And until
such time as the said Offices shall be sold off, this Assembly does authorize
the said Sieur Loride des Galinieres, under the Orders of the said Lord General
Deputy, by and with the Advice of the said Consistory of Paris, to constitute
such Persons at they shall find able to manage the said Offices in those Courts
aforesaid, that so the yearly Profit of them may be received for the benefit of
our Churches. And they shall make diligent Enquiry into the said Courts, who
has last had the Management of those Offices, and if there be in the Hands of
the said Officer any Emoluments accrewing from them, they shall be demanded
from him. And whenas the Account brought in by the said Lord of Candal shall
have been examined and closed up, according to the Order before appointed, in
case the said Lord of Candal shall be found in Arrearages of Debt unto the
Churches, the said Sieur Loride is commissionated and empowred by Authority
from this Assembly, according to the Orders and Advice beforementioned, to
prosecute the Lord of Candal for the payment of the said Debt on account, and
to take up from him into his own Hands that Contract of Rentcharge upon the
Chamber of Paris, and to receive all Arrears that are now due, or may hereafter
happen to be due, and to give account thereof unto the Churches. And in case it
should be requisite that the said Lord of Candal should make a Declaration in
the Name of any particular Person for the Churches Profit, because of the said
Rent, the said Loride, under the Orders of my Lord General Deputy, shall
consult with the Consistory of Paris, and put the said Rent under his Name, if
they think meet. But and if any thing should become due unto the said Lord of
Candal, he shall be paid out of Moneys coming in from the Sale of the Offices
for Commissions of Fines and Seizures, and from the Rent issuing out of the
Chamber of Paris, and this according to the value of Moneys now current. And
if, upon review of those accounts aforesaid, there should happen to be any
Contestation, that it may be composed, and quietly transacted, the said Loride
is commissionated and fully empowred by this Assembly, to give large and valid
Acquittances and Releases; and in case of necessity, to prosecute the matter
before the Judges in any Civil Court of Judicature, and to sell and alienate
the said Offices, or to put in any one to execute them, as also to dispose of
the said Rentcharge on the Chamber of Paris, with all its Circumstances and
Dependencies, or to Mortgage the said Rent, and the annual Income of the said
Sales. Always provided, and not otherwise, that he follow the Orders before
prescribed. And the said Loride shall give advice hereof unto all the
Provincial Synods, by Letters, which he shall send from time to time to one of
the Principal Churches of the Province, that so they may be acquainted with the
Success and Issue of this Affair.

CHAP. XIV. An ACT for the Public National Fast, which is to be Celebrated the
25th Day of March, in the Year 16^0.
ALthough it has pleased God to grace his Majesty, our Sovereign Lord, with
that Blessing, as to terminate a long and bloody War by a most glorious Peace,
which has been always his design and purpose, and that thereby is offered unto
all his good Subjects an ample and general Occasion of Joy and Thankfulness:
Yet nevertheless we cannot but see with Grief and Horror, how that Atheism,
Impiety, Blasphemy, Unrighteousness. Debauchery, Uncleanness, and all other
Sins both against the First and Second Table of the Divine Law are daily
multiplied, and march barefaced, as if the Sons of Men would by their bold and
presumptuous Ungodliness, even brave, d^^e and provoke the Justice of God, and
kindle against themselves the Fire of his most dreadful Wrath and Vengeance, so
that we have too much cause of Fear, lest the Benignity of God yielding unto
his just Indignation by reason of the Impenitency of Sinners, he should at last
pour out the Vials of his Fury upon the Land, without sparing of his poor
Church, which tho separated from the World by the Purity of its Profession, is
too often plunged in the Vices and Corruptions of that Age in which it lives.
Wherefore the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France, assembled by
his Majesty's permission in the Town of Loudun, knowing that there is none
other way nor means to avert the Judgments of God, than by giving speedy and
evident Tokens of a most serious Repentance, of a most sincere and
extraordinary Humiliation, does ordain a Solemn Fast to be kept and observed in
all the Churches of this Kingdom on Thursday the 28th of March next coming,
that Thanks may be rendered to Almighty God for the Peace, which himself the God
of Peace has vouchsafed us, and to obtain from his Divine Goodness, that it
may be attended and followed with all kind of Benedictions, and that ardent
Prayers may be offered up to God for the Health and Prosperity of his Majesty's
Sacred Person, who gave him in as a Return of Prayers unto his praying people,
that the Lord would be pleased to crown his Enterprises with Success, to fulfill
his Desires, to augment the Glory of his Crown, and the Weal of his State and
Government, and to wrestle with God for the yearning Bowels of his Compassions
upon us, which we have forfeited by the multitude and aggravations of our sins,
and importunately to beseech him, that he would extinguish the Fire of his
Indignation, which menaceth his poor Churches with the severest Chastisements,
hoping and believing that upon our sincere Conversion to him, and deep
Abasement and Humiliation in Sackcloth and Ashes before his most terrible
Majesty, he will return to us with his infinite Mercies, and for the sake of
his Dear Son, by whose Name we are called, to cause the Light of his Loving
Countenance to shine upon his Church, and to receive us graciously, which will
be our Salvation. And this Act shall be read and published in all the Churches,
that all persons in Communion with us may take notice of it.

CHAP. XV. A Dividend of the Sum of Sixteen Thousand Livres granted by the King
to the Deputies of the National Synod, of which every one shall receive Two
Hundred Sixty and Two Livres.
l. s. d. TO the Province of Normandy for Four Deputies 1072 00 00 To the
Higher Languedoc for Four Deputies 1072 00 00 To Burgundy for Four Deputies
1072 00 00 To Lower Languedoc for Four Deputies 1072 00 00 To Berry for Four
Deputies 1072 00 00 To Sevennes for Four Deputies 1072 00 00 To Provence for
Two Deputies 0536 00 00 To Poictou for Four Deputies 1072 00 00 To Britain
for Two Deputies 0536 00 00 To Anjou for Four Deputies 1072 00 00 To the Isle
of France for Four Deputies 1072 00 00 To Xaintonge for Four Deputies 1072 00
00 To Dolphin^ for Three Deputies 0804 00 00 To the Lower Guienn^ for Three
Deputies 0804 00 00 To Bearn for One Deputy 0262 00 00 To Vivaretz, for Four
Deputies, 1072 00 00 To the First Deputies sent to Court, 560 00 00 To the
Second Deputies sent to Court, 245 00 00 To the Post who brought the Bill of
Exchange, 250 00 00 To Monsieur de la Morinay, for his needless Expenses, 100
00 00 To those who rode to Richlieu about the Money, 28 00 00 To Chinon, for
getting out the Money 28 00 00 For loss of Money, 17 00 00 To the Porters of
Loudun 48 00 00

CHAP. XVI. Tho Roll of Deposed and Apostat Pastors who have changed their
Religion.
1. JOhn Cordeil, formerly Minister in the Church of Vertueil in Dolphiny, a
Fellow low of Stature, great Head, and Bald before, his Hair mixed with gray,
great uplifted Eyes, high red-colour'd Visage, a great short Neck, Grave in his
Going, but inclining to Stupidity, a loud and clear Voice, and dull Laughter.

2. Sebastian D'aubus, heretofore Minister of Commonde, and Professor of
Philosophy at Montauban, about Six or Seven and Forty Years old, his Face is
marked with little black Spots, his Hair black and curled, even to the Crown of
his Head, a Fellow of mean Judgment.

3. Philip Codure, formerly Minister and Professor at Nismes, about Seventy
Years old, or somewhat more, his Hair gray, tawny colored Face, high raised
Eyebrows, his Eyes sunk into his Head, a frowning ill-look'd Fellow, slow of
Speech, dull and heavy in his Gate, gross and tall of Stature.

4. John de la Port, Pastor of St. Andrews de Val borgne, in the Province of
Sevennes, deposed by the last Provincial Synod held at Alez, for Desertion of
his Church and Calling, Aged about Five and Twenty Years or thereabout, a
middle size Fellow, pale white Face, and Chestnut-colour'd Hair.

5. Bordat, formerly Pastor of the Church in the Island of Barrieres, and
Province of Lower Guyenne, about Seventy Years of Age, the Moustaches of his
Beard thick and trussed up, low of Stature, and somewhat fat, a very
red-favour'd Fellow.

6. Balde alias Bellecourt, Sixty Years old or more, a great and fat Fellow,
born in the Province of Dolphiny, he was bred a Monk, renounced Popery and his
Monastic Profession; but is since returned with the Dog unto his Vomit; he is
Grave in his Deportment, a Man of little Sense or Reason.

7. William Martin, some time since Minister at Montoire, in the Province of
Anjou, Aged about Forty, his Hair Flaxen, wide Mouth, a middle Stature Fellow.
This Wretch like Judas, sold his Christ and Gospel for a sorry Sum of Silver,
and turned Papist at Tours, being bought out of his Religion for Eight Hundred
Livres; and it is very much questioned whether he had half the Money. There was
a very Serious Letter written him immediately upon his Revolt by an Unknown
Person, and which he himself Published, and I have here below subjoyned it for
the Readers Information.

CHAP. XVII. An Act for Taxing the Expenses of the Deputies, and for their
Payment.
BY reason of the dear Rates and high Prices of Victuals, the Journeys of the
Deputies are at the Request of diverse Provinces, Taxed at Six Livres a Day for
each of them, which Sum shall be paid them respectively by the Churches out of
the Tax for our Universities, within Two Months after their Return: And in
default of Payment, the Deputies of the Churches who shall not have gotten
their part and portion, shall be deprived of their Consultive Vote in the
Provincial Synod; and Deduction shall be made of his Majesty's Liberality out
of this Sum.

CHAP. XVIII. An Act for calling the next National Synod.
THE Right and Privilege of calling the next National Synod, belongs
according to the Canons of our Discipline, unto the Province of Power
Languedoc: And this Assembly Ordains, that with the good Pleasure of his
Majesty it shall he convoked about Three Years hence in that Order prescribed
by our Discipline, and the Deputies shall meet from all the Provinces of this
Kingdom, at the City of Nismes.

CHAP. XIX. An Act for the validity of all Acts which shall be Delivered and
Signed.
IT is Decreed, That as great Credit shall be given to those Acts which are
signed either by the Moderator or Assessor, or one of the Scribes of this
Assembly, as if they had been Signed and Subscribed by the Moderator, Assessor,
both the Scribes, and all the Deputies conjoyntly.

The Sieurs Dize, Pastor of the Church at Grenoble and De Foissac, Elder in the
Church of Usez, are nominated to wait upon his Majesty, and to deliver the most
humble Thanks of this Assembly to him, together with the Bill of our just
Grievances and Petitions, and to assure his Majesty that we shall continue in
his Majesty's Service with an untainted and inviolable Fidelity.

Done and Decreed at Loudun, this Tenth Day of January, One Thousand, Six
Hundred and Sixty; Signed in the Original by Daille, Moderator. J. M. D'Angle,
Assessor.
Scribes.
J. De Brissac, Pastor. Loride des Galinieres,



CHAP. XX. Commissions Executed.
WHen as the National Synod held at Loudun, November 10, 1659, was broken up;
the Sieurs Guitton and du Bourdieu, went unto Sanmur according as they were
ordered; add Monsieur Guitton made this Speech in the University.

Messieurs,
THE National Synod which is now ended at Loudun, being Informed by the
Complaints of diverse Provinces, that for a long time together, very many and
great Disorders have crowded in among our Students of Divinity, and that to the
great scandal of all Godly Persons, there is a visible defect of Modesty and
Christian Integrity in their Deportments; that Venerable Assembly judged, that
in prudence it was bound to exert its Authority for the retrenching and removal
of them. And having made a Canon, which we shall read unto you immediately, it
did straightly charge us to assemble your whole Body before the Senate of this
University, that we might reinforce it upon your Consciences by our oral
Exhortations and Remonstrances. Give Sirs, your Attention unto the Synodical
Decree.

The Deputies of all our Provinces complaining with one common Voice of the
great Corruptions crept in among Scholars in our Universities, especially among
Students in Divinity, of their wearing Long Hair, of their Clothes after the
new fangled Fashions of the World, of their wide Floating Sleeves, Gloves stuffed
with Silk and Ribbans, that they frequented Taverns, haunted the Company of
Women, walked Abroad with their Swords, that their Style savored more of the
Romance than of God's Holy Word, and many other Vanities and Excesses of this
Nature. The Assembly touched with a most sensible grief for these great
Disorders, and being zealously concerned for the House of God, does most
earnestly exhort the Professors, and all other Governors in our Universities,
as also the Consistories of those Churches in which they are, to exert all
their Care, Power and Authority for the suppression of these Abuses, which
redound to the disgrace of our Religion, and give great Scandal unto Persons
truly fearing God, and open the Floodgates to a deluge of Profaneness, to
break in upon the Sanctuary. And farther, it enjoyneth them to suspend the
Refractory from the Lords Table, and to blot their Names out of the Matricular
Book of Students, and to deprive Proposans of all hopes of ever being admitted
into the Ministerial Office. And all Scholars are most straightly enjoined, and
most especially Students in Divinity, to refrain all those Abuses
beforementioned, and to keep themselves at the greatest distance from such
things as are contrary to Christian Modesty and true Sanctity, which Virtues
should shine forth most conspicuously in their Lives, whom God is calling to be
Pastors in the Church of Christ. And that there may be no sinister Opinions
conceived of them, they be commanded to perfume the House of God betimes, with
the sweet Odours of an Early, Religious Conversation, every way becoming that
Sacred Employment whereunto they be designed, on pain of Exemplary Punishment
in case of Rebellion. Moreover this Assembly Ordains, that those Provincial
Synods to whose care and charge our Universities are entrusted, and in which
they be erected, shall depute every Year some Pastors to inspect and visit
them, and take notice of the Progress made by our Scholars in their Studies of
Philosophy and Divinity, and by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
this Assembly, to redress whatever Disorders shall be particularly notified to,
or observed by them. And to this end, those Visitors commissionated by this
Assembly, shall as soon as possible, go and visit them, to wit, the Sieurs
Guitton and de Bourdieu, Pastors, and Monsieur Des Champs, an Elder, shall
visit the University of Saumur. The Sieurs Chamier and Vignier, Pastors, de
Pontperdu, and Maisonnet Elders, shall visit that of Montauban; the Sieurs de
Boudan, and de Mesjannes, Pastors, and the Sieurs de St. John de Gardonnengues,
and de Pontperdu, Elders, shall visit that of Nismes; and the Sieurs Homel and
January, Pastors, with the Sieurs de Mirabel and Baruel Elders, shall visit
that of Die: And these Visitors shall give notice unto all Students in
Divinity, that they read the Scriptures publicly in the Desk before Sermons in
all our Church-meetings.

You have heard, Sirs, the true and just cause of all those Complaints which
are formed against you in the several Provinces of this Kingdom: You have heard
what the Synod has declared on this occasion, and the Punishments it has
decreed against the Transgressors; I beseech you to make good use of this
important Admonition, sent you by an Assembly, whose Canons and Orders should
be had in singular Veneration by you. Reflect seriously upon your Selves, and
consider a while unto how great a work you be destinated, and weigh well those
means by which you may accomplish, as well as desire it, and I am confident you
will then have no need of any Teachers, and you your selves will judge what is
best befitting your Profession, and overlooking the punishments threatened,
(which belongs unto Servile Spirits, and wholly enslaved to their own Vanity)
you will devote your Selves to the Love and Practice of Virtue, for those very
Reasons upon which it is recommended to you.

You have consecrated your Labors, your Time, your whole Man unto the Service
of the Sovereign Monarch of the whole World, of that Lord, who is adored by all
the Angels. Your own Consciences, Sirs, as well as mine, must needs tell you,
you cannot bring with you too much Humility, nor too much Self-abasement, nor
too much Self-annihilation, nor too much Symplicity and Syncerity when you come
into his Presence (whose Eyes are as a Flaming Fire, and who searches your
Hearts, and tries your Reins,) and offer your selves to be inrol'd in the
number of his Menial Servants and Gospel Ministers.

Our great Lord Redeemer neither loves the World, nor the things of the World.
The design and end of his Celestial Empire, is to make all Men new Creatures,
and he serves himself of the Doctrine of the Cross, that thereby be may Crucify
the World in you, and you unto the World. Sirs, your own Consciences must needs
reproach you, that it is an affront unto the pure Eyes of his Glory, that it
saddens the Spirit of his Holiness, that it must needs irritate his
indignation, when the Sons of the Prophets shall present themselves before him
in the garb and habit of the World, stuffed up, and bigswoln with Vanities,
Pride and Indecencies, and attended with its wonted Excuses, Artifices and
Deportments.

The Mysteries which our most blessed Savior delivers unto his Servants, that
they may dispense them unto his People, retain nothing of Earth, savor nothing
of this lower World; they are all Divine and Heavenly. And you cannot but
acknowledge that it would be a darkning of their Luster, a Profanation of their
Glory, to manage them with impure Hands, to vend and expose them in a strange
Language, and to search rather from the Wisdom of the World, a Buttress to
support their Authority, than from the Eternal Verities of God's Wisdom, and
from the Lights of the Sacred Scriptures. If none but the Spirit of God can
reveal and manifest unto us the things which are given us of God, is it
possible we should make any considerable Progress and Proficiency in this Holy
Study, when we shall intend and prosecute it with the Spirit of the World, and
with Hearts filled and prepossessed with its Vanities?

To be short, Sirs, you be destinated unto an Employment, in which there be no
Advancements made but by Prayer; and Prayers are never heard nor answered by
God farther than they be sincere; and they be not in the least sincere, where
the Hearts are not guided and purified by the Truth of God's Holy Word and
Spirit, who dictateth our Prayers, and quickens and sanctifies our Affections.
Do you imagine Sirs, that God will give you his Holy Spirit (without whom you
are nothing, and can do nothing) unless you ask him of God? And are you then
qualified and fitted for Prayer, a most holy Duty, whenas your Spirit is
stuffed up, occupied and distracted with your Youthful Lusts, and replenished
with the provoking Objects of your Vanity? Or, can you bring unto this Sacred
Ordinance, to this most Religious Exercise, that Attention, Assiduity and
Perseverance, which is needful to the getting of gracious Answers and Returns
from Heaven, when as the better and far greater part and portion of our Time is
wasted and consumed in worldly Companies and Conversations? Certainly, Sirs,
you will find it exceeding difficult to disintangle your selves from those
Impressions you have first received, and to empty your selves of the Vanities
you have imbibed, that you may be at Liberty to reflect and meditate upon God's
Holy Word.

My Dear Brethren, Honor and adorn that Profession whereunto you be devoted,
and it will reflect Beams of Honor again upon you. Consider, Sirs, what is
decent and becoming you, and God will communicate what is needful for you, to
every one of you: Let his Name and Glory be the principal Mark and Butt of your
Condition and Studies, and it will bring down toe choicest and chiefest
Blessings of God upon you. Let your Lives and Conversations be accompanied and
crowned with all the Virtues and Graces of Reformed Christians, with that
Humility which becomes the Servants of God, with that universal Modesty and
Simplicity which God requires from the Ministers of his Sanctuary in their
Lives, Actions, Habits, Language, Behavior, and in your whole Course: And
then, Sirs, this your Sanctification will be most acceptable unto God, and
saving unto your selves; it will bring your Profession into Credit and
Reputation; it will attract upon you the best Blessings of Heaven, it will
render your Studies and Employments prosperous, successful, edifying. The
Churches will be the better for you, and the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus will be
promoted and advanced by you.

In pursuance of an Order of the same Synod Messieurs Guitton and Bourdeau
being at Saumur, to pacify the differences which were between some Members of
that Church and Messieurs Amyraut and D'Huisseau, Monsieur Guitton made this
Speech.

Messieurs and most dear Brethren,
MY most honored Colleagues, together with my self, were ordered by the
Nationol Synod, which was lately held and dissolved at Loudun, to visit this
Church, and to assemble the Heads of its Families into this Consistory, and to
read unto you the Judgment of that venerable Assembly about the Differences
fallen out among you, and to endeavaur by the Grace of God and your Obedience,
your reunion, which if already most happily begun between your two Pastors,
upon whose account you were divided, and to ratify that reconciliation of the
Deputies of both Parties which you had sent unto it. You shall hear their
Judgment, and the Act of our Commissions.

The Sieurs D'Huisseau Pastor, accompanied with the Sieurs de Haumont, Benoist
and Favre did petition for themselves, and on behalf of others, the Heads of
Families in the Church of Saumur, that Monsieur d'Huisseau might be confirmed
in his Ministry unto the said Church. They appealed also from the Decrees of
the first Synod held at Beauge in the Year 1656. and at Saumur in the Year
1657. and at Preuilly in the Year 1658. and in the second held at Beauge in
this year 1659. and from the Orders of the Consistory of Saumur, bearing Date
the 16th and 27th Day of March, 1659. And they complained of all that had been
done in pursuance of those Synodical and Consistorial Decrees.

On the contrary part, the Sieur Amyrald Pastor and Professor of Divanity in
the said Church and University of Saumur, together with the Sieurs Druett and
Royer, as well for themselves, as for the other Deputies of that Consistory,
and of diverse Heads of Families in the said Church, together with the Deputies
of the Province of Anjou, did abet and maintain all the Acts, Ordinances and
Decrees of those Synods and Consistories before-named. They were also heard
declaring the Grounds of their Differences. The Committee also, who were
appointed to examine and verify the Acts of both Parties, brought in their
Report, and at the same time Monsieur de Bois jardin Pastor of the said Church,
had Audience given him by the Assembly: Upon the whole Debate, this National
Synod censured the Consistory of Saumur, for that in stead of blaming the
Deputies of the Assembly of the greater part of the Heads of Families held
without their Order the 17th of September 1655. they did contrariwise receive
them, and at their instant earnest Suit had enjoined the Sieur D'Huisseau to
withdraw himself from the Service of the said Church against his Will, and in
contempt of the Decre of that Synod held at Loudun, 1655. And it does disannul
the Decree of the Synod of Beauge in the Year 1656. which upon this very
account had confirmed the Decrees of the said Consistory: Yet nevertheless it
approves that Order of suspending the Sieurs Niott, Perillau and Piger from
their Office of being Elders in the said Church, which was denounced against
them by that Consistory, and ratified by the said Synod of Beauge. Moreover
this Assembly does disannul that Decree of the Synod of Saumur in the Year
1657. which confirmed another made in the foregoing Synod of Beauge concerning
the Ministry of the said Sieur D'Huisseau, and disapproveth their Act in
censuring the said D'Huisseau for having put in his Appeal to the Synod of
Poictou from the Synod of Beauge, (for which he had very good and sufficient
Grounds, no less than a Canon of the National Synod of Charenton, 1644.) and
for other Causes mentioned in the Acts of the said Synod. And this Assembly
could wish, that the said Synod of Saumur had not approved the Meetings of the
said Consistory in other places than those in which they were accustomed.
Moreover, this Assembly blames that Consistory, for that in stead of doing
right upon the Complaint of those aforesaid Gentlemen (the Sieurs D'Huisseau,
de Haumont, and their Companions) which was occasioned by those Writings of
Monsieur Amirald, that published their Divisions in prejudice of those
Apologies made by the said Synod of Saumur, it censured them, and would oblige
'em to demand Pardon; and upon this account it reverseth the Decree of the
Synod of Previlly in the Year 1658. which had confirmed the Judicial Sentence f
the said Consistory. This Assembly also could have wished, that the said
Consistory, before they had pronounced Sentence of Suspension from the Lord's
Supper against the Sieus Benoist, Niotte, de Haumont, and Bouchereau, for being
the reputed Authors of those injurious Libels written both against them, and
the Synod of Anjou, and the Sieurs Amyrald, Beaujardin, and others, that they
had took a more exact knowledge, whether the forenamed Persons had been fully
convicted. And yet forasmuch as it has since appeared evidently and plainly
unto this Assembly, that they were the real Authors of them, they be by this
Assembly declared worthy of that Censure of Suspension, which was inflicted on
them. However this Assembly being very much grieved at this Division, which
has so long a time troubled the said Church of Saumur, and designing to settle
a good, firm and lading Peace among them for the future, it does take off that
Suspension denounced against the Sieurs Niott and Perilleau, and Mr. Piger
deceased, and takes off that Censure of Suspension from the Lord's Supper
denounced against the Sieurs Niotte, Benoist, de Haumont and Bouchereau: and
notwithstanding that Opposition made against the Calls of the Sieurs Druett,
Pillet, and D'Ortonne unto the Office of Elders, this Assembly does confirm
them in it. And as to what concerns Monsieur d'Huisseau, this Assembly wishes,
that he had neither written nor printed any Letters on the account of these
Differences: However, it disannulleth that Decree past against him by the
Consistory of Saumur, assisted by the Sieurs Guiraud and La Fay Ministers of
the Gospel, the 27th of March last, and dismisseth him with Honor back unto
his Church of Saumur; and for six Months time he is to preach unto it as often
as his Strength will suffer him, which time the Assembly has regulated to be
the Work of one half Week, when it comes unto his turn; that so it may be known
within that time, whether he may be able for the future to perform the ordinary
Duties of his Ministry, as to the full and whole of it, or of a Moiety only.
And whenas that time shall be expired, or if it be before the sitting of the
Provincial Synod of Anjou, he shall then acquaint that Synod fully and plainly
of his Intentions. And in case he shall be then able to exercise his Ministry
either as to the whole, or to a Moiety of it, he shall be at that time
confirmed, and paid his Wages proportionably to the Service which he has
performed during those six Months of Trial: And if that by reason of his bodily
Infirmities, he cannot perform the whole, or one half of his Work in preaching,
he shall be from that time discharged; but nevertheless he shall still be
reputed and taken for Pastor of the said Church, without Wages, according to
his own Proposals, in which he shall have liberty to preach whenever he shall
be requested to it, and may when, and as often as he pleases, assist at
Consistories, and other Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and shall enjoy both his
Votes deliberative and decisive, yet without pretending to any right of
Presidency in those aforesaid Consistories, or of being deputed by the said
Church unto their Provincial Synods. This Assembly censureth also the Sieur
Niotte and others, who shrouded themselves under the Secular Jurisdiction of
the Civil Magistrate, in Contempt of the Canons of our Discipline, and for
taking the whole Consistory for their adverse Party, that so they might be
exempted from its Jurisdiction, and for presenting an Act highly injurious to
the said Consistory. Moreover, this Assembly does condemn and censure with the
greatest Severity all those Writings and Prints, which have been made and
published by both Parties, as most scandalous and injurious, and particularly a
Letter styled Du Provincial, stuffed with diverse Slanders, not only against
private Persons, but also against the Provincial Synods and Consistory of the
said City: And the last Synod of Beauge is very much blamed for permitting the
Impression and Publication of a Book Entitled, Les Pieces Authentiques. And
this Assembly confirms the Judgment of the Synod of Saumur* in what concerns
the Sieur de Beaujardin, exhorting all Parties to lay by all their Resentments
one against the other upon the score of those injurious Words and Writings, and
to declare that they have no Intention in the least of harboring them any
more, nor of persisting in them; but that, contrariwise, they do acknowledge
one another for Persons of Integrity and Honor, and exempted from all Blame or
Reproach; and in this Quality they shall give each other the Hand of
Reconciliation. And to prevent all Differences for the future, the Provincial
Synod of Anjou is enjoined to proceed against the Transgressors according to
the rigor of our Church Discipline, even to the last Censures: And in case an
Appeal should be entered, the Provincial Synod of Britain shall take Cognizance
thereof, and pass Judgment in it, which shall hold good till the meeting of the
next National Synod.

And as for the Differences in the University of Saumur, this Assembly gives
full Liberty unto the said University of choosing its Professors in Divinity,
proceeding therein according to its ancient Canons; and Monsieur Royer, Doctor
of Physic, is confirmed in his Office of Counselor to the said University;
and the Sieur Doul in that of Professor of Eloquence, without suffering the
said Nomination to be made a Precedent, and on this condition, that the said
Professor Doul do every three Months keep a Public Act. And this Assembly has
likewise approved and ratified that Canon of Agreement betwixt the Consistory
and the said University, for taking Cognizance of all Affairs depending upon
both those Assemblies. And that this present Decree may be put in Execution,
the Sieurs Guitton and de Bourdieu Pastors, and the Sieur des Champs an Elder,
are deputed to pass over unto Saumur, and to visit the said Church, which is
ordered to defray their Expenses.

Now, Sirs, let me add what was given me in charge from this Holy Synod, to
deliver to you. Ton cannot be ignorant of what the Faithful in all Ages have
generally owned and confessed, and which the Church of God has always sung to
its Consolation, that there is nothing better, nothing more pleasant, nothing
more desirable for your selves, nothing more advantageous for the Interest of
God, than to see Peace on Earth in the midst of its horrible Confusions, than,
whilst the Children of Rebellion, who are possessed by the Devil, do by their
turbulent and intolerable Passions turn things upside down, to see the poor
Church of God in Peace, Zion a quiet Habitation, all the Faithful united, the
whole Household of Faith of one Heart, having the same Love, enjoying the same
Hope, and wholly busied and taken up in the Works of their common and holy
Calling: It Is by this that God their Heavenly Father is most especially
glorified. This Peace is not of this World, nor sustained by carnal Interests,
which may either by time be abolished, or by corrupt Affections changed. This
is that Peace of God, which his well-beloved Son our Lord Redeemer Christ Jesus
has left as a Legacy unto us, and which is nourished and supported by that
precious Blood, which he shed for us, and it shed abroad in our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost, who is given unto us, of which the World shall never deprive us, as
long as we cherish and value it. When once this Peace dwells and rules
abundantly in our Hearts, whenas our Holy Communion is strengthened by it,
whenas it leaves Characters and Marks of its Glory upon us, and our Souls taste
its Sweetness, then is Heaven above us reconciled with us, then is the
Sanctuary of our Hope opened to us, then are the Bowels of God's Compassions
yearning on us, then is his Jealousy excited for us, and then shall we obtain
the most glorious Deliverances, a Troop, an Heap, a Multitude of Divine
Benedictions.

Sirs, I never think of this Heavenly Blessing, but that my Head is Waters, and
mine Eyes Fountains of Tears, and mourn bitterly for those Sad Divisions which
have so long time reigned among you. These are horrible Scandals, and noised
abroad in the whole Kingdom. By these Breaches has Satan the Prince of this
World got admission into your Hearts; by these breaches is your Faith exposed
to extreme danger, and I tremble at the Indignation of the God of Peace against
you. For when he sees his Peace despised, his Church distracted and
dismembered, and that Service owed him by your Consciences altered and abated,
and the profession of the Truth exposed to the Laughter and Scorn of his
Adversaries, he has too just cause of being exasperated against you, and to
correct you with his Severest Judgments.

This Gracious God has forborne you a long time, he has supported with
wonderful Patience and Indulgence your grievous Disorders, he has
compassionated your Infirmities, he would rather remove them by the sweetness
of his Grace, than cut you off by the Sword of his just Vengeance. He assembled
when you least hoped it, even at your Doors, the Deputies of all the Provinces
of this Kingdom, who having as to your Concerns none other Interests than that
of your Salvation, did, according to that Authority which God has given them
over your Consciences, put a period unto your differences, and compose them
with singular Equity, in order to your Peace.

When I consider, Sirs, what I was formerly in this City and Academy, the least
among you in all respects, instructed by them who are your Instructors, that
profound respect which I have ever conserved in my Heart for you, causes me to
fear and tremble whilst I am speaking to you. For my own part, I had much
rather that this important Commission had fallen into any other Hands than
mine, that it might have been discharged by a Person much more worthy of your
esteem and commendation; but the most wise God has disposed otherwise by the
Suffrages of his Servants; and it is his Call by them that incourageth me to
execute it. That great deference which I know you have for our
Church Discipline, this holy Order set up by God, himself in the midst of us,
in his own House, raises my Hopes, that you will not so much reflect upon the
Messenger that speaks unto you in Earth, as upon his Message now brought unto
you from God, who is in Heaven, and who does great things and mavelous among
his Saints by the weakest Instruments.

I beseech you, most Honored and Dear Brethren, for the sake of our common
Savior, that you would with Heart and Soul accept of that Peace which is now
by God himself exhibited and offered to you. Forget all past matters, consider
what is to come, look not behind you, but before you; you are entered into a new
World, open the Doors of your Hearts to our Lord Jesus, who demands it by my
Mouth; suffer this King of Glory to set up the Standard of his Cross in your
Souls, to pour into them the Consolations of his Love: Let him crucify your
Old Man, and all his Actions; let him make your many Hearts to be but one, all
your Souls but one Soul, that so he may live in you all; and as you live by
him, so you may live for him. Yon stand obliged unto this by his Grace; the
Commands of God demand it of you: The example of your Rverend Pastors, is a
powerful motive to engage you to it. Be you Followers of them in Love; imitate
that Charity which they have first Sworn in the presence of Christ Jesus.
Consider them as Persons in the same Office, employed in the same work, and pay
an equal Respect unto them. Encourage their Hearts, and strengthen their Hands
in the Service of God, and of your Souls, by your Affectionate and orderly
Carriage and Obedience. Pray for them as they do for you: Love them as they
love you: Repay their Love unto them with Interest: Evidence yours unto them by
all kind of good Offices; they are studious to approve themselves unto you by
their Zeal and Labors for you. And if you practice these Counsels, all the
Churches will be filled with joy, you will be blessed by all the Children of
God; the Adversary will be confounded, and the God of Peace will dwell among
you, will protect you under the shadow of his Wings; he will follow you in your
goings out and comings in, all and every one of you in general and particular,
with his chiefest and choicest Benedictions.

My Reverend Colleagues here present, do concur with me in these Prayers; and
what my weakness could not, their more excellent Gifts will contribute most
effectually on this occasion to promote your Peace.

CHAP. XXI. A Letter written by an Unknown Person, to Mr. Martin, upon his
Apostasy from the Reformed Religion.
Friend,
IT is noised abroad, and I hear it from all parts, that thou have been at
Tours, and renounced the true Religion, and took up that of the Romanists for
the Sum of Eight Hundred Livres, whereof thou have already received Four, and
that thou bear the Arms, and wearest the mark of the Beast, and have sworn
thy self a Champion against all his Enemies. What have thou done Man? What is
the Party thou have abandonned? What Complaints can thou form against them?
Of what Crimes will thou accuse them? Is it true that thou have left us? Can
thou think on what thou have done without terror and horror? Thou have
quitted the Party of God; thou have forsaken his Inheritance; thou art gone out
of his way, the way of Life. The bare knowledge of this must cause the Sinner
to turn Quaker, for it is his utter ruin, his total destruction. Adam had no
sooner sinned, but he was struck with horror and confusion; but thou declarest
thy self as the shameless Whoremongers, who boast impudently of their Sin, and
hold up their Heads audaciously when they come out of the Stews. Saint Peter
having denied his Master, was confounded, muffled his Face, went out and wept
bitterly; but thou, as I am informed, and it touches me to the quick, art more
Joyous than ever, the World can read an extraordinary Mirth and Gayety in thy
Countenance.

Friend, do not take any thing amiss that I shall tell thee; for I can swear
it, that what I do, it is, if possible to regain and save thee. Thou know it
was a Judas who betrayed the Son of God, his Lord and Master, and he betrayed
him for Thirty Pieces of Silver: No sooner had he received the Money, but he
betrayed his Master; yet he confessed his Treason. I have, says he, betrayed
Innocent Blood; yea, and he returns the Money: Take it, says he, take this
accursed Thing from me, it is the price of Blood, of the Blood of the Son of
God. But it was too late; for thou very well know, that the Miserable Wretch
tortured with the furies of his Conscience, utterly despairing of Mercy, went
and Hanged himself. Now inasmuch as thou have been Partner with him in his
Treason, though thou have betrayed thy Master for a greater Sum than Judas did,
yet I beseech thee be not Partner with him in his Despair: But go and return
thy Money, and throw it at their Feet who have seduced thee. Tell them, I have
sinned, I have betrayed my Savior, I have left the way of Eternal Life, but I
do now from my very Soul utterly renounce these matters, I abhor this my Sin, O
look you unto it! and then come weeping and mourning for thy Sin, and give
glory unto God in his House, in his holy Temple, and resolve with David, that
thou will dwell in it for ever more. For the God of Glory, is a God of Mercy,
and he will upon thy sincere Repentance, and humble ardent Prayers, extend his
Mercy to thee. Age igitur poenitentiam, and prima opera fac. I pray thee, Dear
Friend, have compassion upon thy self, pity thy precious Soul; never be ashamed
of Repentance, since thou wast never ashamed of Sin. That Royal Prophet David is
a fair Copy for thee to write after, a most excellent example every way worthy
thy imitation: For having fallen shamefully, he was not ashamed to confess it
unto God, nor to beg his Pardon; and rich Grace restored him. Tell God, I have
sinned; acknowledge thine Offense; own it to him with Compunction and
Confusion, with Remorse and Godly Sorrow, and thou shall be forgiven. It Is true
indeed, thy Crime is heinous, thou have left the Fountain of Living Waters, to
hew out unto thee Cisterns, yea, broken Cisterns that can hold no Waters. Thou
have quitted God, that thou may follow Men; thou have quitted Life to embrace
Death. Thou have falsified thy Promises, and broken that Allegiance which thou
had sworn in the most solemn manner unto God; thou have violated that Sacred
Vow which thou have made to the God and Father of Spirits. Yet let not this
fright thee into Despair; for thou can not but know (unless thou have
forgoten it) that where Sin abounds, there the Grace of God does much more
abound; for he superabounds in loving-kindnesses and multitudes of tender
Mercies. Consider then from whence thou art fallen, be Zealous and Repent. Thou
have not kept the word of Gods Patience, and therefore he has not kept, but
left thee in the Hour of Temptation, which comes upon the Inhabiters of this
Earth to try them. Thou have forsaken the true Riches, to take up with those
that perish: Thou know not thy own Poverty and Misery; Time has not as yet
discovered it unto thee. I counsel thee, my dear Friend, to buy of the Heir of
all things, Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may be rich. Thou have
forsaken the glorious Son of Righteousness, who, thou know, has healing in
his Wings: Thus have thou lost both Health, Sight and Sense. The Lord quicken
thee. When the Sun sets, the Night draws on apace, Darkness deprives us of
Light. The Decays of thy Health are Evidences of the groowth of thy Disease;
one follows ordinarily the other, unless Death intervene: I speak this as to
temporal matters. But as to spiritual, he that is blind abides so; and he that
has lost his Health, can never recover it without Sovereign Mercy, unless the
great Physician do open his Eyes, do anoint them with his Heavenly Collyrium
that he may see and do purge away his Sins, that he may recover his former
Health. Consider then what thou once wast, and from whence thou art fallen; and
O my dear Friend, Repent, Repent, or else God will come unto thee in his Wrath,
and thy last Estate will be worse than thy first, and my Affliction for thine
everlasting Perdition greater. O Friend, rouse up thy drowsy Soul, and from the
bottom of thy Heart, and from the depths of that Dungeon into which thou art
fallen, cry aloud unto him who has the Keys of Death and Hell for Mercy; cry
aloud unto him, for there is yet some hope: Hope yet in God, for he that is
hopeless is helpless. Thou need Divine Wisdom, ask it of God; who gives
liberally and upbraideth none. Call upon him, and he will redeem thee, he will
restore thee, and thou shall refresh my Bowels. Though Simoniacal Persons who
believe the Gift of God may be had for Gold and Silver, will perish they and
their Moneys together; yet this great Redeemer who bought his Inheritance
neither with Silver nor Gold, nor precious Stones, but with his own most
precious Blood, has no mind to lose thee; he would not have thee to perish
with thy Money. Thou know he has not grudged thee any thing, he denies thee
nothing, he has given his dearest Heart Blood for thee. This is an Hour of
Grace, a Season of Mercy, an opportunity wherein God may be found: The Cock
Crows, run out of the High Priest's Hall; flee out of Babylon and weep
bitterly: Tarry not a Moment longer in it. Cry out mightily unto God, I have
sinned, Lord, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee. Say unto thy Soul,
O my Soul, it is the Lord who has redeemed thee; it is the Lord who has
redeemed thee, and he will pluck thy Feet out of the Snare; he will draw thee
out of the horrible Pit, out of the Miry Clay; even he will redeem thee from
thine Iniquity. Thou know that it is natural for Man to sin, and that he
has shut up all under unbelief, under the guilt of their Rebellions, that he
might have Mercy upon all. Thou art included in the number of this All, thou
art not excepted. Call then upon God humbly and penitently, fervently and
fiducially, and thou may yet obtain a Pardon. Do not harden thy self in thy
sin. Remember the Words of David, Abyssus abyssum vocat, the abyss of thine
Obdurateness, will plunge thee into the bottomless abyss of Destruction, Pray
then unto God with thine whole heart, that he would pour the Oil of his Grace
upon thy smoking weik: Cry unto him earnestly and importunately, and tell him,
Lord, I will give thee no rest Night nor Day, 'till thou have pardoned my great
Iniquity. Thou know that the Kingdom of Heaven is taken by Violence, and
that the Violent do take it by force Force thy Soul then to cry out unto God
for Mercy. Cry daily, cry continually, cry without intermission, without
interruption, and God will be merciful. But my Friend, do not address thy
Orisons and Devotions to He or She Saints; that is bootless, that is
unprofitable. The Scriptures of truth tell us, those Divinely inspired Writings
assure us, yea, and the Ancients also, that the Dead know not the things which
are done here below, but God only, who as thou well know, does pardon Sins
for his own Names Sake. Are thy Sins as red as Scarlet? know it, if thou do
not yet know it, that if thou call upon him, he will wash thee and cleanse
thee, and thou shall be as white as Wool. But and if thou neglect this duty,
this thy bounden duty, thy Sins shall remain in thee, thy Guilt and Filth shall
abide upon thee. For he has spoken it, That he who is Filthy, shall be Filthy
still; and because thou would not be purged, thine Iniquities shall never be
purged. O then do not live in thy Sin one moment longer, since God is well
pleased with Repenting Sinners, Say as David, Lord, I have gone astray like a
lost Sheep: O seek thy Servant, and bring me back again unto thy Fold, with the
Fourscore and Nineteen Just Persons. My Friend, O my dear Friend, I beseech
thee come out of thy Spiritual Sodom. Do not look behind thee, lest thou
shoul'st die there. Be grieved as David, that thou have sojourned in Mesech,
and dwelt so long in the Tents of Kedar. Thou know that without Christ thou
can do nothing. Never object unto me, that it is in vain for thee now to
return; having made Shipwreck of thy Faith, thou can be no longer a Minister.
It Is true, thou have none other Calling whereby to subsist, to provide a
Livelihood for thy self and Family; and among the Papists, whose Party thou
have espoused, thou may possibly meet with Employment because they have
promised thee, and it may be as to this World an Employment much more
advantageous and Beneficial. But may not thou be cheated? I am very much
mistaken, if thou have not had already an Earnest of their Fraudulent dealing
with thee. Many Persons, who like thee have left the Truth to be of their
Religion, being enticed with a multitude of Golden Promises, can assure thee
from their sorrowful experience, how much they have been gulled and choused by
them But, my dear Friend, overlook these matters, and lay by all human
Considerations, and say in this case, as the Father of Believers, Jehovah
Jireh, the Lord will provide. Besides, who ever saw the righteous forsaken, or
his Seed begging Bread? Yea, contrariwise, they have been ever Lenders. Thy
Soul, my Friend, is a most precious Jewel of inestimable Value. If thou losest
it, who can redeem it? What Ransom will thou give unto God for it? Get it in a
state of Salvation. I say again, see that it be in a state of Salvation. Fear
not them who can kill the Body, but rather fear that God, who can cast both
Soul and Body into Hell Fire for evermore. Thou know, Friend, that the
Church is God's Garden, that God himself planted it, and that every Plant which
is not of his planting, shall be grubbed up by the Roots. This Consideration
should make thee tremble, thou have plucked thy self up, and cast thy self out
of this Garden. I advise thee, that before thou have taken root elsewhere, thou
entreat the Keeper of the Garden to new set thee, that thou may bring forth
better Fruits hereafter than heretofore; that he would dress thee with his own
Hand, that he would water thee with the Dews and Showers of his Grace, warm and
quicken thee with the Eye and Beams of his Love. Then I shall rejoice at thy
Recovery, and glorify God for his singular Mercies to thee. Thou know also,
that he who having been once enlightened, and has tasted of the Heavenly Gift,
if he shall fall away, 'twill be impossible for him to be renewed unto
Repentance. O! Labor hard that thou may be restored. Seek God whilst he may
be found. Or else, there will a time come when thou shall cry, Lord! Lord! and
he will not hear thee, but as a Worker of Iniquity thou shall be cast off. Tug
hard then at the Oar of Prayer, chasten thy proud Flesh with Fasting, give Alms
of thy Substance unto the Poor, and say unto God, Convert me, Lord! and I shall
be converted. Rend thy Heart to pieces before it grow callous, left God should
swear in his Wrath, that thou shall never enter into his Rest. The Sin against
the Holy Ghost is never pardoned, neither in this World, nor in that to come.
Repent then, and be not obstinate; do not harden thy self against these wholesome
Counsels of thy most Faithful Friend. Be zealous and believe in God. For
whosoever believes in him shall never be ashamed, shall never be confounded.
Call upon him, not upon He or She Saints, but upon the Holy Name of Jesus, and
thou shall be saved. Come, my Friend, consider what thou have done. Thou are
got out of God's Ark, and the Deluge is about thee. Where will thou pitch the
Sole of thy Foot? Go then as the Dove, and return unto thy place. Salvation is
not to be had any where else. Thou know it as well as I. Whether art thou
gone? Where art thou a going? Do not thou know, that Jesus Christ only has
the Words of Eternal Life? Think thou to find it any where else? Why Man! He
only is the Way, the Truth and the Life. Thou have changed thy Riligion, thou
have quitted thy Party, thou have abandoned thy Flock. Good God, what have thou
done? O Friend, I forbear to speak my Fears. But once again, What have thou
done? Thou have quitted the Rich Pearl, with the Cock in the Fable, for a Grain
of Wheat. See from whence thou art fallen, and consider I beseech thee, Dear
Friend, what thou have gotten by thy Fall. Thou embracest a Religion patched up
of Human Ceremonies: Thou know it well, a Religion which is an Hodge-podg of
Jewish and Pagan Ceremonies blended together. Thou have thrown thy self into
its Arms, thou lie in its Bosom, thou wearest its Livery, and art marked with
its Marks. And thou very well know why and wherefore. Thou wast remiss in
thy Duty. Thou wast not paid thy Sallary. This was thy frequent Complaint.
Thou idle and slothful Servant, ought thou to forsake thy Lord's Service and
his Flock? Thou wast not serious enough, nor caredst to take pains in thy
Calling. Instead of studying, and giving thy self to reading, thou hauntedst
wicked Companies, which thou know corrupt good Manners; and being such an
one thy self, thou could not choose better. Birds of a Feather will Flock
together. More I might say, but I spare thee. Well, Man, what have thou done?
Consider, I beseech thee, and I adjure thee to it by the Bowels of our ancient
Friendship, that it is the true Religion which thou have forsaken, and that only
in which Salvation is to be had, and that the very Church of Rome her self
believes all the Articles that the Reformed Church believes. And I can speak
it, and thou know it as well as I, that in case she were divested of all her
Jewish Ceremonies, and Human Inventions, and of Men's Traditions which are set
up in the room of God's Word, the Romish Religion would be no longer Roman, but
Reformed. What then have thou done? Thou have took the Shadow for the
Substance, the Ceremonies for the Truth. I protest unto thee upon my Soul, that
thou art out of the way. Friend, Give me thy Hand, and I will once more set
thee in the right way, and thou shall taste how gracious the Lord is to them
that fear him, that he is ready to forgive, most willing to show Mercy, and if
thou have recourse unto him by Prayers and Supplications in the Name and Merits
of his Dear Son, thou shall certainly obtain the Remission of thy Sins through his
Name. My Friend, thou have joined thy self to the Communion of Idols, and art a
Partner with Idolaters, and do thou think in their Communion to work out thy
Salvation? Be not deceived. God will not be mocked. No Idolaters shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Ah! do not thou know, that our Religion which
thou have quitted gives the Glory of Man's Salvation unto the Christ of God
only? That it ascribes the Salvation of Believers to the Lord Jesus only? That
it preaches nothing else, but what the Elect Apostle of the Gentiles preached,
even Jesus Christ, and him Crucified? That it puts Confidence in none but
God? And as David, seeks for none in Heaven but God? That it adoreth no
Creature whatsoever, but adoreth God only, Father, Son and Spirit, Three
Persons in one God? That it invocateth God only, because besides him there
never was, nor never will be, any that can help, save and deliver? That with
the blessed Virgin, she calls him her God and her Savior? That it teaches
not the Doctrine of Devils, nor forbids Marriage, nor to obstain from Meats,
which God has created, to be used by the Faithful, and those who have not
known the Truth, with Thanksgiving? That it is not Sacrilegious to rob the
People of the Cup, against the express Commandment of God? That it reaches God
to be a Spirit, and that such as worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth? That it teaches to fear God, and to honor the King (whom may the Lord
of his Mercy long preserve?) To sanctify the day of Rest, but not Festivals,
which are only Men's Inventions? To keep Promise and Covenant, tho to a Man's
Loss and Hurt? Rather to serve God than Men? And forasmuch as God has spoken
the Word, that he will not give his Glory unto another, nor his Praise unto
Graven Images, it teaches all to ascribe Glory unto God only, and to give him
the Thanks of all our Mercies, because he is the sole Author and Donour of
them. Our Religion does not take away any of God's Commandments, nor suffers
any Images to be made, nor Pictures to be hung up, that they should be served
and adored. A Religion neither adds to, nor takes any thing from the Holy
Word of God; for it well knows, that such as do so, the Plagues written in that
Word shall be inflicted on them, and their Names shall be blotted out of the
Book of Life. It teaches with St. Paul, that the Divine Scriptures can make us
wise unto Salvation; and with St. John, that the Blood of Jesus cleanses us
from all Sin; and that there is none other Purgatory for our Sins than Christ's
Blood. Time would fail me, and I should but waste it, if I told thee, That the
Death of the Son of God is our Life, his Wounds our Health, and that there is
none other Sacrifice for Sin, than that one only, and never to be repeated
Sacrifice of his Death.

Friend, our Religion teaches, that by this Sacrifice we have the Remission of
all our Sins, and that where the Remission of Sins is, there is no more
Oblation for Sin, and therefore no Mass. Take heed unto thy self, Friend; for
if thou sinnest wilfully after Admonition, after that thou have received the
knowledge of the Truth, know of a Truth, that there is no more Sacrifice for
Sins. Do not then count the Blood of the Covenant a profane thing, for thou
know, that it is a most fearful thing to fall into the Hands of an incensed
God. Be zealous therefore and Repent. In short, thou know that all the
Doctrins of our Religion are contained in the Holy Scriptures, and yet thou
have quitted it. What have thou done? Thou art returned unto Babylon, from
which God has brought thee forth in the Loins of thy Fathers, that thou
might not participate in her Sins, nor in her Plagues. Thou have returned
with the Dog unto thy Vomit, and with the Sow that was washed, to wallow in the
Mire. My Friend, my Bowels are troubled for thee. Believe, and follow my
Counsel. Awake, and repent; rouse up thy self out of thy Spiritual Lethargy.
Awake then, and give Glory unto God, the God of Heaven and Earth, and he will
raise thee up again, tho thou art fallen. Call upon him, for who knows but
that he may have Compassion on thee? He has not forsaken thee, but thou have
forsaken him, and thou can tell in what place thou shookst Hands with him.
Don't consult with Flesh and Blood, go, seek, and find him out in the beginning
of thy Sin, that yet he may recover thee. His Gifts and Callings are without
Repentance. Thou have quitted the Pastoral Office to be a wandering Sheep, a
Sheep wandering after the Voice of a Stranger.

However, thou know what the great Shepherd says by St. John on this
occasion; make use of it to thy best advantage, and if thou can not be a
Pastor, yet at least become a Sheep of Christ's Fold. In the mean while, my
dear Friend, I will humbly beseech God from the bottom of my Soul, and with all
my Heart, that he would recover thee from this thy most dangerous Malady by
some proper and most effectual Remedy. For I know him by good Experience to be
the best Physician, and that he can purge out of thee all thine Errors, all
Humane Considerations, and corroborate the good infeebled in thee through the
perverseness of the former, that he can again enlighten thee, ingraft thee into
Christ, tho thou have broken thy self off from him, and give Rest unto thy Soul
in the Bosom of the Church Militant, that so in the Church Triumphant thou
may enjoy those everlasting Blessings, which he has prepared for them, who
persevere unto the end. And I, being filled with Joy at thy Recovery, will take
thee by the Hand, and we will go together into the House of our God, there to
render him, according to our poor Abilities, that Sacrifice of Thanksgiving,
which is his Due, and our Duty. Now then under this Quality, and with this
Hope, I subscribe my self,

Dear Friend, Excuse, if my Superscription do omit these Titles, which once
thou had; and I am ignorant of what thou now bear. Thy Humble Servant,
Aid de Dieu. Help of God.

A Monsieur, Monsieur Martin, at his House in Montoire.

CHAP. XXII. Remarks upon the Deputies.
1. MR. Boschart, Pastor of the Church of Caen, a Man of vast Learning, and
reputed one of the most able Scholars in all France. His Hierozoicon and Phaleg
proclaim his Worth to the whole World. Christina Queen of Sweedland invited him
into that Kingdom, and he was for some time a Professor in the University there.

2. Peter de la Musse. Here is a Marquess of that Name in London, a faithful
Confessor for Christ, having forsaken his Estate, are embraced the Cross,
rather than part with his Religion, and his God, and I think the same Deputy.

3. Monsieur Mussard, Minister in the Church of Lions, but a Native of Geneva,
he married Mr. Beza's Granchild. By a Trick of the Jesuits, which he told me,
he was outed of the Church of Lions. The Cardinal of Villeroy Archbishop of
that City and Diocese, had an esteem and value for him: For he was a Person of
great Worth, an excellent Scholar, and a most eloquent Preacher. The French
Church of London invited him over to their Service, and he died in the Pastoral
Office of it. There be Printed of his Works a Volume of Sermons in French, in
Quarto. 2. Historia Deorum satidicorum, 4 to. And 3. Les Conformites des
Ceremonies Modernes avec les anciennes. His Modesty made him not put his Name
to his Works. But he himself told me he was the Author of them. Les Conformites
does speak English; for I have seen the Translation in a Booksellers Shop.

4. Monsieur de Bourdieu, Pastor of Montpellier, this reverend and ancient
Servant of the Lord Jesus resides in London, and Preaches tho 95 Years old.

5. Monsieur Guitton, Pastor of the Church of Sion, fled here upon the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes into England, and was some time in London;
but since for want of Employment left the Kingdom, and retired, I think, into
the Netherlands.

6. Monsieur Amyraud, the Famous Professor of Saumur. His Learned Writings are
well known. I shall say more of him, God willing, in my Icones.

7. Monsieur Daille, Pastor of the Church of Paris. A most Learned and Eloquent
Preacher. My Worthy and Reverend Friend Mr. Soreton, an eminent Nonconformist
Minister in Devon, translated his Commentary upon the Colossians into English.
His Book of the Right Use of the Fathers, was translated into English, and
highly valued. He writ against Brachet Sieur de la Millitiere, a Tool of
Richlieu's to compound and reconcile, if possible, the Two Religions.
Millitiere at last turned Apostate. He has a most accurate Treatise, De
Imaginibus Apology des Eglises Reformees, and a great many other things, of
which and him I shall give an Account at large in my Icones.

8. Monsieur Homel, Pastor of the Church of Sojon, a most pious and zealous
Preacher; he died a constant and Faithful Martyr. His Execution was most
barbarous, being broken upon the Wheel, and left under Torments for several
Hours, before his Inhuman Persecutors would give him the Coup de Grace, as they
call it, the last Blow upon the Breast, to put an end to his Torments. But God
filled him under his greatest Sufferings with the Consolations of his Spirit. I
have writ a larger Narrative of his Martyrdom, and shall insert it into the
Life of the Great Chamier; for a Great Grandson of the Famous Chamier suffered
about the same time, unless my memory fail, me, with him.

FINIS

