The DECLAMATIONS OF Quintilian, BEING AN EXERCITATION or PRAXIS Upon his XII.
Books, CONCERNING The Institution of an Orator.

Translated (from the Oxford Theater Edition) into English, by a Learned and
Ingenious Hand.

With the Approbation of several Eminent Schoolmasters in the City of London.

Whose Testimonies follow in the next Page.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for John Tailor at the Globe at the West End of St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

Imprimatur,

Joh. Battely Rmo. P. D^ Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aedibus Lambeth. Oct. 31. 1685.
Worthy Sir,
ACcording to your desire, I have acquainted my self with your Tran^ation of
Quintilians Declamations; It Is (...) piece that is worthy of the Public, and
^ou have done it right, who have reached ^he sense, Design and Acumen of the
Orator, whereby some Life will be put into the at^entive English Reader, which
may justly ^ive a price to the Book, in the opinion of

Sir, Your Servant John Goad.

Worthy Sir,
(...) Have always admired Quintilian in his own Language, and I do not dislike
him (...) yours: Your Translation appears to be ve^^ just, and answers, in all
its proportions, ^^e great Original, from whence you drew

I am Your Humble Servant John Hartcliffe.

Worthy Sir,
I Have, with a great deal of delight and satisfaction, read over your
Translation of the first of Quintilians Orations; and if a judgment may be made
of the goodness of the others by the excellence of this, I make no question,
but your labor in this kind will prove very useful to a great many, and
acceptable to all. For since Translations are now come to be so much in vogue,
and received with a general satisfaction, I know no reason, why this of yours
should not lay claim to, as it justly deserves, a general acceptance and kind
entertainment: Especially since it is don with so much Judgment, and so fully
and clearly expresses the sense of the Author,

I am Sir, Your humble Servant, Tho. Walker.

Good Sir,
AS for other Kindnesses, so particularly I thank you for the Perusal of your
Translation of Quintilians Orations: I must confess, I always took Quintilian
for the best of the Roman Orators; and I am glad, that he can be read in our
Mother tongue; and with more clearness, than in his own Native Language: Many
places in the Latin seem difficult, which you have rendered plain: In my
opinion, you would do well to pleasure those, that are not acquainted with the
Latin Tongue, with more Translations of yours:

Sir, I am, Your affectionate and Humble Servant. William Bolton.

To the Ingenious and Hopeful Young Gentlemen, Samuel Rolt Esquire and Mr. Thomas
Rolt Sons of the deservedly Honored, the Lady Rolt the Younger, of Milton
Erneys in the County of Bedford.
Gentlemen,
SInce the Dedication of Books is so much in fashion, you may justly claim this
of mine; For the Ichnography of this Translation was drawn by me, at the sweet
and delightful Habitation of your Virtuous Mother, in Milton aforesaid, while
she was pleased to make use of me to preside over your Educations for a season,
till better Help could be procured: I presume therefore to prefix your Names
before this Tract; partly out of Gratitude to your most Worthy Mother; and
partly too, as an acknowledgment of your personal Respects to me; and also, as
farther Encouragement to your studies, wherein I hope and believe you have
already made so great a Progress.

Yours In all Offices of Respect and Service. John War.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Reader.
COnsidering that many Classick Latin Authors have been made English by several
Ingenious Persons; Authors, both Historical, as Plutarch, Tacitus, Suetonius,
etc. And also Ethical and Philological, as Tullies Offices, Seneca's works,
Erasmus Colloquies; and several others: Encouraged by such Great Examples, I
have spent some time in Translating XIX of the Declamations of Quintilian,
Printed apart in Latin at the Theater in Oxford, for the use of Schools. The
design then being to gratify those, who do yet militare sub ferula, I hope the
Great Masters of Eloquence will not only hold me excused, but also be my
Compurgators, if I have not Paraphrased or made any Consderable descants on
them, but rendered them so, as to make them intelligible to the meanest
Capacities; only the Latin is so full, and concise too, that it requires some
intersertions here and there, and also a few marginal notes, for the clearing
of the sense.

As for the Author of them M. Fab. Quintilianus, he was a great Master of
Eloquence in the Roman State, and justly deserves that Elogy given him by the
Poet Martial,

The Glory of the Roman Gown. And accordingly he had several Youths committed
to his Education and Care: To those, who were of the Supreme Class, and had
attained to some ripeness of reason and understanding, he was wont to propound
Subjects, fictitious or real, for them to exercise their Wits upon, Pro and
Con, in vocal Orations; which being done, he selected the most nervous
Arguments, and florid Expressions out of all their Speeches, which he
afterward licked over into one terse and polite Discourse, here called a
Declamation. I mention this, as an Encouragement to the Ingenious to peruse
these Orations, in regard they are the Cream and Product of the most promising
Wits, culled out and polished by the Second hand of the Master. For by reading
these Exercitations in Scholis Trivialibus, the Wits of Youth may be excited
and made more capable to manage Logical Exercises, when transplanted thence to
the University; such Velitations and Traverses, as these, whetting their
Inventions, and Edging their Spirits for greater Conflicts, both in the
Physical and also the Theological Schools.

And besides, I was further encouraged to the Translation of this Piece,
because some of our English Schools, even of the very First Magnitude, do not
disdain to suffer their Youth sometimes, to pronounce vocal Orations in cur
Mother Tongue: Which Practice, why may it not be justified, yea commended
rather, in them, in regard it tends to the polishing of our Youth in our own,
as well as the other parts of their Discipline do accomplish them in the Latin
and other Learned Languages.

One favor I desire of the Courteous Reader, that if, in all passages, I have
not had the happy Genius to arrive at the Authors meaning, he would please to
impute it to his Obscurity, whose sense sometimes lies so deep, not only at the
Bottom, (to speak allusively) but even in the very Sand below it, that it is
very hard to fish it out.

Whereupon being Conscious to myself, both of my own Tenuity, and also of the
Difficulty of this Author, I obtained the Favor of some Great and Eminent The
Masters of Merchant-Taylors, and of the Charterhouse Schools.
Orators, to give me their Censure; and, as far as they thought fit, their
Revisals and Approbations: Whose Testimonies, as they were directed in Letters
to myself, at the Booksellers desire, who undertakes the Impression, are
Printed herewith verbatim.

J. W.

THE ORDER AND NUMBER Of the SEVERAL DECLAMATIONS.
DECLAMATION. I. PAries Palmatus, or, The wall all-bloody with the Track of an
Hand. Page 1, 2. For the Blind Son against his Stepmother. DECLAMATION II.
Coecus pro Limine, or, The Blind Son standing at his Chamber Door. Page 25, 26,
27. For the Blind Son against his Mother-in-Law. DECLAMATION III. Miles
Marianus, or, A Soldier under Marius. Page 55, 56. For the Soldier against his
Colonel. DECLAMATION IV. Mathematicus, or, The Astrologer. Page 77, 78, 79. For
the Son against the Father. DECLAMATION V. Aeger Redemptus, or, The sick Son
Ransomed. Page 105, 106, 107. For the Father against the Son. DECLAMATION VI.
Corpus Projectum, sive Anus Coeca. A Corpse thrown into the Sea, or, The Blind
Old Woman. Page 138, 139, 140. For the Father against the Mother. DECLAMATION
VII. Tormenta Pauperis, or the Poor Man's Rack. Page 170, 171, 172. For the Poor
Man against the Rich. DECLAMATION VIII. Gemini Languentes, or the dying Twins.
Page 190, 191, 192. For the Mother against the Father. DECLAMATION IX.
Gladiator, or The Roman Gladiator. Page 220, 221, 222. For the Son against the
Father. DECLAMATION X. Sepulchrum Incantatum, or The Enchanted Sepulcher. Page
251, 252, 253. For the Wife against her Husband. DECLAMATION XI. Dives
Accusatus Proditionis, or A Rich Man accused of Treason. Page 263, 264, 265.
For the Rich Man against the Poor. DECLAMATION XII. Pasti Cadaveribus, or
Citizens (in time of Famine) devouring one another. Page 280, 281, 282 For the
Citizens against their Envoy. DECLAMATION XIII. Apes Pauperis, or The Poor Man's
Bees. Page 321, 322, 323. For the Poor Man against the Rich. DECLAMATION XIV.
Odii Potio, or The Hate-procuring Potion. Page 347, 348. For the Young Man
against his Miss. DECLAMATION XV. Odii Potio, etc. Page 362, 363. For the Miss
against the Young Man. DECLAMATION XVI. Amici Vades, or Two Friends, one surety
for the other. Page 382, 383, 384. For the Young Man against his Mother.
DECLAMATION XVII. Venenum Effusum, or Poison spilt on the Ground. Page 397,
398, 399. For the Son against the Father. DECLAMATION XVIII. Infamis in Matrem,
or A Son Accused of Incest with his own Mother. Page 425, 426, 427. For the
Wife against her Husbands. DECLAMATION XIX. Infamis in Matrem, or, a Son
Accused (by his Father) of Incest with his own Mother. The Argument is the same
with That of the former Declamation. Page 541, 452. For the Husband against the
Wife.
ERRATA.
P. 45. l. 1. dele he. p. 318. l. 18. for many read may. p. 363. l. 8. for ever
read never. p. 401. l. 4. for in read n. p. 430. l. 17. for Houses read
Nourses. p. 439. l. 31. dele not.

Mal-punctations and other literal mistakes (if any be) the Courteous Reader is
desired to correct with his Pen.

Paries Palmatus: OR, The Wall all Bloody with the Track of an Hand.
DECLAMATION I.
The Argument.
There was a Gentleman who had a Blind Son, whom he had made his Heir, but
marrying a Second Wife, He made an Apartment for the dark Youth, in a remote
part of his House. The Father was Murdered in the night, as he was lying in
Bed by his Wife in his own Chamber, and the next morning his Son's Sword was
found in the Wound, and all the Wall, from his Son's Chamber to His, was
bloodied with the Print of an Hand.

The Blind Son and the Stepmother accuse one another of the Murder.
For the Blind Son against the Stepmother.

IF this Innocent Young Man (my Lords and Judges) would use the Motive of his
sad distress, he might allege, that, together with his Eyes, he had lost all
his wild unruly thoughts, but when he has a mind to declare his Innocence
rather by his Manners than his Miseries, he cannot bear so great a reproach to
be cast either on his duty or his Conscience, as not to be thought to have
committed this Murder only upon the account of his Blindness. And therefore he
does not desire that you should think him Pityable, unless also he be found
Innocent, neither would he have you Relieve his afflicted Condition, unless he
proves himself more unhappy in losing his Father than his Eyes. Set then (my
Lords) an estimate upon this Young Man, by those accomplishments, as you would
do if* he had his Eyes, I mean by his Conversation, by his Modesty, by his Duty
to his Father, which if they can be made appear, as we shall undertake for them
all in his behalf, no Indictment will daunt him. And though this wicked Woman
(for-sooth) has pourtrayed our Calamity by blooding the Wall, yet we are not
abashed thereat, for by how much the more diligent and careful she has been,
that she might not be discovered, she has thereby given a most certain
indication, that (to be sure) she wanted not her Eyes. Gramercy Dame, for
bringing over the Arguments of thy too lavish suspicion to our side, it would
have been harder to evince, that the Blind-man had not committed this Villainy,
unless all things had been so personated, that such a Blind-man might seem to
have committed it.

And therefore (my Lords) I may fairly hope, that those Pleas will be justly
suspected by you, which are so Nonsensically forged against the poor
Blind-Youth.

As first, that the large space of the House, which lay in the midst- between
the Son's Chamber and the Father's, was full of Blood, so orderly drawn along
even to the poor Youths Chamber, as if indeed the Parricide had been afraid,
that he should not have been discovered. Next, the Night was principally chosen
out for the Villainy, at which time no Husband is ever found abed without his
Wife. Then in a Murder, no man ever uses his own but rather another Sword,
yet here, whose, but the Young-man's Sword, was left in the Wound? That so the
Stepmother might not want this Argument against him. Lastly, The Murder was
completed at one Blow, (as if it fell pat into the groping Hand of the
wandering Youth.) And yet against so many unlikely things, the Mother in Law
has nothing to plead, but only her Husbands last Will and Testament: She would
have that to be the Motive of the Parricide, that so by a strange Absurdity,
she might prove him to have Murdered his Father, even because he did not in
the least deserve to be Murdered by his hands. But if that be a Crime, that
the Young Man was lest sole Heir to his Father, we acknowledge it. If when the
poor Old Man was yet alive, This his Will could have come out, and have been
known in the House, you know which of the Two had most reason to take Pet: And
whereas she urges, that the Son was ill-resented by his Father, if we should
own it, whose fault (think you) was that, but the Step-mothers? And she thinks
she can prove, he was ill-resented, because he was laid up in a remote part of
the House, not as a beloved Son, but as an hated Blind one: By this Plea she
craftily enough endeavors to cloak her Envy. The Father, who disposed of his
Blind Son, in a secret Apartment of his House, did thereby take off some
pleasure from the Eyes of the Mother-in-law. For she, thinking to come into an
empty House, and reckoning that a Blind Son was as good as none at all, the
indulgent Old Man devised a Way, how his poor Child might be (as to himself) in
the same House, and (as to his Stepmother) in another: if the Youth had never
so fain, he could not have culled out a secreter place for himself. If you
would know the Old-man's intent herein, you may go ask his last Will: Neither
can I believe, that the prudent Father would crack of his Will to his Son, how
he had made him his Heir; you cannot reasonably object it against him, 'twas
she rather, 'twas she, that by some discoveries, or by some cunning Womanish
suspicion or other had worm'd out the secrets of her Husband, and then shook
hands with all Conjugal Duty. For where you Love for hope of gain, there your
disappointed hope, and your pretended love end together.

It Is true, the Young Man had a Sword in his Chamber continually, either
because he got it before he fell Blind, or else because it is a comfort to one
that is Dark, to have an Utensil belonging to one that can See. This id
certain, his Father was never afraid of it, neither did his Stepmother ever
object it to him before; The Sword lay exposed to the veiw of all, it was known
all the House over. You are sensible, My Lords, that a guiltless Conscience
keeps a Sword more regardlessly, than another; you are sensible also, that a
thing, which cannot be used, may be retained without any suspicion: Innocence
many times occasions, that a Sword may be taken away, even from one that Sees:
Whether then any one of the Servants was privately dealt with, as may be
rationally thought on so fair an occasion; or whether the Mother her self was
so bold as to take it away, which she might easily do, though her Son-in-law were
in the Room: Without question (which does most convincingly discover, who was
the Murderer) That Assassin, that would leave a Sword behind, would rather use
another man's than his own.

What she further alleges, my Lords, if it had been possible to have been done,
yet what would it amount to? Here is a Blind-man, without any Guide or Leader,
pretended to have blundered along, with a Sword in his hand, from a distant
part of the House, I had almost said, from another House, through a long Reach,
through so many stumbling thresholds, and through Servants that kept Watch; and
then to have entered his Fathers Chamber, turning to neither hand, but going on
as directly as Eyes could guide a man; and so to have come to his Bed gently
and without any noise, not falling on it by chance, or arriving at it sooner
than he himself thought. I beseech you, my Lords, Judge what a Tumult such a
Criminal would have made, from the Nature of the things themselves. An Old Man
fast a Sleep, whom a Blind Assassin groped after, would have been sooner.
Aw^ked by the bustle, than found. They and thereto Pleas, much more incredible,
as how be Murdered his Father, and yet med^ed not with his Stepmother; how he
finished the Parricide at one Blow, which they can scarce have the hap to do,
who take Aim by the Eye; that here was noneed of Eyes, but a man about to
strike at Random, fortunate enough, if he had hit any part of the Body, in our
Case lighted upon the very Heart, and presently perceived, that he had given a
Deaths-Wound. My Lords, it is the office of our Eyes to tell our Hands what is
done. It had been the only security of a Blind Murderer to strike often:
Besides, the Stepmother says, that she perceived none of all this, though she
lay by her Husbands side, neither does she inform us, whence the Ground of so
great an Astonishment should arise. If the Father had been killed at one Blow,
and his Wife fast a Sleep, the Murderer could not have left the Sword with
Security. As to their other Allegations, they are too too Suspicious, and
Impudently forged; Here is a very spacious Wall, and a large side of the House,
full of Prints of Blood, which the Hand of him, in his return, might seem to
have left. Oh! How finely can Eyes Pourtray what they have a mind to. I should
extremely wonder, if any man can believe, that her Step-son could do all this
in the Night: It Is pretended, that he left his Sword in the Wound, just as the
Stepmother could wish; A Sword, which he could not deny, but that it was his
own; next, what did he Print upon all the Wall? That the Parricide had drawn
along his Fathers Blood even unto his own Chamber, and so had left a plain Path
for any one to trace him: Would any man do so, that had a mind afterward to
deny the Fact? I congratulate thy good fortune, Poor Youth, if thou could not
perpetrate the Murder, but thou must leave a proof of thy Blindness behind
thee, thou could not choose but be Innocent.

I am therefore determined so to Plead the Cause of this poor Young Man; As
first, to defend him, who is only Accused, not Guilty; and when I have
sufficiently cleared his Innocence, I will then begin my charge against the
Mother. You shall view them both by their Manners, and their Cases respectively
and so you may the more easily discharge your Consciences in passing a
Righteous Judgment. For though the Trial takes Cognizance of them both, yet I
will handle their Cases in several. And first, I will suppose the Young Man had
his Sight, and that the Efforts of his Mind were not a jot weakened by any
Infirmity of Body. I will demand, what debauched, what flagitious, what impious
Fact he committed before this, by which he might give some previous Specimen,
that at length he would mount to Parricide. You know, Innocence recedes not
from a man, but by certain degrees; and lest Audaciousness might be
Faint-hearted in the highest Villainies, it gathers Courage time after time in
smaller ones. No man ever began at that height, to which it is scarce credible,
that ever he should have arrived at all. His Accuser must tell, what Grudges
had past between him and his Father before, and how great a Breach had
intervened between the deep engagements of those two sacred Names; Believe me,
Woman, even for thy own sake, for if it be an easy thing for a Son to Murder
his Father, it is much more easy for a Wife to destroy an Husband.

A Word now concerning his sad Infirmity of Blindness. All our wildness and
courage are dashed by the disaster of our Body, and the briskness of our Spirit
is palled, if it be not seconded by the service of our Corporal Members.
Destitution obliges only to mourning and solitude. That countenance, which is
invelop'd with a continual night, and fearful besides, cannot so much as design
a Villainy, which is not practicable without Eyes. He still troubles him self,
lest he should miss his way and stumble, he is solicitous about the difficulty
in going and coming. There is a great necessity for the Innocence of that man,
who knows, that no man can be discovered sooner, than he: Miserable men are
always watchful over themselves, fearing they may cease to deserve compassion;
And who ever has lost his Eyes, anxiously labors, that he might not seem to
deserve such a loss. What lesson can a poor Dark man learn, but to fawn and
beg? When I hate a man, I am the worse to see him, and it makes no small
Accession to ones Fury, when he beholds him with his Eyes, whom he abominates
in his Heart. As for a Blind-man, he is more to be pitied than hated, and he is
more cautious than to hate.

Besides, it is that has often suggested causes of Parricide to unnatural
Children, which they did behold with their Eyes: For, the Eye is the Inlet of
Vice to the Mind. Luxury has put a Sword into some Childrens hands to Murder
their Fathers, now Luxury is a Crime of such as have Eyes. The love of some
Courtezan has done the like for others, when she demanded an unreasonable
Largess, but Love has the Eyes for his Sentinels. But in our Case, what! does
an unhappy Blind-man kill his Father? His Father being killed, who shall now
lead him by the hand with security? Whose Shoulders could he lean upon more
easily? Will any one chastise the reproaches of the Servants more strictly than
the Father? Will any one protect such and so distressed a condition, and so
subject to abuse, with greater tenderness? Wishes go at another rate amongst
Children in misery; a Blind Son prays, that his Father might survive him.

And now, I would fain know, what they will say, how so difficult a Fact could
be accomplished; did a Blind-man say you, Plot Parricide? With whom did he lay
the Plot? Whose Eyes did he trust? When he was to go through the whole House,
whom did he choose for his Guide? He that was alone in his own Chamber, I take
it, can deliberate with none but himself; it is enough, he consults with a nimble
companion, for why should he desire another privity to his Design, who needed
no Information of any thing? First, he can tell, when it is Night, then he can
look carefully, whether all the family be asleep? He knows how to tread sure
and yet soft, and to turn about his careful Visage toward that side, whence
the least fear might come: In a state of fear, it is provision little enough to
have our Eyes. What! Did he not say to himself, it is true, I would fain Murder
my Father, but how shall I do it? Who shall guide my hands? I will get me out
of my Chamber by Night, alone by my self, but when shall I get thither? Do you
think, that our Chambers are next one another? Nay, the whole House is between
the Fathers and Sons Lodgings: How easily may I mistake my way? How long shall
I be about it? I must grope through a huge Reach, scarce to be footed over.
Thou Nonsensical Blind Fool, what art thou going about? 'Twill be broad-day
before thou can'^t perfect thy Design. Again, what would you say, if he should
be awake? Nay, what if the Mother only? Go too, I Will warrant you, I Will find the
Threshold, I Will open the Door without Creaking, I Will enter into my Fathers
Chamber, while he is fast a sleep; I Will Stab him in that Condition, one Blow
shall do the Deed; my Stepmother shall not stir a Wink, I Will go out securely,
I Will return, and no living Soul know it.

These are the wishes, ('it is true) but of such as have their Sight. A Blind-man
would despair, even though the Night did promise her assistance in so many
Circumstances.

In the next place, I must needs ask, what could reason be, why the Son should
use none but his own Sword in this Fact? Ah, Ironic.
this came into his mind that he was to leave it behind him, for if he had left
a strangers Sword in the Wound, some Question might have been made, Who was the
Murderer: But the Wisacre used his own, that so, if he should have escaped,
his Sword might have betrayed him; Ay, but you will say, Why then did he keep any
Sword at all in his Chamber? I will tell you, first, because he had always one
by him; and next, because he never intended to use it.

What? Did I provide a Sword for Parricide so many years before? And was I
innocent so long, though the Sword was at hand, wherewith I threatened to kill my
Father? Was I ready in my Spirit and with my Sword, and yet suffered so many
Nights to slip over my head? You know, I had made you familiarly acquainted
with the sight of the Sword before, it was known also to all the Servants; it
hung carelessly and disregarded in the midst of my Chamber, as a Witness of my
Innocence; yea it hung so openly, that any body living might have filch'd it
away. No guilt of Conscience did conceal it, 'twas as sure known as the
blindness of its Owner: He that prepares a Sword to commit a Murder does keep
it so close, that he may deny it to be his.

Set now before your Eyes the Act of the Murder, and you will find the
difficulty thereof. I Will grant, that he went out of his own Chamber, and that
he deceived the Servants, whom his Father had allotted to attend him; that
after much ^do he sound the Old-man's Chamber, then the Wall ended, and could
no longer guide the Murderer, the door opened without creaking: What does he
do then? Does he go round about the Wall of the Bedchamber, or does he venture
into the middle of it, and flourish his Sword in the dark Room? Well, now he
finds his Fathers Bed, and stretching out his head, overhears them both
Breathe, as they were asleep; tell me, how shall he know, which way he shall
take his Aim? Or Which of the Two to strike? Well, did he grope out the face
and the breast right against him, did he seek the shortest Cut to let out his
dying Soul? What a dead Sleep was that, that could not perceive all this? But
she says, I did not perceive it my self neither. I reply, you see what a bad
Cause you maintain, which you can defend but by one Plea, and that an
incredible one too; say you so, was your Husband Stabbed whilst he lay in your
arms, and you never the wiser? Thy Husband is slain by thy side, and thou not
awaked, as if thy Son-in-Law had dispatched thee first: What was thy Husband
Slain by his Blind Son, and yet not struck by him? Me thinks, if the noise of
the Blow could not, yet his warm Gore might have awakned thee?

But how manifest is thy Guilt, which puts thee to this shift, that when thou
would have it believed, That, thy Son-in-Law Murdered his Father, art
constrained to say, Thou perceivedst nothing: We have enough, and to spare, the
Cause goes on our side, we are clearly Innocent. What! When thou were in the
same Bed with him that was Slain, and perhaps did embrace him, do thou
profess so deep and sound a Sleep? How came it then to pass, that thou did
escape? What good fortune withheld his wrathful hands from shedding thy Blood?
To be sure, thou were a Sleep to purpose, thou perceivd'st nothing of all this.
Did thy Son-in-Law let thee escape, because he did not fear to be apprehended?
Did ever Son Kill his Father and spare his Stepmother? Could he commit the
greatest villainy of all without regret, and did his heart immediately fail him
in the Lesser? Had he violated all the Rights, so Sacred amongst men, and yet
durst he not make bold with a Life so odious, as thine? It is an incredible
thing and against all reason, that he should spare a Mother-in-law, when you
dare accuse him for Murdering his own Father? What say thou, Young Man, did
thy heart misgive thee to shed that Blood? Did she more passionately entreat
thee to spare her Life? Hereby thou have lost the Plea, that she perceived
nothing, that it was Night, all hushed, there was time enough to commit also
another Murder. If it had been possible for thee to Commit the Parricide, thou
could have Slain thy Father upon no other account, but that thereby thou
might have opportunity to Kill thy Stepmother too. Neither do I see any
reason, why he should spare her, unless he would have her live, that she might
seem to have acted that wicked Fact. Craftily enough contrived, Iron^c.
but this shall presently be overthrown by another evidence. These things do
not well hang together, to spare the Stepmother, that so she may be accused,
and to leave the Sword behind, that so he himself might be discovered thereby.
I have often occasion to make use of the Argument from Blindness, and in this
place especially, where we come to treat of the Wound. For certainly; if a
Murderer had entered who had his sight, yea, and had carried Lights before him,
yet he could never so happily have levelled his blow, for though the darkness had
not caused him to miscarry, yet fear and guilt, which are always witnesses to
great Villainies, would have put him to a loss. A Common Executioner seldom
strikes but once, even although he fit the Neck for the Block, yea though his
practiced hand came but newly from giving the like Blow, as his ordinary Trade:
But it seems, the Blind-man hit so right, as immediately to let out the
Heart-blood. Upon my Conscience, I wonder he did not hit his Mother, when he
aimed at his Father; the first Blow of the Parricide does but only show his
intent and resolution: Alas! He quivers, he is thoughtful, he Colors for it,
and is but one degree on this side Innocence, he only makes way by the First,
so as to give a stronger Blow the second time.

And now let me ask, Ironic.
what reason the Youngman could have, to leave his Sword behind him? Oh! the
Good Man, forsooth, would not have his Mother desamed; he has barred all
Apology, he has Confessed himself to be the Murderer by leaving his Sword in
the Wound. If he had thought the first Blow had not done the deed, he would
have given another, but if he had believed the first had dispatched him, he
would have taken away all means of discovering his Guilt. But why do I go about
to demonstrate a thing, which is evident of it self? My Lords, if you would
know, who left the Sword behind, think with yourselves, whose interest it was
it should be found, where it was.

Oh, but you will say, The wall was Bloodied with the Print of an hand even to the
Sons Chamber. In the first place, My Lords, consider, That he was no Simpleton,
no Impolitick fellow, who though he were Blind, would attempt a wickedness, which
was difficult even for one that had his Eyes? What! Did he not think with
himself, when he put his Bloody hand to the Wall, that he should leave the
Print of his Parricide behind him? Whereas he might easily have wiped that hand
(that guided him) in his Clothes, and so got away without leaving any Print
behind him, yet he thought good to Blood the Wall all along, ana so every where
to leave some Memorial of his poor Father? He did not consider in the least,
what would follow the next day after, what a great Hubbub would be raised
thereupon at Daybreak, but he laid a Train beyond all possible mistake, that
so his Mother might trace him even to his very Chamber door. Wonderful hap!
what, was not the Blood all wasted till then? Let us here consider the very
Nature of the thing it self. The Wall was found so Bloodied with the Print of
an hand even to the last, that the entire hand, and every finger thereof, were
exquisitely imprinted thereon. Surely he would have exhausted all the Blood in
his hand at 2 or 3 of the first Prints. Suppose his hand was Bloody, and
thereupon, (...) to gratify our Adversary a little) dropping wet, suppose also
the length of the way, and the long Reach of the Wall (for he could not get to
that farthest part of the House in a little time.) That part of the Wall next
the Fathers Chamber must needs have more Blood; the next to that, less the
third, as good as none; the last none at all? For the Blood, as often as it was
Clapped to the Wall, sticks there, or else drys up in the warm hand of such a
slow-paced Creeper. Now what shall we say to this, when the Print of the Blood,
(would you think it) does begin at both ends? A plain Bloody hand at the one
end, and at the other. How could his hand carry along that, which it left
behind? No, no, 'twas the Mother, the Mother with all her Eyes about her, she
drew all this, 'twas her Right Hand took the poor man's Blood, and ever and anon
dip^ and renewed the Print. We find that the Bloodied Wall has some void
spaces, it is no^ besmeared all along, but here is a perfect Prin^ of an hand
every where; Now a Blind man would have trayled his hand all along.

I Demand next, how he could have so much Blood in his hands? All the Blood
does the^^ gush out from the Body, when it Issues after a^^^ Sword that is
newly drawn out of a Wound, bu^ when a Wound is closed with the same Sword that
gives it, it is but a dark discovery can b^ made by the Blood, in that Case.

Add, that no Blood can come at that part o^ the hand, which gripes that
Sword-hilt and s^^ clutches it self up whilst it holds the Wea^pon; the Back of
the hand only must needs b^ Bloodied, but our Wall is Imprinted with the hollow
of an hand, to which no Blood could come? It Is your part, My Lords, to lay all
these things together, and to weigh them seriously. The reason, why a Judge
should show more discretion in finding out a Villainy, than the offender did in
Committing it, I suppose, is this, because ^he later is thoughtful only for
himself, but the former for both parties indifferently.

Thus have I defended the poor Young-man's Cause: I pass now to the
Step-mother's, and what more certain Evidence of Conviction may reach Her. I
omit that threadbare and welknown Topic, concerning the Comparing of Persons.
Another man would say, that Husband and Wife, unless endeared one to another by
having Children at first, are not mutually cemented by the strongest ties of
Conjugal Union. But I shall rather insist on this; Thou, Good Woman, were
deceived in thy expectation, thou thoughtest to come into a Clear house,
forsooth, an house without an Heir. Thou expectedst, that the poor Youth should
have been expelled the House even upon your Wedding day, and that his Father,
cajoled by thy flattering embraces, should have sent his desolate Son to seek
his Fortune, and so have made provision, that the dismal Misfortune of his Body
might not offend the Eyes of his Coy New-Bride. But on the contrary, thou
soundest the Good Old man affectionately tender of his only Son, and for that
reason thou despairedst of all conjugal affection from him. Miserable is that
Husband, who brings in a Step-dame over his Son, because his Wife can never
think he will love them both.

In the first place therefore, I demand, where your Husband was slain? In his
Bedchamber, say you! Go too! Before thou were Married, thy Son-in-law had no
need of this defense; was the Old Man slain in his Chamber? What! Was not the
Murderer afraid of his Wife? How durst he, that was Blind, enter into a
private Marriage Chamber, and approach the solitude of a Matrimonial Bed,
especially with a Murtherous intent? where can an Husband be found alone
without his Wife? Again, who ever chose the night for the Villainy? The night,
good Madam, was your time. Besides, what if thou had another advantage for
thy Design? Thou needst not come from the further part of the house; Tota
penatium Sacra pera^enda. Quaere, Annon potius legendum peragranda.
Thou need'st not Traverse all the Blind places thereof; Thou need'st not
trouble thy thoughts, how to hold up the Door so gingerly on the Hinges, that
it creak not in the opening; You lie pat for the occasion, your Design is
easily accomplished without stirring a Foot: You need not fear, lest any body
should snap you. Moreover the Servants lodged far off, and great secresy is
afforded you by the very Genius of the place; you may strike when you list, you
may know whether he be a Sleep or no. The night time, a Sword at hand, and a
Snoring Husband, who can desire more to do a Villainy? We know the poor Old Man
could have been Murdered, when you had a mind to it.

But, says she, how could the Sword, that was my Son's, come to my Hands? Here
we are put to it indeed; A shrewd point to be answered Alas! Who will believe
me, if I say, that the Dark-man lost his Sword; his Eyes, closed with a
perpetual night, could not keep it safe. I should then be thought to devise a
thing of mine own head to serve my purpose, and shamelessly to lament a want of
proof, which is too too manifest. To speak Truth, his hand was always clapped on
his Sword-hilt, it was his care day and night; do not pride thy self, as if by
thy craft thou had outwitted a lurking cunning Banditty; no, no, it was our
circumstances made the way easy for thee. It fixes the suspicion more upon
thee, because the Old Man was killed at one Blow. Thou had opportunity to
prepare his body for the Stroke, even whilst thou seemedst to hug him. Thou
with a gentle hand could grope over his breast before hand, and so find by
the constant beat of the Pulse, where the panting Soul resides, where a
deaths-wound might be given presently, and where, by the working Blood, the
best place was to give the fatal Blow. Believe it, my Bedfellow can kill me at
one Blow.

I come now to the Prints of the bloodied Wall, which I have urged upon thee
sufficiently before in the defense of the Young Man; now follows what I have
hitherto kept in further reserve against thee. When thy Husband was slain in
thy Chamber, thou well knew, there could be no Plea left for thee, if thou
had not acted something, which it is likely Blindness might have done, and
therefore thou did put the Blood on that part of the Wall, where thou would
have the enquiry to be made, that so the next day the whole Chase might be
guided by the trail of the Blood which was laid before. Thou layest all on the
Young Man, his Calamity has been thy Counselor. Thou knew, that he could
not otherwise enter without a Guide, but by conducting himself all along by the
Wall, and therefore thou made as if thou were Blind, and to complete thy
Villainy, thou have played pretty tricks with thy Husbands Blood: All these
things were contrived and counterfeited by thee at pleasure and in all
security, that so thy craft might lay the Guilt on another. For now, forsooth,
thou art innocent, because thy Son's Sword was found in the Wound, and because
the Wall was bloodied. Did thou think, that either of those Indications were
sufficient to discover the Murderer? But with how easy a touch of a Balance,
are the Issues of a Cause turned? For he is often found to have committed a
Murder, who accused another for the same; But, says she, he had Cause and
Provocation enough to commit the Parricide, because his incensed Father had
packed him away into some remote part of the House. Know, Woman, that might
perhaps seem an ignominy to a more happy Son-in-law, but it is a privilege to
blindness, to have retirement allotted to it. Oh! The worthy and singular
affection of the good Old Man! How kindly did he shut up his poor Son? How
carefully did he keep him from the Eyes of his Wife, that might have rejoiced
over him? How did he provide for the bashfulness of the poor man* ^^f I had
been a more happy Father, says the Old Man, I would have given up the whole
House to thee, but now seeing thou art ^^ark B^ind, (Poor heart) possess that
part, where none can see thee, and whither none, ^ut my self, can come: Thou
shall have faithful Servants about thee, none shall hear thy groans, nor glad
themselves with thy doleful miseries. And thou have no reason to be troubled
for the loss of the families conversation. The recess granted to thee, Poor
Youth, is therefore granted, that thou might be less sensible of the loss of
thine Eyes. Did ever any Father hate a Dark Child, and rest contented only with
this revenge, to assign him a quiet, a remote, and even the best part of his
House: Ay but, says she, I understand it as if he had disinherited, as if he
had disowned, him; what does the peivish Old Man keep his Youth in his closest
embraces, does he remove him farthest from the passage out? I demand, when he
separated you two the length of the House; Thee, lusty and in good health; him,
poor, blind, subject to reproaches, obnoxious to injuries, was he angry with
the Son, or with the Wife? Son, says he, I would not have thee make use of the
pleasantest part of the House, least the gaudry thereof should affect thee,
because thou can not see it. Who is so foolishly angry with a Blind Son, as
to think it material to him, in what part of the House he is bid to dwell? Nay,
Dame, of the Two, he rather removes thee, he raises up an object of Envy to
thine Eyes, He says to thee, thou have room over and above, thou have the
greatest part of the House, think him to be absent, leave at least a corner to
a poor Son in his own Fathers House: That Father, who, in the reign of a
Stepmother, assigns a secret part of the House to his Son, does plainly tell
his Wife, that he cannot cast him off.

The Mother comes now to another kind of Plea, That she had no cause for the
Murder, seeing the Son was found Heir Apparent of all his Fathers Estate: For
who else should, that so he might take the shortest Cut to his Inheritance. Ay,
but a Son, once made Heir expressly, does not fear, That his Father will alter
his Will. You confess he was lest Heir of all his Fathers Estate; Well then,
you see, that his Father was not angry with-him, when he allotted him a remote
part of the House. Surely, contrary Pleas can never advantage thee, thou
would object the same thing to this Defendant, if he had been Disinherited;
choose which side thou will, if he knew he was Heir, he ought to love his Father
the more; if he did not know it, he had nothing to hope for, by his Fathers
death.

It remains now, that we consider, which of you two would most want the
Murdered Old Man: I wis, the grief goes nearer to thy heart, Ironic.
Good-woman, Thy sadness has almost made an end of thee, but stay awhile, the
black cloud will soon blow over, thou will quickly change thy Mourning Vail,
fitted for thy purpose, for a new Plammeo revertente.
Bridal Tire. But the Poor Youth, if he compare his present miseries with those
which were past, begins now, rather than before, to be really Blind. For what
has not the poor Youth lost in his Aged Father? Whilst he lived, he was his
Dearly beloved; his Fathers Eyes were ready at his service to guide him,
whithersoever he pleased. The Saucy Servants durst not mock him for his unhappy
blindness, nor durst they in ridicule (which is the highest contumacy) desire
him to play the Master amongst them. But now, Good God, how many Taunts must he
undergo? Blindness and desolateness fall to his share both at once. For, Poor
Youth, what good can an Inheritance do thee, which thou enjoy'st only by
Hearsay? What Is Money to thee? What Pleasure can thou have to enjoy it? All
thy pleasure is, that thereby thou will be an easier Prey to the Pillager. But
how carefully did thy Fathers Eyes keep up all for thee? Oh! how easily may
thou now be deceived? How quickly stripped? How soon choust? How suddenly be
made not worth a Groat? It Is thy Fathers Death, that Disinherits thee. What
can thou now expect, but perpetual Mourning and Abhorring even of Life it
self?

This Poor Youth has lost at last even his very Tears, neither can his Eyes
bear a part in Mourning for his Father. Now thou want the Sword to be used
on thy self; Lo, he seeks for it, he gropes after it, give it me again, says
he, it was innocent as long as it touched no hands, but mine. If I must needs
dye, I make it my choice to fall upon it. That burdened and unhappy Soul did
long-since utter such complaints as these; Where is now the strength, that you
talk of? Where Is my sprightlyness and effort? Where is my Arm, formerly (as you
say) to springy? At one Blow, I believe, I can hardly now kill my self.

Coecus pro Limine: OR, The Blind Son standing at his Chamber Door.
DECLAMATION II.
The Argument.
A Tongue Gentleman snatched his Aged Father up in his Arms, and carried him out
of his House, when it was all on Fire. And running back to save his Mother, he
could not find her, but had his own Eyes burnt out. The Father Marries again.
His Wise comes to him one day, and tells him, that his Blind Son had a design
to Poison him, and that the Poison was hid in his Bosom, withal informing
him, that he had promised her one moiety of the Estate, if she would undertake
to administer it. The Father hy's him presently to his Blind Son, and demands,
whether this were true? Upon his denial, he searches, and finds the Poison
about him; whereupon he asked him, for whom he had provided it? The Youth made
no ansiver. Out goes the Father, alters his Will, and makes the Stepmother his
Heir. The same night there was a great Hubbub in the House, all the Servants
rush into their Masters Chamber, where they find him slain, and his Wife (the
Stepmother) snoring by his Corpse, as if she had been fast a Sleep; and the
Blind Son was standing at the door of his own Chamber, his Sword, all to be
Gored with Blood, being laid under his Pillow. The Blind-Son and the
Stepmother accuse one another of the Murder.

For the Blind Son against his Mother in Law.
I Am sensible, ( My Lords) that this bashful Youth is much agreived, not that
he is guilty of the Parricide in the least, but that he is put to clear his
Innocence against his Stepmother. I know also, that much of the Reverence due
to our Blind Defendants Virtues will be lost, when he urges no other Plea for
his Superlative Duty, than what would ^pring off another man, as well as
himself. And therefore in the first place, be it known unto all affectionate
pesons, that our Client scorns to make use of the Argument of his Blindness;
^e, of all men living, will not allow himself the privilege, to be thought
more unlikely to have committed this Murder, because he was Blind, ^han he
was, when he had his Sight. This Youth, one of the most innocent that ever
Virtue made an object of Pity, proclaimed to all the World, he could not design
the Murder before ^is Father was slain; and that you may not think ^im
unconcerned in this days Solicitude, he act^d so, that the highest wickedness
in humane Life might not be believed, no not in another. ^ardon the Young Man,
I beseech you, My Lords, if he scorn to be acquitted, only in com^iseration or
guerdon of his woeful condition;

Son, that saved his Father out of the ^ire with the loss of his own Eyes, it is
an in^olerable absurdity to think, that he should be ^nnocent of Parricide only
upon this account, because he was not able to Murder him.

As for the Woman, My Lords, who has no Plea to defend her self but this. That
the Blind Son Murdered his Father; I had rather see her put to so impudent a
shift of accusing another, than if she had only denied the Fact. Let him look
to it, who thinks it to be her Confidence in the goodness of her Cause, that
she charges the Blind man with the Fact; No, no, the Impudency of the Woman is
clearly discovered hereby, who can by no means be Defended; but by the
suggestion of things wholly Incredible; he that accuses a Blind-man, when he
himself is suspected, must needs be the only Person, Guilty. She stood in need
of other manner of proofs against so great unlikelyhood, a Dark-man ought not
presently to be suspected in a Parricide upon every blind Suggestion, no, he
must be taken in the very Fact. And therefore, Good my Lords, look upon these
things to make highly for the Youngman, which are so solicitously packed
together, as a nimiety of Proof against him. There is nothing can contribute
more to the Blind-mans Innocence, than that so many things are to be framed and
forged against him. There is sufficient Evidence of the Piety and Harmlesness
of the Party, who was to be attaqu'd with the Probability of a Parricide.
Weapons, Gore Blood, Poisons, are all amassed against his woeful condition, and
whatever else might not argue any neglect, but where there is ignorance. For
there is no man, I say, no man, My Lords, that ought to have a more heedful
regard in acting a Wickedness, than he that can Murder his Father, wanting,
Eyes. This Young Man, of whom the monstrousest Crime in Nature is pretend, bore
always such an affection to his Father, that none of us can hardly expect the
like even in our Own Flesh and Blood. When the House was all of a flaming Fire,
and no hopes of safeguard for the Poor Old Folks, this Young Gentleman ran full
into the midst of the Flames, with as much have as we use to run out from them.
In what a great hazard was he then, with such extraordinary Piety to his
Parent? Whilst he was long doubting, through astonishment, casting his Eye on
them both, and running from one to 'tother, his equally-poiz'd Piety had almost
cost him his Poor Father and Mother too. But at last, when the Fire drew near
and enclosed the Old Couple, (let the dutiful Youth hear this, though against his
will) he chose the Father, and though he equally loved them both, as they were a
burning, yet his hovering affection pitched on Him first. He had scarce set the
Old Man down, (it being indeed a miracle, that even He was preserved) but away
he goes back, and breaks through the Flames again; and being engaged in the thick
Globes of Fire, closing and streaming round about him, without question he had
been Burnt, but that he lost his Eyes a little before. It Is observable, My
Lords, that his great undertaking had not that success to rescue his Mother.
Yet he had done less in Both, except his Eyes had been burnt out. Let them look
to it, who most admire the Son upon the account of that Parent, for whose
safety his Face was disfigured, and his Eyes lost; For my part, I am of
opinion, that he obliged his Father (principally) by his Blindness, who spent
his Eyes in quest of his Mother, that he had, just then, left behind.

I know, My Lords, you don't expect any Apology for the Old-man's Marrying
again, it was done at such a time, when 'twas evident he could not manage his
Estate for his Son's use. Nay, I might lay a wager on it, that it was don by the
Young-mans own advice. That his Father, whom the Fire had bereaved both of his
Mother and Himself, might ease the remainder of his years by a second
Marriadge, and that the House, which held only an Old Father and a Blind Son,
might have the Servants watch't over and kept to their duty, by a New Bride.
It Is ordinary, My Lords, for Stepmothers to deceive honest Sons-in-Law with a
great deal of ease, and yet hate them nevertheless. To how many Treacheries, to
how many Artifices is a Blind innocent person exposed? A Woman, to whom the
weakness of her Son in Law, and the Old Age of her Husband, gave hopes to
invade the Inheritance, understood well enough, that was the only thing wanting
to the occasion of the Villainy, That the Blind Son should first be blemished
with the Accusation of Parricide: When this then was perceived by her, that the
Young Man thought himself in the condition rather of an own Son, than of a Son
in Law, she told the Father of the Poison that she had stole into the Poor
Youth's Bosom, as if he himself had provided it to Murder him. And because the
Cheat might easily have been discovered if she had named any Complice, she laid
the whole train of the Accusation so, as to have it believed, That one Moiety
of the Estate was promised to Her, if she herself would have administered it.
You see, My Lords, by what previous steps she made her approaches ^o the last
Will and Testament of her Husband, a Woman that, he believed, would not take
such a part of his Estate to Poison him, must of necessity be so rewarded, as
to be made his Heir. O how much otherwise should that Parricide be proved,
whose Author is now clearly discovered. A Woman that said she was made privy to
the wickedness, did not first desire the Father to demand, who got the Poison
for the Poor Youth? ^r, who gave it him? Nay rather, where she knew the
greatest Intrigue of the Question to lie, ^he contrived, that the innocent
Youth should be ^nterrogated on a sudden, and was ready to ^harge his
Trepidation, as if he had been taken in ^he Fact, whether the Party had held
his Peace, ^r had denied it? The Old Man, being brought ^o his Son, told him
what he heard; was it ever ^nown, My Lords, that a man of such plain^earted
innocence would deny the Fact? The ^outh durst not lie before Her, who
discovered ^he Poison, and knew where it was. But when ^he Poor Youth
perceived, that his Stepmother ^ush'd on the thing, and was urgent that his
^osom should be searched, then he was all in a Quandary, and woefully astonished
and perplexed (...) his thoughts, for now he understood, that was her devise to
lay the Poison there, where it ^ight be found. Whereupon the Young Man in ^reat
have felt all over his Body, and thrust his and deep into his Bosom, searching
and groping every part that might be suspected, till he found the Poison first
himself. My Lords, I commend the Innocence of our mute Defendant, I commend his
confidence, that, being Interrogated, For whom he had prepared it, thought it
needless to ward himself against the heinous Accusation of Impoysoning. He
acted the part of such an one, as knew his Father could not believe it, and
(such is the great resolution of' Innocence) he would not rebate the Old-mans
Belei by any kind of Excuse whatsoever. Alas! This was far from a guilty
Trepidation, neither was it any thing of a silent Confession: He that deals in
Poison, is as well provided of a ready answer too, in case he be discovered.

Upon this, the Old Man acted so, as if he had not been at all concerned in
what he had found* He did not put the Servants of his Blind Son to the Torture,
and in a Villainy, wherein there must needs be more Accomplices than the
Parricide himself, he did not enter upon a Formal Examination, but, which is
more than to Acquit, he did not call the Young Man to his Defense Now whether
it were, that afterward, when he understood the Craft of the wicked Woman, he
was willing to protect his Son by Disinheriting him, and other while intending
to dispose of his Estate with more deliberation, in the Interim made use of the
occasion, that the Step-So^^ should not seem to stand in the way, as a Bart to
her desire; or whether it were not far more easy for her to obtain the
disinherison of the Dark Youth from a man, that she had cajoled to so many
things before, I leave it, My Lords, to your Wisdoms. I shall content my self
in saying This, That he immediately altered his Will, and that you may not
wonder at the haste, present^y thereupon he was Murdered. Judge you, My Lords,
whether it concerned the Young Man, that his Father should live, who now died
with another Heir? Without dispute it was not for ^is advantage, that he should
be slain.

My Lords, The whole House was sensible of the ^omicide, which that very night
was perpetrated (...) their Masters Chamber, yea in his very Bed; every one
thought, that he was upon the very ^ace of the Murder, only the Step-dame,
for^oth, could not Wake, though in that place whence ^l the noise came. The whole
Family ran, as ^^e man, in a trembling posture and a very pi^ful taking,
whither the noise led them, and ^ere they found the Old Man Killed and the
Step-^other lying so close to his Body, that they could ^^t presently ask, who
slew him? At last, the ^^ws was brought to the Son, who was not and (which is a
sufficient Plea for his Innocence) (...) his retreat from committing the
Murder, but ^nding at the threshold of his own Chamber, the same condition
with those, who had Eyes, ^d were running up and down.

Next, that the Young-mans Sword was inquired ^er, 'twas done by no other, but
Her com^and, who had caused the Poison to be sought (...) before. That the
bloody Sword was found in (...) Bed, I shall not be against it, My Lords, but
you ^^y think it no less an Argument against the ^^^nd-man, than that Poison
could be found about ^^n, in a suspicion of Parricide. A Sword bloodied all
over ought to be the last not the only Proof.

Pardon us, all you that are aware of unlucky haps, pardon us, I say, you that
know how obnoxious man's Life is to infinite dangers, That we begin the Defense
of our Client with tears and groans. Alas, the Poor Youth has lost his aged
Father, and such a Father 'twas, that his kisses and embraces did as it were
foment the wounds of his Eyes, and for whose sake alone he was willing to live.
'Twas a miserable ignorance, and an woeful weakness, that thy Mother did not
rather deceive Thee, and make thee drink the Poison, thy self.

It Is worth while, My Lords, to compare circumstances, for thereby this
Parricide will appear even past belief. Do you think that Nuptial endearments,
and affections that have their rise from Emblandishments and Chucks, can avail
as much with us, as the Natural reverence of our own Flesh and Blood? For my
part, I am of opinion, that no Ties are knit with a looser knot than sensual
obligations, these later are the shortest-liv'd of all. And though I Will allow,
that a certain reverence and grave respect accrows by little and little to a
Conjugal state, yet married couples may be severed with as much ease as they
came together. A Wise is one, whom Interest both joins and parts too. The
respect of a Female seems only to lie here, that she was sought after for
Procreation's sake. We hear the squabbles of some Married Couples every moment,
they part habitations every day, and run out of one Bed and Embrace to another;
yea, though a Woman have Children by her Husband, yet she can fancy another; and
we may perceive how easy Women are to all that is unworthy, in that sometimes
they love not their Husbands, even when they are alive; but what if you add the
name of a Mother-in-law to the selfishness of the Sex? The Woman, that is
brought in as a Stepmother over a former Wif's Children, can never look for
the absolute respect due to a Wife. O, how does the love and reverence due to
my Father, that begat me, surpass all lesser endearments? The Affection between
Father and Son seems not inferior to that, which unites the whole Frame of
Nature, and knits the Universe together. Can Flesh and Blood Stab that sacred
and venerable Person, which he ventured to snatch out of the Flames? And for
whose sake he thought his own Eyes well spent? I cannot see, My Lords, how we
can salve Filial Reverence, it cannot be difficult at all for a Wife to Murder
her Husband, if it be not far more difficult for a Son to cut off his own
Father. Don't think, My Lords, that the Debate lies between a Silly Woman and a
Lusty man, nor can the Mother advantage her self on the account of her Sex, let
me tell you, that the Infirmity of Blindness is a stronger Plea than any she
can have, for if a Woman thinks, she has cause enough to kill a Man, she can
find strength to do it as well as the stoutest He alive. Moreover, it is a plain
case, that the Passions of Tears, Hatred, and Wrath, do with more facility
seize and overpower the Female Sex, and because they have not strength enough
to conquer the Vices of their minds, sometimes even their very weakness prompts
them to mischief. Ple grant, that Women are not sufficient for such wickedness,
as requires much toil and laboriousness in the Acting; But what can be more in
a Woman's power, than to Murder a man, lying by her side? To assault an Old
man, who gave himself up to her Embraces? And who did order and watch every
nod, he took. Another Murderer may be discovered before he gives the Blow, but
a, Wife cannot be taken, but in the very Fact, nor before she has done the Do.
It Is no ways incredible, My Lords, that a Woman should Murder a Man, when a
Poor Blind-man is accused upon the account. It may be so, My Lords, if we
believe Blind men to be innocent only out of Necessity, but there is more than
that in the Case, the first incapacity of Blindness is, to refuse a mischeivous
deed, when presented to it: We are much mistaken, if we think, that the loss of
Eyes reaches our Bodies only, not our Minds; the whole man is disabled thereby,
for if we diligently consider all humane Acts, we shall find, men are at the
disposal of their Eyes. A Blind man is not so prone to chafe, to hate, or to
cover, for seeing our Bodies draw activity from our Eyes, our Vicious Passions
cease too, when their Causes fail. To what purpose, I beseech you, should
those Hands be employed upon any attempt, which are so long in venturing upon
what is next? Those hands, which cannot do their own business? Can that weak
Body undertake any exploit, which is ready to fall every step it takes? And who
thinks every thing before him a Precipice, till he gropes out the contrary? Can
he be guilty of a Villainy, in which he can act nothing himself, but must trust
wholly to another?

But what will you say, if his Blindness came by Fire: In such a case, a Man
loses more than his Eyes out of his Head; his whole Visage is defaced, while he
is scorching, every step he takes fails him, neither can he hold up his hands
to guard his Eyes, but he is fain to yield them up to the Flames too, after his
other Members are disabled. Even this is enough to argue a Blind man's
Innocence, that though he may have strength and audacity, yet he has not the
Confidence to think, that ever he shall lie undiscovered. It Is not proper, My
Lords, to Apologize for this Young man, by the same Pleas as would defend
another Blindling: How incredible is it, that he should ever Murder his
Father, that could not endure so much as the very thoughts of losing Him? Pray
what need was there of a Sword: What need was there of Poison to make him a
Parricide? Might he not with more ease have saved his Mother? Might he not have
caught her up, being the weaker of the Two, and less able to help herself? By
such a trick, thou might have committed Parricide, and yet have been
accounted one of the best Sons in the World. Besides, you cannot but think,
that his Fathers yernings were increased toward him after this disaster; The
surplusage of his affection might now make up the loss of his Eyes, that were
spent in his service; and that Piety must need be boundless, when we love that,
which we our selves were the occasion of: What say you, My Lords? Can a Blind
Young Man, that the whole Town flocks about and admires, whom all Children
love, and all Parents revere, can such an one, I say, take encouragement from
his Father's indulgence to do him a mischief? What, will he make himself a
pattern of Piety and of Villainy too? It Is easier to Murder a Father that saved
Thee, than a Father, that thou thy self have saved.

My Lords, we should inquire into the Impulsive Causes of no Parricide more
strictly than of This. 'Twas Covetousness, (says she) that put the Young Man
upon the Fact. If that be credible, much more if true, it may be considered,
whether a Woman, made Heir, be not more likely to kill her Husband, than a
disinherited Blind Son, his Father? Such have, My Lords, may they make, whom
nefarious Avarice does excite, and love of Vice and Luxury does precipitate
daily and push on. But to what purpose is an Inheritance given to a Blind-man,
though never so deserving? It Is our Eyes, our Eyes, I say, that make us impatient
to bear a mean condition; it is to them, that we ow all our superfluity: It Is
they, that continually hurry us into all Vice, it is they, that open the door to
admiration, to love, to concupiscence; A man may sooner fulfill and satisfy the
desire of his Mind than of his Eye. To what purpose are Riches to a Blind-man,
who can make no gay distinction of any thing? Tho you surround such a poor
Creature with all manner of pelf and gawdry, yet he then wants most when he has
most plenty; neither can you find a defect more sweetly allied to Poverty than
Blindness is? A man that lost his Eyes for his Parents sake, will take more
comfort in his Estate under his Father, than without him.

But what way of Parricide, I beseech you, ^id the Youth pitch upon? It Is said,
he provided Poison, If that would do the deed, what need, Iromic.
I pray, of' a Sword? Does Impoysoning require an ^ccomplice, an attendant, but
a Sword neither? Or did it not come into his mind till afterward, what his
Hands could do? And having found the Poison too weak, did he take heart and
resolve ^o try by dint of Sword? Believe it, My Lords, ^here is no man living
but knows, which way to ^ill another, if he have a mind to it.

My Lords, our Step-dame knew well enough, ^ow incredible it was, that a
Dark-youth should ^emper Poison; and therefore she makes up the matter by
telling you, that she was tempted to ^dminister it. I beseech you, My Lords,
let her ^elate what tempting words he used. Here Is a Mother in Law and a
Step-son caballing together about a Parricide. What? Might not one think
himself to be tempted as well as 'tother. My Lords, pray speak, what your
thoughts are? Was there ^o other person in the House that the Parricide could
corrupt, but Her? To be sure, 'twas more hard to trust her than any body else.
Might he not imagine that his Father, and all his Friends, did whisper in his
ear, and give him this kind intimation first of all; have a care of a
Stepmother that has power to deny Thee. It Is not probable he would disclose
the Parricide to one, that he knew would betray him, unless he had obtained her
Consent.

I beseech you, My Lords, compare diligently these Cross-Pleas together. Here Is
a Woman says, she was tampered with to have a hand in the Murder. Do you
think, that a Son in Law would ever have done so, if he could have got any
other Accessory? Oh! But, says she, he had bought and tempered the Poison
already; It Is impossible the Blind-man could do it of himself, tell us then,
whom he entrusted to chaffer only for the Implements of his Parricide? And why
did not the same person give it to the Old Man? Or if the Husband cannot be
deceived but by the hands of his Wife, why then did he design the Murder,
before he knew his Mother would consent? And whereas she alleges, That half of
the Estate was promised to Her; that is no Argument as yet, till it be proved. A
Woman solicited to a Villainy, how does she cast about, lest her Accomplace
should leave her in the Lurch? Besides, she should have provided her self of
Positive Proof, whether she hearkened to the Proposal, or rejected it. I shall
add, it is a very plain Case, that the Blind Youth did not hate his Mother in
Law, seeing he entrusted her with his Design against his Father, neither did he
gape after the whole Estate, for she her self says, he promised her one moiety
thereof. My Lords, no man living will ever commit a Parricide, that another is
to have the benefit of. Woman, I shall put thee to it, who were (by thy own
allegation) an Accessory and a Complice, to bring clearer Proofs of the
Young-mans Guilt. What need was there now, that the Youth should have any
Poison in the case? Come, come, produce the Witnesses to the discourse betwixt
you, and to the words pretend^d to be spoken before some Servants, or some
Friends, or even in his Fathers own hearing. It Is he easiest thing in the
world, to deceive the Pri^acy of a Blind-man. Go to, Woman, make your
^dvantages of the Youth, who trusted himself in^rely to your Eyes, who spoke
not a word but that you did indite? And whose hands were but ^our properties,
to move as you pleased. Sup^ose, I grant, that he himself tempered the Poy^^n,
and that he himself was to administer it; sup^ose likewise, I grant, that he
solicited thee a^^in for thy consent, and that by larger proffers ^^an ever.
Alas! The Parricide might have ^een discovered, whilst there was such ado about
(...) betwixt you Two. But, says she, He was ^ound with the Poison about him. A
slight evi^ence, Madam, and grounded upon as weak a ^undation; This is no
accusation against the Blind ^outh, but a Proof only that he is Blind. A man
^^at lies open to every opportunity, and is ex^osed to all kind of Mockery,
whom his very Fee^ng, and all things about him, cause to mistake, that great
matter is it, what you find about him? Or in what dress you leave him, that you
have (...) mind to betray? He from whom the Mother par^ed but just now, whose
Apparel she had right^d, whose Bosom she had ordered, whose Limbs ^he had put
in equipage, he, I say, might have Poison about him, and yet he himself know no
^^ch matter; he might have it, and yet think it any thing else Alas! If you had
been so minded, he would have showed it openly; if you ^ad but spoke the word,
he would have handled it before Servants or Friends; and if you had not said,
'Twas Poison, he would have drunk it all up. My Lords, There is no Argument
more Forceable to clear our Blind-Youth, than that, to all seeming, he was as
it were surprised in the Fact: If he had a mind to have been a Parricide, and
searched thereupon, he would have pretended to so much Innocence, at least, as
not to have had the Poison about him.

No wonder, My Lords, that the Young Man, being demanded, For whom he had
procured the Poison? returned not a word in Answer. It proceeded not from his
Fathers wrath, nor from his own grief, 'twas the thing called Poison, that the
Youth was astonished at; when such crimes are objected to us, that we think
impossible to be don, our very speech is taken from us; and sudden admiration
strikes wretched persons, Dumb. No man can hold his Peace, when plainly caught
in a Villainy, he is every jot as ready with his defense, as he was to commit
the Fact. It Is easier for those who are surprised with false accusations, to
hold their peace, than for those that are really Guilty. Pray, what would you
have a Young Man do, when his Father, whose life he had saved, propounds a
Question to him concerning a Parricide? For my part, I wonder he did not reply,
it is true, I would have Poisoned Thee, I am a Parricide; I should have thought,
he had but upbraided an unworthy suspicion in him, if he had thus answered:
It Is well, the Young Man had not learnt the Art of denial, it is well, he did
not use so many Put-offs as the Guilty do. The Poison which the poor Blinding
had about him, would have been His indeed, if he had gone ^ut to excuse it.

But, says she, he was disinherited by his Father; (...) Lords, I should think
this was a close and ^p design of the Old Man, and not at all le^^ed against
the Son, as if he would have the others accusation believed. No, no, it is a ^wn
and common custom, My Lords, that ^ves are loved to the prejudice of Children,
^^d the affection of a second match arises from (...) abatement of Natural
love to the Offspring (...) the First. An Old Man that Marries again, (...)
pitiful kind of Creature, for the more ar^tly he loves his New Bride, the less
kind he (...) to his Children; besides, that Husband must ^eds love his Wife
more passionately, who bad ^^ieu to his Son before: It Is very easy to be^^ve a
Blind Son guilty of Parricide, after you ^^ve so far mistaken, as to put it to
the Que^^^n.

(...) would willingly know, My Lords, what the ^^^^d-man did, after he knew
his Son was a Par^^^ide. He did not prepare the Apunishment in use in those
days for Parricide, where the Offender was sewed up in a Leathern Sack, with
Serpents, a Dog, a Cock, and an Ape, and so thrown into the Sea.
Culeus for him; (...) did not make him take the Poisonous draught, ^^mself; he
did not so much as turn him out of ^^ors: No, he only went and altered his
Will, ^^d so, if he would be a Parricide, he would ^ake him but a Pocr one. I
ask again, why ^ch Post-haste? Who spurred him on? What! ^ould he not have
staid, till next day? No, no, (...) would never have done it, had it not been
to ^atify his Wife. Methinks he did it so calmly, ^^d so composedly, as if he
had a mind to pat (...) Trick upon Her. What say you in the Case, all poor
affectionate Parents? Here Is a Father about to disinherit his Son? He calls
none of his kindred, he sends for never a friend, he dispatched the Writing
without a Tear, and without any Outcry at all: Alas, Old Man, the altering
ones will must be done by good advice, especially if a Son be Disinherited,
that deserves rather to be pitied, you must not think, My Lords, that the
Schedule of the Youths Crime was not annexed to the Disinherison, because it
was apparent without it. No, no man ever forbore to object Parricide to his
Son, therefore, because he was sure of it.

I beseech you, My Lords, let us consider, how each of these Two, that are
indicted for the Murder, did behave themselves the next night after the Will
was altered? As for the Youth, Innocent or Guilty, he stands still mute, and
it is hard to say, which troubled him most, if he had the Poison for himself or
for another. And for the Step-dame, she had a nice and ticklish game to play,
It Is very hard to defer a joy, which you know you do not deserve, she is
quickly persuaded, that she is preferred before the Son. Now she expects, that
her Son should plead his Cause the day after, and that all his kindred, nay the
whole Town too, might find fault with the credulous Old dotard; and indeed, the
Mother was sensible, that she was the Heiress only of one night? For no body
living can believe, but that man's Will is suborned, that was Murdered the same
night, he Disinherited his Son.

My Lords, lets now compare circumstances of both sides, a Blind-man cannot
know, where the Old Man lay, or whether he he were a sleep or no; and was it
not very unlikely he should think, that his Father could be a sleep, who so
lately had suspected, that his Son would have made him away? But you, Woman,
can observe presently when he falls a sleep for heaviness: Who tells a Poor
Blind creature of any. secret of day or night? You can also know, whether your
careful Servants watch your Chamber Door, when you are both a bed together. You
can create yourself an occasion, being Wife and Mistress too. A Blind-man
perhaps might have wandered to the wrong threshold; but you had nothing else to
mind, but give the Blow. A Blindman must needs have disturbed his Fathers rest,
in the very Act of choosing, which part of the body he was to smite, but you,
could feel his Gullet and his Breast all over, even in your very embraces.
After the Murder, we must fall to groping again, we are at as great a loss, as
we were before; as for you, you had nothing else to do, but to lay yourself
down, and away presently to sleep again. Inward Plottings are not enough for
one that would actually commit a Villainy, there are so many other requisites,
that a man, with all his Eyes about him, can hardly fetch them in. I beseech
you, My Lords, of which of the Two is it most likely the Old Man was dispatched?
Of the Stepmother, who took care to cast the suspicion on another? Or of the
Young Man, by whose presumptive Guilt, he was to Dye, even though another killed
him.

Consider, I beseech you, My Lords, the Gate and Treading of the Parricide.
Such shufling steps as his, what sleep so sound, but they would have disturbed?
Blind Buzzards take many a step, because they cannot balance their Bodies by
poyzed and fore-essayed paces, so that being long a faultring they must needs
make a deeper impression on the ground they tread upon. Besides night-repose
and quiet cannot but be much broken hereby, for a Blind-mans hands are never at
rest, but are held before him to grope things out, so that they give notice
when they are a coming. Soft steps to nocturnal Embraces cannot be made by a
Blind-man, he would discover himself strait by his rude and stamping noise:
Blindness cannot avoid what lies in his way, unless by stumbling upon it first;
If we would enter a Room, and walk up and down in it in the night, we should
view it first by daylight. In the next place, how many things were there to
do, after he had arrived at his Father? First, he must grope out the difference
between them both, as they lay abed together: Then, he must feel their Faces,
touch their Mouths, take off the Bed-cloths, that so he might find a sit place
to give the Wound* Would not all this ado wake one of the Two (...) I Will add,
that the right hand of a Wanderer makes an heavier touch: Afterward the Point
of the Sword is softly to be directed to the Breast (...) and lest a Blow,
given at random, might miscarry, the hand had need make way for the Sword How,
I beseech you, should a Blind-man have so much strength, as to complete the
Murthe at one Blow? That Wound must needs be uncertain, whose impetus is not
guided by the Eye in such a case, one cannot keep the place h^ aims at, no not
while he is drawing over to give the greater Blow. Now, did the Young Man
presently fly for it, after he had given one Stab? How could he know, whether
he had fully performed the Exploit? Should he not rather have stayed, that he
might have felt by the Carcass, whether he had made sure work, or no? And, as I
said before, when all was done, he must return with the same hazard; all things
were to be essayed with as much danger as at first. Now I appeal to your
Consciences, My Lords, whether the very Indictment it self, as it is laid, does
not make for us: If a Blind Son could neither go nor come without such a noise,
neither could he so act the Murder, that his Stepmother should not know it.
This Question, Woman, I put to you again and again, what sleep can be so dead,
that the slaughter of one so near would not disturb? Men are quickly awake with
a small thing in the night; never so little a stirring, an uncertain found,
afar off, yea sometimes silence itself, break our sleep. Perhaps you may not
perceive the last Farewell of those, who dye for pure Old Age and weakness, but
the end of a man, that is slain with a Weapon, makes a bustling noise, and is
like the end of one, where there is a violent resistance: Besides, it is
evident, that no death can be more disturbing than that, which is acted in a
trice. Grant, he was slain when he was asleep, yet we must at no hand think,
that he passed over immediately from that rest to absolve Death. There must
needs be some medium between Slumber and Death: Two such opposites cannot
easily meet, seeing Sleep it self is an Action of Life. It Is no great matter
here, whether the account of Life or of Death do break our sleep. Death it self
does awaken him, who is killed sleeping; perhaps he speaks no Farewell words,
yet instead thereof he has his palpitations, he has his tossings and
tumblings, such as shake the whole bed, he lies upon. Now you, good Woman,
pray, when did you lie more sweetly incircled with the embraces of your Old
Husband? How could you sleep so sound, who just now madst such a rout in the
House? Whose Son-in-Law was (in thy account) no less than a Parricide: And thy
Husband, a lost man. Behold, how after the deadly Blow, his hearts-blood gushed
out into thine Arms, and his Soul, flitting out of the Wound, carries many a
Groan and Sigh before it: Behold again, how that large stream of Blood does
congeal about your limbs, so that they are stiff and unable to perform their
offices; yet you do neither stir nor flinch, you fear nothing, but, in so
strange a condition, sleep on still. There is no other Plea left for a Woman to
pretend to, that must be found lying by him, whom she had Murdered. It Is not a
whit incredible, My Lords, that one should act a Counterfeit sleep, tush,
nothing is more easily imitated by a Woman's craft. I will tell you, some have
Counterfeited the paleness of dead Carcasses, yea, have held out with the
Patience of death himself against blows and dint of Weapons. It Is much easier
to Ape a matter, the counterfeiting whereof requires only to close the Eyes, to
stretch out our limbs, to stint our sighs, and to make as if we did not breath.
There is no difference between one that really sleeps, and one that
Counterfeits, but the Parties own knowledge. Don't wonder therefore, that at so
many men's coming in, at such a noise of hand and foot, at so many outcries,
she still continued in the same posture, you would sooner have, awakned her,
I Will warrant you, if she had been asleep in earnest. It Is the general guise of
Nature, a man's holds out longer in nothing, than in that, which he imitates. To
Counterfeit sleep has also this easy part in it, that he, who is taken in a
Fact, behaves himself as if he were awoke out of sleep. Tell me, Woman, what is
the meaning of this, that what disturbed the whole House, could not awake thee?
The noise made in the night did rouse all the Servants out of their nests, though
they are wont to be negligent enough, and to sleep securely without care or
trouble, neither does their fear ordinarily take first Alarm. Afterward, how
was the noise increased by peoples running up and down all the House over. The
first refuge of those that wake, is to call Help, Help, now we know help cannot
be afforded in the night time without an Outcry: When you were once up, there
was less Schreiching. Look, your Chamber-doores are broke up in trembling have,
and many lights are brought to your Bedside, and the whole Chamber was full of
Outcries, as if you had both been stretched out for liveless Carcasses. Yet
you lay still, as if you had been quite dead. Do you call this sleep? No, it is
dissimulation, that holds out to the last. My Lords, I leave it to your Wisdoms
to determine, whether the noise, which they, who first entered the Old-mans
Chamber, owned to be there, was made by the struggling of the Dying man, or by
the Woman's hurrying to carry back the Sword, after she had perpetrated the
Murder. May not this also be reckoned amongst the Artifices of the
Stepmother, that, after she had methodically contrived all the other parts of
this Villainy, she was to make a noise on purpose to raise the Family, having
only this to do, to be found (forsooth) asleep? If the Hubbub, that raised the
Family, had been made by the Blind-man in his return, he would have been
apprehended, before he had carried the Sword quite home to his Chamber.

Now, My Lords, to satisfy you, that every body in the House was astonished at
the noise, our Poor Blind-man was also found at his Chamber Door, as he used
ordinarily to pass up and down. If he could easily have gone to his Fathers
Chamber, why did he make such a stop at his own door? Oh! he has escaped all,
he is got free, he has laid up his weapon safe; sure, 'twas much easier for the
Blind-man to make as if he had been a sleep, his Eyes were closed already? I
beseech you, what greater Argument can you have of the Blind-youths
consternation, than that he started up and stood expecting the issue? Such a
lonely person must needs he more affriglited, whose Eyes acquaint him with
nothing, and whose mind, being pent up in Darkness, can make no prospect at the
Window of the Eye, he can have nothing to bear him up under his Fear. The
Young Man was surprised, where the hurry of his Fear left him. A Blind-man may
need no Guide in his own Chamber, which he traverses up and down night and day,
and has learned the way perfectly, by many knocks and stumbles: But take him
without door, over his own Threshold, he is as Blind as a Beetle, and cannot
stir a Foot, without missing his way. None in the world can be more Innocent
than our Poor Blind-man, who was neither taken in the Fact, nor in the pretense
to excuse it.

Hark, what the Young Man says in the case O my Dear Father, quoth he, as soon
as ever the noise in the House, and your Dying Groans did seize me, I presently
starred up, as 'twere to deliver you again out of the Fire. Then, and not
before, wretched I found the disadvantage of Blindness: I stood stock still,
till I was told, you were Murdered, and whilst others in their fright ran
hither and thither, I, Poor man, found no other thing to do, but to be in a
permanent fear. O that some good Deity or other would have lent me Eyes for a
moment, I would then have entered the first man into my Fathers Chamber, perhaps
I might have heard some of his dying words, I might have spoke to and asked him
a Question, though I could not see him. Servants are dilatory and timorous in
doing their duty. I should have found you, Good Madam, in your waking posture,
before you had composed your self to personate sleep.

Ay, but what says she, The Blind-mans Sword was found all-Bloody. My Lords, no
Blind-man is so audacious, as to bring back a Sword, when he had just then
committed a Murder with it, and a man, whose bosom was searched just before
for Poison, would never carry back his weapon to his Chamber, which he could
not put our of sight, nor conceal, though he knew it was all Bloody. My Lords,
this seems to be a piece Impudence scarce tolerable. The Woman says, she could
not filch away the Blind-mans Sword, when he was asleep, who has nothing to say
in her own defense, but that she was asleep. It Is far easier to cheat
Blind-men, when asleep. They sleep more soundly, who go to it in the bitterness
of their tired Spirits. As for one that is Dark, one may easily conveigh away
his Sword, though he be awake. But how finely does this Plea frame now: The
careles^est person in the World would never act at such a rate, it is far easier
for them that have Eves, to Imitate the Blind, in laying up a Bloody Sword so
safely. These are all the pretenses and excuses he can have, that uses another
man's Weapon in a Murder.

I find, My L^rds, that our Poor Youth is very much offended, that he is put to
his defense by dint of Proof and Argument. We owe this Worthy person our
Patronage for his Piety in the loss of his Eyes, the rest of our Plea must be
spent in admiring him. Methinks, My Lords, I see before my eve a fresh and
rennew'd prospect of his incredible adventure. The Youth snatched up his Father
in his Arms, and marches with him throw the raging and increasing Flames.
Perhaps, you think, I am going to say, he hastened to get out, and to make his
Escape; no, the p^or Youth is in haste to go again; his Limbs were shreiveled
by the smartness of the Fire; yet he covered his Father with all his Embraces,
and tho his own Eyes were almost burnt out, yet he covered none but his Fathers
with his hand. Think not now, that I am astonished or wonder at this; That he
was able to carry so great a burden throw the midst of the roling Flames, and
through the ruins, ready to fall about his ears. No, so hard a thing as it was,
yet I will tell you what exceeds all human belief, it seemed to him very easy.
Bless me! What an hardy piece of Piety was here, to rush a second time into the
Flames, where he had almost lost his Father before. Now there was no such thing
as a Closet, there was now no House standing, yet where was it not, that he
thought not his Mother a burning? The Poor Youths Limbs were now all on Fire,
the Flames had enclosed him as he ran up and down, all that sort of strength,
which he had remaining, was to seek out his Mother, but with his Eyes only.
This was not the First and chiefest damage by the Fire, to destroy his burning
Eyes, his hands could nor protect his scorched Face, but while they were
searching for his Mother, his Eyes and all were burnt out. Yet again, the
unhappy poor man gropes all over the Fire, and and where the greatest cracks of
the ruins were, thither the Poor Gentleman hastened, in hopes to find her. Which
leading him out of the Fire, he was the only man preserved alive by means of
his Blindness.

If you think fit, My Lords, let the Accused Person be set in open Court: We
use to fetch much of our Proof from the grim and threatening Looks of Prisoners.
^on.
But see here, My Lords, This is the man, that, they say, ran up and down all
night! This is that wary, and successful Parricide! All his Attendants have
le^t him in his distress, and he, that is now to implore your Favor and Mercy,
has no body to guide him to your Knee, not a Servant lest, not an House to put
his head in; Speak, I beseech you, all you that hear me, speak, whether a man,
in his circumstances, destroyed his Father or lost him? What must we do now,
thou unhappyest of youths? We must fall a begging, yet we cannot crouch or
bend, as a perfect supplicant should do; so that, we fear, your favor and
compassion may be withdrawn from us; yet it is a thousand pitys that our poor
defendant should suffer under the disadvantages of his woeful plight. Come, take
me by the hand, Young man, lean upon my wrists, I Will lend thee Eyes. Why do
shrink back, poor Youth? Why so unwilling? I know, thou will not beg thy life,
yet prithee stay, stay a while, be contented to live, at least till thou art
Acquitted. As ready as thou art to dye, it is sit thou add this Crowning one to
the rest of thy Virtues, to take thy Absolution with thee before thou go hence.

Miles Marianus: OR, The name of the Officer was C. Lucius; of the Soldier,
Tribonius. See Plutarch in the Life of Marius.
A Soldier under Marius.
DECLAMATION III.
The Argument.
A Soldier under Marius, in the Cimbrick War, slew his Tribune (or Colonel,) a
Kinsman of Marius 's, for attempting to abuse him by unnatural Lust. He is
tried for his Life before the General for Killing his Superior Officer.

For the Soldier against the Colonel.
OUR Camp was injured and disgraced enough, when it came into the mind of my
mad Colonel, in the very heat of the Cimbrick War, and that before out Ensigns
(with reverence to your Sacred ears, be it spoken, Mighty General,) to hid one,
that had a Sword by his side, to prostitute himself, that so he might offer
soul and beastly violence (to say no more) to one, that was able to repel his
attempt. It carries with it a Blot, that will never be forgotten, and such a
new practice, when it comes to be known, will pass into an Example, to which
Vice cloth too too easily advance. And tho our virtuous defendant should escape
unpunished, yet in this degenerate Age, I verily believe, that more will be apt
to imitate the Commander than the Soldier Noble General, I grant, That nothing
is more unbecoming an Advocate, than to bereave his Client, when tried for his
life, of what mercy can be afforded him; yet when I call to mind For whom, and
Before whom, I speak, I hope I may boldly, and not insecurely, profess, That
your Soldier here stands fearless of the threatening Issue of this days-Trial,
whatever it chance to be: For either you will acquit him, or Innocent, or
condemn him to death, as a man of Gallantry, It Is no news for a man to be
accused for his Life, who remembers that he was born under a Law of Mortality.
Neither was he ignorant, when he first listed himself a Soldier in this Feirce
and Cruel War, that he must still look Death in the Face: Nor is he such a
Puny, but that he can bear any brunt, provided it be not upon an imoral
account: I dare be bold to say, Great General, he had never made such
resistance against his Colonel, if he had attempted his Life, as he ^ately did,
when he would have forced his chasti^y. Nor was he unmindful of what danger he
^an into by repelling the soul embraces of this furious debaucher, with his
Sword. It Is not praiseworthy in a Soldier, especially under so severe a
General as your self, if he be chaste only because ^t concerns him so to be; and
if he were never so willing to live, yet he would nor repent of what he has
don. When a Soldier kills u Foul Ravisher, if he be his Superior Officer, you
make a great ado concerning his Punishment; this I know assuredly, that if the
Soldier had been the Accused Party, you would have made no bones of his. It
will not repent him, Caius Marius, although you condemn him, (give me leave to
make as valiant a defense for the Soldier, as he did acquit himself.) If
Providence will have it so, he will go to his Execution with a resolute march,
for he is as ready to dye for his Chastity, as to stave off the Ravisher by
killing him; and thus he will carry along with him the Eternal Praise of a
Chaste Gallant. Come as many Informers as can be, yet they will never make your
Soldier more agreived for being Accused for his Life, than for being Assaulted.
Let not our mother-City Rome, ^^t not our Military Ensigns, let not our
all-conquering Eagles, let not your own Godlike virtue, Noble General, ever
suffer, that even by your Sentence, a man of Worth, nay a Roman, and a Soldier
to boot, be accounted too Chaste, who is to plead his Cause in the Head of the
Army. The chief thing now in debate, is, Whether it be lawful hereafter to levy
Foul Pathicks amongst the Bands of the Roman Legions, and drag Soldiers, who
have taken a Solemn Oath, to unclean villainy, by your Authority? Neither is the
Accuser ashamed even before C. Marius, (who seems to be a pattern sent down
from Heaven, to show, to what an high pitch Valor might advance a man) and
before his Assessors, Ambassadors, and Commanders, who wholly disavow such
prodigious Facts, to object to a Soldier, before a whole Court of War, tha^ he
was a man of courage, and not so much rough^ hewn and rustic, as that he is
but little acquainted with Arts of Impurity. As for my self; if you will
believe me, I am almost ashamed to praise Chastity in a Soldier; it is a Virtue
proper to the Female Sex. A man of courage i^ to be extolled otherwise, as
that he is fit so the War, that he values not his Flesh, that h^ is of a noble
Spirit and, if I may have leave (...) speak, worthier of the Two to be the
Commander; For of such a Kinsman, Marius, yo^ had no reason to be ashamed.

This man's Father was a Soldier, discharg^ for Age, in the Wars when we
worsted Jug^tha bolstred up with all the power of Numidis when his hands
were dismissed of Arms, he u^^ them to Country- Labor: His Mother was a good
sturdy Old-fashioned woman, pinched vvi^^ Cold, and tanned with heat, and
shared with ^r Husband in much of his Country-day-labour: his I dare say for
her, no man living could have ^ade bold with her Chastity, but he would
a^arted for it. Being thus descended, he was (...) from any unchaste Embraces;
besides, he passed (...) Childhood in continual hardship, his first ex^^cise
was to keep Cattle from being devoured (...) Wild-beasts, something always he
did above ^^s Age; his recreations were to hurl huge ^reat Stones, to throvv
the Bar, to beat Thick^s for Game; and when he grevv a little strong^^, he
went to Plough, and grub'd up Trees, (...) make Land fit for Arable; by this
means which some think the only way) he was ^^ickly hardened for the Wars. Mean
while, ^om^^he farthest parts of the Ocean, and from the ^igid Zone, and as it
were from another World, ^^me a Nation, Foolhardy, Savage, Wild, pufft ^p
with Victories and like their own Beatsts for ^^rength and Courage, and
overran all Italy: ^et they were raised not so much by their own ^^ovvess, as
by the debauchery and senselesnes (...) our Commanders; for our Party followed
the ^^ices of Peace, even in a Time of War; we ^ere nice and delicate, when our
State was ^iserable, and by this means our Feilds were de^late, our Youth
exhausted, and our Empire in ^^anger to be totally ruined: In such
circum^^ances it is very evident, the People of Rome ^ad never more need of
Gallant men to ward ^t their destruction. Upon this, when it was ^^pparent,
That the strictness of Military disci^line was neglected and diluted, so that
we must stand as much upon our Guard, to keep off our own debauches as the
Enemy, we betook our selves to you, O Marius, whose Greatness, Sanctity, and
Severity was our only refuge. Let me speak freely, at the mentioning of your
very Nam^ Parents made haste to send in their Children (...) get them listed
under you, and tho they knew it would be a very sharp War, yet they embraced it
as an Opportunity to learn the Art o^ Soldiery under your Conduct; where they
might daily be showed an Example of God-like Virtue and have you an Encourager
of their toil an^ a witness too. Tho this was an happyness common to the whole
Army, to have such a renowned General, as Marius, yet those seemed t^ have
attained an higher pitch thereof, who had the honor to be of that Regiment,
whose Colon (an high aggravation of the man's unworthyness) was your Kinsman.
What care you used Noble General, to pick out choice Soldiers for your turn,
that so you might cope with an Enemy, scarce thought conquerable by human
Power, with as brave a Militia, appears by thi^ that you, knowing Valor does
nor go by Estate overlooked that consideration, and respected only Strength and
Courage. But to what purpose Men will find fault with your Muster-roles how
ever; Those that envy you, will say, that yo^ liked only a Boy to go against
the Cimbrians; An^ yet his military age did not deceive you, the surest
standard of that, is an ability to do Valiantly. Neither was that a common
Lust, such as takes fire from beauty to wanton and venereous efforts, no, it is
rather a desperate and debauched ^uch'd desire of abuse, and a pleasure taken
in ^^lany, to vitiate the spotless: This very thing, ^at he ran foremost before
the Ensigns, that be^^^ but a Tiro he was more forward than the ^^errans, that
he used to return clotted with Blood ^^d Dust, This, this, I say, was the
reason, why was so gallant a Stripling. Beauty and Age (...) ordinary lures and
incitements to Lust, but Ganymede, that is Valiant, is one of a thousand. ^y
should I speak any more of those Scars and ^^unds which he wears, as so many
honou^le Badges of his hot Service? I am ashamed, ^^ble-General, you understand
them so much ^^thout me. I pass by his offering him to be ^e from Duty, when he
found him not pliable ^his will; and how the Officer treated the Sol^^ more
kindly (forsooth) and with greater ^^iliarity than the Laws of Military
discipline (...) admit; how that he should be excused from (...) hardest
service lie was commanded forth upon he often valued himself to him on the
account (...) his Place, and often on the score of his near ^^^tance to your self
confess, Cains Marius, ^^^s filthy Ravisher lived the longer, because the
^^^ocent Soldier did not understand his drift in these ^^olings. I dare sa^ no
more, Great-General, ^ay conceive in your mind all the circumstan^^ of that
time, think upon them again and ^^ain: Perhaps in other Cases, it may be
allow^^^e to aggravate the indignity of a Fact by (...) but here we must not
complain of our ^^ry in our. Broad-Mother-Tongue. No, we (...) be shy of
speaking; we must stiffle the ^^^th, in great part. I must play false, and
baulk my Client's Cause, if I have but comm^^^ modesty.

When our Camp was even joining with a terrible Enemies, and the whole War was
just a^ 'twere come to an upshot and push, all men^ thoughts were solicitous
about the issue of th^^ Fight just then beginning, the Shouts and Barbarick
noyses striking and hollowing in our ea^^ from all quarters. Would any one
comman^ a Roman Soldier, one that stood Sentinel, to pr^stitute his Body to his
Filthly Lust? Every man may think as he please, but in my opinion, th^^ Soldier
is not chaste enough, who, when had Arms in his hand, did only say him, Na^ For
this part of the Plea, I could with, N^^ General, you would believe our
Accusers. The own Breviats declare a matter, worthy of a m^^ who is a Roman,
and Marius's Soldier; and the^^ in they have even drawn to the Life the
spa^ling of his Eyes, the staring of his Hair, and (...) outragiousness of his
Passion; upon the very (...) overture of his obscene resolve, as if he h^^
sounded an Alarm against the Enemy, he dre^^ out the Sword he wore by his
side, which (...) received from you for the defense of all ch^^^ Roman Ladies,
and ran it throw the Heart of abominable Ravisher, yea he ran it above a so^
into his side. Ah! Marius, if all our Soldi^^ had been like him, we had been
made for ev^^ For my part, I was afraid that he stood (...) his Guard, only to
fright away the Ravish and (as it is sometimes happens) whilst thinks he will
retreat, and the other will not strik^^ such a glorious Fact had been done only
(...) Chance-medly. For, I hope, you would not re^uire this of the Soldiers
hand, that when his ^fficer, blinded with mad lust, ran upon the point of ^^s
Sword to make sure his Embraces, he should ^^en have put it up. For my part, I
think, he ^^ad scarce had the Indignation, that became him, (...) in so great
an assault, he could take any no^^ce of his Colonel. He runs to no Excuse; all
^^at he says, is, Thanks be to the Warlike God, and to the Protection of our
Eagles, I did his ^^uisiness for him, I slew him, I let out his noxious blood
with my just hand; right or wrong, done (...) is. Would he had been capable of
being kil^ed often, that so renewed punishment might have ^ortured his soul
Spirit. Our Military discipline (...) not severe enough in punishing offenses
as fast ^s they come, if after this Fact the Tribune shall ^ave any advantage
thereby, I shall not there^^re defend my Client by the denial of the Fact;
(...) man that is Valiant and Innocent must do nothing, which he means to deny.
I deny not the ^act, yea if my Accusers had been silent, I would ^ave told the
tale my self: Make your best of it. ^et, as Informers use to do, tell all. For
our ^odest Soldier is less ashamed to confess his Fact, before the Sacred Ears
of his General, than to ^omplain of his abuse. Are we not sufficiently
^isgraced already, that no enquiry is made rather, what honor should be
bestowed on so brave (...) man, and, that we may wish for something ^ear our
merit, shall the Soldier, that has done ^o renowned a Feat, be rewarded only
with ^mpunity? No, let him be Sentenced too, and, (...) you think good, let him
be put to death for daring to be chaste; Assemble together, all ye brave
Legions, bring your devout assistance from all parts; The Law of the Camp is
thus, and the Major part of you would have one part Lawful, 'tother not. Upon
my word, I can hold no longer but my grief must vent it self on my Accuser.
Answer me, if you had been an Officer, would you have done thus? Or if you had
been a Soldier, would you have endured the 'tother? Give us your opinions,
Gentlemen, settle rules of Martial discipline. The Soldier is as good as killed
by this reproach; now he is thus bespattered with such foul reflections, what
shall he do more, but say, nay? Who would not account him as infamous a
Prostitute as any, if he had acted so, as to suffer himself to be attempted the
second time?

Oh! But you will say, he should only have denied his Officer, and put off his
revenge to some other time. Yes forsooth, what shall he make his complaint,
after the filthy Tribune has had his will of him? He laid violent hands upon
him, he drew him from his assigned Post and Station, to make him a beastly
Prostitute. I ask his Accusers, pray, Gentlemen, what shall he do in this Case?
Shall he endure those lustful hands, that treat him so sorely? Shall he lay
down his Arms, or use them in his own defense? He is a stout man, he has
Authority for what he does, the Law of Arms commands it. You Will reply, It Is fit
a Soldier should obey his Officer, for hereby he may, in good time, hope for
preferment, this merit may make him a Centurion, so as to march before the
ranks, and have others sight under him. If this be the state of the Case, that
a man may not plead in his own defense, speak out, tell us aforehand if a
Ravisher must not be repelled by force, he must even take what follows, for he
cannot be kept off by an unarmed hand. Remember, our Ravisher came armed to
him, and when he was held fast in his filthy grasps, what, think ye, could he
do for himself? Must he stand to consider, or, pray, must he endure it, in
hope, upon his complaint, to have Justice done him afterward? But let all
Villainy be blasted in the attempt, for if the Lust of the foul debaucher had
proceeded as far as his wish, no less than Two had been undone for ever.

I shall therefore use freedom of speech before you, Noble General, It concerns
You most of all, what Sentence to pass upon our brave Soldier. The truth is,
nothing more can be added to his renown, save only to dye for so glorious a
Fact. Gray-hair'd time, the only incorrupt Witness of Virtue, will admire this
man, and Fathers will charge their Children to do the like, tho the punishment
of Death were incurred thereby. Pray, Sir, consider with your self, what
Principle would you have men judge you to be of? This Example cannot be
concealed on neither side: It Is certain, that when a man makes a judgment upon
it, he will think that best, which he himself would have done, in the like
case. All men past through Childhood to Mans-Estate; and it is no thanks to forsake
Lust, when Lust forsakes us. Reflect, Sir, upon your own Rise, and call to
honest remembrance your former mean Estate, and your present Greatness: Without
doubt it was nothing, but your divine Valor that advanced you to so many
Consulships, and to so many Triumphs, either born by you, or designed, for you.
Remember also, that even you your self once served under your Officer, nor
could you ever have arrived at this height of dignity in so short a space,
unless you had begun betimes. Must I not now tell you, that the Romans had
always a great regard to Chastity? Shall I mind you of the Story of Lucretia,
who ran a Sword into her own bowels, and took Vengeance on her self, tho the
Act was forced? That her chaste Soul might soon be severed from her defiled
Body, she slew her self, because she could not kill her Ravisher. Now if you
approve what the Soldier has done, it is needless to add the Story of
Virginius, who secured the Virginity of his Daughter, when he could do it no
otherwise, even by her Death, and ran the next Sword, he could catch up, into
her Body, and she also gladly received the wound. His design was only to
deliver her from Appius, but the People of Rome went further, and prosecuted
him with an Exclusion from the Senate, yea, ventring almost a Civil War upon
it, they Ordered him to be cast into Prison: Neither did any thing move the
Indignation of the Commons more than this, that he attempted to dishonor a
Soldiers Daughter. These are eminent Examples of Women, and worthy always to be
remembered. As for Men, pray, what Chastity have they unless it be, not to
attaque another.

It Is bootless for me to complain in this degenerate Age, (for whose ears are
open to hear me?) How Nature it self is overborn by obscene Lusts, and polluted
Males supply the place of Females, so that Lust runs mad even upon its own
Sex. But vice it self (we see) puts some stint to its own progress, and his
villainy could proceed no further, when he had debauched so likely and hopeful a
Youth. Now what a mad bui^^nes is this? Young Soldiers are ^^sted for
Concubinate, and he, who is himself perhaps a Married man, is called forth to
act the part of a Woman. For my part, I rejoice in behalf of our Martial
discipline, I rejoice, I say, in the reputation of our Camp, if this were the
First Customer, that a Tribune, of his humor, met withal. Is it so indeed,
(for I choose to inveigh against his Fury, as if he were alive before us,) must
thy Prostitutes take pay as Soldiers, and must Wanton Gamesters be haled under
thy Colors? Was it for this that Harlots were cashiered our Army, and that no
naughty Huswife must come there? It Is just so, for what need of Females, as
long as thou can attaque a Soldier, (i) one more than a man, yea and one too,
that was just ready to charge the Enemy, whom his Country had trusted with her
safety by reason of his special Valor. Perhaps it was for this, that wherever
an Alarm was given, thou did walk the Rounds, and Visit the Corpse du Guard.
Ah, you would have made a goodly Colonel, if none but Young Gentlemen had been
under you. Is not this downright fury? Is it not apparent madness? Here Is a
man, with a Sword by his side, fenced with an Iron Coat of Male, his Head
locked in an Habergeon, and, to strike a greater terror, his Crest waving up
and down; thou feast Marius his name engraven in his Buckler; in a word, a
S^ldier all over, armed in Martial habit Cap a pee. Does this Dress make him
look like a Prostitute? Do you think such a one is for your turn? If you offer
violence to him, what can you expect thereupon? Shall he remember you to be his
Captain, when you don't remember him to be your Soldier? Iron.
For we have time, I wis, to be wanton; we have nothing else to do, when all
things go so well, according to hearts desire, and our Commonwealth is so
little concerned, that it may easily be restored, if our Soldiers be but Civil.
At this juncture our business is, not so much to enlarge our Empire, nor to
reduce more Outlandish Provinces, (as of late we did) we are disputing now for
Italy, our Native Country, we stand up for our Religion and Liberty; whether we
shall be destroyed by Fire or by Sword; whether a Barbarous Enemy shall cut us
off r^ot and branch; whether we shall change our Italian Dialect for Cimbrick
Gibbrish. All our Liv^s and Safeties are at stake, (for we can suffer nothing
else, no not from an Enemy. An incredible multitude of People is fallen down
upon Italy, so numerous, that even their own v^^t Land could not maintain them;
Their bodies are of a monstrous bigness, and their humors Savage, even in the
account of the very Germans. The feilds are covered far and near with the
multitude of our Slaughtered Bodies. Those, who were discomfited under Carbo
and Sylla, compared with us, are in an happy condition. Scaurus is fallen,
having lost his Army before; Servilius and Manlius, each of their Armies
consisting of so many Legions, have been lost. A People, that had overrun the
greatest part of the World in Triumph and Victory, is now at last stopped by
Marius alone. Pray, let me put a Question to you, Great Sir, in this State of
Affairs, which had you rather, such Soldiers, or such Officers? In such a hurry
of War, you would scarce give leave even to Lawful Dalliances; For the higher a
man is advanced in Honor, his Example is the more conspicuous to all that
behold him. When some lie Perdue in their Arms, others secure Avenues and
Passages, and some Man the Works, scarce eating their meat but on their
sheilds, and that standing too, what! shall a Commander mean while tumble with
his Whores? Is this all the watch he keeps? Can he not forbear, and put on a
Guise of Temperance for so little a while, for fear his Soldiers should scent
his Pranks? Besides, if the Tribune were yet alive, and this Fact came before
you, Noble General, with your whole Army about you, how would you determine,
that they might not think it an Abuse of a single Soldier only, but even of the
whole discipline of War? What Sentence would you pass? It Is a Courtesy done to
you, O Marius, it is a Courtesy, you are now Excused from passing the Sentence
of Death upon your Kinsman.

For, Sir, if we reason right, the whole Empire of Rome to this day stands by
Martial discipline. Our Soldiery is not more numerous than That of other
Nations, nor are our Bodies hardier than those of the Cimbrians, we talk of;
There are diverse Countries richer than Ours, and many Barbarick People can
look Death in the Face more sternly, than We, because they have not such
Temptations to desire Life: It Is only the severity of our Orders, the managery
of our Militia, a Love of hardships, and a daily Practice of War by continual
Exercise, that makes us Masters. We overcome more by our Demeanor, than by main
Strength: It Is reckoned an Irreligious thing amongst us, if we take any Female
Prisoners, to offer violence to them, and there is no such thing as Abuse, no not
to an Enemy. I grant, Sir, that these Regulations have been intermitted by the
debauchery of your Proud Nobles, but they are again revived in your Conduct.
Believe it, My Lord, the Gods themselves tender and direct your Greatness in
this, that, as an accession to your ^ther praises, they have offered you a New
occasion to pass so just a Sentence. If you acquit your Soldier, for acting so
Valiantly, the Example is wholly yours; unless perhaps, you think I check at
this, that he was s Tribune; upon my word he was so much the worse for that,
and worthier to die more than a single death. For this is the Case of
Superiors, what they do seems a Command, and the Greater the Author in a bad
matter, the more pernicious his Example. Who shall now restrain the Soldiery?
Who shall give out strict Precepts for Camp-discipline? When you, My Lord, are
taken up with greater cares, I ask, who shall execute the Law upon faulty
Soldiers? Who shall Chastise and Punish the Offenses of a Commander? To whom
can I fly for refuge? To whom can I complain? You see, at last, there is a
necessity laid upon us, we must avenge our selves. Oh, but he was a Commander,
and (say I) so was this a Soldier. A Commander, you say, you mean such a one,
that the Law enjoins a Soldier to obey; one that has Authority not only over
Common-Soldiers but Captains too, and shares a part with the Commander in
Chief. I warrant, you think, the Soldier had done something against the Law of
Arms, if he had only said his Tribune, Nay. Iron.
Poor Novice, he did not know, what such Great Commanders could do? He was not
acquainted with the Privilege of their Places. Give me leave, Noble Marius, if
a shameless beastly Soldier should have been brought before you, would you have
endured him to have said, My Colonel Commanded me? But if the Fault be equal on
both sides, yet this Crime does not misbecom your Soldier. 'Twas a Commander
that offered the Abuse.

I seem to be transported, Noble General, and to forget my weak Parts, that,
being scarce able to defend one, go about to plead for a whole Army. Imagine,
All these Legions, that stand about you, the Flower of Italy, the Choice of our
Countrymen and Allys, do cry out with one voice before your Tribunal, We
neither can nor will submit to the unclean Abuse of a Tribune. Not a man of us
refuses the Toil of hard marching; we will carry our snapsacks or any other heavy
luggage upon our Armor, with all our hearts; we are willing to abide the
parching heat of Summer, and the pinching cold of Winter, under our Leathern
Jackets. Weary, as we many times are, we will scale Trenches, we will lie Perdue at
Walls and Works, we will fall on Valiantly in the hotest skirmishes; As for our
Wounds, we will count them our Honor, and we will embrace Death it self before an
ignominious Abuse. What we suffer in Fight, is noble. Let our Tribune command
us the cruellest marches, where the Enemy's to be beaten back, tho he have the
advantage of an Hill, and where we are to scout through Woods that the Enemy has
possessed before us; In a word, let him lay it on upon our backs, let him inure
us to the Patience of Slaves; even a Slave has some Exemption from a Bawd and
Pandar, nor can you sell your Captives, but upon such conditions. If we are
under a Command only to be obscene, if we take up Arms, and yet may not repress
the Abuse of a Foul Aggressor, let us deliver up our Quarters, and let the
Cimbrian stop the Tribunes Fury. The Germans themselves are unacquainted with
such wickedness, and there is more Religion and Conscience, even amongst the
Laplanders. What will the end be, My Lord, if a Soldier must be Conquered,
before his Chastity can be secured? Does not your Excellency remember what a
great Sedition arose heretofore amongst the People of Rome, when a Slave rushed
out of a Usurers House with his Back all torn with stripes, and in his
complaint told the People, he bore those marks of punishment, because he would
not suffer himself to be unnaturally abused? Yet he, tho he was so vile as to
attempt so foul a Villainy on a Bondsman, one almost a Slave and scarce Free, was
somewhat mindful of the Roman sanctity in not assaulting any, but one that had
his hands bound. Yet the Revenge of the People of Rome proceeded so far, that,
tho War was at the door, yet none of them would be Listed, till satisfaction
were given by the punishment of that corrupt Aggressor, and the Abrogation of a
Law. They refused to serve, tho he was no Soldier, who received the Abuse. What
should I speak of Fabius Eburnus, who put his own Son to death, when, upon a
private Examination of his Cause, he found him Guilty of Uncleanness? So that
now, Brave Comrade, whatever the issue be, tho the General perhaps may condemn
thee to dye, it is better still, than to be dispatched by thy own Father.

But, (say you) he was Marius's Kinsman. Now, you go to tamper with the Judge,
and to hang the motive of Kindness to his Kindred upon his mind, that is
otherwise unbiassed. You say, he was your Kinsman. It Is fit, that every Body in
the World should hear your Sentence, if you give it for your near Kinsman. For
if, as a Judge, you allow your self to do any thing partially for your own
ends, think with your self, what Envy this will raise upon you, amongst those
who already carp at your Merit, when you shall seem to adjudge the Ravisher of
a Soldier, Innocent; or shall vindicate your own Kinsman, as long as he is
Nocent. This is not the first time, My Lord, that base Envy seeks an advantage
to snarle at your Exellencys illustrious Virtue; and the Nobility, who are
naturally averse to all that are raised on a sudden, tho at present they are
hushed and quelled, as being overborn by your deserved praise, yet peep
narrowly for an opportunity of Fault-finding. And if I understand the nature of
Envy, they will also cast this in your teeth, that 'twas your own Kinsman,
forsooth, that was found tardy. And therefore a necessity is laid upon you, to
abdicate and renounce that Blood, which is none of your own. For certain, you
can do no less than revenge the Villainy on him, who, among those that malign
you, will seem to have acted it by your Connivance or Permission. For should
not he, if ever he called to mind he was your Kinsman, have striven with might
and main to have Copyed out all your Virtues, of which your Fortune is the
Lowest, especially having the advantage to be so near in view of Them and You?
Should he not have made this return for the happyness of being your near
Kinsman? I am sure, your Soldiers imitate you better. If the Tribune should
have escaped with his life after his foul resolve, Envy must needs have twitted
him too with this, that 'twas no other than Marius's Kinsman had played such a
filthy prank, and that a naughty Cyons shot out from so Virtuous a stock. But
when any Family is well rid of such an Infamy, what boot is it every foot to be
objecting it to Marius? It had been very well, if our General had never had any
such Kinsman at all, and it is as well, that he parted with him so willingly.

May it please your Excellency, I have now done with my Plea, as well as my
mediocrity was able to manage it, The Commendatory Part is yet behind, but that
is utterly needless before such a Sanctity as yours. For what need I fear, That
meanness should be prejudicial to a Defendant, before you, who look upon
disrobed and naked Virtue, as acceptable of it self, and who counts this the
greatest Glory for a man to raise his own Fortune? I commend to you the state
of a Private Soldier, that you may glance upon him from an high, as one wishing
to grow Great by your own method. Hitherto perhaps Nobility bore the greatest
sway, but you have improved that Noble Estate, which challenges such a long
Train of Ancestry. You could not expect, that a Youth, of his years, should
have done more bravely. Yet when I have set before you so Gallant a man, one so
fit to serve under you, and worthy of all the Preferment, that attends your
Service, still I offer to your further consideration, that, for ought I know,
he is a General in posse. I know you don't expect this from him, that at the
Close of my Plea, he should come and fall upon his Knees, and beg his life with
pitious moan, and all-humble supplications. You do not expect to be Entreated
by the Innocent, nor has a Valiant man (as such) any need of Acquittal. All
that he desires is this, that if you demur on his Case, you would respit the
matter to the next Battle. There put him in the Forefront, place him, I say,
not among the Punys, but (let me speak a proud word) even before the Standard,
where most danger is, and where the greatest throng of the Enemy presses the
sorest: Do but look then and there how he behaves himself; now, I dare be bold
to say, you will have less kindness for the Tribune. Nay, pray, let him Charge,
let him Grapple with the Enemy hand to hand. If your Soldier must needs be
slain, I beg of your Excellency, that you would be the better for his Death.

Mathematicus: OR, The Astrologer.
DECLAMATION IV.
The Argument of this Declamation is a CASE grounded on a double LAW.
LAW the First, A man, that had done good Service for his Country in the War,
might choose what reward, he pleased. LAW the Second, He that intended
Self-murder, was first to render a Reason of his Resolve in open Senate, or
else his Body was to be thrown out, without Burial. The CASE. A certain Man
went to an Astrologer, to know, What manner of Person, his Wife (then big with
Child) went with. His Answer was, That He should be a Valiant man First, and
afterward a Parricide. It happened, when the Touth was grown up, he fought
bravely for his Country; But upon his return from the WAR, he gives Reasons in
Court, why he intended to make himself away; His Father appears against it.

For the Son against the Father.
NOble Patricians, I am placed in the midst of Two such sad Extremes, that I am
neither worthy of Death, unless you judge me a Parricide; nor of Burial, unless
you think me Innocent. Being thus entangled and held fast in the mockery of so
miserable a Dilemma, I sue for your Hatred, as the greatest Favor you can do
me; and I beseech you, above all those particular events, which the succession
of Truth predicted concerning me, has evidenced and declared, you would
believe, I now bring sufficient Credentials of the Calamities, that overpress
me. It Is by reason of Parricide, (...) would kill my self; but (...) ^^^ms,
s^^ps in, and says, I must not* It Is not the ^ger alone, has told the World
and the (...) to come, that these my hands shall Mu^th^^ my own ^^ther, my own
mind misgives me the same. I carry an Heart about me, that presages more dire
mischeifs, than the Response of that Sacred Artist. Like an unhappy man, I have
nothing in my thoughts, but what is a terror to me: Yea, That Villainy, which
the Piety of my Father and the Innocence of all my other Relations presume
against, That, I say, do I feel, groan under, and cannot deny.

Yet, lest any should think me to lie under a great mistake of judgment, be
pleased to hear my Reason, why I cannot doubt in the least of my hard Fate. He
that is Born to commit a Parricide, believes he shall do it, yet he is not
afraid to prevent it, by dispatching himself. In the first place, then I beg
this Boon of your Public Wisdoms, that you would not be contented with this,
as the Sum or All of my Innocence, that I would fain make myself away. Though I
seem to contend with Art, to master Necessity it self, and to bafflle Fate, I
would not have you therefore think, that I may be safely trusted with my Life.
Though I am willing to Dye to prevent it, yet, I cannot say, but I should commit
it: Nay, (if you will believe me) that which you call Constancy is but
Infirmity; the reason I fly to this last refuge, is, because I know my own
Heart too well. The entire deliverance of my discouraged Mind is yet in my
power, but Death it self will shortly be out of it. I beseech you, Noble
Senators, hope no better from my miserable Piety I, that am willing to Dye,
that I may not commit a Parricide, don't see but I must commit it, if I be
suffered to live.

As for my Father, who would have me live against my Will, I don't wonder at
him, because he is still overjoyed at the acquist of my Martial Glory, which is
yet fresh before him, his Eyes and his Mind are wholly intent on my brave
Atchievments, so that he cannot see the Parricide through the Champion.

This is the Ground, why he would save me, though I am predestined and ordained
to such mischief, and when he has done thus much for me, as to bring me up,
when my Virtues were yet dubious, future, and presumptive, now he would do more
for my actual gallantry, that I should not Dye. And, because I may seem to put
an end to my Life, for the Piety and Reverence I bear to Him, he charges
himself with the Parricide; and in the loss of his Children, which he thinks he
is the Author of, he regards not so much my safe deliverance, as his own
natural affection. A Son, that desires to Dye, that he may be no Parricide,
thinks he cannot otherwise be rewarded, than to let him Dye. There was reason,
great reason, why his sad Thoughts, and foreboding Fears should send the Poor
Old Man to the Fortune Tellers. 'Twas my Fate, that I should be declared a
valiant Man first, and then a Parricide: Whether it were, that the
extraordinary fruitfulness of his Poor Wife did disturb his Nights-rest by
troublesome Jogs; or, whether the Old Man's careful Nights and direful Sleeps,
caused by sad and dismal Apparitions, sent him to the Cunningman, the very
Chief of that mysterious Art. Go he did, and to Him he carried not hopes or
greedy desire, but sight, fears, pale looks, constant presages of some dismal
mischief or other to ensue: What can you call this, Worthy Senators, but the
first insuperable necessity of a Fatal Instinct? He was driven to enquire of
the Astrologer concerning his Wifes Issue, and when he had so done, he did not
believe the Oracle.

Let me tell you, my Lords, of what Authority the Astrologer was, whom my
Father, in his great Fear, thought fit to consult. He was a Man, I speak what I
know, that by many good Proof, and Experiments had merited, that People, in
their Cares and Fears, should fly to him as to the Oracle of the Gods, and a
Breast full of Divine Spirit: 'Twas said, that he inspected the Nature of the
whole Heaven, digested and ranged the Constellations into their Number of Stars
respectively, and was amazed at the Prospect of his Fate, as to both Public
and Private concerns: With such an heap of good and bad Events, he was frighted
more than the Quaerent himself, and 'twas long before he could put down in
Writing, what he saw in the Scheme. But see, what a venerable Old Man this was,
and worthy to whom the Fates should reveal their Secrets. When the Child, he
was consulted about, had many joyful Omens for his young and tender Years, he
was not content to foretell the best only, but (which is an undeniable Evidence
of his veracity) he told All that the Figure held forth, and declared openly,
that he should first be a brave Warrior, and then a Parricide. What a daring
answer was that? When he was to presage the highest Villainy, he told us we
should believe him in that, as far as his other presages had ^^ld good before.
For you may be sure, his Father would never have been at the charge of bringing
him up, if the Astrologer had told him the melancholy part only, and had not
said, his Lot should be first Victorious. Neither did the Astrologer's Judgment
fail him a Jot, no, not in any one Circumstance; he said, she should have but
One, and that a Male, and that he should live to be a notable robust Youth, all
true to a Title. Besides, his Answer did as well hit even foreign
Circumstances, as that there would be a War, a potent Enemy, and an Army levied
to be kept on Foot, till he was able to make no mean Figure in it. And my
Father was so far from being deterred by the Prediction of his own danger, that
he himself, he, I say, (such is the inevitable force of Fate) girt on my Arms,
and equipped me for the Battle, with his own Hands, as if now he were assured
of the Astrologers Truth. No man need wonder, that he did not slight the
Response, while he was in hopes, I should do bravely: And now, he will not have
me Dye, though there is nothing left for me to do, but to Murder Him. O Death,
who art commendable in the Brave, desirable by the Wretched, and no
back-Friend even to the Happy! How often have I courted thee, how often have I
desired to meet thee in Battle? I call Heaven to Witness, I put my Life in my
Hands, not in Ostentation of my own strength, nor for a Puff of vainglory, but
that my low esteem of my self might put me upon some brave Service for my
Country, whereby I might spend my forlorn Life, and my predestined and
reprobated Person for the Public Good. There, alas, I first learnt, how many
things we did in Ignorance, and how many things we did against our Wills.
Desperate Combatant, as I was, I rushed into the thickest the Enemies Troops,
and lo their Army divided, and let me come. By my self alone, I ran where the
hottest Service was, and not a Man was able to beat me back: I laid bare my
Skin for the adverse Blows, my Breast was open to received dint of sword or
dart, aimed at me from all Quarters, and yet the Weapons fell down by me,
without any Execution. Oh miserable I, in the event of my frustrated hopes! I
came bravely off, even when I sought to be slain. Away, all ye that come to
gratulate me; be gone, ye that think to commend me, I am not going from Temple
to Temple, I give no thanks to the Deity, no, I am come home for no other
purpose, but to prove my self a Parricide. You know, how my poor Conscience was
cast down thereupon with shame and confusion: I had not the Heart to come back
to my Father with my Armor on; believe me, I was afraid, when he ran out to
meet me, lest while he kissed and embraced me, he might run unawares upon the
Conquering Sword, in my Hand.

Amongst other Acclamations of the Army, when they brought me back, what was
the Vogue of the People round about me? even this, Oh brave and happy Youth,
(said they all) provided he Died immediately. Let Heaven and Earth assist me,
whilst I earnestly desire, whilst I long, to Dye: Take some pity on me, don't
cool my eagerness to part with my Life, with an unseasonable delay. I tistify
and proclaim to all the World, I stand upon the very last precipice of my Fate,
I am afraid I am not far from Murdering my Father, according to Prediction,
when I am so willing, even to Dye, to prevent it: Dear Father, why do you still
detain me? why do you stop me, that am hastening away? 'Tad been better, I had been
stifled in my Mothers Womb, or else that I had been speedily dispatched, before
my impure breath had polluted my Native Air and Soil. Grant, it was my Father's
Love to his Country, that drowned and overcame his private Fears; grant, he
gave such a Villain as my self Education, in prospect of some Service I was to
do for the Commonwealth, yet now all is done and ended, that induced him to be
at charge to bring me up; there is now but one Point of my Fate behind, and
that is the last Villainous Fact I am to do. What do you mean? It Is in vain to
comfort me with your patient resolution and constancy; I say, your Case and
mine are not the same; you are in danger to be Murdered, and I am in danger,
will I nill I, to Murder even my own Father.

This then is the first Excuse I make to you, Noble Senators, for craving my
Reward, hitherto let me be looked upon only as a Valiant Man, let me insist
only on that branch of the sacred Law, to make it a Plea for my destined End.
Do you think, I will mention the solemn Formulary of my Wish, That high deserts
are not to be rewarded with a strict equality, or just so much? No, he that
has done bravely is to be requited as bountifully, as the large Promises that
set him a Work. My Country was never less able to make amends to any Man than
my Self. I did that for Her, that I am bound to Dye presently after. But, pray,
take no care, I will never ask the top-reward the Law allows, that infinite,
that boundless, Privilege, indulged by Law in the Case, tho I may desire it,
yet I confine it to my naked Self. Titles, Statues, Dignities, reserve them for
those that must live: Grant me only my Father's safety, my own Innocence, and a
good Name after I am gone. Therefore I pray deny me not this Reward, for then
it may be thought, that you hated my Valiant Acts too. My choice is clearly out
of the reach of Envy, seeing I require only that, which I might have obtained,
before I behaved my self so bravely. That I give you an account of my Choice by
the by, let no man think, that I am less confident of my Reward, or of the
Causes thereof, because I have made my Petition on both accounts. Pardon one,
that longs to go out of the World, if I have annexed Two Petitions together,
when One would serve. Nay further, I beseech you, if there be any other Law
extant, that can help a Man forward to his desired end; acquaint me with it,
let me have the benefit thereof. In giving me Liberty to kill my self, let me
Dye for my Reason's sake, let me be Buried for my Guerdon's sake.

I am sensible, my Lords, this is the first Boon I am to desire of the Public
Commiseration, that you would not think me loath to Dye, because I urge so many
things about the Ground of my Resolve, and because I Petition for that from
you, which my own hands can grant without you. I confess, I have deserved such
sinister Interpretations; that I might Dye as a Man of Valor, when I came
home, I threw away my Arms, I acquired the Peoples favor, I received the
Applause of the Town. But whether it be the great esteem we have for a decent
Interment, it being a pitiful weakness incident to all Men, to fear something
after, tho they do fear Death; or whether he, that desired to Dye to clear his
Innocence, must do it with a composed and undisturbed Spirit, upon one or
'tother of these accounts, pardon, I beseech you, my lothness for a while,
pardon my Patience, and my Delay. If I had made my self away immediately, I
must have Dyed as a plain Parricide.

I hope, Worthy Senators, my Fathers appearing against me will not defeat me of
my reward, sometimes there ought to be that Esteem for high meries, that they
may seem to dispense with Obedience to Parents; so that either our applauded
Virtue does balance and counterpoise the moment of a Fathers Authority; or
else we begin to renew our Obedience, when we have enjoyed our Choice. Let not
then my Father's gainsaying my design, move you. You never met with any Body
yet, that had a mind to Dye, but one or other was against it. If a Man have no
dear Relations, yet he will be stopped from such an Act, by the fear of those
that hear of his Resolve, or by their comfortable and prompt Exhortations to
the contrary: But for Parents, indeed all their care is, to make much of their
Children, and to be timorous of their Death. If we be taken from them never so
justly, yet they cannot bear it; if we suffer Death for heinous Crimes, yet
they still count us innocent and worthy of Commiseration. But in my Case, Noble
Senators, my particular Duty and Reverence adds to the impatience of my Good
Old Father. It Is impossible for a Son to persuade his Father to let him Dye, if
he seem to kill himself for his Father's sake.

Thus far of the Laws, and of the Merits of my Prowess, I come now to the mere
Fatal part. I am resolved I say, I am, resolved, to Dye for the Causes before
alleged. You may know, what I mean by this my Resolve, tho I cannot speak it
out. Consider, I pray, what has brought me on thus far, here begins my
Resolution. Imagine, that one of the vulgar desire the Reward, I do? It ought
not to be denied him, if he has just Ground for his demand, and it cannot be
denied, if he has not. You cannot but fear, lest a Man's inconstancy should
push him on to this rashly, and without any Ground; and it is credible, that
Life can speak for it self, as much as can possibly be urged before any C^urt.
I cannot abide your Gratulations, keep your Complements to your selves, how
long will it be, that you will think me unwilling to Dye? This is the first great
thing, that Nature has devised for Man's safety, that we Dye against our
Wills; and against so many cross Accidents she relieves us with a Patience
well-poized. Hence it is, that even in the midst of torments and despair, yet
men entertain a poor desire of prolonging Life. Do you think, I am not
concerned at all, that I am but in the Flower of my Age? That I have newly
begun to taste the pleasures of Life, and the enjoyments of this World? Oh, how
am I taken, when I call to mind, that I was brought back from the Field upon
Men's Shoulders, and Who but I was the Theme and Discourse of the Town? Believe
me, as often as I reflect upon these Wounds of mine, and upon my Arms dropping
with the Blood of the Enemy, I raise my mind above the Ties of Necessity, I
place my self superior even to Fate. But alas! all these things are now
vanished and gone, they are all surmounted and yield to the more honest Motive
of taking revenge on my self. What Obligation have I to be concerned any
further for this Body of mine, that even my Eyes loath to look upon? And with
which my hasty Soul quarrels, and cares not how soon it is discharged from?
These Limbs are none of mine, since I can wound and pierce them, as if they
were mine Enemies. A man that has taken his last Farewell of the World, you may
give him Time, if you please, but Life you cannot; and his desire to die grows
higher and higher, the more it is forbid. More happy is he, that dies before
his time, and before he desires it. It Is almost too late for that man to
renounce his life, when all men think he has no reason to preserve it. You may
deny death only to that person, whose life ought legally to be taken away by
Another, rather than Himself.

As for the Law, that commands an intended Self-Homicide to render a reason
thereof beforehand, or else his body to be cast out without Burial, if he made,
such have to leave the World without telling and declaring it before: He is
deceived that Constru's it so, as if men should be obliged to live whether they
will or no. Alas! The Law takes no notice of men's rashness in killing
themselves, nor does it willingly make a strict inquiry into other men's Greifs;
It foresaw, that those, who were Guilty of great Crimes, and thereupon in fear
of greater Torments, would otherwise be so hardy, as to put an end to their own
lives, and show no cause at all: And therefore lest they might prevent part of
their punishment, by an overhasty end, it was further Enacted, that the Body
of the Offender should be cast out Unburied. The Law is Mild and Gentle, it
requires only, that the Cause of Self-murder should be assigned, not descanted
upon.

If then I am asked the reason, why I would lay violent hands on my self I can
answer in the P^^^^ (...) of all ^^nkind* but 'twould be ^and^^ for m^, to
(...) ^^^^^n wh^ I should Live. Wretched man! What boo^'s it, to detain thy
Soul for so long a time, (provided thou run out thy natural course) in the
dolesom Prison of thy Body? If we make a due search into, and a right estimate
of, all the joys and pleasures of the whole World, that do either take our Eye
or please our Fancy, the Foot of the account will be, That a man's whole Life is
but, as it were, one day. Alas! Those are mean and abject Spirits, that are not
cloved with the return of the same things over and over again; but he, that is
better instructed, and knows what the End of the Good, and what True happiness,
is, never thinks he dies too soon: Every days Life satisfies him, that lives to
his Soul and inward Man.

You expect now, I should instance, that upon comparing the fears and calamitys
with the joy and prosperity we meet with h^re below, the number of avoidable
things does far exceed, in this short seen of our Life. Let us take a just
estimate of those satisfactions, for which we weary Heaven with our Prayers,
and for whose sake we complain our Life is short. What are they all, but
Vanity, Humor, Height of living, Lust? Are we not even ashamed to run through
debilitys, crosses, tedious diseases, for such poor things, as these? Yea, when
we may escape them, we had rather grene under them? Imagine, you heard Nature
accost you with such an Harangue, as this; Behold! thou art admitted into to
the stately Share and Partnership of the Universe, and of the enjoyments
thereof, and for many a Successive Age, being born at last to dye, thou have
enjoyed what I could afford thee; now let others succeed, make room for them
that come after thee. Do thou not know, the longer thou live, the more
unwilling ^hou wilt be to dye? Let your Term of Life be never so much
prolonged, let one man live as ^ong as two, yet he must needs go off miserably,
that dies unwillingly.

Don't you wonder, that I hasten mine own end? Does not every day, that passes
over my head, do the same? Nay every hour, by silent and unobserved moments,
makes nearer approaches t^ my last end. And whilst we are basely taken up with
the thoughts of living to perpetuity, we dye aforehand every minute of our
Flitting Age. Let us rather find a remedy by our Exit, and a releif in our
fatality; let us bid Adieu to ^he World willingly, with deliberation, full of
con^entedness, yea let us give Thanks that our Time (...) come. He only has
lived as long as he could wish, who chooses, at such a time, to put an end ^o
his Life. Let all the sad and severe Motives, I ^ave, favor me, let all Virtue
vote with me, ^s I desire to dye so magnanimously. Is it not enough, think you,
to hasten my end, that I ^ave done so gallantly? It Is the Badg of a base and
ignoble Spirit to reckon ones life by number ^f years. For my part, (so weary
am I, or ^o sated with years, that) my Valorous atcheivements have made me,
Old. Why do I stay any ^onger among the Diseases and Casualties, here below.

I, that have been received with public Congratulations, shall appear
contemptible by my present low condition. They must needs fall to less value in
tract of Time, whose Greatness began only by success; when no room is left for
more atcheivements, nor felicity to reward or crown them. It Is madness to dye,
when our Estate and Honor sinks with us, and so to spin out a decaying Life. I
reckon, no old men live with less esteem than those, who, when time was, were
the bravest Sparks. What! Would you have me stay, till inglorious gray hair
misbecome my mortifyed Limbs? Till my bloodless Carcass is scarce able to creep
a high-lone? Till these glorious hands of mine shall not be able to feed or
dress me? Oh! how sad, how dolesome it is, to remember, what one has been in his
prime? to tell a long Tale of the many scars one carries about him, and to
serve up the cold remembrance of things past long ago? Whereas now, men will
not believe, you were ever able to perform such Exploits, but you will be
scoffed at, even for your own Memoirs. No, I must leave the World upon a push,
while my Body is active, and my Spirit brisk, whilst Men are loath to part with
me, and when I shall be missed; and for all this, I would fain be beholding to
my own Hands, to my own Courage. Let all that is in Heaven and Earth favor me.
I have found the Port of Death, whilst I bear the Name and Credit of a Man,
highly deserving by his Valor.

But this Plea is common to others as well as myself. I come now to what is more
peculiar to myself. If the Astrologer had foretold, I should have lost some of
my Limbs, or that I should have a Sick languishing Body, you would all pardon
me, if I avoid so great misfortunes, tho they had been uncertain; but what I
dread, and tremble at, is far greater: He threatens me with my own Valor, and
that naught but my own Courage, shall be my ruin. So he has left me not a
moment of Life, wherein I may rest or be secure. I am destined to run out my
whole Glass in Frights and Pantings. What room for the least hope or comfort? I
must Dye as a Felon, if the Fortune Tellers say True, and I must Dye as a
Wretch, if he say False. Did he say, I should be a Parricide hereafter? Shall
we consult another, for Experiment of his greater skill? Would you have me
dispute the Point afterward, whether Futuritys may be foretold, or no? To what
purpose is it? So many Men, so many Minds. Why should I be tossed up and down,
according to every Body's talkative humor? He gives it under his hand, I shall
kill my Father: If I can abide to live after such a Response, I shall not be
Innocent, tho I never do it. Let me appeal to you, all that are Children, and
to you, all that are Parents, What Courage can I have, after so dire a Presage?
I am the Man, whom the Deity, being angry perhaps with the Age, wherein I
lived, has singled out, as a ^it Subject for such a mischief: As soon as ever I
was born, 'twas said, That Valor and Villainy should be my Lot: I am, as you
see, capable of all things, tho never so strange and repugnant; I stand out for
no difficult, no unheard of, Practices; I am destined to wretched Pranks;
Guilty, if I do not kill my self; one, in whom you ought to ^ate even his very
Bravery. I know not what prodigious Barbarity slings and throws me against my
Father, as against some Weapon, or some vast weight ready to fall. A Villainy
attends me, hardly to be believed, that will be no advantage to me, and which I
my self am clear against. Not a word of the Time, Place, or Reason thereof it
foretold: Judge you, whether I ought to Dye, for I think, 'twas ^ity that ever
I was Born. My Father himself is sensible of the Monstrousness of my predicted
Cr me, and therefore strives to prove, That there is no certainty in the
Astrological Art: Sometimes he urges, That there is no such thing as Fate, but
all comes by chance and hazard: Otherwhile he contends, That if there be a
Governing Providence, yet man's knowledge is too shallow to fathom it. I lay
both before you, and in the mean time desire your Wisdoms to consider, That my
Father was sensible of something in the Art, even because he was afraid of it.
I have given a Proof, that the Astrologer spoke Truth, and He thereupon
believed what he said.

I beseech you, Dear Father, do you think, That this great variety of things,
compacted into one Systeme out of disagreeing Principles, could be huddled
together by chance? so that the Orb of ^ire is placed aloft above all heavy
Bodies, by ^eason of its hot and burning Nature; the Element of Water is seated
below, that the hot Bodies, above it, might draw nourishment from its moisture;
^h^ Globe of the Earth hangs poised between the ^^^^ament above and the Abyss
below, that so a ^^^^^lless series of Ages might spin out themselves, through
perpetual vicissitudes of Times, by their ^wn Laws. What shall we say of this
Glorious Prospect of sparkling Constellations? some fixed, compacted, and still
shining from the Place they possessed at first, others wandering, and performing
their Planetary Courses, in a set Order, in the whole Firmament. Can you think,
the disposal of them was made at random and by chance? Pray, what could that
thing, called Reason, do better? No, no, 'Twas God, God alone, the Maker of the
Universe, that drew forth a comely Order out of the first rude Chaos of
Confusion, and afterward divided it into its several parts. And when he ^ad
bestowed a beautiful and uniform Aspect on ^he World then he sent a Spirit from
above to ^nimate it: So that whatever is brought forth in ^he World has a
signature of some divine Property ^orn with it, and being thus ordained and
made or a short Life, by a firm certainty of depen^ence, it receives its Fate
as it does its Life. I be^^eve, Dear Father, this Doctrine was somewhat
^errible to Mortals, when it was first broached, ^ut when the Novelty of it was
worn off, they ^^ll to admire it. Thus by degrees, what Men were ^^ighted at at
first, when they took Heart seri^usly to consider, their deep insight pierced
into the ^ery Recesses of Nature, and made such Collections ^om daily
observations and oft-recurring marks (...) secret Effects, that at length they
arrived at ^^eir Causes. Do you think it strange, Sir, that a ^an's Destiny can
be foretold? You see, the ^urses and the Eclipses of Sun and Moon are so: ^en
can fore-tel Storms and Calms; they tell (...), what Constellation threatens
parching heat, and that, pinching cold; what bearded Comets por^nd, what their
extraordinary Luster, and what the mighty shootings and trajections of Stars.
What stronger Argument for the verity of the Art, than to foretell what shall
come to pass, and it comes to pass accordingly? So that if Nature, Reason, and
Experience do jointly prove, that there is such an Art as Astrology, nay, and
my Father himself, who thought fit to consult the Artist, what remains, but
that I may yield, he spoke Truth in what is to come, seeing we cannot accuse him
of a Failer in what is past.

The first Proof of the veracity of the Art, is this, when the Wizard was
consulted about the Child, he did not make a confused or intricate Answer, as
if he had a mind by ambiguities to beguile his Quaerent: He said nothing that
might be interpreted several ways, according to the fancy or humor of the
respective Hearers. For that is the main design of Juglers, not to make a plain
downright Answer to Demandants, but to amuse them with such blind hopes and
promises, that whatever comes to pass, yet the Answer may seem true. Was this
the way to put a Trick on my Father, to tell him of such common and usual
Events, which might easily follow, and He was as glad to hear of? Thy Son, says
he, shall be a brave Fellow. Where, I beseech you, could he have broke off
handsomer, if he had a mind to chouse him? But, Oh Heavens! What Impressions
had he received from above; that he could not choose but tell my Father, when he
asked the Question, That I was destined to murder him. Alack, dear Father, do
you think I admire his Art so much? No, Sir, I rather wonder at his Courage; I
stand amazed at his Fixedness, He shall be, says he, a brave Fellow first, and
then a Parricide. Pray, tell me, was there any Policy in this, to speak that in
the close, which takes off from the Credit of what was delivered before? In the
Parricide, that the Astrologer foresaw, if he would have cheated, 'twas his
only way not to have told it. I grant, in other Consults a Man may be deceived
or mistaken, but in such an heinous Villainy as Parricide, an Astrologer can no
more doubt of it, than an own Father suspect it. For all the Professors of that
sacred Art do agree in this, that men receive their personal Qualities, and the
future disposition both of Body and Mind too, from the Nature of those
Constellations, which were predominant at their Birth. To instance, if a Man be
influenced by a Wandering Star, or Planet, he will live a roving Life: He that
was under a benign Star at his Conception, will be a modest sweet-natur'd Man.
He that was Born under a Fiery Constellation, will be a sprightly Hot-spur. He
that at his Birth had a Star that was declining, and hastening to the Western
Angle, shall not be so brisk in his Youth, but heavy, like those that are aged;
but if a Princely Constellation ( Cor Leonis suppose) influence ones Birth, he
is Born to Empire. For my part, I think that upon the monstrous Day of my
Birth, all the angry Stars conspired together, and thrust down my prodigious
Soul into my Body with the united contribution of their hottest Flames. If the
Doctrine be true, that after many Ages and a numberless Series of Years, Souls
shall be restored to other Bodies, then in me there appears p^rhaps one of
those, by whose wickedness, the Sun being affronted, suddenly changed the Face
of Heaven, and who were driven all the World over by the scaring of the Furies,
and the terrors of all-avenging Conscience.

Those Futurities must needs have fuller Signatures, that come not from blind
and unaccountable Originals. So the noise of the Sea, and hollow Winds in Woods
foretell a Storm. Thus Comets shining in the Heavens, and bearded Meteors,
fore-run the Fate of People, near to destruction. This was my Case, I was
predicted by an Antecedent War, I was pointed at by Arms of all sides, the
unnatural Fury, that was to follow, drove those public Calamities, as
Prognostics before it, and as a Complement of all these mischiefs, Enter
Parricide. Can any Body think, this was foreseen by chance, not by Art?
Perhaps, what happens handover-head may come by chance, but that which is
foretold cannot do so. I beseech you, Father, consider his whole Answer from
first to last and then tell me, whether ever any Bodies Fat^ were more clearly
predicted? He shall be a Male-Child, says he, so it was: He shall be brought up
to such and such an Age, though a destined Parricide, (...) was brought up: He
shall live to be a lusty Youth, (...) did so: He shall be notable for Prowess
and Martial menace; there shall be Wars, so there were. He shall turn Soldier
by thy consent, and shall do bravely in the Field, all true: He shall be a
Parricide at last (...) but stay there, it must be, if I live to it. Dear
Father, if you would have an account of this profound and secret Art, methinks
his Responses have a great agreement even in their unsutableness and diversity.
He said, I should be a valiant Man, and withal a Parricide: These things are
too near* tho they be so different; they are alike for strength, tho the
Principle, from whence they proceed, be plainly dissonant. For what was it made
me so much taken notice of in the War? 'Twas because I was all for killing,
never satisfied with Blood; I would rejoice over an heap of Dead Carcasses, I
would trample upon the Wounded, tho yet panting for Life. This is called
Valor, when it is acted against a Rublick Enemy; but it is Peace that Arrests
me; when I want just matter to execute my rage upon, then my sprightfulness
(forsooth) must be at leisure to break out into Villainy. It Is true, Peace is
restored to the Commonwealth, but I am still practicing with my Sword: I grasp
it in my hand all day long, I view my Armor, I praise my Weapons, I admire
'em, I make Apostrophe's to 'em. Sir, be assured, it is as easy even to murder
my own Father, as to kill mine Enemy, when I am predestined to both. But why do
I insist on reason, seeing the event has already verified the thing? And what
the Wizard said without any circumlocution, can it be evaded by any Art? You
have already seen part of his Answer verified in another business, and that
which increases my torment, my Valor must be an Argument, to make my Villainy
believed. The Authority of his Answer is sufficiently manifested, when of Two
Predictions, One is already come to pass; neither can you make any doubt of the
Truth of it as long as Experiments agree with what is predicted before. That
Response, in which every thing as yet proved true to a Title, cannot be presumed
to be false only in the last clause. You Will say, It Is impossible, there should
be a Patricide committed. It Is no wonder, Father, you don't believe a Villainy
may be done, which will hardly be believed, when it is done. You are much
mistaken, if you imagine, that it is fence enough against inevitable necessity
predicted, That I am a dutiful Son, and you the best of Fathers. It Is pity you
should know it, I had almost said, I my self am loath to know it. What is Fate
then, but something come to pass, when we know no reason, Why? How then, says
he, can that be avoided, which must of necessity be done? I Will tell you, there
is but one only way if I kill my self before I do it. Sir, you Conquer Fate, if
you resist it; it Conquers you, if you make slight of it.

For my part, I thank the Cruel Fates, only upon this account, that they
designed not this great Villainy for me in the leading part of my Life, that I
had opportunity to do Valiantly for my Country before, and that my famous
Atcheivements preceded in a great Train. I hope, a Parricide may be avoided,
which is foretold shall be, and yet shall not be, till last. Suppose, Father,
the Astrologer should speak false, as to this one part of my Life only? It Is
not worth the while to believe it, that so I may spare my Life. A man's own
Father, one would think, cannot be murdered. But what if the doubt be not
clear to me? The misery is inexpressible, when I cannot trust mine own
Innecency, when I am jealous night and day, when I suspect my own Heart, when I
arrest my Hands, indite mine Eyes, when I plot Parricide in my Thoughts. I have
a greater Argument for my Death, if I believe I shall commit that Parricide,
which is impossible to be committed almost by any. Alas, Father, what a hard
Task do you lay upon me? How uneasy is the Patience, which you exact? I
tremble at your very Salutes, lest I should crush your Ancient Limbs by my too
rough embraces. I cannot endure to sit at Table with you, lest the meat, I
carve you, prove to be Poison. I dare not travel in company, nor dare I be
alone, with you, lest some mishap or other should intervene. How long shall I
be jealous of my own Heart? Death can ensure me that I shall commit no
Parricide, Death can ensure the World that I am not likely to do it. But, oh
unhappy man that I am, how many things appear, that I ought to be afraid of,
tho I resolve to the contrary! How do I know but the Idea of some great danger
may transport, and so fright me out of Wits? Perhaps I may fly out, as if I
followed the heat of an Alarm, as if the noise of the Fall of my Country, and
the schreiching of a Taken City roused me. I can perhaps govern my self by day,
but what can I answer to the night, what to casualty, what to mistake? The
Astrologer did not say, I would murder my Father, but that I should.

And for your part, Father, you must needs suffer far greater Agonies, by
forbearing and letting me alone: 'Twere better by much to kill me without any
more ado, when you stand in fear of your Life by me. When you lie sweetly
satisfied in my Presence, Company, and Embraces, you must needs call to mind,
will ye nill ye, your silent thoughts of the danger foretold. And tho you
compose your self to a gallant resolution, yet it is a natural Infirmity in man,
to fear the Murderer as well as Death it self. Rid me, Dear Father, from so
sad and grievous a straight, and, by a short Act of Patience, cut off your
Long-lived anxities. 'Twill appear fairer and more becoming, to dye if I shall
be innocent, than to Live, if I must be a Parricide.

I Will tell you plainly, Father, I am driven to confess it by a Fatal necessity:
My own hands, I cannot now govern: My right hand, I can neither command nor
countermand it. The Transport, I spoke off, comes upon me, I know nothing, I
discern nothing; Then, and not before, I understand, things after they are
acted. What! Do you think I overcame my late Enemy in the Field by the regular
strength of my Arm? What have the very Prisoners said of me? They dreaded my
Aspect, as if it were some monstrous appearance. Alas! I did not lay about me
so much with my Weapons, as I was acted by the very sting of the Furies. My
Breast was not fenced with Coat of Male or Breast Plate, but with those dire
Serpents, that buckl'd about it. I cannot call it a Fight, or a Skirmish, when I
Conquered, 'twas not as a Soldier but as a Furious Parricide. My Acts exceeded
the reach of Mortal strength, whatever was done was downright rage and Fury. I
protest, I proclaim to all the World, I was not my-self when I did so
Gallantly, and I shall commit the Parricide too, when I am not my-self. I
beseech this Honorable Bench, if by any means it can be brought to pass, that
Presages shall not take effect, let the Glory of Innocence accrue to me rather
than to my destiny: Let me be said to have Conquered destiny, to have burst the
bonds of Fatal necessity; Let my Duty, I pray, let my Integrity have the sole
praise. God forbid, I should stay till the Issue decide the Controversy
betwixt the Response and me. I had rather defeat the Astrologer, than venture
to find fault with his Predictions.

What shall I do now, worthy Senators, how can I apply my self to be your
Humble Suitor, either as a Gallant, or as a Parricide? Can I say, Favor me?
Can I say, Help me? These Forms are used when we pray against Death; Men in my
case must court their miseries after a new and uncouth way; unless I dye, I am
in fear and danger. Men think, I have given the reasons of my Resolution, only
that my Father might say, Nay; and, if I rightly understand malign
interpretations, they will say I aimed not at my Exit, but at an Excuse to
prevent it, and to cease the tossing of my wretched Shame, by appealing to the
Public: A Parricide will never be deemed willing to dispatch himself as long
as he yet breaths. And therefore, Dear Father, I choose to fall down at your
Feet, I hold up my Hands to you, as yet Guilty of nothing but Chivalry. I
beseech you (if I may presume so far,) by what I have done, by your very
affection to me which makes you still fearless and secure of me, have pity upon
me: A Son, that would willingly die out of dutiful Affection, don't let him
make a Parricide's end. Make use of that Patience, whereby you were content to
be without me, when you let me go to the Wars. Imagine, I had died there in the
Bed of Honor, and that my Carcass, hacked in pieces, was carried to its
Funeral. Instead of a Son I bequeath to you all good Parents: That affection
you have to keep me with you, lay it out on my Funeral; lay out my Body with
your own hands, build the Funeral Pile your self, and perform the last Office.
When yon have had enough of your Farewell Kisses and Embraces, then and not
before, lift up your hands to Heaven, and cry out, Wizard, Thou art a Liar.

So have I done with my Plea, and ended my Supplications. As for the rest, Help
me, Hands! Assist me, Countrymen! Not that I may die, I I can do that, tho you
deny me: But my Gallantry commends to your Inspection and oversight the care of
my Death, if perhaps I do not presently give my self a mortal Wound. If, I say,
my hasty blow lets not out my Life and Soul with the stream of my Blood, be so
kind as to help my hands, thrust the Weapon deeper, and be sure you keep off my
Father. I know not, how far I may sling my hands in the Agony of my Death, and
whereabout my Sword shall light when I pull it out my Bowels, and upon whom my
Body may chance to fall, when I sink under the stroke. Would you know, how
great Fear I am in, in case I should live? I am afraid, I shall kill my Father,
now I die.

Aeger Redemptus: OR, The Sick-Son Ransomed.
DECLAMATION* V.
The Argument.
The LAW, Children must maintain their Parents when they fall to decay, or else
be committed to Prison. The CASE, There was a man had Two Sons, one Thrifty,
the other a Prodigal: They both went to Travel, and were taken by Pirates,
where he that was the Prodigal fell Sick. They both wrote back to their Father
to be Ransomed. The Good Old Man fold all His Estate to raise a Sum for that
purpose, and made a Voyage to them. When he came, The Pirates told him, he had
brought Money enough to redeem but One of them, and bid him choose which he
would. He pitched upon the Sick Spend-all, who died in his return homewards.
The other Son soon after broke Prison and came home. His Father requires
Maintenance of him, he denies it.

For the Father against the Son.
Tho, My Lords, I have already undergon such a train of misfortunes that now
'twill be no News to me whatever can befall me, in regard my miseries, accruing
both from Comforts and Cures, have left me no kind of Impatience, yet I confessed
that I could never foresee, either by my Fear or my Remembrance of past
calamities, that, after I had to do with Pirates, after I had lost my Son, and
after I was reduced to want, the return of my own Child from Captivity should
add to my misery. Alas, I made a shift to Live so long, that I might once more
have the sight of him. And being buoyed up only by the expectation of his being
Alive, I procrastinated my ardent desire of Death, by a resolved Beggary. But
now, I am even ashamed of my Resolution. The Toungster says, he returned, only
to be vindicated by his Brothers Death, and to mourn in Sack and Claret for my
loss of him: Yet I would have him to know, that by this base undutiful
Carriadg^^ of his, he justifies the more, what I have do^^^ Now he makes me
more sensible than ever, what an unworthy thing it would have been, if I had
not ransomed him that was Sick. What! does he complain, that he was left
behind, yet, you see, he was able to get away. However, My Lords, my Son's
present ill-carriadge justifies me for chusting his Brother; his cruelty shows,
that I ransomed the Best of the Two. Yet I will not, on this occasion,
aggravate things against him as I might, neither will I choose to defend by
complaining, whatever I did in the Impatience of my unhappy affection. At that
nick of time I could not consider or scan the minds and manners of my Children;
my condition was so sad, that I could not stand to argue the Point, nor compare
the affections of either: 'Twas mere necessity, 'twas only the miseries of them
both, that were my motive. Of Two Sons, a Father loves neither best, that, of
the Two, redeems him that was Sick. I confess, my Lord, this is the saddest
circumstance of all, in my woeful case, that my Son, by his harsh Garriadge, and
his slighting my Poverty and desperate need, has questioned the Name of his
good Brother. A Person, that could break Prison, and strike off the Fetters of
the Corsairs, 'twas handsome for him to get clear by no other means, to choose.
For seeing he ransomed himself with so much Prowess and Hazard, he would have
deserved the admiration of Him too, who a little before could not get off,
without a ransom. Good God, what praise, what renown had he deserved, if he
would relieve his Father, or if he had ransomed his Brother? Being now telling
you, My Lord the issue of my Troubles in order, which ar^^^o many that the
cruelest and hard-beartedst Man alive that hears them, cannot but allow me
maintenance, my very private disdain and grief prompts me first to address my
Speech to my Son, who complains that he was undervalued by my choosing his
Brother. What d' ye mean, you wilful proud Yonker? You cannot tell your self,
which of the Two I would have ransomed, if you had been both well, or both
amiss. The Truth is, my Lords, my Two Sons were of very different dispositions
and qualities, as to Body and Mind too And, as afterward their cruel Captivity
made appear, they were wholly unlike, as to their Course of Life. One of them
was hardy and could bear any thing, he was not easily softened by a prosperous,
nor broken by an adverse, state: He was such an undervaluer of Pleasure and
Jollity, that even thence you might have known he was able to bear both
conditions. This hardiness of his Mind had taught his Limbs to be hardy too.
But 'tother was soon glad, soon sorry, he never knew what care meant; he could
not bear the least trouble, a nice pevish Fellow, and as good as sick, when he
was well. Yet this very disagreement did equally endeare them to their Father,
his affection was so far equal to their different tempers, that he loved one
with a real complacency, and 'tother with a kind of pity. But alas! what
availed this equal and undivided affection? 'Twas clear enough, do what I
could, whose Company I desired most, and which of the Two I had rather see and
converse with. Even my Sons very complaint, my Lords, will he ^ill he, proves,
how his Father stood affected toward him. For to be angry and quarrel, that he
was not preferred before his Brother, who was sick and weak, is the Pet of a
Person, who was loved best of the Two. But, my Lords, if you would have a
further Proof of the equality of my affection to them both, pray consider, I
did not I cull out one from 'tother to send him beyond Sea, no, I made them go
both together, I set out hit Brother to be his Companion, and thus I stripped my
self of them both, as believing they were most with me, when they so enjoyed
one another. And when they fell into disasters, my love continued the same to
them both still. They were both taken Prisoners by Corsairs, and both sent
Letter to me to ransom them. Tho thou dissemble never so much, yet thou can
not but confess that I loved thee best, even when you were both i^ a woeful
plight. When you were both in slavery he that was sick (I suppose) could have
least hop^ from his Father. Tell me, thou proud Yonker prithee, tell me, What
could a Father do more that did his part to ransom you both? All my Estate went
to make up Money to redeem you; sold my Land, my Slaves, my House, and a^ my
valuable Goods, with as much haste as a Father could possibly make, nay I Will
tell you, the deepest affection in the World could mount (...) higher, for I
reserved nothing for my self, to kee^ me, when I grew Old, I laid up nothing
for C^sualties, which might possibly happen, yea ((...) unadvised was I, in my
affection) I lest nothing no, not for him that I ransomed. You may understand,
my Lords, what a large Sum I carry^^ to the Pirates, for now I have not a bit of
Bre^^ to eat: If you say, the ransom was mean a^ low-priz'd, yet 'twas my All.

Take the richest, or if you will, take (...) poorest Father alive, no man ever
gave more (...) his Children, than he that lest nothing for hims^^^ Whether the
reason were, my Lords, that one of a man's Sons is counted worth his whole
Estate? Or whether it were the Cunning of these cruel Bucaniers, to set a value
on their Prisoners heads, only according to the ability of those that are to
ransom them? Good God! How arrogantly, how proudly did the Corsair accost me!
Gransire, says he, Thou have brought too little, one of thy Sons is Sick, Man.
Sure, Heaven and Earth were angry with me, that, when he was resolved not to
release them both, he did not make the choice himself? The cruel Fellow was
willing to put me to more sorrow, and therefore said, I could not have them
both? But to make my Circumstances more sad and deplorable, Choose, said he,
which of the Two, thou will. You see, Yonker, that the very Pirates cruelty is a
material Witness of my Affection. He would not have propounded such Terms to
me, but that he thought I came to ransom you both? I know, my Lords, that, in
that very Instant of my sad and tottering necessity, you could not but reckon,
that I should have run presently to the sick Youth, and upon the very proposal
of the condition, immediately have knocked off his Chains: But I Will speak the
Truth, tho I incur your displeasure thereby, I was at a stand what to do. I was
entangled with such a woeful plunge of grief, that my Love held a long debate
within my poor self, what 'twas best to do: so that I shall never be able to
answer it to my Son's Ghost, nor to my own Conscience neither, because I did
not presently pitch upon him that was declining, as if he had been my only Son.
Tho now the loss of my Child might make me hold my peace, yet, I fancy, I added
much to his weakness by my delay in choosing him, so that the unhappy Youth
easily saw, in this pinch, which of the Two I would certainly have chosen, if
they had been both in health. At last, which was the only Motive he could urge,
this very desperateness of his Case prevailed with me. It Is true, I ransomed
him, that when he was released, was not able to follow me home, one that took
no joy in his Releasment, nor in his being preferred before his Brother, and
tho I embraced and encouraged him, yet he was dejected still. If there had been
any mercifulness at all left amongst Mankind, I might have pleaded merit, even
to the Pirates themselves, that they ought to have released them both; I wish,
my Lords, the young man had so demeaned himself in his Life and Conversation,
that my love not my compassion might have put me upon choosing him before his
Brother. But I count my self an unhappy Man, because I had so much to justify
me herein; my Justice in preferring him is sufficiently accounted for, because
he Dyed, even immediately after he was ransomed, he was a Dying Son before, and
that was the only reason, I chose him. Poor Man! I had a hard Game to play,
even in point of Credit! My Son (you will say) Dyed a Natural Death, of a
Consumptive Disease: Grant it, yet his Father had been guilty of his Death, if,
Sick as he was, he had left him behind. As for 'tother Son, my Lords, when I
saw his resolvedness in bearing his Imprisonment, it presently gave me great
bopes, he was not dismayed at his Bondage, nor at my delay in coming to him,
nor at his Brother's Sickness: so that seeing him so hardy, I had good Ground
to hope, that, if his Sick Brother were released before him, he would be the
freer to make any attempt for his own escape. At last, Providence smiled upon
us in our distress, and even in spite of the Pirates cruelty, devised a Way how
to return him to me, whom they denied to release: I confess, my Lords, I cannot
challenge any thing to my-self, as to the contrivance of the Time, for I did
nothing by deliberate advice: yet notwithstanding, the deliverance of both my
Sons gives a sufficient reason for my neceslity. He that I ransomed, is Dead;
and he that I left in Prison, has made his escape, and is come home. Perhaps,
Poor Child, thou look'dst on thy Father, when thou found'st him begging, as if
he had begged for himself; but thou were mistaken, I was begging to make up thy
ransom. I appeal to the Clemency of this Charitable City, whether I did not use
such Supplications, and Motives, as these. Sirs, have pity upon me, give your
Charity, be as liberal to me as you can, for I am to go back to ransom him, who
was willing his Brother should be ransomed before him. As for thy self, at thy
return, you should have called out to your Father with a loud Voice, Dear
Father, be of good cheer, hold up your Head, we are now revenged on the cruel
Pirates, you have now ransomed both your Sons. I demand maintenance, I need not
say, as a Father from his Son, but as a Beggar from the next Man he meets, or
as a decrepit Old Man from one that is young and lusty. For what Affection has
a deeper root in the sacred and venerable Principles of Nature it self, than
that of Pity? What more common or usual, even between Children and Parents,
than one Man to feed his Neighbor, when he is hungry. It is the Command of God
himself, who is the Anther of our frail Life here below, that we should help one
another, and by mutual Offices of Assistance supply others, with what in time
we may want our-selves. This does not yet amount to Charity, nor to Reverence
due to Persons, no, it is only a provident Fear of the like Accidents, and a
Religious dread, lest such common misfortunes should fall to our own Lot. Every
one that fills a starveling's Belly, in so doing, relieves himself. Thus in
Seiges, when Provisions are scanty, one Man's dole serves two; and in a Voyage
at Sea, they often come to half-allowance. Hence also arises that common Pity, we
bury Dead Carcasses, tho we know not who they are, and no Travailer is in so
much Post-haste, bur he will Honor him with one Shovel full of Earth, that
lies unburied in his way. But as for Parents, their Children do not oblige them
by their maintenance, they only repay what they have received, and, God knows,
full short of what they ow for the many and great expenses they have been at
about us, first in our Infancy, then in our Childhood, and at length in our
Youth, tho we are brought up never so frugally. The Truth is, if Nature would
but allow this kind of Duty, when Parents fail, or are Sick, we might well
spare them even part of our very Lives, so that a small Portion of that Soul,
you first had from them, might well return to them as its Original. Would you
know, what great Duty, what high Veneration is due to the Authority of a
Father? I Will tell you, It Is no Curtesy at all to allow them maintenance, but
it is an horrid Impiety to deny 'em it. What does the Law say? Children must
maintain their Parents. I am even ashamed of those Sacred Names; is all the
Religion of Mankind come to this? Must this be a Positive Law? What Curse shall
I imprecate on that Man, who first made Filial duly to be a Vote of Senate?
Children must maintain their Parents. O Cruelly done! O Famine of all Famines!
What, no maintenance but by force of Law? But, says my Son, You deserve none:
For answer, I Will set by the consideration of affection and merit, a while, and
at present insist only on this, that I am to be rewarded only upon the account
of my weakness and poverty. First of all, the Law is made so severe, that we
may demand maintenance with greater Confidence. They go off from the beauty
and sanctity of Nature, who think that the Law provides only for such Parents,
as stand upon good terms with their Children; No, the Law takes care of them,
even in case of variance; and between such Sacred Relations, a just Provision
is made, that even hatred should be bound to some Duty. You complain, fume, and
are angry with me, for this very reason the Law takes hold of you. What! would
you have me stay, till the merits of our whole Life make up an agreement
between Parents and Children, and till Duty, Nature and Blood do, as it were,
tie a daily Knot of Friendship between them? so that unless Parents oblige them
by compliance, flattery, and forbearance, presently Children renounce their
Birth and Dependencies. My Lords, if you would salve the Veneration due to a
Father's Name in all Cases, let it be thus, Let the Son maintain the Father,
when he is good, and let the Law maintain him, when he is otherwise. I will not
wrong Nature so much, nor the Law neither, as to make any Apology even for the
worst of Fathers, or to think that Sacred Name is precarious, and stands in
need of Favor to bolster it up. No, let me be as cruel, and as bad a Father as
he can make me, yet I have loved him, I think, long enough already. Tho I shut
him out of Door, tho I strike him out of my Will, and he has no hope to enjoy a
Foot of Land after me, nay tho I load him with Irons, tho I beat him black and
blew, yet such a bad Father, as this, can hardly be requited. What if I be
Proud and Imperious to my Child? must I, think you, ern every Day that, which
was my due the first Day he was Born? Am I pliable, gentle, indulgent, these
are t^rms of a less affection; for such qualities as these, a Man would
maintain an Acquaintance, or keep a Stranger. The Truth is, when sometimes we
are not so, it is our Childrens fault, and (which is a clear Evidence, that
their miscarriadge makes us uneven in our deportments toward them) we never
meet with a Parent, that is harsh and p^vish, but where the Son began first to
play his Pranks. What is it you say? Am I rigid, and hard-hearted? Let me not
starve though I ask only a bit of Bread, I desire no more for the Reverence you
ow to the Name of a Father. Whatever you do for a Father's maintenance, whom
you pretend to be unworthy, against your Wills, it is not He that is maintained,
but rather all Fathers in him. If willing, you show your dutiful affection; if
not, you must comply with the Law, that forces you. You don't maintain a
Father, if you respect only Virtue in him. Prithee, Young Man, be quiet, defer
your Complaints, 'twill be time enough to Quarrel, and to twit me in the Teeth,
when I call for the Respects and Largesses due to an happy and prosperous
Father: Now, I don't submissly kneel before you, that you may be afraid of me;
when a Father is in distress, he can be cruel to none. Thou feast, I am a
ruined Man, all kind of misery overwhelms me; nay I cannot well be more
miserable, for I have lost my Child, and I go a begging. My gray Hairs are
clitted on my Head for want of Kembing; I did look fresh, but now my Eyes are
sunk in my Head, and can scarce dart a poor ray through my nasty Hair, that
hangs over them. I am so lean, that my Skin even sticks to my Ribs, Famine has
quite destroyed the Man in me, I am now a mere Sceleton.

I hope in this condition I shall be a Good Father again, and deserve my former
Respect and Reverence, even from the piteousness of my Case. What! Is not this
creeping of mine to my Son punishment enough for me, that I am fain to entreat,
to crave, that I am no better than his mere Beggar? Nay, O Heavens! How many
things are there that the Laws themselves cannot make good to us? And how many
more do we come short of, when men do for us against their Wills. Stay, I don't
require, that you should seed me with your own Hands, or that you should make
much of me and cheer me up; No, threw me something that I may catch; cast it
under the Table, that I may take it up. You may be revenged of me in some sort,
if you relieve me, and yet don't pity me Yet, my Lords, if any Plea can be
legally allowed by you for so great an Impiety, and if you think it possible,
that a Son, who will not maintain his Father, can give any reason at all for
it, then, I beseech you, weigh with your selves, what horrid offense that must
be, that a Son cannot revenge but by Famishing his own Father. Oh, says he, You
would not ransom me, when I was taken Prisoner? Who can but think that the
Father should rather complain of the Son? Can a Father bear, his Son should
tell him, I am not at all in thy Debt for giving me Life and Being once,
because thou did not add a second kindness, to give me my Life and Liberty
once again. Truly, we are in a very bad Case to deserve so highly of our
Children, if we must add more or else lose all; it is a very ill Example, if we
fail in what is to come, to have no thanks for what is past. I did not ransom
thee. Thy obligation to me was never the less for bringing thee forth, as a
piece of myself, into the Visible Scene of this World. 'Twas long of me, that
thou can make use of Sea and Land for thy advantage, and serve thy self by
the unwearied Gourses of the Stars, yea and of the bright-shining Firmament of
Heaven. Those very hands, which thou draw'st back; the very words that deny me
maintenance, thou had them both from my Substance and from my Loins. Thou
should rather have rejoiced and been glad at Heart, that thy Father's
unkindness and severity gives thee opportunity to show thy self a good and
dutiful Son. He only is beforehand with his Father, who complains of him, and
yet releives him. Yet, my Lords, how many Answers could I give to his
Complaint, which would wholly take off any reflection upon me, for not
ransoming him? It were an Excuse tolerable enough, if I should say, I made all
the haste I could, but Old Age, my Poverty, and my Weakness, were a great
hindrance to me? Besides, I could not get up Money enough to ransom you so soon:
I could not equip my self for a Voyage in so much haste; it is difficult for
those that are younger and lustier than I, so to do. Besides, being a lone Man,
and stricken in Years, I did not steer so prosperously, as I expected. How
many Fears, how many Jealousies did I undergo in my hasty Voyage? Good Son, be
nor so wrathful, I did no more for him that I ransomed indeed, than I did for
you. I don't ow you the good hap of success in all that I do, I ow you only my
good Will; I do what I can for you, but I cannot undertake for a fair Issue. I
raised Money to ransom you both; I put to Sea in behalf of both; I came and
supplicated the Pirates for both: suppose, they had released both, pray tell me,
which had I loved best then? Go too then, Yonker, (if thou will) aggravate
things against thy Father, give our, Thou pretendest starving, but it is Luxury,
Prodigality, and voluptuous Courses, have brought thee to it, like an Old
Fornicator thou have spent all thy Estate upon Misses and Sluts: If it were so,
yet you ought to succor me. The Law is content only to say, That a Father,
when poor, is to be releived; it does not send the Son to enquire into the
Causes of his Poverty. But what will you say, if I laid out all on your
Education, on your running up and down, and on your ransoms? It Is a horrible
wickedness, and without Parallel, to make one's Father a Beggar, and then not
to relieve him.

My Lords, the Youth now endeavors to load me with another Imputation, for not
redeeming him. You preferred, says he, my Brother before me. Suppose, I plead
Guilty to this Indictment, suppose, I acknowledge the Crime. Thou Impudent'st
of Mortal Race! What, can nor endure that thy Brother should have a little
Love, more than thy self? Whereas it is plain, thou preferr'st the Love of I
know not who; the affection, that takes up the Room thy Heart, proceeds from
far less Obligations. Thou do not care, I should respect him, who drew Life
and Breath from my own Bowels, as well as thy self; and who alone might well
have taken up the All of a Father's Love. He is the worst of Men, that thinks
his Brother cannot be loved, but he must be hated. Will thou Watch, I trow, and
keep reckoning, whom I Kiss oft'nest, and whom I embrace most affectionately?
This is no discontent, or pious quarrel, which was best beloved of the Father?
do'it thou think, that Brother of thine was loved too much, whom, thou did
not love at all? Thou art mistaken, Poor Youth, and ill Principles have led
thee a to'side a true understanding, who supposest, That part of a Father's
affection is lost to one Son, which by reason of some cogent Circumstances
inclines to another. There is an equal, nay the same, affection to all the
Children, yet sometimes he may have proper motives of Indulgence to one of 'm;
and, the equality of Love being salv'd still, there is something, for which, by
a secret Instinct of mind, we again love each one, as if he were the only
begotten. One obtains the preference, as being the Firstborn; another, because
a Young-Infant; One is commended for a brisker Countenance, and a prettier look
after a Kiss, or so; A grave look, and honest Face endears some; others again
are better beloved for unhappy Accidents; Corporal defects, and an helpless
state and condition are the greatest Objects of Commiseration. Yet Fatherly
affection, in gross, is safe and entire, when what we think wanting in one is
supplied in another. Be content, those affections are not wholly lost, they do
not quite perish, but prevail in their turns, as we see good, one while one is
served, and 'tother while another. Nothing can be preferred before a Son, but a
Son as good as He.

My Lords, Let me make the best of my Calamitys awhile, and plead so, as if I
had found both my Sons amongst the Pirates, in good plight. Doubtless the
Ransom, I brought, was enough for both, yet The would not Release both, but bad
me, Take my Choice. Pray, advise me, what shall I do in the Case? What say you?
Would it be the compassion of a Father, to get me gone, to pack away, to take
pet, to make my mean, and by this means strive to make the Pirates, Odious?
Children all, I put the Question to you! Parents all, I interrogate you! Is it
not a plain Crime to Ransom neither, because I cannot Ransom both? 'Twere a
great piece of Piety, sure, to make my Children all alike in an equal state of
Despair, and because I cannot relieve both, therefore to bereave my self of
both. But you, Poor Grandsire, take what is given, be glad of what is offered,
whilst the feirce Pirates are in a good mood, till their cruel Temper does abate
so, as to suffer both to be redeemed. In the mean time, many things may
casually stop in; hope the best, you may come again, or you may hope, that
perhaps he may make his Escape. That which cannot be done by the Lump, yet may
be performed by Peice-meal and in parts; and it is easier to take in pieces
those parts that are separate, which in the bulk must not be meddled with. As
far as I understand, My Lords, my Son, that would have had little benefit by my
choosing him, is only angry at this, that I Ransomed his Brother. Who, My Lords,
can endure such a piece of Impudence? He accuses me, that, I should make any
distinction between my Children. Then he complains that himself was not chose,
so that, tho his Brother, beside his equal share of Relation, had also an
additional advantage, viz. the respect due to his Weakness, yet he is angry,
because that Scale did not weigh heaviest, wherein the bare notion of Son was
only put.

I see not, My Lords, how I could have avoided the odicusness of this Fault, if
I had rather chosen to release him. A Father, that could not obtain both of the
Pirates, must needs redeem either the Weak one, or none. Nay but, says he, You
preferred my debauched Brother before me. Not so fast, good Son, forbear your
reviling language. These distinctions are not seasonable here, those Vices of
his, and these Virtues of yours may be confidered at home, but not before you
come thither. In the Interim, I look upon you both alike, as Brothers, as my
Children, both under Captivity and Misery, the difference between you is
swallowed up by your common share in calamity. You see, how unworthy it is, that
one of you should be of less account with me, than 'tother? The Pirates cared
not, which of you I chose. You have left, says he, your deserving Son behind,
and redeemed the Spend-thrift. I could have born the comparison, do you mark me,
if the dispute had been about Estate or Preferment, then I would have owned,
you should have had the Preference. But we are at this Pass now, we are not to
consider Probity of Mind and Manners, but only to make an Estimate of your
Persons. Alas! How should He live in so delesom a condition? How could he
endure the nastyness of a Prison, and the hungerstarv'd diet of Pirates, that
could not endure the near and sparing entertainment of his Fathers House? Could
he ever have lived in the solitude of a Dungeon, that was always used to
Company and Good-Fellowship? You, who were accustomed to honest Patience and
commendable Labor, were better able to stay behind awhile; you your self do
answer your own Objections: It Is you, that I left behind, and it is the
Company-keeper that I Ransomed. What would you have? I preferred him, that I
complained of to none but you; when I punished and rebuked him, you know, I
used to commend and admire you. Aggravate your Brothers faults as much as you
will, call him prodigal, deboist, as long as you know that thereby you do the
more confirm, that 'twas not his Fathers greater Love, but only a Consideration
of his Misery. He is truly said to Choose, who takes him that was best before.
Prithee, Youth, forbear to misinterperet Adverssity. It Is no choice to take
one, when a man has brought the Price of Both. What difference there is, 'twas
not I, but the Pyrat made it. Whatever I acted for either of the Two, proceeded
from the Affection, wherewith I loved you both. I, being a man, who valued my
Son only for the sake of his Misery, did not prefer him before you; but if you
had been in his Case, I had done as much for you. Do you think, This was done
by me out of design? No, 'twas mere Chance, that you were both made Prisoners,
that one of you fell Sick, and that he did not recover, even tho he were
Ransomed. When I came to redeem Two, that which the Pyrat granted me for one,
it is as much as if he had denied me both.

But how long shall I conceal the true reason of my Fact? This it was; I
plainly chose him, because he was Sick. Tell me now, if you please, that he was
a lewd and a debauched Fellow. Pray, speak softly of his Memory, lets have a
devout tenderness for his last Ashes, perhaps I should have been sorry if he
had lived. I tell you once and again, (seeing you put me to it) I make my
defense from my very Accusation. It Is my Sick Son, I redeemed. For the truth
is, there is no difference between Children, but where calamity intervenes;
amongst those, whom Natural Piety has made all one, you can find no
distinction, unless on account of Misery. I don't now consider Course of Life
or M^rals. I found him panting, I heard his weary-groans, 'twas to him I came,
not as soon as I should. Again, O Fortune, thou have devised a Way, how Charity
may super-erogate, and what accession may be made to the Sacred Names of Father
and Son. This alone is a greater affection than to Love all Sons, to have
compassion on one. If any man should ask me, My Lords, the Condition was not
truly meant nor honest, but savored of a Pirates barbarity. I might by no means
leave my Sick Son behind me, but, I hope, I may take the Weakling with me. Do
you think it likely, that they would release you on as easy Terms, as they
would your Brother, that was a dying? Or that Fellows of such inhumanity, that
had the Heart to share and share alike of Children with their own Fathers,
would suffer him to be left on their hands, who they knew would die even by
this, That his Father left him behind? My miserable Piety was sorely put to it,
and they were pleased to add this also to my calamities, that I should bear the
shame of such a Condition, where no side could be chosen. When a Sick-man is
offered, in competition with a sound, he is therefore offered, that he alone
may be chosen.

My Lords, if I mistake not, there is one point behind. That seeing he
complains his Brother was preferred before him, you your selves would judge,
which of them, in those circumstances, my Piety ought to have releiv'd?
Certainly, this is the Infirmity of humane Nature, that of all misfortunes
every body thinks those the sorest, that he himself undergoes; for seeing we
are sensible of other men's sufferings only by Reflection on them in our
thoughts, but of our own by actual pain, of necessity ours must make a deeper
Impression, tho they be less, in regard of our impatience. But his was a
languishing and consumptive Sickness which outstrips all other calamities, for
in all other Miseries a man may have some glimpse of ease and comfort. Let a
man's hands be manacled under a merciless Jailer; Let his body be shut up in the
Hole or darkest Dungeon, yet some can play even with their Chains, and clear
their Limbs from the links, and it has something of contentm^nt in it, to be
able to manage a contest with ones Punishment. The rage of Kingdoms lies in
Racks, the rage of War in Wounds, yet whatever we are able to go through, does
not trouble us so much; and when Crosses fall upon us in prime of Age and
Spirit, they are mastered by our stout striving against them.

What Torments, what Pains, can you compare to a languishing Sickness? when a
Consumption seizes inwardly on the Bowels and Vitals, and sends the man every
day piece meal to the Grave? When his Stomach calls for meat, drink, and other
accommodations of Life, and yet loathes them, when they are brought to him? When
we long for Attendants, and cannot endure them neither? When we bespeak the
help of hand, and yet when it comes to, are loath to be touched? When our Body
is tumbled and tossed all over the Bed, as upon burning Coals? The very light
is offensive to his almost-spent Eyes, and no Voice he has, but what he utters
in groaning? When of Two Captives, the one is Sick, a Father can do no wrong,
but in this only, if he choose the sound.

Hitherto, My Lords, I have discoursed of him as if he had been Ill at home,
and in his own House, amongst his Parents and Friends: But, Oh, My Lords, a
Prison, and a Thousand diseases attending it, are enough to make any one, Sick;
I don't mean a Prison, that the Severity of the Law, or the Justice of the
Magistrate sent him too; No mortal fear, nay the wit of man cannot sufficiently
conceive, what I saw. First, you have, under the Precipice of a vast Rock, a
dolesom hole, which was dug so deep by all the skill, the Pirates had, far
beyond the natural darkness of the blackest night; next, the vast Ocean
encompassed it about, and when the tempestuous Fury of the Sea dashed against
the Rocks on all sides, it frighted us as if it would fall. Every place looked
dolesom, having Gallows's erected in it; the neighboring parts were full of
floting wracks; wherever we looked, nothing but melancholy or death, and to
comfort the Hearts of Poor Captives, (the clean contrary way) no going out, but
to Execution. There was only a little Breath left, by which they made a shift
to live, which was drawn in and breathed out by groans of Prisoners, and was as
'twere made up by so many languishing Captives. This was the place were my Poor
Gentleman lay; such was the Bed and Furniture the Pyrat had prepared, ever
since he began to set up the Trade. That Body, which could scarce endure the
tendrest touch of those that ministered to it, lies in Fetters, which the cruel
Pyrat bound him in, as if he had but newly come into his Clutches; and tho his
emaciated Limbs slip from the Gives, yet they still gripe him as bad, as if his
Flesh filled them up, they fall lower and lower in a knot as it were, the
Prisoner not being able to hold them up. In what condition was be under a
Chain, whose Consumptive hands could scarce endure the softest wear? What rest
could he take amidst the groans and yawlings of his Fellow Prisoners, that
could scarce sleep when all was hushed and quiet? Who could minister a word of
comfort to him in his sad condition? All about him were in the same case, and
every day, to the Old Standers, came in a New Captive to increase the din. Now,
do you compare, if you please, your Circumstances with your Sick Brothers Case?
You complain, the Pyrat did give you no Victuals, he could not but put it by,
when it was offered him: The bare ground, and naked lodging is all that
afflicts you, but he at every motion of his Hectical body tumbles into his
s^arting Chains, and which way soever he turns himself, tired out with pains,
he renews his Punishment by a fresh exercise of his Patience. Briefly, you may
Consider the height and utmost of his miserable affliction, even by This, Poor
man, He could not be cured, no not after his Father had Ransomed him. Now, Good
Son, examine me if you please, and ask me every foot, Why I made choice o^ your
Sick Brother? Do you think, I can give you a reason, why I did it? I protest, I
could not, if I had redeemed your-self. What if he should call me to Answer,
Why I laid out all my Estate upon his Funeral? Why I invited such a Train of
Friends to the Solemnity? To what purpose did they dwell so long on his Funeral
Pile? What, never part from his ardent embraces? To all which I say, I avow,
and care not who hears me, You are a Fool or a Madman, if you ask me such
Questions.

But, says he, This then is my great complaint against you, That you preferred
a Dead man before me. Prithee, Yongster, don't impute so much Savageness to me,
as to suppose I thought his Case was desperate. May I not hope he would live
the first time that I saw him, and embraced him sick and weak, and whom even
the Pyrat was content to have left behind? If you ask a Fathers Judgment,
whatever it be that torments and troubles the Poor man, I do not think it
Weakness so much, as Impatience, a longing to go home, and grief that he stays
so long there. He that is detained by Pirates, his only Remedy is his Ransom.
But by your leave, Sweetheart, there is no reason I should fly to this Plea
for my calamitous Piety, as to say, I thought he would live. I Will rather
aggravate my Crime in common with thee; Let me confess I Ransomed him, who
could not brook dilatory Put-offs and delays, so that, the Pirates sold me only
some short-lived Kisses, and a small scantling of Life. Upon my word, if you
had been both Sick, I would have Ransomed him that Sickned first. If you had
been both cast away at Sea, I would have lent my helping hand to him, that was
most weary with striving against the Waves, and readiest to drown. If you had
both returned Wounded from the Army, I would have sooner bound up his Wounds,
that bled most cruelly. Forgive me, O Heavens, tho I know not which to choose of
my Children, yet I know which to choose, when they are in a wretched condition.
Moreover, I give thanks to my Fat^, thanks, I say, that my Sick Child has yet
the use of his senses, that he knows how kind I have been to him, otherwise I
had got nothing but a Carcass, and had paid the Ransom of Two for the last
obsequies of one You don't know, how much I was confounded, and how much was
added to my grief, that my Children should be in the same condition under such
different circumstances. A Sick Brother is all one to a Pyrat, but he is not
all one to a Father.

But, Oh, my unhappy age! Whether I will or no I must confess, that what I did
on good grounds, and with an high degree of Piety, ye^ it was with difficulty
and regreet. What, do you think, my thoughts were at that time, and what trouble
of mind was I in, when, Poor man, I was fain to run between both my Children,
as uncertain which to Choose? When I kissed one longer than ordinary, I thought
'tether would die for despair. When I appropriated my Groans and my Tears to
thy Sick Brother, thou lookedst, as if Thou would have been Sick. How often did
I make an attempt to loose thy Chains? But my very preference of Thee did the
^^^re endear to me thy Brother, whom I passed by. How often did I take off his
Chains and then p^t them on again, when my mind was to release thee sound,
rather than him sick. I cannot dissemble the difficulty of that Condition, known
only to my-self. I ought to Ransom thy Sick Brother, but I had rather it had
been, Thee.

My Lords, I would willingly place you in the present straits and necessities,
I my self then was. Behold, the unhappy Youth, at first sight of his Father,
endeavored to rise up, and a little lifted his Hands, discolored as they were
with filth and nastiness, as if he would have embraced me, but the poor Heart
swoon'd before he could bring them to my Neck, and so sell back again upon the
Place he lay on. All the rest of the Prisoners were still, and lest the
terrible noise of the Chains might drown our Discourse, they held their wearied
Limbs with much ado, and stirred not. Perhaps, it is too late to put on my
Gravity, yet now, if you please, I Will begin. Thou debauched Knave, thou
deservedst to be left behind. Alas, that Man does not know the hurrys and
tossings of paternal grief, who thinks it any comfort to him to complain of a
languishing Son, and to upraid his Course of Life and Manners. Tell me not of
Virtue, pardon me at this time, O Probity; he, of my Children, is dearest to me
who is upon the Point of Death. Yet, I confess, it was some comfort to me in my
Child's weakness, that the unhappy Youth lived as he would himself, and that his
Life, tho sh rt, was yet merry and jocund. Believe me, Yonker, I had rather
now, even for thy own sake, that thou had been a Prodigal too: In what time
of his painful Sickness would thou have me brow-beat and chastise him? He is
a very impatient Man indeed, that will go destroy his Son, because perhaps he
may have some reason to be a^gry with him. Do thou think, I was wrought upon
by his Prayers and the Intercession of his Tears? No, the poor Sickling
prevailed upon me, by saying nothing. I sat by the poor Fellow's side, he hung
down his Eyes, I asked him a Question, his Answer was in sighs and groans.
While I was considering, he behaved himself as one given up for lost; when he
went about to embrace me, presently his feeble Hands sell down into my Bosom.
And when we had mingled our weary Groans, and breathed out our very Hearts in
warm sighs, answering one another with united Sobs and wearisom Tears, without
speaking a Word, at last he recollected his Spirit with much ado into these few
Words. Truly, Father, says he, I give you thanks, that you came hither to
ransom us both; yet my sickness has not so blunted my Senses, but that I know
the issue of this my present condition. I am an Hector, I am a debauched
Fellow, and I Dye under the Infamy of that Name and Report. Yet, I wish, that
the Fates at last would bestow this Boon upon me, that I may breath my last in
your Arms and Embraces. But if to stay for a Dying Man seem long to those that
are in haste, then depart ye survivors, happy survivors; only speak a Word for
my C^rps to the Pirates, that it may not be dr^wn'd in the deep, or thrown into
the boistrous Sea, then I should end as if my Father had never come and
attempted to ransom me. For how can I hope, that ever you should come again to
redeem me? Then upon some broken Speeches he quite fainted, and was spent, and
his Vitals being gathered together where his pain was, his Limbs grew stark and
stiff: I confess, I cried out, Poor Y^uth, How do do? Why do sink down in
Despair? Lift up thine Eyes a little, take Heart, hold out a while, Thy very
Brother has chosen thee. At this Word the bargain was struck, the Pyrate
presently took off his Chains, and loos d his Bounds; would you have me deny
now, that I chose him? when he was brought forth into the open Air to see the
Sun, would you have him returned to his darkness again? For my part, I had not
a Word to say, that I might consider, or refuse the Person, that was released.

Pray distinguish between the Father's Act, and the Act of the Pirates. The
Father released both, but the Pirates would let him carry but one home with him.
Oh, but, says my Son, You ought not to have redeemed my Sick Brother, for, you
see, he died presently after. O thou cruelest of Flesh and Blood, who do not
think thy own ransom was lost, hear how much the Pirates restored to me even in
my Dying Son. Your Brother, who fainted away in his Shackles, had some
breathing-time when he came to a Bed, and liberty at last to toss and tumble
his unmanacl'd Hands all the Bed over, after his baleful Prison he shifted
himself of his filthy nasty Rags, he was so happy for a little while, as to see
his Neighbors, to speak to his Friends, to lay his Charge on 'em, and bind 'em
to it, and tho he were sinking under his last Fate, yet he had the privilege
to breath in the free and open Air, before. Fortune, whether she would or no,
has bestowed on me a great comfort, even in the loss of my Son; if I had left
him behind, he would have died with some envious reflection upon my-self, but
now, I have not kil^'d, I have only lost him. What say you, Son? If I ought not
to have redeemed my Son, that was going the way of all Flesh, don't you think
it punishment enough for me, that he is dead and gone? Perhaps you might have
been angry with your Father, if your Brother should have lived; then if I had
demanded maintenance of you, you might have answered, Go to my Brother, who is
more in your Books. As far as I see, you are revenged of your Father's Beggary,
and you are also an Enemy to your poor Brother's Liberty? You don't know the
right way of aggravating things against your Father; your Cause would be the
better, if you did take pity upon me. But, Oh H^avens! how different was the
affection of the poor Youth, that is gone! For I d^clare, and proclaim, so that
all the Town may hear and bear Witness, He gave you many thanks even at the
very Instant of his Dying. I veri^y believe, the poor Man pined away with
grief, upon this account, that for his sake I had lost all that Money. And
therefore in his languishment he spoke to you, as if you had been by, Dear
brother, I beg of you by that sacred and venerable Tie of our B^rth, by our
joint Travels together, by our comm^n misfortunes, by this very Sen^iment, That
sickn^ss might have been your Lot, if ever your Courage, or wearisomeness of
Pirates, shall set you free from this confounded place, I comm^nd t^ ^ou our
Anti^nt Father, whom both of us have even m^de a Beggar. I call the immortal
Gods above to Witness, yea and the Infernal ones too, I would have maintained
my Father, if he had ran om'd you.

But I may thank my self, says the Youth, for my return home. The Truth is,
Young Man, I would no whit detract from the commendation of your Virtues, yet I
am bound to tell you the Truth in this d^ed of mine, and you must hear it. You
ungrat^ful Wretch! do you give out, that you made your escape; No, I tell you,
you were relea^'d, and the Piety of my Election was the Cause: How came it else
to pass, that, during your Impri^onment, you could not make your escape before?
Crack as long as you will of your breaking Pri^^n, and shaking off your Chains.
Would you know, what made the Pirates so s^cure and negligent in guarding you?
'Twas because I paid 'em Money enough to ransom you both.

The Young man him^^lf, my Lord, does now also unders^a^d, that he is not able
to cope with the Justice of my Calamities, and therefore he Pleads as if he
were not bound at all to maintain me: So that he passes over his defense to
this Plea, That he is not in Case or Ability to do it. What say you, my Lords,
will you endure a Young sturdy Fellow with such pretenses? Grant, thou have no
great Estate, yet thou have Limbs and Lustihood: I don't expect any hard labor
or any difficult undertaking from you, I am content, Son, with your good will
only. Don't think, I desire maintenance? Nay, I rather desire shoulders for my
weakness to lean upon, hands to warm my Breast that is so beaten with my
knocking of it, and a Bosom, where to lay the remainder of my even exhausted
Tears; I desire, that you would bury me, and lay my Bones by those of your poor
Brothers deceased. I seek not for maintenance, but I seek for a Son. Moreover,
I require no long and burdensome business in your last Duty? Alas! I would not
live long, tho you maintained me both. Rest secure, in a very short time my
Groans will deliver you, and my Vitals that are even worn away by my daily
waylings: Why do you send me to the Charity of the Crowd? Why do you again make
me burdensome to all my Neighbors? I have spent my stock of Tears already, I
have worn out all the pity of the Town. Other Folks will never relieve a Man,
that his own Son is bound to maintain. Son, what means your harsh dealing with
me, which is unbeseeming my calamity, and also unbecoming your virtuous
Education? You have made me past shame in my miseries. Whatever I did, since
you came home, it is Impudent Beggary. Yet the Youth persists in his
hard-heartedness, neither does the Memory of his Brother, nor the sad Estate of
his Father incline him to any pity at all. Another Man would here cry out, on
this occasion, Oh thou absurdest of Mortals, who returned'st to greive and
torment thy Father, thou art worthy to be cast into Bondage again. And tho thou
insult over this my Confession, yet I shall not press it; why do you show me such
miserable ways of Revenge, and such sad means of Relief? A Father would do so,
that was never willing to redeem his Son. Come now at last, thou
over-long-liv'd Age, let us come to our Prayers, and, which is the only thing a
Paternal Piety does own, let us beg and entreat. Dear Child, I beseech you by
this Age of mine, which you mutter is too long, by those common misfortunes of
Mankind, which we have all Experience of, for thy poor Brother's sake, who had
not the happiness to see thee returned, and to stand by him at his Death,
maintain me now, because I did my best to redeem thee. Maintain me, because I
did actually redeem thy Brother, I don't desire, thou should Work till you
are weary, nor do I desire to be idle my self; nor do I assign soil and sweat
to your laboring hands, that I may lie still and be idle the while. No, let us
join together in duties of mutual Piety, a mournful Pair, a Pair to be
reverenced in all Ages, and upon all accounts. We have to do with a very
merciful Government. They will give more cheerfully, when they shall see those,
who are jointly and alike miserable, to have both their share in mutual
Alimony. For my part, I Will beg, as I use to do, and the People shall throw
their Alms into your Lap. Whatever my Prayers and Tears shall obtain, that take
you, keep, and distribute. I am solicitous for your Credit, that you may be a
dutiful Son. I will beg, and you shall maintain me.

Corpus Projectum, sive Anus Caeca. A Corpse thrown into the Sea: OR, The Blind
Old Woman.
DECLAMATION VI.
The Argument.
The LAW. He that forsakes his Parents in their distress, when he Dies, his
Body is to be cast out unburied. The CASE. A certain Man had a Wife and a Son,
he himself was taken by Pirates, and wrote back to be ransomed. Upon reading his
Letter, his Wife wept out her Eyes, and his Son, much against his Mothers Will,
went and redeemed his Father, putting himself Prisoner in his stead. The Son
dies in Prison; his Body was thrown into the Sea, and, by stress of Weather,
was carried back into his own Country and there cast ashore. The Father would
have him Buried, the Mother withstands it.

For the Father against the Mother.
Although, my Lords, in this woeful plight of frail humane Nature, wherein every
Man living has his share, all are of this Humor, to count their own
sufferings greatest and most intolerable, yet of necessity this must be a
Truth, evident to all Men, That my misery does so far exceed others, that, it
alone ought to be lamented, even to the loss of ones Eyes. For what have I
suffered so light, but that even the disasters of others, compared with mine,
may be counted Felicities? Oh, It Is a grievous thing, to be clapped into Chains
by Pirates, which they have the greatest reason to say, who know, how suddenly,
such persons, when taken, come to their ends. Poor Man, I was a Prisoner
indeed, but I count my self more unhappy, that I was released. Want of
affection to ones own is very unworthy, yet how much of it appears in this
matter, you all see. Nay, I have more, I must complain of this too, that my
Wife and my Child, both loved me too too well. What could I imagine was possible
to be found in the whole World, harder to be born, than total loss of Children?
Yet that which is the most miserable to others, could never be my good hap, to
follow my Son to his Grave. It Is but a light thing, that I was the cause of
Death to my Son of so extraordinary and exemplary Virtue; and that being
redeemed by so precious a Person, by his death I yet live an Aged Odious man.
It Is but a small matter, that the Waves brought me News of my Grief, and, when
I was thinking of nothing less, a Poor Fathers loss was driven a ^hoar, and
that I buried the Carcass of my Poor Son, after it had been wafted and tossed
at Sea, ^o late, tho no body at all had hindered me; I am still forbid to
perform the last Office, and that not a crumb of Comfort may fall to my share,
I have lost also the Pity of my Wife. See, a Woman arrests a floting body, more
cruel than Pyrat or Storm; and to fill up the measure of my grief, Who is it
that acts thus, but my own Wife? And that no Stranger may be mistaken, 'twas
not a Step-dame, but an own Mother. Oh woeful, how is Nature it self changed by
my misery? A Mother denis Funeral Flames to her Son, a Woman so distressed that
she wants her Husbands help in the Case. Who would believe this of her? She is
utterly undon, and yet she bewayls not her Son, she, I think, is Pistol and
Thunder-proof. Let her compare her Grief, she lost her Eyes for a lesser Cause
by much.

My Lords, judge you, I pray, of the quality of this Crime and Punishment by
the very Death, that follows. 'Twas I, only I, that Imprisoned my Son, and
disgraced him, and that he might meet with Repentance, the usual attendant of
great sorrows, 'twas I that plunged him into that dismal Hole. What hap had the
Poor Youth to meet with such Parents, that his Father should bereave him of
Life, and his Mother deny him Burial? For to tell you, once for all, of the
Piety of this Son of mine, 'twas* he that redeemed his Father. If my Wife be
angry, because I came home, let her give a reason, why she wept at the Receipt
of my Letter. But how could the Poor Youth better divide his Duty? The Law
commands him to help his Parents in their distress, both of his Parents were
distressed: 'Twas more than one could do, to help 'm both; yet his artful Piety
found out a way, to relieve 'm both with his own ruin. He came to his Father,
and he remitted me to his Mother. If this be a Crime, I know what I have to do;
I will plead my Cause with Complaint and Wayle, for the Law, I hope, allows a
man to Weep. Otherwise it is not convenient I should be long in pr^ising him,
the Duty of his Burial would be delayed thereby. It Is not the Interest of my
Plea, to be overdiligent in my defense; I stay too long, before I get leave to
bury him. Whilst we wrangle and quarrel about the Corpse of our lost Child;
whilst we Plead the Cause of the deceased; whilst we stay for an Order for
his Burial, whilst we take up a great deal of time in D^claiming, the Body
taints and is not in every part dry and sweet. Were it not for the Good Company
of those that stand about it, the Corpse would be preyed upon by Birds and
Beasts. Parents of all sorts flock to him, a crowd of People run in thick to
the sight, even common humanity m^kes a kind of Funeral for the Body, tho of a
Strang^r. All greive for and bewail him, but the major part say, that The Poor
Youth has no body to bury him. The Young man, sure, has neither Father nor
Mother. He has lain so long, that the shape of a Body is almost spoiled: The
Corruption, that comes from him, moistens the Earth; His Bones now begin to
appear through his Skin. Tho you were never so hard-hearted, yet you could not
endure to see such a sight, you may perhaps endure to hear of it. This ^s our
Son, whose very hopefulness we loved, for whom we prayed to the Gods in all
Temples, who were deaf to our request, that he might outlive us: This is he, we
desired should bury us. That Lovely Infant, that Pretty Boy, and that Youth,
before this accusation, most Dutiful. He, that when the Fortune of his Parents
were both equal, was propense enough to Love you. Let me not be believed, if,
when my Voyage parted us, he had not rather be with his Mother. When I traverst
all the Sea over, to leave a better Estate to my Son behind me, lo, Pirates,
crueller than the Stormiest Sea, waylaid and took me. Shall I give some
description of their Prison, it hung over the Sea; the Chains, strait at first,
hung looser and looser by my leanness; the Ship it self, that knew all my
Misery, was worn away by the pressure of my Sides, and the butcherly Dungeon
envelop'd with perpe^ual darkness? No, out of modesty, I must c^nceal all this;
otherwise, who would pardon me, that I accepted my ransom by leaving my Son in
my room; nay, I am sorry in my heart, that ever I writ about it. Oh Letters
writ crying, and with a shaking hand! Oh these hands of mine, that had too much
Liberty! Oh Epistle, to be blotted out by the Tears of my Wife! Why did I
acquaint them, why did I write the last lines that my Wife or Son should ever
read; That I know not, which of the Two cost most, to redeem or bewail me. My
Wife, a woman of a Thousand, and worthy to be the Mother of such a Son, as soon
as she heard of my miserable Case, quite wept out both her Eyes, so that
nothing, but stark Blindness, stopped up that ever-flowing Fountain of Tears. If
she had not kept back my Son from coming to redeem me, she had exceeded him.
Even after that, there was continual Mourning, Sorrow beyond belief,
Lamentation all day long. I know not whether the Youth would have been more
Undutiful to me or to you, if he had not ransomd me, that was so much mist by
you. Whereupon he prepares for his Voyage, that so, because he could not
restore his Mother her Eyes, he would send her her Husband, that was Dearer to
her.

But we see sometimes, that calamitys terminate in a certain madness, and our
very Prayers at length are turned into Fury. She kept the Young man back,
alleging the Law in opposition to my Letters. O Vain Fancies! O the minds of
men lost and confounded in deep mistake! Every body thought she was solicitous
for her Sons safety. Therefore the Youth did what he thought for her comfort, he
commended the Tuition of his Mother to her Friends, and left his Kinsfolks her
Guardians in lieu of himself. For otherwise the Poor Blind woman would never
have lived, till my return. He did what the wit of man could do. Such was his
Piety, that if he could have redeemed his Mothers Eyes, he would have spent his
own. He entered on his Voyage, having no company at all, but an honest heart, a
pious intent, neither did he judge he went without a Ransom to the Pirates, tho
he carried nothing but empty hands. But, may some say, What, did you leave
nothing at home? Had you lived so long, and laid up nothing against a rainy
day? If it had been so, I call Heaven to Witness, I had never wrote back to be
redeemed. I had enough, and more than enough to ransom me, My Lords, but my Son
lest it all at home for the releif of his Mother. Whereupon he sails through the
Tempestuous Waves, by the Groaning Shoars, and Foamy Rocks, and whithersoever
the Poorfellow was carried up and down, he had an unlucky passage, as if he had
been ominously retained by his Mother; his wishes being also turned the
contrary way, he sought to be made a Prisoner by those Pirates, who must be
miserably harass't tho he escaped them. This is the Impious Youth, you speak of,
who coveted and sought to do all that for his Parents, which one Brother would
not do for another, nor a Wife for a Husband, nay, let me speak it out, nor a
Father for a Son. O ye Immortal Gods, Presidents of Heaven, Earth, and all
under the Earth, who have been so unsufferable to none but me, I make my Appeal
to you alone, How unwillingly I was redeemed. He, Poor Youth, was undon, who
was first made acquainted with it. For as soon as the Young man came to the
Pirates, bringing himself as the Price of my Ransom he skipt out nimbly from the
Fatal Vessel, and offered his hands to the Chains for mine; he threw himself at
all their Feet, and, as his earnest desire found him words, he beseech'd them
with all manner of supplications, by his miserable waylings, and by Tears
almost equal to his Mothers; never any man was heard, who so earnestly su'd,
not for release but bondage. And 'twas not such a hard piece of buisiness, to
obtain slavery of the Pirates, no, he had more ado with me. 'Twas a sight not
fit for Rogues and Raskals, to behold a Father and Son contending about their
Chains, and both alike challenging a Prison. I pleaded Usage and Premier
Seisin; I urged, that one of my years was ripe and ready to knock off. He
alleged on the other side; what! Shall I forsake you in your distress? Shall I
leave you in Fetters? With what Face then can I return to my Mother, who, Poor
woman, for lack of you, spends whole days and nights in nothing but weeping?
And who cannot so much as Live without you? Neither did he tell all out, and
when he had mentioned her daily bewayling, and her restless Tears, he added, By
this time she is almost Blind, but perhaps, if you return, she will recover it.
In fine, I will not go back. I hope, it is lawful for me to do Piously even
without consent of Parents. Again I fay, I will not go back. If you are
resolved to stand it out and not to return, the Pirates must make a Gain of us
both. I will be one or 'tother, either your Substitute or your Companion. With
these words, how many Tears did he shed? How often did he Kill and Murder his
Eyes? If I had persevered and held off a little longer, I had made Mother and
Son both Blind. The very Raskally Pirates stood amazed at so great Piety, and
tho their Countenances never flinch'd before, I observed Tears to trickle down.
Perhaps they would not have retained the Young man, unless they had believed,
his Parents would have redeemed such a Son as He. He took the hard Iron Chains
upon himself, the Son was merrier at his Imprisonment, than the Father was at
his Release. Yet at last, to my Eternal reproach be it spoken, he embraced me
with his now manacled hands, and after he had don taking care for me, now, said
he, by these endearments I commend my Mothers Estate to you. Pray, maintain
her, protect her, love her, never forsake her; so shall we be quits. There, if
you please, you shall be my Substitute; if you do so, perhaps my Mother will
not be so angry, That I went a way from her. Thus, being an ill-exchanged
Passenger, I went aboard my Sons Vessel, and as far as ever my Eye could ken, I
looked back from the stern to the Pirates, I ran back by the slanting shoars,
and left a vast Tract of Sea and Sky behind me, and Towering Rocks that Fronted
Cities. Alas! Said I, How long does it seem to me Co sail away from the Pirates,
even when I return? Yet, dear Child, I observe your Injunctions, I minister to,
I support, your Mother: Nay, but to speak truth, Son, it is rather you that
minister to and supports her; it is for your sake, that my care of her is so
great. I am unwilling to part from my Wife, and that is the reason, I have not
ransomed my Son: But in the Interim he is almost choked with the continual
nastiness of a Prison, his Chains fret to the very bone, he, at whom all Sons
may light their Candle, dies in a Gally. Now, I hope, Madam, you have enough,
even a Punishment beyond the rigor of Law. No Pirates so Barbar^^s, but Would
have buried such a man, if a guilty Conscience and fear of Punishment had not
deterred them from coming ashore: But we see, they did all that they could,
they threw him into the Sea, when the wind served for his own Country. A gale
entertained him, kinder than his Mother, and (if any felicity can be in misery)
wasted his Carcass with a prosperous course even almost to the Sepulchers of
his Ancestors. The Historians of our time may tell of a Thing, so strangly
Various, that I know not which side is molt to be admired, The Sea brought back
a Sons Corpse to his Mother, and the Mother returned it to the Sea again. I
confess, 'twas my Fault in great part; For 'twas I, that brought my Wife
thither, I was loath to hinder the Poor woman from showing her Grief; and
therefore I carried her (tho now she be my Adversary) to the shore upon my
back. To speak truth, her first words about him did deceive me, for I thought
they had proceeded from the sense of her loss: For who would not think it an
affection of Grief, when the Mother said to her deceased Son, What buisiness
had you a Shipboard? Why did you go to Sea? Why would you seek out the Pirates?
As for that Speech, Son, Why did you leave me? I thought it the common Oratory
of all women, in those circumstances. Nay when she lay all along upon the body,
I thought she had embraced it; And when she laid hands on the Bearers that were
taking it up, I excused it, saying, it is the Guise of Mothers so to do, that
they may enjoy the sight of their Children a little longer, before they are put
away never to be seen more. But alas! She urges Law in the Case, and makes a
long Oration over the Carcass of her Son. Peace, Poor woman, Peace? Is all ^our
wishing come to this? Our calamitys were ^^ee only from this blemish hitherto,
that when ^^ven amongst the Prosperous, hard-heartedness is ^ighly to be
blamed, she should show her self such (...) Monster as never was heard of. That
the ^retched cruel woman should desire to detroy with her own hands, what the
Angry Gods had left untoucht, and what cross Fortune ^orgor to sweep away.
Fortune may well be ac^uitted from all blame, when a Mother shall think ^erself
not wretched enough in the loss of her own Son. For my part, I lose; my very
Tears at last, (...) I bewail any thing it must be an empty Bier ^t home, the
abused Verger returns with a Flam, and the Funeral-wood is carried back again.
A midst ^ll this, the Mother gives not so much as one Groan, not a Tear, nor
any complaint at all. One would think, that 'twas some Pyrat cast ahoar. How
came she to be so spirited? If she ^e not sensible of her misery upon this
account, because she cannot see, if blindness have such an ^dvantage in it, I
wish some good body or other would pull out my Eyes too. But alas, ^lindness of
Body does not hinder the passion of the mind. Pray, tell me, can such a woman
as this, be my Wife? Or can that, be my Son? I would call it in question, if it
were possible. For ruly Time has so disguised my Sons Corpse, that hardly know
it to be His; but alas, his Chain-^retted hands, swollen prints made by his
Fetters, and his wasted Body, a proof of his long Imprisonment, are so many
unhappy Arguments to convince me: Poor man, it is too sure I mourn for the right
person. I own my Son, my Wife I cannot own. But seeing, our contest, in point
of Law, will take up too much time, and I desire to make have; I will begin my
Plea with supplications. Draw near, ye Parents all, of both sides, while I Pray
and Entreat a Mother to do right to her Son in Burial. By our old Bond of
Matrimony, by that mutual Love which cost both of us so dear, I add further, by
the Son of both our Loins, by all those years we have lived together, that, by
the blessing of a Son, do seem more, by my tenderness to your self; Pity me
now, as heretofore you have don. Believe me, what I now suffer is worse than a
Prison, it is crueller than any slavery whatsoever. You do not punish him, but
me. Pray, what great injury have I don you? Wherein have I offended you? Sure,
you know, 'twas not I that forsook you. Now if you have spent all your
Affection upon this Husband of yours, and all your Compassion is extinguished
with your Eyes, grant that our Son has suffered deservedly, tho it cost him his
Life: Let us not rip up Old Sores: But as Cicero begged of that cruel Tyrant of
Sicily, let Death, I pray, be the Period of all sufferings. Which when he could
not obtain, some Friends watch't all night at the Prison door, and bought leave
to bury him with their Money? What was the Issue? You Fathers and Mothers all?
That which Marcus Tullius obtained at last, do you, Wife, sell me at least,
which was the Cruellest part that Verres ever played. For my part, I am resolved
to ransom my Son, and the Price is not far to seek, my own hands shall do it.
Don't you put in now, and object your loss of sight. Sure, you desire to be
pointed at, and to be the talk of the Town, when your own Husband could not
obtain so much of you as to bury your Son. Get you gone then, if you will, and
push back his Corpse into the Waves; Or if thou think 'twas but an obscure
place he was cast up in, lay hands on him, and, lest another man's help should
not please you, rather drag it along your-self, to choose. Lay one hand upon the
Corpse, and with 'tother hale him to the tracks where most Carts pass, and where
it is the deepest dirty way. Let an overloden Wain crash the Poor thing, and let
the Feet of the Oxen tread out his Guts. As for Thee, because you want your
Eyes, use your hands, grasp and gripe his bruised Skul, and his Bowels when
they are squeezed out of his Body, nay if you have the heart to do it, tear him
peicemeal with your Teeth. We Quarrel, we hold our own, we have our several
Pleas. Let me tell you, when you have got the better, there will be little
difference between us, except in our affection. How! You say, I shall not bury
him. Prithee take heed, take great heed, I say, lest, while you are a wrangling
about it, the very Waves may throw upon him sand enough to bury him; or some
merciful good People cast mould upon him. What! Do you hinder them? If perhaps
some compassionate person put him in the Earth, let me see you dig him up
again, and seeing you are such a Piece for a Mother, lets see you fume and cry
out, Oh, He loved the Father best. Criminals that are hanged, are cut down to
be buried, and when men are Beheaded, even a common Executioner permits them a
Grave. Yea the Pirates themselves do no more than cast a Corpse into the Sea. A
Mother, (tho I profane that Sacred Name and Relation, to call her so) if she
continues to be a Step-dame to her own Son, that is not sensible of her loss,
deserves the Curse of being hard-hearted, if, beyond the Antipathy of the
Enemy, who often interr those that are Slain in Battle; if beyond what any
Tyrant, or any Banditty, would do, she be so far from burying him herself, that
she also hinders others to do that last Office, and quenches the Fatal fire
with Water, in a manner fetched as sar as the Sea; she shows by this, that she
did not so much bear as tumble him into the World, and by such an unlucky birth
discharged the wearisom burden of her Womb. Let her tell me, as often as she
will, that she is before hand with me in conjugal Love and Duty, (a charge she
can never make good) yet give me leave to speak my mind freely, it had been
more Excusable in her, to have hated her Husband rather than her Son. Tho
indeed as to our mutual Love one to the other, we may even cry quits; she did
not value her Eyes for her Husbands sake, nor I then, my Son's loss: My loss of
a Child balances the loss of her Eyes. And yet amidst these misfortunes, I
must needs be grievously troubled even upon a private account. She has lost
that good Name, she had formerly got. Now my Enemies triumph, and spare not to
say, This is that exemplary Woman, the Glory of the Age she lives in, Lo, she
is unwilling her Husband should be ransomed, or her Son buried! Certainly, My
Lords, in my opinion every man living should Plead for the burial of the dead,
for this is the only thing that concerns the whole race of mortals. And
therefore such a punishment is exacted from none, when they are dead, unless
from a damned Parricide. Nay, tho some Laws are against it, yet if there be but
a chinck-hole, tho never so narrow, that common humanity may creep through, true
Clemency will lay hold on the occasion. I will not dispute, whether deceased
Persons are sensible of any thing, or no? But that the dead are covered with
Earth for the sake of the Living, to put noysomness out of the way, and remove
the Object of Grief out of sight: Or, when the Soul passes to the other World,
she cannot have the Honor to be wafted over to the Elysian feilds, (as Poets
fancy) unless the Body be buried, nor can enjoy the felicities there, which I,
Poor man, hope and believe are true and real, being quickly like to go thither
to my Son. The truth is, as Dame Nature, in begetting and maintaining of man,
has of herself provided before hand a full and sufficient stock, so, when she
takes her own work asunder again, she makes have to reduce our Bodies to their
first Principles, so that even in desert uninhabited places some Earth is
brought down, even by showers of Rain, and swells about a dead Carcass; the
force of Winds heap, and make a bank of dust about it, and in tract of time,
by little and little, the very Earth sucks in the putrefied Limbs, tho no body
bury them at all. Yea the Bones and all at last sink into the Earth. And in us
Men, she has begotten not only a Compassion toward the deceased, which works
in our thoughts, but a certain kind of Religion too. Hence it comes to pass,
that Travellours, as they pass, will bestow a hasty burial even on Corpt's they
do not know; and Strangers will heave Earth upon them. If this be so, Ounworthy
Fact! My Son had been buried, but that he had a Mother.

My Lords, I do not make this Plea to biass your judgments; I don't prescribe
to You, it is my She-Adversary that I upbraid. As for that Law, I have a great
deal of reason to dread it, seeing this is the only thing objected to the poor
Youth, That he did not forsake his Father in his distress: but because I am
questioned in Court for my mourning, I must dispute the Point in midst of my
Tears, and she frets at her loss; let us outdo her, if we cannot entreat her.
Did you ever see two persons so miserably entangled in a Suit, if the Father
prevail here is a Son to be buried; if the Mother has the better, here is a Son
to be cast out without burial: What says the Law in the Case? He that forsakes
his Parents in their distress, must be cast out unburied. In the first place,
my Lords, all the stress of the matter lies between the Words of the Law, and
the Meaning of those Words; and whether our Suit shall be decided by the
Ambiguity of the Letter, or by the true Intention and sense of the Lawgiver:
My Adversary alleges on her side, that she was the Parent in distress, and
that she was the Party forsaken, the punishment of which is to be thrown out
unburied. But what may be the Cause he left her, what followed thereupon, and
how the Law is to be properly understood; all this she cunningly conceals, she
stirs not a jot from the bare words, contenting her self only with the naked
Rehearsal of them too. But I, on my side, say, That the Law does not reach all
persons in general, no, nor all those that are blind neither; and that the
Young Man had just Cause, and such as will bear him out, to be gone: I allege
further, he did it with a good intent, which is enough to Justify a just Law;
And Lastly, Such a going away is not properly called a Forsaking: So that I put
the Case upon this Issue, that the Youth is not only to be acquitted, but more
than that, to be highly commended too: He that makes a doubt, whether it be not
convenient to stick to the meaning of the Law, seems to me to commence a
dispute about he knows not what himself. And therefore I will be the shorter;
for (if you go on, as you begin) the same Ambiguity of words will make me ready
to cavil too: it seems to me, that the very recital of the Law overturns the
whole of my Adversaries Plea. For when the Law says, He that forsakes his
Parents in their distress, and when it says again, Let him be cast out
unburied: certainly this cannot be the meaning, That he may not be buried, after
he is thrown into the Sea, and cast ashore again. And therefore Gentlemen,
either allow me to plead as I will my self, or (which more becomes your Piety)
forbid this catching at words on both sides, as unworthy of your sacred Ears.
And when I shall have proved, that my Son was a very Non-such, let your
judgments be further confirmed, That our Ancestors never made any Law against
Piety.

Now as to the first Point I proposed, that the Law does not reach this Case: I
will but touch upon it, nor it is clear of it self; to raise doubts would but
waste time. For I am not at all of the opinion, that if Age hinder an Infant,
or weakness a sick person; if the Commonwealth employ a man to be their
Ambassador, or a Captain retain his Soldier in some service, that the severe
punishment, prescribed by the Law, should take place notwithstanding, without
admitting the Plea of mere necessity; and it it once appear, that that Door of
Defense is open, then I may be fully assured of the goodness of my Cause, and
need never fear, that my Son shall be Cast, for not helping of us both, as long
as he had an Eye upon the very Law, in what he did. The Father was a Prisoner,
the Mother was blind, they had but One Son between them both; they were at a
vast distance one from another. The Law has a Debtor in the midst of both,
lead him to which of the Two you will, for to Both you cannot, unless you will
tie the poor thing up to such hard terms, that, do what he can, he must be
thrown upon the Dunghill. If he take his Journey, his Mother will deny him
Burial; if he stay at home, his Father will do the same. I suppose there can be
no doubt at all, but the Equity of the Law reaches me as well as her: unless
perhaps (for I perceive you seek all Occasions against me, though never so
unjustly) you imagine, that, here also, by reason of one single word, you think
it one thing to help Parents, and not to forsake them, another, that is, that
you will make it a doubt, whether Parents are to be relieved in all places, be
they where they will, which is my opinion; or else, that no Father deserves
Relief, but he that is in misery under his Sons Eye. For if to forsake Parents
in distress, be interpreted by us to be nothing but a bare departure from a
poor Parent, then we allow two Impieties at once: The first is this, That he,
that does not budge, has done his duty well enough, only by being there and
standing by, for he is absolved by the Law, which bids him not stir: This would
be the way to make Children not Helpers to Parents, but only Spectators of
their miseries. The next is worse than the former; for as the necessity of our
Affairs does almost every day separate us one from another: If any misfortune
seize upon Parents on a sudden, tho a Son be but a little way off, yet he may
have a lawful Excuse not to relieve or assist: For why? He may make use of this
Pretense, I did not leave, I did not forsake, I stirred not a foot, (as the
Phrase is) from my Parent: A Son will be discharged of all obligation to help
and relieve his Parents, if your Interpretation take place, that Absence is an
occasion of Impiety. But my opinion is, That the Intent of the Lawgiver was
this, That they who came out of our own bowels, should help us (Parents) by
their labor and duty, where ever we be, in lieu of that life they received
from us, unless any man should be so absurd as to say, that we are not Parents
but when we are at home with our Children.

What then is the true meaning of, Not to forsake? It Is to assist, it is not to
be wanting in what we can do. All tends to this, That Parents may be safe by
the assistance of their Children This being so, the Law was made for Me, as
well as for the Mother: Both of us called for aid, let us see, to which of the
Two ought he to go? I might make use of the Authority of a Father, and boldly
say, your Father commands you. The name of a Father is above any Law. If my
Child be a Tribune, yet I have power over him; If he be able to bear Office,
yet his Father may chastise him. We have power even of life and death over our
Children; If my Son will not do as I bid him, I Will serve him the same sauce, no
burial shall he have at my hands. The Youth was compelled to obey his Father;
he did not forsake you willingly, but I plucked him from you by mere force.
Believe me, if you please, 'twas not out of disrespect to you in the least,
that he came to his Imprisoned Father. Let Us stand, I pray, upon even terms,
and let our Son be set in the midst of us both; I Will make no comparison between
Persons, tho all Nations give the preference to a Father, let him be looked upon
only as our Son in common; I Will claim no advantage for giving him his Name, for
making him of so creditable a Family, for spending so much money upon him, for
being taken Prisoner while I was getting an Estate for his use: I will not vie
with her as to matter of Indulgence, she, of herself, grants me that point
already. All this I might do, but I reprimand myself, I will not press things as
far as I Lawfully might. His duty stands as indifferent between his Two
Parents; First ask, First served. Sure I am, in point of time, I had the better
on it, for I fell into distress before you. When you were at your Freedom, I was
a Prisoner; you were safe and sound, and had a good House over your head, when
I did almost rot in a Jayle; you needed not yet put up any request to your Son,
but I asked when I had need. As for your calamity, it happened not till after the
receipt of my Letter; and unless your Son had been willing to apply some
comfort to you in your Crying and Lamenting State, he had took his Journey
before you had been stark Blind. Don't wonder, if I got more favor than you;
Alas! (...) had prevailed upon my Son, before ever you opened your Mouth.

If a man should make a Mock-Assize and Fancy (...) Judge in so woeful a Case,
(for, God forbid, any body should really experiment it.) Pray tell me, whose
Calamity would he think the greatest? It Is true, overmuch affection cost you
your Eyes, of your five senses you lost one, you are a dark woman, you say: Why
every nigh that passes over your head, you may say as much, though your Eyes are
safe in your head. But was not this a ^reater misfortune, that deserved to be
so greivous^^ bewailed? For though she may deservedly complain that the Pleasures
of Life are taken away, and that the Acts of sensation are hindered, yet if we
are not unequal Judges, nor vaingloriously mi^erable in the disasters we our
selves are able to ^ure, I will tell you, not only how she is to be ^utdone by
me, but rather how she is to be com^orted. For when all Bodily pain is away,
and ^he aching of our Limbs, that takes up all our Thoughts, is happily at an
end; it follows, that ^oo much Idleness and continual Rest would tor^ent one,
except in such Acts, where the very Necessity brings a Pleasure. The loss of
our ^^ght may be made up by other delights, as Smell, ^ast, Touch, Hearing,
wherein though we must ^rant the greatest Pleasure is wanting, yet a Feli^^ty,
not consummate, is far from being a deep Ca^^mity. A House of ones own, a
Marriadge-Bed, ^he Society of Kindred, Conference with Friends, (...) calamity
not to be ashamed of, (which seldom happens,) and Liberty, which is a Blessing
in any State whatsoever, so many Pleasures together may well stiffle one Grief.
For the desire of having your sight, if compared with my miseries, savours of
Wantonness and Curiosity, in regard Nature is not likely to produce any thing
New, as an Object of the Eyes; whatever we are like to see, be it never so
Specious and Beautiful, we have seen it already. Every day comes Night, and the
Darkness thereof wraps up one half of our Time; so that Nature herself is, as
it were, Blind on one side. He that can have the use of another man's Eyes, he
that can Hear, he that can Command, he that has diligent Servants to tend him,
(so had she, if she were not too high, and made so much account of her
misfortune) is not a miserable man; especially, if he be well satisfied in the
Cause of his Blindness; or if he be miserable, it is for default of a good
Principle. He need not be troubled for a thing, that can boast thereof at the
same time: Though indeed, whoever is struck Blind, and on whatever occasion, yet
such an Assault of Fortune is lighter on a woman, than any. For ye, women,
don't travel beyond Sea, you perform no Embassies, you do not see many fine
Sights by frequent gadding abroad, no Military Employ can you pretend to, nor
no business at Court of Common Pleas. But rather you are always within doors,
for the most part in one place, tied to little petty Offices.

For your part, if I am well acquainted with your humor, you lamented your
Blindness for no Cause more, but because you could not go to ransom your
Husband. This was your calamity, let us now take an Estimate of mine. Alas! No
body was affected with it, more than your-self. Yet, pray observe, how many
things I could not mention in those Letters of mine. O my Son, in what a crowd
of miseries did I leave thee? Liberty (that Great and Principal Gift God
gratifies Man with, which is fixed and innate in the sense even of Bird and
Beast) was the first thing I was stripped of. I lost my own self, I am in hold,
a Market-Slave, being a Citizen of Rome I am become Chaffer, b^ing an Old man I
am forced to forget my Freedom, and being born Free I wish I were a Slave. It Is
scarce worth the mentioning to say, we dwell upon the Sea, the Stormy Winds
beat in upon us. We have never a Harbor, nor Seat, nor Rest, but (which is the
greatest part of our misery) our very Patroons and Masters are as wretched as
our Selves. But I must slip over the mention of these things, as being grievous
to my Wife for my sake, and also to Me for my Sons sake. I forbear to speak of
the grim Looks of my Enemies; I pass over the Brutish grumblings of those Savage
Barbarians, and that I was daily in fear to suffer, what a Poor Prisoner was
able, and what a bold Pyrat durst inflict upon him. Nothing is more grievous to
a man, than the Absence of his Friends, yet I was even afraid to see mine.
Nothing more terrible than a Tempest, yet I wished to be cast away every hour.
As for death, I confess, my Servile weakness wished not for that for this one
reason, I was afraid no body would bury me. What Clothes do you think they left
me, but what were not worth taking away? What Diet could they afford me, who
themselves live upon rapine? As for those things, which I must not pass by, who
can speak them to the full? A damp Prison, The Vessel smelling strong of the
Pump, my restless side laid upon a bare board, my Hands bound behind me, and my
Feet fettered, as if I could run away? 'Twas Darkness alone that eased me in
Prison. I was often sorry I had Ears, which tho they were covered with my
unkemb'd hair, did yet receive in the Noise of the Whip, and the Groanings of
those that were beaten, sad examples of what I might expect. Wretch that I am,
thou, my Son, art lost by Sickness. Compare now the Land with the Sea, your
House with a Ship, your Bed with a Prison, your Liberty with my Slavery, the
loss of Eyes with the suffering of the whole Body. But how far does this woeful
vying of our calamities draw me? Those that are Blind can quarrel, we see, but
Imprisoned Slaves can hardly live. But these things if put into an even Scale,
yet ought to weigh much more on one side, and favor me more than you. We must
spare no pains, where the effect will answer. It Is a foolish care, where we
hope for no advantage. 'Twas I could be ransomed, but your Eyes could never be
cured: Your calamity possibly, be it what it will, was incurable, it could not
be helped, 'twas capable of none to take your Place. It Is true, my Son, after
the Receipt of my Letter, in a silly kind of officiousness, might have sat by
your Beds-side, and put Finger in Eye with his Mother. When he went his Voyage,
he releiv'd the Captivity, tho but of one of his Parents; whereas if he had
staid at home, he would have had a Mother Blind, and a Father Prisoner too. I
add, that your Sons presence was not so necessary neither, to sit by you, to
tend you at Meals, to lend you his Hand, that any body else may do. Let me not
be believed, unless it came to that pass, that when I was taken Prisoner, I was
to be ransomed upon such hard Conditions, because 'twas sufficiently known, no
body would ransom me, but my own Son.

Here my Plea runs, as if my Son did these things only for my sake; tho in this
Action you have forgot you are a Mother, and tho you make it your business to
drown the Merits of your Cause by your Injury done, and tho you put on a
strange Unnaturalness, yet I admit your Testimony. 'Twas you that sent your Son
to ransom me, when you took on so greivously, when you wished for death, when
you cried out, You were robbed of all your delight, when you oftener sighed for
my Bondage than your own Blindness. He had not an Heart of Iron or Flint, that
he could brook these things with Content: You first taught your Son, that he
should venture himself, rather than sit weeping immoderately, and rather than
expert to recover your Blindness. He went, it seems, and by that means sent
home your Husband. O Crime unpardonable! If he had done so a little sooner, you
had ^ot lost your Eyes. But, say you, you could not keep him back. Here I will
not say, That all natural Piety has its Efforts, and that sometimes Affection
knows no Master; neither could he keep you (you see) from passionate weeping.
I Will tell you that which is more true, he had something else in his Mind. He
thought it incredible, that you would be against my ransom. He reckoned it to
be the care of a Mother, he believed it to be the danger of the Sea, which our
Family has had such sad Trial of; fearing if he had not been obedient to you,
every body would have thought, you had put a Sham on the World. But was he able
not to go to ransom me, when you cried out, I am blind, I have lost my Eyes for
my Husband's sake, I cannot bear my Lonesomness and Solitude? So had he gone
more excusably to redeem me, if you had made less moan for me? Is it a
Question, whether he did it for your sake? You could not have your Son and
Husband both; he sent you home him that you loved best. Cease then your
weeping, take your Husband returned in safety. Why are you angry? How so much
altered? Who could believe it? You complain, that he went from you whom you
hated, and yet you would not have him return, whom you pretend to love. But if
He forsakes his Parents in distress, who does not relieve them (as I have
proved before,) and if this best of Sons ransomed me to be an Assistant to his
Mother, by suffering in his own Person (as I shall n^w show) then certainly he
did relieve, (i. e.) he did not forsake them. For if, as I said before, a Man
must not wag a foot from Parents in distress, then he cannot star from those he
helps, no not to fetch 'em Meat, or to provide them other necessary
Accommodations, that they want. But when a Parent is relieved, if it be no
great matter where the Party that relieves, is, provided his Care be present;
then, whatever I did for you is due to him that ransomed me, as the Author of
the Gift. Indeed, I sat not by you, I used no comfortable word to you, I did
not tend you, I did not fetch and carry, I did not return an entire Beneficiary
to you. To confess a Truth, after all this, if you reckon your self forsaken, I
cannot deny it, it is my fault.

But now it is time to defend, with greater Ardency, the things which are so far
from needing an Excuse, that they are very splendid and magnificent; and when
an exemplary Judgment is upon giving, we should understand at length the Merits
of the Cause. Ah, poor Child! this Privilege, at least, thou will obtain,
usually done to Noble Funerals; When you are dead, you shall not go without
your Praise. Let us summon in hither all past Encomiums; tho the Tongues of all
Poets, and Orators too, should make a joint Agreement to chant out the Praises
of this one Man, yet the Subject will pose an hundred Tongues; nay, it would
baffle even Eloquence it self, if it could possibly lodge in one Body, tho I
allege nothing but the very Objections made against him. Here Is a Son that
gave Liberty and open Air to his Father, and (what was never heard of before)
he loved me more than I desired. He went to Sea, where Storm and Tempest was
the least of his Hazards; and amidst all, (which was most difficult,) in Love
he surpassed his Mother. Peace, wicked Tongue! What have you to do to praise
such things as these? He offered himself voluntarily to be a Slave; and tho he
knew how grievous a thing it was to be fettered, yet he would come in his
Father's stead, and undergo such Hardships. His Piety did cheerfully undergo
those Miseries, which were grievous even to Felons. I profess, Wife, you did
better, when you would not let him go. Compare Cases now, if a Man carried his
Father through the midst of his Enemies alone, and received all the Darts, aimed
at him, in his own Body, yet he died but one downright Death. We read of one,
who offered himself for his Father, not to the Pirates, or to the Sea, but
where there was hope of Ransom. Woe is me! I must say, that, by this very
Example, we are put in mind, that it is for the Honor of Filial Piety, that
even those that are Executed are buried. Some like these things, but I don't.
As for you, Young Man, all Ages to come will speak of you; and winged Virtue
will carry up aloft to the Stars such an admirable Example, that Posterity will
never forget: But this thy Praise costs me dear. Had it not been better for
thee to have sat by thy Mothers Bedside; and, devoting thy self to her
Service, to have lived in Security? 'Twas your hap only, that you could excuse
it to your Father, and yet not redeem him. In the mean time, a lingering
Consumption would have wasted me, as it had begun: Death, which only could do
it, would have released the Old Man. And when my dead Body had been cast to the
Waves, if the like Tempest should have happened, 'twould have been your turn to
bury me. But the Love of Glory, which is innate to brave Spirits, has mis-lead
you, the Expectation of immortal Praise has imposed upon you. Where is your
Virtue? Where is your Piety? You are undon, and yet suffer by an ill Report
too. I sat not by him, when he was a dying, as a Father should; I did not lay
his troubled Head in a softer place, I did not turn his wearied Side, not did I
receive his last Breath. Absent was I, Dead and Rum'd, when I heard of your
Death. No man untied your Chains when you were Sick, none freed your Hands,
sullied with your Fetters, to take your Food. You were loosed, as a neglected
despised Creature, only to save your Chains. Why may I not call you the
substitute of a disconsolate Old Man? Amidst so many ardent desires and
longings of a Feav^rish person, you had no body to call to for supply: As you
were grapled in your Chains, so you lay; you could only cast a thought on your
Mother, Father and the rest of your Kindred. Do I please myself, that, I fear,
you are Dead in my loathsome Prison? Alas, your Mother is not satisfied with
your Death.

Because, woman, you demand an exact punishment from dead Carcasses, hear the
sequel. Death it self made Shipwreck of your Son, his Body was swollen by being
tumbled over so many Waves, by being dashed against so many Rocks, by being
driven through such large and spacious Sands, yet it was never more unhappy than
when it came ashore. Oh, how grievous is it to dye, but how far more grievous,
to outlive my Son? I live hated and abhorred by God and Man, but most of all by
my-self. Besides, I lose the Affection, even of my own Wife. About her Sons
Funeral, she has divorced herself. I see those Conveniences of Nature, which I
have deprived my Son of; Every part of Age calls upon me to mourn, Old Age, to
which he arrived not; wretched Childhood, which it is true, now he passed over;
Youthful Estate, in which Age he died. I survive, that, if things cotton right,
I may see a Funeral, and the all-devouring Flames about my Sons Corpse: But if I
may not be so happy, then I shall see a foul black Carcass, a loathsome
Spectacle, even to those that knew him not. Amidst all these miseries, I think
you will believe mo if I say, I wish My Eyes were out too. What shall I say
more? Shall I bend my supplications to you, O Wife, hitherto vainly and
fruitlesly attempted? Well, go you on, make use of your Fortune! Happy you,
that you are not content with this condition! I must make my recourse to you,
Worthy Auditors, by our common misfortunes, by my calamity, which is the
Standard or Idea of humane misery, as your Wives may love you, as they may long
for you in such a case, as you may have no other Instance of such a loss, but
mine may be the last, as you may have no need of such Pious Children as mine
was, Take pity upon me. If you will accept of a Substitute, cast me out. My
Prayers are not refiective, yet I Will have it so. No joyful acclamation shall
follow your Sentence; I shall not be led to the Temple but to the Grave: Tho I
prevail with you, yet I must weep still; but if I prevail not, I will go to the
Seashore all-forlorn. I will drive away the very Birds with my groans, or lay
my-self as a Tombstone over my Sons body. We Will be both alike, unburied. I
will throw my-self out to Wild-Beasts, or at every bodies door. I will cast
myself at the feet of all Passengers, as Poor Beggars are wont now adays; I Will
not ask Victuals or an Alms, no, I will only beg a Grave, and a clod or two
thrown upon my Son, by some compassionate hand or other; or else, (which, I
hope, I may do) I will throw his Body into the Sea: Then ye Cruel Waves, and ye
Winds, but too too prosperous, I return you your kindness back again. Carry it
whither you will, let it be to Savages, let it be to the feircest, Enemies, nay
let it be to the Pirates themselves. Perchance some one of them will say, Let
it be buried; sure there is none (that I know) will be against it.

Tormenta Pauperis: OR, The Poor man's Rack.
DECLAMATION VII.
The Argument.
The LAW. No Free Denizon of Rome was to be put upon the Rack. The CASE. A Poor
man and a Rich were Adversarys one to 'tother. The Poor man had a Son, as He
and his Son were coming home one Night, his Son was Slain. Whereupon the Poor
man says, 'twas the Rich man that Murdered him, and offers himself to the Rack
to prove it. The Rich man would not agree to it, alleging, 'twas against the
LAW.

For the Poor Man against the Rich.
I AM very sensible, my Lords, that your Commiseration of my Distress will be
much abated and taken off, because I seem to bring before you too venturous a
Grief; and that a new Accession is made to the sad Loss of my Child, that, when
I crave and call for such severe Cruelty against my self, I am reflected upon
as if I required another's Torture: Yet I cannot own how much I suffer, because
there is no room for the faint-heartedness of a poor Father left in me. I saw
with my own Eyes the Murderer of my Son, and am more wretched now, than if I
had not known, who 'twas that murdered him. And I confess, my Lords, I wonder
how it comes to pass that I should appeal to this way of Probation. I came
hither, as if I were to relate a plain and manifest Case; neither did I expect
any other Consent of this Courts Opinion concerning my Son's Murder, than as
if you had every one of you seen the Murderer too. But here, alas! here, I
found cause to desire, I might be racked aforehand. For after my words did not
seem sufficiently to make out what I had seen, I resolved to convince you by my
Torments. But what shall I do, if the guilty Conscience of Defendants will not
endure, that I should rashly engage my self to such Hardship? Could I construe
this to be any Pity toward me, that he would not have me racked, who desired
it, since he knows, I would say the same thing on the Rack, that I did before.
Neither do I think, my Lords, any of you do so much as doubt, whence it should
proceed; from what Guilt, or from what Fear, that a Man should be unwilling his
Enemy should be tortured. Little do you think, what Torment the rich Man is in
now, and what Pain he is under, because he will not consent to what I ask. Oh,
how fain would he wish, he had not murdered my Son, that so I might be spared
the Torture! Can you think, my Lords, he does this out of regard to Law or
Liberty, or that he, that has broke the Law, would be careful, lest an Example
be given against Law? But he is now perplexed in Conscience, and so he takes
the more pleasure in my Grief. It Is worth his while to deny the Rack to an
Enemy, when he has brought it about, that he desires it himself. And therefore,
my Lords, I, the unhappiest of all Mortals, do beg this, that seeing I have
already suffered such unheard of, such incredible Griefs, That you would take
no pity on my Carcass. It Is a more cruel and intolerable thing, not to obtain
the Torture when I desire it, than to suffer it in good earnest. Even this is
the strangeness of my Grief, that you cannot succor me any other way, than
that, you would hate another in. Neither is any thing more unhappy than he, who
of necessity flies to the Torture. I plead and contend, That I saw the very
Murderer of my Son. It Is hard, you cannot find this out, if it be false; and
it is as hard, I cannot prove it, if it be true. As for me, my Lords, I fancy my
Son's loss, as if it were just now; and my Thoughts represent that dismal Night
to me, a second time. It seems to me, that I have made my Confession already,
even upon the Rack.

I had a Son, my Lords, as he was of an high^ and undaunted courage, so he had
not as yet any Enemy in the World, and no body would have Murdered him on any
other account, had it not been to greive his Poor Father. O wretched condition
of us, Parents! To what strange and unheard of Pitfals, do we lie open? We are
the Persons, that provoke and offend, yet our Enemy make our Poor Children
suffer. Who, my Lords would ever have been afraid of such a cunni^^ false
disposition, when a man shall find out a new way how to Spare and Murder too?
As for the rest, my Lords, you may expect it on the Rack, no^ before. Those
Parents are happy in comparison of me, who hear the report of their Children^^
death by others; but I am shot at by an unhear^ of misery, my only Son was
Murdered for the nonce, that I might see him Murdered. At nigh^ we were going
home together, as indeed in the whole course of our Lives we were seldom
asunder: For we were men, whose Fortunes did not enable us to keep Servants to
guard us, and therefore we made a shift to defend one another by a mutual
Piety; we upheld one another, we leaned o^^ one another, and were hardly to be
severed b^^ by an expert Murderer; when, behold, the Rich-man sprung forward
with a Sword in his hand in the dead time of the night, and, to the amazement
of us both, ran him through, that was the better man of his hands; and who, if
he had killed me, might have found him some Play. I confess, my Lords, the best
Eyes I had, and the greatest care a Poor Father could use, stood me in no stead
at that Time. The Murderer himself was willing to have it known, who 'twas.
You Countrymen all, I put the Question to you; and I ask you too, O all ye
humane affections, tell me, What a Poor Father should do in this Case? This
Blood you see about me, spurted out from my Son's wounds: With these hands of
mine, I held up the Body of my only Child, as he was a ^alling. Methinks the
aspect of my dying Son ^ticks yet in my Eye; and the words, which his ^xulting
Adversary spoke over his dead Carcass, yet ^ingle in mine Ears. Believe me for
my Torments sake, how long shall my Sons Murder ^aunt my Conscience? Open this
Body of mine, and bring to light the dark business of the Murder out of my
Bowels. I saw it, and yet I cannot be believed; I tell you, I saw it, so that I
can say the same, when upon the Rack. Or, if you think I forge and fain, then
let my Flesh be torn ^n pieces with burning pincers, and yet let me not prove
it at last. Or if you think fit, my Lords, you may Rack me, that I may leave of
this Prating.

My Lords, I am not ignorant, that it is a very ^eighty Action I have
undertaken, tho my Case (...) clearly just and good. For I, that am but a
Poor-man, do accuse one that is Rich, and one ^oo that was my Enemy before, I,
I say, that am ^he Murdered Youths Father; and I require that ^ou would
believe my Testimony, which proceeds from the sense of my loss. And therefore I
do not Sue, that you would not be angry with me, until I can prove it. Rack me,
I beseech you, as a Liar. Ay but, The Law, says he, prohibits, that a Free
Denizon should be Racked. I beseech you, my Lords, is not such an Answer fitter
for the Person, who is called to the Torture. I believe, my Lords, no body
doubts, but the Law, that prohibits the Torturing a Freeman, aims only at
this, That no body should be Racked against his will yea the Privileges, which
exempt us from the Condition of Slaves, are only to succor the
Weak-heartedness of such as are loath to come to it. It Is the very nature of all
Exemptions, that they mu^^ not be imposed by Force, but left at Will: Yea, that
which was designed for another's Accommodation and Honor, is no longer a
Privilege, if it be forced. Run over, if you please, all the Law that ever
were; there was never any one of them so careful for us, as to push us
per-force to what it indulges us. The Law allows a bl^^d Man an Action of Lex
Talionis, but it does not force his hands to execute that Law; it allows one to
sue a Murderer, but it compels him not, whether he will or no. So that, in
effect, it is easier for a Man to let go his Revenge than his Right thereto.
It Is a kind of Bondage, a forced Liberty; and (...) you help an unwilling Man
this way or that way, you do him Wrong either way. Would you know what the Law
had in its Eye? It says not, I demand your Torture; I admit it only, if you
like it. Oh Heavens! How many things are there no less just than the Law? Some
things are so highly criminal, that the Law allows to abate of its Rigor; and
when a Crime is wonderful, the Law is as wonderful in its Execution. Here Is a
Son murdered in his Father's sight: Rack me now without fear. A more wicked
thing could never have been acted. Pardon me, if I think this Act has outdone
the heinousness of all other Crimes. And (whence the Justice of Torturing is
salv'd) greater is the Offense to be inquired after, than the manner How. No
kind of Examination or Trial must seem unjust, when there is no other to be had
in the Case, and whatever conduces to the strictness of a Law, is no ways
prejudicial to be put in practice. My Liberty is sufficiently revered and
salv'd, that you are unwilling to torture me, and that no body else finds me
worthy of the Rack, but my self. A Freeman must not be tortured, says the Law.
That was the very reason, my Lords, why my Adversary was not afraid to murder
my Son, even before my Face. I therefore urge and contend, that my Son was
murdered before my Face. How say you? Would it not make against the Credit of
this Appeal to all the World, if I should sit still and be quiet under my
misery? Alas! when I saw this with my Eyes, would you have me give it a bare
single-sol'd Testimony? Can it be any great wonder, if I now rend my Clothes,
if I strip me bare, if I call for Torture by Fire or Lash. That Father must
needs run mad that, in such a Case, keeps all to himself. He is mistaken, my
Lords, that thinks my Demand proceeds from a Carelessness what becomes of me, or
from Fool-hardyness either. No, my Son puts me to Torture by Fire and by Lash;
and if you rack me, I shall be free of that pain. If I am such a Liar, when I
desire to be racked, pray tell me what I shall do, when I speak Truth, and
cannot prove it. Thou lie, says he: Very well, that you also confess, that I
must not be believed without being tortured.

But (in earnest) what Reason does my rich Adversary give, why I do lie? Is it,
That I did not know the Murderer, and therefore pitched upon him especially,
to accuse of the Fact? Or, do (...) know him well enough, and yet, upon account
of old Grudges, charge the loss of my Child upon him? No, no; It Is evident, I
could not be mistaken. My Son was slain as we were both going home together.
Could not I discern the Murderer in the Night, when the Murderer himself
could discern Whom to strike, and Whither to fly? How say you? Did another Man
murder him, and I now wreak my Revenge upon you? Then, it seems, I accuse you,
that mean while the unknown Murderer may show us a pair of Heels, and be gone.
What a piece of madness do you charge upon me, that I should lose the
Avengement of so great a Villainy, by the false Accusation of I know not who? If
I cannot have the Law of you, Sir, whom, I am sure, I saw murder my Son, I
have left my self no way to prove it upon another Man. O thou, that art utterly
alien from all Huma^^ Affections, do think, I would forge an Untru^^^ here?
Alas! I have lost an Affection that is sweeter to us, poor Parents, than any
Revenge. Do you think it comes now to my Mind, that we were sometimes at odds?
Oh! you are mightily mistaken. He, that has killed a Man's Son, is Enemy
enough upon that sole Account. Do you think a Man can cover a dissembled Grief
under such lying words as these, I will be racked upon it? Soft, I would not
offer my self to the Rack, unless I had spoken the very Truth: For in the midst
of Fire and Lash, it is enough for me to say, This was my sworn Enemy, this was
the Man that every foot gave me ill Language; This unsufferable, this
outrageous Person. I know not, whether it will be enough for me, under Torture,
to say, That I saw it, and therefore my Enemy says, I crave the Torture. I do
demand the Rack. See, I pray, to what I am driven, who am conscious to my self,
I may tell a Lie; There is no need of Racks at all, if they may be made use of
against Truth, and Mankind will be deprived of this necessary Expedient, if
they maintain and draw forth Lies from those that forge them. Men's humors do
hold out to this piece of Art, and tho a man be never so much resolved against
making any discovery, yet his Heart fails him when he comes to the Rack. It Is
to no purpose to aver what one forges, when twill avail little to confess the
Truth it self. Sure when a man is Racked, it is to make him speak contrary to
what he said before. It Is no great matter how a man comes affected to the Or
Eculeus, a sort of Rack, used by the Romans to torture Malefactors, to make
them Confess; It is thus described by Sigonius de jud. l. 3. c. 18. Eculeus
Catasta fuit lignea cohleata, ad intendendum and remittendum apta, atque ad
torquendos homines, ut facti veritas eliceretur, instituta. Tormenti vero genus
erat bujusmodi, ubi Catastae huic brachia pedesque ejus, qui torquendus erat,
nervis quibusdam, quae Fidiculae dicebantur, alligaverant, tum Catasta intenta
atque in altum erecta, ut ex ea quasi cruce quadam miser ille penderet, primum
compagem ipsam ossium illeus divellebant, deinde candentibus ejusdem corpor^
laminis admotis, atque bisulcis ungulis ferreis lateribus laniatis doloris
acerbitatom augebant. The effect whereof in English, is,

The Eculens was a Machin of wood, in the form of a long Stake, or rather two
Stakes or pieces of Timber, joined together by Screws or Vices, to one of
which the Offenders Arms being tied with strings or Cords, and his Legs to the
other, the Engine was lifted up or down, and the Tortured person hoysed up or
let down as pleased the Torturers, even to the dislocation of his Limbs, to
make him Confess: And to increase his pain they did often, with red-hot Iron
plates and Pincers, burn and tear his Flesh from his sides. See also Turneb.
Advers. l. 4. c. 3.


Eqauleus, or what motives of silence he brings thither. For under Torture we
are but Flesh and Blood, and there is no man, but it goes against him, when he
comes to it. Shall I challenge the Torture or shall I refuse it? What Is the
difference between one that's Tortured, and one that shortly will be like a man,
that confesses against his will. My Lords, here is a new and unusal Example
started in human Life. No man ever therefore ought not to be tortured, why?
Because he Ly'd. But, my Lords, if it be fit to doubt of the Truth of such
Confessions as are made on the Rack, some body else ought to be suspected. I
mean, one that is tortured being of a close servile Spirit, and his Body,
Bond-slav'd: When the Torturer is e'n at a stand what to do with his hard
brawny Limbs, when he is hardened by daily punishments, that his Body claims
acquaintance with the smart, and it is no news to him to have his Body stretched
out upon a Rack. But on the contrary, they, who when their Clothes are first
rent and stripped off, cannot well bear the shame of it, that know not how to
turn and wind their Bodies at every Lash, and cannot tell how to meet the Blows
halfway as it were, it is they, I mean, even such as we, that the Law thinks
fit should not be Tortured. For how can we be able to keep Counsel amidst such
things? In Torture, a Freeman had need of a great deal of hardiness, that he
may be able to speak the Truth.

But, says he, you ought not to be Tortured, because you challenge it. I
answer, Torture, Dear Sir, is one thing, and to desire it, is another. Happy
(say I) are they, who choose to shun it. He deserves Clemency and Favor, who is
brought with Trembling to the Rack, and half-dead already, whom the Executioner
can scarce raise up from his Knees, and, tho his Clothes are rent off, yet he
can hardly pull 'm away. Shall I plead against the Torture as you desire,
which, you see, I challenge. He, He, I say, may be mangled without any pity, to
whom the Torturer can say at every Stroke, It Is your own desire; It becomes not
such a one to supplicate, who is thought to make Outcries of purpose, to
counterfeit Groans, and of whom Torments themselves need first to be revenged.
I don't see, my Lords, what he can have in his Eye, who frames a Lie, and then
demands the Rack. He, that is willing to be racked, we don't long believe him
tho he speak the Truth. There is no reason, my Lords, you should believe, that
my sad and disconsolate loss has so bereaved me of all sense of humanity, that
I understand not my request to be, that the Rich-man may be sure to escape; and
that I my self may be tortured, almost instead of the Murderer. But what would
you have to do? You must not reckon, I could possibly lie, seeing I am the man
who was present, when my Dear Son was Murdered. Yet I am willing for Truths
sake, I desire the Torture; wherein I know not what I shall say, but, I have
seen, and do well know, what I ought to say.

Would you have me after this, to deal by Arguments and probable Inferences?
No, Torture is the shorter Cut. I see no reason, my Lords, why the Rich man
should deny me the Rack, so long as there are such doubts and uncertainties to
be cleared. Possibly he would not have me Tortured, if, when I am so, I must be
believed at last. O thou cruellest of all mankind, how long will thou sham me
by counterfeiting Fear. I had more need to Fear, who call for my Rack; I, who
could do nothing, alas, when I saw what I did see. My Patience is suspected by
you. For, you see, that strength and prime of Age, and a well-set solid Body
are an encouragement against Pain; but how easy, how ready a matter it, for a
Poor disconsolate Father to be put to Torment? For I bring with me to the Rack
a piteous Body, already black and blue with the strokes of my Grief and
Complaint. How much of my Life, how much of my Spirits, has the loss of my Son
taken from me already? How much weaker are these my Vitals, wasted away by
daily Lamentations? Can then this pale Visage of mine, this meagerness, this
weak Estate of my Body, as if I had been racked already, devise any thing
that is false? Besides, if you lie, under Torture, you can long say nothing less
than what you saw with your Eyes; it is a short kind of Confession, to tell
what you saw. Those are happy, Sir, whom the Torturer interrogates, examines,
and who cannot command other men's belief. He can endure little, that can put an
end to his Torture, when he will himself. But, says he, why do you not rather
prove the Fact? Oh, thou Confident man, you know, that no body saw it but
my-self. Without doubt, Friend, many Arguments might have been brought to
convict you, if another man had been your Accuser; and you were most clearly
guilty, if I were to seek for the Murderer. For who more likely to kill a Poor
man, than a Rich man, and his Enemy too? Or, what Wickedness can be more easily
sound out, that has no other impulsive Cause, but Revenge? He need not many
words, to say, He saw it; Nor ought I to lose this Probation of mine, because
it might have fallen out, that yon might have been accused by another. He
requires Proof, who so laid the Villainy, that it cannot be proved. What
Testimony could night procure? What Eyewitness could naked and lonely poverty
find? For your part, you had a Servant, but he was to be put out of the way,
that he might not be privy to the Villainy; and things being carried so, who
could be present? Who, do you think, was there to be put upon the Rack? You
brought the whole Fact to this pinch, that he alone was to know it that did it,
and one more, who now, it seems, is not to be believed. Would you make any
doubt to inquire, if any other man knew of this Wickedness? Is it fit, that my
Son's suit should therefore be lost, because I, his Poor Father, saw the thing
don. Truly, my Lords, I have made good one part of Proof, even by this, that
the Rich man refuses me the Torture. An Accused person will never fear the
Torture of his Accuser, unless he thought him likely to be believed, even
before he came to it.

But, says he, if the Feuds between us were the Cause of the Murder, why did I
not rather dispatch Thee? Cruel Man! I prove thee the Murderer by this very
Argument, that thou did let me alone. 'Twas thy wicked Plot, this, to destroy
the Son and save the Father. This was the very reason for thy sparing of me,
that thou could not have been defended, if both of us had been Murdered.
Methinks, I seem to overhear your very thoughts and your secret contriving the
Murder in your Heart, What have I to do, said you, to wound or shed the Blood
of an Old Man, that is spent, and, as it were, half-dead already? Let me rather
make away the Young Fellow, who takes part with his Father already against me,
I am sufficiently revenged of the Old Father, when he sees his Son Murdered
before his Face. Would you have me wonder, that you did not kill me? I believe,
'twas because you were loath, that a short Life should put an end to my Grief.
You spared me, as Tormentors devise ways to lengthen out punishments, they
wreak their cruelty more by prolonging pain, than by speedy dispatching out of
the way. Now I see your mercy toward me that Night, tho you hated me. 'Twas one
and the same reason for both, that you would not have me Tortured, and that you
would not Make me away. This man, my Lords, endeavors to make it utterly
incredible, what I contend for, That he was the person, that Murdered my Son.
Do You think now I Will say, that there is more of security, if a man will trust no
body to do a Fact but himself, it is safer doing it before a Father that is his
Enemy, than a bare Complice. Nay I say more. To Murder a Son in the sight of
his Father, it is then worth the while, if one does it ones self. He loses much
of the Pleasure in a Villainy, that commands another to do it, and there is less
sweetness in things we hear by report. Another man may Murder one, by your
command, but in the mean time you can take no pleasure at the sight: Oh, it is a
great deal more, to be sated with the sobs of a dying Soul, to see the Blood
gushing out, to behold the man grovelling and grasping, and this too while I
my-self am by. These things, my Lords, suit well together, That the Rich man
committed this Fact with his own hands, and, That I saw it don. The reason of
his Cruelty, was, That he should be Murdered in my sight, that was Murdered
for my sake.

I beseech you, my Lords, do not think, I did not see the Fact committed,
because I stood still, and stirred not. That Is the grief of Slaves, and of
half-Free-men, when a Murder is perpetrated, to know presently what to do, to
schriek out, to run up and down, to call God and Man to witness the foulness of
the Fact, and at last to dissolve in Tears. Would you have me set upon the
Murderer? Must I run after him, as he flies? Mean while, who shall take up my
fainting Son? Who shall support his weak dying Body? You know well enough, O
Homicide, how to lay and order your Villainy. To murder a Son before his own
Father, is to do it, when no body is by. Take pity therefore upon me, my Lords,
and even from hence make an Estimate of the rich Man's Guilt, that he is
content no Enquiry should be made into the Fact, he has not the Confidence of
one that thinks I am a Liar; and, that which you ought to heed as much as if he
had confessed, he thinks it not safe for him to deny the same a second time.
Pretend what you will, it is no innocent fear, that makes you dread another
Man's Torture. What says the rich Chuff now? Will he turn my Loss to this kind
of use, as if the Authority of a Father's Grief would fasten another Man's
Wickedness upon him? Next, you bring not the Rack your self, yo your self do
not place the burning Coals. In earnest, you should say, You were willing to be
racked. I rend my Clothes, and you tremble at it: I make bare my Body for the
Lash, and you look as pale as a Clout: I call for the torturing Engine and the
burning Coals, and you have not the patience to see me undergo this pain. What,
I pray, could he do more, that was the Murderer? Wretch that I am, what shall
I do now? I have deprived my self of what was commendable in my Confession,
even before I am tortured to confess. I know right well, how much more credible
it would have been, if I had started this amidst my Flames and Lashes. I have
also lost much of the Authentickness of my first Crying out, yet you must not
think my Torments needless, tho I have told already what I know. I have yet
many things to say concerning that secret Fact, which my pain will give the
force of Argument to. It Is no matter whether I say, I saw it; I shall prove by
my ^orture, that I ought to have been believed, even before I was put to 't.

Oh my Adversary, How do I torture you now, ^y interrogating you that in open
Court, which you ^urst not own to my self alone? But if I well ^erceive the
inside of your Comfort, you do not ^^ink you deny it, because I saw it. Oh
thou, the ^ost presumptuous of all, called Murderers, did ^ou think thou
should come off, because only ^e two knew it? Deny this, Oh deny it, if thou
^anst, when I am under Torture, and while the ^xecutioner asks me through every
Limb so tortured, ^old out, if thou art able, thy resolvedness not to ^^lieve,
when I roar out aloud, I am sure I saw ^ee, thou can bring no Counterproof at
all of thy ^nocency. He can in no wise expect to be acquit^^d, except he hears
me deny it. And yet, my ^ords, pray do not imagine, that I beg my Tor^^re upon
this account only, as if I longed to be ^iserable. No; I will give you Reasons,
why ^ou should be out of patience with me, and com^and me to my Rack. He
Murdered my Son, that ^as praiseworthy of all and every one of you, upon
whose account I thought my-self happy, and ^as as proud as the best. Oh my too
great im^unity! So may I not bring thee off the Rack, ^ay I not free thee from
the schorching Flames? Now thou do vindicate, now thou do defend ^e. Now,
just now, my Rich man has Mur^hered my Son by trusting upon thee. Gather your
^elves together, all ye Children and all ye Pa^ents too, schorch and tear out,
first these Eyes of a ^oor Father, then pull these Arms of mine apieces,
because they were lazy and did nothing for (...) dying man; rend this Boay,
these Limbs, tha^ came off with never a Wound after grapling with the
Murderer. Whether you will call it a Punishment or a Favor, I ought to be as
miserable while I prove it, as I was when I saw it. I am a^ wretched man
indeed, if I can possibly give a^ Lying Testimony, even from the Rack. Without
doubt the Rich man aimed at this in refusing me the Rack, lest they should have
beleive^ me. But hold out a little, prithee, thou Conscience of mine, Thou
did see it. And now let unhappy affection return to us, miserable Creatures:
That which could not be don in tot^^ destitution, the Courage which surprising
Gre^ has taken away, let Torture restore. When my bare Heart and Bowels shall
be schorch'd with Flames, then let that night come into my mind; when the
Rack-scourges shall have unjointed my Limbs, let then the looks of my only
Son, as he was a dying, be again placed before mine Eyes: Let the words of the
Murderer on one side, and the Requests of my dying Son on the other, stick by
me. When I see my Son a dying once, methinks I see it still: Oh unhappy Old
Age, thou know not how much stickling for Truth there must be, that the Rich
man may heartily repent he did not Murder us both. Yet for all this, my Lords,
I desire you to consider, and to bear with, my Weakness; For if perchance, the
Rack-lashes shall make me change my note, yet, I am sure, I saw it; If I lose
my Voice 'midst Torture and Flame, yet, I vow, I saw it: If Pain, assaulting me
on every side, ^^all kill me downright, yet I saw it still. O^^erwise, if you
will not allow me to believe ^^y own Knowledge and my own Eyes, I should ^^ve
been Dead ere this of that Anguish, when I ^^nsidered I was like to be Tortured.

Gemini Languentes: OR, The dying Twins.
DECLAMATION VIII.
The Argument.
A Man and his Wife had two young Children, that were Twins, who both fe^ Sick:
The Physicians, being consulted said, that 'twas the same disease, and tha^ it
was incurable, only one of them offered to work a Cure upon one Child, if
Liberty might be given him to inspect the Bowels of the other: Whereupon the
Father suffers him to dissect one of the Infants, and view his Entrals; by
means whereof he cured the other. Hereupon the Wife commences an Action of
Ill-abearance against her Husband.

For the Mother against the Father.
THo, my Lords, it takes off much pity from a Poor Mother in her distress,
that, of Two Children alike desperately Sick, one is recovered, so that many,
who at first view entertain her great sorrow, will be ready to say, She is too
covetous and greedy of Comfort, that being very lately like to lose both her
Children, now she is not contented with the recovery of one: Yet I cannot but
present to your Piety this first Considerable in her sad calamity, which arises
even from the very terms of the Comfort which is left her. The Poor woman, I
believe, would complain less of her Husband, if he also, for whom his Brother
was Slain, could not have been Cured. Now the unhappy woman is not able to
stand under her grief, now she finds no kind of comfort, since she seems to
have lost a Son, that might have lived too. It adds to her impatience under her
sad loss, because she understands his disease was not without hopes of
recovery; The Poor woman can never be persuaded, he was irrecoverably Sick, who
could afford that, which cured another. Tho the cruel Father stretches hard to
shelter the immanity of his Parricide under a greater Fear, yet I see no ground
to infer, that both of them must needs have miscarried. of Twain, that were
Sick, he alone was lost that was Murdered.

And therefore in the first place, the unhappiest of all Mothers prefers this
request to you, that you would not abate any part of the Odium of this wicked
Fact, because her Husband seems to be concerned, as much as she, in the loss of
a Child. A Father cannot be said to lose a Son, who destroys him; he quits
himself of his Grief, because he thinks he has don a brave thing; and his
bragging of the Contrivance substitutes a Poor comfort, in lieu of his lost
Son. But a Mother is otherwise, yea far otherwise, affected, she would not
believe the Physician, and, by reason of the barbarousness of the Terms
proposed, she would never give way to make the Experiment. For as she feared,
so likewise she hoped, for both their sakes. I would not have you reckon him of
greater Piety, who, by the death of one Son, thought to insure the Life of the
other. You ought to detest the Father, as if he had killed both, sure 'twas no
matter to him, which of them was killed. Yet, may it please you Religious
Lordships, some body else, besides the Mother, has cause to complain of this
Cruel Parricide. For he reckoned Health it self among humane disasters, and he
had the Heart, that his Son should endure all manner of pains and diseases, for
Physick's sake. He slew a Son, (if you will believe himself) that perhaps might
have died notwithstanding; and he parts with a Child, whom he ought to have
loved more dearly by reason of the desperateness of his Case, for some Poor
uncertain event. This Motive, my Lords, does not discharge the Cruel Father
from Savageness, because he thought he might practice an unheard of and a Cruel
thing on his Sick Child. He can have but this one Motive, if the one might be
cured. Oh, great Prosperity, how commonly art thou charged with a sad and
o'repressing load of disasters! A Mother, that was lately noted all the Town
over, is she now come to This? What, she, that had such sweet Company, that
never parted from her sides? She, that made such pretty Glances with her
gladsom Eyes? Why do you tell me of one that is lost? Alas, the woeful Mother has
e'n lost both: For the Poor Children sell both Sick; and without doubt they
were in the same condition at once, not by their Relation or by Sympathy of
Body or Spirit, but on the common account of human frailty, even as Two
Strangers might fall Sick at the same time. I will not deny, but the Disease
was grievous, terrible and such as might minister Fear to both Parents, yet
'twas such, as for which (to speak the least) a Cure was sought. Tell me not,
that the Physicians agre'd, they would both dye, in regard, they said, 'twas
the same disease? It Is plain, they could not speak true of both, for, you see,
they were out in one.

Yet, at present, my Lords, we do not complain of their wretched Prescription,
to throw the Patients on their Parents, when they thought they could not cure
'm themselves? It Is more plain and innocent, to give a man over, where you
don't know a remedy; And I had rather have such honest ignorance, which says,
We cannot cure a Malady, if we don't know it. But the greatest Professors among
them, and such as Mankind were not able to requite, if they knew this kind of
Cure, yet would make no discovery thereof. Would you have me prove, in short,
that they did no better than lie? Why, they said, the Disease was d^sperate,
and yet One of themselves (if the Father speak Truth) sound out the Remedy.
Whether it were, my Lords, that the most vainglorious of the Ignoramus's saw
the over-rigid Patience of the Father in the danger his Children were in, and
so looked upon him as a man careful for a Remedy, even for all Mankind, in
their particular Disease; or whether, he made this a pretense to counterfeit
some skill, seeing he could not cure, and therefore essayed to cover his
shameful ignorance under as great an unlikelihood, or whether it were, that he
would be thought to say somewhat more than the rest, he interlac'd and
flourished his d^spairing words, with incredible vapouring; and, keeping the
poor Parents long in suspense, at last he thought it safest to promise, what no
body living would venture to essay. He acknowledged, that he understood not the
Cause of the Malady, and yet (forsooth) he would undertake to recover One, if
he might slay and dissect the Other, and inspect his vitals. Iron.
This is your Man, that must be trusted by a pious and careful Father. He
professed, he knew a Remedy for that Disease, which he knew not a word of.

Now, my Lords, will it please you to take notice, that the Father did do
nothing of all this, out of his impatient Love? I Will tell you, he did not
acquaint the Mother with it; the poor Woman was driven from her dying Son, by
the very mention of the safety of the the other. Neither did he take any counsel
of his Kindred or Friends, but, resting on his own and his Physicians
persuasion, he gave him leave to choose which he would, which is worse than if
he had slain him himself. Now let the Murtherous man tell me, how it came to
pass, that of Two Children, alike deplorably sick, one should be thought more
desperate than the other? If 'twere indifferent to the Physician, which he
murdered, it is plain from thence, that possibly both might have lived; but, if
he did put any difference betwixt them, then it is clear, that 'twas not quite
the same Malady. What a kind of Cure this was, and what the Poor Youth endured
in a Death that an Anatomist must be present at, I presume it is plain to the
affections of all thinking persons. And therefore I am tender, that the Mother
should hear it; yet we must briefly show you the method of his long-lasting
Cruelty. Of all that he suff'red, his death was the least and easiest. Nor must
he think to procure Pardon for his Cruel Cure, because he made good his promise
in 'tother Brother. Whether the Physician cured the 'tother, let Fortune decide
it, this I am sure of, the Physician kil^'d one.

Here now the unhappy Mother flies out, and cries as loud as she can, Husband,
says she, where is my Child that I committed to you, and to your Physician
both? Here is your uncureable Child, which you trusted to me, taken him, this
is the Child that is a dying, this is he, whom you allowed your Physician, if he
thought good, to Murder. You see, what comes of my distressed pious Vows, and
of my careful Prayers? Whilst I foster and foment his could Breast by applying
my Paps thereto; when I put Life into his stark cold Limbs by incessant Kisses,
and the warm Breath of a Distracted Mother; when his almost closing Eyes did
open a little, at my noise and schreiks, and so admit a glimpse of Light; when I
cogg'd with him, when I promised him great matters, and told him that his.
Brother was Cured, he looked up toward Life, he grew better, he was quite
well. Yet I don't brag of any Piety, nor do I ascribe to myself the Event of
that happy Cure; would you know, what Cured him? I Will tell you, in a word, Even
that, which would have cured them both.

The Laws, methinks, and Statutes may be ashamed for confining the Grief of our
Poor Sex within such narrow bounds. What shall a Wife, when her Son is slain by
her Husbands means, accuse him, of no more than Ill-Treatment, or
Ill-Abearance? Those Wives go off from the Authority of this Law, who make the
want of some Matrimonial Caresses a Ground of Action. For my part, I think
Liberty is given thereby to wretched Wives only, to sue for a divorce from a
wicked Husband, and it defends against such Injuries of an Husband, that you
can endure no longer. It releives those Wives, who cannot in Conscience part
from their Husbands, but are locked in the hard and everlasting bond of the
worst of Wedlocks; who, having Children by their ill Husbands, can neither well
leave them, nor well stay with them. Possibly an Husband may have the better
on it, because he would be condemned, if the Action were grounded on a less
complaint. And therefore such a woman is past Shame, that sues her Husband, for
denying her a Garb sit for her. Quality, for taking off her Attendants, for
refraining her Bed, or for a Flap on the Face, as if he had destroyed a Child.
I have said nothing as yet of those Circumstances, which make the Parricide to
appear so heinous as it is. I say, my Son was slain by his Father, you may
suppose, he was Lewd, Debauched, and Wicked; or you may think, his Father did
it in Anger and Indignation? How heinous a thing it is, to kill a Son, no body
acknowledges more, than he, who would have us think he did it for his 'tother
Son's sake.

What, my Lords, can the wilful humor of an Husband, and the All of a sad
Wises misery be discovered by this? That he denis to be accountable to her for
the offspring between them. Do you like it, you men, that of persons, who
derive more of their Life and Spirit from them, they should have no share but
only of their Grief? Shall a Poor woman then contribute her waylings only? Must
she be set aside from all the Cares and Counsels, which are required for the
trayning of their Youth, and for the disposal of their Life, and have no more
concern for them than a Stranger, shall she be joined to her Husband only in
Partnership of Mourning and Tears for a lost Child? Certainly, if we duly
estimate, to which of the Parents Children are most obliged, it is not without
reason, that that affection should challenge almost all the Preeminence, that
was set upon them, ten Months before the Father dreamed on it: For you, Fathers,
are made such only by the first gladsom sight of the birth, but we Mothers know
our selves to be such, by our going with the burden all that while. Is it fit
that they should have less power over them, because they can do less for them!
You are they, who, when they are shooting up, send them to Travel; and when
they are grown, after the Fashion of Grandees, (forsooth) you send them to
trail a Pike. You are ashamed to seem sensible of their absence, as if it were
a weakness of Spirit; and, (whence there is an easy Transit to severity and
rigor) you love your Children, by putting them to hardships. How many things do
you do with your Children, only because you may. You often Sin by bragging of
your power, while you would seem to affect a grave humor. When you lose your
Children, you cannot shed a Tear, your countenance is stern and unmovable,
even when you behold their Bodies a burning, you are easily comforted, and,
that which surpasses all Savageness whatsoever, you seek ambitiously to be
praised for being unconcerned in their calamity. Can there be any thing then,
which you both perform, not with the same mind, with the same impatience, or,
if need be, with the same rigor, toward your common Children? He Is a Wicked
Father, that will not let the Mother do as much as he. Grant, that our weaker Sex
yields to you about Tutoring our Children; you may settle their Manners, their
Course of Life, their Marriages, and other Acts, by your Counsel and
Persuasion: But is there any arrogance or presumption in the Joint-share and
Partnership of both, when our Children are Sick? Nay: if you have any Shame at
all, now give up all your Power to the Mother, let her sit nearest the Sick
Child's Bed, let her apply fomentations, and let her hand him his diet: If his
Impatience, or the Disorder of his Feavourish Bowels, call for any thing, let
the Mother deny it, or let the Mother give it him. If his hot Fit has thrown of
the Clothes, let her lay them again on his wearied Limbs; if he throws his
hands up and down the Bed or Couch, let her keep them in with a diligent care.
In vain do you seek, that this cruel Act should seem to come from your great
affection, who are indeed secluded from all obligation to take Care. Where
Parents do not agree about the Cure of their Sick Children; the Cure is to be
distrusted, not the Mother.

Moreover, the Son, that he killed, was an innocent Child; he could object
nothing against him, neither had he any Cause to be angry with him; A Son, (if
you will believe himself) that was ready to dye for his Brother, and whose last
Farewell he could not endure to see. My Lords, here is a new and unusal Fact
committed against us, now, Piety, Love and an Impatience to lose a Child,
sticks not at a Parricide. I had rather a man should hate, complain of, and
curse his Children, than Murder them with the same affection as he Saves them.
What avails it, if the Life of the other Child be redeemed by such an Act? If
any just reason can be given for Murdering a Child, he must be Murdered upon
his own account only. Now, my Lords, consider further, I beseech you, to
inhaunce his inhumanity, he killed him when he was Sick and Weak. I conceive,
all of us do entertain a greater tenderness for those, that are Sick; yea even
Malefactors, whose Executions we otherwise long to see, yet we take some kind
of pity upon them, if they be weak and troubled with any violent Fit. When men
are in holes of Prisons, and in the deepest Dungeons, yet the swarthy paleness
of ones panting Breast is beheld, not with such remorse, nor do the railing
Chains about his neck, and a Face begrim'd with a long nasty imprisonment, so
move and strike the Spectators, as that Poor man, who is ready to faint every
step he takes; and who can scarce be pushed on by the long train of his
Fellow Prisoners, this Sick Prisoner, amongst so many condemned ones, and dead
in Law, causes every one to look on him before the rest. What say you? Will you
offer to wound one, or kill him outright, whom, in the case he is in, it is
cruel to correct or to reprove, whose very Ears should not be grated with hard
words; and one so tender, that, if you deny him any thing, you seem to kill
him? You cannot think to defend your self on this account, That you devised this
Expedient to save the 'tother. No, when Two Children are alike desperately ill,
if you be a good Father, your Affection will incline to neither, you will choose
neither; but, to avoid the hazard of being Childless, you will rather dye your
self.

In this place, my Lords, the Cruel Old man strives to patch up an Excuse for
his Rashness, from the Consent of his Physicians; They despaired, forsooth, of
them both. But I Will lay aside a while the Savageness of the Father, who, to
escape the hazard of Childlesness, would give any Credit at all to them; and in
the Name of all that is Man, I will complain against the Men of so bold and
daring a Persuasion. How many Tricks has the miserable care of mortals found
out? It Is by Fate, we Live, we are Sick, we are Well, we Dye: What can the
thing, called Physic, do, but that, according to her Rules, none may despair?
Do you think, I will say, I don't believe them when they give over a Patient;
or that, I am not of their mind, when they utterly leave and forsake him: Tush,
for my part, I Will not trust Doctors, no not when they promise and encourage me:
Look upon the greatest part of mankind, and, in my judgment, that Lustier age,
which lived in the First true Frame of Nature, knew no great Professors of such
an Art; yet for all this, she could cure Wounds received in Battle, and the
attaques of diseases, not by the Learned vanity of disputing pro and con, but
by more Experiment, and by drawing Observations from like and unlike events,
she succors us by the way she has been taught. It Is not the medicinal Art that
Cures, but whatsoever has the hap to Cure, that is medicine. How can I take it,
do you think, that an Art, invented (as you say) for our Life, forsooth, should
take such a guise and authority upon her, as to foresee men's Exits long before?
That it should pronounce that Fate to be at hand, which we dreamt not of? When
it begins to be the chiefest part of this pretended Science, to say, We are
past Cure: Will any man leave a person that can speak still, that breaths, that
understands, as he would give over a dead Corpse? Or, will he think, that
presently there is an end of Life, whenever his poor skill is gravel'd? If we
consider the Frailty of our mortal Fabric, with the uncertain hazards that
attend it, you will find, that the case of every Sick man is alike dangerous. It Is
unreasonable, to call those cases desperate, as often as Physic cannot find
out a Cure, and to make the scantling of our skill, or of our understanding, to
reflect upon the Fates. I think nothing concerns every body more, than that our
hope for a man should hold out as long as his Life. Whence, do you think, does it
proceed, that men are so slow in their Funeral-preparations? How comes it, that
they are always disturbed with beating our Breasts, with weeping and with
immoderate howling? But that, it seems, we are loath to believe, that death it
self can dispatch us so suddenly? And therefore, we frequently see some
returned to Life again, after their last Farewell has been cried; some have
recovered, even by not being looked too: That has saved some, which perhaps
would have killed others. Unadvised Indulgence has helped some, and desperate
Resolution has don as much for others. Perhaps this Art may be able to foresee
diseases, and to find out what is good for them; but how can it possibly tell,
how much Life Nature has granted in the Inwards, in the dark corners and
recesses of the Breast? What property the Spirit may have received, and what,
the Body? There is not such a difference in our Shapes, nor so great a variety
in our Countenances, as there is a latent dissimilitude in our Breasts.
Whatsoever the various composure of the Elements has framed us, it is
unsearchable, and never like to be found out; And, as more or fewer of
Celestial Principles are united with the Terrene, so by a hidden reason we
last, or we knock off. Whether we ought to believe such as give men over, judge
you? They, who denied the Sick Infants were capable of a Cure, said not true
neither in him that escaped, nor in him that miscarried, for he dyed not of any
Sickness.

Certainly, A woman might have had just cause of complaint against you, if you
had gone a ne^^^ and unusal way to work, tho you had saved bo^^ It never shows
any great Affection, to make Try^ of desperate Remedies, tho they may do us
good* For in a very hazardous Prescription, the unadvisedness of the Trial only
argues a desperate resolution. What matter is it, of what condition the Sick
man is? How much of Hope, or how much of Life remains behind? Let the Fears and
Dreads of Parents for their Children be sacred. God forbid, that, of our
Children, he, that is like to dye should be less regarded. The Physicians
despaired! What Is that to the Father? Pray, do you hope notwith^^^nding, and
bid the Mother hope with you: Trust to your own affections rather, and to your
own ardent Prayers. This shows, that you were too too willing to commit the
Murder, when for your Son's Sickness, you chose to go only to de^pairing
Physicians. Do you believe such men, that give one another the Lie, and against
whose Opinion you give Credit to one single Person, before all the rest. Again,
I should think very hardly of your Cruel-heartedness, if in the Cure of a Son,
whatever it be, you did not acquaint your Kindred, s^nd for your Friends, have
regard to the Mothers mind, and did not first consult this Impatience, (on one
side) and that Fear (on the other side) of the Parents. A Father ought to allow
himself less liberty in the case of no Son, than of him that is e'n just upon
dying.

But they were Brothers, says he, and Twins ^^o, and therefore it is probable
they ailed the same ^^ing. Pray, who can endure that any man should be ignorant
and positive, in the same thing? ^^e that knows not, what kind of disease it is,
cannot ^^ow whether it be the same or no. My Lords, nature never made any thing
in the World so ^^ke, but that some property or other did distinguish (...).
What matters it, that the First constitution ^^f Two Bodies and Spirits springs
from the same ^rinciples? Yet, every man is composed and ^ade by a Frame of his
own; Two, or more, Bro^hers may be born, but their Fate may be singu^ar. That
indifference and indistinguishableness, that ^ve behold in some, which men
admire when they ^ee, and all the Town wonders at, yet the know^edge of their
Parents can distinguish them, the Nurse knows Which is Which, and tho the
di^tinctive marks are not easily discerned, yet there ^s something again, where
even likeness it self cre^tes a difference. In some tho they are not
di^^inguishable by their Countenance, yet there is ^ound a different Tone,
another Mien, and a di^^inct Gate or Pace; and suppose all these differ not,
yet there is a different Wit, contrary disposi^ions, and courses of Life which
are quite cross one to the other. Moreover, That Twins have ^not the same
Nature is evinced by their several Fortunes; she depresses one with constant
poverty, ^he pranks up 'tother with an Estate, he could never ^ook for: She
conducts one to Titles, Places, Offices, the other passes his whole Life in
obscure and ^gnoble privacy. All that Twins receive from their Father is like
enough; but what from Fate, is unlike. Neither did they slip out of their
Mothers womb together, so that the same birth consigned them. How much time,
do you think, did pass between the woman's being laid of her first Twin? Whilst her
womb, having a little delivered, is opened a second time for another bearing?
Perhaps it may seem a small Term to our Eyes; but if you consider the vastness
of the Heaven over us with a grovelling mind, you shall know, that there is a
great Arch of a Circle runs between Nativitys. This vast Frame of the Starry
Heaven roles over our heads by a swift motion turning downwards, and, the huge
distance between East and West being measured out by the short space of Day and
Night, we meet with different Constellations from what rose at first, by the
continued revolution of the Axis. Do you reckon this, a small space of the
Heavenly Circumference, that presents you with such distinct appearances. How
much appears above the Horizon every moment of a Flitting hour, and how much
again does disappear? And therefore, when, I pray, did the Children set out to
Travel together; When did they list themselves for Soldiers together? What
have they don, but when they were separate and apart by themselves? When was
it, that they were Sick together, and when were they conjoined in their last
Funeral? And tho it is necessary, that Twins should sometimes be Sick together;
yet this happens to them, not as Brothers but as they are Several. That our
Twins were not Sick of the same Fate, how would you have me prove it more
briefly than thus, That both of them were not Murdered nor both of them Cured?
But suppose this be ^^ue, that the Physicians despaired of them: Yet, ^ray, You
who are the Father, leave us some In^ocence in our Calamity, leave us an entire
Com^^rt in our Children, whom you seem not to have ^^st, but by Fate. What
Parent is ignorant, that ^^e procreates Children under the Fatal Law of
M^rtality? But inhuman and unbecoming Exits are ^orse than to be barely
Childless. For this cause, ^^e bewayl those more, who hap to be taken away by
War, or who chance to be burnt with ^ire, or to be cast away at Sea. You may
the ^etter bear with the loss of those Children, who ^ye with all their loving
Friends and Assistants a^out them; when we have said what we have to ^ay, when
we have given a departing kiss, when ^hey have made their last Will, and when
our Conscience tells us, we have don all that we could ^o save Life. These are
the men, if we speak truth, that may be said to dye, others are all but ^ast
away.

Again, I see not, how the Father can fetch any Excuse from the Consent of
Physicians. Why this is that, which exceeds all Parallel of Barbarity. A ^ather
murders his Son, for another, who, he ^hought, could never be cured. What a
kind of Monster and Prodigy have we here! Can you ^ndure the Murder of a
Child, and yet cannot en^ure the Loss of a Child? Is it come to this, that ^hen
only you can endure the Death of your Son, when you have added a Villainy to it?
Do you Murder him, because the Physicians gave him ^ver. For my part, I would
have complained, if ^ou had but let him alone, or if you had discon^inued or
remitted any part of your paternal Care; Then, it seems, you will do no more,
than they, who go about to visit many a Patient, who are called away and taken
off by other Cures in hand. Ah, trust your Children rather with their Mother,
let her complain of angry fortune, let her cast an Odium upon the merciless
Gods. That woman, which cannot endure the very thought of your giving a Child
over, you will never be able to fatisfie her by his Murder. Oh, my Lords, who
can endure this piece of Impudence? A Father would make you believe this
unlikely story, That every body despaired, and yet One had some hope. It Is
ground enough for my complaint, That the Physicians could not agree, and when
they had found one, who, against the sense of the rest that gave him over,
pretended to Cure, 'twas not unlikely, my Lords, that some other good man might
have been found, who would have given more encouraging and effectual
Prescriptions. I mean, it is this that I complain of, and that troubles me, that
in a matter wherein he should not have hearkened to the whole Pack of them, yet
he gave credit to One. What if there be some remedy, if it be a Sin to use it.
And where Hope brings along with it as much danger as Despair it self, that is
the best issue, that preserves Innocence in misery. Why do we lay an Odium on
the former Physicians? None despairs more than he, that professes he knows not,
What the Disease is. What say you, the Father? Dare any man be so bold to treat
with you concerning your Two Children, as of Two other ordinary Sick persons?
Can you give up either of your Twins to be Murdered? I should not know how to
bear it, if you should part them by Exposing one, or if you should be content
to bring up but one: I should not endure it, if your Son were taken Captive by
Pirates, that you should redeem him by sending his Brother in his room. What,
will you play fast and loose with your Children? Will you make the Case of one
reach them both? I should call it Murder of your Child, if, when the Physician
promised to save one, you had chosen him that was sure to dye. It Is, near upon,
as Cruel a thing, to part Tvvins as to destroy them. He, with all his skill,
where he must be believed, says, That he knows not the Cause of the malady;
and then forsooth, he prescribes something that cannot be don, no not by them
that do know it. This is his method, Pla Kill, says he, Then Ple try to Cure.
Remember, you that are the Father, he puts Kiling into the bargain before
Curing? It Is not so great piety to save one Son, as it is a Villainy to destroy
another. Do you think now, that this is an Arcanum of his profound skill in
Physic? I tell you, he wraps up nothing but words of despair, the Cautions
Braggadochio lays hold on this short response to circumvent and deceive: You
see, in how much obscurity the Physician involves his Prescript and Experiment?
'Twill never be known, whether a Sick Child dies of his disease, if he kill him
any other way: I did not know, says he, the nature of the disease? When he had
once said so, in truth you ought not to have trusted him with the Children, tho
he would have tried nothing but a Potion, or some novel way of diet and
fomentation. I don't know, says he, but if you will give me leave to rip open
'tothers body, and break up his breast, perhaps and peradventure I may find
some remedy there. Well said, Physician, now you have excused your self to the
Mother; for you used all the means you could, that you might not be believed.

I will defer awhile this my Plea, that the Father acted thus toward Two
Brothers, Twins too, and that without the consent of the Mother; I will rather
contend in the name of all that is man, that such a kind of Cure ought by no
means to be admitted. Good Night to all mankind, if we must need the death of
one man for the recovery of another; and all way of Cure will be lost, in
effect, if medicine does as much mischief if as malady. What, shall I endure a
man, that says, Give me another Live Anatomy, another man's Heart-blood, that I
may find out the Cause of a distemper; when I have killed, then will I inquire
after a remedy, then will I study out something, shall do good. Is it so
indeed, can you not find out the nature of a disease on easier terms? How
Impudent and Shameless is this Cruel service? He resolves, to kill a Sick man,
that he may find our a reason, why he ought not to be killed. I appeal to your
Consciences, my Lords, Nature hides no kind of disease in the Inwards only, but
whatever distemper rises at the Center is diffused to the Circumference of the
Exterior Body. Hence comes Paleness and Meagerness of look, because the outmost
surface sympathizes with the Pain that is within Otherwise, I see not, why you
should Probe a man at his wounds, or why you should transmit your remedys to
the Heart through the passages of the Body; and how Physic can reach our
latent Canals through our very skin. Why therefore does not a malady admit lis
to the understanding of it self, the same way, as it discovers its remedy?
Hidden and deep diseases are discovered either by the too swift circulation of
the Blood in the Body, or by the quicker drawing breath of a panting Soul. In
these cases, first and foremost, believe your senses, I say, believe your own
i^yes: Interrogate the Sick partys one while by themselves, another while both
together, whereabouts the greatest pressure of their disease within 'm does
ch^ifly reside, and whence their Feeling pain, bursting forth into Groans, does
proceed? A Physician, who, by these Indications cannot find out a disease, never
did, nor never will, find out a remedy. But what if a Physician can give some
reason to one, that he has Cured already? Is the in pection of one Anatomy
enough, to make your Physician understood the Nature of all Mankind in general?
What can you bring to a Sick Patient, which the Experience of so many Ages, and
of so many persons, has not already found out? Will you chus^ rather, in the
same bold and dangerous way, to try your remedys, as you do find out the
abstruseness of a disease? There is a shorter way of Cure for us, and a more
compendious Expedient to health and recovery. If too much heat, of Bowels
within, has hardened the parts about it, use Emollient remedys: If the Sick
Patient overflow with moist humors, Recipe's should be ready, whereby, the
Veins being discharged and contracted, the Body may come again to a stronger
and dryer temper. If Abstinence from Food will do little good, let him be
cherished with good Kitchen Physic. If the Spirits be overladen with too much
Feeding, let the Body be attenuated by fasting and refraining from Food, for
the cleansing of the passages. Here Is subject enough, for all your Experiments,
Doctor, in Two Sick persons, and their diseases the same. You must never look
to get various ch^yce of remedys by practicing your butchery upon one poor man.
You must try at the same time, what is proper, what is different, what is
contrary: Here Is no consideration of Launcing, of Ripping up, of the higher
Regions: You cannot know, how one Sick party can be cured, unless you have first
cured the other. Besides, tho a disease be never so much the same, yet it must
needs be diversified in the Variety of Two persons. You can never find in one
man's Bowels the whole of what you seek, for another; a different Sick person is
a different disease.

Why should you maintain the greatest of Crimes by the recovery of the other
Son? A man, in whom you only seek the Cause of any disease, is slain for the
Physicians sake. Add hereto, that the Cause of any disease cannot be found out
from him that was not cured. Whatever puts us, out our of Natural state of
health, to ailments and distempers, is either a Pl^th^ry of Blood in our Veyns,
or an excessive heat, or too much Phlegm, or a conflux of Spirits running up
and down their secret Canals, with a more than usual Freedom. Now which of
these, upon an Anatomical Dissection, will not be prejudiced in the Sick, when
the passage of the opened Breast presently vents the pain of the overpressed
Spirit, and when the Blood gush's out of the same Orifices? Do you think it
likely, that the Bowels, when opened, will retain their natural hue? That the
intimate recess of Life and Spirit will lose nothing of its former vigor, when
it takes air. Alas, we find our selves much altered in the region of our
Breast, even by a little fear. How, think you, does Carefulness, Jocundness,
Grief or any sudden Passion, change us? How often do we see, while a Sick man is
preparing for his Applications, and while he lays his Body in a right posture
for his remedy, that he Swoons away? In our case therefore, at every gash of
the Knife, when the wounded person thinks he will never have don, how much of
the whole man is altered by his Outcrys and Groans? The very Foundations and
Fements of Life must needs all suffer, as long as Life it self is prejudiced;
and in a person, who is slam for better understanding of a malady, the malady
it self dies with him but by piecemeal. Oh, stay such Cruelty, you that are the
Father, put it off, at least for a while; what Experiments you will make upon
your Son, make them upon his Corpse. If his disease may be found out whilst he
is killing him, he may as easily find it when he is dead.

Here it were good to ask, Which of the Two chose out him that was to dye, The
Father or the Physician? The Physician say,. 'twas all one to him, which he
killed: So by this, if the other had died too, he would have proved, that both
would have died. And therefore, say I, when one recovered, he would have
proved, that both would have lived. Of a truth, the Father might have found him
a subject for his butcherly Cure with more ease, if he had had but one Son
only. Now he must endure the torment of comparing and of resolving to execute,
one while whether This, anoth^r while whether That, be deerer to him, or like
to be better? Where is the impatient affection of a Father, that can scarce
endure to follow his dead Son to his Funeral-Obsequies? That is loath to part
with his dead Body, but stands embracing it again and again? Good Heavens! How
Cruel, how Merciless is this your deliberation and delay? All the while you
stand considering first one then the other, you show your Murtherous
inclination to both. It Is a sign you care for neither, when you can suffer
either of Two Brothers to be Murdered. Never, my Lords, that I could hear of,
was there such an horrible Butchery and Inhumanity acted. A Father destroys a
Son for that Son's sake, which very Son also he could as willingly have
destroyed too. The Defendant, my Lords, labors to put off the Odium of the
Election upon his Physician. 'Twas He, says he, That gave his judgment of both,
and 'twas he, that pitched upon one. It Is plain then, that 'twas not the same
disease; of the Two, he had m^re hopes of that one, for whose sake he Murdered
the 'tother.

Have patience a little, You poor unhappy Mother, let me declare, how the Cure
of your Son was. O happy, ye Sick persons all, whose hap it is to dye by
Natural diseases, who gasp your last breath amidst the sorrowful Farewels and
Embraces of your own Kindred and Friends: But our Poor Youth, as he was
tormented first by the uncertainty of his Lot, and afterward by the Fatal
choice, so the first thing to be don was to turn away his Mother from him, and
the Officious assistances of the Servants were changed upon a sudden into
preparations for his Funeral. The Clothes must be stripped from his yet
shivering Limbs, and that his whole Body might lie open to their butcherly
hands, his wonderfully piteous Sceleton must be stark naked. Next, he must be
stretched out as far as the Bed reached; he must not stir, but lie stock-still
to bear it out, and to endure whatever they did to him there. See, now the
Butcher takes his Instrument in his hand, not to give him his Death-blow at
once, but to carve him up by inches, and so to keep his dolorous Soul long a
hovering between the confines of Life and Death. Now the encouraging Speech
they made to the dying Child, was this, Well said, bravely don, Flinch not, thy
Brother will be the better for it. Be not disheartened, nor faint away for the
Pain; Oh, take heed yen do not weary your self by Outcrys, nor displace jour
Bowels by your Sighs and Groans, for if you do so, you will spoil all; your
Brother will be never the better for it. Hereupon the Poor Child underwent all
the Cruel traces of his wandering Knife through every part of his dissected
body. Do You think, the Physician could be satisfied, at first sight, to learn his
Experience from the view of his whole man? No, no, he pulled out his vitals
once and again, he felt them over and over, he parted them one from 'tother;
his Hands were more cruel than his Knife. Where stood the Father now, but just
by the Physician, gazing upon his dissected entrals, and whil'^t he tumbles and
tosses his bleeding Heart, the seat of Life, with his gore hands, he charges
him not to make too much have, he bids him be sure to make a deep and careful
search; he stands to put Questions, to raise Doubts, he Disputes with him, he
gives his Opinion, he takes the minutes of his Sons death. While the unhappy
woman, falling on her face at the door that was shut, with all the weight of
her Body, breaks open that Cruel Conclave, and cries out, as if it were for his
last Funeral. Hear me, Oh my thric^ m^serable Youth, if thou have any sense yet
left, hear m^^* 'Twas not your Mother that gave consent to this, b^lieve my
s^nse of Childlesness, believe my tears; na^* Ple tell you, your Brother
himself did not des^re (...) Cured, at so d^ar a rate. While she said the^^
words, the Poor Truth was r^fresh'd as with a Cordial Potion, h^ hearkened to
his Mothers comfortable words, the r^st of his Blood was stanch'd, and his
^p^^^a Bowels were closed again. No man ever suffered such new-coyn'd methods
of Cruelty, he was Killed, as if he were to be Cured. Where are ye now, that
ask the Question, Whether he might have lived under the Physicians Cure, who
you see, lived so long, while he was a Killing. Do You think, that the Physician,
at that time, did seek for the Cause only of that disease? No, he sought for
all that he did not know before, and, making his best of so rare an
opportunity, he would have benefited himself for any novel Cure. Oh Heavens!
What a portion of Spirit, Blood and Life fell to this Poor Child's share, that
he could endure the method of such a long tedious Cure? The wretched Thing
could scarce find a way to dye, his Soul was hardly parted from his Body, no
not by all his Torments. Do You think, his mal^^^ly was found out hereby? Nay, it
was found, that ^e might have been Cured too. Go too then, you Pr^ud Old
Fellow, boast of your Project, you have don something now, to say, you have
obliged Children, Parents, yea the Age you live in, you have made a Physician
more expert, than he was before, by practicing a Murtherous Experiment upon
your Child.

I have a mind truly, to survey this Young Pair. Yon have one of the Sick
persons as given over, not by the salubri^us hand of the Physician, nor by that
Art, which was found out for Life's sake, but by the feirce and cruel Bitings of
Wild-Beasts, and by the satiated ravening of Birds; you have another of them,
rising up to? n^w strength with a s^^^ briskness. Would you know, my Lords,
whence came this great diversity? Why, the Father looked after the one, but the
Mother, the 'tother. Hove much Pain, says she, did I, Poor woman, undergo,
whilst I made much of so sad an object* I did not try it out with the disease,
nor did contend with an Obstinate distemper, that would yield to no remedy: He
was given over to Tears and Melancholy, he hated the very Light, he could not
eat nor drink, nor could he brook his Life for shame of the Murder. In all his
loud Expressions and Lamentations, you could hear nothing, but, Brother; 'twas
He that troubled his Thoughts day and night, 'twas He that haunted his Eyes. Of
what Sick Persons then does this Lawless, more than Audacious, Physic tell us
such a Lie? He would never, never, have dyed of a mere disease, when even his
Brothers death could not kill him? Why then, says our most wretched woman, O
thou Cruel Old Fellow, do thou, after the memory of so sad a loss, turn thy
self to these Locks? Without doubt, it is your Son, and, after the sorrowful
threatenings of the Physicians, restored to Life too. But let Nature and
Affection pardon me, it is no comfort to a Mother to see One for Two. More happy
is that Grief, which may have its due paid it as long as we have our Eyes, that
is renewed and refreshed by them, and that fancys it sees, every day, 'tother
perishing in this Child's looks. Nay, he himself neither, can take no Pleasure
nor Joy in the recovery of his Health; nor can he believe, he was preferred
before 'tother out of any Love, when he was left only to the Physicians choice.
The unhappy Child perceives, of how great a loss he is the Relict, with what
Tears his Kisses were bedewed, and with how great and profound Sighs his
Embraces were shaken. Miserable is the Shame of so unwelcome a Recovery, it
seems to him, that all is well, now he is alive, tho his Brother was Killed.

In this place, my Lords, the unhappy woman turns about, and, as if her lost
Son were in presence, she thus bespeaks him: Whether, says she, you, being at
last delivered by an all-securing Death, do rest in some modest Eternal Seat of
the Blessed; or whether, as an Excluded and Vagrant shade, as yet in fear of
the Fabulous punishments by Dilaceration, you wander up and down amongst the
Dreadful Terrible Ghosts, hear the Lamentable complaint of your woeful Mother; I
was not permitted to break into that Chamber, which was your Execution-place;
nor was I allowed to cover your dear Body by the prostration of mine on your
Wounds in your Bowels. This is all I could do, poor woman, I gathered together
into this my bosom all that body, which the Physician and the Father had left;
I again filled up that empty Chest with your cold and castaway Bowels; your
scattered Limbs I hugged and joined together; I set the parts in order that
were torn in pieces, and, of a Ghastly Horrible Spectacle, I made up something of
the appearance of a dead Corpse. Yet, this is the principal thing I cannot endure
in my sad loss; It Is plain, you were Murdered for your Brothers sake, but it
can never be made appear, that you did recover your Brother.

Gladiator: OR, The Roman Gladiator.
DECLAMATION IX.
The Argument.
The LAW. A Father may cast off, renounce, and turn his Son out of doors. The
CASE. A Poor man and a Rich were Enemies one to the other, but they had each of
them a Son, that were great Friends and Chronies. It happened, that the Rich
man's Son was taken by Pirates, whence he wrote back to his Father to Ransom
him. His Father making some delay in the business, the Poor man's Son undertook
the Voyage, and not finding his Friend amongst the Pirates, who had sold him to
a Fencing-Master before, he went to the Town where a Prize was ready to be
played, just at the nick of time, when the Rich man's Son was entering the Lists,
as a Combatant. The Poor Youth agrees with the Fencing-Master, to redeem his
Friend by putting himself in his stead: And of his Comrade he desired only,
that if his Poor Father where ever in want, He, at his return, would maintain
him. The Poor man's Son fell in the Combat. The Son of the Rich man, finding
the Father of his deceased Substitute in want, when he came home, did openly
relieve him. Whereupon his Father renounces and cast's him off.

For the Son against the Father.
I AM persuaded, my Lords, you will easily believe, that never any body, no
older than myself, suffered more by Land and Sea, than I, in my last Voyage,
either endured, feared, or saw, considering, that, of all the men I know, there
can be but one instanced in, more miserable than myself, and him 'twas I that
made so. Yet even in this hurry, wherein Fortune scrives to do me all the
mischief she can, I confess this Fear never came into my mind, that, after I
was ransomed by another man's hands, my mercifulness should displease my Father.
I was rather afraid of what they commonly said openly of me, who accused me of
Cruelty and Savageness before many pious and worthy persons. I could not make
any Excuse to them, that I was Ransomed. They Objected to me, that I had made
an Old man Childless, and that he, who, whilst his Son was safe at home, was
able to make head against the Rich man, now having lost all his Means, in one
Young Son, he is fain to creep, as a supplicant, to the House of his Enemy. For
tho we call in the whole power of Fortune to heap Envy and Hatred upon one
Poor Old man, and tho we trample upon him with the whole stress of our
Greatness, yer, after all, we must confess, that we have prejudiced him more
by being his Friends, than while we were his Enemies? Yea, my very Clemency in
prolonging his unhappy days, by bestowing a small Pittance upon him, seems to
have something of Malignity in it. For what obligation can it be to a Man, to
be the Cause of his being Childless? Yet I can Apologize for one, tho a greater
Crime, by reason of my unfortunate chance to be cast out of doors, my hand was
so niggardly and sparing, that I could scarce give him Food enough to keep up
his Spirits, I only gave him what just kept him from starving, and no more. I
hope now, all of you will pardon me, if I could do no more, whilst my Father
was unwilling.

Tho indeed, my Lords, sometimes even this suspicion rises in my mind, that
'twas not the maintenance I gave to one Old Man, that always uses to live
sparingly, (which was not very liberal, neither could I hold out long in giving
it) that drove my Father to be offended with me. For you may be sure, it is but
a small Modicum of a Rich Man's Estate, that the Heir of a Family can dispose of
under a Close-fisted Father. Or, if perhaps he has a greater allowance, yet
what Parent is so hard-hearted; as, for a little expense, to debar himself of
his Son, because I did not make him acquainted with it, because I did not
commend the poor Man to his Charity, and because I did not ask his leave,
especially since I never preferred any request to my Father, but he granted it?
But yet my modest delay, in putting off my Suit to him, should not be Chastised
with so Killing a Sentence. In regard, whilst I waited for a fit time to speak
to him, and for an easy access to his Worship, when he was jocund and in a
good mood, in the mean time, I was willing the poor Man should live, that one
day, perhaps, might beg his Pardon. Yet I will not deny, but I was backwarder
than I ought, tho I am like my Father in nothing more than this. But if
Repentance be any am^nds, here I publicly beseech him to forgive me b^fo^e you
all, as my Witnesses. I did not run in debt by my high spending, neither did I
squander away my Estate in lewd or extravagant courses. Nay, I am indebted for
the very sum of my ransom. It I obtain my request, then I Will grant that to be
true, which some, imagine, my Father ambitiously seeks to publish the
Mercifulness of his Family, that it may not be said, Poor Men only give up
their Lives for their Enemies. If he persist to hunger-starve me for giving
Meat to a poor Man, and if he treat his Son as his Enemy, by expelling him from
House and Home, then, I fear, too hard Censurers will cast the blame of that
unpardonable and often reproved hatred on my Father, who can be so easily angry.
But so Folks will have it, Men differ more in the Manners that Fortune gives
them, than in their own natural dispositions. If you see a Man in a mean
estate, that is as bare as can be, yet he will take liberty, rather than be
censured as contemptible, even proudly to affront the best of the Parish: And a
great Estate, if with a good cause, takes an inferior Adversary more heavily.
So Chance many times sets Enemies together by the Ears, whose Piques last long
from small beginnings, whilst a Mean Estate, is sooner sensible of an abuse,
and a Great Fortune resents it deeper. Neither was there any Emulation between
them, (for how can there be any such thing between Persons so unequal?) but by
some fate the same sort of contention arising from different Springs. The one
was stiff in his Anger, the other stout in provoking. Tho, unless it had
pleased my Father to extort the last Confession from the yielding Party, there
were many signs, of asking him pardon, given, and a desire to end the discord.
For what else could be the meaning of the poor Man's Sons, leaving all other
Comrades, and choosing out me alone, to love and respect? Without doubt, while
we were little Children, even in our Infancy, we were dearly beloved
Play-mates, before any seeds of discord were sown betwixt our Parent, or at
least before they were observed by us. Yea, when our Families were Two, we
continued One still, nay, then we studied more to observe one another. And if I
understand any thing aright in the case, sure he did nothing of all this
against his Fathers will. My poor judgment is, that doubtless our poor
neighbor, being ashamed to yield, lest he should condemn his Cause, as also
because no way of favor was open to him, seemed to persist in his undertaken
course, yet he essayed some easier ways of Address, and, till a firm peace
could be made up, he gave us his Son for an Hostage.

Nor did my Father seem to be offended at our Intimacy, I am sure he never
reprehended me for it, nor forbad me his conversie: Yet I did nothing
sculkingly, nor did I ever show my self obstinate against my Fathers command,
as the very Order of matters does sufficiently show. For I went to Sea, at his
Command, tho at that time it was infested with Rogues. I cannot deny, but my
Father might have many and great causes to cast that service upon me, which he
could not do himself. Tho I was ignorant of 'm, yet I never asked him, his Will
was my Law. Happy are those Mariners, who have endured only the cruel shocks of
Storm and Tempest, who have escaped the Rocks white-washed with Waves, and
other dangers of the Sea, alone? For my part, I do even envy those that are
Ship-wrack'd, for I was seized by Barbarous hands; nor was I fettered so much
with the Gripe, as with the load, o^ my Chains; I was put under Hatches, where
al^ was aflote, and my very leanness made my shackles hang loose. Who would not
forgive ever^ body, that, after such an example as mine, is e'n^ afraid to go
to Sea? I had but one hope to dri^^ my wretched Life along, and that was to
write (...) Letter to my Father to ransom me, and (I ca^^ God to witness) I
wrote to none but him. For what would People say, I thought of my Father
affection, if, as long as he was living, I had sough^ to another, for my
ransom? That only relie^ which, next to my Father, Fortune had provide^ for me,
that I could not so much as hope for in the condition I was in. And indeed, to
what purpose was it to write to my Friend, as long as (...) knew he had not
wherewithal to ransom me (...) Shall I never have a lucky hour, to complain
(...) my Father of his Friends, who tried to detain him when he was willing to
go? And who cast i^ delays on his Pious forwardness? Certainly, (...) would have
gone, tho against all their wills, (for what Father would not do so for his Son)
if my Friend, in the mean time, had not prevented him: The danger of the Sea,
the Creeks infested with Corsairs, and the nearer lesson of my misfortune did
not deter him. I wonder at this less in my Friend, but this is that, no
courtesy can requite, his Father did not keep him back as he was a going; nay
more, whatever his parsimonious frugality had laid up for the stay of his Life,
he brought it out all, at spent it on the Charges of his Voyage, Oh unhappy Old
Man, here thou begann'st to want. Shall I now tell you, through what Seas this
brave Youth sailed, what Rocks he passed by, what huge Bays he coasted? They,
who never were at Sea, think this nothing. He, with all the have he could,
without any regard to himself, vent'red upon all; it is plain, he was not
sparing of his Life in seeking his Friend, and yet even he, methinks, that made
all this have, for all this came with the latest.

Hear, my Lords, pray, hear a new complaint of a Prisoner. I see now, I was not
miserable among the Pirates. My body, destined for Butchery, was crammed, (which
was worse than Famine) and I, as a contemptible Novice of a Fencer, amongst all
the Prisoners, was designed to the slaughter; I learned every day that wicked
Mystery, that so at last I might lose even the innocence of my calamity. Yet I
weathered, I bore the brunt of all this, so hard is it for a Man to dye, tho in
his own occupation. And now the Fatal day was come, and abundance of People
were gathered together to behold our Punishment; now the Condemned Combatants
appeared upon the Amphitheatre, and so made their own Funeral Show: The Master
of the Prize took his Place, reckoning to please the People by our Combat and
Blood, and whereas there was none there, that could be acquainted with my
Fortune, my Birth, or my Parents, because of the Great Sea betwixt us, yet one
thing ^ade me an Object of Pity to some, that I seemed so unequally matched.
For I was picked out as a most certain Sacrifice, of all his Janizarys the
Prize-master cared least for me. Great stir there was about me, as preparatory
to my Death, one was whetting the sword, another was making the Iron plates red
hot; Rods were brought of one side, and Whips of the other. You would have took
'm for Pirates, all. The Trumpets sounded with a dolesome din, and, a Dead-mans
Bier being brought in, my Funeral was presented even before my Death. Nothing
but wounds, groaning, gore, and extreme danger could I see, round about me. My
Lords, if I am Guilty of any thing, that deserves a Turning off by my Parents,
this one Crime is sufficient, that I put my Friend to such streights. It is an
hard thing for the Happy, to judge aright of misery, yet you may fancy, what my
mind and what my thoughts were, in those circumstances For as in such extreme
hardships, the sad remembrance of Former Pleasure does naturally break in upon
us, so I recollected the nobleness of my Blood, the splendour of my Fortune, my
education in Learning, every thing, far more genteel than at my new Master's;
my House, Family, Friends, and many fine things, never more to be seen by me,
as I was in this my last expectation of Death, occurred to my thoughts, while I
had my base servile Arms in my hands, and when I was ready to dye an
ignominious Death. And (if you will believe a poor Wretch) it troubled me to
consider, where my Kindred were now, that knew nothing of all this, nor could
suspect any thing worse in my condition, than what I had acquainted them by
Letter; but this was far the worst of all, that I reckoned, because he was so
long a coming, my Father had been taken by Pirates too. Whereupon all my
thoughts were taken up with nothing, but Death; I expected every Moment the
Bloody Villain to do my business for me. Every body may easily tell, what would
have become of me, if I had once entered the Lists; for even one of the stoutest
of us all was, it seems, slain at that time. As I was astonished with these
crouding thoughts, and almost sunk into the Grave already, behold the sudden
unlooked for sight of my Friend shined upon me. I was amazed to see him, a
chill fear seized upon me, all over my Body, and I was aghast, as if I had seen
some Illusion or Phantome. A^^oon as ever I came to my self, and recovered my
freedom of speech, How cost do, poor Heart, said I? what Wind blew you hither?
What have the Pirates sold you, and all? But he, taking me about the neck,
sill'd my bosom with Tears, and after he had recovered his breath, which was
almost gone, at last, while I was trembling, he uttered this first, and, for a
good while, only, saying. I have lived now long enough. But when he told me the
Cause of his Voyage, and that he was come to ransom me? Where, said I, is the
Money? Unless you have reconciled your self to my Father, and He has sent you?
Hear, O ye Foreign Nations, hearken, all ye Outlandish People, let no usual
Concourse surround this Court, yea, if it were possible, let the whole World
take notice of such an Example. Be mute, all Former Ages, wherein, even from
the Infancy of Mankind, very few Pairs of Friends, whose Faithfulness has been
transmitted to our times, have been more Admired; whatever Histories have
reported, whatever Poets have feigned, and Fabulists have devised, let it all
be silent in comparison of This. Who would believe, (if it be a thing that may
be called in Question,) that of Two Friends, whereof one was free and preserved
from misery by good fortune, the other fell into the hand^ of Pirates and of a
pitiful Fencer, that the condition of the Prisoner in hold should be the
better? If I had been rich, says he, and well-lin'd, I had brought Chink to
redeem thee, but I have brought thee all a poor Man's help, that is, my Hands,
these I Will give up to the Pirates, these shall be your Substitutes, to play the
Prize for you. Forgive me, O Father, if in the high stress of my overdoing
affection, I had almost wounded you with the loss of a Child. I call God to
witness, 'twas not long of my self, that I am now alive. For the Fencing-school
had not made me so brutish, nor had the long practice of killing and slaying so
hardened my heart, as to make me willing my Friend should be slain, who could
find in his heart to dye for me. I owned my Lot, and, being as it were bound to
a Fencer, I refused not to Play my Prize, nor could he prevail on me by any
entreaty, tho he threatened, He would never outlive me, telling me, This is all
the Case, Whether I would rather have him dye for me, or dye with me. With all
the Rhetoric I had, I could not dissuade him. What did you then, you will say?
Why, My Lords, he led me to the Master of the Show, and there what strange
Prayers, how never-ceasing Tears, what woeful entreaties did I perceive from
him? I Will tell you, no Man ever desired his Freedom with so much Importunity:
Whereupon the Arms were taken from my Body and clap't upon his, and before his
Harness could be fitted as should be, my Fellow Combatant was hastened on the
Theater; tell me not of my Friends last Prayers, those Prayers that paid so
dear for the relief lie sought for his Poor Old Father? Do you think, this was
a Motive and Inducement to me? I profess, I am ashamed, that I put him to ask
me. By this last hour of my life, says he, by all the noted faithfulness of my
Love, whatever you do, don't suffer my Father to beg his Bread: Maintain him,
stand by him, show him kindness, if you think I deserve so much: Be you now my
substitute for him. No more had he time to say, I gave him my last Kiss with
his Helmet on; so, the Officers giving way on both sides, room was left for the
Combat. Oh, how anxious a spectator was I? and with how astonished a mind, did
I sympathize with him in the same Motions of my Body? How often did I dap down at
the Pass of his Sword, as if he aimed to hit me? How often did I raise my self
up, when he made toward him? Oh, what troublesome thoughts had I? Oh, the cruel
nature of Fear? Now, Friend, there is reason, I see, why you had rather venture
your Life in the Lists. 'Twas an unlucky chance, that such a Courage, and such
spritefulness was not employed in an Enemies Camp, or in a pitched Battle,
where true Valor takes place, without the Gardez-vous, or other Laws of
Fencers. With as much Force, as He began the Combat, (being enraged against
his Adversary, as if he were mine still) the Veteran Gladiator used as much
Craft, and cunningly put by all the Passes he made; so that, what strength he
put forth, made against himself. Yet he might easily have come off, from such
an Engagement especially, but he had no mind to live in that Profession. And
therefore he offered his bare Body to the Swords-point, and, that he might pay
my whole ransom at once, he died Fighting on the Spot. He, that might have
lived in peace and quietness, even to Old Age, in his own Country, in his own
House, amongst his Kindred, without any Curb or Disturbance, is now cut and
hacked in pieces, and in the very Flower of his Youth too, he perishes, Poor
heart, with the Fate due to me. But I, whose due it was to have died the death
Fortune designed for him, am dismissed from the Fencing-school with more Guilt
upon me, than I was sold thither. Nay, what Viaticum I have to bring me home,
it is supplied by my Poor Friend, that is gone. Let us please our selves never so
much with our ample Fortunes, yet, dear Father, we shall never be able to
requite the Poor Man.

Now if you will believe me, my Lords, I am ashamed to make a long Harangue of my
Merits toward him, nor can I give you reason enough, why so little is objected
against me: For what have I done for the Father of him, that ransomed me, who
both lost his Son and was impoverished too by the bargain? Even no more, than
what a very Pyrate would do for his Slave, or a Fencing-master for his
Apprentice, I gave him a small Alms, and a little Victuals, which yet he was to
crave every day. How small a pittance must it needs be, that so watchful a
Owner would not observe and miss? This is the thing, that you sit about to day,
this makes all the bustle in Court, A Piece of Bread given to the Needy? And
the apprehension of my willfulness is grown so high in evidence, that some
suspect, I will make away my Friends with the Sword, and my Enemies by Famine.
Pray, let us cast up all the Charge of my Luxury, as you call it; hear the sum
of it all, and then wonder, if a Great Estate cannot bear such an Expense? did
my Imprisonment cost my Father so dear, when he paid so much for my ransom?
How, I marvel, would you have born it, Sir, if, as a Nice wanton Yonker,
especially in prospect of vast an Estate, I had borrowed my Manners and
Deportment either from my Age or from my Fortune, and, like an over-free and
wild Debauchee had revell'd and gam'd all night amongst my Comrades, thereby
spending so much, that you must needs have found it by your Books of Account:
yet kind Fathers have remitted as much as that, upon the account of their
Childrens Youthful years; and can you think me fit to be turned out of doors,
and worthy to be struck with the utmost severity of Paternal Power, for handing
out to a Poor Old Man, nothing but what, to speak modestly, his own Son sent
him? You do not lay to my Charge, that I purchased a Miss, or spent my
allowance in high Fare; the dear-bought Flattery of Bawds and Parasites is not
cast in my dish; no, it is only a little relief given to one Aged Man, worn out
with year and crosses. Can this, Sir, shake your rich Bags? Can this drain your
Family, founded on the Estates of your Father and Ancestors, before you? If you
are so Near, cast up your Accounts, I, for my part, have lived upon others all
this while. But perhaps this Throng, that compasses your Judgment Seat, and all
this Company, that are ignorant of my Case, expert some great and portentous
Crime to be laid to my Charge. What, Father, do you turn me off so quickly? I
came but just now home, before I was looked for, from that fatal journey,
whence you could scarce hope that I should ever return. You have paid no Vows
as yet for my Return, no Sacrifices have you slain and offered to the Immortal
Gods; I am sure, we have made no amends to my Ransomer. But I expected, your
affection would have been so ardent, that you would never have had enough of my
Company, and that your Conscience would have so checked you, for exposing me to
so much danger in an unlucky Voyage, that for ever after, you would never let
me stir, at least very far, out of your sight. But now, before I had scarce
said my Prayers to the Household Gods, I am driven out, so that some may make a
Question, whether ever I came in. Do you do this, because you would have it
thought, that he did nothing for you who ransomed me? Am I so Cruel, am I so
Impious, and so ungrateful (the greatest character of all Vices) that I do not
value my Fathers kindnesses? Perhaps I know not, to whom I owe my Life, his
Merits and Obligations have no room in my thoughts. What an unhappy man am I,
that I cannot pay what I am in debt.

Tho indeed, my Father fetches the Causes of my Expulsion higher than so, he
inquires into matters before my Voyage, and that, upon a double account. First,
that the Defendant, whom the heynousnes of the Crimes, he is accused of, could
not crush, their number might. In the next place, that a Fathers censure might
carry more weight with it, because it is he Condemns me, that should by right
Pardon me. Why, says he, must you, when the beggarly Father was my Enemy, make
his Son your Friend? Here, my Lord, I Will lay aside all Fending and Proving, I
acknowledge, I have don amiss, I ask his Pardon; as a Son may offend, so, I
hope, a Father may Pardon. The likeness of our Age drew me, his Kindnesses won
upon me, his Faithfulness took me so, that I could not find in my Heart to Hate
him that Loved me. Nevertheless, I have suffered enough and enough, and, if I
well understand your affection to me, it is more, I hope, than you would have
me. Let me offend never so much, what could the surliest Don exact more? Was I
not punished enough by being sold to the Fencing-School? What, will you put no
end to my undoing? Is it a small matter (think you) that I have weathered
raging Seas, that, being given over to cruel storms, I was hurryed aloft at the
Pleasure of the Winds? Is it nothing, that I fell, as if Prey, into the wicked
hands of Rogues? And, (which is the hardest condition of the worst of Slaves)
that I was sold without any Conditions made on my behalf? So that my very Enemy
might have bought me, if he had listed? Is it nothing, that the Pirates kept me
so long in Prison, because I told them that my Father was a Rich man, and would
send to ransom me, and that at last they sold me to a Sword-man, seeing they
thought, I had Cheated them? That by a daily Practice of Arms, I was so long
aforehand learning to dye? That being all-ready, and armed, I had entered on the
Stage, and so had Perished, if I had been a better Friend, unless a new
Tempest, assaulting me as 'twere in the very Haven, had cast me out from my
Fathers House and had sent me up and down, with an Hunger-starved Belly to
other Folks doors? I cannot for Shame recount my calamity step by step, first
the Pyrat, then the Sword-man, and at last, my Father. But, my Lords, this part
of my Crime is worthier of Praise than of Apology. For I find nothing in the
World, that Nature has provided more excellent, than Freindship; What greater
Bulwark against the Assaults of Fortune, than mutual Concord? For first, she
has put a certain sociableness into our minds, beyond other Creatures, whereby
we are taught to rejoice in one another's Company, to gather a People, to build
Citys, and tho she has furnished our minds with several Inclinations, yet she
has given us no affection better, than kindness one to another. For what would
be more happy than us, men, if all of us were Friends? For then, Wars,
Seditions, Robberies, and other Mischeifs that arise from our selves, would not
also come upon us on the score of Fortune. But because God thinks not fit to
bestow so great a Blessing on us, yet certainly at all times, and amongst all
Nations, 'twas ever held one of the greatest and as it were most Sacred
Offices, for men to agree together in honest Principles, to observe Truth and
Faithfulness, to return Love for Love, (for it belongs only to the best minds
that are, to bestow or to receive so much Love as we speak of.) And shall I be
afraid of such a Crime, as this? You should know, Dear Father, how much I would
have gloried, if my Friend and My-self had come home together? Useless perhaps
I had been drawn in with the like Vices, that I saw in my-self, and had grown
Great with a debauched Youth; which kind of Life, tho doubtless it deserve not
so much as the very name of Freindship, yet sometimes we see, that, by a
Natural Rule of Like will to Like, vices themselves have counterfeited a show
of Amity. Upbraid me with my Friend, and then you have some Argument to speak
against me. He was a Swordman, say you, and how could you be such a ones
Friend? Here, I think, you wish, you had never don't. Alas, Father, your Grief
carries you too far, seeing you are hurried with too much anger, you don't
consider, whither you are a going. Do you not perceive, Dear Sir, that you
upbraid me with this, that I am still alive? Can any man complain of such a
Friend as this, except perhaps the Poor man? But, say you, I and his Father
were at Daggers-drawing: Nay, but it is sitting, that animosities and grudges,
which Wise men think should of all things be the shortest-liv'd, should
conclude there, where they began. For if it were otherwise, Yet Fortune still
puts up endless motives of Quarrelling, tho we inherit not our Fathers Feuds,
and the Enmity last longer than the Enemy himself. For all this, if the Young
man himself has acted any thing against you, Sir, let him be even my Enemy
too: But if he be Innocent and free from all blame, he would fain merit your
Love; if the Son of none of my Friends Love me more ardently, pray, Father, how
can I refuse him, how can I wrathfully thrust him away? You your self would not
have hated the Poor man, if he had Loved you. He offers himself, he vyes with
us in kindness? You knew the Young man performed This with all his Heart, he
Loved me to that pass, tho you were his Fathers Enemy. Add farther, that if
there has appeared such an Ingenuity in the Youth, as no Age ever heard of: if
his Faithfulness were of the Ancientest Date of all, hardly known even in those
Heroic times, wherein men had more Communion with God; if he always counted me
dearer than his life, what, must I slight the opportunity of so rare and
extraordinary a kindness? For my part, I shall reckon it a perpetual honor to
me, that such an Heavenly Soul culled me out, before any other, for an Object
of his Love, and that I was approved by a Person of so great a Judgment. Upon
this, Fame may spread my Name too throughout the World, and I shall be
gloriously eternized in the Praises of my Friend; for some good man or other
may think, that I would have don as much for him.

But why, says my Father, were you all one, when we were at odds? Here I
acknowledge another Fault. I confess, we did amiss, we committed an Offense,
that we were Friends, when you, it seems, were Enemies. I would say more to
this Accusation, my Lords, but that I am quit in Court, my own Father has
cleared me. It Is a great while ago, since I incurred this Offense, 'twas never
Objected to me before, nor was he ever angry with me upon that account. And why
may we not be Friends still, but that you are pleased to run so far back to
fetch in Objections against me? Some of our Ill-willers, out of
misconstruction, may think, that you would not ransom me, out of Spite; but if
I had committed any thing worthy of your hatred before, you need not have
entertained me, when I was ransomed. And therefore it is plain, that the Young
man was my Friend by your sufferance, which is as much as to say, You would
have it so; nor were You alone of this Judgment, for the Poor man gave the same
liberty to his Son. But if this part of my Accusation, from which I am
confessedly quitted by your long silence, and is now brought in upon the neck
of another Indictment, can be so happy as to deserve your Pardon, certainly it
will be the easier to dispatch what follows; for grant, that he was the Son of
an Enemy, this now is the Father of a Friend. Neither am I ignorant, my Lords,
how ill this Plea deserves of all Mankind, if mercy, of it self, be of so
little account, that, except some further necessity press too hard upon
modesty, a piece of humanity more useful than necessary should be condemned for
the highest Crime. Wherefore if I should perchance relieve a Stranger, and
(...) Person utterly unknown to me, as long as he is (...) Man, (there being
such a public tie and cognation between every mortal Man, on the accomp^ of
one common Parent) shall it be counted Cri^^^^al to succcour a dying Soul, and
so to have taken pity on humanity, on the score of our Comm^^ Condition? by
which act we do, as it were b^ way of Religion, present our Offering unto
Fo^tune. If this, I say, be blameworthy, then wha^ have I to do, but to break
out in Praise of Cruchy^ and to account no mortals Sager and Wiser, tha^ Bloody
Pirates and Swordmen? Let us have T^^ Examples of mercy (at least) recorded,
for the benefit of Mankind, both within a short space (...) time, one
discarded, and 'tother slain, for his Compassion. But if I must own it for a
Fault, I ca^ say this, that I did not create my-self, nor a^ my Passions
governed, as I please. I was made a^ Nature would have me, which forms the mi^^
of all men, and I brought my Crime into the World with me. For, whether it be
Gods Pro^^dence, or blind Chance, or the Necessity, the seizes us at our
Birth, from the Course of the Stars, whether 'twas this or that, yet so it is,
th^^ they have given us several Inclinations, and the^ is as much variety in
our Souls as of our Body There are some, that cannot endure to see so mu^^ as a
Malefactor punished, that grow pale wh^^ any Man's Blood is shed, be he what he
will, th^^ are ready to weep for the woeful ends of those, th^^ were ^ere
strangers to them. Some there are (...) 'tother side, who have no relent even
for their o^ Friends, in such cases. As for me, I am of a (...) disposition,
and my tender heart trembles within me at the sight of any man's misery. Do not
make a Judgment of me by my Fortune, good Father, for I Will assure you, I have
not a Sword-mans hard Heart. I wish my Cause would suffer me to vaunt thus, A
Young man was I, Born of Noble Parentage, and thinking it was the only
advantage of such a brave Fortune, to be able to do good to others, and to open
as it were a secure Port of humanity against all distresses whatsoever, I aimed
at the Credit of a Civick Garland, in saving a man that was perishing, whether
he were ^^ndon by Shipwreck, by Fire, or by Robbery. I set him at rights again,
I restored him to his Life and Fortunes. Now I am even with the Republic, who
lost one of her Commoners on my account. I had rather be expensive this way,
than ^n buying fine Clothes, Plate or Offices. For where can Money be better
laid out, than when we re^eive our Charity with the largest Interest. It Is a
great satisfaction in point of Conscience, to have merited Happyness. What care
I, tho he be a Fo^einer or a Stranger; I enquire not, what he was before, after
he has don what he did, he must be my Friend. And to speak Truth, the Greater
any one is, and the Wider he lies open to the At^acks of Fortune, he ought more
to mind and to remember, what huge Power she has over us, and on how ticklish
a point human things stand. For neither my gilded Seilings, my glittering
Marble Pillars, nor my thick inlaid Pargetings have, or shall, make me
unmindful of my frail Condition. Many Crosses often fall even to the Richest,
and the greatest heights sink as low. I have seen in my time a Poor man be an
Assistant to a Rich at a dead lift. But let long Felicity make a pist at
Calamity, and tho too much security may despise another Man's hap, yet I, as
often as I see any one sue for relief in distress, cannot but be moved with my
own Fortune. That time comes presently to my mind, when once I my self
petitioned for the mercy and help of others. Pardon me, dear Father, if this
affection be deeply rooted in me; I was miserable my self, and I could not
choose but love mercy ever since.

But, still, He is my Enemy, says my Father. Pray, Sir, who would commend us, I
wonder, if we had done so much only for a Friend? This is that, which is to be
commended in us for Virtue, this is that moderation of spirit to be admired,
when we can overcome our spleen, and, in the midst of our Feuds, remember the
Man. Thus Minutius, being Magister Equitum, or Lord Deputy under Fabius the
Dictator, grew emulous of his Power, and obtained Equal Authority with him, so
that, in a battle against Hannibal, ^e scorned to be under the Command of
Fabius, but divided the Army, he himself being supreme Commander of one half,
and Fabius of the other: Hannibal sets upon Mi^utius and routs him, Fabius
comes in to his succor and recovers the day. See the story in the 22d. Book of
Livy.
Fabius Maximus got immortal Honor for delivering his private Adversary out of
the Enemies hand, so all the World admired Tiberius Gracchus, when he would not
suffer Scipio to be dragged to Prison: The same Greatness of mind will also
perfume your memory to Posterity. For it is at your Charge that your Enemy
subsists. Whatever it was the Poor Old Man received from our House, if you will
give me leave to say it, 'twas you your self allowed it, you, and none but you,
must have the Honor thereof. As for me, if I bestow any thing on the Father of
him that saved my life, I am not Praiseworthy. Nor can you expect, Father,
that in this place I should use such Pleas as these, viz. that mutual Hate is
always honestly laid down and buried; or that, since grudges teem with nothing
but a desire of mischief, it is a glorious change of mind for the better, and a
noble example too, when Men can join Hands into a near alliance, that before
were almost ready to go together by the Ears. How came this Poor Man to be so
Considerable, that you should look upon him as your Enemy? You may see, that he
is a lonely indigent Old Man, that has no House nor Friend; don't you disgrace
your ampler Fortune, by hating such a Man, and by thinking you shall get any
great matter by his Death. You can attain to no greater revenge than this, that
he is so miserably poor, that even we our selves have some pity for him. Oh,
it is a mighty punishment sure, that you mean to take upon your Old Adversary,
to snatch the bread out of a Beggars mouth, and thereby to augment the pressure
of his Fortune, which was hard enough before. Tell me, pray, uppose he were
dead, would you kick his Corpse up and down. The wildest Beasts, that are of the
most generous kind, pass by those that are prostrate. I don't mention those
greater Examples, of defending Prisoners of War, or reedifyng taken Citys? I
urge only what I see, even Swordmen spare those, that they have worsted. After
the loss of his Son, after his penury, what worse thing can befall him, than
what he himself desires? Can you imagine, that a more terrible revenge can be
sought for, or that it can possibly be found out in nature? Who would not have
thought you the most unmerciful of all Mankind, if you had but wished such a
thing against your Emmy? Certainly, if your hatred were irreconcilable, and
your Enmity out-went whatever is recorded in Fable, yet I durst aver, if you
had lost your Children for his sake, you could not have refused such a
satisfaction at Fortunes hands; at least to avoid the Censure of Insolence,
which does sometimes carp at Greatness undeservedly, lest while the over-pityed
Beggar walk up and down the Town, People lay the Cause upon the First Author of
his Misery. For I know not how it comes to pass, all Favor inclines to him,
that is going down the wind, nor does any Victory obtain a lasting welcome, but
that which is temperate. Let him be kept, chiefly by our kindness, the rather
lest others should pity him in our stead.

The Tenor of my defense, as, I hope, you observe, my Lords, goes on pretty
roundly. But before I begin to urge my unquestionable Plea, my conscience is
afraid, and my reason, being as it were engaged between two Rocks, knows not
which way to turn it self, one thing being objected and another pleaded. I dare
not insist on my Courtesies, you have heard me open my Breviate: I have told
you, how great and how incredible the merits of this Good Man have been toward
me? All which, to be sure, he made good upon me. But to what purpose? I am a
nice kind of debt^r: What shall I pretend, my Lords, in this part of my
defense? I will say, I desire to return ^^me amends for his Courtesy. Can any
Man book it, to see his Friends Father go a begging from door to door? But he
redeemed me, without any requital at all from me. Shall I say, I was wrought
upon by my Friends last entreaties? There Is a fine comparison indeed? But what
he did for me, 'twas without my asking. Which way shall I turn my self? Shall I
call it a laudable Fact, or shall I call it a necessary one? This is more
easily to be dispatched, but I think it just, and the Interest of Truth
requires it, that the other should have its due Praise. The maintenance, that you
think you give gratis to the Poor Man, pray, Father, consider how much it cost
him. If, when he heard the news of my Imprisonment, the Young Man, without any
Entreaty or Letter of mine, had of his own accord undertook a Voyage to rid me
from the Pirates Bondage, how should I ever requite him, for performing that,
which I could only look for at a Fathers hands? To venture to Sea, especially
after so frightful an Instance in my self, to go and seek out the raging
Pirates, and that too, when he had nothing wherewith to redeem me, but his own
Person; to sail on with a longing desire after Imprisonment, who could do all
this, but he, that was willing, if need be, even to dye for his Friend? This,
my Lords, is a Great thing of it self, and scarce to be believed in this Age of
Ours. But what follows is above all Rhetorical Encomiums: He left all and made
a Voyage to redeem me, when he knew his own Father would go a begging the
while. It Is true, he might have hoped, that his Friend would have been redeemed
notwithstanding, without any hazard of his own, seeing I had a very sufficient
Father. Ay, but he would not stay to make long preparations for his Voyage, he
hurryed away, that not a minuts-time of my redemption might be lost. Hear, O
Heavens, hearken, O Earth, what posthaste did he make to redeem his Friend,
whose own Father was backward enough? The Ancients have Recorded, That Terence,
whom Scipio would not treat with the Carthaginian Ambassadors about a Peace,
before they had released L. Terentius, a Valiant Roman, whom they had taken
Prisoner before; who thereupon in Scipio's Triumph wore a Pileus, in token of
his deliverance, as Ordinary Apprentices, when they were made Free, did. See
Plutarehs Apothegms.
Scipio Africanus had Freed, among other Prisoners, in the second Punick War,
was gazed at in the Triumph, for that Liberty which he had received, he wearing
a A Cap, as a Badge of Manumission or Liberty.
Pileus on his Head, in Testimony thereof. It Is true, he had his share in the
Public Happiness, by means of that Victory, which was more upon his Heart, yet
he thought he owed also a private acknowledgment of his Kindness to the
Conqueror. How much then am I bound to him, and none but him, for my Liberty,
who sought after me through the Seas, tho infested with Pirates? Who has restored
me my Life, my Liberty, and whatever else I owe to my Father, not in Ignorance,
as at the first hour I was born, but in full knowledge and notice? Nor was I
alone enriched with these mercys, but withal I was freed from the greatest
miseries? Shall I not own, that I received my Life from so true a Friend? And
that I am bound to him in stronger ties than to the other? Oh thou most
wretched, who art yet the most faithful too of all Friends, thy death has made
me ungrateful to thee? What (...) poor business is it, that still I am speaking
of my unlucky hap amongst the Pirates? That is but a small misfortune, and, you
now see, it admits some cessation. Pirates are wont to expect some body to come
to ransom their Captives. But I was got to the Fencing-School. No Villainy ever
sm^rted under a greater punishment; in comparison of it, a Prison is not worth
the speaking of. It you had known so much, dear Father, I dare affirm and pass
my word upon it, such is your Piety, that no body living would have made more
have toward me, than you. I presume now, you would have me relate my Condition?
I dwelt amongst Villains, Boutefeus, and, which is the only Excellency of
Sword-wen, Murderers, locked up in a filthier Confinement than they, in nasty
dirty Prison-Cells. I was come now to that pass, that if I had been worsted,
you could not take me home, nor would you desire it, if I had the better. So it
was, that the very hour of my Punishment was at hand, there was no putting of
it off, I was presently to offer up my Throat, and to spill my Life with my
Blood. There could no doubt at all be made of the Issue; for I found my
Sampler, one Killed before my Face. If Money could have redeemed me from these
perils that hung over me, yet nevertheless the Courtesy would have been more
than the Money. But amongst Malign Censurers of things, he may seem to have in
his Eye some hope of the Future or some Pleasure of the Present, time. This is
to be admired, and can be referred only to his Piety; He bestowed a Kindness
which could never be requited; he was not like to enjoy the Friend he redeemed,
so that he bought only a Noble Conscientious design to dye. Look then, how he
transferred my Fortune on Himself, and all, that he thought would have been
miserable to me, he underwent it, not only bravely, but cheerfully too. Here Is
a thing hardly to be believed, The Gladiator was dismissed, and his Redeemer
slain in his stead. He received the point of Sword to rights and with a full
body, as if he would have transfused that Life, which he let out, into my
Breast; and when he died, he greived only for this, that he should never see
his Friend again. Go then, you Poetical Tribe, Founders of old Stories, think
not, that you have done any great matter in your Verses to encourage true
Friendship, when you tell us, that some have traveled over Sea and Land to
accompany their Friends in their misfortunes, or that a Greek Hero engaged
himself in inauspicious Wars for the death of his Murdered Friend. For in that
most admirable case, where Brother would dye for Brother, yet the death was
alternate, it concerned one as well as the other. There is Alceste, the Wife of
Admetus King of Thessaly, who, as the Poets feign, when he was desperately
sick, obtained Leave of Apollo, that another should die for him, which all his
other Friends refused, save his Wife Alceste.
one only Dame, pretended to have redeemed the Life of her dying Husband with
the loss of her own; and that which adds to the miracle of the story is, she
did that which his own Father would not do: But now, behold the indubitable
Glory of this Age, and that which is above all Fiction whatever: My Friend, to
dye for me, leaves his own Father; my own Father would not have done so much.
And indeed, my Fathers have would have done me little good, tho he had come to
redeem me sooner than my Friend? No body else would ever have ransomed me at so
deer a rate. Nor was his dying for me so much, seeing Life lost has Recompense
made it by his Glorious Name and Title; but this I reckon to be harder than
that, namely to stoop so low, as to take the name of a Butcherly Gladiator upon
him, and to endure a Sword-man for his Master. My dear Friend, I should have
less reason to praise thee, if thou had got the better. What should a man or
such a Spirit return to his Hole, should he undergo a fulsome diet, should he
endure a Master and a Raskal too? You fought for my sake, my dear Friend, but
you dyed for your own. Yet he took off all these blots, of the basest and
lowest Fortune, from me, and put them on himself. He came upon the Stage, as a
man neither wicked nor unlucky. Did you ever hear such a thing before, my
Lords? 'Twas his Goodness made him a Gladiator. I wish, my Lords, these things,
which are so Glorious in him, were as Creditable for me also. As often as I cast
my Eye upon the unhappy Old man, by whose destitution I live, when I consider
that he is quite undon, and only kept alive for a Punishment, I must needs
confess, I am ashamed, I cost him so dear. I see the Old man buried beforehand
in what he counts his better part, I see him Childless, Destitute and one that
has Outlived all his hope: Yet this is some comfort to me, that, unless I had
had such a Friend, all these dolesome things, Father, would have been spoken of
you: He being such a Father, and in want too, I hope (Sir) some of your
spightful Liberality, will fall to his share, it will be Criminal too, as being
earned before by his Son's death. Otherwise, we shall both be in want alike,
and go beg an Alms together, at every bodies, even at Strangers, doors. If
there be any Parent of Years, he will pity the Old man; if there be a Yonker,
and a Son too, he will pity the Youth. Perhaps, when I go a begging, it will be
something in my way, that I, when time was, did maintain a poor man, when he
was in want. Accept of this satisfaction, my dear Friend, in what part soever
of the Universe, thou have a Being. I did not forget thy Charge, but Fortune
failed me, my Estate is taken away. All that I can do, is, I promise my hands
as Substitutes for thy Father. Would you have me do something else? Shall I set
my self to Country-work, being bred as I have been? My Fortune taught me no
such lesson? Besides, the wag^^ of every days work will not be enough for us
both. Woe is me, if I will be as good as my word, I must, I think, return into
the Fencing-School again.

Sepulcrum Incantatum: OR, The Enchanted Sepulcher.
DECLAMATION X.
The Argument.
The LAW. A Wife may have an Action of Ill-Treatment against her Husband. The
CASE. A certain Gentlewoman saw the Appearance of her Son in the Night-season,
who was dead and buried: She acquaints her Husband therewith; He sends for a
Magitian, that Enchanted his Sepulcher, so that her Son appeared to her no
more. Whereupon She accuses her Husband of Unkind Treatment.

For the Wife against the Husband.
THo, my Lords, amongst those, who are left destitute by the loss of their
Children, and who carry out, before them, all their Wishes and Hopes prepared
against their Old Age, this bitter contest and dispute uses to arise, that
every one thinks, a kind of dignity and preeminence accrues to his mournful
Tears, if he seem the Miserablest of all the Company: Yet this woman, who is
become pityable on no ordinary or common account, does, I hope, without
Impudency, affect to claim the Chief and Principal place of Mourners, amongst
all Mothers, who have lost their dear or their only Children, in their Youth;
such is the specialty of her strange misfortune, the she only, would you think
it, of all the women in the World is so unhappy, as to undergo a double
destitution in the loss only of one of her Sons. Her first loss she underwent
as stoutly as she could, it being common to others, and also happening by the Law
of Fate. For the poor woman lost nothing of her Son, but his Company in the
daytime; 'twas come to that pass, she did not fear at all, that Son should dye
any more, whose Company she did still enjoy. She was come to that, if you will
give me leave to say it, that she was not so immoderate in her Mournful Tears
and beating of her Breast, nor did she suffer her grief to lanch out too far,
as long as her Son was coming to her every Night. But now she is bereaved of
all comfort, and deceived in her opinion, while she thought, he was not quite
lost, whom she had leave to see, and her unkindness has deprived her of her
New Relation. The Poor Touth, unless he had been hindered, by this time had come
to his Father too. The Woeful Mother, desires only, that she may not seem to
lose less, than she misses.

The Ghost took his appearance not from some vain persuasion, or Phanciful
thought of the mourning Parent, nor did a light skipping Image trouble her
half-broken slumbers, nor was his Countenance begrim'd with the Ashes of his
sad Urn, nor his ghastly Pole covered with Embers in the Dark; No, her Son
appeared, as fine as he was before, Youthful, and sightly to behold; who was
not contented to be seen only and looked upon, but, if you will believe the
Poor Woman's longing who only saw him, he kissed and embraced her, as if he had
been alive, all night long. The Mother now has lost much, if this were real,
and as much, if it did but seem so. But now she lies waking by her sleeping
Husband, and being quite desolate, she, with Weeping Eyes, measures out the
long darksome Nights, without any comfortable Apparition: I say, he was not
formed by fancy, disguised in his Hue, nor as is usually seen in vain flitting
dreams, but she saw plainly, that the whole Person of the Man was not dead, and
therefore she expected that, which was not devoured by Flames, nor extinct by
Ashes, nor detained fast enough under Urns and Sepulchers. Now she thinks, his
Soul is locked up in a Prison, and that he strives against the Magic
Iron-Bars, that detain him. The most unhappy of Mothers thinks her Son to be
something more than a Shade, seeing he can be kept in durance; and, the loss of
her Child being disanull'd as it were, she is now troubled not so much for her
pain and affliction, that she can see him no more, but rather for this, that he
cannot come, tho he desires it with all his heart. Now he knocks all night and
beats upon the ground, that is made burthensom to him by the Barbarous murmur
of the Enchantment, and he wonders, that, whereas before he could make his way
through Infernal darkness, now the Poor Ghost cannot remove so much as his own
Gravestone. Poor Man, that is shut up, not only by a bare Charm of Words, (for
that perhaps he might have broken through) but Iron Bars and solid links have
reduced him even to Death again. How strait, think ye, is the Poor Thing kept,
that cannot come, so much as to make his complaint?

I take pity on the Woman, to spite whom, all this gear is imputed. The
Husband has got him so enchanted up, as if the Mother complained, he had
disturbed him. So then, my Lords, no Man need wonder, if the Ghost came not to
so cruel and unkind a Father. He knew well enough, where he might find Tears,
and where Groans, and who would miss him most. As for the Father, he had an
heart of iron, steel-hard, he had no sense at all of the loss of his Child.
What Father can be found more Inhuman and Merciless, than he. He envyed the
Mother, that she might not enjoy her Son; Nor did he do this, because he had
rather have the sight of him, himself; for alas, while he was living and well,
he had not such a kindness for him, tho he deserved it well enough, that he
should reserve any affection for the deceased, and so seem to be his Father,
even after he was buried. The Mother did take on so much the more, as answering
her own duty and her Husbands too. She, of the Two, was paler in her Fears,
prompter and readier for her Prayers and Wishes, 'twas she, that had no rest by
day nor by night. And the poor defunct understood, which of his Parents had the
most and readiest affection for him; And therefore he came to kiss her, to
choose, he hung about her neck only. Now because it were too tedious to run
through all the past particulars of her Motherly affection, take a view of her
carriage in his last sickness only, when he left us his frail mortal body
behind; how extremely, how exemplarily did the Poor Woman sometimes weep out
her Eyes over his pale Visage, sometimes complain, that she had Suckled him in
vain, and otherwhile, she beat her Body, that had brought him into the World?
The Poor Youth observed this, as he was drawing on, and told the Fates, Who it
was that was loath to part with him. Where are Ye now, who bid us stint our
Weeping for a Friend? Who don't like, we should take on too much? We see, the
Ghost paid his requital to his Mother. I know and am well assured, when any
Dead Corpse lies in the midst amongst all his Mourning Kindred, and seems to
take Care for nothing, that then, even then, it observes, understands, and
knows, which of them all is kindest to him. Therefore I advise you, if you will
be ruled by me, you that have lost all your Children before you, I advise you,
I say, to be liberal in your Tears, to make a greater ado at their Funerals;
and never believe that the Dead are senseless. The Ghost of a Son is angry with
that Parent, to whom he does not come and appear. Now the standing Blood of his
Chill body had contracted all his Veins for Death, and the last shine of his
twinkling Eyes was going out, when the Father believed the despairing
Physicians, yet even then the Mother hoped still, and what part soever of his
Body the Poor Woman warmed with her Kisses, she cried out straight, Oh, it is
the very warmth of Life, without question. She could not endure the last Fire,
she could not abide to hear of the Funeral Pile, she would rather have the Body
laid up safe, and all his limbs kept entire. And now it more repents the
unhappy Mother, that she buried him at all, seeing he could come again. You
your selves know, how hardly she was pulled away from her Son on the day of his
Funeral, and how long she held his Body, even while the Flames were playing
about it. For how could she hope, ever to see him again? How could she recover
a view of him after he was gone? Now the Poor Woman, even sought for a Manum for
Magum, in the Original. Oxf. Edit. 1675.
Magician to raise him from the Dead. For the rest, Poor Woman, you were best
tell it your self to the Judges, for unless, by your Loss and your Tears, your
Voice be changed all into groanings, you would deplore your Night-stories
better with your own Mouth? However, I will do it, as well as I can. Be
contented, Poor Woman, be contented, at least with the remembrance o^ that day,
when we all went to the Burial of your only Son. For now, says she, I have
spent al^ my groans and tears, and I rejoiced to see darkness come upon me, as
much as if it were a perpetual one. Now our Attendant Kinsfolks were wearied
off their Legs, and deep sleep had put an end to the Out-crys of the Family.
Pray, let no Body cast such an affront upon the Mother, as to say, her Son came
to her, while she was asleep. For how, I pray, could the Poor Woman take any
rest, at that time? As for you, the Husband, I don't complain at all of you.
You would have been punished sufficiently, if you had but wept, as I did, all
Night long. For then you would have seen him, not as airy imaginations are wont
to clothe things with a Body in our Fancies, or as foclish Whims^es do create
appearances, when the judgment is asleep, but your own very Son, such as he
was, when most Lovely, and such as I shall see him again, if he can get away.
He stood presently by my side, the Curtains of Darkness being drawn aside, not
as when he was pale or macerated with his acute disease, nor yet as he looked
upon the Funeral Pile and amidst the Flames, but fresh, youthful and brave to
see to. I wonder, where he lest all that was Death, bebind him. His Hair was
not singed with the Fire, nor his Face smutted with Funeral smother, nor was he
much discolored by the Flame, as Fresh Shades use to be, before their Ashes are
well laid up. His unhappy Mother would have hardly complained; if she had
ceased to see him, even in such a Case. The first time he only stood still, and
permitted himself to be known, Who he was; white I was wonderfully frighted,
and did not dare so much as to kiss or embrace him. I unhappily lost the First
night, in fearing he would be gone. Do you call this, my Persuasion or Fancy
only, Husband, and a vain mistake of my mournful Melancholy Spirit? Whatever it
was of a Son, it seemed more to a Mother, when she could see him no longer.
Would you know, Sir, in short, what you have abridg'd your Wife of? Why, she
has nothing now to hope for from her departed Child. Now came the next night,
and as soon as ever it was dark, Who was there but her Son, not standing aloof
off, as Yester-night, for a Prospect only, but bolder and nearer he came, even
up to his Mothers hand, like a very very Body: And he went not away till 'twas
broad day, and all the Stars had disappeared; then he vanished out of sight as
it were unwillingly too, with many a stop, and looking backward, as if he would
have promised to come again the next Night after. Now there was no time for
grief, the Mother saw her Son in the Night, and she expected to see him in the
Day too. It Is to no purpose to relate every particular? There was never a
Night, that I was left destitute, says she, as long as I ( now, naughty Woman)
kept my own Counsel. I was sated with his kisses, with his embraces: I spoke to
him, and He to me; Poor Woman, how much more am I a loser, if no Body will
believe this!

And now, Cruel Husband as you are, I began to plead for you too, and desired
Our Youth to appear to his Father in as gladsom a posture: And I was willing, O
Ungrateful Man, that the Ghost should part the Night betwixt us. And the Poor
Youth, what did he do, but promised me he would. This Confidence was my
undoing, for it made me break the matter to you. Pray, what could she do, more
like a Woman, or more like a Mother? Oh Husband, said she, I Will tell you joyful
News, to morrow Night perhaps you will see your Son; whom you consumed in the
Cruel Funeral Flames, and left nothing of him behind, but his Ashes and a few
Bones, him you will see in his Prime, and there is Hopes perhaps, that you see him
by Daylight too. For my part, all the Night long, I am no Childless Mother, I
see him, I enjoy him, and now I tell you as much. Would you know, what comes of
his Fatherly affection? Why, he was afraid (forsooth) to see his Son. So this
Projector, that devised a new Death for his Child, goes me to a Magician,
unknown to the Mother, one, by whose horrid Mumblings, and all-commanding
Charms, Celestial and Infernal Spirits both are vexed and disturbed, his errand
was not, that those appeased Spirits might be removed, nor that the Ghost,
being raised up by his Night-yellings, might go whither it would; no, but as if
the Grave had not made him sure enough, and the weight of his Tomb were too
light, My Son, says he, is not laid low enough yet; he enjoys the brightness of
the Stars above still, and our Night-shine here below. For when the day ends,
he is dead no more, he comes home to his Fathers House, as when he was alive,
and disturbs his Mother's rest: Pray, find our, find out, I say, some strong
binding Charms, use all your art and employ all your pains possible, so to do.
You will get a great deal of Credit, if you can lay up that Son fast, that
comes, even after he is dead, to his Mother. Hereupon his Grave was encompassed
with a mischievous Charm, so the Urn was closed by those horrible words; then,
and not before, was he made a Dead Shade. Go your ways now, and persuade your
selves, that the Mothers Solace was delusory only: If she had seen her Son but
in her Fancy, and vain imagination, she would see him so still. But what
Torment did the unhappy Mother endure in the very first Night of the
Enchantment? When all the House and Family were in their first sound sleep,
when all was husht-night, then came the Mothers sweet and welcome hour. When she
lay awake and restless, nay, says she, now he will appear, sure he will come
presently: Yet he never came so late before. Ah Poor Woman, Thou, my Son, were
here last Night by this time: I see now by the Stars, that half the Night is
spent; you have fretted, you have angered me, you cannot satisfy me otherwise,
unless you have been with your Father. Oh woeful me, now, to spite me, it
begins to grow day. When de' think of coming? It Is time now, that you should
return again. But after the Poor woman had past over two or three Nights in
such vain Complaints, then her Mourning was louder, then she put on her frowzy
apparel, then her arms, that were almost well before, were made bloody again
with repeated beatings. No Body can be more unhappy than that Mother, who loses
something of her Son, even after she has Buried him. But when she found, that
her Young Son's Night-appearances were intercepted by a Magic ligature, in his
Enchanted Grave, Oh, how often did she, beat the sealed and fast-closed Sepulcher
with her naked Breasts? With what abundance of Tears did she drench his
Monument? with what loud groans did she fruitlessly call upon the Ghost, who
perhaps heard her, and was as willing to come forth? Oh Cruel Nature! That a
Conjurer should have more Power than an Own Mother! Where are those, that
complain of the inevitable necessity of bitter Death, of the Iron-decrees of
Fate, and of the unalterable Laws of the Airy Shades, that no Mourning can
reverse? Unhappy Woman, 'twas not the load of Earth, laid on his Grave, that
shut up thy Son amongst the Spirits below, nor did the gross Mist of an Eternal
Night and Darkness beep him in, nor the Famed S^yx.
Lake of the Fabulous Poets, nor those Fiery Torrents, so mush spoken of for
their turning and winding Streams; no, he passed, he broke through, all these
in the Night, and made his Death easier to her, than if he had gone a journey,
or had been otherwise absent on a good account. And now his Case would be less
woeful, but that he knows and feels his hindrance. He, who comes not now, as
being translated, from his Tomb, to I know not what Prison or Enclosure,
labors under such Witchcrafts, as Men do, when they are Alive. Great therefore
are the Chains, that fetter Ghosts, that straightly tie and bind the Soul, (tho
it be but a flitting Airy Shadow) to Death, as if it were a true Body bound
over to Prison. But to enclose a Ghost with Iron-bonds and Stones, as Men use
to fortify the Gates of a City in time of War, to Imprison it in Chains and
Barricados I don't say, it is a Cruel, nay rather it is a Monstrous and
Abominable thing, especially if he, that is the Cause of this, believes his Son
is sensible thereof. And now the woeful Mother is ready to think, that those
Spikes do enter into his very Limbs, all his Body over. O thou savage,
hard-hearted, Conjurer, that have so many tricks to make us lament, I wish you
had not shown so Great an Experiment of your Black Art. We cannot choose but be
angry with you, tho we are forced to Flatter you too. For when you lock up the
Ghost, we perceive you are the only He, that can disinchant and raise him too.

Therefore the Woman seems to depart from a Grief befitting her dignity, when
she brings such Womanish grievances, and as it were squeamish complaints of
Ladies, into Court. It Is not for gaudy Apparel, for gilded finery, for a
stately Dress, that she Sues, her destitution is contented with course weeds.
Nor is she touched with grief for a Rival harlot, as if out of Impatience and
Womanish Foolery, she did bewail the Close Amors of her Husband. Nor does she
revenge her forsaken Marriage Bed, as a poor despised Wife; no, she has quite
other Concerns for every one of her Nights. Never fear, whatever is her
Decorum, it is the Grandeur of Grief; the Poor Woman complains of nothing, but
what is as bad as the loss of a Son, but what beseems a Mother, what all the
Town may well grieve for, and what may fetch Tears even from Strangers Eyes.
For would you know, how great a wrong she received from her Husband? Her Son
dyed to his Mother alone, and yet she cannot blame Death neither. Therefore,
before, you know, My Lords, what kind of Grief, what Mourning, and how much
Impatience has broke out in her, that she should at last forget her sweet
beloved Nights, and now endure the Bright Glare of broad Day (the Day, I say,
that she hated when she was at home,) in Court and amongst Lawyers, where,
being drawn from her Sons Grave, she is made a Spectacle to be gazd at; you
see, it is clear, that the Complaints of the Miserable, in such a Case, proceed
not from boldness, impudence or indiscretion. What is true, if that be not,
which Men cry out on in Calamity, nor do fained and counterfeit groans
ordinarily proceed from the Wretched? A Woman that holds up her Bloody Hands to
the Bench, a Woman that appears before them with a rent and torn face, and with
a Breast all black and blew, by no small grief is compelled to do so, rather
than to kiss her Sons Ashes, or to embrace his Urn. Her Orbity is a witness of
the reality of her grief, beyond all exception. But before I come to the Nature
of the Injury, so unreasonably offered, Why, Sir, a Woman, that lost her Son by
your means, does complain against you? Cruel you, you wound her destitution
with another fresh grief, as if her longing desire, after her only Son, did not
wast and pine her enough: You do not suffer the Poor Heart to spend her time in
mourning, who owe your bosom, your solace, your embraces to her. How miserable
is that Woman, who complains of him, that should have been a Comfort to her?
Let a Wife do what she will, as to mourning, do you nothing harshly, naught
against her Will. Every Mother in misery has a certain Privilege; soft hands
and gentle Fomentations must be applied to wide Wounds. If a Wound be permitted
to be launc'd after all this, it is as great as can be: A Man's heart perhaps may
struggle more against Grief, he being of the stronger Sex, than a weak Woman's
can. Wherefore the whole of Mourning belongs to the Woman, and as soon as Orbity
invades her weak Breast, the Heart, which gives way to its Mourning, begins to
have a liberty to shed Tears. I beseech you, Sir Husband, let your Wife have
leave to weep her fill, to be sated with Mourning, let her Orbity be allowed to
weep afresh, as it pleases. Who can endure a Father, that, when he has lost a
Son himself, grudges that the Mother mourns for him too much?

But why then, say you, does she Complain? First of all, that like a naughty
unkind Man, you do not miss your Son, as much as you ought to do. You have a
stou^ heart under your loss, you say only that he was Mortal, and reckon that
nothing survives of him, after his Funeral-Pile. Your Wife stands weeping and
wailing by your side, and you have as many Tears as Milstones. She makes
Funeral Howlings and Laments all Night long, while you snug close and sleep
soundly, like a Pig. O Cruel Father, O Father that have soon forget thy Child,
What can we object more against you, than This? Since the first hour you lost
your Son, you were never so fond of him, as to desire to see him again.
Besides, you have deprived the Mother of her solace, suppose it were a vain
empty foolish one? I would not have you censure her by any means, I would not
have you chide her, you should know how great the sol^ce was, if you could but
Grieve as much as she. There cannot be a more unworthy thing, than when a Man
requires to be believed in that, which he never saw. Pray, give her leave to
suppose it was but a Fancy, excuse it in her, they that bewail their lost
Children are content to be deceived. In such a condition, a mistake many times
may help a Man to bear great pressures, because miserable Persons indulge their
own Fancys and persuasions. The less it is, that belongs to the wretched, the
greater cruelty it is, to take it from 'm. Therefore the unhappy Mother cries out
again and again, if you should take away from me any Image of my Son, either
when he was a little one, or when he was shooting up, or lastly when he was in
his Youth, yet I, Poor Woman, would lay fast hold on that Image, as if it were
a ^eal Body; I would, with Tears in my Eyes, retain that lively Portraiture and
Similitude, those pretty Eyes, that sweet Face, those plain Features of his
Countenance, so artificially drawn by a Cunning Artist. But I have lost the
Original, from whence I would draw this Image, this Likeness, this Solace. O my
Son, I have lost more this day, than on the day I buried thee. For I saw thee,
even after thou were Dead. I profess, if you should strive to take away any
Suit of Apparel, that my Only Son wore, I would say, Don?t abridge me of my
Solace. All these are as good to me as the very Body and Touches of my Child, I
will kiss them, I will embrace them, I will weep over them. Perhaps, I have no
Reason for it. Why then, what ever goes beyond Reason is Affection. There is
nothing more wicked, than a prudential Orbity.

But what, says he, these are but small matters, you yet speak of, For certain
I saw my Son. What good hap was it, and what state of Nature, which indulged
you so brave a visit? Tho you lost him, yet you could see him still. Now, Good
Woman, 'twas come to this, you thought your Child was only absent in the
daytime. Death has lost it is greatest bitterness, if you can be admitted to
see him, whom you have lost. Then 'twas your hap, it seems, Madam, to have a
sight of his countenance, of his mien, of his person and gate. I should not
believe her, but that she is sensible, she has lost so much: Death and you
parted Stakes between you, for every Night you enjoyed your Son as if he had
been alive, even after all, that Death could do. How great your loss was, may
be judged by this, if this had not happened to you, you could never have been so
presumptuous, as to have wished for it. Here Is a Man (O Piety!) dead and
buried, his remaining Corpse turned to Ashes and Embers; yet he assumed a Body
in the Night, and, being restored to the Limbs he had, when he was alive, he
presents himself to his Mother so to the Life, that she could nor believe, he
would ever disappear or vanish away. Nor have we any reason to complain of the
Daytime neither, for there he was to be seen, as much as he might. And you,
Good Woman, it seems, saw him, and enjoyed his presence. I did, says she; and
what matter is it to any body, if I were deceived? But why do I call Thee to
Witness? I give credit to the Conjurer, I believe thou did see thy Son, but
now thou do not see him. But you, Poor woman, expected nothing more cruel
from your Husband, than that he would not believe you. Let no body, says she
say, that I may not trust my Eyes. O my Son, most lovely and affectionate Son,
I saw thee again and again. It Is for certain, I am fixed upon it, no man shall
ever persuade me out on it. How impious is the Father, who labors to deny thee
this, that I may not believe, thou came to me? This I did not prated of, nor
foolishly blaze abroad, no, I told no body of your coming, but he that ought to
have wished, you might do so. I told it only to your Father, your Father, I
say, (pardon a Poor dreaming woman) I confestt it to him, when I asked him,
Whether he had seen you too. Therefore, O unhappy woman, you undergo too great,
too hard, a punishment. The Conjurer was the Cause you did not see your Son,
and he left only this with you, To remember that you had seen him. Pray then,
Poor woman, tell, if you can, the All of your solace* and first confess
honestly, Whether it were the weight of sleep, and a vain imagination, when you
were fast and thought of nothing. Grant it were so, yet I should have thought,
that the poor Mother was unhappy and wretched enough, if she had lost but such
a fine Dream.

But, says she, be not so cruel, Gentlemen, think better, I pray, of my
affections. I had not wearied my self with mourning, when I perceived Night to
steal in upon me; O my all-waking eyes, you deserve to see my Son, but whilst
I was in a fear at first, the Spirit appeared of a sudden, Heavens! What Joy,
what Happiness did that ^ight make me Mistress of? My Son stood before me, as
plainly as if 'twere day, I hope, I shall so part with him. I leap't out of my
Bed presently, and came to him, I viewed his Face, his Locks, and Visage; 'twas
my own very very Son. How spritely was he, how merry did he present himself,
how greatly did he persuade me, that I should not believe, he was dead? Oh
wicked Husband, you don't know, how like your Living Son 'twas, that you have
enchanted and shut up? I traverst all his Body over with my Eye, and could not
perceive, what hurt, his Funeral-Fire had don him I said every foot, Is this
the He, I buried? Did I lay Him on the Pile? Did I gather up his Bones and
Ashes? If he be so much the same, what reason have I to mourn? I had no reason
to think, that my Son was dead, but that I could not show him to his Father. I
will also honestly confess, that, the first night, I could hardly believe my
self, I was angry with my Eyes, as if they had wrought upon me; Poor woman, I
blushed and was ashamed for fear I was asleep; When lo, the Youth comes again,
and now he comes every day. How must I construe this? That which is always so,
must needs be true. The last time he came not as a bodiless shape, but he sat
down by me and embraced me. I perceived his embraces and took them kindly: As
often as the whole House was laid fast asleep, then came He, in such a posture as
the propitious Gods do offer themselves to mortal sight, and such as the
pleasantest deity is, when he suffers himself to be seen. As all the Religious
Worship in Temples and Consecrated Groves* when Mortals are all hush't asleep,
and Prof^^^ persons are far out of the way, is said to enjoy Solitude and to
come forth out of its shrine; (...) my Young man represented my Son all night
long and enjoyed his Fathers House and every Room in it, Sweet, Gentle and Kind
to his Mother, as (...) Deity or God uses to slide down from the Stan, and to
shoot throw the Region of the pure and liquid Air.

What Imprecation shall I bestow on such a bad unreasonable Father? He would
try, whether it were a Ghost, or no? Have pity on me, my Lords, with What
sentiment, will you entertain this Fact? It is fouler than Parricide; it is more
heinous than if he had quite thrown down his Sons Monument, or if he had broken
his Urn, and scattered about the Stones, consecrated by his death; yea, and
disturbed his Bones and Ashes in their Religious rest. He sends for a Fellow,
whose Art it is to go clean against the Grain of Nature; who, as soon as he had
thundered out a barbarous noise from his nasty mouth, he caused the Powers above
to fear, the Infernal Spirits to hear him, and the Earth to shake and tremble,
as Fame reports from Experience. He appeared by the Poor Youths Tomb, as a
second and surer death. Now, says he, O ye Powers of darkness, give me, that am
your Proselyte, suitable assistance in my Blind-night-work. Now every Deity,
black and white, and the mysterious Right which I direct to him, come in and
assist. I must now take more pains, than when the Stars are plucked out of the
Firmament, or when Winter-inundations of Rivers are commanded to be stopped, or
when Serpents, being not ^ble to hold out against my powerful Charms, are
^urst, as with a stronger Poison, upon my very Trangums. Here Is a Young man to
be laid up, ^o be confined to the Infernal Holds, he is a Wanderer and must be
shut up in thicker and straiter darkness. Were it not an easier buisiness by
far, to raise him up again? Hereupon, it is said, he fell prostrate on the Urn,
and so sealed up his words between the Bones and the Ashes. Yet he often looked
back and confessed, That the Ghost was unwilling. Therefore, says he, I believe
my Charms are not strong enough, let us make fast every side of the Tomb, and
cramp it with Ironspikes. So, now it is well, he is dead at last; he can neither
be seen nor stir out. Whether I lie or no, you shall know to morrow-night.
Certainly, all Parents, especially those that have lost their Children ought to
fly upon this man's Eyes, in his head. Do you lay up your Sons Ghost so, as
guity Spirits use to be laid up, which, wandering up and down in sick Families,
and sad Infected Houses, are pretended to be laid by Magic Vanity? What did he
hang himself, after he was condemned by the Jury? Was he guilty of
Self-murder, by stabbing himself? Or did he Poison himself before hand, out of
a guilty Conscience? So that he could not be laid, till he was shut in by a
Charm. When, when, I say, did he trouble your House, or your Self either, with
his ghastly frightful appearance? O thou cruellest Father that ever was, Thou
have made a guilty Ghost of thy own Son! What were the thoughts of your poor
Wife now, think you? Now my Son, says she, lies fast tied, in piteous torment,
and cannot get out thence, whence he used to come. He complains now, that the
Earth lies harder upon him, especially when he perceives, that night i^ come,
the time, when more happy shades are l^^ loose, to go home to their Mothers.
And if there be any discourse amongst Spirits, as I believe there may, one or
other of them may say to my Young man, How vile and contemptible were you to
your Friends? How easily have they parted with you? What say you of your
Mother, whom you used to visit so kindly. These Chains, these Fetters, are
these all the requital she makes you for your kindness? So unhappy is the Case
of the Poor woman, that, if the Conjurer should be discharged, she yet runs
this hazard, That her Son may think, he came to her, against her will.

But now, the Husband pleads his Cause with more Gravity, Depth, and Wisdom, as
a man above Grief. He says, There are no Sprites, he maintains, that all
perishes with the Body, and that nothing, endu'd with Sense and Understanding,
returns from the Grave. As for Ghosts, there is no such thing, they are only
imagined not seen, and our Eyes assent to our Melancholy. If this be so, Why,
pray, did he send for a Magitian? He is the very worst of Parents, who usually
weep only when they bury their Children, that they may return strait from the
Funeral with dry Eyes; but be denies, that deceased Spirits and Ghosts are any
thing the better for our waylings; he says plainly, That our Tears, Sighs and
Sobs are spilt and lost. Oh wicked man, who mourns for the deceased, and yet
thinks it to no purpose neither. So then, all Wise men have been mightily
mistaken, hitherto, who have taught us, that man is made up of a Soul, and an
Elementary Body. The Body is Brittle, Frail, Earthly, as Drought and Moisture,
Heat and Cold, Volatile and Fixed don't agree, sometimes we are subject to pain,
or at last to be dissolved by Old Age. But our Soul, they have told us, is the
Effort of a Fiery Vigor, deriving its perennity not from our Common Fire, but
that Spirit which moves the Stars in their Courses and Wheels about the Sacred
Orbs of Heaven, from thence that Spirit comes, which gives Life to us and every
thing beside. It dies not, nor is dissipated, neither is it affected with the
Fate of Mortal Natures: But whenever it breaks through the Prison or
Enclosure of a human breast, and, having put off all its Mortal part, has
lustrated it self with a light Fire, then it ascends to its seat among the
Stars, till, being mastred by Time, it alters its Condition by Transmigration;
and there too it remembers his Former Habitation. Hence comes it, that Spirits
are raised by Invocation; hence they borrow the Person, the Countenance, and
whatever we see of them, hence they appear as beloved Portraitures to their
Friends, and sometimes turn Oracles too, giving us midnight admonitions; hence
thev are sensible, what Monumental Presents we bring to them, and they
perceive, what Honor we do them at their Burials. I beseech you, when a Son
dies, is it not better to believe so of him? Oh but, says he, I did it for your
sake, that you might take your rest, and not be troubled with terrible frights,
which made you pass the nights, in anxiety and suspense perpetually. So then,
you, Murtherous man, have made the Villainy in Common: And yet do you upbraid
and twit me, that I too must not see my Son any more? For I minded my sleep and
pleasant slumbering before. Bur now, it is you, O Cruel man, that have disturbed
and affrigted a Mother, so that she can have no benefit of her Nights. Could
you think the shade of your Son could be a Bugbear or Hobgoblin? Oh, 'twas a
sweet Bugbear, 'twas a fair desirable Hobgoblin! What could ever caress the
Eye, more? What could a weeping Mother desire more to gaze upon? The shade of
ones Son is no more to be feared, than the Relics of his Corpse, It Is
necessary, that a Terrible Spectre must always be a Strangers Ghost. But
perhaps others Images may fright us, and we use to call those Spirits, who are
unknown to us. And therefore, it is wisely don, when they appear only to their
own Friends. A Wicked and an Impious man is he, who sees his deceased Child,
and yet thinks it cannot be he, because he buried him before. You were frighted,
says he again, and you labored under haunted nights. How cruel a Husband are
you? What, would you have laid up your Son, if he had appeared to you? I tell
you, says he, there was no such thing, as a Ghosh, laid up by the Conjurer, he
only relieved your Fancy: And therefore you think your Son does not appear,
because he appeared not before, and nothing was don, whereby your rest was
disturbed: If you say right in this, then the Mother begins to comfort herself
thereby. He is not locked up, says he, he is not fast bound with any Charm, or
gripped with any Iron-Links: Do but remove then all the Premises, and I Will ask
him a Question. Ah, did I, Wicked woman, so quickly believe, that he would not
appear to me, if he were unbound and at liberty? Would he not show himself to
these Eyes of mine, and run in to these Embraces? For when did the Young man
find me, but I was a weeping! When did he not behold my Breast black and blew,
and my Arms all Bloody, for him? When was he not afraid, that he should in the
least fright his poor Mother? No, the Poor Child is made fast by Magic, I say,
by the Black Art is he detained. What would you have Charms do for you, more?
They have performed, what they promised you. Can you leave blushing now, when
your Son appears no more?

But You, Sir Faustus, by whose Laws the Gods above and below are tortured, who
by your terrible night yellings do shake the profound Abyss, and the very
Center of the Earth, who one while art a laier of Spirits, that obey thy
Commands, and other while art as cruel and inexorable a Jailer, hear now the
Prayer of the Mother, as you did of the Father. I Will contract and bargain with
you for what you will; you shall, if you please, have all the Estate of a poor
Mourner; I would not have you take too much pains neither, or betake your self
to your horrid Incantations; no, I would have you only take off the Iron.
Chains, you put on, and speak your own Charms backward, I would have you do
nothing, only unbind him, and then you have as good as raised him for me. I
know, what you did was not in Cruelty, you only obeyed the Fathers Commands;
but then be so kind, as to do something too for the Mothers Tears and bitter
plaints; do something for your own Credit. O thou man of Art, you will your
self be more abominably hated, if you will be more easily entreated by the
Father, to shut up his Son. And you, Husband, be not afraid to be disturbed
with the vain Frights and Apparitions of the revengful Ghost: No, you will
sleep the better for it; when he is dismissed, he knows to whom he must come. O
thou Dutiful Child, O thou Sweet Kind Youth, never Shade or Sprite to thy
Mother, if thou caust free thy self from thy Magic weight, and from the
Enchanting words, which are beyond all frights and terrors, by the Conjurers
leave, then, Come to me, Sweetheart, says thy woeful Mother, come to my
Weeping, and to my Embraces, which still are living ones to me, poor woman. I
know now, what did prejudice me, I understand what 'twas, that did mischief and
torment me. When you come, I will enjoy the Sight, and I Will tell it to no Flesh
alive.

Dives Accusatus Proditionis, OR, A Rich Man Accused of TREASON.
DECLAMATION XI.
The Argument.
There was a Poor and a Rich Man, that were Enemies one to 'tother, and they had
both Three Children a piece; there happened a War in the Country, wherein the
Rich Man was made General, and took the Field. In his absence, a Report was
raised, that he had betrayed the Commonwealth, Whereupon the Poor Man went to
the Senate, and accused Him of Treason. Upon which the People Stoned his
Children to Death, while He was in the Camp. The Rich Man at last returned a
Conqueror from the War. And finding his Children put to death, he requires, the
Poor Man's Sons should undergo the same Punishment: Their Father offers himself
in their room. The Rich Man opposes him; for the Law ran, that a Traitor should
be punished with Death; and that a false Accuser, should suffer the same
Punishment, as the Accused Person was to do, if he were Convicted.

For the Rich Man against the Poor.
I Was full of expectation, Countrymen all, that no dispute would have been
made concerning the Punishment of my Adversary, nor did I think it possible, I
could be deceived in a Revenge and satisfaction, that a City, which was saved
by me, does justly owe to my Grief; but, seeing I am arrived at such an
extraordinary and strange kind of misery, that, in the first place, you think
good to Consult Laws and Statutes about my satisfaction, I beseech you, it may
not make for the Poor Man, that he cannot be defended, without some sort of
Punishment inflicted. The Fellow deserves to suffer, more than I, who, you see
(by his own Confession) is worthy of Death! This, of all my hardships, my
Lords, is most unsupportable to me, the Poor Fellow thinks, he has e'ne lived
long enough, after he has destroyed my Children. He thinks it worth the while,
to make himself a complete happy Father, seeing I make such a stir to be
revenged; and he adds this also to the glut of his joy, to bequeath my Orbity
to his own Children; I beseech you, my Lords, let it be no prejudice to my
Cause, that I prosecute, and seek my satisfaction from a Good Father: I would
nor give This for my Revenge, if the Poor Fellow were willing to part with his
Children rather. One thing, My Lords, I much admire in this Impudent Fellow, he
Murders my Children, to the shame of our Abused City, and now he calls me
Cruel too. He shows me his Children are but little, that he alleges, as if I
may not rather complain, that any Father may do the same; nor does he consider,
how much accrues to my justly Impatient Grief, since I have suffered that,
which 'twould even pity one to seek satisfaction for; it is a sad Case, my
Lords, that a Man shall be hardly thought of, for the misery, he has undergon.
You should look upon my satisfaction in this light, as if, when he Killed my
Children, he Killed his own too. Nor am I ignorant, My Lords, that many do
believe, that the Cunning Fellow is not willing to dye neither, so that, when
he lays open his Throat, and puts forward his Breast, these are only Tricks to
save his Life. Bur I, for my part, don't think he dissembles, I, who know, what
I would have yet more than he offers. None, but one, that could hardly part
with his Child, would ever have found out such an Expedient against me, he has
devised a new-sound way of suffering at my suit, out of his dear affection to
his own Children. No Man can desire to do worse with his Enemy, than put him to
that, he cannot bear himself.

My Lords, the Innocence of us, Great Ones, has this inconvenience with it;
that we know not who it is, that hurts us, till we feel the smart. And when an
Inferior hates us, then we lie open to all manner of Treacherous Assaults
whatever; A Fellow, because he was so poor and base himself, was therefore
enraged against his Superiors, he thought it a kind of Liberty and Property in
him to hate his Betters; having no love, no Affection, in regard he was himself
low and despicable, he grew up to such a madness, as he durst cope and grapple
with me. First of all, he pretended I was his Enemy: Oh Heavens! What a
Monstrous cunning Fellow have I had to do with? What a wild Gamester have I
encountered? I reckoned him an Enemy, who could find in his heart to Kill me,
and then to Dye himself: I give thanks to you, my Countrymen all, that, in
those Extremities, wherein yon did nothing for favor or affection, I was
commended by the very testimony of our dangers. You entrusted me with the fate
and issue of the Public, then in hazard. Now I could not have done the p^rt of
a better Commander, than when I left my Children behind me: A General, that
would have betrayed you, would never have don't. I think, My Lords, it is not now
to be questioned, from what ground those Sham-stories and false fears did break
our, of a sudden, and who the Raskal was, that first filled the Ears of your
Poor trembling City with such a Confounded Report, when you see, who so wrought
with you, as to make you believe it. He observed and laid hold of the
Opportunity in the midst of your Tears; and because, when Men are in trouble,
they are apt to believe the worst, he abused you with this pretense, that he
might seem to be solicitous for the Public, as well as you. So that the
Fellow, who could name no Complice, nor Article any Crime against me, hoped he
should be believed, even by the very greatness of his Damned Accusation. So,
Gentlemen, when you were persuaded by my Accuser, that I would have betrayed
your City, you dealt with me, as bad as he would have you. You Murdered my
Poor Children, whom my Enemy had pointed at all along his Speech, after the
manner, as Innocent Persons commonly use to suffer in a hurry; give me leave,
my Lords, to speak freely? I must needs say, you have done a thing hardly to be
copied, even tho I had betrayed you.

I know, my Lords, You admire I should be clearly Innocent, as to this my
Accusation; for as soon as ever the News of my sad disaster was brought to me,
into the Camp, I threw down no Arms, I did not stinch or stir from my Line or
Ground: I turned all the Anger of my Childrens loss upon the Enemy, even as if
they had been Murdered by them. My Lords, if ever any such Profane thoughts
could have took place in me, if I could ever have hated my Country, even for my
Childrens sake, then certainly you had made me a Traitor: When I returned, my
Lords, this must needs he my First Out cry, what, has my Enemy any Children
still? Is his Family as big, as when I left it? Oh unhappy Presumption! Oh
False defeated Thoughts? Was this to come home, as if I had a recompense? What
Indignation of your Soldiers, what pain of your Gallant Men about me, did I
appease, when I promised them all, their Children were safe, and when I
modestly reckoned, whatever I did could not challenge such a satisfaction? Let
all imaginable Punishments be heaped up together upon the greatest Villain in
the World, yet I have lost the Main comfort of my satisfaction, because you
your selves should rather have fumed against mine Adversary. But seeing it is
so, that I must try it out with this Fellow by Statute Law, I demand his
Children for Punishment, instead of their Father. What can I wish, bad enough,
to fall upon that Man, who has fore'd me to demand such a satisfaction? Oh
but, says he, The False Accuser must undergo the same kind of Punishment, that
the Accused Persons should. My Lords, my calamity does give me leave to object
against this very law, as not making i^fficient provision of Quid pro Quo; It
has found out a way of satisfaction against my right, where with I ought not
to be contented. Can any Mortal Man term his Generous Act, his Punishment? Does
any Man's Heart ache so much, for a just Punishment as for a dire Calamity? Oh,
he never considers in the least, how great a resolution it creates to hear his
grief, what hardiness it brings to both Body and Spirit, to own, he is justly
Punished. There must be Innocence in the case, wheresoever any pain makes us
miserable; suppose, he has as many Children, to be given up to suffer, as I
had, Murdered, and the Justice of the Law does allow as many of his to be
slain, yet the Law comes not home, unless they be Innocent too. And whatsoever
they suffer, after they are apprehended, although it be sufficient recompense
according to the strictness of Law perhaps, yet in reason and equity it is too
little: You can make the Punishment and the Crime, of an Offender, equal no
other way, unless you make it unsupportable. In vain do you reckon, how Cruel,
and how Bloody a thing it is, I require, because it exceeds all usual kinds of
punishment: The spightfulness and odium of a Law is taken off, my Lords, when a
Man suffers that, wh^c^ he acted before. Besides, Is not this alone a kind of
punishment, where an offender can complain of none but himself; and ought he
not the less to be pitied, the more heavily Men take it that he suffers? What
can be thought, or found o^^, more equitable and more just? He that has
Murdered a Man on the Highway, let his own Life answer for it; has he tempered
Poison for another, let him drink it off himself; has he run and tore out
another Man's Eyes, let his own he plucked our, to make him amends. I cannot
endure, that any Man living should refuse to suffer, what his own wickedness
has deserved. It Is the shortest way of doing vindicative Justice, when the
Offense and Punishment are Commensurate. And if you well consider the nature of
a Compensation, a Man is best avenged in the same way and method, he was
wronged.

I beseech ye, my Lords, don't you therefore think it just, what the defendant
desires, because I am against it; you would not like, that I should have
desired their Fathers Death, if he had offered his Children; yet of all the
Men, that ever have suffered after a strange and unusual manner, I think none
are more worthy to have right done them by this Law, than they, whose Children
have been Murdered. What does the Law say to this? What requital can she make
me? How am I relieved? Where shall I receive any comfort? It Is well remembered,
my grief has very well remembered me, let me have leave to ^^ize upon those,
those I say, who now are dearer and better beloved than they were, whose price
is ^ais'd by my destitution. Yet after all this, we shall come short, unless
the Children be full as many, unless their tender Ages be equal and alike, and
above all, unless they have a Father, excellently kind and good. You had got
the better of me, Oh Fortune, you had been too hard for me, if he had had never
a Child, who had committed such a grand offense against me. Besides, let us
compare all unrighteousness whatsoever, no Man in the World is more detestable
than He, that makes the Laws themselves, blameworthy. Upon your co^n account,
you ought so highly to be imaged against False Accusers, whose villainy can do
no harm, but by and through the Judges Act. Good night to all human safety, if
Lies may be so bold with your Accusations; nor was there ever any Innocent yet
so happy, as to be able to baffle the diligence of Knights of the Post. If any
mortal Man, in a matter that he has forged and devised himself, find any thing
which he can call a Proof, and so make out the Fact by a voluble Tongue, why
then we must hate the Lie the more, because it apes the Truth so much. Whenever
it is plain, that a Man has been put to death unjustly, you must therefore be
more incensed against a False Accuser, that you may excuse them, that believed
him. Add also to this Cursed Crime, that he accused me, when I was in the War,
and for no less than Treason too, when I was a General, and all this he did
upon pretens'd malice. He has no pretense to shelter himself under the Public
mistake, nor can he make his Apology, as if he also believed those who had
coined the Lie to his hand; No man was ever so deceived, that he should ha^ to
tell a Lie of his Enemy. The rumor was, says he, that you had betrayed the
City? Now I remember it, I thank you for that, for this very rumor is the
chief thing I retort upon you, for your slander. For, my Lords, who knows not,
but that this is the very Nature of Fame, to take its Rise, at first, from one
man's impudent sham-report? The whole Body of a People do never discourse of any
thing at an instant; was ever any thing so suddenly started abroad, that the
Talk of all the Town should presently agree about it? What City would not be
disturbed, what People would not have their Heads full, if you should tell all
as and every body else, if you should speak of it in all Companys, and then at
last, in a thing merely of your own devising, you should say, it was a rumor?
What a mighty subject might you have to make your Lies, on every occasion of
the least danger? There is nothing more capable of malignant buzzes and
misconstructions, than War. What matter is it, whence the Report had its Rise?
You cannot deny this, 'twas you that made a long Harangue about it, 'twas you
that managed my Accusation, 'twas you that made me Guilty, by Hearsay. In every
rumor, for which you have no Proof, nor Argument to produce, it is a kind of
base calumny, to be the First, that credits it.

But says he, it is I must dye, because the Law, on which I accused you,
Ordains, that a Traitor must be served the same sauce. I might answer in a
word, that the Law, which Enacts, A False Accuser should suffer the same
punishment, does exact the penalty of that Act, which he had don, not ^f that
which he intended to do. Yet, let us suppose, the Poor Fellow did not aim at
what follow^d, at whose door, I pray, must the sad Issu be said, that proceeded
from the mistaken persuasi^n of the Commons, upon your calumny? May I ^^tart
here another Question, my Lords, of which that ^^^nal Law had no prospect? He
accused me at that ^very nick of time, when, if I had been condemned, I could
not have suffered. Go now, and say, if you can, I war not the Cause, your
Children were ^lain, but call it, if you dare, the City's Act; yet, by all your
skill, you shall never make me, not to pity my Country more than my self; 'twas
she, that suffered under the mischief of that Villainy, as much as the Father.
She was plainly forced to Murder the Children of her Victorious General. He is
much mistaken, my Lords, who thinks any Fact in the World comes first from the
Mobile. What the Generality of a City does, proceeds from the Ascendant, that
seducing Orators have over them; whatever the Commonalty does, they are never
angry, but according as they are exasperated. Thus our bodies receive no motion
but from our Spirit; and our Limbs lie quiet, till our minds use them. There is
nothing more easy, than to work the Common People to any Passion whatsoever.
When we meet together in our Assemblies, no body brings his own private
thoughts, his private sentiments, private persuasion or reason along with him
into the Senate. Nor has any Convention the Wisdom or Humor of single persons;
whether it be, that the Public Interest does not enter to much into us; or
else, because a man is more negligent, when he thinks he is not to give a
r^^^son, alone; and therefore when many are gather^ together, we vote things in
confidence of the whol^* What Commonwealth can there be, but would (...) much
troubled and put into Confusion, if any body should cry out of a sudden, Your
General h^^^ betrayed you, look to it in time, you are Bought a^^ Sold by him;
and yet this your General now, has (...) Children among you? I know assuredly,
that if after this very Speech, O thou wicked Adversary thou had sh^w'd them
the Temple, they would immediately have ventred upon Sacrilege to burn^^ down;
if thou would have had them pluck down Shrines and Images, their audacious
Impiety would not have stuck to abuse the very Deities. Would you know, that
whatever the City did, 'twa^^ your own Act? I Will tell you, you would have been
proud and have boasted of it too, if I had betrayed it indeed.

There is no Cause, my Lord, that your sorrow* for such a satisfaction, should
take you off from the strictness of Justice, upon this account, because my
Enemy offers up his own life; no man would ever beg death, except he, that, by
right ought not to be Executed. Setting then aside for a while, that
satisfaction, which my grief may justly challenge, I only ask this of your
Wisdom^ in the name of all mankind, that you would not le^ any Malefactor choose
his own Punishment. My Lords, you will open a door to a boundless pres^mtion in
wicked men, if a Condemned Person may pic^^ and choose what Punishment, he
please himself; nor can you keep any man's Innocence within the ^ear of Law, if
when a Criminal is apprehended, he may suffer what he list. It eases all Pain
and Torment whatever, when the mind is prepared beforehand for its suffering.
He is mistaken, that thinks human Tortures are measured only by the Cruel
Appellations, they go by: No, there can be no such thing as Punishment, but to
him that is loath to come to it; No man is pained, but when he is made to abide
that, which he cannot abide: For it is Terror that makes any thing Cruel and
Piteous. ^^'s any man call that a Punishment, which he freely leaps at? Which
he earnestly desires? Which be ears not, how soon it comes? No, no, drag, I
beseech you, your Condemned Persons thither, thither I say, where they are loath
to follow you. Then call it Punishment, when the sufferer trembles at it, when
he will go no further, when he plucks back his Chains with all his might. Let
me see the pale visage, let me hear the deep groans of a man, that is going to
his Execution: Let me see him look about him, as if he sought for pity. I
beseech you, my Lords, again and again, let no Criminal have the choice of his
Fatal Punishment. It Is better, a Guilty person should escape his Punishment than
scorn it. Whoever allows present death to a Malefactor, does him a favor; nor
indeed can there be any other Courtesy, do^ him, in such a Case. He is out of
the way, that thinks death is the upshot of all Punishments: To be slain
outright is no Punishment, but a deliverance rather: For whenever we look upon
it as our Fate to dye, it does not admit a strugle of Impatience or Grief at
all. What if you now must leave your Children, leave them did I say, nay, you
preserve them rather? What a brave joyful Issue is it, and full of comfort? He
makes a gain of his death, tho it be never so cruel, that is cried up for
dying. Kill me, says he. O my Enemy, no body wonders at what you desire, but he
that is wholly Childless. O thou Bloody, Cruel one! Shall I do thee the
kindness, to let thee go to it? But what better to my self, can I wish? Do
thou not see the grand heynousness of the Villainy, that thou have committed? I
was not allowed to offer the same for my Children. Hold thou thy little ones in
thy Arms, that they may breath their last in thy Embraces, to choose; yet for
all this, you shall not escape the Law nor put we off. Which way soever they
desired Orbity draws thee, I will be at thy heels: If thou have prepared any
Poison, I will pour it clean out; I will take away every Instrument of death;
I will cut the Rope, that thou have fastened on a beam; if thou would throw
thy self down headlong from a Precipice, I would pull thee back. When all thy
Children are slain, O my Cruel Enemy, thou will not suffer what I did, unless
thy Life be saved.

Nor do I fear, my Lords, lest you should think, that both our Orbitys are to
be treated alike. For lo, my Children shall be brought into Court against my
Tears, which no body will know, they are so mortified. The small Children of an
Innocent Father were Murdered, whom if they had been now alive, you would have
carried in Triumph about your Temples, and about whom all your Festival hurrys
would have been employed. It Is unjust, my Lords, that we should take less pity
of them, whose Murtherous deaths are past and gone. I don't find, how the hate
of the Father should advantage the Children at all: For, you see, those
Children perished, whose very Farther deserved no death at my hands. Oh, what a
Case am I in, thou will still have many things, which I, even when I am
revenged, shall envy thee for! Thou will give them a parting Kiss before they
dye, thou will speak to them, thou will receive their last requests, and thou will have opportunity to promise them, that thou will nor tarry long behind
them. Thou will ease thy Grief, when thou shall promise every one of them his
several Monument. But this will most of all wipe away ^^ars from thine Eyes,
that now thou will see my H^^se Des^late and Childless too. Did ever any man
see so miserable a Case as mine! 'Twill be only the Poor man's comfort, that we
are both equally miserable. Besides, if we compare the very kind of their
deaths, will thy Children suffer the same, as mine? They perhaps may be killed
at one blow, and the Punishment inflicted on them, will be only by the hands of
one Executioner. But my Poor little ones, were Murdered by tag, rag, and
longtaile, every Sex, every Age, even the weakest, every one that could, or
could not, hold a stone, made a shift to hurl it at them. There Is nothing more
Cruel, than the Murders of those, whom the Rabble do destroy. And this is the
only death, wherein they allow no pity nor reverence to our dead Bodies. Do you
think now, that I lament my self only for this, that I was not sated with the
sight of my Children, before they dyed? Oh wretched man! could not come near
their Bodies, after they were dead; I could not bring them into the Sepulchers
of our Ancestors with my own hands; neither had I opportunity to cry out over
their Carcasses, 'Twas not I, that Murdered you. Oh my dear Country, what a
day did I lose, the day, when I your General, and Commanders, returned from a
concluded War! The joyful Soldiery did nor make a Lane for me, nor did the
numerously scattered Citizens dance and skip about my Chariot, with a
Triumphant Jollity; no, I followed my Prisoners, being sadder than they, tho I
brought home Victory; the Soldiers round about me were very Melancholy, my
Kindred met me with tears in their Eyes, and the People knew not, whether they
might give me joy or no, for they blushed at my return. Oh the majerable
condition, even of my good success? so that, I cannot relate my very Victory
without weeping nor shall any of my Friends or Kindred speak a word of the War,
in my hearing. There is nothing more intolerable than that calamity, that
Festival joy recalls to our mind. As often as that your Anniversary Feast shall,
for the memory of my punishment, come about, bring me mourning weeds; you, my
Servants, begin your laments afresh; prepare Cordials for me, my dear Kindred.
No Children are more impatiently missed, than they, who were Murdered for
their Fathers sake. But to tell Truth, my Lords, I am very much afraid, that I
shall not hold out to receive my satisfaction; and lest that affection,
wherewith I am incensed for my Children, should fail me in the midst of my
revengeful Execution. But assist and pity me, all ye my Kindred, help me all my
Friends; and, if perhaps I should not hold out, do you, good Citizens, make up
my satisfaction. I am so tenderhearted, that I fear, when the Executioner
draws near, I shall cry out all of a sudden, I had rather now, 'twere the
Father. But you, mine Eyes, if you have any Shame in you, put away Tears, away
with groans, I must compose and frame my self beforehand to be a Bloody-minded
and Merciless Person, and yet miserable too. Then, Oh thou craftiest of
Mortals, I shall catch this passionate affection, that you now counterfeit and
ape out; then I shall know, what was in your mind, when you desired to dye,
rather than your Children. But if I well understand your wicked heart, which no
manner of villainy or mischief comes amiss to, thou will live, Oh my Enemy, and
that gladly and stoutly too, yea as one, that had got the better.

Pasti Cadaveribus: OR, Citizens, (in time of Famine) devouring one another.
DECLAMATION XII.
The Argument.
When the Famine raged in a certain City, the Inhabitants thereof sent an Envoy
beyond Sea, to buy 'm some Corn, injoyning him to return at a day prefixed. He
went and bought it; but, in his Voyage homewards, was carried, by a Tempest, to
another City; where he sold his Corn for double the, price, and went and bought
a double Quantity of Corn with the Money. By reason of this his delay, his
Countrymen were fain to eat one another. He returns at the day appointed, yet
is Accused, and Arraigned for his Life, as a Traitor to the Commonwealth.

For the Citizens against their Envoy.
Although, my Lords, reasons innumerable, of Indignation, do put me to a Nonplus
in the very beginning of my Plea, because I cannot speak 'm out all once; nor
can I stop my Flood of Grief, which crowds and breaks in with might and main
upon me, (for it is a light Grief, than can be marshalled) yet that, I had
almost called it, Fury of my mind, challenges the first place, which has its
rise from the present sitting of this Court, and the demur of our too slow
revenge: when we do implead a Person, so vilely wicked, that he has drawn us
in too; that we suffer him to make his defense; that we pray the Court he may
be punished; and, when he is condemned, that he may be put to death, that
death, which we, in our dreadful Famine, did even heartily wish for, as long as
we could commit our dead to the ground, undevoured: Or else, that he suffer by
Banishment, a penalty, how little he regards, appears by his slow return to his
own Country. Yet of what Banishment do I speak? Let us brand him with all the
Infamy we can, and vend him packing from us, he knows whither to go. Why did
nor our whole Town tear him in pieces, when he first set foot on shore, and,
(seeing we are at last used to it, and begin in sober sadness to be a City of
Wild-beasts and Cannibals) why was not he himself made the First morsel of his
too slow Provision? For so he ought to have been Quartered, so torn in pieces,
so devoured every hit, by all the right in the World. Who can believe me, that
I could abstain from eating up that Man, when I was famished and enraged too?
But all our mind was upon the Corn, our Eye was fixed on nothing, but that. Oh,
how great was that Famine, that Mastered so grand a rage! For my part, if such
a revenge had took place, if I had vindicated my self on so nefarious a
destroyer of the Commonwealth, not with my Tongue but my Teeth, yet I had
offered up little or no sacrifice to my wrath, or to my revenge: For why? I did
the same, even to my own Relations. The Bowels of our Kindred, buried in our
Paunches, do yet boil up, and seem to swell and struggle within us, and so
rejounce upon us, who too late repent, we devoured them. For now, we are at
leisure to mourn, now we can bury what fed us, now we can burn our Bowels? For
the rest shall be buried with us. Oh Famine never the like heard of, in which
to be hunger-starved is the least of our miseries! Yet pardon me, All ye my
dead Relation, whom I violated, for now I speak to you, pardon me, I say, that
I debauched my mouth, that I degenerated from, and threw off, all humanity.
'Twas not so much to maintain and keep a poor Life and Soul together, nor to
prolong an hated Being; there was but one reason, why we deferred our deaths,
because, if we had dyed, we should have been served the like, as well as they.
And indeed, I can excuse my self to those I have devoured, because I cannot be
angry at my self, for it: But this Envoy, as you see, stands crammed and in
good plight, after so long a Voyage, and is well battled upon the Public
Provision; at the mentioning of our Food, he makes a Face at it, and those that
look as if they would drop down he bids 'm reckon, how much Corn there is for
every one; as if I might not readily own, he had brought enough and too much
too. For now, there are but a few of us left, we walk but thinly about the
s^reets; and tho all the People be called forth from their Chambers, for the
very hate they bear to him that has ruined them, yet, you see, they do not fill
up the Seats, fitted for them. There are but a few of us, fed after a wicked
and barbarous manner, kept alive by other's deaths, self-condemned and a
burden to themselves because they live still, that, with much ado, have
brought our sick and pining Bodies into the Public. This, that you see, is All
that is left of the City; we are so worn away, that, poor wretches, we can show
not live nor dead. This is the Body of the People, this is all their strength,
these their hopes and all the Grandour they have. Unless at last, Mr. L' Envoy,
you had returned to make good your promise, we had not had provision for many
days. But to what purpose, so much Corn, now? Why, your Vessel so laden with
Provisions? You have made a sweet Voyage of 't. We see Corn, but we see no
People. It does us no good, we have no need of it, now you may e'ne go and
sell's. While you, the buyer and seller of the Public health and wealth, do
batter away the next Chapman; while you trade either in our Funerals or ^n our
unnatural cruelties; while you are an En^v^y, forsooth, to another City,
strangers to us, and your own Countrymen perish with Famine the while; in the
Interim, we find Food from ^ur Plagues, our hunger seeds itself, and our very
miseries make us barbarous; we may suffer thee to make thy defense, if withal
we could be absolved our selves.

Now for this, my Lords, is it only I, that complain? Do these things concern
me, more than other? Have I suffered any thing, by my ^elf? Don't I accuse him
upon a Grievance common to you all, my Lords, with me? Can one Man be less
interested in this revenge, than another? Was it not a general starving, was
not the Beggary Universal, of one and all? Unless you think 'twas no Famine,
because we filled our Bellies with Cruel viands, and with wicked repasts. We
are Banished and Out-lawed among all Nations and for all Ages to come, all Men
will tell of these Barbarous Prodigies, and they will all Curse us to the Pit
of Hell, except such, as will not believe it. We have cast a foul blur even
upon Famine it self, and, (that which is the last comfort to the miserable) we
have forfeited all our Title to Pity. Yet we had still one poor defense, that
we were forced to do this by reason of his delay; But now, if this Man be
Innocent, the Crime will lie at our ow^ doors. May I tell you our public
miseries, and so upbraid our lamentable state? Can I get out a word? Will a
sentence follow? Shall I not be Tongue-ty'd? What can I not do? Let me^ survey,
and take a view of the Order of our calamity, and tell all and every particular
very plainly? None so fit to speak it, as my self. Bu^ we felt it and remember
it too well: I suppose, the Judge need not inform about it; we may declare these
things to the Person Accused, who was out of the reach of all our miseries, who
without all dispute owes a great obligation to hi^ Country, that he alone was
sent away from starving* Hearken therefore, Oh Man, hearken attentively, that
Corn, which you brought home at last with interest, how much it cost us?

Some perhaps, my Lords, may wonder, that, tho the Fruits of the last dismal
year were spent, the happy fruitfulness of many former years should be likewise
exhausted; and they may raise a doubt, what the cause should be, why such a
wealthy City, as Ours heretofore was, should have no stock of provision
garner'd up, but only in their Expectations and Hopes? It must needs be so,
when we sell Corn to our Neighbor City, and where a little pidling gain did
tempt us: Thus the we^^ public is regardlessly bought and sold, and Famine
comes to take possession without resistance: And if there were any remainder of
the Provisions of the precedent year left, yet some Men to sell it dearer, kept
it in, to enhaunce the price. Yet I appeal to your Consciences, we did not
complain at all, as long as Corn was but double its usual price. For 'twas not
a Common scarcity of Corn, nor a Fayler of Land, that makes the Farmers labor
to be lost and the unwelcom harvest not answer his hopes, which some Husbandmen
are wont to complain of; No, it was a ^ew, unheard of, and a cursed blast on
Corn, that ^e^^ nothing almost to Man, but Man's flesh, to ^^at. Either the seed
sown rotted away under the Furrows, without striving to put forth, or self, if
a small root shot out with too little moi^^^, the blade hung its head on the
ground; ^r else the dying Corn looked wan and pale, when the blade or stalk was
parched by the cor^hing Sun. No showers laid the dust of the Thirsty Ground,
nor did so much as the shadow of a Cloud hover over the too too dry Land. The
winds blew hot, so that the heat intercepted (...) ripeness of Fruits: And if
perhaps, in any place, some poor lank blade of Corn, make a shift to get up
above the ground, yet the em^^ Ears frustrated the Farmers hopes, and the ^^r
Husbandman winnowed his empty Corn, and ^here was nothing left in the barns
flower. These ^re but petty Circumstances; for the Meadows ^ere parched up,
Leaves were blasted, Trees did not put forth; the Earth was bare, the Clods
^ere hard, and Fountains were dried up. If I ^id not speak all this, to them
that knew the ^^uth of 'm, I might seem to complain, without ^ause, of this*
year wherein, our Envoy knows, ^^e sold so much Corn. Ah, would the woods ^ould
have afforded us their wild and simple ^^^d, that we might pick berries, shake
down ^^rns or gather straw-berries, would the pesti^nt year had left us,
whatever the Men of old ^und out to appease their hunger, before Heaven ^ent us
gentler reflections: I was no nice Fellow; ^ut Oh woeful remembrance! Oh sad and
deadly necessity! We had nothing left to keep us alive but bare Trees. Yet we
cannot complain of Go^ altogether, for we found the Seas, at least, favorable
to us. If our Envoy would but have improved the day, which the happy season p^^
into his hands, he might have brought us Co^^twice by this time.

As Soon as the sense of our great misery wa^ noised all the Town over, and, our
wan^ increasing, we were pinched every day mo^^ and more, tho our Case was bad
yet we fear'^ 'twould be worse, for there was no hope of any relief from our
Neighboring Cities, because they were in the same case with (...) selves: It Is
true, there was a small matter o^ Provision left in our Neighborhood, but
'twa^ come to that, not a jot would any Body se^^ Whereupon, when we saw, that
we must provide for the Public weal, from beyond Sea, every Man of us ran into
the Townhouse. A^ in an Alarm, we cry Arm, Arm; and in a venture by Fire,
Water, Water; so with one consent without respect of Age or Dignity, all
Fellow^ we related our Case, we sat, and determined wit^ one accord, we were
wholly guided by the sense of our necessity, without Punctillio's of Ord^^ or
Observance. Many offered to go on the ^^rand, but this Man was chosen, not by
any preference of Innocence, Authority or Desert, the only reason that moved
us, was, because he pr^mis'd to make a sudden return. We gave him (...) power
of Money, without stint, we bid him g^^ as much Corn, as ever he could. This we
(...) cried out for, as one Man, nor were we long (...) doing it, that we might
not hinder his Voyage; the voice of us all was this, (which he laid hold of, as
a certain kind of Argument he might stay the longer) If you don't come within
the limited ^ime, you were as good bring us no Corn at all; We bore this our
Envoy with our own hands to the Ship, and for fear he should stay, every one
brought in his Quota of Provision for the Voyage, we cut the Cables, and, going
ashore, we ^ut off the Vessel with all our stress. Then we followed the Flying
sails with our Eyes, and, as ^f we our selves had been a Ship board too, we
^rish'd him a good market, the wind fair, and a Sea without storm. Who can
believe, what suc^^^, we, Poor Men, had? We obtained all, that we desired, of
the Gods above; only one thing was defective, we should have put up our Pray^rs
for that other strange City too, that he re^iev'd. He arrived quickly there,
and had as ^uick a market, yea and returned with as much past, whither he
listed. What are we the better for waiting? Another City was Elder-hand, and
^ur precise Commissioner, forsooth, stays for his ^ppointed day. We in the mean
time first plunder our Cattle out of our grounds, we tear and ^evour every bit,
yea that no Provision might be made, no not for the succeeding year, our
Plow-Oxen were not spared: Then we sent our slaves a ^acking, and our Poor lay
grovelling at the doors of our Grandees, and breathed their last, in begging
their bread. When our Children cried to us, we told 'm, poor Things, our
Commissioner was a ^oming. At last, every Man was fain to shift ^ r himself.
Yet I mention none of all this, no not now, to aggravate the Crime of our Envy^
for as yet, he might have come to us first. (...) hitherto, we have born our
misfortunes, for the ^^ther, we may thank our Envoy.

If you have any human Flesh and Blood left i^ you, unless, your Belly being
over-full, you ha^^ quit all thoughts of your Friends, that are a starving,
consider the hard Case of your Country, have some regard to the cruel pinch, we
are put to. W^ sent you in our Extremity, your pale and almo^^ Bloodless
Countrymen look for you, that l^^^ breath, they have yet left, is tilled on in
hope of your return Fa^cy, and set before your Ey^^ those thin-iaw'd Visages,
the decay of your Co^^try-men, that are a dying every day, and the^^ strength
that was decayed long before. You can^ be ignorant of any of this, if we may
believe you a^ all, for you saw with your Eyes, how our Ci^^ labored with
Famine, before you went. Mak^ have, while there are any of us alive, to take a^
account of your Commission; Oh, make have, le^^ we be driven to commit
something worse tha^ Death; certainly we deserve all the Corn, you ca^ bring.
Why do you bring another Cities Fami^^ upon us too? If we miscount not, we have
s^^fer'd a double misery by your means. You l^^ snoring on the deck with our
Corn in the Hold, an^ you travel round about the Sea Coasts, as if yo^ meant to
be an Hydrographer. You, the gra^^ Dispenser of Fate between Two Cities, the
Pres^^vation of a strange one, and the Destruction (...) your own, mete out our
necessary Food a^^ sustenance to Foreigners; and having a Fair wi^^ to bring
you back into your own Country, yo^ wish, it were Contrary. We, mean while,
running too and fro over the parched Fields, pluck ^ip the roots of withered
Herbs, and we pull the ^arder, as hoping, if possible, we may light upon
poison, whilst we are vent'ring upon food, we were never used to before. Now
if we hap upon a richer piece of Ground, we are ready to quarrel for our
Pasture. We pill the bitter bark of Trees, and we crop off the russet Leaves of
the sadly-withered boughs. Whatever our drooping hunger scraped together, all
went down. Now we dye, even in our Forage, and ever and anon one or other of
our Company drops down on the ground, as Sheep do when infected with the C^ath
or Murrain. Now we dye thicker and thicker every day, the Bill increases; and (
woe to say it!) now! we had nothing to feed upon any longer. What Powers shall I
call to witness? The Heavenly ones above, alas, we have driven them from
amongst us, by so great a Cruelty? Or, the Powers below, as for them we are
their Fellow Citizens, as bad as they? Or, shall we appeal to our own guilty
consciences, that we did all things before, that no Man ever did, besides us?
We slew our Cattle, we gruh'd up our Fields, we disforested our Woods, at last
nothing was lest but Hunger and Death?

If you will believe me, I would willingly put off this Branch of my
Accusation, for a while; for when so horrible a wickedness is to be related, a
Man would fain gain a fevv moments of time; and besides, I must needs lay open
to the Accused Person, who was far enough off from us and our miseries, to
how many he came not at the day appointed. Pardon us, O all ye Gods and Men,
pardon us for this highest of Villainies; 'twas woeful enough, we confess, to us
when we were to commit it. But good Manners and Hunger can never cotton
together; and when that Tyrannical Dame has once got possession, she tames
even the monstrousest sorts of Beasts. Those that were a dying, took a mouthful
of the very ground in their mouths: I would have eaten my self, if I had had
nothing else to feed upon; but I must own this, I had something, without being
beholding to our Commissioner. After that our inflamed hunger had mastered all
our Patience, and all our hope was gone, which is the last Anchor to Men in
misery, so that now our hearts durst not so much as wish for that sustenance,
which was in vain so often promised us, then we began to run mad and out of our
wits, and our Hunger did whatever it listed. Our hearts were stupify'd with our
hard condition, our Palats were palled and dead with our uncouth repast, we
began to eat the very beasts of Prey. Yet at first, we fell to this monstrous
kind of diet by stealth, every one sneaked into an hole; so that if thou had
come sooner, we might have wiped our mouths and denied it. If any were missing
of the dead bodies, we reckoned he was interred, but no body said a word, nor
did any one find it out. No Man was led on by Example to do this, every Man was
his own Teacher; after we had been all guilty, then we all began to fina^ out
one another. Yet before I touched a bit, how often did I hye me to the Key? How
often did I weary my Eyes in gazing, whether there were any vessel upon the Main?
you, Sir Envoy, 'twas easy for you to prolong the time, who had sold all, but
your own share. Look you to it, how long you can stay above, for my part I
cannot stay a whole week. And therefore, like so many mad Dogs, we fell upon the
Carcasses, and we were fain to shut our Eyes, as if we made more conscience of
seeing than doing, thus we devoured whole bodies bit after bit. This we could
not do neither, without hor^our for the Fact, hating and loathing our selves,
weaping and wailing, when we had done. But when we started back from our dismal
sustenance, our hunger pricks us again, and we gather up the Mammocks we had
disgorg'd before. Now these things seem ugly and abominable to me, Limbs
all-torn, Bones gnawed bare, and Breasts, flead of their skin, vinew'd and
moldy within. Now, methinks, I see the Entrals thrown about, the Flesh black
and blew, the gore expressed and squeezed out with my Teeth, and the marrow
sucked out of the bones. 'Twas little or nothing of a Body the Famine left us.
Now I ^bhor that time, when I lighted upon an Hand or (...) Head to eat, or any
other part, that by a proper mark showed it was a Man. Now comes ^o my
remembrance, that uncouth food, which I durst not set upon a Table. For we
^an't deny, we devoured the Men, and that greedily too, ^or we had not eaten a
bit along time; and yet for ^ll that, 'twas hard to begin. But after we be^an
to count it no sin, and none in the City were shamed to confess it, what did we
do then, but ^^ovide for to morrow, and store up dead bodies (...) our
Pantries. We either arrested dead Corps's, and brought 'm back from carrying to
their gravel* or we quarreled for them at the Funeral-Pile. The Heir takes
possession of a dead, body, fallen to him. 'Twas a riddle, a monstrous incredible
thing, but that we saw it, there was a Pestilence yet no Funeral. There was no
Bill of Mortality, how many died; we knevv that some were dead, only because
we did not see them among the living. The Sick were afraid of their Attendants,
and called back their fainting souls, when they took the last Farewell of their
Domestics; and the first thing they desired of them, was, an Entire burial But
when a greater necessity began to urge, the^ 'twas counted a courtesy, to keep
Hands off till the breath were out of the body. No Man was so near of kin or in
blood, that our duty would make us abstain from. We eat up our Kindred, our
nearest Kindred; For if we should have desired a Neighbors body, none durst,
none would, le^ us, for they did eat 'm themselves.

Yet notwithstanding, you have no cause to be angry, Iron.
for I have told you, How much you made of it: We sold our Corn for double the
price, s^ our crafty Envoy cheated our Neighbor-city* Now our Garners are
full, there is a good account of his Voyage, our Vessels are full fraught and to
inhance our joy for so great a Blessing the fewer Guests, the better Cheer. As
for the Excuse he makes in point of time, I suppose (...) has no reason to be
troubled: For, I wis, he di^ not light upon a People, desolate and forlorn,
there was no reason he should make such have, v^^^ could have stayed yet
longer. We are the onl^ Men, that cannot be destroyed by Famine.

Do You think, I Will pass over what he can say for himself? I confess, he came at
the very last day, he brought our Grain, let us rejoice, that now neither of the
Two Cities do pine with Famine. Oh that I were strong enough, that my Lungs
would hold out, that I could get some word or other out of my long-dry'd
Larynx; for how great must that Indignation be, when One must grieve for the
whole Town? This being so, let all of us, here present in this Assembly, with
full cry agree and consent unanimously to accuse this Man, yet the Odium would
not be equal to the Crime, for how fevv of us are left, to make our Complaint?
Let every one consider with himself, what woeful misery he has undergon, and
what odious Crimes he has committed. Surely, he is a monstrous Beast, who,
having filled his belly so wickedly not for need only, is not angry with
himself for eating Mans-Flesh. Let me call to mind my grief and my late
vomitings, and my avengeful discontent at my self. Come hither, thou Tyrannous
necessity of so long a Famishing; and You, my Kindred, whom I have devoured
within me, stir, if you can, and break ^orth out of my baleful Paunch, while
we expiate ^he wickedness, we have committed, by this devoted person, and so,
making as it were a so^emn Lustration of the City, we send this dismal
Sacrifice to the wronged Ghosts: For such dire Sacrifices become us well. I
have brought your Crimes in common into Court, and I would fain ^alliate the
dishonor of our poor City. We are ^ffenders, every one; yet here is one, if
you ^lease, Guilty enough for us all. I accuse him for dealing treacherously
with the Commonwealth: by cherously did I say? I am sure you wonder at the
lowness of the word, whereby I seem to understand, as if our Country were
slightly rased only, and had received a Filliping (as they say) rather than a
Wound, when yet our City is fully and wholly consumed, and our People pined
away. But this injury of Nature is to be born here, as well as in other cases,
that she has not given us words, high enough to express such monstrous Facts;
our cursed Famishing is only called, Famine; our abominable Gobbets are called,
diet; and after all, the Commonwealth a little treacherously dealt with, or
so. Nor, forsooth, shall this Offender be punished, without a legal and orderly
Trial: Pray, let all things be done with scruple of Conscience, for fear we do
amiss. See, that we are angry after a legal manner, tho we have violated all
Law to save our Lives. Yea, if you like it, let us have patience to hear his
defense, let him yet keep us a little longer still. Let him deny, he has
injured the Commonwealth, because he has much more than injured it, as we all
know. We do not lay to his charge, that he spoiled the Angles of our Palaces,
that he cut down the Trees of our sacred Groves, nor demolished the Walls of
our public Temples. If he think good, he may perhaps put in, that it is not the
Commonwealth that he ruined; for it is brought now to that pass, that that very
Name is extinct. Perhaps, he may come to this too, as to deny, we ever wanted
victuals. Yet I cannot deny, that his Great wickedness is not properly nor fully
enough expressed by this Law-Term. For our Ancestors would not have the
Commonwealth injured, no not in the least, wherein, I judge, that this Case of
ours is comprehended. But no Man ever feared, that a Crime would ever be
absolved, that was greater than the Law. Besides, he endeavors to ward off the
Accusation of Treason against the Commonwealth, and to dwindle it into the
Fault of an ill-manag'd Embassy and Commission, only. The Accused party chooses
the species of his Crime, which is as much as to say; a condemned Man would
choose his own Gallows.

I cannot endure, my Lords, in so great a Commotion of my Spirit to hunt for
Topics, to argue upon; nor does the effort and vehemence of mine Anger stoop
or descend to the method of First, Second, and Third, etc. Yet this I know,
that a Grief for the Public comes under no starched form. Yea, if the Judges
so far forget what they have suffered, that they can endure these evading
Pretenses, which do not clear him of the Crime but only stave it off, must the
People too pass over his offense without its due reward, by downright stoning?
You shall not prescribe to me, how to lay my Attainder. I can accuse you for
ill-managing your Commission and Trust too. For, look ye, if I should lay to
your charge, here are so many Men killed outright, are not you the Cause of
their Deaths? If I charge you, that our Sepulchers are violated, did not we rob
the Grave by means of your delay? But you had a Commission, forsooth, and what
was that, I pray, but to manage something for the Commonwealth? And he that
manages it ill, I hope is guilty of doing her wrong. Do you think Commissioned
Envoys have such License to offend, that whatever Villainy they commit in their
Employments, they may set all at rights by this one Plea? Oh, how over-grievous
were the case of your Envoy, if he had leave given him to break the Law and to
starve the People, too! But if I do mistake, and our Laws are grown out of date
by disusage, because we have kept no Courts to put 'm in Execution, yet how do
you avoid our Law aforesaid? For unless I am mop'd by my misery, there are Two
things which in such an Accusation are to be inquired into; viz. First, Whether
the Commonwealth be indeed injured; and next, whether by the Party, that is
Accused. In which points, if you had any confidence at all in your Innocence,
you would not throw off one Crime upon another, or run from punishment to
punishment, but you would rather, ward off that, which is now levelled against
you. We say, The Commonwealth was injured. Now should I lanch out into a long
Oration, and cast about, as other Accusers use to do, how to aggravate the
matter by Flourish of words. But the commemoration of our Calamities have so
horrible a report, that if we could forget or nor reach them, yet our public
ruin must not be declared so much by Words, as exposed a spectacle to our Eyes.
Go too then, if you will, let us walk out of our Gates, and there you may see
our Pastures burnt up, our Cornfieldsd overgrown with thorns and briars, and
the barks of our Trees half eaten away. Our Lands are desolate for want of an
Husbandman to till 'am, the Innocent Beasts pack away from our hunger, our
Farms are empty, and our forsaken Barns are ready to fall down. No ground lies
neat after it is plowed and harrow'd, not so much as a Clod is turned up by the
Plow-share. So that now we may fear a Famine next year too. Go home again to
your Houses, there you shall see your very Hearths all-bloody, your Fires put
out with the streams of gore, running out from Carcasses, your Rooms
thick-strew'd with dead-bodies; and at best, when we carry out our dead (
Bones, rather than Men) to be entombed, we are fain to cover 'm; what is left
we bury in this fashion; we commit our broken Corps's to the Flame. But where
the Famine has swept away whole Families (which is the greatest Part by far,)
there our Empty Houses are overgrown with dust and cobwebs, and there lies the
Lumber without any Heir to challenge it. When you have gone all the House over,
at last perhaps the Master of it may be found, locked up in some close room, as
in a Coffin, I mean, if he has escaped being devoured before, and when his
Neighbors looked after him they could not find him, or if he were the last Man
that dyed of the Family: But whither do I send you? Behold this very Assembly,
see the whole City presents you with the Image of one single dying Person, the
Head lank and lean, the Eyes quite sunk into the Head, the Skin loose and
flaggy, our trembling lips cannot hide our Teeth, our Faces stark and stiff,
our Cheeks pitted with holes, and the recesses of our Throats empty. Our Necks
stoop forward, our Back is rugged the Bones staring out, we are like Infernal
Specter, and we are even filthy Carcasses already. Or if any one of us look
not of this Fashion, let him own, that he has Feasted too hard on the deceased.
Let every Man examine his own wretched bowds and his full Paunch, that is accused
and cannot deny't. Say now, Our Commissioner, say, if you will, I am Guiltless,
because I came at the day. But I am sure my Conscience is Guilty, that I made a
shift to live so long, by such woeful means.

What miseries, compared with ours, do not occasion tears, more nice and
sparing? Suppose an Enemy should besiege and shut up a City within their own
gates, it is not unusual that the besieged are driven to great scarcity of
vicluals, but yet they may deliver the Town up; and then the Conqueror will
either kill his Prisoners or give them meat. Some have undergon the Tortures of
Pirates, happy they, so they were Innocent. Death certainly is a Period to all,
and our Cruelty should not go beyond Life. But if a Man should be so stripped of
all humanity, that he will choose to punish there, where there is no sense of
the misery, yet he would throw Carcasses to Beasts not to Men. Some have been
burnt by Fire, but their very punishment ends in a sepulture. But we have
destroyed our very Funeral Ashes, and our very ruin is ruined it self. All Men
see, what our miseries were, the Fire did not burn our dead, the wild-beasts
did not devour them, the Fowls did not meddle with them, yet we can reckon how
many have dyed by our eating their Carcasses, We are afflicted beyond the hope,
yea and beyond the wish too, of any recovery; every day a greater dislike of
what we have done, seizes us, for my part I am e'ne ashamed that I am alive, I
dare not look up to the Sun or the Stars, I call the dead every foot happy
Persons, and being pricked with the Gripes of an Evil Conscience, I judge none
in a better case, than they, who at any rate whatever, are laid up in their
long home. Now also I envy our very food, I am silent of what is past, our store
and plenty hurts us by our excessive greediness; we throw down unsatiably our
long desired Food, and we choke out wearied hunger with too much cramming. And
now we dye, even by the relief, you brought us. But the other parts of the
Commonwealth, which are appointed for the use of the People and run to decay
with less damage, are easily cured by repairing what is amiss. Our stately
Edifices may be rebuilt, our Treasury may be replenished again, our Ships and
Tackle may be repaired, but our wound here pierces deep, here our very
heart-blood is struck at, when the People drop down dead, and every Age and Sex
are laid low with never-ceasing Funerals. Our City is drained, our Houses are
desolate, not a Man to be seen upon our Walls. A sad remembrance of our once
flourishing Condition. Do you ask, how many have perished among us? It Is the
least portion, that is lest alive; which you may know by this, they were as
many as sufficed an hungry and ravenous People: Yea, but it is very
considerable, how they came by their ends; They, who dye by Pestilence, or they
who dye in Battle, dye happily, yea, in a word, every death, but This, is
supportable: But cruel Famine consumes the Bowels, it wastes the Entrals, it is
the Wrack of the mind, the wasting of the Body, a Tut'ress to do mischief, the
most intolerable of all extremities, and the most hated and ugliest of all
miseries. It Is she, that makes noble hands stoop to base Offices, it is she,
that throws us down at other Men's feet in a begging posture, she often breaks
Faith with our Allys, she has administered Poison openly to the People, and she
has driven, even affectionate tenderhearted, Persons to Murder their own
Kindred. Yet we had one remedy lest us, viz. not to stay till the day of our
death, but to release our Souls, that were a pining every day, from all the
calamities that were to supervene; For in a Famine, at last no Man scapes. Now
it is true, 'twas not your fault, that the Famine began; but yet, when we were
wounded thereby, you killed us outright; when we staggered through weakness, you
threw us quite down; and when we were in a disposition to burn, you set Fire to
us.

Now to deal fairly with you, our miseries were of several sorts; the beginning
of our Famine I lay at Fortunes doors, but the fatal Catastrophe thereof, at
yours. I distinguish, between the time of your Voyage, and the time of your
stay: But I begin then to charge our extreme want upon you, since we smarted
under it, by your means. And therefore, I grant, that the dearth of our Corn
and Provision, our thin harvest, the slaying and pulling our Cattle in pieces,
may be imputed to Fortune, to the barrenness of the year, or to the drougth of
the season, but we cannot impute to her the death of our People, nor our
ravenous tearing of their Carcasses, nor such Food as is worse than starving.
This part of our Famine must be charged upon your account, and upon no bodies
else. Suppose at present, to urge nothing more against yon but this one thing,
You came later than you might. I don't yet object, that you staid twice your
time, nor that you traverst the Sea so often too and again, nor your long lying
at Anchor, I don't yet make mention of so much time wasted, as was sufficient
for an Embassy. If we had nothing to answer for, in keeping our vile Carcasses
alive, yet you would have destroyed us all in one seven days. For Famine has
contracted the bounds of human life. We perish, we cannot subsist. If you have
any pity at all, make have, make use of every Gale, nay if the winds be
favorable, and fill all your sails, yet don't be content with that, but ply
your Oars besides. For the public life and health is aboard you, you are laden
with the very Spirit of your Countrymen, that ship of yours is fraught with the
lifeblood of us all. We vow and swear to the Gods, what we will do, if you
return, we lie on our Faces all along the stairs of our Temples, and make our
Vows, we stretch out our hands; for as for sacrifices to offer, there is no such
thing in nature. Why do you bind our public hope and expectation to your
sinking Anchors? Time flies all the while, and death comes on us, all a flaunt
with full-sail. Make have, I pray, and our first Founders will not reach your
merit, yea the Gods themselves will not do more for us. To thee we owe our
selves, our Children, and whatever is dear to Men, to thee we owe whatever thou
affordedst to our Neighbor-city. I don't say all that I could say, for suppose
you ship the vast Waves of she Sea; suppose your Vessel is hid in the surges,
that we cannot distinguish your Sails amidst the white hoary foamings of the
working Main; suppose the Sea wambles up sand from its very bottom, that
Lightnings flash round about you, that the Heaven^ thunder, that the Tempest
whistles, while your Cables crack, and in fine the Winter stormy-star is a
setting; yet, do you go on still, waft thr^, it is Bread you carry; it may be
you are troubled with none of all this, and therefore make the more have. I
should have complained of you, if you had over-stow'd your Ship, even with
Provisions, when you were bound to return in so much have; would you had
brought but half so much. We are not Coy, we do not desire abundance for our
Luxury, but any little tiny thing at present to save us from starving, only to
keep life and S^^ together. If we have need of more hereafter, you shall go
again. Our Jaws are dry and a faint panting widens our Mouths. Now poor
Children do in vain lament in their Parents laps, and Infants, not yet born,
are even sensible of the Famine in the womb: Rich or Poor, no difference now.
We gape after the air, we lick up the dew, now our Hope it self is a Torment to
us, our strength fails us day by day. Now we go no more to the Seaside, but
despairingly come back from it. The People sit upon High Rocks to wait for your
Ship, they return no more into the Pastures. We even run into the very water,
and all stand gazing after you, and none but you; and when all fa^ls, we dye
away. We dye, I say, while our Eyes are set in waiting for Thee, and our dead
bodies pitc^ into the Sea. When we saw any white Clou^ shine from the
reflection of the Sun, was you^ Ship straight; how often, when the hoary wav^
were broken with the wind, did we call it, your Sails. Oh, the unsteady hopes
of the miserable* ^ow do they incline to every spill of comfort upon ^rery
little occasion? Nay, say we, this certain^^ is his Ship, look ye, she is under
sail, she draws ^earer and nearer, and, as she makes her way, ^^e seems bigger
and bigger. It must be Ours, she ^as had a fair wind going and coming, the
winds ^ave been governed according to our Prayers and ^^ishes. This is our
Note, mean while our Fancied ^hip vanishes away. Then we do nothing but ^^wle
and despair, and hate even our very life: ^^or nothing torments Men more
grievously, than ^^eir disappointed hopes. We could not so much as ^^k or
inquire after you, for no Man put a shore. ^^ere we were all in suspense, and
knew not what (...) do, no news at all of any thing for our good. (...) we
could but have known, where you had sold ^^ut Corn, we would have fetched it,
ourselves. ^ut how were our minds changed every minute? ^e said, it is very
well, the Sun set clear, it is like (...) be a pure day, and the wind sits for
us. Now ^^re, he will com. In the mean time, we are in an ^^certain starving
condition, our hunger puts us (...) from time to time, yet so, that she reckons
every ^^ot, how long she has to live: Yet, what is she ^^e better, hitherto?
You remember, when the and began to blow contrary, and the Waves were ^^rryed
from the shore to the main, what public ^ailing, what Lammentation was there,
He will be ^pt back, (said they) he will run a ground, he will (...)
distressed. But, if it please Heaven, Our Com^^^s;sioner might then sail with
the most prosperous ^^e^ze of all. Whilst we, in this unfortunate ^^d heavy
case, were thus employed in our thoughts; (...) hold, you were traversing all
the Creeks and Bays of the Sea, and were Cruising all along the shore,
according to the turning and winding of the Land. At this rate, you may take
pleasure in keeping the Sea long enough; you escaped no fair h^^ven, you visited
every famous City, yet let m^^ not lie, you touched too upon a City in Famine,
a^ well as we. Moreover, if when possibly yo^ complain of Fear only, I cannot
endure your stay how can I sufficiently accuse and charge you, if yo^ make your
Markets there too? You rob us o^ our very life and give it to another, you
expo^^ our health and safety. The Public Innocence which for a long while
could not be valued, yo^ huckster away and sell. Our Corn we lost not by
Shipwreck or Pyracy, no, we lost it by filthy lucre. A Tempest might possibly
have driven a S^^^ on the strand, and the Waves might have sway lowed up all a
numerous Fleet; but we lost o^^ Corn, because our Fleet came safe to shore;
Th^^ we sent an Agent, forsooth, to another City, an^ like poor devoted Souls,
we starve while our Neig^bours filled their bellies with our dainties. No^ we
have no more spirit left in us, we stand upon the very brink of death, we wait
for our Ag^^ and our Corn with an open mouth, when alas! o^^ Fleet, mean while,
makes a Trading Voyage on^^ and barters for the plenty of a Neighbor City.
(...) Ship was almost come in ken, when he turned back and there was but a
small matter between (...) and seeing the dust of our Corn-heaps; so mu^^ time
has past, since we club'd our Money, a^^ since we Commissioned him for our
Envoy. No^^ reckoning the time, which the prosperous wi^^ made to seem
shorter, I am daily in hope, ce^^ainly he is ne^^ But stay, our Commissioner is
^ut just now gone to buy. To. the^ therefore I im^ute so many deaths of our
Countrymen, and so ^reat a destruction of our People. To thee, I say, (...)
impute the lamentable havook of Parents and Children: Yea, what we have
suffered, and, that which is worse, what we have done too, all lies) ^t thy
door.

And do you hope, that the noise of double Money will drive the Odium of your
great wickedness out of our minds? Alas, you know not how many things you have
sold. I sold it for double, say ^ou! What did our misery entice you to turn
Merchant? Than I suffered my own Countrymen ^o dye for hunger; that I undid my
own City to ^ave yours, that I tacked about, when I was so near their shore,
that I cannot come back at the day, What is it worth? What will you give me
under^^and? Double, do say? Alas that will only help ^e to make my excuse to my
Countrymen. But ^e, like a Pack of silly Fools, did complain of Fa^ine,
intolerable and miserable scarcity lay heavy upon us, death stood ready at the
door. Are we ^to bound to gibe thanks to our Industrious Agent? Iron.
Our People dye round the Town, the richer for him Our religious Merchant,
without doubt, has ^ound out a fit time to sell his Cargo. I wonder. (...) my
heart, seeing your Market was so good, why ^ou did hot bring us home our use
Money? I sold (...) for double (...) much, says he. You deceived our
Neighbor-city, you fetck'd 'm off, so that they ^re angry with you for it. I
sold it, says he again, ^or double. It must needs come to that, when ^ou
transport it thither, you must sell it so high. They considered your Voyage,
they considered the Interest of your Money; I, for my part, am glad that you
sold it for so much; for now it appears plainly, that there was no force at all
upon you. But if you once make an Outcry and Public sale of our life and
health, if you will admit Chap-men to buy theirs, pray, let us know (...) you
will make the better Market. We are ready to amass all that we have in our
Houses, and all that we have in our Temples, and all that the City can call her
own, to traffic with you. L^^ all the Money, we have, rebuy the Corn, we will
sell our Liberty for it, we will deliver up our Territories: Tho our
Neighbor-city promise thee all the same, yet she cannot do more. Let us have
the benefit, that Chapmen use to have, we paid. our Money, beforehand. Here Is
Treble, Quadruple, t^ke (...) much as you can ask; take it, and with that M^ney
go and buy Corn, and transport it freely, the it be to our Neighbors. If you
allow us nothing of out own Provisions, then we will e'ne fell ^^^selves to our
Neighbor-city. We are content to be Slaves, where there is something to put in
o^^ heads. It Is no pidling matter this, we traffic for our Life, for a place
of Burial, and for our untainted Innocence: This Provision cannot be ^ong^^ so
dear, as is cost us to expect it.

But, says be, unlese I had sold it to that City the Famine was so great, I was
afraid they would have taken it away by Force. And therefore forsooth, Iron.
you would prevent 'm, that you might be the only Person, to do us the wrong.
Certainly, My Lords, you are mightily* mistaken i^ your opinions, if you think
that any: Cause, the never so evident, can be brought into a Court, that not so
much as a lie can be cast over it, to cover its nakedness. He defends himself
with his own surmises; and where no body can disapprove a Man, he brings
himself as his own Witness. You were not solicitous, lest we should have
perished; you were not afraid, that the Prov^sions should come a day after the
Fair, I mean, after the day of our death. Tho our misery was such, that we
could well strange at nothing, yet, I confess, notwithstanding our Fears of
Tempests and doubtful hazards at Sea, we never feared we should lose our Corn,
and yet our Fleet safe the while. Suppose they pretended to take it by Force;
suppose that a Company of People stood upon the shore, like a pack of Robbers,
to seize it, whether you would or no: I don't say now, resist them, avoid them,
or entreat them. But this I say, you should tell 'm, you would either burn or
sink your Ship, rather than all the Provision should be lost to the true
Owners, in the Case they are in; give them some, gratis if you will, so that
you bring home a little to us to keep us alive: Nay, which is the wofullest
thing of all, suffer them to take it by Force. Let Fortune do her pleasure, an
Envoy must not depart from his Precept. At least, you should have made us
acquainted with our wrong, you should have dispatched a Messenger to us, then we
would all have forget our hunger, we would have took up Arms in a fury, and have
ran out every Man, to beleagure that cursed ugly City, without Listing
ourselves or staying for a Muster. In the mean time, I will plunder their
Borders, that is to say, I will feed on another Common. If I can catch any
Cattle on their Grounds, I Will quarter 'm, my Hostility shall maintain me. You
shall sooner arrive at the Corn this way, than you will make your return there.
with. The just Military Oaths we have taken will encourage us to fight. If
Fortune shall part stakes betwixt us, I mean to receive Provision more than my
own share; if not, I hope, I shall have the privilege to dye honorably. Let Us
come hand to hand, and Charge 'm in the Field; Let 'm the^ retire within their
Walls and the Seidge hold longer yet even then we had better live on our Enem^
Carkalles, than our Own. But alas, there was no Force at all, no external
violence offered, no body in the World took away any of your Corn. We are made
miserable, after a Legal way, we are undone by the very Conditions, we made
with our own Envoy. He sold what he would, and for as much as he would; and
perhaps, that he might add* this delay also to our Expectation; he used many
words over his Corn, to put it off the better. All the Money was very honestly
paid. How do I infer, this, say you? Thus, my Lords, He that sells for what
price he will, may choose whether he will sell or no. For, judge you, if they
both could and would have taken away another Man's Corn by force, why did they
pay a double pri^^ for it? For as in a great scarcity, whatever can be bought
is cheap, so when you can have it for nothing, it is dear to pay double the
worth. But, you may believe me, that is but a colorable excuse, and a Plea
meditated beforehand at li^^ and leisure. There never was, or can be, such
(...) Famine, as Ours. The Constellations of Heaven, this year, were so malign
to us, and the Fate of our People so hard, that not only what we sowed, but
also what we bought, failed us. We sent for Corn with ready Money, a ready
Fleet, a ready Commissioner, the wind was fair, Iron.
the Voyage prosperous, yet for all this, we lost our Provision. Alas, we are
further off from our Corn, than ever. Our Merchant might p^y frequently to that
City, and bring his laden Fleet thither. They had no need to send any
Commissioners; they need not fetch Provision from afar off: it happened to them,
as when Corn is most plenty, when there is? wealth enough, and Money at will,
they need buy nothing, but what was brought home to their own doors. So that
there was no reason for that fear, you pretend, nor was any thing of Force
offered you. You made choice of your Market, and because you thought you had
time enough, you would make bargains by the way. I thought, they would have
robbed me, say you; robbed me, do say? Why, O thou naughty Man, if thou did
fear that, why would thou put in there? Thou, being a Traveller, having a
great charge about thee, do thou take up thy Ledging among Thieves? do thou
run our public Provision on the rock of scarcity, on purpose to cast it away?
And do thou bring the Anchors of thy Fleet, that is full of Corn, before a
Famished City? Would you not keep off from them, as from dangerous Quicksands,
and from the All-devouring Charybdis? should you not have made all the sail you
could, to escape 'm? The credit of your Embassy was never more dangerously Ship
wracked, than amongst them: You your self were the Cause, that you might have
been pillaged, and that your Corn might have been taken away, by your coming
thither: We shall have just so much, as the Manners of their hungry bellies
have left us. What do thou boast of thy double gain? They might have chus'd,
whether they would have paid thee a Great. The Corn, you brought back, is their
kindness, not yours.

Now here is another Lie coined. I was driven in thither, says he, by a storm.
Indeed! Are you so unhappy a Seaman, that the winds do not answer your wishes?
Do we not know, that thou had a better Voyage, than we could expect? Can we
he ignorant, that you made Two Voyages for Two Fraights? Can we be ignorant,
that in one Expedition, the winds were prosperous no less than Four times? It Is
enough, our Nay for your Yea. Don't hope, to put your Shams and Cheat^ thus,
upon our poor City? By what damage can you make out your storm? What less did
you sustam? To be sure, all the Corn came safe to harbor, neither were you in
any stress at all; Tho you pretend your Ships were over-laden, yet, it seems,
they could carry double the Freight. You cannot complain that your Tackle was
disord'red, that your Cables were 'tangled, or, the folds o^ your Sails rent;
No, your Fleet went quickly out* and, as a sign that 'twas not endamag'd at
all, i^ made as quick a return. Moreover, if a Tempe^ had drove you to one
point, could not you (...) your Sails to the other? If you cannot go any
further, then land short. But by all means, avoi^ your R^bbers, avoid those
that will not let yo^ stir out again. If nothing else can be done, the^ go
halves with the storm, and run your Ship aground on some desert shore. But what
did we get, by avoiding the storm? To what purpose did our Fleet withdraw from
the Frowning stormy weather? All of us, you see, were Shipwrack'd in the very
Haven; and we lost our Corn, when our Fleet was at Anchor, But, says he, I did
bring Corn, yea and a double Quantity too. Oh, what an happy People are we! Now
let us break our Bellies with cramming, lei's eat for the time we have lost, and
let us recompense our starving with cruel gutling. Have you brought Corn, d'^
say? Ay, but. Physic is too late to put into a dead Man's Mouth. Will any Man
pour on Water, when the Fire is out? Does not even the A Solemnity held nine
days after the decease of a Person, amongst the Romans.
Novendial Solemnity come too late, when a People is wholly extinct? What do
not I now stand in need of Corn? You take away the Plank from a Person that is
perishing by Shipwreck; after he is drowned you offer him your Ship. It Is a
double Quantity, you will say. Pray shoot it out over their Graves, and mete it
over their Tombs. There are the Gentlemen, that gave you your Commission. What
have you effected by bringing us Corn, but to make us repent of what we have
done, hitherto? Now I am more ashamed, than I was; now I could chide my
feeding, yesterday I might have reframed. Oh sad! In what a wicked posture did
your Provisions find me? Do you thus cry Quits? Hitherto, we have had nothing;
but now, forsooth, we have enough and to lay up too? Iron.
But who will ever adjust necessaries with superfluities. You brought double,
but to them that are gone, you brought nothing at all. But we cannot now undo
what we have done; what comes too late is commonly as good as nothing. But such
things are more precious, and rarer, according to the Critical minute. Would
you know, what difference there is, between This time and That* Try then your
Market, now you cannot sell the whole of what you have, for half the price.

There is only one Plea remaining, and therein lies all the hope of his
desperate and profligate Cause. I came, says he, at the day. Stay here, at
least a while, my Lords, this Excuse is scarce tolerable, deep sorrow
overwhelms me. Do thou protract our public shame and confusion thus fan, tho
desperate and as it were buried underground long before? Why did we not wait
so long? Why did we not hold out our hunger, till the appointed day, forsooth*
Why did we venture on so gre^^ wickedness, before? Our Public Case, my Lords,
hangs in this Balance, either he did, what he did, too slow; or we, too soon.
This was that, forsooth, that you staid for; Iron.
and that you might not supererogate in your duty, by returning too soon, you
trifl'd out the time on purpose. There was nothing of storm in the Case, nor
was there any violence offered you by any City, you made a stop for this one
reason only, because your day prefixed was not yet come. How, have we so soon
forgot our Public Woes then? Are we so bemop'd at our new-come Provisions, as
to be able to he^^ such Pleas, as these? Can this one pretense make the
guiltiest Man, that we, or our Forefathers before us, ever beard of, clearly
Innocent? This Confounder and Destroyer of our City, unless we can capitally
punish him, let him be quitted Our Defendant is returned with this in his
mouth, I returned at the very day, you yourselves gave me. But stay, if you bad
been hindered by Tempest and so had came too late, then, I warrant you, you
would have laid the Fault upon the stormy Sea, or the cross scanty Winds, and
you would have thought, you had made a sufficient Excuse, only by saying, I
could not possibly come any sooner. And the truth is, we allowed for this in
our thoughts, and that was the reason we gave you so long a day. It Is true, we
gave you that day; but because you made a quicker Market, than we expected,
your Voyage was above our wishes. Your Fleet could arrive soon enough at our
Neighbor-city. Can I be sufficiently meens'd against you? Good Fortune we had
sent us, and you destroyed it. You out-staid your time; you exceeded your day,
as much as in you lay: We can suffer no worse than we do, but our suffering
need not have been so long. Make the best advantage of your favorable Winds,
of your happy Current and of your rich liberal City, that sold you as much Corn
as was enough for Two Cities, for us your Countrymen. Boast you never so much
of your speed, yet compute, I beseech you, from the time that you first touched
at our Neighbour-Port, with your full-Fraighted Fleet, how slow have you have
made, from thence? But, forsooth, he defends himself by his sincere intention;
and he asks, what reason he could have, to plague his own City. The truth is,
This I should have asked of him. But, my Lords, I cannot insist on every
particular; If I had a mind to ask Questions, I could ask many. Your Merchants
use, they say, beside their open over-hand price, to agree for something for
themselves, underhand, too, especially when they sell for another Man. It Is
likely at first he intended such gain, as I speak of, but afterward at leisure
it came into his mind, how he should order his Plea and manage his Excuse.
Perhaps he sold the Corn upon the prospect of gain, but he bought more, to make
his defense: Perhaps he might curry Favor with the City he relieved, and might
have some secret grudges against his own, which ( God knows) many times will
arise from slight Causes. Many things offer themselves, my Lords, but (if you
will believe me) none more intolerable than this, that he destroyed his own
City without any Cause in the world. Whatever your Reason, or your Intention
was, pray mark what we have suffered, since the time, you might have been with
us. I shall not mention the Plague of our scarcity, the meagerness of our
bodies, nor our Food grub'd ou^ of the Ground, or peeled off the boughs of
Trees; nor that our Altars were bare of Sacrifices; and that our People laid
the Highways with their Bodies, and that the Beggar knew not where, to ask a
Penny. I would not have thee served, as (...) were. Oh woeful remembrance! O
guslt of Conscience, worse than all Tortures whatsoever! Break open our Breasts
of steel, shake from thence our daring Cruelty, and our Food yet alive and
stirring within us. The very Souls do strive in our Paunches, and dead Persons
stuff our Bellies, so that they start out again. We have made all impossible
old stories Credible, Happiness joined with Misery, Innocence with Villainy. All
the destructions whatsoever, that Fame has ever recorded, may fetch
encouragement from hence: Here you may meet with Murder without Bloodshed,
and Men buried without a Funeral. Whoever feigned the Stories of the Cyclops,
of the Lestrigones, of Sphynx, or of the Yelpings of Sylla's Groyn, heard over
all the Coast of Sicily, and whatever I learned at home when I was a boy, and
now seek for a Parallel, here they may all borrow both Proof and Credit. Some
of those Stories are basely false; as that of Thyestes, where the Sun did never
set at noon, nor made any night, when his Brother Atreus feasted him with Man's
Flesh. I am sure, the Sun saw us Feed upon human Bloody Carcasses, and it shone
upon us when we unbowell'd Men's Bodies, to eat them. Monstrous impiety was
acted in the open Air; and our City, with one bloody mouth, committed
inexpiable Villainy. Now we are punished with something more, than Famine. Some
even of the wild Beasts would not be guilty of such Feeding, and tho dumb
Animals want Reason, yet most of them feed on harmless Food, as they have
always used. And if any of them chance to fasten their Teeth on us, that they
may devour human Flesh, yet they don't tear one another; and there is no
Creature so ravenous upon the Face of the Earth, but has some respect, and as
it were reverence, for its own Species. But we, Men, to whom Divine Providence
has allotted a gentler Food, Who have the privilege to live in societies, to
delight in mutual converse, and to behold the Stars of Heaven with our exterior
and interior Eyes, have even done, what was never seen before. We have
imprinted the marks of our black-hunger-teeth on dead human Carcasses, and we
draw back our lips between the Famine and the Horror, as unresolved, when we
have begun, whether we were best bite or (...). We tumble our dead all along to
their Funerals; and we run as thick to their Graves, as if we were to see your
Ships a coming. One Man perhaps is breathing out his last gasp, yet he maker a
shift to hold out, because he thinks another will go before him; each looks,
which shall dye first; and if any one lives the longer by the Fancy of his
hope, he struggles with himself, whether he should bite or forbear. Every one
does not stay, till they be dead, the Father has a stomach for his Children;
and the Mother, being grieved that her time is out, brings forth not a Son but
a Dinner; her Infant, being mangled in pieces, returns into her own body again.
All men make fast their doors, that none many take away their Dead from them.
All our Riches lie in our Carcasses: And, like inauspicious birds, we stand
gaping over those, that are giving up the Ghost. Poor wretched People run into
Holes and Corners, they fly into solitary desert places; and when they find no
hope of life remains, they dye, unseen: Sometimes they, that are ready to dye,
fly to the Beasts. Gape and cleave asunder, O Earth, and, (if it be lawful to
wish it) swallow up this Guilty City to the lowest pit of Hell. We pollute the
very Air with our infected breath, we are a loathsome spectacle to the Sun and
the day, we raise an Odium upon Humanity it self. We despair of any Fruits to
feed on now; we deserve not, that the Gods should be favorable and propitious
to us. How shall my wickedness and I be parted? To what remote part of ^he
World, to what inhospitable Sea, shall I retire? Verily, upon sight of my
Wickedness, the Torches of the Furies do scare my Guilty Soul; and, as often as I
recollect what I have done, I ^eel the lashes of an avengeful mind. The Black
Goddesses haunt me; and, which way soever I turn my self, the Ghosts of my
devoured Friends ^tare in my Face. I know not what Punishments nestle in my
Breast; and that I may not ^scape these Fears, even by my Death, the grievous
torments of Hell do seize me beforehand, as Ixions Wheel, and old Tantalus his
playsome Tree. What? Can there be any Punishment, even in Hell it self, greater
than Famine? Yet this was all his Punishment, who set Man's Flesh on the Table
before the Gods. The Of-Sisyphus.
Stone hovers over us, the Iron-gates open for us, it is upon our account that
Minos his Urn now is set, ^^s our inconsumptible Liver, that is daily re^ew'd,
(for Prometheus's Eagle or Vulture,) for ^n Hell itself none but Ravenous Birds
feed upon Man's Flesh. The Ghosts of our buried ^indred stare upon us, on the
Bank-side. Alas, Alas! Is all this true, or do I only fancy it? I ^ee the
Ghosts torn and mangled, and their Bodies wanting, here a Leg and there an Arm.
Look ye, what is yonder? The Ghosts of our Countrymen rise, not out of their
Graves, nor do they issue from any Gulf of the gaping Earth; ^o, they come out
of the Crowd. Meddle not with us, get you thither, thrust your Torches in His
Face, hit him with your stinging Snakes, and make him give an account, why he
staid so long. Let him tell you, I brought double: Let him plead to you, I came
at my time. For my pan^ if I shall see a sufficient Penalty inflicted upon him,
I may then render some reasonable account why I lived so long.

Apes Pauperis, OR, The Poor Man's BEES.
DECLAMATION XIII.
The Argument.
The Law allows an Action of the Case, (as they call it) for a damage
wrongfully sustained. The Case. There was a Poor Man and a Rich in the Country,
that were near Neighbors, so that their Gardens adjoin'd one to the other. The
Rich Man had Flowers in his Garden, the Poor Man had a Stock of Bees. The Rich
Neighbor complained, that his Flowers were nip't and injured by the Poor Man's
Bees; whereupon he gave him Order to remove them. The Poor Man not being
willing so to do, What does the Rich, but sprinkle over all his Flowers with
plain Poison. So that the Poor Man's Bees were all killed. The Poor Man impleads
the Rich in an Action of Damage, for doing him so much Wrong.

For the Poor Man against the Rich.
I Believe, my Lords, it will seem a wonder to many, that I, being a mean Man,
and but poor, even before I lost what I had, should dare to sue a Rich Man at
Law, especially a Neighbor and a known Huff, of tried bard-heartedness, and
one, that, being of so great an Estate, must needs be a dangerous Enemy, even
tho he had had no Poison at all by him. Nor am I my self ignorant of this
danger, having found by costly Experience, how much it cost me once, that I did
not presently obey his Command. But, ^y Lords, even this Nuisance of mine must
needs ^e hardly tolerable for a Poor Man, when, we ^ee, the Rich are concerned
at such inconsiderable ^amages. And although I have now almost nothing ^ft, that I
can lose, at least if I shall have no sa^^sfaction, yet it will be some comfort
to me to ^ndure the Anger, rather than the Contempt of ^y Rich Neighbor. And
verily, I have no rea^^n to desire to live any longer, if, over and above ^ll
the affronts of my low condition, that I have any thing, it must walk for it;
and if I lose it, that must say Mum. One thing, I beseech you, my ^ords, that
the Cause of my suit may not seem ^low your Dignities to take into
consideration. To ^e sure, you cannot expect, that a Poor Man should lose any
great matter, but be it never so little the Rich Man has taken away, yet the
less (I hope,) is behind. And yet, who can think it much, that a Few Bees
should be vindicated by Form of Law, when a Few Flowers shall be vindicated,
ever with no less than Poison? Yet, my Lords, tho (...) am utterly undone, and
debarred from all hop^ of sustaining my self in my Low condition, I should have
took it more contentedly, if, for any Fault o^ mine he had conceived Anger
against me, his Anger had been just, tho his Punishment had bee^ unjust. But
for all I can see, tho I have considered all things, the Rich Man can object
nothing against me, but only that I was his Neighbor.

My Lords, I have a small piece of Ground which was left me by my Father, it is
but a p^^scantling, neither planted like a Vineyard, nor fru^^ful like a
Corn-Field: It has no rich Meadow, only a little dry Glebe, and a bank or two
of lo^ humble Thyme, and a small poor Cottage in the Enclosure. Yet, I must
needs say, I liked it the better, if 'twere but for this, that 'twas nor worthy
of the Rich Man's Covetize. In this little cl^^ Hermitage, as it were, for a Man
to live in, (...) more from the bustle of the City, I resolved to pa^^ my
contemptible days, for from any Ambition an^ the desire of a greater Fortune;
and so, quie^^ to steal away the time, whil^t my Age passed the all the
Troubles that, by Natures Law, fall to o^ share. This little spot of Ground and
low Coun^^ Cottage, a Contented mind made a Kingdom to me and I had Richs
enough, that I desired no mor^^ But to what purpose? Tho I thus sneaked in
pr^vate, yet, it seems Envy has found me out. Yet (...) first, my Lords, no
Neighbor was I to the Rich Man, but Men of equal condition with my self ^v'd
round about me; and there were many lit^^e Farms, which our Friendly
Neighborhood did ^anage, every Man his own Tenement. But now, that was a
Common before to maintain all of us, (...) come to be the Peculiar Garden of
one Rich Neighbor. After the Rich Man's Ground had en^rg'd itself, and overrun
all Ours by pulling down ^ur Mounds and Hedges; it came to this, that ^^r
Tenements were laid flat and level with the ^round, the Rooms, wherein we
offered Sacrifices (...) our Lares, were destroyed, and the old Tenants ^ere
sent away packing, with their Wives and ^hildren, to seek their Fortunes, yet
giving, Poor ^earts, many a heavy look, backward: And thus ^e large Common,
spoken of before, became the ^divided and single Property of the Rich Man, then
his Ground reached so far, as to my Poor ^ees. As for my self, my Lords, while
I was ^^ong enough to do hard work, I delv'd the Ground ^ith Spade in hand, and
I mastered the difficulty by ^ligent labor, and I even wrung out something
(...) Fruitfulness from the Ground, tho it were stub^rn and as it were
unwilling to yield it. Time ^es swift away, my Lords, and Age makes me ^op; my
strength, which was my Estate, is ^n; and my Old Age, spent by Labor, being a
^eat part of Death, has already seized me, and ^th left me nothing, but my
diligence. When I ^^nsidered with my self, what kind of employment ^as fittest
for my weak Old Age, I had some ^oughts to turn Herdsman, and to maintain my
^or Body by looking to Flocks of Cattle; but the Rich Man's Ground lay all so
close and thick about me, that I had scarce a small Path for egress and
regress. Then said I to my self, what can I do? I am closed in, on every side,
with the Fortress of a great Estate. On this side ly the Rich Man's Gardens; his
Meadows, on that; here are his Vineyards; there, his Parks; and there is no
Foot-way to stir out. I will go get me some little Creature, that can fly over
all. And what Creature, I pray, has Nature found out, better than a Be? Bees
are frugal, sure, laborious: Oh Poor pretty Animals, like to us, Poor Men? And
indeed the convenience of my Garden gave me an opportunity to keep 'm. For it is
situate to the Rising of the Winter-Sun, open and pervious to the Air, and
secured from all Winds. There Is a small Drill passes by it, arising from a
Fountain hard by, with a green Bank on both sides, where the clear water makes
a little murmuring, and the white bright Pebbles shine through it. Here I had some
Flowers growing among the Quicksets, and a Green Brushet, tho but of a Few
Trees, which was the First place where I set my Hive; and from whence I have
often taken many a good Swarm, that did e'ne over-lade the Bough it pitched upon.
No^ was I so much pleased, that I gathered Honey from the Combs, that so I
might maintain my self in my poverty by carrying something into the City to
sell, for the Rich to eat; as that I had something to do in my Old Age, the
better to pass away the wearisomness and Taedium thereof. It was (...) Pleasure
to me, to wreath the tender Twigs to make Hives for the Spring-swarms, and to
close the gaping chinks with sticking Clay, lest the Summer Sun or Winter-cold
might; might pierce the Laden Hive; or to set some Honey for my weak and
wearied Bees; or when the Swarms were up, to make a Tinckling din with Brass,
that they might not fly away; or to appease their Fighting by throwing up of
dust: And then, lest any danger should happen, at least to particular Bees, I
scared away the Birds of Prey, and kept off many small inconsiderable
Creatures; sometimes I searched into the inmost Cells of the Hive, lest the
Spider, that filthy Nuisance, should spin her Treacherous Web in the void places
thereof. Being old, I had a just dismission from Labor, for I had those poor
Creatures, that would labor for me.

But wicked Spite, whither will thou not ^each? Or what is secure from scurvy
base Envy? A Rich Man, forsooth, envies a Poor Man. Once upon a time he called
me out on a sudden, and I ^rembled all over, with all his High-flown Ruff he
^ssaulted me, How now, says he, what, cannot you ^eep in your Bees? Cannot you
make 'm fly within ^our own bounds? Let 'm not light upon my Flow^rs? Let 'm
not gather Ambrosia, out of any thing ^f mine? Sirrah, remove 'm, carry 'm
away, I ^harge thee, to some other place. Thou proud Ty^annical Huff, whither
can I carry 'm? What, am (...) Master of so much Ground, that my Bees cannot ^y
cross? Yet I confess, I was not so stout-spiri^d, but that I was much disturbed
at the threats ^f his haughty Arrogance. I was thinking to leave ^y Fathers
House, and the Walls within which I ^as born, and the very Cottage where I was
nursed; and, being destined to Banishment, I had re^lv'd to remove my poor
Chimney, my smoaky House, and my little Nursery of Plants, that I h^ set with
my own hand^. To deal plainly w^ you, my Lords, I was willing, I (...) vow, I
was ^ling to be gone, but I could find no piece of Gro^d, where some Rich Man or
other would not have been my Neighbor Nor had I any great time allowed me, to
look out! It fortuned, there was a pure Sunshine day, and the pleasant
Gleaming of the Morning-Sun invited forth my stock of Bees, thicker and
cheerfuller than Ordinary to their daily Task. I my self also went forth to
view their Work; (for it was always my chief delight, to behold them) I hoped
to see, how some did equipoyse their Wings in carrying their Burdens; and
others, laying down their Ladings, went abroad to seek new Provant; and tho the
Passage was narrow, and they were in all have, yet the Party, that went out,
did not hinder those that came in; some of them drove away the lazy company of
Drones from their Quarters; others, after a large flight, were weary and lay
panting to fetch breath, and another would display his wings all abroad to the
warm Sun. Ah Poor Man, now pardon me, if I groan a little! It Is more than
Flowers I have lost, and more than fading Leaves, apt to fall with the next
Wind. I have lost my Bees, who, when they flew abroad, were all the Refuge I
had in my mean condition, and the only comfort of my Old Age. I never reckoned
my self Poor, till now. For what could I expect, but to be entertaine^ with the
sad silence of the Poor Bees, in an empt^ Hive; with the Combs, but begun, and
yet ^^wrought? Consider, my Lords, how far this Gri^^ of mine works with you;
but certainly, I would have drunk Poison with all my heart, if I could ^ave
found it. This great loss of mine was oc^asion'd, not by the piercing cold of
the Frosty winter, nor were the Poor Creatures starved by any great Drought,
that parch't up the Flowers; nor did the Covetousness of the Owner, who, when
he gathered the Honey, left no Reserve behind him, destroy them; neither was it
any universal Murrain, that swept them away; nor any dislike of their Old
Hives, that made them seek their Quarters in the silent Woods and pathless
Groves. Poor Creature, I lost my Bees, whilst they were in their very Work. The
wretched Man took special care to prepare so much Poison, as would have
destroyed even a Rich Man's Gardens; he smeared his Flowers with such deadly
juices, that he turned Honey itself into Poison; he spread a Plaguey Recipe over
'm all; and by this means, did he not spoil more, than my Bees could ever have
done? They, poor Creatures, rising betimes, out of the desire of their daily
Task, asloon as ever the day peeped, took their Flight abroad to their
accustomed Haunts, that so they might gather the Matutine Dew, before the Sun
had sucked up the dankness of the Night; and might carry their Aqua Caelestis to
their Chest of Bottles, as sipping, not for themselves, but for their Works
sake. But here now was a sad Spectacle, to be pityed by all, even almost by him
that did the mischief. One of my Bees, at the very first sip of this balesome
juice, being astonished at the strange Taste, flies away; but alas! She could
fly no whither, to save her life. Another, going abroad to seek for better
repast, mounts aloft and there expires. Another dies, alsoon as ever she had
but touched the very tip of the Flower: Here, ones Feet were stiff after Death,
so that she hung, a^ she clung; There, another, being wearied with endeavoring
to fly, and not having strength so to do, yet creeps faintly along the Ground.
But if a slow death suffered any of them to come home to their Hives, they hung
at the Port-hole, as the Fainter Bees use to do; and so being knit together in
Clusters and mutually embracing one another, Death alone parted them. Who can
imagi^ in his Fancy, much less express in Words, what several Forms and various
shapes of Deaths, so many Destructions did represent? To end my sad story in
one word, I must say, I lost them all. That Famous Hive of mine, known further
than its Poor Master, is come to nothing.

Now go ye, and dare to provoke your Rich Neighbor, if ye have a mind to live
any longer. Speak boldly and freely to him, if he offend you, and that which is
the worst of all, if he has already tampered with Poison! But if Fortune had
given me either strength of Wit, or Means enough, this Crime would deserve more
than a Private Suit at Law. The Law forbids any Man, either to have in his
Custody, or to buy, so much a^ to know the Power of Poison; it is an inevitable
Pest, that kills slowly and slily. Innocence seldom abides with that Man, who
has in his Power a secret wicked way of revenge, such as Poison, especially if
it be such, as is strong enough to dispatch a Man instantly, when it is found
out, prepared, and administered. What great matter is it, who drinks it? 'Twas a
Man that gave it, and to a Man he might have given it. Causes o^ mutual hatred
are not so much to seek now a days, that Fewds should be rare and seldom seen;
yea many a Man, tho he seem to hate the Bad only, will venture to go a little
further, and follow on his spightful Humor. Believe it, my Lords, it is a
harder thing to seek out Poison, than to find an Enemy. But being Conscious to
my self of my mean condition, I Will confine my Complaints within my own Bounds.
And indeed, my Lords, my own loss is big enough for me; I, Poor Man, have
received a Blow, which, I fear, I shall lament longer before you, than seek to
prove. For what need is there to spend ones pains in convincing a Man of a
Crime, who confesses it himself? Rich Men affront us, that are poor, amongst
other things, even with this too, that we are not so considerable in their Eye,
that, for our sakes, they should be put to deny any thing. Besides, he, that
justifies one that has confessed, does not so much seek Absolution from his
Fault, as liberty to commit it again. This Controversy reaches further, than I
dreamt of: Our Suit is not only for what is past, but the Question is also,
whether the Rich Man may not kill them too, if ever I get any more Bees. As far
as I can observe, my Lords, he divides his Plea into Two Quaeries, Whether it
be a real damage done? and if it be, Whether injuriously done?

For the first, he denies it to be any damage at all, because he destroyed a
Creature that was wild, winged and roving, under no Man's property or command:
He denies also, that it was injuriously done, because he killed them upon his
own Ground, and because they had done him a great deal of spoil too; and last
of all, that he only sprinkled a little Poison on a few Flowers, and the Bees
can^^ of their own accord, and at their own peril. My Lords, if I had nothing
to reply to all this, yet was such dealing fair betwixt Neighbors? But I Will
examine particulars, and first I Will Answer his Arguments, before I Will produce my
own. The Question is laid so, as if it were no damage to lose th^^, which it is
an Advantage to keep? Grant it be a wild Lawless Creature; I need not say, that
I took the young Swarms with my own hands, and laid 'm up in a safe Hive; it
was an homebred Swarm, and I reserved the Combs to keep up the stock; and,
because you defend the Rights of Tyrannical Great Ones, I tell you, it was bred
in my own Ground: Suppose I had found them in the Trunck of some hollow Tree,
or in the Hole of some Rock, and so had brought 'm home; yet I would have you
to know, that many things, that were at first Free, do yet pass into the
Propriety of the First Occupant, as we see in Hunting, and Finding out, or
Inhabiting, void Places and Countries. For grant, that Providence has made
other Creatures for Man's use, yet that which is provided for all is the reward
of your diligence. For what has not Nature made free at first? I will not
instants in Slaves, whom the Injustice of War has made a Prey to the
Conqueror, tho they were born under the same Laws, the same Fortune, and the
same necessities with other Men. They breath in the same Common Air with
others; it is not Nature, but the Fortune of the War, has set a Master over
them. Why, I pray, do you put bit and bridle in your Horses Mouths, to ride
upon? Why do Men continually wear Oxens Necks bare with an unjust Yoke? Why do
we shear the Sheeps back, to cloth our own? To say nothing of the Butchers
Knife, and of Food prepared for us in a sanguinary way: If all, that came free
into the World, be given back to Nature, then you Rich Men will be no Richer
than others: But if this be the Condition, that whichsoever of these Animals is
fallen to a Man's share, be the property of the present Occupant, then certainly
that which is Lawfully possessed, is Unjustly taken away; I might instance in
tame Birds, and others, which are fatned in Rich Men's Coops in their Country
Farms; wherein their Owners have yet but an ambiguous Right; the same may be
said of Cows, Herds and all kind of Cattle. But you will say, They have One set
over them to keep 'm. I reply, has the Owner less right to those, that have no
need of your Keeper? For if you say further, that nothing can be Ours, that may
be taken away or destroyed, then we can Commence no suit for the loss of any
Animal whatever. For even our Sheep use to stray; and our Slaves, to run away
from us. If this be allowed in other Creatures, why may not Bees rove about,
and go abroad to their Work, not refusing a constant expedition every day to
increase our Profit by their Labor. Do they not all come home, of their own
accord, at Night? Do they not end their Work, when the Sun sets? Does not the
whole Company of 'm retire to their wonted Cells, and there pass the Night in
civil silence? But suppose, they have no certain Owner, while they are abroad:
yet, I hope, they may be called Ours, when they come home, when they may be
shut up, and removed from place to place, when they may be presented to a
Friend, or sold to (...) Customer. Then, How can that be destroyed without
damage to me, that is mine, one part or oth^^ of every day? But you will say
further, A Be is under no Command. Is that any great Wonder, (...) beseech
you, if, being denied human converse, the^ are in the same Predicament with
other Animals (...) Yet I can say this for them, they dwell in the Hive, that
their Master allots 'm; and when a toy take 'm in the head to fly away, we
fetch 'm back by Tinckling. Yea, and if a sedition be started amon^ them, upon
the account of several Kings, and they are presently all in a heat and must
fight it out* yet with throwing up a little dust among 'm, o^ with the death of
one of their Leaders, all the hurly-burly is quashed. As for their sedulity an^
diligence, that is very admirable, they work from Morning to Night, and the
Honey, that is taken away for their Masters use, they make up again* Now, I
pray, if they were Intelligent Creatures, whom could you lay any further
Command upon? These are but slight Replies, and I find, I have answered them
already, more than I need. If the Bees be not mine, then their Product is not
mine, neither; but I never yet knew any Man so impudent, as to call in Question
the Propriety of Honey. Can this possibly be, that the Effect should be mine,
and the Efficient, another Man's? What if a Man steal away my Hives, may I not
have a just Action against him? What, shall I only sue him for a Twig or too,
and a little watled stuff; and must I lay my Action, as if my Hives were empty?
By your good leave, I hope, I may value my Bees too. Well then, if a Man cannot
lawfully steal 'm, may he yet lawfully kill 'm? Call ^ou that no damage to me,
by which I am un^one? By which, I lose all my Income? And by which, I am
deprived of my yearly Revenue, that ^eliev'd me in my poor Condition? Is it not
a ^amage to lose that, which (to touch upon my ^ext Argument) I cannot have
again, unless I buy? and, pray, what need had you of Poisonous ^rinkling? If
you had a mind to it, might you ^ot have destroyed 'm openly, might you not
have ^urnt their Hives in the Fire, or drowned 'm in ^he Water? Is there any
Creature, but may be ^estroyed without Poison?

But, says he, suppose it were a damage, yet I ^id it Lawfully, upon my own
Ground. I beseech ^ou, My Lords, help at this dead lift. One Poor Country
Client is not able to manage this Plea; here needs a public Authority, and
many Hands ^o lift up against this growing Abuse? Believe it, ^he Case is of
greater moment, than my Poor Suit. You are to determine this day, in what place
or whereabouts a Man may do nothing illegal. For why may he not allege the
same, in case of Homicide? Or, of Robbery on the Highway? The Right is the
same in Law, tho the Modality makes (...) difference: A Broad-way would be
opened to kil^^ng and slaying; and Wickedness, that has hither^o been long
pent up as it were by the Bars of ^he Law, would break out in a Thorough-fare,
if ^he Law shall not take hold of a Man, when he ^s on his own ground: If in an
open and mani^est Trespass, we don't enquire of the Fact so much ^s of the
Place, the Land is not equally divided ^etwixt us and the Lawless: For the
Propriety of a Rich Man now adays, where is it not? 'T^^ a small matter for
them to lay flat their Neig^bours Bounds, and to distinguish their Possessions,
a^ if they were so many Countries, by the Boundar^^^ of Mountains and Rivers:
For they have alrea^^ took into their hands pathless Groves, immen^^ and
lonesome Forests; many Rivers run through a fe^^ Men's Thickets; the Lords of
Manors thrust o^^ the Commonalty from their Borders; nor is the^^ any End of
one Rich Man's Progress, till he lig^^ upon another, to stop him. Before time,
the robbing of Passengers and the stealing of Ca^^^ he defended under this
Plea, now we plead the same Title for Poison. Once and again, my Lord I beseech
you, consider, and ponder it well; (...) seems, a Man may do nothing against
Law an^ where at all; or, he may do every thing against (...) within his own
bounds.

But such a Man may take a just course wi^^ him, that does him wrong, says he.
Let me t^^^ you, how unequal the compensation of the loss wa^ and how contrary
not only to Law but to the Pu^lick Peace. That Is the trick of barbarous Peop^^
whose nature differs little from the Brute, and wh^ are made wild and estranged
from all civil Rig^^ and Society. But we, Men, have therefore r^ceived
Magistracy and Law from our Ancestor^ that no Man might avenge his own
Grievanc^^ And the ordinary Pleas for Wickedness will c^^fute themselves, if
righting my self alters the Crime. Have you received any damage? The Law was
open, the Court and the Judge sits; u^less perhaps you think it below you, to
vindic^^^ yourself by Law. Now, I protest, we are (...) sent out to Club-law,
and here is a dangerous E^^lation of Wrong-doing started, wherein Wrath ^^kes
place instead of Law. The Weakest then ^ust needs go to the Wall, and the
Commonalty ^ust endure a hard bondage under a new Oligar^^y Yet we, Poor Men, I
hope, may have Liberty (...) grieve, and tho we may be damaged with more ^^e,
yet to injure you, extends further. Lastly, ^^o you, rich Man, please your self
never so much ^^th the confidence of your Wealth, if it be fitting (...) me but
to Live, then our Case is alike. What ^^en. If my Bees had done you any wrong,
my ^^ght and Title to defend my self, would not be ^eated thereby, tho perhaps
you might have a ^eater right to implead me. And now, what is ^ur grievance,
say ye? Surely I have laid wast ^ur Grounds, and spoiled your Rental: For, I
^^pe, it is no Flea-bit, as they say, that makes so ^^b a Man as you, to cry
out. Nay but, they ^^'d my Flowers, says he. I hope, you may ^^derstand by
this, my Lords, how great a grie^^^ce my loss is, if to lose a few Flowers can
be ^^nted such a damage: It may be a little prejudice, ^^nfess, for otherwise
you would have laid 'm (...) and kept 'm dry for all the year, and they ^^u'd
have lasted still, if my Bees had not come ^o your Garden. Pray, what is more
fading and ^^ter-liv'd than a Flower? For while it is hide^^nd, as I may call
it, in the Bud, you cannot yet (...), it is a Flower: Then, when it begins to
bur^^ and swell with a brisker sap, and to show its ^^tish Divisions, it is no
Flower still. But when (...) Pods are broken, and the Heads blow and spread
^^^mselves round, as it were in circular Clefts, so that now their maturity is
conspicuous, yet no Man knows, how soon they will fade; even without (...) blast
of Wind their Grace decays; nor can an^ thing be called a Flower, bur whilst it
is New an^ Fresh: Wherefore if I should say, they took away what would shortly
have perished and lai^ flat on the Ground, and converted it to the u^^ of the
Man, that owned them; yet it is a spite never heard of before, to grudge a few
Bees lighti^^ upon them. Give me leave here to discourse (...) little, what
great damage this Poor Pilfering Cre^ture can do you? We don't consider, with
wha^ swiftness, for the most part, she flies hither an^ thither, scarce so much
as touching the Flower; she runs over 'm all, and finds presently what is
prop^^^ for her. And where she pitches, we don't con^^der, how she hangs, as it
were by Geometry, b^ her Wings, and does but sip and away. Whoeve^ found the
miss of what a Poor Be carried away But how little or nothing is it, that they
borr^^ from Garden-flowers, set by hand? It Is the Me^dows, the Woods, the ripe
well-laden Vines, an^ the Hillocks fragrant with Thyme, (as far as (...) Man
may conjecture) that afford them their L^ding. Neither do they gather what is
fitting f^^ their work, out of all Flowers, tho they seek f^^ it indeed in
every one. Nay they make this r^quital presently and out of hand, that on all
the Flowers where they light, they leave the Flav^^ of Honey behind them, so
that every Flo^^^ smells of the Be. Now do you call this a d^mage? Do you
avenge this with Poison? Let (...) tell you, it would have been an uncivil
thing, (...) you should have kept them off, but with a smoth^^ For was not I the
only respectful Neighbor, you had? Did not I send you the First Fruits of my
Honey duly every Spring? If I lighted upon a Fresh Comb, whiter than Ordinary,
was it not kept as a Present for your Table? And was not ^his Complement always
added to my Poor Gift, Sir, my Bees present their humble Service to you? And
now, I think, you have requited me to pur^ose for my labor.

But, says he, I told you of it, and charged you to remove them; so that I was
stubborn, and therefore deservedly suffer, in your opinion. Yet (...) do not
see what that charging of yours can con^ribute to your defense; it was more
than needs, ^f you might lawfully do what I am agrieved at, without it; and it
was unjust, if you might not ^awfully do it; if it were just, right or wrong,
yet ^et it not hold. What cover is this for your shame, ^o be ill-reported off,
that you defend your wrongdoing by your Greatness. What! shall you have ^o many
Cattle, that your Stall, tho never so ^arge, shall not be able to hold them?
Shall the whole Forest Echo again with the bellowing of ^our Herds? Shall you
Plow your Land with whole droves of Oxen? Shall such a numerous Company of
Laborers go forth to dress your Grounds, that your own Bailiffs can hardly
distinguish them? Must the Provision of all the Country de^end on your Barns?
And yet we must envy ^one of all this, nor must any body think that ^he
Greatness of your Estate is burthensom to him: and shall we, Poor Men, be
grudged at, if we have ^ut a few Bees, standing in a small narrow Or^hard; yea
tho they make Honey for the Rich, as well as us; must this, I say, be taken
amiss? An^ that which was never heard of before, must (...) Neighbor Poor Man
be an Eyesore to a Rich? S^ little are you contented to have Great Fortunes,
yourselves, that even your Slaves have something th^^ they are Masters of, yet
we must be grudged at, (...) we have any thing, tho never so little, that do^^^
but exceed the very Name of Poverty? What, d^^ we live under such strange Laws,
in this (as (...) hoped) most equal Government, that it is Lawf^^ for you to
deal in Poison, and it is not Lawful (...) us to have a Remedy?

Last of all, my Lords, I did not think to answ^^ the Rich Man's defense, but
that I could not ^^dure, your Authority should be vilifi'd by such Contumelious
Plea. Your Bees, says he, came (...) their Death of their own accord: It Is so
indeed (...) otherwise, Iron.
you had given Poison to your o^^ Flowers, and to nothing else. My Lords, shall
(...) ascribe it to his Impudence only, Good Man, if (...) carry this point
against me before the Bench; (...) to his Sottishness, if he hoped so to do? If
he h^^^ offered Poison to a Man, he might as well have p^^tended, that the Man
himself had put the Cup^^^ his own Lip. If he had set a Ruffian in A^^^^ to
assassinate a Man, he might say, he came ^^luntarily into the snare. If he had
thrown (...) Weapon in the dark, he might allege 'twas no^^ of his Fault. What
shall I say, my Lords, in e^^ry Crime there are Two Main things, which (...) to
be considered, the Intention of the Party, a^^ the Issue. What was the Rich
Man's Intention, wh^^ he laid the Poison? Even, that he might des^^^ my Bees.
And; what was the Issue? They w^^^ destroyed accordingly. The sum is, my
Lords, ^ho can doubt but that my loss is to be imputed to ^im, without whom it
had not happened? So that, (...) suppose, your Wisedoms need no more Pleas in
^his Cause; nor does your Justice and Piety ex^ect any Exhortation to give a
True Judgment. Why then do I not break off? I Will tell you, my ^rief hinders me,
and the dear miss of my wont^d delight. There are some things in this Case,
that no verdict can make me satisfaction for. Per^aps, my affection may exceed
the Motive. Alas, (...) we, Poor Men, must love nothing but Poor Crea^^res, and
those must needs be precious to us, when ^e have nothing else; then certainly,
so many Pretty ^ives, that had so far obliged me, which were ^ut off in one
moment, must needs affect me. Yea ^he very manner of their Death raises my
Indig^ation? They were destroyed by Poison. What re^ection in this Case, can be
invidious enough? What! Sweet pretty Bees destroyed by Poison! Is ^his the
requital we make them, for their watch^ul Industry to do us good? And for that,
they ^eave not their daily Station and diligent Labor; ^o not when we rob them
of what they have got. and indeed, Nature seems to have made other ^reatures
for our use, but these are made for our ^elicacy too: Those Creatures, that are
used for ^he Plough or for Riding, we spend much pains about 'm, before they
bring us in any Profit; for ^ho they are to be broken and to be kept by us, ^et
at last they can do nothing, without us; and what they do, they do by Force.
But Bees work their Combs without our bidding: Their whole ^rofit comes freely
in, without any aid or assistance of human Art. Add to this, that other Animals
do either spoil our Corn, or prejudice our Vines; whence, they say, the first
Cause Beasts were Sacrificed, was, because they marred the Fruits of the Earth.
But as for Bees, their Labor, all over our Fields and Meadows, is so innocent
and harmless, that nothing appears, but their work don. How can I sufficiently
praise them, answerable to their Merit? Shall I say, it is a Creature that is as
'twere a little Picture of Man? Alas, all our w^^ could never have found out
this: Yea, all our Projecting, that seeks for O^r in the Mines, and traverses
the Sea, as far as the Constellations reach, could not effect or obtain this,
nor do any thing like it. We, Men, are better at finding Poison.

First, their Original is suitable to their future laudable Life; they are not
begotten by lust, nor by that inward Itch that subdues all other Creatures. And
as Men, to excuse themselves, have delivered in their Fables, so the Offspring
and lineage of the Gods have admitted these also under their Dominion. Sensual
Pleasure, an Enemy of virtue, they know not what it means, their Bodies being
chaste and without any blemish. For they, and none but they of all Creatures, do
not bring forth their Young, but create them. They, as they lie close in the
Cavities of their Combs, do by degrees quicken; and as it becomes a Laborious
Creature, they spring from their own Workmanship. Then as soon as the Young Fry
grow^ up, and is old and strong enough to undergo the like pains, they leave
the place free to their Old ones. And, lest the Company, huddled together,
should be encombred by this new accession, out of pure modesty as it were, the
Younger Tribe gives way; and dangling upon some Neighboring bough, lies ready,
waiting for Man's hand to hive 'm. And when they are hived, there they abide
very honestly. And when, our wits, forsooth, (tho, as ambitious over-we^ners of
our selves, we think 'm next to divine) must sweat and toil to attain Arts and
Sciences; yet every Be is born, A Master of Art. What can you think else, but
that ^art of a divine understanding is in their minds? What shall I mention
first? They do not, as other Creatures, wander up and down for Food, and know
not where they shall Couch and lie, but ^ake their Quarters hap hazard, as
Night comes on; No, Bees have a sure and certain Lodging. They imitate Cities
by their Hives, and People by their Company. They do not as the wilder Birds,
who mind only their present Food, and daily do gather what they eat: Nay, these
lay up victuals ^o last all Winter, and at Spring they fill their Combs
top-full, that they may be sure to have e^ough all the year round. Yea, when
part of their ^ork is taken away for our use, they strive to ^epair what was
lost, their labor is more eagerly ^nflamed by their loss, and they never give
over ^s long as they have any room for more. Besides, ^ho they are Creatures,
not united together by ^ommerce of words, nor firmly linked by bonds of ^olity,
yet how mighty a consent is there in their ^ork? And how wonderful an Agreement
in la^ouring about so hard a thing? None of them does ^atch what he can to make
a gain to himself, ac^ording to the vicious custom of us, Men; but ^hey live on
a Common stock, all their store is hoarded up in a public Treasury, and not a
B^^ must so much as sip or taste, before their stor^ house be so full, that it
promises 'm all security so the Future. Besides, how great is their zeal a^
their work? How wonderful their assignation o^ Offices? Are not some appointed
to gather their Loads, others to receive it, others to work it (...) How strict
and severe are they in chastising their Drones? There are many things in 'm
wonderf^^ to see and hear of. They have foresight of a stor^ they will not
trust themselves abroad in uncert^^^ weather; and if it be a Cloudy Sky, they
vent^^^ not beyond the next hedge. Now if a se^r^^ Blast hurry away the poor
light Creatures, the poize their wings with a small Peble, that th^^ may be
carried steady to their designed place. (...) for the stouter and lustier Bees,
they march out (...) Troops for their King, they charge the Enemy, a^^ dye an
Honorable Death in the Field for the Leader: Moreover, if any of 'm dye of Age
(...) Malady, the first thing they do, is, to carry (...) the Body, and, till
the Funeral Rights be perfor^ they will not stir to their work. How shall
understand this, when they bind Flowers to the little Hips? And when they bear
in their (...) Essences for their common Maintenance? But I m^^ of all admire
the work it self. You must (...) think, that they shape their Cells, for the
F^^ they are immediately to lay up, blindfold as it w^^ and at hap hazard; no,
first they make pl^^ wax, then they add an unspeakable Grace there^^to. For
first, they hang the Groundwork by f^^^ Ligaments; then from the beginning
they carry (...) the work equally on every side; nor is any thi^^ that is but
begun; defective, but every thing as ^ompleat in its kind, as could be desired;
They set a double Frontire upon their Combs: And when ^hey have lest so much
room in each Cavity, which ^hey hope will be large enough to beget new ^warms,
(for the Angles are so coherent, and so mutually united one to the other, that
you may ^all the middle, which you please) then, lest ^he weighty Honey should
all run out, the burden ^hereof is intercepted and shut up in these Cells. Who
is not amazed, that such things as these should be don without a hand? That
such Art should be shown without any Teaching? What have they, that is not
divine, but that they are Mortal? Do we Worship Bacchus as the Author of Wine?
Is Ceres accounted the Goddess of Corn? ^s Minerva thought the Juventress of
the Olive? And is it a jot less, to make Honey; and by adding over and above
the pleasure of Taste, to do that, which even Nature, of herself, could never
^ave don? Honey is good, when many Diseases do ^ssault us, yea it is a present
Remedy against them: As for its usefulness in diet, let the Rich look to that.
And could any Man find in his Heart to way-lay such Creatures, yea to way-lay
'm on ^urpose, because they made Honey? Could he destroy such pretty things by
a fraudulent studied Death, with his damned Poisonous Liquors? And ^o make it
much more intolerable, that he might more easily deceive 'm, did he not perhaps
mix Honey with his Poison? What cruelty could be more unnatural? What spite
more monstrous? For now, you, Rich Grub, cannot make use of your old Plea, you
cannot pretend Grief for the loss of few Flowers; for when you resolved to
destroy my Bees, you spoiled your own Flowers into the bargain.

Odii Potio, OR, An Hate-procuring Potion.
DECLAMATION XIV.
The Argument.
^here was a Courtezan that gave an Hate-Potion to one of her Servants, that
was but a Poor Man; so that the Youth was in Love with her no longer. Whereupon
he Accuses her of downright Witchcraft.

For the Young Man against his Miss.
I Am sensible, my Lords, of this new Additional to my misery, that in your
opinion, (...) may not seem to hate this Courtezan, not yet: Nor am I ignorant,
that much of the Envy of this wicked Potion is taken off, while you think me
pityable, only upon the account of my former Fits of Love. Yet, I beseech you,
let your Wisedoms take a survey of the whole Proof of the Mischief complained
of, even from this, that you do not believe any such Grief, as I protend, and
therefore hearken not to my Complaint: For neither do I Love her, if I can
endure to accuse her; nor do I hate her, whom I had rather Love. What else can
it be that I drank, but Poison? Tho therefore this most wicked Woman derides
me, when I accuse her, and, after the Confession her most apparent Wickedness,
hopes to escape by making sport at my Calamity: Yet, it is not this does so much
vex and torment me at this time, that I have abandoned the Love of this Naughty
Woman; as that I abide the Pain of my Remedy. I implore your Justice, even your
strict Justice, that it may not advantage this Harlos, that I seem rid and
delivered from her, by her prevaricating pretenses. Perhaps it might have been
my Concern, that, I should break off so foolish a Love; but this, I am sure,
was a device against me, that I should hate her, whether I would or no: This
then is the first thing, my Lords, that I request of the Clemency of the Court,
that, because you see me so sadly habited, my Looks ruful, my Words rugged, and
that I am so Fierce in my Suit; you would not therefore think, my Nature is
suitable. This is the Fruit of that goodly Cure, forsooth, she has wrought upon
me: Thus you see, what has alien'd my mind and disturbed my Body Night and
Day; I, that was lately so brisk, and (if you believe it) so cool a Lover, am
now all in a Chafe. Pity me so far, my Lords, that this Hag of a Woman may not
so impose upon you, as if she had devised this Trick for love of me; whereas
she satisfied her own mind therein, and complied only with her own coy disdain.
For no Body would give an Hate-Potion against himself, to one that he did not
hate before. I pray and beseech you therefore, most upright Men, that you would
take a full estimate of my Calamity. I have unhappily lost, in an instant, that
good Name, that in time I might have ceased to Love, of my self: I am now made
to abandon that perforce, which shortly I might have done voluntarily. There Is
a new device against my mind and sober reason, that it seems not imputeable to
my affection, that she was left. I am now a second time caught in the Harlots
lock, she again makes my thoughts to turn, and me to cast a Sheeps-Eye toward
her: And a Man, who would have desisted from so inconvenient an Amor, either
by the Glut thereof, or by his Age, or by the Meaness of his Fortune, she has
bound up to a perpetual restlessness, by bending the Twig (...) much to the
contrary side. No Disease so incur^ble as this, to hate perforce.

But, O my Heart, hasten, hasten, I say, to the wailing of my Grief, that sits
so hard upon me but this late indignity has taken thee off from the sense of
thy former Miseries. My Groans an^ my Complaints are to be fetched deeper. When
(...) was my Mistresses fault, that I now hate, where was in Love before; Who,
think you, inveigh me to fall in Love with her first, being so p^^ a Man, as I
am? For my part, my Lords, I w^^^ never one of those, to whom Fortune gave a
gr^^^ Estate, and abundance of Wealth; so that, by reason of their Opulency,
they might take their (...) of wanton Love. Yet I had enough to keep Li^^ and
Soul together; I had a Modicum, enough (...) have afforded me Lawful Pleasure
in my mean Condition: And therefore I was always content wi^^ One and the Same
Miss, which is a certain sig^^ of good Husbandry, even in a Man's Pleasure. B^^
this serious and demure Dame, Iron.
forsooth, who mu^^ will have no more of my Love, Oh, how much of it did she
call for, when time was! With what Art, with what Craft did she first set upon
my simplicity, and when she had caught me, she held me fast, till I, like a
credulous Cully, tho it were long first, threw all my little Fortune into he^
Lap? And now, it is to no purpose, that she desires to seem to pity that
Condition, which she hersel^ has brought me to: Hear, I pray, in a few words,
the Wickedness of this Pernicious Woman? She makes me poor, and then she cannot
abide me. Whether or no, my Lords, she liked to try an Experiment, which common
Strumpets craftily devise (...) Debauch and Tyrannize over the minds of Men,
(...) she would try on me, how much one can Love, and how far he can Hate? Or,
being a Woman ^ostitute to all Customers, she aimed at vainglory (...)
despising and disdaining of me; and thus sought (...) get a Name of being such
a Mistress, as was ^urted only by Men of Fashion. That which I ^nderwent before,
was not any Natural affection (...) ours, that I waited at Ladies doors, that
(if ^ou believe her) I made over my poor Estate to (...) spent at the Becks of
Harlots; my paleness, and ^^eform'd meagerness are owing to the same Potion,
which at present makes me chafe, fret and rage. ^o Miss understands no other
device but this, to ^ake one not to be in Love with her. This then, (...)
Lords, is the Truth and cannot be denied, she ^ixt me a Poison stronger than
Nature and be^aving me of all my wits, which by its intempe^^te heat, and
grievous working, was able to allay (...) pain tho my mind was bent against it;
she ^^per'd it with Conjurations, and horrible Charms, (...) gave it me with a
gentle look, and a soothing ^omplement, when my Stomach was scorched and ^^am'd
before; so she drove me to Fury, she be^^^ me with Cruel pain, and made a great
change (...) me for the worse, whom she had more need have treated with
Cordials and relieving Reme^^^s. Judge you, my Lords, whether she has ^ade me
give over my Love, I am sure, she ^^s brought me to that pass, that I had
rather ^^ve her, as before. Do you think, I am got ^ar off, and am come away
the Merrier after ^is Jobb? Alas, Alas! I have need now, if ever, to be Cured.
It Is some comfort to a Man in distress, as long as he is in Love: Lighter is
that Calamity, where some kind of Delight smiles upon a Man in his Pleasure.
But now I, unhappy Wretch, (...) am tormented and torn in pieces, now I cannot
hold nor govern my self; It Is a Crueller thing to b^ made to hate a Miss, than
it was to Love her.

I accuse her of plain Poison. Setting aside, my Lords, at present, what I have
to say concerning her Poisonous Dose, does she not seem to mak^ good the
Charge, that in the very State I am in, (...) cannot be believed? My Lords, the
Life of a Co^tezan is nothing but Witchcraft. She does no^ think, that Lying
and Glozing is enough; and when she imploys all her care to besot us, yet (...)
does not think it obligation enough to afford the use of her Body. Nay, all her
study day an^ night is about this, how she may make lustf^^ satisfactions to
pass into constant affection; and (...) what means Fleeting and Vagrant desires
may b^ fixed to One; she labors, that the wicked (...) may not be beneficial
to her Paramour, in ord^^ to a possible Repentance; and that Shame an^ Modesty
may not keep him off, nor the very Gl^^ of Pleasure make him take his leave.
Pray to me, do you think, that any of them are ign^rant, by what Glances they
are smi^^^n, and wh^^ things do first Debauch, and then undo, Me^^ minds,
inflamed with unfitting desires; seeing the she knows, by what artifices the
closest Kiss, a^^ the strictest Embraces may be broken off; a^^ what, in a
moment, can turn Pleasure to Pain, a^^ former Joy and Delight into Melancholy.
It Is (...) finite to tell, how by this Potion we may con^^ the knowledge of
those that are worse. No Man ^ows so great a Remedy.

This Impudent Woman, my Lords, seeks to alle^^ate her Offense, by disguising
her Drench under ^^e Name of a Potion, forsooth; and she denies it ^as Poison,
because it did not Kill. Is it well, ^y Lords, that the Guilty should escape,
because ^^eir Act misses some of the Effects, which possi^^^ it might have
produced? What Is the difference, (...) pray, between prejudicing ones Mind, or
ones ^^dy. It Is the same Villainy to administer any ^^^tion whatever, if it be
against Law. It Is Poy^^^, whatever, is given in that Case. This your ^^ccuse
hitherto is from your Sex and Estate; but ^^at you may be acquainted with such
things (...) your own Interest, and may beget a desire ^hether Men will or no,
you have devised, how ^^u may break off Conjugal Love in the heart of Married
Person, and perhaps too, how the ^^^rts of Young single Persons may be alien'd
^^om the Love of other Ladies. Never any Bawd ^^d an Hate-Potion by her, only
that she might feat herself, thereby. If any Body ask me, my ^^rds, if he
compare the Witchcraft that I com^^in of, I Will say, he ought to have hated
that ^^^tion less, that might have Killed him. For as ^^ongst the deadliest
Poisons, those are the kind^^^, that fly out all of a sudden, and don't keep
(...) Man long in pain, lingering betwixt Life and ^^ath: So that Poison is more
Cruel, that is so or^^red, as to spare the Body and affect only the ^^ind. How
say you? Is there no harm in Poy^^^, but in that which Kills outright? Pray,
then, that shall we call that, which bereaves us of our Eyes only? Or that,
which makes one portion Limb of the Body to pine away? Do thou ^^ny thy self
to be a Witch, that by One Potion ca^^ do as much harm, as Wrath and Grief can
do (...) shall Love, forsooth, that you give leave to, (...) at your bidding,
he shall abominably hate. (...) desires must take their Rise, Ends and Mu^^
from you. Let Love and Hatred be never much Natural Affections, yet it is wicked
W^^ craft, when they are under Command. Besi^^ that which is given to a Man
against his (...) can it have any other than the Force of an In^^ment? I see
some reason, why Physic allow^ expel the Diseases of the Body and Limbs by
(...) or such an Infusion: And whatever may hap^^ from without, may be cured by
a Potion, (...) out intrenching on the Soul and Sprit. But (...) Affection can
be driven out of its Seat in Soul by any Poison, but by the disturbance of our
Vitals? And seeing our Soul confirm such Faculties, if you attempt to deprive
us any one of them, that part of the Body, wh^^ is first stopped from its
exercise, and the Fa^^^ destroyed that was aimed at, the rest also (...)
destroyed by so near a Contagion. Some Medi^^ perhaps may be called by another
Name, the that of Poison: But to administer any thing (...) is forbid by Law,
can be no less than Wit^^ Poisoning. What Monstrous ways have thou (...) out to
Plague Man by? It had been less Wi^^edness, to make a Man Love, perforce. (...)
have devised such a Drench, as is able to set Mankind together by the Ears,
hateful, and ^^ting one another. You can tell, how to ma^^ Parents hate their
Children, and how nearness of Kindred, Brotherhood and Friendship, may dash
themselves one against another. No Body takes an Hate-procuring Potion, unless
against a Man, whom he ought not to hate.

Here this wicked Woman endeavors to show, that she has done me a Courtesy by
her Villa^y. You were in Love with one, says she, that was a filthy Whore. Let
me forbear, my Lords, a while my Apology for this Passion of mine. Good God!
What an Abuse is offered to a Whore, Iron.
when she Complains of a Man's extraordinary Affection to her? Will you, Hussy,
take upon you, with the Gravity of a Censor, to examine the measure of ones Love
to you? Will you allow yourself to reckon, how often a Man may go to the Stews?
Will you, that cannot exclude the lame, nor the dirty Fellow, that art exposed
to the Drunkard, prostitute to the Wanton, and, which ^s the extremest
baseness, a Common Hackney to Peasants every Night, will you, I say, take up^on
you to rectify the Manners of a Young Man? You should take it better, that a
Miss should be made much of. You were my Customer, says ^he, but a shabby one.
I desire, my Lords, to ^lead a little upon this Head, as if my own Friends and
Kindred took upon them to re^rove me. I don't watch my opportunity to ^efile
the Marriage Bed; nor do I practice any ^nnatural Lust, or Embraces forbidden
by Law: I ^elieve, Whores were invented at first, that poor Men might affect
such Pusses, as They. Such kind of Cattle cannot be Loved with any ardency of
Affection; Those Affections are most ardent, which are drawn forth toward the
things, that are forbidden by Law. Love never passes into a kind of Fury, till
it meet with difficulties in the way. Our Affection is short-lived in lawful
Pleasures, and soon approaches to nauseousness. It does not increase nor
cherish the Flame of Concupiscence, where it is lawful to enjoy. And whatever we
find in our Fancy about permitted objects, it comes not from our Passion, but
our Reason. This very thing I object to you, Good Woman, that you have made me
a Town-talk, as well as yourself. No body so fit to love a Whore, as he that a
Whore cannot abide: She gave a Counter-Philt^^ to a Poor Man; what de' think she
gave to the Rich, then? If a Good Estate should drop down from Heaven into my
Lap, I question not in the least, but she would call me back to her Affection,
with another Drench; and this (now) demure and moral Whore would be heartily
glad to keep me, with all her former surfeit. A Whore cannot Love a poor
Customer, if it be but for her own sake.

But, I gave it, says she, to him, while he was in Love. If that be a Cure, she
should have let me have known on it. It Is the first step to a Man's Health to take
Physic willingly, and by his own consent. Why did she not rather give it me,
before I loved? How much better, with more forecast, and more to the Patients
case, had it been to have tampered with a Young Man's Affection, whilst it was
yet but bending toward, and so to quench the Flame in the first Sparks? But
you, forsooth, must give me a Potion at that time when it would put me into Two
Fits at once You put me to another Extremity; and I entertain Hate, because I
am not able to abide Love. I have not don, but I begin another way: My Love is not
corrected, but translated elsewhere. Those are true Remedies, which, when they
have Cured our Diseases and Rooted out their Causes, we hear no more of 'm; and
we reckon only those Drugs harmless, which, having spent their specific Virtue
in doing us good, have no more to say. But you gave me a What-shall-I-call 'm,
that puts me (as we say) besides my seven senses perpetually. He Will never have
don, that Hates without a just Cause. Tho I may think of Marrying, yet I shall
Hate Thee: Tho my Country send me on a Foreign Employ, yet my words and my
thoughts will still have a fling at thee. What signifies it, after what way
thou affectest my mind? Or, in what manner I am disabled to quit and leave
Thee? You have made me your Enemy, wherever you are; so that I am like enough,
to offer violence to you, wherever I meet you; and perhaps I may be willing,
you should Drink a Drench of my Brewing. He that cannot leave off to hate a
Courtezan, is her Servant still.

But, unhappy Woman, you take pity of me, you say. What? with so harsh a ^^re?
You should rather have dealt with me by reason, we should have said our Heads
together, to have spoken out the Truth softly and gently. Then there would have
been no need to shut the door upon me, or to drive me out by Force. For Force
does always axasperate, and when we find opposition in Love, we are the more
Inflamed. In the mean time, you may urge me, with the Liberty that I shall
enjoy, with time spent, with the glut I have received, and perhaps another
Customer may twit you with my Condition. But when I have been so kind to you in
secret, and so full of Love-Caresses, you should not mention to 'm my Poverty,
as if you felt it, but only in a way of Pity: Tho, the Truth is, what need was
there of Secrecy in the Case? You should have suffered me to be Cured, that I
may give over, if, as you say, you pity and love one that is under a Force. No
Cure for a Lover, but to be Loved again. Yet, if you think my Cure is so
necessary, how many Remedies are there for Foolish Love, on this side Poison?
You might have sent me packing, you might have shut me out of doors; you might
have done that by your disdaining of me, that my Poverty could never make me
do. Make me rather to amend myself, to give over for Shame, and to despair at
last: He only is Cured of the Disease of Love, that desists therefrom, upon his
own Motives. Seeing then I might deservedly have taken it amiss, if any Body
should but have excluded me from your Love, have I not far greater reason to
complain, when I am made, not the Man I was, even an unhappy Fellow, under a
contrary Passion. The Names and Appellations of things do deceive and abuse us;
and he, who hates is pityable, because he cannot Love. All excess is alike
grievous to the Mind; and there is no difference, no not between Health and
Sickness itself, if both be alike intolerable. It Is in vain for a Man to sooth
me up with a Medicine, which puts me to pain and torment. To give over Love,
and to be Plagued with Hate, are Two different things. Do you think, that I
have now only parted from the Love of a Slut? No, I have lost the best
Affection, that belongs to Man; Wretch that I am, that Affection is taken from
me, whence all the Joy and Cheerfulness of my Life arises. That LOVE, by which
the Sacred Principles of Nature, and the Elements of the whole Universe come
together; that LOVE, which now fixes and keeps fast all their discords, and
amidst their Quarrels and Antipathies unites them into one Bulk by a perpetual
League; that LOVE, I say, is cashiered and driven out of my Breast. So that
now, unhappy Man that I am, I have not Passion enough to think of Marrying, to
Love a Child, to desire any Man's Friendship, or to expect any mutual Converse.
Whoever he be, that has drank an Hateful Potion, may perhaps hate One, but can
Love no Body. O Heavens! What is this that I have drunk? What strange Poison
have I gulp'd down? It could not be One single Poison, sure: No, Poor Man, I
drank down, whatever execrable Recipes the Spleen of all Mortals could
prescribe; the wildness of all Beasts, and the rage of all Stinging Serpents,
lay at the bottom of the Cup. This Hate-drench, what is it else, but the daily
Plague of the mind, a sadness perpetual, that ^urns a Man over from all his
Joys to the very Purlews of Grief? For it is utterly impossible, that ^o damned
a Poison should once be let down into ^ur Stomachs, and then operate only upon
one ^aculty; as if such a Potion could be stinted and ^^unded, how far to work.
See, Good Woman, I ^m now in perfect Hatred already, what further mischief, do you
think, your Potion will do, in my ^owels? By little and little it must needs
diffuse itself my whole Soul over, and tho the First Dose overthrew only that
Affection to which it tended, yet in a short time it will master all my other
Passions, and blend them into that One of Hatred. A Draught, that can show so
much Power at first in my Mind, as to alter my Passion, and to make me hate;
the Issue of all, I Will warrant you, will be plain Poison.

My Lords, I would fain answer those that say, my Condition was miserable
before, upon the account of my Love: But in what grievouser pickle am I, and
how more cruelly tormented, now I am Freed, as they tell me? I was more
temperate, when I was in Love and more composed; perhaps there might be
paleness in my Face, but it was innocent and harmless, 'twas a Melancholy to be
^veted. Men were pleased to entertain discourse with me, and I was thought
worthy enough to be hear^ speak; but now all Men fly from me, abomina^e and
hate me. Time was, when I abstained from going to the Stews, for very Shame; if
I met occasionally with a Friend, that would turn me aside now all the Town
gazes at me: I rave, I stop (...) a sudden, I give foul Language to every Body.
(...) more than miserable Condition! I am scoffed, de^^ded and p^in^ed at,
wherever I go, Not a Man in the Town but knows, I drank the Hate-Potu^^ Thus,
Poor Man, I endure the insultings of the Brothelry, the taunts and reproaches
of my Corr^vals; nor can they sufficiently express, how great my Torments are.
I hate the Person, yet I never seemed to be more deeply in Love. I suppose,
(...) Lords, you observe, that I am a Man, that p^^sent before you the Torments
of his Soul and ^^^lect only, and who complain, that I am yet alive. But, O
unhappy Potion, whatsoever thou art by which I dye by Inches, my Passion still
troubles me, and in a short time, no question, I shall be taken off. The Potion
grows stronger and stronger every day. What kind of Torment, think you, is it,
and what pain, when the mind is prohibited to be directed by the Eye? When the
Soul is divorced from the sense of Seeing? That which does me no good, what can
it do, but dispatch me? Ah! How miserable a Man am I! If that Poison do not
kill me outright, then I must spin out a dolorous Life, yet longer: Why
therefore do I set before my Eyes, the Shifts and Changes of my Mind? If this
Harlots Presumption can do every thing, for ought I know, she may give me
another Drench, to make me an Inamorato a second time.

Oddi Potio, OR, The Hate-procuring Potion.
DECLAMATION XV.
The Argument
Is contained in That of the former Declamation.

For the Miss against the Young Man.
THo, my Lords, it be Natural to us, to grieve for nothing so much, as when we
are ill-requited for our Kindness, so that nothing more inwardly afflicts good
Men, than to see their Merits fall to the ground: ^et this hard Case of mine,
wherein I may seem ^uilty of so horrid a Fact, shall ever make me, ^oor Woman
as I am, not glad at heart, that his Fellow dares now to prefer a Bill against
me. (...) unhappy Woman, was miserably afraid, lest the ^oor Fellow would have
been so little wrought upon by his Potion, that he would have Loved me ^e more,
after; lest the Poor Fellow, I say, who ^as always stout and stubborn, would
have de^ated the Strength of his remedy, for the very ^rief that he was cured
against his Will. But ^ow it makes very well of my side, that he is so
^^rrible, forsooth, and minacious, that he would ^ave me punished, even with
the loss of my Life. (...) cannot be expected, he should give me Thanks
^^esently, when I cured him, perforce. Yet, my ^ords, when I thoroughly
consider the present ^^mper of the poor Fellows Spirit, methinks I ^ave hardly
cured him, no not yet; so that if I ^m any whit acquainted with his former
furious ^its of Love, the Hate he is now in, is rather a Fretting, than any
Hatred at all. For if my R^medy had done him any good, to quit him from his
former Mad-cap Tricks, he would be sensib^^ of his Recovery, and would have
avoided eve^^ the very sight of his Mistress still; he would n^^ have trusted
himself in my Company, so far as (...) pretend to do himself right and he would
ha^^ been afraid of giving me a visit, even before you Lordships. I find at
last, I was strangely mist^ken, when I thought my Potion had cured him. H^ is
in Love, my Lords, he is in Love still, who complains he is not beloved.

What shall I do, my Lords, in this Case? Under what Temper shall I enter upon
my defen^^^ I am afraid, if I begin to commend my o^^ simple disposition, and
to tell you a long Story (...) my good Nature, the poor Fellow, that was (...)
will begin again. For, my Lords, whether it (...) the common malignant Opinion
to call a L^^^ Beauty, that has no Suitors, by the name of (...) Mistress; or
else some Lover or other first p^^^ that name on a poor Woman, to whom Fort^^^
had not given enough of her exterior perfection^ to provide for a strict
Chastity Matrimonial; a^^ therefore she labors to keep up fair deal^^ under
her Necessities This I am sure of, no Ma^^ Marriage Bed was ever in the least
disturbed (...) her: No Gentleman ever complained, that she ha^ debauched his
Son. No Man ever sung Lacrym^^ for his Estate that was quotted away into her
g^^dy Lap. And tho this ungrateful Friend of mi^^ endeavors to cast the Odium
of his former A^fection on my poor Self, yet he can never tw^ his Miss in the
Teeth with both, that she fi^^ ^ade him in Love with her, and afterward made
^im give over, too. And therefore let not this ^ccuser of mine deceive you with
his Grand be^ailing of his Fortune, as if he were undon by ^ancying a Miss: You
may be sure of my Inno^ence, for he was but a Shab when he came ^^rst to me,
and in the same poor Condition he ^ersisted in his Love; I never knew any thing
^e had to lose amidst all his Transports, but the ^uts of his Brain. For you
saw, that he was ^e neediest Fellow in the whole Town, that he ^vou'd wait at
the Civil-Houses (shall I call 'm) ^ight and day: And tho he had his Will upon
a ^imple too indulgent Girl, yea, tho one while he ^as assaulted with the
reproaches and taunts of the ^abble, and otherwhile he got many a bang by ^is
bickering with his Rivals, he could never be ^^ept or stav'd off from us. The
truth is, when I ^^w this unhappy Passion of the poor Fellow, my ^ood Nature
toward him did work; seeing him ^^n such a Case, I was willing to relieve him
by (...) matorious Embraces, but the more I made of ^im, the more was he
inflamed; and he was easi^^ persuaded, in this Impatience of his Affection,
that, because his Mistress gave him so much Free^om gratis, therefore she could
be no other, but in Love with him. But when I saw, that my Pity and my Civility
did no good, then I tried rougher ways. I charged him to be gone, I shut him out
of doors. I used also Entreaties to the poor Fellow, and gave him good Counsel,
drawn from the To^ick of his low Condition. But he was too hard for all these;
and the Remedies, that should have ^indred his Love, were all lost upon him,
till at last, I bethought my self, that a Man, who would n^^ be cured by
Reason, must be cured by Force. I did b^lieve, my Lords, 'twas in vain to give
taunting an^ reviling words to a poor Man in his excessive Cou^^ship. The Woman
Loved the Man the more, who^^ Love she refused. And therefore, when the Go^
Woman had tried all her Methods of Fair an^ Foul means, and when every Body
complained of he^ needy Shabby Servant, she light upon a Remedy that, she was
told, had cured such another po^^ Customer, in the like case. This then is the
first Ple^^ she makes for the harmlessness of the Medicine, an^ the Innocence
of the Administ'rer; she do^^ not deny, but confesses, she did give it him:
Nay, she furthered also what she gave; she laid (...) Charge and Command on her
self, to hearken never more to his Entreaties; yea, that she might not be moved
a whit with his Complaints or Tears under her Nose, she shut him quite out of
door^ Would you know, my Lords, what is all the Passion wrought in him, by the
Draught I gave him (...) Whoever ministers an Hate-Potion, does what (...) can,
from that time forward, to deserve to b^ Loved. Prithee, Younker, when did
thou eve^^ come in better plight into this Court, Iron.
than nou^ Now thou beginnest to act a serious Person and (...) grave; now, I
wis, thy talk is of Laws an^ Statutes; now, tho upbraid'st and reproach'st the
Things, called Misses. Thou had none of thi^ Humor, when thou were lately
amongst the Lemmans in Brothel-Houses; then thou were taken notice of by thy
scraggy leaness, thou we^^ as white as a Clout, and the Talk of the To^^^ for
thy High Amors. Poor Man, thou had bee^ ^uite undon, had thou not drank
that, which ^^ou call'st Poison.

He impleads me of Witchcraft, forsooth. I ^elieve, my Lords, the Ears of this
grave Court ^ill be very erect and attentive at the hearing of (...) high an
Accusation. There Is a Word with all ^y heart, what strange Impiety will it
proclaim (...) the World? How great would the Company (...) of those who have
lost their Children, ready ^^pannelled, to inquire into such black deeds, used
^^ly by Step-mothers? And how great would be ^^e Family of Mourners for their
Heirs, that have ^een destroyed by damned Cups of Poison? Are you ^^t then
ashamed to fit here, about the brangles (...) Bawdy-Houses, and to hear the
squabbles of pi^^^ul Whore-masters, brought before you? Do you ^^e yonder
Fellow, with his terrible accusing Face? ^^as, he wants only a Kiss or Two, his
great com^^aint to you, is, that his Mistress, forsooth, has ^^^sook him. Would
you not advise us rather, to (...) into our privacies, and there produce our
^^s and grievances, and end all amongst our^^^ves, when the Case is altered?
Laws and Courts ^^e not to be troubled with the complaints of ^^th pitiful
Shabs. None, but seri^us Grievan^^^ are to be heard in this place. He is not
^^rthy to be righted here, where only a Miss is (...) the Wind. My Lords, did
you ever hear any ^^dy in the World before, complain of being Be^^ched and
Poisoned, and yet alive in Court ^ore you? Such Accusations are always abomi^ed
upon the account of the Deaths, that fol^^^ them. If you Impeach one of Rob
bery, you ^^st prove it, by some Blood shed or Wounds given; if of Sacrilege,
you must show the spoils (...) the Deities and the plunder of their Temples:
(...) if you accuse a Man of Impoysoning, you m^^ produce the Carcass rotten
and black and ble^^ and the Corpse streaming with Gore, as it is ca^rying out to
its Sepulcher. And wherever y^^ may object that, yet the Person must haven
s^^fred something, when he was alive, that mig^^ be equivalent to the Odium of
his Death. C^^ that, Impoysoning, that rages inwardly, which argued by the
debilitation of some Limb or oth^^ Come away then, and show me some Marks thy.
Body, where the heat of the Poison has s^^ter'd it self up and down in noxious
Effects; a^^ where, the surface of the Body being consumed, settles inwardly,
and destroys the vitals. (...) your Body, I see, is lusty enough to work, (...)
your Limbs are entire; your Mind is able for rious businesses, and strong
enough to accuse lustily. Believe it, my Quondam Friend, all us, that knew you
before, do perceive, t^^ your Senses are brisker and livelier than ever, a^
that your Complexion is more Sanguine, tri^phing in a New Edition, as it were,
of your Y^^ You could never have proved, you had taken y^^ Dose, but that your
Miss confesses it. But, Lords, if you allow the vulgar to descant in (...)
fashion upon all Recipes, that are prescribed a^^tle out of course, they will
misinterpret e^^ Cure to be done by Witchcraft; and it will looked upon as an
Odious Crime, to do a (...) good, when he don't know it. Whereas our L^^ call
that only true Poison, which works no (...) but One. There Is no reason in the
World, ^^uld seem Poison, which he that drinks it may ^^ke an Antidote, if he
please, My Lords, the ^nker knows, that the Crime, he lays to my ^arge, comes
not within either the Letter or the ^aning of the Law: And therefore he
aggra^es it, on the account of what Men please to ^^^l me; It Is a Whore, says
he, I accuse. Believe (...), Friend, yon don't consider, what grand proof (...)
ought to bring to make good your hor^^ Accusation of Witchcraft against me. I
pro^^, I expected in the first place, that my coun^ance should be terrible, and
my hue dismal; ^t my frowzy hair should be disordred, and that (...) wild
Melancholy should be cruelly and merci^^ bent upon Mischief. A Crime, which,
they (...) by its dismal Charms disturbs the very Gods ^^ve, and troubles the
Constellations in the ^^nament; that does conjure up the dead out of it Graves,
and does make Men arm themselves Villainy, even to the mangling of dead Carkas^^
it is impossible but the Party accused thereof ^^t discover himself at first
sight. But you see, this ^^^h of yours has no such horrid countenance, has a
smooth and gentle Face. If you look ^ard, and consider her Plots and Designs,
all Conjurations are to make herself look Fine and ^^dsom. All her Incantations
tend to this, to ^^m Men with a look, and to bind 'm fast with ^^plemental
blandishments. Sometimes, it is ^e, I spend whole Nights amidst the Bottles of
^e with my Paramours, where they draw one ^n another, and some of the Gentlemen
make ^^erate Challenges. A Poor Miss has no Witch-^^^ft but this, how to
engage her Customers to Fancy her, still. I hope, my Lords, you d^^ think it
unjust for me to expect, that so hey^^ an impeachment should be carried on
agai^^^ me, not by my Mis-name, but by my Na^^^^ disposition? Consider, I pray,
did ever y^^ Witch, as you call her, do the same, or any the like it, before?
Where Is the Man, that can (...) this is the Woman that drove me out of my w^^^
Where Is the Young Man, where is the Old M^^ where is the Rich Man, that has any
thing say against her? Yea, where is any other (...) Man can complain, besides
yourself? So t^^^ she is a Witch, forsooth, only to you in parti^^lar; to every
body else, she is an Innocent M^^ Would you have me demonstrate the Innoce^^ of
this Young Woman, in a word? The very s^^^ Person, which the poor Fellow
abominates, a^^sues for her Life, he had rather be dallying (...) her, as
before.

All Offenses, my Lords, if I mistake not, (...) their rise either from Love of
Money, or f^^^ Variances. Now what Hatred can a Miss (...) to her Creature? Or,
what Booty can she get fr^^ a poor Servant. She gave me, says he, an H^^^ful
Recipe. What, my Lords! Sure, the (...) Name of a Recipe may sufficiently
acquit from the Infamy of Poison? Nor do I see (...) reason, why that should
seem the same t^^^ that cannot be called by the same Appellation. go too, Young
Man, make out the Immanity this Potion, to the full: Tell us, I took this
H^^ful Drench against my Wife, against my own C^^^dren, that I might be turned
aside from my (...) affection, and that I might utterly cast off ^^car Pledges
of Matrimony. That Hate-Potion (...) if you will call it so) is ill in a Miss, if
she use it (...) acquire Love. So that this Plea alone is sufficient to excuse
her, that she gave it only against ^erself. She gave me Hatred, says he. Now
here desire you, Young Man, to make the same Re^ection on my Condition, as you
did but now. ^ell us, that 'twas a Miss that gave it you, that was a Common
Strumpet bid you take it. Oh, ^^w was I afraid, lest you should have said,
'twas (...) Love Potion. Come on then, stand up, Iron.
my ^riend, and make good the Horror of the Accu^^tion, you have undertook,
with all your might and main. You may cry aloud, that the Ears (...) all the
Town may hear, Oh some Charitable people, pity me, help me for Heavens sake,
lend ^e some relief. I have drank Cruel and Merciless ^yson, so that now, poor
Wretch, I can Love my ^^^iss no longer: Farewell all my Happiness, for ^^w I
shall be no longer kick't and beaten up and ^^wn the Streets, by every Varlet,
in my trouble^^me Night-walks; nor shall I stand cooling my ^^els any longer,
before the Doors of Bawdy^ouses, till the next Morning. Now I am at li^erty to
do any thing, I can go to Sea, I can ^^rn Husbandman, I can enter my self a
Soldier; ^^w I am come to my self so far, that I may (...) an honest Husband,
and may provide both for (...) self in my Old Age, and also for my Children.
(...) Heavens! What greater Remedy could ever ^^ve been given, if we take in
the Condition of ^^^m that took it? That Potion had made thee ^appy, if the
poor Wench, that gave it, could (...) made thee as Rich. So that, it is not this
alone, my Lords, that is sufficient for the defense of the Innocent Girl, that
she did nothing of what she did for her own sake? No, she delivered (...)
Servant of hers from Bondage, she disengaged him who, they say, makes it her
business to hold him faster, to solicit and entice Men to Love, and to corrupt
their dispositions. Oh ungrateful Fellow* How much art thou bound to her? It Is
true, you bring nothing with you, you are at no Cost (...) not of a Farthing,
but you like my Company you follow me, you stay by me, you go along with me
wherever I go, you favor me, you admire me, you cry me up in all places. And
therefore you have a pique against Misses, because that even Poor Men are
admitted to them because they have such easy access, and are ^^cused from
tedious Attendances. What do thou do, Iron.
that art a Lover, but seek to accuse us (...) that for a great Crime, which is
really and indeed a high Courtesy, so that even the Rich man think well of us?
No Man is forced to break (...) his wanton Love by any, but by him that do
really Love him.

What says my Young Man? Have thou dra^^ the Potion, say thou, which gave
thee a Qu^^^est from thy Passion, which quelled thy heat, and extinguish't thy
Lust? Go thy ways, withdraw (...) while, whilst we give thanks in the Name of
a^ Mankind to this Madam, who has demonstrate to us, that such a thing was
possible. That F^^^ous Affection, which (if we believe Old Stories has brought
the Gods down from their Sta^^ Seats into the Earth, that has made Monsters,
Fable, even of the Sacred Deities, I say, that l^^ful heat, that has coupled
and confounded Man with Beast, that has made its way, through Iron-gates, ^in
midst of Flames, that has roved far and near beyond the Seas, is now checked
and defeated Yea, hearken, I beseech you, to what is a greater wonder, The
Remedy against Love is found out by a Woman. No more now let Mortals be afraid
of Incestuous Crimes, let no chaste Affection be afraid of such abominable
filthy desires. That which the Threats of Parents, that which neither our grave
Kindred, nor Poverty, nor Necessity itself could bring about, one short and
easy Potion has admi^ably effected. Oh that a Man could drink an Anti-potion
to all vices, as well as this? Happy were Mankind, if we could restrain all the
other ^xorbitancies and unlucky wanderings of our minds, by one Infusion. Pity
it is, that so great a Reme^^^ should lose its Esteem, because of the Mis-name
of its first Inventress. We should have admired any Man, if he had found out
such a Potion to de^^at his Whore. Yet 'twas you, Young Man, that ^^^t Inflamed
with thy immoderate lust beyond others, that stood in need of this special
Remedy, more than any. Prithee, what was thy Condi^^on, that thou should fall
in Love? We have ^eed of an Estate, lest, when we are in Love, we may be in a
miserable case; tho perhaps Men do ^ot see the inconveniences of that unruly
Passion, who are buoyed under or discharged from the scorns and contempts of
their Paramours by the Riches, which undo them. Happy is he, that loses nothing
^ut a little Estate in a Stews. Thou losest thy un^erstanding, he his money
only; thou drink'st a ^rovocative and Love-Potion, thou begg'st with pitiful
Tears in thy Eyes, thou su'st by the wanness of thy Cheeks: and that which is
the worst of all thou must be a wretched miserable Man, that thou may be
reckoned a kind Gentleman. Suppose thou feel no such Torment of this thy
Affection, yet thou, that art not worth a Groat, ha^^ thou not reason to be
ashamed of the very thing called Love? Thou art a Person, who can not be at
leisure to pine and languish for his Love, and tho Sick for Love, yet it
becomes not thee to rest all Night; thou can not be excused, if thou losest
the daytime only; thou maintain'st thy self by thy hands, thy Estate comes by
thy daily Labor at thy Fingers ends, which thy daily bread does more than
exact from thee, thou would^^ spend more thou if could get it; yet you,
forsooth, must go a madding; you must mind Cares^^^ and Dalliances, which are
due only to the Rich and, for which you can never be pardoned, you make your
self miserable on the account of you^ Love and Pleasure. It Is true, I Iook'd
when Wa^^ and pinch-belly Hunger would have taught the^ better Manners. But
thou began'st thy Ar^ours forsooth, when thou were a downright Begg^^ and what
room was there left then for Co^^s^ and Advice? He whom Poverty cannot Cure,
the best way left to Cure him is, by an Hate-potion Yet now I think on it, 'twas
not only the Poverty of thy Person, I tell thee, thou did not wa^ Means only
and Estate; for ought I see, thou had neither Kindred, Acquaintance, or
Friends if thou had, they might have Cured thee better than my Antidote; or
at least, if they had nev^^ heard of the virtue of this Ingredient, they mig^^
have bound thee hand and foot, to have kept thee at home. Why do thou clude an
Outrageous Affection, by kind Flattering Complements? I have given thee a
Remedy for that Passion, which has oftimes made Men hang themselves, throw
themselves down a Precipice, and which has let out their Laboring Souls by the
Port-hole of their Wounds. How far Love can Tyrannize over a Man, they best
know who are Engaged.

Now let me consider, with your low Fortune, what Person 'twas you doted upon.
Poor Pil^arlick, you lighted indeed on a Young Gentlewoman, far from proud and
far from scornful. As ^or some Whores, a Man can never come near ^m. How many
things do they call for, on the ^ccount of their tender Sex; how many more,
because they are Young and Handsome? They are ^lways in need of this and that;
of this suit, that ^tire. A Miss is always chargeable and craving. ^he Poor
Shaveling must wait all day long at his ^istresses door, that one time or other
she may be (...) leisure for him. He is put off and excluded (...) the
Emulation of those Gallants, that send their ^^esents before 'm, so that he must
stay till she has (...) body else. When she refuses to be kind, then ^ou art
mad; if she refuse not, thy satisfaction ^^does thee. Thy joys prepare thy
hope, and ^^y disappointments make thee mopish; thy de^^es on both sides are
Inflamed. You may believe (...), who saw with our Eyes, what a State of Body
^^u were in? How pale did thou look? How ^^^^ful and shameful was thy
Melancholy? How of^^^ had thou a mind to drink Poison? You must ^t therefore
complain, Young Man, that the gentlest Passion of your Soul is lost, 'twas not
Love but Madness; not thy Delight but thy Vexation; not thy Passion but thy
Whore. The Deity of Love (if we may believe the first Writers of Philosopby) is
a most Ancient Power, to whom the everlasting Duration of Nature owes itself*
But that Love is gentle, grave, rejoicing in Honorable desires, and in the
puissance of a Sacred Charity. It was that which first severed all things,
envelop'd in the darkness of their Original Chaos, and then cemented them
together agai^^ But this Flame of Love, which makes our re^^less hearts seek
forbidden Unions, is tumultu^^ and troublesome by the woking of our yet
lascivious Blood, and is armed with Killing Weapon and Funeral Torches. The
former helps us to P^^pagation by the Accustomed Piety of Wedlock; b^^ the
other drives to nothing but Incestuous L^^ to Adultery, and, in a word, to
Harlots. No^ may I relate the monstrosity of mad Love in Fable, as the strong
and strange fancy of a Man they never saw; a Youthful Beauty that was (...)
Love with itself; Virgins that have desperately d^^ted on their Aged Fathers;
and the shapes of M^^ and Beasts brought out into the World, mixed a^ confounded
together by our Monstrous Cop^^tions? Yet of all the Mischiefs, that our
Pass^^^ but too too willingly, runs us into, none m^^^ grievous or crueller
than this, we can meet w^^^ no Man, that desires to be cured of his Love.

But, says he, I had rather be in Love (...) 'Twas for that I gave thee the
Potion, Man. (...) Reprimands would serve, no Prayers could p^^vail: Advices
were all lost. A wanton L^^^ must be set free by some Dose, if his Mistress be
his Physician. Pray, let me ask you in this place, could you have accused the
Woman, if she had cured you any other way, as well as by her Potion? 'Twas in
her power to demand, what you could never have paid; and then to scorn and
contemn you as the dirt of her Feet. And are you now angry, because she had
rather cure you by a kind gentle remedy, than by an heart-^^exing one? The
Woman might have discharged ^er self of Thee, only by hating thee herself; but
^ow she has contrived a device, that thou should ^ather hate her. But
suppose, thou most pre^^mptuous Wretch, thou feel some grudge of Pain (...) thy
Cure; could you expect to be perfectly ^ur'd of an immoderate Passion, in an
Instant? What (...) a Sick Man should complain, he is cured by ^^e smart of
Abstinence? Some Vices have been ^riven out by the severe discipline of the
Lash, and ^ave been covered or restrained by being brought ^^w: Help has
sometimes been administered by ^^re and Lancing; and that, which would have ^een
a disaster in time of health, has been ad^anced into the repute of a remedy,
in compari^^n of greater hazard that attended. For you all hardly ever see a
Man go away merry and ^^cund from this unruly Passion, that recedes there^^om
out of modesty, or satiety, or upon the ac^unt of Penitential Thoughts. Never
any Man ^ill retreat from those Evils without regret, which (...) can enjoy
with such pleasure. It Is a point of ^^ve again, to cease loving and be quiet.
There ^as need of as much bent to the the other side, of (...) much strength as
made you love at first, for fear you should bethink yourself, and stand and
muse, when you are perfectly well. I tell you, we see what Remedy should have
been given to the Young Fellow, even by the Condition he is now in. If any
manner of Cure was to be applied to a Man that after an Hateful Drench
complains he cannot Love, it is but a small thing, if he only cease h^^ Passion.
Hearken then, thou most ungrateful Wight, seeing thou will have our secrets
brought into open Court. I did give the Potion. For what else, says he, should
I do, when so many other Remedies were lost? I protest, I could not abide, that
all the Whores in the Town should begin to f^^^^ at thee. Remember, prithee,
the discourse we had in those Nights, wherein I frequently admitted thee to my
Bed and Embraces, when another, and perhaps a better Man than you, was fain t^^
wait; did I not advise you, poor heart, not t^ strive or struggle with a Woman
of my mean Condition? Favor me and my low Fortune, for we are both very Poor.
And thou thy self, how often did thou cry out, weeping without intermission,
and bedewing my Bosom with thy Tears, I am sensible, dear Madam, that I am mad
for Love but I cannot help it for my life; I am overborn by my Passion, I cannot
command my Eyes nor rule my Heart? Woman! I would most willingly h^^^ thee, if
I could. Why then, thou most ungratef^^ of Mortal Wights, should thou blast
my kindness with the name of a Raskally Potion. I ga^^ you a Remedy, but the
Hatred comes from your self. It Is true, you rave, you revile, you (...) out,
but those are not the effects of my Potion but of your Old Passion, Love. You
were such before. Those are quite other gates kind of Men, who flote in
pleasure being buoyed up by a great Estate. But poor Scraps are impudent, when
they think of a Miss. I remember, you kept a pother as well as the best, when I
gave you admittance before; you could not endure to stay, nor to be stav'd off,
you cursed all the Gentlemen that came to me, you railed at every one you saw.
What Man in the World has his Condition happily changed for the better, more
than you? Time was, when you could abide no body at all; but now, poor Man, you
hate but one simple Girl. Why do you not rather give ear and hearken to some
good and wholesome Counsel? Consider, whereabouts you are? Seeing your Health is
but newly recovered, why will you put it in hazard again, by such a over-eager
desire of Quarreling? I protest, and declare, you squander away my wholesome
Potion, the virtue of the Medicine has not yet diffused itself over your whole
Heart and Soul: There are Two very great Passions yet struggling about you. Of
the Two, I beseech you take the Potion's part. Come on, Check and run Counter
to whatever appears against it, and makes such troublesome huffs and bustles in
your heart. Let a perfect recovery settle all about you. Then we shall know,
you are cured of the Passion of Love, when you have put off the Passion of Hate.

Thus, my Lords, I hope I have defended the Innocence of this Gentlewoman, well
enough; yet the Greatness of her danger calls upon us to beg and beseech; Rise
up, then, thou miserablest of Women, abet and make good the remainder of thy
Plea, with thy Tears. O thou, that do Indite her, what do hope for? What
do expect? She shall never fall down on her Knees before thee. Tho thou
accostest the poor Woman with all thy terrible menaces, yet she shall not kiss
thy hand. Tho thou threaten her with death and destruction, yet she shall never
petition thee for her Life. Don't mistake your self so far, as to promise
yourself any advantage from our danger and Fear. Alas, let me tell you, the
poor Girl has no Remedy for Hatred Suppose it comes from the strength of thy
Portion, that thou accusest the Innocent: Is it not sufficient satisfaction to
you, that you see her look so pale for fear? Is it not sufficient to hear her
sigh and groan? remember this is she, that you would not hearken to in your
Youth. What do you do? Let me ask you? Can you endure to have her called in
Question, and her very Life in so much jeopardy? Will you reckon the Votes of
the Court: And if they Cast her, will thou, wicked Wretch, skip and rejoice. I
shall say then, thou did never Love her at all. Perhaps you will follow her
to her Execution, will ye? Will you stand by, when the Executioner touches
those pretty Eyes? Can you look on, whilst that Neck, that you have so often
Kissed and Embraced, is laid bare, for the last Blow? Will nor you leap toward
her? Will you not put your own breast to receive the Stroke? Will you not call
out for help of God and Man? Will thou receive her body after Execution; and
stand over her Limbs, yet panting and quavering after the Blow? Can thou
behold this? Can thou endure it? Then I Will say, thou art perfectly recovered.
But if the Event of this Sentence prove yet more sad, the Gods, who are always
the Revengers of Courtesies soon forgotten; the Gods, I say, (whom this Cruel
Fellow, in the Arms of his Miss, did often beseech, with Mourning and Tears, to
put an end either to his Love, or to his Life,) give a just revenge on this
ungrateful Youth, yet without maiming him. I don't imprecate lameness, nor
drowning, nor sickness on him. No, but I pray he may be poor still, and that he
may love the meanest Drab in the Town, and that he may never have his belly
full, nor give over.

Amici Vades, OR, Two Friends, one Surety for the other.
DECLAMATION XVI.
The Argument
There were Two Friends, whereof one had a Mother alive, that went a long
Journey together, and at last came to a Tyrants Country, where they were made
Prisoners. The Mother hearing her Son was in hold, wept out her Eyes for grief.
The Two Young Men proffered the Tyrant, that if he would let one of 'm go home
to see his Mother, he should return precisely at an appointed day, and if he
did not, his Fellow Prisoner was to be put to death. And he bound himself by
Oath to this purpose. The Young Man returns to his Mother, and she would not
let him go back again, alleging the Law of the Country, That a Child was not
to forsake his Parents in their distress.

For the Young Man against his Mother.
Although, most upright Lords and Judges, I seem already to have laid out all the
Affection of human Breasts upon Friendship alone; and am now invidiously
reflected upon, as one that has not left himself so much good Nature, as to
Love even his own Mother; yet as often as I view the whole Latitude of my duty,
(wherein this bears the least part, that I am a good Friend) I cannot but
bewail this first hit of my choice, that I must of necessity relinquish either
my Friend or my Mother. There is a Violence, most grave Judges, I say, there is
a Violence, upon my ardent Affection, that I am not able to relieve them both.
But above all, nothing troubles me more, than that such cross things do fall
out against my Inclination, that I must seem to choose one, which I cannot help.
What would I not give, poor Man, for the recovery of my Mothers sight, who have
given up my Friend to come to see her? I beseech you, my Lords, let not my
Service be lost in such great straits as these, who am willing to lay out my
self upon both. The best kindness you can do me, is not to keep me there, where
I can do no good. I must own, most upright Judges, that I now set before you an
Instance of so great and incredible an Example, that you may almost have some
cause to think, I juggle with my Mother. I seem to have devised this colorable
pretense of my own head; and while I am detained, I seem to have but a cold
Friendship. Pity me, my Lords, try me, and let me go. You cannot know, whether I
would sain return, till ye see me returned.

This, my Lords, does vex and rend my very heart, that I fall short of my great
expectation. I was full of hope, that my Mother would have done some brave
thing in the Case. I had provided my self of this boast and vapor before the
Tyrant, that so he might have believed, I had been sent back by her. And I was
pleased with this kind of Ostentation, that they would wonder at the Gallantry
of a Man, who left a Mother, tho destitute of comfort. But with what Sentiment
will you have me to bear this, that my Mother made my Friend believe, that
assuredly I should return? And for her part, she has deceived a most Noble
Gentleman, that believed my Affection was so high and great. I cannot
dissemble, my Lords, the Guilt of my Case. I had been less to blame, if I would
not have returned. Let those Religious Persons look to it, who look upon the
Motives of Love, which they have from the ordinary Titles of Father, Brother,
Son, etc. as a kind of tie and service; If you ask me, I think, as the Case
stands, no affections are only born with us. For if a Man weigh all things
aright he shall find, that whatever keeps Children, Brethren and Kindred
together is nothing else, but Friendship. For tho we Men should fly never so
high in incredible expressions, yet doubtless we are not a piece of the same
Soul; nor joint-burthens of the same womb. The less there is pretended in the
Original, the more is there in the Affection between us. That Charity is far
more admirable, that we enter into with all our Faculties: I am not ashamed, my
Lords, to confess this as my Opinion, that less obligation is due to a Man, who
loves his Friend, only because he cannot help it. It Is plain, my Lords, it is
plain, that to be joined together in the same course of Life, even from ones
very Infancy, has some inward touch of the affection of Brotherhood. Thus it
came to pass, that Fame never mentioned one without the other; and we vyed one
with another in our union so far, that what happened to the one, the like happened
to the other. Hence it was, that we scorned to return both together; and, as if
it were easier between Two faithful Friends, we resolved to stick together,
notwithstanding the hazards of the Sea. And yet I would not have you think,
that we went to Sea together on a Humor, or for Table-talk; no, we had great
and inexpressible reasons for our Voyage, and that you may judge by this, that
even my own Mother could not keep us at home. Whether then, my Lords, it was,
that Friendship itself would try an Experiment upon us? Or that Fortune would
trust us but little, as long as we met with no adventures in our Love? Or
whether it be an Envy, that always sticks to great resolutions? Or that none
are ever praised with so general an applause, that Envy would not try 'm, even
in their very Friendship? must tell you, we arrived at the shore, Men whom
their Good hap or common report had joined together. We are swallowed up with
the very Terror, which strikes fond Parents Blind immediately. Hence it happened,
because we were both made Prisoners, together; Yet so, that he is most a
Prisoner, that was set at Liberty. I am ashamed, my Lords, to say it, in this I
was out-don, here my Friend got the better: Of the Two, his affection is the
highest, whom the Tyrant had rather keep in Prison. O my Friend, how much am I
indebted to thee? Nothing but a Mother could have divided us. You were the
first that heard she was blind; and 'twas for the Passion you showed, that the
Tyrant believed any such thing. What did he not do to make the Tyrant desire
his body, instead of mine? He hugged his very Chains. He would engage I should
return, even from Sea; and tho I had a Mother alive, he stipulated for such
uncertainties, as if he would have made them good in his own particular Person.
Did ever any Man do so much for his own sake? My Friend performed, I say, he
performed a thing, that the Tyrant seemed to grant us on purpose, that it might
not be performed; and the Man, who would have no such affection in human
breasts, we deceived him, notwithstanding his Temptation. I see no reason, why
my Mother should be so horribly afraid of my Imprisonment; or what she means to
throw a Veil over us, that are doomed to death? The Tyrant hates me not, you
see, for it is all one to him, to Murder another for me. Pity me, dear Mother,
if there be any Conscience for great obligations, complain, that you loved one
of us so over-dearly, that, since you lost your Eyes, is as it were always
absent from you. Who should undergo this for me? What obligations do you stop?
My Friends chain would admit me to my Friend; now the Tyrant would open the
door to me, now the Pyrate would prepare me a Vessel for my supply. I protest,
if I should dye before your self, Mother, you ought to return in my room at the
very day. Poor Woman, do you not understand, what a far greater obligation my
Friend has laid upon you? you owe more to the Man, who sent me back to you,
even for this, since you cannot endure I should return.

I protest, my Lords, I cannot but pity, I say, but pity those Men, who praise
me for my Return. My Friend trusted me so far, that I would return. And now,
forsooth, I do a brave thing, I that am so sure a Card, so wonderful and
remarkable a Friend. If you will believe a Man, it seems untoward to me, that I
know I shall not be put to death. Besides, my Lords, my Mother is conscious
that she acts unworthily, and is basely guilty, if she detain me out of
necessity, or an account of my duty; and therefore the poor Woman, which has
hitherto acted out of affection, now suddenly flies to the Law. That Mother, my
Lords, has a very bad Cause, which the Law must help out, so much. Children,
says she, must not forsake their Parents in distress. There Is no reason, my
Lords, this should be said to a Man, that is returned. Can it be said, that I
despised my M^ther, or that I slighted my duty to her in her blindness, seeing
all my ambition in my misery, was laid out on this, even to contrive my return?
Who in the very height of my troubles, never petition'^ any thing for my self?
Can any one inflict on me the penalty due to a disobedient Child? Or can he
aggravate things against me, for neglecting Filial Piety? I appeal to Heaven,
how much it cost me, not to appear an undutiful Son? I must needs charge this
on you, good Mother, that I left my Friend for your sake, to whom it is Impiety
not to return.

My Lords, I do not yet insist either upon my own misery, or upon the merits of
my Friend, my Plea at present is, that this Law is of Force only, when ones
Parents alone are in distress. Providence has freed a great part of Mankind
from the obligation of Laws; nor are there any Statutes so severe, that Men,
tho never so much in misery, should be subject to their Penalty. For when want
and necessity do surprise me, I have as much reason to complain too, as if I
were deserted. When Children themselves are in distress, they are excused to
their Parents; and if the Law lays hold upon any one, it must needs count
another Man's misfortune, as a certain kind of Orbity too. For what if, when my
Mother holds me close, another should pluck me by force from her side? What if
my Country should need my Service, as a Soldier? Or what, if as an Ambassador;
or (to come nearer to my present distress and complaint) what, if, when
condemned, I am called forth to Execution? I beseech you, Mother, would you
break Prison, for me to escape? Would you lay violent hands on the Executioner?
And when your Son was about to suffer, would you as 'twere cover his Throat, by
the Authority of the Law? Oh Heavens! The Law, that retains a Man, is far
enough from concerning that Person, who comes not, in fear of punishment. For
ought I see, Mother, you don't consider what a great Odium Parents should raise
upon those Children of theirs, who forsake them in that Case. A Mother, who
complains she is forsaken, had need cry out, Alas, a Foreign Country has drawn
away my Sons heart; he withdraws the shoulder from helping me, because he has
a mind to see some other Pleasant corner of the World, in Utopia. Or, my Young
Son is inveigled by some Miss or other, and the wantonness of his Eye has taken
him off from observing the just Laws of his own Country. With such laments as
these, should you persecute your Son, that so my being detained may be a
punishment to me, but by the by. That Law does not concern Children, who are
detained by their own merciful dispositions. To make it a base thing to return,
it must be considered, to whom the return is made; and it can be no offense at
all to leave a Mother, if there be just cause to bear a man out, for so doing.
I, who return to a Tyrant, if I leave my Mother out of an undutiful Spirit, am
worthy to be kept back. And therefore, Madam, you have no reason to object
against me the weight of Maternal obligations; nor should you think, it is out
of disrespect to you, if I believe that there is another affection in human
breasts, even that of Friendship, which Nature seems to have devised on
purpose, that all Mankind in general might make a coalition; and which is not
as yet universally admired, because we do not find it Complete; and yet such as
it is, it would do wonders, unless you yourselves did hinder it* Friendship is
but one soul in many bodies, my hand is thine and thine is mine, it is an
Affection stronger than the Maternal. Pray tell me, what matter is it, by what
Name you call him, that loves at so high a rate? If great Merits descend down
to us, never ask, from whom? Would you know, what my Mother herself thinks of
this Affection? She thinks, that even my Friend had rather, I should not
return. Suppose I should lay aside at present the great obligations I stand
indebted in to my Friend, upon the account of his Merit, and that I should say
only this, it is my Friend that is a Prisoner, Dear Mother, I Will go, that he may
have leave to return, that I may comfort him, that I may entreat his Patreon
for him; and if the cruel Man be so Tyrannical as to require it, I Will give him
body for body. Pray, why do you detain me? Why do you stop me? Now or never I must
show my self a Friend. You cannot tell, whether that be true Love, which never
met with any cross adventure; and if our lives have nothing but Sunshine, a
Friend is a needless Why-not. Do You think, I Will plead, that my Friend, that is in
Hold expects this from me, nay all Mankind expects the same, and they received
me unto the number Friends on this account, that ^o body should wonder at all,
if I expressed such Faithfulness? Would you know, dear Mother, what ^ffection
and what reverence we ought to show ^o a Friend in distress? Alas, he never
feared any Law, that he should be left alone. I Will set aside ^t present the
cause of Friendship, for I have a mind to speak a few words in the behalf of
Humanity itself, even the Tyrant believed that I would return, and therefore I
must return. Dear Mother, no Man living was ever trusted more, no Man's
expectations ever laid a greater obligation upon me. He that trusted me was a
Man of that Kidny, as to account it a Courtesy to be deceived; he seemed to
have devised this Trick against all Friends whatever, that we might impose upon
him. You have no reason, dear Mother, to tell me of my capital punishment, and
of all the Preparation for my Execution. It Is an offense, to believe Men only
in that which is expedient. Goodnight to all Mankind, if we must keep Faith
with none, but where we gain by it. How hugely and how infinitely did the
Tyrant trust me, if he puts me to death, when I return.

My Mother herself, my Lords, knows well enough, what an high Seat a Friend
has in a Man's Heart, and therefore she begins to urge affection, too.
Wherefore, if I mistake not, seeing I am the Subject Matter of this Suit, you
should first of all consider, whether my Mother or my self have done more in
this calamitous Case? In the first place, dear Mother, I must crave leave to
complain, that your affection is not of the right kind Pray, what did you mean,
by your raving and headstrong Passion? Why did you show your grief all outward,
as if you had received the Message of your Sons Captivity with the Eye, not
with the Heart? You have not lest your self Liberty to redeem me, doubtless you
have added to the Affections of a Mother, you wept ou^ your Eyes in the midst
of your Orbity, but a^^ this does not loose my Chains, nor free my Body from
the Prison. What good does that Passion o^ a Mother do her Son, that spends it
self in noysy Crying? If you had undertaken a Voyage to the Tyrant, then,
Mother, you had done something indeed. Grant, I am in Hold, what! will you now
make your Lamentation, as if I were dying at home in my Bed; or, as if I were
giving up the Ghost in your Arms? In some kind of distresses, Despair itself is
none of the highest Passions; and whoever believes the loss of his Children at
first hearing, what does he do, but make have to shake hands with his Grief?
Tho you twit me, dear Mother, with your great impatiency for, and unspeakable
affection to, your poor Son, yet, let me tell you, my Friend had an harder
piece of service to do for me, he Husbanded the matter so as to save his Eyes,
that he might be made a Prisoner. Oh Heavens! what an high piece of merit was
this, he was grieved for my punishment, and yet would not be released. It Is he,
that speaks a Prison to be a terrible thing, who is delivered from thence. Now
the Chains would nor stick to his body it was so lean, but they fell to his
heels for very weight, his countenance was piteously disfigured and begrim'd,
and the Tears, that he shed night and day, did smear his Face all over. I
beseech you, my Lords, show some pity, let not a Merit, that is so much above
expectation, lose its Authority. Imagine us to be both Prisoners under your Eye,
and that a Friend redeemed one; a Mother, the other. I beseech you, which of the
Two did most? Good God! How greedily, how strongly did he catch up my Chains?
By what urgent Prayers, did he even compel the Tyrant to believe him. Take,
says he, these my hands, and these my Limbs, that so, if possible, my Friend
may be sent back to his Mother. I my self, if you think good, will undergo the
full punishment for us both; or if you will have him to return after he is
discharged, here is my Neck, hang me up, if he don't return, at whatever day you
your self shall name. I call God and Man to Witness, every thing, that could
be, was done to make my po r Friend repent his Bargain^ The poor Soul was
thrown down into a dark and deep Dungeon, he must be laden, says the Pyrate,
with double-irons, seeing he is so good a Friend. And presently the worst of
the Felons were thrust down into the same Hole; and ever and anon, he was
taunted with this mock; What! Will you buy your Friend at so dear a rate? Yet
still, this was his note, this was the poor Man's constant Groan, Torture me
with Fire, with red-hot Pincers, tear me in pieces, yet, I Will warrant ye, he will
return. Pity me, dear Mother, it is an extraordinary matter I am speaking of,
now. I left my Friend at hard dispute with the Tyrant. Let all human affections
excuse me, and you, Mother, above all, that I suffered such horrid things to be
done. What! Could there be ever any necessity in nature so urgent, that I my
self must throw such a Friend, as he was, into a Prison? That I should put off
my begrimedness and my Fetters, and put 'm upon him, that was in as much
post-hast to receive 'm? That I should appoint so short a day for my return,
notwithstanding the many uncertainties of my Voyage? I appeal to my own poor
Conscience, and to that Deity too, if there were any such present in that
rueful instant, how much we quarreled about my Chains, and how I did all that
ever I could, that, of the Two, he might rather return to my Mother. I confess,
my Lords, there was but one modest thought that overcame me, and that was, if I
had not accepted the Courtesy of my Friend, tho accompanied with so much
difficulty, he would have thought I had not believed him. Pity me, dear Mother,
that you may not think me discharged, I have Imprisoned my second self. Those
are the Chains, which gripe my Limbs, which bind me fast, notwithstanding the
vast Sea, and huge distance of Land, between us. This is a Prison, that I
cannot break! I envy the cunning Tyrant, he knows how to keep both of us in
Prison, he knows how to fetter even him too, that he has released. I must needs
cry out, again and again, 'twas I, that clap't my Friend in Irons; and, that I
might have liberty to see you, another Man was punished for me. I know, with
what spirit my Friend did this; but as for me, I carried my self, as if I would
never have returned. Let me ask you, Good Mother, I say, let me ask your
impatient affection, if some of the Barbarous Halberdiers or Prison-Keepers had
brought me back in Irons, to see you? Would you have taken any comfort either
to see or to embrace me? Don't mistake your self, as if I am now returned to
you, upon easier and slighter terms? What made him, think you, dismiss me, to
go whither I pleased? I tell you, the Cruel Sophister knew well enough, that he
had prevented us, so that we could not cozen him, if we had a mind to it.
Therefore, my Mothers Plea, that she is blind, is needless in this Case. That
she aggravates things against me upon account of the loss of her Eyes, pray
don't think it a sufficient Cause to detain me; for, if she had her sight, she
would strive to keep me at home, still. It Is not the Blind Mother, than cannot
endure this, but the very Mother; sometimes indeed, distress makes a Mother
unable to bear the Absence of her Son. Now, my Lords, if, in my opinion, my
Friend be not inferior to my Mother, either in his Love to, or Desert from me,
what should your Justice consider more, than which of them would be the
Greatest Sufferer? My Mother has sated her Grief already, she has spent all
her Passion, her vehemence is cooled; now she has lost her Eyes, how can she
desire her Sons presence? Besides, this her misfortune, whatever it be, befalls
her amongst her own Friends and Kindred, tho she be weak, yet she has all her
Servants abour her, to make her broth, and to do all other necessary Offices.
Would you know, how much more intolerable it is, that my Friend suffers? Judge of
it by this, it cost you your Eyes, when you did but hear, I was so badly used
in a Goal; but he must be contented with those scraps or none, that his very
Executioner, and his Tormentor, sets before him.

Venenum Effusum, OR, Poison spilt on the ground.
DECLAMATION XVII.
The Argument.
There was a Gentleman, that entered Three Actions in Court against his Son,
that he might have leave to Renounce and Disinherit him; but was Cast in them
all. One day he found him tampering a certain Medicine in a private part of his
House; and asked him, What it was, and for Whom he had prepared it: His Son
answered him, 'twas Poison, and that he intended to put an end to his own life
by taking it off: His Father hearing this, commands him to drink it; but he,
instead of drinking it, spilt it on the ground; whereupon his Father accuses
him of an intended Parricide.

For the Son against the Father.
WEary as I am, my Lords, with the different hurries of my woeful mind, my grief
being the same in each of them, whilst that which pushes me on, does likewise
pluck me back from every frame of Spirit I am in, so that I cannot endure
either to be so hardy as to live, or so desperate as to dye; yet I humbly beg
this in the first place of your Lordships Clemency, (which I have already had
so much experience of) that you would not wonder to see me unresolved what to
do, when so many sad distresses do press me on every side; so that by reason of
my Misery, I can find no better Remedy, than to dye; and by reason of my
Innocence, no better Expedient than to live. Therefore, my Lords, seeing I am
accused upon both accounts, in such a new and unusual kind of Action, how shall
I sufficiently bewail or lament my Calamity? It Is true, I was a Person willing
to make away my self in secret, and it had almost Killed me outright, that my
Father chopped in upon me on a sudden. You see him yet quarrelling with me, as he
did when we were in that close Room, where he found me. Whatever does not
destroy, and bring me to my Grave, he calls Contumacy; so little does he
respect my absolution, or my Life. After this, who can make any doubt, with
what intent he bid me drink the Poison, seeing he calls it Parricide, that I
did not drink it? No Question, he would have let me have taken it all off, if I
had been willing. I beseech you therefore, my Lords, look narrowly into the
Cause of this present Suit. Do you think my Father objects Parricide to me,
upon his own account? No, he is even cut to the heart, he frets, ^e is
tormented that I am alive. For this is that he cannot endure to hear of; that he
commanded me to kill my self, and yet could not compel me thereto; he knows, it
was Wickedness in him to command it, if it were Innocence in me to refuse it.
This is a great piece of Cruelty in him, he defends and excuses himself from
any odious reflection by my crimes, and that you might not hate that word
(Parricide) as if the deed had been done, he substitutes a miserable for a bad
Father. My Lords, this is the rage of his Impiety, now he is sound out. No
Father would ever have his Son seem innocent, if he has a mind to destroy him.

My Lords, I humbly beseech this also of your public Wisdoms, that none of you
would imagine I was not peremptorily resolved to dye. As yet I make my defense
at the rate of my former Constancy; but if I get the better in the Suit, then I
stand upon another Foot; I stand firmer as accused, than I shall be, if
acquitted. For then only I shall not be able to bear my calamity, when it
begins to appear, that I am only miserable not innocent. It Is well for me, that
my Father su's me again at Law, he occasions me thereby to plead my Innocent
Cause, and he does me the Favor, to make me think my death had been lost, if I
had drank the Poison. If my Father repents, that he bid me drink off the
Poison, I cannot abide that I spilt it. Tho therefore the Merciless Old Man
endeavors to confound public Affections, by changing the nature and kind of
his Complaint, yet we are no new Customers, we have been Plaintiff and
Defendant before, nor has the late immanity of his impious Suit discharged us?
Parricide in an old accusation with him. It Is just so, my Lords, it is just so,
it is a long time ago, since I was indicted as the veriest Villain in the World.
So that the first Churlish unnaturalness of my Father did endeavor to blast
me. And now, tho you have already commanded him to desist and give over, yet
this is the Man, that will trouble your Lordships still, tho he be cast never
so many times, yet he is at it again. He is deceived that thinks the Old Man's
disposition will be tired out and made to endure it. No, a Father, that could
not prevail in Law to disinherit his Son, had rather have him found Guilty than
Acquitted. A Man's own Parents, when they are cast in their Suits, are the most
pertinacious Accusers of all; they will never give over. Whilst you maintain the
Authority of your Power strongly by imperious affections, and, lest you should
confess your shame or penitence, do vindicate error by calumny, this addition
is made to my calamity, that I was acquitted thrice. For when the Old Man found
that his spite against me was successless the very first Trial he had; he
could not abide I should be turned back upon him, against his Will; and because
your Lordships would not give way, he should legally disinherit me, yet he was
stiff in his resolution still, to desire to do it. He kept up his belief, that
it would be for his advantage, if he persisted in his unjust Complaints; and he
hoped that by his common barretting against me, People at last would be weary
of pitying me. What should I do in this Case? My Innocence being tired out as
it were, whither should I turn my self? 'Twas not convenient, I should leave
the House, for then I should seem to have owned, what your Lordships would not
believe; nor could I well stay at home, for he threatened me with another Set of
miseries, for now he seemed to hate me with such an additional eagerness, as he
showed toward you for my sake. At last, poor Man, I took pity on my self, and
on my Father too, for seeing I foresaw by what was past, that he would be at
variance with me as long as I lived, I confess I caught at every opportunity,
which seemed to me to exasperate my present State, to beseech his favor till I
died; and I found out this as the last Expedient I had for it, that seeing I
was willing to dye for honor and reverence of him, he would at last cease
hating me, even as if I had gone out of the way till his rage was over. That Son
can have no other Exit but death only, that can neither be reconciled to hit
Father, nor yet be disinherited by him.

There was a private Room in our House, into which, when I was Accused, I used
always to retire myself, and when I was Acquitted in Court, I did the same;
here, and no where else, I had liberty to make my Complaints and shed my Tears.
Yet, let me tell you, I went not into it, as if I could deceive the watchful
Guard my Father set upon me, for alas, 'twas not possible to find out any place
at all, where his Spies, that studied to take even the least advantage against
me, could not find me out? But as those Persons do, who are resolved to dye, I
separated my self, out of modesty not out of wrath, from all things that might
have diverted me from my purpose. For, to tell you the truth, I never liked a
quarrelsom and noysy Exit out of the World; nor such as would leave any
reflection upon others behind it. But what have I to do with this extraordinary
simplicity of Innocence? He that prepares Poison for himself to drink, never
thinks it possible that he can be discovered. Here, poor Man, considering all
things, within and without, I will not deny, but I stuck a little at that Fatal
business of dying; I confess, I used some cunctation and delay, for a good
Conscience covets not an hasty death; neither do such Persons run headlong to
their Graves, who dye only out of Pity to themselves. My Soul, being wholly
fixed on the Contemplation of Death, was taking its flight by secret
complaints; and when I was about to drink the Potion, that was to give me my
Farewell from the World, my mind was inwardly pondering upon my complete
Innocence. When lo, my Father rushed in upon my Privacy, tho I had filled the
Room full enough with the Impatient moans of a dying Man; I believe he was
guided to the place, by the noise of my Groanings and Tears. My Lords, he cannot
seem to have suspected any thing of Parricide: He that put the Question to me,
what I was a pounding, and for whom I was preparing it, must needs be ignorant
of both. I tell you plainly, my Lords, dying Men cannot counterfeit, and nothing
more harmlesly innocent, than a Soul that is ready to part from the Body. At the
sudden rushing in of my Father, I confess, I was somewhat astonished, but not
as Criminals are, when they are surprised; if I had held my peace, my
Countenance was not pale at all, nor did any guilty trembling betray me; nor
did I stumble or falter in my Answers or Excuses, as Offenders, when they are
questioned, use to do: But, when my Father, with his sudden Question, made me
start and look about me, What are you Compounding, says he, and for whom? I
Answered him truly, without any hesitation or stop in the least, Sir, said I, I
have a mind to put an End to my own Life: and I confessed as truly, that 'twas
Poison, I was a tampering. Is there any Father, my Lords, that is unwilling his
Son should Poison himself, and yet believes him, that he will? Who, would
believe him, tho he says it himself? If a Father find his Son tampering with
Poison, methinks he should have spilt it himself rather; but he stood stock
still, fearless and huffy, tho he saw he was like to lose his Son, and tho I
was resolved and had threatened to destroy my self therewith, yet he would make
me gulp it down presently. Drink it, says he, or I Will pour it down thy Throat.
After such a word as that, my Lords, could any body expect, that I should
immediately obey him? If I had don so, I had been gone for ever. Here, O ye
Heavens, and hearken O Earth, what, after three Abdications and as many
Complaints, tho they were all disappointed by the Wisdom of your Lordships,
what, I say, my Father, like a wild hair-brained Man, tells the World; Oh. says
he, Iron.
my Son is a Savage Fellow, he is a cruel Parricide; he would not drink Poison,
when I bad him. This is all my Offense, forsooth, that I am alive, that I
answer him at Law, that I decline not to be tried by the Court, that I do not
fly for it. Now I don't wonder, what it is, that makes him fret so impatiently
for the disappointment of his Cruelty, besides his joy for my loss, wherein he
was disappointed too; it is this, he hoped to destroy me with my own Poison.

But because he thinks, he has found out an Art to make you believe, that tho
he was cast in his former Actions, yet new Causes of Grievance may bear more
weight in Court, he has therefore devised unusual Methods. As ever I desire to
live any longer, I deny the Crime, he objects against me, with the same
plain-heartedness and integrity, as I confessed concerning the Poison. You
accuse me of Parricide, forsooth. Sir, you have cut me off from this part of my
defense, to cry out in this place, it is impossible such a thing should ever be.
I know how much difficulty it adds to my defense, that long since you have
forgot paternal duty to your Child in your own House, but it is plainly evident,
which of us two is more prone to Impiety, and which of us had rather live, let
the other be never so much in distress. For your part, Sir, you are every day
heaving at your only Son, to cast him out of doors; you would be glad to see
him an errant Beggar and a very Tatterdemallion, with all your heart. As for
me, I kiss those hands, that throw me out into the street, I cling about the
knees and legs of him that would kick and spurn me; and to a Father, that hates
me so mortally, I could have no reason to return, but my extraordinary Love.
Perhaps, Sir, the Authority of your paternal Name might have carried the point
against me, if this had been your first Action, about the Poison: But you have
spent already all those Pleas, which may defend Fathers from any suspicion of
Wickedness. A Father cannot believe any Child of his will be guilty of
Parricide, unless it be such an one, that he himself is as willing to destroy.
Truly, Father, if any body should ask me concerning the simple and honest
ground of my unhappy opinion, I have this to say, that I believe it impossible
you would ever destroy me, but with a Poison of my own Brewing. But a Villainy,
which is hardly to be believed in any relation at all, is yet, I think, much
more difficult for a Child to act. You, Fathers, can hurry your Children to
their Graves, upon the account of your Authority; to Murder a Child with you,
is but a point of Gravity; you disinberit 'm to make them better, Iron.
forsooth: The rest of your Childrens punishments, you veil under the name of
reasonable Corrections; and all your rigid hard-heartedness you guild with a
softer Appellation. We, Children, cannot so much as conceive so borrid a Villainy
in our minds, let our circumstances be what they will, either happy or
miserable. Necessities, even the greatest that are, cannot drive us to so high
a wickedness. All Grief and all Passion flags, before it comes to such
desperate attempts. And, Oh Heavens! Is it not much more difficult to be
committed without a Complice, without an Assistant, when the whole of the
Villainy must be entirely perpetrated, only by the Sons hand and heart? Besides,
pray consider what horror such an Immanity would strike into a Man, to say,
You would have killed your Father. Such an Accusation receives strength only
from this, that he who is caught attempting it, must needs be put to death.

That you may know, says he, What I now lay to his charge is true, I had a mind
to disinherit him, before. Pray, Father, don't think to make your obstinacy in
complaining, as any kind of Proof against me. You, when you say, My Son would
have Murdered me, think, that you raise an Odium upon your former Judges, and
cry out, You, forsooth, were too easy, you were too merciful, you sent home my
Son to me back again. But it is most unjust, that an Action of disinherison,
which could not prevail for itself, should procure credit to a greater Crime.
This is not the first time, that my modesty has been tried in Court; nor is
this the first Suit that has been commenced against me, upon the account of
the precedent part of my life; It Is true, that Man's Innocence is more happy,
that never comes under suspicion, but it is made more sure and unquestionable,
when it has stood a Trial at Law. And as much Infamy as Objections do raise
upon a Man, while they are under a probability of proof, so, when they are once
cleared and answered, they procure him as much credit. What! De' think, I got
the better of my Father in my Suit, upon the account of Favor; and that I
overthrew him by my Authority amongst Old Men, Grave Elders and Parents? Let
them look to it, who are so Indulgent to themselves in their Distresses, that
they think Favor and Mercy must be showed? to them: But a Son, that is accused
by his own Father, Can no ways prevail over him, but by the Merits of his
Cause. Yet, in earnest, let us grant, that in your first Action to disinherit
me, you did not spend all your stock of grief, but you were over-modest,
forsooth, to complain of all my faults, Iron.
nor could your paternal Piety in your Old Age call'm all to mind, yet, I trow,
your second Actions will make sure work, even to over-measure? You are returned
to Court, now the Judges are angry? With how great terror were all the
Spectators struck, when they saw you so shameless, that after you had been so
often beaten, you would again come into the Pit? Grief always grows more eager,
after a shameful repulse. Yea, the Judges will brow-beat those more, who come
under their cognizance a second time. How many does the Authority from the
dissimilitude of the decision please, and does not the contrary sentence seem
the more severe? But the third Suit, Oh Heavens! What a Clutter did it make;
What an Expectation did it raise? For my part, I wonder I had any leave given
me to make any defense at all, that in the very first hubbub, my Brains, had
not been knocked out? After all this, pray, what new Crime can my Father object
against me? I am grown Old in a well-regulated Government, I have nothing in my
manners or conversation, but the Judges know it better than myself. I beseech
you, is such a thing possible in nature, that, he, which will be a Parricide
hereafter, should show no symptoms of it, beforehand? A Villainy, so notorious
and immane, does it not use to be ushered in by some puny Offenses, as
Harbingers thereunto? That savageness, that is to be expiated by the n="*" The
culeus was a leathern sack, where in a Parricide, after cruel scourgings was to
be sewed, amongst the Romans, together with Serpents, and afterward an Ape,
and some other living Creatures, and so thrown into the Sea.
Culeus and by Serpents, what, can it lurk under a pleasing frame of Spirit in
ones Youth? It Is another sort of miserable Persons, that the Clemency and
Favor of the Court does relieve. Those Persons acquitted me, that knew,
'twould do me no good, that I was not disinherited. Therefore, tho you cry out,
I accused thee ever and anon, I complained against thee many a time, I would
have disinherited thee, thrice; yet all this ought to do no more, than make you
not to be believed, if you levy any new Objections against me. For it is a plain
non-sequitur, good Father, that you should accuse me of what you yourself are
guilty; and I must be an Offender, forsooth, because you judge of me by your
own naughty self. It Is not all your severity, nor your Cruelty, nor your
Terror, can make me a Parricide; To make me guilty of so great a Crime, you
must not bring your own Passion but my Conversation in Evidence; not your
grief, but the frame of my spirit. Men are exasperated less, and they hate
less, on the account of other injuries. The revenge of a Son, that is Innocent,
is only to kill himself.

But if it be evident, that there was nothing at that time in my Conversation,
that might give any ground of suspicion of Parricide, let us consider then what
Cause might afterward arise. Let me here propound a Question to your Lordships,
Who, in such circumstances, ought to have had a greater regard to Innocence,
than myself? I got the better of my Father, it was then a duty incumbent upon
me, with might and main, to keep my self in your Lordships good Graces, and to
study how to reward my Counselors, and to pay you your due, by whose favor I
can boldly return home; and by whose means I am not afraid of any sudden
mishap, or malignant fate, from my Father. It Is past all belief, that Three
Acquittals in Court should prove me Innocent, and yet make me a Parricide too.
Besides, dear Father, my very Casting of you in your Action, how jealous and
how fearful does it make me? Do I not know, that, as soon as I returned, the
whole House had a watchful and an ill eye upon me; that I live amongst
Pick-thanks, who curry Favor with you, by telling Lies and Stories of their
own devising, upon me? But you will say, perhaps, I may be hurried on to such a
Villainy, because I hope to get something by your death. Bur alas? Do I not
know, that tho I am sent home upon the account of such another Wickedness, yet
I am as much hated by you, as ever? I beseech you, with what confidence can I
undertake such a mischievous Exploit, seeing I have been so often accused of it
before, and pointed at as it were, by the Complaint of my Father? What Plea and
Apology can I hope to make for my Parricide? I could make no defense at all, if
you had drank the Poison. Suppose I had a mind to Murder my Father, suppose I
had Cause so to do; yet how should I have an opportunity; or how, the
Confidence to attempt it? I cannot so much as dye, but that I must be found
our. Can I prepare Poison, that have no Assistant, nor no Complice, to help to
Administer it? The Journey-men despise me, the Apprentices set me at naught,
avoid my company, they shun my discourse, they pretend they hate me, out of the
Love they bear to you. Pray tell me, de' think it possible, that I can
Administer it, myself? For I, forsooth, may have easy access to you at all
times, may I not? Iron.
Let me tell you, let these hands of mine give you what they will, you will say,
it is nothing but Poison. And what! Do I prepare such a Poison as kills
immediately, that seizes and flies out all of a sudden? How then can I make the
least shadow of defense? Or, was it a slow Poison, that wastes a Man by Inches,
so that you cannot presently cry out; nor cannot immediately believe, that you
have drank any Poison, at all? I beseech you, tell me, for whom I prepared that
Poison, which I could give to none, but myself?

But, says he, even this shows thou had a Parricidal Intent, because thou
had Poison, by thee. I answer, my Lords, all those things that we have about
us, whereby wicked attempts may be furthered, and which Mortals ordinarily turn
to the worst use, yet nature has not therefore put them in our power, only
that we may use them, as the corrupt and guilty minds of some Men would have
us; no, the use of them is good or ill according to the Intent of their Owner;
All the good or hurt they do is, as it were, specificated and comes from the
Conscience of him, that possesses them. For, I beseech you, can you prove a Man
a Robber, only because he has a Sword about him? You know, Men that are asleep
have Swords too, hanging by their Beds-side. If you search any Traveller, you will
find that Fear makes him carry some Weapon or other about him. The Laws don't
forbid us to have, or to make provision of such things; they do not prohibit
the Weapons themselves, but they direct and regulate their use. Suppose, I
should say, as if I were in the Ruff of all my prosperity, n="" He alludes to
an Ancient Custom, in some Countries, where Poison was allowed to be publicly
sold, for Men in distress to make use of, to rid themselves out of the World.
I provided Poison, that if any sudden hazard, if any weakness, pain, or
unfore-seen distress should seize me, I might have it ready at hand, as my last
refuge. You need not wonder, if I did so, who have stood a long time as
Fortunes Butt, and who have almost wearied out all human Chances; and against
whom, my Father is brewing another Action tho he has been so often cast
already. That Son has need to have death in his Power, whose own Father could
have killed him, before.

Again, it is no eredible, says he, that thou should be willing to Poison
thyself, when thou were Acquitted; seeing thou would not do it, when thou
were Accused only: I could tell you in answer, dear Father, I was willing to
live, as long as I could conceive any probable hope, that you would at last
have some pity upon me, that my woeful plight might affect you, that my tears
might mitigate you, and that my very paleness might overcome you; but, pardon
my Innocence, I had then need of a pertinacious and stubborn defense. I was
willing to live, I say, that People might not report, after I was gone, that I
was taken napping in the highest of Villainies, and that I hurried my self out
of the World, that I might not bear the blowing of it. And that you your self
might not proclaim over my dead Corpse, You see I had cause to fear, 'twas not
for nothing that I told you of Poison, he had not the Confidence to live, to
abide the Trial. That you might not rail at me, when I am gone; and make
Objections, when I am not in a Condition, to answer. Yet I shall confess this
Truth to you concerning my Impatience, I was not willing to dye when you would
disinherit me, upon the same ground, that I would not drink the Poison when you
bad me. But, make your best, Sir, I say, again, make your best of my woeful
Confession, and because you could not glut your Eye with the sight, you may
satisfy your Ears; I confess, I was willing to dye: And, if you will, you may
add this further jeer to my miseries, as to ask me, Why, pray, would you
renounce and cast me off? What says Natural Piety to this? Has not my Grief a
juster ground, than any bodily loss, or than the ruin of ones Estate? My own
Father hurries me to destruction: Does not that one Speech contain all misery,
in the Bowels of it? Are not all woes summed up in that one Complaint. Perhaps,
we may expect some end of other mishaps, but the hatred of Relations never
cease. Alliances joined together by bonds of nature, as by Kindred or
Brotherhood, they cannot be slackned or loos'ned, but they must be overthrown;
those that from their very rise can scarce be mastered and turned to the
better, and are hardened too in a long course of Wickedness, when they are
allowed, do not presently return back to their former course, but bending
downwards draw all their weight and strength; by that very vigor they
increased, when left to themselves, they grow up to the very height of vice.
All the difficulty lies here, how a Father may begin not to love his Son, for
if he once loap over that Block, then all the rest comes on amain; and that
which hindered him to hate at first, the same is a bar to the return of his
Love: If Children and Parents are once changed in their Affections, at the same
time the Relation is cancelled between them. They are happy, who are sensible
they have something to correct and amend within 'm. No anger of a Father with
his own Children can cease, but that which is grounded on their Faults. What
then shall I do, I have no luxury to repent off; nor no petulancy to bewail?
And whose Abdication is grounded not on my own Manners, but my Fathers? In vain
do you comfort me, in vain do you sooth me up, with Honey-words. A Man, whose
Father never gives over hating him, his only Issue is, to hate himself. But
alas! when I come to complain before a Judge in Court, it is but a small part of
my Grief, I can utter: When I say, my Father hates me, I do as good as proclaim
to all the World, that he counts every day a Holy Day, without me; that there is
no Mirth, when I am by; that he never comforts me when I am sad; nor ministers
to me, when I am sick and weak. If any Man can tell him of some disaster, that
has befallen me; if any one do rail and reproach me behind my back, Who but He
with my Father. If I am able to endure all this, you may well say, I have
deserved it. There are some Crosses, whose very continuance makes us patient
under them, which do firm and barden our minds by their duration. That a Man's
Father hates him, it is a new Trial every day. Perhaps when Men arc cross one to
another, their natural grudges less affect them, and it is some kind of relief
to a Man, if he be chid to chid again; No Son can bear a Fathers hatred, but
he, who returns hate for hate.

I, poor unhappy Man, my Lords, do ask you, yea I interrogate all Mankind in
the Case, what would you have me to do? Without doubt the Issue of my Suit has
discharged me from my Indictment, seeing I am acquitted; and yet my discharge
has not taken me off from my desire to dye, it has only condemned me to live
still, if I please. For certain, my Lords, I had the worst of it when I was
acquitted, and (which is the undeniable weakness of a troubled Soul) I fainted
under a piteous kind of Happiness. When I returned home, pray tell me, how I
shall order my Looks, and how, my Spirit? Joy is not fit for me, for my Mirth
does exasperate: If I am sad, then my Melancholy offends: If I seek for an
opportunity to discourse, than I am hated, as an arrogant Insulter. If I come
near, he tells me, I am an Eyesore to him; if I go farther off, then,
forsooth, I despise and slight him. How long shall I have the better of 't?
It Is plain, they cannot be cured by Suits of disinherison, who do not presently
give up the bucklers, but stand upon the strict terms of their Innocence; my
Father was not cast, now was I acquitted, when I came home, for no body loves
me, no body shows any respect to me, there: I can now go to none, but the blind
and dark corners of the House. I put not off, nor lay aside my nasty weeds, I
think upon my Old Father every day, as if he had as accusing a Face, as ever. I
am jealous what to do, what to speak, or how to look, and (which is the
cursed'st kind of care, than can be) I am fain to set a Guard on my self. Now,
Sir, you have sated me, I say, you have sated me with Life. And whereas even
happy Persons are glutted with the continuance of too much prosperity, what an
irksomness do you brew for me, to tire me out in my Misery? My Age is spent in
Tears and Prayers, I pass the day in slavery, and the Night in anxieties. What
does my Innocence hold forth to, balance such undeserved and burthensom
things? That Son ought to be disinherited, that his Father hates, if he be
guilty; and he ought to dye if he hate him, being innocent.

But, says my Father, grant that we believe, you were willing to dye, why must
you choose Poison, above all, to do the Feat? Truly, Father, you may make the
like-quarrel with dying Man, let him choose what Death he pleases; and because
Nature has been so good, as to allow us several ways of Exit out of this
Miserable World, you may as well find fault with whatever of them, a Man please
to choose. Thus if I had fallen on a naked sword to kill my self, then you would
have cried out, Why had you not made use of Poison, rather? But nothing is more
nice, than such an Exit, that is not occasioned by legal Punishment or by Fear,
but proceeds from weakness of Spirit, grounded on the Miseries of Life. For my
part, I have a greater and a more particular kindness for a death by Poison,
than any other way: It sheds no Blood; it does not leave the Corpse dismal and
ghastly to look upon; it is a quiet, and an easy kind of death. O thou most
ungrateful of all Aged Fathers, I took care in dying so, that no body else
might have been thought to have killed me. And now, I think, Father, I have got
you at a lock, I make bold to interrogate you. What! Can I be a Parricide, who
brought Poison into your House unprepared, as 'twere in the Oar, and such as
had need of Compounding, still; and that must have a great deal more don to it,
before it can be administered? Can I be a Parricide, that seek to hide my self
in your own House, that answered you so plainly and so readily about a Potion,
that you knew nothing of before, and which no body had complained to you about?
I got me to a room into the middle of the House; I set no body, to watch at the
door, to keep folks out; I cared not who passed by, I shut out no Comers at
all. I beseech you, are these signs that I would have Murdered you, and not
rather, that I would have killed myself. If I had prepared the Poison for you,
you would have found it hid close in some hole or corner, you would have found
me astonished about it, and as pale as a Clout, my words would have been
broken, my sighs trembling, and to be sure I should have denied it. If a real
Parricide had been caught, he would have spilt the Poison, that he might not
have confessed it.

But why then, says he, if you had provided it for yourself, would you not
drink it off? I Will answer you, Father, in brief, and according to the condition
of human Nature: There is nothing else in the power of the Miserable, but to be
willing to dye. Yet when I say, I am willing to dye, I do not say, I must of
necessity dye immediately. I answer according to my own resolution, I do not
promise what Fate will do. Do you wonder, that tho I have Poison ready at hand,
yet many things may fall out between the Cup and the Lip? We see sometime a Man
is run quite thorough the body with a Sword, and his very Life despaired of,
and yet he miraculously recovers. Some Men have had the Rope about their Necks,
and yet either the nooze has slipped, or the very Fall of their bodies has
broken it; when others have been to be thrown down a Precipice, the very spring
of their bodies has freed them. It Is as fit, he should not dye that is willing,
as that we dye against our wills: But I had rather deal with you by plain
reason, as I have begun. There is nothing, Father, that consists so much in an
Impetus or Effort, as to be willing to dye. And Nature knows nothing more
impatient, than the Passion of a dying Man. If you would retain this, it is
sufficient that you are willing to dye; he that takes away the ardour of death
from a Man, takes away the reason of it too. He that chops in upon a Man, in
that case, interrupts and breaks off his eagerness; he that does but speak two
words to him does divert and hinder him. Every minutes stop does as it were
supplicate for Life. And therefore 'twas, to deal plainly with you, that I
chose such a private place to do my business in. The least thing in the World
will trouble a Man, when he dies through weakness; and the smallest causes of
all do make that death displeasing, which a poor Man's Innocence persuades him
too. What if one should step in, that would rejoice at it? What if he thinks to
revenge it? If he be an Eyewitness, that should be grudged such a sight? Then
presently, forsooth, his arrogant Life will be blamed, and his contumacious
grief will disagree with his death, when it is found out. You don't know how
much hesitation you occasion, while you interrogate me, and force me to answer
you. And he that thou make to give thee an Answer, thou give him
opportunity to abide another Suit, and to make another Plea. As for me, at that
time all manner of Passions seized upon me at once, as Indignation, filial
duty, paternal reverence, and grief. I can dye for my Father, but I cannot dye
before him. Add hereto, your peremptory words, Drink it. In earnest, if when I
had been wounded and panting for Life, you had commanded me to thrust the Sword
further in, I would have shut up my Wounds, and labored to keep in my
departing Soul; if you had bid me hang my self in a Halter, ready prepared, I
would have endeavored to have broke the rope and leap down; if when I was
running in post have to throw my self down a Precipice, and you did lay no
hands on me to pull me back, I would have directed my course to the Champain of
my own accord. 'Twas with great reason, O my Soul, that thou did long for
secrecy and solitude. But in comes a Father, and now I am undon, my eagerness
to perfect my death is at an end, and he discharges me of a double Passion; for
I ought not to dye, if he forbid it; and I cannot dye, if he command it. Off
with it, says he. But stay, the poisonous Drug is not yet put into the draught;
but you apprehend me for the nonce, because I was yet but a pounding it. Alas,
Father, there are many things to be done, before I drink it, I must call first
all the Slaves; together, and then all the Liberti or Journey-men, I must make
my moan to 'm, I must complain, I must leave them something in charge, I must
make my defense. Drink it off! At the tail of that word I thought you had
added, now thou art caught, now thou art non-plust, let us away to the Court.
Drink it off, say you! Perhaps, Sir, you bid me do it, as if I denied it to be
Poison. My Lords, let me ask you as if you had been present in that secret
appartiment, what frame of Spirit, what courage, de' think I could have, after
such a word as that? It Is my Accuser that says it, it is, he says it, that was
cast before, he says it in secret, he says it so that he might have denied it,
if I had taken it off at his bidding. Take it off! Sir, I Will do it with all my
heart, and I provided it for no other purpose but that, but you, with your
grey-hairs, are so over-eager upon me, that you have quite changed my mind.
Drink it off, say you! What else have you now to do, but to pull my Chops
asunder, if I refuse so to do, as you bid me? Or, that you pour it down my
throat, even tho I lift up both my hands to oppose you? In this struggle, I had
e'ne quite forgot, what I had resolved to do, I had forgot what I was
preparing. I saw, you looked so fierce upon me the first word you spoke; and
your very countenance was so bent and set upon accusing me of Parricide, that I
e'ne thought you had bid me drink Poison, even of your own brewing. You did not
know the way, Father, I say again, you did not know the way, how to keep up my
pertinacious resolutions. When your Son was resolved to dye for your sake in a
Corner, you, forsooth, must find him out. What, will he kill himself? Do you
forbid him; pluck the Cup out of his hand, that he may not take down or drink
the Fatal dose. Cry out, O thou rash Fellow, what art thou a doing? Hold thy
hand, now I am angry with thee no longer, now we are perfect Friends again. Yet
I Will make have to do the Do, that my Ears may carry this sound along with them,
and that my Eyes may be somewhat pleased with your Impatience. You may impute
it to yourself, that you have retorted upon me, and that you have made me
forget all my solemn vows to destroy myself. An Innocent Man can dye with more
ease, if he be desired to live. Oh Heavens! Into what stubbornness of Spirit,
into what fiery quarrelsom humor did you cast me, when you said to me, Drink
it off. I could hardly tell, whether 'twere best live or dye. Poor heart, I was
almost beside my self, I was astonished at such an unexpected Command, I stood
stock still as one quite stupid, without any power so much as to deny it, so
amazed and transported was I, so that I had almost killed my self another way.
For certain there is nothing more surprising than sudden and unthought of
grief, for when our minds are already weakened with striving against our
miseries, when new onsets come, they quite undo us. After this I could not find
words to make my complaint, nor had I a vent for Tears. It suffices for no
undertaking, to dye at another Man's pleasure, and with his own Poison. Tho
therefore you ply me with a bundle of new Indictments, yet it repents me not, I
say it repents me not, to have slackned that ardour and eagerness to dye: I did
dye as a Parricide. My Father, who complains I did not drink it, would now say,
he was taken in the Fact, he cannot deny it. I should now be addicated three
times, and he would urge, that I dared not for my ears return into the Court
again. 'Twas well that I spilt the Poison, as if I had a mind to live again.
That Poison that is found out in secret, no Man ever will be thought to drink
it, because he had provided it for himself. You Will say now perhaps, That I would
not have suffered you, if you had showed yourself willing to drink it; and you
prove it, since that, by a very good Argument, forsooth: You seek my Life, even
now. You would not have suffered is! Pray, did you ever lay hands upon me to
hinder me? You might as easily have done that, as to bid me drink it. You would
not have suffered it, would ye! And further, you were not afraid, lest even the
sense I had of your Command should raise up in me a desire to destroy my self.
It Is a Crime in me, if I dye, that it may be questioned afterward, Iron
whether you would have killed me or no? Tho you, forsooth, endeavor to take
off the Odium of that word, by pretending another Frame of Spirit, yet the very
Experiment shows a Murtherous Intent. Nor is there any great difference in
point of Cruelty, whether you suffer a thing to be don, or essay to do it your
self. That Father will never be moved with the actual death of his Son, that is
not moved with his readiness to dye.

My Lords, what shall I now do to his pertinacious rigor? To what kind of Mould
of Patience, shall I cast myself? You see a Man, that no posture at all of my
Spirit can change; he takes offense at my constancy, and he is as much offended
with my soft-heartedness and infirmity. If I am willing to live, he takes me by
head and shoulders and throws me out of doors: If I endeavor to dye, then he
stops and vexes me. Yea perhaps, he has prepared and invented something
against me, even this very day, if your Lordships Clemency should be willing to
relieve me. What end, what issue is there of my unspeakable miseries? Of a Son
that was Acquitted, he has made me willing to dye; of a Son, that was a dying,
he has made me willing to live. But, with what Motives and with what Prayers
shall I make my Address to your most upright Lordships? Your poor unhappy
Client, your thrice acquitted Defendant, is forbid so much as to shed a Tear.
He has not so much Favor, as to fall down at your Feet so often; he has
wearied out your Compassion already, and yet he brings before a new pressing
Grievance. O death! who stand always aloof of from the Miserable, who
stoppest thy Ears to those that desire thy Company, When will thou relieve me?
Woe is me, poor Youth, I have lost the fruit of my Poison. And yet, Father,
seeing I have put you at least in some kind of hope, pray don't wholly despair.
But before I am dead and buried, take some comfort in this Speech of mine, You
have overthrown me at Law. It Is true, I know not yet what other kind of death I
shall choose, or whether it were best for me to get any more of that unlucky
Poison. But this I proclaim, and beseech, that which way soever I resolve to go
out of the World, take so much pity of me, as not to command me; take so much
pity, as not to enforce me. Your Groans and your Tears would kill me a great
deal sooner. And that you may not think I have forgot that word, you uttered to
me in secret, I tell you, tho I could not drink the Poison at your bidding, yet
your very bidding of me so to do, will one time or other most certainly be my
Death.

Infamis in Matrem, OR, A Son accused of Incest with his own Mother.
DECLAMATION XVIII.
The Argument.
The Law allows an Action against an Husband for Ill-treating and Abusing of
his Wife. The Case, There was a Gentleman that had a Son, buxsom and beautiful,
who he suspected was naught with his

I loved my Son with a maternal-affection, whose Childish years, and mind that
never knew what Marriage meant, were never bespotted with the Infamy of Lust;
to whom the most brasen-fac'd Report that ever was, and the suspiciousest
Husband in the whole World, could never object any thing but that only Title of
Son; That which was the first faithful Testimony of my Nuptial Chastity, I
brought forth a Son that my very Husband owned to be his, nor was I afraid,
lest the countenance of the Infant at first, nor any likeness growing up
afterward, should discover any stolen or unlawful Copulation. As Soon as ever
he was born, (if you will but believe a poor Mother) she hugged him more
affectionately, than Mothers ordinarily use to do, she did not abandon him to
the Care of Houses or Servants; no, she suckled him at her own Breasts, and
cherished him with her own Embraces. O thou wicked Parricide, can thou find
in thy heart to throw dirt upon one of such tender years, and to blemish the
very Childhood of of the poor Youth, with such Odious Aspersions? Farewell all
faithfulness between the Sacred Relations of Husband and Wife, if a Mother
cannot be Innoce^^, but as long as her Child is under-age: Besides, the good
Mothers Indulgence was enhaunced toward her only Son, because he had a Father
so harsh to him, and one that was so unkind an Husband to her too; and yet she
herself thought that she was very deficient in her affection, seeing she was to
bring enough for both. For the Father would seldom ever kiss his Son, and as
seldom take him in his Arms; so that, he looking upon his Son, tho he were all
that he had, with the same Murtherous Intent, that sometime or other he
designed to destroy him, it made the Mothers love more remarkable. Hence it
was, that the poor Woman was always a Chatting with her Son, and she never went
abroad, but he was with her. And she was very glad, when she heard the People
that she met, say, There Is a brave Child, when he was taken notice of as the
best in every Company, for thereby he did as 'twere tell every body himself,
that his Mother loved him best. Pity me, my Lords, and don't think, that my
Husband drew his wicked suspicions from other Men's Opinions and Judgments; no,
he was guided therein only by his own churlishness and the unnatural hardness
of his Heart. If you, the Father, don't Love your Son, then, forsooth, the
Mother must presently be thought to love him overmuch? Do You think, my Lords, I
will now make my Complaint against the licentious Tongues of the Vulgar? No, he
that has such a kind of Father as he, need not run to blame Reports. He
sufficiently shows, what was the Subject of the Impudent story, and who was the
Author thereof, who first believed it. The Commonalty might easily talk of such
a thing as Incest, after they once admired that a Father could suspect such a
thing.

These are the things, my Lords, which the Mother did securely, plainly and
openly, before her Husband and the whole Town. Now, pray, let the Father tell
all his Secrets. He caught and hurried the Youth, (who feared nothing, which
was the first argument of his Innocence and Plain-heartedness,) into such a
corner of the House, where if he had cried out never so loud, and groaned never
so deeply, yet he could not have been heard. There did he torment to him to
death with Lash, Fire, and all the Arts of Cruelty: Did ever any Man, my Lords,
deserve worse of the Innocence of the days wherein we live, and of all Sacred
Natural Affections too, than this Defendant here in Court. He tortured his Son
that he might prove the Incest; and he Murdered him, that it might not be
believed. Set now before you, my Lords, the Confessions of both the Parents:
The Mother cries out, I love my Son, the Father says, I killed him: It Is
impossible, you should think both of us to be Innocent. And now, most guilty
Old Man, it is a great Evidence of your Savage Cruelty, that after you had
destroyed your Son, you could endure to stay, till you were questioned about
it. What! Did you not run out, of that blind Corner of yours, into the street
after a frightful manner? When your Clothes were sprinkled with your Sons
blood, don't you make Proclamation of his Death? Don't you call God and Man to
Witness? What! don't you kill even the Mother, too? But, forsooth, you must be
very modest in your Wickedness, and therefore you leave yourself a ground, to
be quiet under your suffering. You, poor Man, do spare your Wife in the Case,
you bear some reverence to the Conjugal Gods, and to the Rights of the
Marriage Bed. Alas, you ha'nt now so much as a ground for a Lie?

I accuse him of Ill-treatment or Ill-abearance. Will it please you, my Lords,
that the death and burial of ones Children should be bewailed under the same
Law-term, with which we complain of lesser Matrimonial injuries, and with the
lamentations wherewith we mourn for some bodily loss or reproach, as when we
are denied some neater kind of dress, or, to go abroad out of doors into the
Town? And what would you have my woeful grief to do, if our Sex has no other
Law to relieve it, but that only? And if all Nuptial complaints must be bound
to come under that one narrow Law, or none. A Mother, that for the Murder of a
Son accuses her Husband only of Ill treatment, does not avenge him, but only
shows she is content, that he ought not to have been Slain. Let me omit, my
Lords, a little my Grief for my sad Orbity; and in a Case of Parricide, let us
give other Reasons for Ill treatment. Might not a Wife justly complain and say,
you were too easy in suspecting me Guilty of Adultery, and you believed it too
soon? The Chastity of a Matron is not sufficiently defended only by her own
Innocence; the weakness of this Sex cannot owe the whole Report and Opinion of
their being naught to their own Manners only; all the respect that Women have,
is according to the Report their Husbands make of them; all the Stories about
them come from the breasts of their own Husbands. To be frowned upon, to be
complained of, to be disdained, is the Fate of a Married Woman. A Husband gives
Sentence against the Chastity of his Wife, he tells it abroad, he makes
Sham-stories of it; after him, the Servants of the House report it, and
Strangers believe it to be so. There is no Man gives a worse Example to speak
ill of his Wife, than he, that every body is likely to believe. Grant, that the
nimiety of your Love does make you prone to suspect, and that your Impatient
Affections do oftimes make you full easily to believe, what you fear. A Woman's
own Husband may accuse her, tho falsely, of secret Adultery and unlawful
Copulation, such a thing is possible, and sometimes usual, yet I tell you, it is
very rare, when a Woman has had a Child by her Husband, and if she firm'd her
plighted Chastity by the Fruitfulness of a Wife. What if she too should be
severe, while her Son is yet but Young? What if she should think beforehand of
a Daughter-in-Law, and of Grandchildren? Take some pity on the Times, Let
every one draw the Interpretation of another Man's Innocence, from the Text of
his own Manners. Here Is a Father, that would prove an Incestuous Crime might be
committed, only by this one Argument, that 'twas in his power to kill his Son.

But, says he, There was a strong Report, there was such a thing. I beseech
you, Sir, whose Report should a Man believe, that is against Nature itself, and
against the Interest of all Parents and Children. It Is a good one, indeed!
There was a Report. What! shall we interpret your Meaning, as if you had said,
some Servant, that was privy to the Fact, complained of it to you, or that the
Chambermaid told you of it: And perhaps, you will say, I was by in a corner,
unknown to them, I came in upon them, unawares. I beseech you, my Lords, which
of the Two is most credible, that a Mother should be guilty of Incest, or that
Fame should be guilty of a Lie? It had been the Impudentest thing in the World,
for the Common People to have talked of such a thing, unless the Father had
believed it before. It is one of the greatest Mischiefs, my Lords, that is
incident to human minds, that we coin wicked things with more eagerness than
good* and ill-reporters never think they do a better piece of service, than
when they relate things perfectly incredible, as if they had been acted. You
must needs show a greater eagerness in telling of that, which you cannot prove;
that so, what has no ground in the Truth of the thing, may borrow some shadowy
one from the Positiveness of him that affirms it. And yet this is a most unjust
thing, as to the Talkativeness of the Mobile, because the very bandying, even
of such as do not believe it, does many times increase the Report itself. What,
can you wonder at the matter of such a Report, which no Man believes, his own
self? Which the very he, that reports it, quotes another Auther for? Report is
a thing without a witness, without a discoverer, of uncertain things it is one
of the wickedest, it is malign, it is fallacious, and, in a word, it is of kin to
your present silence. Nay would you have me prove in short, what you yourself
thought of report? You would not believe, report spoke truth, till you had made
enquiry by torture. Grant, that report may have some kind of Authority, in such
things that the People may possibly come to the knowledge of. I see now, how
Adulteries committed in secret come to be divulged; some Servant or some
Accomplice does tell 'm abroad, such Joys are not managed with discretion; Men
count it a great part of their pleasure to boast of it. But it is an Offense,
which, if human minds are capable of so great a Wickedness, is inveloped with a
midnight and thick darkness, so that the very looks of the Offenders do make no
discovery thereof; they will not trust neither Man nor Maid. What need is there of
Messages between, what need of Love Letters? The Privity of Two is enough, the
Mother and Son are enough to do the deed. An Incest is so much the more
incredible, as it is made a Town-talk of. O the miserable condition of the
Female Sex, whose very virtues sometimes give occasion for false Stories, to be
made upon them! Why does not the poor Wife take delight sometimes to gad
abroad? Why is her deportment so stern to every body, and her disposition so
rigid? What, has she no desires, nor no want of any thing at all? Yes, but her
Son takes up all her vacant Time, he fills up all her affections, a Mother has
nothing else to boast off, but her Son. I beseech you, did she love him too
much? Such simplicity cannot commit so great a Wickedness. Suppose, that there
should be such a Guilt between Mother and Son, sure they will not openly
discover it by any Eyeglances, they will abstain from Embraces before the
Father, they will forbear all their Familiarity in public, they will avoid to
discourse or so much as to meet one another before the slaves, or before the
half-Free-men; tho they be never so hot upon so high a Wickedness, yet they
will seem to affect a certain kind of Gravity. O thou cruel Parricide, choose
which side thou will, a diligent and wary Incest is never suspected, and it is a
negligent one, that can be found out.

But why do I keep such ado, as if 'twere the Common People, that bruited
abroad this unusual and incredible Villainy? Alas, in all this tittle-tattle, I
find only the footsteps of one bad Husband. It Is no great matter, whether he be
the first raiser of the Report, that his Wife was an Incestuous Person, or
whether he believes it, when it is raised. What! did not he stand in fear of
the Report of so horrid a villainy, and was not the Fame itself of such a thing
almost ashamed to come to the Ears of a Father? Deny, while you will, that the
scurvy Report had not its Rise from you, yet let me tell you, no Man durst have
been so bold, as to have talked of or published any such matter, unless first
they had had it from you. Give me but a good Father, and a good Husband, and I
need not say, does he not believe it? No, rather he will never hear of any such
Report at all. My Lords, if you will give me leave to say it, go your ways now,
and make a doubt, if you can, who was the Author of the Report, when you see
the Father pleads for it.

He was a beautiful Youth, says he. I hope, this is no more an offense in the
Mother, than it is a Crime in the Son. He was beautiful, say you. If you would
have this Plea bear any weight against me, you should have added, that he was
an Adulterer too, and a Ravisher of Women, so that, when he had to do with this
or that Married Wife, her grieved Husband had almost killed him; or if he had
vitiated this or that Virgin, he was cried out upon, as abominable Fellow, all
the Town over: And yet we know, that some Young Men use to be as extravagant,
as that comes to. What de' say, Sir? Did his first lustful prank begin at
Incest? Did ever any Young Man venture first on such a Crime? Is this your only
proof for it, because, forsooth, he was a beautiful Youth? Why don't you rather
say, I took him napping, as he was mixing Poison for me, he had such a Guilty
Conscience, that that set him on to take away my life. Let me tell you, a Son
had need have don an Infinite deal of mischief before, that his own Father may
believe, he is guilty of Incest. He was an handsome Youth, say you. Pray t^ll
me, was there ever any Son, that his own Mother did not count him handsome?
Alas, Mothers love their Children tho they are Lame, they prize 'm the more,
when they look pale or wan by any Disease or any Correction, yea, in such a
Case, their very Pity amounts even to the strength of Love. If a Child be
deformed, yet a poor Mothers Natural Affection is not hindered thereby, nor, if
he be Beautiful, is it increased. They Love 'm only, because they are their
Children. Children, Husband, I say, Children are not loved by a Mother with
wanton glances, she does not fetch 'm in with kind speeches and looks, but a
Mother sees something in her Son, whatever it be, that is more beautiful than
the Man: Perhaps a new Beauty might attract the Eye and conquer the Heart, but
there is no such thing in ones Children, for a Mother has her Son under her Eye
in his very Infancy, his Childhood arises up under the same, and so he creeps
up to write Youth. A Mother sees that which you call a Beautiful Son, every day
of the week, she daily admires and embraces him. She that has loved a Child so
long, pray when will she give over loving him? O thou Guilty Old Man, there is
no need of Love to urge to such a Villainy, Iron.
but of Madness and Fury rather. That a Mother may unlawfully lust after
something in her Young Son, she must needs first hate, that he is her Son, so
that her pious affection is so far from assisting her to commit such a
Wickedness, that she can never be wrought over to it, but she must forget the
Relation, she bears. Besides, this makes the Incest more incredible, that it
requires even Two Persons to be equally horn-mad. To an Incestuous Crime it is
not enough, that a Son be doted upon, but he must dote as much, o'th the other
side. And besides, who, pray should begin the Entreaty and the Courtship,
first; dare any Son propound a Question of that Nature to his own Mother? Or on
the other side, can any Mother hope to obtain such a request (if she should
make it,) of her Son? I ask you, Old Man, even in your greatest humor of
silence, (if you be not a most crafty and malicious Dissembler) whether you can
believe me guilty of so great a Crime? Can a Mother commit an Offense that a
Father cannot so much as name? What! de' say, he was a beautiful Shipling? Pray
in this place, let me interrogate the natural Affection of all Mankind in
general? Must this be, that if a Son has a sweeter Face than ordinary, and a
better meen'd Countenance, that presently his Mother must be afraid, forsooth,
to kiss or embrace him? If a Man has a Daughter cast in more beautiful Mould,
than other Females are, what must her Father fly from her salutes, or dread her
embraces. Let Heaven overthrow, with a witness, such impudent over-carefulness,
and such nefarious Feats. It Is but one degree below Incest, to fear, that it
may not be committed. I had rather have such simple plain-heartedness, that
does not fear Infamy, I had rather have naked and undisguised Passions, and an
unprojecting Piety; such as will not believe, that any such idle story can be
made of it, or told abroad. Let it hug a child unmeasurably, and never have don;
Report is not so much worth, that a Mother should love her Son, in solicitude
for her Chastity. For my part, Husband, if any body should ask me, I think that
all Mothers whatever, do so love their Children as if they doted on them. You
shall see my Eye always intent on his sweet pretty Face and Lo^ks, you shall
see me kemb his head, and set his Clothes at rights, I will fetch a sigh when
he goes from me, I Will skip for joy, when he comes again to me, I Will shake hands
with him, and we will hang about one another necks: I will not be satisfied
neither with kiss nor discourse, nor with the pleasure of his Company. This is
the cruellest thing of all in this damnable suspicion, an Incest cannot be fully
coined of any, but the very best of Mothers

My Lords, I would have abominated the Crime, if the Father had objected it to
his Son more publicly, or if he had rated him with outrageous words. No Man
has less reason to believe an Incest, than he that is ready to destroy his Son,
therefore. Besides, O you wicked Man, you do not only believe it, but you make
Questions about it? So little are you afraid to rake in this secret and
monstrous filthy puddle. Whereas, indeed, if the Vulgar had talked of an
Incest, you should have told them, there was no such thing: If the Town does
disgrace us, you should have kissed your only Son, and hugged your own poor
Wife, the more; you should have wrung them both together more closely in your
Arms. But Oh, a piece of cruelty never heard off, before! As if it were not
enough for a Father not to believe the Incest, which he cannot prove? And yet,
O thou that art grown old in wickedness, I should have endured thy wicked
suspicions the better, if thou had gone about to make a discovery of so great
a wickedness, and yet dissembled thy suspicion Observe our Talk, watch us in
s^cret, every moment both of day and night, li^e a prying Eves-dropper be thou
at our heels. But what have thou to do with such abrupt violent Courses? What,
with such extremities? You must needs believe the Incest before, that you might
have some color, to torture your Son. But you, Oh horrid! do search out a
business by Fire, Lash, and all other Artifices of Cruelty, upon the body of
your own Son, for which you ought not to have tortured one of your Servants,
nay it had been a petulant Cruelty in you to have put the worst Bond slave you
had, to so much Cruel suffering. You heat the Irons red-hot, you hoist the
n="*" See the marg. note p. 179.180
Strapado, thus, all in good time, you suspect an Incest by a Parricide. You
know not what headlong and scurvy in and out work you make, by the madness of
your wicked diligence. A Father that tortures his Son about an Incest, is not
like to believe him, tho he deny it.

My Lords, all Suspicions, that are grounded upon uncertainties, begin at the
wrong end, when they are first vented upon the body; for it is never well to
interrogate that part of a Man concerning his Conversation, that indites it is
Answers, not from Verity but from Interest: I don't yet tell you, who the
Person was, you tortured; who 'twas, that you put between the Rack and the
Tormenting-fire, of whom you had made your subtle discoveries before. It ought
'to be the last thing of all, that which t^rtures, and is a just punishment
too; Oh Heavens! I beseech you don't think, that his severe Gravity takes its
Alpha, from that which should l^^' been the last Letter of the Row. That Crime
can never be proved, where a Father can put no other body to the Rack, but his
own Son. There is but one only way for you, that I know off, to make your
defenc^, and that is, if you had used all other means possible to find out the
Incest, before you appealed to the Rock. What de' say? Did you ask the Servants
of the House? And was there not a Man that would confess any thing? Did you
inquire among the Maids, and was there no Pandress, amongst them? There were no
lustful amat^rious L^tters between us. O you wicked Old Man, you could not,
with all your flattery, c^iole out a word of Confession. You can make no
discovery at all, neither as an Husband, nor as a Master, nor as a Father. Go
thy ways now, and say, Report was full of the thing? Why, if upon Report thou
must Torture, yet still thy Examinations must pass through thy Wives
Maidservants, or through thy Sons Val^t de Chamber; it is better for thee to
vent thy Cruelty there: A Wife should first of all be repudiated, that this
great secret of the Family, forsooth, might be managed by a divorce, It exceeds
all savageness whatever, to torture a Son, on purpose to find out, whether he
deserved to be t^rtur'd, yea or no? You, the Father, examine your only Son by
Fire and Lash, I beseech you, what would you do, if he denied it? I know, you
would commend him highly, and afterward you would let him go, that you might
embrace his half-burnt vitals, and with a Fatherly piety again hug and cherish
his mangled and wounded breast. That Man, who puts his only Son to the Torture,
can have but one modest pretense for it, viz. that he ought to have been so
served. Sir, this business cannot but make you the worst of Fathers, you must
needs hate your Son so, that you can never make him amends. I had rather, you
would have poisoned him, or that you would have run him through with a Sword, that
you would have killed him unawares, and before he thought on it. He that does
not believe the Incest, ought not to Torture one; and if he does believe it, he
should immediately kill him outright.

But if you have a mind to have even your own Son tortured, if such a wicked
Report must be satisfied that way; yet I require of you, that you would not
lose the benefit of your Torturing; let it be don in the middle of the Town,
and in the very mouth of Fame; call in all those Malignant and Talkative
Prattle-boxes; and a Matter that concerns the whole Age we live in, let it be
inquired into, in the Hearing of all the People. He ought to be Tormented
before them all, if they all have had their Talks about him. Let every one of
the Company put what, Questions to him they please, let 'm believe their own
Ears, and their own Eyes. Why, I pray, must the poor Youth be hurried into a
blind remote Corner of the House? Such secrecy in Torturing was no ways fit,
whether your Son were Guilty of the Incest, or Innocent thereof. And yet I can
put you into a middle way, if you desired it, between so secret and so open.
You might have called our Kindred together, you might have sent for some
Friends, you might have placed some Grave Seniors about the Young Man, you
might have let the Magistrates be present, and such might have stood by, as the
City might have trusted. You should have given an Opportunity, either to
yourself to have proved it, if your Son had confessed; or to your Son, that, at
least, he might have denied it: But you, like a wicked cruel Man, do abridg him
of the benefit of his Counter-part of the Torture; you have brought it to that
pass, that now no body will think him Innocent, seeing he has been put upon
the Rack. What can a Torturing in secret do, against Peoples Talk? I declare
and protest, that hereby you do but administer more Fuel to malicious Reports;
and the uncertainty is rendered doubtfuller and greater, when a Man is Racked in
hugger-mugger. That Father ought to Torture his Son publicly, and in the Face
of the World, who would either have him Acquitted, or else, who is ready to
murder him.

Would you have me, my Lords, to aggravate this Odious and Unworthy Fact, by
alleging, that 'twas an own Father that Tortured his Son? What! Could not such
a necessary piece of service be committed to Journey-men, or Slaves, to
execute? Might not the common Executioner have done it, rather? Here Is an own
Father, while he was T^rmenting him, does not so much as turn his head of to'
side, nay he himself rent off his Clothes, 'twas he that tore his shirt, that
gave him the Lashes with his own hands, and that was so eager in jerking him up
and down, that he would not suffer him to breath his last; when Death had
almost closed his Jaws, who, but he, must pluck them asunder; he cherished his
life, Iron.
that his Patience might be exercised with longer Torments. Here Is a Father, is
there not, that deserved his Son, tho Innocent, should have told him, I did the
Fact. O thou wicked Fellow, I will not in this place cry out, that a Man, who
is Tortured against his Mother, should be also Tortured before her. Why is the
poor Woman excluded from her own Concern, and from the Examination, wherein she
has so great an Interest? She Loves him overmuch, and therefore, to choose, let
her be present at his exquisite Torments; mark her groans, take notice how she
sighs, and how she looks, if there be any real Crime committed, if you Torture
the Son, the Mother, perhaps, will confess. O thou Cruel Parricide, imagine that
at that very Instant of time, I brake in upon thy Close-lock'd room, and that
whilst thou art hastening him to the Rack, I laid hold upon thee, and say,
Forbear striking, set aside the burning Coals a while. Whatever Confession thou
have extorted from him, tell it out and spare not; but remember thou have don
that to thy Son, for which no body in the World ought to believe thee. Why do
thou hurry and over-turn his Soul with Grief and Pain? Why do thou make such
frequent Intervals, for thy obstinate Cruelty to Torment the Man between every
Hoist, if thou think it in vain for thee to tell or declare what thou have
heard? An Incest cannot be believed, unless the Party accused be heard, too. My
Lords, I my self too should not but wonder, if such an Impious way of
interrogating by Torture could possibly have any other Issue but death. This is
the modesty, forsooth, of the Parricide, no other end can those things have,
which ought never to have been begun. Thou coverest the horridness of thy
Torturing Villainy with the pretense of a greater wickedness that thou have
found out, of which, forsooth, thou can not rid thy self, but by the death
of thy Son. But I know very well, what it is that puts thee thus to it, thy
Cruelty could make the poor Youth to confess nothing at all. He that dies under
Torture, overcomes his Torturer. And now it is no wonder, after such pranks as
these, that thou can not find a Tongue to speak, nor have not a word to say.
Thou have torn thy only Son in pieces without any body by, thou have murdered
him in secret, so that now, forsooth, none but you must know how to conceal the
Villainy, and in a Parricide you seek for matter of sorrow, elsewhere. It Is a
preposterous thing to kill ones Son, and then to be ashamed of it, afterward.
It Is not fit, but That should be known abroad, for which a very Parricide
counts himself Innocent. Choose which side thou will, thou must either condemn
thy Torturing thy Son, or else thy silence, thereupon. That which must not be
told, why should you make any Examination about? Perhaps, O thou cruel Old
Fellow, thou would have it thought, that thou art silent upon thy Sons
account, as if he were alive. Nay, but if that be true that thou suspectest,
then thou art excused from all the religious duty of a Father, all pious regard
of natural affection is Cancelled. If he justly deserved this, his Torture, nay
his very dying under it, was far too little for him to suffer, in a way of
avengement. Would thou have his supposed Confession to be avenged? Then hale
out his Corpse, and upon every wound make a preachment of its Cause. It Is more
than one Man can do, to Confess why he Tortured; and to tell no Cause at all,
why he Murdered. What say thou, thou Tiger of a Parricide? What have thou
destroyed thy Son by Lash and Red-hot Irons. Can thou pluck out those Bowels,
that had their Origin from thine own; can thou shed that Blood, which came
from thy own veins; and that too, not in a mad furious Fit, but (as you
yourself would have it thought) by Advice and Grave deliberation? Can thou
hold thy Peace over the Wounds of thy Only Son, and do thou stand, as if thou
would fright folks, over his disjointed Limbs; and when the Mother, or
rather, when the whole Town asks thee the cause, thou say's^ only, I am the
Man, that killed him? Must she be content with such an Answer at random?

Do You think now, Sir Husband, that it is only the Mother interrogates you about
this? Nay, I Will tell you, the solicitude of all Mankind does require an account
of his death, at your hands. All Parents stand about their Children, as if they
were afraid* of, or amazed at, them: Brothers, tho* they love never so much,
yet dare not, for their lives, embrace one another; The Innocent way of
saluting by a kiss, between Fathers and Sons in Law, is quite broke off. How
long will thou sen us together by the Ears, by the different Construction we
make of thy silence? If nothing was don, that the modesty of our times need be
ashamed off, than why, pray, do you use such dubious and suspectful words? But
if you have found out a Monstrous Villainy, as bad as ever was Chronicled in
Fable, then, Lord have mercy upon me, too, pray kill me, as well as your Son*
Let me tell you, in an Incest you ought to conceive the greater hatred against
the Female, especially since, you see, that she comes against you in open
Court, that she imitates the Confidence of those, that are wholly Innocent, and
that she is so angry with you, because she cannot get a word from you. When you
Tortured your Son, by reason of the Report that was raised of him, as you say,
and then you killed him too under his Torture, it is more than a matter of mere
Indifferency, that we should know neither. This is it, my Lords, that the
Innocent Mother grieves at, this is it she cannot bear, that this Parricide of a
Husband is as mute as a Fish. But soft and fair, perhaps he will speak by and by.
Oh Sir, we know what you aim at, like a wicked Man as you are, we know why you
fetch such deep sighs from your silent breast, and why you would have us think,
you are ready to faint, when you begin to speak out; you would hereby procure
some Authority to your Lies, would ye? And to make us believe, that what you
would have spoken should have been the very Truth, you must, forsooth, seem to
confess against your Will. Yet speak out and spare not, the Mothers Innocence
is such that she can bear all your base Lies. Alas, Sir, how mightily are you
Tormented, that, now she is here in Court, you cannot abash her with some horrid
Exclamation. It Is not words, that you want against the poor Woman, but
arguments rather; you are not tongue-tyed, but proof-tyed, Sir. All that you
can do, is, you turn us over to Infamous Reports still, so that we shall never
have don with the malignity of Folks Tongues. He that neither Condemns nor yet
Acquits me, when he is asked and desired so to do, is well content, that the
Bruit should hold still.

Take a Proof, I beseech you, of the modesty, forsooth, of this Husband and of
this Father: He is contented, that his Wife should be believed to be
Incestuous, tho she cannot be proved to be so. Did ever any Man find out such
wicked Arts, was there ever any Man of such a bloody disposition, before?
Because he cannot prove what he once said, he seeks to be believed, because he
will not say it again. Art thou mute, do thou hold thy peace, thou savage, cruel
Man? Ay now, thou have found out a Torture, fit for such a Father, as thou art.
But hear, what the poor Woman proclaims from her simple innocent grief? Thou
shall never, says she, bring it about, O thou craftiest of Parricides, to make
me desist from hugging even the dead Corpse of my Son. I were an Incestuous Slut
indeed, if I would moderate my groans and refrain my Tears: Come therefore to
my Sons Funeral, you Children all, come, you Parents all, watch my Plaints,
observe my Sighs. If I am guilty, if I have committed any offense, I will
freely confess it. Behold, I cast my self upon the Fatal Bier, and as I embrace
his lacerated ^imbs, and his Torture-scorch'd body, I cry out, now I hold my
only Son in my Arms, now, poor Woman, I hug and embrace my Fair one. This was
that, which did even transport a woeful Mother beyond the rate of an Ordinary
Affection. O thou cruel Husband I loved a Child, that was just a dying;
disgrace my extraordinary and impatient Love, as much as thou will, yet I seem
to myself to have been defective to have been a slow-back, and to have lost
much of my mirth and joy: No Woman living ever loved her Child too much. I
excuse my self to thee, says she, O most Innocent Youth, that my misery was
such, that I have not yet accompanied thee to thy Grave.

It Is true, I ought not to have lived an hour after thee, but I could not dye,
as long as my Husband was in this mute and silent posture. I will cut off the
thread of my tedious and loathed life, but first give me leave to pay my
Funeral rite^ to your Ghost in the presence of the whole City* when, the
Parricide being condemned, notwithstanding his crafty silence, it will
evidently appear, that thou discoveredst nothing at all. Pardon me, that tho I
had lost my Child, yet I was willing to hold out, till this Cause was decided
in Court. For I was afraid, lest if I had hastened my End with too much
Impatience, and a rash precipitate piety, the Parricide would have raised
another Story about my Death, also.

Infamis in Matrem, OR, A Son accused (by his Father) of Incest with his own
Mother.
DECLAMATION XIX.
The Argument
The same with That of the former Declamation.

For the Husband against his Wife.
IT was a debt justly due, my Lords, to the pityable modesty of my sad Orbity,
that we should now, even all of us, bold our Peace; and after such strange and
prodigious matters and discourses, this ought to have been the concluding Story
of my woeful House and Family, that I, being a Father, did destroy my own Son.
But because my Wife, who was always a Woman upon Extremes, besides all that I
have either don or suffered a little before, thinks fit to Torment me further
with a grievous Accusation, I appear in Court, to desire of your Lordships,
that you would not think I study silence, on purpose to make an advantage
thereof, for my own ends, in this Suit. No, I do not hold my Peace because I
dispatched my Son, but rather I dispatched him that I might purchase leave to
hold my Peace. I wish with all my heart, my Lords, that I could deny that I was
the Man that dispatched him; I wish it were fit for me to enter into the whole
series of my woeful necessity, and that I could stop this mouth of mine, from
telling it. Does any body wonder at this Patience of mine, in such a Case? That
violent chafe, which lately so furiously hurled me upon my own Son, is now
spent by its own fierceness. Whatever within me might have broken forth into
Talk, is ended in the Parricide, and is silenced in the Orbity. So that now I
have no kind of Passion at all, but what is for suffering, for bearing, and for
enduring all miseries whatever. It Is impossible I should do both in my Sons
Case, that is, first kill him, and then confess, why he deserved ^t. And
therefore, my Lords, I can never sufficiently wonder, yea stand amazed, at this
Woman, who, besides her Guiltless Conscience, forsooth, even because of her
very Sex ought to have showed more modesty in my miseries, yet quarrels against
my silence. She is at such a Combat within her self, and with such an unusual
kind of Impatience too, as ever was mentioned in any Story. For she complains,
that the People of the Town are Talkative, and that the Father himself is
silent. Nor is she contented with her Husbands plain Confession, who vows that
he dissembles not at all, and that he knows nothing, tho pressed by such an
Authoritative Suit before your Lordships to discover, it, yet she had rather
make a secrecy, forsooth, of my silence: Whether this be the Madness or the
Innocence of her Orbity, let her own wretched grief look to it, she herself may
know well enough in her own mind, what my Son said, seeing she thinks, I have
something to say, that I will not speak out.

And therefore, I beseech you, my Lords, let not the pity of the Mothers
Orbity, only, discompose your thoughts; pray, don't think that the great sense
of this highest of calamities resides only there, where you see more Tears, and
hear more groans. If a comparison be made between me and my Wife, of the Two
you ought rather to pity me, who have both lost my Son and killed him too. Of
us, Two Parents, I am the most unhappy, my Lords, let the Woman complain as
much as she will, for I am both a Sufferer and Actor too in procuring that
suffering. Oh the happy consciousness of the Mothers Ignorance, which can hold
out to ask Questions in the Case. But a greater kind of Impatience, and a
greater Passion torments me, seeing I killed my Son, and yet cannot either
discover it, nor yet repent at all, that I killed him. O unhappy Old Man! O
woeful Patience! It I could speak, I might make a long Oration, even upon this
Head too? My Lords, heretofore we were the happiest Parents in the World,
whilst we fawned upon the, as yet untainted, Infancy of our only Child; and
the entire prosperity of our House and Family did continue, as long as we
equally delighted in him, one as much as the other, as long as we equally loved
him, and as long as the Town could say no more of us, but this, That we bad a
very amiable Son, betwixt us. But when he grew up to that Age, in which
beautiful Youths use to be insolently proud, on the account of their bodily
accomplishments, then he was very haughty and arrogant, he would take no
Employment at all upon him, he spent the Flower of his Age to no advantage at
all, as to Private or Public Concerns, either. O Heavens! What strange and
lamentable Talk was there abroad, about the Young Man? He was cried out upon,
and reproached by every body, he was as a Mark for all Men in their discourses
to condemn, until at last he himself perceived that the whole Town, with one
consent, were much troubled about When he once knew that, he went very seldom
abroad, as if he had a mind to avoid meeting his Father, or to see any body in
the streets. It Is an hard matter to express in words, how much the Youth was
abominated, and how much he was blamed, all the Town over. Some said of him,
that he might possibly in time kill his Father; others said, that he deserved,
his Father should kill him. In this case, my Lords, what should an unhappy Old
Man do? For now the Report had reached his Father too, and my ears were even
grated with hearing it. I durst not ask many Questions about it, neither yet
could I conceal it. He Is much mistaken, that thinks I did, what I did, by
deliberation or advice; no, 'twas the very Impetus, and the present Chafe of my
Spirit, just at that very Instant, that pushed me on. A Father cannot have the
heart to prepare Torture for his Son, beforehand.

In our now ruful House, there is a remote room, severed from all the rest,
where it is as dark as Pitch, and the passage to it is as sad, it is a fit place
for the worst of Villainies to be acted in; and even an own Father might have
the confidence of perpetrating a bloody Fact there, without suspicion of
discovery. As I was ranging all about the House, by reason of my distracted
thoughts, I lighted at last upon this room, as far as I can understand,
unawares to my Son. And the truth is, he, as soon as ever he saw me, stood
amazed like a surpised Offender, and he fled back in a trembling posture; I
think his reason was, that I should ask him no Questions. I rushed in upon him
with a great deal of have and eagerness, I had not so much as a Freeman or a
Slave with me just as the Fatality of the present moment acted me, so I
assaulted him with handy-blows; and also I caught up any thing that was near,
that my Grief told me might serve for a Weapon, with which I laid about me,
beyond the strength of my Old Age. I set upon him at once and altogether (not
by degrees, nor by divided and intermittent pains,) with the Fire that was next
at hand, and with the Lashing-whips, that chance put into my hands: 'Twas a
great part of the secrecy, that I should do it my self; O Heavens! What
contumacy, what an hardened Patience was there in him, when he was Tortured by
his Father, that he would not call out for his Mothers help? No, the Youth made
no resistance at all, he did not at all lift up so much as an hand, against me,
nor did he cry out for any one bodies help: His eyes were only a little sunk
and dejected in his head, yea, as if he had felt no lashes at all, but had been
Tortured only by my eyes, he received all the blows upon his Face; that comely
Face, as if he himself had been angry with it, was all that he opposed to my
Fire and Lash. I give this last Testimony, my Lords, to his Modesty, he was
Slain when he was e'ne willing to dye, himself. My Lords, I commend the
Patience of the Mother, that whereas she was for the most part at home, and
perhaps at that time not far from the place, yet she would not come in, she
dared not to interrupt me. And besides, I commend the good Fortune of my own
hands, that none of my Kirdred or of my Friends did rush in upon me; for if any
body living had been so bold, as to ask me about my Son, in that nick of time,
I should certainly have killed him. And yet I buried his torn Tortured Limbs, I
allowed him a Funeral, I gathered his Bones together. My Wife then laid no
violent hand on the Bier, while the Funeral rites were a performing; her raised
no envious reflection upon me by beating her breast, and tearing and rending
her very dugs. How comes she now to break forth, and to be transported, to this
Monstrous Impatience? She never asked me a word about him, at home. O thou
unhappy Mother! I my self can proclaim before all Children and Parents, yea in
the hearing both of God and Man too, that I loved my Son very well, but not by
the way of effeminate Kisses or Tears, but I loved him with a Manly Love, even
with grief and patience. He was my only Son, and if a Party of his Enemies had
hemmed him in amongst them in the Field, I would have ventured my Life to have
freed him from their Clutches; if a sudden Fire had closed about him at home, I
had carried him out upon my shoulders, tho I had ventured the burning of some
of my Limbs; I delivered him from all evil Reports, I sent him far enough from
malignant Town-talk. I have got the Advantage now of that, which is called
Natural Affection. I did the difficultest thing of all, that I did not rather
kill myself.

She accuses me of Ill-treatment, forsooth. What, Wife, do you think, that a
Father has not suffered Punishment enough, after all this danger and toil,
that he may not make any benefit to himself, for killing his Son? What, are you
not ashamed that you are angry with the Parricide still? What have you to do
with the Law, which was given you to plead in a case of inferior affections?
That Law remedies slighter Complaints, not deep Wailings; it provides, indeed,
for the Female, yet not as a Mother, but only as a Wife. What do you again call
forth my woeful modesty to the view of the People? Indeed! Do you raise up
matter for a new scurvy Report? Nay then, I have quite lost the benefit of my
secrecy. I had managed all things so, that nothing should have been asked, nor
nothing at all said: But what is more impudent, what is more unworthy, than for
a Woman to think she has as much right over her Children as the Mam, so that
in her opinion the Right of Father and Mother are but equal, as if we did not
know, that the Power of life and death, in relation to Children, is committed
to us, Men? It Is no Privilege, to kill a S^n when there is just cause to do it;
and there is no Man will ever do it only on purpose, because he may. I held
out, to rend the bowels of my only Son. Forgive me, if you cannot believe me: No
Man ever killed his own Son, for mere hatred of him. An hated Son is not so
much worth. This is a thing in Fathers, which is dreadful even unto Parricide,
that they love their Children, that they relieve them, that they think they
cannot otherwise take pity of them any other way, than that. There is no reason,
my Lords, that the Plea of the weaker Sex should take you off from the due
consideration of my Miseries. It Is a thing of greater Affection to kill ones
Son, than to avenge him. And therefore cease, Woman, to weary me with your
Questions. What! Does not he answer all in one word, about his Son, that says,
I slew him: And tho he makes no Exclamations, and tho his mouth be as it were
stopped, yet he denies nothing, that confesses that. But the very Immanity of
some horrid Offenses argues the Innocence of those, that commit them, I slew my
Son, not as an hair-brained Father, nor as one out of my wits. Whoever now
pity's a Man that is transported, and as it were past sense and feeling, slays
him outright. You see an Aged Man, weltring in his own blood, and, with his
hands all-bloody, lying over the dead body of his only Son, whose bowels he
counts sacred and dear to him, all rent and burnt as they are. I dread so much
as to look upon his Carcass, I stand a loof of from it, as from a body, that is
struck dead with Lightning from the Firmament of Heaven. It Is true, in some
Crimes, it is enough to shut ones Eyes, to turn away ones Face, to hold ones
peace, to stand amazed, and to leave incredible calamities to their Causes,
without further inquiry. Take pity upon me, ask me no more Questions, make no
more Demands. De' think, Ple say, spare the Age we live in, spare the Husband,
spare the Father? Nay rather, spare him, that was Slain.

My Lords, hear, I beseech you, a new Crime objected against an Husband. It Is
his silence, he is questioned in Court about. Heretofore your Indignation,
Dame, could not bear our ill-words, and your Matronly Passion seemed to say,
What! Husband, cannot you forbear foul Language toward me, the Wife of your
bosom? What! has your Lavish Tongue no respect for me, that you do so easily
break forth into railing Language, and twit me even with what you please, you
cry out upon me, and whilst you allow too much liberty to your Tongue, you give
occasion to the Vulgar, to raise stories upon me. But you, Woman, object that
as a Crime against me, which was never counted so in any Man living before;
that only piece of Innocence in my manners, which is reprehended by speaking,
is maintained by my silence. See now, why my hands, and why my words seem to be
such great Offenders. It Is with the one we defame, and with the other, that we
torture and kill. Would you know, Madam, how little reason yon have to complain
of my silence? I tell you, you have been a very happy Woman, if we had all been
Tongue-tyed, too. Suppose, I lay aside a while the deep Causes of my silence,
and only say, It Is not fit for me, to discover a secret. My Lords, of all the
serious and solid endowments, that the mind of Man may be furnished with, there
is no one, in my opinion, harder either to get, or to keep, than virtuous
silence; yea, Men are so prone to offend by Talkativeness themselves, that they
cannot abide to see a constant Taciturnity, no not in others. My Woman calls
this a Great Crime in me, which was an High piece of Wisdom in the Ancient
Philosophers, those Original Directors of Men's minds and manners; and for
maintaining thereof all their Lives long, some Men have been more admired in
woeful old stories, then those have been, who were so privy to the profound
secrets of Nature, as to settle Rules for the ebbing and flowing the Sea, and
for the Courses of the Celestial Constellations. I beseech you, what a piece of
bold Intrusion is this, to break open a breast, that is stiffly resolved upon an
holy silence? To unlock that spirit, that was shut and even settled upon
secrecy, and which could not be loos'ned therefrom, neither by Joy, nor by
Grief; neither by Necessity nor by Fortune? He that complains of one that is
silent, his mouth will open wider against him, if once he begin to talk.
Besides, there is not such an Intimate and All-blending Union between Husband
and Wife, but that, notwithstanding the near Relation between them; yet the
heart of each of them may lawfully retain some proper secret, apart to himself.
Add hereto, that a Man would not impart every thing, no not to his own Flesh
and Blood; and it is a certain kind of reverential respect: you sometimes bear,
even to your dearest Relations, that you would not have'm know some things,
that are to be concealed: some things you cannot get out, no not by Lash or
Rack: Yea, many have been so stout, as to dye under Torture rather than
discover a Secret. Go too then, if you think fit, set us run over, by a
diligent inquiry, both Sexes and every Condition and Age whatever; and we shall
find, that, there is no breast without a secret corner for private Guilt; and
no life so innocent, but it has reason, as to some things, to say Mum. Even
you, Madam Wife, if your Husband should rummage all the secrets of your Soul by
his searching Interrogatories, I believe, he might find something in you too,
that you would be loath to confess. If this be so in you, Dame, then I hope
silence is much more proper for an Old Man; it is more modest in an Husband;
it is more sacred in a Father. Let me tell you, Woman, both of us have reason to
be e'ne ashamed of our wealwess. Our Young Son, e'ne now, was more constant
than we, for he was resolved to dye, that we might hold our peace. You see,
Woman, to what ill Interpretations you expose your Grief? People say abroad,
that you Question me on purpose, because you know that Ple endure all extremity
whatever, rather than speak out. For who is there, pray, in the whole Town, but
knows that I am inflexibly and unalterably silent, when I am once resolved upon
it? What Man can be ignorant, with what a steely patience I use to endure every
thing? As now of late, when I was even killing my own Son, I sent not to much
as a sigh nor a Groan, as an Harbinger, before the Fact; I did nothing in the
World, that either you with all your quick-sighted and forecasting fear, nor my
poor Son neither, that was to be killed, could interpret in the least, that I
had a Parricidal Intent, to bereave myself of my Child. De' think, I make a
Boast of this secrecy of mine, that I never allowed myself to make any
Proclamation of the thing in the street, or in the Public Assemblies of the
People? Alas, I never made any Complaint of the Young Man, no not to yourself;
neither did I ever study any advantage against him, by telling People, that his
Mother too did hate him, as much as I. It Is in vain, Madam, for you to think to
extort that from me by your Accusation, that neither my very Miseries
themselves, nor my Grief, nor the consideration of my Orbity could never draw
out. No, tho you put me to the Torturing-fire, yet I Will hold out, I Will endure
to the last, I have already suffered that, which was the hardest to be born,
viz. I have slain my Son.

He put my Son, says she, to the Torture. In brief, my Lords, pray, hear the
reason. Guilty or Innocent is it not all one, if the matter be known to every
body? The Malignant talk of the Town had made the Young Man to be hated of all
QChildren, and also to be a burden to all Parents. What shall I do, O my Soul,
in this Case? How shall I come off? How shall I clear my self? To do nothing at
all upon such high Infamous Reports, were all one as to believe 'm to be true;
or would you have me go to every particular Person to convince him, would you
have me cry out aloud against the Talk of the Vulgar, and so pick a quarrel
with airy Fame? Perhaps 'twere enough for your weak Sex, barely to deny the
Fact, but it is fit that I should vindicate my only Son at another gates rate.
Ple free him from their scurvy Reports, not with a few quarrelsom words, but in
such a way as Ple make the whole Town e'ne amazed, and ashamed too, of their
scandals. De' think, 'twas upon my Sons ewn account, that I Tortured him? No, I
did it to raise an Odium upon this naughty Town, of Ours. I seemed to my self,
with those very blows I gave my Son, to make as many gashes in their defaming
Tongues; and with those Fires I scorched him, to shrivel up their false
Reports. When ones own Son is accused of Incest, the only way to prove him
Innocent, is, by Torturing him. God forbid, that you should be made acquainted
with the full dimensions of that grief, that makes a Father able to Rack his
Son. There is nothing more unhappy than that Father, who, tho he has killed his
only Son, yet he is not satisfied therewith. I freely confess, 'twas I, that
did destroy my Young Son by Lash and Fire, for all Parental respect and
reverence had lost its place in his heart; and we were fain to make Apologies
and Excuses for him every day, to buoy him up against the Talk of the Town: And
the truth is, he was one, that carried himself amongst us more like a wanton
Amoroso, than a dutiful Son. Would you know, Madam, would you know, I say, what
great reason I had to put him to the Rack? I Will tell you, even after he had
been Racked, he deserved to be slain.

And yet, Dame Mother, if you have such a mind, forsooth, to hear the cause,
pray, come near to me, and lend me your Ear. I, like a poor unhappy Father, did
foresee that one time or other he would break forth into some notorious
Villainy, because he lived an idle life and squandred away his Time at home, in
the Chimny-corner. He had not the least desire to Travel, that he might better
his Reason thereby; nor was he willing to trail a Pike, nor to venture to Sea;
he would not study the Law, nor undertake any Office in the Commonwealth: Nay,
he would not so much as think of Marrying a Wife; Besides, I had corrected him
so often, that he grew weary of his Father; and his guilty Conscience, because
it was not amended by my chastisements, flew so high, as to curse and bann me.
It came to that pass, that he was even afraid to meet me, he durst not come
into the room, if I had been there; he avoided all discourse and conversation
with me; he would not come so near, as even to be kissed by me. In a word, to
give you a full prospect of the wickedness of his spirit, He was a Boy that
extremely hated, and was afraid grievcusly of, his own Father. Seeing then, my
Son was condemned by the Vote of the whole Town, and that every body wondered I
would suffer him to live so long, de' call it Torture, that I put him to? No,
'twas a plain Execution, tho but a slow and lingering one: You call it a
Racking, forsooth, but, I say, 'twas a legal capital punishment, and 'twas the
Conclusion of all my Miseries. There is cause to Torture a Man, if he has no
other way, but to deny.

And yet, pray, observe what great Moderation I used, even in my Racking of
him? For I was not hurried on, by a rash headstrong Impulse, to fly upon him
presently, and all of a sudden; nor was my impatient grief so mad and blind, as
to give him his death-blow at once; No, that Son must needs be killed in cool
blood, and by deliberation, that is Tortured before. I was so favorable as to
make some stop, to give him a little longer time and space. You see, I might
have given a far greater occasion to malign Reports, if I had a mind to it? For
if I had killed him in that close Room, only with the sword, or by hacking him
to pieces, then his death had been, as if he had been caught in the Fact. And
therefore, Madam, you have no reason to raise a double Odium upon me in the
Case, as that I Tortured him and Murdered him, too. His death is the only
Argument to prove his Torture was necessary. It Is that, and none but that, can
be called Parricide, when a Fathers torture a Son, that survives after his
Racking. De' think, 'twas possible, the Youth could have lived, that could no
ways be relieved, but by his death? He that I had once began to justify
against malign Reports, I did not give him back again to be black'd by the same
Infamous mouths, nor would I send him out of his Fathers Closet-room, to be
made a gazing-stock, or to be tumbled and tossed on Peoples Tongues, any more:
Yea, Mistress Mother, my forecast was for you too, I took him off, that you
might not be put to the trouble of Questioning him, as well as I. As for the
Youth, I knew that, after his Torture, he would be ashamed to live, he would
never have born, to have had so many Questions put to him by every body that he
met, nor would he have endured to have made, tho but negative, Answers to them.
But, Woman, you must renounce your private affection, I believe, it concerned
our whole House and Family, in point of Innocence, that the Boy should not
rather kill himself.

My Lords, my Wife is sensible now, that it makes nothing for the Equity of her
Complaint, either that I Tortured my Son, or that I Slew him. And therefore she
Queries, what he discovered, tho she don't know, whether he discovered any
thing at all. What say thou, O most impatient of Mothers? What art thou
concerned in nothing else about the death of thy Son, but only of what he said?
Well then, if I tell thee what he said, then it seems thou will forgive me the
Parricide, and I shall not hear a word more of my Torturing him. Oh, how unadvised
still is this Woman's madness! She asks, what the Boy spoke in his Torments, as
if she did not know; and yet, she thinks, I got nothing out of him, as if she
did really know, what he had said. I beseech thee, upon the account of our
Conjugal Union, and upon the account of our Common Miseries, don't press me to
rip open the Arcanum of the Parricide, don't make thy own Innocence an
additional burden to our calamity? Let the Young Man look to it, as to his own
Merit, for my own part, I can now reverence his Funerals, and after my only
child's death, I again put on the Bowels of a Father. We ought to bear a greater
Reverence to our Children, after they are dead than before; and there is
nothing more unbecoming Paternal affection, than to insult over a Man after he
is dead and gone. My very loss of my child reconciles me to him, and the cruelty
of his death has quite appeased my wrath. Yea moreover, when I cast back my
thoughts upon the whole process of that secret Fact; a silent kind of
compassion informs me, what a great deal of Reverence I owed to my Son, in that
I was able to Torture him alone, and alone also, to put him to death.

Yet, do you, forsooth, persevere in our old course of Interrogatories, do you
force me, do you press upon me, still? I Will be quits with you, Woman, and I Will
ask you as many Questions on my side; Pray, if you are so inquisitive to know,
what I asked and what he answered, why did you not break in upon the
Torturing-room, it was not guarded by the Father, either by Sentinel or
Officer? Had it not been a great deal better for you, the Mother, to have come
to him, yourself? Might not your Interrogatories have had the more force, if
they had been urged, when we had been all together? Would he not have spoken a
great deal more to you, than to another, think you? And who, I pray, Woman,
kept you back from showing your Affection; who hindered you from coming in, who
shut you out of doors? Oh now, I see, it is your modesty, forsooth; without
Question, you were afraid, that if we had been all together in that lonesom
room, then People would have said, that the Mother had Murdered her Son, too.
And yet you press upon me still; and tho a poor Old Man do shut his mouth, yet
you are almost ready to pluck his jaws asunder, to make him speak. Seeing you
are so importunate, suppose, I should say only This, I came lately from the
dilatory Commission of so horrid an Offense, that I don't yet mind, what I
heard; my thoughts are yet wholly taken up with my Parricide; and seeing 'twas
all the Sons I had, all those Lashings and other Torments that rent and tore in
pieces, his (now) dead body, are again yet fresh in my mind. It Is a very hard
thing, for a Parricide to be capable of any hame, but I even fainted away in my
Orbity, out of astonishment, out of madness, and out of silence. All credit is
taken away from what I shall say, my words have no Authority at all; he has no
reason to speak, that cannot be believed if he do speak. And therefore, Woman,
leave Questioning your Husband; a Father that has Slain his Son already, ought
not now either to acquit or to accuse him.

Yet still, she urges, What did he speak, when you were a killing him? O the
piteous Innocence of my Parricide, that it is not any Lawful Power or
Magistrate; not any of our Kindred or Friends; no nor you, the Folks of the
Town, tho you are always tattling and ill-will'd enough, that ask me the
Question. You are all hush't, and as mute as a Fish. Unhappy I, what is the
matter? What do you all know it, already! Suppose, Woman, all the Answer I give
you should be this, That things, too big to be believed, do even stop Men's
Mouths, so that they cannot relate them. Some things are so great, that human
speech cannot reach high enough to express them. But for your part, pray, do
you believe, that I was in a perfect Frenzy, and that I was stark mad, so
that what I saw was but a mere Phantome, and that I imagined that I heard, what
Mr. Nobody spoke. Yet let me tell you, if any thing shows me not to be mad,
'twas this, and this alone, that I hold my Peace. Suppose I should answer you,
that he said nothing, that he spoke not a word, would you believe me? But I am
certain, you would much less believe, what he did really say. Take then in
short, Good Woman, a true account, why I killed the Youth, under his Torments.
'Twas this, I tortured him, and yet asked him no Questions. If any noise at all
did reach your Ears from that very remote part of the House, 'twas my Gro^ning
not his, 'twere the Pliants that proceeded from my own inward pain. Do thou
ask me, why he said nothing? 'Twas, because he had nothing that I was willing
to know, or that I ought to hear. In my Torturing him, I aimed at nothing else
but silence, which his life could never have afforded me. He that is Slain on
the Rack is racked for the nonce, that he may be Slain. Do you think, his
Torture was such, as we use to the bodies of our Gally-slaves and Bondmen? And
therefore you say, like a Cunning Old Man, I managed the Sea the marg note in
p. 179.180.
Equuleus up and down, I held the Cords on the account of Cruelty, that so his
Limbs might be dislocated joint by joint, and the structure of his whole body
be, as it were, unbing'd by Inches. No, his life was destroyed by his own
silence, the Lash and the Fire stopped his Speech and his Breath together. He
seemed to me to suppress his Groans, and to stifle his Sighs; and he so carried
himself in his silence, as if he were Tortured by one that knew all, as well as
himself. Do you wonder at this Contumacy in a Son, and this Patience in a Young
Stripling? There can no other Answer be made to a Father, when he Tortures his
Child, than to be willing to dye, rather than to confess. And therefore, Woman,
I answer enough to satisfy modest Enquirers, I was the Man, that Slew him.

He is much mistaken, that thinks, I Will lay ordinary Crimes to his Charge, nay
on the contrary, I proclaim to all the World, that he was no luxurious Fellow,
he did not discredit himself by Courting any Miss, he did not offend as other
Youngsters use to do; No, it was a Monstrous and unexpressible Guilt, 'twas a
prank, that I was loath to catch him at, and 'twas such as I could by no means
bear. Does any body wonder, that I did not disinherit him, and that I was not
contented with the usual revenge of abused Fathers, only to kick him out of
doors. 'Twas your cursed and unadvised Passion, Good Woman, that would not
suffer me so to do. You, that pardoned a Son, as it were in spite of my
severity; you, that could not hate him as well as I, would doubtless have
followed after him, if he had been abdicated. Suppose the Youth had spoken
something or other, yet for my part I had not an ear to hear. For I did not sit
there, like some Justice of Peace, nor, while others were a Torturing him, did
I act the part of a Father and Judge. No, at that time, I suffered all things
with him, and did them too. Alas, I was not at leisure to hearken to what he
said, now could I take notice of his Groans nor reckon his Sighs; my eagerness,
my Grief, my Orbity, and my Parricide, these were the things that took me up,
wholly; I did all that I did, in precipitation and have. It Is the same
Affection in a Father, to Torture, that he may know; and to kill, that he may
not know.

But, says she, your silence tends to my disgrace. What, poor Woman, is this
the first time, that you are solicitous for your Credit, now you have lost your
only Son, do you begin now to bethink what Men say of you? Iron.
What! Was a Son cast away, de' say, to make you to be ashamed, and cried out
upon? If that had been the thing aimed at, was it not enough to leave the whole
matter to Report? But I, Good Woman, interposed my self between you, and your
Ill-report, and as I stood, as 'twere, in the midst between Mother and Son, I
committed the Parricide: I Slew my only Son, that all People in their talk
might reflect on no body, but myself. Otherwise; if I aimed at what, you think,
I do, how long de' think will my silence hold? To what time shall I put off my
speaking, which you think I so voluntarily suppress? I acknowledge myself Guilty
in Court, and yet I deny that I know any thing at all. Here Is an Excellent way
indeed to spite folks, Iron.
when I would speak against my Wife, I acted so, that no body may believe me. I
confess therefore, that I have brought nothing to a sure, certain, and
unquestionable pinch, and that is the reason, why I contended with my Son, even
unto death. Those Torments that kill, do not resolve the Question. What said
he, says she still! Happy were thou, poor Woman, if thou did not know, what
he said. What! Art thou not contented with the Testimony of thy own Conscience?
Is it not enough for thee, that he had nothing, either to deny or confess? Do
thou require, to know the words he spoke upon the Rack, do thou compel and
enforce me to speak them? I protest, you act so that you cannot deny, what I
shall say. What said he, say you? Did he say, that he had prepared Poison, to
make away his Parents? You deny any such thing. Did he talk any Treasonable
words? You deny that, too. Did he carry on any Tyrannical Design? This also
will not be granted by you. Let me say what I will, yet still you will deny it. O the
unwary simplicity of a Good Conscience! What! Art thou not afraid, that if thou
compellest me to speak, I shall make many a story of my own head, and forge
abundance of Lies? If thou can know, Woman, whether I Lie or no, then thou
know as well what he said. What said he, de' say, again? He said just nothing.
What said he? He said every thing. He cursed the Age we live in, he cast a
great Odium upon the times, he used soul Execrations against his Father, and
bitter Reproaches against his Mother. What did he say? He said more, than ever
I asked him. O Woman, thou have overcome, at last, even my obstinate silence,
hear then my brief and succinct answer to your Question, What said he? He said,
that which you ask; He said, that which you think. O that any body could have
set you down in that secret room at that time, then you had seen a new kind of
Torture! I stood like an Old Man, begirt with furies of a monstrous fierceness,
my hands were stretched out, one was armed with Fire, the other with Lash; I
stood upon the very Face and Eyes of him, as he lay along on the ground, and
cried out, O thou Furious, O thou Mad Boy, hold thy Peace. And he on the other
side was as much amazed, and even beside himself, as if all the passages had
been quite burnt up, or else cut off, by which Men's Grief passes out into
words. How often, when I put the burning Coals and Red-bot-irons to any part of
his body, would he offer to me his very breast? O how greedily, and how widely
did he gape, to take in the very Flames, that so he might stop his, almost
pronounced, words? And now when all his natural heat, being driven out by the
Lash, did break forth by the power of his last pain, his spirit was a little
collected to fetch a deep sigh from the bottom of his heart, so that the last
Rattle, that carries away life, was like to one that would have said something,
I know not what, and this perhaps you should have heard too. Put I confess, I
prevented him, and summoning in all my strength, which was even spent before, I
did my utmost with hand, weapon, and my whole body altogether, and so I slew
him, before he could tell out a lying word. Woeful is the remembrance of that
time. I beheld my Son fainting under my hands, I saw his wan face, his breath
was Key-Cold, his sighs were interrupted, and his Soul was quitting his body
with a great deal of silence, and yet I did not abate his Torments, I did not
withdraw, no nor quench, the Flames. Have pity upon me, O Woman, ask me no more
for a word of this affectionate nature, I slew my Son that was a dying. And yet
I did not lose, I say, I did not lose the death of my only Son, I did not lose
the fortunate Issue of it, for now no body can interrogate me, but the Mother
only; Go too, then, Woman, set thy self in my place, and as if thou were
accoutred with a like fury, as my Paternal one was, bring hither the Equuleus,
bring hither the Whips, and the Red-hot-irons. I protest and declare that
without them I am not able to speak, and without them no body living can
believe me. Tho, O thou miserable Youth, (for now let me address myself to thy
Ghost) no pain shall ever make me open my mouth, let her lance me as much as
she will, yea, tho she kill me at last: Thou have taught me, how to conquer
Torments. And yet if it be lawful for me to ponder, in my mindful thoughts, the
words of that woeful Torturing, why would you have me questioned in public and
before all the People? Good Wife, let us rather go in to that desolate part of
the House, into that room, which may now be called the Fathers privy-Closet and
the Sons both, there Question me just by the Rack, there, where I Tortured,
where I slew, my Son and where perhaps his wandering Ghost yet walk about the
Mournful Chamber. Let some body there present me, with the picture of my Son
that I slew, let him lay those Garments in his Mothers lap, that she, poor
Woman, was wont to dress and kemb the Youth in. Let Us go both to his Tomb,
let us mingle our Tears over his Monument. There we will either be silent
together, or confess together. Now, poor Man, now, I am able to dye. O natural
Piety, now care and grief have discharged thee: I make no Will, I trust not my
last words to my last Testament, for I myself will dye too, under my Torture
as well as my Son. Only I humbly prefer this, as the last, request to you, my
dear City, for the sake of all my Fellow-denizons, and also for the sake of all
Wives and Children whatever; and I entreat the same of you too, Wife, for the
Ghosts sake of my murdered Child who came out of your own Bowels; that you ask
me no more Questions, that so you yourself may not thereby occasion the
divulging the sad disgrace of our House and Family.

FINIS.

