THE QUAKERS Prophe^^e OF THE (...) Of all the (...) of the Church of England,
etc.
GO to, Ye Merchants of Babylon; who are now, in this Day, bringing forth, and
exposing to Sale, Your old Cankered, Rusty, and Moth eaten Ware.

And though You gather some heat from the Sun, [ K. C. II.] that is newly arisen;
and from it receive some small Vigor; and like the Insects, and the Reptilia of
the Earth, who creep out of their holes at the Suns warmth, by when they are
vivified; -- yet know, such are not Permanent; but the withdrawing of ^he Suns
heat from them, soon return to their holes, and soon Perish: You may take this
as a Figure.

For there is a Cup prepared for You, being mixed with (...) which You shall
not pass; for You are found from the Lord God, worthy; and a (...) is to be
given unto You.

In some things You parallel Simon and Elimas the Sorcerer: You are di^^^vered
and known to be as You are, viz. Antichrists, Deceivers, Sorcerers, and
Ravening Wolves; -- (...). In the Light of the Eternal God, I have beheld You,
and all Your Actions. If I should parrellel You with Salvage Beasts, I could
not truly do it; I think, be they never so fierce, -- but Men of Prey, such as
You are, are quite out of kind, and not to be paralleled by any thing that
draws breath.

Oh! Full of all Subtilty; Children generated of the Seed of Deceit; brought
forth out of the Womb of Wickedness; and nourished up at the Breasts of
Witchcraft; and rocked in the Cradle of Idleness; Woe is me, for the Day which I
see is coming upon You from the Lord, and all them that you have made drunk, by
putting your Bottle of Poison to their Noses; who have drunk deep; and so are
become one in Nature with You; it had been better You had never been born; it
had been better for You, that You had been strangled in your Mothers Wombs; and
Still-births had been presented to them, than Living Children into their Arms:
Oh! What shall I say concerning You? (...)

Howl, Howl, Hireling Priests of all Orders; for the Winepress of the Wrath of
God Almighty is EVEN NEAR to be trod; into which You are to be cast; for the
Lord God has spoken it; and he will not repent; (...)

Taken out of their Book, styled, A strict account of Babylons Merchants, etc.
Signed by Richard Crane, and Printed for their then Bookseller, Thomas Symonds,
at the Bull and Mouth, etc. 1660.

Note, this is that Thomas Symonds, who with G. Whitehead, C. Atkinson, and
James Lancaster, put forth that Blasphemous Book, Entitled, Ishmael etc.
wherein (p. 22.) they also condemn the [for ever blessed] Trinity, to be (...)
Is not this most horrid? And yet they had the confidence to set all their
Names, not only on the Title Page, but also at the latter end, to let People
see 'twas the Judgment of them all.

Again W. Penn and G. Whitehead in their serious Apolog. p. 106. say, We have
nothing for them (that cursed bitter Stock of Hirelings p. 156.) but (...) who
have made drunk the Nations, and laid them to sleep on the Downy-beds of soft
Sin-pleasing Principles; whilst they have cut their Purses, and picked their
Pockets: (...) prepared for Them to act their (...) upon, whose Scenes will be
renewed (...)

And W. Penn in his Book, The Guide Mistaken, p. 18. says, "No sort of People
have been so universally through Ages, the very Bane of Soul and Body, to the
Universe, as that abominable Tribe; for Whom, the (...) most D (...) Eternal
Trapedy (...)

Query, Are not these men acted by the very same Spirit, that caused the Three
Children to be put into the Fiery Furnace? Dan. 3.21. Certainly there is not
any serious Person who shall read this Paper, but will abhor Quakerism.

London, Printed, and to be Sold by J. Nutt near Stationers' Hall, 1700.


