scenes of the poisoning; sickness; execution

HELL OPENED, OR, The Infernal Sin of Murder Punished.

BEING A True Relation of the Poisoning of a whole Family in Plymouth, whereof
Two died in a short time.

For which horrid Fact, the Malefactors were Condemned before the Lord Chief
Justice North at Exceter, the last Lent Assizes. The one to be Burnt, the other
to be Hanged.

WITH An Account of the several Discourses, and Religious means used by diverse
godly Ministers to bring them to Repentance.

Published for a warning to both Young and Old, to fly Iniquity, and exercise
themselves in the practice of Godliness.

By J. Q. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Eglesfield, at the Sign of the Marygold in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.

Prove. 14.27. A Man that does violence to the Blood of any Person, shall flee
to the Pit, let no Man stay him.

Prove. 28.17. The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes: the wicked
is snared in the work of his own hands.

Psalm. 9.16. (...), without (the Gates of Heaven) are the Dogs, and the
POYSONERS.

Rev. 22.15. And they became a Sign.

Numb. 26.10. And Israel shall hear, and fear, and do no more such wickedness.

Deuteronomy. 13.11. To the Right Worshipful John Dell Major, and to the Worshipful
William Weeks, William Jennings, and John Martyn, Justices of the Peace,
together with their Brethren the Magistrates of the Town of Plymouth. And to my
very Honored Friend, John Harris of Manniton Esquire.
Sirs,
I Have real somewhere of an Hermit, who being guided by an Angel unto two
Cities, saw the Gates of the first close shut, and a Devil having the Keys
thereof at his Girdle in a deep sleep, and snorting, From thence he is led unto
the other, (which was fair and spacious,) and finds the Gates wide open,
innumerable Devils crouding and thronging in, multitudes climbing over the
walls, and whole swarms of them in the Churches, Streets, Houses, Shops, walks,
and all other Avenues and places of concourse, exceedingly employed, busying
and bestirring themselves to the utmost for the ruin of it, and her
Inhabitants. At which wondering beyond measure, the Angel told him, yonder City
is the worst of the Two, ingulpht in all wickedness and irreligion, so that
Beelzebub has no fear of loosing it, and therefore there is but one Devil to
guard it, and his work so little, that he sleeps. But as for this wherein now
we are, here are many Souls fearing and serving God, Religion is professed, and
Religious Worship countenanced and encouraged, and the Holy Angels of God are
watching over these precious Saints and their Habitations to preserve them.
This has caused Hell to break loose, and to endeavor by all means, and arts
imaginable their ruin, and its destruction.

Sirs, I think this be no unfitting Emblem of our Plymouth, wherein I trust
there are multitudes of Gods dear Servants, as well as Sinners: But I fear me,
multitude of Devils also, that walk in Temples and Congregations, in Streets
and Houses, in Chambers and Closets, in Ships and Shops, upon Keys and
Exchange. The over abounding of Sin among us, and of late of that heinous and
crying sin of Blood and Murder, (for which Two of the prime Actors (and God
knows whether there be any other) have suffered condign punishment,) is too sad
and clear an instance hereof. When Hannibal was at the Gates of Rome, it was
more than time for the Consuls and Senate to look about them. Woe! Woe! Unto
the Inhabitants of the Earth, says an Angel from Heaven, Because the Devil is
come down among you, having great wrath, for his time is short. He does not
appear in a visible shape at noon day, but walks (as his younger Son the
Jesuit) in all sorts of Masks and disguises, in every habit and fashion, and
among Persons of every Trade, Calling, Quality, and Condition.

Now, Sirs, God having constituted you the Angel-Guardians of our Plymouth, and
made you Gods unto it, there is all reason you should be awake, and do your
utmost to prevent the Stratagems and attempts of Hell against it. I know no
other way or means that you have, than by an exemplary Holiness in your lives,
than by walking with God in your respective Families and Callings, than by a
courageous, zealous, activity for God and Godliness, and a vigorous
suppression, and impartial punishing of all Vice and Impiety. Would you but
continue your great respects and encouragements to your Reverend and Learned
Ministers, and join both Swords together, Temporal and Spiritual, I am
confident the designs of Hell against you would be broken, frustrated, and
rendered ineffectual.

Honored Sirs, My hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that you may do worthily
in your Ephrata, and Famously in your Bethlehem, that you may glorify God in
your Station, and that God may reflect rays and beams of Glory upon you, For
such as Honor him, God will Honor them, but they that despise him shall be
lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Sirs, if you will suppress all profaneness, and by your Authority put out the
Fire of uncleanness, if you will stop the Mouth, and Gag the Tongue of the
Swearer, that the Roaring of Oaths and Curses be not heard in our Streets, if
you will promote true practical Piety, and persevere as you have begun in the
conscientious discharge of your Magistratical Duty, the God of blessings will
bless your persons and Families, and Plymouth shall never be a Sodom but Zion,
shall ever be a, Jerusalem for Gospel-priviledges, a Pillar and Ground of
Truth, rich and flourishing as Tire for Trade and Traffic, and as formerly, so
in aftertimes a Zoar for Divine safety and wonderful preservations.

That endeared affection I have for the Town of my Nativity, where I first drew
my breath, and where I had my School-Education, moves me to speak and write so
freely. And your true goodness cannot but make a candid interpretation thereof.

May Plymouth, her Magistrates and Government ever live before God! May this
Famous Town be called Hephzibah and Beulah, the Delight of God, and Married
unto God! Let her be called the Righteous, the Holy City! And may this be her
name unto Posterity, Jehovah Shamma, The Lord is there. So prays, Right
Honored Sirs.

From my Study in Plymouth, April 7. 1676. Your most humble and unfeigned
Sevant in our Lord Jesus, John Quick.

THE PREFACE
THe Devil is styled by our blessed Savior. A Murderer from the beginning;
Having destroyed himself by his willful A postacy from God, and being justly
banished the Glories of the celestial Paradise for his Voluntary Rebellion, he
turned about him, seeking how and in what manner he might be revenged on his
Judge. And after all his rueful thoughts and consultations could find no
expedient more likely to succeed and take than the working mischief on mankind.

Our first Parents a Compendium of both Worlds, Sublunary and Aetherial, the
Crown of Gods Creation, but a little lower than the Angels, are become the
objects of his rage and fury. Satan had lost Heaven, and he envies them Earth.
Their habitation in an Earthly Heaven displeases him, because it pleases God.
They just now came out of their Creators hands endowed with a double Portion,
Holiness and happiness: But he resolves they shall not long enjoy either. Hence
in the very first dawn of their Creation, he contrived and accomplished their
destruction. He subtly insinuates the poison of sin by his conferences with,
and suggestions unto Eve, and she having once tasted of the dose, and allured
with the deceitful pleasantness thereof to her sensual appetite, communicates
it to her Husband, and they both derive it down unto all their natural
posterity.

Ah! How many Murders were in this One? Mankind made and ruined altogether.
Certainly they who plotted the blowing up of King and Kingdom in One hour, they
who effected the Sicilian Vespers, Parisian Mattins, and Irish Massacres had
been all trained up and Educated in the Schools of this, this old, and Grand
Abaddon.

Adam being in Honor, continued not a day in it. His glorious state did shine,
and set with the same Sun. In the Morning it flourished and grew up, in the
Evening it was cut down and withered like the Grass. He played away (as a
besorted Gamester) his whole, and all present and to come, what he had in
possession, what he might have in Reversion, at one cast. Nothing was left him
but his sin and curse, and this he propagates unto all his Children. (A most
sad Portion) to be inherited by us.

Sin being now conceived does prodigiously spawa and swarm. The Old Serpent is
not idle. His boiling malice gives him no rest. His first born like the Plague
spreads its venom universally, and new Monsters are hatched and produced by it
every day. New sins in new shapes, in odious and hideous colors show forth
their heads. Grace is modest. Sin impudent and shameless: It seeks no
disguise, nor puts on a Vizard, but for its own security, and in order to
further mischief, to perpetrate some greater Villainy.

The Devil having set variance between God and Man, will give another cast of
his Office: He throws a Bone of contention between Man and Man. The nearest
Relations, the dearest Friends, they that had the same flesh in their Bodies,
the same blood in their veins, that if not Twins yet scarce divided in their
age, that were Nursed, Fed, and Educated together, both alike tendered by their
Indulgent and Religious Parents, shall yet through his subtilty and cruelty be
sundered and divided one from the other: And if he cannot drag them both with
himself into Hell, yet will he precipitate the one by a bloody and Barbarous
death into his untimely Grave, and the other (by a sin like his own) into the
bottomless Pit of destruction ere he is aware of it.

Cain by the instigation of the wicked one, upon no provocation, no offense
given, (unless Gods gracious acceptance of Abel for his Faith and Holiness be a
crime,) Murders his own, his only and dearest Brother. Bloody Villain! Thou
choppest off thy right hand with thy left, thou dashest out thine own Brains in
dashing out his. Thou destroyest his, body, but damnest thine own Soul. Ah,
what grief it this to Pious Adam! Oh, what joy and Music unto Hell! Revenge is
sweet. But its a poor revenge, Satan! Which ends hi thine own, in thine endless
destruction.

However the Devil has shown the way of Murdering, and bad Arts are soon
learnt. Any one may be an easy and early proficient in Ungodliness, the whole
and old World soon got the skill of it. God saw that the wickedness of man was
great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
only evil continually. The Earth also was corrupt before God, and filled with
Violence: All flesh had perverted its way, and blood touched blood.

There was no fair and gentle means left unessayed by God to reclaim sinners,
to dam up, if possible, the torrents of their ungodliness, to stench those foul
issues, and frequent effusions of Innocent blood. Adam, and the Holy Patriarks
decry it down in their Lives and Sermons. Enoch (the Phoenix of his Age for the
life and power of Godliness shining most illustriously in his Conversation)
Thunders out Prophesies of dreadful Judgments against the irreligious Cainites.
Behold, says that Glorious Saint, The Lord comes with Holy Myriads of Angels
to Execute vengeance upon all the ungodly, and to convince you of your
ungodliness in flames of Fire, who will not be convinced by our Ministry. Upon
the wicked he shall Rain Snares, Fire, and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest,
This shall be the Portion of their Cup.

But the Prophet is counted a Fool, and the Spiritual man Mad, and his Menaces
of approaching wrath idle Dreams, melancholy thoughts, bugbears to fright
Children, and bublings up of his envy and malice against them. Thus he and his
Prophecies are despised, and scornfully rejected.

At last fair warning and loud calls and Summons unto Repentance having been
long afforded them, and not accepted, nor in the least improved, the patience
of God is tired, mercy finally departs from them, and Divine Justice sweeps
away the Habitations and persons of those Scarlet Sinners with a deluge of
Waters.

One would have thought that such a fearful Judgment should have cautioned
afterages from ever treading in their steps. But alas! Posterity is grown
stupid, and Judgment-proof. As for Gods Judgments the wicked makes a puff at
them, they are afar off, above, and out of his sight, he forgets and makes no
reckoning, nor account of them. God has Hanged up some in Chains before their
eyes, Executed a whole World of Malefactors, and made them an everlasting Sign
and Example to them, yet they wilfully shut their eyes that they may not see,
and lock up the Doors of their hearts, that they may not consider for what
causes this great wrath is come upon them. So that we need not wonder at Gods
plaguing such willful blind Souls. It is but a righteous Retribution that his
Justice owes them. In as much as they regarded not the works of the Lord, nor
took notice of the operation of his hand, he could not build them up, he must
totally and utterly destroy them. Sinners ate the Voluntary Carvers of their
own misfortunes. They choose and Create unto themselves their own bane and
destruction, Temporal and Eternal. The reading of this ensuing Narrative will
be a clear proof and evidence hereof.

Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Francis Eglesfield, at the Marygold
in St. Paul's Churchyard.
DIvi Britannici, being a Remark upon the Lives of all the Kings of this Isle,
from the year of the World 855. Unto the year of Grace, 1660. By Sir Winston
Churchill Knight, in Folio.

The Works of that Famous Mathematician Master Edmond Gunter, sometimes
Professor of Gresham College London. Reprinted, Corrected, and much enlarged
in this Fifth Edition, in Quarto.

The whole Art of Dyalling. By Samuel Foster, much enlarged in the Second
Impression, in Quarto.

Aesops Fables in Prose and Verse, Grammatically Translated with apt Morals,
according to the Order of the Latin Copy, together with his Life, in Twelves.

London Drolery, or Wits Academy, in Octavo.

The Grandeur, and Glory of France.

Dugards English Rudiments of the Latin Tongue Explained, in Octavo --

-- His Rhetoricae Elementae.

Clarks Formulae Oratoriae, in Twelves.

-- His Dux Grammaticus, Dux Oratorius, in Twelves.

Chishuls Works in Three Parts, in Twelves.

A Map of England, with all the Kings since the Conquest about it, with a brief
Description of them.

Divine Emblems, and Hieroglyphics, by Franch Quaries, in Octavo.

Spare Minutes, or Divine Meditations, by Arthur Warwick, in Four and Twenties.

The perfect way to die in peace, by Ed. Burghall, in Octavo.

Steps to the Altar, or a Treatise on the Sacrament, by Doctor Prior, in
Twelves.

The Covenant of Grace, by John Cotton, the Third Edition much enlarged, in
Octavo.

THE NARRATIVE.
ON Monday the 23 day of August last, 1675. Elizabeth, the Wife of Mr. William
Weeks of Plymouth Dyer, after many and frequent Vomitings and violent
Purgations, departed this life toward the Evening. Her Husband and Daughter
were seized with the same extraordinary motions, accompanied with grievous
Pains and Swellings in their Stomachs, with cold Sweats and Faintings, as also
with a great and unquenchable Drought.

A Physician being called, and consulted with upon the case, gives in his
Judgment that they were Poisoned. That which induced him the more readily to
determine of the nature and manner of their Sickness, and her death, was a
quantity of Crude Arsenick, presented him by a Neighbor of these Afflicted and
Murdered Persons, which she had found in a Pot of Oatmeal in the Kitchen.

At the same time the Child of Mistress Pengelley (Daughter unto the said Mr.
Weeks) was also affected with the same Symptoms, and Philip Carry her Nurse,
together with her Husband, were found Counterfeiting Sickness and Vomitings.
Wine and Oil had been given them, which procured a more easy relaxation and
discharge of their Stomachs, and through the Blessing of God, upon the use of
that and other means contributed, to the recovery of the Child and his
Grandfather. Only his Daughter Mistress Pengelley, having labored Eight or Ten
days under exquisite torments without any remission, (Physic, and Physicians
being disabled by Gods Holy wise Providence, from affording her any relief or
succor,) she also yielded up the Ghost.

The noise of this horrid Accident was soon spread abroad, and immediately the
Nurse and her Husband, and a Prentice Girl in the House were suspected, and
apprehended for it.

The first which was brought before the Major of the Town, was Anne Evans
Apprentice to the said Mistress Weeks, a Poor Child, whose Mother being dead,
had been bound out in the Majoralty of Mr. Peter Schaggel, Anno 1672. by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of Charles Parish, being then about Twelve or
Thirteen years old.

And now making her appearance, she was examined by him, and another Justice of
his Majesty's Peace; which for the satisfaction of my Readers curiosity, and
for a further discovery of this Crying and Hellish sin, I shall crave his
pardon, if he be troubled with an Authentic Relation thereof, and of the other
persons depositions concerning it, as they were transcribed from the day Book
of the Town.

The Examination and Information of Anne Evans of Plymouth Spinster, taken
before the Right Worshipful William Weeks Major of Plymouth, and William
Jennings Merchant, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, within the said
Borough, 25. August. l675.
THE said Examinant says, that she being sent on Thursday last by her Master,
William Weeks Dyer, to buy some Oatmeal.
Girts in the Market, she this Examinant accordingly did buy a Pottle of Joan
the Wife of George Searle, and brought them home to her Masters House, and put
some of the same Oatmeal.
Girts into the Pot to make Pottage the Sunday following, and this Informant
further says, that at Noon she laded up a Dish of Pottage to her Master, and a
Dish to her Mistress, Elizabeth Wife to the said William Weeks, and also a Dish
of Pottage for her self, and John Pengelley Son of Mary Pengelley; and this
Examinant further says, that after her Mistress had eaten the Pottage, she did
complain in her Stomach, Head and Belly, and said that she was very Sick, and
then she presently Vomited very much, and about an hour after she went to Bed,
and kept continually Vomiting and Purging till Monday last, and in the Evening
she died, and her Master then also Vomited, and Purged, and lies now a Bed
very Sick, and also says, that she washing some of the Girts afterward, she
found some Yellow thing in the Girts, and as this Informant was told by some
people, that it was Poison.

The Sign of Anne Evans, A. E.

The Information of Gray Holland Doctor in Physic, taken as aforesaid on Oath.
THe said Informant says, that on Monday last, being the three and twentieth
day of this instant August, about Nine of the Clock in the Evening, he being
sent for to come to the House of William Weeks of this Town Dyer; This
Informant was by the people of the House informed concerning the death of the
said Master Weeks his Wife, who told him that she was taken with Vomiting,
Scouring and Purging, and says, that the said William Weeks Dyer, being a Bed
Sick, he asked him how he did, who told him, that he had a great pain in his
Stomach, and that he was swollen in his Stomach, and whatsoever he did take, he
did Vomit it up again; And this Informant further says, that he going into a
Chamber to see Mistress Mary Pengelley; who told this informant, that she had a
very great pain in her Stomach, and was swollen, and that she was taken with
violent Purging and Vomiting, and cold Sweats, and Faintings, with great
drought; And this Informant being so informed, he judged that there was Poison
in the Case, and thereupon desired to make an inquiry concerning it; And this
Informant farther says, that yesterday in the Morning, one Mistress Hurd
bringing to him something which she had taken out of some of the Girts, which
was put in the Portage; This Informant judged it to be Poison.

Gray Holland

The Information of Mary the Wife of James Hurd of Plymouth Merchant, taken as
aforesaid on Oath.
THe said Informant says, that she was sent for to come to the House of
William Weeks Dyer, on Sunday last past, and when this Informant came to the
said House, she met with Mistress Pengelley, who told her that she was very
Sick, and that her Father and Mother were also very Sick, that they were a Bed
asleep. This Informant departed, and came again the next Morning, and this
Informant then meeting with the said Mistress Pengelley, she asked her how her
Father and Mother did, who told her that they were very ill, and desired this
Informant to go up in the Chamber and see them: And when this Informant came
into the Chamber, she found the said Master Weeks his Wife very ill, with
Vomiting and Purging; and she demanded of them what they had eaten the day
before: They said, nothing but Pottage; And this Informant further says, that
she coming into the Court of the said Master Weeks, she saw Vomiting there
which the Dog had done, whereupon she desired them to take some Oil and Sack,
which was taken by Master Weeks and his Daughter Pengelley, but his Wife did
take very little, and that the Nurse and Child took some Sack and Oil likewise.
And this Examinant further says, that the said Mistress Weeks continued so bad
till about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and then died: And endeavoring
to find out the cause, the next day they put a Spoonful of the same Oatmeal.
Girts which were in the Pottage, and boiled it in a Pint of Water, and gave
the same to the Dog. And about half an hour after, the Dog was taken with
Vomitings, and looking into the bottom of the Skillet wherein the Water and
Girts were boiled, took out some Yellow thing, which they understood to be
Yellow Arsenick; to make a further disovery, they took the remainder of the
Oatmeal.
Girts, and put them in a Bowl of Water, intending to see what was therein, to
stand a little white, and when they came to see for it, the Oatmeal.
Girts were taken out, and the Water thrown away by Anne Evans (Apprentice to
the said William Weeks Dyer) into the Sink; and seeing afterward into the
Sink, they took up some more of the Poison, and showed it to Doctor Holland,
and some other Physicians, who said it was Yellow Arsenick.

Mary Hurd.

The Information of Hugh Littleworth, taken before the Right Worshipful William
Weeks Major of Plymouth. August 25. 1675.
THe said Informant faith, that he having some discourse with Anne Evans, she
said, that there had been a difference between the Nurse Philip Wife of Richard
Carry and her Mistress Weeks, and the said Philip Carry said, that she would fit
her Mistress, and the said Philip Carry asking of the said Evans where she should
have any Rats-bane. Who replied, if she did go to the Apothecary, he would take
her name. And also the said Evans confessed to this Informant, that she
gathering of Herbs on Wednesday or Thursday last in the Garden, some Stones
were thrown in over the Wall into the Garden, and at last a Paper was thrown
in, which she took up and carried it in, and put it in a Salt-Sellar, showing
it to the said Philip Carry, who told her that she did not know what it was, and
then she put it into the Salt-Sellar again, and seeking for it on Sabbath day
at night, it was gone out of the Salt-Sellar. And this Informant further says,
that he was informed by Christopher Scibbow, that the said Philip Carry was
packing up her Clothes to be gone.

Hugh Littleworth.
Elizabeth Crone and Anne Partridge both depose the same.



The Information of the said Philip Carry taken as aforesaid.
THe said Informant says, that on Monday was Sevennight, there was a
difference between her and her Mistress concerning the Frying of Pilchards, and
amongst other things, the said Mistress Weeks called this Informant Whore, and
said, that she was her Husbands Whore. And this Informant told the said Mistress
Weeks, that she had made a difference between this Informant and her Husband;
but the next Morning the said Mistress Weeks and this Informant were very good
Friends; and this Informant going to call her Husband where he was at Keels, he
took up a Bowl in his Hand, and said, that she should go home to Master Weeks,
for that she was his Whore. And this Informant further says, that this
Informant and her Husband being invited to Dinner to the said Master Weeks his
House on Sabbath day last, and when she came, there was a Dish of Pottage laded
up before she came, which she did eat, and her Husband did eat two Dishes of
the same Pottage.

And this Informant further says, that Mistress Pengelley did tell this
Informant, that Anne Evans did rise on Sabbath day by Four of the Clock in the
Morning, which she did wonder at, and this Informant further says, that the
said Anne Evans told her, that she would go away with the Mountebanks, for she
could not endure the hardness of her Mistress.

And this Informant further says, that the Monday following, she Vomited and
Purged, and that she had great pains in her Stomach, and Griping in the Guts,
and also says, that there are no retainers belonging to the House besides this
Informant, and the said Anne Evans, and that no one else does dress the Meat.

The Examination of Anne Evans, taken as aforesaid on Oath the 26th. of August,
1675.
THe said Examinant says, that about a Fourtnight or Three Weeks since, there
then being a difference between her Mistress Elizabeth Weeks, and Nurse Philip
Carry, the said Nurse said, that she would fit her one way or other. And this
Informant further says, that a Tuesday last, she going out into the Garden to
gather Herbs, amongst the Mary golds she found a Paper, in which was a yellow
Stone, which she thought was Painting, but now she supposes it was Rats-bane,
so this Informant carried it in, and put it in a Salt-Sellar, and a Saturday
she showed the same to the Nurse, and asked her what it was, who told her she
knew not, and then she put it in the Salt. Sellar again.

And this Examinant further says, that the next day after the said difference,
the said Nurse told this Examinant, she did wish the old Gypson were so far as
she did wish her, and said that she would fit her, and this Examinant asking
her how, she answered, a little Rats-bane would make work with her by and by.
And this Examinant asking her where she would have it, she said that there was
enough at the Apothecaries. And this Examinant told her, that he would take her
name, and she answered, that there was an Apothecary in St. Andrews Street that
did not know her.

And this Examinant further says, that on Saturday last, this Examinant
fetched a Pot of Beer for her Master before he went to Plympton, and her Master
made a Toast, and put in Nutmeg and Sugar therein, and did Drink thereof, and
her Mistress, and Mistress Pengelley, and her Son John, and put the remainder in
the Window, and when this Examinant came to see for the Drink, there was a
great Spider in it, then she took out the Spider with a Spoon, and left in the
Window, and a little after she asking the Nurse whether she had drank the Beer
that stood in the Window, she said no. Then this Examinant told her that there
was a Spider in it, but she had taken it out, and did believe that her Mistress
had drank it; then the Nurse replied, thou should have let it alone thou
Fool, and not have taken it out, but should have squatted it abroad in the
Beer.

The Sign of Anne A.E. Evans.

The Examination of the said Philip Carry, taken as aforesaid.
THe said Examinant being demanded whether she did say that she did wish the
old Gypson were so far as she did wish, and that she would fit her, and whether
she did say that her Rats-bane would work with her by and by, of words to that
effect, she answered, no. And being demanded whether she had any discourse with
the said Anne Evans touching the Spider on Saturday last, which should be taken
out of the Beer, she says she had; and being demanded why she said to the said
Evans, that she should have let the Spider alone and squatted it abroad in the
Beer, or used any words to that effect, she says, that she had no discourse
with her, nor spoke any such thing; and this Examinant further says, that she
did hear the said Anne Evans say, that she would make away with her Mistress, to
wit, the said Mistress Weeks, there being a difference between them on Saturday
was Fourtnight, to the best of this Examinants remembrance: and being demanded
why she did not reveal it, she answered, that the said Anne Evans did desire
her that she would not reveal it, for if she did, she should be even killed,
and therefore she did forbear to reveal it.

The Sign of the said Philip Carry.

The Examination of Anne Evans, taken before the Right Worshipful. William
Weeks Major, and William Jennings Merchant, two Justices, etc. the First day of
September 1675.
THe said Examinant says, that there has been a continual difference between
the said Nurse Philip Carry, and her Mistress Elizabeth Weeks, and the said
Philip Carry did say several times, that she would fit the said Mistress Weeks.
And this Examinant further says, that yesterday was Fourtnight, she being in
the Herb Garden, there were some Stones thrown into the Herb Garden by some
Children which were out in the Lane, and she looking out over the Wall, saw the
said Philip Carry and the Child out in the Lane. And this Examinant further
says, that she then took up a Paper, in which was a yellow Stone, which she
thought was yellow Painting, but now she does think that it was Rats-bane, so
this Examinant carried it in, and put it in a Salt-Sellar, and the Saturday
following, this Examinant cleansing of the Shelves, she took it down, and put
it in her Pocket, and in the Evening she showed it to the Nurse, and asked her
what it was, who seeming not to take notice of it, she (this Examinant) put it
again in the Salt-Sellar, so she went out unto the Conduit to fetch some Water,
and when she came in again, this Examinant further says, that she does
believe, that the said Nurse did take down the said Rats-bane, for that when
she came in, she saw the said Nurse breaking of it between two Tiles into
Powder, and this Examinant asking her what she would do with it when she had
broken it, she replied, she was going to fit a Medicine for the old Woman,
meaning the said Mistress Weeks, and then the said Nurse, when she had broken
the same small, she took some of the same Rats bane and put it in a Cloam-Dish,
and then drew about a quarter of a Pint of Small Beer to it, and so let it
steep all night long: And then the said Nurse gave some of the said Rats-bane
to this Informant, and told her that she should put the same into the Old
woman's Dish, when she did take up some Pottage for her, and you shall see, as
she said, what sport we shall have with her to Morrow, and that which this
Examinant should give her, would do her no hurt, but that which she had fitted
would do her work, and that it would make her die within half an hour, and
said, when the Old woman was gone, that we should live so merry as the days
were long. And this Examinant further says, that the said Nurse did charge
this Examinant upon her life, that she should not tell of it, for unless that
she this Examinant did not declare it, it would never come to light: And
withal, told this Examinant, that if she did tell of it, she would deny it, and
lay it all upon this Examinant. And this Examinant further says, that the next
day being Sunday, having Boiled a piece of Beef, and part of a Neck of Veal and
Cabbidge, and Carrots, and made Pottage; And then about Eleven of the Clock,
the said Mistress Weeks asked for a Dish of Pottage, and bid this Examinant lade
up a Dish, which this Examinant did, and then put in the said Rats-bane into
the Dish, according as the Nurse had ordered, thinking of no hurt; and this
Examinant says, that the said Mistress Weeks did eat up all the Pottage, and
left the Bread in the Dish, and then she laded up more Pottage to the Bread in
the same Dish, and the said Master Weeks did eat up all the Pottage, and very
little Bread: and then Mistress Marry Pengelley laded up some more Pottage to
the same Bread, in the same Dish, which she did then eat up all, Pottage and
Bread. And this Examinant says, that about three hours after the said Mistress
Weeks was taken with Purging and Vomiting, and being very dry, they gave this
Examinant order to fetch a Pot of Strong Beer in a Silver Tankard, and the mean
while the said Nurse made a Tossed to put in it, which she accordingly fetched,
and when she came into the Kitchen, where the said Nurse was making of a Toast,
she gave the Tankard with the Beer unto the Nurse: And this Examinant says,
that she did see the said Nurse Drink a little of the Beer, which was in the
said Tankard, and then presently filled it up again with the same Beer, in
which the said Rats-bane was steeped in the night before, and then the said
Nurse carried the same Beer up in the Chamber unto the said Master Weeks and
Mistress Weeks: And this Examinant going up after her with a Swab to take up the
Vomiting. This Examinant saw the said Mistress Weeks Drink first of the said
Beer, and then she delivered it to Master Weeks, and he did Drink, so he
delivered it to Mistress Pengelley, and she found fault with it, and said, that
the Beer was keamy, and that if they had no better, they should fetch it at
some other place. But this Examinant did see the said Mistress Pengelley eat
some of the said Toast: And this Examinant further says, having the next day
an occasion to make use of the said Tankard, found the inside thereof in the
bottom, black, yellow, and discolored, as though it was Cankered, and the Nurse
bad her Scour it out with Sand, whereas before when she fetched the Beer it was
clean.

And this Examinant further says, that she being troubled to see her Master
and Mistress so Sick; she said, Alas! Nurse, what have you done, that our Master
and Mistress are so very Sick? She replied, what she had done as to Mistress
Weeks, she had done God good Service in it, to rid her out of the way, and
hoped that she had done her business, and did look upon it, that she had done
no sin in it; and says, as to the Girts that she can say no farther, but what
she has said in her former Examination; to which for more certainty she
refers her self.

The Mark of the said Anne A. E. Evans.

The Examination of the said Philip Carry, taken as aforesaid.
THe said Examinant being demanded whether the said Anne Evans did not show her
the said yellow Stone, on Saturday last was Sevennight, and whether she did not
break it abroad in Powder between two Tiles, and whether she did not steep part
of it in a Dish in Small Beer, and whether she did not give some of the same
Rats-bane which she had broken unto the said Anne Evans, and told her that she
should put it into the Old woman's Dish, meaning the Old Mistress Weeks, or used
any words to that effect, answered, No. And being demanded also, whether she
had any dicourse with the said Anne Evans, concerning the Poison mentioned in
the aforesaid Examination of the said Anne Evans, or any words to that effect,
denies the same; but says, that she does believe that they shall both die for
it, because she has concealed the Counsel of the said Anne Evans.

The Mark of Philip Carry.

ANd now they are in safe Custody, in the Prison joining to the Town Hall in
Plymouth, where they have time and leisure to ruminate upon their foul and
odious Crime, to consider of the horrible danger to which these precious Souls
are exposed, and to make their Peace with God, if it be well husbanded and
improved. But I fear me, that though the Lord wait graciously Six Months
together for their Repentance, and cry aloud by this terrible dispensation to
convert, reform and give Glory to him before they come to Judgment, we shall
even after their Condemnation at the Assizes, meet with other and worse news
from them. Before we talk with these Malefactors any further, it will not be
unnecessary to make a little digression, and see what evidence the Righteous
Providence of God does Administer toward a fuller detection of their Sin and
Guilt.

Mistress Weeks being deceased, and Doctor Holland a Physician of the Town
having averred it to be by Poison; the Coronor was sent for, to inquire into
the causes of her death; who having impannel'd his Jury, and examined
Witnesses, do all Unanimously concur in their Verdict, that she was murdered,
and that by Poison.

The same Verdict also was given in by another Jury, that sat upon the death
of Mistress Pengelley. The obstinacy of the Nurse to the very instant of her
going off the Ladder, in denying her self either principal or accessory to this
bloody fact, will excuse the relator, if he subjoyn the respective depositions
of several Witnesses upon their Oath concerning it, that so the Justice of God
may be glorified, and no Sinister thoughts of the Judge, Grand or Petty Juries
that condemned her be entertained.

The Examination of Christopher Scibbow of Plymouth in the County of Devon
Dyer, had and taken at Plymouth aforesaid, by and before Thomas Pain
Gentleman, Coronor for our Sovereign Lord the King, within the Liberty of the
Borough of Plymouth aforesaid, on the Corporal Oath of the said Examinant,
this 27th. day of August, Anno Domini, 1675.
THe said Examinant says, that on Wednesday night last, he was at the Prison
window in Plymouth, where Anne Evans Spinster was committed on Suspicion, for
poisoning Elizabeth the wife of William Weeks Dyer, when and where this
Examinant heard the said Anne Evans to say, that the Nurse (meaning Philip the
wife of Richard Carry) did ask of her about a month before to buy some
Rats-bane, and that she gave answer to the said Nurse, that she would not do
it, because the Apothecary would put her name upon the Book.

Christopher Scibbow.

The Examination of Susanna, the Wife of Brian Cansfield of Plymouth aforesaid
Planter, taken before the said Coronor, on the Corporal Oath of the said
Examinant, the day and year aforesaid.
THe said Examinant says, that on Monday last; she went and saw Elizabeth, the
Wife of William Weeks Dyer, and found her very Sick, and this Examinant, and
other Persons that were present, did believe that she had been poisoned, upon
which there was some new Broth made, and made with some of the same Oatmeal.
Girts, that had been put into the old Broth, and when it was made, she gave it
to a great Dog, who presently Vomited it up again. She also says, that Anne
Evans, Master Weeks his Servant, showed this Examinant the bottom of the new
Broth, where was sound a Yellow Gravel, and one showing of it to Mistress Hurd
and others, they did believe that it was Rats-bane.

Susanna Cansfield.

The Examination of Alice, the Wife of Anthony Windeit of Plymouth, aforesaid
Clothier, taken as aforesaid before the said Coronor on her Oath.
THe said Examinant says, that on Wednesday last, she went and saw Master
William Weeks Dyer, and Mary Pengelley, being very Sick, it being reported that
they and Mistress Weeks had been poisoned, on which it was said, that the
Oatmeal.
Girts which were in the house and had not been used, should be washed, and the
same were accordingly washed by Anne Evans, the said Master Weeks his Servant,
and in the bottom there was found some Yellow, like Gravel, part whereof was
about the bigness of a small Pins head, upon which this Examinant blamed the
said Anne Evans for washing the same without order, who confessed that she had
done it without Order.

Alice Windeit.

The Examination and Information of Mary Pengelley of Plymouth, in the County
of Devon Widow, taken before the said Coronor on her Corporal Oath, the
thirtieth day of August, Anno Domini 1675.
THe said Examinant says, that yesterday last was Sevennight in the Morning,
Anne Evans the Apprentice of Master William Weeks Dyer, fetched a Tankard of
Strong Beer, on which there seemed unto this Examinant that there was Keam, for
which she was blamed, of which this Examinant drank hearty: And now this
Examinant does verily believe by what has happened since, that that which she
took to be Keam on the said Beer, was Poison: And this Examinant further says,
that afterward yesterday was Sevennight she being come down over the Stairs
in the Kitchen, about Noon the said Anne Evans asked this Examinant if she
would eat any Pottage, (the said William Weeks and Elizabeth his Wife, this
Examinants Father and Mother having eaten Pottage a little before,) and this
Examinant told her that she would, and accordingly she did eat a Dish of
Pottage, (being out of the same Dish that her said Father and Mother did so eat
Pottage a little before,) and that presently after this Examinant and her said
Father and Mother were taken exceeding Sick, of which her said Mother died the
next day after. And this Examinant does verily believe in her Conscience, that
the said Anne Evans with the contrivance of Philip the Wife of Richard Carry,
who also lived in the said Master Weeks his House, did put Poison in the said
Pottage, and so poisoned her said Mother, whereof she died, and also poisoned
her said Father and this Examinant. And this Examinant does also believe that
the said Richard Carry, who fetched his Diet in the said house, had also some
hand in the said contrivance.

Signum praedictae Mariae Pengelley.

The Examination of William Weeks of Plymouth aforesaid Dyer, on his Corporal
Oath before the said Coronor, the Thirtieth day of August, 1675.
THe said Examinant says, that there have been often several differences
between Elizabeth the Examinants Wife, and Anne Evans his Apprentice, and
Philip the Wife of Richard Carry his Servant; and that yesterday was Sevennight
last, about Noon, the said Anne Evans took up a Dish of Pottage, and gave the
same to this Examinants Wife, who did eat up most part of the Broth, but did
eat up little or nothing of the Bread, she not liking the same; and one looking
into the Dish, this Examinant found some Yellow Gravel (and by what this
Examinant does understand since, he verily believes that it was Yellow
Arsenick.) And he demanding what it was, there was no one there would or could
make any discovery. And presently afterward the said Anne Evans took up some
more Pottage in the said Dish; to the Bread which his Wife had left, and he did
eat up the Broth thereof, and some of the said Gravel which crushed in his
Teeth, but did not eat any of the Flesh which was boiled in the said Pottage,
for that it did look black: And presently after Mary Pengelley Widow, this
Examinants Daughter did eat some of the same Pottage, and all Three were
presently taken very Sick by great Swellings and Vomitings, and that his said
Wife continued so till the next day and died. And this Examinant does verily
believe in his Conscience, that the said Anne Evans, together with the said
Philip Carry, did wittingly and willingly put Arsenick into the said Pottage,
and so poisoned his said Wife, whereof she died. And this Examinant also does
verily believe in his Conscience, that the said Anne Evans and Philip Carry, did
by the same means and procurement as aforesaid, Poison this Examinant and the
said Mary Pengelley. And he does also verily believe, that the said Richard
Carry was privy and had a hand therein.

Per me William Weeks.

The Examination of Philip Sendy of Plymouth aforesaid, Widow, taken before the
said Coronor on her Corporal Oath, the Two and twentieth day of September, Anno
Domini 1675.
THe said Examinant says, that the day on which Mistress Elizabeth Weeks was
Buried, Philip the Wife of Richard Carry being then in Plymouth Prison on
Suspicion, for poisoning of the said Mistress Weeks; she the said Philip sent
for this Examinant, to whom this Examinant went, and spoke with her, and
demanded of her what she would have, who made answer, that this Examinant
should remember her Service to her Master and Mistress, and to tell them that
she was troubled that she had not acquainted her, what she (meaning as this
Examinant believes one Anne Evans) had an intent to do the Saturday was
Sevennight before.

Signum praedictae P Philip Sendy.

The Examination of Joane the Wife of Richard Scannel of Plymouth aforesaid
Cooper, taken before the said Coronor on her Corporal Oath, the day and year
last mentioned.
THe said Examinant says, that the Monday Evening that Elizabeth the Wife of
William Weeks died, being the Three and twentieth day of August last, this
Examinant coming into the Kitchen of the said Master Weeks, where was Anne
Evans, Richard Carry, and Philip his wife, unto whom this Examinant spoke, that
it was very sad there should be so many Sick, upon which the said Anne Evans
said, that she was forry for her Mistress (meaning Mary Pengelley,) but was glad
that the Old Devil was gone (meaning that the said Mistress Weeks was dead) and
said that she would sing the day that she was Buried, but would not lie one
night in the house after she was Buried, for that she was sure she would appear
again as a Spirit, and that the Devil had been a long time building of a
Palace for her, and that the yesterday before he had laid the last Stone, and
that that very day he placed her in. All which was spoken by the said Anne
Evans, in the presence and hearing of the said Richard Carry, and Philip his
wife, and although this Examinant did blame the said Anne Evans, yet they, nor
either of them did any way reprove the said Anne Evans for what she did say.

Joane Scannel.

The Examination of Joane the Wise of William How of Plymouth aforesaid
Beer-Brewer, taken before the said Coronor on her Corporal Oath, the day and
year last mentioned.
THe said Examinant says, that the very day that Elizabeth the wife of William
Weeks Dyer died, being the Three and twentieth day of August last past, this
Examinant being at the house of the said William Weeks, and discoursing with
Philip the wife of Richard Carry, the said Philip Carry went away from this
Examinant, and said, Oh that she should ever go out the Saturday before (to the
best of this Examinants remembrance) to ruin this Family (meaning the said
Master Weeks his Family.

Joane How.

The Examination of Arabella the Wife of Thomas Moore of Plymouth, aforesaid
Merchant, taken before the said Coronor on her Corporal Oath, the day and year
last mentioned.
THe said Examinant says, that the day that Elizabeth the wife of William
Weeks died, or the day after, she being at the house of the said William Weeks,
Philip the wife of Richard Carry wept, and wrung her hands, and said to this
Examinant, Oh Mistress Moore, that ever she should go out of Doors to ruin this
Family! (Meaning the said Master Weeks his Family.)

Arabella Moore.
Marian Cook worthy of Plymouth Spinster, being then sworn, deposes the same.



The Examination of Philip the Wise of Richard Carry of Plymouth, aforesaid
Husbandman, taken before the said Coronor, the day and year aforesaid, last
mentioned.
THe said Examinant being demanded whether she were a Servant at Wages to Mary
Pengelley, late of Plymouth, aforesaid Widow deceased, at the time of the death
of Elizabeth the wife of William Weeks; she says that she was then a Servant
to the said Mistress Pengelley at Wages, and continued in the same Service until
she was committed to Prison; she also says, that when she was a Nurse unto the
said Mistress Pengelley, she had Three Pound and Ten Shillings per annum, and
that the same was continued to her ever since, and she believes that there is
Money now due to her.

Signum praedictae, Philip Carry.

THe Witnesses having been Examined, their Depositions taken, they are all
bound over to Prosecute our Malefactors at the next Assizes for the County of
Devon, whose Mittimus is now Signed and Sealed, and they sent to the High Goal
near the Castle of Exon.

Here they spend full Six Months, but what! In a serious and sad reflection
upon their heinous and Crying sin: In the exercises of Repentance, Contrition,
and Godliness: No, in nothing less than in the practice of such indispensible
Duties.

In truth they came thither the Slaves and Vassals of the Devil, full of
Ignorance, and unacquainted with God, and the things of God, they were got into
a Prison, the very Suburbs of Hell, a place (to the Relators knowledge) a
Seminary of all Villainies, Profaneness, and Impieties; destitute of good
Company, good Books, and the good means of Grace, and of all helps, saving
their Affliction, that might lead them Heavenward. And it was very improbable,
that under so great a want of Spiritual advantages, they should bethink
themselves of Heaven and Eternity. Indeed they might and ought to have done it.
But they were captivated by the Prince of Darkness, who had blinded the eyes of
their understandings, and Seared their hearts as with an hot Iron, that they
should not see, nor know, nor consider the things that belonged unto their
Peace. Besides they were held in stronger Chains than those of Iron; their own
iniquities had taken hold of them, and they were bound with the Cords of their
sins.

Here they fed themselves, and are flattered also by their Companions in
Ungodliness, with the fond and false hopes of escaping the Justice of man; and
as for that of God, they never Dream of it, it enters not into their thoughts.
Let them but escape the Gallows and get out of Goal, they imagine Hell may be
avoided with less difficulty, and Heaven obtained with far more facility.

Thus Camelion-like they live upon the Air, or with Ephraim upon the East wind;
or as Esay's Idolator they feed upon Ashes; a deceived heart has turned them
aside, that they cannot deliver their Souls, nor say, is there not a lie in our
right hands? But in the depth of their Sencelesness and Security, they are
surprised with a cold damp.

The Assizes are come, the Judges arrived, the Trumpets sound, and our wretched
Prisoners are Summoned unto Judgment. Up they go unto the Bar with heavy
hearts, though with undejected Countenances. They had some Figleave excuses to
cover their shame, and rather than want a Shift and Plea for themselves, they
will add sin to sin, lyings and impudent denials. Alas! Poor Souls, this is not
to lessen, but to aggravate your guilt, this does not hide but discover it. You
Cloth your selves with a Net, your Nakedness and filth is the more Apparent.
Witnesses are examined, evidence is produced, the Malefactors are heard and
permitted to speak for themselves, the Bill was found, and an Impartial Jury
declares them Guilty, they are cast, Sentence is pronounced, and now being dead
in Law, they Petition for a Transportation.

Here is the last Refuge of miserable Murderers; But Justice dispenses no
favors, they may be Transported to another world, not to another Land. Blood
cries for Blood. Innocent Blood demands Vengeance. God has said it, and the
Righteous Law of England has confirmed it; that he, who sheddeth man's Blood,
by man shall his Blood be shed, a man that offers Violence to the blood of any
person, shall fly to the Pit, let no man stay him.

Accordingly their Petition is rejected, their Request is denied, they are
bidden to prepare for death, all hopes of life here have left and forsaken them.

The Girl, as Guilty of Petty Treason and Murder, is Sentenced to be drawn on
an Hurdle to the place where she shall be Executed, and there Burnt to death.
An horrible death! An Emblem and lively Picture of Hell torments! D^awn as if
dragged by Devils, Burnt alive, as if in that Lake of Fire and Brimstone
already! Lord! what Rocks are these that do not rend and break to pieces at the
hearing and thinking of it? Methinks the very Sentence should have struck her
dead. There is so much of horror in it, that with Nabal her Heart should have
died in her. Yet she lives under it. Lord! Let it be in mercy to her! Space is
given her to escape the wrath of God, though she cannot the vengeance of Man.
The Nurse must Hang till she be dead, a too gentle death for such a Prodigy of
Ungodliness! She Pleads stiffly her Innocence, disowns all Guilt, takes no
Shame, her Brow is Brass, she is Impudent, and has an Whores Forehead. If ever
there were a Daughter of Hell, this was one in her proper colors. No evidence
shall convince her. Confess faith she! Then I shall Hang indeed, I deny the
fact, none saw it, none knew it but the Girl, it may be that vile Person her
Husband, had a Finger in it, but he is gone. Some will pity me, though none
will believe me, none can help me. Yet though she must die, as sure as she was
born, the Devil helps her to one Expedient, as she conceives that may save her
Life. My Lord, I am Innocent, I am with Child, do not kill two Innocents. If I
must die, let my Child live!

The Reverend Judge is too Righteous to punish the Innocent with the Guilty; or
to destroy the Child for the Mothers fault. Hence a Midwife is commanded to
attend the Court, a Jury of Matrons impannell'd, the Murderess is searched, and
after their strictest Scrutiny and Inquest, they find her a Liar, to have
troubled the Court needlessly, she is not quick, as she would bear them in hand,
if she have at all conceived.

Upon this they are returned to their Prisons, and now in sight of Hell. Others
pity them, and tremble at their dismal State; but poor wretches, they have no
Bowels for themselves, yea, without any gracious Sentiments, without any
feeling apprehensions of their approaching misery.

Plymouth has been the first Scene of this Tragedy, there had they committed
their Murders, and upon the humble Petition of Master Weeks, Husband, and
Father to the Murdered Persons, and concurrent Request of the Grand Jury, His
Lordship grants it to be the place of their Execution. This was a rare
Spectacle, such a sight was never seen since the foundations of that Town. Oh!
that it might be the last.

In the Interval of their Sentence and Execution, several Divines visit them.

The Right Reverend Diocesan, out of his Religious care of their happiness,
ordered two, who frequently attended on them, but with no success on the Nurses
part. Other Ministers moved by Charity, and yearning at their misery, did
concur to use their utmost endeavors to save them from Hell. Instructions,
Exhortations, Prayers, Tears, dreadful denunciations of unsusterable torments
with the damned, sweet and gracious promises in case of Confession, Repentance
toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus are used and urged with the greatest
Vehemence, and industry upon the Nurse; but they beat the Air, they Plow the
Rock, they do her no good, their labor of love is lost, their Prayers return
into their own bosoms.

The Relator having visited them several times while they were in the High Goal
at Exon, thought it convenient to subjoyn the substance and effect of his
conferences with them. Possibly it may not be displeasing unto his Reader.
Coming into the Prison early in the Morning, he had the Four condemned Persons
brought unto him; and bespeaks them in these words, Miscrable Souls! I am
heartily sorty to see you in this place, and to find you in this Condition. You
are here Judged of man, and you must die; but what also if you are Condemned of
God, and must to Hell for ever? You are Sinners, are you not? You are Guilty of
those Crimes for which Sentence is past upon you? Three had so much Ingenuity
as with Weeping and Trembling to acknowledge it. Alas! Poor wretches, you are
weeping because you have offended man, and brought your selves to destruction.
Ah! what a mercy would it be, if you could weep unfeignedly for your offenses
against God, and because you have lost his Image and favor, which is the
greatest Blessing, and deserved his wrath and Curse, which is the greatest
misery.

What think you of Sin? Is it as sweet and pleasing to you now you must die for
it, as when at first you did commit it? Here they were silent and Confounded.
Ah! Now you see what it is, not to believe God speaking to you from his Word,
and by his Ministers, you were told that sin would bring sorrow and shame,
wrath and death, sooner or later. The Devil and your own corrupted heart, rose
up against this Discovery of his will, and you made light and slight of it, and
what have you got by it? All the Fruit of your sin is, that you are ashamed of
it, and grieved for it; its wages is the loss of Earth, Life, and Heaven, and
these you are expecting every moment. Man has cast you off for your sins; you
cannot stand before your earthly Judge: And if God shall cast you out of his
blessed presence for ever among the Devils and the Damned Spirits, how would
you be able to bear it? They being somewhat moved, he asked them, How think you
to escape the dreadful wrath of God? What means have you to save your precious
Souls from Hell? What, First do you believe you have Souls to save, a being in
your Body, that does not, that cannote die with your Bodies? Do you believe
there is a God, and Devil, a Heaven and Hell, and that all the wicked shall be
turned into Hell, and that you, all of you shall be flung into it for your sins
against God? At this they shrugd up their shoulders, and had nothing to answer,
but their Repentance. Your Repentance, said I, what is that? Why, our sorrow
for our sins, we would not commit them again, if they were now undone. Yea
indeed, so you say, and possibly think you would not; but you do not know the
wickedness and deceitfulness of your own hearts, if you were now as heretofore,
and under the same temptations. I know nothing to the contrary but that you
would be Guilty of the same transgressions, of as bad, or worse.

Besides, suppose your Repentance were true and real, what amends is that unto
God for the manifold dishonors you have done him? You have broken every command
of God, you are Guilty of innumerable sins, your very birth and nature is
horribly corrupted, and all your life long you have been Rebels against God,
and you think to put off Gods wrath with your pitiful Repentance, a late
Repentance, and it may be no other than the very Reprobates have that are now
in Hell.

Is this all the satisfaction you can make to God? They knew no other; Then it
was told them, that God was a great and terrible God, that would not put up the
affronts and wrongs had been done him, without satisfaction, that he would by
no means acquit the Guilty. That they had sinned, and must die eternally, and
if ever they were redeemed from Eternal wrath, they must make God full a mends,
and bring him a Ransom; and if they had none, nor knew where it was to be had,
they must expect as soon as they died, to be damned for ever.

I asked of them in particular, who or what Jesus Christ was, and what it was
he had done for them. To which there was this answer made, they could not tell.
None that knows a Goal will conceive this a Fable. Hardly any but Atheists, and
the most ignorant wretches in the whole County are clapped up there; and for one
sin they brought with them into it, they carry away Cart-loads out of it. Our
County Prisons being the Common Sinks of the Country, and a Shop wherein all
impiety is soonest learned and attained.

Their ignorance of Christ, his Person, Natures, Offices and Undertakings for
poor Souls, made me to aggravate their wickedness, and to tell them they had
wretchedly misspent their time, and that now they were going out of the World,
they must learn the Principles of Christian Religion, and I questioned whether
they had any Repentance that was pleasing unto God, for they had no Faith, nor
knowledge, even of the most necessary Truths, without which they could not be
saved. And for my part I must not flatter you, you are nearer Hell than Heaven.
Upon this there was a discourse made of Christ, adapted to their capacities, as
also of his wonderful love and condescension in becoming man, and dying for
sinners, and satisfying the Justice of God, and holding forth his death as the
price of Redemption unto all Penitent believers; and that this was now offered
unto them upon these terms of confessing and abhorring their sins, and
themselves for their sins: and that if they came to God with a sense and
feeling of the insupportable burden, of the horrid nature, and infinite number
of their sins, and threw themselves at his feet prostrate before him, imploring
his mercy for the passion of his dear Son, the Lord would be merciful to them,
and he would not cast them off, but would pardon and forgive their heinous and
grievous offenses.

In the close of this conference, Master Holmes Chaplain to the High Sheriff
came into the Chamber, and after some words with the Malefactors, we jointly
parted the Prisoners, I withdrawing into another Room with the Nurse and Maid,
and having pressed them to a free and ingenious confession of their Guilt, the
Girl with tears in her eyes gave me for substance the same confession, and not
varying in a circumstance from that which at her first apprehension she had
made unto the Major, and Justice of Plymouth. I adjured her in the name of the
All-seeing and heart-searching God, who hated a Lie, and would cast all Liars
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for ever, to declare nothing but the Truth:
That she had sinned enough already, and had been Guilty of two Murders, and if
the Nurse were Innocent, she should not for a World accuse her, for if she did,
the Lord might Damn her immediately.

To which she replied with Tears, Sir, I am a lost Creature, I have no hopes in
this World, I would not willingly Damn my Soul, by drawing upon me the Guilt of
more Blood, I speak it as in the presence of God, I had not put in the Poison
into the Pottage, had not the Nurse bid me do it. And added, My Body is lost,
but if the Lord would have pity upon my Soul, it is all that I desire.

And the Nurse has said, she should never confess, though she did Hang for it.
That I might confess what I would, she would not confess any thing. Upon this I
confronted her with Philip Carry, she obstinately denies all, stands stiffly to
her Innocence, throws all upon the Girl; says. Judge, Jury, and Witnesses, are
all Guilty of her Innocent Blood, and she will lay it at their Doors.
Whereupon, I desired the Maid to go in to Master Holmes, and dealt privately
with this Vile woman, yet to give Glory unto God by confessing of her sin, and
renouncing all commerce with Hell, that if she did hide her sin, and keep the
Devils Counsel, she could never prosper. That it was in vain for her to think
of concealing it, for God knew it, the World knew it, her Country condemned her
for it, her own conscience, if she had any left in her, must needs accuse and
condemn her. Possibly said I, you think of life, and feed your self with vain
imaginations of escaping death, I told her they were foolish and groundless,
that Justice would have its Course, that the whole World could not save her.
That she was already dead in Law, and must be as certainly Executed, as she was
already Condemned. That she stood upon the brink of the Pit, and was ready to
drop down into the bottomless Gulf of Hell: That she might, if she would,
escape it. God offered pardon, Life, Heaven and Salvation to her, provided she
would but give glory to him by confessing her sin, and taking the shame thereof
unto her self. That it was better to do it now than upon the Gallows. She had
served the Devil long enough, too too long, and it was a miracle of mercy, if
ever the Lord showed mercy to her at last; but yet I would, and did assure her
in his name, (as being his Ambassador, and sent with his Commission to
reconcile her unto God, whom she had so hainously dishonored,) that if she
would disclose all this cursed crime, who first contrived it, who managed it,
and put her upon it, there was hopes. For the Lord was a merciful God unto
unfeignd Penitents, and compassionated her deplorable condition, and would
bring her out of it. That she take care not to Rebel against his grace, nor to
tear a pardon, that was offered her upon such easy terms, in pieces, nor to
refuse Heaven, and all its joys and happiness.

Alas! Sir, says she, What will you have me say? I will tell you all I know of
it. I am as free from this Crime, as the Child that is now Born. But the Maid
did it. For she told me she was weary of her life by reason of her Mistress, who
was such a Cursed Old Woman, that there was no living with her, and that she was
resolved to leave her Service, and go away with the Mountebanks, and that she
told me she would fit her, and had bought the Rats-bane of the Mountebanks Boy
or Man, with whom she was in Love.

This was all I could get from her then, and not one Syllable of it true. I
told her, she should beware of Lying, and false Witness bearing, and not let
the Devil sit upon her heart and Tongue; and added, when you knew this Girl had
an intent to make away her Mistress, why had not you discovered it? She said,
That indeed it was her fault, if it were a fault. I told her, consent unto, and
concealing of Murder, was Intentional Murder before God and Man, and that she
had a real hand in it. She told me she had none at all, and could give me no
other answer.

Our secret conference being ended, I brought the Maid again unto her, who
avowed her former Confession, disavowed all acquaintance with the Mountebanks
Servant, never to have talked with him but once at the Conduit when she fetched
water; and maintained to her face, that this wicked woman the Nurse, did
oftentimes persuade her to run away from her Mistress, and if she would have
gone away the Saturday before the fact was committed, she would help her to a
Riding Suit.

Unto this she made no reply.

Returning with them unto Master Holmes, he pressed upon them the evil of their
sin, advised them to Repentance: and bespeaking the Nurse, Philip Carry, said
he, there is a report and Suspicion of your having been unclean with your
Master. At which she fell down upon her Knees in the midst of us, and
impricated most direfully upon her self, is he ever knew her to be a man or
woman, more than by giving suck unto his Grand Child.

Having cleared her Master, but not confessing any other thing or sin, Master
Holmes being desired by me, concluded this conference with Prayer, and we
departed.

In the evening I returned again unto these Prisoners, And dealt with the Nurse
to acknowledge her Crime, freely to unbosome her self unto me, that I might
spread it before the Lord in Prayer, and entreat him for a broken heart, and a
new Spirit for her.

And withdrawing from the Company that crowded on us into a private Chamber, I
desired her for Gods sake, her poor Souls sake, (with cears in my eyes,) that
she would yet leave sin before sin left her, that she would flee from that
wrath to come, that she would bid defiance unto the Devil, who she saw had
ruined her, and would Damn her everlastingly; that she would yet accept of
grace and peace, and reconciliation with God; it was late indeed to return unto
him, but not too late, how ever she must not thus dally with the Divine
Majesty, to put him off with delays and lies. That she should not be afraid of
shame, that it was the greatest shame and reproach unto her to have committed,
and concealed this sin; but it would be a step to Honor and Eternal Glory to
confess it, good men would then pity her, pray for her, and God would save her.

And added, that if she would not confess it publicly to the World, (which yet
was her duty, and if ever the Lord gave her Repentance she would do it more
feely, and in a more ample manner than I could desire,) she should at least
confess it unto me, and I promised her upon the word of a Minister, that
without her consent I would never divulge it: Or if she would not trust me with
such an important secret, I advised her to single out some Godly Learned
Minister, or some Judicious private Christian, to whom she might Communicate
it, and have the benefit of their Assistance, Counsels, and Directions in order
to her Salvation. That it was impossible for her to get to Heaven without it.
Confession being a main and principal ingredient into Repentance.

To this she answered positively she would not, and as peremptorily, that it
was enough to confess to God, and why should she confess unto men?

I told her God required in public, scandalous and crying Crimes, such as
those whereof she was Guilty, and especially now the lot of God had attached
her, and his holy righteous providence had condemned her, that she should
confess, accuse, shame and condemn her self publicly. That otherwise she
slandered most unworthily the Right Honorable Judge, and the whole Court; and
endeavored to raise up a base and scandalous suspicion of them, as if they had
maliciously took away her life.

To which she in plain terms said, They had, she was Innocent, and they must
answer for it unto God.

I told her, I heard the Devil speaking with her tongue, and was afraid to stay
with her any longer, least the should tear her in a Thousand pieces before me.
I had known many hard-hearted Murderers this Thirteen years last past in this
Goal, but never before met with the like; That I saw, she was resolved to be
Damned, and go to Hell: And I was seriously persuaded, that since so many
Ministers had been with her, and treated with her about everlasting life to no
purpose, and that all my poor endeavors were unsuccesful, that God would never
grant her Grace to repent, but that she was a Vessel of wrath, and preparing
her self a pace for endless destruction.

At these words she began to weep, and wept bitterly, wringing her hands,
crying, Oh! Sir, What shall I do? Will you have me speak that which I do not
know? I am Innocent.

Well woman said I, if you be Innocent as to this Crime, tell me, are you not
Guilty of some other Capital Crime deserving death? For though the Lord may
suffer an Innocent person to undergo an unjust Sentence from men, yet if he
have any Grace, he will own the Justice of God in man's injustice. It is rare,
very rare indeed, that God the Wise and Righteous Governor of the World suffers
the Innocent to be Condemned, and the Guilty absolved; but if he do, is there
not a Cause for it? Were I in your Case, I would say unto the Lord, do not
Condemn me, show me wherefore thou contendest with me? Come, unrip your heart,
and tell me what sins thou have been Guilty of, that though you need no
Repentance for this Murder for which as you say, you are unjustly Condemned,
yet you may be helped unto Repentance for them.

Sir, I know no sin at all that I am Guilty of, is her reply. No Sir, none at
all.

Ah! poor wretch, Guilty of no sin? Is not thy nature depraved? Has not thy
life been debauched? How have thou improved thy time here in Prison? In
Prayers, Repentance, and preparation for death.

Still she answers, No sin deserving death: It may be she had committed some
little sins as all others do, but for sins deserving death, she never had
committed any.

I told her she was a perfect stranger to her own heart, that she was full of
sin all over, but blind and could not see them; that her little sins were all
damnable, and as she knew one drop of Poison would kill as bad as a Spoonful,
so one little sin without Repentance would as infallibly Damn her as the
greatest; that for my part I did utterly despair of her Salvation, seeing the
Devil to be so strong in her, that she was in the Gall of bitterness and bond
of Iniquity, and seared that she would go to Hell with a lie in her mouth; she
was now pleasing the Devil, and thought she had found his Service so profitable
and beneficial to her, that she was resolved to serve him to the last, and to
hear the Lord Thunder in her Ears, Go! Thou Cursed Murderess into everlasting
Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels for ever.

At this she wept again, and told me she was a poor Ignorant.
Ingrant Soul. But she hoped it would not be so bad with her as I spoke.

I told her it was my hearts desire it might not be so. I pitied her from my
Soul. I labored for her everlasting welfare. I had no other design upon her
than to pluck her out of the Jaws of Hell. That I had nothing but labor for my
pains, and was afraid I should be a Witness at the last day against her for her
refusal, her stubborn, wilful rejection of everlasting life.

That so her Brother had done before her, and would never repent, nor confess,
till he was upon the Gallows ready to be turned over, and then out all came,
when he could live no longer to the Devil, then he would go to God; and God
must be put off with the Devils leavings.

To which she rejoyned, that her Brother had made a Godly end, and she was sure
he was now in Heaven, and did wish she might make as good an End. And said I, I
pray God you may make a better!

Now that the Curiosity of my Reader, who will inquire concerning her Brother,
may be satisfied: I shall give an account of him briefly, craving pardon for
amuseing him with this Digression. Take then his and subscribed with his own
hand at Lanceston in Cornwall, April the Third, 1675. Just as he was a turning
over, for till then he would make none.

The Confession of John Codmore Condemned to be Executed, and Made by him at
the Gallows.
1. HE began to commit the sin of Theft first upon Pease and Apples.

2. The next thing he stole, was Figs from a Merchants Stall, unknown to the
Owner.

3. Next he wronged his Father in giving away his Syder unknown to him, and by
reason of persuasions of others. And he Married against his Fathers consent.

4. When he was with his Master John Temple of Tamerton Parish, he took Money
for Dying of Cloth and Stockings unknown to his said Master.

5. Next, when he was with Robert Strong of Plymouth, he there received Money
for Dying of Cloth, Stockings, and Wool, unknown to his Master, which did
belong unto his Master, and in his Service went into a Garden, and stole
Goesberries and Cherries.

6. Next he stole from Peter Slade of Tregony, Fourteen Pounds of Wool, and
also kept from him Dy-stuff which did belong unto him.

7. Next he stole from Samuel Pentire of Tregony, One piece of Sarge, who
brought it to him to Dye, and never had the return of it more.

8. Next he stole from John Cooling of Verrian, a Yard and half of Sarge, and
several Pounds of Wool.

9. Next he stole from John Bullock of the same Parish, One piece of Sarge, who
brought it to him to Die, and never had it more.

10. He stole from another person whose name he has forgot, Two Yards and half
of Sarge, which were bought to be Dyed, and several pare of Stockings from
several people, which they never had again.

11. He stole from Henry Jellings of Tregony, One piece of Sarge, who brought
it to him to Dye, and never had the return of it more.

12. He stole from Robert Strong of Plymouth, Three Yards of Sarge, Two Yards
of Cloth, and Four pair of Stockings, at another time Four Sticks of Brazil.

13. He stole from William Weeks of Plymouth, Seven Yards of Sarge.

14. He stole from a Widow woman of Loo, out of a Box that was in a Chamber
wherein he lay, Eight Shillings and Six pence.

15. He stole from his Uncle John Codmore, a Dun Nag.

16. He stole out of John Temples House of Tamerton, Eight Yards of Linen, and
One pair of Stockings, and at another time stole from him Fourteen Yards of
Sarge, Three Yards of Cloth, and Eleven pair of Stockings.

17. He stole from his Father, Money out of his Pockets at several times, and
once Eighteen Shillings.

18. He stole from Tryphena Channings of St. Stephens, One Silver Thimble, and
Two Yards and half of Sarge, and a man's Sarge Coat, for which he broke a Window.

19. He stole from John Walter of the said Parish, a white Mare, Bridle,
Saddle, and Gambadoes.

20. He broke an House in Pillington, and stole from thence Five Silver Spoons,
One Silver Trimble, and a Silver Whistle.

21. He stole from Hugh Northam of Tamerton, the Sum of Nine and thirty
Pounds, Fifteen Shillings, and Ten Pence in Money, and One Scarf, Six Dozen and
Four Silver Buttons, Twenty Gold Buttons, a shoulder Knot of Scarlet Ribband,
and Four small Knots of the same, and some Silver Bobbin.

22. He confessed he sold his Wife to a Millar, for Five pound on a Bill, half to
be paid on Easter Monday, and the other half to be paid the Whitsun Monday
after.

23. He stole from Hatherly Moore Two Steers, and fold them at Plymouth.

24. He brake the House of John Trapling of Pillington, and from thence stole
meat dressed.

25. He went into Thomas Mallets House of Gerrance, at the top of the Chimney,
and his Wife heard it, so he went out, and stole nothing.

26. He was also tempted to break the House of Tryphena Channings, if she had
not changed her lodging Room, from the Chamber to the under Room, he had then
intended to have stolen away her Box wherein her money lay.

27. He stole a Goose at Lee in Pillington Parish.

28. He was also riding in St. Blazy, and saw Geese in the way, he struck one
and killed it, and carried it away with him.

I certify my offense, that all the world may know the effects of sin, and
hereto I have set my hand, the day above written. And the Lord give me
Repentance whilst it is time.

John Codmore.

REader this is a fair Catalogue! A goodly Bedroll! And a very sweet Penitent!
And that I do not wrong his memory, give me leave to tell thee, that of all
this money which he last stole from Mr. Northam (and it is credibly reported
the Sum was double to what he confessed,) he never took any care to restore one
Farthing; nay, ordered a considerable Sum of it, I think Thirty Pound, to be
put out for his Child; and gave order unto his wretched Brother in Law to go to
Loo, and in that Chamber where he lay last, hanging to the Vallance of his Bed
next to the Wall, he should find a Purse of Money, which accordingly he fetched,
but what is become of it is unknown.

However at the Execution of his wicked Sister, we may chance to hear some
farther tale and tidings thereof. But for this fellow, he has a Twelve month
since received his Doom, and is gone unto his place, and there we leave him.

And now let us return Reader from our Digression, though I think we have not
been much, nor long out of our way.

Finding no good success in my labors with the Nurse, I sent for the Maid to
come unto me. Who being shut into the Chamber with me, I asked her what she did
think would become of her precious Soul; that it was better worth than a World,
and it was a Thousand pitties that a Jewel of such inestimable worth and value
should be lost for ever. That now it was in a very dangerous ^ state, and ready
to perish irrecoverably. That as she had by her envy, malice, Instigation, and
Correspondence with the Devil Murdered her two Mistresses, so she also had
Murdered her own Soul and Body: And that as they were dead and Buried, so would
she also shortly die a very horrible death, and without wonderful mercy be
swallowed up of everlasting wrath. That the Fire which was to consume her in
Plymouth would be very painful, but the Fire of Hell in which she must live and
lie for ever would be insupportable. That her many and mighty sins had brought
her to this woeful condition. And I added, How will you get out of it?

Poor wretch! She fell a trembling and weeping, and desired my help and
direction, and she would labor to follow it.

Whereupon, my Bowels yearning on her, and mingling my tears with hers, I told
her I was heartily glad to hear such words drop from her mouth, and through
Gods blessing she would never want it.

Then I told her. Anne, do you sit down in some secret place, and review your
life, and look over all your ways, and call your self to an account for all the
sins that you can remember your self Guilty of; and consider chiefly that your
heart and nature are desperately wicked, that there dwells in you nothing
that is good, and that you cannot do any thing that is good, no not so much of
your self as think a good thought, much less to Convert and turn your self to
God. Then remember every one of the Ten Commandments, and how that you have
transgrest against them, especially against the Sixth. Thou shall not kill; and
that for every one of these sins of yours, even for the least you have deserved
to burn in Hell: Oh! Then how many Hells have you merited.

Besides, consider all the mercies of God bestowed upon you, as your Life,
Health, Liberty, Friends, Food; and to live in a Land where the Gospel is
preached, and the way to Heaven revealed and discovered, and yet how unworthily
have you abused them to the dishonor of the Lord that gave them. But
principally consider that all your sins have been committed against God the
Father, that Created you, that gave you life and being, against God the Son
Christ Jesus, who became man, and died for you.

Anne, said I, this makes your sin exceeding sinful, a very horrible sin, that
Christ Jesus to save you from sin and Hell, died for you, was crucified and
accursed for you, lost his heart blood for you, and underwent the torments of
Hell for you, to keep and save you from them: And yet by every sin that you
have been Guilty of, you have Crucified Christ afresh, you have stabbed him to
the heart, drawn fresh blood from him. For not one of your sins can be pardoned
without his blood, and you have been very prodigal of it, to spill, and
despise, and trample it under Foot, which is Hellish ingratitude.

Will you set home this meditation upon your Heart?

Finally, consider, that you have sinned against the Holy Spirit of God, who
sanctified you in Baptism unto his Service; and that quite contrary to the end
and intent of God in Baptizing you, that you might repent, and renounce sin,
you have wallowed in it all your days, and grieved the good Spirit of God, and
only gratified and served the Devil.

And having done this, do you throw your self not upon your knees, but flat
upon your face, upon the earth before God, and think as if you were at the very
mouth of Hell, and ready to be cast headlong into the torments of it; that are
endless, easeless, and remediless; and then with showrs of tears, and with as
much Shame and Grief as you can possibly confess all these sins unto God, and
beg of God to give you Repentance unto life, to Weep, Mourn, and be confounded
for them; and never seave Praying, Sighing, and Groaning unto God in Prayer,
till he do make your hard heart wax soft within you, and that you be chiefly
abased and humbled, that you have sinned against God, who is your best Friend,
Savior, and alone Comforter.

Besides, do this at night upon your Bed, and be up early at this work, and
desire the Lord that your late Repentance, may be a true Repentance.

Having promised me, that she would take this course, we came out unto the
other Prisoners. And speaking unto the Man condemned for coining, I told him,
and his Companion who stole a Mare, (but is since mercifully reprieved,) That
God had said, Thou shall not Steal, and as he that Murdered by Gods Law
deserved everlasting death in Hell, so by that same Law, did he that stole;
that burning in Hell was a worse punishment than hanging upon a Gallows.

That it was a wickedness against the light of nature that they were guilty of:
That the very Heathen who knew not God, punished it with as much severity as
our Laws.

That they would not willingly have others so use them, to take away their
goods from them:

That every Man had a Right, Title and Prerogative to the fruit of his own and
honest Labors.

That it was a sin against the whole Land, and Nation to invade the
Prerogatives of the King, such as coining was, being inseparable from the
Crown, and a most glorious Flower of it.

That he who would strike at the Royalties of the King, would never stick nor
boggle to make away the Life of the King, which was such a piece of damnable
impiety in it self and consequences, that none but an incarnate Devil would be
guilty of.

That they should do well to seek the pace of God in time, and to wrestle
mightily with him for Grace, Repentance, and Forgiveness, that so they might
not perish everlastingly. Their time was short, their work great, it was no
easy matter to get to Heaven.

That I had known many very holy, mortified, and godly Persons that had spent
Threescore years in a Religious Life, and close walking with God, yet to be
full of fears and doubts they should never get to Heaven. And that they had
much more cause to work out their Salvation with fear and trembling.

And in the upshot told them, that if they would seriously and heartily embrace
and follow these Counsels, if they would to day, whilst it is called to day,
hearken to the Voice of God, and nor harden their Hearts, there was hope for
them in their latter end, For their was forgiveness with God that he might he
feared, yea with the Lord there was mercy, and plenteous Redemption. Other
Ministers coming in, I bad them farewell for the present.

THe next morning about Eight of the Clock, I visited them again, and sound
with them Mr. G. T. a worthy Minister of Exon, who gave me an account of the
unsuccesfulness of his Labors, as to that wicked Woman the Nurse; and then in a
very pathetical and devout prayer, most pertinent to their conditions, with
great meltings of his own heart and affections, commended them unto the Lord.

When he was gone, I dealt again with the Nurse, but no more privately as
heretofore; I urged her to repent of her horrid Murders, to acknowledge them,
and take the shame of them to her self: That she must do it. God and Man,
Heaven and Earth required it from her mouth.

She still asks me, Sir, what will you have me confess an untruth unto you, a
matter of which I am not Guilty? I told her that none believed her, that it was
a most improbable thing that those Persons who witnessed against her, some of
them being to my knowledge Persons fearing God, hating a lie, should ever accuse
her falsely. They had no temptations to it, she never having wronged nor
offended them, that as far as I knew, the were as much her Friends, as her
Mistresses, that there was neither profit, nor advantage, nor pleasure, nor
honor accrewing to them in taking away her life, and they were too tender, and
made more Conscience than so, to draw upon themselves the guilt of innocent
Blood.

And finally, I told her, that she had made
swopt a Bargain with the Devil for secrecy to her own destruction, that all
would out at last, as cunningly and closely as she did carry it, before Men and
Angels; and said I, you are one of the most bloody Women, that ever came into
this Goal, you are guilty of Two Murders upon your Mistresses, guilty of a
Third before God, having drawn in this poor Girl like a Devil, as you are, to
join with you to ruin them and her self also, and though she suffered justly
from Man, yet her Blood would be required from your hands by God, and then you
must answer for the shortning of her days, and that destruction she and you
have brought upon her self; so that she was drowned over and over in
Blood-guiltiness: And I did as verily believe she would be in Hell, unless
there were a very wonderful change wrought upon her, as that old Murderer her
Father the Devil was.

These words extorted tears from her, but no confession, and she prayed me to
have better thoughts and hopes of her. I told her, I wish I had some grounds
for them, but I could have none, till I saw her stony Heart rent and shivered
to pieces, and her Bones broken under the sense of her Hellish wickedness, and
she did not continue to reject the Counsels of God to her own destruction.

Upon this her Accusers, that unthought of, or unknown to me, were at the Door,
being admitted, conferred with her; and I betook my self to the poor Penitent,
the Maid.

This is a sad, too sad a Truth. After condemnation crowds of vulgar Persons
throng in upon these Malefactors: The covetous Keepers for love of a piece of
money letting them in, who by their loose; idle, and impertinent discourses,
obstruct the success of Ministerial Labors. However this poor Maid assured me,
that her thoughts had been upon my Counsels in the night, and she would make it
her business to do it more effectually, and withal, added that she saw her self
undone for ever.

To which I replied, No, she was nearer Heaven than she was aware of. That her
sins were not too great for God to pardon. That she should remember Three Texts
of Scripture that I would tell her.

First, This is a true and faithful saying, worthy of her acceptance, that
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Yea Sir,
(says she,) I am the greatest sinner in Plymouth.

Secondly, That whosoever comes unto Christ, that is, believes in Christ, he
would in no wise cast out. That for her to believe in and come to Christ, was
no other than this; That seeing her self by reason of sin to be a damned
Wretch, she cast her self upon the everlasting mercies of God because of
Christ's death, with hope and expectation of them, and waiting for them.

And then Thirdly, That the Blood of Christ cleanses from all sins.

And she should meditate and think upon these precious words of God, and
resolve that she would live and die with them in her Heart. And if she did, and
grieved unfeignedly for her sins, loathed them, and her self for them, my Soul
for hers, she should never perish. For Jesus Christ was a most absolute and
complete Savior, able and willing to save the worst of Mankind, that would be
saved by him upon these his Terms, and therefore would save her. Upon this she
wept again.

Having comforted her, and done somewhat to bind up her wounds; I added, Anne,
there are yet some other works for you; you must die in Charity with the world,
and crave pardon as from God, so from Man, especially from your Master whom you
have so grievously wronged. You must also in particular forgive this bloody
Woman the Nurse, that has seduced you to this great sin, and to your
perdition. Will you? Can you do it? If you do it not from your heart, God will
never forgive you. Sir, says she, I wit, I do it. And it should not grieve me
if she lived, though l died only for this Fact. I forgive her, a I expect
forgiveness from God.

Then I added, She must beware of mispending her time, or loosing a moment of
it; she should take heed of vain thoughts, she must be much in private Prayer,
and not be long, but short, short in Prayer, but often. She must hearken to all
the good counsels of Gods Ministers that would come and visit her, and do them
to the utmost. She should be as Spiritual, Holy, Religious, Humble, Serious,
and Heavenly minded as possible. She should not take any great care of her
Body, the less the better, as to eating, drinking, or sleep: Her whole thoughts
and care should be spent about her Soul, and its salvation.

And to conclude, Anne, said I, it is a hard work to die at any time, but for
one in thy condition very hard indeed. But however, once thy peace is made with
God, and thou have repented of thy sin, and thrown thy poor Soul upon Sovereign
mercy in the Blood of Jesus, never fear death. Take it humbly, patiently, and
submissively. Bear the indignation of the Lord because thou have sinned, accept
of the punishment of thine iniquity, yea be thankful unto God, that thou may
be Burnt here and not hereafter. I hope the Lord will make thy death easy,
short, and comfortable. Thou art yet a stranger to the joys of Gods Salvation,
and to the comforts of his Holy Spirit: But it may be the Lord will give them
to thee in thy bitter torments, and then thou will scarce feel them; or if he
shall detain them from thee, yet his Grace is sufficient for thee; believe in
the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.

And finishing my discourse with her, she asked whether she should not see me
again, especially when she was to suffer, for she earnestly requested my help,
my assistance to her in that hour.

I promised, if it could be obtained, she should have it.

Being now returned to the rest of the Malefactors, I spoke something of the
Glories of that other World, where truly Penitent and believing sinners were a
going, what an unspeakable happiness God had prepared for them, and what
wonderful rich grace this was on Gods part, that he should promise and tender
it unto them. Two of whom I hope were broken hearted, though they wanted much
knowledge, and much of that Compunction that they ought to have; that if they
would endeavor after more Grace, God, who was the God of all Grace, would give
liberally unto them, and never upbraid them with their past ungodliness.

That the promises were not made so much unto the measure and degree of Grace,
as to the nature and Truth of Grace: That a Grain of Gold was as truly Gold, as
an heap or Mountain; That the Lord was no respecter of Persons, but an
Universal, a Common Savior: That he despised not the day of small things, He
would not quench the smoking Flax, nor break the bruised Reed, nor cast off
any self-confounded, and self-condemned wrerches. That whatever their sins had
been, they should beware of doubting or despairing of Gods mercies. Their
despair of Salvation being a greater sin than Murder or High Treason. That I
was not ignorant of Satan's devices, no stranger to his Wiles and Stratagems,
who when he could keep them no longer in Chains of darkness and Impenitency,
would put Souls upon Over-doing in Repentance, and over whelm them with horrors.

They should look to this and believe it, live and die upon it, that Christ
Jesus was more willing to save them, than they were to be saved by him, that
though they were to die shameful and painful deaths, you to be Hanged; and you
to be Burnt. Yet here was a comfortable meditation, it was as easy going to
Heaven from the Stake and Gallows, as from their Beds; and when their Souls
were departing out of their Bodies, Gods Holy Angels would convey them into
Paradise.

At this good news my Two Penitents wept; and I hope Tears of Joy.

And turning my self unto the Nurse, Woman, said I, it is the very grief of my
Soul, and makes my heart bleed within me, that not one Syllable or tittle of
these good words of Gods gracious promises belongs to thee. This is the
Children Bread, it must not be given unto Dogs and Devils.

Having finished my discourse, I gathered up the particulars, and spread them
before the Lord in Prayer, begging grace and glory for them: And that his
Divine Majesty would yet mollify that Adamant before him, and take away the
heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh, and open the Brazen Doors that this
Captive of Hell might go forth, and give glory to him by a full and ingenious
Confession, and find mercy ere she went hence, and should be seen no more.

Taking my leave of them, hoping another day to see them in Heaven, I departed
the Chamber. As I was going out the Nurse pulls me by the Coat, desiring
private conference with me.

This very much surprised me, conceiving that she began to relent, and that
Satan was a falling.

But I was miserably mistaken, when with Tears in her eyes she entreated me to
deal effectually with the Maid, to declare who set her upon it to accuse her,
that she might know them that contrived her death.

I told her, I had already; and in Three conferences could never find her to
vary one tittle. That I saw the Maid ingenious and Penitent, but had not the
least token of true Repentance from her; That she was a Brazen Impudent
Hypocrite, thus to dissemble with God and Man, to pretend Innocence, when her
own Conscience convinces her of the Guilt of so much blood. That she should not
deceive her self, God would not be mocked, as she had Sown so she should Reap.
She kept the Devils Counsel, and to the Devil she would go. I had spent my time
and Spirits for the good of her Soul, but I saw no good issue thereof; and
therefore look to it Woman, Look to it, that this do not make thy Hell hotter
than Ordinary.

And then added one word, Prithee tell me, whether thou have no sin at all upon
thy Spirit, that troubles thee?

No, Sir, none it all I thank God. I never wronged any one in my life. I never
hurt my Mistress, nor took a Needle of Thread from her.

I asked her father. Whether she had not the Gold which her Brother stole from
Master Northam.

She said No.

I told her my Intelligence came from her own Father, who avowed that her
Brother gave it her in a Paper to take to his Child, and that she took it
indeed to the Child, but then immediately took it from him again.

All which she stiffly denies, maintaining she never saw nor knew of One
Farthing of that Money, either Gold or Silver: That her Brother was too wise to
entrust it to her a poor Woman for his Child, who had a Child of her own. But
this is downright Lying and aequivocation, as you will hear at the day of her
Execution.

Coming down in the Court of the Jail, the Prisoners flock about me, to whom I
addressed my self in short.
SOme Thirteen years ago in my first Imprisonment, I was confined unto this
place, but blessed be God for no evil that I had done, unless to work in my
place and calling be an evil. However, I learnt, from that day to this, to
compassionate all Prisoners. And the mercies (being a stranger and Prisoner, I
found by the good Providence of my God, in this House,) have made me pay yearly
some Vows and Thank-offerings to him within these Walls. That I would leave
something with them, which should be better than Money, if they would aceept it.

Some of you are now Reprieved, others Burnt in the Hand and to be discharged:
Take heed, Sin no more, lest a worse thing befall you. If you do not go out of
a Prison new Men, and new Creatures, your old sins will return again upon you,
and the Devil that brought you hither, will enter once more into you with Seven
worse Devils, and your latter end will be worse than your beginning. If you do
not mend your Lives, avoid and abhor your former sins, obey, serve, and fear
God, labor diligently in your callings, keep your Church, and wait upon Gods
Holy Ordinances: If you do not leave all your wicked Company, and wicked
Courses, 'ile assure you, God will never bless you, you do but get loose from a
Prison in Earth, to be clapped up at last everlasting Prisoners with the Devil in
his Gaol of Hell.

Whilst my affairs called me Homewards, it pleased God to stir up the Hearts
of many Ministers in the City of Exon to visit these Prisoners, and to
Prosecute that good work which was begun in them.

I am sorry that no Memorials of their Pious Labors, and Divine Discourses are
fallen into my Hands, that might have enricht the Soul of my Reader, and been
an embellishment to this course Paper.

Something occurred in Two Letters, which (craving pardon of my worthy Friends
for inserting it without their Privity,) I here offer to the World.

I Have yours of the Nine and twentieth instant, and immediately made it my
work to inquire after the Ministers which visited the Poor Prisoners Condemned
for Poisoning Mistress Weeks, etc. And after my best Inquiry, can only learn in
the General, that several have been with them, and that the Girl seems more
Penitent than the Nurse* who stiffly denies the Fact. I do not hear that either
the one or the other have been absolved or received the Sacrament. Master
Treasurer-Hall was Ordinary, but I have not spoken with him. My affairs and
business (which called me out of Town) would not permit me to see them till
this day. I tarried an hour and half at least with them, and upon my entering
into the Room, where the poor wretches were kept, I found the young Girl with a
Bible, and another Prisoner with a Book, (I presume reading to them, for he
told me he did use to do so.) Directing my self to them both, I did the best I
could to represent their sad condition, and the demerits of their sins,
especially of that horrid one, for which they were Condemned.

The Girl seemed somewhat sensible; but I saw no relenting in the Nurse, which
made me afterward direct my discourse chiefly unto her. But after all I could
say, I perceived it had little effect upon her; which made me tell her at my
departure, that I was sorry, I had not the least word of Comfort for her. But
however, I told her, I did hope my discourse would prevail with her for a
Confession, if so, I should be very glad of it, and upon any other notice from
her, would readily come to her, though it were at midnight.

She seemed most sensible of these last words, and as I think, told me (for she
spoke low) that she would Consider of it.

Exon March 27. 1676. I am Sir, Your Brother and Servant.


From another I had this.

Dear Sir,
ALL the times I was with them, I could discern no great alteration in any one
of them, the Nurse still refusing to confess any thing, and the Girl indeed
uttering some good expressions, but I could not discern that they proceeded
from any great sense within, or were accompanied with any affection. I hope God
may have succeeded your endeavors there with them, better than he has ours
here. Mr. D. was with them thrice since I was, but could do no great good upon
them, nor discern any thing in them: Yet I have heard the Nurse should desire
to speak with him again, but to what purpose I know not. It Is reported she
should say, She knew she should be Damned, but not for this Crime.

Exon March 30, 1676. Sir, Yours to love and serve you in our Lord Jesus,


What ever the effect and Fruit of their labors was, she gave them this ensuing
Confession, which one of those Reverend Ministers, that panted after her Souls
Salvation, took from her mouth, and has Clothed it in these words.

The Ingenious and true Confession of Anne Evans, concerning the horrid and
cruel Murder of Elizabeth Weeks, and Mary Pengelley.
ENvy being once at the height, it put in Execution with a Witness. This Nurse
having by some means caused her Husband to receive words from her Mistress, he
was pleased to be very angry with his Wise for the same, and withal threatens
her to leave her. And departed for a Fortnights time; whereupon began an
hatching of this Barbarous action by the said Nurse, saying she would fit her
for it; for she her Mistress was the cause of her Husbands going from her, (as
she said) and endeavored to put it in practice with persuading the said Anne
Evans to go to Master Mathews the Apothecary for Ratsbane, telling her she
should ask it for the poisoning of Rats and Mice, saying, it will do her work
in as short a time as one might go to the Gate and back again, and then they
should live as merry as the days were long, when the old Devil was gone.
Saying, she knew one who was poisoned in as little time with it and some Cream.

Whereupon like a true and Faithful Servant, the said Anne Evans refuses and
rejects the said sayings, and would by no means do it.

Here we must stop a while, and give you to understand how much this poor
Creature lived in fear of the Nurse, and by that means neglected the discovery
of it to the destroying of her Body, ^ut (...) hot (...) the destroying of her
Soul. For there is mercy with the Lord, that he may be Feared.

Now the Devil having once got hold on her Heart, neglects no opportunities,
but puts her on it with great subtilties and invention: The Nurse laying, as it
is supposed by all circumstances, a clean Paper twisted at both ends with
Poison in it in the path of the Garden; knowing that this Anne Evans was to go
forth to gather Herbs to put into the Pot, (according to her Mistresses
command,) she finds the Paper lying in her way, which she took up, and brought
in, and shows it to this Nurse again, asking her what it was, who pretended she
knew not, and with all bidding her put it out of her hand, the Nurse eyed her
where she laid it, which was in the Kitchen on a shelf.

Going afterward to the Conduit for Water, at her return it came into her mind,
to look on that thing once more, which she had taken up in the Garden, and it
was gone off from the shelf; which no body else could take but the said Nurse,
for it was at Eight of the Clock at night, and no body there but she.

Then the said Anne Evans saw her grinding it on the Harth with Two Tiles, and
demanding her what she was doing, she cried Peace! we shall have brave sport,
if you will but put this into the old Woman's Dish. She through her enticements
and strong persuasions, not knowing what it was, or that the end of it would be
death, being not willing to have her displeasure. For she lived in great fear
of offending the Nurse, because she was in great favor with the young Mistress,
thinking that if she did not consent to her request she should fare the worse
for it.

And further the said Anne Evans does testify that the same Sunday she was
sent for some drink, which she brought to the Nurse, and the Nurse did Warm it,
and put a bit of Bread into it, and drank up a good draught of it, and filled
it up again afterward with other drink, in which she had steeped some of that
Powder all night, and gave it to the old Mistress to drink.

Here is a Consession Harmonical with that she made formerly, she varied
nothing from first to last in it. So that as the Serpent drew in Eve, in like
manner did this wicked Nurse beguile this poor Maid into the transgression.

ON Wednesday the 29. of March, they left Exon, and were brought on Horseback
to Plymouth in order to their execution.

At the Bridge end, as they were coming out of the City, that vile Woman was
heard to lay unto the Hangman boastingly, That she had known many Men in her
life, and used several other obscene expressions, that I will not soil my
Paper, nor make my Reader blush at the Relation of them.

In their journey, the Girl was very pensive, cared for little or no
refreshment, and at the last place where they baited, being desired to take
some sustenance; she replied, There was other work for her than to eat or
drink, she had a Soul to save, would look wholly after that, and no more care
for her Body; which should neither eat, nor drink more in this world.

The Nurse was of a far different temper and deportment, far from seriousness,
or thoughts of Death and Eternity; The Executioner was her Husband, and if he
had not defiled her, they are both abominably wronged.

Now they return again to Plymouth. At their entrance they are attended by
Thousands of People. Persons of all Age and Quality ran to meet them. They are
gazed at as so many Monsters. Every one passes his censure on them; some with
bowels of pity on the poor Girl, scarce any one has Charity for the Nurse.
They went from this Town with their sin, and under guilt: They return unto it
with shame, and sorrow, and under wrath.

Being conducted unto their Chamber, the Reverend and Learned Ministers of
Plymouth, Dr. Ashton, Mr. Collings, and Mr. Read visits them, and discourse
with them, but the Throng of Spectators was so great, that for the present much
good could not be done by them. Yet so strong a flame of divine love toward the
Souls of these condemned wretches was kindled in the hearts of those grave
Divines, that they return again unto them after Ten, and though late at night,
yet spent a considerable space of time in Religious conferences with them, and
muster up all their arguments to induce that obstinate sinner the Nurse to
confess, and forsake the Devil, and to accept of Gods tender mercies. But the
flinty Rock will sooner gush out with Waters, and the Adamant be broken to
pieces by the Hammer, than her unmovable Soul utter forth one Syllable of
guilt. Heart-work, is hard work. None but the Divine and Omnipotent Arm can
unlock it is Doors, or break its Bars in pieces.

With the Maid they had no difficulty, she owneth, and confesses all. Her
desires are for mercy at the hands of God, acknowledging she deserved and
expected none from Men.

They conclude their charitable Visit with seeking God, the Reverend Doctor
praying most fervently for them.

I also visited them again, and renewed my assaults and batteries against this
strong hold of the Devil; but she resists, stands out against God, and all his
Counsels; she resolves from first to last, whatever parleys she has with
Heaven, let the Lord humble himself never so much unto so base a Murderer, she
may treat with him, but unless she can obtain her own Terms, her own Articles
and Conditions, she will not surrender. Sill she hides her sin, as Adam; still
concealeth she the secret of Hell, as if she had been sworn Privy Counselor
unto the Devil. She will sooner bite out her Tongue, and spit it out of her
Mouth, or seal up the door of her Lips, than let the deposi^um Satan have vent,
and see the Sun. So that I could sigh unto my self as that German Philip, The
old Satan is too hard for young Melancthon.

It was high time to leave her, upon whom no good impressions could be wrought.

I then betook my self to the poor Penitent, and asking her how she did, How it
went with her Soul? She answers me, Never was a poor Creature so cheated out of
her life: But I forgive the Nurse front my Heart. And Sir, Though my sins are
many, yet Gods mercies are more, and if Christ bath not merits enough to save
me, I will be contented to be damned eternally.

And afterward inquiring of her into the grounds and reasons of this her
confidence, she told me, she saw her sin, she was unfeignedly sorry for it, and
not only that it was committed against her Mistresses, and had ruined them, and
her self here; but chiefly this grieved her, that she had thereby dishonored
God her Heavenly Father, who had made her, and Jesus Christ who had died for
her, and God the Holy Ghost, who had sanctified her to become his Servant. That
however, she would not despare of mercy. For the Thief upon the Cross found
mercy from our Savior at the last hour, and I Question not, that he my Savior
has mercy for me.

Reader, I give thee her very words, neither adding to them, nor substracting
from them; and if they do do not melt thee in reading, I must assure thee they
did me in heating them.

Her Sisters being come to her weeping and crying, she was desired to speak to
them, and urged because her time was short, she answered, My time is short
indeed, and I am drawing near unto Eternity, but I hope in God to an Eternity
of Happiness.

My great work now was to settle her Spirit, and to corroborate her Soul
against the horrors of her death; and told her after many other discourses,
Anne, thou art happier than many here, for I hope before Twenty four hours be
past, thou will be in Heaven. Hold fast thy hope and confidence in Gods mercy,
which shall have a good recompense of Reward. No matter for thy punishment,
since thou have a pardon.

Yea Sir, says she, I believe, and receive this true and faithful saying,
worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief.

Having got a little silence, (and very little indeed it was, the noise and
tumult of the people ever and anon drowning my voice,) I prayed with these
Malefactors, and wished them a good Night.

But sleep they did not. Every hour increases their fears.

The day of their Execution is now come, and early in the morning I gave them
another visit, comforted and confirmed the poor Maid, who desired me not to
leave her at her sufferings, and dealt again with the Nurse, though to as
little purpose as formerly, and then sought God by Prayer in their behalf.

That duty finished, Turning my discourse to the Maid, Anne, said I, Thy time
flies away, thy end is very near, take off thy heart wholly from the world. Be
dead unto thy Relations, tell them, the best service and kindness they can do
thee is not to see thee, but pray for thee, and let all thy thoughts and
desires be unto God, to be at home with him: long now to be in Heaven and
Glory, turn thy Face to the Wall, since thou have no private Room, and power
out thy Soul before the Lord, and wait, yea wait earnestly for, his Salvation.

Do not fear the Fire, God will carry thee thorough it, it can only hurt thy
Body, it shall not singe thy Soul. Though thy Flesh and thy Bones be consumed,
thou will have many Mourners, and God, I hope will gather thine Ashes, and
grant thee a Glorious Resurrection. I want words to tell thee what the Joys of
Heaven are, but thou will see, and feel, and taste, and enjoy them very shortly.
I hope this day thou will be with the Lord, and all his blessed Saints, and
glorious Angels in Paradise. She said, Amen.

Notwithstanding my ill success and many repulses hitherto, yet I would not
leave the Nurse. I reasoned still with my self, who knows but that Grace may
be given, and Satan may loose his hold fast, and the Prey may be taken out of
the Paws of the spoiler, out of the jaws of the Devourer?

Satan has fallen as a flash of lightning before the Ministry of Gods Holy
word, God has him in a Chain, and though she has not listened to the voice of
former admonitions, it may be she shall now unto the last.

Addressing my self, therefore once again unto her, I told her, Nurse, this is
the last conference that ever I will have with thee on Earth about thy Soul,
and nothing but my real sense of its worth, and lothness that it should be lost
for ever, would ever have engaged me to it. That I got nothing but trouble,
grief, and loss of time thus to wait upon her, and not to be able to do good. I
knew indeed my reward was with the Lord, and my work with my God, but yet I
demanded this poor satisfaction of her now at parting, that she should not send
me away with the sad thoughts of her damnation.

To which she very civilly replied, Sir, I thank you for all your love to my
Soul. I believe that what you have done and spoken, has been in order to my
Eternal good.

Well then, I added, shall you and I have a little private discourse together?
She agreed. Desiring therefore the people to withdraw at a distance, I asked her
in her Ear whether she were Guilty or not.

Sir, (says she,) I will tell you all I know -- Then stopped, at length the
repeats again. I will tell you all I know -- And then stops.

Whereupon I told her, Nurse, the Devil is leaving thee, God is coming in with
mercy, do not now at the last hour refuse it, tell me what you know of this
business, and I assure thee upon the word of a Minister, that without thy
consent I will not disclose it. Do not fear shame, shame the Devil, and give
Glory to God.

Sir, I confess, I did put the Spider into the Cup, and bad the Girl to squat
it abroad; but it was a Foolish and vain word, I never intended any more hurt
to my Mistress, than I do to my own Soul.

I believe she spoke the truth, for she never intended good to her Soul. Just
like Doctor Lopez the Jew, who being convented before the Privy Council, for
attempting to Poison Queen Elizabeth, told their Honors, That be loved the
Queen better than be loved Christ. Yea, (said a Noble Lord, thou tellest the
truth, for thou art a Jew, and love both a like.)

And Sir, I knew that this wicked Maid had an intent to make away her Mistress,
and that she did it; but I was loath to discover, and now I must suffer for her
fault. I told her no, it was for her own; and she did not yet confess any thing
to the purpose, all this I knew before, you must tell me as to your own hand
and Guilt in this Murder. None! None at all Sir, that is her answer.

But Nurse, did you not tell such a Minister that visited you in Goal, that you
would consider what he spoke unto you? at this she changed countenance, paled
and redded once and again, minced, aequivocated, and faltered in her
expressions; but taking her in all her Evasions, she could not deny she had
promised him; and had considered of it, yet knew no guilt by her self worthy of
death.

Getting no ground here, I asked her concerning the Gold, her Brother took her
for his Child, she told me she never had any from him. Why then did you speak
to Master W. to look after your Money, if you never had any, and be such a Poor
Woman?

Sir, I will without any dissimulation tell yon all the Truth. My Brother
acquainted me that there was Ten Pound in a Purse hanging between the Vallance
and the Wall of his Bed Chamber in Loo: Whereupon my Husband got an Horse in
Plymouth, Rode thither and brought it to me. So that I never had any of my
Brother, but my Husband had.

Well, Nurse, this may be as you say, though undoubtedly there was more; but
how have you disposed of it? She replied, It is put out for my Child. I told
her this is a very horrid Theft, the healer was as bad in the sight of God as
the stealer; that without Restitution there was no Remission: That unless she
took some course for its being restored, she could never be saved: That God
would never bless it unto her Child: Yea, the very contrary, for it would be a
snare and a curse unto her, and an occasion of destruction unto her, otherwise,
innocent Child.

And recollecting all my former discourses and arguments to her, I pressed with
all possible earnestness and importunity, not wilfully to precipitate her self
into Hell. That there were now but a few Sands in her Glass, a few breaths in
her body, a few minutes in her time, that she should not play the Fool any
longer; love the Devil, and hate God. The Devil had already undone her, yet the
Lord was willing to save her. He sent me once again upon that errand, but if
she were resolved to adhere unto her grand Enemy, and utterly forsake the Lord
her best Friend, I was heartily sorry for her, I foresaw she must Burn in Hell
Everlastingly. That in the day of Judgment, I should be a witness against her,
and it would be a fearful thing, that God Almighty should tell her; did not I
send Minister upon Minister to Convert, reconcile and save thee? Did not this
and that come unto thee, Woe and entreat thee with tears in their eyes, with
fair and gentle, with terrible and amazing words to confess and give Glory to
me, but thou would not?

Ah! Nurse! Nurse! What will you say unto the Lord then? She wept; and I wept
for Company.

But recovering my self, Woman said I, do not flatter thy self with false hopes
of Life. For I fear thou keep the Devils Counsel upon that account. Thou
must die. All the world cannot save thee. Ere three hours be spent and gone,
thou must be led unto the Gallows, and thence into Eternity. Oh! Hell! Hell!
Hell! Woman is a place and state of unspeakable, of unsufferable horror and
torment: Yet, Flee! Flee! Flee from it! Or thou art undone for ever.

I now Love, Pity, Entreat, and Pray for thee* But if thou will be a
Reprobate, a cast away, I take God to witness, I have done my duty, my utmost
to save thee, Lord, said I, lifting up my Eyes and Hands to Heaven, I am free
of the ruin of this Woman. Let her Blood, and Damnation lie upon her own Head!

And Nurse, It is a very fearful thing to fall into the bands of the living
God. The God to whom thou art going, is a consuming Fire. Ah! Who can abide his
anger? Who can stand before his indignation? None will compassionate thee at
thy death. And in the day of Judgment, thou will be an abhorrency to all.

All this wrought nothing upon her besides tears: Still she avows her
innocence; and had I not had unquestionable evidence of her guilt, possibly I
might have been persuaded she was accused and condemned unjustly.

After this I sat down, and Mr. Collings, the Reverend Minister of Charles
Church coming in, he reasoned with her for a long time, as also my worthy
Friend Mr. Sh. But a Marble Quarry affords no Water, nor her stony Heart one
penitential Tear. At length all their pains being useless, ineffectual; and
unsuccesful, we resolved to try the Lord once more by Prayer, and see whether
any mercy might be got out of Heaven for her.

Mr. Collings was our Mouth to God. The condemned Persons were upon their
knees. Duty ended, I departed, and never spoke more with her, till she was upon
the Ladder.

ANd now she is waited on to the Gallows.

The Streets are crowded. The Major, Magistrates, and under Sheriff can hardly
pass for the throngs.

The poor Maid is drawn on the Hurdle. The posture she lay in was on her left
side, her Face in her Bosom, her Bible under her Arm, seeming like one dead,
rather than alive.

At length we are come, though slowly to the place of Execution. Plymouth was
then naked of Inhabitants, the Town was easy to be taken, and the Houses to be
plundered, if an Enemy had been at hand to have done it. Cat down, the
Lambhey, Citadel, Turn-Chappel, and Cat-Water are pressed with multitudes. Some
computed their number I'wenty thousand. But Commanders, who at lived in Wars,
and seen great Armies, and therefore the most competent Judges in this case,
estimated them at one half. I write within compass.

The Maid being nailed to her Stake, and the Iron Hoop about her, and the Nurse
mounted upon the Ladder, she desires. that this Relator might now Pray with her.

But it being thought requisite that the established Order of the Church should
be observed, the Common Prayers were first Commanded. Which having been read
Audably, and with great Devotion from the Bystanders. The 51. Psalm according
to the Girls request was sung: Who (it was very observable,) joined with the
People, singing also herself.

Now she being questioned about her offense owns every particular thereof, it
having been propounded to her in particulars. Owneth that the Nurse bad her put
it in; Only denies the Deposition of Scannels Wife, professing that she cannot
remember it: Professes her hearty and unfeigned sorrow for her sin, not only
because it had ruined her Mistresses and her self; but principally, and
especially because it was an high dishonor to God, Father, Son, and Spirit,
that it made her unworthy of his Favor and Blessing; yet she professed her
Faith and Hope of Salvation, through the alone Merits of the Lord Jesus, Into
whose hands she now commended her self; and desired to forgive all the World,
and that Bloody Woman the Nurse, who had drawn her into destruction; and added,
that she submitted patiently to her death, because she had deserved it. And
said, it was her wish, that all others would take warning by her Example; and
taking this Relator by the hand, Sir, says she, will you not pray with me? Did
you not promise me yon would? And craving it with Tears, it was readily
accorded.

Silence being commanded, and every Person composed, there was this following
Prayer conceived, and poured before the Lord in her behalf.

MOst Holy Lord God! The Righteous Judge of the whole World! Just in all thy
Ways, and Holy in all Works! The great and terrible God! a consuming Fire, and
everlasting burnings! How can such sinful chaff, and stubble as we are stand
before thee? We must needs in a Moment be reduced unto Ashes, if thou have not
pity on us. But blessed be thy Name, thou art a God of wonderful Love and
Mercies, Thou have so loved the World as to give thine only begotten Son to the
death for us, that we believing in him should not perish but have everlasting
life.

We are greater Sinners than the Apostate Angels, and yet have greater Mercies
afforded us, though they are better capacited to serve God than our selves, and
never sinned against thee but once, yet thou did utterly reject them, never
gave a Christ to them, nor to die for them; whereas thou have bestowed him on
us the most unworthy Persons, Sons and Daughters of sinful Adam, who have never
ceased sinning against thee.

We are all Sinners by Nature, and from our Youth upward. We were conceived in
sin, and born in iniquity. Our Infancy, our Youth, and riper years have been
all spent in the drudgery of sin. We have broken all the Commandments of our
God in heart, thought, word, and deed; sinned against the Law, and against the
Gospel; against all the means used by our God to reclaim, and to reform us. We
have despised the best of Mercies, and deserved the worst of Judgments, yea to
be burnt up with unquenchable flames, as this poor, wretched Malefactor is now
ready to be with those that are temporal. But hitherto thou have spared and
reprieved us, and given us space for Repentance, and waitest to be gracious to
us, and biddest us, seek thee O our God, whilst thou may be found, and call
upon thee whilst thou art near, it forsake our ungodliness, and to forego all
our wickedness, and thou would abundantly pardon; yea thou art so gracious,
as to bid and encourage us to Pray for others, with promises of Audience and
Acceptance.

This emboldens us to make our addresses to thee for this poor condemned
Creature, ready to be executed. We confess for her, and she does acknowledge for
her self, Lord! her great and grievous offenses, that she has been a Rebel
against thee all her days, lived in sin, neglected duty, neglected getting the
saving knowledge of God, and acquaintance with thee; that she has not hearkened
to the voice of God speaking from his holy Word unto her; but listened readily
unto the Temptations and Suggestion of the Devil, a Murderer from the
beginning, and by whose enticements she has embrewed her hands in Blood, in
the guilt of innocent Blood of her Relation and Superiors, which cries to Heaven
for vengeance against her. Lord! she cannot stand before the Justice of Men.
Ah! how unable is she to subsist at the Bar of God? Man has justly contemned
her, and the Lord might justly damn her, and that to all Eternity. The wages of
her sin is death, death Temporal, and Eternal.

But Lord! though she is miserable, thou art merciful; though she is full of
sins, thou art full of pardons; though she is helpless in her self, yet in thee
Lord, is she not hopeless. Blessed be God that has opened a Door of hope for
her in the Resurrection of Christ Jesus, who was delivered to the death for her
sins, and rose again from the dead, that she might be justified. Thy Free gift
in Christ Jesus is Eternal Life, Oh! How sweet is thy mercy?

Suffer us, Blessed Father! in all humility to plead with thee in her behalf,
Oh, That thou would be gracious to her! she is thy Creature, the work of
thine hands, do not destroy her! She is the purchase of thy Sons blood, Oh, Let
him not loose her! Christ died for her, Oh, Let him not die in vain for her!
Therefore save her! Her sins are many, but thy mercies are infinitely more, her
sins are Bloody, Crimson, Scarlet, and crying sins. but the blood of Jesus
cleanses from all sins. Bloodshed by her cries down Vengeance on her. But
yet, dear Lord! Hear! Oh hear the louder outcries of thy Sons blood for her!
She is, if ever any, an object worthy of pity, not from any worth in her, but
because of her misery. If God do not help her, who will? Who can? Men and
Angels cannot save her, but Jesus Christ can. He is able. And Bessed be thy
name, sweet Jesu! Thou art willing also even to the worst and utmost to save.

Thou art an Almighty, and All sufficient Savior, thine arm is not shortened,
thy Grace is not exhausted. Oh, Magnify thy Grace now, even now upon her! Thou
have said, that the weary, the heavy laden should come unto thee, and thou
would give them rest: And that such as come unto thee, though the greatest
sinners, thou would not cast out It Is late indeed that she comes unto thee,
but not too late. Truth Lord! Late Repentance is seldom true, but yet true
Repentance is never too late. Bitter late than never.

Thou have given us one instance, one example of the Thief on the Cross saved
at the Eleventh, at the last hour save one, it is but one, that we should not
presume; and yet one, that we. should not despair; Oh Lord, she will not
despair of thy mercy, that were a greater sin than all the rest that she has
committed. Now Lord, though late she comes unto thee, she throws her self at
thy Feet, and we thy poor Servants come unto thee, and prostrate our selves at
thy fleet for her: Oh! Do not cast her out of thy sight! Oh! Let her not be
Damned, but saved! This is a true and faithful saying, worthy of all
acceptance, most worthy of hers, and she accepts of it, and rests upon it, and
trusts unto it, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, Of whom
she is chief, Thou art willing that all should be saved: Therefore thou art
willing she should be saved also. Thou have put these words into her mouth, and
into our mouths for her. That if Jesus Christ, has not merits enough to save
her, she, and we also will be contented that she should be Damned for, ever.

But Blessed be our God! The merits of our Savior are Infinite, Oh! Lord, make
application of them unto her poor Soul. Oh! Take away for Christ's sake all her
sins! Blot out her iniquities at a Cloud, and her Transgressions as a thick
Cloud, Though her sins have abounded unto her Condemnation, yet let thy grace
much more, infinitely more abound unto her justification. Enter not into
judgment with her, Oh Lord! Deliver her from blood guiltiness, Oh God, thou God
of her salvation! And her Tongue, and our mouths shall sing aloud of Christ's
Righteousness and of thy Faithfulness.

Oh, take away whatsoever may hinder the Communications of thy Love, favor, and
salvation unto her! Purge sin out of her! Give a broken, contrite, and truly
Peritent heart unto her! She is Mourning for her sin, and misery: Oh, wash her
in the blood of the Lamb, in that Fountain opined for sin and for
Uncleanness, in the lavor of Regeneration! Oh, sanctify, and renew her by
thy Holy Spirit! Take away all the spots and blots of her sin! Though she be
defiled and deformed with innumerable and those the most abominable, yet can
thou rense and cleanse her in a moment. No unclean thing shall enter into thy
Kingdom. Without Holiness none can see the Lord. Now the Lord Sanctify her
throughout, in her whole Soul, Body and Spirit.

And though she has been by the wiles of the Devil cheated of her life, and is
now to suffer Justly for her evil deeds, give her to bear patiently the
indignation of her God, because she has sinned against thee, and to accept of
the punishment of her iniquity! Though she must burn in Temporal flames, yet
let her not burn in Everlasting flames! Oh, Let the streams of Christ's blood
quench out the flames of thy wrath! Though she die in Earth, Lord! Save her
from Hell! Oh, Give her Faith, the Faith of Gods elect! And the Lord strengthen
her Faith! Oh, Confirm her hope! Oh, Give her to abound in hope through thy
Holy Ghost given to her! Oh, Grant that Faith, Hope, and patience may have
their perfect work in her.

Give in some token, some pledge of thy good will unto her, if it be thy good
pleasure! Oh, revive, support, and comfort her drooping Spirits! Though she be
in the Valley and shadow of death; do not forsake her! Oh, do not forsake her!
Say unto her, thou art her Salvation! Tell her, that after she has suffered a
little while, she shall be with thy self in Heaven, perfect with thee in Glory!
Say unto her as unto the Thief upon the Cross, this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise!

Oh, keep off Satan from her! He is never more busy, ^han when thy poor Worms
are weakest, and least able to defend themselves from him. Lord Jesu! Fight for
her against him! Keep her precious and immortal Soul from him! Oh, Be with her
now in these her last agonies. Give thy Holy Angels to wait upon her, and in
that very moment that her Soul shall go out of her Body, let those Glorious
Angels carry it into Abraham's bosom! Into thy hands do we commend her. Into
thy hands does she commit her Spirit Dear Jesu! Save it! For thou have loved,
redeemed, and died for it! And now Lord, though earth will loose a bloody
Sinner, yet let Heaven be augmented by one saint more!

O Look down from Heaven, the Habitation of thy Holiness and Glory upon this
numerous Assembly! Oh, let them not be idle Spectators of these dreadful
Providence. Oh, That they may be Ordinances for this good, for their
Conversion and Reformation! Oh, That every Soul, that is gazing here may smite
upon his Breast, and lament that Universal corruption which is in our nature,
and the woeful effects of our sin. Sin having once conceived, brings forth
death.

We have the root of the matter in us, the very causes of those sins, for which
these Malefactors suffer, had we the same temptations we might be Guilty of the
like transgressions. And were it not for the Cords and Curbs of thy Restraining
Grace, we should be in their Condition. Blessed be God we are not! It Is thou
only that have made us to differ. Oh, That all Masters of Families, Parents of
Children, would see that they in their own Persons, and with their Families do
serve the Lord! Oh, Let there be no 'Prayerless Families, no uncatechized
Children in this Place!

Look once more we pray thee, with mercy upon this thy poor Creature! She is
very low, very miserable, yearn upon her with bowels of compassion, and embrace
her with arms of everlasting lave! Be her God and her Guide unto death, and her
Savior from everlasting death!

And all we beg, in, and for the sake of our dearest Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who sits on the Right hand making intercession for her, and for us.
Hear us for his sake, and graciously answer us, and do abundantly for her, and
us, beyond what we can ask or think! To him, with thy self Holy Father, and
Eternal Spirit, be Everlasting Glory, Dominion, Praise, and Thanksgiving. Amen.

Prayer being ended, I lifted up my hands over her, and said, Anne, the Lord
bless thee, and keep thee! The Lord make his Face to shine upon thee, and be
gracious to thee! The Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon thee, and
give thee Peace! And if thy Repentance be true, and thy peace made with God,
and our Prayers heard, as I hope they all are, death wont be terrible unto
thee. Now Farewell Life, welcome Death. God will send his Holy Angels in a Fiery
Chariot to Convey thy Soul into Heaven.

THis poor wretch weeping, and wringing me by the hand, Sir, says she, I am
never able to requite you for all your labor of love, care and pains about the
Salvation of my precious Soul; but the Lord. will, I hope. The Lord reward you!
The Lord recompense you for all these kindnesses! I thank you with all my Heart.

And as I was departing from her, she helpake me, Sir, pray entreat for me,
that I may not be put to too much torture. I answered her in broken words and
tears (for few there refrained.) That I would do my utmost endeavor to prevent
it: And turning my self to the Gentlemen in Authority. Gentlemen, the English
temper abhors Cruelty, show same Bowels to this poor Creature. I need not
entreat it, there was such a Clowd of grief sitting upon all their Faces, and
so much tenderness and companion, that they would have done their utmost to
have hindered it.

Two -- went to the Maid, and asked her what Faith and what Repentance were.
And one of them proceeded to instruct her in the nature of Faith, that it was
to take Christ as Lord and King, and to submit unto all his Laws, to be
Governed by them, and in particular to this of suffering the punishment
inflicted on her for her sin.

At which putting them off with my Hand, I replied.

Gentlemen; do not trouble her, it is unseasonable now to Catechize her in
Doctrinals; she stands in need of some Sovereign Cordials to revive and support
her drooping Spirit in these her last Agonies with death, and conflicts with
the Devil.

And Addressing my self once again unto her, Anne said I, fear not, but cast
thy self upon the everlasting mercies of God in the blood of Christ Jesus, and
thou shall be saved. Since thou must die, die upon this, that Jesus Christ came
into the World to save sinners, of whom thou art chief. And 'twill be but a
quarter of an hour, and thou shall be freed from all sins and torments. Say.
Into thy hands I commit my Spirit. Lord save it! For thou have died for it.
Lord Jesu, thou Son of David have mercy upon me! Oh, Thou Lamb of God receive
my Soul!

I left her, expecting no answer. The Rope is now drawn close unto her Neck,
and the Hangman would have set Fire unto the Fu^ze before she was strangled but
some more charitable and tenderhearted, cried to him to take away the Block
from under her Feet; which having done, she soon fell down, and expired in a
Trice.

And it was observable, that all the skill and diligence of the Executioner and
his Assistants, could not make either Powder, Wood, or Fuel to take fire; till
she had been dead a Quarter of an hour; as also, that as soon as the fire was
kindled, the Wind which blew before in the back of the Nurse, immediately
shifted, and drove the smoke full in her Face; as if God had spoken to her, The
Smoke of my Fury, and Flames of my Fiery Vengeance are now Riding upon the
Wings of the Wind toward thee.

And now for Two hours, the Nurse feeds her eyes, and feasts her thoughts with
the sad spectacle of this poor Maids burning.

The flames being well allayed, several Ministers, and worthy Gentlemen
endeavor yet the Repentance, Conversion, and Saving of her Soul. But All
succeeds as formerly. She denies her guilt; pleads her Innocence, accuses
Judge, Jury, Witnesses, Country, and all of her Murder; that she is Murdered,
that they take away her Life unjustly: Nay, that they kill too; she is with
Child, expects to be delivered about Midsummer. What will you Murder one that
is unborn? And a great deal more of the like stuff.

That she was not with Child we heard evidenced upon Oath at her condemnation.
And a skilful Hand-Woman, searching her but a night before her Execution, could
never discover any such thing.

Most probable the true ground of all her denials, was a foolish hope of Life;
the Hangman as it is commonly noised, having promised never to execute her.
Whatever familiarities had past between them Two in Jail, I know not. This is
certain, the Hangman brought the under Sheriff to terms just as they were
leaving Plymouth, and going to the place of Execution. And the Girl being
dispatched, he ran away with the Halter under the Clifts; and when he was
brought back, lay asleep at the Foot of the Gallows, or at least pretended
sleep, and so deserted Execution.

Besides another Accident intervened, which put a stop for a time, and had it
not been prudently and presently composed upon the place, would have totally
suspended, for that day at least, her Execution.

All these Circumstances jumping in one upon the other, contributed to the
strengthening of her Heart in the false hopes of Life. For what she would have,
it was an easy matter to persuade her to believe and hope.

But at length she has worn out all patience both of God, and Man. And the
Halter is fastened to the Gibber, and put about her Neck. Now Ministers ply
their work with her, because she is upon the brink of Destruction, and in view
of Hell.

No sin she acknowledged, no guilt as to the Fact for which she is condemned.
Indeed she confesses, She had been a Swearer, Lier, and Sabbath breaker, but
none others trouble her. As to Money that her Brother stole, and was in hers,
or her Husbands hands, she now charge upon a dead Person, having wronged her
in her life, the must mischief her at her death too. No Bond, nor Bill can she
produce, nothing under the Deceased's hand can she show for her having received
it; yet does she charge Mr. W. to look that it be restored unto the right Owner.

Ministers however lament her deplorable condition, especially since just as
she is going out of the World, she cries, Judge and Revenge my cause, O Lord!
Which made this Relator tell her, He now saw, what he formerly feared, viz.
That God was departed from her, that the Devil was already in her heart, for he
sat upon her tongue, that troops of Devils were upon the Ladder by her, all
gaping for her; and that within in a few moments, they would have her wretched
Soul into Hell with them; and then, and there she would be soon sensible of her
madness in dying with a Lie in her Mouth, and confess, and mourn for her folly
and madness in rejecting Heaven and Salvation, but it would be too late, and to
no purpose: For her condition, whatever it might be here, would infallibly be
there unalterable, and irreversible.

That she was going into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone there to be tormented for
ever and ever; and when she was in the midst of those Eternal torments, she
would remember that I had told her of it.

A Psalm was called, and part of the Twenty fifth sung. Never did I see but one
in that heavy condition. Whilst the people sing, she cries and weeps bitterly,
the very terrors of death are upon her, she cries as if her Heart would break.
Indeed her Soul was overwhelmed with unmeasurable horrors and fears; she had no
mind to die, nor could she be vouchsafed Life. What hopes could she have in her
departure, who never laid any sollid basis for good hopes during life?

The Psalm is now sung out, and yet is she summoned to confess, but it is as
good speak to the stones, or to the Deaf Adder, that stops his ear, she will
never be charmed, let the Charmers Charm never so wisely.

At last being demanded whether she would have any Prayers, or any Person Pray
for her, she said yes, and pointed to this Relator, desiring him to perform
that Office for her: Who replied, that he was most willing to serve and save
her Soul: But in as much as she made no Confession of her Crying sins of
Murder, and of her Theft and Uncleanness, and other Villainies whereof me knew
her selt Guilty, he durst not take the name of God in vain tor her sake;
Besides he should but tempt God to ask a pardon for her, Who resolved never to
take it upon Gods Terms.

In short, if she would be yet ingenious, and give Glory to God by adoring his
Justice, and shameing her self, and renouncing her sin and the Devil, there Was
no person more willing to pray with her, and pray for her than himself.

To which she making no reply, Mr. R. the Minister conceived a pithy and
pertinent Prayer, lamenting the depravedness of our Nature, the horribleness of
Gods wrath, the possibility of Salvation refused by desperate sinners, and as
we feared in particular by this Malefactor his dear Sister now ready to be
turned over. He petitioned that if it were not yet too late, that God would
give her Repentance, and break her stony heart, and cause her to glorify him
at the last by an ingenious and full Confession.

Prayer being ended, she is once again asked, whether she would confess. But
being obstinate in her refusals, she prayed for her self in the words of the
lords Prayer, said the Creed; and being yet exhorted to Remember the merciful
nature of God, who would save her, as we yet hoped, provided she would come
unto his Terms of Confession and Repentance.

She tells us. She cannot confess that whereof is not Guilty.

Being asked whether she could die in Charity with her Witnesses and Accusers.
She said, I forgive all the World.

And a while after, without any visible tokens of Religion, Grace, or Devotion,
without any observable preparedness or willingness for death, by any of those
many Divines that had painfully dealt with her, or Christians that beheld her,
she was turned off the Ladder, and went into that other World. She went out
like the Snuff of a Candle, leaving a stench behind her.

And if it be asked, what is become of her Soul?

I answer, the Question is idle, needless, overcurious, and unprofitable, it is
not for saucy Creatures, poor crawling Earthworms, (such at our selves are) to
pry into the deep secrets of Gods Eternal Counsels, nor to peep into the sacred
Ark of his bottomless decrees. These inscrutable purposes of God by reason of
their inexplicable difficulties will amaze and puzle us; nor can we ever
possibly attain unto any infallible certainty or satisfaction concerning her. I
know the absolute and uncontrollable Sovereignty of Divine Grace and mercies,
and that God can come in, if he please, between the Bridge and Water, the Cup
and the Lip. But who can inform, or assure me that God did so to her? She is
gone unto her Judge, has undergone her Doom; and if she be saved, it is a
Thousand mercies unto the World, that the World neither does, nor can know it.

But did she not protest her Innocence to the very last.

I know she did, and is she Innocent because she said so? Dying persons are
indeed to be credited: But then they must be persons of credit and serious; and
if Condemned Malefactors, such as are most Eminent and exemplary for their
Repentance. Can any one Man or Woman living, that Converst with her from first
to last, from her Imprisonment to her Execution, avow upon her knowledge, that
she saw so much as one poor token of a broken heart, of a sincere Penitent in
her? Produce it, and it shall be Thankfully accepted.

Had she been Innocent, she could not have been so much concerned for life as
she was? I told her in 'Plymouth and Exon, and she was told the same by a
Reverend Divine, that Innocence was a Wall of Brass, it would carry a Person
above the fear of Death, make her to outbrave Death; she could go triumphantly
into the presence of the Eternal Judge, and bless him that she was condemned
unjustly.

Besides, her Innocence as to this Fact, would have engaged her to a more
curious and exact scrutiny into her life past, to have found out the true cause
of Gods anger in shortning her days, and to a most holy life, and religious
preparation of her Soul for death, during the whole time of her imprisonment.
None of which she had done; unless looseness, profaneness, and uncleanness
must be expounded, and taken for it.

Finally, I looked upon her as a desperate and Forelorne wretch, and told her it
was no new thing to find her such. It Is no new thing tor the worst of sinners
to be desperate. Were not Cain, Saul, Abimelech, Achitophel and Judas
desperate? This Relator heard a man Condemned to be Hanged, utter upon the
Ladder these words.

Gentlemen, I value not my life of a Rush, I fear not death; and without any
more Ceremonies or ado, (and Soldiers are none of the most Religious.) He
wilfully leapt off of the Ladder at Crimble-passage: Where had not others
shown his body more mercy than he did hi own Soul, he might have perished
everlastingly.

I know not whether she had as much Courage. Sure I am, Death never struck unto
her Spirits; till the Psalm was a Singing, and it was a doleful Tune unto her.
Her heart was then up in her mouth. If it were not broke with the sense of sin,
and near approaches of Divine wrath, it was with the very horrors of death.
Others Sang, she did but howl and yell. Methought the expressions of her grief,
and vehemence of her passions, raised strange resentments and compassions in
the Spectators.

One, and but one have I known in her condition, a big and tall Fellow, that
upon the score of his strength, could have affrighted the King of Terrors: Yet
after Sentence (and for Burglary was he Sentenced unto death,) his heart failed
him, his Spirits sunk, his Soul died within him: All his Language, and that too
in groans and Floods of Tears, with blubbered Cheeks and wringed hands, was: I
shall die! I shall die! I shall die! I shall die! Woe is me! I shall die! I
shall die!

Though I came to him into the Jail, took him by the hand, entreated him upon
my knees, not to be so much concerned for the loss of his Natural Life: But to
look after another, a better Life, after the life of his miserable Soul; Yet no
Arguments, no motives could prevail upon him. He was Deaf in that ear. A stone
might have heard and answered, but this wretch would give none other answer,
than, I shall die! I shall die! Woe is me! I shall die! I shall die! The
terrors of death, like an opiate Medicine, had quite stupefied him, that he
could not listen unto the best Counsels for his Souls welfare.

But what and if this vile woman had been Guilty of some other Capital Crimes?
I know of the dead rue best must be spoken; but then those dead persons should
not be Impenitent Criminals.

It is no pleasure to me, no pleasing task to Rake in Dunghils. Would to God
all Vices were Buried together with hers, though under the Gibbet! It were no
difficult matter, nay a man might with a wet Finger, prove her Guilty of soul
and frequent Adulteries, of Debauching Young persons, of prostituting her self
in Prison, are these no Capital offenses? Let them not be! What meant she by
those words unto the Girl, that to her knowledge a little Poison in Cream had
made one away in less time than you could go from her Matters House to the Gate.

I am apt to think that she would not confess this Murder lest some other might
out also. There was a shrewed Item in her Exon acknowledgment, That she knew
she should be damned, though not for this Crime.

It brings to my remembrance a Story which I had from Mr. B. Cl. a very holy
Man of God, a Reverend Minister of the Gospel, (who if yet in the Land of the
living, is one of the most Ancient Laborers in the Lords Vineyard in this
Western Diocese,) that in his younger days when he was Minister of Petrocks by
the Castle of Dartmouth, he was sent to Visit and Pray with a dying Man, under
very much trouble of Conscience.

His case was this, Sir, said he unto the Minister, about Seven months since,
as I was walking to Buscow, I met a Camerade of mine, who had gone to Sea about
a fortnight since, and taking him by the hand, wondering at his arrival, I said,
What cheat Mate? What makes thee return so soon, and look so Pale? I am dead
quoth this Spectrum. Dead Man, and yet walk, and talk? Yes, says he, I am
dead. I was took sick shortly upon my going to Sea; and died this day, and
about an hour since, so many Leagues off, was I thrown overboard.

Now I desire thee to go home, and tell my Wise of it, and to open my Coffer,
and show her my Will, and see my Legacies paid; which having promised to do for
him, at parting he added, And at for that business between thee and me, that
thou well wotest off, I charge thee, that thou never speak of it to any Man
living, for if thou do, I will in that very moment tear thee in a thousand
pieces.

Now Sir, this lies heavy, heavy upon my Conscience. Fain would I declare it,
It is upon my Tongue, but I cannot. And why can you not? Oh Sir, do not you see
him? Do not you see him? Look how terrible he is! There he is just against me.
Oh! how does he threaten me? I would tell you, but I dare not, And whatever
arguments this Reverend Personage could use unto the sick Man, he could never
bring him to a Confession; but he pines away under his terrors, and horrors;
till at last not being able to subsist any longer by reason of them, he died.

Whether there be any parallel between the conditions of this Man, and Woman, I
leave it unto my Readers judgment.

The poor Girl, at her Death, at the very point of Death charged her with it.
This Philip Carry her self confessed before the Major of Plymouth at her
Examination, and the very day before her Execution to this Relator, that she
knew of it. And is she Innocent? We have reason to believe the confession of a
Penitent, before the denial of a stubborn, and impenitent Woman.

Besides, she had a very fair trial before the Judge. There were no less than
Nineteen VVitnesses that gave in their Evidence to his Lordship, and the Grand
Jury upon Oath against her. Yet she says, Not guilty: Yea, and takes it to her
death, that she is Innocent, knew nothing of Poison.

But what if all this be nothing but Lies, and Imposture? What if evidence
appears against her after death, and that she did both know of it, and buy the
Poison also?

Reader I will not amuse thee, call thine Eyes upon what follows, and thou will
be in so me measure satisfied.

The Examination of Elizabeth the Wife of Thomas Webb of Plymouth, in the
County of Devon. Mariner, had, and taken at Plymouth, by, and before the
Worshipful William Weeks, Gentleman, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
within the Borough of Plymouth, on her Corporal Oath the Seventh day of April,
Anno Domini 1676.
THe said Examinant says, That about a week before, Philip the Wife of Richard
Carry of Plymouth was committed to Plymouth Prison, on suspicion for the
Poisoning of Elizabeth Weeks, and Mary Pengelley; This Examinant, on a Saturday
Evening, when the Candles were lighted being at the House of John Vallacke
Apothecary in Plymouth, there came into the said Mr, Vallacks shop, a Woman
(who was a stranger unto this Examinant,) and desired the said Mr. Vallacks Boy
to give her a Penny worth of Mercury, as she called it, and said she was hasty:
That accordingly the said Boy, delivered unto the said Woman the said Mercury,
(as she called it) in a white Paper.

And that about a week after, that the said Philip Carry being committed unto
the said Prison as before said, this Examinant went to the VVindow of the
Prison, and saw her, and she believes that the said Philip Carry was the same
Woman, which so fetched the said Mercury as aforesaid.

Signum dicta. E. VV. Elizabeth Webb.


Possibly you will ask, Why had not this Woman given in her Evidence, being
so material, before her death? I answer, She is of age, Let her speak for her
self.

REader, by this time, I believe thou art wellwearied; Sure if thou be not, I
am. However at parting, let me ask thee one Question, What art thou? A Master,
or a Servant? A Parent, or a Child? In what Relation stand thou? Inferior,
or Superior.

I. If thou be a. Child, or Servant; Receive Wisdom, receive Instruction.
1. BEware of little sins, you generally make no reckoning of them. Your vain
Thoughts, your idle Words, your envious and malicious Imaginations, your
froward Replies and Answers again, your undutiful and disobedient Carriages to
Parents, to your Masters, and Mistresses, these are counted by you little sins.
But what and if God call them great sins? Whose opinion and judgment shall we
take concerning the nature and evil of sin. Yours, or Gods?

My dear Youth! Read, and Ponder that Text of Scripture, Whosoever shall break
one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the
least in the kingdom of Heaven. Math. 5.19.

I must tell you, and you shall find it by woeful experience, that little sins
allowed, make way for great sins. A little Thief creeping in at the Windows,
may open the Door to great Ones. A little Sin is as mortal, as damnable as a
great one. A little Leak undiscerned, may sink Ship, Men, and Goods. A Poniard
shall stab a Man to death, as well as a Rapier. A Pistol can kill, as well as a
Cannon. Little sins fill up the measure of your sins; one very little sin may
do it. Ciphers in themselves signify nothing; but added unto figures, how do
they raise the sum? A Consonant of it self may be a Mute, make no sound, but
joined with a Vowel may make a roaring noise.

Those which you call little sins may fill up the Sum, and seal up the Account,
and make a roaring Noise against you in Heaven. Your thought-sins never acted
but intended, are just like a Grain cast on a piece of Gold, or a light Feather
upon an heap, they may turn the Scales, and bring down upon you Eternal
Vengeance. The Sodomites had committed many sins, and God had passed them by
very graciously; at last they would have sinned, and are punished with Hell out
of Heaven for the sin of their Wills, a sin intended by them, though never
committed. Genesis 19.9.11.24.

2. My dear Youth, beware of wicked Company. Blessed is the Man that walks
not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stands in the way of Sinners, nor
sits in the Seat of the Scornful. Psalm. 1.1. Look upon wicked Company as
Plaguey Person, and shun them as you would those who had the Plague of God upon
them. When Corah, and his rebellious Crew were swallowed up alive by the
yawning Earth, and went down quick into Hell, All Israel that were round about
them, fled at the cry of them; for they said, lest the Earth swallow us up
also. Number. 33.34.

My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not; if if they say come with us,
let us lay wait for Blood, let us lurk privily for the Innocent without Cause;
let us swallow them up alive as the Grave: We shall find all precious
substance, we shall fill our Houses with spoil. Cast in thy lot among us, let
us all have one Purse. My Son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy
Foot from their path: For their Feet run to evil, they lay wait for their own
Blood. You lurk privily for the destruction of your own lives. Companions in
sin, will be Companions in Hell. Prove. 1.10. to 19.

3. Flee the sins of youth, vanity and self-conceitedness, rashness, pride, and
ostentation, hot blood, Fiery, and vindictive passions, noisome, filthy, and
fleshly lusts, disobedience and brutish obstinacy, self-love, lying, idleness
and intemperance, neglect of your Souls, forgetfulness of God and of your
latter end. Sins of youth, have been an Hell to Gods aged Saints. Thou writest
bitter things against me, and rememberest the iniquities of my Youth, Job
13.26. The sins of your green years will be a stock of sorrows for your Gray
Hairs. Young Colts must be tamed and broken. A young Penitent is better than an
aged Sinner. Holiness in youth will give you peace in death; 1 King 14.13. and
2 Chronicles 34.27.28.

4. Study diligently and practice conscientiously the duty of thy place,
calling and Relation. Art thou a Child? Learn and perform the duty of a Child.
Art thou a Servant? Learn and perform the duty of a Servant, submit to
Catechizing, do not count it a thing beneath thee. Subjection to Gods
Ordinances is thy dignity and Glory. Honor thy Father and Mother, thy Master
and Mistress is the First Commandment with promise, if you do not, you are
self-Murderers, you cut your own Throats, and shorten the days of your life.

I have read of a Young man Hanged at Four and twenty years, whose Curled Black
Locks upon the Gallows instantly turned white, many inquiring into the cause of
such a strange event: A Grave Divine assigned this reason, had this young man
been dutiful to his Parents, Obedient to his Superiors, he might have lived so
long, till that in the course of nature, his Black Hairs had become White.

5. When tempted to any scandalous sin, tending to the hurt of thy Neighbor,
and the Temptation abides on thee, disclose it without any more ado to some
Godly Minister. This dasheth the temptation to pieces, and will contribute as
you shall find by experience, wonderfully unto your peace and safety.

Had this poor Girl, when first assaulted, detected the Devils Counsel,
possibly she had never been drawn out to Murder.

I knew one in the like Case, that after I had preached of the mischievousness
of thoughts, and of the ready way to quell and subdue their violence and
impetuosity, by taking Ghostly Counsel from a Spiritual Guide, came and
discovered unto me with a stood of Tears a long imended purpose of Murder, and
by the blessing of God on a Religious use of Holy Counsels was afterward
delivered from that Hellish Temptation.

Beware dear Youth, of trusting to your own understanding, or going out in your
own strength to combat Hell. You are not all David's of sufficient force to Duel
it with the Goliath of Hell.

6. Do not commit any sin presuming on secrecy or Impunity, not on secrecy. For
there is nothing hid but shall be revealed. Conscience that Bird of the Air
shall publish upon the House top before Men and Angels, what you have done in
your Privy Chambers. Angels see you, good and bad, and they shall Witness
against you. God sees you at all times. Who can hide himself from God that is
every where, and knows all things? Darkness and light are both alike to him.
Psalm 139.1. to 13. and Job 34.21.22.

Murderers have of all other sinners presumed most upon Secrecy, and yet how
miraculously have they been detected? Dreams, Apparitions, and mere
Circumstances have detected and Convicted them.

And suppose you might escape Scot-free as to man, is it possible you can
escape the Justice of God? The Barbarous Malteses spoke sound Doctrine, though
they were out in their Application, when they said of Paul, no doubt this man
is a Murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers not
to live. God may forgive the Eternal, but will not remit the temporal
punishment.

If you escape a public Execution, you shall never a private one. Kings may
pardon what God will not. Some that have escaped the Gallows, could never
escape the Scourges of their own Conscience, which is Gods Vicegerent: Yea,
though truly Penitent, yet have died either with grief of mind, or by the
immediate stroke of Heaven. Plymouth can afford an example of the former many
years ago; and Scotland shall of the Latter.

A Gentleman whose name was Wastraw a most bloody man, and other ways notorious
for profaneness, but most in this; that it was his great work, and pleasure to
put difference betwixt men, and as it was at that time very easy to engage
them in blood, whilst he had thus stirred up a neighbor Gentleman to kill
another in that place, finding him after sore troubled in mind, there anent, he
told him more of that practice would be the best Cure, for he himself had
killed Six, and at the first time was much disquieted, but the longer he did
continue, it became the more easy.

But one day whilst he was on such an account, riding to a place where Two had
trysted to deside a private Quarrel by Fighting, his Horse stumbles on the side
of a steep Rock, and he falls a great way down, his Sword falling out before
him, yet without any hurt; and hereby such a strange piece of Providence tryst
and break in upon his Conscience, so that he quits his Journey, turns home with
great trouble and remorse; a most kindly change following thereon, and for some
years after witnessed much tenderness and repentance by his afterwalk; spent
much time alone, mourning before his death; and that day he died, having no
visible appearance thereof to those who looked on, he was heard in his Chamber
much Wrestling in Prayer, and after long continuance those of the House were
forced to break open the Door, getting no answer after their long knocking, and
found him dead in the Room, but upon his knees in a Prayer posture, and the
whole blood of his body, which from every passage thereof had issued out,
swimming about the Floor: It being visible how all these passages were opened
for that effect, a most astonishing instance declaring this to the world,
though he pardon the iniquity of his people. Yet some sins he will not let pass
without a visible mark of his anger, but will take vengeance on their
inventions. I have given you the Story in its own Scottish Dialect.

7. Carry this ever upon your hearts, keep it in your minds that you have a
Father and Master in Heaven, and that daily tributes of obedience and
Thanksgiving must be yielded by you unto him.

That you are Gods Children, and Gods Servants, and you must Love, Honor,
Reverence, and Obey the Lord, whose you are, and that you ought to serve him
principally, in the first place, and continually to the very last.

Remember you have precious, never dying Souls, and these must be saved. Do not
for fear of any man's displeasure displease God, and Damn your Souls. If you
once come to neglect God, to turn your backs upon your known duties, God will
abandon you: And if God leave you, woe, woe unto you!

My dear Youth, acquaint your selves with the practice of secret Prayer. Be at
least once a day in private upon your knees before God. Bear the Yoke of
Christ's Commandments, it is a Golden Yoke, his Yoke is easy, his Burden light.
You have seen very lately a vast difference between the Service of God and of
sin. When Souls drudge for sin, like a cursed Tyrant, it makes them dig their
untimely Graves.

Sin is neither profitable, nor honorable, nor comfortable. It puts you upon
the basest work, and pays the worst wages. What fruit have sinners had of sin
but shame? That Harvest which they reap from the Seed of sin, is nothing else
but an heap of grief and desperate sorrows.

8. Receive warning and instruction from these dreadful providence. Do not
boast nor glory over these wretches. You stand by Grace, be not high minded but
fear, it is God withholds you from their sins, and preserves you from their
Judgments.

Our blessed and Famous Martyr Master Bradford never saw any Malefactor leading
to Execution, but he would smite upon his breast and say, Here! Within me is
the root of that matter, for which this man suffers? You can all say the same.

Remember Lots Wise. If God erect A Pillar of Salt in Plymouth, if God Fire a
Beacon upon Catdown, as God has done in the Execution of these unfortunate
Creatures, here is the use you must make of them, to hear, and fear, and do no
more any such wickedness.

They are become a Sign unto you. God has made them your Examples, to the
intent that you should not lust after evil things as they lusted.

They are a Warning-piece shot off in your Ears, a Light-house presented to
your Eyes, that you might be kept from the paths of the Destroyer. These things
are happened, and fallen out now in your days, for Examples that you might take
admonition upon whom the ends, the last, and worst days of the World are come.

The just Lord has been in the midst of us; he cannot do iniquity; every
morning does he bring his judgments to light, he fails not. Oh! be not as the
unjust that know no shame. When Gods judgments are come home, so near unto us,
to our very Doors and Houses, The Youth of Plymouth must learn righteousness.
If you will not be warned by others, God will make you a warning unto others.

Dear youth, remember, that all Poysoners, all Dogs that Bark at Religion and
Godly Persons, all Whoremongers, and Murderers, all wicked and unnatural
Children, all disobedient, and undutiful Servants shall be driven out of
Heaven, by this Token, by this Sign, that Two of Plymouth were lately by a very
shameful and cursed death driven out of the Earth.

II. Art thou a Superior? A Master, or Parent, Friendly Reader? Then suffer the
word of Exhortation.
1. STudy Christian Oeconomicks, the Arts of well-ordering thy Family according
to the Laws of Christ, and put them into practice. It was an excellent Order of
our Church, full of religious Prudence, that those who Married, should on their
wedding day receive the Sacrament: Teaching us this Lesson, that none should
enter upon Family charges, before they did well understand the nature of Family
duties. Ah! how much is this neglected? Persons get into a married life, and
yet them Families, Servants, and Children before they have any skill to govern
themselves, and neither skill nor will to govern s;uch as are under them.

This is the true Source of all our mischiefs, the Seminary and Root of our
abounding Profaneness; and till there be a Reformation here in our respective
Families, in Masters, and Parents, I shall despair of ever meeting with it
among Children, or Servants. If Children prove unnatural, and Servants
ungovernable, Why did you not teach them better? If you are ignorant of your
duties, do not complain that they neglect theirs. If Poison and Murder come
into a Family, it was because the fear of God was not there.

2. My dear Plimouthians, Give good Examples to those that are under you. They
are led more by Examples than Precepts. They do not write after the best
Copies, but those that are nearest hand. Oh! walk before God, before your
Children, and Servants in a perfect way. Read and Meditate upon the 101. Psalm.
There is a divine Platform of your whole duty. What Children learn from their
Parents, Servants from their Masters, that do they instill and teach also unto
their Children and Servants.

The happiness or wretchedness, the weal and woe of the next age depends upon
the Education, and Examples of this. Make not posterity miserable, nor your own
Flesh and Blood, your dearest parts, your chiefest Goods to curse you when you
are dead and gone, for your cockering and indulgence to them.

Live all the Sermons you hear, and be an Epistle of commendation of your
Ministers to your Children, Servants, Families, and the whole World. Let none
under your roofs have occasion to behold your miscarriages. They are natural
Apes, imitating what is had, not what is good. Keep your selves from all sin,
and keep the sight of sin from all that belong unto you. If Children and
Servants instead of Praying, hear Swearing and Cursing, instead of the Bible
and Catechisms, bloody Oaths and Blaspheming, instead of seeing Holiness, and
the shining beauties of Godliness, shall be the Spectators of their Parents
wickedness and uncleanness, Atheism and Irreligion; Mark it, Sirs, Mark what I
tell you, without Miracles of mercy, you, and your Children, and your Servants,
and your Houses shall be undone Eternally. The curse of the Lord is it to the
House of the Wicked, but he blesses the Habitation of the Just.

3. My dear Townsmen, Perform Family duties, let them not grow out of use and
fashion. Whatever others do, yet do you and your Families serve the Lord. Give
God a Morning and Evening Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving. He has
throatned to pour out his wrath upon the Families that call not upon his Name.
Jer. 10. ult. Prayerless Families, are Paganish Families, and Heathen Families
are loathed by God.

Read the Scriptures daily in your Houses, Catechize and Instruct in the
doctrinals of Religion the Youth within your Gates. Repeat, and frequently
discourse with them about the Word of God read, and preached. Sanctify the
Lords day. Sing Psalms, and the high-sounding Praises of God in your dwellings.
Examine the Proficiency of your Children, and Servants in the grace and
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Give due and seasonable
reprehension and correction, and spare not the Rod, unless you will spoil the
Child. Comfort and encourage them in well-doing* Press them to private duties,
and give them time for Closet-prayer; and do you endeavor to bring them to the
public Worship and Ordinances, especially to the Sacraments. Remember that
they who serve God most, will serve you best; that a graceless Servant is a
Devil in your Family, which will ruin himself, and you, and yours also.

4. Consider with your selves that you have the charge of Souls, there is a
great trust committed from Heaven unto Governors of Families. The Lord
Treasurer of the Kingdom has no such Jewels, nor Treasure in the Exchequer, as
you have in your Houses. God has made you the Guardians and Trustees of
precious Souls, and as sure as you live, shall you be responsible for them unto
God. Do your utmost that none miscarry under your hands. Prefer the concerns of
their Souls to those of your Bodies, and be at as much care and pains that they
may live in Heaven, as you and yours to live on Earth. You are their best and
surest Friends, if fast and faithful Friends unto their Souls. To ruin a Soul
is the Trick and Work of Devils, it is an irreparable loss, an everlasting
evil. Lost Goods may be recovered, but if a Soul be once damned, either by your
sins of omission or commission, it can never be recovered more. The Lord
deliver you from the Guilt of Soul-Murder.

5. When you dispose your Children abroad in the World, get them into Religious
Families, that they may drive a thriving trade Heavenward, and obtain the
Inheritance of Gods Saints, his precious promises. It is not Riches, nor
Honors, nor great dealings in the World; but Godliness that has the promises
of this life, and of that which is to come.

6. Are your Relations and Inferiors, your Children and Servants wicked, and
irreligi^us? do you become better. Let not their sins be justy charged on your
Souls. Shortly, When death is in your Pot, remember nothing but the Grace of
God can preserve you. Therefore value, and prize it. Did Servants do it?
Consider, that it is just with God, they should be Instruments of your
destruction, when your neglect of their Religious Education, is a real cause of
their Trangression. They must go to Heaven as well as you, and therefore should
enjoy liberties, and opportunities for the solemn, and public Worship of God
as well as your selves.

The Gallows and Stake, the Fire and Halter preach unto Young and Old, High and
Low, Parents and Children, Masters and Servant this Doctrine, That unless you do
Repent, you shall also perish. Gods judgments upon others, are warnings unto
us. It is an Oracle from Heaven, That such who sin as others, shall perish as
others: That if you do not repent, the wrath of God which lighted upon others,
shall either here, or hereafter infallibly, and to all eternity light down upon
you also.

FINIS.

