WALLOGRAPHY; OR The Britton Described: BEING A Pleasant Relation of a Journey
into Wales, wherein are set down several Remarkable Passages that occurred in
the way thither.

AND ALSO Many choice Observables, and notable Commemorations, concerning the
State and Condition, the Nature and Humor, Actions, Manners, Customs, etc. of
that Country and People.

By W. R. a mighty Lover of Welsh Travels.

LONDON, Printed for Obadiah Blagrave at the Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1682.

To Sir Richard Wenman OF CASSWELL In the County of Oxford Baronet.
SIR!
HAving had the Honor to be employed in a Negotiation between an English
Gentleman and the Ancient Brittons, I was not only upon the Borders, and (as it
were) the Limbs of Wales, but have traveled through the (very Bowels of the
Country; in which Journey there did salute me so many occurrences worthy of
observation, that I could not forbear a Description of them, and from
presenting you with the (as I may say) Wallography of my Voyage.

I make bold to imitate one Alexander of Greece, who still as he went
dragooning about the World, described the wanderings, and (as it were) the Tom
Coriat was a silly Travellor, who in King James his time beat upon the hoof
about two or three thousand miles, and returned home as very a Cox-combe as he
went out. See his Travels called his Crudities.
Tom Coriatism of his Expeditions; only in this I shall differ from him,
whereas he gave only a bare Image and Portraicture of the Country, I shall draw
the Character of the Inhabitants, and shall not only express in a Map or Table
the mere Picture of the Place, and tell you that here stands one Tow^ and
twenty Miles off stands another, but my Design is to give you a Narrative of
what I observed concerning the Nature of the (1) Soil, and of the (2)
Inhabitants, their Original, Persons, Diet, Apparel, Language, Laws, Customs,
Policy, etc.

But what need I go so far as Macedonia for a Pattern, seeing we have so many
Precedents at home? For one tells us in Octavo that he has been at
Constantinople; another that he has been at Vienna; a third that he has been
in Spain; and why may not I tell the World in a little Book that I have been in
Wales? When a Fellow has either a Maggot in his Pate, or a Breeze in his Tail,
that he cannot six long in a place; or perhaps when he has entitled himself by
some misdemeanors either to the Pillory or Gibbet, to disinherit himself of
his deserved Right, he flirts into Holland, or is transported into some
Foreign Country; where conversing a little while, he thrusts into the World
the History of his Adventures, he varnisheth over his Banishment with the Name
of Travel, and styles that his Recreation which was indeed his Punishment, and
so dignifies a Ramble by the name of Journey. He tells what Wonderments have
surpised him, what Fragments of Antiquity have amazed him, what Structures
have ravished him, what hills have tired him; in a word, he is big with
Descriptions, and obliges you with the Narrative of all his Observations and
Notices; seeing every one almost that has but untruss'd in a Foreign Country,
will have his Voyage recorded, and every Letter-Carrier beyond Sea would be
thought a Drake or a Gandish, I thought with my self why may not I have the
liberty of relating my Journey, and of communicating my Observations to
Mankind. I must confess my Pilgrimage was not far, but perhaps it was checkered
with as great variety both of Pleasure and Peril as a longer Progress; neither
are my Remarques very solemn and stately, but yet they were such as gratified
my curiosity, and pleased my humor as well as the Observations of longer
Journals.

Such as they are (Sir!) I humbly crave leave to devote them to your Perusal,
as the most signal Testimony of that venerable Esteem I have for you. I wave
your Panegyric, and forbear to Rhetoricate or to descant in your Praise. You
are too Copious a Subject even for the most Transcendent Oratory. I list not to
display your Personal Accomplishments, which are so eminent and conspicuous
already in the World. I know an Attempt of that Nature would be too great a
Violence to your Modesty, and I am sure too hard a Task for my Capacity. My
present Business (Sir!) is to put this little Book into your Hand, and to
desire you to Honor the Author in accepting, and to Divert your self in
reading of it; for possibly you may find so much Comoedy in this Walk, as may
dispose you to smile away an hour in the perusal of it. The Relations are not
common and ordinary, and perhaps as pleasant as they are rare and unusual. I do
not know that any Travellor jogging in the same Road has given the same
Account of Things, or has made the same Descriptions which I here present you
with; so that my Remarques are spick and span new, and if they are ridiculous,
they are not unlike the Persons upon whom they are written. For the Welsh
People are a pretty odd sort of Mortals, and I hope I have given you a pretty
odd Character of them, and so I think I am pretty even with them for Oddness. A
Taphy is observed to be a Trickish, Animal, that has a Vein of Jackpuddinism
running through alls his Actions, and therefore I thought if not improper to
sprinkle here and there somewhat of the Blew-jacket, and to Merry-Andrew my
Progress a little farther as I went with jocund Observations, that the History
might be agreeable to the Matter it Treats of. So that if a Welch-man is a
Jest, as all the World account him a Living Pun, a walking Conundrum, and a
breathing Witticism; Then have I made one Joke upon another.

I am not unsensible that Papers of another Nature and Complexion are more
agreeable to that Character you bear in the World; Machiavel and Malvezzi, or
some discourse of the Maxims of Policy, would be a more suitable Subject for
your Contemplation: But (Sir!) I pretend not to instruct you for the
Parliament House, but to direct you by the Fireside.

Now for the Conclusion of all; If there are any Good Things in Wales, the
enjoyment whereof is worth the wishing you, I pray Heaven to crown you with the
Fruition of them: But possibly it may be a Province not much crowded with
Blessings; may you therefore Flourish in the Affluence of good English Mercies;
may you always possess good English Riches, Health and Honors, and all other
Happinesses and Prosperities of our own Nation!

I am, (Worthy Sir!) Your very Humble Servant. W. R.
Helmdon, October. 24.1681.
WALLOGRAPHY OR The Britton described, etc.
UPon the First of June 1673, having taken leave of my Friends, and received a
Message, a little tiny Errand to be uttered by word of mouth, together with a
Letter to be delivered into the hands of one of the most Reverend Taphies, I
began to have some thoughts of rigging my self out for mine intended Voyage;
and to that end I spatterdash't my Legs with a pair of Cuckolds boots, and
either adorned or furnished my hand with battooning Cudgel, and having
entertained in my Retinue a whole Distick of Spannels.

Upon the Fourth of June, I turned one side upon London, and the other toward
Wales; the Country which was so be the Period and Term of my Journey. We
traveled all that day with much pleasure, being treated as we went, with the
Delicacies of Nature: the Air was kind and soft; the Fields were trim and neat;
the Sun benign and cherishing; the whole Creation was obliging, and from every
thing we met, we received a Civility; so that this first day passed over with
much satisfaction. I do not remember that we saw any thing remarkable, unless
'twas a Fellow driving a tired Cow, whose slow motion he now and then quickn'd
by wringing the Pendulum of her Tail, and (as it were) curling it into a screw
he twisted her forward, and bored the Air with this Living Augre; Me-thoughts a
very pretty trick to make a wimble of his Beast, and a handsome way to
insinuate her along, and to improve her pace. 'Twas far beyond the courtship of
a wisp of hay, in regard Fear urges more than Flattery can allure, and all
Creatures are more ready to ease their Backs, than to fill their Bellies; how
Scorpions pretty crabbedly applied will make a thing caper, and increase his
Career far beyond the temptation of Cake and Marmalade! and a Cat of Nine-Tails
will drive better than a dish of Sweetmeats can invite and draw. This was the
Method the Bumpkin used to advance the progressive Motion of the Animal; which
indeed is far different from the Custom and Practice of the Croatians; For
whereas this man made his Beast proceed by thrusting at one end, the Tail; They
make their tired Jades jog on by putting at the other, the Fore-top. We began
to subscribe to Cartesius's opinion, that Animals were Engines; For it is like,
the Clock-work of the Cow was somewhat disordered, and the Machine (like a
Jack) was run down and (rood still, till this Artist wound it up, and set the
movements a going.

Being indifferently refresht by the virtue of that Passage, we went forward
very courageously, and after a little time were presented with the prospect of
another Scene, which was laid in a Meddow by a Riverside, where we overtook a
Rat-catcher and a Fisherman disputing Precedence, and the Preheminency of their
Professions: The Rat-catcher argued that his Calling was most worthy, in regard
the object of his Art was a vocal Creature, whereas that of the Fisherman's was
dumb and silent; besides Rats are educated in Courts and Palaces, are more
choicely bred, and have a more delicate diet, than Fish, to feed on; Plentiful
Reversions of Roast and Boiled, luxurious fragments, and the magnificent ruin:
of Pudding and Pasty are their common dishes; only sometimes they pop on a
piece of Bread and Butter not of so wholesome a relish, that is, a little
Arsenick spread for ^um on the trencher of a Chip, these are the Viands of this
domestic Vermin; whereas Worms and Flies, and vile Insects, and perhaps a hook
to boot, are the best Fare that is eaten by Fishes. The Fisherman replied, that
Fish themselves were food for men, but it was never known that Rats were in
season, unless in the extremity of a Siege or Famine.

We left these Fellows very hot in controversy, which could not be decided, and
passed on, till at length we arrived to a little knot, or Asterism of houses
standing, or rather lying on the Crump of a Hill, raised somewhat proudly above
the ordinary level; and methoughts, looked down with somewhat of Disdain upon
the Humble Valleys. Who was the Founder of this Hamlet is not certainly known,
but we perceived the Thacker had been a great Benefactor. As for the Nativity
of the Place, the Foundation was laid under an unfortunate Configuration of the
Heavens: so that the Tinkers and Cobblers, and the dregs of mankind that dwelt
there, expected not Prosperity, nor hoped to be advanced and sublimated into
the Flower of the People. The main stress of Government lay upon the shoulder
of a single man, who was a Bear-ward by Office, and being the most substantial
Person was thought fit to be invested with the sole Authority of the Township;
A most proper Magistrate for such wild Savages! We observed that this Village
had as many ways into it, as it had ways out of it, which were equal in number
to the Points of the Compass. The purling Brook that crawled by it, the reeking
Dunghill that breathed within it, the crook-back'd Elm that stands cringing
near it, and the Pack- saddle Steeple that stood squinting over it, made a
pretty Draught of an handsome Landscape.

The Inhabitants of this place were much addicted to the vice of Stealing;
every thing sticks to their Pitchy Fingers, and they have such an attractive
virtue, that, wherever they come, all things trot after the Magnetism of their
Persons. A Fellow squotting upon a criket in a room we were in, and rising up
from his seat, the stool on a sudden (as if tackt to his A --) immediately
marched after him, to the great amazement of the woman of the house, who did not
suspect that his Bum had hands, or that her Stool so nimbly could have used its
legs. Another espying a Cylinder of Bagpudding pretty thick in the wast lolling
upon the table, whilst the Hostess turned her back, in the very twinkling of
her head, pocuss'd it into Fob, and so shrouded its Dimensions into a second
Bag.

The approaching night and our wearied limbs compelled us to lodge among these
Tenements; Having almost worn out our selves by tedious Travel, we resolved
here to repair our breeches: But (alas!) this mending (I allude to Taylourism)
was little better than mere Botching. For, whereas we thought to have renewed
nature, and to have recreated our Palates with the pleasant wholesomeness of
Rural Delicacies, we could scarce so much as even patch her up with the hurden
Accomodations of a red-lattic'd Inn; The foretop of a Carrot, and a few parcht
Pease were our choicest Provender, which filled our cavities so full of wind,
that we thought we had got the Four Quarters in our Bellys, which made such
Squibs of our Breeches, that (like the fifth of November) we were continually
discharging of Rockets and Crackers.

The next day dressed with Aurora, nay before she had put on her Indian gown,
we set out with the Sun, who bearing us company but a little while withdrew
into an apartment behind a cloud, at whose absence the Heavens frowning and
contracting their brows, did presently fall a crying and wept such plentiful
showers of tears, that they moistn'd our skins with the Deluge of their Grief.
But that which terrified us most of all, was water which we saw of several
colors, sometimes red, and sometimes black; which put us in mind of those
Prodigious Rains the Philosophers speak of, Blood and Ink; But overtaking a
Collier and Red-Oker man, we perceived 'twas the Distillations of their
Buggets. But that which gave wings to time, and made it fly merrily while we
were in the company of these Vagrants, were the frequent Quarrels that were
broacht between them, which at length were improved into severe Buffetings. The
Object of both their Occupations lies hid in the Earth, and they work like
Moles, whose Employ is underground, and (like a certain Fish) they take their
color from the place they converse in. The Collier thumpt with tincturing-fist
the Red-man, black; and the Red-man died with Vermilion-blow the Blackman, red;
so that we never saw before such a party-colored Combat, such a Fools-coated
conflict, wherein the stout Champions were so mutually disguised, that they
seemed to be Amphituo'd, and to be wholly transformed into each others Person.

After another days Travel in Dust and Sun, we saluted a good handsome Town,
not a little resembling in crookedness a middlesiz'd shooing horn; At the
entrance into it, the uncarpetness (as I may say) of the Floor, or (in other
words) the unevenness of the streets somewhat dislocating the position of our
almost tript up feet, had like to have demolisht us, and to have thrown us down
backward, but to prevent the Soloecism of kissing the place at wrong end, we
recovered our fall, and went bolt upright into the navel of the Coporation,
where there was such an Assembly of Provision as represented a market, which
was unhappily disturbed by an unfortunate accident; For a certain Bull of an
uncertain man having mistaken his box, and taken pepper in the nose instead of
Snush, and being enraged and heated by the virtue of the Spice, took a risk
about the Cross, and emptied by his Ramble all Stalls and Panniers; so that
this Brisk Customer made a scrambling kind of Dinner for the whole Country; who
was riding upon one another backs for Viands and Booty, and was tumbling among
the ruins of Bakers, Victuallers, and Costermongers. We were informed that this
Town was much infested with the unwelcome Visitants, Rats and Mice; insomuch
that the Inhabitants have a Rat-catcher at a certain Pension, as the only
Talis-man against such noxious Vermin.

Having left this Town behind us, we come to a Wood on our left hand, nigh unto
which was a discontented Fountain murmuring as it run (we did not enquire a
what) and bubling forth seemingly much Dissatisfaction. This wood was a
promiscuous Babble of all vegetables. A throng of trees of all ranks and
qualities; we refresht ourselves a little under this natural Arbor, and being
pretty and cheerful in this circumstance of Place; one of our Caravan began to
express his joy in some notes of Music, who as soon as he began to strike up
with his Pite (thinking he had but one) he presently perceived it to be
multiplied into an Organ, and wondered (with the Bumpkin that pulled at the
Bellows) that he had so much Harmony in him. For you must know hereabouts dwelt
a thing called an Echo, who as soon as she heard but Sol, Fa, whipped! she
improved the melody into a noise and consort: and presently increased those
single notes into the whole Gamut; and most neately played the wag with the
tail of his voice! being a very pretty Songster, that sings well by the Ear.
But while Lug was solac'd with the tatling Reverberation of voice, our eyes
were ravished with a most delicate Prospect; For here was a most pleasant
champion piece of ground, which extending and roaming it self some Furlongs in
length, was furnished with all the Excellency that ever commended the most
transporting Elisium; the Air was lullaby'd as still and quiet as Dormant
Infant; the Day was Orient, bright and clear; the Earth (like a Forester) was
clad in green. The Figure of this Field was a Parallellogrammum, the Style was
situate South-East-by North, and consisted of a climax of three rails, over
which we conveyed our selves by Elevation of Leg; near the entrance into the
Meadow, we observed an hole or casement in the hedge, which we perceived the
Hogs had oftentimes threded; but the Hedger had glazed it with a pane of Furze.

Having ambled over some Furlongs on this (as it were) New Market Heath, we
perceived it to degenerate and to grow worse and worse, and (like an handsome
neck of Mutton) to determine in the unevenness of a Rock, or Scrag. A little
while after we winded a Cordwainer, who (as he told us) was newly recovered
from a sad mischance; For walking carelessly, one day he happened to have a
fall, and to squot his Breech upon an Hedg-hog, which he carried away as
cleverly, (it clinging to his Buttocks) as if he had sat upon a ball of his
wax; whether there is a simpathy between a Shoomakers tail, and the skin of an
Vrchin, or whether the bristles of the Creature entered the pores of his
Backside, we list not to decide that controversy now; but however the mortal
complained that it was an uneasy cushion, and that that Spinny of Awls had made
a cullender of his A --: But being not much concerned at the cerebrosity of his
seivy Bum; The Iletholes whereof being not very deep, we went together, till we
arrived to the roughness of the forementioned Downs, which did somewhat decline
into an uneven Praecipice, whose craggy stairs as soon as we had descended, we
stumbled upon an House, or a Dunghill modeled into the shape of a Cottage,
whose outward surface was so all to-be-negro'd with such swarthy plaster, that
it appeared not unlike a great blot of Cow-turd: This Structure stradled over
about eight Else of ground, above the surface whereof the Eves were advanced
about two Yards, and the Chimney peeped out about a Foot above the Eves; the
light flowed in through the old circumference of a bottomless Peck; which being
stuck in the Thatch, supplied the place of an Orbicular Casement. The Door-way
was a breach in the wall toward one end, which being of a dwarfish size, i. e.
two Foot lower in stature than an ordinary Man, we were forced to abridge our
Dimensions, and to creep in. The Parlour, Hall, Kitchen, i. e. one Room within
was prettily adom'd with the Poetry of Ballads; a crippled Pipkin with a broken
shin, near allied to a Dish of the same matter; a vocal Spoon with a Whistle at
the end; and a Tipsy Cradle reeling in the corner, (methoughts) were a pretty
sort of Goods, and not unhandsome Furniture. A whole Litter of Children was
strewn upon the Floor; only one Mopp-headed Boy was Tripos'd on a Cricket, and
blew the Fire; The carved Mantle-tree seemed to be defended by a little wood^n
Fellow furiously strutting in an Oa^on Cloak; and we perceived the Window was
endors'd with the Pictured of a Fly. We observed that the Bulkie Cupboard was a
Nuisance to the whole Family of Hooshold-stuff, which it had mightily disobliged
by entrenching on their Liberties, they grutching it so much room; and indeed
the Table, Bed, and other Utensils have not suffered a little detriment by its
injurious Contiguity. We had a Prospect of whole Territories about this
Building, which though not large, yet were exceedingly well fortified; a little
Hedge being a Pallizado on one side, and a narrow Trench instead of a Bulwark
on the other: The Continuity of the Mound was violated by a Notch in the corner
to set a Style in; over which when we had passed, we espied a Bank like a
little Hybla, cap'd with a Hive of Bees, which this small Eden curiously
carved, and (as it were) Quincunx'd into a Knot, did feast with the moisture of
its delicious Flowers. Leaving the Phylacteries of this Yard, we met the
Good-Housewife of this little Tenement with her Tippet bristling, her Mouth
mumping, and her Hands knitting; she had a Cade Lamb at her Rere, attending
upon her, and a Kitten in the Van, conducting her home.

We followed our Noses from hence, and were directed by the Clue of a long
Hedge; which after a great extent in length, we found to be Tagg'd with a rough
Lane; turning from which a little toward the right, we overtook a Church
standing (like an Ace) and moping by it self, at some distance from the Town;
which whether it run from the Parish, or the Parish from it, we are not as yet
informed; though we have most reason to suspect the latter; in regard as to
outward appearance the weak Constitution of the Fabric seemed not much to be
addicted to run. It seemed to be very crazy, and had a muffler of Ivy, which we
presume were instead of Crutches; For whereas that feeble Vegetable is usually
upheld by the walls it clings to, we believe it was a Buttresse here to support
the Walls. But having sadden'd our Aspect with the melancholy looks of this
desolate Temple, we took our leave of it, and shot directly down a Balk upon
that profane Town to which it seemed to stand related. At our first salutation
whereof, we chanced to pop into a dapper Alehouse, mightily stufft with a huge
Hostess, whose moisture distilling through the Pores of her Body, and being
somewhat turned through excessive heat, struck our olfactive Nerves with so
great a sowrness, that we had quite been overcome with this Vessel of Vinegar,
had she not too much jog'd her self by an unhappy fall, and spilt a great
quantity of her unctuous Liquor.

The Shoemaker conjectured that she had lost about five or six pound
(aver-du-pois) from her Rere behind, and presently concluded that she was in
great danger of hanging all a-one-side, unless some charitable Person should
poize her with thrust of Assisting Nose. We had scarce prim'd our Pipes, but in
comes a Law-jobber, accompanied with the Bum-brusher, or Schoolmaster of the
place, who after some time, took occasion to show their skill and breeding at
Fistycuffs, but (thanks to the Stars) without any danger to their Professions;
For they did not so much aim at the head, as level their fury at each others
heels, where their knowledge was supposed not to lie, though some hold that
they have as much Learning at one end as they have at to other. The most
remarkable thing in this Village was a Carrot-pate house at the Posteriours of
the Town; it was covered, with Tile, and was curiously contrived after the
Italian Models. The Master that did animate, or the (...) of this Stone-carcass
(they told us) was lately dead: His Distemper was a Quarrel between his Belly
and his Back; the one being bursten took pet and run away from the other, so
that the poor Man being at a loss for a place to put his Victuals, in, died
with a conceit.

S. Crispin's Disciple having a Mistress in this Lordship, and being almost
within the Atmosphere of her presence, began to wind her, and had a great
tendency to the place where she was; so that I might as soon expect that a
stone should fall beyond the center, as that this Gentle-crafts-man should
budge further; wherefore nothing was expected now but an immediate Divorce from
each others company; but before we parted, he obliged me with the Prospect both
of her Person and Fortune. As for the first, as soon as I saw it, I had greater
reason to congratulate my Eyesight than I had before; for she was blessed with a
most ravishing Aspect, and a snug Face, most prodigiously graced with a dainty
fine Nose, fastened in its middle; which is not like some Snouts that look more
upon one Cheek, than they do upon the other, but shows equal respect to both,
not at all disobliging the right by fleering too much on the lest. And then for
her Eyes, they are excellent at twireing, and will be sure to keep her Nose
safe, (I Will warrant you) for one looks one way, and the other another. The
Woman had a Mouth too, which was somewhat bigger than that of a Musket, though
not twice as big as the capacious bore of a Blew Noggin. This Mouth she put but
to one use, and that is the same that we put ours to, that is to eat three or
tout Meals in a day; for it seems whereas other Women often use theirs in
prating and twatling, we perceived that this saved her Mouth and spoke through
her Nose. As we have given you the Picture of her Person, so now let us present
you with a Landscape of her Fortune. As for her Lands, that is, Pasture-ground,
and Meadow, we could not discern, but that (like a spot upon the Globe) they
took but little room upon the surface of the Earth, and (like the Possessions
of Alcibiades) were but a little speck to the World. A little Muck would dung
her Fallow; one high Table T -- (to speak in the Oxford Dialect) will much
enrich it, and an Ear of Corn will go near to sow it; it is like she has Grass
enough for a couple of Rabbets. Having surveyed the Paramour, and the Portion
of this Nivelling Cobbler, after a single sip of sixes out of a Tin Pot, and a
Treble go-down out of a cup of Double; after a right-line scrape with left Leg;
and uncouth doffing of a bad Bonnet, after slinking a Complement by way of
thanks for his Society, attended by his Coblerhood to the confines of a Yard,
at the clasping together of two lowering Gates in the presence of a Corpulent
and Burly Elm, I solemnly took leave of my Fellow-Traveller. After his
departure I was forced to beguile away the time in the shady solitude of silent
thoughts, which before I spent in the brisker Entertainments of Discourse and
Dialogue: I had not long busied my faculties with inward speculations, but I
met with variety of Objects courting with their Flatteries my almost distracted
Contemplations. I saw Three Stones so artificially set, that they represented
the Figure of a convenient Style. Methoughts the Architecture of it was very
curious; for one stone about a Foot square, being placed perpendiculary
upright, its Northern Extremity was crossed by another at right Angles; on the
other side whereof was erected another perpendicular correspondent to the
former. The Position of these Materials made a pretty Fabric, over which a Man
might commodiously pass; its surface was smooth, not tufted with snags, which
are always catching and snarling at your Clothes, to the great Disguize and
Damage of your Breeches; about two yards distant there was a Cross delv'd in
the Earth, which seemed either an Argument of Popish Superstition, or a Sign or
Mark of the Parish Selvidge.

Departing from hence, we moved through a Close very popalous with Mutton;
there being, (as it were) a whole Academy of Sheep sizeing on a Hay-rick, not
botled out into Commons, but Geometrically carved into good Sexangular
Luncheons. 'Twas Foot-cloath'd (as it were) with Straw near five yards about,
upon which were tumbling a Bag-piper, and an Ho^us, who wantoned so long till
(like Dogs) at last their Play determined in a sharp conflict. The Man of
Music buffeted the Jugler to some tune, who adding two or three howls to the
Notes of his Drone-pipe, by cleanly conveyance did vanish from him. The Piper
appeared of a tawny Complexion, his Nose bending with an Arch upward; his Eyes
being somewhat hollow, seemed to increase the promontory of his jetting
Forehead. In a word, there was charm enough in his Aspect; He was well built,
his whole Frame and contexture was sweet and regular; I must needs say, I have
seldom met with any handsomer Model, or Platform of a Man. But though his
Person was neat and uniform, yet his habit and garb was full of deformity, and
there were as many Soloecisms and Incohoerencies on these, as there was
Congruities and Beauty commendable in that. He wore a Mis^ellany of Apparel, a
Gallimasry of Clothes, as I humbly conceive, 'twas a Tyth Suit, composed of
various and several sorts; such a Club of Rags, and Randesvouz of Fragments,
must needs be a Collection (like the Jerkin of the Jay) of several Feathers
from diverse Birds. His Doublet (which indeed was but one great Patch in Folio)
was very heterogeneous from the rest of his Attire; he had worn his Lappets
into perfect Fringe, (so that he seemed to be surrounded with the remnant of a
Curtain) and had thin'd his Elbows into their first Principles. 'Twas of a
Mousecolour hue, and (as near as I could guess) it appeared to be the Result of
an old Cloak; both its first Crop and Latter-Math too were both worn off; and
it was so Threadbare, that it had almost foundered three or four of his best
Lice; wherefore we advised him to hang it no longer on a Knaves back, but to
condemn it to the Housewifery of a Shooe-clout. The Relics that were left of
his tattered Breeches were one Story pendulous below his Coat. His Instrument
(like a Gizzard) was tucked under his arm, which by shog of Elbow, he did hug
into harmony, and squeeze out of its Womb most ravishing Ditties. We made but
few Remarks on the Person of the Jugler, only we thought it appeared to be
somewhat sleathy; his Noddle was shrouded under the Patronage of a collop'd
Hat, whose indented Margin being somewhat frail, declined from the equality of
an Horizontal Position, and flapping inward on both sides, and hugging his
Ears, forced the poor Man to look as it were through a Spout. He had a bunch of
Bibbond in his hand, which possibly might be the effect of his last Vomits; for
we suppose having had a surfeit of Silkworms, and a Loom in his Throat, he can
disgorge more at a cast, than an ordinary Weaver can work in a weeks time. His
little pointing-stick and Tin Dishes, with other Implements of his Art, made an
horrible noise and combustion in his Pocket, even to the terror and amazement
of an Humble Be, who was rioting on the Luxuries, and was wantonly basking on
the Sunny Terrace of a magnificent Thistle. Nay, the jingling of his Tackle did
alarm an Army of Wasps and Hornets, which lay encamped hard by under the roof
of a shady Furz bush; These made such an onset on Hocus with their
Lansprizades, that making a Pin-cushion of his Body, they stuck it so full of
Needles, that the Pungency of their Weapons, and Artillery piercing to the
quick, made the poor fellow curvete and elevate himself nimbly into two or
three dancing Capreolls. He carried on his back as thick a Quickset of Stings
as a Hog of Bristles. He was swelled to a treble proportion beyond what he was;
his Hands were grown too big for his Pockets, and could have no reception into
those narrow Closets. The circumference of his head was hugely increased beyond
the Diameter of his Hat; so that the Convexity of the former could not be
contained within the Concavity of the latter. In a word, being magnified beyond
the fallacy of the best Glass, his Clothes were too little for his enlarged
Dimensions; so that he burst through the confines of his scanty case. Means
presently was used for the levelling of this Mountainous Vagrant, and
Hide-swoln; He was immediately plunged into a Bath of Honey, which though a
present cure of his Disease and Malady, yet was as great a cause of an
inconvenience as bad; For a certain Bear not far off got his Medicine in the
wind, and came galloping for a lick of her admired Dainties; which when the
Jugser perceived, having lost through fear the retentive Faculty, he
adulterated her Dish by a mixture of somewhat that was of the same color,
though not so sweet. The Jugler hooft it away with a winged speed; the Bear
with a pair up and a pair down most swiftly pursued him. We staid not to see
the Issue of the Race, but advanced forward in a regular progressive motion,
who after a little time were crossed by a Rivulet, which wrigled along with a
crooked current; over which we conveyed our selves by saltation. On the other
side of the Bank was a little Arabia of Sand, enough (I suppose) to supply all
the Hour-glasses in the Country, nay perhaps and that of Time too till the last
minute; near this Mountain of Sand lay prostrate at length two Iron Wedges
contiguous to a Block in Felio, which we supposed was to be rent into collops,
and to become a Sacrifice to hungry Vulcan. There was a numerous Family of
chips about it, which were different in shape, color, and bigness, so that
they seemed not to be the offspring of the same Parent; they lay in a Chaos
without any order, amidst which confusion the unlucky Gibeonite that hewed them
lost the head of his Ax: The Decollation whereof seemed ominous to the Man, and
made him superstitiously leave his work: My self and a couple of Gadarens that
were driving Swine, made a diligent scrutiny for the Noddle of the Tool; which
after some time we perceived to lie entombed under the Mausoleum of a good
lusty shaving. We did not perceive that it was much damnify'd by its
retirement, only the dampness of its Vrn did somewhat abate and obscure the
eagerness of its edge, and the Luster of its Aspect. We delivered it into the
hands of its Owner, who presently fastened it to the shoulders to which it did
belong.

After a small offering of thanks for our careful search, the Swineherds turned
to the left, and we wheeling to the right, after we had jog'd over some few
Acres of a phlegmatic and cold constitution, most happily pop'd on the warmer
Turf of a pleasant Cornfield. 'Twas fringed about with a Mound of Elder-trees,
whose ambitious height, and luxurient Branches gave impregnable security to the
nestling Birds. The Diameter of a Path run through the midst, whose Poles were
transverse or thwarted the hinges of the World. 'Twas environed on both tides
with a Sea of Corn, which being moved by the breath of AEolus, (that Bellows of
the World) what a Flux and Re-flux was there of waves of Wheat! We passed
through this Territory and Dominion of Ceres with the most exalted delight. How
did that Goddess sit in Triumph there! What crowds of Clients bowing their ears
to her Commands and Dictates? Every Land was parted with the Isthmus of a Balk,
on several of which lay the Habiliments of the Harvesters; An extended sleeve
of a Red Wast-coat, embracing the collar of a Leathern Jump, and touching the
hem or a grafted Petticoat, presented us with the Idea of a pretty Wardrobe.
We went out of this Enclosure through the western passage of a three-raild
Gate: Upon which there did directly shoot the aged Fragments of a decrepit
wall; which over-topping our stature in height and tallness, we were forced to
add to our quantity a Nine-inch-stone, that raising our Dimensions we might
peep over it. There was scarce any thing remarkable on the other side, unless a
vast Rolling-pin of humane ordure. 'Twas four Inches Diameter, and probably
discharged from a Musket bore, and that near upon the confines of a tuft of
Wormwood, whose bitter scent mixed with the unsavouryness of Excrementitious
Atoms breathed a medly kind of stink, and gave but ordinary entertainment to
our offended Nostrils. Among the Ruins of this Mound we discovered the Snout
and some other Limbs of a murdered Dial; It was not so defaced, but that we
could discover in its Physiognomy some martyred Figures, that were yet legible,
and there were some Relics of Lines, that were not quite obliterated. Time I
presume (being vexed perhaps that it should observe its motions) has set its
Grinders in it, and out of envy, and malice has quite devoured it. I am apt to
think that this pile of Stones stood in its Native Country, where 'twas first
bred, as may be conjectured from an adjacent Pillar, whose pregnancy (we fancy)
produced this litter of Stones, it being the Mother of these rockie Bales. We
advanced to the Orifice of this Lapideous Womb, where were hewing Mortals, by
cruel Midwifery digging out the Offspring of teeming Earth. 'Twas an unpolished
spectacle, and the Workmen were as rough and uneven as the Prospect; and the
Artificers were as intractable and stubborn as the Materials, or Object of
their Art. Two of the most Brawny Paviers stood lolling by the Mattock that
picked them out, and a single one in a decumbent posture lay prostrate at their
feet, whose Northern Extremity performed the Office of a Pedestal to the Embryo
of a Statue, which was but newly hatched, and fashioned in a bed of Sand. The
Declivity of a corner near the entrance into the Pit gave occasion to the water
to stagnate into a Puddle; through which we did not sail, though the trajection
was very short, but fetching a circuit about its shore, we went out at the
passage through which we entered. But no sooner had we conveyed our selves out
of this hole, but after we had traced over some few Furlongs of a grassy
Pavement, a certain Moity of our Bodies pop'd into another, and a few steps
after some of our feet happened into a third; and a little while after, falling
down, our hands were buried in two more. We wondered who had punch'd so many
Eyelet-holes in the Earth's skin, till seeing a Robin Run-a-hole sit mumping
(like a Troglodite) in his house under ground, we perceived the Enclosure we
were in, was a well peopled Warren: We had a frisk or two after the Inhabitants
of the place; but their Heels prevented our design on their Scuts, for the
nimbleness of the one secured them from imposition of Salt on the other. The
Sanctuary of their Burrows defended them from the violence of all Persecutions.
Their Cells were contiguous, nay in some places they had broken down the
Partitions, and by a frequent Burglary did invade the privacy of each others
apartments. The Dragon that kept this Garden of Coneys was a Zamzummin in
stature, a second Goliath, whose hand was Quarterstafft with a mighty Beam. They
told us of an Hercules or two that came to encounter this Keeper, who ('it is
said) did so out-club the Yermin, that instead of an Auger hole, he made them
earth themselves in the Asylum of a Coney-hole. The Burrow of the Keeper stood
near the center of his Dominions, being the Metropolitan Seat of that little
Nation of Rabbets. The Architecture of the Fabric was not contemptible, being
stately in height, whose top was crowned with the magnificence of Turrets,
whose vigilant loftiness had an eye to the security of the circumjacent Region:
The biggest wonderment we beheld about it, was, That its Head did not shoot so
far upward into one Element, but its Feet sunk as low downward into another, it
standing knee-deep, nay almost up to the Wast in Earth, having as many Stories
under ground as it had above. Whether the Bucks or Does were the Pioneers that
dug those Cellars, or whether the Architect designed them on purpose to prevent
the underminings of those notable Delvers, we are not so well able to
determine. We espied in a corner a wooden Stratagem or two, on purpose to
entrap (we supposed) ensnaring Reynard, so that that living Gin, so fatal to
Pullen, died himself in a wile, and one Trap was trapan'd by another. 'Twas a
well contrived Ambush, and pretty handsomely victual'd with a good lusty
Temptation, which so wrought upon Reynard, that he could not by any means
resist its charms, though it is thought he was as wise a Fox as any in Aesop,
whom we never met with, without a piece of Morality tackt to their Tails.

Having passed the Bounds of this Rabbet-Limbo, it was not long before we were
embraced within the confines of a spot of ground like an Orchard; For the
Ranges of Vegetables gave us a shrewd suspicion that Pomona had had her
residence in that place: Here Autumnus stood lolling under the pressure of a
Burden, being scarce able to bear so many wreaths of Fruit. His Head was
crowned so, that it bowed with Apples; so that shaking his ears as we passed
through, he did so pelt us with a shower, that the unlading of his Noddle made
fractures in our Pates, and raised Tumors in sinciput as big as Kentish
Pippins. The place was pretty populous with Trees, the squadrons whereof seemed
to be well disciplined, standing in their Ranks, and as it were in Battle-array
like a well ordered Army. Here were several degrees cf Vegetables in wonderful
subordination one under another from the Commonalty of Shrubs to the Majesty of
a Cedar. Here were Inferior and Superior, and (as it were) Dignified
Fruit Trees; among whom there stood a Pear Tree, I suppose Lord Primate of the
Hierarchy. In a South-west corner we espied a few vermiculating Hops, wrigling
like worms up the Pyramid of a Pole; near which stood an Elm-Tree in the Arms
of Ivy, which hugged it so close, that it was almost incorporated into it by
its clasping Embraces. The Posteriours of the Elm-Tree were most barbarously
chastised by the Prickles of a Bramble, which the Breath of Aeolus would often
move with smart Jerks. One of our company taking an occasion to pass by one of
these unseen Briars, they presently had their Talons clawing upon his back, and
frighted the Man as much as the Bush did Demosthenes, which catching him by the
Coat, made him (supposing it to be an Enemy) to cry out for Quarter: But the
Fellow being cased in Leather, and the Buffness of his Coat being Armor-proof
against the Bristles and (as it were) Hedghogism of their Prickles, they could
not fasten their Fangs in his Garment, wherefore (thanks to his Stars) the Man
had no hurt, but was blessed with a great deliverance. Toward the bottom of
this Orchard lay prostrate the Trunk of a slain Myrtle, and that not far from
the verge or shadow of a Cops of Beans, pretty tall in stature, and well
branched; by the Coverlets we saw there should be Beds not far off, I suppose
they were the Lodgings of Carrots, Turnips, and of other Roots. There were
Cabbages grown to a commendable globosity, the roundness whereof tempted us to
a Game at Football; we banded them about sufficiently, and made some of them
caper over a Ten-foot wall. One of the Gamesters was hat just in the mouth, the
bore whereof being too little for the Bullet, could not receive it into its
Orifice, but however it gelded and dampt its fury, so that it did not retort
with violence to the injury and detriment of any body else. We had sweat longer
at the Recreation and Olympic sport of Kick-Cabbage, had not the Breath of
Cloacina (her habitation being near) been so strong, and been a nuisance unto us.

So that being stunk out of our Quarters, we turned our Quarters upon the
stink, and traveled over a Grate into a Churchyard: The Track of our path lay
between the Mansion house of the Levite on the left hand, and the Church on the
right; behind which toward the South there stood or lay (we cannot tell which)
a weather-beaten Tomb, which was Mouse-eaten at one end by that Vermin Time,
that nibbles all things: It seemed to be an inverted Hog-Trough turned
topsy-turvy with its muzzle downward; but whether it was or not, or whether it
was purposely erected as a Monument to preserve the memory of those Ashes that
lay under it, we cannot tell, tho we have some reason to suspect the Former, in
regard there were so many Swine a digging about, who with the natural Spades of
their noses, had almost made a Pit-hole for the Stone, and so had like to have
buried one grave in another. Here was a whole Herd of Swine a rooting as if
they had been turned in on purpose to root up Christians, as they are in the
Feilds in Italy to dig up Turffles. A little Wall lay sculking about this
Territory of the Dead, which we supposed was placed there as a Bulwark to their
Ashes, but it proved but a feeble Fence against the intrusion of the Lambs, who
made frequent Capreolls into this adjacent Dormitory: The mound was raised a
little, and cap'd with Turf, and environed with the hollowness of a good
handsome Ditch; but yet, neither Cap nor Ditch could keep these Animals from
l^ap-frogging over them, from grazing in a Charnel-house, and from turning a
Coemitery of Shades and Ghosts into a Feeding Pasture of hungry Beasts.

We mounted this wall, and moved on toward the Western period of our intended
Journey. The bordering close was pimpled with mole-hills, which seemed but
young Protuberances not blister'd into the bigness of some neighboring Banks.
Leaving this ground behind us, we descended the Declivity of an adjoining
Pasture pretty well bearded or bristled with Thorns and Bushes; and so passed
through a Farmers yard, where we saw an Alps of Straw, with Swine (instead of
Snow) a grovelling a-top on it; which put us in mind of the Ambition of Goats,
who are always clambering up the crags of Rocks. The Western Extremity of the
Wheat-Hovil shot directly up the Barn, an Appendix to which stood the Apartment
of the Hogs, over which was perch't a Roost for Poultry.

Not far from this Country Tusculum stood the Island of a house in the embraces
of a Moat, like Ticho's Vranoberg in the midst of the Sea; An ancient Pile, a
Reverend Nest of as Venerable a Bird, which having taken her Flight has left
it a solitude. The greatest Observables were a little silent Bell in Duodecimo,
which being utterly Disleepled, hung between the collops of an old wall, or
rather a Mortar invers'd, which had lost its Pestle, so that it was not vocal
by stroke of internal Clapper, but by knocks and blows of external Hammer;
within the sound of this Bell stood a lolling washing-Block; being a wooden
kind of Anvil, where the She-Vulcans were hammering out with Battle-Door the
Filth of Linen, whose unctuous Distillations were the Nile that watered the
little Egypt of the adjacent garden.

Having moved from this Mansion about three or four Furlongs, we passed by the
skirts of a rotatile Engine, in shape not unlike an House, being pack-fall'd at
Top with a aridge: it seemed to stand upon stilts, and to be a moving
Habitation like those of the Gete^. 'Twas prefac'd with a Portico, into which
we ascended by a scale of Stairs. Tho whistling Wind breathed a Vertigo in its
Pate, whose giddyness communicating a motion to its Grinders, made it whirlegig
the grain into Flower. A little distant from hence beyond a small sandy Desert
stood a Village, whose Steeple was in its center, not unlike the Mast of a
Ship. This Tower as to outward appearance had a Portly Person: yet they told us
it had the imperfection of Dumbness; it having been Dis bell'd for some years.
They were alarmed to Church by the Report of a Musket, which the Clerk (being
an eminent Guner) did usually discharge at every man's Door. This Clerk was a
Weaver by Trade, and had relation to a Loom, wherein he had been ambling for
several years with one Foot up and the other down, and with all his treading
has scarce got cloth enough to repair the Breaches of his tattered Elbows.
They told us that his Trade and he had lately been at Cuffs, and are just upon
parting, it being such a Limb-wagging Profession, that he is not able to endure
the Penance of it. This man had wonderful skill in sweeping the Church, and
it is thought could tell what a Clocks 'twas at the South Dial as well as most
Astronomers; He was also a pretty Man of his hands for singing; For when the
Tune one Sunday had ambled from him into the Chancel, and had almost caught a
fall among the Non-songsters; really they told us that this Notable Man gave it
such a neat jerk, as that he twitch it into the Church strangely. Now (I say)
for the Clerk to have a rare knack of securing the Hymn from those that would
steal it, Oh! It Is an excellent thing! The most remarkable things in this Town
were an Ecclesiastical Wall made of Soecular Mud, which mounded in the
Introduction of the Parsonage: it afforded secure Harbor to Vagrant Bees, who
randevozing here, became a Colony; They made so many Cells in it, that it
appeared to be the Fragment a Reverend Honeycomb. Not far from this grew a Tree
in Folio, an huge, thick, squot Elm, pounded within the circumferences of 4
Benches, which we supposed to be seats made a purpose for the Posterns of
Spectators, when Whitsun-Ale is solemnized with Festivity of Fiddle, and
celebrated with Caper after Pipe and Tabour.

Immediately after our Departure from this place, night overtook us, whose
Sables eclipsing the Splendour of the Day, shortened our course, and crooken'd
our Career aside to look for a Lodging. An happy Retrospest obliged us with the
Prospect of glimmering Thatch, which the nearer we approacht, the more visibly
it appeared in the shape of an House. It was called by way of Irony a Castle,
whose Governor was a decayed Tailor, who having lost through an unfortunate
hole of his Pockets, his Needles, Thimble, those Chattels of his Breeches, and
Implements of his Vocation, was reduced to poverty. The Man was nimble of foot,
though a Dwarf in bulk, so that nine of such might very well club to the
elementing of a Man. After a small Collation of Tripe and Buttermilk, we tript
up a Ladder to the apartments of our several Cabbins, where with the Poppies of
sleep we refresht our Noddles to the great comfort and satisfaction of our
wearied Carcasses. After Va^ediction to Pricklouse, the next morning we set out
with the Sun, and had not went above a mile or two, but we heard the rumor of a
sad disaster which had lately befaln a Country Corydon, which was the loss of a
whole pound of Candles, supposed to be stolen by some highway Rat at one
Robbery. The Relations were various as to the manner of the theft; some say he
carried them away behind him like a burden of sticks; others say, that he hung
them by his side like Bandileers, but most agree that he laid them upon his
shoulder one by one, and ran armed away with the Luminaries as with so many
Muskets. We were somewhat amazed at the horror of that sad story, fearing lest
we our selves should be a Prey to those bold Banditi, who being pretty greasy,
seemed to be a good handsome Bait, and so being mistaken for Rats-bane, might
be pouch'd by the Vermin: But (thanks to the Stars) we escaped the Fate of the
Bishop of Mentz, and marched on upon the Forehead of a smooth Mountain, upon
the summity whereof squotted another Hill; but it bore no proportion to the
seat it sat on, being but a Pim^le to it, as that was but a Molehill to the
whole Globe; it put us in mind of Pelion clambering upon the back of Ossa, that
false Heraldry of the Giants, Hill upon Hill, by which Bunches they thought to
have scaled Heaven; the Crown of the uppermost was somewhat deprest and sunk
into the hollowness of a little Valley, about which stood the natural
Bannisters of some Thorn-bushes, whose folding Branches weaved into a ^attice,
which threaded by the Sunbeams dappled the ground with a pleasant
che^quer-work, and yielded besides a good handsome shade to the panting Sheep,
whose Fleeces discovered them to have taken sanctuary here against the
Persecutions of the violent heat; for the Cattle feeding within the covert, and
rushing through the Brake, every Briar took Toll of their Coats, and excis'd
their Backs as fast as they sill'd their Bellies; on every sprig there hung a
Fragment of their Liveries, and the whole hedge was clothed with tattered
Fleeces, as if Wool had been vegetable and had grown there. These spoils were
looked upon as excellent Booty to vagrant Youth, who went about stripping,
plundering, and (as it were) Sheep-shearing the hedges: We met a crew of these
Pickeering Wool-gatherers, the very Emblems of Beggary, and but once removed
from vilest Rascality; one Shoe a-piece, and half a Hat, a Remnant of a
Doublet, and a Moiety of a Sleeve, a pair of Dispocket Breeches, and a jagged
Jump, were the flower of their Accoutrements, except two or three locks of Wool
tucked like Scuts under their Girdles as a Badge of their profession, and some
crammed Stockins bobbing at their sides as Trophies of their Pyracies.

Some few Furlongs from hence there was a mixed Assembly of Kine and Goats at
dinner upon the Lawns; their Meal was interrupted by the unwelcome salutes of
troublesome Breeze, whose stimulation of Rump did engender such a Frolic, that
with curled Tail and tossed up Horn they run gadding and bellowing, and with
their vocal Friskings, with a pleasant kind of terror, did at once both
recreate and affright the astonished Beholders: The Magistrate or Herds-man,
that kept these Animals, was in the midst of the Tumult, who finding himself
miserably involved in a Hubbub, with furious Club chastised their Gamesomness,
and with mighty busling becalmed the uproar. This Fellow was a strange
Creature, wonderfully Goth'd, and all-to-be-Vandall'd even to Barbarity it
self. A Clown in grain! An uncultivated Boor! A Beast of the Herd in humane
shape. We proposed a Quaery or two about the Genius of the Place; he told us
the Soil was cold, and big with day, and would doubtless yield a good Harvest
of Tobacco-pipes: And as for the People, he said they were a Pan-pudding sort
of People, much addicted to that vile sort of Creature. A whole Table at a
Christening is spread with a Yard of Pudding, and a Balk of Beef, a Ridge of
one and a Furrow of the other, which did so wonderfully work upon their Chops,
and made their mouths so water, that two of the chiefest Grandees of the Town,
the Hogherd and the Heyward fell seriously to snouting for some few Morsels:
the two-ear'd Pitcher that stood upon the Bench was Mr.- Prinn'd in the
scuffle, i. e. lost a Lug in the Fray; and we were informed afterward that the
Di^aff lost a Lock or two of its Flaxen Periwig.

Among Rational wonders the most remarkable Miracle of this Place, was an
eminent Cot-quean, a mere Woman in the habit of a Man, a kind of Mal-cut-purs'd
Creature, an Epicaene Animal of a twisted Gender, who has a Petticoat Soul in
a Trunk-Breech'd Body, and scandalizeth Virility by skill in Housewifery. He
spins (they say) like a Spider, and makes his Wheel giddy by a swift Vertigo;
we observed him to be s^at^ly in his gate when he advances up to Spindle; and
indeed was retrograde again with no little Gravity. He is a learned Craftsman
in the making of Diet, a notable Food-Framer, who buffets the Cream till he
has frighted it into a consistence, and knocked it into Butter, and afterward
squeezes with dexterity of Fist. He was endowed with the gift of tossing of
Pan-cakes, and had a wonderful knack at tempering the Materials of a
Bag-pudding. He surpassed the Dairy-maids in Milkpan accomplishments, and was
excellently qualified for a Meal-Tub Office. He squeezed the Curds with
Cheese-pr ss Bum, and kneads the Dough with fulch of Elbow. He is a Critic at
sweeping, and manageth the Beesome with mighty skill. We could hardly discern
any mote of dust, he having dislodged from Crevis even the smallest Atoms; we
were dazzled with the Sunshine of his radiant Brass, which was exceedingly
enlightened by modern cleansing, he being a singular scowrer, and very knowing
and able at Sand and O^^ershel.

This Hen-Ho^s wif^-Mortal lived a monkish kind of Life, being cloistered up in
a desolate habitation of a certain Gentleman, who, we suppose, does fee him to
dwell there to affright the Mice, and to be a Bull-beggar to the Rats; and also
to terrify a worse kind of Vermin which we call Thieves, who are apt to creep
through the Mouse-hole of a window, and to nibble away the Furniture of a
dispossessed house: or possibly he might abide there to repair its breaches, and
to recover it from its craziness, and by the wholesome Phyfick of frequent
Fires to keep it in health, and to persuade it not to tumble, but to remain
still a Mansion to the Family that owns it.

We tasted here of the Hospitality of this foemasculine wight, who spread a
Joynt-stool with several sorts of Viands; which though not very delicate, yet
the variety might atone and make amends for their meanness. Here was the
Epidermis of a Hog, the outward skin called the Swerd of Bacon, which was
infected with the Jaundice, and looked yellow; here was the Hull of a Pescod
plundered of its Pease, and corn'd with Salt, some broken Fragments of Sheeps
Trotters S. Lawrenc'd on a Gridiron; the offal of a Lark, the minced Spurs of a
Bootless Cock, a skim'd Quadrant of soft Cheese, well sawc'd with the Butt-ends
of forked Scallions, the moldy reversion of an Antiquated Loaf dipped in the
verdure of Water-cresse Pottage, afforded us the refreshment of a pretty
Collation; by the virtue whereof being somewhat recruited, we moved forward and
crep up the Brisket of a small Mountain, upon whose sloaping descent stood a
Quadrangular Sheep-pen, which we passed through, and found pitched with Buttons,
a pretty sort of Floor and Modern M^saick. Not far from the most eastern hurdle
(as near as we could observe) leaned a ruinous Bridge, which gloried in the
passage but of one Arch, and that seemed rather Natural than Artificial; for
the Impetuosity of the Current having bored an hole through a heap of stones,
licked it into the shape of an indifferent Arch: At the Foot whereof stood a
Smiths Shop, about a Bay of watling; it seemed to be a pretty reverend Seat as
we gathered from the Mantle of Green Moss upon its back. Though it was covered
with stubble without, yet it was pretty tolerably furnished with Iron within,
as threadbare Horse-shooes, bits of Keys, some few semicircles of Iron Rings,
odd Links of interrupted Fetters, and a broken Series of a discontinued Chain.
The Vulcan was in his Den, and was hammering out Hob-nails for Country hoof.
His Forge was raised from the ground like an Altar, upon which there did burn
(as it were) a Vestal Fire, which blast of Bellows made much to bubble up in
this little Mongibel. What Cinders were belched from this flaming Vesuvius,
whose smoke and ashes besmutted the Pluto in this Infernal Region! who having
Primitive Apparel, i. e. being skinned over with a Case of Leather, and having a
swarthy Complexion, did with the grimness of his Aspect, and with the horrible
russel of his Breeches, fright one of the Dogs of our company into a fit of
sickness; we imagined the Cur might mistake him for a Tinker, who is commonly a
Disease, or at least a Nuisance to those Creatures.

We saw nothing hereabouts very remarkable, only we met several Mastiffs laden
with the Cargo of good lusty Bones in their mouths; they were ambling eastward;
a very fine spectacle to see a Regiment of Curs trooping along instead of
Bilboa, armed with Shoulder-blades. We wondered at first from whence such
plenty of Anatomy as to furnish them, till spying the Carcass of a dead Palfry,
we perceived they had been feasted with the Viands of his Flesh, and stole the
Skeleton Piecemeal. A Baker chanced to come by through a Gap near at hand,
mounted upon just such another Morsel, ripe for Collar-maker, which being
surpised with the spectacle of his Brother Carrion, took an occasion to start,
and to disburden himself of his Load; which sad misfortune proved a lucky
accident to the Dogs, whereby they were furnished with Bread to their Meat.

Not far from hence was a scurvy Slough, most fatal (as is observed) to
Millers, whom it sups up into the Abyss of its profundity; we saw one moving
a-tit-up, a-tit-up, till he flounc'd in, and by a most disastrous Pitch-pole
into mud and dirt, discolored his Coat, that was candy'd with the effluviums
of his mealy Bags. The Neck-lace of Bells about the crest of his Beast ceased
to be sonorous, being quite choked. His Meal through fright and moisture was
metamorphoz'd into Pudding; and spunging up the Liquor, it grew so heavy, that
it thrived into such unweildiness, as that it was almost unmovable: we
cautelously waved the danger of this dirt by diverting a little toward the
northern parts of this Quagmire, and so in a dainty fine Path, and that not
meanly beautified with variety of Flowers, we continued our Journey very
prosperously, only one of our company had a most calamitous fall over an
unhappy clod of the first magnitude, which undermining his Pedestals, gave him
a preposterous squob, his head fainting the ground first, to the great
detriment of the outward man. There run parallel with this Path a pitched Causey
(as we supposed) about ten Furlongs, we stepped into it, and followed its track
till it brought us into the desert of a Common, not so much as accommodated
with Horse, Tree, House, or Man, so that here we felt the rigor of somewhat
called hardship, the Stomach barking, the Hoof galling, the Winds whistling,
and the Heavens dropping; all these conspired to make us miserable. At last
arriving to the borders of the Wilderness, we were courteously received into an
hospitable Hamlet, where we enjoyed the blessing of an indifferent refreshment.
We took up our Quarters here that night, and passed away the evening in some
pertinent Quaeries about observables in the Place. They presented us with a
pretty curiosity which seldom occurs, and that was the Copy of a Brief
containing the Losses of a distressed Virgin, which because the form and style
is somewhat unusual, we care not much if we here insert.

The Copy of a BRIEF.
To all Ladies, Gentlewomen; whether Maids, Wives or Widows, or others of that
softer Sex, of what state and condition soever, whether Waiting-women,
Semstresses, Spinsters, Bawds, Punks, Doxies, and all other Petticoateers, from
those who through wantonness have naked Backs to those who through want have
naked Bums, Greeting.
WHereas we are credibly informed by our trusly and well-beloved Roper
Thwickwack of B. in the County of Salop Jumper, and Arthur Twitch-box, Smoaker,
Cadwallader Whipwhop, Wrestler, Anthony Snug, Fiddler, Giles Firker Bum-brusher,
and several others of the like Laudable Professions; That our beloved Subject
Mrs. A. C. of the Town and County aforesaid Damsel, has lately sustained a
great loss by a most lamentable misfortune, which on the fifth of this instant
most miserably befell her after this manner following.

There was a certain Glass-case of a Gad-fly color, i. e. a little inclining
to a Calf-dung Yellow, and somewhat of a dwarfish size, not much exceeding the
stature of a Cricket; it was supported by the strength of a double ^hong at the
North-west Point of her Chamber, where for some time it ^ad continued in a
pendulous posture, and ^ad arrived to a great repute of civility and me^kness,
whereby it did much exceed, and frequently put toth' bl^sh the other Vtensils
of her Chamber.

Now this Poor Thing, by reason of the rudeness of two lusty Pusses, whether
affrighted at their Caterwawling, or it being not a^le to ^ear them in the Acts
of Love, we cannot tell, but certain it is, it let go its hold, and after a
dismal manner came blundering down, attended with the ruin and desolation of
several Jiggumbobs and Jim^racks, to the great loss and detriment of our poor
distressed Subject. -- The Particulars whereof are as follow.

1. The Ivory Gums of a Toothless Comb. 2. A little Bottle-breecht Glass,
replenished with Love-Powder. 3. A Brace of blind Needles that lost their Eyes
in the tumble. 4. A Double S^ut of an Hare tied up with a single Pack-thread.
5. The latter end of an o'd Br^oms^aff. 6. The Butt-end of an old Suqarloaf. 7.
The True-Lovers Knot made in wire. 8. A square bit of Tin. 9. The Margin of a
broad Hat. 10. One Finger-stall. 11. Two Tags. 12. A cracked Glass with a
clubfoot. 13. The skin of an Onion stufft with Arsenick. 14. One Whisker of a
Bearded Arrow. -- The loss of which ^ackle and Implements amounting to a Sum of
great value, we do send our Letters Patents to beg the Charitable Benevolence
of all well-dispos'd Persons, hoping that they will be pleased to take the
deplorable condition of our unhappy Subject into their serious consideration:
-- For is it not a sad thing to lose so commodious a Place to lay pretty things
in, and all by the misdemeanour of two unmannerly Cats? For where will this our
Subject lay her Gally-pots and Syrups, her Gums and Pomatum? Had these
Mount-hunters only eased Nature there, and then gingerly departed, they had
been very excusable; but first to come slyly into a Ladies Chamber, and then to
squobble and fall out there, and the midst of their Quarrel to pursue one
another to the top of a Shelf, and there to renew the Battle again, and to box
one another till themselves did fall, and to demolish that very thing which
supported them in their bickering; as the Fool in the Fable sawed off the Bough
he sat on. Oh! this is a sad thing.
Another Living observable we met with here was the Fragment of a Physician,
whose pretenses to Learning were very great, but by converse we found him to
have more Stomach than Brains, and therefore was like to have more consolation
in a Kitchen than in a Study; for there perhaps he may find a job of work for
his Grinders; whereas he knows not what to do with his Books, unless he should
act the Moth, and eat them. One of our Company perceived his Parts to lie more
toward the Powdering-tub, than his Pharmacopeia; for whilst he is busy in the
former he may keep himself alive, but when he reads in the latter he kills his
Patients. We had some Rost-beef to Supper, and we commonly found him within an
inch of the Drippingpan, with an Acre of Bread in his hand, which he called a
Sop, with which, when our backs were turned, he usually spung'd up the
Dripping, and cheated Sir-Loin, and robbed its Knighthood of its due moisture.
A Scholar of our Company perceived him to be well read in Papers that skreen
the Back of a Limb of Roast, and that he found a great deal of matter in the
Socks that are on the Souls of Mince-pies.

After a days Journey from hence, we set our Feet upon Welsh Turf, and indeed
were strangely surpised at the uncouthness of many things that did salute us
here.

The Country is tuckt in on all sides with the Sea, except on the East, on
which part it was ditcht in from England by that notable Delver King Offa, King
of the Mercians: Over this Dike if any Welch-man chance to skip with his Sword
by his side, by King Harolds Law, he was to lose a Branch of his Body, i. e.
his right Arm was lopt off by the Kings Officers.

Some think it had its Name from its Godfather Idwallo Son to Cadwallader, who
with a small crew of Brittons at the arrival of the Saxons hid themselves in
this Corner. Others suppose them to be the Spawn of the Gauls, from whom they
seem to be but a few Aps removed; Ap Galloys Ap Gauls, Ap Wallois Ap Wales.

As for the Inhabitants, they are a pretty sort of Creatures, which when we
saw, we were so far from stroaking them with the Palms of Love, that we were
almost ready to buffet them with the Fist of Indignation. They are a rude
People, and want much Instruction. For when we consider the soil from whence
they sprang, and the Deserts and Mountains wherein they wander, we cannot but
think that greater pains should be taken in cultivating and manuring, in
disciplining and taming them, in regard it is harder for a Bearuard to teach
civility to the Beasts of Africa, than to those that come from a more mannerly
Country: -- We do not say that when they are in their Country they do (like
Bears and Foxes) live in Woods and Forests, (for I presume they have more Sun
than Shade, and so more Fire than Wood) but if we agree with Geographers, and
are of an opinion that they are Inhabitants of a Wilderness, and are Landlords
of a Common, as I and every body else are owners of the Air, we must beg their
pardon for our conceit. We have been informed that they were dug from a Quarry,
and that they dwell in a stony Land; so that if we compare this Kingdom to a
Man; (as some do Italy to a Man's Leg) they inhabit the very Testicles of the
Nation. And I pray what are those but the vilest of Creatures that breed as
well in the Privities of the greater British World, as those that are hatched
in the Pudenda of the lesser? But whether Welch-men are the Aborigines of their
Country, as Grab-lice are the Autocthones of theirs, and proceed only (like
them) from the excrements of their Soil, we shall not here dispute. They are of
a B^orish behavior, of a Savage Physiognomy; the shabbiness of their Bodies,
and the Baoticalness of their Souls, and that, which cannot any otherwise be
expressed, the Welchness of both, will fright a Man as fast from them, as the
odness of their Persons invites one to behold them. Some of them are such rude
and indigested Lumps, so far from being Men, that they can scarce be advanced
into Living Creatures; nay they are such unmanageable Materials that they can
scarce be hewn into the shape of Blocks; much Labor and Art is required
therefore to make them Statues.

They are not much given to fighting, as by a Speech it appears that was
uttered by hur nown Countryman, who when drawn out upon some Design, began to
pur and murmur after this manner*

Hur has worn out her-Freez Preeches, and all hur Clothes; and now hur can get
no Money to keep hur, or to buy hur some Cows-baby, and hur could hear nothing
but Marsh, Marsh! and Drums beat, hur was therefore (once for all) now resolved
to fight no longer, but to go into hur nown Country. -- They are much inclined
to Choler; for hur Welsh Plood is soon moved, and then hur stamp and stare, and
scrat hur Pole, and vent hur fury in ud^-plutt^r-a-nails, and will fight for
hur life in battle at Fifty-cuffs.

The whole Nation (like a German Family) is of one Quality; for as every Lords
Son is a Lord here, so every one is crowned with the Title of Gentleman there;
so that hur Country is a good Pasture for an Herald to bite in. Who cannot
choose but grow fat among such worshipful Genealogies. We were much surpised
at the thoughts of their Rank, and did not suspect so much Gentility among such
a People; when we saw so many Coats without Arms, we could not imagine they had
any with them, but fancied they had more need of a Tailor than of Clarentius,
and of a Prick-louse to stitch up and compose their Breaches, rather than an
Herald to blazen their Families. They appeared to us to be very ill accoutred
Gentry: But however vileness of Equipage is no blot in Scutcheon; as may be
easily made out from this following Narrative. When King James commanded all
that were Gentlemen in an Army to pass by him, he observing a Rag-a muffin to
hobble in the Rear of the Train, commanded him to be stopped, because he looked
not like a Gentleman; but Taphy cried out that hur was as good a Shentleman as
the best, only hur Cattle was not so good. In their Travels they care not much
that their Horses should drink with a Tossed; as appears by the wrath which
Shenkin discovered, whom his quaffing Beast had pitch-pol'd into a River.
Vds-plutter-a-naits (quoth he) in great fury, what cannot hur drink without a
Tossed? He took it much in dudgeon, that that the Jade should be so bold as to
make a Sop of his Master.

They do not always observe the Mules of Justice in their Punishments;
oftentimes chastizing one Body for another, and so misplace their rigor on the
undeserving; as will be very evident from this following Instance. A certain
Tailor ferrying over a River in their Country with a Diminutive Nag; the Steed
never using to travel by Water, and wondering that he stood still and moved,
was possessed with fear, and made some dist^rbance in the Boat, to the great
endangering of the Passengers: The Welch-man being in jeopardy, was fired with
anger, and without any wings he flew on the Tailor, and revenged the injury of
the Pa^fry on poor Pricklouse. The Stitcher swadled the scrupling Horse, and
Taphy beat the Stitcher, to the great diversion and grief of the Spectators.

The Materials of his Apparel are usually a well shagg'd Fre^z, so that we
cannot call it sleepy, being fleeced with a Nap like any Sheep-skin: It affords
excellent harbor to the Vermin of his Body, which whether it be stockt with
store of Joicements of them, he commonly signifies by the Symbol of a shrug.

His Fashion is generally a Pair of oblong Trowzes made of a Brace of
Cloak-bags, supposed to be Twins; these tackt together are a perfect Emblem of
his crural Attire. This Garment had conjugal Affinity to a thing called a
Doublet of the same Lineage; a copious Vestment, very roomthy and capacious,
able to comprehend both his Arms in the single Puddingbag of one Sleeve; its
uppermost confines were hemmed with the scanty dimensions of a contracted
Collar, but its lower extremity was bordered with the Paraphrase of amplify'd
Lappets. The Summity of his Head is commonly crowned with a Monmouth Cap, and
its Crown is commonly pinnacled with the Battlement of a Button. Cuffs are an
Innovation, things which their Ancestors were seldom guilty of; and indeed
Bands and clean Linen are an upstart Invention; being the modern effects of
the pride of their huge ones, whereas Primitive Brittishness was never
acquainted with the habiliment of a Shirt. Their Feet it seems are of an hot
Complexion, for they often air their distockin'd Pettitoes; and if they had any
Hosen they were the offspring of their Drawers, to which they were fastened by
Leathern Ligaments. The Perf^ction of a Welch-mans Equipage, the cream (as it
were) of his Accoutrements, and that which compleats even his most F^stival
Attire, is (as the Story goes) an old Sword of hur nown breeding, which hur
has brought up from a Tagger: And this he can brandish with much valor
against the Tremendous onset of Dragooning Bees; a kind of Enemy which the
Taphy is much afraid of, in regard he is always armed with a Pike in's Rere,
which once upon a time being fastened in his Forehead, broacht such a Pore in
his Phyio^nomy, that he could never endure those hum-buzzing. Shentlemen (as he
calls them) in Yellow Doublets.

The Country is mountainous, and yields pretty handsome clambering for Goats,
and has variety of Precipice to break ones neck; which a Man may sooner do
than fill his belly, the Soil being barren, and an excellent place to breed a
Famine in. It is reported of Campania, That it was the most noble Region in the
World, the Air pleasant, the Soil fertile, the Theater of Bacchus and Ceres,
where they were at Fisty-cuffs for the Pre-eminence; but we perceived no such
scuffle in Wales; for those Deities are so far from fighting there, that we
could not discern that they were so much as ever there; there being scarce
water and Oat-meal to give us being, we could not expect Egypt and the
Canaries, Butts and Granaries to give us a well-being: There is no Canaan to be
found in the Arms of a Desert.

The Commodities of the Nation are chiefly Woollen-cloaths, as Cottons, Bays,
etc. of which their tattered Backs are an ill sign of; for sure they are not so
filly to furnish other Countries with Raiment, and to go naked themselves.

As for the Diet of the Britton, it is not very delicate, neither is he curious
in it; for if he should, his Appetite perhaps might curse his nicety, and by
pleasing his Palate he may starve his Belly. A good mess of Flummery, a pair of
Eggs he rejoices at as a Feast, especially if he may close his Stomach with
tosted Cheese; a morsel for which he has a great kindness. You may see him
pictured sometimes with that crevis in his Head called a Mouth, charged at both
corners with a crescent of Cheese, and himself a cock-horse on a Red-herring,
and his Hat adorned with a Plume of Leeks: Good edible Equipage! which when
hunger pinches, he makes bold to nibble; he first eats his Chease and his Leeks
together, and for second course he devours his Horse. He never much cared for a
Sop, since once upon a time it drank up all his Drink, and would not club to
pay his Shot.

As for his Person, his stature is of the lowest size, not above a Stair or two
above one Story; and we found always a Cock-loft, and that usually empty. His
Face usually bubbles into Tumors and Pustles. Besides the natural Haut-goust of
Body that breaths from grain, he usually sends forth an artificial smell, which
you may wind as far as the Extreme Unction of twenty Funerals, only the scent
is not so sweet: he smells as rankly of the single stink of Brimstone, as a
Gold finder of a medly; for a scurvy Disease commonly called the Scrubado makes
frequently an Inroad into his Person, and invades his Body; so that he is
forced to choke his Enemy by stink of Sulphur. It Is a creeping Distemper, whose
progress is checked by mortisication, so that when he leaves off his Shirt, that
is, when it leaves him, and can hang on no longer, it is excellent Furniture
for Tinderbox, as virtually containing in it both Match and Tinder.

The Music he plays upon, is a Tool styled an Harp, that is, a Triangular
stick bed-corded with variety of extended Catlings; which he tickles with as
much dexterity, as if prentice to Amphion, and draws as many Boys after him, as
he did Stones; nay these we have seen in some places totrot after him; but not
so much to admire, as to pelt him for his Harmony. He puts his Instrument to
one use more than the Ancients did theirs, i. e. he purveys with it for
maintenance; so that when sustenance fails him, he strikes up for a Morsel, and
so lives by sounds, and (Camaeleon like) has Alimony from Air. He serenades
Victuals in every Village, as the Pide-piper did Rats at Hamel, and he allures
Luncheons after him, as much as the other did Vermin: Here a knob of Bacon wags
after him, for one strain, and there a Crust follows him as the Reward of
another, one hits him in the Mouth with a payment of Pottage, another pops him
in the Pocket with the gratuity of a Carrot; he is laden sometime with such
plenty of Beverege, that he cannot jog for his Fraught; all which variety of
Fragments is the most ample In-come, and wonderful Revenue of his skill in
Music. His usual Admirers are Country Milkmaids, whom vibration of string
does move and stir into Jig and Measure; and whom Breez of Instrument (like
those in Tail) do chafe and tickle into Dance and Caper: By the wagging of his
Noddle, and the wrigling of his Limbs, he seems to be taken with the Accents,
or else to be bitten with the Tarantula of his own Music, which has insected
him into a Galliard, and caused him to fig about with a Frolic Motion.

We could not perceive that they were guilty of much Learning; of which the
lowest Degree is several notches above their most exalted capacity. We met with
one pretty proband in the Alphabet; but for the most part the knowledge of the
least jota is rare, and unusual. A Man skilled in Orthography is admired as a
Sophy, and a writer of his Name is termed a Rab^i. The Top-gallant of the
Parish possibly may be so wise in Hie^oglyphick as to scrawl the Character of a
Mystic Mark; tho such deep Literature is not frequent amongst them. Some of
their Ancestry have smelt rank of Astrology; one whereof, Merlin by name, was
very nota^le at the Stars, and most intimate with the Planets; in so much that
sometimes he would fling at a Futurity, and venture at a Prognostic concerning
the weather. It Is supposed he was bred up at the Feet of some She-Gamaliel,
being so well versed in the Prophecies of old women's Corns, and who could as
cleverly fore-tel Rain, as the learned Almanac of the most weatherwise Toe. --
The study of Wizzardism has also been famous amongst them; one Good man Druis
was well accomplished in that kind of Learning; hence formerly a Wizard was*
styled a Drue. This Fellow (they tell us) was the Schoolmaster of Pythagoras,
into whose Breech ('it is said) he infused by Birch the Opinion of
Transmigration. He was dextrous at a Fortune, and Old-Dog at Augury; the only
thing we dislike in him, is, he sacrificed Men, and so divined by Butchery.

To the Wisdom and Philosophy of this Sophy, his little Boy Bardus added
Poetry; a Lad (it seems) notably inspired with Flames and Firebrands, with
Heats and Raptures, and such kind of Tackle that are used by Poets. The
Disciples of this La^reat were termed Bards, the great Embalmers of Heroic
Actions; who (I warrant you) will wrap up an Achievement so securely in a
Monument of a single Verse, that all the niblings in the world shall never be
able to devour the Immortality of a Name. They balladsung the Praises of
Renowned Heroes, and in lofty strains wire-draw'd their Fame, and stretched
their Glory to after-ages. They were in huge esteem, and had the Cap and Knee
of the greatest Commanders, in so much that if two Armies were even at Cuffs or
at Cudgels, and a venerable Bard stepped in but with one Foot of his Poetry, they
would have held their hands, and have thrown down their Hilts, and have
hearkened to the advice of his learned Dactails, and not offer to shout it till
his Poetical worship had been out of danger. The most Famous of these
Meter-mongers were Robbin Plenidius, my Gaffer Glaskirion, and of late years
old Farmer Davy, and our Neighbor David ap Williams.

The Champions of the Country, Men of celebrated Prowess, were Mr.
Cassibellane and Sir Nennius Knight, the former whereof was so Doubty a Blade,
that it is said he confronted Caesar, and bid him kiss his Backside with
undaunted Gallantry; the other grapling with the same Emperor, did diswhiniard
his hand by main strength, and sent the Man home laden with some stripes, and
with a naked Belt. A notable Instance of Welsh Valor! To these we may add that
Hector of Britain, the Renowned Arviragus, who was so great a Raw-head and
Bloody-bones to the Roman Soldiery, that it is thought he frighted them even to
the bewraying of their Breeches, and made them mightily stink of a filthy thy
discomfiture.

As for the Loves of the Brittons, the Intrigues of their Amors are not a
little remarkable; they being very pretty Animals when disguised with that
Passion: They are Tinder to such Flames, being quickly set on fire, even by the
least spark, which when it has caught the Match of their Souls, (for they
have Brimstone in them as well as in their Bodies) they are presently kindled
into Transport and Ecstasy; and these model them into the shapes of a thousand
Anticks, and make them show more tricks than Banks his Horse. Sometimes they
are shaking the Globules of their Noddle, and sometimes dancing some Geometry
with the Figures of their Feet; now they smite with clapper of Fist their
troubled Breasts, and anon sound out some Knells of dismal Groans; being
variously affected according as the weather is in their Clorinda's Faces; if
Aspect be clear, then is Taphy Serene; if Brow be cloudy, then is Morgan
Showry. He commonly ore-flows in his prattle about the Princum prancumness of
his Mistress, and is witty even to a Jest on the Fineries of their Habiliments,
in describing of which he is pretty lucky at Similitude, and is happy in his
Comparisons about her Person. One having a glympse through the Keyhole of her
Saffron Body, burst out into a Panegyric of the Beeswaxness (as he phras'd it)
of her Tawny Complexion; and seeing her Tippet to bristle into the erectness of
a Turbant, he fell a laughing at the Cox-comb (as he termed it) of her Coif and
Head-gear. He seldom troubles his Madam with the falutation of a Letter, but
usually accosts her with the Missive (as I may say) of his nown Person, which
being broken up in her presence, out fly the Contents full of flame and rapture.

Shentle Modest! when hur see
The Fair Looks her made at me,
Hur could not choose by what is above,
But be entangled by her Love.
Hur was not think it fit and meet,
To wrap hur Love within a Sheet;
But was think it great deal better,
To speak hur Loufe than write a Letter;
Hoping her not exception take
At hur for hur Countries sake.
What if hur Welch-man be? what then?
Taffies was all Shentlemen;
Born from Venus that fair Coddess,
And many other Shentle Bodies;
Part Humane and part Difine,
We are d scended from Joves Line.
All this Truth her dare not mince,
Being the Issue of British Prince.
If should with Shenkin drink some Wine,
Her would think her Fortune fine,
And hur would tell such Tale in Ear,
That all the Worcester d was never hear.
Then Shentle Modest let hur prove,
Honest Shenkin will hur love;
Though hur was very s^lthy fit,
That drives poor Wel^hman out of wit;
And if hur will not pity hur pain,
Hur will never Loufe again.
We heard of one that went a wooing with a Gun upon his shoulder, being
resolved (it seems) if Love be a warfare, not to enter unarmed into the Camp of
Venus; still as his coy Daphne shifted from his presence, he marched
Musketeering about the Room, and most fiercely pursued her, till at last in the
brisk Encounter of a close Embrace, this warlike Instrument took an occasion
somewhat unmannerly to go off, and Blunderbuss'd the Mistress on her Breech on
one side of the house, and poor Taphy on his Nose on the other; so that being
much dismayed at this unhappy Accident, one serabled one way, and the other
another, to the total separation of a pair of Lovers, and to the utter spilling
of a Mess of Love.

They are pretty devout in their worship, though the exercise of Religion is
somewhat scarce, and have a pretty glowing zeal, though their Churches are f^w,
and at a great distance. It Is almost incredible how far they are fain to trudge
for a little Homily, which when they have expected, have been mump'd with a
Sermon ten times worse. For on such Raw-bone Livings there cannot be expected
very plump Parts. The ordinary Revenue of a Spiritual Preferment may possibly
be about five Marks per Annum; a Bay of Wailing for a dwelling; endowed with no
more Glebe than just what it stands upon, only perhaps it may be howe-stall'd
with as much ground as may hold a Sty for the Pig, and a Roost for the Pullen.
These Divine Cottages are usually situated some Leagues from the Temple; so
that the Holy-man with Crab-tree Truncheon sets out with the Sun, and
stretches his Legs with a good handsome walk, before he arrives to Pulpit to
stretch his Lungs, and wears out much of his Soles before he can reach his
Stall to mend their Souls. Their Houses of Prayer are generally Thatcht
Tabernacles, which being steepled (as it were) with a Lover-hole, seem to be
really that what the Temple resembled when profaned by the Jews, I mean,
rather the Pictures of Pidgeon-houses, than holy Sanctuaries. They are
wainscoted toward the East with little Desks, like Pounds, where Levite
imprisoned for about half an hour, fodders the poor Taffies with some
melancholy Tear-fetching Story about a Grim Fellow called Death, who ambles
Folks on his back into another World; a thing which he ^eard from the Oracular
Gums of ^f his edentulous old Grannum, as she ^^e in the Settle in the
Chimneyorner. Some of the most Reverend Rectors are dignified with a stipend of
six pounds a year, besides the Perquisites of a Drum and Fiddle; which well
managed on a Holy Day, make up a very pretty Thing. Others have an Augmentation
of a Bull or a Bear, which being solemnly baited about twice in a Quarter, do
pick pretty comfortable Tyth from the Spectators Pockets, and makes the poor
Parsons Purse to smile and mantle.

Their Recreations are various, but not much different from those in England;
you may see them sometimes smite a Ball at the Rebound, and to send it on an
errand to their Antagonists, which being retorted by way of Answer, is
rejoinder'd back again with much dexterity. They will bandy to and fro this
misside Globule, and shittle-cock it to each other with great celerity. Their
Lungs are pretty good at a Bubble in the Air, which Meteor arising from the
Womb of a Wallnut-shell, they will make fly through the Welkin on the Wings of
their Breaths, and for a considerable time, by the Blasts of their Mouths, will
support the Being of those Emblems of Mortality.

In the whity-brown Evening, or in the Twilight, they run hobbling about their
Common with Kites at their heels, certain Comets of Paper, which they tow along
with a tall string, and make themselves merry with the length of their Tails,
which are a large Series of jaggd Tossels, raged with a Candle, as with the
twinkling of a Star. Happy is the Man amongst them that can most discreetly
manage this Artificial Planet; and he is presently dubbed the very Pha^ton of
their Country, that can most swiftly career it with this little lanthorn'd
Phoebus. The Scrubs want Candle on Earth, and yet they must needs be sticking
up Lights in the Socket of Heaven; there is scarce half a pound in a Lordship
either to scare away darkness or to work by, and yet these Rascals (forsooth)
will be studding the Sky with Luminaries to play by. -- As for true and real
Hunting, there is no such thing among them; only they have (as it were) the
Picture and some kind of resemblance of that Pastime; for their Principality
affording them but few Hares, they course a Lock of Hay in lieu thereof, and
Alloo the Puss of a good nimble wisp. The whim of it is this; when they have a
mind to refresh themselves with somewhat that is a kin to, or with an Idea of
Hunting, they make diligent search for a Furlong or two of smooth and champion
ground, which at last being found, they purchase a Bundle of the swiftest Hay,
(if Irish, it is the better, for there are the best Runners of all sorts) this
they expose to the Fans of Aeolus, which being presently started by force of
puff, it feuds away, and the Dogs pursue it with mighty speed. In rainy weather
they have also their In-door Divertisements as well as other Nations, such as
Rump pressing, Hotcockles, Chap-smutting, Snap-apple, and the like. Some are
cunning at the Cockall, not so much for picking off the meat (though they are
good at that too) as at throwing it with accuracy, and checquering the sport
with variety of Tumble.

As far as we could perceive, they love Holy Day Fingers, and care not much for
encumbring them with that Inconvenience called ^ork. They can (Shepherd like)
lo^^ upon a crook pretty handsomely in the Field, and can discharge a
superintendency over the Goats. They are most accomplished Drov^rs, to which
laudable Function they are so naturally prone, that they are apt to drive
sometimes more than their own.

They are much addicted to the sin of Nastiness, wallowing in filthiness like
so many Swine; so that the whole Province seems to be but a general Sty. You
may swear they are made of Earth without a Metaphor; appearing like so many
Dirt-Images, o^ like that of Prometheus made of clay. The meaner sort of Women
are generally such Draggle-Tails, that the Cattle in their Bosoms are
quag-mir'd in the filth of their well-gleb'd Attire; so that the frisking Fleas
are so far from Levalto's, that we are verily persuaded they can scarce pull
out Proboscis, and their Feet from the Bogs.

The Tenements they live in are suitable to the Guests that possess them; for as
these seem to be Dirt molded into Men, so those are the same matter kneaded
into Houses; they are usually very Humble Cottages, and low in stature, so that
a Man may ride upon the Ridge, and yet have his Legs hang in the Dirt; those
that are so magnificent as to be crested with a Chimney, are mightily valued,
as most Cocking Fabrics. We were not so vain as to expect very splendid
Furniture in such contemptible Hutts; but we soon perceived what Utensils were
most necessary; a Dish-clout and a Beesome, and such cleansing Implements are
very proper to correct the filthinness of their Mansions; we found no
Apartments in these their Habitations, every Edifice being a Noah's Ark, where a
Promiscuous Family, a Miscellaneous Heap of all kind of Creatures did converse
together in one Room; the Pigs and the Pullen and other Brutes either truckling
under, or lying at the Beds-feet of the little more refined, yet their Brother
Animals. The Country is fortified in some places with a pretty sprinkling of
Castles, which whether they naturally grew out of the Rocks, or were
artificially ingrafted there, may be a matter of dispute; some fancied them to
be Stone-pits shot up into the Air, which represent the Figure of vast
Buildings.

Wales is the most monstrous Limb in the whole Body of Geography, for it is
generally reported to be without a middle, or if it has a Navel it is yet a
Terra Incognita; for we never could find that ever any Man dwelt there, the
Natives confessing themselves to be only Borderers. Surely the reason why they
do so much affect the circumference of their Country, and abominate the
center, is, because they are ashamed of the Dominion; and indeed it is a sign
they have but a little kindness for their Nation, who (like unnatural Sons) run
from their Mother their Country, and when out of her Embraces never return
again. A Welch-man when once abroad, has no more tendency home, than a Stone
an Inclination to fall upward: He will trot over the Globe, and rather endure
the infliction of any Exile, than the cruel punishment of being banished home;
if he is once on this side Dee, neither Hunger nor Husks, nor any kind of
hardship shall drive him on the other.

We could not in our Travels wind very many Feasts among them, the shabbyness
of their Soil being not able to nourish and pomper Luxury, so that a Cook,
unless he exercise on himself, and dress his own Fingers, he is immediately
starved here for want of an Employment. They make some little Invitations
perhaps to a Kids-head or so; and will junket with Hoptops with brisk alacrity.
Such plain, mean (and as I may say) Borough Food was even their Festival
Entertainments; but as for any Embroidered and (as it were) Metropolitan Mess,
such as Bisks and Oglio's, we never so much as heard of them in their
Territories.

Their Mart for Law is a Parish Town called Ludlow, where there is a Court of
Judicature decked with a Judge, Councilors, Attorneys, Sollicitors, and other
Furniture which embellish the Law: Hither they trudge for Decision of Case, and
here Red-coat Integrity dispenses Equity. Most of their Indictments are
generally the Tragical effects of some dismal Counterscuff^e, where a bloody
Nose and a broken Shin is ample matter for the Commencement of a Suit; for they
being of a fiery temper, sometimes choler is kindled by an Antiperistasis with
a Pot of Ale; and then they fall to biting and scratching as hard as they can
drive, and the wounds of this Caterwauling and Bickering affords stust for an
Action the next day; which being once got into the Poun^es of a Welsh Attorney,
is dandled into a Business of no small aggravation. Oh! How these Pettifoggers
will hug a Buffeting, and improve a Squobble! They are the very Bellows of
Contention, and will soon blow a Spark into a great Combustion. They are a kind
of Tinkers in the Law, who usually make holes on purpose that they may mend
them; nay sometimes they will play at Loggerheads themselves to set others
together by the Ears, and so (as if fighting was contagious) will infect the
Taphies into Quarrels and Blows. One marching along the Streets advanced the
Scolding of two Women into an huge Tumult, as Duels swell into great Wars; and
made the snarling of two Dogs thrive into an Action, and the fighting of
Mastiffs to end in the Court of the Common Pleas. They commonly broach
Quarrels, and incense the Shentlemen into knockings and smitings, cracked
Crowns, and black Eyes, into Assaults and Batteries, and all for hopes of a
Livelihood that may be skim'd from the benefit of such Wars: But perhaps the
Spoils from the Skirmishes of such Clients are as rate as Pillage from a Scotch
Army. The usual crime for which they stand generally convicted, is that great
transgression and sin of Mice, the nimming of Cheese, and the filching of
Oatmeal, and of the rest of the good Creatures that are Arkt in the Cup-board;
and as they offend like Vermin, so are ordinarily taken so too, that is, not
apprehended like Men, but entrap'd like Rats; after which they are convented
before the Sage Puss of the Law, which purring upon a Tribunal together with
his Kitling Officers, does fasten on the Prey, and does so suck and claw it,
till it has mumbled out all its Blood, that is, all the Money of its Veins,
and then wholly devours it. This (I say) is one of their offenses, though not
the only one; for some of them have been lasht for an attempt upon Hen-Roosts,
and have received condign punishment even for stealing of Poultry at the wrong
end; for Taphy (it seems) having filch'd a Chicken by the Breech, did disrump
her by his Theft; and therefore in resemblance to his Crime was almost disrumpt
by punishment; so that for stealing the Birds Tail, he had well-nigh lost his
own: A pretty Circumstance observed in their Justice! and a laudable way of
proceeding according to Lex Talionis.

For several Crimes they have various Punishments. That grand Enormity of
Breaking-wind is chastised there as it is in England, that is, the hand of
Magistracy does usually inflict a pretty lusty Cobling, that is, for every
Report the loss of an Hair, though some that have been much addicted to that
Infirmity, and therefore have been very guilty of a stink, have endured the
cruelty of tormenting Faries, that is, have been pinched into manners, and a
better smell. Artificers when at work punish any unhandsome Action by a
particular severity peculiar to themselves, which they call Pursing. The
Execution whereof is after this manner: The Malefactor being prostrate on a
Block, two of the same occupation pull as discreetly as they can his Drawers as
close to Buttock as a Spaniards Breeches, so as not to be laid hold on by the
most curious Pinsers; the Pavement of Posteriours being levelled and smoothed
from any wrinkles, a third Artisan strikes it with a Rule, whose smart
Application by Quick jerks makes some impression of pain, and so moves the
Blood as to raise and start a Tincture and (as (...) were) the Flea-biting of a
Blush. Some of the more obstinate Criminals are punished by ^^^pension, but not
by the Neck, (...) here in England, but by the wrists, Thumb-rop'd together
with a sting of Hay, and so fastened ^o a Peg; well! this is but the beginning
(and as it were) the Hissing of the Punishment, do but mark, and the Sting will
follow: The offending Taphy thus dangling in the Air, the Beadle approaches
with a stick impt with a Feather at one end, and tickles his Testicles; these
softer Titillations engender some vibrations of Body, and nimble Friskings,
which are shrewdly chastised by a surly Cat-of nine-tails.

The Cattle we saw most legible on their Mountains were Goats and Heifers; a
runtish sort of Animals, of a dwarfish size, but very hardy, of a flinty
Constitution calculated on purpose for the meridian of a Rock; on which (it
seems) they can as heartily feed, as an Ostrich on an Anvil. Great numbers of
these are often disembogu'd into adjacent Countries, which after some time
circulate home again in a stream of Money; which yields wonderful refreshment
to the fainting Dominion, almost sick for the comfort of such a Cordial. We
perceived their Herds to be frequently mingled with little Palfries; a stunted
sort of Horses, diminutive Brutes, Shavals in shorthand. They are lower in
stature than an Ass, but much swift^r in Foot, and very strong, as it appears
from their Burdens, which are oftentimes the Fortune and Substance of a whole
Family; for when a Mortal breaks, he mounts all he has on Welch-Nag, and
travels under the Character of a Scotch Pedlar. We chanced to see a Team of
this small Cattle, a rare Spectacle, being (as we supposed) the least that ever
was heard of, unless that which was harnessed in Venus her Chariot, which was a
Team of Doves. These British Steeds are so brisk and Mercurial, that the
People would persuade us that a Taphy on a Tit would outstrip in travel an
Arabian on a Dromedary; a thing almost incredible, though the pricking up their
Ears, and the sticking up their Tails, is an Argument of their Metal, and may
give some color and ground for the Assertion.

That which we admired most of all amongst them, was the Virginity of their
Language, not deflowered by the mixture of any other Dialect: The purity of
Latin was debauched by the Vandals, and was Hun'd into corruption by that
barbarous People; but the sincerity of the British remains inviolable. It Is a
Tongue (it seems) not made for every Mouth; as appears by an Instance of one in
our Company, who having got a Welsh Polysyllable into his Throat, was almost
choked with Consonants, had we not by clapping him on the back made him
disgorge a Guttural or two, and so saved him. They usually liquefie the most
rugged Mutes, and soften 'um by Promulgation; melting the word Tug into Tudge,
as is clear from this Distick.

Still he did Tudge hur Ear

In praise of the Tirteen Seer, i. e. did Tug hur Souses with Elogiums of hur
Country. Whether the Welsh Tongue be a Splinter of that universal one that was
shattered at Babel, we have some reason to doubt, in regard it is unlike the
Dialects that were crumbled there: However, whether it be kin or no to other
Country Speeches, it matters not; but this we are assured of, it is near and
dear to the Folk that utter it, who are so passionately fond of it, that they
will scarce admit another into the Embraces of their Lips, which sputter sorth
a kind of loathing of our English Language; wherein, if a Question be asked
them, they will with somewhat of disdain and choler make answer Dim saissonick,
i. e. no English. Their Native Gi^berish is usually pratled throughout the
whole Taphydome, except in their Market Towns, whose Inhabitants being a little
raised, and (as it were) puss^ up into Bubbles above the ordinary Scum, do
begin to despise it. Some of these being elevated above the common Level, and
perhaps refined into the Quality of having two Suits, are apt to fancy
themselves above their Tongue, and when in their the other Clothes, are quite
ashamed on it. It Is usually cashiered out of Gentlemen's Houses, there being
scarcely to be heard even one single Welsh Tone in many Families; their
Children are instructed in the Anglican Ideom, and their Schools are
Paedagogu'd with Professors of the same; so that (if the Stars prove lucky)
there may be some glimmering hopes that the British Lingua may be quite
extinct, and may be Englished out of Wales, as Latin was barbarously Goth'd out
of Italy.

The Cambro-Brittons are great admirers of Heroic Actions, and much honor the
Memory of Famous Achievements; in so much, that rather than a Dead-doing Man
shall perish in Oblivion, they will Eternize his Name by the Monument of a
Straw, or some such inconsiderable trifle; as appears by that Famous Example of
that Saint of their Country, Bishop David, who being a pert fighter, and
having soundly basted and swadled their Foes, is at this day consecrated to
Posterity by the Trophy of a Leek; and smells as rank of Renown from that
Vegetable Preservative that Embalms his Fame, as they do of a Scullion that
carry it about for his Glory. Their Hats are set with this Aniversary Badge and
Emblem of Honor, and triumph on the first of March; which Day has been
christened by his Name, and being Dubbed an Holy Day, has worn yearly in the
Almanac a Scarlet Letter.

There is one thing more also very observable among them, and that is, that of
all the maimed Persons that ever we read of, we find none comparable for
nimbleness to a Cambrian Cripple; a pregnant Proof whereof was presented to us
in this following Instance; A Fellow with Crutches moved by Protrusion in a
certain Wheel-barrow, espying a Bear near the Rere of the Thruster, was so
surpised with horror at this tremendous sight, that he packed up his
Pedestals, i. e. tucked his Oaken Shins to the Zodiac of his Girdle, and away
he fled; Bruin and the Protrusor in vain troop'd after him, who led them a risk
with such winged speed, that they could never over take him; He clearly
out-stript them, to the Eternal Glory and Renown of Welsh Lameness.

These are some of the choicest Observations we made when conversant among the
British Mountains; we might easily have added more, (the whole Nation indeed
being but on^ grand Remark) had not the suddenness of our Return prevented us.
If it should chance to be our Lot to set our Feet on that Soil a second time,
we shall venture to present another Show of it; for it is pity such a rare sight
as Wales should want a Trumpet, nay and a Fool too to proclaim and expose it to
the World.

After we had crammed our Budget with these few Notices, we jog'd on with our
Fraught to the Brink of the Sea, where mounted on a Pinnace we rode to Bristol,
from whence with all possible speed we trudged in a few days to the Metropolis
of the Nation called London.

FINIS.

