INSTITUTIONS, Essays and Maxims, POLITICAL, Moral and Divine.

DIVIDED Into Four CENTURIES.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-street in Russel
street, Covent Garden. 1695.

THE INDEX.
CENT. I.
ALteration Max. 5 Auxiliar Max. 48 Ambitious Men Max. 78 Ambitious Natures
Max. 58 Assault Max. 87 Advice Max. 71 Conquest Max. 2 Climatical Advantages
Max. 10 Calumny Max. 11 Composition Max. 12 Conspiracy Max. 18 Correspondency
Max. 20 Custom Max. 34 Conquest Max. 35 Civil Commotion Max. 36 Courage Max. 42
Castles Max. 44 Clergy Max. 53 Covetousness Max. 89 Counselors Max. 23, 59
Commanders Max. 64, 97 Clemency and Severity Max. 69, 80 Commission Max. 82
Church Government Max. 88 Confidence. Max. 93 Demeanor Max. 14 Deliberation
Max. 15 Disposition Max. 28 Discovery Max. 30 Design Max. 40 Debt Max. 63
Discontents Max. 66 Delay Max. 67 Deserts Max. 91 Experiments Max. 25 Exactions
Max. 27 Exuls Max. 49 Encouragement Max. 70 Fortresses Max. 29, 61 Foolish
confidence Max. 37 Foreign King Max. 65 Foreign Humors Max. 84 Foreign
Inclinations Max. 98 Hearts of Subjects Max. 41 Hierarchy Max. 60 Hunting Max.
79 Invasion Max. 1 Just War Max. 19 Idleness Max. 21 Liberality Max. 16 League
Max. 75 Love and Fear Max. 94 Mixed Government Max. 6 Money Max. 9 Manufacture
Max. 46 Neutrality Max. 22 Nobility Max. 24, 57 Necessity Max. 68 New Gentry
Max. 76 Opinion Max. 74 Order and turn. Max. 92 Piety and Policy Max. 100 Peace
Max. 39, 62 Pillars of State Max. 45 Prevention Max. 51 Pleasures Max. 55
Popular Sects Max. 83 Power Max. 85 Quo Warranto Max. 99 Rebel Max. 3 Rewards
and Punishments Max. 13 Reformation Max. 38 Religion Max. 47, 56 Resolution
Max. 54 Repute Max. 96 Strength of Parts Max. 4 Successor Max. 26 Strength to
keep Max. 36 Scandal Max. 43 State-change Max. 50 Secrecy Max. 73 Scruples Max.
77 Situation Max. 80 Sudden Resolution Max. 86 Times Max. 7 Timely War Max. 17
True Temper Max. 31 Treachery Max. 72 Variance Max. 52 Virtue Max. 90 War in
League Max. 8 War Offensive and Defensive Max. 32 Weighty Service Max. 95
CENT. II.
Action Max. 4, 5, 98 Affections Max. 16, 25, 94 Afflictions Max. 36, 38 Anger
Max. 37, 60, 67 Acquaintance Max. 43, 45 Advancement Max. 49 Advantage Max. 54
Avarice Max. 64 Apparel Max. 79 Brother Max. 42 Charity Max. 2, 70 Care Max. 24
Company Max. 29 Custom Max. 65 Confession Max. 76 Censure Max. 81 Child Max.
87, 97 Ceremonies Max. 88 Daughter Max. 56 Death Max. 100, 84 Evil Max. 40, 78
Enemy Max. 68 Faith Max. 11, 59 Fancy Max. 15 Friendship Max. 26 Friend Max. 52
Haste Max. 89 God Max. 28, 30 Gift Max. 63 Grace Max. 65 Giver Max. 85 Honor
Max. 21, 47, 72, 82 Happiness Max. 83 Heaven Max. 99 Ignorance Max. 8, 92 Love
Max. 7, 14 Loss Max. 53 Luxury Max. 74 Money Max. 10, 55 Moderation Max. 73
Mysteries Max. 90 Mother Max. 95 News Max. 51 Oppression Max. 61 Promise Max. 1
Pleasing Max. 6 Pride Max. 9 Possession Max. 20 Passion Max. 32, 33, 46
Prosperity Max. 33, 57 Popularity Max. 41 Prayer Max. 62 Puritan Max. 91 Pride
Max. 96 Riches Max. 17 Reason Max. 19, 22 Religion Max. 31 Recreation Max. 80
Redemption Max. 75 Sinful custom Max. 12 Souls Progress Max. 18 Sin Max. 48, 71
Swearer Max. 50 Servant Max. 93 Time Max. 27 Trembling Max. 34 Theology Max. 35
Thy self Max. 43 Treasure Max. 77 Undertaking Max. 3 Vow Max. 23 Valor Max. 59
Work Max. 13 Wrong Max. 69, 86
CENT. III.
ARgument Max. 22 Alms Max. 38 Actions Max. 48 Apparel Max. 67 Argument Max. 69
Adversity Max. 89, 97 Banishment Max. 7 Beauty Max. 9 Brother Max. 45 Censure
Max. 13, 78 Child Max. 18 Children Max. 37 Conversation Max. 47 Copy-Book Max.
58 Charity Max. 71 Conscience Max. 90 Consideration Max. 94 Discourse Max. 5,
55 Drunkenness Max. 14 Danger Max. 64 Doubt and Opinion Max. 86 Eucharist Max.
34 Esteem Max. 87 Exercise Max. 91 Familiars Max. 27 Fasting Max. 79 Festival
Max. 83 Gift Max. 61 God Max. 63, 92 Harlot Max. 26 Heir Max. 28 Honor Max. 51
Hope Max. 62 Hope and Fear Max. 77 Idiot Max. 16 Journey Max. 30 Intention Max.
36 Justice Max. 74 Innocence and Wisdom Max. 82 Knowledge Max. 73, 81 Laughter
Max. 3 Liar Max. 4 Law and Physic Max. 19 Love Max. 46, 95 Library Max. 85
Mysteries Max. 20 Mercy Max. 23 Money Max. 31 Multitude Max. 41 Mirth Max. 41
Merit Max. 54 Magistrate Max. 65, 98 Obloquy Max. 17 Pains Max. 1 Poor Max. 15,
21 Priest Max. 24 Patience Max. 34 Palate Max. 75 Providence and Experience Max.
88 Repentance Max. 25 Resolution Max. 35 Reproof Max. 42 Rest Max. 49 Riches
Max. 50 Reproof Max. 52 Savior Max. 6 Sin Max. 12 Silence Max. 57, 93 Servant
Max. 60 Sabbath Max. 76 Soldier Max. 84 Treasure Max. 29 Tongue Max. 32
Traffic Max. 40 Theft Max. 56 Table Max. 66 Theology Max. 72 Truth Max. 99
Virtue Max. 8, 59 Vanity Max. 33 Undertaking Max. 53 Wife Max. 2 Wedlock Max.
11 Well-doing Max. 43 Words Max. 68, 96 Wages Max. 80 Wisdom Max. 80, 100
CENT. IV.
ACtion Max. 12 Affection Max. 61 Banquet Max. 70 Contentedness Max. 10 Content
Max. 13, 20 Church Max. 33 Confession Max. 35 Cross Max. 41 Commendations Max.
58 Calling Max. 74 Circumspection Max. 77 Common-place-book Max. 78 Complaint
Max. 94 Child Max. 99 Demeanor Max. 1, 56 Drunkenness Max. 2 Death Max. 37, 53
Discourse Max. 73 Devotion Max. 85 Envy Max. 24 Example Max. 66 Exercise Max.
81 Estimation Max. 88 Fear Max. 15, 38 Folly Max. 22 Forgiveness Max. 64
Frugality Max. 75 Friend Max. 100 God Max. 86 Giver Max. 8 Glory Max. 47 Gift
Max. 52 Give and Forgive Max. 57 Gaming Max. 59 Humiliation Max. 11 Heaven Max.
30 Humility Max. 54 Humane Writings Max. 65 Heir Max. 98 Infamy Max. 5
Impropriations Max. 19 Ignorance Max. 23 Idleness Max. 27 Jest Max. 83
Knowledge Max. 4, 26, 62 Loss Max. 67, 71 Letters Max. 80 Language Max. 36 Last
Sin Max. 90 Magistracy Max. 6 Man Max. 21 Marriage Max. 40 Magnanimity Max. 42
Misery Max. 48 Mysteries Max. 91 Name Max. 92 Obedience Max. 29, 41 Obsceneness
Max. 76 Opinion Max. 84 Painting Max. 28 Praise Max. 32 Prayer Max. 39 Practice
Max. 43 Place Max. 44 Philosophy Max. 46 Praise and Censure Max. 50 Reputation
Max. 25 Repentance Max. 31, 45 Recreations Max. 49 Rules Max. 72 Reversion Max.
87 Sin Max. 3 Security Max. 60 Safety Max. 63 Superstition Max. 69 Scoffs Max.
68 Scripture Max. 89, 93 Style Max. 97 Truth Max. 9 Theft Max. 14 T^por Max. 55
Temperance Max. 79 Tuition Max. 82 To Day Max. 45 Times Max. 96 Virgin Max. 7
Vainglory Max. 16 Use of Creatures Max. 17 Wicked Max. 18 Want Max. 34
INSTITUTIONS AND MAXIMS Political and Moral, etc.
CENT. I.
MAXIM 1.
LET not Civil Discords in a foreign Kingdom encourage thee to make Invasion:
They that are factious among themselves, are jealous of one another, and more
strongly prepared to encounter with a common Enemy. Those whom Civil Commotions
set at variance, foreign Hostility reconciles: Men rather affect the Possession
of an inconvenient Good, than the Possibility of an uncertain Better.

MAX. 2.
If thou have made a Conquest with thy Sword, think not to maintain it with thy
Scepter, neither conceive, That new Favors can cancel old Injuries: No
Conqueror sits secure upon his new got Throne, so long as they subsist in
Power that were despoiled of their Possessession by this Conqueror.

MAX. 3.
Let no Price, nor Promise of Honor, bribe thee to take part with the Enemy of
thy Natural Prince; assure thy self whoever wins, thou art lost: If thy Prince
prevail, thou art proclaimed a Rebel, and branded for Death; if the Enemy
prosper, thou shall be reckoned but as a meritorious Traitor, and not secure of
thy self. He that loves the Treason, hates the Traitor.

MAX. 4.
If thy strength of Parts has raised thee to eminent Place in the
Commonwealth, take heed thou sit sure; if not, thy Fall will be the greater. As
Worth is fit matter for Glory, so Glory is a fair mark for Envy. By how much
the more thy Advancement was thought the Reward of Desert, by so much thy Fall
will administer matter for Disdain. It is the ill fortune of a strong Brain, if
not to be dignified as meritorious, to be deprest as dangerous.

MAX. 5.
It is the Duty of a Statesman, especially in a free State, to hold the
Commonwealth to her first frame of Government, from which the more it swerves
the more it declines; which being declined, is not commonly reduced without
that Extremity, the danger whereof rather ruins than rectifies, Fundamental
Alterations being inevitable Perils.

MAX. 6.
There be three sorts of Governments, Monarchical, Aristocratical,
Democratical; and they are apt to fall three several ways into Ruin; the first
by Tyranny, the second by Ambition, the last by Tumults: A Commonwealth
grounded upon any one of these is not of long continuance, but wisely mingled,
each guard the other, and make the Government exact.

MAX. 7.
Let not the Proceedings of a Captain, though never so commendable, be
confined: As the Times alter, so must they; if these vary, and not they, Ruin
is at hand. He least fails in his Design, that meets Time in its own way; and
he that observes not the Alteration of the Times, shall never be a Conqueror.
He is a wise Commander, and only he, that can discover the Change of Times, and
changes his Proceedings according to the Times.

MAX. 8.
If thou desire to make War with a Prince with whom thou have formerly ratified
a League, assail some of his Allies rather than himself; if he resent it, and
come or send in, then thou have a fair Gale to thy Desires: If not, his
Infidelity in not assisting his Allie will be discovered. Hereby thou shall
gain thy self Advantage, and facilitate thy Designs.

MAX. 9.
Before thou undertakest a War, let thine Eye number thy Forces, and let thy
Judgment weigh them. If thou have a rich Enemy, no matter how poor thy Soldiers
be, if courageous and faithful. Trust not too much the Power of thy Treasure,
for it will deceive thee; being more apt to expose thee for a Prey, than to
defend thee. Gold is not able to find good Soldiers; but good Soldiers are able
to find out Gold.

MAX. 10.
If the Territories of thy equal Enemy are situated far South from thee, the
advantage is thine, whether he make Offensive or Defensive War: If North, the
advantage is his; Cold is less tolerable than Heat; this is a Friend to Nature,
that an Enemy.

MAX. 11.
It is not only uncivil, but dangerous, for Soldiers by reproachful Words to
throw disgrace upon their Enemy: Base Terms are Bellows to a slacking Fury, and
Goads to quicken up Revenge in a fleeing Foe. He that objects Cowardice against
a failing Enemy, adds Spirit to him, to disprove the Aspersion at his own Cost.
It is therefore the part of a wise Soldier to refrain it, or of a wise
Commander to punish it.

MAX. 12.
It is better for 2 weak Kingdoms, rather to compound an Injury (though to some
loss) than seek for Satisfaction by the Sword; lest while they 2 weaken
themselves by mutual blows, a third decide the Controversy to both their
Ruins. When the Frog and the Mouse could not take up the Quarrel, the Kite was
Umpire.

MAX. 13.
Let that Commonwealth which desires to flourish be very strict both in her
Punishments and Rewards, according to the Merits of Subjects, and Offense of
the Delinquents. Let the Service of the Deserver be rewarded, lest thou
discourage Worth; and let the Crime of the Offender be punished, lest thou
encourage Vice. The neglect of the one weakens a Commonwealth; the omission of
both ruins it.

MAX. 14.
It is Wisdom for him that sits at the Helm of a settled State, to demean
himself toward his Subjects at all times, so that upon any evil. Accident they
may be ready to serve his Occasion. He that is only Gracious at the approach of
a danger, will be in danger when he expects Deliverance.

MAX. 15.
In all Designs which require not sudden execution, take mature Deliberation,
and weigh the convenients with the inconvenients, and then resolve; after which
neither delay the execution, nor betray thy Intention. He that discovers
himself, till he has made himself Master of his Desires, lays himself open to
his own Ruin, and makes himself Prisoner to his own Tongue.

MAX. 16.
Liberality in a Prince is no Virtue, when maintained at the Subject's
unwilling cost. It is less reproach, by Miserableness, to deserve the popular
Love: than by Liberality, to deserve private Thanks.

MAX. 17.
It is the Excellent Property of a good and wise Prince, to use War as he does
Physic, Carefully, Unwillingly, and Seasonably; either to prevent approaching
Dangers, or to correct a present Mischief; or to recover a former Loss. He that
declines Physic till he be accosted with the Danger, or weakened with the
Disease, is bold too long, and wise too late: That Peace is too precise that
limits the Justness of a War, to a Sword drawn, or a blow given.

MAX. 18.
Let a Prince that would beware of Conspiracies, be rather jealous of such whom
his Extraordinary Favors have advanced, than of those whom his Pleasure has
discontented. These want means to execute their pleasures; but they have means,
at pleasure to Execute their desires. Ambition to Rule is more vehement than
Malice to Revenge.

MAX. 19.
Before thou undertake a War, cast an Imperial Eye upon the Cause. If it be
Just, prepare thy Army, and let them all know they fight for God and thee: It
adds fire to the Spirit of a Soldier to be assured that he shall either prosper
in a fair War, or perish in a Just Cause.

MAX. 20.
If thou desire to know the Power of a State, observe in what Correspondence it
lives with her Neighboring State: If she make Alliance with the Contribution
of Money, it is an evident sign of Weakness: If with her Valor, and repute of
her forces, it manifests a Native Strength; It is an unfallible sign of Power
to sell Friendship, and of weakness to buy it. That is bought with Gold will
hardly be maintained with Steel.

MAX. 21.
In the Calms of Peace, it is most requisite for a Prince to prepare against
the Storms of War; both Theorically, in reading Heroic Histories, and
Practically, in maintaining Martial Discipline. Above all things, let him avoid
Idleness, as the bane of Honor; which in Peace Indisposes the Body, and in War
Effeminates the Soul. He that would be in War Victorious, must be in Peace
Laborious.

MAX. 22.
If thy two Neighboring Princes fall out, show thy self either a true Friend,
or a fair Enemy. It is indiscretion to adhere to him whom thou have least cause
to fear, if he Vanquish. Neutrality is dangerous, whereby thou becomest a
necessary Prey to the Conqueror.

MAX. 23.
It is a great argument of a Prince's Wisdom, not only to choose but also to
prefer Wise Counselors, and such are they, that seek less their own
advantages, than his; whom Wise Princes ought to reward, lest they become their
own Carvers, and so of good Servants, turn bad Masters.

MAX. 24.
It much conduces to the dishonor of a King, and the Ill-fare of his Kingdom,
to Multiply Nobility in an over proportion to the Common People: Cheap Honor
darkens Majesty, and a Numerous Nobility brings a State to Necessity.

MAX. 25.
It is very dangerous to try Experiments in a State, unless extreme Necessity
be Urgent, or popular Utility be palpable. It is better for a State to Connive
a while, at any Inconveencies, than too suddenly to Rush upon a Reformation.

MAX. 26.
If a Valiant Prince be succeeded by a weak Successor he may for a while
maintain a happy State, by the remaining Virtue of his Glorious Predecessor;
but if his Life be long, or dying, he be succeeded by one less Valiant than the
first, the Kingdom is in danger to fall to ruin: that Prince is a true Father
to his Country that leaves it the rich Inheritance of a brave Son. When
Alexander succeeded Philip, the World was too little for the Conqueror.

MAX. 27.
It is very dangerous for a Prince or Republic to make continual practice of
Cruel Exaction: For where the subject stands in sense or Expectation of Evil,
he is apt to provide for his safety, or for the Danger he fears: and growing
bold in Conspiracy, makes Faction, which Faction is the Mother of Ruin.

MAX. 28.
Be careful to consider the Good or Ill Disposition of the People toward thee
upon Ordinary Occasions; if it be Good, labor to continue it; if Evil, provide
against it. As there is nothing more terrible than a dissolute Multitude
without a head; so there is nothing more easily reduced, (if thou can endure
the first shock of their Fury) which if a little appeased, every one begins to
doubt himself and think of home, and secure themselves either by flight or
agreement.

MAX. 29.
That Prince who stands in fear more of his own People, than Strangers, ought
to build Fortresses in his Land. But he that is more afraid of Strangers, than
his own People, shall build them more secure in the affections of his Subjects.

MAX. 30.
Carry a watchful Eye upon dangers before they come to Ripeness; and when they
are ripe, let loose a Speedy hand. He that expects them too long, or meets them
too soon, gives advantage to the Evil; Commit their beginnings to Argus his
hundred Eyes, and their end to Briareus's hundred Hands, and thou art safe.

MAX. 31.
Of all the difficulties of a State, the temper of true Government most
felicifies and perpetuates it. Too sudden alteration distempers it. Had Nero
tuned his Kingdom as he did his Harp, his harmony had been more honorable and
his Reign more prosperous.

MAX. 32.
If a Prince, Fearing to be assailed by a Foreign Enemy, has a well armed
People, well addressed for War: Let him stay at home and expect him there; but if
his Subjects be unarmed, or his Kingdom unacquainted with the stroke of War,
let him meet the Enemy in his Quarters. The farther he keeps the War from his
own home the less Danger. The Seat of War is always miserable.

MAX. 33.
It is a necessary Wisdom for a Prince to grow in Strength as he increases in
Dominions. It is no less Virtue to keep than to get; Conquests not having power
answerable to their Greatness, invite new Conquerors to the Ruin of the Old.

MAX. 34.
It is great prudence in a Statesman to discover an Inconvenience in the birth,
which so discovered, is easy to be suppressed. But if it ripen into a Custom,
the sudden Remedy thereof is often worse than the Disease; In such a case it is
better to temporise a little, than to struggle too much. He that opposes a full
aged Inconvenience too suddenly, strengthens it.

MAX. 35.
If thou have Conquered a Land, whose Language differs not from thine, change
not their Laws and Taxes, and the two Kingdoms will in a short time incorporate
and make one body. But if the Laws and Language differ, it is difficult to
maintain thy Conquest, which that thou may the easier do, observe three
things; First, to live there in Person, (or rather send Colonies.) Secondly, to
assist the weak Inhabitants and weaken the mighty. Thirdly, To admit no
powerful Foreigner to reside there. Remember Lewis XIII. of France, how
suddenly he took Milan, and how soon he lost it.

MAX. 36.
It is a gracious Wisdom in a Prince, in Civil Comotions rather to use Juleps
than Phlebotomy, and rather to break the Distemper by a wise delay, than to
Correct it with too rash an Onset: It is more honorable by a slow preparation
to declare himself a gracious Father, than by a hasty War to appear a furious
Enemy.

MAX. 37.
It is Wisdom for a Prince in Fair Weather, to provide for Tempests: He that so
much relies upon his People's Faith, to neglect his own Preparation, discovers
more Confidence than Wisdom. He that ventures to fall from above, with hopes to
be caught below, may be dead ever he come to Ground.

MAX. 38.
He that would reform an ancient State in a free City, buys Convenience with a
great danger. To work this Reformation with the less mischief, let such a one
keep the shadows of their ancient Customs, though in substance they be new. Let
him take heed when he alters the Nature of things, they bear at least their
ancient Names. The Common People that are naturally impatient of Innovations
will be satisfied with that which seems to be as well as that which is.

MAX. 39.
Upon any difference between Foreign States, It is neither safe nor honorable
for a Prince, either to buy his Peace, or to take it up at Interest. He that
has not a Sword to command it, shall either want it, or want honor with it.

MAX. 40.
It is very requisite for a Prince not only to weigh his Designs in the Flower,
but likewise in the Fruit. He is an unthrift of his Honor, that enterprises a
design, the failing wherein may bring him more disgrace, than the Success can
gain him Honor.

MAX. 41.
It is much Conducible to the happiness of a Prince, and the security of his
State, to gain the Hearts of his Subjects. They that Love for Fear, will seldom
Fear for Love; It is a wise Government which gains such a tie upon the Subject,
that he either cannot hurt, or will not. But the Government is best and most
sure, when the Subject joys in his Obedience.

MAX. 42.
Let every Soldier arm his mind with hopes and put on Courage, whatsoever
disaster falls, let not his Heart sink. The passage of Providence lies through
many Crooked ways; a despairing Heart is the true Prophet of approaching Evil.
His actions may weave the Webs of Fortune, but not break them.

MAX. 43.
It is the part of a wise Magistrate to vindicate a Man of Power or
State-Employment, from the malicious Scandals of the Giddy-headed Multitude,
and to punish it with great severity. Scandal breeds hatred, hatred begets
Division, Division makes Faction and Faction brings Ruin.

MAX. 44.
The strongest Castles a Prince can build, to secure him from Domestic
Commotions, or Foreign Invasions, is in the Hearts of his Subjects; and means
to gain that Strength is, in all his actions to appear for the Public Good.
Studious to contrive and resolute to perform.

MAX. 45.
A Kingdom is a great Building whose two main Supporters are the Government of
the State, and the Government of the Church. It is the part of a Wise Master,
to keep those Pillars in their first posture Irremoveable. If either fail, it
is Wisdom rather to repair it than to remove it. He that pulls down the Old, to
set up a New, may draw the Roof upon his head and ruin the Foundation.

MAX. 46.
It is a necessary Wisdom in a Prince to encourage in his Kingdoms Manufacture,
Merchandise, Arts, and Arms; in Manufacture, lies the Vital Spirits of the
Body-Politique; In Merchandise the Spirits Natural; In Arts and Arms, the
Animal. If either of these Languish the Body droops; as these flourish the Body
flourishes.

MAX. 47.
True Religion is a Settler in a State, rather than a Stickler; while she
confirms an Established Government, she moves in her own Sphere; but when she
endeavors to alter the old, or to erect a new, she works out of her own
Vineyard: When she keeps the Keys, she sends Showers of Milk: But when she
draws the Sword, she fails in Seas of Blood. Labor therefore to settle
Religion in the Church; and Religion shall settle Peace in thy Land.

MAX. 48.
If thou entertain any Foreign Soldiers into thine Army, let them bear thy
Colors, and receive thy pay, lest they Interest their own Prince. Auxiliary
Soldiers are most dangerous: A Foreign Prince needs no greater Invitation to
seize upon thy City, then when he is required to defend it.

MAX. 49.
Be cautious in undertaking a design, upon the report of those that are
banished their Country, lest thou come off with shame, or loss, or both. Their
end expects advantages from thy actions; whose miseries lay hold of all
opportunities, and seek to be redrest by thy Ruins.

MAX. 50.
If thou endeavourest to make a Republic in a Nation where the Gentry abound,
thou shall hardly prosper in that Design; and if thou would erect a
Principality in a Land where there is much equality of People, thou shall not
easily effect it. The way to bring the first to pass, is to weaken the Gentry.
The means to effect the last, is to advance and strengthen ambitious and
turbulent Spirits; so that being placed in the midst of them, their Forces may
maintain thy Power, and thy Favor may preserve their Ambition. Otherwise there
shall be neither Property nor continuance.

MAX. 51.
It is more excellent for a Prince to have a provident Eye for the preventing
future mischiefs, than to have a potent Arm for the suppressing present Evils.
Mischiefs in a State are like Hectic Fevers in a Body, in the beginning hard
to be known, but easy to be cured: But let it alone a while, it becomes more
easy to be known, but more hard to be cured.

MAX. 52.
If a Kingdom be apt to Rebellion, it is Wisdom to preserve the Nobility and
Commons at variance; where one of them is discontented, the Danger is not
great. The Commons are slow of motion, if not quickened with the Nobility: The
Nobility is weak of Power, if not strengthened by the Commons. Then is Danger
when the Commonalty troubles the Water, and the Nobility steps in.

MAX. 53.
It is very requisite for a Prince to have an Eye, That the Clergy be elected,
and come in, either by Collation from him or particular Patrons, and not by the
People; and that their Power hold Dependence upon home and not foreign
Authority: It is dangerous in a Kingdom where the Crosiers receive not their
Power from the Regal-Sword.

MAX. 54.
It is a perilous Weakness in a State, to be slow of Resolution in the time of
War: To be irresolute in Determination is both the sign and the Ruin of a weak
State. Such Affairs attend not time. Let the wise Statesman therefore abhor
Delay, and resolve rather to do, than advise what to say. Slow Deliberations
are Symptoms either of a faint Courage, or weak Forces, or false Hearts.

MAX. 55.
If a Conqueror has subdued a Country or a City abounding with Pleasures, let
him be very circumspect to keep himself and his Soldiers temperate. Pleasures
bring Effeminacy, and Effeminacy foreruns Ruin: Such Conquests, without blood
or sweat, sufficiently do revenge themselves upon their intemperate Conquerors.

MAX. 56.
It is an infallible sign of approaching Ruin in a Republic, when Religion is
neglected, and her established Ceremonies interrupted. Let therefore that Prince
that would be Potent be Pious; and that he may punish Looseness the better, let
him be Religious. The Joy of Jerusalem depends upon the Peace of Sion.

MAX. 57.
Let that Prince that desires full Sovereignty temper the Greatness of too
potent a Nobility: A great and potent Nobility quickens the People, but presses
their Fortunes: It adds Majesty to a Monarch, but diminishes his Power.

MAX. 58.
It is dangerous for a Prince to use ambitious Natures, but upon necessity,
either for his Wars, or to be Skreens to his Dangers, or Instruments for the
demolishing insolent Greatness; and that they may be the less dangerous, let
him choose them rather out of mean Births than noble, and out of harsh Natures
rather than plausible, and always be sure to balance them with those that are
as proud as they.

MAX. 59.
Let Princes be very circumspect in the choice of their Councillors, choosing
neither by the greatness of the Beard, nor by the smoothness of the Face. Let
him be wise, but not crafty; active, without private ends; courageous, without
malice; religious, without faction; secret, without fraud: One better, read in
his Prince's Business than his Nature; and a Riddle only to be read above.

MAX. 60.
In a mixed Monarchy, if the Hierarchy grow too absolute, it is Wisdom in a
Prince, rather to depress it than suppress it; all Alterations in a Fundamental
Government being apparent Dangers; but too sudden Alteration threatens
inevitable Ruin. When Aaron made a molten Calf, Moses altered not the
Government, but reproved the Governor.

MAX. 61.
Before thou build a Fortress, consider to what End: If for Resistance against
the Enemy, it is useless; a valiant Army is a living Fortress: If for
suppressing the Subject, it is hurtful; it breeds Jealousies, and Jealousies
beget Hatred. If thou have a strong Army to maintain it, it adds nothing to thy
Strength: If thy Army be weak, it conduces much to thy Danger. The surest
Fortress is the Hands of thy Soldiers; and the safest Citadel is the Hearts of
thy Subjects.

MAX. 62.
It is a Princely Alchymy, out of a necessary War, to extract an Honorable
Peace; and more beseeming the Majesty of a Prince, to thirst after Peace, than
Conquest. Blessedness is promised to the Peacemaker, not the Conqueror. It is
an happy State, whose Prince has a Peaceful Hand, and a Martial Heart; able
both to use Peace, and to manage War.

MAX. 63.
It is a dishonorable thing for a Prince to run in Debt for State-service; but
to pay it in the Pardon of a Criminal Offense, is most dangerous. To cancel the
Faults of Subjects, with their Deserts, is not only the Symptom of a disordered
Commonwealth, but also of her Ruin.

MAX. 64.
Let not a Commander be too forward to undertake a War, without the Person of
his Prince. It is a thankless Employment, where Mischief attends upon the best
Success: And where (if a Conqueror) he shall be in danger, either through his
own Ambition, or his Prince's Suspicion.

MAX. 65.
It is a great Oversight in a Prince, for any Respect, either Actively or
Passively, to make a foreign Kingdom strong. He that gives means to another to
become powerful, weakens himself, and enables him to take the advantage of his
own weakness.

MAX. 66.
When the humors of the People are stirred by Discontents or popular Grief, it
is Wisdom in a Prince to give them moderate Liberty to evaporate. He that turns
the Humor back too hastily, makes the Wound bleed inwardly, and fills the Body
with Malignity.

MAX. 67.
If, having levied an Army, thou find thy self too weak, either through the
Want of Men or Money, the longer thou delayest to fight, the greater thy
Inconvenience grows. If once thy Army falls asunder, thou certainly losest by
thy Delay. Where, hazarding thy Fortunes betimes, thou have the advantage of
thy Men, and may by Fortune win the Day, it is less dishonor to be overcome
by Force than by Flight.

MAX. 68.
It is the part of a wise Commander, in Wars either offensive or defensive, to
work a Necessity of Fighting into the Breasts of his Soldiers. Necessity of
Action takes away the Fear of the Act, and makes bold Resolution the Favorite
of Fortune.

MAX. 69.
Clemency and Mildness is most proper for a Principality, but Reservedness and
Severity, for a Republic; but Moderation in both. Excess in the one breeds
Contempt; in the other Hatred: When to sharpen the first, and when to sweeten
the last, let Time and Occasion direct thy Judgment.

MAX. 70.
It is very requisite for a Prince that desires the Continuance of Peace, in
time of Peace to encourage and respect his Commanders. When brave Spirits find
Neglect to be the effect of Quiet, they devise all means to remove the Cause;
and by suggesting Inducements to new Wars, disturb and unsettle the old Peace,
buying private Honor with public Danger,

MAX. 71.
Be not covetous of Priority in Advising thy Prince to a doubtful Attempt,
which concerns his State. If it prosper, the Glory must be his; if it fail, the
Dishonor will be thine. When the Spirit of a Prince is stopped in the
Discharge, it will recoile and wound the first Adviser.

MAX. 72.
If, being the Commander of an Army, thou espiest a gross and manifest error in
thine Enemy, look well to thy self; for Treachery is not far off. He whom
desire of Victory binds too much, is apt to stumble at his own Ruin.

MAX. 73.
It is the height of a Provident Commander, not only to keep his own Designs
indiscoverable to his Enemy, but likewise to be studious to discover his: He
that can best do the one, and nearest guess at the other, is the next Step to a
Conqueror; but he that fails in both, must either ascribe his Overthrow to his
own Folly, or his Victory to the hand of Fortune.

MAX. 74.
If thou be ambitious of Honor, and yet fearful of the Canker of Honor, Envy;
so behave thy self, that Opinion may be satisfied in this, That thou seek
Merit, and not Fame; and that thou attributest thy Preferment rather to
Providence than thy own Virtue. Honor is a due Debt to the Deserver; and who
ever envied the Payment of a Debt? A just Advancement is a Providential Act;
and who ever envied the Act of Providence?

MAX. 75.
It behooves a Prince to be very circumspect before he makes a League, which
being made, and then broke, is the Forfeiture of his Honor. He that obtains a
Kingdom with the Rupture of his Faith, has gained the Glory of a Conquest, but
lost the Honor of a Conqueror.

MAX. 76.
Let States that aim at Greatness, beware lest new Gentry multiply too fast, or
grow too glorious: Where there is too great a Disproportion betwixt the Gentry
and the Common Subject, the one grows insolent, the other slavish. When the
Body of the Gentry grows too glorious for a Corslet, the Heads of the Vulgar
wax too heavy for the Helmet.

MAX. 77.
Upon the Beleaguering of a City, let the Commander endeavor to take from the
Defendants all Scruples which may invite them to a Necessity of Defense. Whom
the Fear of Slavery necessitates to fight, the boldness of their Resolution
will disadvantage the Assailants, and difficilitate their Design. Sense of
Necessity justifies the War, and they are hopeful in their Arms, who have no
other Hope, but in their Arms.

MAX. 78.
It is good for States and Princes (if they use ambitious Men for their
advantage) so to order things, that they be still Progressive rather than
Retrograde. When ambitious men find an open Passage, they are rather busy than
dangerous; if well watched in their Proceedings, they will catch themselves in
their own Snare, and prepare a Way for their own Destruction.

MAX. 79.
Of all Recreations, Hunting is most proper for a Commander; by the frequency
whereof he may be instructed in that necessary Knowledge of Situation with
Pleasure, which by earnest Experience would be dearly purchased. The Chase is a
fair Resemblance of a hopeful War, proposing to the Pursuer a flying Enemy.

MAX. 80.
Expect the Arms of thy Enemy on plain and easy ground, and still avoid
mountainous and rocky places and strait Passages to the utmost of thy Power. It
is not safe to pitch any where, where the Forces cannot be brought together. He
never deserved the Name of a good Gamester, that hazards his whole Rest upon
less than the strength of his whole Game.

MAX. 81.
It matters not much whether in Government thou tread the Steps of severe
Hanibal, or gentle Scipio, so thy Actions are Honorable, and thy Life
Virtuous: Both in the one and the other there is both Defect and Danger, if not
corrected and supported by the fair Repute of some extraordinary Endowments. No
matter whether black or white, so the Steed be good.

MAX. 82.
It is the safest Way, in martial Expedition, to commit the main Charge to one.
Companions in Command beget Confusion in the Camp. When two able Commanders are
joined in equal Commission, each is apt to think his own way best, and by
mutual thwarting each other, both give opportunity to the Enemy.

MAX. 83.
It is a high Point of Providence in a Prince to observe Popular Sects in their
first rise, and to nip them in the bud; But being once full aged, it is Wisdom
not to oppose them with too strong a hand, lest in suppressing one, there arise
two. A soft Current is soon stopped; but a strong Stream resisted breaks into
many, or overwhelms all.

MAX. 84.
It makes very much to thy advantage, to observe strictly the National Virtues
and Vices and humors of Foreign Kingdoms, whereby the times past shall read
useful Lectures to the time present. He that would see what shall be, let him
consider what has been.

MAX. 85.
If like Manlius thou command Stout and great things, be like Manlius stout to
Execute great commands. It is a great blemish in Sovereignty when the Will
roars, and the Power whispers. If thou can not Execute as freely as thou
Commandst, Command no more than what thou may as freely Execute.

MAX. 86.
If one Prince desire to obtain any thing of another, let him (if occasion will
bear it) give him no time to advise; let him endeavor to make him see a
necessity of sudden resolution, and the danger either of denial or delay. He
that gives times to resolve, gives leisure to deny, and warning to prepare.

MAX. 87.
Let not thine Army at the first Encounter be too prodigal in her assaults, but
husband her strength at a dead lift. When the Enemy has abated the fury of his
first heat, let him then feel thou have reserved thy Forces for the last blow.
So shall the honor he has gained by his Valor, increase the Glory of thy
Victory. Fore-Games when they prove are speediest, but After-games, if wisely
played are surest.

MAX. 88.
It is very requisite for a Prince to keep the Church always in proportion to
the State. If the Government of the one be Monarchical, and the other
Democratical, they will agree like Metal joined with Clay. But for a while
durable is that State where Aaron commands the People, and where Moses commands
Aaron; but most happy in the continuance where God commands both.

MAX. 89.
Let not the Covetousness of a Captain purloyn to his own own use, or any way
bereave his Soldiers of any profit due unto their service, either in their
means or spoils: Such injuries (being quickened by their daily Necessities) are
never forgot: What Soldiers earn with the hazard of their Lives (if not
enjoyed) prophesies an Overthrow in the next battle.

MAX. 90.
If a Prince expect Virtuous Subjects, let his Subjects have a Virtuous Prince,
and so shall he the better punish the Vices of his degenerate Subjects; so
shall they trulier prize Virtue, and follow it being exemplified in their
Prince.

MAX. 91.
It is the property of a Wise Commander, to cast an Eye rather upon Actions
than upon Persons; and rather to reward the Merits of Men, than to read the
Letters of Ladies. He that for favor or reward prefers a worthless Soldier,
Betrays a Kingdom to advance a Traitor.

MAX. 92.
Where order and fury are well acquainted, the War prospers, and Soldiers end
no less Men than they begun: Order is quickened by Fury, and Fury is regulated
by Order: but where Order is wanting, Fury runs her own way, and being unthrift
of its own strength, failing in the first assault, cravens; and such beginning
more than Men, end less than Women.

MAX. 93.
It is the quality of a wise Commander, to make his Soldiers confident of his
Wisdom, and their own Strength; If any danger be, to conceal it; if manifest,
to lessen it. Let him possess his Army with the Justness of the War, and a
certainty of Victory. A good Cause makes a stout Heart and a strong Arm. They
that fear an Overthrow are half Conquered.

MAX. 94.
It is requisite in a General to mingle Love with the severity of his
Discipline. They that cannot be induced to Fear for Love, will never be
enforced to Love for Fear; Love opens the heart, Fear shuts it; that
Encourages, this Compels, and Victory meets Encouragement, but flees Compulsion.

MAX. 95.
It is the part of a well-advised State, never to entrust a weighty service,
unto whom a noted Injury or dishonor has been done; he can never be Zealous
in performance of service, the height of whose Expectation can rather recover a
lost Name than gain a fresh Honor.

MAX. 96.
Three ways there be to begin a repute, and gain Dignities in a Commonwealth.
The first, by the Virtue of glorious Parents, which till thou degenerate too
much may raise thee upon the wings of Opinion. The second, is by associating
with those whose actions are known Eminent. The third, by acting some Exploit,
either Public or Private, which in thy hand has proved Honorable. The two
first may miss, being founded upon Opinion: The last seldom fails, being
grounded upon Evidence.

MAX. 97.
If thou art called to the Dignity of a Commander, dignify thy place by thy
Commands, and that thou may be the more perfect in Commanding others,
practice upon thy self. Remember that thou art a Servant to the Publick-weal,
and therefore forget all private respects either of K^n or Friends. Remember
thou art a Champion for a Kingdom: Forget therefore all private affections
either of Love or Hate. He that would do his Country right, must not be too
sensible of a Personal wrong.

MAX. 98.
It is the part of a wise Commander to read Books, not so much as Men; nor Men
so much as Nations: He that can discern the Inclinations, Conditions, and
Passions, of a Kingdom, gains his Prince a great advantage both in Peace and
War.

MAX. 99.
And you most high and mighty Princes of this Lower World, who at this
Intricate and various Game of War, vye Kingdoms and win Crowns; and by the
death of your reverend Subjects gain the Lives of your bold hearted Enemies:
Know there is a Quo Quarranto, whereto you are to give account of your
Eye-Glorious Actions, according to the Righteous rules of Sacred Justice. How
Warrantable it is to read Imperial Crowns from off the Sovereign Heads of their
too weak Possessors, or to snatch Scepters from out the hand of Heaven:
Anointed Majesty, and by your vast ambitions still to enlarge Dominions with
Kingdoms ravished from their Natural Princes, Judge you. O let your brave
designs, and well weighed actions be as Just as they are Glorious, and
consider, that all your Wars, whose ends are not to defend your own
Possessions, or to recover your dispossessions, are but Princely Injuries,
which none but Heaven can right. But where necessity strikes up her hard
alarms, or wronged Religion beats her Zealous marches, go on and prosper, and
let both Swords and Stratagems proclaim a Victory, whose Noised Renown may fill
the World with your Eternal Glory.

MAX. 100.
Piety and Policy are like Martha and Mary, Sisters: Martha fails if Mary helps
not, and Mary suffers if Martha be Idle. Happy is that Kingdom where Martha
complains of Mary, but most happy where Mary complys with Martha: where Piety
and Policy go hand in hand, there War shall be Just, and Peace honorable.

The End of the First Century.
INSTITUTIONS AND MAXIMS Moral and Divine, etc.
CENT. II.
MAXIM 1.
A Promise is a Child of the Understanding and the Will: the Understanding
begets it, the Will brings it forth. He that performs it, delivers the Mother;
He that breaks it Murders the Child. If he be begotten in the absence of the
Understanding, it is a Bastard; but the Child must be kept. If thou mistrust
thy Understanding, Promise not; If thou have Promised, break it not: It is
better to maintain a Bastard than to murder a Child.

MAX. 2.
Charity is a Naked Child, giving Honey to a Be without Wings; Naked, because
Excuseless and Simple; a Child, because tender and growing; giving Honey,
because Honey is pleasant and comfortable: To a Be, because a Be is laborious
and deserving, without Wings, because helpless and wanting. If thou deniest to
such, thou killest a Be; if thou give to other than such, thou preservest a
Drone.

MAX. 3.
Before thy Undertaking of any design, weigh the Glory of thy Action with the
Danger of the Attempt: If the Glory outweigh the Danger, it is Cowardice to
neglect it: If the Danger exceed the Glory, it is rashness to attempt it: If
the Balances stand poised, let thy own Genius cast them.

MAX. 4.
Would thou know the Lawfulness of the action which thou desire to
undertake? Let thy Devotion recommend it to Divine Blessing: If it be Lawful,
thou shall perceive thy Heart Encouraged by Prayer: If Unlawful, thou shall
find thy Prayer discouraged by thy Heart. That action is not Warrantable, which
either blushes to beg a Blessing, or having succeeded, dares not present
Thanksgiving.

MAX. 5.
If Evil men speak good, or good men Evil of thy Conversation, Examine all thy
actions, and suspect thy self. But if Evil men speak Evil of thee, hold it as
thy honor, and by way of thankfulness Love them, but upon condition, that they
continue to hate thee.

MAX. 6.
If thou hope to please all, thy hopes are vain; If thou fear to displease
some, thy fears are Idle. The way to please thy self is not to displease the
best; and the way to displease the best, is to please the most. If thou can
fashion thy self to please all, thou shall displease him that is all in all.

MAX. 7.
If thou Neglectest thy Love to thy Neighbor, in vain thou professest thy Love
to God; for by thy Love to God, the Love to thy Neighbor is begotten, and by
the Love to thy Neighbor, thy Love to God is nourished.

MAX. 8.
Thy Ignorance in unreveal'd Mysteries, is the Mother of a Saving Faith; and
thy Understanding in revealed Truths is the Mother of a Sacred Knowledge:
Understand not therefore that thou may Believe, but believe that thou may
Understand: Understanding is the wages of a Lively Faith, and Faith is the
reward of an humbler Ignorance.

MAX. 9.
Pride is the Ape of Charity, in show, not much unlike; but somewhat fuller of
action. In seeking the one, take heed thou light not on the other; they are two
Parallels; never but asunder. Charity feeds the Poor, so does Pride: Charity
builds an Hospital, so does Pride: In this they differ; Charity gives her Glory
to God, Pride takes her Glory from Man.

MAX. 10.
Have thou lost thy Money, and do thou Mourn? another lost it before thou
had it; Be not troubled; perchance if thou had not lost it now, it had lost
thee for ever: Think therefore What thou have rather escaped than lost: Perhaps
thou had not been so much thine own, had not thy Money been so little thine.

MAX. 11.
Flatter not thy self in thy Faith to God, if thou wantst Charity for thy
Neighbor; and think not that thou have Charity for thy Neighbor, if thou
wantst Faith to God; where they are not both together, they are both wanting;
they are both dead if once divided.

MAX. 12.
Be not too slow in breaking of a sinful Custom: a quick Courageous Resolution
is better than a Gradual Deliberation: In such a Combat, he is the bravest
Soldier that lays about him without fear or wit. Wit Pleads, Fear disheartens;
He that would kill Hydra, had better strike off one Neck than Five Heads: Fell
the Tree, and the Branches are soon cut off.

MAX. 13.
Be careful rather of what thou do, than of what thou have: for what thou
have is none of thine, and will leave thee at thy death, or thou the pleasure
of it, in thy sickness: But what thou do, is thine; and will follow thee to
thy Grave, and plead for thee, or against thee, at thy Resurrection.

MAX. 14.
If thou enjoyest not the God of Love thou can not obtain the Love of God,
neither until then can thou Enjoy a desire to Love God, nor relish the Love
of God: thy Love to God is nothing but a faint reflection of God's love to
thee: till he please to Love thee, thy Love can never please him.

MAX. 15.
Let not thy Fancy be guided by thine Eye, nor let thy Will be governed by thy
Fancy: Thine Eye may be deceived in her Object, and thy Fancy may be deluded in
her Subject. Let thine Understanding moderate between thine Eye and thy Fancy;
and let thy Judgment Arbitrate between thy Fancy and thy Will; so shall Fancy
apprehend what is true, so shall thy Will elect what is good.

MAX. 16.
Endeavor to subdue as well thy irascible as thy concupiscible Affections: To
endure Injuries with a brave Mind is one half of the Conquest; and to abstain
from pleasing Evils with a courageous Spirit, is the other. The Sum of all
Humanity, and height of Moral Perfection, is Bear, and Forbear.

MAX. 17.
If thou desire not to be too poor, desire not to be too rich: He is rich, not
that possesses much, but he that covets no more; and he is poor, not that
enjoys little, but that wants too much. The contented Mind wants nothing which
it has not; the covetous Mind wants not only what it has not, but likewise
what it has.

MAX. 18.
The outward Senses are the common Cinque Ports, where every Subject lands
toward the Understanding. The Ear hears a confused Noise, and presents it to
the Common Sense; the common Sense distinguishes the several Sounds, and
conveys them to the Fancy; the Fancy wildly discants on it: The Understanding
(whose Object is Truth) apprehending it to be Music, commends it to the
Judgment; the Judgment severally and jointly examines it, and recommends it to
the Will; the Will (whose Object is Good) approves it; or dislikes it, and the
Memory records it: And so in the other Senses, according to their Subjects,
observe this Progress, and thou shall easily find where the defect of every
Action lies.

MAX. 19.
The way to subject all things to thy self, is to subject thy self to Reason;
thou shall govern many, if Reason govern thee: Would thou be crowned the
Monarch of a little World? Command thy self.

MAX. 20.
Though thou give all thou have for Charity's sake, and yet retainest a secret
desire of keeping it for thy own sake, thou rather leavest it than forsakest
it. He that has relinquished all things, and not himself, has forsaken
nothing: He that sets not his Heart on what he possesses, forsakes all things,
though he keep his Possessions.

MAX. 21.
Search into thy self before thou accept the Ceremony of Honor: If thou art a
Palace, Honor, (like the Sunbeams) will make thee more Glorious; if thou art
a Dunghill, the Sun may shine upon thee, but not to sweeten thee; Thy Prince may
give thee Honor, but not make thee honorable.

MAX. 22.
Every Man is a King in his own Kingdom: If Reason command, and Passion obey,
his Government bespeaks a good King; if thine inordinate Affection rules, it
shows a proud Rebel; which if thou destroy not, will depose thee. There is no
mean between the Death of a Rebel and the Life of a Prince.

MAX. 23.
A Vow, a Promise, and a Resolution, have all one Object, only differ in
respect of the Persons to whom they are made; the first is between God and Man;
the second between Man and Man; the third between Man and his own Soul; they
all bind, if the Object be lawful, to necessity of Performance; if unlawful, to
the necessity of Sin: They all take thee Prisoner; if the Object be lawful, thy
Performance has redeemed thee; if unlawful, Blood and Fears must ransom thee.

MAX. 24.
If thou have any business of Consequence in agitation, let thy Care be
reasonable and seasonable: Continual standing bent weakens the Bow; too hasty
drawing breaks it: Put off thy Cares with thy Clothes; so shall thy Rest
strengthen thy Labor, and so shall thy Labor sweeten thy Rest.

MAX. 25.
When thy inordinate Affections do flame toward transitory Happiness, quench
them thus; think with thy self, if my Prince should give me what Honor he has
to bestow, or bestow on me what Wealth he has to give, it could not stay with
me, because it is transitory; nor I with it, because I am mortal: Then revise
thy Affections, and weigh them with their Objects, and thou will either confess
thy Folly, or make a wiser Choice.

MAX. 26.
With three sorts of Men enter no serious Friendship; the ungrateful man, the
multiloquious man, the Coward; the first cannot prize thy Favors; the second
cannot keep thy Counsel; and the third dare not vindicate thy Honor.

MAX. 27.
If thou desire the time should not pass too fast, use not too much Pastime;
thy Life in Jollity blazes like a Taper in the Wind: The blast of Honor wastes
it; the heat of Pleasure melts it: If thou labor in a painful Calling, thou
shall be less sensible of the Flux of time, and sweetlier satisfied at the time
of Death.

MAX. 28.
God is the Alpha and Omega in the great World; endeavor to make him so in the
little World; make him thy Evening Epilogue, and thy Morning Prologue; practice
to make him thy last thought at night when thou sleep, and thy first thought
in the morning when thou awakest; so shall thy Fancy be sanctified in the
Night, and thy Understanding rectified in the Day; so shall thy Rest be
peaceable, thy Labors prosperous, thy Life pious, and thy Death glorious.

MAX. 29.
Be very circumspect in the Choice of thy Company. In the Society of thine
Equals thou shall enjoy more Pleasure; in the Society of thy Superiors thou
shall find more Profit. To be the best in the Company is the way to grow worse;
the best means to grow better, is to be the worst there.

MAX. 30.
Think of God (especially in thy Devotion) in the Abstract, rather than in the
Concrete: If thou conceive him good, thy finite Thoughts are ready to terminate
that Good in a conceived Subject; if thou think him great, thy bounded Conceit
is apt to cast him into a comprehensible Figure: Conceive him therefore a
diffused Goodness without Quality, and represent him an incomprehensible
Greatness without Quantity

MAX. 31.
If thou and true Religion be not as yet met, or met unknown, by these marks
thou shall discover it: First, it is a Religion that takes no Pleasure in the
Expense of Blood. Secondly, it is a Religion whose Tenants cross not the Book
of Truth. Thirdly, it is a Religion that takes most from the Creature, and
gives most to the Creator. If such an one thou meet with, assure thy self it is
the right, and therefore profess it in thy Life, and protect it to thy Death.

MAX. 32.
Let another's Passion be a Lecture to thy Reason, and let the Shipwreck of
this Understanding be a Sea-mark to thy Passion: So shall thou gain strength
out of his weakness, safety out of his danger, and raise thy self a Building
out of his Ruins.

MAX. 33.
In the height of thy Prosperity expect Adversity, but fear it most; if it come
not, thou art the more sweetly possessed of the happiness thou have, and the
more strongly confirmed; if it come, thou art the more gently dispossessed of the
happiness thou had, and the more firmly prepared.

MAX. 34
To tremble at the sight of thy Sin, makes thy Faith the less apt to tremble:
The Devils believe and tremble, because they tremble at what they believe:
Their Belief brings Trembling; thy Trembling brings Belief.

MAX. 35.
Authology is the way to Theology: Until thou see thy self empty, thou will
not desire to be filled. He can never truly relish the sweetness of God's
Mercy, that never tasted the Bitterness of his own Misery.

MAX. 36.
Is any outward Affliction fallen upon thee by a temporary loss? Advise with
thy self, whether it be recoverable or not; if it be, use all lawful means (the
Violence and Unseasonableness whereof may not disadvantage thee in the pursuit)
to recover it: If not recoverable, endure with Patience what thou can not
recover with Pains. He that carnally afflicts his Soul for the loss of a
transitory Good, casts away the Kernel because he has lost the Shell.

MAX. 37.
Natural Anger glances into the Breasts of wise men, but rests in the Bosom of
Fools: In them it is Infirmity; in these a Sin; there is a natural Anger, and
there is a Spiritual Anger; the common Object of that is the Person; of this,
his Vice. He that is always angry with his Sin, shall seldom sin in his Anger.

MAX. 38.
If any hard Affliction has surprised thee, cast one eye upon the hand that
sent it, and the other upon the Sins that brought it. If thou thankfully
receive the Message, he that sent it will discharge the Messenger.

MAX. 39.
All Passions are good and bad, according to their Objects: Where the Object is
absolutely good, there the greatest Passion is too little; where absolutely
evil, there the least Passion is too much; where indifferent, there a little is
enough.

MAX. 40.
When thou do Evil, that Good may come thereby, the Evil is surely thine; if
Good should happen to ensue upon the Evil which thou have done, the Good
proceeds from God: If therefore thou do Evil, thereby to occasionate a Good,
thou lay'st a bad Foundation for a good Building, and servest the Devil, that
God may serve thee. Where the end of Evil is Good in the Intention, there the
end of that Good is Evil in the Extension.

MAX. 41.
Be as far from desiring the Popular Love, as fearful to deserve the Popular
Hate: Ruin dwells in both; the one will hug thee to Death, the other will
crush thee to Destruction. To escape the first, be not ambitious; to avoid the
second, be not seditious.

MAX. 42.
When thou see misery in thy Brother's Face, let him see mercy in thine Eye;
the more the Oil of mercy is poured on him by thy Pity, the more the Oil in
thy Cruise shall be increased by thy Piety.

MAX. 43.
Read not Books alone, but Men, and amongst them chiefly thy self: If thou find
any thing questionable there, use the Commentary of a severe Friend, rather
than the Gloss of a sweet lipt Flatterer. There is more Profit in a distastful
Truth than deceitful Sweetness.

MAX. 44.
If the opinion of thy Worth invite any to the desire of thy Acquaintance,
yield a Respect suitable to his Quality: Too great a Reservation will expose
thee to the Sentence of Pride; too easy Access will condemn thee to the
Censure of Folly. Things too hardly endeavored discourage the Seeker; too
easily obtained, disparage the thing sought for: Too easily got, is lowly
prised, and quickly lost.

MAX. 45.
When Convenience of time has ripened your Acquaintance, be cautious what thou
say, and courteous in what thou do: Observe his Inclination; if thou find
him weight, make him thine own, and lodge him in a faithful Bosom: Be not
easily exceptious, nor rudely familiar; the one will breed Contention, the
other Contempt.

MAX. 46.
When Passion is grounded upon Fancy, it is commonly but of short Continuance:
Where the Foundation is unstable, there the Building is not lasting. He that
will be angry for any Cause, will be angry for no Cause; and when the
Understanding perceives the Cause vain, then the Judgment proclaims the Effect
void.

MAX. 47.
If thou desire to purchase Honor with thy Wealth, consider first how that
Wealth became thine; if thy Labor got it, let thy Wisdom keep it; if
Oppression found it, let Repentance restore it; if thy Parent left it, let thy
Virtues deserve it; so shall thy Honor be safer, better, and cheaper.

MAX. 48.
Sin is a Basilisk whose Eyes are full of Venom; if the Eye of thy Soul see her
first, it reflects her own Poison and kills her: If she see thy Soul, unseen,
or seen too late, with her Poison, she kills thee: since therefore thou can
not Escape thy Sin, let not thy Sin escape thy Observation.

MAX. 49.
If thou expect to rise by the means of him, whom thy Father's Greatness raised
from his service to Court-preferment, thou will be deceived, for the more in
esteem thou art, the more sensible is he of what he was, whose servitude will
be Chronicled, by thy Advancement and Glory obscured by thy Greatness: However,
he will conceive it a dead service, which may be interpreted by thee, as a
merited reward, rather than a meritorious benefit.

MAX. 50.
Trust not to the Promise of a Common Swearer, for he that dare Sin against his
God, for neither Profit nor Pleasure, will trespass against thee for his own
advantage. He that dare break the precepts of his Father, will easily be
persuaded to violate the Promise unto his Brother.

MAX. 51.
Let the greatest part of the News thou hear be the least part of what thou
believe, lest the greatest part of what thou believe be the least part of
what is true; where Lies are easily admitted, the Father of Lies will not
easily be excluded.

MAX. 52.
Deliberate long before thou consecrate a friend, and when thy impartial
Judgment concludes him worthy of thy Bosom, receive him Joyfully and entertain
him Wisely, impart thy secrets boldly, and mingle thy thoughts with his; he is
thy very self and use him so, if thou firmly thinks him faithful thou makes him
so.

MAX. 53.
As there is no Worldly Gain, without some Loss, so there is no Worldly Loss
without some Gain; If thou have lost thy Wealth, thou have lost some trouble
with it; if thou art degraded from thy honor, thou art likewise freed from the
stroke of Envy; if sickness has blur'd thy Beauty, it has delivered thee from
Pride, set the allowance against the loss and thou shall find no loss great, he
loses little or nothing that reserves himself.

MAX. 54.
If thou desire to take the best advantage of thy self, especially in matters
where the Fancy is most employed, keep temperate Diet, use moderate Exercise,
observe seasonable and set hours for Rest; let the end of thy first sleep raise
thee from thy repose: then has thy body the best temper, then has thy Soul
the least encumbrance, then no noise shall disturb thy Ear, no object shall
divert thine Eye; then if thy sprightly Fancy transport thee not beyond the
common pitch, and show thee not the Magazine of high Invention, return thee to
thy wanton Bed, and there conclude thy self more fit to wear thy Mistresses
favor than Apollo's Bays.

MAX. 55.
If thou art Rich, strive to Command thy Money, lest she Command thee: if thou
know how to use her, she is thy Servant, if not, thou art her slave.

MAX. 56.
Bring thy Daughter a Husband of her own Religion, and of no Hereditary
Disease; let his Wisdom outweigh his Wealth; let his Parantage excel his
Person, and let his Age exceed hers; let thy Prayers recommend the rest to
Providence: If he prove good, thou have found a Son, if not thou have lost a
Daughter.

MAX. 57.
So use Prosperity that Adversity may not abuse thee; if in the one security
admits no Fear, in the other despair will afford no hopes: He that in
Prosperity can foretell a Danger, can in Adversity foresee Deliverance.

MAX. 58.
If thy Faith has no Doubts, thou have Just Cause to doubt thy Faith; and if
thy Doubts have no Hope, thou have Just Reason to fear Despair; when therefore
thy Doubts shall exercise thy Faith, keep thy Hopes firm to qualify thy Doubts,
so shall thy Faith be secured from Doubts, so shall thy Doubts be preserved
from Despair.

MAX. 59.
If thou desire to be truly Valiant, fear to do any Injury. He that fears not
to do Evil is always afraid to suffer Evil; He that never Fears is desperate,
and he that fears always is a Coward; he is the true Valiant man that dares
nothing but what he may, and fears nothing but what he ought.

MAX. 60.
Anger may repast with thee for an hour, but not repose for a Night; the
continuance of Anger is Hatred, the continuance of Hatred turns Malice, that
Anger is not warrantable that has seen two Suns.

MAX. 61.
If thou stand guilty of Oppression, or wrongfully possessed of another's Right,
see thou make restitution before thou give an Alms; if otherwise, what art
thou but a Thief and make God thy Receiver.

MAX. 62.
When thou Prayest for Spiritual Grace, let thy Prayer be absolute; when for
Temporal Blessings add a Clause of God's pleasure; in both with Faith and
Humiliation, so that thou undoubtedly receive what thou desire, or more or
better; never Prayer rightly made was made unheard, or heard ungranted.

MAX. 63.
He that gives, all though but little, gives much, because God looks not to the
quantity of the Gift, but to the quality of the Givers: He that desires to give
more than he can has equalled his Gift to his desire, and has given more than
he has.

MAX. 64.
Be not too greedy in desiring Riches, nor too eager in seeking them, nor too
Covetous in keeping them, nor too passionate in losing them; the first will
possess thy Soul of Discontent, the second will dispossess thy Body of Rest,
the third will possess thy Wealth of thee, the last will dispossess thee of thy
self: He that is too Violent in the Concupiscible, will be as Violent in the
Irascible.

MAX. 65.
Be not too rash in the breaking of an inconvenient Custom, as it was gotten so
leave it by degrees; danger attends upon too sudden alterations: He that pulls
down a bad Building by the great, may be ruined by the fall; but he that takes
it down brick by brick, may live to build a bettter.

MAX. 66.
If thou desire that inestimable grace of Saving Faith, detest that insatiable
Vice of damnable Covetousness; it is impossible one heart (though never so
double) should lodge both: Faith possesses thee of what thou have not,
Covetousness disposesseth thee of what thou have, thou can not serve God,
unless Mammon serve thee.

MAX. 67.
Beware of him that is slow to Anger, Anger when it is long in coming is the
stronger when it comes, and the longer kept: Abused Patience turns to Fury:
When Fancy is the ground of Passion, that understanding which composeth the
Fancy qualifies the Passion, but when Judgment is the ground, the Memory is the
Recorder.

MAX. 68.
He that professes himself thy open Enemy, arms thee against the Evil he means
thee, but he that dissembles himself thy Friend, strikes beyond caution and
wounds beyond cure. From the first thou may deliver thy self, from the last
Good Lord deliver thee.

MAX. 69.
If thou have wronged thy Brother in thought reconcile thee to him in thought,
if thou have offended him in words, let thy reconciliation be in words, if thou
have trespassed against him in deeds be reconciled to him: that Reconciliation
is most kindly which is most in kind.

MAX. 70.
Not to give to the Poor is to take from him; not to feed the hungry if thou
have it is the utmost of thy power to kill him: That therefore thou may avoid
both Sacrilege and Murder, be Charitable.

MAX. 71.
So often as thou Remember'st thy Sins without Grief, so often thou repeatest
those Sins for not grieving: He that will not mourn for the Evil that he has
done, gives earnest for the Evil he means to do; nothing can assuage that fire
which Sin has made, but only that water which Repentance has drawn.

MAX. 72.
Look well before thou Leap into the Chair of Honor, the Higher thou Climest
the lower thou fallest; If Virtue prefer thee, Virtue will preserve thee; if
Gold or Favor advance thee, thy honor is pinned upon the Wheel of Fortune,
when the Wheel shall turn, thy Honor falls, and thou remainest an Everlasting
Monument of thy own ambitious folly.

MAX. 73.
We are born with our Temptations; Nature sometimes presses us to Evil,
sometime provokes us unto Good; If therefore thou give her more than her due,
thou nourishest an Enemy: if less than is sufficient, thou destroyest a Friend;
moderation will prevent both.

MAX. 74.
If thou scorn not to serve Luxury in thy Youth, Chastity will scorn thy
service in thy Age; and that the will of thy Green Years thought no Vice in the
acting, the Necessity of thy Gray Hairs makes no Virtue in the forbearing;
where there is no Conflict there can be no Conquest, where there is no Conquest
there is no Crown.

MAX. 75.
Thou did nothing toward thy own Creation, for thou were Created for thy
Creator's Glory; thou must do something toward thy own Redemption, for thou
were redeemed for thy own Good; he that made thee without thee, will not save
thee without thee.

MAX. 76.
When thy Tongue and Heart agree not in Confession, that Confession is not
agreeable to God's Pleasure; He that confesses with Tongue and wants
Confession in his Heart, is either a Vain Man or an Hypocrite; He that has
Confession in his Heart and wants it in his Tongue, is either a Proud Man or a
Timorous.

MAX. 77.
Gold is Caesar's treasure, Man is God's, thy Gold has Caesar's Image, and
thou have God's; Give therefore unto Caesar those things which are Caesar's,
and unto God which are God's.

MAX. 78.
In the Commission of Evil, fear no Man so much as thy own self; another is but
one witness against thee, thou art a thousand; another thou may avoid, but
thy self thou can not; wickedness is its own punishment.

MAX. 79.
In thy Apparel avoid singularity, Profuseness, and Gaudiness; be not too early
in the fashion, nor too late, Decency is the half way between Affectation and
Neglect; the Body is the shell of the Soul, Apparel is the Husk of that shell,
the Husk often tells you what the Kernel is.

MAX. 80.
Let thy Recreation be Manly, Moderate, Seasonable, Lawful; if thy Life be
sedentary, more tending to the exercise of thy Body, if active, more to the
refreshing of thy Mind, the use of Recreation is to strengthen thy Labor and
sweeten thy Rest.

MAX. 81.
Be not Censorious, for thou know not whom thou Judge; it is a more
dextrous error to speak well of an Evil Man, than Ill of a Good Man, and safer
for thy Judgment to be misled by simple Charity, than Uncharitable Wisdom: He
may tax others with Privilege that has not in himself what others may Tax.

MAX. 82.
Take heed of that Honor which thy Wealth has purchased thee; for it is
neither lasting nor thine own; what money creates money preserves; If thy
Wealth decays thy Honor dies: It is but a slippery happiness which Fortune can
give and Frowns can take, and not worth the owning which a Night's Fire can
melt, or a Rough Sea can drown.

MAX. 83.
If thou can desire any thing not to be repented of, thou art in a fair way
to Happiness; if thou have attained it, thou art at thy way's end: He is not
happy who has all that he desires, but that desires nothing but what is good;
if thou can not do what thou need not repent, yet endeavor to repent what
thy Necessity has done.

MAX. 84.
Spend an hundred years in Earth's best pleasures, and after that an hundred
more, to which being spent add a thousand, and to that ten thousand, the last
shall as surely end as the first are ended, and all shall be swallowed with
Eternity: He that is born to day is not sure to live a day; He that has lived
the longest is but as he that was born yesterday; the happiness of the one is,
that he has lived; the happiness of the other is, that he may live, and the
lot of both is, that they must die: It Is no happiness to live long, nor
unhappiness to die soon: Happy is he that has lived long enough to die well.

MAX. 85.
Be careful to whom thou give, and how; He that gives him that deserves not,
loses his Gift, and betrays the Giver; He that confers his Gift upon a worthy
receiver, makes many Debtors, and by giving receives; He that gives for his own
ends, makes his Gift a Bribe, and the receiver a Prisoner; He that gives often
teaches requitance to the Receiver, and discovers a crafty confidence in the
Giver.

MAX. 86.
Has any wronged thee? bravely revenged, slight it, and the Work is begun;
forgive it, and it is finished: He is below himself that is not above an Injury.

MAX. 87.
Let not thy Passion miscall thy Child, left thou Prophesy his misfortunes; let
not thy Tongue curse him, lest it return from whence it came: Curses sent in
the room of Blessings are sent back with a double Vengeance.

MAX. 88.
In all the Ceremonies of the Church which remain indifferent, do according to
the Constitution of that Church where thou art. The God of Order and Unity, who
created both the Soul and the Body, expects Unity in the one, and Order in both.

MAX. 89.
Let thy Religious Fast be a voluntary Abstinence, not so much from Flesh as
fleshly Thoughts: God is pleased with that Fast which gives to another what
thou deniest to thy self, and when the afflicting of thy own Body is the
repairing of thy Brother's; he fasts truly that abstains sadly, grieves really,
gives cheerfully, and forgives charitably.

MAX. 90.
In the hearing of mysteries, keep thy Tongue quiet; five Words cost Zacharias
40 weeks Silence: In such heights, convert thy Questions into Wonders, and let
this suffice thee; the Reason of the Deed is the Power of the Doer.

MAX. 91.
Deride not him whom the looser World calls Puritan, lest thou offend a little
one; if he be an Hypocrite, God, that knows him, will reward him; if zealous,
that God that loves him will revenge him; if he be good, he is good to god's
glory; if evil, let him be evil at his own Charges. He that judges shall be
judged.

MAX. 92.
So long as thou art ignorant, be not ashamed to learn; he that is so fondly
modest, not to acknowledge his own Defects of Knowledge, shall in time be so
foully impudent, to justify his own Ignorance. Ignorance is the greatest of
all Infirmities, and justified, the chiefest of all Follies.

MAX. 93.
If thou be a Servant, deal justly by thy Master as thou desire thy Servant
should deal by thee; where thou art commanded, be obedient, where not
commanded, be provident; let Diligence be thy Credit; let Faithfulness be thy
Crown; let thy Master's Credit be thy Care, and let his Welfare be thy Content:
Let thine Eye be single, and thine Heart humble; be sober, that thou may be
circumspect: He that in Sobriety is not his own man, being drunk, whose is he?
Be neither contentious nor lascivious; the one shows a turbulent Heart, the
other an idle Brain, A good Servant is a great Master.

MAX. 94.
Let the Foundation of thy Affection be Virtue, then make the Building as rich
and as glorious as thou can; if the Foundation be Beauty or Wealth, and the
Building Virtue, the Foundation is too week for the Building, and it will fall.
Happy is he, the Palace of whose Affection is founded upon Virtue, walled with
Riches, glazed with Beauty, and Roofed with Honor.

MAX. 95.
If thy Mother be a Widow, give her double Honor, who now acts the part of a
double Parent; Remember her nine months Burden, and her ten months Travel;
forget not her Indulgence when thou did hang upon her tender Breast; call to
mind her Prayers for thee before thou came into the World, and her Cares for
thee when thou were come into it; remember her secret Groans, her affectionate
Tears, her broken Slumbers, her daily Fears, her nightly Frights: relieve her
Wants, cover her Imperfections, comfort her Age, and the Widow's Husband will
be the Orphan's Father.

MAX. 96.
As thou desire the Love of God and Man, beware of Pride; it is a Tumor in
thy mind, that breaks, and poisons all thy Actions; it is a Worm in thy
Treasure, that eats and ruins thy Estate; it loves no man, is beloved of no
man; it disparageth Virtue in another by Detraction; it disrewards Goodness in
it self by Vain Glory; the Friend of the Flatterer, the Mother of Envy, the
Nurse of Fury, the Band of Luxury, the Sin of Devils, and the Devil in mankind:
It hates Superiors, it scorns Inferiors, it owns no Equals; in short, till
thou hate it, God hates thee.

MAX. 97.
So behave thy self amongst thy Children, that they may love and honor thy
presence; be not too fond, lest they fear thee not; be not too bitter, lest
they fear thee too much: Too much Familiarity will embolden them, too little
Countenance discourage them. So carry thy self, that they may rather fear thy
displeasure than thy correction; when thou reprovest them, do it in season;
when thou correctest them, do it not in Passion. As a wise Child makes a happy
Father, so a wise Father makes a happy Child.

MAX. 98.
When thy hand has done a good Act, ask thy heart if it be well done; the
matter of a good action is the deed done, the form of a good action is the
manner of the doing; in the first, another has the Comfort, and thou the
Glory; in the other, thou have the Comfort, and God the Glory. That Deed is ill
done, wherein God is no Sharer.

MAX. 99.
Should thou purchase Heaven, advise not with thy own ability: The Price of
Heaven is what thou have; examine not what thou have, but what thou art; give
thy self, and thou have bought it: If thy own Vileness be thy Fears, offer thy
self, and thou art precious.

MAX. 100.
The Birds of the Air dye to sustain thee; the Beasts of the Field dye to
nourish thee; the Fishes of the Sea dye to feed thee; our Stomachs are their
common Sepulchers. Good God! with how many Deaths are our Lives patched up? how
full of Death is the miserable Life of momentary Man.

The End of the second Century.
INSTITUTIONS AND MAXIMS Moral and Divine, etc.
CENT. III.
MAXIM 1.
If thou take pains in what is good, the Pains vanish, the Good remains; if
thou take pleasure in what is evil, the Evil remains, and the Pleasure
vanishes: What art thou the worse for Pains, or the better for Pleasure, when
both are past.

MAX. 2.
If thy Fancy and Judgment have agreed in the choice of a Wife, be not too
fond, lest she surfeit, nor too peevish, lest she languish: Love so that thou
may be feared; rule so that thou may be honored; be not too diffident,
lest thou teach her to deceive thee; nor too suspicious, lest thou teach her to
abuse thee. If thou see a fault, let thy Love hide it; if she continue it, let
thy Wisdom reprove it: Reprove her not openly, lest she grow bold; rebuke her
not tauntingly, lest she grow spiteful; proclaim not her Beauty, lest she grow
proud; boast not her Wisdom, lest thou be thought foolish; show her not thy
Imperfections, lest she disdain thee; pry not into her Dairy, lest the despise
thee; profane not her Ears with loose Communication, lest thou defile the
Sanctuary of her Modesty. An understanding Husband makes a discreet Wife; and
she a happy Husband.

MAX. 3.
Wrinkle not thy Face with too much Laughter, lest thou become ridiculous;
neither wanton thy Heart with, too much Mirth, lest thou become vain. The
Suburbs of Folly is vain mirth; and profuseness of Laughter is the City of
Fools.

MAX. 4.
Let thy Tongue take Counsel of one Eye, rather than of two Ears; let the News
thou reportest be rather stale than false, lest thou be branded with the Name
of a Liar: It Is an intolerable Dishonor to be that, which only to be called
so, is thought worthy of a Stab*

MAX. 5.
Let thy Discourse be such as thy Judgment may maintain and thy Company may
deserve* ^n neglecting this, thou losest thy Words; in not observing, the
other, thou losest thy self. Give wash to Swine, and Wort to Men; so shall thou
husband thy Gift to the advantage of thy self, and shape thy Discourse to the
advancement of the Hearer.

MAX. 6.
Do thou roar under the Torments of a Tyrant? Weigh them with the Sufferance
of thy Savior, and they are no Plague. Do thou rage under the Bondage of a
raving Conscience? Compare it to thy Savior's Passion, and it is no Pain? Have
the Tortures of Hell taken hold of thy despairing soul? Compare it to thy
Savior's Torments, and it is no Punishment. What Sense unequally compares, let
Faith interchangeably apply, and thy Pleasure have no Comparison; thy Sins are
the Authors of his Sufferings, and his Hell is the Price of thy Heaven.

MAX. 7.
Art thou banished from thy own Country? Thank thy own Folly: Had thou chosen
a right home, thou had been no Exile; had thou commanded thine own Kingdom,
all Kingdoms had been thine own. The Fool is banished in his own Country; the
Wise man is in his own Country, though banished: The Fool wanders, the Wise man
travels.

MAX. 8.
In seeking Virtue, if thou find Poverty, be not ashamed, the Fault is none of
thine; thy Honor or Dishonor is purchased by thy own Actions: Though Virtue
give a ragged Livery, she gives a golden Cognizance; if her Service make thee
poor, blush not; thy Poverty may disadvantage thee, but not dishonor thee.

MAX. 9.
Gaze not on Beauty too much, lest it blast thee, nor too long, lest it blind
thee, nor too near, lest it burn thee; if thou like it, it deceives thee; if
thou love it, it disturbs thee; if thou lust after it, it destroys thee: If
Virtue accompany it, it is the Heart's Paradise; if Vice associate it, it is
the Soul's Purgatory: It is the Wise man's Bonfire, and the Fools Furnace.

MAX. 10.
If thou would have a good Servant, let thy Servant find a wise Master; let
his Food, Rest, and Wages be seasonable; let his Labor, Recreations, and
Attendance, depend upon thy Pleasure; be not angry with him too long, lest he
think thee malicious, nor too soon, lest he conceive thee rash, nor too often,
lest he count the humorous; be not too fierce, lest he love thee not, nor too
remiss, lest he fear thee not, nor too familiar, lest he prize thee not. In
brief, whilst thou give him the Liberty of a Servant, beware thou losest not
the Majesty of a Master.

MAX. 11.
If thou desire to be chaste in Wedlock, keep thy self chaste before thou
wed'est; he that has known Pleasure unlawfully, will hardly be restrained from
unlawful Pleasure: One Woman was created for one Man. He that strays beyond the
limits of Liberty, is brought into the Verge of Slavery: Where one is enough,
two is too many, and three is too few.

MAX. 12.
If thou would be justified, acknowledge thy Injustice: He that confesses
his Sin, begins his Journey toward Salvation; he that is sorry for it, mends his
Pace; he that forsakes it, is at his Journey's end.

MAX. 13.
Before thou reprehend another, take heed thou art not culpable in what thou
go about to reprehend: He that cleanses a Blott with blotted Fingers makes
a greater Blur.

MAX. 14.
Beware of Drunkenness, lest all good men beware of thee: Where Drunkenness
reigns, there Reason is an Exul, Virtue a Stranger, God an Enemy; Blasphemy is
Wit, Oaths are Rhetoric, and Secrets are Proclamations. Noah discovered that
in one hour, drunk, which sober, he kept secret Six hundred Years.

MAX. 15.
What thou give to the poor, thou securest from the Thief; but what thou
witholdest from his Necessity, a Thief possesses. God's Exchequer is the
poorman's Box; when thou strikest a Tally, he becomes thy Debtor.

MAX. 16.
Take no pleasure in the Folly of an Idiot, nor in the Fancy of a Lunatic, nor
in the Frenzy of a Drunkard; make them the Object of thy Pity, not of thy
Pastime, when thou beholdest them, behold how thou art beholden to him that
suffered thee not to be like them; there is no difference between thee and
them, but God's Favor.

MAX. 17.
If being in an Eminent place thou have incurred the obloquy of the Multitude,
the more thou endeavourest to stop the Stream, the more it overflows: Wisely
rather divert the course of the Vulgar humor, by divulging and spreading some
ridiculous Novelty, which may present new matter to their various fancy, and
stave their Tongues from off thy worried name; the first subject of the common
Voice is the last News.

MAX. 18.
If thou desire to see thy Child Virtuous, let him not see his Father's Vices:
Thou can not rebuke that in them that they behold practiced in thee. Till
Reason be Ripe, Examples direct more than Precepts: Such as thy behavior is
before thy Childrens Faces, such commonly is theirs behind their Parents backs.

MAX. 19.
Use Law and Physic only for necessity; they that use them otherwise, abuse
themselves into weak Bodies and light Purses. They are good Remedies, bad
Businesses, and worse Recreations.

MAX. 20.
Be not over curious in prying into Mysteries, lest by seeking things which are
needless, thou omit things which are necessary; it is more safe to doubt of
uncertain Matters than to dispute of undiscovered Mysteries.

MAX. 21.
If what thou have received from God thou sharest to the Poor, thou have gained
a blessing by the hand: If what thou have taken from the Poor thou give to
God, thou have purchased a Curse into the bargain: He that puts to Pious Uses
what he has got by Impious Usury, Robs the Spittle to raise an Hospital, and
the Cry of the one, will out-plead the Prayers of the other.

MAX. 22.
Let the end of thy Argument be rather to discover a doubtful Truth, than a
Commanding Wit; in the one thou shall gain substance, in the other Froth: That
Flint strikes the Steel in vain that propagates no sparkles. Covet to be
Truth's Champion, at least to hold her Colors: He that pleads against the
Truth takes pains to be overthrown, or if a Conqueror, gains but a Vainglory
by the Conquest.

MAX. 23.
Take no pleasure in the death of a Creature; if it be harmless or useless
destroy it not, if useful or harmful destroy it mercifully: He that mercifully
made his Creatures for thy sake, expects thy mercy upon them for his sake,
mercy turns her back to the unmerciful.

MAX. 24.
If thou art called to the Dignity of a Priest, the same Voice calls thee to
the honor of a Judge: If thy Life and Doctrine be Good, thou shall Judge
others; if thy Doctrine be Good and thy Life bad, only thy self: If both be
Good, thou teach thy People to escape Condemnation: If this be good, and
that bad, thou teach God to Condemn thee.

MAX. 25.
If thou be not a Prometheus to adivise, before thou do be an Epimetheus to
examine what thou have done, when the want of Advice has brought forth an
improvident act, the Examination may produce a profitable Repentance.

MAX. 26.
If thou desire the happiness of thy Soul, the health of thy Body, the
prosperity of thy Estate, the preservation of thy Credit, converse not with a
Harlot; her Eyes run thy Reputation in debt, her Lips demand the Payment, her
Breast arrest thee, her Arms imprison thee, from whence believe it thou shall
hardly get forth till thou have either ended the days of thy Credit, or paid
the utmost farthing of thy Estate.

MAX. 27.
Carry a watchful Eye upon those Familiars that are either silent at thy
Faults, or sooth thee in thy Frailties, or excuse thee in thy Follies, for such
are either Cowards, or Flatterers, or Fools: If thou entertain them in
prosperity, the Coward will leave thee in thy Dangers; the Flatterer will quit
thee in thy Adversity; but the Fool will never forsake thee.

MAX. 28.
If thou have an Estate and a Son to Inherit it, keep him not too short, lest
he think thou live too long; what thou give let him receive from thy hand
as Gifts, not from thy Tenants as Rent; keep the Reins of thy Estate in thy own
hand, lest thou forsaking the Sovereignty of a Father, he forget the Reverence
of a Child; let his liberty be grounded upon thy permission, and keep him
within the compass of thy Instructions: Let him feel thou have the Curb, though
occasion urge thee not to Check: Give him the choice of his own Wife if he be
wise, Counsel his affection rather than Cross it; if thou be'st wise let his
Marriage Bed be made in secret, or depend upon thy Grave. If he be given to
Lavish Company endeavor to stave him off with lawful Recreations: be cheerful
with him that he may love thy presence, and wink at small faults that thou
may gain him; be not always chiding lest thou harden him, neither knit thy
brow too often lest thou dishearten him: Remember the discretion of a Father
often times prevents the destruction of a Child.

MAX. 29.
If thou hide thy Treasure upon Earth, how can thou expect to find it in
Heaven? can thou hope to be a sharer where thou have reposed no stock? That
thou gave to God's Glory and thy Soul's Health is laid up in Heaven, and is
only thine: That alone which thou exchangeth or hidest upon Earth is lost.

MAX. 30.
Regard not in thy Pilgrimage how difficult thy passage is, but whither it
tends; nor delicate thy Journey is, but where it ends; if it be easy, suspect
it; if hard, endure it; He that cannot excuse a bad way, accuses his own
sloth; and he that sticks in a bad passage, can never attain a good Journey's
end.

MAX. 31.
Money is both the Generation and Corruption of Purchased Honor; Honor is
both the Child and Slave to Potent Money: The Credit which Honor has lost,
Money has found; when Honor grew Mercenary, Money grew Honorable; the way to
be truly Noble is to Contemn both.

MAX. 32.
Give not thy Tongue too great a liberty, lest it take thee Prisoner; a word
unspoken is like the Sword in thy Scabbard, thine; if vented, thy Sword is in
another's hand: If thou desire to be held wise, be so wise as to hold thy
Tongue.

MAX. 33.
If thou be a subject to any great Vanity, nourish it not: If it will be
entertained, encourage it not; if it grow strong, more strongly strive against
it; if too strong, Pray against it; if it weaken not, join Fasting to the
Prayer; if it shall continue, add perseverance to them both; if it decline not,
add Patience to all, and thou have Conquered it.

MAX. 34.
Has any wounded thee with Injury, meet them with Patience; hasty words rankle
the wounds, soft language dresses it; forgiveness cures it, and Oblivion takes
away the scar; it is more noble by Silence to avoid an Injury, than by Argument
to overcome it.

MAX. 35.
Be not instable in thy Resolutions, nor various in thy Actions, nor inconstant
in thy Affections; so deliberate, that thou may resolve; so resolve, that
thou may perform; so perform, that thou may persevere: Mutability is the
badge of Infirmity.

MAX. 36.
Let not thy good intention flatter thee to an evil action; what is essential
Evil, no circumstance can make Good: it matters not with what mind thou did
that which is unlawful being done; if the act be good the intention crowns it,
if bad it deposes thy intention; no evil action can be well done.

MAX. 37.
Love not thy Children too unequally, or if thou do, show it not, lest thou
make the one Proud, the other Envious, and both Fools; if Nature has made a
difference, it is the part of a tender Parent to help the weakest: That trial
is not fair where Affection is the Judge.

MAX. 38.
In giving of thy Alms, enquire not so much into the Person as his Necessity;
God looks not so much upon the Merits of him that requires, as into the manner
of him that relieves; if the Man deserves not, thou have given it to Humanity.

MAX. 39.
If thou desire the Eucharist should be thy Supper, let thy Life be thy
Chaplain; If thy own worthiness invites thee, presume not to come; If the
sorrowful sense of thy own Sins forbid, presume not to forbear; If thy Faith be
strong, it will confirm it, if weak, it will strengthen it: He only that wants
Faith is the forbidden Guest.

MAX. 40.
Would thou traffic with the best advantage, and crown thy Virtues with the
best return, make the Poor thy Chapman, and thy Purse thy Factor; so shall thou
give trifles, which thou could not keep, to receive treasure which thou can
not lose: There is no such Merchant as the Charitable Man.

MAX. 41.
Follow not the multitude in the evil of Sin, lest thou share with the
multitude in the evil of Punishment; the number of the offenders, diminishes
not the quality of the offense; as the multitude of Suitors draws more favor
to the suit, so the multitude of Sinners draws more punishment on the Sin, the
number of the Faggots multiply the fury of the Fire.

MAX. 42.
If thou be angry with him that reproves thy Sin, thou secretly confessest his
reproof to be Just: if thou acknowledge his reproof to be Just, thou secretly
confessest thy Anger to be unjust; He that is angry with the Just Reprover,
kindles the fire of the Just Revenger.

MAX. 43.
Do well whilst thou may, least thou do evil when thou would not: He that
takes not advantage of a good power, shall lose the benefit of a good will.

MAX. 44.
Let not Mirth be thy profession, lest thou become a make-sport: He that has
but gained the title of a Jester, let him assure himself the Fool is not far
off.

MAX. 45.
In every Relative action change Conditions with thy Brother; then ask thy
Conscience what thou would be done to; being truly resolved exchange again,
and do thou the like to him, and thy Charity shall never err: It is injustice
to do, what without impatience thou can not suffer.

MAX. 46.
Love thy Neighbor for God's sake, and God for his own sake, who created all
things for thy sake, and redeemed thee for his mercy sake: if thy love have any
other object, it is false love; if thy object have any other end, it is
self-Love.

MAX. 47.
Let thy conversation with Men be sober and sincere; let thy Devotion to God be
dutiful and decent; let the one be hearty and not haughty; let the other be
humble and not homely; so live with Man as if God saw thee, so pray to God as
if Men heard thee.

MAX. 48.
God's pleasure is the wind our actions ought to sail by, Man's will is the
stream that Tides them up and down; if the wind blow not, thou may take the
advantage of the Tide; if it blow, no matter which way the stream runs; If with
thee, thy Voyage will be the shorter; if against thee, the Sea will be the
Rougher. It is easier to strive against the Stream, than to sail against the
Wind.

MAX. 49.
If thou desire much rest, desire not too much; there is no less trouble in the
preservation, than in the acquisition of abundance; Diogenes found more Rest in
his Tub, than Alexander on his Throne.

MAX. 50.
Would thou multiply thy Riches, diminish them wisely; or would thou make
thy Estate entire, divide it charitably; Seeds that are scattered increase, but
hoarded up they Perish.

MAX. 51.
How came thou by thy Honor? by Money; How came thou by thy Money? by
Extortion; compare the Pennyworth with the Price, and tell me truly, how truly
Honorable thou art: It is an ill purchase that is Cumbred with a Curse, and
that Honor will be Ruinous that is built on Ruins.

MAX. 52.
If thy Brother has privately offended thee, reprove him privately; and having
lost himself in an injury thou shall find him in thy forgiveness; he that
rebukes a private fault openly, betrays it, rather than reproves it.

MAX. 53.
What thou desire inspect thoroughly before thou prosecute; cast one Eye upon
the Inconveniences, as well as the other upon the Conveniences; weigh the
fullness of the Barn with the charge of the Plough; weigh Honor with her
burden, and Pleasure with her dangers; so shall thou undertake wisely what
thou desire, or moderate thy Desires in undertaking.

MAX. 54.
If thou owe thy whole self to thy God for thy Creation, what have thou left
to pay for thy Redemption, that was not so cheap as the Creation? In thy
Creation he gave thee thy self, and by thy self to him; in thy Redemption he
gave himself to thee, and through him restored thee to thy self: Thou art given
and restored, now what owe thou to thy God? If thou have paid all thy Debts,
give him the Surplusage, and thou have merited.

MAX. 55.
In thy Discourse, take heed what thou speak, to whom thou speak, how
thou speak, and when thou speak: What thou speak, speak truly; when
thou speak, speak wisely: A Fool's Heart is in his Tongue, but a Wise man's
Tongue is in his Heart.

MAX. 56.
Before thou act a Theft, consider what thou art about to do; if thou take it,
thou losest thy self; if thou keep it, thou disenablest thy Redemption; till
thou restorest it, thou can not be restored; when it is restored' it must
cost the more Sorrow and Pain, than ever it brought thee Profit or Pleasure. It
is a great Folly to please thy Palate with that which thou know must either
be vomited or thy Death.

MAX. 57.
Silence is the highest Wisdom of a Fool, and Speech is the greatest Trial of a
Wise man; if thou would be known a Wise man, let thy Words show thee so; if
thou doubt thy Words, let thy Silence feign thee so: It is not a greater point
of Wisdom to discover Knowledge than to hide Ignorance.

MAX. 58.
The Clergy is a Copy-book; their Life is the Paper, whereof some is purer,
some courser; their Doctrine is the Copies, some written in a plain hand,
others in a flourishing hand, some in a Text hand, some in a Roman hand, others
in a Court hand, others in a Bastard Roman. If the choice be in thy power,
choose a Book that has the finest Paper; let it not be too straight nor too
loosely bound, but easy to lie open to every Eye: Follow not every Copy, lest
thou be good at none; among them all choose one that shall be most legible and
useful, and fullest of just Writing: But if the Paper chance to have a Blot,
remember that Blot is no part of the Copy.

MAX. 59.
Virtue is nothing but an Act of loving that which is to be beloved, and that
Act is Prudence; from whence not to be removed by constraint, is Fortitude, not
to be allured by Enticements is Temperance, not to be diverted by Pride is
Justice; the declining of this Act is Vice.

MAX. 60.
Rebuke thy Servant's Fault in Private; public Reproof hardens his Shame; if
he be past a Youth, strike him not; he is not fit for thy Service that after
wise Reproofs will either deserve thy Strokes or digest them.

MAX. 61.
Take heed rather what thou receivest, than what thou give; what thou give
leaves thee, what thou take sticks by thee; he that presents a Gift, buys the
Receiver; he that takes a Gift, sells his Liberty

MAX. 62.
Things temporal are sweeter in expectation, things eternal are sweeter in the
fruition; the first shames thy hopes, the second crowns it: It is a vain
Journey whose end affords less pleasure than the way.

MAX. 63.
Know thy self, that thou may fear God; know God, that thou may love him;
in this thou art initiated to Wisdom, in that perfected: The Fear of God is the
Beginning of Wisdom; the Love of God is the fulfilling of the Law.

MAX. 64.
If thou have Providence to foresee a Danger, let thy Providence rather prevent
it than fear it; the fear of future Evils brings often times a present
Mischief; whilst thou seek to prevent it, practice to bear it: He is a wise
man can prevent an Evil; he is a patient man that can endure it; but he is a
valiant man can conquer it.

MAX. 65.
If thou have the place of a Magistrate, deserve it by thy Justice, and
dignifie it with thy Mercy: Take heed of early Gifts; an open hand makes a
blind Eye. Be not more apt to punish Vice, than to encourage Virtue; be not too
severe, lest thou be hated, nor too remiss, lest thou be slighted: So execute
Justice, that thou may be loved; so execute Mercy, that thou may be
feared.

MAX. 66.
Let not thy Table exceed the fourth part of thy Revenue; let thy Provision be
solid, and not far fetched, fuller of Substance than Art: Be wisely frugal in
thy Preparation, and freely cheerful in thy Entertainment: If thy Guest be
right, it is enough, if not, it is too much.: Too much is a Vanity; enough is a
Feast.

MAX. 67.
Let thy Apparel be decent, and suited to the Quality of thy place and purse:
Too much punctuality, and too much morosity, are the two Poles of Pride. Be
neither too early in the Fashion, nor too long out of it, nor too precisely in
it; what Custom has civilized is become decent, till then ridiculous. Where
thy Eye is the Jury, thy Apparel is the Evidence.

MAX. 68.
If thy Words be too luxuriant, confine them, lest they confine thee: He that
thinks he never can speak enough, may easily speak too much; a full Tongue and
an empty Brain are seldom parted.

MAX. 69.
In holding of an Argument, be neither choleric nor too opinionate; the one
distempers thy Understanding, the other abuses thy Judgment. Above all things
decline Paradoxes and Mysteries: Thou shall receive no Honor either in
maintaining rank Falsehoods, or meddling with secret Truths. As he that pleads
against the Truth makes Wit the Mother of his Error, so he that argues beyond
Warrant makes Wisdom the Midwife of his Folly.

MAX. 70.
Detain not the Wages from the poor man that has earned it, lest God withold
thy Wages from thee: If he complain to thee, hear him, lest he complain to
Heaven, where he will be heard; if he hunger for thy sake, thou shall not
prosper for his sake: The poor man's Penny is a Plague in the rich man's Purse.

MAX. 71.
Be not too cautious in discerning the fit Objects of thy Charity* l^st a Soul
perish through thy Discretion: What thou give to mistaken Want, shall return
a Blessing to thy deceived Heart; better in relieving Idleness to commit an
accidental Evil, than in neglecting Misery to omit an essential Good; better
two Drones be preserved than one Be perish.

MAX. 72.
Theology is the Empress of the World, Mysteries are her Privy Council,
Religion is her Clergy, the Arts are her Nobility, Philosophy her Secretary,
the Graces her Maids of Honor, the moral Virtues the Ladies of her Bedchamber,
Peace her Chamberlain, true Joy and endless Pleasures are her Courtiers, Plenty
her Treasurer, Poverty her Exchequer, the Temple is her Court. If thou desire
access to this great Majesty, the way is by her Courtiers; if thou have not
Power there, the common way to the Sovereign is by the Secretary.

MAX. 73.
It is an evil Knowledge to know the Good thou should embrace, unless thou
likewise embrace the Good thou know: The Breath of Divine Knowledge is the
B^llows of Divine Love; and the Flame of Divine Love is the Perfection of
Divine Knowledge.

MAX. 74.
If thou desire Rest unto thy Soul, be just; he that does no Injury fears not
to suffer Injury: The unjust mind is always in Labor; it either practices the
Evil it has projected, or projects to avoid the Evil it has deserved.

MAX. 75.
Accustom thy self to what is most usual: He that delights in Rarities must
often feed displeased, and sometimes lie at the mercy of a dear market; common
food nourishes best, Delicates please most; the sound Stomach prefers neither;
what art thou the worse for the last year's plain Diet, or what now the better
for the last great Feast?

MAX. 76.
Whoever thou art, thou have done more evil in one day than thou can expiate
in six, and can thou think the evil of six days can require less than one?
God has made us rich in days by allowing six, and himself poor by reserving
but one; and shall we spare our own Flock, and sheer his Lamb? He that has
done nothing but what he can justify in the six days, may play the seventh.

MAX. 77.
Hope and Fear, like Hypocrates's Twin's, should live and dye together; if Hope
departs from Fear, it travels by Security, and lodges in Presumption; if Fear
depart from Hope, it travels to Infidelity, and Inns in Despair; the one shuts
up Heaven, the other opens Hell; the one makes thee insensible of God's Frowns,
the other incapable of God's Favor; and both teach God to be unmerciful, and
thee to be most miserable.

MAX. 78.
Close thine ear against him that shall open his mouth secretly against
another; if thou recieve not his words, they fly back, and wound the Reporter;
if thou receive them, they fly forward, and wound the Receiver.

MAX. 79.
If thou would preserve a sound Body, use fasting and walking; if a
healthful Soul, Fasting and praying; walking exercises the Body, praying
exercises the Soul; fasting cleanses both.

MAX. 80.
Would thou not be thought a Fool in another's Conceit? be not wise in thine
own; he that trusts in his own Wisdom, proclaims his own Folly: He is truly
wise, and shall appear so, that has Folly enough to be thought not worldly
wise, or Wisdom enough to see his own Folly.

MAX. 81.
Desire thou Knowledge? Know the end of thy desire: Is it only to know? then
it is Curiosity; is it because thou may be known? then it is Vanity; if
because thou may edify, then it is Charity; if because thou may be edified,
it is Wisdom. That Knowledge turns to mere Excrement, that has not some heat
of Wisdom to digest it.

MAX. 82.
Wisdom without Innocence is Knavery; Innocence without Wisdom is Foolery; be
therefore wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves: The Subtilty of the Serpent
instructs the Innocence of the Dove; the Innocence of the Dove corrects the
Subtilty of the Serpent. What God has joined together, let no man separate.

MAX. 83.
The more thou imitatest the Virtues of a Saint departed, the better thou
celebratest the Saint's day: God is not pleased with surfeiting for his sake,
who with his Fasting so often pleas^d his God.

MAX. 84.
Choose not thy serviceable Soldier out of soft Apparel, lest ^e prove
effeminate, nor out of a full Purse, lest he grow ^morous: They are more fit
for action that are fiery to gain a Fortune abroad, than they that have
Fortunes to lose at home. Expectation breeds Spirit, Fruition brings Fear.

MAX. 85.
God has given to Mankind a common Library, his Creatures; and to every man a
proper Book, himself; being an abridgement of all the others. If thou read with
Understanding, it will make thee a great Master of Philosophy, and a true
Servant to the Divine Author; if thou but barely read, it will make thee thy
own wise man, and the Author's Fool.

MAX. 86.
Doubt is a weak Child, lawfully begotten between an obstructed Judgment and a
fair Understanding. Opinion is a bold Bastard, gotten between a strong Fancy
and a weak Judgment. It is less dishonorable to be ingeniously doubtful, than
rashly opinionate.

MAX. 87.
As thou art a moral man, esteem thy self not as thou art, but as thou art
esteemed. As thou art a Christian, esteem thy self as thou art, not as thou art
esteemed: Thy Price in both rises and falls as the market goes; the market of a
moral man is wild Opinion; the market of a Christian is a good Conscience.

MAX. 88.
Providence is an Exercise of Reason, Experience an Act of Sense; by how much
Reason excels Sense, by so much Providence exceeds Experience: Providence
prevents that Danger which Ezperience repents; Providence is the Rational
Daughter of Wisdom, Experience the Empirical mistress of Fools.

MAX. 89.
Has fortune dealt thee ill Cards, let Wisdom make thee a good Gamester; in a
fair Gale every Fool may sail, but wise behavior in a Storm commends the
wisdom of a Pilate; to bear adversity with an equal mind, is both the sign and
glory of a brave Spirit.

MAX. 90.
If any speak ill of thee, flee home to thy own Conscience, and examine thy
heart; if thou be guilty, it is a just Correction; if not guilty, it is a fair
Instruction: make use of both, so shall thou distill Honey out of Gall, and out
of an open Enemy, create a secret Friend.

MAX. 91.
As the exercise of the body Natural is moderate Recreation, so the exercise of
the body Politic, is Military-Discipline; by that, the one is made more able;
by this, the other is made more active: where both are wanting there wants no
danger; to the one, through a humorous supply; to the other, by a Negligent
security.

MAX. 92.
God is above thee, Beasts are beneath thee; acknowledge him that is above
thee, and thou shall be acknowledged by them that are under thee; whilst Daniel
acknowledge God to be above him, the Lions acknowledge God to be above them.

MAX. 93.
Take heed, whilst thou show Wisdom in not speaking, thou betrayest not thy
own Folly in too long silence; if thou art a Fool, thy silence is Wisdom; if a
Wise man, too long silence is Folly: As too many words from a Fool's mouth,
gives a Wise man no leave to speak, so too long silence in a Wise man gives a
Fool the opportunity of speaking, and makes thee guilty of his Folly.

MAX. 94.
Consider what thou were, what thou art, what thou shall be, what is within
thee, what is above thee, what beneath thee, what is against thee, what was
before thee, what shall be after thee; and this will bring to thy self
Humility, to thy Neighbor Charity, to the World Contempt, to thy God
Obedience. He that knows not himself positively, cannot know himself relatively.

MAX. 95.
Think not thy love to God, merits God's love to thee; his acceptance of thy
Duty crowns his own Gifts in thee. Man's love to God is nothing but a faint
reflection of God's Love to man.

MAX. 96.
Be always less willing to speak than to hear; what thou hear thou
receivest, what thou speak thou give. It is more glorious to give, more
profitable to receive.

MAX. 97.
Seeft thou good days, prepare for evil times; no Summer but has its Winter:
He never reapt Comfort in adversity, that sowed it not in prosperity.

MAX. 98.
If being a Magistrate thou connivest at Vice, thou nourishest it; if thou
sparest it, thou committest it; what is not by thee punished in others, is made
punishable in thee; he that favors present Evils, entails them upon his
Posterity: he that excuses the Guilty condemns the Innocent.

MAX. 99.
Truth haunts no Corners, seeks no by-ways; if thou profess it, do it openly;
if thou seek it, do it fairly: he deserves not to profess Truth that professes
it fearfully: he deserves not to find the Truth that seeks it fraudulently.

MAX. 100.
If thou desire to be wiser yet, think not thy self yet wise enough; and if
thou desire to improve knowledge in thy self, despise not the Instructions of
another: He that Instructs him that thinks himself wise enough, has a Fool to
his Scholar; he that thinks himself wise enough to Instruct himself, has a
Fool to his Master.

The End of the Third Century.
INSTITUTIONS AND MAXIMS Moral and Divine, etc.
CENT. IV.
MAXIM 1.
DEmean thy self more warily in thy Study than in the Street; if thy public
actions have an hundred witnesses, thy private have a thousand; the Multitude
look but upon thy actions, thy Conscience looks into them; the Multitude may
chance to excuse thee, if not acquit thee; thy Conscience will accuse thee, if
not Condemn thee.

MAX. 2.
Of all Vices, take heed of Drunkenness; other Vices are but fruits of
disordered affections, this disorders, nay banisheth Reason; other Vices but
impair the Soul, this demolisheth her two chief Faculties, the Understanding
and the Will; other Vices makes their own way, this makes way for all Vices: He
that is a Drunkard is qualified for all Vice.

MAX. 3.
If thy Sin trouble thee, let that trouble comfort thee; as pleasure in the
Remembrance of Sin exasperates Justice, so sorrow in the Repentance of Sin
mollifies Mercy: It is less danger to Commit the Sin we delight in, than to
delight in the Sin we have Committed; and more Joy is promised to Repentance,
than to Innocence.

MAX. 4.
The way to God is by thy self, the way to thy self is by thy own Corruptions;
he that baulks this way, errs; he that travels by the Creatures, wanders: the
motion of the Heavens shall give thy soul no rest; the virtue of Herbs shall
not increase thine; the height of all Philosophy both Natural and Moral, is to
know thy self, and the end of this Knowledge is to know God.

MAX. 5.
Infamy is where it is received; if thou art a Mud-wall, it will stick; if
Marble, it will rebound; if thou storm at it, it is thine; if thou contemn it,
it is his.

MAX. 6.
If thou desire Magistracy, learn to forget thy self: If thou undertake it, bid
thy self farewell. He that looks upon a Common Cause with private Eyes, looks
through false Glasses. In the exercise of thy Politic Office thou must forget
both Ethics and Oeconomicks: He that puts on a public Gown, must put off a
private Person.

MAX. 7.
Let the words of a Virgin, though in a good Cause, and to as good purpose, be
neither violent, many, nor first, nor last; it is less shame for a Virgin to be
lost in a blushing silence, than to be found in a bold Eloquence.

MAX. 8.
Art thou in Plenty, give what thou will; art thou in Poverty, give what thou
can: as what is received, is received according to the manner of the
Receiver, so what is given is prized according to the measure of the Giver: He
is a good workman that makes as good Work, as his matter will permit.

MAX. 9.
God is the Author of Truth, the Devil the Father of Lies; if the telling of a
Truth shall endanger thy Life, the Author of Truth will protect thee from the
Danger, or reward thee for thy Damage; if the telling a Lie may secure thy
Life, the Father of Lies will beguile thee of thy Gains, or traduce the
Security: Better by losing of a Life to save it, than by saving of a Life to
lose it. However, better thou perish than the Truth.

MAX. 10.
Consider not so much what thou have, as what others want; what thou have take
heed thou lose not; what thou have not, take heed thou cover not: If thou have
many above thee, turn thy Eye upon those that are under thee. If thou have not
Inferiors, have patience a while, and thou shall have no Superiors; the Grave
requires no Marshal.

MAX. 11.
If thou see any thing in thy self which may make thee proud, look a little
and thou shall find enough to humble thee; if thou be Wise, view the Peacock's
feathers with his Feet, and weigh thy best parts with thy imperfections: he
that would rightly prize the man, must read his whole story.

MAX. 12.
Let not the sweetness of Contemplation be so esteemed, that action be
despised. Rachel was more fair; Leah more fruitful; as Contemplation is more
delightful, so is it more dangerous: Lot was upright in the City and wicked in
the mountain.

MAX. 13.
If thou have but little, make it not less by murmuring; if thou have enough,
make it not too much by unthankfulness; he that is not thankfully contented
with the least favor he has received, has made himself incapable of the
least favor he can receive.

MAX. 14.
What thou have taken unlawfully, restore speedily; for the Sin in taking it is
repeated every minute thou keep'st it; if thou can, restore it in kind; if
not value; if it may be, restore it to the Party; if not, to God; the Poor is
God's Receiver.

MAX. 15.
Let the fear of a Danger, be as a spur to prevent it; he that fears otherwise
gives advantage to the Danger; it is less folly not to endeavor the prevention
of the evil thou fear, than to fear the Evil which thy endeavor cannot
prevent.

MAX. 16.
If thou have any Excellence which is thine own, thy Tongue may glory in it
without shame; but if thou have received it, thy Glory is but Usurpation, and
thy Pride is but the Prologue of thy Shame; where Vainglory Commands, there
Folly Counsels; where Pride Rides, there Shame Lacquys.

MAX. 17.
God has ordained his Creatures not only for necessity but for delight; since
he has Carved thee with a bountiful hand, fear not to receive it with a
liberal heart; he that gave thee Water to allay thy thirst, gave thee Wine to
exhilerate thy heart: Restore him for the one, the necessity of thanks; Return
him for the other, the cheerfulness of Praise.

MAX. 18.
If the Wicked flourish and thou suffer, be not discouraged; they are fatted
for destruction, thou art dieted for health; they have no other Heaven but the
thoughts of a long Earth; thou have nothing on Earth but the hopes of a quick
Heaven: If there were no Journey's end, the Travel of a Christian were most
Comfortless.

MAX. 19.
Imp not thy Wing with the Church's Feathers, lest thou fly to thy own Ruin;
Impropriations are bold Metaphors, which continued are deadly Allegories; one
foot of Land in Capite encumbers the whole Estate; the Eagle snatched a Coal
from the Altar, but it fired her Nest.

MAX. 20.
Let that Table which God has pleased to give thee, please thee; he that made
the Vessel knows her burden, and how to ballast her; he that made all things
very good, cannot but do all things very well; if thou be content with a
little, thou have enough; if thou complainest, thou have too much.

MAX. 21.
Would thou discover the true worth of a Man, behold him Naked, distreasure
him of his ill got Wealth; degrade him of his dear bought honor; disrobe him
of his purple habit; discard his pampered body; then look upon his Soul, and
thou shall find how great he is: Natural sweetness is never scented but in the
absence of Artificial.

MAX. 22.
If thou art subject to any secret folly, blab it not, lest thou appear
impudent; nor boast of it, lest thou seem insolent; every man's Vanity ought to
be his greatest shame; and every man's Folly ought to be his greatest secret.

MAX. 23.
If thou be Ignorant, endeavor to get Knowledge, lest thou be beaten with
stripes: If thou have attained Knowledge, put it in practice, lest thou be
beaten with many stripes; better not to know what we should practice, than not
to practice what we know; and less danger dwells in unaffected Ignorance, than
unactive Knowledge.

MAX. 24.
Take heed thou harbor not that Vice called Envy, lest another's happiness be
thy torment, and God's blessing becomes thy Curse: Virtue corrupted with
Vainglory turns Pride; Poisoned with Malice becomes Envy: Join therefore
Humility with thy Virtue; and Pride shall have no footing, and Envy shall have
no entrance.

MAX. 25.
If thy endeavor cannot prevent a Vice, let thy Repentance lament it; the more
thou remember'st it without hearts-grief, the deeper it is rooted in thy heart:
Take heed it please thee not, especially in cold blood, thy pleasure in it
makes it fruitless, and her fruit is thy destruction.

MAX. 26.
The two knowledges of God and of thy self, are the highway to thy Salvation;
that breeds in thee a filial Love, this a filial Fear. The Ignorance of thy
self is the beginning of all sin; and the Ignorance of God is the perfection of
all Evil.

MAX. 27.
Rather do nothing to the purpose than be Idle, that the Devil may find thee
doing. The Bird that sits is easily shot, when flyers 'scape the Fowler;
Idleness is the dead Sea that swallows all Virtues, and the self made Sepulcher
of a living man: The Idle man is the Devil's hireling, whose Livery is Rags,
whose Diet and Wages are famine and diseases.

MAX. 28.
Be not so mad, as to alter that Countenance which thy Creator made thee;
remember 'twas the work of his hands; if it be bad how dare thou mend it; if
it be good, why do thou mend it? art thou ashamed of his work, and proud of
thy own? he made thy face to be known by; why desire thou to be known by
another? It is a shame to adulterate Modesty, but more to adulterate Nature;
lay by thy Art, and blush not to appear what he blushes not to make thee. It is
better to be his Picture than thine own.

MAX. 29.
Let the Ground of all thy Religious actions be obedience; Examine not why it
is Commanded, but observe it because it is commanded; true Obedience neither
Procrastinates nor Questions.

MAX. 30.
If thou would buy an Inheritance in Heaven, advise not with thy Purse, lest
in the mean while thou lose thy Purchase. The Widow bought as much for two
Mites as Zacheus did for half his Estate. The Price of that Purchase is what
thou have, and is not lost for what thou have not, if thou desire to have it.

MAX. 31.
With the same height of Desire thou have sinned, with the like depth of Sorrow
thou must repent; thou that have sinned to day, defer not thy Repentance till
to morrow. He that has promised thee Pardon to thy Repentance, has not
promised Life till thou repent.

MAX. 32.
Take heed how thou receivest Praise from men; from good men, neither avoid it,
nor glory in it; from evil men, neither desire it nor expect it: To be praised
of them that are evil, or for that which is evil, is equal Dishonor; he is
happy in his Worth who is praised by the good, and imitated by the bad.

MAX. 33.
Proportion thy Charity to the strength of thy Estate, lest God proportion thy
Estate to the weakness of thy Charity: Let the Lips of the Poor be the Trumpet
of thy Gifts, lest in seeking applause thou losest thy Reward. Nothing is more
pleasing to God than an open hand and a close mouth.

MAX. 34.
Do thou want things necessary? Grumble not; perchance 'twas a necessary
thing thou should want; endeavor lawfully to supply it: If God bless not
thy Endeavors, bless him that knows what is fittest for thee; thou art God's
Patient, prescribe not thy Physician.

MAX. 35.
If another's Death, or thy own, depend upon thy Confession, if thou can, say
nothing; if thou must, say the Truth: It is better thou lose thy Life than God
his Honor; it is as easy for him to give thee Life being condemned, as
Repentance, having sinned: It is more Wisdom to yield thy Body, than hazard thy
Soul.

MAX. 36.
Cloth not thy Language, either with obscurity or affectation; in the one thou
discoverest too much darkness, in the other too much lightness: He that speaks
from the Understanding to the Understanding, is the best Interpreter.

MAX. 37.
If thou expect Death as a Friend, prepare to entertain it; if thou expect
Death as an Enemy, prepare to overcome it: Death has no advantage, but when it
comes a Stranger.

MAX. 38.
Fear nothing but what thy Industry may prevent: Be confident of nothing but
what fortune cannot defeat. It is no less folly to fear what is impossible to
be avoided, than to be secure when there is a possibility to be deprived.

MAX. 39.
Let not the necessity of God's Decree discourage thee to pray, or dishearten
thy Prayers; do thou thy Dury, and God will do his Pleasure: If thy Prayers
make not him found that is sick, they will return, and confirm thy health that
art sound: If the end of thy Prayers be to obtain thy Request, thou confinest
him that is infinite; if thou have done well because thou were commanded, thou
have thy Reward, in that thou have obeyed God's Pleasure in the end of our
Prayers.

MAX. 40.
Marry not too young; and when thou art too old, marry not, lest thou be fond
in the one, and dote in the other, and repent for both: Let thy. Liking ripen
before thou love; let thy Love advise before thou choose; and let thy Choice be
first, before thou marry: Remember that the whole Happiness of thy Life depends
upon this one Act; remember that nothing but Death can dissolve this Knot: He
that weds in haste, repents oftentimes by leisure; and he that repents him of
his own Act, either is or was a Fool by Confession.

MAX. 41.
If God has sent thee a Cross, take it up and follow him; use it wisely, lest
it be unprofitable; bear it patiently, lest it be intolerable; behold in it
God's Anger against Sin, and his Love toward thee in punishing and chastising
the other. If it be light, slight it not; if heavy, murmur not: Not to be
sensible of a Judgment, is the symptom of a hardened Heart; and to be displeased
at his Pleasure is a sign of a Rebellious Will.

MAX. 42.
If thou desire to be magnanimous, undertake nothing rashly, and fear nothing
thou undertakest: Fear nothing but Infamy; dare any thing but Injury. The
measure of Magnanimity, is neither to be rash, nor timorous.

MAX. 43.
Practice in Health to bear Sickness, and endeavor in the strength of thy life
to entertain Death. He that has a Will to dye, not having Power to live, shows
Necessity, not Virtue: It is the Glory of a brave mind to embrace Pangs in the
very Arms of Pleasure. What name of Virtue merits he that goes when he is
driven?

MAX. 44.
Be not too punctual in taking place: If he be thy Superior, it is his due; if
thy Inferior, it is his Dishonor; it is thou must honor thy place, not thy
place thee. It is a poor Reward of Worth, that consists in a Righthand, or a
brick Wall.

MAX. 45.
Pray often, because thou sinnest always; repent quickly, lest thou dye
suddenly: He that repents it, because he wants power to act it, repents not of
a Sin till he forsakes it: He that wants power to actuate his Sin, has not
forsaken his Sin, but his Sin him.

MAX. 46.
Make Philosophy thy Journey, Theology thy Journey's end: Philosophy is a
pleasant way, but dangerous to him that either tires or retires: In this
Journey it is safe neither to loyter, nor to rest, till thou have attained thy
Journey's-End: He that sits down a Philosopher, rises up an Atheist.

MAX. 47.
Fear not to Sin, for God's sake, but thy own; thy Sin o'erthrows not his
Glory, but Good: He gains his glory not only from the Salvation of the
Repentant; but also from the confusion of the Rebellious. There be Vessels for
honor, and Vessels for dishonor; but both for his honor. God is not grieved
for the glory he shall lose for thy Improvidence, but for the horror thou shall
find for thy Impenitence.

MAX. 48.
Insult not over Misery, nor deride Infirmity, nor despise Deformity. The first
shows thy Inhumanity; the second, thy Folly; the third, thy Pride; He that made
him miserable, made thee happy to lament him: He that made him weak, made thee
strong to support him; He that made him deformed, gave thee favor to be
humbled; He that is not sensible of another's Unhappiness, is a Living Stone;
but he that makes Misery the object of his triumph, is an Incarnate Devil.

MAX. 49.
Make thy Recreations servants to thy business; lest thou become slave to thy
Recreations; when thou go up into the Mountain, leave this Servant in the
Valley; when thou go to the City, leave him in the Suburbs; and remember,
the Servant is not greater than his Master.

MAX. 50.
Praise no man too liberally before his face; nor censure him too lavishly
behind his back. The one savours of Flattery; the other, of Malice, and both
are Reprehensible: The true way to advance another's Virtue, is to follow it;
and the best means to cry down another's Vice, is to decline it.

MAX. 51.
If thy Prince command a lawful act, give him all active Obedience: If he
command an Unlawful act, give Passive Obedience. What thy well-grounded
Conscience will suffer, do cheerfully, without repining; where thou may not
do Lawfully, suffer courageously without Rebellion: Thy Life and Livelihood is
thy Prince's, thy Conscience is thy own.

MAX. 52.
If thou give to receive the like, it is Exchange: If to receive more, it is
covetousness: If to receive thanks, it is Vanity: If to be seen, it is
Vainglory: If to corrupt, it is Bribery: If for Example, it is Formality: If for
Compassion, it is Charity: If because thou art Commanded, it is Obedience: The
affection in doing the work, gives a name to the work done.

MAX. 53.
Fear Death, but be not afraid of Death. To fear it whets thy Expectation; to
be afraid of it dulls thy Preparation: If thou can endure it, it is but a
slight pain; if not, it is but a short pain: To fear Death, is the way to Live
long; To be afraid of Death, is to be long a Dying.

MAX. 54.
If thou desire the love of God and Man, be humble; for the proud heart, as it
loves none but it self, so it is beloved of none, but by it self: The Voice of
humility is God's Rhetoric. Humility enforces, where neither Virtue, nor
Strength, nor Reason, can prevail.

MAX. 55.
Look upon thy burning Taper, and there see the Emblem of thy Life: The flame
is thy Soul; the Wax thy Body, and is commonly a span long; the Wax, (if never
so well tempered) can but last his length; and who can lengthen it? If ill
tempered, it shall waste the the faster, yet last his length; an open Window
shall hasten either; an Extinguisher shall put out both: Husband them the best
thou can, thou can not lengthen them beyond their date: Leave them to the
injury of the Wind, or to the mercy of a wastful hand, thou hastnest them, but
still they burn their length: But puff them out, and thou have shortened them,
and stopped their passage, which else had brought them to their appointed End.
Bodies according to their Constitutions, stronger or weaker, according to the
equality or inequality of their Elements, have their dates, and may be
preserved from shortning, but not lengthned. Neglect may waste them, ill Diet
may hasten them to their Journey's End, yet they have lived their length; a
violent hand may interrupt them; a sudden death may stop them, and they are
shortened. It lies in the power of Man, either permissively to hasten, or
actively to shorten; but not to lengthen or extend the Limits of his Natural
Life. He only (if any) has the art to lengthen out his Taper that puts it ^o
the best advantage.

MAX. 56.
Demean thy self in the presence of thy Prince, with reverence and
cheerfulness. That, without this, is too much sadness; this, without that, is
too much boldness: Let thy Wisdom endeavor to gain his opinion, and labor to
make thy Loyalty his Confidence: Let him not find thee false in Words, unjust
in thy Actions, unseasonable in thy Suits, nor careless in his Service: Cross
not his passion; Question not his pleasures; Press not into his secrets; Pry
not in his prerogative: Displease him not, lest he be angry; appear not
displeased, lest he be jealous. The anger of a King is implacable: The
Jealousy of a Prince is Incurable.

MAX. 57.
Give thy heart to thy Creator, and reverence thy Superiors: Give diligence to
thy Calling, and ear to good Counsel: Give alms to the Poor, and the Glory to
God: Forgive him that ignorantly offends thee, and him that wittingly offended
thee, seeks thee. Forgive him that has forcibly abused thee; and him that has
fraudulently betrayed thee: Forgive all thine Enemies; but least of all thy
self: Give, and it shall be given to thee; Forgive, and it shall be Forgiven
thee; the sum of all Christianity is Give and Forgive.

MAX. 58.
Be not too great a Niggard in the Commendations of him that professes thy own
Quality: If he deserves thy praise, thou have discovered thy Judgment; If not,
thy Modesty: Honor either returns, or reflects to the Giver.

MAX. 59.
If thou desire to raise thy Fortunes, Encourage thy delights to the casts of
Fortune; be wise be times, lest thou repent too late; what thou gettest, thou
gainest by abused Providence; what thou losest, thou losest by abused Patience;
what thou winnest is prodigally spent; what thou losest is prodigally lost: It
is an Evil trade that prodigally drives; and a bad Voyage where the Pilot is
blind.

MAX. 60.
Be very wary for whom thou becomest Security, and for no more than thou art
able to discharge, if thou love thy Liberty. The Borrower is a Slave to the
Lender; the Security is a Slave to both: whilst the Borrower and Lender are
both eased, the Security bears both their burdens. He is a Wise Security that
recovers himself.

MAX. 61.
Look upon thy Affliction as thou do upon thy Physic; both imply a Disease,
and both are applied for a Cure; that of the Body, this of the Soul: If they
work, they promise health; if not, the threaten death: He is not happy that is
not Afflicted, but he that finds happiness by his Affliction.

MAX. 62.
If the knowledge of good, whet thy desire to good, it is a happy knowledge: If
by thy ignorance of Evil, thou art surpised with Evil, it is an unhappy
Ignorance. Happy is he that has so much Knowledge of Good, as to desire it;
and but so much Knowledge of Evil, as to fear it.

MAX. 63.
When the Flesh presents thee with delights, then present thy self with
dangers: Where the World possesses thee with vain Hopes, there possess thy self
with true Fear. When the Devil brings thee Oil, bring thou Vinegar. The way to
be safe, is never to be secure.

MAX. 64.
If thy Brother has offended thee, forgive him freely, and be reconciled: To
do Evil for Evil is humane Corruption; to do Good for Good, is civil
Retribution: To do Good for Evil is Christian perfections; the Act of
Forgiveness is God's Precept; the manner of Forgiveness is God's President.

MAX. 65.
Reverence the Writings of Holy Men; but lodge not thy Faith upon them, because
but Men: They are good Pools, but no Fountains. Build on Paul himself, no
longer than he builds on Christ: If Peter renounce his Master, renounce Peter.
The word of Man may convince Reason; but the word of God alone can compel
Conscience.

MAX. 66.
In Civil things follow the most; in matters of Religion, the fewest; in all
things, follow the best; so shall thy ways be pleasing to God, so shall thy
behavior be plausible with Men.

MAX. 67.
If any loss or misery has befallen to thy Brother; dissemble it to thy self;
and what Counsel thou give him, Register carefully; and when the case is
thine, follow it: so shall thine own Reason convince thy Passion, or thy
Passion confess her own Unreasonableness.

MAX. 68.
When thou go about to change thy Moral Liberty, into a Christian Servitude,
prepare thy self to be the world's laughing stock; if thou overcome her Scoffs,
thou shall have double honor; if overcome, double shame. He is unworthy of a
good Master that is ashamed of a bad Livery.

MAX. 69.
Let not the falling of a Salt, or the crossing of a Hare, or the crying of a
Cricket, trouble thee: They portend no evil, but what thou fear. He is ill
acquainted with himself, that knows not his own Fortunes better than they: If
evil follow it, it is the Punishment of thy Superstition, not the fulfilling of
their Portent: All things are lucky to thee, if thou will; nothing but is
ominous to the Superstitious.

MAX. 70.
So behave thy self in thy course of Life, as at a Banquet. Take what is
offered with modest Thankfulness; and expect what is not as yet offered with
hopeful Patience. Let not thy rude Appetite press thee, nor a slight
carefulness indispose thee, nor a sullen discontent deject thee. Who desires
more than enough, has too much; and he that is satisfied with a little, has
no less than enough.

MAX. 71.
Is thy Child dead? He is restored, not lost. Is thy Treasure stolen? It is not
lost, it is restored: He is an ill Debtor, that counts Repayment loss; but it
was an ill chance that took thy Child, and a wicked hand that stole thy
Treasure: What is that to thee: It matters not by whom he requires the things
from whom he lent them; what Goods are ours by Loan, are not lost when
willingly restored, but when unworthily received.

MAX. 72.
Censure no man; detract from no man; praise no man before his Face; traduce no
man behind his back: Boast not thy self abroad, nor flatter thy self at home:
If any thing cross thee, accuse thy self; if any extol thee, humble thy self:
Honor those that instruct thee, and be thankful to those that reprehend thee.
Let all thy Desires be subjected to Reason, and let thy Reason be corrected By
Religion. Weigh thy self by thy own Balances, and trust not the Voice of wild
Opinion: Observe thy self as thy greatest Enemy; so shall thou become thy
greatest Friend.

MAX. 73.
Endeavor to make thy discourse such as may administer Profit to thy self, or
Standers by, lest thou incur the danger of an idle Word: Above all Subjects,
avoid all those that are scurrilous and obscene, Tales that are impertinent and
improbable, and Dreams.

MAX. 74.
If God has blessed thee with a Son, bless thou that Son with a lawful Calling;
choose such Employment as may stand with his Fancy and thy Judgment: if his
Country claims his Ability toward the building of her Honor; if he cannot
bring a Cedar, let him bring a Shrub: He that brings nothing, usurps his Life,
and robs his Country of a Servant.

MAX. 75.
At thy first Entrance into thy Estate, keep a low Sail; thou must rise with
Honor; thou can not decline without Shame. He that begins as his Father
ended, shall end as his Father begun.

MAX. 76.
If any obscene Tale should chance to slip into thine Ears, among the Varieties
of Discourse (if opportunity admit) reprove it; if otherwise, let thy Silence
or change of Countenance interpret thy dislike: The smiling Ear is Bawd to the
lascivious Tongue.

MAX. 77.
Be more circumspect over the Works of thy Brain, than the Actions of thy Body;
these have Infirmity to plead for them, but they must stand upon their own
bottoms; these are but the Objects of few, they of all; these will have Equals
to defend them, they have Inferiors to envy them, Superiors to deride them,
all to censure them: It is no less danger for these to be proclaimed at
Paul's-Cross, than for them to be protested, in Paul's Churchyard.

MAX. 78.
Use Common place-books, or Collections, as Indexes to light thee to the
Authors, lest thou be abused: He that takes Learning upon Trust, makes him a
fair Cupboard with another's Plate; he is an ill advised Purchaser, whose Title
depends more on Witnesses than Evidences.

MAX. 79.
If thou desire to make the best advantage of the Muses, either by reading to
benefit thy self, or by writing others, keep a peaceful Soul within a temperate
Body: A full Belly makes a dull Brain, and a turbulent Spirit a distracted
Judgment. The Muses starve in a Cook's Shop and a Lawyer's Study.

MAX. 80.
When thou communicatest thy self by Letters, heighten or d^press thy Style
according to the Quality of the Person and Business; that which thy tongue
would present to any if present, let thy pen represent to him absent. The
Tongue is the Mind's Interpreter; and the Pen is the Tongue's Secretary.

MAX. 81.
Keep thy Soul in exercise, lest her Faculties rust for want of Motion; to eat,
sleep, or sport too long, stops the natural course of her natural actions. To
dwell too long in the Employments of the Body, is both the Cause and Sign of a
dull Spirit.

MAX. 82.
Be very circumspect to whose Tuition thou committest thy Child; every good
Scholar is not a good Master. He must be a man of invincible Patience and
singular Observation: He must study Children, that will teach them well, and
Reason must rule him that would rule wisely; he must not take advantage of an
ignorant Father, nor give too much ear to an indulgent Grandmother: The common
Good must outweigh his private Gains, and his Credit must out-bid Gratuities:
He must be diligent and sober, not too familiar, nor too reserved, neither
amorous, nor fantastic; just, without fierceness; merciful, without fondness:
If such an one thou meet with, thou have found a Treasure, which if thou
know how to value, is invaluable.

MAX. 83.
Let not thy Laughter handsel thy own Jest, lest whilst thou laugh at it,
others laugh at thee; neither tell it often to the same Hearers, lest thou be
thought forgetful or barren. There is no Sweetness in a Cabbage twice sodd, or
a Tale twice told.

MAX. 84.
If Opinion has lighted the Lamp of thy name, endeavor to encourage it with
thine own Oil, lest it go out, and stink. The Chronical Disease of Popularity
is Shame: If thou be once up, beware; from Fame to Infamy is a beaten Road.

MAX. 85.
Cleanse thy Morning Soul with private and due Devotion: Till then admit no
business; the first born of thy Thoughts are God's, and not thine but by
Sacrilege. Think thy self not ready, till thou have praised him, and he will be
always ready to bless thee.

MAX. 86.
In all thy actions, think God sees thee; and in all his actions labor to see
him; that will make thee fear him, this will move thee to love him. The Fear of
God is the beginning of Knowledge, and the Knowledge of God is the Perfection
of Love.

MAX. 87.
Let not the Expectation of a Reversion entice thy heart to the wish of a
Possessor's Death, lest a Judgment meet thee in thy Expectation, or a Curse
overtake thee in thy fruition; Every wish makes the a murderer; and moves God
to be an accessory: God often lengthens the Life of the Possessor, with the
days of the Expector.

MAX. 88.
Prize not thy self by what thou have, but by what thou art: He that values a
Jewel by her Golden Frame, or a Book by its Silver Clasps; or a Man by his vast
Estate, errs: If thou art not worth more than the World can make thee, thy
Redeemer had a bad Peny-worth, or thou an uncurious Redeemer.

MAX. 89.
Let not thy Father, nor the Fathers, nor the Church, thy Mother's belief, be
the ground of thine: The Scripture lies Open to the humble Heart, but Locked
against the proud Inquisitor: He that believes with an Implicit Faith, is a
mere Empyrick in Religion.

MAX. 90.
Of all Sins, take greatest heed of that which thou have last, and most
repented of: He that was the last thrust out of doors, is the next readiest to
crowd in again; and he that thou have forest battled, is likest to call more
help for a Revenge. It is requisite for him that has cast one Devil out, to
keep strong hold, lest seven Return.

MAX. 91.
In the meditation of Divine Mysteries, keep thy Heart humble, and thy Thoughts
holy; let Philosophy not be ashamed to be Confuted, nor Logic blush to be
Confounded; what thou can not prove, approve; what thou can not comprehend,
believe; and what thou can believe, admire; so shall thy Ignorance be
satisfied in thy Faith, and thy doubts be swallowed up with wonders: The best
way to see Daylight is to put out the Candle.

MAX. 92.
If Opinion has cried thy Name up, let thy modesty cry thy heart down, lest
thou deceive it, or it thee; there is no less danger in a great Name than in a
bad; and no less honor in deserving of Praise, than in the enduring it.

MAX. 93.
Use the Holy Scriptures with all Reverence; let not thy wanton fancy carry it
out in Jests, nor thy sinful wit make it an advocate to thy Sin; it is a
subject for thy Faith, not Fancy: Where Wit and Blasphemy is one Trade, the
Understanding's Bankrupt.

MAX. 94.
Do thou complain that God has forsaken thee; it is thou that have forsaken
him; it is thou that art mutable; in him there is no shadow of Change; in his
light is Life: If thy will drive thee to a Dungeon, thou make thy own
darkness; and in that darkness dwells thy death; from whence if he Redeem thee,
he is merciful; if not, he is just; in both, he receives Glory.

MAX. 95.
Make use of Time if thou love Eternity; know yesterday cannot be recalled;
to morrow cannot be assured; to day is only thine; which if thou procrastinate,
thou losest; which loss is lost for Ever; one to day is worth two to morrow.

MAX. 96.
If thou be strong enough to Encounter with the times, keep thy Station; if
not, shift a foot to gain advantage of the times: He that acts a Beggar to
prevent a Thief, is never the Poorer; it is a great part of Wisdom sometimes to
seem a Fool.

MAX. 97.
If thou intend thy Writings for the public View, lard them not too much with
the choice Lines of another Author, lest thou lose thy own Gravy; which thou
have read and digested, being delivered in thy own style, becomes thine; it is
more decent to wear a plain suit of one entire Cloth, than a gaudy Garment,
checkered with other rich Fragments.

MAX. 98.
If God has blessed thee with Inheritance, and Children to Inherit, trust not
the staff of thy Family to the hands of one. Make not many Beggars in the
building of one great Heir, lest if he miscarry through a prodigal will, the
rest sink through a hard necessity: God's allowance is a double portion: when
high blood and generous breeding, break their fast in plenty, and dine in
poverty, they often fup in Infamy: If thou deny them Falcon's Wings to prey on
Fowl, give them Kite's Stomachs to seize on Garbage.

MAX. 99.
Be very vigilant over thy Child in the April of his Understanding, lest the
frost of May nip his blossom; whilst he is a tender twig, streighten him;
whilst he is a New Vessel, season him; such as thou make him, such commonly
thou shall find him; let his first lesson be Obedience, and the second shall be
what thou will; Give him Education in good Letters, to the utmost of thy
ability and his capacity; season his Youth with the love of his Creator, and
make the fear of his God, the beginning of his Knowledge; if he have an active
Spirit, rather rectify than curb it; but reckon Idleness amongst his chiefest
faults; above all things keep him from vain Lascivious and Amorous Pamphlets,
as the Primer of all Vice. As his Judgment ripens, observe his Inclination, and
tender him a Calling that shall not cross it: Forced Marriages and Callings
seldom prosper; show him both the Mow and the Plough, and prepare him as well
for the danger of the Skirmish, as possess him with the honor of the Prize. If
he choose the profession of a Scholar, advise him to Study the most profitable
Arts: Poetry and Mathematics take up too great a Latitude of the Soul, and
moderately used, are good Recreations, but bad Callings; being nothing but
their own Reward. If he choose the Profession of a Soldier, let him know withal,
Honor must be his greatest Wages, and his Enemies his surest Paymaster:
prepare him against the danger of War, and advise him of the greater mischief
of a Garrison: let him avoid Debauchedness and Duels, to the utmost of his
power, and remember he is not his own Man; and (being his Countries Servant)
has no Estate in his own Life: If he choose a Trade, teach him to forget his
Father's and his Mother's Wing; advise him to be conscionable, Careful, and
Constant; this done, thou have done thy part, leave the rest to Providence, and
thou have done well.

MAX. 100.
Convey thy Love to thy Friends, as an Arrow to the Mark, to stick there; not
as a Ball against the Wall, to rebound back to thee; That Friendship will not
continue to the End that is begun for an End.

Meditation is the Life of the Soul, Action is life of Meditation, Honor is
the Reward of Action; so Meditate that thou may do; so do that thou may
purchase Honor: For which Purchase, Give GOD the Glory.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for Sam. Briscoe, at Corner of Charles street,
Covent Garden.
2. THe History of Polybius the Megalapolitan; Containing a Geneneral Account
of the Transactions of the World, and principally of the Roman People, during
the first and second Punick Wars, etc. Translated from the Original Greek, by
Sir H. Sheres: 2 Vol. 8 vo.

2. The Satyrs of Titus Petronius Arbiter, a Roman Knight; with their Fragments
recovered at Belgrade: made Engglish by Mr. Burnaby of the Middle Temple.

3. The Young Lawyer's Recreation; being a Collection of the most unusual and
pleasant Customs and Passages in the Law, as well for the use as diversion of
the Reader.

4. Letters of Love and Gallantry, together with the pleasant Adventures of a
young Lady, and Nuns Memoirs; with several other Letters that passed between
Ladies and Gentlemen both in Town and Country. In two Vol. 120

5. The Religious Stoic, or a brief Discourse on these several Subjests, viz.
Atheism, Superstition, World's Creation, Eternity, Providence, Theology,
strictness of Churches, of the Scriptures, of Moral and Judicial Law, of Man
and his Creation, of the immortality of the Soul, of Faith and Reason, of the
Fall of Angels, and what their Sin was, of Man's Fall, of the Style of Genesis,
a Refutation of the Millinaries, etc. with a friendly Address to the Fanatics
of all Sects and Sorts. By Sir George Mackenzey.


