THE QUAKER TURNED JEW.

BEING A true Relation, HOW An eminent QUAKER in the Isle of ELY, on Monday the
18th. of April. 1675. Circumcised himself, out of Zeal for a Certain Case of
Conscience, Renounced his Religion, and became a Prosolited JEW.

With the Occasion, and Manner thereof, in all Circumstances.

LONDON, Printed for W. L: 1675.

THE QUAKER TURNED JEW: BEING A true Relation.
HOW An Eminent QUAKER turned JEW; etc.
NOt to stand trifling with a long Preamble, I shall come directly to the
Relation of the Story, which both for the Truth and Rarity of it, deserves the
Readers Attention: It happened no longer ago then on Monday, the 18th. of April
last: the Occasion and manner of it was thus.

There was a Man in the Isle of Ely, that seemed a great Zealot, and very
strict in the profession of that Mock-Religion, which is Vulgarly called
Quakerisme; He was indeed formerly for a long time, very unstable in his way,
and had run through several Forms and Parties, but at last he fell upon this
Quaking way; which is a kind of Common Shore, into which the Puddle of Heresies
runs, and there settles. Amongst them he soon learned to sigh profoundly, and
make scurvy faces, to set his looks in a posture of simplicity, that he might
Cheat people with the better Advantage. His Hat was as fixed to his Head as a
Turks Turbant, and no Man could Thou his betters more nimbly: In a word, He was
so strict in observing the Ill manners of that Sect that he seemed to surpass
most of them in Zeal: For he would at their Meetings, not only be a Hearer but
a Speaker; and rattle it for two hours, till he Foamed at the Mouth, in
declaring no body knows what to them. And in all his dealings with his
Neighbors he would still be at a word, from which he would not vary in the
least, But whatever price he set upon his Goods (being a Chandler by his
Calling) he would not bate a Farthing, though it were far above the worth. For
being upheld by those of his own Sect (who make it part of their Religion, and
perhaps it is the best Principle in it, to deal one with another) he would never
sell any thing to those of the World, unless they would abandon their own
Judgments, and suffer themselves to be abominably Cheated by crediting his
very-lyes, and pretentions of Honesty. By which practices making great Gain his
Godliness, he grew Rich; and fell into the way of Farming, and great doings in
the Country, and often Rid to Cambridge upon his occasions; which puts me in
mind of a Cheat of his, Which (though it may seem a Digression) I cannot pass
it by with out Relating. It happened one day, he being mounted on a lusty and
very goodly Gelding to look at; a Gentleman overtaking him, liked him very
well: and asked, If he would sell him, Yea quoth the Quaker, if thou and I can
agree; What will you have for him says the Gentleman, Twenty pounds, says the
Quaker. In short they agreed, and at the next Inn the Gentleman paid the Money;
and then desired to know what faults the Nag had. The Quaker answered* Do
thou see any fault in him* To which he answered no: Then Friend says he it is
very like the Beast may not see any in thee* For the plain Truth was, he was
Stark Blind and the Gentleman Religiously Trappan'd, by which public Prank,
our trembling Saint began to be noted* but soon after grew more notorious by
the following Accident, which gives occasion to this Discourse.

There dwelt in the same Town a Woman descended of honest Parents whom a Friend
of the same Religion had Married; She was both handsome and Buxome, about
twenty Years of Age* and had a Rolling Eye that seemed to declare her
Affections apt to wander; our before mentioned Thomas the Quaker, had often
attempted her Chastity, alleging that in them it was no sin, but a duty to
supply each others necessities, but she several times gave him a Repulse, till
at length he affirming that he had a Vision, and was commanded to know her
according to the Flesh; and that she should conceive aHoly Seed, which should
do great things on the Earth* She was prevailed with to consent, and they
contrived, That the next time her Husband should (by reason of his Business) be
absent* they would consummate their Lascivious Desires.

The place which they had designed for this beastly Action was very suitable,
being as sordid as the Deed required, That is to save a Hogs Stye: So having
notice the good man was gone out* Thomas that dwelt but next Door almost, came
as he used to do, and the Woman and he walked out talking together, and slily
got into the said withdrawing Room, unobserved by any of the Servants. There he
fell roundly to his business as the Spirit moved him; and Read her such a
Lecture of Perfection that her Bowels were much refreshed with Consolation in
the Inward Man. But whilst they were thus exercising each others Gifts, and
spreading abroad their Talents for mutual Edification; Honest Cornute the
Husband coming home sooner than was expected, and finding his Spouse absent,
was informed by his Servants, That she was gone toward the Garden with Thomas
-- (of whom he before had some suspicion) Jealousy therefore having taken
possession of his Brain, he searched for her with a more curious Eye than
ordinary, but at last hearing a noise or Grunting of the Hogs, being disturbed
by the Active Couple that had usurped part of their Lodging, he goes up to the
Stye, and peeping through the Boards, saw to his Grief and Confusion, his Wife
fallen flat on her back in an Illuminated Trance, and his Friend Thomas holding
forth to her with eager Transports of Zeal; The sight whereof Rouzed the Old
man within him, and made him break forth into these words. Oh ye Generation of
Vipers, and Seed of the Serpent, ye Children of Belial, and Instruments of all
filthiness, how have ye given way to the Temptation, to work this Wickedness
this day before my Eyes. They no sooner heard this Voice but it spoiled their
sport, and put an abrupt period to their delights, making them shift away as
fast as they could; whoilst the Husband girding up his Loins, resolves not to
put his Horns in his Pocket; but repairs to several of their Friends,
especially some that were (as they call it) in the Ministry: Whom he tells how
he had caught his Zealous Friend Thomas, committing a Deed of Darkness against
the Convictions of the Light, and Scandalizing the Truth with Fleshly
Filthyness, in committing Adultery with his natural Wife, whereof his eyes were
Witnesses. Hereupon Thomas is Summoned to appear before a Special Meeting of
Friends, where his Crime is laid before him, from which he endeavored to
excuse himself, Saying, Friends! I do confess I am as they say under Blame in
this matter; and as a City Friend said, when he had Cheated the Wicked of Forty
Thousand pounds; I have much trouble upon my Spirit for the thing, but I hope
you will consider that Flesh is Frail, and that I was not yet Arrived at a
State of Perfection, but suffered the Light to be Clowded with Concupiscence,
but though the outward Man did the Act, the indwelling Seed remains still
within me in purity. Wherefore since it is not yet known in Gath, nor declared
to the Ungodly* ye will do well to pass it by with silence considering it may
be any of your own Cases another day.

But this Apology would not serve; they were resolved to deliver him over to
Satan to be Buffetted for the Mortification of the Flesh, and therefore
disowned him; so that he was forced to depart with sorrow and heaviness of
heart: When he came home, considering with himself how he had of ended, and
fearing that his Reputation amongst Friends* and his Gain that accrewed thereby
would cease, he resolved upon the following Penance, for immediately he
Retired into his Closet, drew forth the man of sin out of his Breeches, and
beholding it with an Eye of Indignation, Thou base and filthy Member (quoth he)
whose standing has occasioned my Fall, I now will take Vengeance upon thee:
Saying which, with a sharp Knife he Circucised himself, and sending for a
Chyrurgeon applied Remedies to the Wound; resolving to expiate his offense by
dissembling himself for the future to perpetrate any such nefarious Crime.

This being done, he sent to the heads of his Sect, acquainting them that he
had cut off the unruly Member, and desiring again to be admitted amongst them;
but this the She Friends, at the next Assembly violently opposed; alleging,
That no person unfit for the Work of Generation, ought to be admitted to their
Communion. So that he is forced to remain as an Outcast, being generally known
throughout all the Isle of Ely, and parts adjacent, by the Reproachful Name of*
The Apostaliz'd Quaker; Or, The Proselited Iew^ of which Opinion he now owns
himself, and has resolved never more to eat Swines Flesh* because of the
unhappy Adventure of the Hogg-stye.

But I may not Conclude this, Tragy-Comedy without relating one pleasant
passage of the Woman that proved a Back-slider with him. Her Husband has since
refused to Bed with her; alleging that she had Defiled her Vessel, and having
lain apart from her seveal Nights, she comes one Morning early into his Chamber
and would needs go into his Bed to him* which he perceiving, and resolving to
avoid her temptations lept out, and went into her Chamber, and goes into the
Bed where she lay before: By and by she follows him thither, and offered the
same kindness there, But he absolutely refusing to admit of her Embraces. She
being enraged, catches up her Chamber Pot, and flings it all upon him; Saying,
Verily John, if thou will have none of the Flesh, thou shall have some of the
Broth. Of which abuse he has since complained to Friends, who have thereupon
disowned her likewise: And now she and her Husband live apart. And these
Extravagancies being become publicly known in those parts, have occasioned
many who werere formerly deluded, by Quaking Seducers, to forsake their
deceitful ways, and Erroneous Principles.

FINIS.

