The QUALIFICATIONS Established by His Majesty and the Lords of the Admiralty
December the 18th. 1677, without which no Person is to be thenceforth held
capable of the Employment of a Leiutenant in any of His Majesty's Ships.
1. TO have spent so much time actually at Sea in one or more Voyages in his
Majesty's Service as (after abatement made for all Intervals of Voyages) shall
together amount to three entire Years at least, and to have served in the
quality, and have performed the duty of an ordinary Midshipman in some one of
His Majesty's Ships for the space of one Year of the said three, receiving
Midshipman's Pay for the same.

Provided, that the aforesaid serving His Majesty as an ordinary Midshipman for
the space of one of the said three Years, shall not be interpreted to extend to
any Person, who has at this day served His Majesty at Sea for more than two
Years in the Quality of a Volunteir by Warrant from His Majesty, or the Lord
High Admiral, and shall abide the Examination, and answer in every other
respect, what is in this Establishement required from him, saving in that of
his having actually performed the Duty of an ordinary Midshipman.

2. Not to be under twenty years of Age at the time of his first admission to
the said Office.

3. To produce good Certificates under the hands of the several Commanders
under whom he has served, testifying the several Voyages he has been employed
in, with his Sobriety, Diligence, Obedience to Order, applications to the study
and practice of the Art of Navigation expressed therein, and his strict
performance of the Duty of an ordinary Midshipman for one Year, saving in the
Case above excepted.

4. To produce a like Certificate under the hand of one at least of the
Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, who has served His
Majesty as a Commander, as also of two other Commanders, one whereof to have
been a Flag-Officer, and the other a Commander of one of His Majesty's Ships of
the First or Second Rate, or in Case no Flag-Officer shall by their distance
from Town, be at that time to be resorted to, some other like Commander of a
First or Second Rate Ship, jointly signifying their being (upon a solemn
Examination of the said Person on that behalf had at the Office of the Navy)
fully satisfied in his ability to judge of, and perform the Duty of an able
Seamen, and Midshipman, and his having attained to a sufficient degree of
knowledge in the Theory of Navigation capacitating him thereto.

Provided, that where upon occasion of constituting a Leuitenant to any of His
Majesty's Ships at Sea, the aforesaid Examination cannot be had either in the
manner, or at the place hereby enjoined, nor the Certificates arising there
from signed by the Hand appointed, by the aforegoing Article, in such Case it
is His Majesty's Will and Pleasure, That the Admiral, or Commander in Chief of
any of his Fleets or Squadrons who shall so have occasion of advancing any
Person to the Office of a Leiutenant, shall Authorize any three of his
Principal Commanders of His Majesty's said Fleet or Squadron to examine the
said Person in the particuculars abovementioned, the Ceritificates of which
Commanders pursuant thereto, together with the evidences which shall be brought
on behalf of the said Person, showing his being duly Qualified for this
Employment in the other particulars herein required, shall be a sufficient
Warrant to the said Admiral or Commander in Chief, to commissionate the said
Person to the Office of Lieutenant. Provided, That either the Original or
Copies of the said Certificates, and evidences attested by the said Admiral or
Commander in Chief, be by the first Conveyance transmitted for his Majesty's
special saitisfaction to the Secretary of the Admiralty, to be by him presented
to His Majesty's view, and afterward safely disposed of among the other Papers
of his Office.

By Command of His Majesty, and the Lords of the Admiralty.

