The Dead Prophet yet Speaking.

Being A Funeral Sermon Preached at Plaisterers-Hall on the Decease of their
late Reverend Pastor, Mr. John Faldo.

By J. Q.

The Dead Prophet yet Speaking.

A Funeral Sermon Preached at Plaisterers-Hall, Feb. 15. 1690. to the Church of
Christ there, upon the sad Occasion of the Decease of their late Reverend
Pastor, Mr. John Faldo.

By JOHN QVICK, Minister of the Gospel in London.

Infoelix de quo clamabitur; Tollatur impius, ne videat gloriam Dei. -- Vtinam
nihil unquam vidisset oculus meus, si illa (quod avertat Deus) frustrandus est
visione!

Bernhardus de verbis Esaiae, Sermon 2do p. 61. The Voice said, Cry. And he
said, What shall I cry? All Flesh is Grass, and all the goodliness thereof as
the Flower of the Field. -- The Grass withers, the Flower fades; but the
Word of our God shall stand for ever,

Isa. 40.6, 8. LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden for Thomas Philips at the Seven
Stars in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1691.

For the very Honored Madam MARY WILLET.
Madam,
THE Death of God's Saints and Faithful Ministers is not at all considered by
the careless World. Little do they know how much they be beholding to their
Lives, and what Loosers they are by their Death. Lot was a burden to them, so
thought the wicked Sodomites, whilst he lived among them; and therefore would
fain have rid their City of its best and greatest Blessing. But no sooner was
he gone, than wrath came upon them to the uttermost. We have lost of late too
many of God's Favorites, who stood in the Gap; and had power with God to keep
off Judgments from us: And when as any one of these Men of God Powerful in
Prayer, and mighty Wrestlers with Heaven are taken from us, we may well cry out
with the Psalmist, Help! Lord, for the Godly Man cease; and as that Prophet
seeing his Master Translated into Glory, My Father! My Father! The Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof! Blessed be the Lord, there be yet some Pious
and Devout Souls in our Nation, and in this City, that when the Righteous
perish do lay it to Heart, and when the Merciful are taken away do consider,
that they be taken from the evil to come, and are therefore weeping over their
own and the Churches weakness, which has lost so many Stakes out of her Hedge,
so many Pillars out of her Temple, so many Buttresses out of her Wall, that
should support and sustain her, so many Sons and Fathers, that should instruct,
cherish and comfort her. You, Madam, have enrolled your self among the Mourners
in our Zion, and have been deeply affected with the Deaths of Godly Ministers
and private Christians, which though timely to them, (being gathered in respect
of their Age as Corn in due Season into the Granary,) yet to us that survive
them, must needs be very unseasonable: Who were it the good will of God so to
order it, can hardly spare them, and would most unwillingly part with them in
such a day as this is. But it is from the Lord, the Sole and Sovereign Disposer
of us, and of all our Comforts, and we must acquiesce.

Reverend Mr. Faldo whilst living was very Dear to your Godly Parents, (who are
now reaping the Fruit of their Great and Ample Charities,) and was as much
prized and honored by your self. This makes me to address his Funeral Sermon
to you, and once more to offer that to your Eyes, which you twice heard in one
day with your Ears. I surprise you with the Dedication. But that hove and Value
you have for all that fear God, and for the Ambassadors of our Lord Jesus, and
which you have abundantly expressed to me the least and meanest of them all (an
Hereditary Virtue in you) moves me to it. The Lord give you to be a Follower of
them, who through Faith and Patience have Inherited the Promises! I am,

Most Honored Madam, Your very Humble Servant in the Lord, John Quick.

Zachariah 1. ver. 5. Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they
live for ever?


IT IS an unexpected Providence, and undesired that has brought me into this
Assembly, and put me upon this Service. A very Dear Brother, upon whom this
Work lay, earnestly desired me to do it for him, he being necessitated to be
elsewhere, and I could not well deny him. Yet little did I imagine that the
last time your Reverend Deceased Pastor and my self were together in another
place, and familiarly discoursing each with other, that it would fall to my Lot
to Preach his Funeral Sermon. But the Holy Wise Providence of God has so
brought it about, that I must do him this last Office of Love, which may the
Great God in whose Hands are all our Lives, all our Times, by his Holy Spirit
make useful and beneficial to your Souls!

Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever?

These words were spoken by the Prophet Zachary. We read in Scripture of three
Zachary's.

1. There was Zachariah the Son of that good High Priest Jehojada, Murdered by
his Unnatural and Ungrateful Kinsman, Joash King of Judah, who ill requited his
Father that saved his Life, by taking away that of his Godly and Zealous Son.
You may read the Story, 2 Chon. 24.21. But this was not our Prophet, he was
Stoned to death about four hundred and twenty one years before the Son of Iddo
Prophesied.

2. There was Zachariah the Father of John the Baptist; but he lived about four
hundred years after our Zachary.

3. There was Zachary the Son of Barachias, the Son of Iddo. Iddo his
Grandfather returned from the Captivity of Babylon with Zerubbabel, Nehemiah
12.4. The Jewish Rabbis say, That where the Father and Grandfather of a
Prophet are mentioned in Scripture, it denotes they were also Prophets.

It was a great Honor to the Family of the Piso's at Rome that for three
Generations successively they had been Princes of the Senate. And 'twas a very
great Honor to Zachary that his Father and Grandfather had been Prophets
before him. The Spirit of Prophecy seemed to run in his Blood, and the
Prophetical Office to be entailed upon him as an Inheritance: Yet did he excel
his Fathers in true Honor. If they lived Prophets so did he also. They lived
Prophets, but he lived a Prophet, and died a Martyr. He was slain by his
ungodly Countrymen for his free Rebuking of their sins, between the Temple and
the Altar, whither he fled for Sanctuary. No place so Holy, no person so Sacred
but the wicked will profane and violate in pursuit of their Brutish Lusts and
Malice, Matthew. 23.35.

How long he Prophesied is not certain; when he began to Prophecy the first
verse of this Chapter tells us. It was in the eighth Month, in the second year
of Darius (Nothus.) He was contemporary with Haggai the Prophet, who began his
Ministry but two Months before him. See Hag. 1.1.

The parts of his Prophecy are four.

1. Doctrinal, in the six first verses of this Chapter. 2. Visional, from the
seventh verse to the end of the sixth Chapter. 3. Casuistical, in the seventh
and eighth Chapters. 4. Lastly, Purely Prophetical, from thence to the end of
his Book.
The Text is fallen under the first Head. In which we have,

1. The time of his Prophecy, two Months after his Colleague in the same Work
and Ministry, Haggai. Haggai begins in the sixth Month of the second year of
King Darius. Zachary follows him in the same Work and Office two Months after.
God keeps an exact and faithful Register of all the Ministers he sends, and of
all their Sermons, he orders them Preach unto a people, and of the times and to
places when and where, and of the beginning, duration and continuance of their
Ministerial Labors among them. Look to it Sirs, you may take no notice of
this: You may forget when, and where, and whom you heard. But so does not God.
He Records all in his Book of Remembrance, and you shall be accountable for it
another day.

O that you may be able to yield up your Accounts with Joy, and not with Sorrow!

2. We have the subject matter of his Sermon. And there lie before us but brief
Heads, short Minutes of it, and we shall as briefly run them over.

1. In the second verse we have a Narration of God's just anger against their
Ancestors. The Lord has been sore displeased with your Fathers.

2. In the third and fourth verses, we have God's summons unto their Children
for Repentance, Conversion and Reformation. Therefore say thou unto them, Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, turn ye unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will
turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts. Be ye not as your Fathers, unto whom
the former Prophets have cried, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, turn you
now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings, but they did not hear nor
hearken unto me, says the Lord.

3. In our Text we have a Dialogue (for so many Expositors read it) between the
Prophet and his wicked Auditory.

1. The Prophet first Queries. Where are your ungodly Fathers? What Is become of
them? Did not God's Vengeance light upon them, as he had threatened them? They
would not believe, nor obey, but rebelled against his Word spoken to them by
former Prophets; yet did they feel the Verity and Majesty, the Truth and
terrible Power thereof in their own persons; for were they not cut off by
Deaths? Whence by the way note,

That Judgments upon the Fathers do not always work Repentance and Reformation
in the Children; they be as bad as they.

2. We have his Auditory's reply, by way of Expostulation with the Prophet. And
you Sir! pray! Where are the Prophets? Do they live for ever? You throw in our
Teeth the death of our Ancestors, and we will also as justly retort upon you,
What is become of those busy, censorious Fellows their Prophets? Are not they
gone to their long Home? You see God's Judgments Doctrinal and Providential on
the Parents do find the Children bad, and leave them worse, greater Atheists
and Despisers of God, his Word, and Ministers than themselves.

But though the Text may be thus read Dialogue-wise, yet I humbly conceive, It is
an Argument urged by the Prophet to enforce his Doctrine, asserted before in
the third and fourth verses. Your Fathers where, are they? And the Prophets do
they live for ever? This double Interrogation must be answered negatively. No;
your Fathers are not. Your Prophets are not. They do not live here for ever.
They be dead. But though they die, yet the Word of God, preached by your
Prophets, that dies not, it lives and will live, and take hold of all
stubborn, unbelieving and disobedient sinners. As verse 6.

Whence observe these two Points of Doctrine.

Doctrine I. That Ungodly Persons and Godly Ministers are all alike Mortal
Creatures. Doctrine II. Though Ministers die, yet God's Word from their Mouths
never dies, it lives for ever.
Though these Points shall be opened distinctly, yet I shall apply them jointly,
in case time do permit us.

Doct. I. Ungodly Persons and Godly Ministers are all alike Mortal Creatures.

I need not stand to prove this Point, 'twere but to abuse your time and
patience. Who needs a Candle to see the Sun at Noonday? The truth of the
Doctrine is visible, and notorious to all the World. Eccles. 8.8. There is no
Man that has power over the Spirit to retain the Spirit, neither has he power
in the day of death: And there is no discharge in that War; neither shall
wickedness deliver those that are given to it. Besides, there are in both the
Godly and Ungodly, the Natural and Moral Causes of Mortality, this is also
undeniable. The matter of our Bodies is made up of contrary humors and
qualities; and when their Balance is turned, their Temperament broken, the
whole Frame and Compages must be dissolved, and moulder into dust: Besides, sin
is in the best, and its wages is death. It Is appointed to all Men, to the
worst, and to the best once to die, and then to Judgment.

But yet there is a vast difference between the Wicked and the Godly in their
death. We see that Wisemen die, likewise the Fool, and the brutish person
perish. But dies Abner as a Fool? The Saint as the Sinner? No; The two Poles
are not at a greater distance than these are in their deaths. That wretched
South-sayer will assure you of it. He, who never cared to live as the Saint, is
yet afraid to die as the Sinner, Numb. 23.10. Let me die the death of the
Righteous! and let my last end be like unto his.

Quest. But wherein lies the difference?

Ans. 1. The one dies in his sins, and in his infidelity and impenitency,
without a Pardon. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, Prove. 5.2
23.
and he shall be holden with the Cords of his sins. Sins shall Arrest the dying
sinner as so many Bayliffts and Sergeants, and drag him as a Prisoner to God's
Tribunal. He shall be Fettered, Hampered, and Manacled by them, so that though he
would fain (as it may be no wicked man would willingly be found in his sins in
the hour of death, but) be rid of them, yet he shall not. For sin as an Officer
or Bailiff will keep his Prisoner. He shall die without Instruction, without
Conversion, in all his filth and guilt, and be so hurried unto the Bar of
Christ. Oh! how uncomfortable must this needs be unto the sinner! But so does
not the Saint die. None of God's Elect but are either sooner or later, sometime
in their life, and before death, either at the sixth hour in the dawn of their
Youth, or at the ninth in the Flower of their Strength, or at the eleventh the
last Hour of their Life effectually called, and savingly converted.

2. The Saints are in Life and Death united unto Christ. He is their Head, they
his Members, he their Root, they his Branches, and the Axe of Death cannot
sunder nor sever between them. Nay Death befriends them, it carries them into
Paradise. It ushers them into the Bride-chamber, it brings them unto the desire
of their Souls, with whom they long to be, and shall be for ever. Them that
sleep in Jesus God wilt bring with Jesus. The Angels carried the Soul of
Lazarus into Abraham's, Bosom, into the presence of God where is fullness of
Joy, and Rivers of Pleasure for evermore. But the wicked are buried in Death.
They never had any Union with Christ living, nor shall they when they are
dying. They go like Judas unto their own place, Acts 1.25. far enough from
Christ, Heaven and Glory. No sooner is Dives dead, but the next news you read
of him is that he is in Hell tormented, Luke 16.23.

3. The one dies as to his Soul, and Everlasting Concerns, stupid and
senseless, as Nabal whose Heart grew dead as a stone in him, 1 Samuel 25.37. Their
Spiritual Lethargy kills them. The injudicious World say indeed of the sinner,
O! how quietly did he die! He slipped away like a Lamb. He had no pangs in his
Death. He was not in bitterness of Spirit as many others. But this is an
horrible mistake. Senslesness is no quietness, stupidity of Conscience is not
true serenity. True tranquillity of Soul in death flows from the sense of God's
Love, who is reconciled to us in the Blood of Jesus; and this none but Saints
have, who have laid hold of it by Faith, and ran to it under distress of Soul
as to their only City of Refuge, Glorious high Throne, Heavenly and Inviolable
Sanctuary.

Quest. But you will ask of me, Have all God's Saints this inward peace upon
their Deathbeds?

Answ. 1. No wicked Man has it at all. If the Child of God has it not, no
Child of the Devil has it. Through fancy and self flattery, he may think he
has it, and so dream himself into a Fools Paradise; but the first and next
moment after death undeceives him, for then he finds himself in the midst, in
the very Belly of Hell. There is no peace, says my God, unto the wicked.

2. Multitudes of Godly Persons have it, though many other's as truly Godly want
it, and die away without it. God's Holy Spirit is a free Agent, and as the wind
blows where he lists, so he seals and comforts when and whom he pleases. Our
blessed Martyr Mr. Glover met with the Comforter at the stake, and cried out
unto his Man, Austin, He is come! He is come! The Comforter whom I waited for
he is come! St. Stephen when he was condemned was so ravished with Divine Joys,
so that in the midst of a shower of stones which brained him to death, he could
joyfully commend his Soul into the Hands of Christ, and died praying like his
Savior for his Persecutors and Murderers, Acts 7.55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60.

3. It Is a most happy mistake for those poor Saints, who die fearing their
Damnation, and yet the next instant after death find themselves as Elijah in
the Arms of blessed Angels, riding post in those flying Chariots to Glory. O!
my Dear Friends, may you and I be so happily mistaken! A Godly Minister upon
his Deathbed laughed aloud, and being demanded the reason of it, answered, I am
thinking, says he, how my Blessed Father will be surprised to see me in
Heaven, whom he once gave over for a Reprobate in Earth, and lost for ever. So
will the fearful, desponding Saints be happily mistaken of himself, and cry out
as Jonas, Out of the Belly of Hell have I cried, and thou heardest my voice.
Thou had cast me into the deep, into the midst of the Seas, the Floods of
wrath compassed me, all thy Billows and Waves passed over me: I was cast out of
thy sight, but thou have made me to look, again toward thy Holy Temple, O! my
God, thou have brought up my Soul from the bottomless Pit of destruction,
Jonah, 2.3, 4, 5, etc. I thought I should be damned, but through rich Grace I
am now saved.

4. Sometimes the wicked die under Horrors and Terrors, despairing of Mercy,
their confidence is rooted out of their Tabernacle, and they be brought unto
the King of Terrors, Job 18.14. What think you of Cain roaring out, Mine
iniquities are more than can be forgiven! And my punishment greater than can be
born! What think you of Saul sadly groaning? O! Miserable that I am, God has
forsaken me, and the Devil will have me; this day I and my Sons shall be with
him in Hell! What, think ye of Judas? I have sinned! I have sinned! in
betraying my Master. He that is the Savior of the World will be my Judge, and
Damn me! His Innocent Blood that reconciles Believers, is like Abel 's to me,
crying, Wrath! wrath! Eternal vengeance upon me! What think you of the
Sodomites, who past out of one Hell into another? O! the frights and scrieches
of those filthy sinners, burning in their Lusts, and running from the fiery
Streams, and flaming Torrents of Divine Wrath! What think you of the Giants of
the old World, howling and yelling under the deluges of God's Vengeance! Job
26.5. What think you of Korah, and his Schismatical and Rebellious Grew? Had
they peace, confidence and comfort, when the Earth opened her Mouth, and
swallowed them up quick, and they went down alive into the Pit of Hell? Their
cries and lamentations frighted all Israel in such a manner, that they fled
from them, fearing lest they should be engulpht in their destruction, Numb.
16.31, 32, 33, 34.

But possibly you will say these were extraordinary Judgments from Heaven, and
so no Rules for us to walk by. Wherefore to silence all queries and clamours
for the future, pray do but read and consider attentively what the Holy Ghost
says, Prove. 14.32. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness; driven away,
how? As with a Tempest and a furious Whirlwind; before your Pots can feel the
Thorns, the burning wrath of God shall take them away one by one with a sudden
destruction, they shall go down to Hell alive, quick into the Pit: But the
Righteous has hope in his death.

And so much for Explication and Confirmation of the Doctrine; let us subjoin a
word of Application.

Use 1. Do the Prophets and Godly Ministers as well as their ungodly Hearers
die? Then a Wicked People shall not be long blessed with their Persons, and
Preachings, with their Company and Labors. For, 1. They be too good for them.
The World is not worthy of them. The unkind World cries out, Take away such
Fellows! They be not fit to live in it! Acts 22.22. And God says so too, but
in another sense, The World is not worthy of them, they be too good for Earth,
they be Ripe for Heaven, meet and fit to be partakers of an Inheritance with
God's Saints in Glory. Those famous Witnesses ( Rev. 11.10, 11, 12.) that the
World despised for their Sackcloth and Poverty, and hated for their Doctrine
and Prophecy, and rejoiced at their Death and Calamity, sending Gifts to one
another, and Feasting each other because these their Tormentors were now dead,
(though yet 'twas but a civil death, a Bartholomew Act, that disabled them from
their Work, which was their Life,) yet the voice of God bids them in the sight
and hearing of their very Enemies, to come up unto him into Heaven. Come up
hither, my dear Saints! my faithful Witnesses! Come up unto your God in Glory.
The World is weary of you. That Dunghill is not worthy to have you. Come up unto
your God in Glory!

2. As soon as their Work is done God will call them home. After Work Rest,
after Labor Wages. There remains a Rest, an Everlasting Sabbatism for God's
Saints. We have a little Type and Shadow, a poor Picture-pledge and Earnest of
it in this holy day of rest. O! but when all our Work is done, then an Eternal
rest, then God will call upon his Servants, Come enter into your Rest, into
your Master's Joy, my dear Saints! There is a Twofold Work that God's
Ministers have to do.

1. A Work of Conviction and Condemnation. This is a very sad, burdensome and
uncomfortable Work, that instead of Preaching Souls out of their sins, we
shall only show them to them, make them see them, but not leave them. Our
Sermons shall awaken and startle them, but not renew nor reform them, we shall
give them a Pisgah view of Heaven, but they shall nevertheless, because of
their unbelief never enter into it. To some we shall be the savor of death
unto death. They shall be convinced of their sins, hardened in their sins, and
by those self-same Sermons condemned for their sins. Noah that Preacher of
Righteousness did thus convince and condemn the old World, Heb. 11.7. O! Sirs,
it affrights me to think I should Preach any of you into Hell, and that my self
and Sermons should witness to your condemnation in the last day.

2. There is a Work of Conversion and Edification God sometimes sends us about
this Work, this is pleasing, delightful, and exceeding comfortable. Go, says
God to Paul and preach at Corinth, for I have much people there, Acts 18.10.
Seedsman! says Christ unto his Minister, go scatter the good Seed of my Word
in such a Soil, and it shall yield thirty, sixty, and an hundred fold.
Fisherman! let down thy Net in yonder Pool, and thou shall take many a Fish, a
multitude of precious Souls. O! Sirs, if we can but gain you to Christ, and as
his Ambassadors reconcile you to God, we have our ends, we have done our Work,
our Masters Work, to our great Joy and Consolation. Now when we have done this
Work, filled up our number of Converts, as Spiritual Fathers begotten many a
Child for God, and built them up in Faith and Holiness, we shall hear our Great
Lord say unto us, Well done, good and faithful Servants, enter into your
Masters Joy.

3. The sins of their Hearers, of their people, do oftentimes shorten the days
of their Ministers, and many Churches are real Murderers of their most Faithful
Pastors.

You will say possibly this is an hard word, and who can bear it? How do
Churches Murder their Ministers? Why Sirs, 1. Not only by exacting Work from
them above their Ability; 2. Nor only by denying them due encouragement, and a
competency for their subsistence; Nor yet, 3. By downright killing of them in
Persecution, as both the Zachary's were, and an infinite number of other
Faithful Prophets of the Lord were. But, 4. By your sins. The sins of the
Hearers are our Murderers.

But what sins? I answer, 1. Your Non-proficiency by our Ministry. You be God's
Husbandry, and Garden, we are to Manure and Dress you; you be God's Building
and Temple we are to repair, beautify and adorn you. 'Twas said of Augustus
Caesar, that he found Rome Brick, but left it Marble. O! what a comfort will it
be to our Souls to have found you Earthly, and left you Heavenly! To have found
you Sinners, and leave you Saints! We have dug about you, we have manured
and dressed you, studied for you, preached to you, admonished you in public and
private, and what? Shall we have labored in vain? When you have been a
sleeping in your Beds, and Sins at midnight, possibly your Faithful Ministers
have been upon their Knees weeping and mourning for you, struggling and
wrestling with God in Fervent Prayers for your Souls; and shall all these Pains
and Labors be lost? Shall we Meditate and Study, Preach and spend our Spirits
in Prayer in vain, and not for your good? Shall the Lord say unto us as to
Moses in another case, Speak to me no more, move me no more in this matter for
these Souls, for these Sinners? They be Reprobate Silver, dross and lost
Creatures, whom the Lord has rejected for their unprofitableness under all the
Means of Grace? Brethren, this cutts us to the quick, and helps to break our
Heart. Your Eternal Happiness would be our Life: The fear of your being undone
Eternally is as death unto us, it is killing to us.

2. The Pragmaticalness of Church Members, who take upon them to contradict and
control their Ministers. Preposterous courses! God has made us Teachers and
our People will teach their Instructors! God has made us Guides and Lights
unto you in the way to Heaven but pragmatical Hearers take upon them
Magisterially enough to direct, dictate, and prescribe unto their Ministers,
what Doctrine they shall Preach, and what not. The Lord takes notice of these
by the Prophet, Isa. 30.8, 9, 10, 11. Now go, write it before them in a Table,
note it in a Book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever. That
this is a Rebellious people, lying Children, Children that will not hear the
Word of the Lord; which say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets
prophecy not right things unto us, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy
deceits. When a Godly Minister had preached of Hell unto his Parishioners, a
great Lady takes him up sharply enough. What! Do not you know that my Lord
cannot endure to hear speak of death, and are you so unwise as to preach of the
Torments of Hell unto him? Pray learn more wit next, and deliver in public a
Doctrine that shall be more edifying and pleasing to him! Again, Christ has
made us by virtue of our Pastoral Office Rulers in the House of God, and
committed the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline to us; but sorry Mechanics take
upon them to overruled and correct their Pastors. We be Watchers for your
Souls, and some watch for our failings. Jesus Christ has positively commanded
you, Heb. 13 7. to remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken
to you the Word of God, to follow their Faith, considering the end of their
Conversation: And again, Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you.
And 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. I Will not meddle
with that Controversy, whether in the Church there be such an Officer distinct
from the Pastor, as the Ruling Elder, I have told my poor thoughts about it
elsewhere, it is certain the Pastor is a Ruler in the Church of God, no Civil
Officer, he is a Spiritual Officer, not a Magistrate but a Minister, we Preach
our selves your Servants for Christ's sake; we are not the Lord's of your
Faith, but the Helpers of your Joy, our Ministry is not a Saecular Magistracy.
But though we be Spiritual Fathers, your Shepherds, and Elders in Office in the
House of God, who are more slighted, disesteemed and disobeyed? So far are
Church Members from giving their Pastors their double, that they deny them
their single Honor. Brethren, the honor of our Ministry and Office must be
vindicated. We have received it for your Edification. We encroach not upon your
just Liberties, but take you heed of invading ours, of overthrowing God's
established Mound, and ancient Landmarks. That Eminent Godly Minister of the
Lord Jesus, old Mr. Wilson of Boston in New England called this sin Koraism.
For lying upon his Deathbed, and being visited by the Preaching Elders of that
Famous Colony, they desired that he would solemnly declare unto them what he
conceived were those sins which provoked the displeasure of God against the
Country, he then told them, That among others, Corahism was none of the least,
which he thus explained, When people rise up as Corah against their Ministers
or Elders, as if they took, too much upon them, when indeed they do but rule
for Christ, and according to Christ; yet said he, it is nothing for a Brother to
stand up, and oppose without Scripture or Reason the Doctrine and Word of the
Elder, saying, I am not satisfied. Oh! what a sad account shall we give of such
Children, Sheep, and Members of ours unto the Lord Jesus? when in the day of
Judgment we shall be asked by him (for we must give an account as for our selves
so for you also.) How fare my Sheep committed to your Care and Charge in yonder
Wilderness? How did you leave them, when you left the World? My Brethren, what
answer do you think we shall return unto our Lord and Judge concerning you? We
tremble to think the truth, the sad truth we must then relate unto him, of the
Pride and Self-conceitedness, of the Stubbornness, Perverseness, and
Untractableness, of the Unbelief and Disobedience of a multitude of our Hearers
and Church Members. I speak it Brethren with Tears, that I fear we shall cry as
the Prophet did, Lord! who has believed our report? Isa. 53.1. Chap. 65.2.
And to whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed? And all the day long have
we stretched out our hands to a Gain saying and Rebellious People. They have
despised both our Persons and Doctrine. As soon as negligent Hearers are
admonished by us of their Duty, and delinquent Members reproved by us for their
sins, they fly in our Faces, leave our Communion, rail at us and revile us,
vomiting out the worst of Lies against us, as if we were the worst of Men. To
whom shall we speak, and give warning that they may hear? Behold their Ear is
uncircumcised, Jer. 6.10.
and they cannot hearken: Behold the Word of the Lord is unto them a reproach;
they have no delight in it. I know this has sat near the Hearts of several of
God's Ministers, both formerly and of later times, and filled them with
unspeakable grief to the shortning of their days. If you stand fast in God, and
the practice of Godliness we live, we have the end and design, and desire of
our Life; for this we wish and labor for, even your perfection. Our Hearts
Desire and Prayer is that you may be saved: And we preach, warning every Man,
and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we may present every Man perfect in
Christ Jesus. But if instead of this, you will retain your old sins, and slight
our Counsels, and render our poor Labors ineffectual and unsuccessful, though
this will pierce our Souls to the quick, and over-whelm us with grief to the
shortning of our Lives, yet let me be bold to tell you, such wicked ones shall
answer for it unto the Supreme Judge, and the Judge is now at the Door.

Use 2. Are Godly Ministers Mortal Creatures? Then serve your selves of them
whilst you have them. Jesus Christ has given us to you for the service of your
Souls. As I said but now, so I repeat it again; we preach our selves your
Servants for Christ's sake; make use of us then for your Souls good. God has
tinded us up poor Lamps, poor Candles in the Golden Candlesticks of our
Churches, receive Light, and Heavenly Instruction from us. We desire to guide
you by the Divine Councils, and to feed you with the Celestial Manna, and do
bring unto you the best news in the World, the glad-tydings of Salvation. O!
let our Persons, our Message be acceptable to you. How beautiful are the Feet
of them that publish the glad-tydings of Salvation? You should say unto us as
Laban did to Abraham's Servant, (for we come unto you upon the like Errand to
Espouse and Marry you unto Christ) Come in, ye blessed of the Lord, wherefore
stand you without? When the Jesuits first came into Portugal, they were called
the Apostles of Portugal, and entertained with all imaginable honor. Strange!
that a Crew of self-seeking, and deceiving Idolaters should be caressed and
Embraced, and the Ambassadors of Christ stand waiting, and weeping without, at
your Doors. We are, Sirs, Christ's Ambassadors, and we come upon this Errand to
you, and beseech you to listen to it, to reconcile you unto God. You are by
nature his Enemies, and it is very dangerous for you. O! become his Friends. Be
you reconciled unto God. And the rather do this, because you shall not have us
always with you. We are Mortal, we are dying now whilst we are living and
preaching to you. My Race is well nigh run, my Work is well nigh finished, the
Sands in the Glass of my Life are almost out. Walk in the Light whilst you have
the Light. The Prophets don't live for ever.

Quest. But how shall we use and serve our selves of our Ministers?

Answ. 1. Be swift to hear, slow to wrath. God has made us Preachers, and you
Hearers, we should not preach to empty Houses, and naked Walls. Church Members
should be ordinarily Hearers of their own Ministers. Neglect no opportunities
that you can conveniently have and spare for this Duty. If we are to preach in
season and out of season, to be instant in Exhortation and Doctrine, you must
lend us your Ears. Blessed are they that watch at Wisdoms Gates, and wait daily
at the Posts of her Doors.

2. Rejoice in our Light, Doctrine, and Conversation. Herod heard John the
Baptist with delight. His Person and Preaching was very sweet and pleasing to
him, yea and to the Jews also, for he was a burning and shining Light, and they
rejoiced in his Light for a time, John 5.35.

3. Frequently consult with your Pastors in private about your Souls, and your
Estate to Godward. When you find inward struglings and perplexities within you
as to your Everlasting condition, do as Rebekah did, go and consult with God by
us. Ask the counsel and mind of God for you from us. There should not be that
strangeness that is between Pastor and People, but a sweet intimacy and holy
familiarity as between Children and their Fathers. Come to us with such
questions as these, Oh! Sirs, What shall we do to be saved? Is this work that
is wrought in me a saving or a common work? Inform and direct me, that I may
not miscarry in Conversion, nor be mistaken as to my Right and Title to Heaven
and Glory.

4. Never let us go out of your Houses without leaving our blessing with you.
The old Puritans would not let their Pastors go without praying with them, and
praying for them.

Use 3. Are Godly Ministers and Ungodly Hearers both all alike dying Creatures?
Then look to it, that you be not numbered in your Deaths with Godless Hearers.
O! says Balaam, Let me die the death of the Righteous, and my latter end like
unto theirs! A young Man seeing the happy end of St. Ambrose Bishop of Millain,
turning to his Boon Companions, I would, said he, fain live with you, but die
with Ambrose. There had been some picks and quarrels between Maccovius
Professor of Divinity at Franequer in Friseland, and our Pious Learned Ames,
which made our Reverend Countryman to quit that University: But when Maccovius
heard of his death, he cries out, May my Soul when it leaves this Body be where
Blessed Dr. Ames is! O! Sirs, 'twill be your happiness to be with all the Holy
Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, with the Glorious Company of innumerable
Angels, and with the Blessed Spirit's of God's Ministers, those just men made
perfect. That Blessed Society which is in Heaven is the sweets of Heaven. I
shall only change my place, not my Company, said dying Dr. Preston. He left
imperfect for perfect Saints. The Communion of Saints in Glory, next to the
Eternal Enjoyment of God, is the Paradise of Heaven. O! Labor for it.

Quest. But how shall we get our selves among them in Death?

Answ. 1. Consider their Faith, and the end of their Conversation. God has
made your Ministers your Examples both in Life and Death. Be you Followers of
them as they be of Christ. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: If there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, thinks on these things. Those things which
ye have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: And the God
of peace shall be with you.

2. Let not our Sermons be buried with us in our Graves. Let not those hundreds
of Sermons you have heard from your two Learned and Faithful Ministers die with
them. Have them always in remembrance. Let them live in your minds and
memories, 2 Pet. 1.12, 15.

3. Let our Word, which yet is not our's but God's, ever live in your Hearts
and Affections. O! how do I love thy Word! it is my Meditation all the day long,
said that Royal Prophet, Psalm. 119.97, 103, 113, 127, 140. If you will love and
live God's Word, do and practice it, you will be guided by the best of
Counsels, and infallibly brought unto Glory.

4. Let our Sermons be copied out in your Conversations; hold you forth in them
the Word of Life unto all that see and observe you. This renders God's Word on
your part, and as much as in you lies Immortal, and fitteth you for blessed
Immortality. Though the Preachers die, yet in this manner God's Word never dies,
and the Preacher's themselves will seem to be alive. I Will shut up all with
these words of the Apostles, 2 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. Do we begin again to commend our
selves? Or need we as some others Epistles of Commendation to you, or Letters
of Commendation from you? Ye are our Epistle written in our Hearts, known and
read of all men: For as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of
Christ, ministered by us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the
Living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in Fleshly Tables of the Heart.

And if you are thus the Epistle of Christ, and our Ministry unto your Souls
is the Ministry of the Spirit of Life, you may rest assured that Godly
Ministers and Godly Hearers shall be as Saul and Jonathan lovely in their
Lives, nor shall they in Death be divided.

I have done with my Sermon, yet I cannot but speak something of your late
Reverend, and now Glorified Pastor, though by reason the time is past, it will be
but very little.

1. He was a Man of singular Moderation, and of a very peaceable Spirit. If the
Peacemakers are blessed, and shall be called the Children of God, then Blessed
is Mr. Faldo, who had an especial hand in the healing of our Breaches, which,
Glory be unto God's Holy Name, are to the Mutual Joys of all the Saints now
composed, and those two great divided Parties in this Nation, and that had been
so for above Forty years, are now once again United, and become one, and we
shall no more for the future hear of those unhappy Terms of Distinction and
Separation, Presbyterian and Independent, but we shall be called as the
Primitive Church of Antioch by his Name who has Redeemed us, and Anointed us
with his Holy Spirit, even Christians.

2. He was a stout Assertor of Ancient, Primitive Truths in Doctrine and
Worship. He contended earnestly for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints,
and was a Zealous Champion for it against the Impious Errors, and Damnable
Opinions of a Deluded, Seduced Party in this Land. His Learned Labors
Polemical with them, Practical and Devotional for the use of others do praise
him in the Gate, and by these as Righteous Abel, though dead, he yet speaks.

3. He was a constant Labourer, and very painful in his Lord's Vineyard, and
the very first that entered publicly upon it before the last Indulgence by
King James the Second. And his Great Master found him in his Work. There the
Gripes and Stone assaulted him, which at last killed him. Blessed is that
Servant, whom when his Lord comes he finds so doing!

I cannot but condole your loss, and the Churches loss, and pardon these Tears,
my own particular loss. I have been so unhappy as to loose in your two
Successive Holy and Reverend Pastors two very Worthy and Dear Friends.

I pray God, my Brethren, that as you had a Learned and Pious Faldo to succeed
your Blessed Mr. Partridge, so you may have another; who may Excel them both in
Gifts and Graces, in all Ministerial Indowments, and Pastoral Abilities.

But my Dear Brethren, such a Pastor as Reverend Mr. Faldo is Forty years a
making.

However, I beseech you be not too long in making your Choice, and filling up
your Vacancy. Either Incorporate with some other Church, or call in speedily
another Pastor. There be some young Men of great Hopes, of Eminent Parts and
Piety that are yet unimployed. If any one ask why they are idle this time
a day, they will reply, Because none has hired us. Pray get one of them; some
One may be had.

The Lord, God of Wisdom Lead, Guide, and Direct you in your way! And give you
a Pastor after his own Heart, that may feed you with Knowledge and
Understanding! Amen.

FINIS.

