THE CASE OF THE Cross in Baptism CONSIDERED. Wherein is Showed, That there is
nothing in it, as it is used in the Church of England, that can be any just
Reason of Separation from it.

Galat. VI. 14. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. LONDON, Printed for Fincham Gardener, at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1684.

THE CASE OF THE CROSS IN Baptism, etc.
THE Matters in Dispute betwixt Us and our Dissenting Brethren, may generally
seem to the unconcerned stander by, of so slight and Inconsiderable Moment,
that he must needs wonder how in the World the Controversy should come to have
arisen to that Deplorable height, which in this last Age it has done. And
although the Case which will fall under our present Debate, seems to have
admitted of the most specious scruples and given the best scope of reasoning,
of any other thing that has fallen under question amongst us since the
Reformation; yet even here also, the Immeasurable Bias of Prejudice, (...).
and Fervency of Opposition, has too apparently managed the Argument. So that
the Pleas against it have not seemed so weighty as they have been numerous, L.
5. c. 20. Infirmiora Argumenta Congreganda sunt, imbecilla enim natio a, mutuo
auxilio sustinentur.
as if the Objectors had an Eye to that direction in Quintilian, they would be
sure to amass all the weaker Arguments, which though weak in themselves, yet by
standing together may lend a Mutual assistance to one another; like Articles of
Impeachment, none of which singly would perhaps affect the accused Person, but
all together may amount to accumulative Treason.

My business therefore in handling this Case, shall not be to follow every nice
Scruple, or trivial Objection (as where the Cross in Baptism has been charged
with the breach of every particular Precept in the Decalogue) not to concern my
self in any thing, which either by long Induction of consequences has been far
fetched, or with great difficulty drawn in, to make a show of Argument, but, as
briefly and plainly as may be to sum up all that has ever seemed of any Moment
in this matter, and that under this twofold Head.

I. That the Sign of the Cross has been so notoriously abused to the worst
purposes of Superstition and Idolatry in the Church of Rome; that the retaining
of it still amongst us, makes us partakers of the Superstitions and Idolatry of
that Church.

II. That it seems the introducing of a New Sacrament, which having not the
warranty of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, must needs be a very Offensive
invasion of his Rights, whose Royal Prerogative alone it is to institute what
Sacraments he pleases in his Church.

Under these two Heads I think may be fairly comprehended all those Objections
our Brethren have offered against the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, at least
all those that are any thing Material. Insomuch that if the difficulty of these
could be removed, we might fairly hope, none of the Sober and Conscientious
Dissenters, but would think themselves obliged to submit to the use of it,
rather than maintain the Separation upon this account.

And this shall be endeavored with all the Candor and Clearness that becomes
the design of this, and the rest of those Discourses that have been Published of
this kind, viz. to Convince and not Reproach or Provoke any: to Effect (if
possible) the happy agreement, and consequently enlarge and strengthen the
interests of good Men. And for this purpose I have thought fit not to quote the
writings of particular Persons, but rather to represent the Objection, as what
is in general avowed and agreed upon by the whole Party.

And although it is not likely that any thing should be here offered, that has
not been already with great Learning and Integrity made use of, by the many
assertors of our Church; yet perhaps, the bringing this under one view, without
the Warmth or Salt of an Adversary may not prove altogether Vain and
Ineffectual.

I. I begin therefore, with the first Objection, viz. That the Sign of the
Cross has been so notoriously abused to the worst purposes of Superstition and
Idolatry in the Church of Rome, that the retaining of it still amongst us,
makes us Partakers of the Superstitions and Idolatry of that Church.

I must readily acknowledge that the Material Figure of the Cross has been
indeed abused to very Idolatrous purposes in the Church of Rome, and even the
aereal Sign of it to Purposes superstitious and ridiculous enough, and if what
we do in using this Sign in Baptism, were really chargeable with Popery, it
would be a sufficient reason to detest and Reject it. The Objection therefore
at the first view looks plausibly enough, when it thus charge this Ceremony
of the Cross; Paganism it self being hardly more Odious, nor in Truth (for some
very good Reasons amongst wise Men,) more Ridiculous and Intolerable. There is
scarce any part of Popery, properly so called, but is so plain a d'pravation of
Christianity it self, such a contradiction to the Rules, such a defeat to the
great purposes and ends of our Holy Religion, that it deserves well enough the
good Man's Justest abhorrency, which he may reasonably express, when he finds
himself in any real danger of the Snare. But then, we must consider, how easy
and natural a thing it is for Persons (that otherwise mean honestly enough) to
humor a Just and Reasonable Offense against Popery, into groundless Suspicions
upon things which have no such Tendency at all in them: And upon these first
Suspicions not only to startle, and grow alittle shy and nice, but to determine
themselves in resolved and unmovable Prejudices, that have had Effects ill
enough. For upon this, designing Men have made their advantage upon every
trifling occasion, giving out the word, and laying the charge of Popery, upon
what it has been their humor or interest to desire a change in. And this
probably we shall find to have happened in this Case in hand. The accusation
has been drawn against it that it is very Popish, and the Prejudices which
this Accusation has begot in some honest Minds, are so strong that they seem
invincible. How unreasonably therefore this charge is laid against our use of
the Sign of the Cross in Baptism may appear when we have considered these three
things.

I. That the use of this Sign was much more ancient, than the first Corruption
and Depravation of the Church of Rome.

II. That the use of it, as it is ordained and appointed in our Church, has
not the least affinity with the use of it, as it is in the Romish Rituals.

III. Last. Although it cannot be denied but the Church of Rome has greatly
abused this Ceremony to very ill purposes of Superstition, yet does not this
make it unlawful to continue the Reformed use of it still amongst us that have
professedly separated from the Corruptions of that Church.

I. Consider we that the use of this Sign of the Cross was much more ancient
than the first Corruption and Depravation of the Church of Rome. When I speak
of the first Corruption and Depravation of the Church of Rome, I would be
understood as to those things that have put that Church under the Imputation of
what we now call Popery. For that there were some depraved Customs crept into
the Church in general (and so that of Rome perhaps as well as any other) in
very early days, is Evident from what St. Paul Rebukes in the Church of
Corinth, and from what our Savior himself in his Revelations to St. John,
Condemns in the Seven Churches of Asia. So that, when I say the use of the
Cross was more ancient than the first Corruption and Depravation of the Church
of Rome, I mean, more ancient than any of those Corruptions in her by the
reason of which, we have justly esteemed her an Apostatized Church, more
ancient than either the Introduction of Images, their Multiplication of
Sacraments, their pretentions to Supremacy and Infallibility, or any of those
Superstitious Rites in Worship, by which we distinguish that Church as Popish,
and brand it as false and Antichristian.

As to this therefore, By which Phrase the Apostle in Truth meant, the Secret
workings of the Haereticks of that Age.
I know none of our Dissenting Brethren, however for a shift in Argument they
may talk of the Mystery of Iniquity beginning to work betimes, and in the first
Ages of the Church *, that yet do professedly charge any Signal Apostasy upon
the Church of Rome, at least for the first four hundred Years after Christ: not
to the Age wherein St. Austin Flourisht; but that it was a Church that might be
Communicated with at that time, notwithstanding that Father complained of the
Superfaetation of Ceremonies even then, which (at least for the Number of them)
began to be very burdensome. And yet, for an Hundred or two of Years before
this, we find in the Writings of Tertullian such mention of the use of this
Sign, that makes it very plain, it had been a Customary thing long before his
time also, and probably, even amongst those of the Apostolical Age it self.
There are those indeed that would make that Father the first that brought in
the use of this Ceremony into the Church, having received it from the
Montanists of whom he seems to have been particularly fond. But the frequent
and familiar mention he makes of the Sign of the Cross in many of his Books
renders this Conjecture very improbable. Tertullian tells us it was grown so
much in use in his time, that upon every motion of theirs, at their going out
and coming in, when they put on their Garments or Shoes, at the Bath, or at
Meals when they lighted up their Candles, Frontem crueis signaculo terere.
Pertul. de Coron. mil.
or went to Bed, whatever almost they did in any part of their Conversation,
still they would even wear out their Forheads with the Sign of the Cross; which
though he confesses there was no express Law of Christ that had enjoined it,
yet Tradition had Introduced, Custom had Confirmed, and the Believers Faith had
observed and maintained it.

This does not look as if it had been a thing newly invented by Montanus, and
brought into the Church by Tertullian, as being himself too great a Favourer of
that Sect. Although, were it thus indeed, yet this shows that the Practice of
it was received among the Faithful, some Ages before the Depravation and
Apostasy of the Romish Church. But he is not our single Author in this matter:
for, Homil. 2. in Psalm. 38.
Origin who Flourisht not much above CC Years after Christ, and not XL Years
after Tertullian, makes mention of those who upon their Admission into the
Church by Baptism, were Signed with this Sign. And St. Basil not much above one
Hundred Years after him, gives this usage the Venerable Title of an
Ecclesiastical Constitution, or fixed Law of the Church, that had prevailed from
the Apostles Days, Basil. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 27.
that those who believed in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, should be Signed
with the Sign of the Cross.

But of all the Fathers, St. Cyprian, who was before St. Basil, and very near
if not contemporary with Tertullian himself, not only speaks most Familiarly of
the use of this Sign, but has some Expressions in this matter, that would seem
very harsh and unwarrantable now; and yet, the Authority of that Father, has
saved him hitherto from being brought under question about it. He tells us in
one place, that in front cruce signantur, qui Dominum promerentur, i.e. they
are Signed in the Forehead with the Cross who are thought worthy of the Lord,
and in another place, Omnia sacramenta peragit, it Compleats every Sacrament,
and per crucem baptisma sanctificatur, Baptism is Sanctified by the Cross. I
will not stand accountable for the Justifiableness of these passages, were they
to be allowed no kind of Latitude: but, as to the purpose for which they are
cited they seem pertinent enough: that is, to Argue the antiquity of this usage
(and that in the Sacrament of Baptism too) the Phrase so frequently occurring
in the writings of those ancient Fathers, that front signati, being signed in
the Forehead, seems a known and usual Periphrasis for being entered into the
Faith of Christ and the Body of his Church by Baptism.

After all which, what need I Instance in St. Cyril, St. Ambrose, or St.
Austin? Who sprinkle their writings with the Common mention of this Ceremony,
and oftentimes frame Arguments of the Obligation upon Christians to live as
becomes them, from this very badg they wear upon their Foreheads. St. Austin
wittily enough glorying in the Confidence of a Christian as to a Crucified
Savior, Nec nos pudet Crucifixi, sed ubi pudoris signum est, crucis ejus
signum habemus. August. in Galat. 6.14.
that he willingly imprints the Sign of it upon that part of himself which is
the proper seat of Blushing.

I shall only add this remark further, that after the time wherein this Custom
had been so Universally received into the Christian Church, and some of the
Fathers had so liberally expressed themselves in it, we may observe that the
first Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great, had his Directions probably
from heaven it self to make this Sign, the great Banner in his Wars, with this
Additional encouragement, (...).
that by this he should overcome. That this Dream or Vision (call it which we
will, for Histories mention it differently) was from Heaven, and a thing of
great reality, is Evident, from the success of that Princes Arms under it.

The Authors of the Centuries allow a considerable Signification in that Sign
as given him from Heaven, as the future Standard he should fight under, viz,
that God had admonisht him by that Sign of the Cross, and the Motto added to
it, Cent. 4. oap. 13.
by this thou shall overcome, concerning the Knowledge and Worship of the true
God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, in Memorial of which he took care to have it
Painted on his Banner, that it might be as the Symbol of the Christian Religion.

Now we would not suppose that our Blessed Lord would by so immediate a
Revelation from Heaven, Countenance such a Rite as this, already received and
made use of in the Church, giving it to Constantine both as a Symbol of his
Profession, and Pledge of his future Victories, if he had resented it before as
Superstitious or any way unwarrantable. This kind of Standard the Roman
Emperors successively had born before them in their Wars: nay, Theodoret.
Hist. l. 3. c. 3.
it is recorded that Julian himself (probably from what he had made some former
Observations of,) could not forbear defending himself with this Sign, upon a
mighty fright he was seized with, while in the use of Magic Arts he went to
have consulted with the Devil. Orat. Cont. Julian.
This Nazianzen calls his craving aid and refuge of him whom he had Persecuted.
Which, (by the way) might give us the modestly and caution of showing our
selves too petulant against what it has pleased our Lord Jesus in a Revelation
from Heaven to give the Figure of, and the Holy Spirit also to signalize
sometimes by very renowned miracles, which those that consult Ecclesiastical
Histories of best Authority cannot but be convinced of.

So that, we find the use of it very ancient, and the Effects of it very
Memorable, Exercit. in Baronium.
Casaubon himself (no very fond Man of Rituals) calls it Primitivae Ecclesiae
Symbolum ejus fiduciae quam in Christo and cruce ipsius, and passione ponebant:
a Symbol the Primitive Church used to denote that Confidence they had in
Christ, his Cross, and Passion.

I confess it would be a fond thing to endeavor, with some of the Romish
Church, to trace up the Antiquity of the Cross, to the first Creation of Man,
and so all along downward to the Actual Death of our Blessed Lord. They can spy
out the Cross, in the Figure of a Man's Face, by the placing of the Nose
betwixt the two Eyes, and much more in the Position of the whole Body of the
Man with his Arms extended. See the notes of Laur. le bar upon Tertul. advers.
Marcion. l. 3. p. 178, 179.
They can discern it in the Sword in Paradise, and in the Cross stick that
Noah's Dove brought back into the Ark, etc.

And indeed some of the Fathers bend their Imaginations something that way, and
would fancy the Figure of the Cross in Moses his stretching out his Arms whiles
the Israelites were fighting with Amalek, in the Paschal Lamb when the Spit
went through it, etc. which, however they were conceits too much suiting that
way of allegorizing that some of them were fond of, yet does it at least
confirm what I am now upon, I mean the ancient Reception of this Sign into the
Primitive Church. Nay, I may further add, that in some of the passages they
have of this kind, the hint they take may not deserve perhaps to be absolutely
exploded, as if there were no weight or moment at all in it. I will crave leave
to instance particularly in one thing which some of the Fathers do a little
insist upon, and that is, that Mark in Ezekiel. 9.4. that was to be set upon the
Foreheads of the Men that sigh, etc.

This Mark in several of the ancient Versions is supposed to be the Hebrew Tau,
which St. Hierom tells us was, in the Samaritan Character, like our T, and so
made the figure of the Cross, from whence he Collects that this was signum
crucis quae in Christianorum frontibus pingitur, a token of that Cross that is
imprinted upon the Forehead of the Christian. If St. Hierom be not mistaken in
the Samaritan Character, his conjecture in the Application of it, is not very
unjustifiable; because, as all the promises are in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 1.20.
yea, and in him Amen: So, all the Prophesies of old, where they concerned any
signal advantages or deliverances to the Jewish Church had the assurance of
them frequently confirmed by some hint or Remembrance of the Messiah, that was
afterward to be revealed. Thus in that Confirmation that Isaiah was to give to
Ahaz of his present deliverance from the Invasions of Ephraim and Syria, Isai.
7.4.
he gives him this Sign, behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. How
could that great Event that was not to come to pass of so many Ages after Ahaz
his Death, affect him, who stood in need of so immediate Deliverance, but that
it was brought in as an instance, (not only that as God could bring about such
a wonder, as the Birth of a Child from a Virgin, could as easily relieve Judah
in its present streights: but further,) he that had so gracious a design toward
them, as to send the Messiah amongst them, would in the Prospect he had to
that, show now his particular regards for the Church at this time. In Analogy
to this, might this passage in Ezekiel, look toward that mark which Christians
in after Ages should wear upon their Foreheads, as a present Symbol of the
escape of those that should be found sighing for the Abominations that were
then done in Israel. And to this probably, may that Seal of the living God have
some Reference, which was to be set upon the Foreheads of the Servants of God.
Revel. 7.2, 3. For, as they are there reckoned up by the number of twelve times
twelve, to signify that they are the true and genuine offspring of the twelve
Apostles; so, Vid. Med. in loc.
the Seal of the Living God upon their Foreheads, may point at the Figure of
the Cross, to betoken them (though under the Prophetic Denomination of the
Jewish Tribes) to be of the Christian Church. This I would not be supposed to
lay any great stress of Argument upon, only offer the Conjecture to the Candor
of the Reader.

And thus, having shown the Antiquity of this Sign, as it was received into
the Church long before the Corruptions of Popery appeared in the World; I know
but of one thing can be urged to take off the strength of what has been
hitherto said; and that is, that the Primitive Christians might probably take
up this Custom of thus signing themselves, because they lived wholly amongst
the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, the Jews making the Cross a
Stumbling Block, and the Greeks Foolishness. So that, their design of doing it,
was only to bear their Testimony to the Faces of both, that is, tho the Cross
was scandal to the one, and scorn and laughter to the other, yet they would not
be ashamed of this Cross but made it the Badg of their Profession. Whereas we
live in an Age and Nation, where (thanks be to God) there seems no such
occasion, because Christianity is the Religion we openly and universally
profess.

To this I answer, that this Objection being thus made, does at least suppose
the usage of the Cross not to be a thing that is in it self evil, because if
so, no good end or design in using it could hallow the Action; so that the
Ceremony is not Evil in its self, but that upon some weighty reasons, it might
be brought into the Church, if so, then we might reasonably think, that the
injunction of Authority in this Case, might Justify the Practice of it. But
much more, if the reason now alleged might be a just occasion for the Church
in its first Ages to take the usage up, God knows the occasion may be as urgent
still upon an Equally sad account: and that is, the Profane and Atheistical
Contempt that is thrown, not so much upon the Sign as the Doctrine of the
Cross, by the pretended Wits of our Age. He has a very slender concernment for
the interests of Religion, that is not sensibly touched with those Blasphemous
Railleries he may every where meet with, upon the whole Scheme of Christianity,
especially that which we make the great Foundation of our hopes and trust, viz.
the Merits of our Saviors Cross and Passion. That the use of this Sign, if
ever it was reasonable upon such a score as this, it is so now. And St.
Cyprians Caution is strong and pertinent enough at this time of the day against
all the Wit and Pride of the daring and haughty Atheist, Muniatur frons, etc.
Epist. 56. ad Thiberitanos.
Arm your Foreheads that the Seal of God may be kept safe. q. d. Remember the
Badg you took upon you in Baptism, and so long as you have that upon your
Foreheads, never be ashamed or laughed out of Countenance, as to the Memory of
your Saviors Love, and the Foundation of your hopes laid in his Death and
Passion.

And now, since it is so evident how Ancient a practice this has been in the
Christian Church: I would not have this part of the Argument pretended further
than it was first designed, which was only to show that this Ceremony has
nothing owing in it to that which we call Popery, because it was established in
the Church so long before that Mystery of Iniquity had its being. And tho
through the Antiquity of it (if warrantable at the first) it becomes so much
the more Venerable, and might justly lay some restraints upon the modest
Christian in his Censures against it; yet does not this put it beyond the
degree of an indifferent Ceremony, without which, the Sacrament of Baptism is
declared by our Church as complete and perfected. Did the Antiquity of its
practice make it necessary, it might prove as necessary almost in every Action
of Life, as well as Baptism, because (as I have noted before) Tertullian tells
us, it was once so used. No, it only gives us the warrant of doing it, because
practiced in the most incorrupt Ages of Christianity; and the necessity of
keeping it still in use, lies not so much in that it was the Custom of some
Church, or Constitution of some Council in former days, as that it is the
Custom of our Church now, and the appointment of our Governors. But,

Secondly, It is further considerable, that the use of the Cross as it is
ordained and appointed in our Church, has not the least affinity with the use
of it, as it is in the Romish Rituals.

1. We do by no means allow any visible Images of a Crucified Jesus, so as to
have the least concern in any part of our Worship. There is no mention of them
in our Rubric; there is hardly in any writings of the Doctors of our Church
one passage to be found of that latitude, Christian direct. Ecclesiastical
Cases qu. 113. p. 875. Ibid. p. 876.
that Mr. Baxter amongst his calmest thoughts has not adventured to say, that
is, that a Crucifix well befiteth the Imagination and Mind of a Believer; nay
further, that it is not unlawful to make an Image (and gives the instance
particularly of a Crucifix) to be the objectum vel medium excitans ad cultum
Dei, an Object or medium of our consideration, exciting our minds to Worship
God. The sense of our Church is truly expressed in this matter by Mr. Hooker, who
tells us that between the Cross which Superstition honors as Christ, and
that Ceremony of the Cross which serves only for a sign of Remembrance, there
is as plain and great a difference, as between those brazen Images which
Solomon made to bear up the Cistern of the Temple, Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p. 348.
and that which the Israelites in the Wilderness did adore. Or between those
Altars which Josias destroyed, because they were Instruments of mere Idolatry,
and that which the tribe of Reuben with others erected near the River Jordan to
far other purposes. Ours is no other than a mere transient, or (as others
express it) aerial figure of the Cross, which comes not within the widest
notion of an Image; or if it were so, is so very transient, that it abides not
so long as to be capable of becoming any Object or medium of Worship, any
further than any words we use in Worship may do.

2. The use even of this transient sign, bears no kind of Conformity or
likeness with the use of it in the Church of Rome. They use it upon numberless
occasions beside Baptism. If they enter in, or go out of Church, or a Friends
House; when they say their Prayers, or are present at any Religious Solemnity.
If startled at Thunder, taken in a storm, frighted with a spectrum, or are
surpised with any kind of Fear or Astonishment, they bless themselves still,
and take refuge under this sign of the Cross, which they will make upon
themselves. If they visit the sick, administer the extreme Unction, or indeed
perform any of their other Sacraments (so called by them,) the transient sign
of the Cross must begin and close all. But then, in the Sacrament of Baptism,
the use of this sign is so exceedingly different, as well in the nauseous
Repetitions of it before and afterward, in the Forehead, in the Mouth, and upon
the Breast: as also, the Monstrous Significations according to the diverse places
whereon it is impressed, that nothing can be more. Beside that it is not used at
the time, nor with the form of words that we use it with. So that, there is not
the least agreement betwixt us and them, either in the use, or in the
significancy of this Ceremony; and so no reasonable offense can be taken at it,
upon any Symbolizing of ours with the Church of Rome in it. All this might be
further confirmed by giving a particular view of the Roman Ritual, See Case
about the Chapter of Engl. Symbol. with the Chapter of Rome, p. 10.11.12.
as to what respects their office for Baptism; but this is done by a better
hand upon another Case of this kind.

Lastly, Although it cannot be denied but the Church of Rome has greatly
abused this Ceremony to very ill purposes of Superstition, yet does not this
make it unlawful to continue the reformed use of it amongst us, that have
professedly separated from the Corruptions of that Church. It is a Principle
that some of our Brethren imagine they are very well fortified in, from some
instances in the Gld Testament, viz. that whatever has been abused to
Idolatrous or Superstitious purposes, should eo nomine be abolisht. But perhaps
they would find this much more a question than they have hitherto presumed, if
they would consider, that if this Principle were true, it would go nigh to
throw a scorn upon all or most so the Reformations that have been made from the
Church of Rome, for they do not seem to have governed themselves by this Rule.
Some of them in their public Confessions declaring, that they might lawfully
retain such Rites or Ceremonies as are of advantage to Faith, the Worship of
God, Confess. Bohem. Art. 15.
or Peace and Order in the Church, though they had been introduced by any
Synod, or Bishop, or Pope, or any other.

It is a Principle that would render Christianity impracticable, because no
Circumstance, no Instrument, no Ministry in Worship, but may have been some way
or other abused and desecrated by Pagan or Romish Idolatries. It would make
every Garment of what shape, or of what color soever, unfit for use in our
Religious services: for, not only the White, but the Red, the Green, and the
Black, have been used (even for the significancy of their respective colors)
by the Gentile, or the Romanist to very superstitious purposes in divine
Worship. It would condemn the Practice of those very Persons that would pretend
this to be their Principle. For they have sew of them carried it to that height
as to abolish Churches, Fonts, or other Vtensils, but have thought fit to make
use of them in the same services of Religion as formerly, though not in those
modes by which they were abused to Superstition and Idolatry. All which they
should not do, if either the Principle had any real Foundation in it self, or
they acted in any due consistency with the Principle they pretend.

That which our Dissenting Brethren urge, (as they think) of the greatest force
and pertinency in this matter, is the example of Hezekiah, who when he found
the brazen Serpent, which God himself had directed to be set up for the Healing
of those that had been stung with Fiery Serpents, abused to downright Idolatry:
He would not endeavor to recover it to the first design of its preservation,
that is, to keep it standing only as a memorial of Gods Power and goodness, who
had done such great and beneficial things amongst them by it: but without any
more ado, takes it away from all further view of the People, breaks it in
pieces, and calls it Nehushtan, 2 Kings xvi. 1.4.
i. e. let us the People see it was a thing of Brass and nothing else.

To this I answer, First, Although it is very natural to mankind to govern
themselves more by example than precept, yet, Arguments fetched from examples,
generally are not the truest way of reasoning; and that partly upon this very
account, namely, the proneness we have toward example, and Bias and Prejudice
we may the easilier be drawn away with, upon that account. But chiefly, because
in alleging examples, it is very rare that we can hit the Case perfectly
right. It may be said of Examples, as it is of Similitudes; they seldom do
Currere quatuor pedibus, they do not perfectly reach the thing intended to be
proved, but are so widely different, or defective in some one or other
Circumstance, that there is not that parity of Reason that ought to be; and the
varying of Circumstances may much alter the Case. Which very thing apparently
falls out in this very instance. For certainly, if the example be concerned in
any thing with respect to our practice, it may seem to prove nothing further
than the necessity of taking away (not what has been used only to Idolatrous
purposes, but) what it self has been, and at that instant is, a mere Idol.
This was the Circumstance of the brazen Serpent, it was by Custom become a real
Idol; it had been so for a long time, was so at that instant, when Hezekiah
brake it to pieces: to those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense unto
it. So that, thus far perhaps this instance might affect us, that, were there
any Crucifix, or material image of our Savior upon the Cross, now standing, to
which People for some Ages had given, and for the generality did still give
divine honor; it would then indeed concern the Government, in their
Reformation from the Idolatries of the Church of Rome, to take away and abolish
this and all other Images of this kind. This perhaps answers the pattern pretty
much, and copieth out Hezekiah's wise and good Action; and this accordingly is
entirely done in our Church; there being no such Image abiding now amongst us,
to which any adoration is publicly avowed, or that can be pretended to have
such snare in it, as to hazard any general Idolatry. What proportion does our
Aerial sign of the Cross (toward which there is no intention, nor indeed any
possibility of giving any divine Worship,) what proportion does this bear to
the material figure of the brazen Serpent, to which they had for a long time
actually burnt Incense, did it to those very days, and gave such Evidence of
their Inveteracy in Idolatry, that there seemed no moral likelihood of
preventing it by any other course than breaking the Idol to pieces, and letting
them see what a mere lump of Brass they had been Worshipping? But then,

2. If Example were a good way of Arguing, we find by Hezekiah's practice in
other things, he did not think it an indispensible Duty in him to abolish every
thing that had been made use of to Idolatry, if they did not prove an immediate
snare at that time; for, as to Temples which Solomon had erected for no other
end but the Worship of false Gods in them, 1 Kings 11.7. Hezekiah did not make
it his business to destroy them, as being in his time forlorn and neglected
things, of which no bad use was then made. Although indeed King Josiah
afterward (probably upon the increase of Idolatry, and renewed use of those
places) foued it expedient to lay them wholly waste. 2 Kings 23.13.

And thus much I have thought fit to say as to that first Head of Objection
against the sign of the Cross, as it is cried out against as a Relick of
Popery, and had been so depraved by the Superstitious use of it in the Church
of Rome. I cannot but acknowledge this to be the weakest part of their plea
against it; and probably our Brethren know it to be so too: yet, because it is
most affecting amongst common People, and seems to have made the deepest
impression upon those that are not so well fitted for profound and solid
reasoning, I have chosen to be the larger here, that even the meanest
capacities may see that the Sign of the Cross, as we use it, was not introduced
by the Church of Rome, but was of a much ancienter date: That the use we make
of it bears no Conformity at all with that Church in their using it: that by
our different usage we keep at a sufficient distance; nay, perhaps are in less
likelihood of falling into the Snare of their Communion, than if it had been
utterly abolisht: In a word, that that very Principle, upon which the charge of
Popery is laid as an Argument against the Cross, is it self weak and fallible;
nor are we bound by any Precept or Example in Holy Writ, to throw off the use
of any one thing merely because the Church of Rome has abused it. It has
proved a mighty inconvenience to the Church, that People have been thrown into
so precipitant a Zeal of removing themselves to the utmost extremes from the
Church of Rome, that they have been almost afraid to determine in any action or
circumstance of Divine Worship, lest it should some way or other, have been
Profaned and made unwarrantable by their practice. This is that gave rise to
the mischievous Enthusasms in Germany, that ended in such bloody and barbarous
Practtises, as well as senseless and ridiculous Principles taken up and
maintained by the Anabaptists there. I am loath to mention the horrid confusions
of our own Age and Nation, which yet perhaps we were wrought up into by this
very humor; I mean, a restless fondness for some additional refinements still,
which our Church had not thought fit to make.

I cannot but inwardly reverence the Judgment, as well as love the Temper, of
our first Reformers, who in their first Separations from Rome, were not nice or
scrupulous beyond the just reasons of things. Doubtless they were in earnest
enough, as to all true Zeal against the Corruptions of that Church, when they
sealed the wellgrounded offense they took at them, with their warmest blood;
and cheerfully underwent all the hardships that Primitive Christians signalized
their Profession with, rather than they would intermix with Rome, in any usage
of Worship, or Article of Faith that had the least savor of Idolatry,
Superstition, or false Religion at all in it. And yet these Holy and Wise Men,
when they had the Power and Opportunity of Reforming, wholly in their Hands,
being equally jealous of Enthusiasm as they were of Superstition, would not
give themselves up to those fantastic Antipathies as to abolish this or that
Ceremony, merely because it had been in use amongst the Papists, if some other
very substantial Reason did not put in its claim against it. And verily, had
they not Governed themselves in these temperate and unbyast methods of
Reformation, they would not so easily have justified themselves to their
Adversaries, or the World; or have made it so evident (as by their wise
management they did) that what was done by them was from the mere urgencies of
Conscience and Reason, and not the wantonness of Change and Innovation. So
that, where any mean honestly (as I doubt not but many of those do, that
Dissent from us in this particular circumstance of the Cross in Baptism) they
ought to have their Reason very well awake, that the mere charge of Popery upon
any disputed point, may not so prejudice them in their enquiries into things as
to leave no Room for debate and mature Consideration.

Secondly, The other head of Objection against the sign of the Cross in Baptism
is, that it seems the introducing of a new Sacrament, which having not the
warranty of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, must needs be a very offensive
invasion of his Rights, whose Royal Prerogative alone it is, to institute what
Sacraments he pleases in his Church.

This Objection seems to point at a twofold argument. The one, with respect in
Common to all those Circumstances in Worship, which for Decency and Order, are
appointed by the Governors of the Church, but not antecedently prescribed and
enjoined in the word of God. For, to do this, our Dissenting Brethren have
generally affirmed it a bold and unwarrantable intrusion upon our Lord and
Master, who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful
in all his House, that is, in prescribing to the Jews all their modes and
usages in Worship, from which they were not to vary or deviate, to add or
diminish in any one Circumstance.

This I shall take no further notice of, than as it may necessarily intermix it
self with the question particularly in hand about the Cross in Baptism, partly
because I would keep as strictly as may be to this distinct Case, and
especially, because this Case [of doing nothing in or about the Worship of God,
but what is expressly prescribed and appointed by him in his word] has been
another's province; so that, I shall only say, the Customs of the Jewish Church
it self, (which our Brethren would make their main instance in this matter,) do
make directly against it. They did unquestionably take up some usages wherein
Moses had given no antecedent directions, which yet it is evident were not
unlawful upon that account, because our Blessed Lord did not only not blame or
accuse them of Encroachment or Superstition, but himself practiced and complied
with them; this, amongst many other things, has been cleared up in the
instance of their Synagogue Worship, and upon another occasion may be further
insisted on by and by. Besides, it is plain, this was no Rule amongst the
primitive Christians in the first ages of the Gospel, not to add, the
inexpediency and unfitness of this Rule to the very Economy and Dispensation
of Christianity, which was to diffuse it self amongst all Nations, and all
kinds of People, who did so infinitely differ from one another, both in their
Customs, and in the Significations of those Customs too, that it must have been
a vast and bulky digest of Laws indeed, that must have suited all Countries,
were every Circumstance and Punctilio in divine Worship to have been
antecedently prescribed. All this has been with so much clearness made out by
several Hands, that I am apt to think at this time of the day, our Brethren do
not expect or stand in need of further Conviction in this point, and seem in
some measure agreed that this Position of theirs will not hold water.

It is the other part of the Objection therefore, that will fall more directly
under our consideration at this present; and that is, that our using the sign
of the Cross in Baptism, does seem to run into the nature of a new Sacrament.
And this is that they mean, when they tell Sacrament. And this is that they
mean, when they tell us, it is an outward Visible sign of an inward invisible
Grace, whereby a Person is dedicated to the Profession of, and Subjection to
the Redeemer. That it is a dedicating means to consecrate us to God; that it
signifies our covenanting engagement, and is as a Badg and Symbol of the
Christian Religion; that it represents Christ dying on the Cross, and signifies
our being listed under Christ; that it is an addition to Baptism; that it adds
another Sacrament to Baptism: And that it is used as an engaging Sign, in our
first and solemn covenanting with Christ, and the duties whereunto we are
really obliged by Baptism, are more expressly affixt to that aerie Sign than to
the Holy Sacrament. With many other Expressions of this kind, which we may find
interspersed in the several writings of the Nonconformists, where they take
occasion to dispute this Ceremony. This of the Crosses having at least the
semblance of a Sacrament, is indeed the only Objection the Presbyterian
Brethren insist upon in their exceptions against some passages in the present
Liturgy.

As to this therefore, first, I must needs say, I have sometimes wondered that
the word Sacrament it self, has been so well agreed upon amongst us. The
Fathers have used it so much at large in their writings that it would sometimes
be difficult to understand what they mean by it: and our Brethren, upon the
same reasons by which several other exceptions have been made, might have
disallowed and rejected it as a word by no means Scriptural, but Pagan and
Heathenish. However, since by a long reception of the word into the Church, it
seems agreed on all sides, what the Sense and Acceptance of it should be; my
business will be to show, 1. What we are agreed in as to the Notion of a
Sacrament, and then 2. to make it plain, that as our Church never did design or
intend, by the use of the Cross in Baptism to make any new Sacrament of it; so,
in the nature of the thing, it has not any semblance of a Sacrament, according
to the Notion of a Sacrament that both sides are agreed in.

First, As to our being agreed in the Notion of a Sacrament, I must presume our
Church in her public catechism, has given that definition of it, which no
reformed Church, but approves and allows of. That is, that it is an outward and
Visible Sign of an inward and Spiritual Grace given to us, Ordained by Christ
himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a Pledge to assure us
thereof. It is true, the Assembly of Divines in their larger Catechism do in
that question of their's [ what is a Sacrament?] put in an expression or two,
that point at some Opinions, wherein they may be no more agreed amongst
themselves, than they are with some of our Church. But then, in their next
question [ what are the parts of a Sacrament] they give us the same account
with that of our Church-Catechism, only a little varied in the words, viz. The
parts of a Sacrament are two, the one, an outward sensible sign used according
to Christ's own appointment: the other, an inward and spiritual Grace thereby
signified. by all which it is evident, we are well enough agreed in the Common
acceptance of the word Sacrament. And therefore,

Secondly, I proceed to show, that as our Church never did design or intend, by
the use of the Cross in Baptism, to make any new Sacrament of it, so according
to the common Notion wherein we are agreed as to the word Sacrament, there is
not any semblance of a Sacrament it can justly be charged with.

And here I might, not without some reason, insist, that as we are agreed in
the Definition of a Sacrament, that both the outward Sign must signify an
inward Spiritual Grace, and also must have its express institution and
appointment from Christ, we, that never supposed the use of the Cross in
Baptism could confer Grace, nor have ever made the least pretext to any Divine
appointment for it, ought not to be charged as introducing a new Sacrament,
when it has no pretensions to any one thing that is of the Essence of a
Sacrament. But I am willing to follow the Argument as they have laid it. They
say therefore, that however, we do not call or account it an Holy Sacrament,
yet forasmuch as we bring a Ceremony into the Church, which in the
Significations of it seems tantamount to a Christian Sacrament, we do thereby
usurp the Prerogative of our great Lord and Master, setting up our Posts
against his Post, and our Threshold again his Threshold.

This they say we do partly, 1. as we make the Cross a sign betokening our
Faith, and Christian courage, when in applying it to the Baptized Person, we
say we do it in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the
Faith of Christ Crucified, etc. And partly 2. when by an entire Representative
of our Church it is determined, that by the sign of the Cross, the Baptized
Person is dedicated to the service of him that died upon the Cross.

First, they say that by making the sign of the Cross in token that hereafter,
etc. we apply such Significations to it, that run it into the nature of a
Sacrament, using it as an outward Visible sign of an Inward Spiritual Grace. As
to this, we must ingeniously confess, that we make use of no Rite or Ceremony
in our Church, but it is with this design, that it should be Significant of
some thing or other. It would be an odd piece of pageantry indeed, to use this
or that gesture or action in our Religious services, that should have no
Signification at all in it, and to account it therefore Innocent, because it
were Impertinent. It is the Significancy of it, that makes it useful or proper,
and if there were nothing of that in it, it would be very disallowable. But
then, though our Ceremonies are significant, and any of them used as Memorative
Signs to put us in mind of any Duty or Obligation toward God, they are not
therefore an outward Visible sign of an inward Spiritual Grace; that is, they
are not in the nature of any seal or assurance from God of his Grace to us, but
hints and remembrances of some Obligation we are under with respect to God. And
that this kind of significant usages have been all along arbitrarily taken up,
without any Imputation of introducing a new Sacrament, may be made out, both
from the practice of the Jewish Church, notwithstanding the punctual
prescriptions delivered to them by Moses. From the practice of the Christian
Church, and that, both in the very first ages of it, and also in all the later
Reformations that have been made.

First, take we a view of the Jewish Church; and herein,

1. We may observe that in their very Passover, about which, both thing and
Circumstances, they had such express directions by Moses before they went out
of Egypt; yet did they in some ages following considerably vary, not only in
their time of keeping it, which having been originally appointed on the Tenth,
they changed it to the Fourteenth day of the Month: but in the gesture too. In
the first institution of it, they were to eat it with their loins girded, their
shoes on their feet, and staff in their hand, and all as a token of the haste
they were then in. This gesture of eating the Passover, it is not so certain
how long it continued in the Jewish Church after their coming out of Egypt, as
it is unquestionable it was changed into a discumbing posture (that is, a
posture wherein they took their ordinary meals) long before the days of our
Savior, and that so warrantably too, that our Savior himself used it. And
yet, this very posture they had taken up (if we will believe an Expositor that
was no great friend to the Ceremonies of our Church) had its Signification too;
V. Ainsw. in Exodus 12.3.
for he tells us that they did it in sign of their rest and security otherwise
than they had in Egypt.

2. Another instance in the Jewish Church might be that of the Altar of
Witness, which Phineas, after he had made a jealous enquiry upon, approved of,
Josh. 2^.
as a standing memorial that they on the other side Jordan professed the true
God, had Relation to the other tribes, and a Right to the Service of God in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation.

3. But that which seems to come nearest us is what the Jewish Authors do
frequently take notice of, and that is, that as to those whose Office entitled
them to the Anointing (which by all that does very evidently appear, were only
Kings and Priests) although the Anointing Oil, as to its confection and
ingredients, and the manner of doing it (as one would think) were particularly
enough prescribed by God; yet did the Jews amongst themselves bring in the use
of a Significative sign in doing it, which seems no where disallowed, or
charged as an invasion of Gods Holy Institutions: this was, to Anoint the Heads
of their Kings with the figure of a Crown, Maimon. H. Melachim.
and their Priests with the figure of an Hebrew or the Greek chapter Not to add,
that the Synagogue Worship, the Rites of Marriage, the form of taking Oaths,
and the like, things that had great Significations in them, had not the express
Institution of God for their warranty, and yet were well enough received in the
purest times of the Jewish Church, and complied with by our Savior himself.

Secondly, take we a view of the Christian Church, and that, both as to the
first ages of it, and all the later Reformations that have been made. 1. We may
observe even from the days of the Apostles themselves, the Church has taken
the Liberty of making use of one Rite or other that has signified things of
greatest weight and moment, to instance in a twofold Custom primitively used
amongst Christians, that looked much more Sacramentally than our use of the
Cross in Baptism, that is, the institution of them seemed Apostolical, being
frequently mentioned in their Holy writings; and they were immediately annexed to
the Holy Eucharist, and in their Signification bore some analogy with what that
Sacrament it self was in part the token and seal of, these were the Holy Kiss,
and the Agapae or Feasts of Charity.

The Holy Kiss was performed (as the best Writers generally conceive) after all
other preparations, immediately before they entered upon the Celebration of the
Lord's Supper, Dr. Caves prim. Christ. part 1 Chap. 11. p. 346. 352.
and at the close and upshot of the whole Solemnity; from whence Tertullian
gives it the term of signaculum orationis, the Seal of Prayer. This the Apostle
is supposed to direct to, 1 Cor. 16.20. Quae oration cum divortio sancti osculi
integra? Tent. de orat.
when he enjoins the Corinthians to greet one another with an holy kiss. And
this was kept up with that Reverence in Tertullian's time, that he speaks as if
the Service of the Public Prayers were maimed and imperfect, if it concluded
not with this kiss. This was used in token of the mutual Communion and
Fellowship that Christians had with one another, and the unfeigned
reconciliation of their Minds, that they came with no inward heart-burnings
against one another, being that great Christian Grace and Virtue, so much
insisted upon in our Savior's Gospel, and after that, by his Apostles made one
great Evidence of the Professors having passed from Death to Life. And yet,
that this custom had not its Foundation in any Divine Appointment, but the
voluntary use the Church made of it, seems agreed to on all hands; because
afterward, it is not only prohibited by some Councils, but by an universal
consent in all Churches, wholly laid aside, and grown out of all use.

Again, we may observe, as to that custom of the Agapae or Feasts of Charity, 1
Cor. 11.20, 21.
which in the Apostles days probably were celebrated immediately before the
Lords Supper, and in some Ages afterward, not till the Holy Communion was
finished. But, whether they had them before, or after, it is certain they had
great Significations in them, not only of Christians mutual Love and Communion;
but also, of the equal regards that God and our Blessed Lord had, toward all
sorts and conditions of Men; the poor as well as the rich, those of meaner
degree and quality, as well as the high and noble, when they were all to eat
freely together at one common meal. This the Apostle seems to point at, in the
remarks he makes upon the disorders in the Church at Corinth, that in their
Love Feasts, every one takes before other his own Supper, and so did despise
the Church of God. And those that had Houses to Eat and Drink in, shamed those
that had not. Now, though this custom was hallowed by the practice of the
Apostles, and had so great Significations in it, and was from the first, so
annexed to the Holy Eucharist that it always either begun or concluded it, and
consequently looked much more Sacramentally, than our Sign of the Cross in
Baptism can be supposed to do; yet is it plain, by the universal disuse of it,
in these later ages of the Church, that it self never was esteemed any
Sacrament.

I might further instance in the Ceremony of insufflation, Aug. de nupt. and
concup. lib. 2.29.
or breathing upon the Person that was to be Baptized, called by one of the
Fathers an ancient Tradition, which they used as a sign of expelling the Evil
Spirit, and breathing into them the good Spirit; this seemed to signify more
the Grace of God, than Duty of the Christian, and yet not suspected as any
Sacrament. Thus, the Baptized Persons stripping of his Garment in token that he
put off the Old Man which was corrupt according to his deceitful Lusts, does it
not look full as Sacramentally as our Cross in Baptism? Yet we find it
anciently practiced without any jealousy of invading the prerogative of
Christ, in instituting Holy Sacraments. To say no more, what think we of the
trine immersion once accounted a pious usage in the Church, whereby the Person
being thrice dipped or put under water, at the mention of each Person of the
Trinity, was supposed to be Baptized in the belief of that great Article.
Advers. Praxeam. Again, in lib de Coron. milit,
So Tertullian expresses it, Nam nec semel, sed ter ad singula nomina, in
Personas singulas tingimur. We are dipped not once but three times, at each
name, and so are Baptized into the three Persons. And besides this
Signification of the three Persons by this threefold immersion, which
Tertullian, and not only he, but St. Ambrose have mentioned, there are others
of the Fathers that have supposed, the Death, the Burial, and the Resurrection
of our Savior, together with his being in the Grave three days, was signified
by this custom. And yet, was this so far from being accounted any Sacrament of
it self, or a Sacrament within that of Baptism, that the Church has thought
fit to lay Immersion aside, for the generality; and the threefold Immersion
much sooner, particularly in Spain, and that upon a reason that made the single
dipping as significant as the Trine had been when it was in use, viz, to
distinguish themselves from the Arrians, who had taken occasion from this
threefold dipping in Baptism, to assert the three distinct substances,
pretending a Testimony from the Catholic Church by this usage. Much such a
reason (by the way) the Reformed Churches in Poland governed themselves by,
when in a general Synod they decreed against the Posture of sitting at the
Lords Supper, because that Custom had been brought in first by the Arrians,
who, as they irreverently treat Christ, Synod. Petricov. An. 1578.
so also his sacred appointments. Which leads to a view of the Church in all
its later Reformations.

2. Is it not very evident, that in none of our later Reformations, nay even in
those of our Dissenting Brethren themselves, but they do in their most
Religious Solemnities, some things that are very Symbolical; Actions that have
great significations in them?

1. There giving to every Baptized Infant a new Name. which both they and we do
call the Christian Name; this seems to betoken our being made new Creatures,
and entered into a new State or Condition of Life, which still they seem to aim
more expressly at, in their general care to give the Child some Scripture Name,
or some name that should signify, some excellent virtue or Grace, some
Religious duty owing to God, or some memorable benefit received from him. Here
we have an outward Visible sign, and this too sometimes of an inward Spiritual
Grace, and yet this no more accounted a new Sacrament, or a Sacrament within
that of Baptism, than we do our Sign of the Cross; and indeed there seems just
as much reason for the one as for the other, and no more.

2. Those Arguments which some of our Dissenting Brethren, have used in Plea
for the posture of sitting at the Lords Supper, do show, that besides what they
urge from the posture wherein our Savior himself celebrated it, they apprehend
some Significancy in the gesture, that renders it more accommodate to that
ordinance than any other; for, some of them plead for the posture of sitting,
as being most properly a Table Gesture and does best of all express our
fellowship with Christ, and the honor and privilege of Communion with him as
Coheirs. Now in this matter let us consider; our Lord has no where expressly
Commanded us to perform this Sacrament in a sitting posture; much less has he
told us that he ordained this gesture in token of our fellowship with him; so
that, we see this gesture of sitting (by the Tenor of their Argument) made an
outward Visible sign of an inward and Spiritual Grace; and this, not from any
antecedent express institution of Christ; which notwithstanding, this posture
of sitting is not accounted by those that frame the Argument, any new or
additional Sacrament to that of the Lords Supper.

3. Lastly, Those of the Congregational way have a formal Covenant, which they
insist upon, that whoever will be admitted into any of their Churches, must
engage themselves in; this is of that importance amongst them, that they call
it, the Constitutive Form of a Church, that which makes any particular Person
Member of a Church. Apol. for Church-coven.
Yea, and (as another expresses it) that wherein the Union of such a Church
does consist. We will suppose then, this Covenant administered in some form or
other, and the Person admitted by this Covenant into an Independent Church
declaring his consent by some Action or other, such as holding up his Hand, or
the like. Let me ask them, What must they of that Church think of this Rite, or
Ceremony of holding up the hand? will they not look upon it as a token of his
consent to be a Churchmember? Here then is an outward Visible sign, of What?
of no less (according to their apprehension of things) than a perfect new State
and Condition of Life; that is, of being embodied in Christ's Church, engaged
to all the Duties and enstated in all the privileges of it. Will they say that
this way of admission, either the form of words wherein their Covenant is
administered, or the Ceremony of holding up the hand, by which this Covenant is
taken and assented to, was originally ordained by Christ? or do they themselves
esteem this of the nature of a Sacrament? or did the Presbyterian-Brethren, in
all their Arguments against this way, charge them with introducing a new
Sacrament? So that, from all instances imaginable, both of the Jewish and
Christian Church, and that, both Primitive, and later Reformations; even from
the particular practices of our Dissenting Brethren, it is very Evident, how
unreasonable a thing it is, that though we sign the baptized person with the
Sign of the Cross in token, that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess
the Faith Christ of Crucified, etc. We should be accused as introducing a new
Sacrament, or adding the Sacrament of the Cross to that of Baptism.

But then, they tell us secondly, we seem to own it our selves, when in an
entire Representative of our Church (such as we suppose a Convocation to be) it
is actually determined, that by the Sign of the Cross, the Person Baptized is
dedicated to the service of him that died upon the Cross; and what can be more
immediate (says one of our Brethren) than in the present dedicating act to use
the sign, and express the dedicating Signification? It is confessed that the
30th. Canon does say the Cross is an honorable badg, whereby the Infant is
dedicated, etc. And the stress of the Objection in this part of it lies in the
word dedicated that is, because the Sacrament of Baptism is it self a Seal of
Admission into Covenant, and Dedication to God, and the Christian Religion;
therefore, by using a Symbolical Ceremony of humane institution, whereby we
profess the Person Baptized, dedicated to the service of him that died upon the
Cross, we have made a new Sacrament, and added to that of Baptism, to dedicate
him in our own invented way as Christ has in that which he has instituted.

1. To this I answer, that surely the word dedication, is of a much larger
Signification, than that it should be confined merely to the Interpretation,
that our Brethren would put upon it. The meaning of dedication properly is, the
appropriating of any thing or Person to any peculiar service, such as a Church,
or Temple for the Worship of God: any Person to the profession the true
Religion, to the Ministry, or to any kind of attendance at the Holy Altars.
This is the strictest sense of dedication; but then, in a larger sense we may
suppose it applied to any strict or conscientious discharge of all the Duties,
and answering all the ends of the first dedication. Thus, suppose a Man
ordained to the Ministry, whereby he is properly dedicated to the work and
service of the Gospel; he may by some solemn act of his own, dedicate himself
to a zealous and faithful discharge of that Office; and this, after some time
that he may have apprehended himself hitherto not so diligent in the trust that
had been committed to him. This cannot be called in any sense a new ordination;
but it may with reason and sense enough be styled a dedicating of a Man's self
more particularly to the service of God, in the discharge of that Ministry he
was ordained to. And therefore,

2. In this sense the Convocation ought in all justice to be understood, when
they, in explaining the intention of the Cross, tell us, it is an honorable
badg whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service of him that died upon the
Cross, etc.

And yet, I must needs say, it seems hard measure upon the Church of England,
that if those in a Convocation should not have applied the word dedication, to
what might be most strictly the sense of it, that this should be so severely
expounded, that no other declarations of their meaning and intention must be
accepted of, than what merely the strict and critical sense of that word will
bear. Surely there are many expressions in the Fathers, that may seem more
distant from that sense we are willing to take them in; and we should be very
loath to yield them up as the Authors or Defenders of some dangerous Opinions in
the Church of Rome, because some phrases of theirs in the rigor of them, may
be pressed to a kind of meaning that may seem to favor them. There is a
necessary allowance to be given to some schemes of Speech, and meaning of
words, or else we should be in a perpetual wrangle and dispute about them.

However, there does not need even this sort of Charity for this word
dedicated, upon which such weight of Argument has been laid. For, as in all
Authors it has been variously used, so is it properly enough applied in this
Canon, for the design for which it was used; and the declaration is plain and
intelligible enough to the candid and unprejudiced mind. The word dedication
(as they use it) may properly enough signify a Confirmation of our first
dedication to God in Baptism, and a declaration of what the Church thinks of
the Person Baptized, what she does expect from him, and what Obligations he
lies under by his Baptism. And as a medium of this declaration, the sign of
the Cross is made, being as expressive as so many words, what the Infant by his
Baptism was designed to; the Apostle himself having comprehended the whole of
Christianity under that term and denomination of the Cross. Now that our Church
did design this declarative dedication (by the use of this sign) and none
other, is very evident, in that, though the word dedicated is used in the
explication of their sense in that Canon, yet, do they there refer to the words
used in the Book of Common Prayer. By comparing therefore the Canon and the
Office for Baptism together (the Canon directing to the Office, and the Rubric
belonging to the Office directing to the Canon) we may observe what stress is
to be laid upon the word Dedicated that is, how far they were from designing
the same sort of immediate dedication that is made by Baptism, and yet how by
the Cross, we may properly enough be said to be dedicated too.

As to the Sacrament of Baptism, we are all agreed that by that we are
dedicated to the Service of Christ, and the Profession of his Gospel; Now the
Church of England, both in the Rubric and Canon do affirm and own, that the
Baptism is complete, and the Child made a Member of Christ's Church, before the
Sign of the Cross is made use of; or if upon occasion it should not be made use
of at all. It is expressly said, We receive this Child into the Congregation of
Christ's Flock, and upon that, do sign it with the Cross. So that the Child is
declared within the Congregation of Christ's Flock, before the Sign of the
Cross be applied to it. Beside, that in the Office for private Baptism, where
the Sign of the Cross is to be omitted, we are directed not to doubt, but that
the Child so Baptized is lawfully and sufficiently Baptized; the Canon
confirming it, that the Infant Baptized is, by virtue of Baptism, before it be
signed with the sign of the Cross, received into the Congregation of Christ's
Flock, as a perfect Member thereof, and not by any power ascribed unto the sign
of the Cross.

If therefore, we be dedicated in Baptism, and the Baptism acknowledged
complete and perfect, before or without the use of this Sign, the Church cannot
be supposed ordaining so needless a repetition as this would be, to dedicate in
Baptism, and then to dedicate by the Cross again, but that which they express
by dedicated by the Cross, must be something very distinct from that dedication
which is in Baptism; that is, the one is a sign of dedication, the other is the
dedication it self, as distinct the one from the other, as the Sign of
Admission is from Admission it self, and a signification of a privilege, is
from an Instituted means of Grace. It seems a thing decent and seasonable
enough, that when it has pleased God to receive a person into his favor, and
given him the Seal of it, that the Church should give him the right hand of
fellowship, solemnly declaring and testifying he is received into her
Communion, by giving him the Badg of our Common Religion. So that, this is
plainly no other than a Declaration the Church makes of what the Person
Baptized is admitted to, what engagement he lies under when capable of making a
visible Profession. It expresses what has been done in Baptism, which is
indeed not a sign of Dedication but Dedication it self, (as I have already
said) as also the Cross is not dedication itself, but a sign of it. Which
Declaration is therefore made in the name of the Church in the plural number,
We Receive this Child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do sign him
with the sign of the Cross, etc. Whereas, in Baptism, the Minister, as the
immediate agent of Christ, by whom he is Authorized and Commissionated, in the
singular number (as in his Name) pronounces it, I Baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

As to what is urged above, that nothing can be more immediate, than in the
present dedicating act, to use the sign, and express the dedicating
signification; they must know, it might have been more immediate, either to
have placed this Sign before Baptism, or to have appointed some such form of
words, in applying it as the Church of Rome does; or if it had been pretended
to be of divine Institution, and necessary to make the Sacrament of Baptism
complete and perfect.

And thus, I presume, I have run through the main debate betwixt us and our
dissenting brethren as to this Case. Wherein, I hope, I have neither
misrepresented their objections, nor let pass any material strength in them,
nor in replying to them, used any one provoking or offensive word. Would they
but read and weigh this and the other Discourses of this kind, with the same
calmness of temper, and study of mutual agreement, wherewith (I dare say) they
have been written; I cannot think there would abide upon their Spirits so
vehement a desire for the removal of these things; but it might rather issue in
a peaceable and happy closure in the use of what has been made appear was so
innocently taken up, and might with so much advantage, under the encouragement
of serious and good Men, be still retained. I do not indeed think any of our
Church so fond of this Ceremony particularly, but that, if the laying it aside
might turn to as great Edification in the Church, as the serious use of it
might be improved to, our Governors would easily enough condescend to such an
overture. Instances of this have been given in our Age; and our
Presbyterian-Brethren in their Address to the Bishops do own, Except. and Pap.
of the Presbyt. p. 31.
that diverse Reverend Bishops, and Doctors, in a Paper in Print, before these
unhappy Wars began, yielded to the laying aside of the Cross, and making many
material alterations, etc. They have not those apprehensions of these things,
that they are unalterable, and obligatory upon all Christians, as such; or that
the laying them aside, for the bringing about some greater good would be
offensive to God. I would to God, our Brethren, at least would but meet us thus
far, as to throw off those Superstitious prejudices they may have conceived
against them, and think that as the laying them aside would not be displeasing
to God, so the use of them cannot be so neither. Forgive the expression of
Superstitious prejudices. For I must suppose we put too high a value upon
indifferent rites, when we think that either the use or rejection of them will
recommend us to God, unless there be other accidents of obedience or
disobedience to Authority, that will alter the Case. Otherwise the Imagination
we may have of pleasing or displeasing God in any of these things, must look
like what the Greeks express Superstition by, (...)
I mean, a causeless dread of God. It is a passage in Calvin, that it is
equally Superstitious, to condemn things indifferent as unholy, In 2 Praecept.
and to command them as if they were holy. It is infinitely a nobler Conquest
over our selves, a proper regaining that Christian liberty to which we are
redeemed, and would be of far happier consequence to the Church of God, to
possess our selves with such notions of God, and of indifferent things, as to
believe we cannot recommend our selves to him in the least measure by scrupling
what he has interposed no Command to make them either Obligatory or Unlawful.

FINIS.

