A Reply on behalf of the Present East India Company, to a Paper of Complaints,
commonly called, The Thirteen Articles, delivered by their Adversaries, to the
Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
ARTICLE I. THat they did procure Illegal Commissions from the late King for
Martial Law, whereby some Persons have been Executed.

ANSWER.HOW far a Power to grant Commissions of Martial Law in Foreign
Plantations, in the Case of Rebellion, is by Ancient Prerogative vested in the
Crown, is not fit here to be debated, much less determined; though the Author
of this Article here presumes so to do. But this is true, That the Commission
here styled Illegal, was no other, than what has been from time to time
granted to the said Company; more particularly, at its first Institution in the
Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James I. As does appear by the Original
Commissions ready to be produced.

That the said Commission was grounded on the same Power with their Charter,
and their Charter on the same Power with all the Charters of the respective
Plantations in the West Indies; Upon which Charters, several Persons have been
Executed both by Civil and Military Judicatures, and never yet called in
Question; and is no more than what all the European Joynt-Stocks make use of in
India.

That the Governor of St. Helena caused to be put to Death two Men, before any
Commission was obtained.

What the Governor of St. Helena did before the Commission arrived, was
without the Order or Privity of the Company here, and so they not answerable
nor blameworthy for the same.

Art. II. That the Company did procure, of the late King, the Ship Phoenix to
be sent to India, to seize the Ships and Goods of their Fellow Subjects; And
also gave Orders to the Commanders of their own Ships to do the same.

Answ. These Fellow Subjects here mentioned, are such as did break in on the
Trade of the Company, contrary to His Majesty's Charter, and are usually styled
Interlopers. Now it being generally granted, and likewise declared by the
Honorable House of Commons, That the East*India Trade will be best managed by
a Joynt-Stock, exclusive to all others. It Is humbly submitted to the Judgment
of all Persons unconcerned, what other Measures the Company could have then
taken, or can be taken for the future, by this or any other Company, on such an
Exigency, for the preservation of the Trade to the Nation and themselves, than
those which the Objection would render Criminal?

Art. III. That they did procure their late Majesty's Proclamations, for the
putting the Powers granted to them by their Charters, in Execution, and
commanding all persons from their Employments and Settlements in those Parts,
to repair to the Companies Garrisons in India, or return home.

Answ. This Article is no more, than that they did procure from their late
Majesty's, their respective Proclamations for the Confirmation of their
Charters, and putting the Powers therein given them, in Execution; which is
usual, and has been the practice of most, if not all Companies established by
Charter* Nor was it ever until now objected as a thing Criminal so to do, nor
had they done it now, but to restrain Interloping.

Art. IV. That they did in the two last Reigns, commence vexatious and
chargeable Suits against their Fellow Subjects.

Answ. The Company being, as they humbly conceive, in Possession of a Right, it
was never yet accounted Criminal by any Persons, to maintain that Right in
Westminster Hall.

Art. V. They have caused several Ships fitted and designed for India, to be
Illegally stopped; and also one Ship homeward bound, to be unladen at Portsmouth.
In order to which, they procured a Letter from the late King, to the Judge of
the Admiralty, commanding him to order the said Cargoe there to be Landed.

Answ. As to this, that, as is before hinted, in answer to the second Article:
It being generally agreed on, and declared by the Honorable House of Commons,
That the East India Trade will be best managed by a Joynt-Stock, exclusive to
all others. It Is humbly conceiv*d, it was no ways Criminal, for them to apply
to His then Majesty, and His Courts of Admiralty, for such assistance as that
Court could afford them, to preserve the Trade to themselves, exclusive to
others, according to their Charter. But as to any such Letter, as is here
suggested, it being matter of Fact, it must rest upon them to prove it, by
producing the same.

Art. VI. That the Company have expended great sums of Money, under the title
of secret Services, and presented to the two late Kings, several ten thousand
Guineys.

Answ. This were much more proper to be objected by the Present Members of the
Company, than by those, some of whom at least wise were the chief Promoters of
it: And having since sold themselves out, would render the present Managers
Criminal, for those very Actions which they committed, while Members of the
said Company.

And as to these ten thousand Guineys which were presented to the late Kings,
it was always Paid into the Exchequer, for the Public Service; and was at
first introduced, not by the present Managers, but by some of those, who as
aforesaid, have sold themselves out, and do now complain against it. But it
has been since taken off by a Present of Seven Thousand Pound ^tock in the
said Company, which his present Majesty, whom God long preserve, does now enjoy.

Art. VII. Some of the prevailing Members in the Committee, have sold to
themselves great part of the Companies Goods, by Private Contract, to the
Prejudice of the Buyers, and the Defrauding the other Adventurers.

Answ. This Objection likewise had been much more proper to have come from the
Present Members, than from those who had no Interest in the Company, when these
Private Contracts were made: Nor were these Contracts so private, but first by
the allowance of the General Court of Adventurers; and then Publication made,
that such Contracts were proposed, and all Persons, both Members and others,
had full freedom to bid for the Goods intended to be Exposed to Sale. And it is
humbly conceived, That it is the Property of every individual Person, and of
all Communities, to dispose of their Effects, as they do think most conducing
to their present Advantage: Nor is it contrary to the Companies present
Constitution. But if it be thought inconvenient for the future; This, as all
other Regulations, is by the Companies Petition, humbly submitted to the
Honorable House of Commons.

Art. VIII. They have not for many Years past made up their Books, and valued
their Stock; although by the General Preamble, subscribed by every Adventurer
on his admission into the Company, they are obliged so to do every seven Years:
Whereby the late Managers have engrossed a great part of the said Stock, in
opposition to the Interest of the Public.

Answ. This Objection is not true in fact. The Company having made up their
Books, and a Valuation of their Stock, in the Year 1685, which is yet within
the seven Years. Nor is it true, as is further suggested, That the late
Managers have thereby engrossed a great part of the Stock, in opposition to the
Interest of the Public.

Art. IX. That they have of late made over-large Dividends, whereby they have
not only divided their Profit, but the very Stock it self: And that it has
been urged (as an Argument so to do) in their Public Courts, That it was the
only way, to put themselves out of the Power of a Parliament:

Answ. This Article consisting of several Particulars huddled up together
without any due connection, must notwithstanding, to render the Answer to it
intelligible, be brancht into several particulars.

As to the making the late Dividends, it was occasioned for want of Liberty to
send out Shipping for India; The Company having made several earnest
applications for the same, which by reason of the Pressing occasions for
Seamen, to Man Their Majesty's Fleet, could not be obtained: And also they have
had certain Advices from India, that by reason of the Great Moguls Warring upon
the King of Gulconda, and the grievous Famine and Sickness happening on the
Coast of Choromandel, most of the Handicrafts-men being destroyed, The
Companies Agents and Factors could not procure Callicoes for their Money: By
which ways the Companies Stock then lying dead, both in England and India, the
said Dividends were made; And not, as is falsely suggested, to put themselves
out of the Power of a Parliament.

And that thereby they have not left a Fund sufficient to carry on their Trade.

But that by these Dividents there is not left a Fund sufficient to carry on
the Trade, is denied; and being matter of Fact, must rest upon the Perusal of
the Accounts of the Companies, ordered, and intended to be delivered into the
Honorable House of Commons.

But are become necessitated to Farm it out to their Fellow Subjects.

As to the Permission Ships, there was a necessity for it during the time of
the War, when Trade might be carried on by private Management of particular
Persons, with less noise or notice taken of it, than could then be done by the
Company; But that being ceased by the Peace made, They are now restrained by
the present Company, and therefore ought not to remain an Objection against
them.

And likewise to the Armenians.

This was principally designed for the increasing the Exportation of the
Woollen Manufacture; They being the only Persons that can greatly increase the
vent of English Cloth, by carrying it into the Upland and Northern parts of
Persia and Tartary, whereby new Markets for the same may be obtained. The
Factors and Agents of the said Company, being never able to penetrate so far
into the Country; And by permitting them to send out, not only our Manufactory,
but also Foreign Commodities, which used always to go with the Caravans for
Turkey, it would have brought great advantage to Their Majesty's Customs, and
increased our Navigation, and may in time bring hither, all the Fine Callicoes
expended in Italy and other parts, that used to go overland by the great
Caravans, to the increase of our, and diminution of their Trade.

And further, that they have permitted the Jews to Establish themselves in
India, and made them a part of their Government there, which has in a manner,
given them the entire Possession of the Diamond Trade, to the great
discouragement and loss of the English Subjects.

As to the Jews being permitted to settle in India, It is no more than what is
done in England, and they may as well accuse the Government here, as the
Company there: And for their being part of the Government, it was admitted to
them, as to all other Nations, thereby to encourage persons of all Persuasions
to settle among them, for the greater strengthening of the Place, and increase
of the Trade thereof.

Art. X. That they have for many Years past carried on their Trade in an
irregular manner, by sending out Ships at improper seasons, and keeping them
abroad longer than was requisite, by which mismanagement, together with the
War, they have occasioned the loss of several considerable ships, and the
mortality of some thousands of Seamen and Soldiers.

Answ. The taking of Ships for a longer time than was formerly practiced, was
occasioned by the War with the Great Mognl, in which it was absolutely
necessary, to have a strong force of English Shipping on the place, to secure
the English Interest there, and if they staid longer than the time limited in
Charter-Party, it was their own voluntary action, they having it in their power
by Charter-Party, to return.

Nor was the loss of the English Seamen more in proportion, than of the
Inhabitants of the Country; there being then such a Contagion in those parts,
as depopulated whole Cities; nor can the Company be more Reasonably accused for
the death of their Seamen and Soldiers, than the Government of this City can
for the loss of its Members, in times of Contagion.

Art. XI. That the Company have commenced an unjustifiable War against the
Great Mogul, and under that

Answ. The War with the Great Mogul was occasioned by pure necessity, and that
necessity did arise, from the breaking in of the Interlopers upon them, in
their Trade, when by dividing the English Interest in India, the Natives there
took advantage of the said division, to extort very great, and most
unreasonable Sums of Money

pretense, committed many great Depredations on the Subjects of that Prince;

from the Company, contrary to their Phirmaunds given to them, as has been more
at large demonstrated by the Company in Print.

Besides, the War was neither commenced nor prosecuted, but by the Direction
and Commissions of the late King under his hand. And it was always believed,
that the sole Power of making War and Peace, was vested in the Crown; so that
this War (being commenced by, and under the then Sovereign Power of this
Nation,) cannot in Reason be accounted an injustifiable War, as is Objected.

Whereby the English are rendered in all Parts of India, odious and
contemptible, and esteemed rather Pirates than Merchants.

As to that which is further Objected, That the English are in all parts of
India rendered odious and contemptible by the War; the quite contrary is true:
For should they have tamely submitted to these Exactions and Insults, without
endeavoring to vindicate themselves, they had then become absolutely
contemptible with the Natives: Whereas now by their endeavor to right
themselves, they have gained Reputation and Respect, more than any other
European Nation in India.

They have been likewise guilty of a notorious breach of Faith, by making Prize
of diverse Ships, to which they had given the protection of the Companies
Passes. And also have seized the Goods and Moneys, which were laden on Freight,
on board the Companies own Ships, for which Bills of Loading are still standing
out.

As to the first branch of this part of the Objection, it is utterly denied: For
what Ships had the Companies Passes, were either not seized at all, or upon
their bringing up to Bombay, immediately discharged by the General.

As to the first branch of this part of the Objection, it is utterly denied: For
what Ships had the Companies Passes, were either not seized at all, or upon
their bringing up to Bombay, immediately discharged by the General.

As to the other part of this Objection, That they have seized the Goods and
Moneys, which were laden on freight on the Companies own Ships, for which Bills
of Loading are standing out. It is answered; That if they mean by these Goods
and Moneys, such as did belong to any Englishman, it is utterly denied; but if
they mean the Goods and Moneys belonging to any of the Natives, then it is
acknowledged, that there were 179 Bales of Goods, laden on the Emerauld Frigate,
designed for Persia, which were afterward put on board Charles the 2 d. there
being a necessity for the Emeralds going a Cruizing; and there being several
other Goods, in the hurry of the Moors Invasion, brought on board the said
Ship, and laid upon them: The Monsoons would not suffer them, when the Charles
was about Lading for Europe, to meddle with her Stowage, and take them out;
which was the Reason of their being brought for England: But they were
accordingly taken notice of, in the Letters and Invoices to the Company; and a
particular Account desired to be kept of their Contents and Sale, to enable the
Companies General and Council to account with the Owners; which is paid and
done accordingly: It being so promised to the Owners from the beginning, and
they were satisfied with it. For what Moneys were laden on the Companies Ships
on freight, and seized on, as is alleged by the Objection, the Truth thereof
is no more than this, That there was some Money so laden detained at Bombay;
but is actually restored to the Owners at Surrat, to their great satisfaction,
which they have publicly acknowledged.

That the Company did make War on the Mogol, without first having made
Application to him for Redress of their Grievances.

This likewise is not true in Matter of Fact; for they did make Application to
himself, and likewise to his Ministers, before the commencement of this War.

Art. XII. That the Company first contrived to make Advantage, of the Credit
and Friendship, which till that time, they had with the Natives, by ordering
their Agents to borrow all the Money they possibly could.

Answ. It is well known, that the Company have all along from their first
Institution, borrowed Money at Surrat, as they have had occasion, and have as
punctually paid it: And what Money, now said in this Objection to be borrowed,
(which is nothing near so much as is alleged) was not done, as is here
suggested, by contrivance to make an Advantage, of the great Credit and
Friendship our Nation had with the Natives, thereby to defeat them of it; but
either is, or will be, as punctually paid when due, as these Suggesters pay
their own Debts, and was never otherwise intended.

That they are at last become sensible, and have supplicated that great Prince
for a Pardon, which he has condescended to grant them.

It is observable, that these Persons, who in their former Articles did accuse
the Company, for not having made their Application to the Great Mogol, for
redress of their Grievances, do now in this criminate them, for having made
their Application to him for a Peace; which they disingenuously call a Pardon.

Art. XIII. That they did also upon most unjust and frivolous pretenses, make
War on the King of Syam, which occasioned the Massacre of diverse of their
Majesty's Subjects, and the ruin of several Families.

Answ. The War made by the Company on the King of Syam, was not made, as is
here pretended, on most unjustifiable and frivolous Pretenses, but upon most
just and reasonable Grounds: The Company having received most notorious
Injuries, both in their Estates, and in the Persons of their Factors, from that
Government.

And now the beforementioned Objections having received their several Answers;
It is humbly submitted to the Judgment of all unconcerned Persons, whether by
them it is made clearly evident, that the Present Company are become a
dishonor to this Nation, a great Grievance to Their Majesty's Subjects; and
that nothing but a New National Joynt-Stock, can retrieve and preserve that
Trade, from being utterly lost to this Kingdom, as is suggested, in the
Conclusion of the said Paper.

And whereas they have Printed the Phirmaund, or Patent lately Granted by the
Great Mogol to the Company, from the style of which they would insinuate, that
the Company have made a base and dishonorable Peace: It is well known to all,
who have observed the style of the Eastern Princes, That it is no other, than
what the said Mogol, and others of the Great Eastern Monarchs generally use, in
their Treaties, they make with their Neighboring Princes: But for the
particular Articles Granted to the Company for their Trade and Settlement, They
are as advantageous as the Company could, or did desire; and beyond what has
ever yet been Granted.


