A RETURN OF PRAYER: OR A Faithful Relation OF Some Remarkable Passages of
Providence concerning THOMAS SAWDIE, a Boy of Twelve Years of Age, Servant to
JOHN ROBERTS of Trebitian in the Parish of Lawrack, and County of Cornwall.

Who was possessed with an Unclean Spirit, and through mercy by Prayer and
Fasting, dispossessed and delivered from the Servitude and Jaws of SATAN.

Attested by Mr. Toms, Mr. Lydston, Mr. Travers, and Mr. Nicholas Tyack Eminent
Ministers of Christ, and other Christian Friends and Neighbors; whose Names
are annexed to the ensuing Relation.

Mark. 9.29. This kind can come forth by nothing, but by Prayer and Fasting.

Acts 4.14. Beholding the man which was healed, standing with them, they could
say nothing against it.

Printed in the Year MDCLXIV.

The PREY plucked out of the Mouth of the LION. OR, An account of some passages
of Providence concerning THOMAS SAWDIE, etc.
ON the 29th. of June 1663, there being a Fair then at Lawraek, this Boy went
to the Fair in the presence of his Mother and some others. By the way he was
very importunate with his Mother for money (though he had some small pieces in
his pocket given him by his Master to buy him a Fairing:) His Mother not being
well stored, did deny him. The boy having seen many, and bought some toys in
the Fair, toward the Evening returned homewards in good season, to manage some
necessary employments that were incumbent on him as his charge.

In a Field, as he was on his way alone, not far from his Masters house, there
met him the appearance of a Woman very gaudy, all in white: who asked him,
whether he wanted any money whether he would have any money reaching out money
to him with her hand. The Boy refused it. On this the Spectrum or appearance
vanished away, rushing by him with some muttering, discontented words, which he
did not understand, and suddenly a great Black Dog, with very great and fiery
eyes stood before him; on which he fell to the ground as dead, but when he
recovered, and rose up, he saw nothing.

After this he went home, and followed his business; but that night lying with
his Fellow Servants he rested very unquietly, and there appeared to him again
the former Spectrum in the shape, or likeness of a great black Dog, which
charged him, that he should not discover any thing that he had seen, and that
he would come again to him the next night.

The second night, when his Bedfellow was asleep, it came again, and stood by
his bedside, as before; made him some tempting proffers, and went off. And the
Boy confesses, that he was not then afraid, though he heard the voice of a man
out of the mouth of a Dog.

The third night it came as formerly; as asked him whether he would have any
money? and the money tendered was eight pieces, as great as pieces of Eight,
very specious, which were given hm, and received by him, on this condition,
that he shouly come to it near the Bakes-Park-Gate (which was near his Masters
house) on the Lords Day in the afternoon (which is called the Ugly Day) which
was to be the Evening before the next Fair, to be held at Lawrack's, eight
weeks distant from the former: To which Fair he should be carried, and have all
his desires.

Now the Boy was charged, when he received the money into his hand, and laid it
on a Chest by him, that the next day he should lay it up in the Chest, and
nail it fast, and not make it known. But the next morning the money was gone
from the top of the Chest, where he laid it. However he was promised afterward
that he should have money enough, if he would come into the Field called the
Bakes-Park, at the time and place appointed.

On this the Boy fell sick, swelling in his stomach and belly, and almost
totally lost his appetite to meat. In which manner he continued for a
Fortnights space: then the swelling struck up into his neck and throat, most
thinking that it was an impostume: some that it was worms; but the apparition
told the Boy that this was not sickness, but it was only to deceive the people,
that they might not suspect any other thing by him.

This distemper increasing on him, his Master sent to one Mr. Carry a Physician
at Lyskerd; who when he poured his Water into an Urinal, said, he could not
discern any thing by the Water, for that it was very full of black dust, and as
it were rags of Brown Paper; and told those that brought it, they should go
home again, and take his Water, and put it into a cleaner Vessel; which being
done, (though the Vessel was clean enough before) and brought to him again; he
found it even as at first; and then he said it was bewitched. However he sent
him a Julep, a Plaster, and a Cordial of Alchermes, with some other things:
But the Boy grew worse, and worse, and fell into several sorts of Fits.

1. Like Epileptick Fits (or of the Falling Sickness) and in these he would
continue for the space of seven or eight hours. After this the swelling in his
throat went off, but that in his belly continued.

2. Like Convulsion Fits; and he had forty or fifty, yea more in a day; and in
these he continued for a Fortnight, or longer: In which Fits he would tear off
his hair from his head, bite his own flesh, or any others, or whatever he could
fasten on. His Master and his Relations on this applied themselves to diverse
persons for the cure of these Fits, could find no remedy.

Hereupon an Uncle to the Boy, who held an Estate, wherein his life was of main
concernment, took him and carried him to one Condy's of Stoke-Climsland in the
said County, who said, that the Boy was overlookt. He gave him a Plaster, a
Powder, and a little Bag to hang about his neck, and doubted not to cure him.

The second time his Relations went, this Condy gave them only a Powder, but
did promise them most certainly to cure him. The third time that they applied
themselves to this Condy, they did most earnestly entreat him to show them
somewhat more, what the distemper was, (seeing the Boy was so unruly, and taken
so strangely) he charged them to watch him carefully, and not to let him be out
of their sight, least he were taken away: For that on their neglect so he would
be, and they should never find him, but dead by some hedge or old wall. He
charged them to come to him again, but they went no morre.

The very next day after this the Boy would have run away to the place
appointed for meeting, but was caught hold of, and brought back again.

That night the Family being at Religious Duties, both reading and praying, he
began to hollow like a Hunter, to roar, and whistle, to make disturbance, till
his spirits were quite spent; and so fell into a deep sleep, from two hours in
the night till seven next morning: In which time they could not perceive
whether he were alive or dead, but only by his heat. His Arms were spread
abroad, and such a stiffness seized on them, with his legs, and other parts,
that there was no bending of them, without breaking them. Thus he continued for
three nights, beginning after the first night about midnight, and so lying till
seven or eight in the morning. In all this time since his fits began, the food
he received was very inconsiderable. After this for three days following in the
morning, lying in his bed as dead, he was taken out, and thrown with violence
under it, his arms all abroad, his limbs inflexible as before, yet none of the
bed-clothes were removed, and this as soon as the parties that watched by him
were come down the stairs.

The third morning, when the Boy was put into bed, and came to himself, his
Mother (who then watched by him) was very earnest in pressing him to make some
discovery, whether he had seen any evil thing, and whether in discourse he had
made any promise, or what he had done. The Boy was extremely unwilling, but
(being urged far) at last he confessed, that he had seen, as before is related,
and that he had promised to go with that which appeared to him.

On this discovery he fell into very strange motions of his body, like one
ringing of Bells, lifting up his hands and feet for five hours at least, (as he
lay on the ground) though even then appearing to be senseless, and not able to
speak a word, yet would make strange noises, which were heard at a great
distance. Sometimes he would neigh like a Stone-horse, then would sing certain
strange Musical Notes and Tunes; which having done, he would scratch, tear, and
bite those that held him.

Now after he had made this discovery as before, the Devil did appear to him in
the shape of a little man, with long fingers, and great eyes, clad all in
black, and that usually like Velvet, and threatening him with his fist: On this,
ever at the naming of God, he would fall down dead. When the Scriptures were
read, or any other religious duty performed, he would hollow, roar, and
whistle, till his strength seemed quite spent: Yet though so disaffected to
what is good, he would ask for a pack of Cards, or a Ballad; and laugh; and
show great rejoicing, if any one did but mention such things to him.

Then he fell into furious frantic Fits. Being one time in the Field with the
Mowers of Corn, on a sudden (though several took care of him) he made and
escape, and threw off his clothes in his flight; and they could not overtake
him, till he had gotten to the other end of the field, and was crept into a
narrow gutter in the Hedge, so that they could hardly pluck him back again.

And when he was within, and the doors kept fast, and two or three to watch
him, he would run to and fro in the House, leaping up and down over the Table,
with very strange agility of body. His eyes would commonly be at the door;
which if he could at any time find un guarded, or not much regarded by the
company, he would run swiftly to make an escape, which was always his great
desire. Once he ran through seven or eight persons, who could not hold him: And
as he was running, he threw off all his clothes, shirt, and all in an instant.

Then they bound his hands behind him with a very narrow Towel, tied strait
upon his wrists, with three knots: Yet when he pleased he would take out his
hands, and put them in again; which would be as fast bound, as ever they were.
Thus he would leap over an high gate with his hands fast bound behind his back;
which he once did, on an endeavor to make an escape, being let out only to try
what he would do.

He did attempt to go out at a Window, the breadth between the Moulins being
scarce three inches; yet had gotten his legs out, and one arm, and almost all
his head, notwithstanding that diverse persons present followed him immediately
to pluck him back again, but could not, till some went on the outside; and
then (as he said) the Devil left him. He could (as he affirmed) have put his
body out at a Mouse-hole; and did shoot himself into a little hole in the Wall
on the side of a Window up to the Waste, and further. The hole went through the
Wall, in the form of a Pyramid, of no capacity in the ordinary course of nature
to contain such a body as his was.

One, among many others, coming toward the house to see him, at a good
distance in the Field met with the Boys Master, and gave advice to bind him,
and not suffer that trouble with him: Who coming immediately into the House,
called the Boy by his name, and asked him how he did: Who looking with a
furious countenance, answered, Thou rogue, thou said I should be bound, did
not? For the Boy confessed afterward that the Devil told him ere the person
came into the House what he said, and described him unto him.

When the Devil did appear to him, (which was very often) it was however
variously, and in diverse modes: Sometimes pleasantly, showing him rare things,
and presenting to his view the Towns and Villages within two miles compass
round about, as plainly, as though he had been in them; sometimes frowning and
threatening him: On which the Boy was as variously affected and postured;
sometimes smiling, laughing, and playing with his fingers, uttering a childish
fawning voice; sometimes yelling and roaring in a very hideous manner, yet in
the intervall was rational and sober: Only when any Religious Duties were on
foot, he would still hollow, roar, and whistle very shrilly; and so continue
for a while, and then fall as if dead, and then on a sudden he would start up,
and renew the same out cry again.

Thus for about seven weeks his Master and the Family were exercised with a
very sore trial in him; and knew not what else to do, but to betake themselves
to him, who has Satan in a Chain, and rules him at his will. Hereupon
consulting with some Friends, what was now farther to be done in this their
astonishing perplexity: Some were for making their address to some Ministers:
Others were against it, arguing that they were but men the best of them; and
others were endued with the same spirit that they were: Some answered, that the
Ministers might have a double portion; and that they might expect an answer
from Heaven rather on their Intercessions, then others.

That therefore at length was the determination. In the pursuance whereof, the
Master of the Boy went to Mr. Nicholas Teag a Minister of his acquaintance a
few miles distant, (with whom it was Vacation time) and declared the case to
him, under what a sad dispensation of Providence they were cast; and with tears
besought his advice, what course to steer for deliverance. He was told, that as
the disease was, so must be the means for remedy. That he should get some
knowing, experienced, pious Christians, or Ministers, or both; and setting
apart a day, seek help of God, with the Boy in the midst of them. That this was
Gods way, and so the safest and most effectual. That he should take care none
did thenceforth apply themselves to Condy in the Boys behalf, for that was
dangerous: And that he had cause to thank God, that he was not conscious to
former applications in that kind, he being ignorant (as he professed) of the
person, and his ways of working.

Upon this he desired that Minister to bear a part in the work of such a day,
as was then proposed, and resolved on; who promising him, wished him to get
three more, and to carry the business with as little noise as possible might
be. Thus he returns to his House, and the next day early, went to procure three
Ministers more, to meet at his House on this sad occasion the day after. And
therein he did speed, and got Mr. Toms, Mr. Travers, Mr. Lydston, Mr. Teag,
(who were all at leisure for such a service) though not without a providence
casting one of them in his way, whom he had no acquaintance with, nor intended
to engage; without whom he had not (probably) been furnished that time with his
desired number.

The very Morning that the Boys Master was gone to procure the Ministers, the
Devil appeared, and told the Boy what his Master was gone, (though the thing
was carried very secretly) viz. to get thither four Black Rogues, (as his style
was) and described to him each of them in particular, what manner of men they
were that would come, giving him evident characters of their persons, which the
Boy presently made a recital of to those about him, though he knew not these
Ministers before. Besides, that one of them fell in unexpectedly, when another
was designed, whom the Boy knew, but said expressly, He was not to come, (being
indeed absent that day from his House) yet he spoke directly of the feature and
stature of him, who was least likely to come together with the other three: But
the Devil then charged him, not to hearken to any one word those black Rogues
should say unto him.

On the morrow Mr. Toms, Mr. Travers, Mr. Lydston, Mr. Teag met; but met with
more company there, then they thought of, and yet not without a good
providence, (as it fell out afterward) by reason of the various reports about
the business.

These Ministers, when they came into the House, found the Boy sitting in a
Chair, with a dreadful Visage, looking fiercely upon them. They spoke to him in
words as suitable as they could, to his condition, and with much mildness,
endeavoring to gain a little on his affections, and to engage his attension:
But they received no other answer from him, save, thou Fool, and thou Rogue,
what care I for thee, I Will fight with thee. A furious spirit against the
Minister seeming to dart out at his eyes, and to flame through his whole
visage. Sometimes he fell a struggling violently, to get loose from them that
held him, erecting himself on the ledg of the Chair, as though he meant to rush
upon the Ministers; but was told, that they were come in the Name and Strength
of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, to be employed in his Work; and that they
feared not him, nor whatever power acted in him, so much to Gods dishonor.

While the Ministers were whispering with their heads together at the Table,
this Lad at the other end of the Room said, He knew what they spoke: And
immediately he leaped out of the Chair, and like a Tumbler jumped on the top of
an high Table, and so down again on the in side, and crept under it, roaring
much like a Bull. Mr. Teag one of the Ministers plucked him with some violence
thence, and set him in the Chair again.

Then the Devil appeared to him in a Staircase, that was over against him in
the same Room, all in black, like Velvet, and told him, he should not hearken
to those Black Rogues. The Boy held up his finger. and smiled, making a
Childish noise to it by way of answer, and then began to roar again; yet
earnestly looking ever and anon toward the Staircase. On this, a Woman of his
intimate acquaintance asked him privately what he said, who told her as it is
before related. Then she stepped directly before him, interposing her self
directly between him and the Stairs, to hinder his sight of what he fixed his
eyes upon: But he raised himself up in the Chair on a sudden, higher then her
head, with his feet on the Seat of the Chair, and saw it again, making the same
signs to it.

Now Mr. Teag one of the Ministers took a portion of Scripture suitable to the
occasion, and spoke on it a while and then addressed himself, and the rest
there present with him, to God in prayer. In the beginning of these exercises
the Boy did hout, roar, and whistle, but after a little while fell as dead.
Then were his Arms, and other parts, one while as plyant as a Glove, and on a
sudden as stiff as a Stake, no bowing of them. He would sometimes start up
suddenly, and stare with his eyes, hout, and roar, and whistle, but soon fell
back in the Chair as dead again. A strong young man held his arms all the
while, and a Gentlewoman (Sister to a Justice of Peace, not far from thence)
held his legs, kneeling before him.

Thus the Ministers went on in prayer by turn, with some little intermission
betwixt each of them, in which they spoke to the Boy, and to one another, with
the rest of the company. About the middle of that days duty the Boy was very
unruly, and made an hideous noise, causing great disturbance, so that the
remaining part of that service was in danger to be confounded, the voice of the
Minister then in prayer being almost wholly drowned for a good while together.
But Mr. Teag, one of the Ministers removed from kneeling at the Table, and
placed himself besides the Chair, where the Boy sat; then took he the Boy by
the hand with his, as he was raving, and presently he became silent, and dead,
as before. After a while he took off his hand softly from the Boys; which was
no sooner done, but he started up, giving a sigh, opened his eyes, and brake
into outrage, as at other times. Then Mr. Teag took hold on his hand again,
and immediately the Boys spirits sunk away, and he became as dead. This was done
sundry times, partly to avoid the trouble which the Minister found in keeping
still in that posture and action of holding the Boys hand, and partly for
trial, whether it would prove alike, being often reiterated, and that sometimes
after a longer cessation, but still the effect was the same; that if he
withdrew his hand never so insensibly, the Boy raged forthwith; but laying it
on, he fell in an instant, and lay in appearance as dead as a stock: Only now
and then the Minister felt at his Wrist a sudden vibration and quivering of the
spirits within, but no part moved outwardly. So after full trial this Minister
kept on his hand, till the duties of the day were concluded. That which gave
the first occasion and motive to this course, was an observation made in the
morning, upon the Ministers first entering discourse with the Boy, that his
enmity to them was such, as he would not endure any of their hands should touch
his, but declined it with much vehemence; and if they caught hold of him
unavoidably, he fell in a dead fit; but not so, when others d d take him by the
hand: Which occasioned that expression of some afterward, that in this the
Devil was outwitted; though indeed there was a special Providence so ordering
and directing it at that time, as is for good reason acknowledged by the most
concerned in that particular. Yet toward the close of that days work, about a
quarter of an hour before the end, the Devil told the Boy (as he fince affirms)
while he lay in his dead Fit, that if he would look the other way, and not in
the Ministers face, he should open his eyes, and roar, and disturb them again,
notwithstanding the Ministers hand which held his; which he began to do, with
mighty struggling, his face being turned away directly from the Ministers even
into the bosom of the man that held him on the other side of the Chair. Mr.
Teag the Minister did not perceive this at first (his thoughts being otherwise
exercised) nor indeed, when he looked up at the noise did he understand the
meaning of it, nor what more to do; so that the Boy made a little disturbance,
but it so fell out, that Mr. Teag raised himself a little somewhat higher on
his knees, and stretching over, looked the Boy in the face, and rebuked him,
whereupon he presently fell dead, but within little that Mr. Teag the Minister
was returned to his former posture, and had withdrawn his head, the Boy was up
again, beginning to hollow again aloud and again sunk dead on his looking over
upon him. But Mr. Teag the Minister did not remove to the other side of the
Chair, to look steadfastly and constantly in his face; so that these changes in
him were sundry times repeated in that short space, till Prayer was ended.

When the duty was over, and the day spent, the Boy was not much altered; yet
was thought somewhat better, in that he went up and down the House very quiet,
and walked forth into the entry, and did not essay to run away. But still the
Ministers had no other language from him then before. And he said, their words
were ugly words. Only he uttered it more calmly and modestly, as though he had
been ashamed.

Thus they departed, commending the Family and company to the Grace of God,
desiring the Lord to make some return to their prayers, and to remember that
poor creature in mercy, etc. leaving some charge concerning him that night.

As soon as they were gone, the Boy desired to go to Bed, where he no sooner
was, but he fell into a dead sleep, (as was thought) and so lay till the next
morning. Three persons did watch by him that night, who heard a noise, as of
horses running furiously into the Court, the doors unlatched and unlockt, so
that they were in a very great fear. The ne t morning the Boy rose somewhat
early, and told his Master, he would go into the Field to the Harvest work,
whither he went, but being come thither, he fell into his roaring fits, making
a great noise, so they bound him, and laid him down, and went a little distance
from him to their work.

The Boy, though his hands were bound behind him, and his legs fastened
together, yet would leap upright upon his feet, and move forward leaping, and
then fall down again, and move on his side toward the hedge. This drew his
Master and all the people about him, who brought him back to the place where
they had left him. And after they had dealt seriously with him a little while,
they returned to their work again, leaving him bound; but he began to make
toward the hedge as before. On which they all came about him again, and sat
down with him.

And whereas no persuasion or means could bend his obstinacy through the whole
course of these his extravagancies to make any mention of God, or show himself
active and willing in any duty of Religion, they now found upon their urging
him that way (though it had often been done before) some passionate relent and
meltings in him.

Then some that were by, put him upon repeating the Lords Prayer, as that which
they judged most familiar to him. Having rehearsed these words, he began to
make some noise, and falling backwards, cried out, He is gone, He is gone. His
Master asked what? The Boy said the Devil, that has troubled me all this
while. Then he presently enquired for Mr. Teag the Ministers, that had prayed
for him the day before, and would be carried to them. This was observed to fall
out about the same hour that the Ministers fell to work the day foregoing.

Then they took up the Boy, and carried him into the House. For he that just
before could leap, and do such strange feats of Activity, now could not stand
alone, nor had strength to feed himself, but was sed on a Woman's knees as a
child. His spirits and voice were very low, and his body exceeding sore all
over.

As soon as he had recovered so much strength of nature, as to be able to utter
so many words with an audible voice (which was about a week after.) He
confessed not only what has been already mentioned, which he farther
confirmed, but moreover, as follows.

1. That toward the end of the day of seeking God, when Mr. Teag the last of
the Ministers was drawing to a close, he felt somewhat within him creeping up
toward his Throat like a living creature, and striving (as it seemed to him)
to force its passage out at his mouth, which caused a great commotion in him,
and exceedingly afflicted him with torture in his body. And he was farther told
by that which so vexed him, that he should be tormented yet worse, if that
black Rogue did not leave praying the sooner. And he verily thought that if the
duty had continued a while longer, some strange effect had followed on the
place, and the Devil had then gone out of him. This was about the time, when he
was bid turn away his face from Mr. Teag the Minister who held his hand (as was
mentioned before) that he might make farther disturbance. 2. That the night
after the Ministers went away, though he went to Bed, and seemed asleep, yet he
was not asleep all that night, but saw all the Chamber, and all the World (as
he thought) in a flame about him. And once that night the Devil came to the top
of the stairs, and holding up his fist, did grin at him, threatening him that if
he had him in his power, he would tear him in a thousand pieces. 3. That what
went out of his Mouth in the Field next morning, when he said, he is gone, he
is gone, was like a Rat, and went into a Fire, which did appear near the hedge
of that Field in a Ditch, toward which he was moving, when left bound as
before, and that the fire did ascend into the Air, and the Rat in it, and he
saw it pass over to Saint Germans Town two miles from thence. 4. That this
Field, and that very part of it, where the Fire appeared, was the place
appointed before for meeting. The time then very near approaching, being on the
Lords Day in the Afternoon next following (which was termed in their contract
the Ugly Day) when and where he was to have received money enough, and gone
away with the Devil: From whom God has now graciously and mercifully delivered
him.
After the noise of this stupendous Providence was somewhat over (for much
discourse there was about it. Some said, It was the Fanatics work. Others that
'twas a Presbyterian Juggle, but the more sober and wiser sort, and those in
power, after narrow scrutiny, did acknowledge themselves fully satisfied, and
openly confessed Digitus Dei est hic) the Ministers met in the same place with
the same company to return praise to God, where the Boy was also present in his
former soundness of mind, and freedom from that power, which had so cruelly
infested him. Yet was he still under much faintness and debility of spirits.
And there did he Ioyn in that Days service, demeaning himself soberly and
modestly, affectionately acknowledging Gods mercy in his great deliverance
(seeing the very next Lords Day after was like to have proved so critical and
fatal to him) and applying himself to the Ministers, gave them all great thanks
for their great care and pains.

Since that he has recovered bodily strength and liveliness, and his Master
keeps him to School. The Lord power his Spirit on him, and purge him, that he
may be a Vessel of Honor, who has been as a brand plucked out of the Fire.

The Boy can go in the dark into the Chamber, where he lay under this dreadful
Visitation, and walk abroad without fear.

The truth of this is attested by
Mr. Toms. Mr. Lydston. Mr. Travers. Mr. Teag.
The Names of the persons (besides the four Ministers) who have attested these
things, and are ready to do it upon Oath, if thereunto lawfully called.
John Roberts, the Boy's Master. and Elizabeth his Wife Dorothy Sawdie, his
Mother Mrs. Jane Brooking, and Mrs. Isabella her daughter. Thomas Geffery.
Samuel Geffery, and Zenobia his Wife Henry Palmer, Constable. Richard Roberts.
Josias Lee. Constance Record. Christopher Earl.
FINIS.

