A REPRESENTATION OF THE SAD Condition and Humble Desires Of the PEOPLE of
GLASGOW.
IT pleased the LORD, in the deep of his Wise dome and overruling Providence,
so to dispose, that, upon the 17. of June last, 1652. being Thursday, a little
before two of the clock in the afternoon, a sudden and violent fire brake up
within a narrow closse, upon the East side of the street above the Cross,
which, within a short space, burnt up six closses with diverse considerable
buildings upon the fore-street. And while the inhabitants of the neighboring
places of the Town were flocked together for the removal of the goods that
could be gotten from amongst the fire, and hindering, so far as in them lay,
the spreading of the same: the wind, blowing from the North-East, carried such
sparks of the flamme as kindled unexspectedly some houses on the West side of
the Salt-Mercat, where the fire so spread, that it did overrun all from house to
house, and consumed in some few hours what came in its way, not only Houses,
but Goods also, both of the Inhabitants of that street, and of others likewise,
who, when the fire began upon them, had brought to that place these of their
Goods and Movables which were gotten safe from the fire that first seized upon
them. This fire, by the hand of GOD, was carried so from the one side of that
street to the other, that it was totally consumed on both sides: and in it the
far best and most considerable Buildings in the Town, with all the Chops and
Warehouses of the Merchants which were therein; And from that street the
flamme was carried to the Tron-gait, Gallow-gait and Bridg-gait: In all which
streets a great many of considerable Closses and Buildings, with the best part
of the movables and commodities of the Inhabitants, were burnt to ashes. This
sad dispensation, from the Hand of an angry GOD, continued near by eighten
hours, before the great violence of the fire began to abate. In this short
time, a great number of those who were wealthy before were extremely
impoverished, many Merchants and others near by ruined; a very considerable
number of Widows, Orphans and honest Families, were brought to extreme misery,
the Dwellings of almost a thousand Families were utterly consumed, and many of
these, who had a large Patrimony, and oftimes had been a shelter to others in
their straits, had not themselves a place where to cover their head, or knew
wherewith to provide bread for them and their families, That which was
preserved from the violence of the fire, being cast out in the open street, and
by frequent removings thereof from one place to another, and from that to a
third, and from a third place to a fourth, as the fire occasioned, so that it
was either taken away by stealth, which in such a confusion was inevitable: or
in a great part so spoiled, that it was made utterly unprofitable.

When some hundreths of Families, in great distress and wants, had, till the
Saturnday at night, lain in the open fields, and diverse of them were beginning
to get some shelter with such of their neighbors as the LORD had spared: Upon
the LORDS Day, betwixt seven and eight in the morning, the fire brake up anew
in the North side of the Trongait, and continued burning violently till near by
twelve hours in the fore-noon. This new and sad stroke, upon the back of the
other, not only destroyed diverse Dwelling-houses, and occasioned the pulling
down of many more* but it so terrified the whole Inhabitants, that all carried
out of their houses what movables they had, and took themselves again for some
nights to the open fields; And in this fear, and removing of their goods from
their houses to the streets, and from the streets to the fields, the loss by
stealing and spoiling of goods was very great to all: and diverse, on whom the
fire unexspectedly seized, were altogether ruined.

As we desire to acknowledge the Justice of the LORD in this terrible stroke,
having ministered so much fuel to the fire of his indignation that burns so
hot against the whole Land: and to mourn under His heavy displeasure, that His
further wrath against us may, in his Son, be averted; So are we necessitate
earnestly to entreat for charitable and timous supply from our Christian
Brethren and Neighbors, whom we do in all humility request, if there be any
consolation in CHRIST, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, That they would tenderly lay to heart, and consider
the desolate condition of the poor Inhabitants of this afflicted City, and,
with cheerfulness and a willing mind, in due season, cast some of their seed
upon these many waters, for the refreshment of us who are ready to faint in
this our languishing condition. As GOD has given every one ability, so we hope
they will give; A very mite, from a willing mind of these who can do no more,
will be accepted of the LORD, will be to us comfortable, and, we are confident,
will be no small matter of joy to themselves, in the day of their accounts,
that, in this so considerable an opportunity of charity, they have not hid
themselves from their own flesh.

FINIS.

