The FIFTH BOOK OF THE WORKS OF FRANCIS RABELAIS, M. D.

Containing the Heroic Deeds and Sayings Of the Good PANTAGRUEL.

To which is added, The Pantagruelian Prognostication; Rabelais's Letters, and
several other Pieces by that Author.

Never before Printed in English.

Done out of French by P. M.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
1694.

THE AUTHOR's PROLOGUE TO THE FIFTH BOOK.
INdefatigable Topers, and you Thrice precious Martyrs of the Smock, give me
leave to put a serious Question to your Worships, while you are idly stroaking
your Codpieces, and I my self not much better employed: Pray, Why is it that
people say, that men are not such Sots nowadays as they were in the days of
Yore? Sot is an old word, that signifies a Dunce, Dullard, Jolthead, Gull,
Wittal, or Noddy, one without Guts in his Brains, whose Cockloft is
unfurnished, and in short, a Fool. Now would I know, Whether you would have us
understand by this same Saying, as indeed you logically may, That formerly men
were Fools, and this Generation is grown Wise? How many and what dispositions
made them Fools? How many and what dispositions were wanting to make 'em Wise?
Why were they Fools? How should they be Wise? Pray, how came you to know that
men were formerly Fools? How did you find that they are now Wise? Who the Devil
made 'em Fools? Who a God's name made 'em Wise? Who do you think are most, those
that loved Mankind Foolish, or those that love it Wise? How long has it been
Wise? How long otherwise? Whence proceeded the foregoing Folly? Whence the
following Wisdom? Why did the old Folly end now, and no later? Why did the
Modern Wisdom begin now, and no sooner? What were we the worse for the former
Folly? What the better for the succeeding Wisdom? How should the Ancient Folly
be come to nothing? How should this same new Wisdom be started up and
established?

Now answer me, an't please you; I dare not adjure you in stronger Terms,
Reverend Sirs, lest I make your pious fatherly Worships in the least uneasy.
Come, pluck up a good heart, speak the Truth, and shame the Devil. Be cheery,
my Lads, and if you are for me, take me off three or five Bumpers to the best,
while I make an halt at the first part of the Sermon; then answer my Question.
If you are not, avaunt! avoid Satan! For I swear by my great Grandmother's
Placket, (and that is a horrid Oath!) that if you don't help me to solve that
puzzling Problem, I will, nay, I already do repent, having proposed it: For
still I must remain netled and gravelled, and the Devil a bit I know how to get
off. Well, what say you? IN faith, I begin to smell you out. You are not yet
disposed to give me an answer; nor I neither, by these Whiskers. Yet to give
some light into the business, I Will even tell you what had been anciently
foretold in the matter, by a Venerable Doc, who being moved by the Spirit in a
Prophetic Vein, wrote a Book eclip'd, The Prelatical Bagpipe. What do you think
the Old Fornicator says? hearken, you Old Noddies, hearken now or never. The
Jubilee's year, when all, like Fools, were shorn,
Is about thirty [ Trente] supernumerary.
O want of Veneration! Fools they seemed,
But, persevering, with long Briefs, at last
No more they shall be gaping greedy Fools:
For they shall shell the Shrub's delicious Fruit,
Whose Flower they in the Spring so much had feared.
L'an Jubilee que tout le monde raire
Fadas se feit, est supernumeraire
Au dessus Trente, O peu de reverence!
Fat il sembloit; mais, en perseverance
De long Brevets, fat plus ne gloux sera;
Car le doux fruict de l' herb esgous era
Don't tant craignoit la fleur en prime vere.
Now you have it, what do you make on it? The Seer is Ancient, the Style
Laconic, the Sentences dark, like those of Scotus, though they treat of matters
dark enough in themselves. The best Commentators on that good Father take the
Jubilee after the Thirtieth, to be the years that are included in this present
Age tili 1550, [there being but one Jubilee every fifty years.] Men shall no
longer be thought Fools next Green Pease Season.

The Fools whose number, as Solomon certifies, is infinite, shall go to pot
like a parcel of mad Bedlamites as they are; and all manner of Folly shall have
an end, that being also numberless, according to Avicenna, Maniae infinitae
sunt species. Having been driven back and hidden toward the Center, during the
rigor of the Winter, it is now to be seen on the Surface, and buds out like the
Trees. This is as plain as a Nose in a man's Face; you know it by experience,
you see it. And it was formerly found out by that great good man Hippocrates,
Aphorism. Verae etenim maniae, etc. The World therefore, wisifying it self,
shall no longer dread the Flower and Blossoms of Beans every coming Spring;
that is, as you may believe, Bumper in hand, and Tears in Eyes in the woeful
time of Lent, which used to keep them company.

Whole Cartloads of Books that seemed florid flourishing and flowery, gay and
gaudy as so many Butterflies; but in the main were tiresome, dull,
soporiferous, irksome, mischievous, crabbed, knotty, puzzling, and dark as
those of Whining Heraclytus, as unintelligible as the Numbers of Pythagoras,
that King of the Bean according to Horace: Those Books, I say, have seen their
best days, and shall soon come to nothing, being delivered to the executing
Worms, and merciless Petty-Chandlers; such was their Destiny, and to this they
were Predestined.

In their stead Beans in Cod are started up; that is, these Merry and
Fructifying Pantagruelian Books, so much sought nowadays, in expectation of
the following Jubilee's period; to the Study of which Writings all People have
given their Minds; and accordingly have gained the Name of Wise.

Now, I think, I have fairly solved and resolved your Problem; then reform and
be the better for it. Hem once or twice like hearts of Oak, stand to your
Pan-puddings, and take me off your Bumpers Nine go downs, and Huzza! since we
are like to have a good Vintage, and Misers hang themselves: Oh! they will cost
me an Estate in Hempen Collars if fair Weather hold. For I hereby promise to
furnish them with twice as much as will do their business, on free cost, as
often as they will take the pains to dance at a Rope's end, providently to save
Charges, to the no small disappointment of the Finisher of the Law.

Now my Friends, that you may put in for a share of this new Wisdom, and shake
off the antiquated Folly, this very moment, scratch me out of your scrouls, and
quite discard the symbol of the old Philosopher with the Golden Thigh, by which
he has forbidden you to eat Beans: For you may take it for a truth granted
among all Professors in the Science of good eating, that he enjoined you not to
taste of them, only with the same kind intent that a certain fresh water
Physician had, when he did forbid to Amer, late Lord of Camelotiere, kinsman to
the Lawyer of that Name, the Wing of the Partridge, the Rump of the Chicken,
and the Neck of the Pigeon, saying, Ala mala, Rumpum dubium, Collum bonum pelle
remota. For the Dunsical Dog-leech was so selfish, as to reserve them for his
own dainty Chops, and allowed his poor Patients little more than the bare Bones
to pick, lest they should overload their squeemish Stomachs.

To the Heathen Philosopher succeeded a pack of Capusions, Monks, who forbid us
the use of Beans, that is, Pantagruelian Books. They seem to follow the Example
of Philoxenus and Gnatho, Sicilians of fulsome Memory, the Ancient
Master Builders of their Monastic Cramgut Voluptuousness; who when some dainty
Bit was served up at a Feast, filthily used to spit on it, that none but their
nasty selves might have the stomach to eat of it, though their lickerish Chops
watered never so much after it.

So those hideous, snotty, pthisicky, eves-dropping, musty, moving Forms of
Mortification, both in public and private, curse those dainty Books, and like
Toads spit their Venom upon them.

Now though we have in our Mother Tongue several excellent Works in Verse and
Prose, and, Heaven be praised, but little left of the Trash and Trumpery stuff
of those dunsical Mumblers of Avemaries, and the barharous foregoing Gothic
Age; I have made bold to choose to chirrup and warble my plain Ditty, or as they
say, to whistle like a Goose among the Swans, rather than be thought deaf among
so many pretty Poets and Eloquent Orators. And thus I am prouder of Acting the
Clown, or any other under-part among the many Ingenious Actors in that Noble
Play; than of herding among those Mutes, who, like so many shadows and Ciphers,
only serve to fill up the House, and make up a number, gaping and yawning at
the Flies, and pricking up their Lugs, like so many Arcadian Asses at the
striking up of the Music, thus silently giving to understand, that their
Fopships are tickled in the right Place.

Having taken this Resolution, I thought it would not be amiss to move my
Diogenical Tub, that you might not accuse me of living without Example. I see a
swarm of our Modern Poets and Orators, your Collinets, Marots, Drouets,
Saingelais, Salels, Masuels, and many more; who having commenced Masters in
Apollo's Academy on Mount Parnassus, and drunk Brimmers at the Caballin
Fountain, among the Nine merry Muses, have raised our Vulgar Tongue and made it
a noble and everlasting Structure. Their Works are all Parian Marble,
Alebaster, Porphiry, and Royal Ciment, They treat of nothing but Heroic Deeds,
Mighty things, grave and difficult matters, and this in a Crimson Alamode
Rhetorical Style. Their Writings are all Divine Nectar, rich, racy, sparkling,
delicate and luscious Wine. Nor does our Sex wholly engross this Honor; Ladies
have had their share of the Glory: One of them of the Royal Blood of France,
whom it were a Profanation but to name here, surprises the Age at once by her
transcendent and Inventive Genius in her Writings, and the admirable Graces of
her Style. Imitate those great Exomples, if you can, for my part I cannot.
Every one, you know, cannot go to Corinth. When Solomon built the Temple, all
could not give Gold by handfuls.

Since then it is not in my Power to improve our Architecture as much as they, I
am even resolved to do like Renault of Montauban; I Will wait on the Masons, set
on the Pot for the Masons, cook for the Stonecutters; and since it was not my
good luck to be cut out for one of them, I will live and dye the Admirer of
their Divine Writings.

As for you, little envious Prigs, snarling, bastard, puny Critics, you will
soon have railed your last: Go hang your selves, and choose you out some
well-spread Oak, under whose shade you may swing in state, to the admiration of
the gaping Mob; you shall never want Rope enough. While I here solemnly protest
before my Helicon, in the Presence of my Nine Mistresses the Muses, that if I
live yet the Age of a Dog, ek'd out with that of three Crows, sound Wind and
Limbs, like the old Hebrew Captain Moses, Xenophilus the Musicianer, and
Demon^x the Philosopher, by Arguments no ways impertinent, and Reasons not to
be disputed, I will prove, in the teeth of a parcel of Brokers and Retailers of
Ancient Rhapsodies, and such moldy Trash, That our Vulgar Tongue is not so
mean, silly, poor, and contemptible, as they pretend. Nor ought I to be afraid
of I know not what Botchers of old thredbare stuff a hundred and a hundred
times clouted up and piec'd together; wretched Bunglers, that can do nothing
but new vamp old rusty Saws; beggarly Scavengers, that rake even the muddiest
Canals of Antiquity for scraps and bits of Latin, as insignificant as they are
often uncertain. Beseeching our Grandees of Witland, that, as when formerly
Apollo had distributed all the Treasures of his Poetical Exchequer to his
Favorites, little hulchback'd Aesop got for himself the Office of
Apologuemonger: In the same manner, since I do not aspire higher, they would
not deny me that of Puny Riparographer, or Riffraffscribler of the Sect of
Pyrricus.

I dare swear they will grant me this; for they are all so kind, so
good-natured, and so generous, that they will never boggle at so small a Request.
Therefore both dry and hungry Souls, Pot and Trenchermen, fully enjoying those
Books, perusing, quoting them in their merry Conventicles, and observing the
great Mysteries of which they treat, shall gain a singular Profit and Fame; as
in the like case was done by Alexander the Great, with the Books of Prime
Philosophy composed by Aristotle.

O rare! Belly on Belly! what Swillers, what Twisters will there be!

Then be sure, all you that take care not to dye of the Pip, be sure, I say,
you take my advice, and stock your selves with good store of such Books, as
soon as you meet with them at the Booksellers, and do not only shell those
Beans in Cods, but even swallow them down like an Opiat Cordial and let them be
in you, I say, let them be within you: Then shall you find, my Beloved, what
good they do to all clever Shellers of Beans.

Here is a good handsome Basketful of them, which I here lay before your
Worships; they were gathered in the very individual Garden whence the former
came. So I beseech you, Reverend Sirs, with as much Respect as e're was paid by
Dedicating Author, to accept of the Gift, in hopes of somewhat better against
next Visit the Swallows give us.

The Fifth Book of RABELAIS, Treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the
Good PANTAGRUEL.
CHAP. I. How Pantagruel arrived at the Ringing Island, and of the noise that
we heard.
PUrsuing our Voyage, we sailed three days without discovering any thing; on
the fourth we made Land. Our Pilot told us, That it was the Ringing Island, and
indeed we heard a kind of a confused and often-repeated Noise, that seemed to
us at a great distance not unlike the sound of great, middle-siz'd and little
Bells rung all at once as it is customary at Paris, Tours, Gergeau, Nantes, and
elsewhere on high Holidays; and the nearer we came to the Land, the louder we
heard that Jangling.

Some of us doubted that this was the Dodonoan Kettles, or the Portico called
Heptaphone in Olympia, or the Eternal humming of the Colossus raised on
Memnon's Tomb in Thebes of Egypt, or the horrid Din that used formerly to be
heard about a Tomb at Lipara, one of the Eolian Islands. But this did not
square with Chorography.

I don't know, said Pantagruel, but that some swarms of Bees here abouts may be
taking a Ramble in the Air, and so the Neighborhood make this dingle dangle
with Pans, Kettles, and Basins, the Co^ibanting Cimbals of Cybele, Grandmother
of the gods, to call them back. Let Us harken! when we were nearer, among the
everlasting Ringing, we heard the indefatigable Singing (as we thought) of some
Men. For this Reason, before we offered to Land on the Ringing Island,
Pantagruel was of opinion that we should go in the Pinnace to a small Rock,
near which we discovered an Hermitage, and a little Garden. There we found a
diminutive old Hermit, whose name was Braguibus, born at Glenay. He gave us a
full Account of all the Jangling, and regaled us after a strange sort of a
fashion; four live-long-days, did he make us fast, assuring us, That we should
not be admitted into the Ringing Island otherwise, because 'twas then one of
the four Fasting, or Ember-Weeks. As I love my Belly, quoth Panurge, I by no
means understand this Riddle; methinks, this should rather be one of the four
Windy-weeks, for while we fast, we are only puffed up with wind. Pray now, good
Father Hermit, have not you here some other pastime besides Fasting; methinks
it is somewhat of the leanest, we might well enough be without so many
Palace-holidays, and those fasting Times of yours. In my Donatus, quoth Friar
Ihon, I could find yet but three Times or Tenses, the Preterit, the Present,
and the Future, doubtless here the fourth ought to be a work of Supererogation.
That Time or Tense, said Epistemon, is Aorist, derived from the Preterimperfect
Tense of the Greeks, admitted in War, and odd Cases: Patience per force, is a
Remedy for a Mad dog. Says the Hermit, it is as I told you, fatal to go against
this, whoever does it, is a rank Heretic, and wants nothing but Fire and
Faggot, that is certain. To deal plainly with you, my dear Pater, cried Panurge,
being at Sea, I much more fear being wet, than being warm, and being drowned
than being burnt.

Well, however, let us fast a God's Name; yet I have fasted so long, that it
has quite undermined my Flesh, and I fear that at last, the Bastions of this
Bodily Fort of mine will fall to ruin. Besides, I am much more afraid of
vexing you in this same Trade of Fasting, for the Devil a bit I understand any
thing in it, and it becomes me very scurvily, as several People have told me,
and I am apt to believe them. For my part, I have no great Stomach to Fasting;
for alas, it is as easy as pissing a Bed, and a Trade of which any body may set
up, there needs no Tools. I am much more inclined not to fast for the future;
for to do so, there is some Stock required, and some Tools are set a work. No
matter, since you are so steadfast, and have us fast, let us fast as fast as we
can, and then breakfast in the name of Famine; now we are come to these esurial
idle Days. I vow, I had quite put them out of my head long ago. If we must
fast, said Pantagruel, I see no other Remedy but to get rid of it as soon as we
can, as we would out of a bad way. I Will in that space of time somewhat look
over my Papers, and examine whether the Marine Study be as good as ours at
Land. For Plato, to describe a silly, raw, ignorant Fellow, compares him to
those that are bred on Shipboard, as we would do to one bred up in a Barrel,
who never saw any thing but through the Bunghole.

To tell you the short and long of the matter, our Fasting was most hideous and
terrible; for, the first day we fasted at Fisticuffs, the second at Cudgels,
the third at Sharps, and the fourth at Blood and Wounds; such was the Order of
the Fairies.

CHAP. II. How the Ringing Island had been inhabited by the Siticines, who were
become Birds.
HAving fasted as aforesaid, the Hermit gave us a Letter for one whom he called
Albiam Camar, Master Aedituus of the Ringing Island; but Panurge greeting him,
called him, Master Antitus. He was a little quear old Fellow, bald pated, with
a Snout whereat you might easily have lighted a Card-match, and a Phiz as red
as a Cardinal's Cap. He made us all very welcome, upon the Hermits
Recommendation, hearing that we had fasted, as I have told you.

When we had well-stuff'd our Puddings, he gave us an Account of what was
Remarkable in the Island; affirming, That it had been at first inhabited by the
Siticines, but that according to the course o^ Nature, as all things, you know,
are subject to change, they were become Birds.

There I had a full Account of all that Atteius Capito, Paulus Marcellus, A.
Gellius, Atheneus, Suidas, Ammonius and others had writ of the Siticines, and
Sicinnists; and then we thought we might as easily believe the Transmutations
of Nectimene, Progne, Itys, Alcyone, Antigone, Tereus, and other Birds. Nor did
we think it more reasonable to doubt of the Transmogrification of the Macrobian
Children into Swans, or that of the Men of Pallene in Thrace into Birds, as
soon as they have bathed themselves in the Tritonie Lake. After this the Devil
a word we could get out of him but of Birds and Cages.

The Cages were spacious, costly, magnificent, and of an admirable
Architecture. The Birds were large, fine, and neat accordingly; looking as like
the men in my Country, as one Pea does like another; for they eat and drank
like men, muted like men, endued or digested like men, farted like men, but
stunk like Devils, slept, bill'd and trod their Females like men, but somewhat
oftener; in short, had you seen and examined 'em from Top to Toe, you would
have laid your head to a Turnip, that they had been mere men. However, they
were nothing less, as Master Aedituus told us; assuring us at the same time,
that they were neither Secular nor Layick; and 'truth is, the diversity of
their Feathers and Plumes, did not a little puzzle us..

Some of them were all over as white as Swans, others as black as Crows, many
as gray as Owls, others black and white like Magpyes, some all red like
Red-birds, and others purple and white like some Pigeons. He called the Males,
Clerghawks, Monkhawks, Priesthawks, Abbothawks, Bishhawks, Cardinhawks, and
one, Popehawk, who is a Species by himself. He called the Females, Clergkites,
Nunkites, Priestkites, Abbesskites, Bishkites, Cardinkites, and Popekites.

However, said he, as Hornets and Drones, will get among the Bees, and there do
nothing but buzz, eat and spoil every thing, so, for these last Three hundred
Years, a vast Swarm of Bigottello's flockt I don't know how among these goodly
Birds every fifth full Moon, and have bemuted, beray'd, and conskited the whole
Island. They are so hard-favour'd and monstrous, that none can abide 'em. For
their wry Necks make a figure like a crooked Billet; their Paws are hairy like
those of rough-footed Pigeons, their Claws and Pounces, belly and breech like
those of the Stymphalid Harpies. Nor is it possible to root them out, for if
you get rid of one, strait four and twenty new ones fly thither.

There had been need of another Monster-hunter, such as was Hercules, for Friar
Jhon had like to have run distracted about it, so much he was nettled and
puzzled in the matter. As for the good Pantagruel, he was even served as was
Messer- Priapus, contemplating the Sacrifices of Ceres, for want of Skin.

CHAP. III. How there is but one Popehawk in the Ringing Island.
WE then asked Master Aedituus why there was but one Popehawk among such
numbers of venerable Birds, multiplied in all their Species? He answered, that
such was the first Institution and fatal destiny of the Stars. That the
Clerghawks begot the Priesthawks and Monkhaws, without carnal Copulation, as
some Bees are born of a young Bull. The Priesthawks beget the Bishhawks, the
Bishhawks the stately Cardinhawks, and the stately Cardinhawks, if they live
long enough, at last come to be Popehawk.

Of this last kind, there never is more than one at a time, as in a Beehive
there is but one King, and in the World is but one Sun.

When the Popehawk dies, another arises in his stead out of the whole Brood of
Cardinhawks, that is, as you must understand it all along, without carnal
Copulation. So that there is in that Species an individual Unity, with a
perpetuity of Succession, neither more nor less than in the Arabian Phoenix.

It Is true, that about Two thousand seven hundred and sixty Moons ago, two
Popehawks were seen upon the Face of the Earth; but then you never saw in your
lives such a woeful Rout and Hurly-burly as was all over this Island. For all
these same Birds did so peck, clapperclaw and maul one another all that time,
that there was the Devil and all to do, and the Island was in a fair way of
being left without Inhabitants. Some stood up for this Popehawk, some for
the other. Some, struck with a dumness, were as mute as so many Fishes; the Devil
a Note was to be got out of them, Part of the merry Bells here were as silent
as if they had lost their Tongues, I mean their Clappers.

During these troublesome Times, they called to their Assistance the Emperors,
Kings, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commonwealths of the World that live on
the other side the water; nor was this Schism and Sedition at an end, till one of
them died, and the Plurality was reduced to Unity.

We then asked what moved those Birds to be thus continually chanting and
singing? he answered, that it was the Bells that hanged on the Tops of their
Cages. Then he said to us, Will you have me make these Monkhawks whom you see
bardocucullated with a Bag, such as you use to still Brandy, sing like any
Wood-Larks? Pray do, said we. He then gave half a dozen pulls to a little Rope,
which caused a diminitive Bell to give so many Ting-tings, and presently a
parcel of Monkhawks ran to him as if the Devil had drove'em, and fell a singing
like mad.

Pray Master, cried Panurge, if I also rang this Bell, could I make those other
Birds yonder with red-herring-colour'd Feathers sing? Ay, marry would you,
returned Aedituus. With this Panurge hanged himself (by the hands, I mean) at
the Bell-Rope's end, and no sooner made it speak, but those smoked Birds hy'd
them thither, and began to lift up their voices, and make a sort of an
untowardly hoarse noise, which I grudge to call singing. Aedituus indeed told
us, that they fed on nothing but Fish, like the Herns and Cormorants of the
World, and that they were a fifth kind of Cucullati newly stamped.

He added, that he had been told by Robert Valbringue, who lately passed that
way in his Return from Africa, that a sixth kind was to fly hither out of hand,
which he called Capushawks, more grum, vinegar-fac'd, brainsick, froward, and
loathsome, than any kind whatsoever in the whole Island. Africa, said
Pantagruel, still uses to produce some new and monstrous Thing.

CHAP. IV. How the Birds of the Ringing Island were all Passengers.
SInce you have told us, said Pantagruel, how the Popehawk is begot by the
Cardinhawks, the Cardinhawks by the Bishhawks, and the Bishhawks by the
Priesthawks, and the Priesthawks by the Clerghawks, I would gladly know whence
you have these same Clerghawks. They are all of them Passengers, returned
Aedituus, and come hither from the other world; part out of a vast Country,
called Want-o-bread, the rest out of another toward the West, which they style,
Too-many-of-'em. From these two Countries flock hither every year, whole
Legions of these Clerghawks, leaving their Fathers, Mothers, Friends and
Relations.

This happens when there are too many Children, whether Male or Female, in some
good Family of the latter Country; insomuch that the House would come to
nothing, if the Paternal Estate were shared among them all; ( as Reason
requires, Nature directs, and God commands.) For this cause Parents use to rid
themselves of that Inconveniency by packing off the Younger Fry, and forcing
them to seek their Fortune in this Isle Bossart, (Crooked Island.) I suppose he
means IN Isle Bouchart, near Chinon, cried Panurge. No, replied the other, I mean
Bossart (Crooked); for there is not one in ten among them, but is either
crooked, crippled, blinking, limping, ill-favored, deformed, or an
unprofitable load to the earth.

'Twas quite otherwise among the Heathens, said Pantagruel, when they used to
receive a Maiden among the number of Vestals; for Leo Antistius affirms that it
was absolutely forbidden to admit a Virgin into that Order, if she had any Vice
in her Soul, or Defect in her Body, tho it were but the smallest Spot on any
part of it. I can hardly believe, continued Edituus, that their Dams on the other
side the water go Nine Months with them; for they cannot endure them Nine
Years, nay scarce Seven, sometimes in the House: But by putting only a Shirt
over the other Clothes of the Young Urchins, and lopping off I don't well know
how many Hairs from their Crowns, mumbling certain apostrophis'd and expiatory
words, they visibly, openly, and plainly, by a Pythagorical Metempsychosis,
without the least hurt, transmogrify them into such Birds as you now see; much
after the fashion of the Egyptian Heathens, who used to constitute their
Isiacs, by shaving them, and making them put on certain Linostoles, or
Surplices. However,I don't know, my good Friends, but that these She-things,
whether Clergkites, Monkites, and Abbesskites (that should not) instead of
singing some plaisant Verses and Charisters, such as used to be sung to
Oromasis by Zoroaster's Institution, may be bellowing out such Catarates and
Scythropys, (cursed, lamentable, and wretched Imprecations) as were usually
offered to the Arimanian Demon; being thus in Devotion for their kind Friends
and Relations, that transformed them into Birds, whether when they were Maids,
or Thornbacks, in their Prime, or at their last Prayers.

But the greatest number of our Birds come out of Want-o-Bread, which tho a
barren Country, where the days are of a most tedious lingering length,
overstocks this whole Island with the lower Class of Birds. For hither fly the
Assaphis that inhabit that Land, either when they are in danger of passing
their time scurvily for want of Belly-timber, being unable, or what is more
likely, unwilling to take heart of grace, and follow some honest lawful
calling, or too proud-hearted and lazy to go to service in some sober Family.
The same is done by your frantic Inamoradoes, who when crossed in their wild
Desires, grow stark-staring mad, and choose this Life suggested to them by their
despair, too cowardly to make them swing like their Brother Iphis of doleful
Memory. There is another sort, that is, your Goal-birds, who having done some
Rogue's Trick, or other heinous Villainy, and being sought up and down to be
trussed up, and made to ride the Two or Three-legg'd Mare that groans for them,
warily scour off, and come here to save their Bacon: Because all these sorts of
Birds are here provided for, and grow in an instant as fat as Hogs, tho they
came as lean as Rakes: For having the Benefit of the Clergy, they are as safe
as Thieves in a Mill, within this Sanctuary.

But, asked Pantagruel, Do these Birds never return to the world where they
were hatched? Some do, answered Aedituus ^ formerly very few, very seldom, very
late and very unwillingly. However, find some certain Ecclypses, by the virtue
o^ the Celestial Constellations, a great Crows of them fled back to the world.
Nor d^ we fret or vex our selves a jot about it; for those that stay, wisely
sing, The fewer the better Cheer; and all those that fly away first, cast off
their Feathers here among these Nettles and Briars.

Accordingly we found some thrown by there; and as we looked up and down we
chanced to light on what some people will hardly thank us for having
discovered; and thereby hangs a Tale.

CHAP. V. Of the dumb Knighthawks of the Ringing Island.
THese Words were scarce out of his mouth, when some Five and twenty or Thirty
Birds flew toward us: They were of a Hue and Feather like which we had not yet
seen any thing in the whole Island. Their Plumes were as changeable as the Skin
of the Chamelion, and the Flower of Tripolion, or Tenerion. They had all under
the Left Wing a Mark like two Diameters dividing a Circle into equal parts, or
(if you had rather have it so) like a Perpendicular Linefalling on a Right
Line. The Marks which each of them bore, were much of the same shape, but of
different Colors; for some were White, others Green, some Red, others Purple,
and some Blue. Who are those, asked Panurge, and how do you call them? They are
Mongrels, quoth Aedituus.

We call them Knighthawks, and they have a great number of rich Commanderies,
(fat Livings) in your World. Good your Worship, said I, make them give us a
Song, an't please you, that we may know how they sing. They scorn your words,
cried Aedituus, they are none of your Singing Birds; but to make amends, they
feed as much as the best two of them all. Pray, where are their Hens, where are
their Females, said I? They have none, answered Aedituus. How comes it to pass
then, asked Panurge, that they are thus bescabb'd, bescurf'd, all embroidered
over the Phiz with Carbuncles, Pushes, and Pockroyals; Some of which undermine
the handles of their Faces. This same Fashionable and Illustrious Disease,
quoth Aedituus, is common among that kind of Birds, because they are pretty apt
to be tossed on the Salt Deep.

He then acquainted us with the occasion of their coming. This, next to us,
said he, looks so wistfully upon you, to see whether he may not find among your
Company a stately gaudy kind of huge dreadful Birds of Prey, which yet are so
untoward, that they never could be brought to the Lure, nor to Perch on the
Glove. They tell us that there are such in your World, and that some of them
have goodly Garters below the knee with an Inscription about them, which
condemns him (qui mal y pense) who shall think ill of it, to be bewrayed and
conskited. Others are said to wear the Devil in a string before their Paunches;
and others a Ram's skin. All that is true enough, good Master Aedituus, quoth
Panurge, but we have not the honor to be acquainted with their Knight-ships.

Come on, cried Aedituus in a merry mood, we have had Chat enough of
Conscience! let us even go Drink, -- and Eat, quoth Panurge: Eat, replied
Aedituus, and Drink bravely old Boy; Twist like Plough-jobbers, and Swill like
Tinkers, Pull away and save Tide; for nothing is so dear or precious as Time,
therefore we'll be sure to put it to a good use.

He would fain have carried us first to bathe in the Bagnio's of the
Cardinhawks, which are goodly delicious places, and have us licked over with
precious Ointments by the Alyptes, alias Rubbers, as soon as we should come out
of the Bath. But Pantagruel told him, that he could Drink but too much without
that: He then led us into a spacious delicate Refectuary, or Fratrie-room, and
told us, Braguibus the Hermit, made you Fast Four day. together; now,
contrariwise, I Will make you Eat and Drink of the Best, Four days through stitch
before you budge from this place. But hark-ye-me, cried Panurge, may not we take
a Nap in the mean time? Ay, ay, answered Aedituus, that is as you shall think
good, for he that Sleeps, Drinks. Good Lord! how we lived! what good Bub! what
dainty Cheer! Oh what an honest Cod was this same Aedituus!

CHAP. VI. How the Birds are crammed in the Ringing Island.
PAntagruel looked I don't know howish, and seemed not very well pleased with
the Four days Junketting which Aedituus enjoined us. Aedituus, who soon found
it out, said to him, you know, Sir, that seven days before Winter, and seven
days after, there is no Storm at Sea: For then the Elements are still, out of
respect for the Halcyons, or Kingfishers, Birds sacred to Thetis, which then
lay their Eggs and hatch their Young near the Shore. Now here the Sea makes it
self amends for this long Calm; and whenever some Foreigners come hither, it
grows Boisterous and Stormy for four days together. We can give no other reason
for it, but that it is a piece of its Civility, that those who come among us
may stay whether they will or no, and be copiously Feasted all the while with
the incomes of the Ringing. Therefore pray don't think your time lost, for
willing, nilling, you will be forced to stay; unless you are resolved to
encounter Juno, Neptune, Doris, Aeolus and his Fluster-blusters; and in short,
all the pack of ill-natured lefthanded Godlings and Vejoves. Do but resolve to
be cheary, and fall to briskly.

After we had pretty well staid our stomachs with some tight snatches, Friar
Ihon said to Edituus, For ought I see, you have none but a parcel of Birds and
Cages in this Island of yours, and the Devil-a-bit of one of them all that sets
his hand to the Plough, or Tills the Land, whose Fat he devours: Their whole
Business is to be frolic, to chirp it, to whistle it, to warble it, tos'ing
it, and roar it merrily night and day; Pray then, if I may be so bold, Whence
comes this Plenty and Overflowing of all dainty Bits and good Things which we
see among you? From all the other World, returned Aedituus, if you except some
part of the Northern Regions, who of late years have stirred up the Jakes; Mum!
they may chance e're long to rue the day they did so; their Cows shall have
Porrage, and their Dogs Oats; there will be work made among them, that there
will: Come, a Fig for it, let us Drink, -- But pray what Countrymen are you?
Tourain is our Country, answered Panurge; Cod so, cried Aedituus, you were not
then hatched of an ill Bird, I Will say that for you, since the blessed Tourain
is your Mother. For from thence there comes hither every year such a vast store
of good Things, that we were told by some folks of the Place that happened to
touch at this Island, that your Duke of Tourain's Income will not afford him to
Eat his Belly-full of Beans and Beacon [a good Dish spoiled between Moses and
Pythagoras] because his Predecessors have been more than liberal to these most
holy Birds of ours, that we might here munch it, twist it, cram it, gorge it,
craw it, riot it, junket it, and tickle it off, stuffing our Puddings with
dainty Pheasants, Partridges, Pullets with Eggs, Fat Capons of Loudunois, and
all sorts of Venison and Wild Foul. Come Box it about, Tope on my Friends. Pray
do but see yon jolly Birds that are Perched together, how Fat, how Plump, and
in good Case, they look with the Income that Tourain yields us! And in faith
they Sing rarely for their good Founders, that is the truth on it. You never saw
any Arcadian Birds mumble more fair^y than they do over a Dish, when they see
these two gilt Battoons, or when I Ring for them these great Bells that you see
above their Cages. Drink on, Sirs, whip it away, verily Friends it is very fine
Drinking to day, and so it is every day of the week; thenDrink on, Toss it
about; here is to you with all my Soul, you are most heartily Welcome: Never
spare it, I pray you, fear not we should ever want good Bub, and Belly-Timber;
for, look here, though the Sky were of Brass, and the Earth of Iron, we should
not want wherewithal to stuff the Gut, though they were to continue so Seven or
Eight years longer than the Famine in Egypt. Let us then with Brotherly Love
and Charity refresh our selves here with the Creature.

Woons, man, cried Panurge, what a rare time you have on it in this World!
Pshaw, returned Aedituus, this is nothing to what we shall have in the other: The
Elizian Fields will be the least that can fall to our Lot. Come, in the mean
time let us Drink here, come here is to thee old Fuddlecap.

Your first Siticines, said I, were superlatively wise, in devising thus a
means for you to compass whatever all men naturally covet so much, and so few
or (to speak more properly) none can enjoy together; I mean, a Paradise in this
Life, and another in the next; sure you were Born wrapped in your Mother's
smickits. O happy Creatures! O more than men! Would I had the luck to fare like
you.

CHAP. VII. How Pantagruel came to the Island of the Apedefers, or Ignoramus's,
with long Claws, and Crooked Paws, and of terrible Adventures and Monsters
there.
AS soon as we had cast Anchor and had mor'd the Ship, the Pinnace was put over
the Ship's side, and Manned by the Coxswain's Crew. When the good Pantagruel
had prayed publicly, and given thanks to the Lord that had delivered him from
so great a Danger, he stepped into it with his whole Company, to go on shore,
which was no ways difficult to do; for as the Sea was Calm, and the Winds laid,
they soon got to the Cliffs. When they were set on shore, Epistemon, who was
admiring the Situation of the Place, and the strange shape of the Rocks,
discovered some of the Natives. The first he met, had on a short Purple Gown, a
Doublet cut in Pains like a Spanish Leather Jerkin; half-sleeves of Satin, and
the upper part of them Leather, a Coif like a Black Pot tipp'd with Tin; he was
a good likely sort of a Body, and his name, as we heard afterward, was
Double-fee. Epistemon asked him, how they called those strange Craggy Rocks and
Deep Valleys? he told him it was a Colony, brought out of Attorney-land, and
called Process; and that if we forded the River somewhat further beyond the
Rocks, we should come into the Island of the Apedefers. By the memory of the
Decretals, asked Friar Ihon, tell us, I pray you, what you honest men here live
on? Could not a man take a chirping Bottle with you, to taste your Wine? I can
see nothing among you but Parchment, Inkhorns and Pens. We live on nothing
else, returned Double-fee; and all who live in this place must come through my
hands. How, quoth Panurge, are you a Shaver then, do you fleece 'em? ay, ay,
their Purse, answered Double-fee, nothing else. By the Foot of Pharao, cried
Panurge, the De'll a Sous you will get of me. However, sweet Sir, be so kind as
to show an honest man the way to those Apedefers, or Ignorant People, for I
come from the Land of the Learned, where I did not learn over much.

Still talking on, they got to the Island of the Apedefers, for they were soon
got over the Ford. Pantagruel was not a little taken up with admiring the
Structure and Habitation of the People of the Place. For they live in a
swindging Wine Press, fifty steps up to it; you must know there are some of all
sorts, little, great, private, middlesiz'd, and so forth. You go through a
large Peristile, alias a long Entry set about with Pillars, in which you see in
a kind of Landscape the Ruins of almost the whole World; besides so many great
Robbers Gibbets, so many Gallows and Racks, that it is enough to fright you out
of your seven Senses. Double-fee perceiving that Pantagruel was taken up with
Contemplating those things, Let us go further, Sir, said he to him, all this is
nothing yet. Nothing, quoth he, cried Friar Ihon, By the soul of my overheated
Codpiece, Friend Panurge and I here shake and quiver for mere hunger. I had
rather be drinking, than staring on those Ruins. Pray come along, Sir, said
Double-fee. He then led us into a little Wine Press that lay backwards in a
blind Corner, and was called Pithies in the Language of the Country. You need
not ask whether Master Ihon and Panurge made much of their sweet selves there;
it is enough that I tell you, there was no want of Bolonia Sawcidges,
Turky-poots, Capons, Bustards, Malmesy, and all other sorts of good
Belly-Timber, very well dressed.

A pimping Son of ten Fathers, who, for want of a better, who did the Office of
a Butler, seeing that Friar Ihon had cast a Sheep's eye at a choice Bottle that
stood near a Cupboard by it self, at some distance from the rest of the
Bottellic Magazine, like a Jack in an Office, said to Pantagruel, Sir, I
perceive that one of your Men here is making love to this Bottle, he ogles it,
and would fain caress it; but I beg that none offer to meddle with it; for it is
reserved for their Worships. How, cried Panurge, there are some Grandees here
then I see: It Is Vintage-time with you, I perceive.

Then Double-fee led us up a private Staircase, and showed us into a Room,
whence, without being seen, out at a Loop-hole, we could see their Worships in
the great Winepress, where none could be admitted without their leave. Their
Worships, as he called them, were about a score of fusty Crackropes and
Gallowclappers, or rather more, all posted before a Bar, and staring at each
other like so many dead Pigs: Their Paws were as long as a Crane's Foot, and
their Claws four and twenty Inches long at least; for you must know, they are
enjoined never to pair off the least Chip of them, so that they grow as crooked
as a Welsh Hook, or a Hedging Bill.

We saw a swindging Bunch of Grapes that are gathered and squeezed in that
Country, brought in to them. As soon as it was laid down, they clapped it into
the Press, and there was not a bit of it out of which each of them did not
squeeze some Oil of Gold. Insomuch, that the poor Grape was tried with a
Witness, and brought off so drained and picked, and so dry, that there was not
the least moisture, juice or substance left in it, for they had pressed out its
very quintessence.

Double-fee told us they had not often such huge Bunches, but, let the worst
come to the worst, they were sure never to be without others in their Press.
But hark you me, Master of mine, asked Panurge, Have they not some of different
growth? ay marry have they, quoth Double-fee; do you see here this little
Bunch, to which they are going to give 'tother wrinch; It Is of Tyth-growth you
must know; they crushed, wrung, squeezed and strained out the very heart's
blood of it but the other day, but it did not bleed freely, the Oil came hard,
and smelt of the Priest's Chest; so that they found there was not much good to
be got out of 't. Why then, said Pantagruel, do they put it again into the
Press? only, answered Double-fee, for fear there should still lurk some Juice
among the Husks, and Hullings, in the Mother of the Grape. The Devil be damned,
cried Friar Ihon, do you call these same Folks illiterate Lobcocks, and
Dunsical Doddipoles? may I be broiled like a Red-herring, if I don't think they
are wise enough to skin a Flint, and draw Oil out of a Brick-wall. So they are,
said Double-fee, for they sometimes put Castles, Parks and Forests into the
Press, and out of them all extract Aurum potabile. You mean, Portabile, I
suppose, cried Epistemon, such as may be born. I mean as I said, replied
Double-fee, Potabile, such as may be drunk; for it makes them drink many a good
Bottle more than otherwise they should.

But I cannot better satisfy you as to the growths of the Vine-tree Syrup that
is here squeezed out of Grapes, than in desiring you to look your self yonder
in that Backyard, where you will see above a thousand different growths that lie
a waiting to be squeezed every moment. Here are some of the public, and some
of the private growth; some of the Builders, Fortifications, Loans, Gifts and
Gratuities, Escheats, Forfeitures, Fines and Recoveries, Penal Statutes,
Crown Lands and Demesne, Privy-Purse, Post Office, Offerings, Lordships of
Manors, and a world of other growths for which we want Names. Pray, quoth
Epistemon, tell me of what growth is that great one with all those little
Grapelings about it. Oh, oh! returned Double-fee, that plump one is of the
Treasury, the very best growth in the whole Country; whenever any one of that
growth is squeezed, there is not one of their Worships but gets Juice enough
out of it to soak his Nose six Months together. When their Worships were up,
Pantagruel desired Double-fee to take us into that great Wine Press, which he
readily did. As soon as we were in, Epistemon, who understood all sorts of
Tongues, began to show us many Devises on the Press which was large and fine,
and made of the Wood of the Cross (at least Double-fee told us so.) On each
part of it were names of every thing in the Language of the Country. The
Spindle of the Press was called Receipt; the Trough, Costs and Damages; the
Hole for the Vice-pin, State; the Side-boards, Money paid into the Office; the
great Beam, Respit of homage; the Branches, Radiatur; the Side-beams,
Recuperetur; the Fats, plus Valeur.

I don't know what it means.


Ignoramus; the two-handled Baskets, the Rolls; the Treading place,
Acquittance; the Dossers, Validation; the Panniers, Authentic Decrees; the
Pailes, Potentials; the Funnel, Quietus est.

By the Queen of the Chitterlings, quoth Panurge, all the Hieroglyphics of
Egypt are mine A -- to this Jargon. Why! here is a parcel of Words full as
analogous as Chalk and Cheese, or a Cat and a Cartwheel! But why, pr'y thee,
Dear Double-fee, do they call these Worshipful Dons of yours, Ignorant Fellows?
Only, said Double-fee, because they neither are or ought to be Clerks, and all
must be ignorant as to what they transact here; nor is there to be any other
Reason given, but, The Court has said it; The Court will have it so; The Court
has decreed it. Cop's Body, quoth Panurge, they might full as well have called
'em Necessity; for Necessity has no Law.

From thence, as he was leading us to see a thousand little puny Presses, we
spied another paltry Bar, about which sat four or five ignorant waspish
Churls, of so testy, fuming a Temper, and so ready to take Pepper in the Nose
for Yea and Nay, that a Dog would not have lived with 'em. They were hard at
it, with the lees and dregs of the Grapes, which they gripped over and over
again, might and main, with their clench'd Fists. They were called Contractors,
in the Language of the Country. These are the ugliest, misshapen, grim-look'd
Scrubbs, said Friar Ihon, that ever were beheld with or without Spectacles.
Then we passed by an infinite number of little pimping Wine-presses, all full
of Vintage-mongers, who were picking, examining, and raking the Grapes with
some Instruments, called Bills of Charge.

Finally, We came into a Hall down Stairs, where we saw an overgrown cursed
mangy Curr with a pair of Heads, a Wolf's Belly, and Claws like the Devil of
Hell. The Son of a Bitch was fed with Cost; for he lived on a Mulctiplicity of
Fine Amonds, and Amerciaments, by Order of their Worships, to each of whom the
Monster was worth more than the best Farm in the Land. In their Tongue of
Ignorance they called him Twofold. His Dam lay by him, and her hair and shape
was like her Whelp's; only she had four Heads, two Male, and two Female, and
her Name was Fourfold. She was certainly the most cursed and dangerous Creature
of the place, except her Grandam, that had been kept locked up in a Dungeon,
time out of mind, and her Name was Refusing of Fees.

Friar Ihon, who had always twenty yards of Gut ready empty, to swallow a
Gallimaufry of Lawyers, began to be somewhat out of humor, and desired
Pantagruel to remember he had not dined, and bring Double-fee along with him.
So, away we went, and as we marched out at the Back-gate, whom should we meet
but an old piece of Mortality in Chains; he was half Ignorant, and half
Learned, like an Hermaphrodite of Satan. The Fellow was all caparison'd with
Spectacles, as a Tortoise is with Shells, and lived on nothing but a sort of
Food, which, in their Gibberish, was called Appeals. Pantagruel asked
Double-fee of what Breed was that Prothonotary, and what Name they gave him?
Double-fee told us, that time out of mind, he had been kept there in Chains, to
the great Grief of their Worships, who starved him, and his Name was Review. By
the Pope's sanctified Two-pounders, cried Friar Ihon, I don't much wonder at
the meager Cheer which this old Chuff finds among their Worships, do but look a
little on the weather-beaten Scratch Toby, Friend Panurge; by the sacred Tip of
my Cowle, I Will lay Five Pounds to a Hazel-Nutt, the foul Thief has the very
Looks of Gripe-me-now. These same Fellows here, ignorant as they be, are as
sharp and knowing as other Folk. But were it my Case, I Would send him packing with
a Squib in his Breech, like a Rogue enough as he is. By my oriental Barnicles,
quoth Panurge, honest Friar, you are in the Right; for if we but examine that
treacherous Review's ill-favored Phiz, we find that the filthy Snudge is yet
more mischievous and ignorant than these Ignorant Wretches here; since they
(honest Dunces!) grapple and glean with as little harm and pother as they can,
without any long Fiddle-comefarts, or Tantalizing in the Case; nor do they
dally and demur in your Suit, but, in two or three words, whip-stitch, in a
trice* they finish the Vintage of the Close, bating you all those damned
tedious Interlocutories, Examinations and Appointments, which frets to the
hearts-blood your Furred Law-cats.

CHAP. VIII. How Panurge related to Master Aedituus, the Fable of the Horse and
the Ass.
WHen we had crammed and crammed again, Aedituus took us into a Chamber that
was well furnished, hung with Tapestry, and finely gilt. Thither he caused to
be brought store of Mirabolans, Cashou, Green Ginger preserved, with plenty of
Hypocras, and delicious Wine. With these Antidotes, that were like a sweeter
Lethe, he invited us to forget the hardships of our Voyage; and at the same
time he sent plenty of Provisions on Board our Ships that rid in the Harbor.
After this, we even jogged to Bed for that Night, but the Devil-a-bit poor
Pilgarlic could sleep one wink, the everlasting jingle-jangle of the Bells kept
me awake whether I would or no.

About midnight Aedituus came to wake us, that we might drink. He himself
showed us the way, saying, You Men of the other World say that Ignorance is the
Mother of all Evil, and so far you are right; yet for all that, you don't take
the least care to get rid of it, but still plod on, and live in it, with it,
and by it, for which cause a plaguy-deal of mischief lights on you every day,
and you are right enough served; you are perpetually ailing somewhat, making a
moan, and never right. It Is what I was ruminating upon just now. And, indeed,
Ignorance keeps you here fastened in Bed, just as that Bully-rock Mars was
detained by Vulcan's Art; for all the while you don't mind that you ought to
spare some of your Rest, and be as lavish as you can of the Goods of this
famous Island. Come, come, you should have eaten three Breakfasts already, and
take this from me for a certain Truth, That if you would consume the
Mouth-Ammunition of this Island, you must rise betimes; Eat them, they
multiply; Spare them, they diminish.

For Example: Mow a Field in due Season, and the Grass will grow thicker and
better; don't mow it, and in a short time 'twill be floor'd with Moss. Let Us
drink, and drink again my Friends; come, let us all carouse it. The leanest of
our Birds are now singing to us all, we'll drink to them if you please. Let Us
take off one, two, three, nine Bumpers, Non Zelus, sed Charitas.

When Day peeping in the East, made the Sky turn from Black to Red, like a
boiling Lobster, he waked us again to take a Dish of Monastical Browess. From
that time we made but one Meal that only lasted the whole Day, so that I cannot
well tell how I may call it, whether Dinner, Supper, Nunchion, or After-Supper;
only to get a Stomach, we took a turn or two in the Island, to see and hear the
blessed singing Birds.

At Night Panurge said to Aedituus, give me leave, sweet Sir, to tell you a
merry Story of something that happened some three and twenty Moons ago in the
Country of Chastelleraudland.

On the first of April, a certain Gentleman's Groom, Roger by Name, was walking
his Master's Horses in some fallow ground. There 'twas his good Fortune to find
a pretty Shepherdess, feeding her bleeting Sheep, and harmless Lambkins, on the
Brow of a neighboring Mountain, in the shade of an adjacent Grove: Near her,
some frisking Kids tripp'd it over a green Carpet of Nature's own spreading,
and to complete the Pastoral Landscape, There stood an Ass. Roger, who was a
Wag, had a Dish of Chat with her, and after some If's, And's, and But's, Hem's,
and Heighs on her side, got her in the mind to get up behind him, to go and see
his Stable, and there take a Bit by the bye in a Civil way. While they were
holding a parley, the Horse directing his discourse to the Ass (for all Brute
Beasts spoke that year in diverse places) whispered these words in his Ear: Poor
Ass, how I pity thee! Thou slavest like any Hack, I read it on thy Crupper;
thou do well, however, since God has created thee to serve Mankind; thou art
a very honest Ass: But not to be better Rubbed down, Curricom'd, Trap'd, and Fed
than thou art, seems to me indeed to be too hard a Lot. Alas! Thou art all
Rough-coated, in ill Plight; Jaded, Foundred, Crestfallen, and Drooping like a
Mooting Duck, and Feedest here on nothing but course Grass, or Briars and
Thistles: Therefore do but Pace it along with me, and thou shall see how we
noble Steeds, made by Nature for War, are Treated; come, thou wilt lose nothing
by coming, I Will get thee a taste of my Fare. IN troth Sir, I can but love you
and thank you, returned the Ass; I Will wait on you, good Mr. Steed. Methinks,
Gaffer Ass, you might as well have said, Sir Grandpaw Steed: Oh! Cry mercy,
good Sir Grandpaw, returned the Ass; we Country Clowns are somewhat gross, and
apt to knock Words out of joint. However, an't please you, I Will come after your
Worship at some distance, lest for taking this Run my side should chance to be
Firk'd and Curried with a Vengeance, as it is but too often, the more's my
sorrow.

The Sheperdess being got behind Roger, the Ass followed, fully resolved to
Bate like a Prince with Roger's Steed. But when they got to the Stable, the
Groom who spied the Grave Animal, ordered one of his Underlings to welcome him
with the Pitch-fork, and Curricomb him with a Cudgel. The Ass who heard this,
recommended himself Mentally to the God Neptune, and was packing off, thinking,
and syllogising within himself thus; Had not I been an Ass, I had not come here
among great Lords, when I must needs be sensible that I was only made for the
use of the small Vulgar; Aesop had given me a fair warning of this in one of
his Fables. Well, ^ I must even scamper, or take what follows* With this he
fell a Trotting, and Winsing, and Yerking, and Calcitrating, alias Kicking, and
Farting, and Funking, and Curvetting, and Bounding, and Springing, and
Galloping full drive, as if the Devil had been come for him in propria persona.

The Sheperdess who saw her Ass scour off, told Roger that 'twas her Cattle,
and desired he might be kindly used, or else she would not stir her foot over
the Threshold Friend Roger no sooner knew this, but he ordered him to be
fetched in, and that my Master's Horses should rather chop Straw for a Week
together, than my Mistress's Beast should want his Belly full of Corn.

The most difficult point was to get him back; for in vain the youngsters
complimented and cox'd him to come; I dare not, said the Ass, I am bashful; and
the more they strove by fair means to bring him with them, the more the
stubborn Thing was untoward, and flew out at heels; Insomuch that they might
have been there to this hour, had not his Mistress advised them to toss Oats in
a Sive, or in a Blanket, and call him, which was done, and made him wheel
about, and say; Oats with a witness, Oats shall go to pot, adveniat; Oats will
do, there is Evidence in the Case; but none of the Rubbing down, non of the
Firking. Thus Melodiously Singing, for as you know that Arcadian Bird's Note is
very Harmonious, he came to the young Gentlemen of the Horse, alias Blackgarb,
who brought him into the Stable.

When he was there, they placed him next to the great Horse, his Friend, Rubbed
him him down, Curricom'd him, laid clean Straw under him up to his Chin, and
there he lay at Rack and Manger; the first stuffed with sweet Hay, the latter
with Oats; which when the Horse- Valets-de Chamber sifted, he clapped down his
Lugs to tell them by Signs that he would Eat it but too well without sifting,
and that he did not deserve so great an honor.

When they had well Fed, quoth the Horse to the Ass, Well poor Ass, how is it
with thee now? How do thou like this Fare? Thou were so nice at first, a body
had much ado to get thee hither. By the Fig, Answered the Ass, which one of our
Ancestors Eating, Philemon dyed Laughing, this is all sheer Ambrosia, good Sir
Grandpaw; But what would you have an Ass say? Methinks all this is yet but half
Cheer; don't your Worships here use now and then to take a leap? What leaping
do thou mean, asked the Horse, the Devil leap thee, do thou take me for an
Ass? IN troth, Sir Grandpaw, quoth the Ass, I am somewhat a Blockhead you know,
and cannot for the heart's blood of me learn so fast the Courtway of speaking of
you Gentlemen-horses; I mean don't you Stallionize it sometimes here among your
metal'd Fillies? Tush, whispered the Horse, speak lower; for, by Bucephalus, if
the Grooms but hear thee, they'^ maul and belam me and thee thrice and
threefold; so that thou wilt have but little stomach to a leaping bout. Cod so,
man, we dare not so much as grow stiff at the tip of the lowermost snout,
though 'twere but to leak or so, for fear of being Jirk'd and Paid out of our
Letchery. As for any thing else we are as happy as our Master, and perhaps
more. By this Packsaddle, my old Acquaintance, quoth the Ass, I have done with
you, a fart for thy Litter and Hay, and a fart for thy Oats: Give me the
Thistles of our Fields, since there we leap when we list: Eat less, and leap
the more, I say; it is Meat, Drink and Cloth to us. Ah! Friend Grandpaw, it
would do thy heart good to see us at a Fair when we hold our Provincial
Chapter! Oh! how we leap it while our Mistresses are selling their Goslins and
other Poultry! With this they parted: Dixi: I have done.

Panurge then held his Peace; Pantagruel would have had him to have gone on to
the end of the Chapter; but Aedituus said, A word to the wise is enough; I can
pick out the meaning of that Fable, and know who is that Ass and who the Horse;
but you are a bashful youth I perceive; Well, know that there is nothing for you
here, scatter no words. Yet, returned Panurge, I saw but even now a pretty kind
of a cooing Abbeykite as white as a Dove, and her I had rather ride than lead.
May I never stir, if she is not a dainty bit, and very well worth a Sin or two.
Heaven forgive me! I meant no more harm in it than you; may the harm I meant in
it befall me presently.

CHAP. IX. How with much ado we got a sight of the Popehawk.
OUR Junketting and Banqueting held on at the same Rate the third day, as the
two former. Pantagruel then earnestly desired to see the Popehawk, but Aedituus
told him, it was not such an easy matter to get a sight of him. How, asked
Pantagruel, has he Plato's Helmet on his Crown, Gyges's Ring on his Pounces, or
a Cameleon on his Breast, to make him invisible when he pleases? No, Sir,
returned Aedituus, but he is naturally of pretty difficult access; however I Will
see and take care that you may see him if possible. With this he left us
piddling; then within a quarter of an hour came back, and told us the Popehawk
is now to be seen; so he led us, without the least noise, directly to the Cage
wherein he sat drooping, with his Feathers staring about him, attended by a
Brace of little Cardinhawks, and six lusty fusty Bishhawks.

Panurge star'd at him like a dead Pig, examining exactly his Figure, Size, and
Motions. Then with a loud voice he said, a Curse light on the hatcher of the
ill Bird, of my word this is a filthy Whoophooper. Tush, speak softly, said
Aedituus, By G -- he has a pair of Ears, as formerly Michael de Metiscone
remarked. What then, returned Panurge, so has a Whoopcat. So, said Aedituus,
if he but hear you speak such another blasphemous word, you had as good be
damned: Do you see that Basin yonder in his Cage? Out of it shall sally
Thunderbolts and Lightnings, Storms, Bulls, and the Devil and all, that will
sink you down to Peg-Trantums an hundred Fathom under ground. 'Twere better to
drink and be merry, quoth Friar Ihon.

Panurge was still feeding his Eyes with the sight of the Popehawk, and his
Attendants, when somewhere under his Cage he perceived a Madgehowlet; with this
he cried out, By the Devil's-maker's Master, there is Roguery in the Case; they
put Tricks upon Travelers here more than any where else, and would make us
believe that a T -- d's a Sugar Loaf. What damned cousening, gulling, and
Coney-catching have we here! Do you see this Madgehowlet? by Minerva we are all
beshit. Odsoons, said Aedituus, speak softly, I tell you, it is no Madgehowlet,
no she-thing, on my hon^^ word, but a male and a noble Bird.

May we not hear the Popehawk sing, asked Pantagruel? I dare not promise that,
returned Aedituus, for he only sings and eats at his own time; so don't I,
quoth Panurge, Poor Pilgarlic is fain to make every body's time his own; if
they have time, I find time: Come then, let us go drink if you will. Now this
is something like a Tansy, said Aedituus; you begin to talk somewhat like,
still speak in that fashion, and I Will secure you from being thought an Heretic.
Come on, I am of your mind.

As we went back to have the other fuddling Bout, we spied an old green-headed
Bishhawk, who sat moping with his Mate and three jolly Bitter Attendants, all
snoring under an Arbor. Near the old Chuff stood a buxom Abbeskite, that sung
like any Linet; and we were so mightily tickled with her singing, that I vow
and swear we could have wished all our Members but one turned into Ears, to
have had more of the melody. Quoth Panurge, This pretty Cherubin of Cherubins
is here breaking her Head with chanting to this huge, fat, ugly-face, who lies
grunting all the while like a Hog as he is. I Will make him change his Note
presently in the Devil's Name. With this he rang a Bell that hung over the
Bishhawk's Head; but tho he rang and rang again, the Devil a-bit Bishawk would
hear; the louder the sound, the louder his snoring. There was no making him
sing. By G -- quoth Panurge, You old Buzzard, If you will not sing by fair means,
you shall by foul. Having said this, he took up one of St. Stephens's Loaves,
alias a Stone, and was going to hit him with it about the middle. But Aedituus
cried to him, Hold, hold, honest Friend, strike, wound, poison, kill and
murder all the Kings and Princes in the world, by Treachery, or how thou will,
and as soon as thou would, unnestle the Angels from their Cockloft, Popehawk
will pardon thee all this. But never be so mad as to meddle with these sacred
Birds, as much as thou love the profit, welfare and life not only of thy
self, and thy Friends and Relations alive or dead, but also of those that may
be born hereafter to the thousandth Generation; for so long thou would entail
misery upon them. Do but look upon that Basin. Cat-so! let us rather drink
then, quoth Panurge. He that spoke last, spoke well, Mr. Antitus, quoth Friar
Ihon; while we are looking on these devilish Birds, we do nothing but
blaspheme; and while we are taking a Cup, we do nothing but praise God. Come on
then, let us go drink; How well that w^^ sounds!

The third day (after we had drank, as you must understand) Aedituus dismissed
us. We made him a Present of a pretty little Perguois Knife, which he took more
kindly than Artaxerxes did the Cup of cold Water that was given him by a Clown.
He most courteously thanked us, and sent all sorts of Provisions aboard our
Ships, wished us a prosperous Voyage and Success in our undertakings, and made
us promise and swear by Jupiter of Stone to come back by his Territories.
Finally, he said to us, Friends, pray note that there are many more Stones in
the world than men; take care you don't forget it.

CHAP. X. How we arrived at the Island of Tools.
HAving well ballasted the holds of our Human Vessels, we weighed Anchor,
hois'd up Sail, stowed the Boats, set the Land, and stood for the Offing with a
fair loom Gale, and for more have unparrell'd the Misen yard, and lanch'd it
and the Sail over her Lee-quarter, and fitted Gives to keep it steady, and
boom'd it out; so in three days we made the Island of Tools, that is altogether
uninhabited. We saw there a great number of Trees which bore Mattocks,
Pickaxes, Crows, weeding Hooks, Sythes, Sickles, Spades, Trowels, Hatchets,
hedging Bills, Saws, Adds, Bills, Axes, Sheers, Pincers, Bolts, Piercers,
Augres and Wimbles.

Others bore Dags, Daggers, Poniards, Bayonets, Square-bladed Tucks,
Stilettoes, Poinadoes, Skenes, Penknives, Puncheons, Bodkins, Swords, Rapiers,
Backswords, Cutlasses, Semiters, Hangers, Falchions, Glaives, Raillons,
Whittles and Whinyards.

Whoever would have any of these, needed but to shake the Tree, and immediately
they dropped down as thick as Hops, like so many ripe Plumbs; nay, what is more,
they fell on a kind of Grass called Scabbard, and sheathed themselves in it
cleverly. But when they came down there was need of taking care lest they
happened to touch the Head, Feet, or other Parts of the Body. For they fell
with the point downwards, and in they stuck, or slit the continuum of some
Member, or lopt it off like a Twig; either of which generally was enough to
have killed a man though he were a hundred year old, and worth as many thousand
Spankers, Spur-royals and Rose-nobles.

Under some other Trees, whose names I cannot justly tell you, I saw some
certain sorts of Weeds that grew and sprouted like Pikes, Lances, Javelins,
Javelots, Darts, Dartlets, Halbarts, Boarspears, Eelspears, Partisans,
Tridentes, Prongs, Trout-staves, Spears, Half-pikes and Hunting Staffs. As they
sprouted up and chanced to touch the Tree, strait they met with their Heads,
Points and Blades, each suitable to its Kind, made ready for them by the Trees
over them; as soon as every individual Wood was grown up, fit for its Steel;
even like the Childrens Coats that are made for them as soon as they can wear
them, and you Weane them of their Swaddling Clothes; nor do you mutter, I pray
you, at what Plato, Anaxogoras and Democritus have said; Od's fish! they were
none of your Lower-Form Gimcracks; were they?

Those Trees seemed to us Terrestrial Animals, in no wise so different from
Brute Beasts as not to have Skin, Fat, Flesh, Veins, Arteries, Ligaments,
Nerves, Cartilages, Kernels, Bones, Marrow, Humors, Matrices, Brains and
Articulations; for they certainly have some, since Theophrastus will have it
so; but in this point they differed from other Animals, that their Heads, that
is, the part of their Trunks next to the Root are downwards; their Hair, that
is, their Roots, in the Earth; and their Feet, that is their Branches, upside
down; as if a man should stand on his Head with out stretched Legs. And as you,
battered Sinners, on whom Venus has bestowed something to remember her, feel
the approach of Rains, Winds, Cold, and every Change of Weather, at your
Ischiatic Legs, and your Omoplates, by means of the perpetual Almanac which she
has fixed there; So these Trees have notice given them by certain sensations
which they have at their Roots, Stocks, Gums, Paps or Marrow, of the growth of
the Staffs under them; and accordingly they prepare suitable Points and Blades
for them beforehand. Yet as all things, except God, are sometimes subject to
Error, Nature its self not free from it, when it produces Monstrous things;
likewise I observed something amiss in these Trees. For a Halfpike that grew up
high enough to reach the Branches of one of these Instrumentiferous Trees,
happened no sooner to touch them, but instead of being joined to an Iron-head,
it impaled a stubb'd Broom at the Fondament. Well, no matter, 'twill serve to
sweep the Chimney. Thus a Pertusan met with a Pair of Garden-shears; Come,
all is good for something, 'twill serve to nip off little Twigs, and destroy
Catterpillars. The Staff of a Halbert got the Blade of a Sithe, which made it
look like an Hermaphrodite; happy be lucky, it is all a case, 'twill serve for
some Mower. Oh it is a great blessing to put our trust in the Lord! As we went
back to our Ships, I spied behind I don't know what Bush, I don't know what
Folks, doing I don't know what business, in I don't know what posture, scowring
I don't know what Tools, in I don't know what manner, and I don't know what
place.

CHAP. XI. How Pantagruel arrived at the Island of Sharping.
WE left the Island of Tools to pursue our Voyage, and the next day stood in
for the Island of Sharping, the true Image of Fontainbleau; for the Land is so
very lean there, that the Bones, that is the Rocks, shoot through its Skin.
Besides, it is sandy, barren, and unpleasant. Our Pilot showed us there two
little square Rocks, which had eight equal Points in the shape of a Cube; they
were so white that I might have mistaken them for Alabaster or Snow, had he not
assured us they were made of Bone.

He told us that twenty chance Devils, very much feared in our Country, dwelt
there in six different Stories, and that the biggest Twins or Braces of them
were called Sixes, and the smallest Amb'sace; the rest Cinques, Quaters, Treys
and Dewses. When they were conjured up, otherwise coupled, they were called
either, Sice cincq, Sice quater, Sice trey, Sice dewse, and Sice ace; or Cincq
quater, Cincq trey, and so forth. I made there a shrewd Observation; would you
know what it is, Gamesters? It Is that there are very few of you in the world but
what call upon and invoke the Devils. For the Dice are no sooner thrown on the
board, and the greedy gazing Sparks have hardly said, two sixes, Frank, but six
Devils damn it, cry as many of them; If amb's Ace, then, A Brace of Devils
broil me, will they say. Quater Deuse, Tom; The Dewse take it, cries another,
and so on to the end of the Chapter. Nay, they don't forget sometimes to call
the Black Cloven-footed Gentlemen by their Cristen-names and Sirnames; and
what is stranger yet, they use them as their greatest Cronies, and make them so
often the Executors of their Wills, not only giving themselves, but every body
and every thing to the Devil, that there is no doubt but he takes care to seize,
soon or late, what is so zealously bequeathed him. Indeed it is true, Lucifer
does not always immediately appear by his lawful Attorneys; but alas! it is not
for want of good will; he is really to be excused for his delay, for what the
Devil would you have a Devil do? he and his black Guards are then at some other
places, according to the priority of the persons that call on them: Therefore
pray let none be so venturesom as to think, that the Devils are deaf and blind.

He then told us, that more Wrecks had happened about those Square-rocks, and a
greater loss of Body and Goods, than about all the Syrtes, Sylla's and
Charibdes, Sirens, Scrophades and Gulphs in the Universe. I had not much ado to
believe it, remembering, that formerly amongst the wise Egypptians, Neptune was
described in Hieroglyphics by the first Cube, Apollo by an Ace, Diana by a
Duce, Minerva by seven, and so forth.

He also told us that there was a Phial of Sang real, a most divine thing, and
known but to a few. Panurge did so sweeten up the Syndics of the place, that
they blessed us with the sight often: But it was with three times more pother and
ado, with more Formalities and antic Tricks, than they show the Pandects of
Justinian at Florence, or the Holy Veronica at Rome. I never saw such a sight
of Flambeaux, Torches and Hagio's, sanctified Tapers, Rush-Lights, and Farthing
Candles, in my whole life. After all, that which was shown us, was only the
ill-fac'd countenance of a roasted Conny.

All that we saw there worth speaking of, was a good face set upon an ill game,
and the shells of the two Eggs formerly laid up and hatched by Leda, out of
which came Castor and Pollux, fair Helen's brothers. These same Syndics sold us
a piece of 'em for a Song, I mean, for a morsel of bread. Before we went, we
bought a parcel of Hats and Caps of the Manufacture of the place, which, I
fear, will turn to no very good account: Nor are those who shall take 'em off
our hands, more likely to commend their wearing.

CHAP. XII. How we past through the Wicket, inhabited by Gripe-men-all,
Archduke of the Furred Law-cats.
FRom thence Condemnation was passed by us: It Is another damned barren Island,
whereat none for the world cared to touch. Then we went through the Wicket, but
Pantagruel had no mind to bear us company, and 'twas well he did not, for we
were nabb'd there, and clapped into Lob's-Poun^ by Order of Gripe-men-all,
Archduke o^ the Furred Law-cats, because one of our Company would have put upon
a Sergeant some Hats of the sharping Island.

The Furred Law-cats are most terrible and dreadful Monsters, they devour
little Children, and trample over Marble-Stones. 'Pray tell me, Noble Topers,
do they not deserve to have their Snouts slit? The hair of their Hides does n't
lie outward, but inwards; and every Mother's son of 'em for his Devise wears a
gaping Pouch, but not all in the same manner; for some wear it tied to their
Neck Scarf-wise, others upon the Breech, some on the Paunch, others on the
Side, and all for a Cause, with Reason and Mystery: They have Claws so very
strong, long, and sharp, that nothing can get from 'em, that is once fast
between their Clutches. Sometimes they cover their heads with Mortar-like Caps,
at other times with mortified Caparisons.

As we entered their Den, said a common Mumper to whom we had given half a
Teston, Worshipful Culprits, God send you a good deliverance. Examine well,
said he, the Countenance of these stout Props and Pillars of this Catch coin
Law and Iniquity; and pray observe, that if you still live but Six Olympiads,
and the Age of two Dogs more, you will see these Furred Law-cats Lords of all
Europe, and in peaceful Possession of all the Estates and Dominions belonging
to it; unless by Divine Providence what is got over the Devil's Back is spent
under his Belly; or the Goods which they unjustly get, perish with their
Prodigal Heirs: Take this from an Honest Poor Beggar.

Among 'em reigns the Sixth Essence; by the means of which they gripe all,
devour all, conskite all, burn all, draw all, hang all, quarter all, behead
all, murder all, imprison all, waste all, and ruin all, without the least
notice of Right or Wrong: For among them Vice is called Virtue, Wickedness
Piety, Treason Loyalty, Robbery Justice: Plunder is their Motto, and when acted
by them is approved by all men, except the Heretics; and all this they do,
because they dare; their Authority is Sovereign and Irrefragable.

For a sign of the Truth of what I tell you, you will find, That there the
Mangers are above the Racks. Remember hereafter, that a Fool told you this; and
if ever Plague, Famine, War, Fire, Earthquakes, Inundations, or other Judgments
befall the World, do not attribute 'em to the Aspects and Conjunctions of the
Malevolent Planets, to the Abuses of the Court of Romania, or the Tyranny of
Secular Kings and Princes, to the Impostures of the false Zealots of the Cowl,
Heretical Bigo^ False Prophets and Broachers of Sects, (...) the Villainy of
griping Usurers, Clipper^ and Coiners; or to the Ignorance, Imp^^dence, and
Imprudence of Physicians* Surgeons, and Apothecaries, nor to the Lewdness of
Adulteresses and Destroye^ of By-blows; but charge 'em all who^^ and solely to
the inexpressible, incredible and inestimable Wickedness and Ruin* which is
continually hatched, brewed, an^ practiced in the Den of those Furred L^^^cats.
Yet it is no more known in the wo^^ than the Cabala of the Jews, the more^ the
Pity; and therefore it is not detested chastis'd, and punished, as it is fit it
should be. But should all their Villainy be one displayed in its true Colors,
and expos'^ to the people, there never was, is, no^ will be any Spokesman so
sweet-mouth'd whose fine colloguing Tongue could saw 'em; nor any Laws so
rigorous and Draconic, that could punish 'em as they deserve; nor yet any
Magistrate so powerful as to hinder their being burned alive in their
Cony-boroughs without Mercy. Even their own Furred Kittlings, Friends and
Relations would abominate 'em.

For this reason, as Hannibal was solemnly sworn by his Father Amilcar to
pursue the Romans with the utmost hatred, as long as ever he lived; so, my late
Father has enjoined me to remain here without, till God Almighty's Thunder
reduce them there within to Ashes, like other presumptuous Titans, Profane
Wretches, and Opposers of God; since Mankind is so inured to their Oppressions,
that they either do not remember, foresee, or have a sense of the Woes and
Miseries which they have caused; or if they have, either will, dare, or cannot
root 'em out.

How, said Panurge, say you so! Catch me there and hang me! Damme, Let Us march
off! This Noble Beggar has scared me worse than the Thunder would do them. Upon
this we were filing off; but alas! we found our selves trapp'd: The door was
double locked and barricado'd. Some Messengers of ill news told us, 'twas full
as easy to get in there as to get into Hell, and as hard for some to get out.
Ay, There indeed lay the Difficulty: For there is no getting loose without a
Pass and Discharge in due course from the Bench. This for no other reason than
because Folks go easier out of a Church than out of a Spunging-house, and they
could not have our Company when they would. The worst on it was when we got
through the Wicket, for we were carried to get out our Pass or Discharge,
before a more dreadful Monster than ever was read of in the Legends of
Knight-Errantry: They called him Gripe-men-all: I cannot tell what to compare it
t^ better than to a Chymaera, a Sphynx, a C^^berus; or to the Image of Osiris,
as the Egyptians represented him, with Thre^ Heads, one of a Roaring Lion,
the other (...) a Fawning Cur, and the last of a Howling Prowling Wolf, twisted
about with ^ Dragon, biting his Tail, surrounded wit^ Fiery Rays. His Hands
were full of Gore his Talons like those of the Harpies, hi^ Snout like a Hawk's
Bill, his Fangs o^ Tusks like those of an overgrown brindle^ Wild-Boare; his
Eyes were flaming, like the Jaws of Hell, all covered with Mortars interlac'd
with Pestles, and nothing of his Arms was to be seen, but his Clutches His
Hutch, and That of the Warren cats his Collaterals, was a long, spick-and-span
new Rack, a top of which (as the Mumper told us) some large, stately Mangers
were fixed in the Reverse. Over the Chief Seat was the Picture of an Old-woman
holding the Case or Scabbord of a Sickle in her Right hand, a Pair of Scales in
her Left, with Spectacles on her Nose: The Cups of the Balance were a Pair of
Velvet. Pouches; the one full of Bullion, which over-pois'd the other, empty and
long, hoisted higher than the middle of the Beam: I Am of opinion that it was
the true Effigies of Justice Gripe-men-all; far different from the Institution
of the Ancient Thebans, who set up the Statues of their Dicastes without Hands,
in Marble, Silver, or Gold, according to their Merit, even after their Death.

When we made our Personal Appearance before him, a sort of I
don't-know-what-men, all clothed with I don't-know-what Bags and Pouches, with
long Scrowls in their Clutches, made us sit down upon a Cricket: [ Such as
Criminals sit on when they are Tried in France.] Quoth Panurge to 'em, Good my
Lords, I Am very well as I am, I Would as lieve stand, an't please you. Besides,
this same Stool is somewhat of the lowest for a man that has new Breeches and a
short Doublet. Sit you down, said Gripe-men-all again, and look that you don't
make the Court bid you twice. Now, continued he, The Earth shall immediately
open its Jaws, and swallow you up to quick Damnation, if you don't answer as
you should.

CHAP. XIII. How Gripe-men-all propounded a Riddle to us.
WHEN we were sat, Gripe-men-all, in the middle of his furred cats, called to
us in a hoarse, dreadful Voice; Well, come on, give, give me presently -- an
answer. Well, come on, muttered Panurge between his Teeth, give, give (...)
presently -- a comforting Dram. Harke^ to the Court continued Gripe-men-all.

AN ENIGMA.
A Young tight Thing, as Fair as may be,
Without a Dad conceived a Baby;
And brought him forth, without the Pothe^
In Labor made by teeming Mother.
Yet the cursed Brat feared not to Gripe her,
But gnawed for haste, her sides like Viper.
Then the black Upstart boldly sallies,
And walks and flies over Hills and Valleys.
Many fantastic Sons of Wisdom,
Amazed, foresaw their own in his Doom,
And thought, like an old Grecian Noddy,
A Human Spirit moved his Body.
ENIGME.
Vne bien jeune et toute blondelette
Conceut un fills Ethiopien sans pere;
Puis l' enfanta sans douleur la tendrette,
Quoy quil sortit comme fait la vipere,
L'ayant ronge, en moult grand vitupere,
Tout l' un des Flanes, pour son impatience,
Depuis, passa monts and vans en fiance,
Par l' Air volant, en terre cheminante;
Tant qu'estonna l'amy de sapience,
Qui l'estimoit estre humain animante.
Give, give me out of hand -- an Answer to this Riddle, quoth Gripe-men-all.
Give, give me -- leave to tell you, good good my Lord, answered Panurge, That
if I had but a Sphynx at home, as Verres one of your Precursors had, I might
then solve your Enigma presently; but they verily, good my Lord, I was not
there; and as I hope to be saved, am as innocent in the matter as the Child
unborn: Foh, give me -- a better Answer, cried Gripe-men-all, or, by Gold, this
shall not serve your turn; I Will not be paid in such Coin: If you have nothing
better to offer, I Will let your Rascalship know, that it had been better for you
to have fallen into Lucifer's own Clutches, than into ours. Do thou see 'em
here, Sirrah? hah? and do thou prate here of thy being Innocent, as if thou
could be delivered from our Racks and Tortures for being so! Give me --
Patience! Thou Widgeon, our Laws are like Cobwebs; your silly little Flies are
stopped, caught, and destroyed there, but your stronger Birds break them, and
force and carry them which way they please. Likewise don't think we are so mad
as to set up our Nets to snap up your great Robbers and Tyrants: No, they are
somewhat too hard for us, there is no meddling with them; for they would make no
more of us, than we make of the little ones: But you paultry, silly, Innocent
Wretches, must make us amends; and, by Gold, we will Innocentise your Fopship
with a Wannion, you never were so innocentis'd in your days.

Friar Ihon hearing him run on at that mad rate, had no longer the power to
remain silent, but cried to him, High dey! Pr'ythee, Mr. Devil in a Coif,
would th^^ have a man tell thee more than he knows? has-n't the Fellow told
you he does not know a word of the business? his Name's Twyford. A Plague rot
you, will not Truth serve your turns? Why, how-now, Mr Prate-a-pa^^ (cried
Gripe-men-all, taking him short) Marry come up, who made you so saucy as to
open your lips before you were spoken to? Give me -- Patience! By Gold! this is
the first time since I reign, that any one has had the impudence to speak
before he was bidden. How came this Mad Fellow to break loose? (Villain, thou
lie, said Friar Ihon, without stirring his lips.) Sirrah, sirrah, continued
Gripe-men-all, I doubt thou'l^ have business enough on thy hands, when it comes
to thy turn to answer (Damme thou lie, said Friar Ihon, silently.) Do tho^
think, continued my Lord, you are in the Wilderness of your foolish University
wrangling and bawling among the idle wandering Searchers and Hunters after
Truth? By Gold, we have here other Fish to fry, we go another-gat's way to work
that we do: By Gold, People here must give Categorical Answers to what they
don't know. By Gold, they must confess ^hey have done those things which they
have not and ought not to have done. By Gold, they must protest that they know
what they never knew in their lives: And after all, Patience per Force must be
their on^y Remedy, as well as a Mad Dog's. Here ^lly Geese are plucked, yet
cackle not. Sir^ah, Give me -- an Account, Whether ^ou had a Letter of
Attorney, or whether ^ou were fee'd, or no, that you offered to ^awl in another
man's Cause? I see you ^ad no Authority to speak, and I may ^^ance to have you
wed to something you ^on't like. Oh you Devils, cried Friar ^hon, Proto-Devils,
Panto-Devils, you would ^^ed a Monk, would you? Ho ha, ho ha, (...) Heretic, a
Heretic, I Will give thee out ^r a rank Heretic.

CHAP. XIV. How Panurge solved Gripe-men-all's Riddle.
GRipe-men-all, as if he had not heard what Friar Ihon said, directed his
^iscourse to Panurge, saying to him, Well, that have you to say for your self,
Mr. Rogueenough, hah! Give, give me out of hand -- an Answer. Say! quoth
Panurge, w^^ what would you have me say? I say th^^ we are damnably beshit,
since you give ^^ heed at all to the Equity of the Plea, a^^ the Devil sings
among you; let this a^^swer serve for all, I beseech you, and (...) us go about
our business; I am no longer able to hold out, as gad shall judge me.

Go to, go to, cried Gripe-men-all, W^^ did you ever hear that for these Th^^^
hundred years last past any body ever (...) out of this Weel without leaving
so^^thing of his behind him. No, no, get (...) of the Trap if you can, without
loss Leather, Life, or at least some Hair, a^^ you will have done more than ever
was d^^^ yet. For why, this would bring the W^^dom of the Court into question,
as if (...) had took you up for nothing, and d^^^ wrongfully by you. Well, by
hook or (...) crook we must have something out of (...) Look ye, it is a folly
to make a Rout (...) fart and a do; one word's as good twenty; I have no more
to say to th^^ but that as thou likest thy former en^^^tainment, thou wilt tell
me more of the n^^^ for 'twill go ten times worse with t^^^ unless, by Gold,
you give me -- a Solu^^^^ to the Riddle I propounded. Give, (...) -- it,
without any more ado, I say.

By Gold, quoth Panurge, it is a black Mite or Weevil, which is born of a white
Bean, and sallies out at the hole which he makes, gnawing it: The Mite being
turned unto a kind of a Fly, sometimes walks and sometimes flies over Hills and
Dales. Now Pythagoras the Philosopher and his Sect, besides many others,
wondering at its Birth in such a place, (which makes some ^rgue for equivocal
Generation) thought that by a Metempsycosis the Body of that ^nsect was the
Lodging of an Human Soul. Now were you Men here, after your wel^om'd Death,
according to his Opinion, ^our Souls would most certainly enter into ^he Body
of Mites or Weevils; for in your present state of life you are good for nothing
in the world, but to gnaw, bite, eat, and devour all things; so in the next
you will ^'en gnaw and devour your Mothers very ^ides, as the Vipers do. Now, by
Gold, (...) think I have fairly solved and resolved your Riddle.

May my Bawble be turned into a Nut-cracker, quoth Friar Ihon, if I could not
almost find in my heart to wish that what comes out at my Bunghole were Beans,
that ^hese evil Weevils might feed as they deserve.

Panurge then, without any more ado, ^hrew a large Leathern Purse stuffed with
Gold Crowns [ Escus au Soleil] among them: The Furred Law-Cats no soone^ heard
the jingling of the Chink, but the^ all began to bestir their Claws, like a
part of Fiddlers running a Division; and the^ fell to it, squimble squamble,
catch that cat^ can. They all said aloud, These are the Fees, these are the
Gloves; now this (...) somewhat like a Tanzy: Oh, 'twas a pretty Trial, a sweet
Trial, a dainty Tria^ OF my word they did not starve the Cause* these are none
of your sniveling Forma P^^^peris's: No, they are Noble Clients, Gen^tlemen
every Inch of them. By Gold it is Gold, quoth Panurge, good old Gold I Will assure
you.

Says Gripe-men-all, The Court upon ^ full Hearing, (of the Gold, quoth
Panurge) and weighty Reasons given, finds the Priso^ners Not Guilty; and
accordingly order 'em to be discharged out of Custody, paying their Fees. Now,
Gentlemen, proceed go for wards, said he to us; we have no^ so much of the
Devil in us, as we have (...) his Hue; tho we are Stout, we are Merciful.

As we came out at the Wicket, we we^^ conducted to the Port by a Detachment of
certain Highland-Griffins, scribere ^^^^dashoes, who advised us, before we came
to our Ships, not to offer to leave the place, till we had made the usual
Presents, first to the Lady Gripe-men-all, then to all the Furred Law-Pusses;
otherwise we must return to the place from whence we came. Well, well, says
Friar Ihon, we'll fumble in our Fobs, examine every one of us his Concern, and
even give the Women their due; we'll never boggle or stick out on that account;
as we tickled the Men in the Palm, we'll tickle the Women in the right place.
Pray, Gentlemen, added they, don't forget to leave somewhat behind you for us
poor Devils to drink your Healths. O Lawd! never fear, answered Friar Ihon, I
don't remember that I ever went any where yet where the poor Devils are not
mentioned and encouraged.

CHAP. XV. How the Furred Law-Cats live on Corruption.
FRiar Ihon had hardly said those words e're he perceived Seventy Eight Galleys
and Frigates just arriving at the Port. So he hied him thither to learn some
News; and as he asked what Goods they had o'board, he soon found that their
whole Cargo was Venison, Hares, Capons, Turkeys, Pigs, Swine, Bacon, Kids,
Calves, Hens, Ducks, Teals, Geese, and other Poultry and Wild-fowl.

He also spied among these some pieces of Velvet, Satin and Damask. This made
him ask the New-comers whither and to whom they were going to carry those
dainty Goods? They answered that they were for Gripe-men-all, and the Furred
Law-Cats.

Pray, asked he, what is the true name of all these things, in your Country
Language? Corruption, they replied. If they live on Corruption, said the Friar,
they will perish with their Generation; May the Devil be damned, I have it now:
Their Fathers devoured the good Gentlemen, who, according to their state of
life, used to go much a Hunting and Hawking to be the better inured to Toil in
time of War; For Hunting is an Image of a Martial Life; and Xenophon was much
in the right on it, when he affirmed that Hunting had yielded a great number of
excellent Warriors, as well as the Trojan Horse. For my part I am no Scholar, I
have it but by hearsay, yet I believe it. Now the Souls of those brave Fellows,
according to Gripe-men-all's Riddle, after their decease, enter into
Wild-boars, Stags, Roe-bucks, Herns, and such other Creatures, which they
loved, and in quest of which they went while they were men; and these Furred
Law-Cats having first destroyed and devoured their Castles, Lands, Demesnes,
Possessions, Rents and Revenues, are still seeking to have their Blood and Soul
in another Life. What an honest Fellow was that same Mumper who had forewarned
us of all these things, and bid us take notice of the Mangers above the Racks!

But, said Panurge to the New-comer, how do you come by all this Venison?
methinks the Great King has issued out a Proclamation strictly inhibiting the
destroying of Stags, Does, Wild-boars, Roebucks, or other Royal Game, on pain
of Death. All this is true enough answered one for the rest: But the Great King
is so good and gracious, you must know, and these Furred Law-Cats so cursed and
cruel, so mad and thirsting after Christian Blood, that we have less cause to
fear in trespassing against that Mighty Sovereign's Commands, than reason to
hope to live, if we do not continually stop the mouths of these Furred Law-Cats
with such Bribes and Corruption. Besides, added he, tomorrow Gripe-men-all
marries a Furred Law-Puss of his to a high and mighty Doublefurr'd Law-Tibert.

Formerly we used to call them Chop-hay; but alas, they are not such neat
Creatures now as to eat any, or Chew the Cud. We call them Chop-Hares,
Chop-Partridges, Chop-Woodcoks, Chop-Pheasants, Chop-pullets, Chop-Venison,
Chop Connies, Chop-Pigs; for they scorn to feed o^ courser Meat. A T -- d for
their Chops* cried Friar Ihon, next year we'll have 'em called Chop-Dung,
Chop-Stront, Chop-Filth.

Would you take my Advice, added h^ to the Company? What is it, answered we?
Let Us do two things, returned he First, Let Us secure all this Venison and
Wild-fowl, (I mean paying well for them:) for my part I am but too much tired
already with our Salt-meat, it heats my Flan^ so horribly: In the next place
let us go bad to the Wicket, and destroy all these devili^^ Furred Law-Cats. For
my part, quot^ Panurge, I know better things, catch m^ there, and hang me; No,
I am somewha^ more inclined to be fearful than bold, ^ love to sleep in a whole
skin.

CHAP. XVI. How Friar Ihon talks of rooting o^ the Furred Law-Cats.
Virtue of the Frock, quoth Friar Iho^ what kind of a Voyage are we m^^ king? A
shitten one of my word; the Devi^ of any thing we do but sizzling, farting
sunking, squatrering, dozing, raving, an^ doing nothing. Ods Belly, it is n't in
m^ Nature to lie idle, I mortally hate it; unless I am doing some Heroic Deed
every foot, I cannot sleep one wink of nights. Dam it, did you then take me
along with you for your Chaplain, to sing Mass and shrive you? By
Maunday-Thursday, the first of ye all that comes to me on such an Account shall
be fitted; for, the only Penance I Will enjoin shall be, that he immediately
throw himself headlong overboard into the Sea like a wicked Cow-hearted Son of
ten Fathers; this in deduction of the Pains of Purgatory.

What made Hercules such a famous Fellow, do you think? nothing, but that while
he traveled he still made it his business to rid the World of Tyrannies,
Errors, Dangers and Drudgeries, he still put to death all Robbers, all
Monsters, all venomous Serpents and hurtful Creatures. Why then do we not
follow his Example, doing as he did in the Countries through which we pass? He
destroyed the Stymphalides, the Lernaean Hydra, Cacus, Antheus, the Centaurs,
and what not; I am no Clericus, those that are such, tell me so.

In imitation of that noble By-blow, let us destroy and root out these wicked
Furred Law-Cats, that are a kind of Ravenous Devils; thus we shall remove all
manner of Tyranny out of the Land. Mawmet's Tutor swallow me Body and Soul,
Tripes and Guts, if I would stay to ask your help or advice in the matter, were
I but as strong as he was. Come, he that would be thought a Gentleman, let him
storm a Town: Well then, shall we go? I dare swear we'll do their business for
them with a wet Finger; they will bear it, never fear; since they could swallow
down more foul Language that came from us, than ten Sows and their Babies could
swill Hogwash. Dam 'em, they don't value all the ill words or dishonor in the
world at a Rush, so they but get the Coin into their Purses, though they were
to have it in a shitten Clout. Come, we may chance to kill 'em all, as Hercules
would have done* had they lived in his time. We only want to be set to work by
another Eurystheus, and nothing else for the present; unless it be what I
heartily wish them, That Jupiter may give 'em a short visit only some two or
three hours long, and walk among their Lordships in the same Equipage that
attended him when he came last to his Miss Semele, jolly Bacchus's Mother.

It Is a very great mercy, quoth Panurge* that you have got out of their
Clutches; for my part, I have no stomach to go there again; I Am hardly come to
my self yet, so scared and appalled I was; my hair still stands up an end when
I think on it; and most damnably troubled I was there, for three very weighty
Reasons. First, Because I was troubled. Secondly, Because I was troubled.
Thirdly and lastly, Because I was troubled. Heark'n to me a little on thy right
side, Friar Ihon, my left Cod, since thou wilt not hear at the other: Whenever
the Maggot bites thee, to take a Journey down to Hell, and visit the Tribunal
of Minos, Eacus, and Rhadamantus, do but tell me, and I Will be sure to bear thee
company, and never leave thee, as long as my name's Panurge, but will wade over
Acheron, Styx and Cocytus, drink whole Bumpers of Lethe's Water, (tho I
mortally hate that Element) and even pay thy Passage to that bawling
cross-grained Ferryman Caron. But as for that damned Wicket, if thou art so
weary of thy life as to go thither again, thou may even look for some body
else to bear thee company; for I Will not move one step that way, even rest
satisfied with this positive Answer. By my good will, I Will not stir a foot to
go thither as long as I live, any more than Calpe will come over to Abyla.
[Calpe is a Mountain in Spain, that faces another, called Abyla in Mauritiania,
both said to have been severed by Hercules.] Was Ulysses so mad as to go back
into the Cyclops's Cave to fetch his Sword? No marry was he not. Now, I have
left nothing behind me at the Wicket through forgetfulness, why then should I
think of going thither?

Well, quoth Friar Ihon, as good sit still as rise up and fall; what cannot be
cured, must be endured. But, pr'ythee, let us hear one another speak. Come, were
thou not a wise Doctor, to fling away a whole Purse of Gold on those mangy
Scoundrels? Hah? A Squinzy choke thee, we were too rich, were we? Had it not
been enough to have thrown the Hell Hounds a few cropped Pieces of white Cash?

How could I help it, returned Panurge? Did you not see how Gripe-men-all held
his gaping Velvet-Pouch, and every moment roared and bellowed, By Gold, give,
give me out of hand; By Gold, give, give, give me presently. Now, thought I to
my self, we shall never come off scotfree; I Will even stop their mouths with
Gold, that the Wicket may be opened, and we may get out; the sooner the better.
And I judged that lowsy Silver would not do the business; for, do you see,
Velvet-Pouches don't use to gape for little paultry clipped Silver, and small
Cash: No, they are made for Gold, my Friend Ihon, that they are my dainty Cod.
Ah! when thou have been larded, basted, and roasted, as I was, thou wilt hardly
talk at this rate, I doubt. But now what is to be done -- we are enjoined by
them to go for- Wards.

The Scabby Slabberdegullions still waited for us at the Port, expecting to be
greased in the Fist as well as their Masters. Now when they perceived that we
were ready to put to Sea, they came to Friar Ihon, and begged that we might not
forget to gratify the Apparitors before we went off, according to the
Assessment for the Fees at our Discharge. Hell and Damnation, cried Friar Ihon,
Are you here still, ye Bloodhounds, ye citing, scribbling Imps of Satan? Rot
you, Am I not vexed enough already, but you must have the impudence to come and
plague me, ye scurvy Flycatchers you? By Cob's-Body I Will gratify your
Ruffianships as you deserve, I Will Apparitorize you presently, with a Wannion,
that I will. With this he lugg'd out his slashing Cutlas, and, in a mighty
heat, came out of the Ship, to cut the cousening Varlets into Stakes, but they
scamper'd away, and got out of sight in a Trice.

However, there was somewhat more to do; for some of our Sailors, having got
leave of Pantagruel to go of shore, while we were had before Gripe-men-all, had
been at a Tavern near the Haven to make much of themselves, and roar it, as
Seamen will do when they come into some Port. Now I don't know whether they had
paid their Reckoning to the full or no; but, however it was, an old fat Hostess
meeting Friar Ihon on the Key, was making a woeful Complaint, before a Sergeant,
Son-in-law to one of the Furred Law-Cats, and a Brace of Bums his Assistants.

The Friar, who did not much care to be tired with their impertinent Prating,
said to them, Harkee me, ye lubbardly Gnatsnappers, Do you presume to say, that
our Seamen are not honest Men? I Will maintain they are, ye Dotterells, and will
prove it to your brazen Faces, by Justice; I mean this trusty piece of cold
Iron by my side; with this, he lugg'd it out, and flourished with it. The
forlorn Lobcocks soon showed him their backs, betaking themselves to their
heels: But the old fusty Landlady kept her ground, swearing, like any
Butter-whore, that the Tarpawlins were very honest Cods; but that they had only
forgot to pay for the Bed on which they had lay'n after Dinner, and she asked
Five-pence French money for the said Bed. May I never sup, said the Friar, if
it be not Dog-cheap; they are sorry Guests, and unkind Customers, that they
are; they don't know when they have a Penniworth, and will not always meet with
such Bargains; Come, I my self will pay you the money, but I would willingly
see it first.

The Hostess immediately took him home with her, and showed him the Bed, and
having praised it for all its good qualifications, said that she thought, as
Times went, she was not out of the way, in asking Five-pence for it. Friar Ihon
then gave her the Five-pence, and she no sooner turn^d her back, but he
presently began to rip up the Ticking of the Featherbed and Bolster, and
throw'd all the Feathers out at the window. In the mean time the old Hag came
down, and roared out for help, crying out Murder, to set all the Neighborhood
in an uproar. Yet she also fell to gathering the Feathers that flew up and down
in the Air, being scattered by the wind. Friar Ihon let her bawl on, and,
without any further ado, marched off with the Blanket, Quilt, and both the
Sheets, which he brought aboard undiseover'd; for the Air was dark'ned with the
Feathers, as it uses sometimes to be with Snow. He gave them away to the
Sailers, then said to Pantagruel, that Beds were much cheaper at that place
than in Chinnonois, tho we have there the famous Geese of Pantile; for the old
Belda^ had asked him but Five-pence for a Bed, which in Chinnonois had been
worth above Twelve There were several sorts of Francs then, some worth about
Eighteen pence, others four or five shillings.
Francs.

CHAP. XVII. How we went For- wards, and how Panurge had like to have been
killed.
WE put to Sea that very moment, steering our Course For- wards, and gave
Pantagruel a full account of our Adventures, which so deeply struck him with
compassion, that he wrote some Elegies on that Subject, to divert himself
during the Voyage. When we were safe in the Port, we took some Refreshment, and
took in fresh water and wood. The People of the place, who had the countenance
of jolly Fellows, and boon Companions, were all of them For- ward Folks,
bloated and pufft up with Fat; and we saw some who slashed and pink'd their
Skin, to open a passage to the Fat, that it might swell out at the slits and
gashes which they made: neither more nor less than the shitbreech Fellows in
our Countrey-bepink and cut open their Breeches, that the Tafety on the inside
may stand out and be puffed up. They said that what they did was not out of
Pride or Ostentation, but because otherwise their Skins would not hold them
without much pain. Having thus slashed their Skin, they used to grow much
bigger, like the young Trees, on whose Barks the Gardeners make Incisions, that
they may grow the better.

Near the Haven, there was a Tavern which forwards seemed very fine and
stately; we repaired thither, and found it filled with People of the Forward
Nation, of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions; so that we thought some notable
Feast or other was getting ready: But we were told that all that Throng were
Invited to the Bursting of mine Host, which caused all his Friends and
Relations to hasten thither.

We did not understand that Jargon, and therefore thought that in that
Country, by that Bursting they meant some Merry meeting or other, as we do in
ours, by Betrothing, Wedding, Groaning, Christening, Churching [ of Women]
Shearing [ of Sheep] reaping [ of Corn, or Harvest home] and many other
Junketting Bouts that end in ing. But we soon heard that there was no such
matter in hand.

The Master of the House, you must know, had been a Good Fellow in his time,
loved heartily to wind up his Bottom, to bang the Pitcher, and lick his Dish;
he used to be a very fair swallower of gravy Soupe, a notable accountant in
matter of Hours; and his whole life was one continual Dinner, like mine Host at
Rouillac. But now having Farted out much Fat for Ten years together, and
watered the Marigolds with much Wine of his own Burning, according to the
custom of the Country, he was drawing toward his Bursting hour; for neither
the inner thin kell wherewith the Intrals are covered, nor his skin that had
been jagg'd and mangled so many years, were able to hold and enclose his Guts
any longer, or hinder them from forcing their way out; like a Wine-Vessel whose
sides fly out. Pray, quoth Panurge, is there no remedy, no help, for the poor
Man, good People? Why don't you swaddle him round with good tight Girts, or
secure his natural Tub with a strong Sorbopple-tree-hoop? nay, Why don't you
Iron-bind him if needs be? This would keep the Man from Flying out and
Bursting. The word wa^ not yet out of his mouth, when we hear^ something give a
loud Report, as if a huge sturdy Oak had been split in two; then some of the
Neighbors told us, that the Bursting was over, and that the Clap, or Crack,
which we heard, was the last Fart: And so there was an End of mine Host.

This made me call to mind a saying of the venerable Abbot of Castillers, the
very same who never cared to hump his Maids but when he was in Pontificalibus.
That Pious Person, being much dunn'd, teiz'd, and importuned by his Relations
to resign his Abbey in his old Age, said and professed, That he would not Strip
till he were ready to go to bed; and that the last Fart which his Reverend
Paternity was to utter, should be the Fart of an Abbot.

CHAP. XVIII. How our Ships were Stranded, and we were relieved by some People
that were Subject to Queen Whims [qui tenoient de la Quinte.]
WE weighed and set Sail with a merry Westerly Gale, when about Seven Leagues
off [Twenty two Miles] some gusts, or scuds of Wind suddenly arose, and the
Wind ve^ring and shifting from Point to Point, was, as they say, like an old
Woman's Breech at no certainty; so we first got our Starboard Tacks Aboard, and
Haled off our Lee Sheets. Then the Gusts increased, and by fits blowed all at
once from several Quarters; yet we neither settled nor braded up close our
Sails, but only let fly the Sheets, not to go against the Master of the Ship's
Direction; and thus having let go amain, lest we should spend our Topsails, or
the Ship's Quick-side should lie in the Water and she be overset, we lay by and
run adrift, that is, in a Landlopers phrase, we temporis'd it. For he assured
us, that, as these gusts and whirlwinds would not do us much good, so they
could not do us much harm, considering their easiness and pleasant strife, as
also the clearness of the Sky, and calmness of the Current. So that we were to
observe the Philosopher's Rule, Bear, and Forbear: that is, Trim, or go
according to the Time.

However these Whirlwinds and Gusts lasted so long, that we persuaded the
Master to let us go and lie at Try with our main Course; that is, to hale the
Tack Aboard, the Sheet close aft, the Boling set up, and the Helm tied close
Aboard; so after a Stormy Gale of wind we broke through the whirlwind. But
'twas like falling into Scylla to a^oid Carybdis, [out of the Fryingpan into
the Fire.] For we had not Sailed a League, e're our Ships were Stranded upon
some Sands, such as are the Flats of St. Maixant.

All our Company seemed mightily disturbed, except Friar Ihon, who was not a
jot daunted, and with sweet-Sugar-plumb-words comforted now one, and then
another, giving them hopes of speedy assistance from above, and telling them
that he had seen Castor at the Main-yard-arm, Oh! that I were but now ashore,
cried Panurge, that is all I wish, for my self (at present) and that you who
like the Sea so well, had each man of you Two hundred thousand Crowns; I would
fairly let you set up Shop on these Sands, and would get a fat Calf dressed,
and a hundred of Faggots, [ i. e. Bottles of Wine] cooled for you against you
come ashore. I freely consent never to mount a Wife, so you but set me ashore,
and mount me on a Horse that I may go home; no matter for a Servant, I Will be
contented to serve my self; I am never better treated than when I Am without a
Man. Faith old Plautus was in the right on it when he said, the more Servants
the more Crosses; for such they are, even supposing they could want what they
all have but too much of, a Tongue, that most busy, dangerous, and pernicious
Member of Servants; accordingly 'twas for their sakes alone, that the Racks,
and Tortures for Confession were Invented; though some Foreign Civilians in our
time have uncivily drawn alogical and unreasonable Consequences from it.

That very moment we spied a Sail that made toward us; when it was close by us,
we soon knew what was the Lading of the Ship, and who was aboard of her. She
was full Freighted with Drums: I was acquainted with many of the Passengers
that came in her, who were most of 'em of good Families; among the re^^ Harry
Cottiral, an old Tossed, who had got a swinging Ass's Touchtripe fastened to his
waste, as the Good women's Bead^ are to their girdle. In his left hand he held
an old overgrown greasy foul Cap, such as your Scald-pated Fellows wear, and
in the right a huge Cabbage-stump.

As soon as he saw me he was overjoyed, and bawled out to me, What Cheer ho?
How do like me now? Behold the true Algamana (this he said showing me the
Asses Ticklegizard.) This Doctor's Cap is my true Elixir; and this (continued
he, shaking the Cabbage-stump in his Fist) is Lunaria M^jor, you old Noddy, I
have 'em, old Boy, I have 'em; we'll make 'em when you are come back. But pray,
Father, said I, whence come you? Whither are you bound? What Is your Lading?
Have you smelt the salt deep? To these Four Questions he answered, From Queen
Whims; for Touraine; Alchymy* to the very Bottom.

Whom have you got of boar'd, said I? Said he, Astrologers, Fortunetellers,
Alchymists, Rhimers, Poets, Painters, Projectors, Mathematicians, Watchmakers,
Sing-songs, Musitioners, and the Devil and all of others that are Subject to
Queen La Quinte, This means a fantastic Humor, Maggots, or a foolish
Giddiness of Brains; and also, a fifth, or the Proportion of Five in Music,
etc.
Whims. They have very fair legible Patents to show for it, as any body may see.
Panurge had no sooner heard this, but he was upon the High-Rope, and began to
rail at them like mad. What of Devil do you mean, cried he? to set idly here like
a pack of loitering Sneaksbies, and see us stranded, while you may help us and
tow us off into the Current! A plague of your Whims, you can make all things
whatsoever they say, so much as good Weather and little Children, yet will not
make haste to fasten some Hawsers and Cables, and get us off. I was just coming
to set you a'float, quoth Harry Quotiral; By Trismegistus I Will clear you in a
Trice. With this he caused 7532810 huge Drums to be unheaded on one side, and
set that open side so that it faced the End of our Streamers and Pendants; and
having fastened them to good Tacklings, and our Ship's head to the Stern of
theirs, with Cables fastened to the Bits abaft the Manger in the Ship's Loof,
they towed us off ground at one pull; so easily and pleasantly, that you would have
wondered at it, had you been there. For the Dub-o-dub rattling of the Drums,
with the soft noise of the Gravel, which murmuring disputed us our way, and the
merry Cheers and Huzzaes of the Sailors made an Harmony almost as good as that
of the Heavenly Bodies when they roll and are whirled round their Spheres,
which rattling of the Celestial wheels, Plato said he heard some nights in his
sleep.

We scorned to be behind-hand with 'em in Civility, and gratefully gave 'em
store of our Sawsidges and Chitterlings, with which we filled their Drums; and
we were just a hoisting Two and sixty Hogsheads of Wine out of the Hold, when
two huge Whirlpools with great Fury made toward their Ship; spouting more
water than is in the River Vienne, [Vigenna] from Chinon to Saumur: To make
short. All their Drums, all their Sails, their Concerns, and themselves were
sows'd, and their very Hoze were watered by the Collar.

Panurge was so overjoyed seeing this, and laughed so heartily, that he was
forced to hold his sides, and it set him into a Fit of the Cholic for two hours
and more. (...) had a mind, quoth he, to make the Dogs drink, and those honest
Whirlpools e'gad have saved me that Labor and that Cost* There Is Sauce for
them; (...) Water's good, says a Poet, let 'em Pind^rise upon it; they never
cared for fresh water, but to wash their Hands or their Glasses. This good Salt
water will stand 'em in good stead for want of Sal Ammoniac and Nitre in
Geber's Kitchen.

We could not hold any further discourse with 'em; for the former Whirlwind
hindered our Ship from feeling the Helm. The Pilot advised us henceforwards to
let her run adrift and follow the stream, not busying our selves with any
thing, but making much of our Carcasses. For, our only way to arrive safe at
the Queendom of Whims, was to trust to the Whirlwind, and be led by the Current.

CHAP. XIX How we arrived at the Queendom of Whims, or Enthelechy.
WE did as he directed us for about twelve hours, and on the Third day the Sky
seemed to us somewhat clearer, and we happily arrived at the Port of
Mateotechny, not far distant from Queen-Whims, alias the Quintessence.

We met full-but on the Key a great number of Guards and other Military Men
that garrisoned the Arsenal; and we were somewhat frighted at first, because
they made us all lay down our Arms, and in a haughty manner asked us whence we
came?

Cousin, quoth Panurge to him that asked the Question, we are of Touraine, and
come from France, being ambitious of paying our Respects to the Lady
Quintessence, and visit this famous Realm of Enthelechy.

What do you say, cried they? do yo^ call it Enthelechy or Endelechy? Truly,
truly, sweet Cousins, quoth Panurge, we are ^ silly sort of grout-headed
Lobcocksan't pleas^ you; be so kind as to forgive us if w^ chance to knock
words out of joint; as for any thing else, we are downright hon^ fellows, and
true hearts.

We have not asked you this question without a cause, said they; for a great
number of others who have passed thi^ way from your Country of Touraine, seem'^
as mere joltheaded Doddipoles, as eve^ were scor'd over the Coxcomb, yet spo^^
as correct as other folks. But there ha^ been here from other Countries a pack
(...) I know not overweening self-conceite^ Prigs, as moody as so many Mules,
an^ as stout as any Scotch Lairds, and no^thing would serve these, forsooth,
but the^ must wilfully wrangle and stand out a^gainst us at their coming; and
much they got by it after all; Troth we even fit^ted them, and clawed 'em off
with a venge^ance, for all they looked so big and so gru^

'Pray tell me, Does your time lie so heavy upon you in your world, that you
don't know how to bestow it better than in thus impudently talking, disputing
and writing of our Sovereign Lady? There was much need that your Tully, the
Consul, should go and leave the Care of his Commonwealth to busy himself idly
about her; and after him, your Diogenes Laertius the Biographer, and your
Theodorus Gaza the Philosopher, and your Argiropilus the Emperor, and your
Bessario the Cardinal, and your Politian the Pedant, and your Budeus the Judge,
and your Lascaris the Ambassador, and the Devil and all of those you call
Lovers of Wisdom; whose number it seems, was not thought great enough already,
but lately your Scaliger, Brigot, Chambrier, Francis Fleury, and I cannot tell
how many such other junior sneaking Fly-blows must take upon 'em to increase it.

A Squincy gripe the Cods-headed Changelings at the Swallow, and eke at the
cover-weesel; we shall make 'em -- But the Dewse take 'em; (they flatter the
Devil here, and smoothify his name, quoth Panurge, between his Teeth) you don't
come here, continued the Captain, to uphold 'em in their Folly, you have no
Commission from 'em to this Effect; well then, we'll talk no more on it.

Aristotle, that First of Men and peerless Pattern of all Philosophy, was our
Sovereign Lady's Godfather; and wisely and properly gave her the Name of
Entelechy. Her true Name then is Entelechy, and may he be in Tail beshit, and
entail a Shit-a-bed Faculty, and nothing else on his Family, who dares call her
by any other Name; for whoever he is, he does her wrong, and is a very impudent
person. You are heartily welcome, Gentlemen; with this they coll'd and clipped us
about the neck, which was no small Comfort to us, I Will assure you.

Panurge then whispered me; Fellow-Traveller, quoth he, have thou not been
somewhat afraid this Bout? a little, said I. To tell you the Truth often, quoth
he, never were the Ephraimites in a greater fear and quandary when the
Gileadites killed and drowned them for saying Sibboleth instead of Shibboleth;
and among Friends, let me tell you, that perhaps there is not a man in the
whole Country of Beauce, but might easily have stopped my Bunghole with a
Cart-load of Hay.

The Captain afterward took us to the Queen's Palace, leading us silently with
great Formality. Pantagruel would have said something to him; but the other,
not being able to come up to his height, wished for a Ladder, or a very long
pair of Stilts; then said Patience, if it were our Sovereign Lady's will, we'd
be as tall as you; well, we shall, when she pleases.

In the first Galleries we saw great numbers of sick persons, differently
placed according to their Maladies. The Leprous were apart; those that were
poisoned on one side, those that had got the Plague on another. Those that had
the Pox in the first Rank, and the rest accordingly.

CHAP. XX. How the Quintessence cured the sick with a Song.
THE Captain showed us the Queen, attended with her Ladies and Gentlemen in the
second Gallery. She looked young, tho she was at least Eighteen hundred Years
old; and was handsome, slender, and as fine as a Queen, that is, as hands could
make her. He then said to us, It Is not yet a fit time to speak to the Queen, be
you but mindful of her doings in the mean while.

You have Kings in your World, that fantastically pretend to cure some certain
Diseases; as for Example, Scrophube or Wens, swelled Throats, nick-nam'd the
King's Evil, and Quartan Agues, only with a touch; Now our Queen cures all
manner of Diseases without so much as touching the sick, but barely with a
Song, according to the nature of the Distemper; he then showed us a Set of
Organs, and said, that when it was touched by her, those miraculous Cures were
performed. The Organ was indeed the strangest that ever Eyes beheld; for, the
Pipes were of Cassia Fistula in the Cod; the Top and Cornish of Guayacum; the
Bellows of Rhubarb; the Pedals of Turbith; and the Clavier or Keys of Scammony.

While we were examining this wonderful new make of an Organ, the Leprous were
brought in by her Abstractors, Spodizators, Masticators, Pregustics, Tabachins,
Chachanins, Neemanins, Rabrebans, Nercins, Rozuins, Nebidins, Tearins,
Sagamions, Peratons, Chasmins, Sarins, Soteins, Aboth, Enilins,
Archasdarpenins, Mebins, Chabourins, and other Officers, for whom I want names;
so she played 'em I don't know what sort of a Tune or Song, and they were all
immediately cured.

Then those who were poisoned were had in, and she had no sooner given them a
Song, but they began to find a use for their Legs, and up they got. Then came
on the Deaf, the Blind and the Dumb, and they too were restored to their lost
Senses with the same Remedy; which did so strangely amaze us (and not without
reason, I think) that down we fell on our faces, remaining prostrate like men
ravished in Ecstasy, and were not able to utter one word through the excess of our
Admiration, till she came, and having touched Pantagruel with a fine fragrant
Nosegay of white Roses, which she held in her hand, thus made us recover our
Senses and get up. Then she made us the following Speech in Byssin Words, such
as Parisatis desired should be spoken to her Son Cyrus, or at least of Crimson
Alamode.

The Probity that scintillizes in the Superficies of your Persons, informs my
ratiocinating Faculty, in a most stupendous manner, of the radiant Virtues,
latent within the precious Caskets and Ventricles of your Minds. For,
contemplating the mellifluous Suavity of your thrice discreet Reverences, it is
impossible not to be persuaded with Facility, that neither your Affections nor
your Intellects are vitiated with any defect, or Privation of liberal and
exalted Sciences; far from it, all must judge that in you are lodged a
Cornucopia, an Encyclopedia, an unmeasurable Profundity of Knowledge in the
most peregrine and sublime Disciplines; so frequently the Admiration, and so
rarely the Concomitants of the imperite vulgar. This gently compels me, who in
preceding Times indefatigably kept my private Affectious absolutely subjugated,
to condescend to make my Application to you in the trivial Phrase of the
Plebeian World; and assure you, that you are well, most well, most heartily
well, more than most heartily welcome.

I have no hand at making of Speeches, quoth Panurge to me privately; prithee,
man, make answer to her for us if thou can; this would not work with me
however, neither did Pantagruel return a word; so that Queen- Whims, or Queen
Quintessence (which you please) perceiving that we stood as mute as Fishes,
said: Your Taciturnity speaks you not only Disciples of Pythagoras, from whom
the venerable Antiquity of my Progenitors in successive propagation was eman'd
and derives its Original; but also discovers, that, through the Revolution of
many Retrograde Moons, you have in Egypt pressed the Extremities of your
Fingers, with the hard Tenants of your Mouths, and scalptiz'd your heads with
frequent applications of your Unguicules. In the School of Pythagoras,
Taciturnity was the Symbol of abstracted and superlative Knowledge; and the
silence of the Egyptians was agnited as an expressive manner of Divine
Adoration: This caused the Pontifs of Hieropolis to Sacrifice to the great
Deity in silence, impercussively, without any vociferous or obstreporous Sound.
My design is not to enter into a Privation of Gratitude toward you; but by a
vivacious formality, tho matter were to abstract it self from me, excentricate
to you my Cogitations.

Having spoken this, she only said to her Officers, Tabachins a Panacea; and
strait they desired us not to take it amiss, if the Queen. did not invite us to
dine with her; for she never eat any thing at dinner but some Categories,
Jecabots, Emnins, Dimions, Abstractions, Harborins, Chelimins, second
Intentions, Caradosh, Antitheses, Metempsycoses, transcendent Prolepsies and
such other light Food.

Then they took us into a little Closet, lined through with Alarums, where we
were treated God knows how. It Is said, that Jupiter writes whatever is
transacted in the World, on the Diphthera or Skin of the Amalthaean Goat that
suckled him in Crete, which Pelt served him instead of a Shield against the
Titans, whence he was Nick-nam'd Egiochos. Now, as I hate to drink water,
Brother Topers, I protest, it would be impossible to make Eighteen Goat Skins
hold the Description of all the good Meat they brought before us; tho it were
written in Characters as small as those in which were penned Homer's Iliads,
which Tully tells us he saw enclosed in a Nut-shell.

For my part, had I one hundred Mouths, as many Tongues, a Voice of Iron, a
Heart of Oak, and Lungs of Leather, together with the mellifluous Abundance of
Plato; yet I never could give you a full account of a Third part of a second of
the whole.

Pantagruel was telling me, that he believed the Queen had given the Symbolic
Word used among her Subjects, to denote Sovereign good Cheer, when she said to
her Tabachins, A Panacea; just as Lucullus used to say, in Apollo, when he
designed to give his Friends a singular Treat, tho sometimes they took him at
unawares, as among the rest, Cicero and Hortensius sometimes used to do.

CHAP. XXI. How the Queen passed her Time after Dinner.
WHEN we had dined, a Chachanin led us into the Queen's Hall, and there we saw
how, after Dinner, with the Ladies and Princes of her Court, she used to sift,
searse, boult, range, and pass away time with a fine large white and blew Silk
Sieve. We also perceived how they revived Ancient Sports, diverting themselves
together at 1. A sort of Country-dance. 2. A still Tragick-dance. 3. Dancing
and Singing used at Funerals. 4. Cutting Sarcasms and Lampoons. 5. The
Persian-dance. 6. Tunes, whose Measure inspired Men with a kind of Divine Fury.
7. The Thracian-movement. 8. Smutty Verses. 9. A Measure to which the Melossi
of Epirus danced a certain Morice. 10. A Dance with Bowls or Pots in their
Hands. 11. A Song where one Sings alone. 12. Sports at the Holidays of the God
of Bounds. 13. Dancing naked at Flora's Holidays. 14. The Trojan-dance in
Armor.
1. Cordax. 2. Emmelia. 3. Sicinnis. 4. Jambics. 5. Persica. 6. Phrygia. 7.
Thracia. 8. Calabrismes. 9. Molossia. 10. Cernophorum. 11. Monodia. 12.
Terminalia. 13. Floralia. 14. Pyrrhice.


And a thousand other Dances.

Afterward she gave orders that they should show us the Apartments and
Curiosities in her Palace; accordingly we saw there such new strange and
wonderful things, that I am still ravished in Admiration every time I think
often. However nothing surpised us more than what was done by the Gentlemen of
her Household, Abstractors, Pazarons, Nebidins, Spodizators, and others, who
freely and without the least dissembling, told us, That the Queen their
Mistress did all impossible things, and cured Men of incurable Diseases; and
they, her Officers, used to do the rest.

I saw there a young Parazon cure many of the new Consumption, I mean the Pox,
tho they were never so peppered; had it been the rankest Roan-ague [ Anglice,
the Covent Garden Gout] 'twas all one to him, touching only their Dentiform
Vertebra thrice with a piece of a Wooden-shooe, he made them as wholesome as so
many Sucking-pigs.

Another did thoroughly cure Folks of Dropsies, Tympanies, Ascites, and
Hyposarcidies, striking them on the Belly nine times with a Tenedian Satchel,
without any Solution of the Continuum.

Another cured of all manner of Fevers and Agues, on the spot, only with
hanging a Fox-tail on the left side of the Patient's Girdle.

One removed the Toothache only with washing the root of the aching Tooth with
Elder-vinegar, and letting it dry half an hour in the Sun.

Another, the Gout, whether hot or cold, natural or accidental, barely making
the Gouty-person shut his Mouth, and open his Eyes.

I saw another ease nine good Gentlemen of A Consumption in the Pocket, or want
of Money; those of St. Francis 's Order must carry none about 'em.
St. Francis's Distemper, in a very short space of time, having clapped a Rope
about their Necks, at the end of which hanged a Box with ten thousand Gold
Crowns in it.

One with a wonderful Engine, throw'd the Houses out at the Windows, by which
means they were purged of all Pestilential Air.

Another cured of all the three kinds of Hectics, the Tabid, Atrophes, and
Emaciated, without bathing, Tabian Milk, Dropax, alias Depilatory, or other
such Medicaments: Only turning the Consumtive for three Months into Monks; and
he assured me, that if they did not grow fat and plump in a Monastic way of
living, they never would be fatten'd in this World, either by Nature, or by Art.

I saw another surrounded with a Crowd of two sorts of Women; some were young,
quaint, clever, neat, pretty, juicy, tight, brisk, buxom, proper, kind-hearted,
and as right as my Leg, to any Man's thinking. The rest were old,
weather-beaten, over-ridden, toothless, blear-eyed, tough, wrinkled,
shrivelled, tawny, moldy, ptysicky, decrepit hags, beldams, and walking
Carcasses. We were told that his Office was to cast anew those She-pieces of
Antiquity, and make them such as the pretty Creatures whom we saw, who had been
made young again that day, recovering at once the Beauty, Shape, Size, and
Disposition, which they enjoyed at Sixteen, except their Heels that were now
much shorter than in their former Youth.

This made them yet more apt to fall backwards whenever any Man happened to
touch 'em, than they had been before. As for their Counterparts, the old
Mother-scratch-tobies, they most devoutly waited for the blessed hour, when the
Batch that was in the Oven was to be drawn, that they might have their turns,
and in a mighty haste they were pulling and hawling the Man like mad, telling
him, that it is the most grievous and intolerable thing in nature, for the Tail
to be of Fire, and the Head to scare away those who should quench it.

The Officer had his hands full, never wanting Patients; neither did his place
bring him in little, you may swear. Pantagruel asked him, whether he could also
make old Men young again? He said, he could not. But the way to make them new
men, was to get 'em to cohabit with a new-cast Female; for thus they caught
that fifth kind of Crinckams, which some call Pellade; in Greek, (...), that
makes them cast off their old Hair and Skin, just as the Serpents do; and thus
their Youth is renewed like the Arabian Phoenix's. This is the true Fountain of
Youth, for there the Old and Decrepit become Young, Active and Lusty.

Just so, as Euripides tells us, Jolaus was transmogrifi'd; and thus Phaon, for
whom kind-hearted Sappho run wild, grew young again for Venus's use; so Tithon
by Aurora's means; so Aeson by Medea, and Jason also, who, if you will believe
Pherecides and Simonides, was new-vamp'd and died by that Witch; and so were
the Nurses of Jolly Bacchus, and their Husbands, as Eschinus relates.

CHAP. XXII. How Queen Whims's Officers were employed; and how the said Lady
retained us among her Abstractors.
I Then saw a great number of the Queen's Officers, who made Black-a-moors
white, as fast as Hops, just rubbing their Bellies with the Bottom of a Pannier.

Others with three Couples of Foxes in one Yoke, plowed a Sandy-shoar, and did
not lose their Seed.

Others washed burnt Tiles, and made them lose their Color.

Others extracted Water out of Pumice-Stones, braying them a good while in a
Mortar, and changed their substance.

Others sheer'd Asses, and thus got Long-fleece-wooll.

Others gathered Barberries and Figs off of Thistles.

Others stroak'd He-goats by the Dugs, and saved their Milk in a Sieve; and
much they got by it.

Others taught Cows to dance, and did not lose their fidling.

Others pitched Nets to catch the Wind, and took Cock-lobsters in them.

I saw a young Spodizator, who very artificially got Farts out of a dead Ass,
and sold 'em for five pence an Ell.

Another did putrify Beetles. O the dainty Food!

Poor Panurge fairly casted up his Accounts, and gave up his halfpenny, [i. e.
vomited] seeing an Archafdarpenin, who laid a huge plenty of Chamberlee to
putrify in Horse-dung, mish-mash'd with abundance of Christian Sir Reverence;
pugh, fie upon him, nasty Dog. However, he told us, that with this sacred
Distillation, he watered Kings and Princes, and made their sweet Lives a fathom
or two the longer.

Others built Churches to jump over the Steeples.

Others set Carts before the Horses, and began to flay Eels at the Tail;
neither did those Eels cry before they were hurt, like those of Melun.

Others out of nothing made great things, and made great things return to
nothing.

Others cut Fire into Stakes with a Knife, and drew Water with a Fish-net.

Others made Chalk of Cheese, and Honey of a Dog's T -- d.

We saw a knot of others, about a Baker's dozen in Number, tippling under an
Arbor. They top'd out of jolly bottomless Cups, four sorts of cool, sparkling,
pure, delicious Vine-tree Syrup, which went down like Mother's Milk; and
Healths and Bumpers flew about like Lightning. We were told, that these true
Philosophers were fairly multiplying the Stars by drinking till the Seven were
Fourteen, as brawny Hercules did with Atlas.

Others made a Virtue of Necessity, and the best of a bad Market, which seemed
to me a very good piece of Work.

Others made Alchymy [i. e. Sir-reverence] with their Teeth, and clapping their
Hind-retort to the Recipient, made scurvy Faces, and then squeezed.

Others in a large Grass-plat, exactly measured how far the Fleas could go at a
Hop, a Step, and Jump; and told us, that this was exceeding useful for the
Ruling of Kingdoms, the Conduct of Armies, and the Administration of
Commonwealths. And that Socrates, who first had got Philosophy out of Heaven,
and from idle and trifling, made it profitable and of moment, used to spend
half his Philosophizing time in measuring the leaps of Fleas, as Aristophanes,
the Quintessential, affirms.

I saw two Gibroins by themselves, keeping Watch on the top of a Tower; and we
were told, they guarded the Moon from the Wolves.

In a blind Corner, I met four more very hot at it, and ready to go to
Logger-heads. I asked what was the cause of the stir and ado, the mighty coil
and pother they made? And I heard that for four live-long-days, those over-wise
Roisters had been at it ding-dong, disputing on three high, more than
Metaphysical Propositions, promising themselves Mountains of Gold by solving
them: The first was concerning a He-asses Shadow: The second, of the Smoke of a
Lanthorn: And the third, of Goat's Hair, whether it were Wool or no? We heard
that they did not think it a bit strange, that two Contradictions in Mode,
Form, Figure, and Time, should be true. Tho I Will warrant the Sophists of Paris
had rather be unchrist'ned than own so much.

While we were admiring all those men's wonderful doings, the Evening Star
already twinkling; the Queen (God bless her) appeared attended with her Court,
and again amazed and dazzled us. She perceived it, and said to us;

What occasions the Aberrations of humane Cogitations through the perplexing
Labyrinths and Abysses of Admiration, is not the Source of the Effects, which
sagacious Mortals visibly experience to be the consequential Result of Natural
Causes; It Is the Novelty of the Experiment, which makes Impressions on their
conceptive, cogitative Faculties, that do not previse the facility of the
operation adequately, with a subact and sedate Intellection, associated with
diligent and congruous Study. Consequently let all manner of Perturbation
abdicate the Ventricles of your Brains, if any one has invaded them while you
were contemplating what is transacted by my Domestic Ministers. Be Spectators
and Auditors of every particular Phenomenon, and every individual Proposition,
within the extent of my Mansion, satiate your selves with all that can fall
here under the Consideration of your Visual or Auscultating Powers, and thus
emancipate your selves from the Servitude of Crassous* Ignorance. And that you
may be induced to apprehend how sincerely I desire this, in consideration of
the studious Cupidity, that so demonstratively emicates at your external
Organs, from this present Particle of time, I retain you as my Abstractors.
Geber, my Principal Talachin, shall Register and Initiate you at your Departing.

We humbly thanked her Queenship, without saying a word, accepting of the Noble
Office she conferred on us.

CHAP. XXIII. How the Queen was served at Dinner, and of her way of eating.
QUeen Whims after this, said to her Gentlemen, The Orifice of the Ventricule,
that Ordinary Ambassador for the Alimentation of all Members, whether Superior
or Inferior, importunes us to restore by the Apposition of Idoneous Sustenance,
what was dissipated by the internal Calidity's Action on the Radical Humidity.
Therefore Spodizators, Gesinins, Memains, and Arazons, be not culpable of
Dilatory Protractions in the Apposition of every re-roborating Species, but
rather let 'em pullulate and super-abound on the Tables. As for you, Nobilissim
Praegustators, and my Gentilissim Masticators, your frequently experimented
Industry internected with perdiligent Sedulity, and sedulous Perdiligence,
continually adjuvates you to perficiate all things in so expedititious a
manner, that there is no necessity of exciting in you a Cupidity to consummate
them. Therefore I can only suggest to you still to operate, as you are
assuefacted indefatigably to operate.

Having made this fine Speech, she retired for a while with part of her Women,
and we were told, that 'twas to bathe, as the Ancients did, more commonly than
we use nowadays to wash our Hands before we eat. The Tables were soon placed,
the Cloth spread, and then the Queen sat down; she eat nothing but Celestial
Ambrosia, and drank nothing but Divine Nectar: As for the Lords and Ladies that
were there, they as well as we, fared on as rare, costly, and dainty Dishes, as
ever Apicius wot or dreamed of in his Life.

When we were as round as Hoops, and as full as Eggs, with stuffing the Gut, an
Some call it an Olio. Rabelais Pot-pourry.
Olla Podrida was set before us, to force Hunger to come to terms with us, in
case it had not granted us a Truce; and such a huge vast thing it was, that the
Plate which Pythius Althius gave King Darius, would hardly have covered it. The
O^^ consisted of several sorts of Pottages, Salads, Fricasees, Saugrenees,
Cabirotadoes, Roast and Boil'd-meat, Carbonadoes, swindging pieces of
Powder'd-beef, good old Hams, dainty Somates, Cakes, Tarts, a world of Curds
after the Morisk-way, fresh Cheese, Gellies and Fruit of all sorts. All this
seemed to me good and dainty; however the sight of it made me sigh; for alas; I
could not taste a bit on it; so full I had filled my Puddings before, and a
Belliful's a Belliful you know. Yet I must tell you what I saw, that seemed to
me odd enough of Conscience; 'twas some Pasties in Paste; and what should those
Pasties in Paste be, do you think, but Pasties in Pots? At the bottom I perceived
store of Dice, Cards, Great Cards on which many different things are figured.
Tarots, Pieces of Ivory to play withal.
Luettes, Chess-men, and Chequers, besides full Bowls of Gold Crowns, for
those who had a mind to have a Game or two, and try their Chance. Under this, I
saw a Jolly Company of Mules in stately Trappings, with Velvet foot-cloaths,
and a Troop of Ambling Nags, some for Men, and some for Women; besides, I don't
know how many Litters all lined with Velvet, and some Coaches of Ferrara-make;
all this for those who had a mind to take the Air.

This did not seem strange to me; but if any thing did, 'twas certainly the
Queen's way of eating, and truly 'twas very new, and very odd; for she chewed
nothing, the good Lady, not but that she had good sound Teeth, and her meat
required to be masticated; but such was her Highness's Custom. When her
Praegustators had tasted the meat, her Masticators took it and chewed it most
nobly; for their dainty Chops and Gullets were lined through with Crimsin Satin
with little Welts, and Gold Purls, and their Teeth were of delicate White
Ivory; thus, when they had chewed the Meat ready for her Highness's Maw, they
poured it down her Throat through a Funnel of fine Gold, and so on to her Craw.
For that reason, they told us, she never visited a Close-stool but by Proxy.

CHAP. XXIV. How there was a Ball in the manner of a Turnament, at which Queen
Whi^^ was present.
AFter Supper there was a Ball in the form of a Tilt or Turnament, not only
worth seeing, but also never to be forgotten. First, the Floor of the Hal^ was
covered with a large piece of Velvete^ white and yellow checkered Tapistry,
eac^ Chequer exactly Square, and three full Spans in breadth.

Then thirty two young Persons came into the Hall; sixteen of them arrayed i^
Cloth of Gold; and of these, eight we^ young Nymphs, such as the Ancients
de^scrib'd Diana's Attendants; the other eigh^ were a King, a Queen, two
Wardens (...) the Castle, two Knights, and two Archers Those of the other Band
were clad in Cloa^ of Silver.

They posted themselves on the Tap's^ in the following manner: The Kings (...)
the last Line on the fourth Square, so the the Golden King was on a White Squa^
the Silvered King on a Yellow Square, an^ each Queen by her King; the Gold^
Queen on a Yellow Square, and the S^^ver'd Queen on a White one, and on ea^
side stood the Archers to guard their Kings and Queens; by the Archers the
Knights, and the Wardens by them. In the next Row before 'em stood the eight
Nymphs; and between the two Bands of Nymphs, four rows of Squares stood empty.

Each Band had its Musicians, eight on each side dressed in its Livery; the one
with Orange-colour'd Damask, the other with White, and all played on different
Instruments most melodiously and harmonious^y, still varying in Time and
Measure as ^he Figure of the Dance required. This ^eem'd to me an admirable
thing consi^ering the numerous diversity of Steps, ^ack-steps, Bounds,
Rebounds, Jerts, ^aces, Leaps, Skips, Turns, Coupes, Hops, ^eadings, Risings,
Meetings, Flights, Em^uscadoes, Moves, and Removes.

I was also at a loss, when I strove to ^omprehend how the Dancers could so
sud^enly know what every different Note ^eant; for they no sooner heard this or
^at sound, but they placed themselves in ^e peace which was denoted by the
Mu^ck, tho their Motions were all different. ^or the Nymphs that stood in the
first ^e, as if they designed to begin the Fight, ^arch'd strait forwards to
their Enemies ^om Square to Square, unless it were the ^st step, at which they
were free to move ^er two steps at once, They alone never fall back [which is
not very natural to oth^ Nymphs] and if any one of them is (...) lucky as to
advance to the opposite King^ Row, she is immediately crowned Qu^^^ of her
King, and after that, moves w^ the same State, and in the same manner (...) the
Queen; but till that happens, the never strike their Enemies but forwar^ and
obliquely in a diagonal Line. Ho^ ever, they make it not their chief B^^ness to
take their Foes, for if they (...) they would leave their Queen exposed* the
adverse Parties, who then might (...) her.

The Kings move and take their E^^mies on all sides square-ways, and o^ step
from a white Square into a yellow (...) and vice versa, except at their first
step (...) Rank should want other Officers than (...) Wardens; for then they
can set 'em in (...) place, and retire by him.

The Queens take a greater Liberty (...) any of the rest, for they move backwa^
and forwards all manner of ways, (...) strait Line, as far as they please,
provi^ the place be not filled with one of her (...) Party, and diagonally also
keeping to (...) Color on which she stands.

The Archers move backwards or ^^^^wards, far and near, never changing (...)
Color on which they stand.

The Kights move, and take in a lineal manner, stepping over one Square, tho a
Friend or a Foe stand upon it, posting themselves on the second Square to the
right or left, from one Color to another, which is very unwelcome to the
adverse Party, and ought to be carefully observed, for they take ^t unawares.

The Wardens move, and take to the right or left, before or behind them, like
the Kings, and can advance as far as they find places empty; which liberty the
Kings ^ake not.

The Laws which both sides observe, is ^t the end of the Fight, to besiege and
enclose the King of either Party, so that he may not be able to move; and being
reduced to that extremity, the Battle is over, and he loses the day.

Now to avoid this, there is none of ^ither Sex of each Party, but is willing
to sacrifice his or her Life, and they begin to take one another on all sides
in time, as ^oon as the Mus^ick strikes up. When any one takes a Prisoner, he
makes his Honors, and striking him gently in the hand, puts ^im out of the
Field of Combat, and En^amps were he stood.

If one of the Kings chance to stand where he might be taken, it is not lawful
for any of his Adversaries that had discovered him, to lay hold on him; far
from it they are strictly enjoined humbly to pay him their Respects, and give
him notice, saying, God preserve you, Sir, that his Officers may relieve and
cover him, or he may remove, if unhappily he could not be relieved. However, he
is not to be taken, but greeted with a Good morrow, the others bending the
Knee; and thus the Turnament uses to end.

CHAP. XXV. How the Thirty two Persons at the Ball fought.
THE two Companies having taken the Stations, the Music struck up, an^ with a
Martial-sound, which had something of horrid in it, like a Point of War, rom'^
and alarmed both Parties, who now be^gan to shiver, and then soon were warm'^
with Warlike rage; and having got in (...) readiness to fight desperately,
impatient (...) delay, stood waiting for the Charge.

Then the Music of the Silvered Ba^ ceased playing, and the Instruments of the
Golden-side alone were heard, which de^noted that the Golden-party attacked.
Ac^cordingly a new Movement was played for the Onset, and we saw the Nymph, who
stoo^ before the Queen, turn to the left toward her King, as it were to ask
leave to fight; and thus saluting her Company at the same time, she moved two
Squares forwards, and saluted the adverse Party.

Now the Music of the Golden Brigade ceased playing, and their Antagonists
began again. I ought to have told you, That the Nymph, who began by saluting
her Company, had by that Formality also given them to understand that they were
to fall on. She was saluted by them in the same manner with a full turn to the
left, except the Queen, who went aside toward her King to the right; and the
same manner of Salution was observed on both sides, during the whole Ball.

The Silvered Nymph that stood before her Queen likewise moved, as soon as the
Music of her Party sounded a Charge; her Salutations, and those of her side,
were to the Right, and her Queens to the left. She moved into the second Square
forwards, and saluted her Antagonists, facing the first Golden Nymph, so that
there was not any distance between them, and you would have thought they two
had been going to fight, but they only strike side-ways.

Their Comrades, whether Silvered or Golden, followed 'em in an intercalary
Figure, and seemed to Skirmish a while, till the Golden Nymph, who had first
entered the Lists, striking a Silvered Nymph in the hand on the right, put her
out of the Field, and set her self in her place. But soon the Music playing a
new Measure, she was struck by a Silvered Archer, who after that was obliged
himself to retire. A Silvered Knight then sallied out, and the Golden Queen
posted her self before her King.

Then the Silvered King dreading the Golden Queen's Fury, removed to the right,
to the place where his Warden stood which seemed to him strong and well-guarded.

The two Knights on the left, whether Golden or Silvered, marched up, and on
either side took up many Nymphs, who could not retreat, principally the Golden
Knight, who made this his whole business: But the Silvered Knight had greater
Designs, dissembling all along, and even sometimes not taking a Nymph when he
could have done it, still moving on till he was come up to the main Body of his
Enemies, in such a manner, that he saluted their King with a, God save you, Sir.

The whole Golden Brigade quaked for fear and anger, those words giving notice
of their King's danger; not but that they could soon relieve him, but because
their King being thus saluted, they were to lose their Warden on the right
Wing, without any hopes of a Recovery. Then the golden King retired to the
Left, and the silvered Knight took the golden Warden, which was a mighty Loss
to that Party. However, they resolved to be revenged, and surrounded the Knight
that he might not escape; he tried to get off, behaving himself with a great
deal of Gallantry, and his Friends did what they could to save him, but at last
he fell into the golden Queen's hands and was carried off.

Her Forces not yet satisfied, having lost one of their best men, with more
Fury than Conduct moved about, and did much mischief among their Enemies: The
silvered Party warily dissembled, watching their opportunity to be even with
them, and presented one of their Nymphs to the golden Queen, having laid an
Ambuscado, so that the Nymph being taken, a golden Archer had like to have
seized the silvered Queen. Then the golden Knight undertakes to take the
silvered King and Queen, and says, good morrow. The silvered Archer salutes
them, and was taken by a golden Nymph, and she her self by a silvered one.

The Fight was obstinate and sharp: The Wardens left their Posts, and advanced
to relieve their Friends. The Battle was doubtful, and Victory hovered over
both Armies. Now the Silver Host charge and break through their Enemy Ranks, as
far as the Golden King's Te^ and now they are beaten back; The golden Queen
distinguishes her self from the rest by her mighty Achievements, (...) more
than by her Garb and Dignity for at once she takes an Archer* and going
side-ways, seizes a silvered Warden. Which Thing the silvered Queen perceiving
she came forwards, and rushing on with e^qual Bravery, takes the last golden
Warde^ and some Nymphs. The two Quee^ fought a long while hand to hand; no^
striving to take each other by Surprise, then to save themselves, and sometime^
to guard their Kings. Finally, The golden Queen took the silvered Queen; b^
presently after she her self was taken by the silvered Archer.

Then the silvered King had only three Nymphs, an Archer, and a Warden left;
and the golden only three Nymphs and the right Knight, which made them fight
more slowly and warily than before. The two King^ seemed to mourn for the Loss
of their loving Queens, and only studied and e^^deavour'd to get new ones out
of (...) their Nymphs, to be raised to that Dig^nity, and thus be married to
them. The made them excite those brave Nymphs (...) strive to reach the
farthest Rank, where stood the King of the contrary Party promising them
certainly to have them Crowned if they could do this. The golden Nymphs were
beforehand with the others, and out of their number was created a Queen, who
was dressed in Royal Robes, and had a Crown set on her head. You need not doubt
the silvered Nymphs made also what haste they could to be Queens; one of them
was within a step of the Coronation Place; but there the golden Knight lay
ready to intercept her, so that she could go no further.

The new golden Queen, resolved to show her self valiant and worthy of her
Advancement to the Crown, achieved great Feats of Arms, But in the mean time,
the silvered Warden takes the golden Knight who guarded the Camp; and thus
there was a new silvered Queen, who, like the other, strove to excel in Heroic
Deeds at the beginning of her Reign. Thus the Fight grew hotter than before. A
thousand Stratagems, Charges, Rallyings, Retreats and Attacks were tried on
both sides; till at last the silvered Queen, having by stealth advanced as far
as the golden King's Tent, cried; God save you, Sir. Now none but his new Queen
could relieve him; so she bravely came and exposed her self to the utmost
Extremity to deliver him out of it. Then the silvered Warden with his Queen,
reduced the golden King to such a stress, that to save himself, he was forced
to lose his Queen; but the golden King took him at last. However, the rest of
the golden Party were soon taken; and that King being left alone, the silvered
Party made him a low Bow; crying, Good morrow, Sir; which denoted that the
silvered King had got the Day.

This being heard, the Music of both Parties loudly proclaimed the Victory.
And thus the first Battle ended to the unspeakeable Joy of all the Spectators.

After this the two Brigades took their former Stations, and began to tilt a
second time, much as they had done before; only the Music played somewhat faster
than at the first Battle; and the motions were altogether different. I saw the
golden Queen sally out one of the first, with an Archer and a Knight, as it
were angry at the former Defeat, and she had like to have fallen upon the
silvered King in his Tent among his Officers; but having been balked in her
Attempt, she skirmish'd briskly, and overthrew so many silvered Nymphs and
Officers, that it was a most amazing sight. You would have sworn she had been
another Penth^silea; for she behaved her self with as much Bravery as that
Amazonian Queen did at Troy.

But this havoc did not last long; for, the silvered Party, exasperated by
their Loss, resolved to perish, or stop her Progress; and having posted an
Archer in Ambuscado on a distant Angle, together with a Knight Errant, her
Highness fell into their hands, and was carried out of the Field. The rest were
soon routed after the taking of their Queen; who without doubt, from that time
resolved to be more wary, and keep near her King, without venturing so far
amidst her Enemies, unless with more Forces to defend her. Thus the silvered
Brigade once more got the Victory.

This did not dishearten or deject the golden Party; far from it, they soon
appeared again in the Field to face their Enemies; and being posted as before,
both the Armies seemed more resolute and cheerful than ever. Now the martial
Consort began, and the Music was above a Hemiole the quicker, according to the
Warlike Phrygian Mode, such as was invented by Marsias.

Then our Combatants began to wheel about and charge with such a swiftness,
that in an instant they made four moves, besides the usual Salutations. So that
they were continually in Action, flying, hovering, jumping, vaulting, tumbling,
curvetting, with petauristical Turns and Motions, and often intermingled.

Seeing them turn about on one Foot after they had made their Honors, we
compared them to your Tops or Giggs, such as Boys use to whip about; making
them turn round so swiftly, that they sleep, as they call it, and motion cannot
be perceived, but resembles rest its contrary: So that if you make a Point or
Mark on some part of one of those Gigs, 'twill be perceived not as a Point, but
as a continual Line, in a most divine manner, as Cusanus has wisely observed.

While they were thus warmly engaged, we heard continually the Claps and
Episemasies which those of the two Bands reiterated at the taking of their
Enemies; and this, joined to the variety of their Motions and Music, would have
forced Smiles out of the most severe Cato, the never-laughing Crassus, the
Athenian Man-hater Timon; nay, even the whining Heraclytus, tho he abhorred
Laughing, the Action that is most peculiar to Man. For who could have forborne?
seeing those young Warriors with their Nymphs and Queens so briskly and
gracefully advance, retire, jump, leap, skip, spring, fly, vault, caper, move
to the Right, to the Left every way still in Time, so swiftly, and yet so
dexterously, that they never touched one another but methodically.

As the number of the Combatants lessened, the Pleasure of the Spectators
increased; For the Stratagems and Motions of the remaining Forces were more
singular. I shall only add, that this pleasing Entertainment charmed us to such
a degree, that our minds were ravished with Admiration and Delight; and the
martial Harmony moved our Souls so powerfully, that we easily believed what is
said of Ismenias's having excited Alexander to rise from Table and run to his
Arms with such a warlike Melody. At last the golden King remained Master of the
Field; And, while we were minding those Dances, Queen-Whims vanished, so that
we saw her no more from that day to this.

Then Geber's Michelots conducted us, and we were set down among her
Abstractors, as her Queenship had commanded. After that, we returned to the
Port of Mateotechny, and thence strait of board our Ships; For the Wind was
fair, and had we not hoisted Sail out of hand, we could hardly have got off in
three quarters of a Moon in the Wain.

CHAP. XXVI. How we came to the Island of Odes, where the Ways go up and down.
WE Sailed before the Wind, between a pair of Courses, and in two days made the
Island of Odes; at which Place we saw a very strange thing. The ways there are
Animals; so true is Aristotle's Saying, that all self-moving things are
Animals. Now the Ways walk there; Ergo. They are then Animals: Some of them are
strange unknown ways, like those of the Planets; others are Highways,
Cross-ways, and By-ways. I perceived that the Travelers and Inhabitants of
that Country asked whither does this way go? whither does that way go? Some
answered, between Midy and Feurolles, to the Parish Church, to the City, to the
River, and so forth. Being thus in their right way, they used to reach their
Journeys end without any further trouble, just like those who go by water from
Lions to Avignon or Arles.

Now, as you know that nothing is perfect here below, we heard there was a sort
of People whom they called High-way-men, Way-beaters, and makers of Inroads in
Roads; and that the poor ways were sadly afraid of them, and shunned them as you
do Robbers. For these used to waylay them, as people lay Trains for Wolves, and
set Ginns for Woodcocks. I saw one who was taken up with a Lord-Chief-Justice's
Warrant, for having unjustly and in spite of Pallas taken the School-way,
which is the longest. Another boasted that he had fairly taken his shortest,
and that doing so, he first compassed his design. Thus Carpalin, meeting once
Epistemon looking upon a Wall with his Fiddle-diddle, or live Urinal, in his
hand, to make a little Maid's water, cried, that he did not wonder now how the
other came to be still the first at Pantagruel's Lever, since he held his
shortest, and least used.

I found Bourges Highway among these. It went with the deliberation of an
Abbot, but was made to scamper at the approach of some Waggoners, who threatened
to have it trampled under their Horses feet, and make their Wagons run over
it, as Tullia's Chariot did over her Father's Body.

I also spied there the old Way between Peronne and St. Quentin, which seemed
to me a very good, honest, plain way, as smooth as a Carpet, and as good as
ever was trod upon by shoe of Leather.

Among the Rocks I knew again the good old way to la Ferrare, mounted on a huge
Bear. This at a distance would have put me in mind of St. Jerome's Picture, had
but the Bear been a Lion; for the poor way was all mortified, and wore a long
hoary Beard uncomb'd and entangled, which looked like the Picture of Winter, or
at least like a white-frosted Bush.

On that way were store of Beads or Rosaries, coursely made of wild Pine Tree;
and it seemed kneeling, not standing, nor lying flat; but its sides and middle
were beaten with huge stones; insomuch, that it proved to us at once an Object
of Fear and Pity.

While we were examining it, a Runner Batchelour of the Place took us aside,
and showing us a white smooth Way, somewhat filled with Straw, said,
Henceforth, Gentlemen, do not reject the Opinion of Thales the Milesian, who
said that water is the beginning of all things, nor that of Homer, who tells
us, that all things derive their Original from the Ocean: For, this same Way
which you see here, had its beginning from water, and is to return whence she
came before two months come to an end; now Carts are driven here where Boats
used to be rowed.

Truly, said Pantagruel, you tell us no news, we see five hundred such changes
and more every year in our World. Then reflecting on the different manner of
going of those moving Ways; he told us, he believed that Philolaus and
Aristarchus had Philosophis'd in this Island, and that some indeed were of
Opinion, the Earth turns round about its Poles, and not the Heavens, whatever
we may think to the contrary; As when we are on the River Loire, we think the
Trees and the Shore moves, tho this is only an effect of our Boat's motion.

As we went back to our Ships, we saw three Way-Layers, who having been taken
in Ambuscado, were going to be be broken on the Wheel; and a huge Fornicator
was burned with a lingering Fire, for beating a way, and breaking one of its
sides: we were told it was the way of the Banks of the Nile in Egypt.

CHAP. XXVII. How we came to the Island of Sandals; and of the Order of
Semiquaver Friars.
THence we went to the Island of Sandals, whose Inhabitants live on nothing but
Ling Broth. However, we were very kindly received and entertained by Benius the
Third, King of the Island; who, after he had made us drink, took us with him to
show us a spick-and-span-new Monastery, which he had contrived for the
Semiquaver Friars; so he called the Religious Men whom he had there. For he
said, that on the other side the Water lived Friars, who styled themselves her
sweet Ladyships most humble Servants. Item, the goodly Friar-minors, who are
Semibreves of Bulls; the smoak'd-herring Tribe of Minim Friars; then the
Crotchet Friars. So that these diminitives could be no more than Semiquavers.
By the Statutes, Bulls, and Patents of Queen- Whims, they were all dressed like
so many House-Burners, except that as in Anjou, your Bricklayers use to quilt
their Knees when they tile houses, so these holy Friars had usually quilted
Bellies, and thick quilted Paunches were among them in much Repute: Their
Codpieces were cut Slipper-fashion, and every Monk of them wore two; one sowed
before, and another behind, reporting that some certain dreadful Mysteries were
duly represented by this duplicity of Codpieces.

They wore Shoes as round as Basins, in Imitation of those who inhabit the
sandy Sea. Their Chins were close shaved, and their Feet Iron-shod; and to show
they did not value Fortune, Benius made them shave and powl the hind part of
their Poles, as bare as a Bird's Arse, from the Crown to the Shoulder-blades:
But they had leave to let their Hair grow before, from the two triangular Bones
in the upper part of the Skull.

Thus they did not value Fortune a Button, and cared no more for the Goods of
this World, than you or I do for hanging. And to show how much they defied that
blind Jilt, all of them wore, not in their Hands like her, but at their Waste,
instead of Beads, Sharp-razors, which they used to new grind twice a Day, and
set thrice a Night.

Each of them had a round Ball on their Feet, because Fortune is said to have
one under hers.

The Flap of their Cowles hanged forwards, and not backwards, like those of
others; thus none could see their Noses, and they laughed without fear both at
Fortune and the Fortunate, neither more nor less than our Ladies laugh at
barefaced Trulls, when they have those Mufflers on, which they call Masks, and
which were formerly much more properly call Charity, because they cover
multitude of Sins

The hind part of their Faces were alwas uncovered, as are our Faces, which
made them either go with their Belly, or the Arse foremost, which they pleased.
When their hind Face went forwards, you would have sworn this had been their
Natural-gate; as well on account of their round Shoes, as of the double
Codpiece, and their Face behind, which was as bare as the back of my Hand, and
coursely daubed over with two Eyes, and a Mouth, such as you see on some
Indian-nuts. Now, if they offered to waddle along with their Bellies forwards,
you would have thought they were then playing at Blind-man's Buff. May I never
be hanged, if 'twas not a Comical sight.

Their way of Living was thus; about Owl light they charitably began to Boot
and Spur one another: This being done, the least thing they did, was to Sleep
and Snoar; and thus Sleeping, they had Barnacles on the Handles of their Faces,
or Spectacles at most.

You may swear, we did not a little wonder at this odd fancy; but they
satisfied us presently, telling us, That the Day of Judgment is to take Mankind
napping; therefore to show they did not refuse to make their Personal
Appearance, as Fortune's Darlings use to do, they were always thus Booted and
Spurred, ready to mount whenever the Trumpet should sound.

At Noon, as soon as the Clock struck, they used to awake. You must know that
their Clock-bell, Church-bells, and Refectuary-bells; were all made according
to the Pontial device, that is, quilted with the finest Down, and their
Clappers of Foxtails.

Having then made shift to get up at Noon, they pulled off their Boots, and
those that wanted to speak with a Maid, alias piss, pissed; those that wanted
to Scumber, scumber'd; and those that wanted to Sneeze, sneez'd. But all,
whether they would or no (poor Gentlemen!) were obliged largely and plentifully
to Yawn, and this was their first Breakfast (O rigorous Statute!) Methought
'twas very comical to observe their Transactions; for, having laid their Boots
and Spurs on a Rack, they went into the Cloisters: There they curiously washed
their Hands and Mouths, then sat them down on a long Bench, and picked their
Teeth till the Provost gave the Signal, whistling through his Fingers; then
every He stretched out his Jaws as much as he could, and they gaped and yawn'd
for about half an hour, sometimes more, sometimes less, according as the Prior
judged the Breakfast to be suitable to the day.

After that, they went in Procession; two Banners being carried before them, in
one of which was the Picture of Virtue, and that of Fortune in the other. The
last went before, carried by a Semiquavering-Friar, at whose Heels was another
with the Shadow or Image of Virtue in one hand, and an Holy-water-sprinkle in
the other; I mean of that Holy Mercurial-water, which Ovid describes in his de
fasti^. And as the preceding Semiquaver rang a Hand-bell, this shak'd the
Sprinkle with his First. With that, says Pantagruel, This Order contradicts the
Rule which Tully and the Academics prescribed, That Virtue ought to go before,
and Fortune follow. But they told us, they did as they ought, seeing their
Design was to breech, lash, and bethwack Fortune.

During the Processions they trill'd and quaver'd most melodiously betwixt
their Teeth I don't know what Antiphones, or Chantings by turns: For my part,
'twas all Hebrew-Greek to me, the Devil a word I could pick out on it; at last
pricking up my Ears, and intensely listening, I perceived they only sang with
the Tip of theirs. O, what a rare Harmony it was! How well 'twas tuned to the
sound of their Bells! You Will never find these to jar, that you will not.
Pantagruel made a notable Observation upon the Processions; for, says he, have
you seen and observed the policy of these Semiquavers? To make an end of their
Procession, they went out at one of the Church-doors, and came in at the other;
they took a deal of care not to come in at the place whereat they went out. On
my honor, these are a subtle sort of people, quoth Panurge, they have as much
wit as three folks, Two Fools and a mad man; they are as wise as the Calf that
ran Nine miles to suck a Bull, and when he came there 'twas a Steer. This
Subtilty and Wisdom of theirs, cried Friar Ihon, is borrowed from the Occult
Philosophy, may I be gutted like an Oyster, if I can tell what to make on it.
Then the more it is to be feared, said Pantagruel; for Subtilty suspected,
Subtilty foreseen, Subtilty found out, loses the Essence and very Name of
Subtilty, and only gains that of Blockishness. They are not such fools as you
take them to be, they have more Tricks than are good, I doubt.

After the Procession, they went sluggingly into the Fratry-Room by the way of
walk and healthful Exercise, and there kneeled under the Tables, leaning their
Breasts on Lanterns. While they were in that Posture, in came a huge Sandal,
with a Pitch fork in his hand, who used to baste, rib-roast, swaddle, and
swindge them well-favour'dly, as they said, and in truth treated them after a
fashion. They began their Meal as (...) you end yours, with Cheese, and ended
it with Mustard and Lettice, as Martial tells us the Ancients did. Afterward a
Platter full of Mustard was brought before every one of them; and thus they
made good the Proverb, After Meat comes Mustard.

Their Diet was this.

OF Sundays they stuffed their Puddings with Puddings, Chitterlings, Links,
Bolonia-Sawcidges, Forc'd-meats, Liverings, Hogs-haslets, young Quails, and
Teals; you must also always add Cheese for the first Course, and Mustard for
the last.

OF Mondays, they were crammed with Pease and Pork, cum commento, and
interlineary Glosses.

OF Tuesdays, they used to twist store of Holy-bread, Cakes, Buns, Puffs,
Lenten-Loaves, Jumbals and Biscuits.

OF Wednesdays, my Gentlemen had fine Sheeps-heads, Calves-heads, and
Brocks-heads, of which there is no want in that Country.

OF Thursdays, they guzzled down seven sorts of Porridge, not forgetting
Mustard.

OF Frydays, they munch'd nothing but Services or Sorbapples; neither were
these full ripe, as I guessed by their Complexion.

OF Saturdays, they gnawed Bones, not that they were poor or needy, for every
Mother's Son of 'em had a very good fat Belly-Benefice.

As for their Drink, 'twas an Antifortunal, thus they called I don't know what
sort of a Liquor of the place.

When they wanted to eat or drink, they turned down the Back-points or Flaps of
their Cowls forwards, below their Chins, and that served 'em instead of Gorgets
or Slabberring-Bibs.

When they had well dined, they prayed rarely, all in Quavers and Shakes; and
the rest of the day, expecting the day of Judgment, they were taken up with
Acts of Charity. And particularly,

OF Sundays, Rubbers at Cuffs.

OF Mondays, lending each other Flirts and Fillups on the Nose.

OF Tuesdays, clapperclawing one another.

OF Wednesdays, sniting and fly-flapping,

OF Thursdays, worming and pumping,

OF Fridays, tickling,

OF Saturdays, jirking and firking one another.

Such was their Diet when they resided in the Convent, and if the Prior of the
Monk-house sent any of them abroad, then they were strictly enjoined, neither
to touch nor eat any manner of Fish, as long as they were on Sea or Rivers; and
to abstain from all manner of Flesh whenever they were at Land, that every one
might be convinced, that while they enjoyed the Object, they denied themselves
the Power, and even the Desire, and were no more moved with it, than the
Marpesian Rock.

All this was done with proper Antiphones, still sung and chanted by Ear, as we
have already observed.

When the Sun went to bed, they fairly Booted and Spurred each other as before,
and having clapped on their Barnicles, even jogged to bed too. At Midnight the
Sandal came to them, and up they got, and having well whetted and set their
Rasors, and been a processioning, they clapped the Tables over themselves, and
like wire-drawers under their work, fell to it as aforesaid.

Friar Ihon des Entoumeures, having shrewdly observed these jolly
Semiquaver-Friars, and had a full account of their Statutes, lost all patience,
and cried out aloud; Bounce Tail, and God have mercy Guts; if every Fool should
wear a Babble, Fuel would be dear. A Plague rot it, we must know how many Farts
go to an Ounce; would Priapus were here as he used to be at the nocturnal
Festivals in Crete, that I might see him play backwards and wriggle and shake
to the purpose. Ay, ay, this is the World, and the other is the Country; may I
never piss, if this be notan Antichthonian Land, and our very Antipodes: In
Germany they pull down Monasteries and unfrockifie the Monks; here they go
quite Kam, and act clean contrary to others, setting new ones up, against the
hair.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Panurge asked a Semiquaver Friar many questions. and was
only answered in Monosyllables.
PAnurge, who had since been wholly taken up with staring at these Royal
Semiquavers, at last pulled one of them by the Sleeve, who was as lean as a
Rake, and asked him,

Hark 'e me, Friar Quaver, Semiquaver, Demisemiquavering Quaver, where is the
Punk?

The Friar pointing downwards, answered, There.

Pan. Pray have you many?


Fry. Few.


Pan. How many Scores have you?


Fry. One.


Pan. How many would you have?


Fry. Five.


Pan. Where do you hide 'em?


Fry. Here.


Pan. I suppose they are not all of one age; but pray how is their Shape?


Fry. Straight.


Pan. Their Complexion?


Fry. Clear.


Pan. Their Hair?


Fry. Fair.


Pan. Their Eyes?


Fry. Black.


Pan. Their Features?


Fry. Good.


Pan. Their Brows?


Fry. Small.


Pan. Their Graces?


Fry. Ripe.


Pan. Their Looks?


Fry. Free.


Pan. Their Feet?


Fry. Flat.


Pan. Their Heels?


Fry. Short.


Pan. Their lower Parts?


Fry. Rare.


Pan. And their Arms?


Fry. Long.


Pan. What do they wear on their hands?


Fr. Gloves.


Pan. What sorts of Rings on their Fingers?


Fry. Gold.


Pan. What Rigging do you keep 'em in?


Fry. Cloth.


Pan. What sort of Cloth is it?


Fry. New.


Pan. What Color?


Fry. Sky.


Pan. What kind of Cloth is it?


Fry. Fine.


Pan. What Caps do they wear?


Fry. Blew.


Pan. What 'the Color of their Stockins?


Fry. Red.


Pan. What wear they on their Feet?


Fry. Pumps.


Pan. How do they use to be?


Fry. Fowl.


Pan. How do they use to walk?


Fry. Fast.


Pan. Now let us talk of the Kitchen, I mean that of the Harlots, and without
going hand over head, let us a little examine things by particulars. What is in
their Kitchins?


Fry. Fire.


Pan. What Fuel feeds it?


Fry. Wood.


Pan. What sort of Wood is it?


Fry. Dry.


Pan. And of what kind of Trees?


Fry. Yews.


Pan. What are the Faggots and Brushes of?


Fry. Holme.


Pan. What Wood do you burn in your Chambers?


Fry. Pine.


Pan. And of what other Trees?


Fry. Line.


Pan. Harkee me, as for the Buttocks, I Will go your halves: Pray, how do you
feed 'em?


Fry. Well.


Pan. First, what do they eat?


Fry. Bread.


Pan. Of what Complexion?


Fry. White.


Pan. And what else?


Fry. Meat.


Pan. How do they love it dressed?


Fry. Roast.


Pan. What sort of Porridge?


Fry. None.


Pan. Are they for Pies and Tarts?


Fry. Much.


Pan. There I Am their Man. Will Fish go down with them?


Fry. Well.


Pan. And what else?


Fry. Eggs.


Pan. How do they like 'em?


Fry. Boild.


Pan. And how must they be done?


Fry. Hard.


Pan. Is this all they have?


Fry. No.


Pan. What have they besides then?


Fry. Beef.


Pan. And what else?


Fry. Pork.


Pan. And what more?


Fry. Geese.


Pan. What then?


Fry. Ducks.


Pan. And what besides?


Fry. Cocks.


Pan. What do they season their Meat with?


Fry. Salt.


Pan. What Sauce are the most dainty for?


Fry. Must.


Pan. What Is their last Course?


Fry. Rice.


Pan. And what else?


Fry. Milk.


Pan. What besides?


Fry. Pease.


Pan. What sort?


Fry. Green.


Pan. What do they boil 'em with?


Fry. Pork.


Pan. What fruit do they eat?


Fry. Good.


Pan. How?


Fry. Raw.


Pan. What do they end with?


Fry. Nuts.


Pan. How do they drink?


Fry. Neat.


Pan. What Liquor?


Fry. Wine.


Pan. What sort?


Fry. White.


Pan. In Winter?


Fry. Strong.


Pan. In the Spring?


Fry. Brisk.


Pan. In Summer?


Fry. Cool.


Pan. In Autumn?


Fry. New.

Buttock of a Monk! cried Friar Ihon, how plump these plaguey Trulls, these arch
Semiquavering Strumpets must be! That damned Cattle are so high fed that they
must needs be high mettal'd, and ready to winse, and give two ups for one
go-down, when any one offers to ride 'em below the Crupper.

Prithee, Friar Ihon, quoth Panurge, hold thy prating Tongue, stay till I have
done.

Till what time do the Doxies set up?


Fry. Night.


Pan. When do they get up?


Fry. Late.


Pan. May I ride on a Horse that was foal'd of an Acorn, if this be not as
honest a Cod as ever the Ground went upon, and as grave as an old Gate-post
into the Bargain. Would to the blessed St. Semiquaver, and the blessed worthy
Virgin St. Semiquaverera, he were Lord Chief President [ Justice] of Paris.
Odsbodikins, how he would dispatch! with what Expedition would he bring disputes to
an upshot! what an Abreviator and Clawer off of Lawsuits, Reconciler of
Differences, Examiner and Fumbler of Bags, Peruser of Bills, Scribler of
Rough-drafts, and Ingrosser of Deeds, would he not make! Well, Friar, spare
your Breath to cool your Porridge: Come, let us now talk with Deliberation, fair
and softly, as Lawyers go to Heaven. Let Us know how you Victual the Venereal
Camp.

How is the Snatchblatch?


Fry. Rough.


Pan. How is the Gate-way?


Fry. Free.


Pan. And how'st within?


Fry. Deep.


Pan. I mean, what weather is it there?


Fry. Hot.


Pan. What shadows the Brooks?


Fry. Groves.


Pan. Of what is the Color of the Twigs?


Fry. Red.


Pan. And that of the Old?


Fry. Gray.


Pan. How are you when you shake?


Fry. Brisk.


Pan. How is their Motion.


Fry. Quick.


Pan. Would you have them Vault or Wriggle more.


Fry. Less.


Pan. What kind of Tools are yours?


Fry. Big.


Pan. And in their helves?


Fry. Round.


Pan. Of what Colour's the Tip?


Fry. Red.


Pan. When they have been used, how are they?


Fry. Shrunk.


Pan. How much weighs each Bag of Tools?


Fry. Pounds.


Pan. How hang your Pouches?


Fry. Tight.


Pan. How are they when you have done?


Fry. Lank.


Pan. Now, by the Oath you have taken, tell me, when you have a mind to
Cohabit, how you throw 'em?


Fry. Down.


Pan. And what do they say then?


Fry. Fie.


Pan. However, like Maids, they say nay, and take it, and speak the less, but
think the more; minding the work in hand, do they not?


Fry. True.


Pan. Do they get you Bairns?


Fry. None.


Pan. How do you pig together?


Fry. Bare.


Pan. Remember you're upon your Oath, and tell me justly, and bona fide; how
many times of day you Monk it?


Fry. Six.


Pan. How many bouts of Night?


Fry. Ten.

Cat so, quoth Friar Ihon, the poor fornicating Brother's bashful, and sticks
at Sixteen, as if that were his stint. Right, quoth Panurge, but could thou
keep pace with him, Friar Ihon, my dainty Cod? May the Devil's dam suck my
Teat, if he does not look as if he had got a Blow over the Nose with a Naples
Cowlstaff.


Pan. Pray, Friar Shakewell, does your whole Fraternity quaver and shake at
that rate?


Fry. All.


Pan. Who of them is the best Cock of the Game?


Fry. I.


Pan. Do you never commit dry Bobs, or Flashes in the Pan?


Fry. None.


Pan. I blush like any black Dog, and could be as testy as an old Cook, when I
think on all this; it passes my Understanding. But, pray, when you have been
pumpt dry one day, what have you got the next?


Fry. More.


Pan. By Priapus, they have the Indian-herb, of which Theophrastus spoke, or
I Am much out. But harkee me, thou Man of Brevity, should some Impediment
honestly, or otherwise, impair your Talents, and cause your Benevolence to
lessen, how would it fare with you then?


Fry. Ill.


Pan. What would the Wenches do?


Fry. Rail.


Pan. What if you skipt, and let 'em fast a whole day?


Fry. Worse.


Pan. What do you give 'em then?


Fry. Thwacks.


Pan. What do they say to this?


Fry. Bawl.


Pan. And what else?


Fry. Curse.


Pan. How do you correct 'em?


Fry. Hard.


Pan. What do you get out of 'em then?


Fry. Blood.


Pan. How Is their Complexion then?


Fry. Odd.


Pan. What do they mend it with?


Fry. Paint.


Pan. Then; what do they do?


Fry. Fawn.


Pan. By the Oath you have taken, tell me truly, what time of the year do you
do it least in?


Fry. Now August.
.


Pan. What season do you do it best in?


Fry. March.


Pan. How is your performance the rest of the Year.


Fry. Brisk.


Then, quoth Panurge sneering, Of all, and of all commend me to Ball, this is
the Friar of the World, for my Money; you have heard how short, concise, and
compendious he is in his Answers? Nothing is to be got out of him but
Monosyllables; by Jingo, I believe he would make three bits of a Cherry.

Dam him, cried Friar Ihon, that is as true as I am his Uncle, the Dog yelps at
another gat's rate when he is among his Bitches; there he is Polisyllable
enough, my Life for yours; you talk of making three bits of a Cherry! God send
Fools more Wit, and us more Money; May I be doomed to fast a whole Day, if I
don't verily believe he would not make above two bits of a Shoulder of Mutton,
and one swoop of a whole Pottle of Wine; zoons do but see how down of the mouth
the Cur looks? He Is nothing but Skin and Bones; he has pist his Tallow.

Truly, truly, quoth Epistemon, this Rascally Monastical Vermin all over the
World mind nothing but their Gut, and are as ravenous as any Kites, and then
forsooth, they tell us they have nothing but Food and Raiment in this World;
'sdeath, what more have Kings and Princes?

CHAP. XXIX. How Epistemon disliked the Institution of Lent.
PRay did you observe, continued Epistemon, how this damned ill-favored
Semiquaver mentioned March as the best Month for Catterwawling. True, said
Pantagruel, yet Lent and March always go together; and the first was instituted
to macerate and bring down our pampered Flesh, to weaken and subdue its Lusts,
and curb and assuage the Venereal rage.

By this, said Epistemon, you may guess what kind of a Pope it was, who first
enjoined it to be kept; since this filthy wooden-shoo'd Semiquaver owns that
his Spoon is never oftener or deeper in the Porringer of Letchery than in Lent;
add to this, the evident Reasons given by all Good and Learned Physicians,
affirming, That throughout the whole Year no Food is eaten, that can prompt
Mankind to lascivious Acts, more than at that time.

As for Example, Beans, Pease, Phasels or Long-peason, Ciches, Onions, Nuts,
Oysters, Herrings, Saltmeats, Garum, (a kind of Anchovy) and Salads, wholly
made up of venereous Herbs and Fruits, as Rocket, Nose-smart, Taragon, Cresses,
Parsley, Rampions, Poppy, Sellery, Hop-buds, Figs, Rice, Raisins, and others,


'Twould not a little surprise you, said Pantagruel, should a Man tell you,
That the Good Pope, who first ordered the keeping of Lent, perceiving that at
that time of year the Natural heat (from the Center of the Body, whither it was
retired, during the Winter's Cold) diffuses it self as the Sap does in Trees,
through the Circumference of the Members, did therefore in a manner prescribe
that sort of Diet to forward the Propagation of Mankind. What makes me think
so, is, that by the Registers of Christenings at Touars, it appears that more
Children are born in October and November, than in the other ten months of the
Year, and reckoning backwards, 'twill be easily found that they were all made,
conceived, and begotten in Lent.

I listen to you with both my Ears, quoth Friar Ihon, and that with no small
pleasure I Will assure you. But I must tell you, that the Vicar of Jambee
ascribed this copious Prolification of the Women, not to that sort of Food that
we chiefly eat in Lent, but to the little licensed stooping Mumpers, your
little booted Lent-Preachers, your little draggle-taild Father Confessors; who,
during all that time of their Reign, damn all Husbands, that run astray, three
Fathom and a half below the very lowest Pit of Hell. So the silly Cods-headed
Brothers of the Noose, dare not then stumble any more at the Truckle-bed, to
the no small discomfort of their Maids, and are even forced, poor Souls! to
take up with their own bodily Wives. Dixi, I have done,

You may descant on the Institution of Lent as much as you please, cried
Epistemon; So many Men, so many Minds: But certainly all the Physicians will be
against its being suppressed, tho I think that time is at hand, I know they will,
and have heard 'em say, Were it not for Lent, their Art would soon fall into
Contempt, and they would get nothing, for hardly any Body would be sick.

All Distempers are sowed in Lent; it is the true Seminary and native Bed of all
Diseases; nor does it only weaken and putrify Bodies, but it also makes Souls
mad and uneasy. For then the Devils do their best, and drive a subtle Trade,
and the Tribe of canting Dissemblers come out of their holes. It Is then
Term-time with your cucullated Pieces of Formality, that have one Face to God,
and another to the Devil; and a wretched clutter they make with their Sessions,
Stations, Pardons, Syntereses, Confessions, Whipping, Anathematizations, and
much Prayer, with as little Devotion. However, I Will not offer to infer from
this, that the Arimaspians are better than we are in that Point; yet I speak to
the purpose.

Well, quoth Panurge, to the Semiquaver Friar, who happened to be by, Dear
bumbasting, shaking, trilling, quavering Cod, what think thou of this
Fellow, is he a rank Heretic?

Fry. Much.


Pan. Ought he not to be sindg'd?


Fry. Well.


Pan. As soon as may be?


Fry. Right.


Pan. Should not he be scalded first?


Fry. No.


Pan. How then should he be roasted?


Fry. Quick.


Pan. Till at last he be?


Fry. Dead.


Pan. What has he made you?


Fry. Mad.


Pan. What do you take him to be?


Fry. Damned.


Pan. What place is he to go to?


Fry. Hell.


Pan. But first, how would you have 'em served here?


Fry. Burnt.


Pan. Some have been served so?


Fry. Store,

Pan. That were Heretics.


Fry. Less.


Pan. And the number of those that are t^ be warmed thus hereafter is?


Fry. Great.


Pan. How many of 'em do you intend to save?


Fry. None.


Pan. So you would have them burnt?


Fry. All.


I wonder, said Epistemon to Panurge, what pleasure you can find in talking
thus with this lowsy Tatterdemallion of a Monk; I vow, did not I know you well,
I might be ready to think you had no more wit in your head, than he has in both
his shoulders. Come, come, scatter no words, returned Panurge, every one as
they like, as the Woman said when she kissed her Cow; I wish I might carry him
to Gargantua; when I Am married he might be my Wife's Fool. And make you one,
cried Epistemon. Well said, quoth Friar Ihon, now, poor Panurge, take that
along with thee, you are even fitted; it is a plain case, thou wilt never escape
wearing the Bull's Feather; thy Wife will be as common as the highway, that is
certain.

CHAP. XXX. How we came to the Land of Satin.
HAving pleased our selves with observing that new Order of Semiquaver Friars,
we set Sail, and in three days our Skippermade the finest and most delightful
Island that ever was seen; he called it the Island of Frize; for, all the ways
were of Frize.

In that Island is the Land of Satin, so celebrated by our Court Pages. Its
Trees and Shrubs never lose their Leaves or Flowers, and are all Damask and
flowered Velvet: As for the Beasts and Birds, they are all of Tapestry-work.
There we saw many Beasts, Birds and Trees of the same Color, Bigness and Shape
of those in our Country, with this difference, however, that these did eat
nothing, and never sung, or bit like ours; and we also saw there many sorts of
Creatures which we had never seen before.

Among the rest, several Elephants in various Postures; twelve of which were
the six Males and six Females that were brought to Rome by their Governor in
the Time of Germanicus, Tiberius's Nephew; some of them were Learned Elephants,
some Musicians, others Philosophers, Dancers, and Showers of Tricks, and all
sat down at Table in good Order, silently eating and drinking like so many
Fathers in a Fratry-room.

With their Snouts or Proboscis's some two Cubits long, they draw up water for
their own drinking, and take hold of Palm Leaves, Plumbs, and all manner of
Edibles, using them offensively or defensively, as we do our Fists; with them
tossing men high into the Air in Fight, and making them burst out with laughing
when they come to the ground.

They have Joints, whatever some men, who doubtless never saw any but Painted,
may have written to the contrary. Between their Teeth they have two huge Horns;
thus Juba called 'em, and Pausanias tells us, they are no Teeth, but Horns:
However, Philostratus will have 'em to be Teeth, and not Horns. It Is all one to
me, provided you will be pleased to own them to be true Ivory. These are some
three or four Cubits long, and are fixed in the upper Jaw Bone, and consequently
not in the lowermost. If you hearken to those who will tell you the contrary,
you will find your selves damnably mistaken, for that is a Lie with a Latchet: Tho
'twere Aelia^ that Long-Bow-man that told you so, never believe him, for he
lies as fast as a Dog can trot. 'Twas in this very Island that Pliny, his
Brother tell-truth, had seen some Elephants dance on the Rope with Bells, and
whip over the Tables, Presto, be gone, while people were at Feasts, without so
much as touching the Toping Topers, or the Topers toping.

I saw a Rhinoceros there, just such a one as Harry Clerberg had formerly
showed me; methought it was not much unlike a certain Boar which I had formerly
seen at Limoges, except the sharp Horn on its Snout, that was about a Cubit
long; by the means of which that Animal dares encounter with an Elephant, that
is sometimes killed with its Point thrust into its Belly, which is its most
tender and defenseless part.

I saw there two and thirty Unicorns; they are a cursed sort of Creatures, much
resembling a fine Horse, unless it be that their Heads are like a Stags, their
Feet like an Elephants, their Tails like a wild Boar's, and out of each of
their Foreheads sprouts out a sharp black Horn, some six or seven Foot long;
commonly it dangles down like a Turkey-Cock's Comb. When an Unicorn has a mind
to fight, or put it to any other use, what does it do but make it stand, and
then it is as straight as an Arrow.

I saw one of them, which was attended with a Throng of other wild Beasts,
purify a Fountain with its Horn. With that Panurge told me, that his Prancer,
alias his Nimble-Wimble, was like the Unicorn, not altogether in length indeed,
but in Virtue and propriety: For as the Unicorn purified Pools and Fountains
from Filth and Venom, so that other Animals came and drank securely there
afterward; In the like manner, others might water their Nags, and dabble after
him without fear of Shankers, Carnosities, Gonorrhaea's, Buboes, Crinckams, and
such other Plagues caught by those who venture to quench their Amorous Thirst
in a common Puddle; for with his Nervous Horn he removed all the Infection that
might be lurking in some blind Cranny of the Mepbitic sweet-scented Hole.

Well, quoth Friar Ihon, when you are Sped, that is, when you are Married,
we'll make a Trial of this on thy Spouse, merely for Charity-sake, since you
are pleased to give us so beneficial an Instruction.

Ay, ay, returned Panurge, and then immediately I Will give you a pretty gentle
Agregative Pill of God made up of two and twenty kind Stabs with a Dagger,
after the Cesarian way. Cat 'so, cried Friar Ihon, I had rather take off a
Bumper of good cool Wine.

I saw there the golden Fleece, formerly conquered by Jason, and can assure you
on the word of an honest man, that those who have said it was not a Fleece, but
a golden Pippin, because (...) signifies both an Apple and a Sheep, were
utterly mistaken.

I saw also a Chameleon, such as Aristotle describes it, and like that which
had been formerly showed me by Charles Maris a famous Physician of the noble
City of I^ons on the Rosne; and the said Chameleon lived on air just as the
other did.

I saw three Hydra's, like those I had formerly seen. They are a kind of a
Serpent, with seven different Heads.

I saw also fourteen Phoenixes. I had read in many Authors that there was but
one in the whole World in every Century; but if I may presume to speak my mind,
I declare, that those who said this, had never seen any, unless it were in the
land of Tapestry; tho 'twere vouched by Claudian or Lactantius Firmianus.

I saw the Skin of Apuleius's golden Ass.

I saw three hundred and nine Pelicans.

Item, Six thousand and sixteen Seleucid Birds marching in Battalia, and
picking up straggling Grasshoppers in Cornfieldsd.

Item, Some Cynamologi, Argatiles, Caprimulgi, Thynnunculs, Onocrotals, or
Bitterns, with their wide Swallows, Stymphalides, Harpies, Panthers, Dorcas's
or Bucks, Cemas's, Cynocephalis's, Satyrs, Cartasons, Tarands, Uri, Monops's,
or Bonasi, Neades, Stera's, Marmosets, or Monkeys, Bugles, Musimons, Byturos's,
Ophyri, Scriech Owls, Goblins, Fairies, and Gryphins.

I saw Mid-Lent of horseback, with Mid-August and Mid-March holding its
Stirrups.

I saw some Mankind-Wolves, Centaurs, Tigers, Leopards, Hyena's, Camelopardals,
and Orix's or huge wild Goats with sharp Horns.

I saw a Remora, a little Fish called Echineis by the Greeks, and near it a
tall Ship, that did not get of head an inch, tho she was in the Offin with Top
and Top-gallants spread before the Wind; I am somewhat inclind to believe, that
'twas the very numerical Ship in which Periander the Tyrant happened to be when
it was stopped by such a little Fish in spite of Wind and Tide. 'Twas in this
Land of Satin, and in no other, that Mutianus had seen one of them.

Friar Ihon told us, that in the days of Yore, two sorts of Fishes used to
abound in our Courts of Judicature, and rotted the Bodies and tormented the
Souls of those who were at Law, whether noble or of mean Descent, high or low,
rich or poor: the first were your April Fish or Makerel, [Pimps, Panders and
Bawds] the others your beneficial Remorae's, that is, the Eternity of
Lawsuits, the needless Lets that keep 'em undecided.

I saw some Sphynges, some Raphes, some Oinces, and some Cepphi, whose
fore-feet are like Hands, and their hind-feet like Man's.

Aso some Crocuta's, and some Eales as big as Sea-horses, with Elephant's
Tails, Boar's Jaws and Tusks, and Horns as pliant as an Asse's Ears.

The Crocuta's most fleet Animals, as big as our Asses of Mirebalais, have
Necks, Tails and Breasts like a Lyon's, Legs like a Stag's, have Mouths up to
the Ears, and but two Teeth, one above, and one below; they speak with human
Voices, but when they do, they say nothing.

Some people say, that none e're saw an Airy or Nest of Sakers; If you will
believe me, I saw no less than Eleven, and I Am sure I reckoned right.

I saw some left handed Halberts, which were the first that I had ever seen.

I saw some Menticores, a most strange sort of Creatures, which have the Body
of a Lion, red Hair, a Face and Ears like a man's, three Rows of Teeth which
close together, as if you joined your hands with your fingers between each
other; they have a Sting in their Tails like a Scorpions, and a very melodious
Voice.

I saw some Catablepas's, a sort of Serpents, whose Bodies are small, but their
Heads large without any Proportion, so that they have much ado to lift them up;
and their Eyes are so infectious, that whoever sees 'em, dies upon the spot, as
if he had seen a Basilisk.

I saw some Beasts with two Backs, and those seemed to me the merriest
Creatures in the World; they were most nimble at wriggling the Buttocks, and
more diligent in Tail wagging than any Water-wagtails, perpetually jogging and
shaking their double Rumps.

I saw there some milch'd Craw-fish, Creatures that I never had heard of before
in my Life; and these moved in very good order, and 'twould have done your
heart good to have seen 'em.

CHAP. XXXI. How in the Land of Satin we saw Hearsay who kept a School of
Vouching.
WE went a little higher up into the Country of Tapistry, and saw the
Mediterranean Sea opened to the Right and left down to the very bottom, just as
the Red Sea very fairly left its bed at the Arabian Gulf, to make a Lane for
the Jews, when they left Egypt.

There I found Triton winding his silver Shell instead of a Horn, and also
Glaucus, Proteus, Nereus, and a thousand other Godlings and Sea Monsters.

I also saw an infinite number of Fish of all kinds, dancing, flying, vaulting,
fighting, eating, breathing, billing, shoving, milting, spawning, hunting,
fishing, skirmishing, lying in Ambuscado, making Truces, cheapning, bargaining,
swearing and sporting.

In a blind Corner we saw Aristotle holding a Lantern in the Posture in which
the Hermit uses to be drawn near St. Christopher, watching, prying, thinking,
and setting every thing down.

Behind him stood a Pack of other Philosophers, like so many Bums by a
Head-Bailiff; as Appian, Heliodorus, Athenaeus, Porphyrius, Pancrates,
Archadian, Numenius, Possidonius, Ovidius, Opianus, Olympius, Selenus,
Leonides, Agathocles, Theophrastus, Demostratus, Metianus, Nymphodorus, Aelian,
and five hundred other such plodding Dons, who were full of business yet had
little to do; like Chryfippus or Aristarchus of Soli, who for eight and fifty
years together did nothing in the world but examine the state and concerns of
Bees.

I spied Peter Gilles among these, with an Urinal in his hand, narrowly
watching the water of those goodly Fishes.

When we had long beheld every thing in this Land of Satin, Pantagruel said, I
have sufficiently fed my Eyes, but my Belly is empty all this while, and chimes
to let me know it is time to go to dinner; Let Us take care of the Body, left the
Soul abdicate it; and to this effect, let us taste some of these An Herb, the
touching of which is said to reconcile Lovers.
Anacampserotes that hang over our heads. Pshaw, cried one, they are mere
Trash, stark naught of my word, they are good for nothing.

I then went to pluck some Mirabolans off of a Piece of Tapistry whereon they
hanged, but the Devil a bit I could chew or swallow 'em, and had you had them
betwixt your Teeth, you would have sworn they had been thrown Silk, there was
no manner of savor in 'em.

One might be apt to think Heliogabalus had taken a Hint from thence, to feast
those whom he had caused to fast a long time, promising them a sumptuous,
plentiful and imperial Feast after it: For all the Treat used to amount to no
more than several sorts of Meat in Wax, Marble, Earthen-Ware, painted and
figured Table-Cloths.

While we were looking up and down to find some more substantial Food, we heard
a loud various noise, like that of Paper-mills; so with all speed we went to
the place whence the noise came, where we found a diminitive, monstrous,
misshapen, old Fellow, called Hearsay; his Mouth was slit up to his Ears, and
in it were seven Tongues, each of 'em cleft into seven parts. However, he
chatter'd, tattled and prated with all the seven at once, of different Matters,
and in diverse Languages.

He had as many Ears all-over his head and the rest of his body, as Argus
formerly had Eyes; and was as blind as a Beetle, and had the Palsy in his Legs.

About him stood an innumerable number of men and women, gaping, listening, and
hearing very intensely; among 'em I observed some who strutted like Crows in a
Gutter, and principally a very handsome bodied man in the Face, who held then a
Map of the World, and with little Aphorisms compendiously explained every thing
to 'em; so that those men of happy Memories grew learned in a Trice, and would
most fluently talk with you of a world of prodigious Things; the hundredth part
of which would take up a man's whole Life to be fully known.

Among the rest, they descanted with great Prolixity on the Pyramids and
Hieroglyphics of Egypt, of the Nile, of Babylon, of the Troglodytes, the
Hymantopodes or Crumpfooted Nation, the Blaemiae People that wear their Heads
in the middle of their Breasts, the Pygmies, the Cannibals, the Hyperborei and
their Mountains, the Aegypanes with their Goat's-feet, and the Devil and all of
others: Every individual word of it by Hearsay.

I am much mistaken if I did not see among them Herodotus, Pliny, Solinus,
Berofus, Philostratus, Pomponius Mela, Strabo, and God knows how many other
Antiquaries.

Then Albert the great Jacobin-Fryar, Peter Tesmoin alias Witness, Pope Pius
the Second, Volaterran, Paulius Jovus the Valiant, Jemmy Cartier, Chaton the
Armenian, Marco Paulo the Venetian, Ludovico Romano, Pedro Aliares, and forty
Cart-loads of other modern Historians, lurking behind a piece of Tapistry where
they were at it ding-dong, privately scribbling the Lord knows what, and making
rare work on it, and all by Hearsay.

Behind another piece of Tapistry on which Naboth's and Susanna's Accusers were
fairly represented, I saw close by Hearsay, good store of men of the Country
of Perch and Maine, notable Students, and young enough.

I asked what sort of study they applied themselves to? and was told, that from
their youth they learned to be Evidences, Affidavit-men and Vouchers; and were
instructed in the Art of Swearing; in which they soon became such Proficients,
that, when they left that Country, and went back into their own, they set up
for themselves, and very honestly lived by their Trade of Evidencing.
Positively giving their Testimony of all things whatsoever to those who feed
them most roundly to do a Job of Journey work for them; and all this by
Hearsay.

You may think what you will of it, but I can assure you, they gave some of us
Corners of their Cakes, and we merrily helped to empty their Hogsheads. Then in
a friendly manner they advised us to be as sparing of Truth as possibly we
could, if ever we had (...) mind to get Court-preferment.

CHAP. XXXII. How we came in sight of Lantern-Land.
HAving been but scurvily entertained in the Land of Satin, we went of board,
and having set Sail, in four days came near the Coast of Lantern-Land. We then
saw certain little hovering Fires on the Sea.

For my part I did not take them to be Lanterns, but rather thought they were
Fishes, which loll'd their flaming Tongues on the surface of the Sea, or
Lampyris's, which some call Cicindela's or Glowworms, shining there as ripe
Barley does of nights in my Country.

But the Skipper satisfied us that they were the Lanterns of the Watch, or more
properly Light-houses, set up in many places round the Precinct of the Place to
discover the Land, and for the safe Piloting in of some outlandish Lanterns,
which like good Franciscan and Jacobin Friars, were coming to make their
personal Appearance at the Provincial Chapter.

However, some of us were somewhat suspicious that these Fires were the
forerunners of some Storm; but the Skipper assured us again, they were not.

CHAP. XXXIII. How we Landed at the Port of the Lychnobii, and came to
Lantern-land.
SOon after we arrived at the Port of Lantern-land, where Pantagruel discovered
on a high Tower, the Lantern of Rochel, that stood us in good stead, for it
casted a great light. We also saw the Lantern of Pharos, that of Nauplion, and
that of Acropolis, at Athens, sacred to Pallas.

Near the Port, there is a little Hamblet inhabited by the Lychnobii, that live
by Lanterns, as the gulligutted Friars in our Country live by Nuns: They are
studious People, and as honest Men as ever shit in a Trumpet. Demosthenes had
formerly lanternis'd there.

We were conducted from that place to the Palace by three A kind of Beacons.
Obeliscolichnys, Military-Guards of the Port, with high-crown'd Hats, whom we
acquainted with the cause of our Voyage, and our Design, which was to desire
the Queen of the Country to grant us a Lantern to light and conduct us, during
our Voyage to the Oracle of the Holy Bottle.

They promised to assist us in this, and added, that we could never have come
in a better time, for then the Lanterns held their Provincial Chapter.

When we came to the Royal Palace, we had Audience of her Highness, the Queen
of Lanternland, being introduced by two Lanterns of Honor, that of
Aristophanes, and that of Cleanthes, Mistresses of the Ceremonies. Panurge in
few words acquainted her with the Causes of our Voyage, and she received us
with great Demonstrations of Friendship, desiring us to come to her at
Supper-time, that we might more easily make choice of one to be our guide,
which pleased us extremely. We did not fail to observe intensely every thing we
could see, as the Garbs, Motions, and Deportment of the Queens subjects,
principally the manner after which she was served.

The bright Queen was dressed in Virgin Crystal of Tutia, wrought Damask-wife
and beset with large Diamonds.

The Lanterns of the Royal Blood, were clad partly with Bastard-diamonds,
partly with Diaphanous Stones, the rest with Horn, Paper, and Oyl'd-cloath.

The Cresset-lights took place according to the Antiquity and Luster of their
Families.

An Earthen-dark-lantern shaped like a Pot, notwithstanding this, took place of
some of the first Quality, at which I wondered much, till I was told, it was
that of Epictetus, for which three thousand Drachmaes had been formerly refused.

Martial's A Lamp with many Wicks, or a Branched Candlestick with many Springs
coming out of it, that supply all the Branches with Oil.
Polymix Lantern made a very good Figure there: I took particular notice of its
Dress, and more yet of the Lychnosanity, formerly consecrated by Canopa the
Daughter Tisias.

I saw the Lantern Pensile formerly taken out of the Temple of Apollo Palatinus
at Thebes, by Alexander the Great.

I saw another that distinguished it self from the rest by a Bushy Tuft of
Crimsin Silk on its Head. I was told, 'twas that of Bartolus, the Lantern of
the Civilians.

Two others were very remarkable for Glister-pouches that dangled at their
waste. We were told, that one was the Greater Light, and the other the Lesser
Light of the Pothecaries.

When 'twas Supper-time, the Queen's Highness first sat down, and then the
Lady-lanterns according to their Rank and Dignity.

For the first Course, they were all served with large Christmas-Candles,
except the Queen, who was served with a hugeous thick, stiff flaming Taper, of
white Wax, somewhat red toward the Tip, and the Royal Family, as also the
Provincial Lantern of Mirebalais, who were served with Nut-lights; and the
Provincial of Lower Poitou, with an armed Candle.

After that, god-wot, what a glorious Light they gave with their wicks: I do
not say all, for you must except a parcel of Junior Lanterns, under the
Government of a high and mighty one. These did not cast a Light like the rest,
but seemed to me dimmer than any long-snuff-farthing Candle, whose Tallow has
been half melted away in a Hot-house.

After Supper we withdrew to take some Rest, and the next day the Queen made us
choose one of the most Illustrious Lanterns to guide us; after which we took our
leave.

CHAP. XXXIV. How we arrived at the Oracle of the Bottle.
OUR glorious Lantern lighting and directing us to heart's content, we at last
arrived at the desired Island, where was the Oracle of the Bottle. As soon as
Friend Panurge landed, he nimbly cut a Caper with one Leg for Joy, and cried to
Pantagruel, Now we are where we have wished our selves long ago. This is the
place we have been seeking with such Toil and Labor. He then made a Complement
to our Lantern, who desired us to be of good Cheer, and not be daunted or
dismayed whatever we might chance to see.

To come to the Temple of the Holy Bottle, we were to go through a large
Vineyard in which were all sorts of Vines, as the Falernian, Malvesian, the
Muscadine, those of Taige, Beaune, Mirevaux, Orleans, Picardent, Arbois,
Coussi, Anjou, Grave, Corsica, Vierron, Nerac, and others. This Vineyard was
formerly planted by the good Bacchus, with so great a blessing, that it yields
Leaves, Flowers, and Fruit all the Year round, like the Orange Trees at Surene.

Our magnificent Lantern ordered every one of us to eat three Grapes, to put
some Vine-leaves in his Shoes, and take a Vine-branch in his left hand.

At the end of the Close, we went under an Arch built after the manner of those
of the Ancients. The Trophies of a Toper were curiously carved on it.

First, On one side was to be seen a long Train of Flaggons, Leathern Bottles,
Flasks, Cans, Glass-bottles, Barrels, Nipperkins, Pint-pots, Quart-pots,
Pottles, Gallons, and old fashioned Semaises [swindging Wooden-pots, such as
those out of which the Germans fill their Glasses] these hanged on a shady
Arbor.

On another side was store of Garlic, Onions, Shallots, Hams, Botargos,
Caviar, Biscuits, Neat's Tongues, Old Cheese, and such like Comfets, very
artificially interwoven and packed together with Vine-stocks.

On another, were a hundred sorts of drinking Glasses, Cups, Cisterns, Ewers,
False-Cups, Tumblers, Bowls, Mazers, Mugs, Jugs, Goblets, Talboys, and such
other Bacchie Artillery.

On the Frontispiece of the Triumphal Arch, under the Zoophore, was the
following Couplet.

You, who presume to move this way,
Get a good Lantern, lest you stray.
We took special care of that, cried Pantagruel, when he had read them; for
there is not a better, or a more Divine Lantern than ours in all Lanternland.

This Arch ended at a fine large round Alley, covered over with the interlaid
Branches of Vines, loaded and adorned with Clusters of five hundred different
Colors, and of as many various Shapes, not natural but due to the skill of
Agriculture, some were Golden, others Bluish, Tawny, Azure, White, Black,
Green, Purple, streaked with many Colors, Long, Round, Triangular, Cod-like,
Hairy, Great-headed, and Grassy. That pleasant Alley ended at three old
Ivy-trees verdant, and all laden with Rings. Our enlightened Lantern directed
us to make our selves Hats with some of their Leaves, and cover our Heads
wholly with 'em, which was immediately done.

Jupiter's Priestess, said Pantagruel, in former days, would not like us have
walked under this Arbor. There was a Mystical Reason, answered our most
perspicuous Lantern, that would have hindered her. For had she gone under it,
the Wine, or the Grapes of which it is made, that is the same thing, had been
over her head, and then she would have seemed overtopt and mastered by Wine.
Which implies, that Priests, and all Persons who devote themselves to the
Contemplation of Divine Things, ought to keep their minds sedate and calm, and
avoid whatever might disturb and discompose their Tranquillity; which nothing is
more apt to do than Drunkenness.

You also, continued our Lantern, could not come into the Holy Bottle's
presence, after you have gone through this Arch, did not the noble Priestess
Bacbuc first see your Shoes full of Vine-leaves; which Action is diametrically
opposite to the other, and signifies that you despise Wine, and having mastered
it, as it were, tread it under foot.

I am no Scholar, quoth Friar Ihon, for which I Am heartily sorry; yet I find by
my Breviary, that in the Revelation, a Woman was seen with the Moon under her
Feet, which was a most wonderful sight. Now, as Bigot explained it to me, this
was to signify, That she was not of the Nature of other Women, for they have
all the Moon at their Heads, and consequently their Brains are always troubled
with a Lunacy: This makes me willing to believe what you said, dear Madam
Lantern.

CHAP. XXXV. How we went under ground to come to the Temple of the Holy-Bottle;
and how Chinon is the oldest City in the World.
WE went under ground through a plastered Vault, on which was coursely painted
a Dance of Women and Satyrs, waiting on old Silenus who was grinning of
Horseback on his Ass. This made me say to Pantagruel, that this Entry put me in
mind of the Painted Cellar, in the oldest City of the World, where such
Paintings are to be seen, and in as cool a place.

Which is the oldest City in the World, asked Pantagruel? It Is Chinon, Sir, or
Cainon in Touraine, said I. I know, returned Pantagruel, where Chinon lies, and
the Painted Cellar also, having my self drunk there many a Glass of cool Wine;
neither do I doubt but that Chinon is an Ancient Town. Witness its Blazon; I
own it is said twice or thrice, Chinon,
Petite Ville, grand Renom,
Assise sur pierre ancienne:
Au haut le bois, au pied la Vienne.
Chinon,
Little Town,
Great Renown,
On old Stone
Long has stood:
There Is the Vienne, if you look down,
If you look up, there is the Wood.
But how, continued he, can you make it out that it is the oldest Town in the
World? where did you find this written? I have found in the Sacred Writ, said
I, that Cain was the First that built a Town; we may then reasonably conjecture
that from his Name he gave it that of Cainon. Thus, after his Example, most
other Founders of Towns have given them their Names; Athena, that is Minerva in
Greek, to Athen^, Alexander to Alexandria; Constantine to Constantinople;
Pompey to Pompeiopolis in Cilicis; Adrian to Adrianople; Canaan to the
Canaanites; Saba to the Sabaeans; Assure to the Assyrians; and so Ptolemais,
Caesarea, Tiberias, and Herodium in Judea got their Names.

While we were thus talking, there came to us the great Flask whom our Lantern
called the Philosopher, her Holiness the Bottle's Governor. He was attended
with a Troop of the Temple-Guards all French Bottles in Wicker-Armour, and
seeing us with our Javelins wrapped with Ivy, with our Illustrious Lantern,
whom he knew, he desired us to come in with all manner of safety, and ordered
we should be immediately conducted to the Princess Bacbuc, the Bottle's Lady of
Honor, and Priestess of all the Mysteries; which was done.

CHAP. XXXVI. How we went down the Tetradic Steps, and of Panurge's Fear.
WE went down one Marble Step under ground where there was a resting, or (as
our Workmen call it) a landing-place; then turning to the left we went down two
other Steps, where there was another resting place; after that we came to three
other Steps turning about, and met a third; and the like at four Steps which we
met afterward. There, quoth Panurge, Is it here? how many Steps have you told,
asked our Magnificent Lantern? One, two, three, four, answered Pantagruel. How
much is that, asked she? Ten, returned he. Multiply that, said she, according
to the same Pythagorical Tetrad? That Is ten, twenty, thirty, forty, cried
Pantagruel. How much is the whole, said she? one hundred, answered Pantagruel.
Add, continued she, the first Cube, that is eight; at the end (...) that fatal
Number you will find the Temple-gate; and pray observe, this is the (...)
Psychogony of Plato, so celebrated by the Academics, yet so little understood;
^^^moiety of which consists of the unity of the two first Numbers full of two
Square and two Cubic Numbers. We then went down those Numeral Stairs all
underground, and I can assure you in the first place, that our Legs stood us in
good stead; for had (...) not been for 'em, we had rolled just like so many
Hogsheads into a Vault. Secondly, our Radiant Lantern gave us just (...) much
light as is in St. Patrick's Hole in Ireland, or Trophonius's Pit in Boeotia;
which caused Panurge to say to her, after we were got down some seventy eight
Steps;

Dear Madam, with a sorrowful a king heart, I most humbly beseech your
Lanternship to lead us back. May I be led (...) Hell if I be not half dead with
fear, my Heart's sunk down into my Hose; I am afraid I shall make buttered Eggs
in my Breeches. I freely consent never to many. You have given you self too
much trouble on my account; the Lord shall reward yo^ in his great Rewarder,
neither will I be ungrateful when I come out of this Cave o^ Troglodytes. Let Us
go back, I pray you* I Am very much afraid this is Taenarus, the Low-way to
Hell, and methinks I alread^ hear Cerberus bark. Hark! I hear the Cur, or my
Ears tingle; I have no manner of kindness for the Dog; for there never is a
greater Tooth-ake, then when Dogs bite us by the Shins: and if this be only
Trophonius's Pit, the Lemures, Hob-thrushes and Goblins will certainly swallow
us alive, just as they devoured formerly one of Demetrius's Halbardeers for
want of Bridles. Art thou here, Friar Ihon? Prithee, dear, dear Cod, stay by
me, I Am almost dead with fear; have thou got thy Bilbo? ^as poor Peelgarlick's
defenseless, I Am a naked man thou know; Let Us go back. ^oons, fear nothing,
cried Friar Ihon, I Am by thee, and have thee fast by the Collar, Eighteen
Devils shall not get thee out of my Clutches, though I were unarmed. Never did a
man yet want Weapons who had a good Arm with as stout a heart; Heaven would
sooner send down a shower of them; even as in Provence, in the Fields of la
Crau, near Mariane, there rained Stones (they are there to this day) to help
Hercules, who otherwise wanted wherewithal to fight Neptune's two Bastards. But
whither are we bound? are we a going to the little Children's Limbo? By Pluto,
they will bepawh, and conskite us all; or are we going to Hell for Orders? By
Cob's Body, I Will hamper, bethwack and belabour all the Devils, now I have some
Vine-leaves in my Shoes. Thou shall see me lay about me like mad, old Boy.
Which way? where the Devil are they? I fear nothing but their damned Horns; but
Cuckoldy Panurge's Bulls Feather will altogether secure me from 'em.

Lo! In a Prophetic Spirit I already see him, like another Actaeon, horned,
horny, hornified. Prithee, quoth Panurge, take heed thy self, dear Frater,
lest, till Monks have leave to marry, thou wedst's something thou dostn't like,
as some Cat o'nine Tails, or the Quartan Ague; if thou do, may I never come
safe and sound out of this Hypogeum, this Subterranean Cave, if I don't tup and
ram that Disease merely for the sake of making thee a cornuted, corniferous
Property, otherwise I fancy the Quartan Ague is but an indifferent Bedfellow.
I remember Gripe-men-all threatened to wed thee to some such thing, for which
thou callst him Heretic.

Here our Splendid Lantern interrupted them, letting us know this was the Place
where we were to have a taste of the Creature, and be silent; bidding us not
despair of having the Word of the Bottle before we went back, since we had
lined our Shoes with Vine leaves.

Come on, then cried Panurge, let us charge through and through all the Devils
of Hell; we can but perish, and that is soon done: However, I thought to have
reserved my Life for some mighty Battle. Move, move, move forwards. I am as
stout as Hercules, my Breeches are full of Courage; my heart trembles a little,
I own; but that is only an effect of the coldness and dampness of this Vault;
it is neither Fear nor an Ague, Come on, move on, piss, pish, push on. My name's
William Dreadnought.

CHAP. XXXVII. How the Temple Gates in a wonderful manner opened of themselves.
AFter we were got down the Steps we came to a Portal of fine Jasper of Doric
Order, on whose front we read this Sentence in the finest Gold, ENOINO AAH^EIA,
that is, In Wine Truth. The Gates were of Corinthian-like Brass, Massy, wrought
with little Vine-branches, finely inemall'd and engraven, and were equally
joined and closed together in their Mortaise without Padlock, Key-chain, or Tie
whatsoever. Where they joined, there hanged an Indian Loadstone as big as an
Egyptian Bean, set in Gold, having two Points, Hexagonal, in a right Line; and
on each side toward the Wall hanged a handful of St^rdium [Garlick Germander.]

There our Noble Lantern desired us not to take it amiss that she went no
further with us, leaving us wholly to the Conduct of the Priestess Bacbuc; for
she her self was not allowed to go in, for certain Causes rather to be
concealed than revealed to Mortals. However, she advised us to be resolute and
secure, and to trust to her for the Return. She then pulled the Loadstone that
hanged at the folding of the Gates, and throw'd it into a Silver Box fixed for
that purpose; which done, from the Threshold of each Gate she drew a Twine of
Crimsin Silk about nine Foot long, by which the Scordium hanged, and having
fastened it to two gold Buckles that hanged at the sides, she withdrew.

Immediately the Gates flew open without being touched, not with a creaking, or
loud harsh noise, like that made by heavy Brazen Gates, but with a soft
pleasing Murmur that resounded through the Arches of the Temple.

Pantagruel soon knew the cause of it, having discovered a small Cylinder or
Rowler that joined the Gates over the Threshold, and, turning like them toward
the Wall on a hard well-pollish'd Ophits Stone, with rubbing and rolling,
caused that harmonious Murmur.

I wondered how the Gates thus opened of themselves to the right and left, and
after we were all got in, I cast my Eye between the Gates and the Wall, to
endeavor to know how this happened; for one would have thought our kind
Lantern had put between the Gates the Herb Aethi^^^s, which they say opens some
things that are shut; but I perceived that the Parts of the Gates that joined
on the inside were covered with Steel; and just where the said Gates touched
when they were opened, I saw two square Indian Loadstones, of a bluish Hue,
well polished, and half a Span-broad, mortais'd in the Temple-wall. Now, by the
hidden and admirable Power of the Loadstones, the Steel Plates were put into
motion, and consequently the Gates were slowly drawn. However, not always, but
when the said Loadstone on the outside was removed, (...) which the Steel was
freed from its ^ow'r, the two Bunches of Scordium being (...) the same time put
at some distance, because it deadens the Magnes, and robs it of (...)
attractive Virtue.

On the Loadstone that was placed on the ^ight side, the following Iambic Verse
was ^^^ously engraven in Ancient Roman Cha^acters.

Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem trabunt.
Fate leads the willing, and the unwilling draws.
The following Sentence was neatly (...) in the Loadstone, that was on the left.

ALL THINGS TEND TO THEIR END. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Temple's admirable
Pavement*
WHen I had read those Inscription I admired the Beauty of the Tem^ple, and
particularly the Disposition of i^ Pavement, with which no Work that (...) now,
or has been under the Cope of He^^ven can justly be compared; not that the
Temple of Fortune at Praeneste in Sy^ Time; or the Pavement of the Gr^^^ called
Alerotum, laid by Sosistratus at P^^mus. For this here was wholly in
C^^partments of precious Stones, all in the Natural Colors: One of Red Jasper,
(...) charmingly spotted. Another of Op^ A third of Porphyry. A fourth of
Lyco^my, a Stone of four different Colo^ powdered with sparks of Gold, as (...)
as Atoms. A fifth of Agath, strea^ here and there with small Milk-colo^ Waves.
A sixth of costly Chalcedony, (...) Onyx Stone. And another of Green Jas^ with
certain red and yellowish Ve^ ^d all these were disposed in a Diagonal ^ine.

At the Portico, some small Stones were ^laid, and evenly joined on the Floor,
all (...) their ^ative Colors, to embellish the Design of the Figures, and
they were ordered in such a manner, that you would ^ave thought some
Vine-leaves and Bran^es had been carelessly strow'd on the ^vement: For in some
place they were ^ick, and thin in others: That Inlaying was very wonderful
every where; here, ^e seen, as it were in the Shade, some ^ils crawling on the
Grapes; there, lit^ Lizards running on the Branches; (...) this side, were
Grapes that seemed yet ^nish; on another, some Clusters that ^'d full ripe, so
like the true, that ^y could as easily have deceived Starlings, (...) other
Birds, as those which Zeuxis ^ew.

Nay, we our selves were deceived; for ^here the Artist seemed to have strow'd
(...) Vine-branches thickest, we could not ^ear walking with great Strides,
lest ^e should entangle our Feet, just as People ^over an unequal Stony place.

I then cast my Eyes on the Roof and ^alls of the Temple, that were all
par^tted with Porphyry and Mosaic Work; which from the left side at the coming
in, ^st admirably represented the Battle, in which the Good Bacchus overthrew
the Indians; as follows,

CHAP. XXXIX. How we saw Bacchus's Army drawn up in Battalia in Mosaic Work.
AT the beginning, diverse Towns, Hamlets, Castles, Fortresses, and Forests
were seen in Flames; and several mad and loose Women, who furiously ripped up,
and tore live Calves, Sheep, and Lambs, Limb from Limb, and devoured their
Flesh. There we learned how Bacchus, at his coming into India, destroyed all
things with Fire and Sword.

Notwithstanding this, he was so despised by the Indians, that they did not
think it worth their while to stop his Progress, having been certainly informed
by their Spies, that his Camp was destitute of Warriers, and that he had only
with hi^ a Crew of Drunken Females, a low-(...) old, effeminate, sottish
Fellow, continually raddled, and as drunk as a Wheel-barrow with a pack of
young Clownish Doddipoles, stark naked, always skipping and frisking up and
down, with Tails and Horns like those of young Kids.

For this Reason the Indians had resolved to let them go through their Country
without the least Opposition, esteeming a Victory over such Enemies more
dishonorable than glorious.

In the mean time, Bacchus marched on burning every thing; for, as you know,
Fire and Thunder are his Paternal Arms; Jupiter having saluted his Mother
Semele with his Thunder; so that his Maternal House was ruined by Fire. Bacchus
also caused a great deal of Blood to be spilt; which when he is roused and
angered, principally in War, is as natural to him, as to make some in time of
Peace.

Thus the Plains of the Island of Samos, are called Paneca, which signifies
Bloody, because Bacchus there overtook the Ama^^s, who fled from the Country of
Ephes^^, and there let 'em Blood, so that they all died of Phlebotomy. This may
give you a better insight into the meaning of an Ancient Proverb, than
Aristotle does in his Problems; viz. Why 'twas formerly said, Neither eat nor
sow any Mint in time of War. The reason is, That Blows are given then without
any distinction of Parts or Persons, and if a Man that is wounded, has that day
handled or eaten any Mint, ^is impossible, or at least very hard to stanch his
Blood.

After this, Bacchus was seen marching in Battalia, riding in a stately
Chariot, drawn by six young Leopards; he looked as young as a Child, to show
that all good Topers never grow old; he was as red as a Cherry, or a Cherub,
which you please; and had no more Hair on his Chin, than there is in the inside
of my Hand; his Forehead was graced with pointed Horns, above which, he wore a
fine Crown or Garland of Vine-leaves and Grapes, and a Mitre of Crimsin Velvet;
having also gilt Buskins on.

He had not one Man with him, that looked like a Man; his Guards, and all his
Forces consisted wholly of Bassarid^s, Evantes, Euhyades, Edonides,
Trietheride^, Ogygiae, Mimallonides, Maenades, Thyiades, and Bacchae; frantic,
raving, raging, furious, mad Women, begirt with live Snakes and Serpents,
instead of Girdles, dischevell'd, their Hair flowing about their Shoulders,
with Garlands of Vine-branches instead of Forehead-cloaths, Clad with Stags or
Goat's Skins, and armed with Torches, Javelins, Spears, and Halberts, whose
ends were like Pine-apples; besides they had certain small light Bucklers, that
gave a loud sound if you touched 'em never so little, and these served them
instead of Drums: They were just Seventy nine thousand two hundred twenty seven.

Silenus, who led the Van, was one on whom Bacchus relied very much, having
formerly had many proofs of his Valor and Conduct; he was a diminutive,
stooping, palsied, plump, gorbellied, old Fellow, with a swindging pair of
stiff-standing Lugs of his own, a sharp Roman Nose, large, rough Eyebrows,
mounted on a well-hung Ass; in his Fist he held a Staff to lean upon, and also
bravely to Fight, whenever he had occasion to alight; and he was dressed in a
Woman's yellow Gown. His Followers were all young, wild, clownish People, as
hornified as so many Kids, and as fell as so many Tigers, naked and perpetually
singing and dancing Country-dances; they were called Tityri and Satyrs; and
were in all Eighty five thousand one hundred thirty three.

Pan, who brought up the Rear, was a monstrous sort of a Thing, for his lower.
Parts were like a Goats, his Thighs hairy, and his Horns bolt upright, a
Crimsin fiery Phiz, and a Beard that was none of the shortest. He was a bold,
stout, daring, desperate Fellow, very apt to take Pepper in the Nose for yea
and nay.

In his Left hand he held a Pipe, and a crooked Stick in his Right. His Forces
consisted also wholly of Satyrs, Aegipanes, Agripanes, Sylvans, Fauns, Lemures,
Lares, Elves, and Hobgoblins, and their Number was Seventy eight thousand one
hundred and fourteen. The Signal or Word common to all the Army, was Euohe.

CHAP. XL. How the Battle, in which the Good Bacchus overthrew the Indians, was
represented in Mosaic Work.
IN the next place we saw the Representation of the Good Bacchus's Engagement
with the Indians. Silenus, who led the Van, was sweating, puffing, and blowing,
belabouring his Ass most grievously; the Ass dreadfully opened its wide Jaws,
drove away the Flies that plagued it, winc'd, flounc'd, went back, and bestir'd
it self in a most terrible manner, as if some damned Gad-bee had stung it at
the Breech.

The Satyrs Captains, Sergeants, and Corporals of Companies, sounding the
Orgies with Cornets, in a furious manner went round the Army, skipping,
capering, bounding, jerking, farting, flying out at Heels, kicking and prancing
like mad, encouraging their Companions to fight bravely; and all the delineated
Army cried out Euohe.

First the Menades charged the Indians with dreadful Shouts, and a horrid Din
of their brazen Drums and Bucklers; the Air rung again all-a-round, as the
Mosaic Work well expressed it. And 'pray, for the future don't so much admire
Apelles, Aristides the Theban, and others who drew Claps of Thunder,
Lightnings, Winds, Words and Spirits.

We then saw the Indian Army, who had at last taken the Field, to prevent the
Devastation of the rest of their Country. In the Front were the Elephants with
Castles well garrisoned on their backs. But the Army and themselves were put
into Disorder; the dreadful Cries of the Bacchae having filled them with
Consternation, and those huge Animals turned Tail, and trampled on the men of
their Party.

There you might have seen Gaffer Silenus on his Ass, putting on as hard as he
could, striking athwart and along, and laying about him lustily with his
Staff, after the old fashion of Fencing. His Ass was prancing and making after
the Elephants, gaping and martially braying, as it were to found a Charge, as
he did when formerly in the Bacchanalian Feasts. He waked the Nymph Lotis, when
Priapus full of Priapism had a mind to priapise, while the pretty Creature was
taking a Nap.

There you might have seen Pan frisk it with his goatish Shanks about the
Maenades, and with his rustic Pipe excite them to behave themselves like
Maenades.

A little further you might have blessed your Eyes with the sight of a young
Satyr who led seventeen Kings his Prisoners, and a Bacchis who, with her
Snakes, hawl'd along no less than Two and forty Captains; a little Faun, who
carried a whole dozen of Standards taken on the Enemy; and goodman Bacchus on
his Chariot, riding to and fro fearless of Danger, making much of his dear
Carcass, and cheerfully toping to all his merry Friends.

Finally, we saw the Representation of his Triumph, which was thus; First, his
Chariot was wholly lined with Ivy, gathered on the Mountain Meros; this for its
scarcity, which you know, raises the Price of every thing, and principally of
those Leaves in India. In this Alexander the Great followed his Example at his
Indian Triumph. The Chariot was draw'd by Elephants joined together, wherein he
was imitated by Pompey the Great at Rome in his African Triumph. The good
Bacchus was seen, drinking out of a mighty Urn, which Action Marius ap'd after
his Victory over the Cimbri near Aix in Provence. All his Army were crowned
with Ivy, their Javelins, Bucklers, and Drums were also wholly covered with it;
there was not so much as Silenus's Ass, but was betrapp'd with it.

The Indian Kings were fastened with Chains of Gold close by the Wheels of the
Chariot; all the Company marched in Pomp with unspeakable Joy, loaded with an
infinite number of Trophies, Pageants, and Spoils, playing and singing merry
Epiniciums, Songs of Triumph, and also rural Lays and Dithyrambs.

At the farthest end was a Prospect of the Land of Egypt; the Nile with its
Crocodiles, Marmosets, Ibides, Monkeys, Trochilos's, or Wrens, Ichneumons or
Pharo's Mice, Hippopotami or Sea-Horses, and other Creatures its Guests and
Neighbors: Bacchus was moving toward that Country under the Conduct of a
Couple of horned Beasts, on one of which was written in Gold, Apis, and Osiris
on the other; because no Ox or Cow had been seen in Egypt till Bacchus came
thither.

CHAP. XLI. How the Temple was Illuminated with a wonderful Lamp.
BEfore I proceed to the Description of the Bottle, I Will give you that of an
admirable Lamp, that dispensed so large a Light over all the Temple, that tho
it lay under ground, we could distinguish every Object as clearly as above it
at noonday.

In the middle of the Roof was fixed a Ring of massive Gold as thick as my
clench'd Fist. Three Chains somewhat less most curiouslly wrought, hanged about
two foot and a half below it, and in a Triangle supported a round plate of fine
Gold, whose Diameter or Breadth did not exceed two Cubits and half a span.
There were four holes in it, in each of which an empty Ball was fastened,
hollow within, and open of top, like a little Lamp; its Circumference about two
hands breadth, each Ball was of Precious Stone; One an Amethyst, another an
African Carbuncle, the third an Opale, and the fourth an Anthracites: They were
full of burning Water, five times distilled in a Serpentine Lymbeck, and
inconsumptible like the Oil formerly put into Pallas's Lamp at Acropolis of
Athens by Callimachus, In each of them was a flaming Wick of Asbestine Flax, as
of old in the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, such as those which Cleombrotus a most
studious Philosopher, and Pandelinus of Carpasium had, which were rather
renewed than consumed by the Fire.

About two foot and a half below that gold Plate, the three Chains were
fastened to three Handles that were fixed to a large round Lamp of most pure
Crystal, whose Diameter was a Cubit and a half, and opened about two hands
breadth of top; by which open place a Vessel of the same Crystal shaped
somewhat like the lower part of a Gourd-like Lymbeck, or an Urinal, was put at
the bottom of the great Lamp, with such a quantity of the aforementioned
burning Water, that the flame of the Asbetine Wick reached the Center of the
great Lamp. This made all its spherical body seem to burn and be in a Flame,
because the Fire was just at the Center and middle Point: so that it was not
more easy to fix the Eye on it, than on the Disque of the Sun; the matter being
wonderfully bright and shining, and the Work most transparent and dazzling, by
the Reflection of the various Colors of the precious Stones, whereof the four
small Lamps above the main Lamp were made, and their Luster was still variously
glittering all over the Temple. Then this wandering Light being darted on the
polished Marble and Agath, with which all the inside of the Temple was
pargetted, our Eyes were entertained with a sight of all the admirable Colors
which the Rainbow can boast when the Sun darts his fiery Rays on some dropping
Clouds.

The Design of the Lamp was admirable in it self; but, in my opinion, what
added much to the Beauty of the whole, was that round the body of the
Christal-Lamp; there was carved in Cataglyphick Work, a lively and pleasant
Battle of naked Boys, mounted on little Hobby-horses, with little
whirligig-Lances and Shields, that seemed made of Vine-branches with Grapes on
them; their Postures generally were very different, and their childish Strife
and Motions were so ingeniously expressed, that Art equaled Nature in every
Proportion and Action. Neither did this seem engraved, but rather hewed out and
imboss'd; in Relief; or, at least like Grotesque, which by the Artist's Skill
has the appearance of the roundness of the Object it represents; this was
partly the effect of the various and most charming Light, which flowing out of
the Lamp, filled the carved Places with its glorious Rays.

CHAP. XLII. How the Priestess Bacbuc showed us a Fantastic Fountain in the
Temple.
WHile we were admiring this incomparable Lamp, and the stupendous Structure of
the Temple, the Venerable Priestess Bacbuc, and her Attendants came to us with
jolly, smiling Looks; and seeing us duly accoutred, without the least
difficulty, took us into the middle of the Temple, where just under the
aforesaid lamp, was the fine Fantastic Fountain.

CHAP. XLIII. How the Fountain Water had the Taste of Wine, according to the
Imagination of those who drank of it.
SHE then ordered some Cups, Goblets, and Talboys of Gold, Silver, and Cristal
to be brought, and kindly invited us to drink of the Liquor that sprung there,
which we readily did; for to say the truth, this Fantastic Fountain was very
inviting, and its Materials and Workmanship more precious, rare, and admirable
than any thing Pluto ever dreamt of in Limbo.

Its Basis or Groundwork was of most pure and limpid Aleblaster, and its
height somewhat more than three Spans; being a regular Heptagone on the
outside, with its Stylobates or Footsteps, Arulets, Simasults or Blunt Tops,
and Doric Vndulations about it. It was exactly round within. On the middle
Point of each Angle and Brink stood a Pillar orbiculated, in form of Ivory or
Alabaster Solid Rings.

Each Pillar's length from the Basis to the Architraves, was near seven Hands,
taking an exact Demension of its Diameter through the Center of its
Circumference and inward Roundness; and it was so disposed, that casting our
Eyes behind one of them, whatever its Cube might be, to view its Opposite, we
found that the Pyramidal Cone of our Visual Line ended at the said Center, and
there, by the two Opposites, formed an Equilaterial Triangle, whose two Lines
divided the Pillar into two equal Parts.

That which we had a mind to measure going from one side to another, two
Pillars over, at the first third part of the distance between them, was met by
their lowermost and fundamental Line, which in a Consult Line drawn as far as
the Universal Center, equally divided, gave in a just Partition the distance of
the Seven opposite Pillars in a right Line; beginning at the Obtuse Angle on
the Brink; as you know that an Angle is always found placed between two others
in all Angular Figures odd in number.

This tacitly gave us to understand that seven Semi-diamiaters are in
Geometrical Proportion, Compass and Distance, somewhat less than the
Circumference of a Circle, from the Figure of which they are extracted, that is
to say, three whole Parts with an eighth and a half, a little more; or a
seventh and a half, a little less, according to the Instructions given us of
old by Euclid, Aristotle, Archimedes, and others.

The first Pillar, I mean that which faced the Temple-gate, was of Azure,
Sky-colour'd Saphir.

The second of Hyacinth, a precious Stone, exactly of the Color of the Flower,
into which Ajax's Choleric Blood was transformed; the Greek Letters, A I,
being seen on it in many places.

The third an Anachite Diamond, as bright and glittering as Lightning.

The fourth a Masculin Ruby Ballais [Peach colour'd] amatistising, its Flame
and Luster ending in Violet or Purple, like an Amatist.

The fifth an Emerald, above five hundred and fifty times more precious than
that of Serapis in the Labyrinth of the Egyptians, and more verdant and shining
than those that were fixed instead of Eyes in the Marble Lyon's Head, near King
Hermias's Tomb.

The sixth of Agath, more admirable and various in the Distinctions of its
Veins, Clouds, and Colors, than that which Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, so
mightily esteemed.

The seventh of Sienites, transparent, of the Color of a Beri^, and the clear
Hue of Hymetian Honey, and within it the Moon was seen, such as we see it in
the Sky, Silent, Full, New, and in the Wain.

These Stones were assigned to the Seven heavenly Planets by the Ancient
Chaldeans; and that the meanest Capacities might be informed of this, just at
the Central Perpendicular Line, on the Chapter of the first Pillar, which was
of Saphir, stood the Image of Saturn in Eliacim Lead, with his Scythe in his
Hand, and at his Feet, a Crane of Gold, very artfully enemall'd according to
the Native Hue of the Saturnine Bird.

On the second, which was of Hyacinth, toward the lest, Jupiter was seen in
Jovetian Brass, and on his Breast an Eagle of Gold enemall'd to the Life.

On the third was Phoebus of the purest Gold, and a white Cock in his right
hand.

On the fourth was Mars in Corinthian-Brass, and a Lion at his Feet.

On the Fifth was Venus in Copper, the Metal of which Aristomides made
Athamas's Statue that expressed in a blushing whiteness his Confusion at the
sight of his Son Learchus, who died at his Feet of a Fall.

On the Sixth was Mercury in Hydrargyre, I would have said Quicksilver, had it
not been fixed, malleable, and unmovable: That nimble Deity had a Stork at his
Feet.

On the Seventh was the Moon in Silver with a Grayhound at her Feet.

The size of these Statues was somewhat more than a third part of the Pillars
on which they stood, and they were so admirably wrought according to
Mathematical proportion, that Polycletus's Cannon could hardly have stood in
competition with them.

The Bases of the Pillars, the Chapters, the Architraves, Zoophores and
Cornishes, were Phrygian Work of Massive Gold, purer and finer than any that is
found in the Rivers Leede near Montpellier, Ganges in India, Po in Italy,
Hebrus in Thrace, Tagus in Spain, and Pactolus in Lydia.

The small Arches between the Pillars were of the same precious Stone of which
the Pillars next to them were. Thus that Arch was of Saphir which ended at the
Hiacynth Pillar; and that was of Hiacynth which went toward the Diamond, and
so on.

Above the Arches and Chapters of the Pillars on the inward Front a Cupola was
raised to cover the Fountain; it was surrounded by the Planetary Statues,
Heptagonal at the bottom, and Spherical of top; and of Crystal so pure,
transparent, well polished, whole, and uniform in all its parts, without Veins,
Clouds, Flaws or Streaks, that Xenocrates never saw such a one in his life.

Within it were seen the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, the Twelve Months of the
Year, with their Proprieties, the Two Equinoxes, the Ecliptic Line, with some
of the most Remarkable fixed Stars about the Antartic Pole and elsewhere, so
curiously engraven, that I fancied them to be the Workmanship of King Necepsus
or Petosiris the Ancient Mathematician.

On the top of the Cupola, just over the Center of the Fountain, were three
noble long Pearls all of one size, Pear-fashion, perfectly imitating a Tear,
and so joined together as to represent a Flower-de-luce or Lilly, each of the
Flowers seeming above a Hand's-breath. A Carbuncle jetted out of its Calix or
Cup, as big as an Ostridge's Egg, cut seven square (that Number so beloved of
Nature) and so prodigiously glorious, that the sight of it had like to have
made us blind; for the fiery Sun, or the pointed Lightning are not more dazzling
and unsufferably bright.

Now were some Judicious Appraisers to judge of the Value of this incomparable
Fountain, and the Lamp of which we spoke, they would undoubtedly affirm, it
exceeds that of all the Treasures and Curiosities in Europe, Asia and Africa
put together. For that Carbuncle alone would have darkened the Pantharb of
Joachas the Indian Magician, with as much ease as the Sun outshines and dims
the Stars with his Meridian Rays.

Now let Cleopatra that Egyptian Queen boast of her Pair of Pendants, those two
Pearls, one of which she caused to be dissolved in Vinegar in the presence of
Anthony the Triumvir, her Gallant.

Or let Pompeia Plautina be proud of her Dress covered all over with Emeralds
and Pearls curiously intermixed, that attracted the Eyes of all Rome, and was
said to be the Pit and Magazine of the Conquering Robbers of the Universe.

The Fountain had three Tubes or Channels of right Pearl, seated in three
Equilateral Angles already mentioned, extended on the Margent; and those
Channels proceeded in a Snail-like Line winding equally on both sides.

We looked on them a while, and had cast our Eyes on another side, when Bacbuc
directed us to watch the Water: We then heard a most harmonious sound, yet
somewhat stopped by starts, far distant, and Subterranean, by which means it
was still more pleasing than if it had been free, uninterrupted, and near us;
so that our Minds were as agreeably entertained through our Ears with that
charming melody, as they were through the Windows of our Eyes, with those
Delightful Objects.

Bacbuc then said, Your Philosophers will not allow, that Motion is begot by
the power of Figures; Look here, and see the contrary. By that single
Snail-like motion, equally divided as you see, and a five-fold insoliature,
moveable at every inward meeting, such as is the Vena cava where it enters into
the right Ventricle of the Heart; just so is the Flowing of this Fountain, and
by it an harmony ascends as high as your World's Ocean.

She then ordered her Attendants to make us drink; And to tell you the truth of
the matter as near as possible, we are not, Heaven be praised! of the nature of
a Drove of Calf-lollies, who (as your Sparrows cannot feed unless you bob them
on the Tail) must be Ribroasted with tough Crabtree, and firk'd into a stomach,
or at least into an humor to eat or drink; No, we know better things, and
scorn to scorn any man's Civility who civilly invites us to a Drinking Bout.
Bacbuc asked us then, how we liked our Tiff; We answered, that it seemed to us
good harmless sober Adam's Liquor, fit to keep a man in the right way, and in a
word, mere Element; more cool and clear than Argyrontes in Aetolia, Peneus in
Thessaly, Axius in Migdonia, or Cydnus in Cilicia, a tempting sight of whose
cool silver Stream caused Alexander to prefer the short-lived Pleasure of
bathing himself in it, to the Inconveniences which he could not but foresee
would attend so ill-timed an Action.

This, said Bacbuc, comes of not considering with our selves, or understanding
the motions of the Musculous Tongue, when the Drink glides on it in its way to
the Stomach! Tell me, Noble Strangers, Are your Throats lined, paved, or
enameled, as formerly was that of Pythilus, nicknam'd Theuthes, that you can
have missed the Taste, Relish and Flavor of this Divine Liquor? Here, said
she, turning toward her Gentlewomen, Bring my scrubbing Brushes, you know
which, to scrape, rake, cleanse and clear their Palates.

They brought immediately some stately, swindging jolly Hams; fine, substantial
Neat stongues, good Hung-beef, pure and delicate, Botargos, Venison, Sawcidges,
and such other Gullet-sweepers. And to comply with her Invitation, we crammed
and twisted till we owned our selves thoroughly cured of Thirst, which before
did damnably plague us.

We are told, continued she, that formerly a Learned and Valiant Hebrew Chief
leading his People through Deserts, where they were in hopes of being famished,
obtained of God some Manna, whose taste was to them by imagination such as that
of Meat was to them before in reality: Thus, drinking of this miraculous Liquor
you will find it taste like any Wine that you shall fancy you drink. Come then,
fancy, and drink. We did so, and Panurge had no sooner whipped off his Brimmer,
but he cried, By Noah's Openshop, it is Vin de Beaulne, better then ever was yet
tipp'd over Tongue, or may Ninety six Devils swallow me. Oh that to keep its
taste the longer, we Gentlemen Topers had but Necks some three Cubits long, or
so, as Philoxenus desired to have, or at least like a Crane's, as Melanthius
wished his.

On the Faith of true Lanterners, quoth Friar Ihon, it is gallant sparkling
Greek Wine; Now, for God's sake, Sweetheart, do but teach me how the devil you
make it. It seems to me Mirevaux Wine, said Pantagruel, for before I drank, I
supposed it to be such. Nothing can be mislik'd in it, but that it is cold,
colder, I say, than the very Ice, colder than the Nonacrian and ^eraean Water,
or the Conthopian Spring at Corinth, that froze up the Stomach and Nutritive
Parts of those that drank of it.

Drink once, twice or thrice more, said Bacbuc, still changing your
Imagination, and you shall find its taste and flavor to be exactly that on
which you shall have pitched. Then never presume to say that any thing is
impossible to God. We never offered to say such a thing, said I; far from it,
we maintain he is Omnipotent.

CHAP. XLIV. How the Pristess Bacbuc equipt Panurge in order to have the Word
of the Bottle.
WHEN we had thus chatted and tippled, Bacbuc asked, Who of you ^ere would have
the Word of the Bottle? (...) your most humble little Funnel, an't ^lease you,
quoth Panurge. Friend, says (...), I have but one thing to tell you, which
(...), that when you come to the Oracle, (...) take care to hearken and hear
the Word only with one Ear. This, cried ^riar Ihon, is Wine of one Ear, as
Frenchmen all it.

She then wrapped him up in a Gaberdine, bound his Noddle with a goodly clean
Biggin, clapped over it a Felt, such as those through which Hypocras is
distilled, at the bottom of which, instead of a Cowle, she put three Obelisks,
made him draw on a pair of old fashioned Cod pieces instead of Mittins, girded
him about with three Bagpipes bound together, bathed his Jobbernol thrice in
the Fountain; then threw a handful of Meal on his Phyz, fixed three Cock's
Feathers on the right side of the Hypocratical Felt, made him take a jant nine
times round the Fountain, caused him to take three little leaps, and to bump
his A -- seven times against the ground, repeating I don't know what kind of
Conjurations all the while in the Toscan Tongue, and ever and anon reading in a
Ritual, or Book of Ceremonies, carried after her by one of her Mystagogues.

For my part, may I never stir, if I don't really believe, that neither Numa
Pompilius the Second King of the Romans, nor the Cerites of Tuscia, and the Old
Hebrew Captain, ever instituted so many Ceremonies as I then saw performed; nor
were ever half so many Religious Forms used by the Southsayers of Memphis in
Egypt to Apis, or by the Embrians, or at Rhamnus to Rhamnusia, or to Jupiter
Ammon, or to Feronia.

When she had thus accoutred my Gentleman, she took him out of our Company and
led him out of the Temple through a golden Gate on the Right, into a round
Chapel made of transparent speculary Stones, by whose solid Clearness the
Sun's Light shined there through the precipice of the Rock without any Windows
or other Entrance, and so easily and fully dispersed it self through the
greater Temple, that the Light seemed rather to spring out of it, than to flow
into it.

The Workmanship was not less rare than that of the Sacred Temple at Ravenna,
or that in the Island of Chemnis in Egypt. Nor must I forget to tell you, that
the Work of that round Chapel was contrived with such a Symmetry, that its
Diameter was just the height of the Vault.

In the middle of it was an Heptagonal Fountain of fine Alablaster most
artfully wrought, full of Water, which was so clear, that it might have passed
for Element in its purity and singleness. The Sacred Bottle was in it to the
middle, clad in pure fine Crystal, of an oval shape, except its Muzzle, which
was somewhat wider than is consistent with that Figure.

CHAP. XLV. How Bacbuc, the High-Priestess brought Panurge before the Holy
Bottle.
THERE the Noble Priestess Bacbuc made Panurge stoop and kiss the brink of the
Fountain; then bad him rise and dance three Dances in the honor of Bacchus.
Ithymbi. Which done, she ordered him to set down, between two Stools placed
there for that purpose, his Arse upon the ground. Then she opened her
Ceremonial Book, and whispering in his left Ear made him sing an Epileny,
inserted here in the Figure of the Bottle.

Bottle, whose Mysterious Deep
Does ten thousand Secrets keep,
With attentive Ear I wait;
Ease my Mind, and speak my Fate.
Soul of Joy! Like Bacchus, we
More than India* gain by thee.
Truths unborn thy Juice reveals,
Which Futu^ity conceals.
Antidote to Frauds and Lies,
Wine, that mounts us to the Skies,
May thy Father Noah's Brood
Like him drown, but in thy Flood.
Speak, so may the Liquid Mine
Of Rubies, or of Diamonds shine.
Bottle, whose Mysterious Deep
Does ten thousand Secrets keep,
With attentive Ear I wait;
Ease my Mind, and speak my Fate.
depiction of bottle

When Panurge had sung, Bacbuc throw'd I don't know what into the Fountain, and
strait its Water began to boil in good earnest, just for the world as does the
great Monastical Pot at Bourgueil when it is high Holiday there. Friend Panurge
was listening with one Ear, and Bacbuc kneeled by him, when such a kind of a
humming was heard out of the Bottle as is made by a Swarm of Bees bred in the
Flesh of a young Bull killed and dressed according to Aristaeus's Art, or such as
is made when a Bolt flies out of a Cross-bow, or when a shower falls on a
sudden in Summer. Immediately after this was heard the Word TRINC. By Cob's
Body, cried Panurge, it is broken, or cracked at least, not to tell a Lie for
the matter; for, even so do Crystal Bottles speak in our Country when they
burst near the Fire.

Bacbuc arose, and gently taking Panurge under the Arms, said, Friend, offer
your Thanks to Indulgent Heaven, as Reason requires, you have soon had the Word
of the Goddess Bottle; and the kindest, most favorable and certain Word of an
Answer that I ever yet heard her give since I officiate here at her most Sacred
Oracle: Rise, Let us go to the Chapter, in whose gloss that fine Word is
explained. With all my heart, quoth Panurge; by Jingo, I am just as wise as I
was last year: Light, where is the Book. Turn it over, where is that Chapter?
Let Us see this merry Gloss.

CHAP. XLVI. How Bacbuc explained the Word of the Goddess Bottle.
BAcbuc having thrown I don't know what into the Fountain, strait the Water
ceased to boil, and then she took Panurge into the greater Temple, where was
the enlivening Fountain.

There she took out a hugeous Silver Book in the shape of a Hast-tierce, or
Hog's-head of Sentences; and having filled it at the Fountain, said to him; The
Philosophers, Preachers and Doctors of your World feed you up with fine Words
and Cant at the Ears; now, here we really incorporate our Precepts at the
Mouth. Therefore I Will not say to you, read this Chapter, see this Gloss; No, I
say to you, Taste me this fine Chapter, swallow me this rare Gloss. Formerly an
Ancient Prophet of the Jewish Nation eat a Book, and became a Clerk even to the
very Teeth; now will I have you to drink one, that you may be a Clerk to your
very Liver. Here open your Mandibules.

Panurge gaping as wide as his Jaws would stretch, Bacbuc took the Silver Book,
at least we took it for a real Book, for it looked just for the world like a
Breviary; but, in truth, it was a Breviary or Flask of Right Phalernian Wine as
it came from the Grape, which she made him swallow every drop.

By Bacchus, quoth Panurge, this was a Notable Chapter, a most Authentic Gloss
of my word! Is this all that the Trismegistian Bottle's Word means? in troth I
like it extremely, it went down like Mother's Milk. Nothing more, returned
Bacbuc, for Trinc is a Panomphean Word, that is, a Word understood, used and
celebrated by all Nations, and signifies Drink.

Some say in your World that Sack is a Word used in all Tongues, and justly
admitted in the same sense among all Nations; for, as Esop's Fable has it, all
men are born with a Sack at the Neck, naturally needy, and begging of each
other; neither can the most powerful King be without the help of other men, or
can any one that is poor subsist without the rich, though he be never so proud
and insolent; as for example, Hippias the Philosopher, who boasted he could do
every thing. Much less can any one make shift without Drink than without a
Sack. Therefore here we hold not that Laughing, but that Drinking is the
distinguishing Character of man. I don't say Drinking, taking that word singly
and absolutely in the strictest sense; No, Beasts then might put in for a
share; I mean drinking cool delicious Wine. For you must know, my Beloved, that
by Wine we become Divine; neither can there be a surer Argument, or a less
deceitful Divination. Your Varro.
Academics assert the same when they make the Etimology of Wine, which the
Greeks call OINOS, to be from Vis, Strength, Virtue and Power; for it is in its
power to fill the Soul with all Truth, Learning and Philosophy.

If you observe what is written in Ionian Letters on the Temple-gate, you may
have understood that Truth is in Wine. The Goddess Bottle therefore directs you
to that divine Liquor, be your self the Expounder of your Undertaking.

It Is impossible, said Pantagruel to Panurge, to speak more to the purpose than
does this true Priest; you may remember I told you as much when you first
spoke* to me about it.

Trinc then: What says your heart elevated by Bacchic Enthusiasm?

With this, quoth Panurge, Trinc, Trinc, by Bacchus, let us tope,
And tope again; for, now I hope
To see some brawny juicy Rump,
And tickle't with my Carnal Stump.
Ever long, my Friends, I shall be wedded,
Sure as my Trap-stick has a red head;
And my sweet Wife shall hold the Combat,
Long as my Baws can on her Bum beat.
O what a Battle of A -- fighting
Will there be! which I much delight in.
What pleasant Pains then shall I take
To keep my self and Spouse awake!
All heart and Juice, I Will up and ride,
And make a Duchess of my Bride.
Sing Io Paean! lowdly sing
To Hymen who all joys will bring.
Well, Friar Ihon, I Will take my Oath,
This Oracle is full of Troth;
Intelligible Truths it bears,
More certain than the Sieve and Shears.


CHAP. XLVII. How Panurge and the rest rim'd with Poetic Fury.
WHat a Pox ails the Fellow, quoth Friar Ihon? stark staring mad, or be
witch'd, of my word! Do but hear the chiming Dotterel gabble in Rhyme. What of
Devil has he swallowed? His Eyes roll in his Logger-head, just for the world
like a dying Goat's. Will the addle-pated Wight have the grace to sheer off?
Will he rid us of his damned Company, to go shite out his nasty riming
Balderdash in some Bog-house? will no body be so kind as to cram some Dog's-bur
down the poor Cur's Gullet, or will he Monk-like run his Fist up to the Elbow
into his Throat to his very Maw to scour and clear his Flanks? Will he take a
hair of the same Dog?

Pantagruel chid Friar Ihon, and said, Bold Monk, forbear, this, I Will assure ye,
Proceeds all from Poetic Fury;
Warmed by the God, inspired with Wine,
His Human Soul is made Divine.
For without Jest,
His hallowed Breast,
With Wine possessed,
Could have no rest,
Till he had expressed
Some Thoughts at least
Of his great Guest.
Then strait he flies
Above the Skies,
And mortifies,
With Prophesies,
Our Miseries.
And since divinely he is inspired,
Adore the Soul by Wine acquired,
And let the Toss-pot be admired.


How! quoth the Friar, the fit Rhiming is upon you too! Is It come to that? Then
we are all peppered, or the Devil pepper me. What would not I give to have
Gargantua see us while we are in this Maggotty Crambo-vein! Now, may I be cursed
with living on that damned empty Food, if I can tell, whether I shall escape the
catching Distemper. The Devil a bit do I understand which way to go about it;
however, the Spirit of Fustian possesses us all, I find. Well, by St. John,
I Will Poetise since every Body does; I find it coming. Stay, and pray pardon me,
if I don't Rhyme in Crimsin; it is my first Essay.

Thou, who can Water turn to Wine,
Transform my Bum by Power Divine
Into a Lantern, that may Light
My Neighbor in the darkest Night.
Panurge then proceeds in his Rapture, and says, From Pythian Tripos never were
heard
More Truths, nor more to be revered.
I think from Delphos to this Spring,
Some Wizard brought that conj'ring thing:
Had honest Plutarch here been toping,
He then so long had never been groping
To find, according to his Wishes,
Why Oracles are mute as Fishes
At Delphos: Now the Reason's clear,
No more at Delphos they are, but here.
Here is the Tripos, out of which
Is spoke the Doom of Poor and Rich.
For Athaeneus does relate
This Bottle is the Womb of Fate.
Prolific of mysterious Wine,
And big with Prescience Divine:
It brings the Truth with pleasure forth,
Besides you have it a pennyworth.
So, Friar Ihon, I must exhort you
To wait a word that may import you,
And to inquire, while here we tarry,
If it shall be your luck to Marry.


Friar Ihon answers him in a Rage, and says, How Marry! by St. Bennet's Boot.
And his Gambadoes, I Will never do it.
No Man that knows me ever shall judge
I mean to make my self a Drudge,
Or that Peelgarlick ever will dote
Upon a paultry Petticoat.
I Will never my Liberty betray
All for a little Leap-frog play,
And ever after wear a Clog
Like Monkey, or like Mastiff-dog*
No, I Would not have upon my Life,
Great Alexander for my Wife,
Nor Pompey, nor his Dad in Law,
Who did each other clapper claw.
Not the best he that wears a head,
Shall win me to his Truckle-bed.


Panurge pulling off his Gaberdine and Mystical Acoutrements, replied,
Wherefore thou shall, thou filthy Beast,
Be damned twelve Fathoms deep at least;
While I shall reign in Paradise,
Whence on thy Loggerhead I Will piss.
Now when that dreadful hour is come,
That thou in Hell receiv'st thy Doom,
Even there, I know, thou wilt play some trick,
And Proserpine shall not escape a prick
Of the long Pin within thy Breeches.
But when you are using these Capriches,
And catterwawling in her Cavern,
Send Pluto to the farthest Tavern,
For the best Wine that is to be had,
Lest he should see, and run horn-mad:
She Is kind, and ever did admire
A well-fed Monk, or well-hung Friar.


Go to, quoth Friar Ihon, thou old Noddy, thou doddipold Ninny, go to the Devil
you are prating of; I Have done with Rhiming, the Rhume gripes me at the Gullet.
Let Us talk of paying and going; come.

CHAP. XLVIII. How we took our leave of Bacbuc, and left the Oracle of the Holy
Bottle.
DO not trouble your self about any thing here, said the Priestess to the
Friar; if you be but satisfied, we are. Here below in these Circumcentral
Regions, we place the Sovereign Good not in taking and receiving, but in
bestowing and giving; so that we esteem our selves happy, not if we take and
receive much of others, as perhaps the Sects of Teachers do in your World, but
rather if we impart and give much. All I have to beg of you, is that you leave
us here your Names in Writing in this Ritual. She then opened a fine large
Book, and as we gave our Names, one of her Mystagogues, with a Gold Pin, drew
some Lines on it, as if she had been Writing; but we could not see any
Characters.

This done, she filled three Glasses with fantastic Water, and giving them
into our Hands, said, Now, my Friends, you may depart, and may that
Intellectual Sphere, whose Center is every where, and Circumference no where,
whom we call GOD, keep you in his Almighty Protection. When you come into your
World, do not fail to affirm and witness, that the greatest Treasures, and most
admirable Things are hidden under Ground, and not without reason.

Ceres was worshipped, because she taught Mankind the Art of Husbandry, and by
the use of Corn, which she invented, abolished that beastly way of feeding on
Acorns, and she grievously lamented her Daughter's Banishment into our
Subterranean Regions, certainly foreseeing that Proserpine would meet with more
excellent Things, more desirable Enjoyments below, than she her Mother could
be blessed with above.

What do you think is become of the Art of forcing the Thunder, and Celestial
Fire down, which the wise Prometheus had formerly invented? It Is most certain
you have lost it; it is no more on your Hemisphere; but here below we have it.
And, without a Cause, you sometimes wonder to see whole Towns burned and
destroyed by Lightning, and Ethereal Fire, and are at a loss about knowing from
whom, by whom, and to what end those dreadful Mischiefs were sent. Now, they
are familiar and useful to us; and your Philosophers who complain that the
Ancients have left them nothing to write of, or to invent, are very much
mistaken. Those Phenomenon which you see in the Sky, whatever the surface of
the Earth affords you, and the Sea, and every River contain, is not to be
compared with what is hid within the Bowels of the Earth.

For this reason, the Subterranean Ruler has justly gained, in almost every
Language, the Epithete of Rich. Now, when your Sages shall wholly apply their
Minds to a diligent and studious Search after Truth, humbly begging the
Assistance of the Sovereign God, whom formerly the Egyptians in their Language,
called, The Hidden and the Concealed, and invoking him by that Name, beseech
him to reveal, and make himself known to them, that Almighty Being will out of
his infinite Goodness, not only make his Creatures, but even himself known to
them.

Thus will they be guided by good Lanterns. For all the Ancient Philosophers
and Sages have held two things necessary, safely and pleasantly to arrive at
the Knowledge of God and true Wisdom; first, God's gracious Guidance, then Man's
Assistance.

So among the Philosophers, Zoroaster took Ariamspes for the Companion of his
Travels; Esculapius, Mercury; Orpheus, Musaeus; Pythagoras, Aclophemus; and
among Princes and Warriors, Hercules in his most difficult Achievements, had
his singular Friend Theseus; Ulysses, Diomedes; Aeneas, Achates; you followed
their Examples, and came under the Conduct of an Illustrious Lantern: Now, in
God's Name depart, and may he go along with you.

The End of the Fifth Book of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the Noble
Pantagruel.
THE Most Certain, True and Infallible Pantagruelian Prognostication.

For the Year that is to come, and ever and aye.

Calculated for the Benefit and Noddification of the Giddy-brain'd and
Weather-wise Would-be's.

By Master Alcofribas Nasier, Architriclin to the aforementioned Pantagruel.

TO THE Courteous READER, GREETING.
HAving considered the infinite Abuses arising from whole Cart-loads of Lovain
Prognostications made in the Shadow of a Pot of Drink, ^ so, I have here
calculated one the most sure ad unerring that ever was seen in Black and White,
as hereafter you will find. For, doubtless, considering what the Royal Prophet
says to God in the 5th Psalm, Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing, it is
a heinous, foul, and crying Sin to tell a damned wilful Lie, thereby to deceive
the poor gaping World, greedy of Novelties; such as the French, above all
others, have been time out of mind, as Caesar in his Commentaries, and John de
Gravot in his Gallick Mythologies have set down. Which is daily observable
throughout all France, where the first questions, which you shall put to People
newly arrived, are, what News? Is there no News stirring? What do they say?
What Is the Discourse abroad? And so inquisitive they are, that they will be stark
staring mad at those who come out of strange Countries, unless they bring a
whole budgetful of strange Stories, calling them Dolts, Blockheads,
Ninnyhammers, and silly Oufs.

Since then, they are so ready to ask after News, and consequently the more
glibly swallow down every flim flam Story that is told them, Were it not
expedient that some People, on whose Faith we might depend, should hold Offices
of Intelligence on the Frontiers of the Kingdom, and have a competent Salary
allowed them for nothing else but to examine the News that is brought, whether
it true or no? Yea, verily Friends. Even so did my good Master Pantagruel
through all the Countries of Utopia and Dipsody; whence it comes, that his
Territories are so prosperous, that at present they cannot tell how to make away
with their Wine fast enough, but are feigned to let it run about in waste, if
plenty of good Fellows from other Parts do not come to help them off with it.

Being therefore desirous to satisfy the curiosity of every good Companion, I
have tumbled over and over all the Pantarchs of the Heavens, calculated the
Quadrates of the Moon, hooked out whatever all the Astrophiles Hypernephelists,
Anemophylaxes, Uranopetes, Ombrophores, and the Devil and all of them, have
thought; and then having conferred with Empedocles upon the whole, who, by the
way, desires to be kindly remembered to you, I have (...) here crammed the Pith,
Marrow and Matter of the Substance of it into a few Chapters. Assuring you that
I say nothing of it, but what I think; and that I think nothing of it, but what
it is; and there is no more to be known in those Matters, than what you are
going to read. As for any thing that may hereafter be said over and above, it
will come to pass, per 'anture ay, per 'anture no.

Take notice by the by, That if you don't believe every Syllable, Jota, and
Tittle of it, you do me a great deal of wrong, for which either here or
elsewhere you may chance to be clawed off with a vengeance; and a good
Salt-eal, Crab-tree, or Bull's pizzle may be plentifully bestowed on your
outward Man. You may take Pepper in the Nose, and snuff and suck up the Air as
you would Oysters, as much as you please; it is all one for that.

Well, however, come, snite your Noses my little Children; and you old doting
Father-Grey-Beards pull out your best Eyes, d'on your Bar^icles, and in the
Scale of the Sanctuary, weigh me every tittle of what I Am going to tell you.

Of the Golden Number.
THE Golden Number non est inventus: I cannot find it this Year by any
Calculation that I have made. Let Us go on, Verte folium; turn over leaf.

CHAP. I. Of the Governor and Lords Ascendant this Year.
WHatsoever these Blindfolded, Block-headly Fools, the Astrologers, of Lovain,
Norimberg, Tubinge, and Lions, may tell ye, don't you feed your selves up with
Whims and Fancies, nor believe there is any Governor of the whole Universe this
Year, but God the Creator, who by his Divine Word rules and governs all; by
whom all things are in their Nature, Propriety, and Conditions, and without
whose Preservation and Governance all things in a moment would be reduced to
nothing, as out of nothing they were by him created. For of Him comes, in Him
is, and by Him is made perfect every Being, and all Life and Motion, as says
the Evangelical Trumpet, my Lord St. Paul, Romans the 11th.

Therefore the Ruler of this Year, and of all others, according to our
Authentic Solution, will be God Almighty. And neither Saturn, nor Mars, nor
Jupiter, nor any other Planet, nor the very Angels, nor Saints, nor Men, nor
Devils, shall have any Virtue, Efficacy, or Influence whatsoever, unless God of
his good Pleasure gives it them. As Avicen says, Second Causes have not any
Influence or Action whatsoever, if the first Cause did not Influence them. --
Does not the good little Mannikin speak truth, think ye?

CHAP. II. Of the Eclipses this Year.
THis Year there will be so many Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, that I fear (not
unjustly) our Pockets will suffer Inanition, be full empty, and our feeling at
a loss. Saturn will be retrograde, Venus right, Mercury as unfixt as
Quicksilver. And a pack of Planets w'on't go as you would have them.

For this reason the Crabs will go sidelong, and the Rope-makers backward; the
little Stools will get up on the Benches, and the Spits on the Racks, and the
Bands on the Hats; and many a ones Yard will hang down and dangle, for want of
Leathern Pouches; Fleas will be generally black; Bacon will run away from Pease
in Lent; the Belly will waddle before; the A -- will sit down first; there
will not be a Bean left in a Twelf-cake, nor an Ace in a Flush; the Dice will not run
to your wish tho you cog them, and the chance that you desire will seldom come;
Brutes shall speak in several places, Shrovetide will have its day, one part of
the World shall disguise it self to gull and chouse the other, and run about
the Streets like a parcel of addle-pated Animals and mad Devils; such a
hurly-burly was never seen since the Devil was a little Boy; and there will be
above Seven and Twenty irregular Verbs made this Year, if Priscian don't hold
them in. If God don't help us, we shall have our hands and hearts full. But on
the other side, if he be with us, nothing can hurt us, as says the Celestial
Stargazer, who was rapt into the Third Heaven, Romans the 7th. Si Deus pro
nobis, quis contra nos? If God be with us, who will be against us? In good
Faith, Nemo domine, No body, an't like your worship; for he is as powerful as
he is good. Here for the same praise ye his Holy Name.

CHAP. III. Of the Diseases this Year.
THis Year the Stone-blind shall see but very little; the Deaf shall hear but
scurvily; the Dumb shall not speak very plain; the Rich shall be somewhat in a
better case than the Poor, and the Healthy than the Sick. Whole Flocks, Herds,
and Droves of Sheep, Swine, and Oxen; Cocks and Hens, Ducks and Drakes, Geese
and Ganders, shall go to pot; but the Mortality will not be altogether so great
among Apes, Monkies, Baboons, and Dromedaries. As for Old Age, 'twill be
incurable this Year, because of the years past. Those who are Sick of the
Plurisy will feel a plaguey Stich in their Sides; those who are troubled with
the Thoro'-go-nimble or Wild-squirt, will often prostitute their Blind cheeks
to the Bog-house; Catarrhs this year shall distill from the Brain on the lower
Parts; sore Eyes will by no means help the Sight; Ears shall be at least as
scarce and short in Gascony, and among Knights of the post, as ever: A most
horrid and dreadful, virulent, malignant, catching, perverse and odious Malady,
shall be almost Epidemical, insomuch, that many shall run mad upon it, not
knowing what Nail to drive to keep the Wolf from the Door, very often plotting,
contriving, Cud-gelling, and puzling their weak, shallow Brains, and
syllogizing and prying up and down for the Philosopher's Stone, tho they only
get Midas's Lugs by the bargain. I quake for very fear when I think on it; for I
assure you, few will escape this Disease, which Averroes calls Lack of Money:
And by consequence of the last years Comet, and Saturn's Retrogradation, a huge
drivelling He-Scoundrel, all be-crinkum'd and colly-flower'd shall dye in the
Spittle; at his Death will be a horrid clutter between the Cats and the Rats,
Hounds and Hares, Hawks and Ducks, and eke between the Monks and Eggs.

CHAP. IV. Of the Fruits of the Earth this Year.
I Find by the Calculations of Albumazar, in his Book of the great Conjunction,
and elsewhere, That this will be a plentiful year of all manner of good things
to those that have enough; but your Hops of Picardy will go near to fare the
worse for the Cold. As for Oats, they will be a great help to Horses. I dare
say, there will not be much more Bacon than Swine. Pisces having the Ascendant,
'twill be a mighty year for Muscles, Cockles, and Perry-winkles. Mercury
somewhat threatens our Parsly-beds, yet Parsley will be to be had for Money.
Hemp will grow faster than the Children of this Age, and some will find there is
but too much on it. There will be but a very few Bon-Christians, but Choak-pears
in abundance. As for Corn, Wine, Fruit, and Herbs, there never was such plenty
as will be now, if poor Folks may have their wish.

CHAP. V. Of the Disposition of the People this Year.
It Is the oddest whimsy in the World, to fancy there are Stars for Kings,
Popes, and Great Dons, any more than for the Poor and Needy. As if, forsooth,
some new Stars were made since the Flood, or since Romulus or Pharamond, at the
making some body King: A thing that Two Court-Fools.
Triboulet or Two Court-Fools.
Caillette would have been ashamed to have said, and yet they were Men of no
Common Learning or Fame; and, for ought you or I know, this same Triboulet may
have been of the Kings of Castille's Blood in Noah's Ark, and Caillette of that
of King Priam. Now, mark ye me, those odd Notions come from nothing in the
World, but want of Faith: I say, the true Catholic Faith. Therefore resting
fully satisfied, that the Stars care not a Fart more for Kings than for
Beggars, nor a jot more for your rich topping Fellows, than for the most Sorry,
Mangy, Lousy Rascal, I Will even leave other addle-pated Fortunetellers to speak
of Great Folks, and I will only talk of the Little Ones.

And in the first place, of those who are subject to Saturn; as for example,
such as lack the ready, jealous, or hornmad self-tormenting Prigs, dreaming
Fops, crabbed Eves-droppers, raving, doting Churls, hatchers and brooders of
Mischief, suspicious, distrustful Slouches, Mole-catchers; closefisted, griping
Misers, Usurers, and Pawn-broakers, Christian-Jews, Pinch-crusts, Hold fasts,
Michers, and Penny-fathers, Redeemers of dipped, mortgaged, and bleeding
Copy-holds and Messuages, Fleecers of Sheer'd-Asses, Shoe-makers and
Translators, Tanners, Brick-layers, Bellfounders; Compounders of Loans,
Patchers, Clowters, and Botchers of old trumpery Stuff, and all moping,
melancholy Folks, shall not have this Year whatever they would have; and will
think more than once how they may get good store of the King's Pictures into
their Clutches; in the mean time they will hardly throw Shoulders of Mutton out
at the Windows, and will often scratch their working Noddles where they do not
itch.

As for those who are under Jupiter, as Canting-vermin, Biggots,
Pardon-pedlers, Voluminous Abbreviators, Scriblers of Breves, Copists, Pope's
Bull-makers, Dataries, Pettifoggers, Capuchins, Monks, Hermits, Hypocrites,
Cushing-thumping Mountebanks, Spiritual Comedians, Forms of Holiness,
Pater-Noster-faces, Wheadling-gablers, Wry-neck'd-scoundrels, Spoilers of
Paper, Stately-gulls, Notch'd-cropt-ear'd Meacocks, Public Register's Clarks,
Clergy-Taylors, Wafer-makers, Rosary-makers, Engrossers of Deeds, Notaries,
Grave-bubbles, Protecoles, and Prompters to Speakers, Deceitful-makers of
Promises, shall fare according as they have Money. So many Clergymen will dye,
that there will not be men enough found on whom their Benefices may be
conferred, so that many will hold two, three, four, or more. The Tribe of
Hypocrites shall lose a good deal of its Ancient Fame, since the World is grown
a Rake, and will not be fooled much longer, as Avenzagel says.

Those who are under Mars, as Hang-men, Cutthroats, Dead-doing Fellows,
Free-booters, Hedge-birds, Foot-pads and Highway-men, Catchpoles, Bum-bailiffs,
Beadles and Watchmen, Reformadoes, Tooth-drawers and Corn-cutters,
Pintle-Smiths, Shavers and Frig-beards, Butchers, Coyners, Paultry-Quacks and
Mountebanks, Renegadoes, Apostates and Marraniz'd Miscreants, Incendiaries or
Beutefeus, Chimny-sweepers, Boorish Clusterfists, Charcoalmen, Alchymists,
Merchants of Eel-skins and Egg-shels, Gridiron and Rattle-makers, Cooks,
Paultry-pedlers, Trashmongers and Spanglemakers, Braceletmakers, Lanternmakers
and Tinkers, this Year will do fine things; but some of them will be somewhat
subject to be Rib-roasted, and have a St. Andrew's Cross scor'd over their
Jobbernols at unawares. This Year one of those Worthy Persons will go nigh to
be made a Field-Bishop, and, mounted on a Horse that was foal'd of an Acorn,
give the Passengers a blessing with his Legs.

Those who belong to Sol, as Topers, Quaffers, Whipcans, Tospots, Whittled,
Mellow, Cupshotten Swillers, Merry- Greeks with Crimsin-snouts of their own
dying; fat, pursy Gorbellies, Brewers of Wine and of Beer, Botlers of Hay,
Porters, Mowers, Menders of Til'd, Slated and Thatched Houses, Burthen-bearers,
Packers, Shepherds, Ox-keepers and Cow-herds, Swine-herds and Hog-drivers,
Fowlers and Birdcatchers, Gardiners, Barnkeepers, Hedgers, Common Mumpers and
Vagabonds, Day-labourers, Scowerers of greasy Thrum-caps, Stuffers and
Bum-basters of Pack-saddles, Rag-merchants, idle Lusks, sloathful Idlebies, and
drowsy Loiterers, Smell-feasts and Snap gobbets, Gentlemen generally wearing
Shirts with Neckbands, or heartily desiring to wear such; all these will be
hale and sharp set, and not troubled with the Gout at the Grinders, or a
stoppage at the Gullet, when at a Feast on free cost.

Those whom Venus is said to Rule, as Punks, Jills, Flirts, Queans, Morts,
Doxies, Strumpets, Buttocks, Blowings, Tits, Pure Ones, Concubines,
Convenients, Cracks, Drabs, Trulls, Light-skirts, Wrigglers, Misses, Cats,
Riggs, Tried Virgins, Bonarobaes, Barbers Chairs, Hedge-whores, Wagtails,
Cockatrices, Whipsters, Twiggers, Harlots, Kept-wenches, Kind-hearted-things,
Ladies of Pleasures, by what Titles or Names soever dignified or distinguished;
Bawds, Pimps, Panders, Procurers, and Mutton-broakers; Wenchers, Leachers,
Shakers, Smockers, Cousins, Cullies, Stallions and Bellibumpers; Ganymedes,
Bardachoes, Huflers, Ingles, Fricatrices, He-whores and Sodomites; swaggering
Huffsnuffs, bouncing Bullies, Braggadoccios, Tory-rory Rakes and Tantivy-boys;
peppered, clapped and pox'd Dabblers; shanker'd, colli-flower'd, carbuncled
Martyrs and Confessors of Venus; Rovers, Ruffian-Rogues, and Hedge-creepers;
Female Chamberlains; Nomina mulierum desinienta in ess ut Laundress, Semptress,
Hostess, etc. and in er ut, Mantuamaker, Bed-maker, Bar-keeper, Fruiterer, etc.
all these will be famous this Year. But when the Sun enters Cancer and other
Signs, let them beware of the Crinkams, and its Attendants; as Shankers, Claps,
Virulent Gonorrheas, Cordees, Buboes, or Running Nags, Pockroyals, Botches,
Wens or Condyloms, Tetters, Scabs, Nodes, Glands, Tumors, Carnosities, etc.
Nuns shall hardly conceive without Carnal Copulation; very few Virgins shall
have Milk at the Breasts.

As for those who come under Mercury, as Sharpers, Rooks, Coseners, Setters,
Sherks, Cheats, Pickpockets, Diverse, Buttocking-Foiles, Thieves, Millers,
Night-walkers, Masters of Arts, Decretists, Picklocks, Dear-stealers, Hedge
Rimers, Composers of serious Doggril meter, Merry-Andrews, Jack-puddings,
Tumblers, Masters in the Art of Hocus Pocus's, Legerdemain, and Powder of
Prelinpinpin; such as break Priscian's head, Quibblers and Punsters,
Stationers, Paper-makers, Card-makers and Pirates, will strive to appear more
merry than they will often be; sometimes they will laugh without much cause, and
will be pretty apt to be blown up, sh -- in the Plum-bag, and march off, unless
they find themselves better stored with Chink, and stronger of the Cod than
they need to be.

Those who belong to Madam Luna, as Hawkers of Almanacks and Pamphlets,
Huntsmen, Ostridge-Catchers, Falkoners, Couriers, Salt-carriers, Lunaticks,
Maggotty Fools, Crackbrain'd Coxcombs, Addlepated Frantic Wights, Giddy
Whimsical Foplings, Exchange-Brokers, Post-boys, Footboys, Tennis
Court-keepers-Boys, Glassmongers, Light Horse, Watermen, Mariners, Messengers,
Rakers and Gleaners, will not long stay in a place this year. However, so many
Lifrelofes, a word coined in derision of the Germans and Switzers.
Swag-bellies and Puff-bags will hardly go to St. James in Galicia.
St. Hiacco, as there did in the Year 524. Great numbers of Pilgrims will come
down from the Mountains of Savoy and Auvergne, but Sagittarius sorely threatens
them with kib'd Heels.

CHAP. VI. Of the Condition of some Countries.
THE Noble Kingdom of France shall prosper and triumph this year in all
Pleasures and Delights, so that Foreign Nations shall willingly retire thither.
Presents of Nosegays, and Feasts on Birthdays, and Saintsdays, Treats,
Pastimes, and a thousand Sports, shall keep up the Mirth. There will be plenty
of delicious Wines; many Radishes in Lymosin; store of Chestnuts in Perigord
and Dauphine; a deal of Olives in Languedoc; whole shoals of Sand in Olone; a
world of Fish in the Sea; swarms of Stars in the Firmament; abundance of Salt
at Brouage; and prodigious quantities of Corn, Pulse, Kitchen Herbs, Flowers,
Fruit, Butter, Cheese, Milk, and other Dairy Goods. No Plague, no War, no
Vexation. A Fart for Poverty, hang Sorrow, cast away care. Old Gold, such as
your Double Ducats, Rose-Nobles, Angels, Spankers, Spur-Royals, and
Well-wool'd-Sheeps of Berry will once more be in fashion, with plenty of
Seraphs and Crowns with a Sun upon them, however about Midsummer you are
threatened with an Invasion by black Fleas, and Weevels of la Deviniere. Adeo,
nil est ex omni part beatum; Nothing is yet found that is perfectly happy; But
care must be taken to curb them with store of Evening Nunchions.

Italy, Romania, Naples and Sicily will remain where they stood last year.
People will be very thoughtful there toward the latter end of Lent, and
sometimes will rave and dream at Noonday.

Germany, Switzerland, Saxony, Strasburgh, Antwerp, etc. will thrive upon it, if
they don't fail to do so. Woe be to Pardon-Pedlers if they come among them; I
dare engage that there will not be many yearly Obits, Trentals and Services for
the Dead founded there.

Spain, Castile, Portugal and Arragon will be subject to sudden Thirsts, and
Young and Old will be woefully afraid of dying, for which reason they will be sure
to keep themselves warm when it is cold; and will often tell over their Money if
they have any.

England, Scotland, and the Easterlings, will be but indifferent
Pantagruelists. Wine would at least prove as wholesome to them as Beer, provided
it were good and delicious. When they sit at Table, their best hopes will be in
the aftergame. St. Traigeant of Scotland will work Miracles and sh -- Wonders
like mad; but the Devil a bit he will see the better for all the Candles that
will be offered him, if Aries ascending does not fumble, and rumble, tumble,
stumble, and be humble, though he grumble, and scorned, and unhorn'd.

The Moscovites, Indians, Persians, and Troglodytes, will often be troubld with
the Bloody Flux, because they will not be ridden, tupp'd and ram'd by the
Romanists, considering the Ball of Sagittarius Ascendant. The Bohemians, Jews
and Egyptians will not be brought this year to conform with the said Romanists,
as they expect. Venus bitterly threatens them with Wens at the Throat; if they
do not condescend to the Will of the King of the Papillons.

Escargots [Snails] Sarabouytes, Cauquemares [Nightmares] Cannibals shall be
pestered. with Ox Flies [Informers, Promooters] and will have but little heart
to play on the Cymbals, and Tongue and Keys [or, to letcher] unless Guyacum be
in request.

As for Austria, Hungary and Turkey, by my Troth, my dainty Lads, I cannot tell
how they will do, neither does Peelgarlick trouble his head a jot about it,
considering the Sun's rare entrance into Capricornus; and if you chance to know
more of the matter than I do, pray scatter no words, keep it to your selves,
but stay for the lame Post.

OF THE Four Seasons of the Year.
CHAP. VII. Of the Spring.
IN all this Year's Revolution there will be but one Moon, neither will it be
New. I dare warrant you are damnably down of the mouth about it, you who do not
believe in God, and persecute his holy and Divine Word as also those that stand
up for it. But you may even hang your selves out of the way, I tell you there
will never be any other Moon than that which God created in the beginning, and
which was placed in the Sky to light and guide Mankind by night. But in good
sooth, I Will not infer thence that it never shows to the Earth and Earthly
People a decrease or increase of its Light, according as it is nearer the Sun
or further from it. No, no, why should I say this? For, wherefore, because,
however, notwithstanding, that, etc. and let none of you hereafter pray that
Heaven may keep her from the Wolves; for they will not meddle with her these
Twelve months I Will warrant you. A propos, now I think on it, you will see as many
Flowers again this Season as in all the other Three; neither shall that man be
thought a Fool who will have wit enough to lay by Money, and get together more of
it this Quarter than he will do of Cobwebs in the whole Year. The Griffons and
Marrons, men who make the Ways passable in great Snows, and dwell on the
Mountains of Savoy, and D^uphine, and the Hyperboreans, that are perpetually
furred with Snow, are to miss this Season and have none on it; for Avicenna
tells us, it is not Spring till the Snow is melted away on the Mountains.
Believe the Liar. I have known the time when men reckoned Ver, or the Spring,
to begin when the Sun entered in the first Degree of Aries. If they reckon it
otherwise now, I knock under, and Mum's the word.

CHAP. VIII. Of Summer.
IN the Summer I cannot justly tell you what kind of Wind will blow; but this I
know, that it ought to be warm weather then, and now and then a Sea-Breeze.
However, if things should fall out otherwise, you must be sure not to curse
God; for he is wiser than we, and knows what is fit for us far better than we
our selves; you may take my word for it, whatever Haly and his Gang may have
said. It will be a delicious Thing to be merry and drink cool Wine, though some
have said there is nothing more contrary to Thirst. I believe it; and indeed
Contraria contrariis curantur.

CHAP. IX. Of Autumn.
IN Autumn men will make Wine, or before or after it, it is all one to me, so we
have but good Bub and Nippitati enough; Foul mistakes will then be in season,
for many a one will think only to burst at the Broadside by the way of
Fizzlecum-funk, and will foully give their Breeches a Clister with a fecal
Decoction. As for those Men and Women who have vowed to fast till the Stars be
in the Heavens, they may even from this present hour begin to feed like Farmers
by my particular Grant and Dispensation. Neither do they begin of the soonest;
for those pretty twinkling things have been fixed there above Sixteen thousand
and I cannot tell how many days, and stuck in to the purpose too, let me tell
you. Nor would I have you for the future hope to catch Larks when the Sky
falls: For on my Honor that will not happen in your time. Legions of
Hypocritical Church-vermin, Cucullated Sham Saints, Pedlers and Hawkers of
Pardons, Perpetual Mumpers and Mumblers of Orisons, and other such Gangs of
rascally Scoundrels will come out of their Dens. Escape that escape can, say I.
Harkee me, take heed also of the Bones whenever you eat Fish, and God preserve
you from a Dose of Ratsbane too.

CHAP. X. Of Winter.
IN Winter, in my silly Opinion, those men will not be over-wise who will sell
their Furred Gowns, Swans-Skins, and other warm Cloths to buy Fuel; neither did
the Ancients use to do so, says Avenzouart. If it chance to rain don't fret
your selves, so much the less Dust you will have when you go abroad. Keep your
selves as hot as Toasts, do you hear, beware of Cathars, Drink of the best, till
the other sort mend; and pray henceforth sh -- no more of bed. Oh ho! Poultry,
do you build your Nests so high?

The End of the Pantagruelian Prognostication.
AN EPISTLE BY PANTAGRVEL's Lymosin, Grand Excoriator of the Latiale Tongue,
mentioned Book 2. Chap. ^.
To his own Amicissim residing at the Inclite and Famosissim Urb of Lugdun.
OUR Auricles, percuss'd by Fame sonorous,
Your mirabundous Acts have brought before us.
Your placid Life, here inaudite before,
Repletes the Town of Lugdun ore and ore.
Where Nymphs convening three Times thrice Divine
Prostrate themselves as Vot'ries at your Shrine.
Some voluntary fly into your Arms,
For your Opiparous or Aureous Charms:
Some, tender Souls! on you themselves obtrude,
Moved by your Tongue's most melleous Dulcitude.
Your Phrase, robustly propt, with ease produces
Fractions in many weak Virgineous Cruises;
When you're placientated the Fort is won,
Id est, when e're y' impel the matter on.
You therefore, if your Appetite desires
New Dapes each hour, pursue what that requires.
If sated with your Urban Stale Fruitions,
Or with your half unnatural Coitions,
You to your Neighboring rural Fund migrate,
And there your Lassate Corpse reanimate.
There every Joy to you is an Oblation
In which your Ingeny finds delectation.
The gay Merule and warbling Philomel,
To please you, strive each other to excel.
Their plaisant Notes tristitious Thoughts confound,
And wake your Soul with their letating sound.
To that amaene Recess the rural Quire
Sylvanus, Satyrs, Fauns and Pan retire;
Gods, Demigods, Nymphs, Dryads, Nayads meet,
And leave their Mansions for your Dulcior Seat;
And, when the Turb is once accumulate,
Jucund Jucundity's immensurate.
With sumptuous Cates Divine Ambrosia joins,
And Nectar there exuperates all your Wines.
With this each dry Esurient Guest replete is,
As at the Feast of Peleus and his Thetis.
Then All arise, the Tables are sublate;
In Arbors some themselves refocillate,
Some in ferine Venation take delight,
For Cony-caption some have Appetite:
In fine, Ludes omniform are there invented,
And every Indoles and Sense contented.
Pleasure invades, Pain abdicates the mind,
What more in Heaven can its grand Tenants find!
While we alas! must still obambulate,
Sequacious of the Court and Courtier's Fate.
O most infaust who optates there to live!
An aulic Life no solid Joys can give.
We Have been cruciated, since your last Migration,
With an indesinent obequitation:
Our Boots and Legs have not been separated,
While we the Burgade Lands have conculcated.
Lute, Unds and Sands did long our March oppose,
And asp'rous Rocks, the Bulwarks of our Foes.
But now I Will not too many Verbs effund,
Nor with our Ills your Auricles obtund.
Nor all our Martial Conflicts represent,
Obsesses, Storms and Fights Sanguinolent;
When angry Mars Burgundia cicatris'd,
And Friend with Friend in dolors sympathis'd.
Desperate of Conquest, through dire Accidents,
Apert we jac'd to the Ether without Tents.
At last the kind, tho rigid Brume came on,
The Camp was derelict, and all are gone.
For when Hybernal Evils appropinque,
The Legions on their Hybernacles think.
So, when the Belly Season was expired,
Wisely the Regal Majesty retired.
To Fonsbeliaqueus now the Monarch's come.
The noblest Master to the noblest Dome:
No more had Nero's matched its noble Pride,
Than with the King the Tyrant could have vy'd.
Were even Diana's Temple raised again,
The Regal Palace would eclipse the Fane.
It Is true, you have ocul'd it in Times praeterit,
But every day 't has meliorated merit,
And Those who supervis'd it noct hestern,
In Hodiern bores, will major Things discern.
Opining to revise a Structure new,
Where Art surpassed its self, and Nature too.
Now, to apply my primary Ingredient,
That you move huc I think it not expedient:
For, should you come before the Brume's abated,
The Opime you would linquish for the Macerated.
Since, thanks to Jove's Benignity you're valid,
Choose not a frigid State, while yours is calid.
Unless Salubrity you vilipend,
And, from your own, become your Medic's Friend.
For in veracity these Times denote
Morbs to the Sane, and Obits to the Aegrote;
And alterate the suavest Pulchritude
To the Complexion of its native Mud.
Incluse with Sylves behind, and Lakes before us,
Our outward man wants something that is calorous.
Scarce one poor Fascicle we can acquire;
In fine all Solaces from us retire.
And were we not (in this Extremity)
Juvated by the Town's proximity
To which we equitate with maturation,
And to kind Nature make Sacrification,
Soon in our Sepulchers we should all hide us;
For, sure, one Hebdomad would here occide us.
By this Imparity you plainly see
Our Life's Distress, and yours Jucundity;
Our State's naufrageous and periclitating:
If then you sape, as we are cogitating,
Hither till Spring return make no Transition,
Tho you were stimulated by ambition.
What tho Honorabilities it offers,
Large heaps of Numms to fill your largest Coffers,
Imperial Favor too, and what not else?
Ample Munificence, and Office celse,
Such as you execute when here; yet these
Have no intrinsic Valor, tho they please.
Our means of Life are Pote, and Cibe, and Vest;
Who jugulates himself for Wealth's a Beast.
To this Epistle Finis now we'll fix,
Which to your School a Transit does adnix;
Where Rules to polish Loquels are prescribed,
And Doct Verbocination is imbibed;
Excoriating the Language Latiale.
To make Reply let not your Calam fail;
But atrament at large the candid Chart
With corresponding Rimes transcending Art.
Which will to him be the altest Obligation
Who is
Your Serve with maxim Veneration, Desbride Gousier.

An EPIGRAM.
ALL strive of late to bring to purity
Our Tongue, that once lay in Obscurity;
And, profligating all Barbarity,
With the Attic set the French in parity:
So, to revive its old Nobility,
They shun the Phrase of our Mobility;
But, thus disguised, by a Fatality
It Is mere excoriated Latiality.
The Philosophical Cream OF Encyclopedic QUESTIONS By PANTAGRVEL, Which were
Sorbonicoficabilitudinissely debated in the Schools of the Decree near St.
Denis de la Chartre at PARIS.
UTrum, A Platonic Idea, hovering to the right on the Orifice of the Chaos,
might drive away the Squadrons of Democratical Atoms.

Vtrum, The Bats.
Flickermise flying through the translucidity of the cornered Gate might,
spy-like, discover the Morphean Visions twirling and unwinding in a circular
manner the thread of the rete admirabile that wraps up the A certain Fish in
the River Po, which sometimes weighed 1000 pound.
Artili of ill caulk'd Brains.

Vtrum, The Atoms turning about at the sound of the Hermagorical Harmony, might
make a Compaction or a Dissolution of a Quintessence, by the substraction of
the Pythagorical Numbers.

Vtrum, The Hybernal Frigidity of the Antipodes, passing in an Orthogonal Line,
through the homogeneous solidity of the Center, might warm the superficial
Connexity of our heels by a soft Antiperistasis.

Vtrum, The Tassels of the Torrid Zone might so far be dipped and wetted at the
Cataracts of the Nile, as so moisten the most Caustic Parts of the Empyreal
Heaven.

Vtrum, By reason of the long Hair that was bestowed on the Bear at her
metamorphosis, if her Breech were but shaved the Italian way a la Bougarone, to
make Triton a Beard, she might not be Keeper of the Arctic Pole.

Utrum, An Elementary Sentence might allege a Decennal Prescription against
Amphibious Animals, and e contra the other respectively put in her Petition in
case of Seizure and Novelty.

Vtrum, An Historical Grammar, and Posteriority, by the triad of Articles,
might find some Line or Character of their Chronicle on the Zenonian Palm.

Vtrum, The Genera generalissema, by a violent Elevation over their
Predicaments, might crawl and clamber up to the Stories of the Transcendents,
and consequently let the special and predicable Species follow, to the
unspeakable loss and damage of poor Masters of Arts.

Vtrum, Proteus that transformed himself into all manner of Shapes, turning
himself into a A thick, broadheaded flying Insect, which sits on Trees in Hot
Countries, and sings after a skreaking fashion; It Is called Cicada in Latin,
and therefore mistaken by some here for the Grasshopper.
Cigale, and musically trying his Voice in the Dog Days, might make a third
Concoction with Morning-dew carefully botled up in May, before the full
revolution of a Zodiacal Girdle.

Vtrum, The Black Scorpion might bear a solution of the Continuum in his
substance, and, by the effusion of his Blood, darken and blacken the milky way,
to the great loss and grief of the Swagbellied Jacobites.

FRANCISCVS RABELAESVS, Poeta Sitiens, Ponebat. Vita, Lyaee, sitis; liquisti,
flebis, adures;
Membra, bominem, tumulum; morte, liquore, face.
Two Epistles to Two Women of different Humors.
To an Old Woman.
OLd toothless, pox'd, mischievous Hag of Night;
Old graceless Witch, who liv'st in Virtue's spite;
Old treacherous Beldam, burden to the Earth;
Plots, Broils, and Wars, from thee derive their Birth.
Old errand Bawd, by whose destructive Trade,
The Lewd are sold, the Modest are betrayed.
Honor thou never knew'st, thou, living Tomb,
Whor'd with thy Father in thy Mother's Womb.
Thy Charity does like the Devil's prove,
And damns the Wretches who thy Lewdness love.
Thy livid Blood with poisonous Rage is swelled,
Thy Breast with Gall, thy Head with Mischief filled.
Thou never of any but thy self spok's* well,
And for Detraction even supassest Hell.
Old Brimstone-Bawd, with Brandy flaming red,
That make a cursed rank Brothel of thy Bed,
Propitious to all Malice and Ill-luck,
That have a Tet to give the Devil suck;
Damned Witch, thou do in Magic far excel
Medea, and the Blackest Fiends of Hell:
Thou make thy hideous Phiz more dreadful still,
But when thou do, we should thy Hagship kill,
Lest thy redoubled Ugliness affright,
And like Medusa's ruin us at sight.
Thou, Scarlet Whore, never mourn'st for doing ill;
Thy only Tears are Rhumes, and Wines distilled;
Thy only sighs are vented at the Bum,
Outstink a Carrion, and outroar a Drum.
Old monstrous Hag of matchless, dreadful kind,
Thou the three Furies in one Body joined.
Satan outdone by thee does envious grow,
And longs to burn thee in Revenge below,
Dissembling Witch, whose Tongue, still muttering, dares
Mock frowning Heaven with thy unhallowed Prayers.
Thou, bold bad Spright, with Satan's borrowed Force,
Pretend'st to turn a rapid River's Course,
With Spells to paleness fright th'astonish'd Moon,
And darken quite the blushing Sun at Noon.
Base murdering Sorceress, with relentless heart,
On Innocence thou try'st thy cursed Art,
Bewitching Infants in their Mother's Arms,
And Death alone can end the painful Charms.
No God thou own'st but thy infatiate Gut,
Thou make each Trull turn up her filthy Scut.
Pity thou slight'st, by Pity you are abhorred,
And more deserv'dst a Faggot than a Cord.
Thy cruel heart with Rancour has its Load,
Natural to thee as Poison to a Toad.
Thou worst of Mischiefs, guide to endless Death,
Who scatt'rest Plagues with thy contagious Breath,
Can thou expect unpunished to remain,
And for each Crime to escape a double pain?
Millions against thee will in Judgment rise,
And loudly call for Vengeance to the Skies.
Those whom thy Arts to lawless Flames decoyed,
Shall be below to burn thy Soul employed.
But thour't the worst of Hells for impious Deeds,
The Other perhaps in Punishments exceeds,
Prepare, prepare for its revenging Pains,
There to be racked in everlasting Chains,
Tremble, and loudly to the Mountains call,
That they may gape, and crush thee with their fall:
For still thy latter Sins the first excel,
And, living on, thou wilt grow too bad for Hell.
Damned Harridan, with reeking Lust more drunk
Than M^ssaline, that great Imperial Punk;
Never tired nor sated, thou out do her more
Than she out did the out most stint of Whore.
Thy sweaty Carcass (which kind Heaven confound!)
With noisome Steams offends us all a-round,
Old drunken Pispot, Sink of Filth and Sin,
Plaster without, and Rottenness within,
Cursed lump of Lees, thou universal Sore,
Thou putrid Product of the Common-shore,
Thou lowest last degree of Infamy,
Thou very highest top of Villainy;
Repent, or know I Will double every Curse;
But no, thou can not mend, nor e're be worse.
An Epistle to another Woman of a quite different Humor.
HAil! Reverend Matron, virtuous as you're fair:
Hail! you, whose Autumn may with Spring compare;
Matron, adorned so richly in your mind
That in your Looks the Treasures we may find.
With Pious Doctrine you your Faith improve,
Shun idle talk, and Books of idler Love,
And setting Vice and needless Forms apart,
Your suffering God ingrave within your heart
While you on Earth a heavenly Saint commence,
Your Charity is like the World immense;
Ready to ease the Afflicted of their Load,
At awful distance y' imitate your God.
So sweet, so modest, and so void of Pride,
That even that God does own you for his Bride.
You to all Folly wisely shut your Eyes,
And dare the world's alluring Joys despise.
That Sacred Writ alone is your delight,
Which saves the Soul from everlasting night.
You Temper still, yet never to a fault,
Your Wine with Water, and your Words with Thought.
And never cherished an unchaste Desire,
Or could be warmed but by the Nuptial Fire;
But, waiting for your Savior, pass away
In Prayers (...) the Night, in Pious Acts the Day.
In Faith, in Piety alone extreme,
You shun Applause, yet best deserve Esteem.
The Prophets great Inspirer fills your Breast;
Your Head, your Heart, by the Whole God possessed.
While some unthinking Virgins are betrayed,
And made Proficients in Hell's thriving Trade,
Your wise Advice, your great Example, draws
The thoughtless Wretches out of Satan's Jaws.
Matron, in Wedlock faithful and sedate,
An honor to that honorable State,
Not weakness made you wed, but Piety,
Thus to increase the Saint's Society.
Those wanton Toys could never your heart entice,
Which stifle Virtue, and encourage Vice.
Matron, whom All the Christian Pallas term,
Wise is your Conduct, and your Courage firm.
I prise, admire, and love your matchless store,
Your outward Beauties much, your inward Graces more.
From Heaven you came, and to that Heaven are born,
Virtue adorns you, Virtue you adorn.
Oh that I may, even till my latest hours,
Advance in Knowledge, contemplating yours.
May you obtain below what Earth can crave!
What Heaven can grant, above, you're sure to have!
LETTERS Written by FRANCIS RABELAIS, M.D. During his stay in ITALY, In the
Year 1536.
LETTER I. To my Lord Bishop of Maillezais.
My Lord,
I Writ to you at large on the Nine and twentieth of November, and sent you
some Naples-grain for your Sallads, of every sort that is eaten on this side,
except Pimpernell, which then I could not procure. I have sent you no great
quantity at present, because it had been too much for the Courier at one time;
but if you please to have more, either for your Gardens, or to dispose of
otherwise, I will send it you upon notice. I had written to you before, and
sent to you the four Signatures concerning the Benefices of Friar Dom. Philip,
obtained in the name of those whom you had set down in the Instructions you
gave me. I have not received since any Letter from you that mentions the
receipt of the aforesaid Signatures. I received only one dated from l'
Ermenaud, when my Lady d'Estissac came thither, in which you let me know that
you had received two Pacquets from me; one from Ferrara, the other from this
City, with the Cipher which I writ to you: But for ought I understand, you had
not yet received the Packet where the Signatures were enclosed. I can now give
you an account, that my Business has been granted and dispatched better, and
with more certainty, than I could have wished; and I have had therein the
assistance and advice of Worthy men. Particularly of the Cardinal de Genutiis,
who is Judge of the Palace, and of the Cardinal Simonetta, who was Auditor of
the Chamber, a very knowing man, and well versed in such matters. The Pope was
of opinion that I should proceed in my Business per cameram: The
abovementioned Cardinals were of a mind, that it should be by the Court of
Contradicts: Because, that in foro contentioso, it cannot be revocable in
France, and Quae per contradictoria transiguntur transeunt in rem judicatam;
quae autem per Cameram, and impugnari p^ssunt, and in judicium veniunt. Those
things which are transacted by Contradictories, pass as determined; but those
things which are done by the Chamber, may be called into question, and tried
over again.

Upon the whole I have nothing more to do, than to take up the Bulls sub plumbo.

My Lord Cardinal du Bellay, as likewise my Lord Bishop of Mascon, have assured
me that the Charges shall be remitted me, tho the Pope by old custom remits
nothing except of what is dispatched per cameram. There will remain to be paid,
only the Referendaries, Proctors, and other such like Scriblers and Blotters of
Parchment. If my Money falls short, I will recommend my self to your Lordship's
Alms; for I don't think to leave this Place till the Emperor goes.

He is at present at Naples, whence, as he has written to the Pope, he will
part on the Sixth of January. This Town is already full of Spaniards: And he
has sent an Extraordinary Ambassador to the Pope besides him who constantly
resides at this Court to give him notice of his coming. The Pope leaves him
half the Palace, and all the Borough of St. Peter for his Retinue, and has
ordered three thousand Beds to be prepared, according to the Roman Custom, that
is to say, with Quilts: For the City has been unprovided of 'em ever since it
was sacked by the Lanskenets. He has got together as much Hay, Straw, Oats,
Spelt-Corn and Barley as he could find, and of Wine as much as is arrived in
ripa: I fancy he will be at no small charge, which cannot be very easy to him in
this his great Poverty, so apparent in him, more than in any Pope for these
Three hundred years past. The Romans have not yet resolved, how to behave
themselves upon this occasion, and have had many meetings, by order of the
Senators, Conservators and Governor: but they cannot agree in their Opinions.
The Emperor has declared to 'em by his said Ambassador, that he does not design
his people shall be entertained at free-cost, but as the Pope shall think fit
to entertain 'em, which does the more sensibly touch the Pope: For he
understands well enough, that by this saying the Emperor means to see, how and
with what affection he will treat him and his People.

The Holy Father has sent two Legates to him by the choice of the Consistory, to
wit, Cardinal of Siena, and Cardinal Cesarini. Since which, the Cardinals
Salviat^ and Rodolph, are also gone to him, and with them my Lord de Saints. I
understand it is about the Affair of Florence, and concerning the Difference
between the Duke Alexander de Medicis and Philip Str^ssi, whose Estate, which
is considerable, the Duke had a mind to confiscate. Next to the Fourques of
Ausbourg in Germany, he is counted the richest Merchant in Christendom; and the
Duke has set People here to poison or kill him whatever came on it. Being
advertised of this Attempt, he obtained of the Pope to go armed. And he
commonly went attended with thirty Soldiers armed at all Points. The said Duke
of Florence having notice (I suppose) that Strossi, with the abovementioned
Cardinals, was gone to the Emperor, and that he offered to the Emperor Four
hundred thousand Ducats, only to give Commissions to People who might inform
against the Tyranny and baseness of the said Duke, left Florence, constituted
Cardinal Ciho his Governor, and came to this City the morrow after
Christmas Day, the twenty third hour, entering at St. Peter's Gate, followed by
fifty light Horse, in white Armor, with Lances, and about a hundred
Harquebusiers. The rest of his Train was but little, and in no very good order.
And no soul went to receive him, but the Emperor's Ambassador, who met him at
the same gate. As soon as he was in Town he came to the Palace, and had a short
Audience of the Pope. And had Lodgings in St. George's Palace. The next morning
he went away attended as before.

Eight days since, news came to this Town, and his Holiness has received
Letters from diverse parts, that the Sophy, King of Persia, has defeated the
Army of the Turks. Yesterday night arrived here the Nephew of Monsieur de Vely,
the King's Ambassador to the Emperor, who assured my Lord Cardinal du Bellay,
that the thing was really true: And that this has been the greatest slaughter
that has been heard of these Four hundred years: For above Forty thousand Horse
were killed on the Turk's side.

Consider what a number of Foot sell there! As likewise on the Sophy's side.
For, among People that do not willingly fly, Non solet esse incruenta Victoria.
The Victory does not use to be without blood.

The principal Defeat was near a little Town called Coni, not far distant from
the great City of Tauris,, for which the Sophi and the Turk contend; the other
Action was near a place called Betelis. The manner was thus, The Turks had
divided their Army, and one part was sent to take Coni; of which the Sophi
having intelligence, he, with his whole Army, rushed upon this separated part
before they could stand upon their guard.

See here the effect of ill Counsel, in dividing his Army before he had gotten
the Victory The French can give a good account of this, when the Duke of Albany
drew out the Strength and Flower of the Camp before Pavia. Upon the News of
this Rout and Defeat, Barbarossa is retired to Constantinople to secure the
Country, and says by his good gods, That this is nothing considering the
mighty Power of the Turk. But the Emperor is eased of the fear that he had of
the Turk's coming into Sicily, as he had threatened at the beginning of the
Spring. And this may give repose to Christendom for some considerable time; and
those who would lay Tithes upon the Church, eo pretextu, that they would
fortify themselves against the approach of the Turk, are but ill furnished with
demonstrative Arguments.

LETTER II.
My Lord,
I Have received Letters from Monsieur de Saint Cerdos, dated from Dijon, in
which he tells me of a Process that he has depending in this Court of Rome. I
dare not answer him, without running the hazard of incurring a great deal of
displeasure. But I understand he has the greatest right in the World, and that
he suffers a manifest injury; and that he ought to come hither in person. For
there is no such Affair, how equitable soever, that is not lost for want of a
man's own soliciting in it; especially when he has a strong party, who can
overawe with Threats those that solicit for him. The want of a Cipher prevents
my writing to you more at large. But it troubles me to see so much as I do,
particularly, being sensible of the great kindness you have for him; and
likewise because he has of a long time loved and favored me. In my opinion
Monsieur de Basilac, Conseiller (one of the Judges Assistants) in the
Parliament of Toulouse, came hither this Winter on a less occasion, and is
older and more infirm than he, and yet has had a quick dispatch to his content.

LETTER III.
My Lord,
THE Duke of Ferrara, who went to the Emperor at Naples, returned hither this
morning. I know not yet how he has determined matters relating to the
investiture and homage of his Lands. But I understand he is come back not well
satisfied with the Emperor. I fear he will be forced to empty his Coffers of
those Crowns his Father left him, and that the Pope and Emperor will fleece him
at pleasure; considering also that it was above six months before he refused to
espouse the King's Interest, notwithstanding all the Emperor's Remonstrances
and Threats. My Lord Bishop of Limoges, who was the King's Ambassador at
Ferrara, seeing the said Duke without acquainting him with his Design was
retired to the Emperor, is returned to France. It Is feared that Renee of
France, Duchess of Ferrara.
My Lady Renee will receive no little displeasure by it: The Duke having
removed Madam de Soubise her Governess, and ordered her to be served by
Italians, which don't look well.

LETTER IV.
My Lord,
THree days since arrived here a Post from Monsieur de Crisse, who brings an
Account that some of the Lord Rance's men, who went to the relief of Geneva,
were defeated by a Party of the Duke of Savoy's. With him came a Courier from
Savoy, who brought the News of it to the Emperor. This may unhappily prove
SEMINARIUM FUTURI BELLI, the cause of an ensuing War. For these little wilful
Broils draw after them great Battles, which is demonstrable from Ancient
History, as well Greek and Roman as French, as appears by the Battle at Vireton.

LETTER V.
My Lord,
ABout fifteen days since, Andrew Doria, who went with Stores to those who hold
the Gouletta near Tunis for the Emperor, as likewise to supply them with Water.
(for the Arabians of the Country make continual war upon them, and they dare
not stir out of their Garrison,) is arrived at Naples, where he staid not above
three days with the Emperor, since when, he is sailed hence with Nine and
twenty Galleys. It Is said, in quest of Judeo and Cacciadiavolo, who have burnt
a great deal of the Country of Sardinia and Minorca. The Grand Master of
Rhodes, who was born in Piedmont, is lately dead; in whose room the Commandeur
of Forton between Montauban and Toulouse, is chosen.

LETTER VI.
My Lord,
I Here send you a Book of Prognostications, which busies this whole Town, It Is
intitl'd, De eversione Europae, of the overturning of Europe. For my part, I
give no credit at all to it. But Rome was never seen so wholly given over to
Vanities and Prophecies, as it is at present. I am apt to think the reason is,
because Mobile mutatur semper cum principe vulgus. The Giddy multitude always
change with the Prince. I have also send you an Almanac for the ensuing Year
1536. I send you besides, the Copy of a Brief which his Holiness has lately
decreed for the arrival of the Emperor: As likewise the Emperor's Entry into
Messina and Naples, and the Funeral Oration at the Interment of the deceased
Duke of Milan.

My Lord, I humbly recommend my self to your good favor, praying to our Lord
for your good health and long life.

Rome, Dec. 30. 1536.
LETTER VII. To the Lord de Maillezais.
My Lord,
I Have received the Letterrs you were pleased to write to me, dated the second
of December: By which I understand that my two Pacquets are come to your hands;
one of the Eighteenth, the other of the Two and twentieth of October, with the
four Signatures which I sent you. I writ since to you more at large, on the
Nine and twentieth of November, and Thirtieth of December. By this time, I
believe, you have received the said Pacquets. For Mr. Michael Parmentier,
Bookseller, living at the Arms of Basil, writ to me the fifth of this Instant,
that he had received and sent them to Poitiers. You may assure your self, that
the Pacquets which I shall send you will be safely delivered at Lions; for I
put them into the great sealed Packet, which is for the King's Affairs, and
when the Courier comes to Lions, he is dispatched by the Governor; then his
Secretary, who is much my Friend, takes the Packet which I superscribe on the
first Sheet, to the aforesaid Michael Parmentier. Afterward there is no
difficulty, unless from Lions to Poitiers, which is the reason that obliges me
to set an extraordinary Postage upon it, that the greater care may be taken of
it by the Messengers at Poitiers, in hopes to get a Spill by it. For my part, I
constantly encourage this same Parmentier with some small Presents, which I
send him of Novelties on this side, or to his Wife, that he may be the more
diligent to engage Merchants or Messengers at Poitiers to deliver the Pacquets
to your Lordship. And I very much approve of the advice which you gave me in
your Letter, that I should not trust them to the hands of the Banquiers, for
fear they should be picked and broke op^n. I think 'twill not be amiss, the
first time you write to me, especially, if it be business of Consequence, that
you write a Line to the said Parmentier, and enclose a piece of Gold to him in
your Letter, in consideration of the Care he takes to send your Pacquets to me,
and mine to you. A small matter sometimes highly obliges honest Men, and makes
'em more diligent for the time to come, when the Case requires a speedy
dispatch.

LETTER VIII.
My Lord,
I Have not as yet presented your Letters to my Lord Bishop de Saints, for he
is not yet returned from Naples, whither he went with the Cardinals Salviati
and Rodolph. He will return in two days; then I will give him your Letters, and
desire an Answer of 'em, which I will send you by the first Courier that goes
hence. I understand their Affairs have not had that success with the Emperor
which they hoped for: And that the Emperor had positively answered, That at
their Request and Instance, as likewise, at the late Pope Clement's, he had
created Alexander de Medicis Duke of the Territories of Florence and Pisa,
which he never thought to do, nor would have done: Meanwhile to depose him,
would be the trick of some Stage Player, which does and undo's the same thing.
However, that they should resolve to acknowledge him as their Duke and Lord,
and obey him as his Vassals and Subjects, and be sure they did so. As to the
Complaints they made against the said Duke, he would take Cognizance of them
when he came to Florence.

For he designs after some stay at Rome, to pass through Sienna, and thence to
Florence, to Bolonia, to Milan, and Genoa. Thus the aforesaid Cardinals,
together with the Bishop of Xaintes, Strossy, and some others, returned, re
infecta, [as wise as they went.]

The Thirteenth of this Month, came back hither the Cardinals of Sienna and
Caesarini, who had been Elected by the Pope, and the whole College, Legates to
the Emperor. They have so negotiated the Matter, that the Emperor has deferred
his coming hither to the latter end of February. If I had as many Crowns, as
the Pope would give days of Pardon, Proprio motu, de lenitudine potestatis; Of
his own free Will, out of the Lenity of his Power, and other such like
favorable Circumstances, to any one that could defer it for five or six years
to come, I should be richer than ever was Jacques Coeur. Here are great
Preparations made in this City for his Reception; and a new way is made by the
Pope's Command, by which he is to make his Entry; that is, through St.
Sebastian's Gate, toward Champ-doli, Templum pacis, the Temple of Peace, and
the Amphitheatre, and he is to pass under the Ancient Triumphal Arches of
Constantine and Titus, of Numetianus, and others. Then on one side of St.
Mark's Palace, by Campo de Fiore, and by the Palace Farnese, where the Pope
used to Reside, then by the Banks, and below St. Angelo's Castle. To make and
level which way, above Two hundred Houses, and three or four Churches, are
pulled down to the Ground, which most People take for an ill Omen. On the day
of the Conversion of St. Paul, his Holiness went to St. Paul's to hear Mass,
and made a Feast to all the Cardinals. After Dinner he returned passing through
the abovementioned way, and lodged at St. George's Palace. But it is a sad sight
to behold the Ruins of the demolished Houses that are not paid for, nor have
the Landlords any recompense made 'em.

To day arrived here the Venetian Ambassadors, four brave old gray headed
Gentlemen, who are going to the Emperor at Naples. The Pope has sent all his
Family before 'em; His Bed chambermen, Chamberlains, Janisaries, Lanskenets;
and the Cardinals have sent their Mules in Pontificalibus.

Likewise, the 7th of this Month, the Ambassadors of Sienna were introduced in
good order, and after they had made their Speech in open Consistory, and that
the Pope had answered 'em in fine Latin, they suddenly parted for Naples. I
believe Ambassadors will be sent for all Parts of Italy to the Emperor, and he
knows well enough how to play his Game, to get Money out of 'em, as it has been
discovered about ten days since. But I am not yet fully acquainted with the
Subtilty which ('it is said) he made use of at Naples; hereafter I may give you
an account of it.

The Prince of Piedmont, the Duke of Savoy's Eldest Son, died at Naples fifteen
days ago; the Emperor ordered him a very honorable Interment, at which he
assisted in Person.

The King of Portugal, six days since, commanded his Ambassador at Rome, that
immediately upon receipt of his Letter, he should return to him in Portugal,
which he did the same hour, and came ready Booted and Spurred to take his leave
of the Most Reverend the Lord Cardinal du Bellay. Two days after, was killed
near the Bridge of St. Angelo, in open day, a Portuguese Gentleman, who
solicited here for the whole Body of the Jews that were baptized under King
Emanuel, and have been since molested by the present King of Portugal, that he
might succeed to their Estates when they died. That King has also exacted
several things of them against the Edict and Ordinance of the King Emanuel. I
doubt we shall hear of some Sedition in Portugal.

LETTER IX.
My Lord,
IN the last Packet I sent you, I gave you an account, that part of the Turk's
Army was defeated by the Sophy, near Betelis. The Turk did not very long delay
his Revenge; for two Months after, he fell upon the Sophy with the greatest
Fury imaginable; and after having put to Fire and Sword, a great part of the
Country of Mesopotamia, he has driven back the Sophy on the other side of Mount
Taurus. In the mean time, he causes a great number of Galleys to be built upon
the River Tanais, by which they may come to Constantinople. Barbarossa is still
at Constantinople to secure the Country, and has left several Garrisons at Bona
and Algiers, lest the Emperor should by chance Attack him. I have sent you his
Picture, drawn by the Life; as also the Map of Tunis, and of the Sea-port-towns
adjacent. The Lanskenets, whom the Emperor sent into the Duchy of Milan to
keep the strong Places, are all drowned and lost at Sea, to the number of
fifteen hundred, in one of the biggest and stoutest Ships belonging to the
Genoeses, and it was near to a Port belonging to the Commonwealth of Lucca,
called Lerza. The occasion was; because they being weary of the Sea, and
desirous to get ashore, which they could not for the Tempest and Stress of
Weather, imagined that the Pilot of the Ship would still keep them off at Sea,
longer than he needed: For which cause they killed him, with some other of the
Officers of the said Ship, after whose Death the Ship remained without a
Commander; and instead of taking in their Sails, the Lanskenets hoisted them,
as being unpractic'd in Sea-affairs, and in this Confusion they perished within
a stone's throw of the aforesaid Port.

My Lord, I understand that my Lord Bishop de l' Avaur, who was the King's
Ambassador at Venice, has had his Audience of Leave, and is returning to
France. The Bishop of Rhodez goes in his place, and is now at Lions with all
his Retinue ready to go, when the King has given him his Instructions.

My Lord, I humbly recommend my self to your Favor, praying to our Lord, to
give you a long Life in good Health.

Rome, Jan. 28. 1536. Your most humble Servant, Francis Rabelais.

LETTER X.
My Lord,
I Writ to you at large all the News I could learn, the 28th of January last
past, by a Gentleman, Servant to Monsieur de Montreuil, called Tremeliere, who
returned from Naples, where he had bought some Horses of that Kingdom for his
Lord, and was returning to him with all speed. The same day I received the
Packet that you were pleased to send me from Leguge, dated the 10th of the
said Month, in which you may see the method I have taken for the delivery of
your Letters, by which they are safely and suddenly brought to me here. Your
said Letters and Packet, were delivered at the Arms of Basil, on the one and
twentieth of the same Month, the eight and twentieth they were delivered to me
here. And to encourage at Lions, (for that is the Point and principal Place) the
Bookseller at the Arms of Basil to be diligent in this Affair, I repeat what I
writ to you in my aforementioned Packet, if you chance to write to me about
any thing of Consequence: That it is my advice, that on the first occasion of
writing to me, you write a word or two to him in a Letter, in which be pleased
to enclose some Gold-crowns, or some other piece of old Gold, as a Royal, an
Angel or Salutation, in consideration of the pains and care he takes of them,
so small a matter will more and more endear him to your Service.

Now, to Answer your Letters, I have diligently searched the Registers of the
Palace, since the time that you commanded me, that is, the year 1529, 1530, and
1531, to see if Dom. Phillippe's Act of Resignation to his Nephew were to be
found, and have given the Clerks of the Register two Gold-crowns, which is but
a small recompense for the great and tedious Trouble in it. In short, they have
found nothing of it, nor ever heard news of his Procurations; wherefore I doubt
there is some foul play in his Case, or the Instructions you writ to me were
not sufficient to find 'em. And that I may be more certifi'd in it, you should
tell me, cujus Diocesis, of what Diocese the said Friar Dom. Phillippe was, and
if you have heard nothing to give more light in the matter, as if it was pure
and simpliciter, or causa permutationis.

LETTER XI.
My Lord,
WHat I writ to you of my Lord Cardinal du Bellay's Answer, when I presented
him your Letters, ought not to displease your Lordship. My Lord of Mascon has
sent you an Account of the whole Matter, and we are not yet like to have a
Legate in France. It Is certain, that the King has presented the Cardinal of
Lorrain to the Pope. But I believe, that the Cardinal du B^llay will endeavor
by all means possible to get it for himself. The old Proverb is true* which
says, Nemo sibi secundus. And I shrewdly suspect by certain signs that I see,
that my Lord Cardinal du B^llay will engage the Pope on his behalf, and thus be
made acceptable to the King. Nevertheless be not uneasy, if his Answer be a
little ambiguous in your concern.

LETTER XII.
My Lord,
THe Grains which I sent you, I can assure you, are the best of Naples, of the
same which his Holiness has caused to be sowed in his Privy-Garden of Belveder.
There are no other kinds of Sallads on this side but those of Nasidord and
Arroussa, but those of Leguge seem to me altogether as good, and somewhat more
sweet and grateful to the Stomach, and particularly better for you; for those
of Naples, in my opinion, are too hot and tough.

As for the Season for sowing 'em, you must caution your Gardeners not to sow
'em altogether so early as they do on this side, for it is not warm Weather so
soon with you as here. They may very well sow your Sallads twice a year, that
is to say, in Lent, and in November; and they may sow the white Cards or
Thistles in August and September; the Melons, Pompions, and the others in
March; fencing them for some days with Mats, and a thin Layer of Horse-dung,
not altogether rotten, when they fear it will freeze. Many other Grains besides
are sold here, as Alexandria Gilliflowers, Matronal-Violets, and Shrubs, with
which they refresh their Chambers in the Summer, called Belvedere, and other
Physical Herbs. But this would be more for my Lady d'Estissac's turn. If you
please to have of all sorts, I will send them you without fail. But I am forced
to have recourse again to your Alms; for the Thirty Crowns which you ordered to
be paid me here, are almost gone, yet I have converted none of them to any ill
use, nor for eating, for I Eat and Drink at my Lord Cardinal du Bellay's, or at
my Lord of Masc^n's. But a great deal of Money goes away in these silly Postage
of Letters, Chamberrent, and wearing Apparel, tho I am as frugal as I can be.
If you will be pleased to send me a Bill of Exchange, I hope I shall make use
of it wholly to your Service, and not remain ungrateful. I see in this City a
thousand pretty cheap things, which are brought from Cyprus, Candia, and
Constantinople. If you think fit, I will send what I think fittest of them to
you and my Lady d'Estissac. The Carriage from hence to Lions will cost nothing.

Thanks be to God I have made an end of my business, and it has cost me no more
than the taking out of the Bulls, his Holiness having, of his own good Nature,
given me the Composition. And I believe you will find the Proceedings right
enough, and that I have obtained nothing by them, but what is just and lawful.
But I have been obliged to advise very much with able Counsel, that every thing
might be according to due form; and I dare modestly tell you, that I have in a
manner hardly made use of my Lord Cardinal du Bellay, or my Lord Ambassador,
tho out of their kindness, they not only offered me their own good Word and
Favor, but absolutely to make use of the King's Name.

LETTER XIII.
My Lord,
I Have not as yet presented your first Letters to the Bishop of Saints, for
he is not yet returned from Naples, whither he went as I writ to you before. He
is expected here within these three days: Then I will give him your second, and
entreat an Answer of it. I understand, that neither he, nor the Cardinals
Salviati, and Rodolph, nor Phillip Stozzi with his Money, have done any thing
with the Emperor in their Affair, tho they were willing to pay him a Million of
Gold upon the Nail, in the Name of all the Foreigners and Exiles of Florence,
also to finish la Rocca [the Fortress] begun at Florence, to maintain a
sufficient Garrison in it for ever in the Name of the Emperor, and to pay him
yearly an Hundred thousand Ducates, provided and upon Condition he restored
them to their former Goods, Lands, and Liberty.

On the contrary, the Duke of Florence was most honorably received by him at
his arrival, the Emperor went out before him, and, Post manus oscula, he
ordered him to be attended to the Castle of Capua in the same Town, where his
Natural Daughter has an Apartment; she is affianc'd to the said Duke of
Florence, by the Prince of Salerne, Viceroy of Naples, the Marquess de Vast,
the Duke D'Alva, and other Principal Lords of his Court. He held discourse with
her as long as he staid, Kissed her, and Supped with her; afterward the
abovementioned Cardinals, the Bishop of Xaintes and Strozzi never left
soliciting The Emperor has put them off for a final Resolution to his coming
to that Town, to the Rocca, which is a place of prodigious Strength, that the
Duke has built at Florence. Over the Portico he has caused an Eagle to be
painted with Wings as large as the Sails of the Wind-mills of Mirebalais,
thereby declaring and insinuating, that he holds of no body but the Emperor.
And in fine, he has so cunningly carried on his Tyranny, that the Florentines
have declared before the Emperor, nomine Communitatis [in the Name of the
Commonalty] that they will have no other Lord but him. It Is certain, that he
has severely punished the Foreigners and Exiles. A Pasquil has been lately set
up, wherein it is said, To Strozzi,
Pugna pro patria. [Fight for thy Country.]
To Alezander Duke of Florence,
Datum serva. [What's given thee, keep.]
To the Emperor,
Quae nocitura tenes quamvis fint chara relinque.
Quit what will hurt thee, tho it is never so dear.
To the King,
Quod potes id tenta.
Dare what thou can.
To the Cardinals Salviati and Rodolph,
Hos brevitas sensus fecit conjungere bines.
Pure want of Sense unites these Blocks,
As petty Tradesmen join their Stocks.


LETTER XIV.
My Lord,
I Writ to you, that the Duke of Ferrara is returned from Naples, and retired
to Ferrara. Her Highness, the Lady Renee, is brought to Bed of a Daughter; she
had another fine Daughter before, between Six and Seven years of Age, and a
little Son of Three years old. He could not agree with the Pope, because he
demanded an excessive Sum of Money for the Investiture of his Lands.
Notwithstanding, he had abated fifty thousand Crowns for the love of the said
Lady, and this by the Solicitations of my Lords the Cardinals du Bellay and
Mascon, still to increase the Conjugal Affection of the said Duke toward her.
This was the occasion of Lion Jamet's coming to this Town, and they only
differed for Fifteen thousand Crowns; but they could not agree, because the
Pope would have him acknowledge, that he held and possessed all his Lands
entirely in see of the Apostolical See, which the other would not. For he would
acknowledge no more than his deceased Father had acknowledged, and what the
Emperor had adjudg'd at Bolonia, by a Decree in the time of the deceased Pope
Clement.

Thus he departed, re infecta, [without doing any thing,] and went to the
Emperor, who promised him at his coming, that he would easily make the Pope
consent, and come to the Point contained in his said Decree; and that he should
go home, leaving an Ambassador with him, to solicit the Affair when he came
on this side, and that he should not pay the Sum already agreed upon, before he
heard further from him. The Craft lies here, that the Emperor wants Money, and
seeks it on all hands, and Taxes all the world he can, and borrows it from all
Parts. When he comes hither, he will demand some of the Pope, it is a plain
case. For he will represent to him, That he has made all these Wars against the
Turk and Barberossa, to secure Italy and the Pope, and that he must of
necessity contribute to it. The Pope will answer, That he has no Money, and
will manifestly prove his Poverty to him. Then the Emperor without disbursing
any thing, will demand the Duke of Ferrara 's of him, which he knows he may
command at a word, and this is the Mystery of the Matter. Yet it is not certain
whether things will be managed thus or no.

LETTER XV.
My Lord,
YOu ask whether the Lord Pietro Ludovico, is the Pope's Legitimate Son or
Bastard; be assured, the Pope was never married, which is as much as to say,
that the aforesaid Gentleman is certainly a Bastard; The Pope had a very
beautiful Sister. There is to be seen to this day, at the Palace in that
Apartment where the Summists reside, built by Pope Alexander, an Image of our
Lady, which ('it is said) was drawn after that Gentlewoman: She was married to a
Gentleman, Cousin to the Lord Rance, who being in the War, in the Expedition of
Naples, the said Pope Alexander * * *: Now the Lord Rance having certain
knowledge of the thing, gave notice of it to his Cousin, Telling him, that be
ought not to suffer such a wrong done to their Family by a Spanish Pope; and
that if he would endure it, he himself would not. In short, her Husband killed
her; for which Fact the present Pope grieved: And to assuage his Sorrow,
Alexander made him a Cardinal, being yet but very young, and bestowed several
other Marks of his favor upon him.

At that time the Pope kept a Roman Lady della Casa Ruffina, and by her had a
Daughter who was married to the Lord Bauge, Count of Sancta Fiore, who died in
this Town since I came hither. By her he has had one of the two little
Cardinals (who is called the Cardinal of Sancta Fiore.) The Pope likewise had a
Son, who is the said Pietro Ludovico, concerning whom you inquire, who has
married the Daughter of the Count de Cervelle, on whom he has got a whole
Houseful of Children, and among others the little Cardinalicule Farnese, who
was made Vice Chancellor by the death of the late Cardinal de Medicis. By what
is said you may judge, why the Pope did not very well love the Lord Rance, and
vice versa, [on the other side] the Lord Rance put no great confidence in him:
Whence arises a great quarrel between my Lord John-Paul de Cere, Son to the
said Lord Rance, and the abovenamed Petro Ludivico, for he is resolved to
revenge the death of his Aunt.

But he is quit of it on the part of the said Lord Rance, for he di'd the
Eleventh day of this Month, going a Hunting, in which he extremely delighted,
old as he was. The occasion was this, He had got some Turkish Horses from the
Fairs of Racana, and as he was hunting on one of them that was very
tender-mouth'd, it fell, tumbled over him, and bruised him with the Saddle-bow
so severely, that he did not live above half an hour after the fall. This was a
great loss to the French, for the King in him has lost a good Servant for his
Affairs in Italy: It Is rightly said, that the Lord John-Paul his Son will be no
less hereafter. But it will be a long time e're he gets such Experience in
feats of Arms, or so great a Reputation among the Commanders and Soldiers, as
the late brave man had. I wish with all my heart that my Lord d'Estissac, by
his death, had the County of Pontoise; For, it is said, it brings a good Revenue.

To assist at the Funeral, and to comfort the Marchioness his Wife, my Lord
Cardinal has sent to Ceres, near Twenty miles from this Town, my Lord de
Rambouillet and the Abbot of St. Nicaise, who was a near Kinsman to the
deceased (I believe you have seen him at Court) he is a little man, all life,
who was called the Archdeacon of the Ursins; Besides, he has sent some others
of his Prothonotaries; which likewise my Lord of Mascon has done.

LETTER XVI.
My Lord,
I Defer to my next to give you more at large the News concerning the Emperor;
for his Design is not yet perfectly discovered. He is still at Naples, but is
expected here by the end of this Month. Great preparations are made for his
coming, and abundance of Triumphal Arches. His four Harbingers have been a good
while here in Town; two of them Spaniards, one Burgundian, and the fourth a
Flemming.

It Is great pity to see the Ruins of the Churches, Palaces and Houses which the
Pope has caused to be demolished and pulled down to make and level him a way.
For the Charges of his Reception he has laid a Tax on the College of Cardinals,
on those who have Places at Court, and the Artificers of the Town as much as
the very Aquarols. The Town is already full of Foreigners.

On the Fifth of this Month the Cardinal of Trent (Tridentinus) arrived, being
sent here by the Emperor. His Train is very numerous, and more sumptuous than
the Pope's. He had with him above a hundred Germans all dressed alike; their
Gowns were Red, with a Yellow Galloon; and on their right Sleeve was
embroydered a Wheat-sheave ti'd close, and round it was written VNITAS.

I hear he is much for Peace, and reconciling all the Christian Princes. He
eagerly desires a General Council, whatever is done in other matters. I was
present when he said to my Lord Cardinal du Bellay: His Holiness, the
Cardinals, Bishops and Prelates of the Church are against a Council, and will
by no means hear any thing of it, though they are pressed by Secular Princes on
that Subject; but I see the Time at hand when the Prelates of the Church shall
be reduced to demand a Council, and the Laity will not hearken to it. This will
be when the Latter have taken from the Church all the Wealth and Patrimony
which they had given, while Ecclesiastics by the means of frequent Councils
maintained Peace and Unity among the Laity.

Andrew Doria came to this Town on the Third of this Month in no very good
Equipage. No manner of particular respect was shown him at his Arrival, save
only that the Lord Pietro Ludovico conducted him as far as the Palace of the
Cardinal Camerlingo, who is a Genoese, of the House of Spinola. The next day he
saluted the Pope, and the day after went away for Genoa, on the Emperor's
behalf, to inform himself underhand concerning the Dispositions of the French
about the War.

We have had here a positive Account of the Old Queen of England's Death; and
they add, That the Princess her Daughter lies very ill.

However, The Bull that was to be issued out against the King of England to
excommunicate him, and to interdict and proscribe his Kindom, did not pass at
the Consistory, because of the Articles, De commeatibus externorian and
commerciis mutuis, Of the Passages of Foreigners and Mutual Intercourses, which
my Lord Cardinal Du Bellay and the Bishop of Mascon opposed in the King's name,
on account of the Interests which he pretends to have in it. It has been put
off till the Emperor's Arrival.

My Lord, I most humbly recommend my self to your kind Favor, praying God that
it may please him to keep you long in health and prosperity.

Rome, Feb. 13. MDXXXVI. Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Francis Rabelais.

The End of the Letters.
THE CONTENTS.
The Fourth Book of Pantagruel.
CHap. 1. How Pantagruel went to Sea, to visit the Oracle of Bacbuc, alias the
Holy Bottle.page 1 Chap. 2. How Pantagruel bought many Rarities in the Island
of Medamothy. 7 Chap. 3. How Pantagruel received a Letter from his Father
Gargantua, and of the strange way to have speedy News from far distant places.
11 Chap. 4. How Pantagruel writ to his Father Gargantua, and sent him several
Curiosities. 15 Chap. 5. How Pantagruel met a Ship with Passengers returning
from Lantern-Land. 19 Chap. 6. How the Fray being over, Panurge cheapned one of
Dingdong's Sheep. 23 Chap. 7. Which if you read, you will find how Panurge
bargained with Dingdong. 27 Chap. 8. How Panurge caused Dingdong and his Sheep
to be drowned in the Sea. 32 Chap. 9. How Pantagruel arrived at the Island of
Enasin, and of the strange ways of being akin in that Country. page 35 Chap.
10. How Pantagruel went ashore at the Island of Cheli, where he saw King St.
Panigon. 41 Chap. 11. Why Monks love to be in Kitchins. 44 Chap. 12. How
Pantagruel passed by the Land of Petifogging, and of the strange way of living
among the Catchpoles. 48 Chap. 13. How, like Master Francis Villon, the Lord of
Basche commended his Servants. 54 Chap. 14. A further Account of Catchpoles,
who were drub'd at Basches House. 59 Chap. 15. How the Ancient Custom at
Nuptials is renewed by the Catchpole. 63 Chap. 16. How Friar Ihon made trial of
the Nature of the Catchpoles. 68 Chap. 17. How Pantagruel came to the Island of
Tohu and Bohu, and of the strange death of Widenostrils the Swallower of
Windmills. 72 Chap. 18. How Pantagruel met with a great Storm at Sea. 77 Chap.
19. What Countenances Panurge and Friar Ihon kept during the Storm. 81 Chap.
20. How the Pilots were forsaking their Ships in the greatest stress of
weather. 85 Chap. 21. A Continuation of the Storm, with a short Discourse on
the Subject of making Testaments at Sea. page 89 Chap. 22. An End of the Storm.
93 Chap. 23. How Panurge played the Good Fellow when the Storm was over. 97
Chap. 24. How Panurge was said to have been afraid, without reason, during the
Storm. 100 Chap. 25. How after the Storm, Pantagruel went on shore in the
Islands of the Macreons. 103 Chap. 26. How the good Macrobius gave us an
Account of the Mansion, and decease of the Heroes. 106 Chap. 27. Pantagruel's
Discourse of the decease of Heroic Souls; and of the dreadful Prodigies that
happened before the death of the late Lord de Langey. 110 Chap. 28. How
Pantagruel related a very sad Story of the death of the Heroes. 114 Chap. 29.
How Pantagruel sailed by the Sneaking Island, where Shrovetide reigned. 117
Chap. 30. How Shrovetide is anatomized and described by Xenomanes. 120 Chap.
31. Shrovetide's outward parts anatomized. 123 Chap. 32. A Continuation of
Shrovetide's Countenance. 126 Chap. 33. How Pantagruel discovered a monstrous
Physetere, or Whirlpool near the Wild Island. page 131 Chap. 34. How the
monstrous Physetere was slain by Pantagruel. 134 Chap. 35. How Pantagruel went
on shore in the wild Island, the ancient Abode of the Chitterlings. 138 Chap.
36. How the wild Chitterlings laid an Ambuscado for Pantagruel. 141 Chap. 37.
How Pantagruel sent for Colonel Mawl-Chitterling, and Colonel Cut-Pudding, with
a Discourse well worth your hearing, about the Names of Places and Persons. 144
Chap. 38. How Chitterlings are not to be slighted by Men. 150 Chap. 39. How
Friar Ihon joined with the Cooks to fight the Chitterlings. 152 Chap. 40. How
Friar Ihon fitted up the Sow; and of the valiant Cooks thht went into it. 155
Chap. 41. How Pantagruel broke the Chitterlings at the Knees. 159 Chap. 42. How
Pantagruel held a Treaty with Niphleseth Queen of the Chitterlings. 163 Chap.
43. How Pantagruel went into the Island of Ruach. 165 Chap. 44. How a small
Rain lays a high Wind. 169 Chap. 45. How Pantagruel went ashore in the Island
of Pope Figland. 172 Chap. 46. How a Junior Devil was fooled by a Husbandman of
Pope Figland. page 177 Chap. 47. How the Devil was deceived by an Old Woman of
Pope-Figland. 182 Chap. 48. How Pantagruel went ashore at the Island of
Papimany. 185 Chap. 49. How Homenas, Bishop of Papimany, showed us the Uranopet
Decretals. 189 Chap. 50. How Homenas showed us the Arch-Type, or Representation
of a Pope. 393 Chap. 51. Table-Talk in Praise of the Decretals. 196 Chap. 52. A
Continuation of the Miracles caused by the Decretals. 200 Chap. 53. How, by the
Virtue of the Decretals, Gold is subtly drawn out of France to Rome. 207
Chap. 54. How Homenas gave Pantagruel some Bon-Christian Pears. 212 Chap. 55.
How Pantagruel being at Sea, heard various unfrozen Words. 215 Chap. 56. How
among the Frozen Words Pantagruel found some odd ones. 219 Chap. 57. How
Pantagruel went ashore at the Dwelling of Gaster, the first Master of Arts in
the World. 223 Chap. 58. How at the Court of the Master of Ingenuity,
Pantagruel detested the Engastrimithes, and the Gastrolaters. 227 Chap. 59. Of
the ridiculous Statue Manduce; and how, and what the Gastrolaters sacrifice to
their Ventripotent God. page 230 Chap. 60. What the Gastrolaters sacrificed to
their God on interlarded Fish-Days. 235 Chap. 61. How Gaster invented Means to
get and preserve Corn. 239 Chap. 62. How Gaster invented an Art to avoid being
hurt or touched by Cannon Balls. 243 Chap. 63. How Pantagruel fell asleep near
the Island of Chaneph, and of the Problems proposed to be solved when he waked.
248 Chap. 64. How Pantagruel gave no Answer to the Problems. 253 Chap. 65. How
Pantagruel past the Time with his Servants. 258 Chap. 66. How by Pantagruel's
Order the Muses were saluted near the Isle of Ganabim. 263 Chap. 67. How
Panurge bewrayed himself for fear, and of the huge Cat Rodilardus, which he
took for a puny Devil.266
The Fifth Book of Rabelais, treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the
Good Pantagruel.
CHap. 1. How Pantagruel arrived at the Ringing Island, and of the Noise that
we heard. page 1 Chap. 2. How the Ringing Island had been inhabited by the
Siticines, who were become Birds. 5 Chap. 3. How there is but one Popehawk in
the Ringing Island. 8 Chap. 4. How the Birds of the Ringing Island were all
Passengers. 11 Chap. 5. Of the dumb Knighthawks of the Ringing Island. 15 Chap.
6. How the Birds are crammed in the Ringing Island. 18 Chap. 7. How Pantagruel
came to the Island of the Apedefers, or Ignoramus's, with long Claws, and
crooked Paws, and of terrible Adventures and Monsters there. 22 Chap. 8. How
Panurge related to Master Aedituus, the Fable of the Horse and the Ass. 32
Chap. 9. How with much ado we got a sight of the Popehawk. 40 Chap. 10. How we
arrived at the Island of Tools.page 44 Chap. 11. How Pantagruel arrived at the
Island of Sharping. 48 Chap. 12. How we past through the Wicket, inhabited by
Gripe-men-all, Archduke of the Furred Law-Cats. 51 Chap. 13. How Gripe-men-all
propounded a Riddle to us. 57 Chap. 14. How Panurge solved Gripe-men-all's
Riddle. 61 Chap. 15. How the Furred Law-Cats live on Corruption. 65 Chap. 16.
How Friar Ihon talks of rooting out the Furred Law-Cats. 68 Chap. 17. How we
went For-wards, and how Panurge had like to have been killed. 76 Chap. 18. How
our Ships were stranded, and we were relieved by some People that were subject
to Queen Whims [qui tenoient de la Quinte.] 79 Chap. 19. How we arrived at the
Queendom of Whims, or Entelechy. 85 Chap. 20. How the Quintessence cured the
Sick with a Song. 89 Chap. 21. How the Queen passed her Time after Dinner. 94
Chap. 22. How Queen Whims's Officers were employed; and how the said Lady
retained us among her Abstractors. 99 Chap. 23. How the Queen was served at
Dinner, and of her way of eating.page 104 Chap. 24. How there was a Ball in the
manner of a Turnament, at which Queen Whim was present. 108 Chap. 25. How the
Thirty two Persons at the Ball fought. 112 Chap. 26. How we came to the Island
of Odes, where the Ways go up and down. 122 Chap. 27. How we came to the Island
of Sandals or Slaves; and of the Order of Semiquaver Friars. 125 Chap. 28. How
Panurge asked a Semiquaver Friar many Questions, and was only answered in
Monosyllables. 135 Chap. 29. How Epistemon disliked the Institution of Lent.
146 Chap. 30. How we came to the Land of Satin. 151 Chap. 31. How in the Land
of Satin we saw Hearsay, who kept a School of Vouching. 159 Chap. 32. How we
came in sight of Lantern-Land. 164 Chap. 33. How we landed at the Port of the
Lychnobians, and came to Lantern-Land. 165 Chap. 34. How we arrived at the
Oracle of the Bottle. 167 Chap. 35. How we went Under ground to come to the
Temple of the Holy-Bottle; and how Chinon is the oldest City in the World.page
17^ Chap. 36. How we went down the Tetradic Steps, and of Panurge's Fear. 175
Chap. 37. How the Temple Gates, in a wonderful manner, opened of themselves.
179 Chap. 38. Of the Temple's admirable Pavement. 182 Chap. 39. How we saw
Bacchus's Army drawn up in Battalia in Mosaic Work. 94 Chap. 40. How the
Battle, in which the Good Bacchus overthrew the Indians, was represented in
Mosaic Work. 188 Chap. 41. How the Temple was illuminated with a wonderful
Lamp. 192 Chap. 42. How the Priestess Bacbuc showed us a Fantastic Fountain in
the Temple. 195 Chap. 43. How the Fountain Water had the taste of Wine,
according to the Imagination of those who drank of it.ib. Chap. 44. How the
Priestess Bacbuc equipt Panurge, in order to have the Word of the Bottle. 205
Chap. 45. How Bacbuc the High Priestess, brought Panurge before the Holy
Bottle. 208 Chap. 46. How Bacbuc explained the Word of the Goddess Bottle. 211
Chap. 47. How Panurge and the rest rim'd with Poetic Fury. 214 Chap. 48. How we
took our Leave of Bacbuc, and left the Oracle of the Holy Bottle.page 219
The most Certain, True and Infallible Pantagruelian Prognostication.
OF the Golden Number. page 227 Chap. 1. Of the Governor and Lords Ascendant
this Year. 228 Chap. 2. Of the Eclipses this Year. 229 Chap. 3. Of the Diseases
this Year. 230 Chap. 4. Of the Fruits of the Earth this Year. 232 Chap. 5. Of
the Disposition of the People this Year. 233 Chap. 6. Of the Condition of some
Countries. 239 Of the Four Seasons of the Year.
Chap. 7. Of the Spring. 242 Chap. 8. Of Summer. 244 Chap. 9. Of Autumn. 245
Chap. 10. Of Winter. 246

An Epistle by Pantagruel's Lymosin Grand Excoriator of the Latial Tongue, etc.
page 247 The Philosophical Cream of Encyclopedic Questions. 254 Two Epistles to
Two Women of different Humors.
To an Old Woman. 257 To another Woman of a quite different Humor. 260

Letters written by Francis Rabelais, M. D. during his stay in Italy, in the
Year 1536.
LEtter 1. To my Lord Bishop of Maillezais. page 1 Letter 2. 7 Letter 3. page 8
Letter 4. 9 Letter 5. 10 Letter 6. ib. Letter 7. 11 Letter 8. 13 Letter 9. 17
Letter 10. 19 Letter 11. 21 Letter 12. 22 Letter 13. 24 Letter 14. 27 Letter
15. 29 Letter 16.32
FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by Richard Baldwin.
BIbliotheca Politica: Or, An Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arguments as
well against as for the Late Revolution, are Impartially represented and
considered. In XIII. Dialogues. Collected out of the best Authors, both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added, An Alphabetical Index to the Whole Work.

The Four Epistles of A. G. Busbequins, concerning his Embassy into Turkey.
Being Remarks upon the Religion, Customs, Riches, Strength and Government of
that People. As also a Description of their chief Cities and Places of Trade
and Commerce. To which is added, His Advice how to manage War against the
Turks. Done into English.

The Bounds set to France by the Pyrenean Treaty; and the Interest of the
Confederates not to accept of the Offers of Peace made at this Time by the
French King To which are added some short Reflections; showing, How far England
is concerned in the Restitution of that Treaty. Together with a List of the
Towns and Countries that the French have taken since that Time.

Letters of State, written by Mr. John Milton, to most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe. From the Year 1649, till the Year 1659. To which is
added, An Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems; and a
Catalogue of his Works, never before Printed.

Mercury: Or, The Secret and Swift Messenger. Showing, How a Man may with
Privacy and Speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance. The 2d.
Edition. By the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, Late Lord Bishop of
Chester. Printed for R. Baldwin, where are to be had, The World in the Moon,
and Mathematical Magic.

Berault's French Grammar.


