THE REPUTATION OF Dr. OATS, (The First DISCOVERER of the horrid POPISH PLOT)
CLEARED IN THE TRIAL OF THOMAS KNOX, Formerly a Servant to the Earl of DANBY,
and the Lord DUNBLAIN, his Son; AND JOHN LANE, Formerly a Servant to Doctor
OATS. WHEREIN Is set forth their Endeavors to scandalize the Doctor, thereby
to invalidate his Evidence; and how the Lords in the Tower, and others, hired
them to it.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Angel in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange, 1679.

THE REPUTATION OF Dr. OATS (The First DISCOVERER of the horrid POPISH PLOT)
CLEARED.
DOctor TITUS OATS, having on the 19th day of November, 1679. preferred a Bill
of Indictment against Thomas Knox, who was formerly Servant to the Earl of
Danby, and his Son the Lord Dunblain, and John Lane and William Osborn, (both)
once his Servants. The grand Jury found the Bill against the three. But, Osborn
being fled, the Court appointed the other two to be tried on Saturday the 22th
instant; upon which day the Jury not filling in time, and some other business
intervening, the Court adjourned the said Trial until Tuesday, the Twenty fifth
of November.

At which time the Court being sat, there appeared therein a great number of
Persons of Honor, and Gentlemen of good Quality, to see and hear a Trial of
such a nature, and a Scrutiny that so much concerned the Honor and Reputation
of the Protestant Religion, and upon which so much depended the display of
Popish Machination.

The Prisoners being brought to the Bar, the Jury sworn, whereof Sir John Kirk
was Foreman, and the Prisoners arraigned, their Indictment was read, to which
they severally pleaded, not guilty.

In the Indictment is included in a manner the Sum of their whole Crimes, That
whereas it had been proved, that there was a most horrid Plot carried on by
Roman Catholics, in and out of the Kingdom, against the Life and Government of
His most Sacred Majesty, and that diverse had been deservedly executed for the
same, and others lay still under Impeachment in the Tower of London, and
elsewhere, for the same Crimes, as the Lords, Powis, Petre, Arundel, Bellasis,
Castlemain, etc. as the said Knox, Lane, and Osborn well knew. Notwithstanding
which, they the said Knox, Lane, and Osborn, did maliciously and falsely
endeavor to stifle the farther Discovery of the Plot as much as in them lay.
And in favor to the said Impeached Lords and others, and for the preventing of
Justice, and that the said Persons might escape the punishment of the Law, did
slander and defame Dr. Titus Oats Clerk, and William Bedlow Gentleman, two of
the Discoverers of the said Plot; and that in order thereunto, Knox did
heretofore endeavor to bribe one Mr. Wiggens, then Servant to Mr. Bedlow, to
give him Copies of all his Master's Papers of Secrecy, that he should take
notice of all such Lords as came at any time to discourse his Master; and give
him their Names in writing.

That the said Knox had obliged himself to introduce the said Wiggens and Lane
into Company with the Earl of Danby; at any hour in the night Season.

That the Countess of Danby, who well approved of what Lane had engaged to
endeavor, did likewise offer to introduce Wiggens, and his Mother to her Lord
in her own Coach at any time.

That Knox had diverse Conferences with Lane and Osborn in the Cloyster-walks of
the Abbey Church at Westminster.

That upon discovery of this Design in February last, Dr. Oats expelled from
his Service the said Lane and Osborn; but that then this Knox did hire them
Lodgings in obscure places, and sometimes lay with them.

That Knox had forged several Letters, as from Lane and Osborn, directed to
himself, therein expressing how perplexed in Conscience they were at the
malicious Contrivances of their Master Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow, against the
Earl of Danby, and other Lords in the Tower. All which Contrivances they were
resolved to discover, and also make it appear, that their said Master was a
most vicious and infamous Man, and had made many attempts of Buggery upon the
Body of Lane.

In pursuance of which devilish Design, they did repair to a Justice of Peace,
to give in upon Oath their Informations of these forged Crimes against the
Doctor, which the said Justice refusing to take, they drew up one themselves,
and delivered it unto the Lord Latimer, who kept it a few days, then delivered
it back, to be conveyed to the Lord Powis to amend.

That the Lord Powis did send it to one Mr. Henry Nevil, alias Pain, a
Prisoner in the Prison of the King's Bench, to enlarge and give colorable
Proofs thereunto

That the said Papers so enlarged and amended, were conveyed unto the Lord
Castlemain to do the like. From whence they came to the hands of Mr. Thomas
Willoughby, alias Dangerfield, who out of them drew Affidavits, which the said
Lane offered to swear to before he had read them; adding, that he would swear
any thing against his Master, so that he might be a gainer.

That afterward they did swear these forged and contrived Informations before
the Worshipful Sir James Butler, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace.

That the said Knox did at several times purposely drop or let fall several
pieces of Gold called Guinneys, and sometimes Silver, which they took up as
their own.

That Knox did promise them, as from the Earl of Danby, beneficial Places,
either in the Treasury or Customs, and promised them, as from the other Lords
in the Tower, Five hundred Pounds in hand, and each One hundred Pound per Annum
to be settled upon them.

That after the Design had gone thus far, they being in February last
apprehended and committed to the Gate House, were examined upon their Oaths by
Sir William Waller; and Colonel Warcup; to whom they confessed, that all they
had sworn against Dr. Oats was malicious and false, and that they were
prompted, hired, and encouraged thereunto by the said Knox, and that they did
verily believe, that the Earl of Danby, in confidence of the success of this
Design, did surrender himself to the black Rod.

Soon after this, they were brought before a Committee of Lords then sitting in
the Lord Privy-Seal's Chamber, where also appeared the two Justices, who showed
their Lordships the said Examinations, which they owned, and humbly prayed the
mercy and forgiveness of their Lordships, and their Master Dr. Oats.

A few days after which they were discharged from the Gate House; but no sooner
had they their liberty, but upon the Instigation a second time, of the said
Knox, in behalf of the Lords, and other Popish persons, but they most
impudently and maliciously resumed the prosecution of their aforesaid false and
forged Informations against the said Dr. Oats; and have also been received and
lodged in the House of the Lord Powis, and at his charge, and with and from the
said Lord, and other Lords in the Tower, had frequent Conferences and
Directions.

That when they lodged at Mrs. Cellier's House, they had an allowance of Ten
Shillings per Week.

And this present Term did bring the said false, forged, and slanderous Papers
and Matters into the Court of King's Bench, thence and thereupon to frame an
Indictment against the said Dr. Oats, which was by the Jury found Ignoramus,
and thrown out.

After all which they now stand here to make Defense to these their villainous
Crimes of Forgery and Perjury, and slandering the King's Evidence.

The Doctor had many Witnesses (13) to prove the Indictment against them.

I. Sir William Waller, and Colonel Warcup, produced Lane and Osborn's
Confession upon Oath in February last, as is beforementioned in justification
of Dr. Oats.

II. Mr. Wiggens and his Mother proved Knox his tampering with them against Mr.
Bedlow.

III. One of His Majesty's Warders, and Mr. Samuel Oats, declared, That the
said Lane and Osborn confessed to them, what great Preferments and Rewards they
were to have for their work, when done.

IV. Mr. Dangerfield (whose Pardon passed the Great Seal the day before) did
fully declare how and in what manner he was employed by the said Lords in the
Tower, to tamper with, and corrupt the said Lane and Osborn with Knox; and did
clearly make out, how the said forged Papers were mended and enlarged by him
and them, and that the Lady Powis did deliver, or cause to be delivered to the
now indicted Persons, or their Use, Ten Shillings per Week; which Evidence was
strengthened by concurring circumstances from two persons more; and besides
them, other Witnesses, which sufficiently proved the Indictment, so that the
Jury, without removing from the Bar, pronounced them guilty; at which the
People gave a great shout: And the Prisoners were committed to the Prison of
the King's Bench.

His Majesty was graciously pleased to give Dr Oats an Order upon the Lords of
his Treasury, for the forthwith reimbursing him all such Moneys, as the full
Charge of this Prosecution has amounted unto.

The Judges and Chief Officers of the Court, together with the Jury, had that
Honor and Esteem likewise for the Doctor, and were so far convinced of the
Injury done him, by being put to such great and unnecessary Charge, that they
all forgave him his Fees.

November 27. Dr. Oats appeared at the King's Bench Bar, and demanded Judgment
against the said Knox and Lane, which by reason that the Verdict was not
recorded; or if recorded, that the Record was not filed up, or some other
formality in Law; they could not pass Judgment until the next Term.

The Council for the Doctor were, Sergeant Maynard, The Attorney General, The
Solicitor General, The Recorder, Sir Francis Winnington, Mr. Trenchard, Mr.
Williams, Mr. Smith.


The Council against the Doctor were,

Mr. Scroggs, the Lord Chief Justice's Son, With two more.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A True Narrative of the Popish PLOT against King CHARLES the First and the
Protestant Religion, as it was discovered by Andreas ab Habernfeld to Sir
William Boswell the English Ambassador at the Hague, and by him transmitted to
Archbishop Laud, who communicated it to the KING. The whole Discovery being
found amongst the Archbishop's Papers, by Mr. Prynn, who was ordered to search
his Study in the Tower by a Commitee of the then Parliament May 31. 1643. With
some Historical Remarks on the Jesuits, and a Vindication of the Protestant
Dissenters from Disloyalty. Also a Complete History of the Papists late
Presbyterian PLOT discovered by Mr. Dangerfield, wherein an Account is given of
some late Transactions of Sir Robert Peyton.


