A REPRESENTATION of the present Affairs and Interests of the most considerable
parts of EUROPE, more especially of those of the NETHERLANDS: As they now
stand, in the beginning of the year 1677.

Laid open in a Letter from Holland.

By a Lover of Truth and Peace.

Anno Dom. 1676/7.

SR,
Upon some serious Considerations lately had by us both touching the great
Confusion and Calamities of sundry parts of Europe, and particularly of the
Netherlands, you were pleased to put such a value upon my judgment (beyond
it is deserts) as to ask my opinion of the source and progress of those Evils,
together with my Advice concerning such Remedies as might restore the Lands to
their former rest, and the Inhabitants to their ancient foelicity and safety.

Sr, This was not the work of One day, nor is it now possible in one Letter to
comprehend so ample a Relation, or discussion of those things wherein so many,
so grand, and so various circumstances occur; Neither have I now the leisure to
reduce them into such a distinct Method as you might expect. But according to
the several discourses I daily am accosted with, and the observations I have
made of persons and passages, I shall give you a general view of our Maladies;
the idea whereof may happily somewhat move your compassion, though it cannot have
so great an influence upon the affections of your Countrymen, as upon those on
this side the water, who have born and are yet likely to bear the heat and
burden of a sad and doleful day: And as for an Esculapius to heal these
dreadful wounds, something we shall assay, though rather wish than hope for
such an Expedient; unless you in England, sensible, that when your Neighbors
houses are on fire, apprehending your own cannot long escape, shall be moved to
add a helping hand ere it be too late.

Now, Sr, for the better answering of your expectation, ere I give you my own
Observations, I judge it not amiss to propose to you the several sentiments of
the 2. great Heads of the present contending parties: and since Our ears are
daily filled with the noise of their loud boastings, high pretenses and mutual
calumniations, I take the Freedom to exercise your patience with an account of
their own Rhodomantado's; which I cannot better do than by personating One of
each Nation.

I shall first introduce the Frenchman: who would persuade us to a belief that
his King is the only qualified Prince of Christendom to become Emperor, not
only of Europe, but of the world. And thus you may hear him Flourishing over
the encomiums of his King, Country and Cause.

In the first place (says the Monsieur) I say, That my Sovereign Lord and
Master, His most Christian Majesty is every way qualified for the Sovereign
Imperial Dignity and Charge: I shall begin with his Person, which no man can
deny to be the most graceful of all the Princes on earth: his mind yet more
richly adorned with all the graces and transcendent Excellencies and Endowments
which may become a Prince. Had he lived in some days, no doubt, he would have
been reckoned amongst the Gods. He came into the world with a wonder, therefore
was he named Dieu done, Gods gift: and being so miraculously given beyond all
expectation, 't is a sign he came to do some grand work; he being prophesied of
by many, as if he were to begin or set up the Fifth Monarchy: and to me this
seems evident: for when you shall well weigh what great and glorious things he
has don, in raising the Monarchy of France to that degree of height as has
never yet hitherto been known, adding thereto so many great Conquests, and that
in very few years, to the astonishment of all the Princes in Europe, and the
admiration of the Great Turk, who, you find, sends an Ambassador to treat his
Christian Majesty with the Title of Emperor, which never formerly was given
to any King of France since Charle Main's time; and when you shall truly
consider the great power of my King at Land and Sea, certainly you must yield
him to be the most potent of all the Princes of Christendom: He is able to
bring two hundred thousand men to fight, and yet not take three men out of a
Parish: for it is undeniable, that in France alone and it is limits, leaving out
Lorrain, Burgundy, French County and Alsatia, he has within the French
Monarchy, one hundred and thirty three thousand Parishes. But, before I speak
of his Riches and vast Dominions, I ought to mention something of the virtues of
his mind, which are so numerous, that certainly never have so many met together
in any Prince in our modern times: he is all bon Air and courteous beyond
expression: and yet in labors, vigilancie, and hazards, who ever more
sedulous? And what Prince ever out-did him in distributions of justice and
rewards to the meritorious? What encouragements does he give to the Vertuoso's?
What pensions are given to the widows and orphans of the brave English and
other Nations that have served him well? Nor can his own Subjects complain of
missing their reward when they deserve it. And this his glorious Example has
begotten an imitation in his Subjects: What numbers of brave Generals and
skillful Officers is France plentifully furnished with? What a disciplined Army
is that of the French? none in in the world to be compared to them. And if you
take notice of the Riches of my King in the Number of his Subjects, then you
will grant, he exceeds all Europe.

Charle Magne was of opinion that France, for it is situation, was the most
convenient and commodious Country of all Europe for making the Residential
seat for the Emperor: and Charle le Magne had made it so, had not these two
considerations overswayed, viz. (1.) That the German Princes and their
Countries might so have taken the opportunity of returning back to their
Heathenism, to which they were very inclining. (2) Since at the time of his
disposal of his possessions amongst his Sons, France (now so called) was under
several Princes and Potentates, which Charle Magne in justice could not turn
out of their lawful rights, as Languedock, Provence, Britain, Normandy and
several other Provinces: But now these, and diverse more, as Lorain, Alsatia,
French County, Burgundy and a great part of the Netherlands are of later years
added and laid to the Monarchy of France. I am of opinion, that if my King
should join with his Majesty of Great Britain, they Two might divide the world
between them; the One to be Emperor at Land, the Other at Sea: and it is both
reasonable and natural it should be so: for We and the English are So mixed in
blood, and our consanguinity such that We are One People: The English have been
several ages in France; as may be seen by the stately Churches and other
Fabrics they built, whilst in France: Then the Normans possessed and governed
England; as may appear by the Laws written in the French tongue, and yet
remaining in practice to this very day: so that we are an English-French, and
they a French-English. But if the King of Great Britain will not join with nor
assist my King, yet he must, notwithstanding that, be Emperor; all things tend
to it. Is not Paris now become like Rome in old time, who gave Laws and taught
Manners to the whole world? As in those days all Nations learned Latin, that
thereby they might understand the Civilities, Laws and Education of the Romans:
So now, Do not all Nations learn French? Do not you send all your choice and
Noblest-born Princes, Gentry, and richest Merchants Sons to our Academies in
Paris? Do not We impose on you all the Modes of France? Take but a view of all
Christendom, and you will find, That there is not so much as a little German
Prince but he must have a Frenchman for his Barber, Valet de chamber, or
Lackey; and one of these often makes a Governor for the young Prince, and a
most Excellent Privy Counselor. Sometimes I have known a Prince that has kept
himself undrest six days, expecting with great impatience his perwiggs and
feathers, and other gallantries out of France. Travel into what parts you
please where there is a Court, as in Rome, and even in Madrid itself, there you
shall find every Prince and Gentilman has a Frenchman to teach him how to
dress himself, yea, and how to eat with a bon mein. Go no farther than to
Amsterdam, or more especially to the Hagh, where you may observe all to be
turned perfect Monsieurs: and in Amsterdam the old Hollander is so changed,
that there is scarce such a Creature to be found: there is not a rich Merchants
daughter there that will admit of a Bezuca, much less go to Church to be
married until she has her Modes, Curls for her head, her Tower etc. from
France, or at lest, buy the same of a French Madam, who, with the help of a
French Dancing Master, set's Mrs. Brides Locks, teaches her the Courant and
Coupe, and then persuades her, She is the most complete Madam a la mode in the
Town; giving as an advise, that nothing but a French Feile de Chamber can
preserve the Dress and bon meyn they have left her in. Thus are We French the
Fashionmongers and School of Manners and good breeding for the Universe.
Besides all this, All Europe and Other parts of the world are beholden to us
for Invention: Our King has established in Paris 2 Colleges, One for a Royal
Society of Virtuoso's, the Other called Bon Esprit. In a word, France
furnishes the world with more numbers of Good Writers, Fighters, and Men Onet
and bein a just, than all Christendom besides.

Gentilmen, I suppose you know, I am a Son of the Church of Rome; yet I wish
from my very heart, that the Dolphine were crowned King of the Romans: For my
part, I wish that old Holy man and all the Fops about him were removed to some
other place; and so make room for a Brave Emperor, such as my King or the
Dolphine would make: but if he must needs live in Rome, let him be content to
live in St. John de Lateran, as in old time: Five hundred pistols a year is
more than any honest Bishop in the world ought to spend, if he live like a true
Shepherd, and uses only his Crosiers Staff. Murblew, Since the Bishops
traversed the sword over the Crosiers Staff in their Arms, the Churchmen become
Fighters and Executioners of Civil Justice; which, to my judgment, is quite
contrary to Sr. Paul's words, Let not a Bishop be a striker. My Opinion is, That
if the thirty five Millions of Livres which the Pope and his Idlepack or lazy
Drones devour, were employed in the maintaining of a brave army against the
Turk, it might be better spent. You shall see in some few years, if my Master
be not Emperor, that the Turk will make bold to give his Holiness a Visit from
Candia. And, on the contrary, if my King be Emperor, you will see the
Flower-de Luces placed in the room of the 3. Half-Moons.

If Any think I have been too satirical touching the Pope and his Cardinals,
and spoken too irreverently of them, since, Some of those Bishops of Rome have
been good men, as Sixtus Quintus a Gentleman eminent both for learning and
Religion, the like whereof may be said of that devout man Cardinal Bona lately
dead, yet living in his highly esteemed works; as also that Pope Alexander the
VII. was a Gentleman etc. Yet for all that, Know, that I handle that sort of
men very modestly: I could blacken the Sea of Rome, in this Discourse, at
another rate, if I were not a Child of that Church. I could tell of several
Popes. who lived and died Heathens; Some of their bodies having been taken up
and burned, as is for truth received, after their tenants were found in their
Closets: neither, have I painted out the Lives of Some Cardinals in my days;
those are things so well known by them who live among them, that it is needless
here to repeat what is in every vulgar mouth. In short, Let me say over again,
If the Pope and his Crew, who, possess Rome, do continue so to rule, and that
Italy be thus governed, most by the Church, then, say I, the Turk or any Other
Neighbor may take the Country from them: (Let it be remembered what my King
did at Avignion:) for their Country is half depopulated; which is occasioned
by 3. things: First, by making such vast numbers of Eunuchs. Secondly, by
practicing the sin of Sodom so much as they do: for it is most certainly true,
that many thousands of Italians perfectly hate the Female Sex. Lastly, by the
innumerable Company of Monasteries and Nunneries; in which may be modestly
accounted two hundred thousand Nuns; the which, if lawfully employed in
generation-work, might produce great numbers of useful Creatures: whereas now,
on the contrary, both Monks, Friars and Nuns are forced to make use of all
their skill and arts to destroy Gods image by them made in secret, and all to
hide the scandal of being accounted breakers of the unwarrantable oaths and
vows they make to observe their Founders Maxims or Rules of their Order.

To conclude my Discourse, I will only say this One thing more touching the
qualification of My Master to become Emperor, rather than any Other King: and
that is, His most Christian Toleration of Liberty of Conscience in all his
Dominions and Territories. In France you find several Protestant-Universities,
and great numbers of Temples and Churches for the Protestant-Worship. Consider
but what abundance of French-Ministers are sent thence to serve the
Protestant-Churches abroad, as under that one Government of the States of the
United Provinees; where may be reckoned about Fifty French Ministers; besides
what are in England, Germany and other Countries. Our Doctors of the Sorbon are
not such Fools as to maintain or nourish an Inquisition; No: Nor will Our King
refuse the good service of the Protestants: On the contrary, He makes them
Presidents of Parliaments, and Secretaries of State in several Provinces, also
Generals and other Officers in his Armies, according to their merit. Whereas on
the other hand, the House of Austria will permit no man to have preferment in
the Emperors or King of Spains Courts, unless he first become a Papist. And if
you well weigh the horrid, hellish and absolutely unwarrantable practices of
the Spanish Inquisition, then will you with me confess, that most of the Evils
that have befallen Christendom, have had their Rise from that Diabolical Court
of Inquisition: it makes more Jews in Spain, Portugal, and Italy, than would
be; occasioned from the worse than Barbarous cruelty practiced by the Lords of
that Inquisition: for, say the Jews, as you pretend, your Jesus was filled with
bowels of Love and compassion; yet to the contrary, you practice worse
cruelties than ever did, any Pagan. I pray also, what was the Cause of the
Netherlanders Revolt? And what were the designs of the Spanjards against Queen
Elizabeth in 88? and from whom came that wicked Plot or Gun-powder-Treason in
King James his days? you will answer me, these were hatched in Spain by the
Spanish Inquisition. and if you cast your eye upon our present Age, you will
find Messina revolting from the same Cause; at lest from the ill Government of
the House of Austria; which if a man take a view of, either in the Kingdom of
Naples, Milain, Sicily or in Spain itself, he will behold such disorder in the
civil Government, that it is a miracle how that Monarchy has so long continued.

I thought to have said something touching my King his being lineally descended
from Charlemagne: But that I shall refer to another opportunity: and so put a
Period to what I have to say upon this high and eminent and just Design.

Thus have you the Frenchmans Pretenses, with the Rhetoric used to beget a
belief and approbation of the righteous and necessary grounds of their high
Undertakings.

Now please to admit the Spanjard to be heard in his sober Replication: and
permit me to bring him also upon the Stage, making answer to what with patience
has been born out of the Discourse of the vapouring Frenchman.

And thus the Don begins:

I acknowledge that the Monsieur, like a true-born Frenchman, has made a large
Bravado: and yet if all were true he has asserted, I doubt not but to give you
greater Arguments and Demonstrations to prove that No one Family in Europe or
in the whole world is of that consideration as is my Kings Family: yea, I do
affirm, that No two Kings in Christendom have half the strength in numbers of
Subjects, and quantities of Countries and Provinces as are under the Command of
my Masters Family. 'Twere but time vainly spent to entertain you with
answering the Monsieur to that wherein he would impose upon us a belief that
his King is lineally descended from Charlemagne: For your Conviction, it is but
only casting your eye upon that piece of Treason practiced by a Iacobin-Frier
on the House of Valois, for the bringing in this House of Bourbon; of which
this Lewis the 14th. is the Third.

But most apparent it is, that the House of Austria is a true branch of the
Charlovinyans; as is evident from several Historians. Touching therefore the
Right or Title that either the House of Bourbon or Austria has to the Imperial
Crown, I shall not proceed to discourse, because it is so well known where the
Right is, that this is the first time I ever heard it brought in quaestion.

But I shall go on to show you why the Imperial Crown ought to remain in the
House of Austria.

First, Do but consider what vast numbers of Kingdoms, Dukedoms and Segniories
the House of Austria does possess: and by that you may judge how much they
exceed in Subjects, Riches, and quantity of Land: I will name some of their
Possessions, viz. the Kingdoms of Leon, Aragon, Catalonia, Navarre, Naples,
Granada, Myrcia, Valentia, Castilia, Biscaia, Galicia, Algarle, Cicilia,
Hungary, Bohemia, the Dukedoms of Burgondy, Milain, Austria; part of the
Netherlands: and besides all these, many Isles in Europe and Africa, as
Tenerif, the Canary Islands etc. Beyond all which, if a view could be taken of
the large extent of those grand Kingdoms and Provinces, Isles and various
Territories they have in the East and West Indies, as their Patrimony left them
by St. Peter, then might you truly grant that to be a reality which has so
long been asserted, viz. That the Sun always shines on their Dominions. But
further, if you shall make a comparison between the Riches, Traffic, and
Merchandise of the House of Austria with that of France; 'twill be evident to
you, the One is but a Pedlers Shop, the Other a Rich Magazin of gold, silver,
pearls, silks, and spiceries. For a Demonstration hereof, Do but ask the
Englishman, what Kind of Merchandises the French bring over into England, and
what sort of Trumperie and Pedling-Merchants the French there be: The best
Merchandise the French furnish other parts of the world with, except some salt
and wine, is little better than Bables and Toys, when at the same time We
Spanjards send great quantities of Bullion, and rich Silks, fine Wool etc. And
as for the French Traders in England, Do but observe them, and you will find
them, for the most part, Barbers, Tailors, Perwigg-makers, John Potages, and a
sort of Vermin, that only live so long in England until they have swelled
themselves full with the riches of that Land; and then they fly to France again,
and disgorge that Riches on some few acres of Land; by which means, after a
year or two, starts up, mushrom-like, Monsr. Marquis de Chandelle, de bell
Gantelet or Marq. de peigne, Marq. de Valet etc. and this great grievance bring
the French to all Nations where e're they come, that they marry some Fille de
Chamber, and they two, dwelling in Chambers, paying no custom or duties, make
children together; and most commonly the Wives and Brats are left to the Parish
to maintain; nay, yet further, how is every Prison, yea and Hospital filled
with them in England? yea and the gallows too sometimes, witness the Frenchman
that set London on fire, and the Monsieur that killed his Master. When to the
contrary of this, I dare be bold to affirm it, that there are in all London
scarce two Spanish Barbers, Tailors, or Mechanic Handicrafts-Tradesmen: all
being great and able Merchants or Bankers.

Now whereas the Frenchman makes a semblance of Religion, and giving freedom to
Religious people; Let All men judge of this, who do but lend their ears to the
most deplorable stories of their cruelties in destroying so many hundred Towns
and thousands of poor People in the Palatinate, in Alsatia, Tweebrugge and the
circumjacent parts; such dreadful burnings, rovings, plunderings and tyranny
exercised on an innocent people has not been paralelled in a whole age, as
they have now committed within these 2 last Months of January and February. And
whereas the Monsieur says, that if his Master were Emperor, he would thrust
the Grand Seigneur out at a farther distance from Italy and Hungary, I believe
't is no hard matter to prove that it is He that has invited him into
Christendom to make diversion, whilst he practices his designs upon the
Emperor. and 't is most certain, that it was the French alone that widened the
breach in Germany between the Emperor and the Princes in the last Civil War.
The Frenchman is not ashamed to boast of his Kings Actions about Avignion; also
telling us, that there is no use for the Pope, since the Sorbon-Doctors can do
all as well: but as to the French Kings manner of treating the Pope at
Avignion, and his rendering the Pope useless, let every true Catholic judge how
religiously those things look.

For a Conclusion, I shall only put the Monsieur to a change of his
countenance, and, it may be, of his ambition also, when I shall advertise him
of the great disappointment of his Grand Masters expectations touching his
hopes of intestin troubles in Spain; the thoughts whereof do now wholly vanish,
upon the peaceable entrance of that Illustrious Prince Don John into Madrid,
and the right understanding between the King my Master and him; together with
his present capacity of relieving Catalonia, and, perhaps, giving a visit to
the King of France, where he will scarce be welcome: From him doubtless, I
mean, that honest and heroic Spanjard, Don John, all men of sober judgments
expect both good and great things, such as may become the grandour of his
person, and integrity of his principles.

Thus have you an account of the Essays made by the Champions of these aspiring
Princes: Much more of this Kind of polemical Discourse are We in this place,
bordering on the seat of War, daily acquainted with: Only by pride (says
Solomon) comes contention: The unsatiable desire of being great and having
much, makes all this strife, from whence the misery of mankind is grievously
aggravated; and in particular this part of the world involvd in a present
labyrinth of trouble, and in danger of a future desolation: the State whereof I
shall endeavor with all modesty, candor and indifferency to present to your
view.

Herein, Sr, I shall give you the trouble of a short Relation of the Source and
Rise of these Affairs, and so descend to these last times, which you will find
to abound with all the abominable and horrid evils that can enter into the
mind of Man to imagine: Which account of things, as a single-hearted Hollander,
I shall so manage, that all passion, Satyricall expressions, provocations, or
offensive reflections shall be forborne; and all due observance manifested to
all Sovereign Potentates, Princes and Powers whatsoever.

In the Beginning of the Fifth Age (or Century) in the midst of the divisions
of Rome, Mezeray a French Author in his Abbrev. Chronolog. p. 4.
they spoke of the French, as of a barbarous people, perfidious, inconstant and
full of lies; they were inclined to wars, having much wit and understanding,
which gave them occasion, courage and means to overthrow and ruin the Roman
Empire in the West: and upon those ruins they meant, under their Clouis, to lay
the foundation of a Kingdom that should be formidable to it is Neighbors, and
that should have drawn along with it the rest of Europe, Mezeray page 29.
under it is dominion: Which might happily have been, if it had not immediately
been weakened by the dividing of it among his Children and Successors; Who by
their continual debates so hindered, that it did not fall under One Monarchy;
and by that means conserved the Balance so necessary for the rest of their
Neighbors. But this good time endured not longer than unto Charlemagne, who,
having reunited those so formidable forces of the French, and subdued the best
part of Europe, was proclaimed Emperor by the Pope of Rome; and became the
Arbiter of Christendom. But, by a secret fatalitie, he fell into the same
fault, which Clouis had committed with his Children, Mezeray page 157.
and distributed this mighty Empire among his Children; so making an Eclyps in
the Universal Monarchy; which the French at this day endeavor with so much
zeal to retrieve. And indeed the Posterity of Charle Magne have vexed themselves
exceedingly about the reestablishing this grand Empire; though hitherto in
vain; they at the last growing sluggish, gave over, or however slacked much in
that design: which gave occasion that One of the Third Race came to be let upon
the Throne; who reigns at present, more vigilant and more active than the Other
of those Branches do, who yet have never lost their view and prospect of the
Monarchy of Clouis and of Charle Magne their Predecessors. But upon the
advancement of Capet to the Crown, the Grandees of the Kingdom thought that He
ought to suffer all things from them, because they had put on his head the
Diadem which he wore; whereupon they divided the Kingdom among them, and parted
it into several pieces; which have not been reunited without great pains and
trouble: and you must grant it me, that none at all, saving Lewis the Eleventh,
was capable of effecting so great a work as the reuniting together of what was
squandred abroad in so many Provinces; and so to bring his Kingdom into a
State, not only to defend himself against his Neighbors, but also to Rule
over them; and to bring again to his Successors the appetite and envy of
reestablishing the Monarchy of Charle Magne; And this might have had a good
issue by King Louis the XIV, if he had known how to pursue his victory, in
stead of standing amused, at Seist near Utrecht in the year 1672.

The high attempts of Louis the XI. put the following Kings of France again
upon the oppression of their people, and abasing the greatest Personages under
them: And, the truth is, since the English were constrained to abandon the
Kingdom of France, Mezeray page 713.
more by their own quarrels and divisions than by the valor of the French,
their Kingdom has received a wonderful increase and access, by the reunion of
their best Provinces; and their Monarchs have recalled to mind their ancient
idea's and apprehensions of the Universal Monarchy, and from time to time have
ruined their Neighbors by wars grounded upon their old pretenses.

And to take a little nearer inspection into this affair, you most know, that
when Louis the XI. did in the beginning of his Reign take notice, that his
only Brother Charles was allied with the Dukes of Burgondy and Britain against
him, for the public welfare of the Kingdom He carried smoothly toward them and
made semblance as if he would give them contentment, but with intention to
separatethem, and to ruin them one after another; which did succeed very well
to his mind, to the great damage of the rest of Christendom, and particularly
to the destruction of the Netherlands: since that, since that time, the French
have wasted Italy and Germany, and nigh ruined the Netherlands etc. with the
loss of an innumerable multitude of people and goods. And, in case the Civil
Wars for Religion had not prevented and diverted this fiery, impetuous,
restless warlick humor, Poor Christendom had seen itself at that very hour a
Slave of France. Thence you have, Sr, the general source of the misery of
Europe, viz. the vast and unlimited ambition of that Sanguin Nation, their gall
and unquiet humor, ready to eat out and devour it is own bowels; if those
ancient pretenses be not laid aside: of which there is little hope, whilst the
French renew them every moment; still wearying the world with those chimerical
images of their Louis and Charlemagne, which had sufficiently galled the former
ages; although they have been abolished by Solemn Treaties (yet become
unstuitfull) and by Praescription almost time out of mind. Lo the plague of
Mankind, and the true cause of all the calamities whereunder Europe at present
groaneth.

But to come to particulars: I shall not speak here, but only en passant, of
the old Wars of the Gauls against the Romans: nor tell how they brought to
desolation their Great City, as also a good part of Italy; nor how they
ravaged in Asia, and there established the Kingdom of Gallo-Graecia, as an
evidence, as it seems, that this Climate always produced men given to high
enterprises above others, and to trouble the tranquillity of the world: For
that this does not so concern the French who have subdued the Gauls; Mezeray
Abre v. Chronolog. p. 3.
and, by consequence, are therefore the more to be feared; as likewise for
their cruelty and natural fury, which they have inherited from their
Ancestors the Scythians; of whom their Authors make them Successors.

Only please to consult the Historians of Florence: Ouiccidrdin lib. 1. della
sua Historia.
by whom you may see how they have troubled and confounded the State of Italy,
till almost the end of the fourteenth Century.

Though true it is also, that among the Italians were several domestic and
internal Wars: yet they were without any cruelty, without consuming by fire,
without the shedding of much humane blood: as Machiavel, writing of a great
battle that endured four hours together between many thousands of men (I shall
take heed of calling them Soldiers) of the Duke of Milains and of the
Florentins, Machiavel lib. 5. del. Hist. p. 175. and 216.
says, that there was killed but one single man, who fell off from his horse,
and was trampled under the feet of the Horsemen.

Et in tanta rotta, and in si lung a zutta, che duro dalle XX. all XXIV. hoar:
non vi mori altri, che un huomo; il quale non diferite; o d'altro virtuoso
colpo: ma caduto da cavallo, e calpesto espiro, con tanta sicurta all' hora gli
huomini comb attevano; etc. In so much, that at that time in Italy properly
there was neither peace nor watt.

Perch pace non si puo affermare chesia; dove spesso i principati con l'armi
l'uno el' altro s'assaltano, guerre ancora non si possono chiamare; etc. But
after the French were entered there, and renewed their old pretenses upon the
Realms of Naples and Cicilie under Charles the VIII. this fair Elogie is given
them by Guicciardin, that they filled the Country all over with fire and
blood: as he pathetically writes:

Et che condussero seco in Italia; Guicciardin Auteur Florentin, affectione aux
Francois; comme la pluspart de ceux de sa nation; dans son primier livre de
l'Hist.
isemi d'innumer abili calamita; e d'horribilissimi accidenti, and variatione
di quasi tutte le cose: perch dalla passata sua non solo hebbero principio
mutationi di stato, soversione di regni; e desolationi di paesi; etc. And the
same Author remarketh the cause and original of all those miseries and evils,
by his following words; which I shall here insert, because they are worthy your
reflection upon them:

Mori finalmente Renato; e non havendo figliuoli maschi, fece herede in
tuttiglistati; eragioni sue, Carlo figliuolo del Fratello, il quale morendo
poco dipoi senza figliuoli, lascio per testamento la sua heredita a Luigi XI.
Re di Francia; a cui non solo ricadde; come a supremo Signore il Ducato
d'Angio; nel quale perch e membro della Corona; non succedono le femine; ma
con tutto: che'l Duca di Lorena asserisse appartenersi a se la successione de
gli stati, entro in possessione della Provenza; e poteva per vigore del
Testamento medesimo pretendere essergli applicate le ragioni: Che gli. Angioini
havevano sopra il Reame di Napoli; le quali essendo per la sua morte,
continuate in Carlo VIII. suo figliuolo, incommincio Ferdinando Re di Napoli ad
havere potentissimo auversario, e si presento grandissima opportunita a
chiunque d'offenderlo desiderava: perch il Regno di Francia er a in quel tempo
piu Florido d'huomini: di gloria d'arme, d'arme, di potentia, di ricchezze: e
d'autorita intra gli altri regni: che forse doppo Carlo Magno fusse may stato
essendosi ampliato novellamente, in ciascuna di quelle treparti; nelle quali
appresso gli antichi si divideva tutta la Gallia. Conciosia che non piu che
quaranta anni a questo tempo sotto Carlo VII. Re, per molte vittorie ottenute
con gravissimi pericoli, chiamato been auventurato, si fussero ridotto sotto
quelimperio, la Normandia, e'l Ducato di Ghienna; provincie possedute
primadagli Inglesi: e ne gli ultimi anni di Luigi XI. la Conte a di Provenza,
il Ducato di Borgogna, e quasi tutta la Picardia, dipoi aggiunto per nuovo
matrimonio alla potentia di Carlo VIII, il Ducato di Bretagna; ne mancava nel
animo di Carlo inclinatione a cercer d'acquistare con l'arme il regno di
Napoli, come giustamente appartenente a se, cominciata per un certo instinto
quasi natural insino da pueritia; e nutrita da conforti d'alcuni, che gli er
ano molto accetti; i quali empiendolo di pensieri vani, gliproponevano, questa
essere occasion d'avanzare la gloria de' Suoi predecessori: perch acquistato
il Reame di Napoli, gli sarebbe agevole, vincere l'Imperio de Turchi. Shortly
after the said Historian follows his discourse in this manner:

Incommincio in tale dispositione de gli animi, and in tale confusione delle
cose tanto inclinate a nuove perturbationi, l'Anno 1494, anno infelicissimo all
'Italia, and in verita anno primo de gli anni miserabibili perch aperse la
porta a innumerabili, and horribili oalamita delle quali si puo dire che per
diversi accidenti, habbia dipoi participato una gran part del mondo, and par
les prodiges qui presageoient cette guerre; d'incredibile timore si riempivano
i popoli; spaventati gia per la Fama della potentia de Francesi; etc. And
indeed King Charles the VIII. made himself Master of the Kingdom of Naples in
few days, by the terror of his Arms; (doing it by assault, burning the Mount
Sr. John, passing with his sword through all that was to be found: an unheard
of Case in those times) and he soon lost it again afterward by his negligence,
and too little care he had to preserve it.

But We must not now so flatter ourselvs: Their present Monarch know's no less
how to conserve than to conquer Provinces. If we do but observe the marches of
this Imperious Nation on the borders of Germany, there we shall see Alsatia
turned out of the hands of the Almains: and joined to their Crown; a Duke of
Lorrain driven out of his own Land; 3. Bishops, viz. Thoul, Metz and Verdun
dismembered from the Empire; which He Keeps in continual divisions and
agitations by his Emissaries, by his intrigues and by his corruptions.

Lastly, Descending to the Netherlands, the Principal Subject of our
Discourse: It is to be considered, in what manner the French have en deavoured
to bring them into that miserable Condition wherein we see them at this day;
and to discover the true cause of their maladies: to this end We must have
recourse to the reign of Louis the XI. King of France, who by his subtilty and
deceits ruined Charles the Stout Duke of Burgondy, and Lord of all the
Netherlands; stirring him up new Enemies from time to time, who at last
gathered together before Nancy; where he lost his life, and his people all
their welfare, which since that time they never could recover. Some years
before, this Prince, who possed Bourgondy, all the Netherlands, and (the City
Paris being then a Frontier of the Kingdom of France) almost whole Picardy, did
bridle, by his intelligence and courage, the ambition of this King so full of
artifices: but, because, for easing of his people, he was not provided with a
good and well ordered Militia, he came to be surprised by the Other; who, by
his horrible exactions of taxes and laying impositions upon his people, was
always accompanied and encompassed with a great quantity of armed men; the
which gave him means and therewith desire to extend his limits in despite of
his Neighbors: but the matter was well enough balanced until the death of
Charles the Stout: whose death caused to his people an abyss of calamities and
miseries: seeing Louis the XI. at that time kept to himself Bourgondia, whole
Piccardy, Arras, and many other considerable places: He likewise always amused
the English, after the death of the said Duke, to the end they should not
hinder him in the conquests of those Lands. Yet by the marriage of Mary of
Bourgondy Heyress of the Netherlands with Maximilian of Austria, Philip. de
Comines Chapit. second du. 6. Livre.
as also by the loss of the battle of Guinegate, the French could not execute
their design, to bring under their power the Seventeen Provinces; which yet
they might very easily have joined to their Crown, The same Author. 12. Chap.
of the 5. Book.
by a marriage of their Dauphine with the said Damsel Mary of Bourgondy: if the
good God had not blinded Louis de XI. and taken away his senses: and hereby was
the way to the Universal Monarchy wonderfully made plain and clear for Philip
the Fair Son of Maximilian, and for Charles the Fifth: Then again the
Netherlanders took a little breath; howbeit They were often incommodated by the
invasions of the French: who nevertheless found themselves not in posture to
undertake any thing against their Neighbors, because of the Parties and
leagues which soon after were formed in the bosom of that Kingdom: And yet,
however hindered by so many cruel civil wars, the French quickly recovered
again; and retook very much vigor by the courage and wise conduct of Henry the
Great: The Netherlands having been in that intervall always rent by a
perpetual war in the bowels of their Provinces: but all that was not capable
of ruining them: there was need of the engines of a Cardinal de Richelieu for an
absolute abasing of them, and reestablishing the French in their ancient
splendor, and making them (after the reduction of Rochel, and suppressing
those of the Refored Religion) to follow on in the footsteps of their glorious
Ancestors, taking the way of Charlemagne unto the Monarchy: to which end they
must throw down or debase the greatness of the House of Austria, now
prodigiously increased, more by Marriages than by Arms; which fell out
exceeding well: He leaving behind him a worthy Successor the Cardinal Mazarin
for to atchieve the prosecution of his Designs; who would not have missed to
emport the Netherlands; in case it had not then been prevented by the Queen of
France Anna d' Austria, who did oblige him to make a marriage between the King
Louis XIV. and the Infanta of Spain; and at the same time to conclude the peace
of the Pirenees; by which means the rest of the then staggering Netherlands was
preserved: then were affairs in a tolerable state; whereof the good Subjects
wished a long continuance and confirmation, having begun to taste the sweetness
of the Peace: When yet in the year 1667, without any denunciation, or
reasonable cause of war, upon a weak cause, and pretext of a Custom of
Devolution of Fief upon the Children of the First Marriage, practiced in
Brabant and other places in particular houses, (which had never been confirmed
by the Sovereign, nor used in Families of Princes) the French, as an effect of
their enterprizing humor, invested the best Cities of those Lands; the rest
whereof cannot maintain themselves otherwise than by miracles: But this deserves
a more particular Examination.

The King Louis XIV. having conceived an unchangeable design of reaching hard
for the Monarchy of the greatest part of Europe, or, at lest, to limit his
Kingdom by the Alps, the Pirenees, the Mediterranean Sea, the Ocean and the
Rhine; judging that the Netherlands, now in a state of welfare and comeliness,
might serve for a wall of planks, for the further propagating of his Conquests,
Did, in the Month of May in the year 1667. in time of a full peace, without
any subject of rupture with Spain, and notwithstanding good and positive
assuranees of good correspondence and friendship given by his Ambassador at
Madrid, march with an Army of 50000 men for to take possession (so as they
could, and not make war) of the Netherlands, devolved by the death of Philip
the IV. King of Spain upon the Queen his Wife: and therewith He approached
Charleroy, which the Spanjards had abandoned, because it was not in a State of
defense: But the French having in a short time brought it into a good posture,
soon after took, without great resistance, the Towns of Tournay, Douay,
Orchier, Lisle, Courtray, Audenard, Aeth, Bergen St. Winox, and Turns, that is
to say, all the best Cities of Flanders, situated in the bosom of the Land,
which had very little or no Garrisons in them, because of the assurance they
had of a Peace, which had been so solemnly sworn, and confirmed by a Marriage;
which yet, in stead of serving as a band, as was hoped, for the nearer uniting
of the two Crowns, was by the French made use of for a pretext of war: and by
this means they were soon Masters of three of the principal Rivers of the
Land, viz. of the Liz, the Escarpes, and the Scheld; thereby breaking their
Comerce and Communication with the remaining Towns, to their great decay of
trade. And really the Spanjards being obliged by the Treaty of Aken to yield
over to the French all that they took from them in the Netherlands, they became
very unable to preserve the rest: For, as is evident, when we will pass the
Center within Bruxels, we cannot pass the circumference of the Frontier for
it is defense, otherwise than by three or four semidiameters which are very
narrow, One whereof goes by Mons (or Bergen) in Hainaut, (or Henegow) St.
Gillain and Valencienne to Cambray; the Second by Namour (or Namen) to
Luxemburgh; the Third by Gent and Ypre to St. Omer; the Last by Weert and
Roermonde a village of Gelderland: all which passages are incommodated by the
French, who, by their continual concourses in those parts, do very lightly
hinder the Convoys which should be brought into the Cities of the Frontiers.
And who can, without tears in his eyes, look upon this Country that is so
miserably subjected to a cruel Contribution, (being not a fingers breadth of
Land without vexation) the value whereof amounts unto prodigious sums: the
City of Mastricht alone bringing up for their share four Millions: by which
it is very easy to comprehend, That they pursue their Wars at the charge of
their Enemies; which doubtless they therefore desire to continue,
(notwithstanding all their shows and expressions they make for Peace) and so
will they make the poor people desperate, who wish for nothing else but a good
Peace and an end of the wars, or a Master that is powerful to defend them:
and that they may be driven to that extremity I very much apprehend, and fear
we shall shortly see effected; this having already been showed in diverse
rencounters, particularly at Air, (or Arien) where the Burgers did constrain
the Garrison which consisted of 400 men to give it over to the French.

It is very true that the Netherlands are in a poor condition, unprovided of
all things; and that the King of Spain has no more there than 6000 horse to
bring into the field, wherein their whole army consists, and 5000 Spanish
foot to keep their Cittadels and places whereof they are most jealous; besides
about 15000 Waloons and Germans for the ordinary Garrisons of the Towns; which
number is yet too little, and the Soldiers not well enough treated to be able
to keep their places: in so much that the Hollanders are obliged to leave there
more than ten thousand men for their defense. My hairs rise upon my head, when
I consider the danger wherein we are; and that the welfare of the Land depends
only upon the taking or surprising of one or two Cities; the loss whereof
would undoubtedly cause the rendition of the rest: for if the French take
Bergen in Henegow, (where the Burgers are malcontent and murmr against the
disorders of the Spanish) Valencien and Cambray are cut off, and without
succor; having already much to do, being blocked up by parties of the French
Army, by Bouchain, and by a considerable Corpse of the French that lodge in
Cambresis: And in case we loose Namur, then the City and Land of Luxemburgh
will immediately follow, for want of relief: so that one or two of those
Columns being taken out of the way, the rest of the Building will fall of
themselves, and applaud the triumph of the Overcomer. For the Great Cities, as
Bruges, Gent, Bruxels, and Antwerp, either because of their conformity in
Religion with the Most Christian King, or that they are in hopes (not without
grounds) thereby to see the reflourishing of the Commerce, and to have their
River Scheld opened, or that they apprehend that their Sovereign is too far
off, or has not strength enough to guard them from the insultings of their
Enemies who consume them to their bones, will very lightly embrace the French
yoke: for the multitude of people that are there choose such Party as they will;
which shall certainly be the strongest, and that is the French. There is no man
now who discerns not the manifest danger of the Whole Netherlands, which are so
drained out by these wars, and among whom you rencounter many people that have
not the greatest affections for the Prince of Orange, and others, for reasons
too long here to deduce, enclining to the French: Who then shall after this
doubt, but that this French Monarch shall at last attain his aim, viz. first to
extend his limits to the Alps, to the Pirenees, and to the Rhine, and then to
think further?

The French declare openly enough that they will not suffer the Spanish within
the Netherlands, who during the minority of their King, or in their Civil
Wars, may give any trouble to this great and mighty Kingdom. Men must reform
this error which till now has prevailed in their Opinions, That the Prince of
Orange, joining his troops with those of Spain, should be able to save the
Netherlands: the contrary having been experienced; for, notwithstanding what
efforts he used, the French this last year took Conde, Bouchain and Air; being
three places which mightily incommodate the Other; the last whereof had more
than 200000 livres of contribution of France. Further is to be considered the
advantages they have over us by their Magazins, which make them subsist in the
Camp with their numerous Cavalry, when their Enemies cannot show themselves for
want of forage: by which means they have the opportunity to make siege by some
detachement, opposing the body of their Army (which is stronger in Cavalry than
the Army of the Allies) in some advantageous place against those who would
bring succor to the place they besiege; and so they play sure play, not
hazarding their reputation and glory. The King came in at the beginning of the
Spring (when there was no grass on the field to feed the horses) with an Army
of 20000 horse and 30000 foot, leaving a few men within the Cittadels, now
almost impregnable, which he had caused to be built, (after the peace made at
Aken) at Lisle, Tournay, Arras, Dunkerk, and other places; and drawing out all
the Garrisons which make up 30000 men, he joined them to the troops of the
Kings house, who were 16000 men strong: whereas on the contrary, the Prince of
Orange was necessitated to weaken his Army, and to send or leave more than ten
thousand men in the greatest Cities (for fear they should render themselves)
then must he have an artillery well furnished, regulated and governed, for to
open the Campaign to some conquests, the Germans being still constrained to
stay in their winter quarters, incapable to act or cause any diversion, through
defect of forage in the Netherlands. Then after an enterprise don upon any
place, as is ordinary, His Majesty rereturns back, re been gesta, and without
any hazard of a battle; then makes detachements from Flanders to Germany, and
so illudeth the great designs of the Allies.

We conclude then by all this, that the irregular ambition of the French, their
unsatiable avarice, their old pretenses upon quasi all the Provinces of Europe,
their will and inclination to robbery, their vain, inconstant and unquiet
humor not permitting their Neighbors to live in rest, are the true causes of
all the calamities and miseries of Christendom, and especially of the
Netherlands; whom, it seems God had placed, as in his anger, in the midst of
Europe, to the end they might be the beam of the Balance.

Now in this case, It is necessary to have recourse to other Remedies, under
God, than those which to this time have been used, for the healing us of this
French Disease, that comes now to the Noble parts of the Body of the Seventeen
Provinces, making them rotten, and fall off by pieces, being in danger of a
total destruction: Better means know we not than the application of English
Mercury to make the Enemies salivate and evacuate what they have with so great
greediness swallowed in. For whither else shall we betake ourselvs for refuge,
but to the English, for reestablishing the counterpois so necessary for the
public rest and felicity of Christendom, and especially of the Netherlands?
for whose Conservation England is so greatly in it is interest concerned, having
also received of God the advantage of a situation so excellent, as to be fit to
keep the balance of Europe, and be an Arbiter of all things therein, showing
in effect that it has reason on all occasions to say, Cui adhaerco, ille
praeest, Whom I incline to shall prevail.

And truly it is a glory for the King of England, that, whilst Other people are
very unable to help, or are menaced, and so in an appreehension of the terrible
forces of the King of France, or are overcome by his presents, against their
own interest, or elsely still in a deep lethargy, He alone can praescribe
limits to the, almost endless, ambition of the French, to bring them to reason,
and put them in mind that they with their Monarchy, now so idolized, the
designs whereof they believe to be infallible, are yet no other than men, and
subject to change of fortune; which would ensue, in case the English should
take the party of the Allies.

And what help can there be expected if we cast our eyes on other places for
relief? Let Us begin with the Alps; there we have an object of astonishment, in
observing the Low-spiritedness of the Switsers, that mercenary people, obliged
by reason of State and formal Treaties to the guarrantie of the Dukedom of
Milain and the French County; which yet they suffered, not long since, to be
taken, in their sight. If we come to Turin, there we shall find a Duke de Savoy
under the government of a French Mother, and depending on intelligences from
the French Court, and in some sort bridled by the Fort of Pignarol, which is
the Key of his Land. Not far from thence shall we find those of Geneva
irresolved, trembling for fear, prepared to suffer insultings, and to make all
sorts of courteous addresses for preserving their quiet; the conquest of whom
would but be as the fruit of one Campaign, or, it may be, of three months time.
If we enter further into Italy, there we shall find Princes weak and timid,
who will not oppose themselves against the progresses of the victorious arms of
France, unless in the greatest extremity. The Republic of Venice, in former
times called the Buckler of Italy, being newly delivered from a grievous war
against the Turks, shall not engage, or but very slowly, and putting off so
long as they can, in a new war against France, which might be worse to them
than the former. I shall not here mention the Pope, nor the Great Duke of
Tuscany, who shall never undertake any thing of themselves, unless what properly
relates to the reading of their Breviarie; or, at best, they may be good to
contrive a Treaty, or to fortify one that is already made by Others. If we
pass into Poland and Portugal, we shall stand admiring, as we might not long
since have don, in Savoy and Bavaria, to see the Mistresses to be French Wives,
who possess and govern their Husbands, kept by the French, and driven by the
same spirit of ambition to endeavor that Kings greatness, and who persuade
themselves, that they have don a singular favor to the Allies, that they have
till this timeforborn to give them some notable diversion; which we have reason
to apprehend for the future.

In so much that there is none but his Majesty of Great Britain, that is
capable and worthy to sustain the quality and heavy (though glorious) burden of
Arbiter and Peacemaker of the troubled world: for we shall here leave out, as
unworthy to be Mediators, the Swedes, those mercenary Souls and boutefeus of
Germany, those unfortunate Braves, who in stead of procuring the peace and rest
of the Empire, where of they were Considerable Members, have disturbed the
tranquillity thereof, by their unjust invasion into the Lands of an Elector,
then employed on the Frontiers for the common defense of his Country; having
sold themselves to France, for finishing the combustion of the rest of
Christendom, There is therefore no other that can sustain the rank and do the
function of a true Esculapius to heal our sicknesses, by Others incurable, but
the King of England, and that by prescribing to the French such conditions of
peace as shall reduce them from beyond the River the Sum, to keep within
their old limits, as in the time of Louis XI. in the beginning of his Reign.
And in case they refuse it, there is none but the King of England that can make
them swallow Ellebore to purge their brains of those ill humors and fumeswhich
corrupt them, and blot out of their corrupted imaginations the vast idea's and
Chimaera's of their Charlemagne; and so to calm all the troubles and tempests
of Europe, whereof they are the Cause.

His Majesty shall but follow therein the footsteps of his glorious Ancestors,
who passed beyond the Seas with numerous Armies to reliev the Netherlands, and
not suffer them to fall into the hands of the French, believing that whole
England should be in great danger of destruction, Phil. de Comines chap. 1. l.
4. and 8. chap. of l. 3. of his memorialls.
in case so many Soveraignties were joined with that Crown: This matter should
be wonderfully taken to heart: Witness Philip de Comines. And there is no doubt
but the English people would liberally contribute to that undertaking, after
their old custom, yea, were it to carry an Army into France: as King Edward
did, requiring King Louis XI. to render him the Kingdom of France, that was his
own, that he might redress the State of the Religion and the Nobles, and
restore to the people their old Liberties, and take off the great charge and
vexation under which they groaned. Comines chap. 5. of lib. 4.
I wonder very much, that the like design was not formed two years ago, when
the Inhabitants of Ghienne and Bretagne stretched out their arms to England,
for to taste, under the conduct of the Duke of York or Monmouth the sweetness of
an English Government, which they wish for unto this day.

Do the English want Motives to excite them hereunto? I beseech you, what
shall, after such French Conquests, become of the English Commerce? is not that
sufficiently ruined, or lamentably decayed already? The Hamburgh-trade is, upon
the matter, quite lost, as to the English manufactures, which in times of peace
were sold into Germany, Pomerania, and other adjacent Countries: and so also is
the Dort-trade lost, by which the Spanish Netherlands, and the parts of
Germany, which ly that way, were wont to be supplied with English Cloth: by
reason whereof those English Manufactures, as Cloth, Serges, Bays, etc. which
formerly gave 50. per piece, are now sold for 35. or 37. at the highest; which
proves so great an evil to England, that those Cloathiers, which formerly
employed 400 persons at work, have not now work for 20 persons; which has
caused the price of Wool to fall 40. per Cent cheaper than heretofore: and the
people are forced to steal it out of England, and sell it to the French, who
with the same make Serges and other Stuffs, to the damage and utter loss of
the English trade: The complaints of this kind are every where heard; as also
of that palpable cause of this decay in Commerce, from the taking, roving,
plundering, confiscating of so many English ships by the French within a short
time; the Value whereof with their Loadings is inaestimable, and thereupon the
provocations and grievances unsufferable.

But above all, the English ought to cast their eyes upon, and provide a remedy
for the great strength and increase of the French Ships, which trouble all
Navigation at present; and what shall they do, when they shall come to dispose
(Deus avertat omen, God forbid it) of the Navall Forces of Holland, and of
their riches in the Indies? And more particularly is to be considered what
shall become of the English Traffic in the Mediterranean Sea: There is no
Merchant that know's not how absolutely necessary the English Trade is with
Spain, as also with Smyrna, and all those parts to which we must pass through
those Mid-land Seas: but how can that be maintaind, if the French should make a
Conquest of Cicilia, Naples and Sardinia? Let but in spection be made into
their proceedings at Messina; where, besides what they have gained at Land,
they have now at Sea 25. Galleys, and 50. great vessels, menof war, and a great
number of others less, but very commodious for transport of Soldiers and
provisions; they being absolute Masters and Dominators in those Seas: whereto
gives no small advantage the Commodity of their Ports of Marseilles and Toulon,
which are not far distant; from whence succors and provisions may be sent to
refresh them in Messina in less than eight days time: and, by consequence, they
may soon be Masters of those Islands, and afterward of the Kingdom of Napels:
for the Faction of Anjou (that is, of France) is not all extinguished there:
and then can the French, when they will, ruin the navigation of the Northern
Inhabitants, who have there neither Ports nor Galleys; which are two things
very necessary in those Seas, because of the great Calms which in Summer time
are often met with there. These Considerations, with many more, call aloud to
the English Nation to awaken, and help themselves and us.

For a Conclusion: I propose two particular ways for the further engaging of
England to come into our help:

First, that a true and firm Union may be cemented between England and Holland,
the Expedient of the so much discoursed of Marriage between Our Prince of
Orange and Madam Maria, daughter of the Duke of York ought to be endeavored
that it may speedily be effected: His Highness ought to solicit it with
ardour and passion: after the Example of Charles the Stout, Duke of Bourgondy,
and Lord of the Netherlands, who married the Sister of King Edward of the House
of York, for to fortify himself against King Louis XI. (who had got advantage
against him so much by surprises and deceits in time of peace, Phil. de Comines
Chap. XI. lib. 3. of his Memor.
like as our Frenchmen did in the year 1667.) for otherwise he would never have
don it, for the great love he bore to the House of Lancaster whereof he was a
near Relation by his Mothers side. If therefore so great a Prince, that
followed rather the incitements of his anger, than of reason, sacrificed the
interest of his House to the public welfare: what shall not Our Illustrious
Prince, who is so wise and Politic, do to attain that design or end so
necessary for the saving of the Netherlands? unto the preservation whereof
that of England is in separably annexed. For in case the French should now
become Masters of the Spanish Netherlands, will it not follow then that Holland
and the other United Provinces shall be constrained at last to take upon them
the same yoke? and suppose the Hollanders could maintain themselves with some
assistance from England and Germany, yet would they not be always the continual
Theater and seat of war; but rather at last submit themselves to the great and
mighty King of France, in hopes to enjoy, without fear of any Enemy, a perfect
tranquillity and long continuing Rest. A present hearty Conjunction between
England and Us therefore is the present needful; to which the foresaid
Marriage seems to be a proper medium: for the accomplishing whereof the
blessing of the Almighty is earnestly implored, that he, who straitneth and
enlarges Kings, Kingsdoms, and Commonwealths, that limits the Grandees of the
Earth, putting a hook in their nostrils, that makes wars to cease on the
earth, and sets up the oppressed and the lowly, will, if it may stand with
his good pleasure, make this marriage of our great Prince with that Illustrious
Princess Mary to become successful for those righteous and happy ends: that
not only by this great knot the hearts of those two Grand personages may be
more united; but also that the Two Nations may concur and conspire with more
harmony, courage, and activitie, to procure a good peace for the rest and
tranquillity of Christendom, and particularly of England and the Netherlands; a
peace, I mean, not colored over, nor plaistered, and such as the French (when
the Allies shall be disarmed and separated) shall presently break, and so again
surprise the Netherlands; who indeed ought to be always in posture of defense;
and who (when the balance shall be kept equal in Europe) ought to serve for a
bank and bar against the inundations and attempts of this unquiet and
imperious Nation.

Secondly, As to a sure Asylum, under our Almighty Protector, We would address
to the Renowned Parliament of England, now beginning their Session: Upon them
are at present the eyes of all the Considerable and Considering Parties of
Europe: Ill men are jealous and conceive fears concerning them; Good men hope
for great advantages from their grave and wise Councels: The loud clamours of
the innumerable injuries don by the French to the honest Subjects of England in
their Commerce, more ways than one, to their inestimable damage, we know, have
reached their ears: and the sad state of these Lands, with all the present
evils and future dangers I have mentioned in this Letter cannot be unknown to
them: the Sympathy of their affections with our miseries, and the identity of
their Cause with Ours, will, we hope, effect so much, that Their Wisdoms will
propose, vote, direct, order, and conclude of such ways and means whereby the
sober Inhabitants, and particularly the Trading Party of England, may with Us
be extricated out of this Labyrinth in which we are bewildered; that at last we
may arrive at such a state of just freedom and safety, as may excite us, with
them, to render to the God of wonders hearty praise and thanksgiving for his
wonderful deliverances and preservations: for which you have the concurrent
Vote of

Sr, Yours etc.


