A REQUEST TO Protestants, To produce Plain Scriptures directly authorizing
these their Tenets.
I. Scripture is clear, in all Necessaries, to every Sober Enquirer. II. The
Secular Prince has all Spiritual Jurisdiction and Authority, immediately, from
and under God. III. Justification by Faith alone (viz. a Persuasion that we are
justified) is a wholesome Doctrine. IV. The Substance of Bread and Wine remains
after, what it was before, Sacerdotal Consecration. V. Our Lord's Presence in
or with the Eucharist is merely gracious and influential; and, if more, only to
the Faithful. VI. Adoration of the Eucharist (i. e. of our Savior under the
Species of Bread and Wine) is Idolatry. VII. All Christians, whenever they
communicate, are obliged to receive in both Kinds. VIII. Chastity, deliberately
vowed, may be, inoffensively, violated. IX. All Christian Excellencies are
commanded. X. Every Soul, as soon as expired, is conveyed to Heaven or Hell.
XI. Desiring the Intercessions of the Blessed, is more Superstitious, and
derogatory to our Lord's Mediatorship, than entreating the Prayers of Holy Men
Militant. XII. Honoring the Cross, the Relics and Representations of our
Lord and his Saints, with that degree of Reverence as we do the Gospels,
(commonly kissed and sworn by) Altar, and other Sacred Vtensils, is Idolatry.
XIII. The Pope is Antichrist. XIV. Every Prayer, used in Divine Offices, must
be in a Language vulgar, and intelligible to every Auditor. XV. A Company of
Christians, voluntarily separating from all other Christian Societies,
condemning their Doctrins and Rites, destitute also of any visible
Correspondence with them in the Eucharist, in any Religious Assemblies or
Solemn Devotions, can, notwithstanding this perverse, entire, and manifest
Separation, be a mystical Member of Christ, in Catholic Unity, and a Charitable
Part of the Catholic Church. XVI. The whole Clergy of the Catholic Church may
apostatize from Fundamental Truth and Holiness; whilst part of a National Laity
may preserve both, discover the Clergies Defection, and, depriving them, heap
to Themselves Teachers of their own sending and instruction.
IN these positive Propositions (if Protestants have any affirmative Belief)
does their Religion chiefly consist: because, Baptism, and such Articles of the
Creed, as are still uncorrupted by them, are no more theirs, than Tertul. de
Praescript. c. 36. Constat ratio Propositi nostri, definientis non esse
admittendos Haereticos ad ineundam de Scripturis provocationem, quos sine
Scripturis probamus ad Scripturas non pertinere. -- Nullum jus capiant
Christianarum Literarum.
the Scriptures were the Valentinians: they are the Churches Peculiar, and
claimed by Her against all novel and unjust, both Forreiners and Outlaws: but
whatever they have invented or chosen, that belongs (as Sin to a depraved
Will) properly to them; thence they derive their Title, and thereto must we
precisely confine their Religion.

Now Protestants (as all other Deserters of Truth and Unity) conscious of their
own Deficiencies as to Defensive Weapons, are more earnest and sollicitous to
invade Tertul. de Praescript. c. 42. Negotium illis, non Ethnicos convertendi,
sed nostros evertendi. -- Ipsum opus eorum non de suo proprio aedificio venit,
sed de veritatis destructione nostra suffodiunt, ut sua ^edificent.
Catholic Doctrins, than to justify their own Inventions; more ready also to
assault particular Doctrins, than that decisive and most conspicuous Truth,
Church Authority, obliging all Christians to repose in and assent to her
Decisions in all Points of necessary Faith.

In Disputes, their usual Clamor is, Allege Scripture; Produce Reason.
Intimating the Catholic Church must, to convince them, offer Scriptures and
Reasons demonstrating what they contradict (not with the Auxiliary of her
Authority, but against the most impudent prejudice of), themselves being
Judges. Yet, could this be performed, solent oculis clausis denegare, qui non
credunt factum esse, quod nolunt: Hieron. adv. Lucif.
Like to those who will not believe that to be, which they have no mind should
be, it is not unusual with them to shut their Eyes and deny it.

She, however, gentle, patient, and apter to teach her own, than to pry into,
and other ways perillously confute contagious Doctrins, to recover such Strays
out of the Snare of the Devil, instructs them by rightly dividing the Word of
Truth, and by yielding those Reasons of the Faith that is in her, as It (a
Revelation and Mysterious) can condescend unto.

What Protestants so insultingly demand, we then retort; and what the Catholic
Church returns, we expect: Nor can they here take Sanctuary under Negatives;
for the above-recounted Points are Positive, and Affirmers must prove. We then
require express Scriptures and solid Reasons for these Novelties, or a
disavowing and Anathema of what they cannot thus defend. Neither shall
Perversions of the One, Calumnies and Falacies in lieu of the Other, satisfy
us. Their Private Spirit adulterating Scripture by corrupt Translations,
sacrilegious Mutilations, blasphemous Misapplications, gross Wrestings, and
false Interpretations; Their Wit imposing on the credulous Multitude,
Indefinits, Non-consequences, Ambiguities, Drollery, Digressions evading the
Cause, and, if any Truth, utterly impertinent to the Controversy. I say, these
Phantomes and Abuses of Scripture and Reason will not content us; though thereby
the Delusion, Protestancy, be strenghthned as 'twas begotten (for can a
Falsehood be supported without lying?) and wretched Souls seduced to confide in
damnable Fables.

Their Brethren Tertul. ibid. Agnoscit naturam suam, and originis suae morem,
profectus rei. -- Id^m licuit. -- Marcionitis quod Marcioni, de suo arbitrio
fidem innovare.
, by Descent and Iniquity, the Socinians, steering by the Blast of a Private
Spirit, the Chart o^ ^lear Scripture, and Compass of Human Reason, have made
shipwreck of Faith; and their other Relations, the Antinomians, adding another
Protestant Implement (Faith alone is a wholesome Doctrine), have made shipwreck
of a good Conscience; and no other Protestant either does, or can, without
confusion to his own Principles, hinder their being cast away.

When Prelatical Protestants are pressed with Church Authority, and submission of
Judgment, they strait retire to Hobbism, their Lay-Supremacy, declaring their
Prince, the Sole and Sovereign Judge in all Causes Spiritual; and that a
Christian, certain of the Truth of his own Profession, and of the Falsehood of
the Established Religion, may not, unless permitted by the Prince, or enabled
by God to work Miracles, preach his own, and decry the other. And will not such
absolute Lay-Authority (indeed unknown to St. Austin when he wrote de Unit.
Eccles. c. 13. Neque enim quia and orb terrarum plerumque regna dividuntur,
ideo and Christiana Unitas dividitur, cum in utraque part (sc. multis regnis)
Catholica inveniatur Ecclesia [indivisa]; Will not, I say, such absolute
Lay-Authority (tho pernicious to Catholic) procure a National Unity? We see
nothing like it; because, when the Supremacy grows suspicious or heavy on their
Private Spirits, and disfavours Protestant Libertinism in Opinion and Life,
then Supremacy was devised against a Foreign not Domestic Ecclesiastical
Authority, and the King was only the Church of England's Father-in-Law, or
Guardian in her Minority, chosen who^ she broke loose from the Pope and General
Councils; but now she is at discretion, and means to challenge and exercise her
essential Rights: Rights inalienable, notwithstanding the Encroachments of
some, and Usurpations of others. Having thus disclaimed all Clerical Authority,
whether Conciliary or Papal, Primatical or Diocesan, and attributed it to the
Sovereign; and now deposing Him also from his Spiritual Supremacy and
Absoluteness, with a The Church has her Rights, etc. what can be intended, by
these new Church-Rights, consistent with Supremacy? What can these perplexed
People (perplexed most justly by their own Servileness to some, and
Disobedience to others) what can they erect, in stead of their Head's
now-rejected Prerogative, but an Equality of all the Headless Members? I say, a
Parity or an individual Supremacy must be retreated to, as least unjust, and
more free than preferring one or more Tyrants. For thus the King shall have no
Superior, as no Subject, Spiritual; all will share alike (as they ought to do)
in the Spoil; and, according to Custom, a Republic succeeds a Monarchy. The
Royal cashiered the Synodical Authority, and the Popular ( i. e. every Man's)
the Royal Authority. Thus Cranmer's and Tillotson's Court-Doctrin is
relinquished, and Stillingfleet's Maxim entertained; That none be constrained
to Submission of Judgment to any Authority, but All be left to judge according
(...) the Pandects of the Divine Law. Ipsi sibi and Laici sunt and Episcopi St.
Jerome of Hilarious the Roman Deacon, separating from all the World.
. Nor are these individual Catholic Churches without their Schisms. -- Cum
sint, non modo non parent [praesidibus], sibi ipsis autem non constantibus,
quotidianam fidem cudunt; but refusing to obey their Rulers, and contradicting
themselves, every day invent a new Faith.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.


