Mr. Resburys SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL. On Sunday, Aug.
16. 1691.

JOB XXXVI. 8. Behold God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number
of his years be searched out.
THese words are part of a long discourse that Elihu took up with Job, after
his three friends had ended theirs. This person, perhaps a Syrian born, and of
the kindred and family of Abraham, tho of younger years than the other three,
yet seems of deeper judgment, stronger reasoning, less affected piety, and one
that framed the method of his discourse to a better design, as he had grounded
it upon a better foundation than the other three had done.

He apprehends Job as having a little too much insisted upon his own Innocence,
and so, by justifying himself too warmly, had seemed to glance obliquely upon
God; as if by that severe usage of his Providence, God had dealt in something
an unjustifiable rigor with him. The part therefore that Elihu takes, is, not
so much to charge Job with some unknown wickednesses which his friends had been
loading him with, because of the present condition they saw him in. But to
justify God in his dealings with him, who knew his own holy ends and designs
in all, tho man is not able reach or to fathom them. My Text is in that part of
the argument where Elihu is setting forth the perfections of God, which to us
are so incomprehensible; His power, his greatness, his eternity, which being so
infinitely beyond the reach or compass of humane understanding, should keep the
man in so humble and resigned a sense of God, as not to cherish the least
irreverent thought of him, let the condition be never so miserable, to which he
may be reduced.

In the words we have laid before us, 1. The greatness of God, infinitely
surpassing our knowledge of him; Behold, God is great, and we know him not. 2.
His Eternity, not to be brought within the compass of our numbers; Neither can
the number of his years be searched out. By both which is intimated to us, how
very short and imperfect all the knowledge we can have of God in this World
ought to be esteemed; how scanty all the conceptions we can frame of his
Majesty or Eternity? Perfections infinitely surpassing all our measures, either
as we are mortal, or finite and limited creatures. This I shall a little
illustrate, and then draw some useful inferences from the whole.

1. To illustrate the thing; viz. How infinitely short we are in our highest
conceptions of God, while we are in this World. We may ask the same question
still with Zophar the Naamathite, Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out
God? can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? This may appear, if we
consider how imperfect our knowledge is, either as to 1. The Divine nature; or
2. His decrees or counsels; or 3. His works either of Creation, or Providence.

1. As to the Divine nature: It is some demonstration how incompetent humane
nature is herein, when we consider that any part of it has sunk so low in its
speculations concerning God, so far short of his immense and boundless, his
pure and invisible nature, as not only to make Gods of men, and adore them, but
to fancy a Divinity even in Serpents, and Dogs, and Fish; the trunks of old and
overgrown Trees, in Leeks and Onions, and what not! It is not more evident
still, were we to look among the wiser Heathens who made it the business of
their profession to enquire into the nature of the chief good, who after they
had raised their minds much beyond the common pitch of men of that age, yet
after their most labored researches, have been fain to confess that God was
something not only invisible, but unintelligible. Plato tells us, it is
impossible to find out God, and as impossible it would be to express him, or
communicate the notion of him when once found out. So Xenophon, God, etc. the
great and the powerful, who is in every ones view, and yet, what his form and
essence is, is evident to none but himself, who makes all things clear and
conspecious by his own light.

But such thoughts as these, though the highest flights among the wisest
Philosophers, need not be much insisted upon. For we may observe it, in the H.
Scriptures, where God has condescended to make as plain revelations of himself
as he thought fit; when Moses made request for a fuller discovery of his
nature, he tells him how incompetent this state of life is for beholding or
knowing him aright. Exodus 33.20. Thou can not see my face, for there shalls
no man see me and live: That is, thou can have no proper conceptions of my
nature and essence, for there is no mortal in this state of life capable of the
Speculation. This is said to Moses, who yet was blessed with such lintimacies,
that it is said, God spoke to him face to face, as a man speaks to his
friend, Exodus 23.10. Yet is he in this place assured, that this distant,
obnoxious, mortal state of life, is not the state where the Divinity is pleased
to make any adequate displays of his incomprehensible nature, but reserves that
for the happiness of the other World. Hence is God pleased so far to consider
the infancy and childishness of this state, that he does in the H. Scriptures
(if I may so express it) (...), he attributes to himself what is most fitted to
our senses, and therefore represents himself by hands, and eyes, and ears; by
all the shapes of men, and human passions, etc. which are infinitely below his
immenseland spiritual nature, to which no mortal eye can approach. He gives us
notions of his mercy, by that of an indulgent and compassionate father; and of
his justice, by that of a severe and impartial Judge; and of his power, by that
of a Crowned and Sceptered King; and of his bounty, by that of a liberal and
rich Householder, and of his Eternity, by that of an old man, or the Ancient of
Days.

All which we ought to make so awful and reverend an use of, as to look upon
them only as Condescensions in God to help us in our contemplations of the
divine Nature, not to make them the boundaries and limits of our thoughts. And
yet, they are a standing argument, that the wise God, who knows our frame,
knows how incapable we are without such condescentions to frame any useful, or
comfortable Ideas of him. And indeed, so far are we owing to these lower helps
of instruction, that it is more than probable, where the minds of men are wholly
destitute, even of these Rudiments they are so far from knowing any thing
agreeably of the divine Nature, that they have not the least thoughts or
consciousness of God at all. I know some have made it an Argument against the
Atheist, that there is no Nation under heaven so brutish, no part of mankind so
salvage, but they have naturally and inseparably some notion and sense of God,
and are apt of themselves, and in the natural tendency of their own thoughts to
offer at some kind of Worship. But I fear, this is gratis dictum, sooner said
than proved. Histories give us frequent instances of several regions of a wild
and uncultivated sort of Mankind, that give no vilible intimations at all, by
which a man might guess they have any sense or apprehension of God. This is
true indeed, that no one endu'd with reason, however void of all thoughts of
this nature he may have been, but when the notion comes to be offered him, and
he is told there is a God above that gave him his being, and that governs the
world, he speedily embraces it as highly reasonable, and finds a natural and
ready inclination to so great and probable a truth. And this gives the Argument
as strong a force against the Atheist, in that, the ready compliance of the
mind with all such notions when first offered, seems a demonstration that the
thing it self has a native and original truth in it, which needs only to be
brought to remembrance, and then reason falls in immediately with it. But this
is certain; as there may be that failure and defect of Reason in some parts of
the World, where barbarous mankind may either have lost all notions of God, or
at least have taken up some, that are no more suited to the divine nature, than
the conjectures of a man born blind would be in the description of colors, or
the figures and shapes of things. So, those that have the greatest advantages
of revelation by the word of God himself, and have improved these advantages by
the greatest industry and enquiry thereinto, yea, that have wrought their minds
into some participation of the divine nature, by labored meditation, fall
infinitely short of all just and adequate conceptions of God. For

1. We are greatly to seek in the first notion of God, that he is a Spirit: The
Scripture tells us, God is a Spirit, but we are no more able to conceive what
the nature of a Spirit is, than the Child in the Womb apprehends what the
nature of his being and sustenance is there. To say the truth, were the great
searcher of hearts, but to lay to our charge all those absurd Idolatries we
commit, in the odd conceptions, the mean and bodily shapes we frame of God in
our imaginations, whiles we offer at the most solemn acts of worship toward
him, we might perish under the iniquities of our most holy things, and the
guilt of our most labored endeavors in devotion.

2. As we are to seek in the notion of a Spirit, so no less are we in that deep
and bewondring mystery of the Trinity in Unity, which, upon the strength of
Divine revelation we justly believe and adore. We are indeed sure, from the H.
Scriptures, that the Father is God, and that Jesus Christ the Son is not only
God too, but was so from all Eternity, and that the H. Ghost is no less God,
than the Father and the Son. We also know, from the same express revelation
that we are to own and worship no other than the One only, and true God. These
things are certain matter of Divine revelation, and being so, we have all
imaginable reason to believe and embrace them. But then how these three
distinct Persons should be so united in one undivided nature, that while we
worship three Persons, we still do worship but one God, this is a mystery
reserved to be unfolded in the other world only.

We may, perhaps, endeavor to illustrate the notion by some faint and
imperfect resemblances, but alas! they are so faint and imperfect, that they
rather serve to darken and obscure it still more.

II. As we are very short in apprehending the Nature of God, so are we no less
as to his Decrees and Counsels. The one is the consequence of the other, we
therefore must needs conjecture uncertainly about his Decrees, because we are
so distant, and so incompetent in all our Speculations about the Divine Nature.
There have been warm and heated disputes about these things amongst assuming
men. The Decrees of God have been canvast and talked over by some, as if they
were the very rudiments of Religion, and might be the first learnt and
understood; when in the mean time, the dust that disputes have raised in things
of so high and unsearchable a Nature, have only served to hurt the Eyes of both
the contending Parties, that they have seen the less for their warmth in
arguing. What man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of a man? Even
so the things of God, knows no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. It is
an excellent passage in the Apocryphal book of Wisdom to this purpose. Chap. 4.
from v. 13 ad finem. What man is he that can know the Counsel of God, or who
can think what the will of the Lord is? For the thoughts of mortal men are
miserable, and our devices are but uncertain, for the corruptible body presses
down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle weighs down the mind that museth
upon many things. And hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon the
Earth, and with labor dowe find the things that are before us; but the things
that are in heaven who has searched out? and thy Counsel who has known?
Except thou give Wisdom and send thy Holy Spirit from above! It is plain how
short we are in our thoughts of this kind, not only from the irreconcilable
differences about these things, but also the infinite difficulties wherewith
both ways of thinking are perplexed. Thus when any would be point blank
representing God, as from all eternity choosing out some few for everlasting
happiness, and decreeing the rest of mankind absolutely to eternal damnation,
how are they gravelled in their thoughts when they observe God in his holy word
exhibiting himself as so kind and benign a Lover of Mankind, so unlikely to
hate originally any thing he makes, that he does never willingly grieve nor
afflict the Children of men. On the other hand when some are peremptorily
rejecting all doctrines of this Nature, how do they stick and labor under the
inexplicable difficulty of Divine foreknowledge, etc.

Herein therefore, we should all imitate the Modesty of St. Paul, who yet had
the advantage of brighter revelations than ever we can pretend to. He, when he
had been discoursing that difference it had pleased God to put betwixt the
Nation of the Jews and all the rest of mankind, results the whole in (...) -- O
the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and of the Knowledge of God; how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out! Romans 11.34, 35.

III. Last. Come we to consider, lastly, how short and imperfect we are in our
knowledge of God, as to his works either of Creation or Providence.

1. The works of his Creation. And therefore Elihu to confirm what he had said
in the words of my Text appeals to the Works of his Creation, and instances in
so small a thing as a drop of Water, the breaking of a Cloud, and a clap of
Thunder. Behold God is great and we know him not -- For the makes small the
drops of water, they pour down rain according to the Vapor thereof, which the
Clouds do drop, and distill upon man abundantly; Also can any understand the
spreading of the Clouds, or the noise of his Tabernacles, v. 27, 28, 29.

It is from these works of his, that it pleases God to humble Job, by laying
them before him, and thereby giving him a view of his own ignorance, Job 38.16.
Have thou entered into the Springs of the Sea, or have thou walked in the search
of the deep? Have the gates of death been opened to thee, or have thou seen the
doors of the shadow of death? Have thou perceived the breadth of the Earth?
declare if thou know it at all. Where is the way where light dwells, and
as for darkness, where is the place of it? Have thou entered into the treasures
of the snow, or have thou seen the treasures of the hail? Out of whose womb
came the Ice, and the hoary frost, who has gender'd it? Can thou bind the
sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Can thou bring
forth Mazaroth in his season, or can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons? etc.
We live by conjecture only as to the reasons and nature of all those things we
either see or use. It is no certain account we can give of the air we breathe
in, or the light that gives us the pleasure of all created glories; not only
the Stars of Heaven, but the Spark in the Diamond, and the lustres we meet with
in a clod of Earth, puzzles our deepest Philosophy. Nothing we see either in
the Air, or Seas, or Earth, or Heaven, but, as they have been mighty subjects
of enquiry, so, they never yet could be so explained, but that some new
supposals of things have been offered with as probable reasons; and the man of
strongest fancy has usually made the most pleasing and acceptable guesses, and
all is but guess at last.

In short, how can we expect well to understand the secrets of nature at a
distance, when we know so little nearer home. We carry about with us in the
nature of our own beings such numberless and insuperable difficulties, that
they are never to be solved till the Soul comes nearer to its first original,
and the body is refined from its corruption and dross, that the whole man may
discern himself (if I may so express it) in his own transparency. Let our
thoughts therefore turn a little inward, and see what conjectures we can make
about our own frame and nature, and this perhaps, will let us see how short our
sight is, as to all the other great works of the Creation. This observation the
wise man makes Eccl. 11.5. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit,
nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with Child, even so thou
know not the works of God that makes all. The Spirit that enlivens and
actuates us, lies hid from us in the whole course of its motion, discourse, or
thinking. We know we subsist of something that can discourse and think, can
grieve and rejoice, can remember and reflect; but that Soul it self that does
all this, by all its reasoning, can give no account how it came into the body,
nor where the seat of its own residence is, nor by what way or influence it
gives the body sense or motion. It never yet has seen its own face in any glass
that could give it any tolerable representation of it self, but must wait the
time when it shall arrive at its own proper Country, that world of Spirits,
where the body it self shall be spiritualized, and come so much nearer to the
nature of that being that informs, and is to dwell for ever in it. But further

2. As our insight into the works of Gods creation is short and imperfect, so
is it no less into those of his providence. We are apt to wonder and stand
amazd at many unaccountable events in the world, and many times can discern no
other reason but the mere arbitrary will of God. Several perplexing amusoments
about the age and first birth of the World: Why of no earlier a date than 7000
years ago? About the fall of man, why permitted to be so soon baffled by the
Devil? About the great mystery of Redemption, why to be brought about by no
less a method than the incarnation and death of the Son of God? About the
prosperity of some Kingdoms, and the overthrow of others; about particular
events of providence to our selves, our friends, or our enemies; and
innumerable instances of this kind, that may perplex and confound our thoughts;
but we must expect to have no tolerable account of them, till we come to that
state where all stories will be told over again, all amazing revolutions of
things shall be discerned fully in their first causes, and their last issues;
where wisdom will justify it self in all the intricacies of its operations,
and the great Judge of all shall be clear indeed when he has judged.

And thus much may serve for illustrating the argument, viz. how infinitely
short we are, in our highest conceptions of God, as to any just and adequate
knowledge of him, if we consider either his nature, or his decrees and
counsels, or his works either of creation or providence.

Come we now to some useful inferences from the whole.

I. From all that has been said we learn what an inestimable treasure the H.
Scriptures ought to be esteemed by us: Wherein it has pleased God to make known
himself so far as our natures in this present condition of life, are capable of
apprehending him. It is very little that we could ever have conjectured aright
concerning God without some revelations of himself, in what method he himself
pleased. It is indeed but little he has given us leave to know of him in this
world, by all that he has told us in his word: But herein are we blessed and
priviledg'd indeed, that having this free use of the H. Scriptures, if we will
learn not to be wise beyond what revelation has thought fit to teach us, we may
be sure that all the knowledge of God which we acquire from the H. Scriptures,
is most unquestionably true, because they are the dictates of that H. Spirit,
who only knows the nature, and counsels, and operations of God, and is himself,
the God that cannot lie or deceive us. And besides that, what we learn of God
from the H. Scriptures is unquestionably true, so, we shall not be accountable
for what we do not know of God, if we make the Scriptures our guide, because
therein is contained the whole revelation of the divine Nature, so far as he is
pleased to indulge it to us in this World. If we submit our speculations of God
to these lively oracles, by which, and by which alone, he has taken care we
should know any thing of him, we are safe from all the false flights of
Superstition on the one hand, Enthusiasm on the other hand, and all the
wandering misguided opinions concerning God on every hand. Here we may set our
foot, and acquiesce in what we certainly meet with here, tho we may not be
carried into those heights to which some vain opiniastres think they could be
soaring, or tho there may be some mysteries which leave our reason behind them,
and call in for the assistance of Faith as believing that they are the certain
matter of revelation, which must therefore be true, because revealed to us by
the H. Spirit of God.

There are two things wherein the Socinians have seemed to lay a bar against
themselves as to the soundness of their Faith.

1. The loose conceptions about the Divine inspiration of the H. Scriptures. 2.
Their apprehension that they must believe nothing, which their own reasons
cannot comprehend. By the former, they let go that firm hold they ought to have
of some first principles, on which they ought to rest and depend, and lay
themselves open to a gradual Skepticism throughout the whole Occonomy of Faith.
And by the other they discard all mystery in Religion, and would pretend to
fathom the utmost depths of that, while they are incapable of solving a
thousand difficulties in every thing which they see and handle, and converse
immediately with. Hence their hesitating in the great mystery of our redemption
by Christ Jesus, and the satisfaction to divine justice effected by his death;
the deep and unfathomable doctrine of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity. They forget the authority that matters of pure revelation ought to
have with our Belief, and that where our reason cannot reach they must not
therefore cry out of Contradiction and Impossibility, because we cannot tell
what is contradictory or what is impossible, where we cannot understand the
nature of that thing about which we are apt to suspect an impossibility; unless
it appear contradictory to something that is plainly revealed. It is therefore
a good Caution of the Apostles which he gives, and that in a peculiarly smart
turn of words, which he has hardly used more than this one time throughout his
whole writings. (...) Not to think more highly than he ought to think but to
think soberly. Romans 21.3. Let this be the measure we take in all matters of
pure revelation, first to satisfy our selves, that this or that thing is
unquestionably revealed, and then, how insuperable soever the difficulties may
seem that attend it, not to perplex our selves in nicely unfolding them, but
give Reason only the scope of arguing the necessity of believing what is
revealed, and after submitting the whole mystery of it to the obedience of
faith. And this will infinitely endear to us the H. Scriptures wherein we know
is contained the whole compass of knowledge concerning God, which we ought to
aspire after in this world.

II. We may hence also infer how reasonable a thing it is for us to love one
another in some differences of thought and opinion while we are on this side
heaven. Our knowledge of God is scanty and imperfect, and in our imperfect way
of thinking it is hardly possible not to think differently, where therefore any
differences in opinion have no influences to a bad life, nor disturb the
government, nor lead to a necessity of throwing off the Authority of the
Scriptures, there, our mutual love and forbearance (whatever else is) is a most
undoubted command.

III. Last We may hence infer, how justly the wise and the good mind may be
longing after that state where their knowledge of God may be advanced to such
unspeakable degrees, suitably both to the nature of God, and the capacious
nature of our Souls. Alas! What is all this World (in comparison) but ignorance
and mistake! Where fancy chiefly proves the guide to reason, and in recompense
to all its travels in Worldly knowledge, gives it little other satisfaction
than cheat and delusion! With what satisfaction can the wise mind linger and
trifle here, distant from home, and a stranger to the interests and affairs of
its own Country above! Coopt up and confined to a place where so little light
is; conversing hardly with any thing, but the shapes and images of things,
which a trivial fancy or a diseased eye is framing to it self. It is in the
other World only that the Soul can bath it self in the pure, and clear streams
of rational knowledge. The Apostle tells us, that we see but through a glass
darkly, and we know but in part; i. e. it is but little we see at most, and but
uncertainly at best. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be done away. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. Then as to the nature, and
decrees, and works of God, We shall see all face to face, and know even as we
are known, v. 12. That will be the land of Vision indeed; where all things
shall be seen as they are, where all representations shall cease, and metaphors
prove useless. Where every riddle shall be explained to the utmost satisfaction
of greediest enquirers into the deep things of God. Then, tho the Divine Nature
be so boundless and infinite that it surpasses the thoughts and comprehensions
of Angels themselves, yet will both Angels and Men so far comprehend the nature
and being of God, that they shall never entertain any unworthy or uncomely
thoughts of him more: They shall never frame to themselves any mean and
wretched images of God, but shall see him as he is; and that so substantially,
and so much in reality, that the very sight will, in some measure, transform
them into his image, and make them like him whom they thus view. So S. John
tells us, Behold now we are the sons of God, (1 John 3.2.) and it does not yet
appear what we shall be; but we know when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, for we shall see him as he is. We shall not then see the back parts only,
as it once pleased God to indulge to Moses in this world, but we shall be able
fully and substantially to contemplate his nature, so as to acquiesce in the
knowledge of him, as a most sure and indissoluble bond of eternal Converse and
Communion with him. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Matthew. 5.8.

And as they shall see him in his Nature, so they shall see him in his Decrees
too. Then all the difficult knots of the divine foreknowledge shall be untied.
We shall then see how the liberty of man's will consisted with Gods praescience?
that this latter did not influence the former, as to a necessity of the man's
sinning and undoing himself, but that he himself was the author and first mover
in both. S. Austin after he had so positively asserted and with so much heat
argued the doctrines of Predestinanation, yet was he so conscious of his being
in the dark in these things, that he made it one comfortable speculation in his
thoughts about Heaven and the other state, that he should then come to
understand the vast mystery of God's decrees, in what method they were
disposed, and what influences they had or had not upon mankind.

Then (in a word) will all the glories of the Creation unveil themselves? then
will all the intricacies of divine Providence be unravelled, and the just
connection of every link in that great Chain, will be seen plainly, and
thankfully adored. Then all our perplexed enquiries into the reasons of strange
and unaccountable events will be most transportingly satisfied* Then all the
murmuring and oblique reflections we have rashly cast upon Providence in this
world, shall turn into praises and adorations, wondering and owning that
infinite wisdom that has run through all the turns and windings of humane
affairs, and made all seeming contrarieties of action and event, conspire in
one great and subservient design of Gods glory, and the eternal well-being of
those that have trusted in, and depended upon him. As God will then call all
the actions of men to a severe and particular account, so will he condescend to
give as fair and treatable reasons of his dealings in this world to the perfect
satisfaction of all happy beings, and to the surprising Confusion of Devils,
and bad men; when they shall see how much the mischiefs (wherein God permitted
them to be so successful and prosperous for a time) tended not only to their
own misery and undoing, but to the furtherance of those very Persons happiness
whom they so much disdained and hated: which perhaps may be not obscurely
intimated in that passage we shall know as we are known. That is, as God will
sift all our actions, and make his distinct enquiries what we have had and done
in the world, so will he lay before us all his own methods, and show us all the
just and wise reasons of his providence in this world. Then David whose feet
had well-nigh slipped when he saw the prosperity of the wicked; and Jeremy who
would have been pleading the case with God here, wherefore the way of the
wicked should prosper, and all they be happy that had dealt very treacherously:
Nay I may add, then, all those bleeding Souls, that have been so long crying
under the Altar, How long Lord, Holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood upon them that dwell upon the Earth! they shall all join in one
consort, and make infinite harmony before the wise and faithful God, in that
Song of Moses and of the Lamb, which comprehends the whole Church of God under
both dispensations, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just
and true are thy ways, O thou King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. What wise and good
mind, should not long for this mighty advance into the knowledge of God, where
the knowledge of him will be so transporting and satisfactory, and will advance
mankind to such degrees of likeness and conformity with God. To this glorious
state of knowledge and enjoyment of himself, the Blessed God bring us all
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with himself and the eternal Spirit of
grace be rendered, as is most due, all honor, and glory and praise, both now
and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed, for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon, in St. Paul's Church
yard.
AThena O^onienses. An Exact History of all the Writers and Bishops who have
had their Education in the most ancient and famous University of Oxford, from
the Fifteenth Year of King Henry the Seventh, Dom. 1500, to the End of the
Year. 1690. Representing the Birth, Fortune, Preferment, and death of all those
Authors and Prelates, the great Accidents of their Lives, and the Fate and
Character of their Writings. To which are added the Fast^ or Annals of the said
University, for the same time. The first Volume extending to the 10th Year of
King Charles I. Dom. 1640.

The Second Volume extending to 1691, is in the Press, and will be published
with all possible Expedition.

The Plagiary Exposed: Or an Old Answer to a Newly Revived Calumny against the
Memory of King Charles I. Being a Reply to a Book entitled King Charle's Case,
Formerly Written by John Cook of Grays Inn, Barrister; and since Copied out
under the Title of Colonel Ludlow's Letter. Written by Mr. Butler, the Author
of Hudibras. And never before Printed.

A Critical History of the New Testament, In two Parts, by Father Simon.

The Reasons of Mr. Bay's Changing his Religion, In Three Parts. The Second
Edition.


