portrait De Francisco Rabelaeso.
Qui sic nugatur, tractantem vt Seria vincat
Seria cum faciet, dic rogo quantus erit.
Theodorus Beza 1552

THE WORKS OF F. RABELAIS, M.D. OR, The Lives, heroic Deeds and Sayings of
GARGANTUA AND PANTAGRUEL.

Done out of French by Sir Tho. Urchard, Knight. and others.

With a large Account of the Life and Works, of the Author, particularly an
Explanation of the most difficult Passages in them. Never before Published in
any Language.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane,
1694.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Edward Russel, Esquire Admiral of Their Majesty's Navy,
One of the Lords of Their most honorable Privy Council etc.
SIR,
I Make bold to Dedicate to you a Book, whose Worth has fixed on its learned
Author the Character of the greatest Genius that France ever produced:
Superstition, Tyranny and all the numerous Train of Vices and Extravagancies
being ridiculed in it with as much Wit as Judgment; a Lover of Britain, envying
to France such a Treasure, has made it a Prize; and now it sets out with
English Colors, fearless of its Enemies, under your powerful Patronage.

Pardon, Sir, the Necessity of this Address: It was not easy to find a Name
worthy to be prefixed to such a Work, which disobliging the blameable
Inclinations of almost all Mankind, had left me but little Room for the Choice
of a Patron. I knew none in whom I could be safer than in you, who, by the
consent even of Envy, are not only granted to be free from those Defects, which
render the generality of the World obnoxious to Satyr; but would have turned
our satirical Author into a Panegyrist; had he lived now, and, like us, seen
every Virtue and heroic Accomplishment happily centred in your Person.

These Qualifications endearing you to Mankind made me eagerly embrace this
Opportunity, to express in a public Manner my share of the Joy which fills
every honest Breast in this Nation; pleased, to see you resume the mighty Task,
which you have discharged so much to its Glory and your own. Not to partake of
the Sense of Gratitude, which they would all express, for what you have so
bravely performed and still undertake for its Prosperity, would be to resemble
those who do not think themselves obliged to the Sun, because he dispenses his
Light and Heat to all; as, on the other side, to pretend to impart to you a
greater Luster, would be like striving to add Brightness to that glorious
Planet, that only withdraws a while to shine the more, and obscure the Train of
Stars that supplied its Absence.

I can hardly hope, that this Book will deserve your Attention at this
Juncture, when the most weighty Affairs in the World wholly employ your
Thoughts: Yet, Sir, if your Care for the Welfare of your Country will admit no
breathing Intervals, at least, when on your watery Charge you seek an Enemy, who
has too deeply felt the Effects of your Valor, not to dread it as much as we
love and admire it; this ingenious Satyr may then not be unfit to lessen a
while your Impatience in those tedious Moments. Thus when the Heroes of Argos
embarked in search of a Conquest, which the distance of the Prize only delayed,
they had their Orpheus to soften the Tediousness and Toyls of the Expedition.

May your next be no less Successful than theirs and your last; and secure to
these Kingdoms Peace and Plenty, that golden Fleece, which we, as well as the
Heroes, who are Proud to follow while you lead, may now reasonably expect.
Advance, Sir, to new Triumphs that wait for you: The Enemy who is to be
Conquered, is but the same whom you have already Vanquished, and seems to have
had time to Recruit the mighty Losses, which by your Valor and Conduct he
sustained, only that he might be the more Worthy of giving those Virtues an
Opportunity to exert themselves in a more glorious Manner.

They are so Conspicuous in you, Sir, as well as that Zeal for your Country's
Happiness, the hereditary Attribute of your Noble Family, that it would be an
impardonable Vanity in me to pretend to make them more known to this Age, by
any thing of the Nature of this Address; and it will be the proper Task of
History to transmit them not only to the next, but to the latest Posterity. I
will not therefore, Sir, tire you with Praises far below those which you so
highly deserve and shun: And, since the Best and Ablest Patriots have, by
public Acknowledgments of your great Merits, as it were, made themselves your
Panegyrists, what can be left for a Person of my private Circumstances to do,
but at a Distance to Admire you, and be Ambitious of no greater Name than that
of,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Devoted Servant. PETER MOTTEUX.

THE LIFE OF Dr. Francis Rabelais.
HAD Dr. Rabelais, like Cardan, Scaliger, Thuanus and other learned Men, given
us the History of his Life; employed, as it was, wholly in Mirth, and penned by
so uncommon a Hand, it must needs have pleased not only more than the most
diverting Works of others, but even more then his own unparalleled Chronicle*

But by a cruel Fatality, most of th^se whose Works perpetuate the Lives of
others, neglect to eternise their own by such a method; and, instead of
painting themselves and their most memorable Actions, only strive to be known
by the Pictures of Strangers which they have drawn: Some of them, perhaps,
slatter themselves with the Examples of a small number of happy Men the
Pictures of whose Lives and Persons have been consecrated to Posterity by
Pencils equal to those with which they had redeemed others from Oblivion; but,
as few prove kinder to us than our selves, those who expect to be excepted out
of that Rule after their Deaths may be assured, That if by chance some of their
able Survivers bestow one short minute to give, en passant, an imperfect Idea
of their Resemblance, Ten ill hands rudely attempting to do the same, while
they faintly hit one Lineament, will miscarry on the rest, and thus ignorantly
or maliciously ridicule what they pretend to represent.

It Is true, the ancient Philosophers have had their Laertius and the Heroes,
their Contemporaries, their Plutarch: But now that History seems almost lost in
disorderly Memoirs, its primitive Chaos, great Warriors are as unlikely to find
good Historians as famous Authors.

Thus Rabelais, that greater Lucian of France, has been even worse used than
that of Greece; for though we know the Old only by his Writings, yet few
fabulous Stories wrong his Memory, while that of Rabelais is so much abused by
unkind Fame, that, to know him, it were perhaps better only to seek that Modern
Lucian, as we do the Old, in the Pictures which he has drawn of others, than in
those which his careless or malicious Painters have given us of him.

However, you have here the best Account I could get of him: Neither was it
without much difficulty, that, out of the Ruins of Time, in a Kingdom where
it is not easy to find many Books and Persons that can inform us of that
Author, I could get together what follows; principally if we consider how
little is to be found in the French late Editions of his Works.

FRANCIS RABELAIS was born about the Year 1483, at Chinon, a very ancient
little Town, situate near the Place where the River Vienne loses it self into
the Loire, in the Province of Touraine in France. His Father Thomas Rabelais
was an Apothecary of that Town, and possessed an Estate called la Douiniere;
near which Place, Particular de la vie and moeurs de Rabelais, imprim. devant
ses Oeuvres.
having first sent his Son Francis to be Educated by the Monks of the Abbey of
Seville, and finding that he did not improve, he removed him to the University
of Angers, where he studied sometime at a Convent called la Baumette, but
without any considerable Success. There he became acquainted with Messieurs Du
Bellay, one of whom was afterward Cardinal: And it is said, that Rabelais
having committed some Misdemeanor, was there very severely used.

A Famous Author writes, Scaevol. Samarthanus, lib. 1. Elog. Clar. Vir.
That he was bred up in a Convent of Franciscan Friars in Poictou, and was
received into their Order. Which Convent can be no other than that of Fontenay
le Comte, Thresor Chronolog. de St. Romuald. 3d. part.
in the said Province, where he proved a great Proficient in Learning; in so
much, that of the Friars, some envied him, some, through Ignorance, thought him
a Conjurer; and in short, all hated and misused him because he studied Greek;
the Beauties of which Tongue they could not relish; its Novelty* making them
esteem it not only Barbarous, but Antichristian. This we partly observe by a
Letter which Budaeus, Budaeus Graec. Epist.
the most learned Man of his Age in that Tongue, writ to a Friend of Rabelais,
wherein he highly Praises him, particularly for his Excellent Knowledge in that
Tongue, and exclaims* against the Stupidity and Ingratitude of those Friars.

Such a Misfortune befell Erasmus; as also the Learned Rabanus Maurus
Magnentius, Abbot of Fulda and A^chbishop of Ments: For, having Composed some
Excellent Poems in Verse, Rabanus, Brower in Fuld. Hist.
they only served to expose him to the Hatred of his Monks, who accused him of
applying himself too much to Spiritual Things, and too little to the Increase
of the Temporal; to the Loss, as they thought, of the Monastery. So that, about
the Year 842, he was forced to retire near Lewis King of Germany, his
Protector; where his Monks, who had soon found their Error and their Loss in
the Absence of so esteemable an Abbot, came to beg his Pardon, and prayed him
to resume the Administration of the Abbey, which, however, he resolutely
declined.

Thus Rabelais hating the Ignorance and Baseness of the Cordeliers was desirous
enough to leave them, being but too much prompted to it by several Persons of
Eminent Quality, who were extremely delighted with his Learning and facecious
Conversation.

A Monk relates, That he was put in Pace, that is, P. de St. Romuald. Feuillent.
between four Walls with Bread and Water, in the said Convent, for some unlucky
Action; and was redeemed out of it by the Learned Andrew Tiraqueau, then
Lieutenant General (that is, Chief Judge) of the Baylywick of Fontenay le
Com^e; and by Tradition it is said in that Town, That on a Day when the Country
People used to resort to the Convent's Church, to address their Prayers, and
pay their Offerings to the Image of St. Francis, which stood in a Place
somewhat dark near the Porch; Rabelais, to Ridicule their Superstition,
privately removed the Saint's Image, and placed himself in its room, having
first disguised himself. But at last, too much pleased with the awkward Worship
which was paid him, he could not forbear Laughing, and made some Motion; which
being observed by his gaping, staring Worshippers, they cried out, Miracle! My
good Lord St. Francis moves! Upon which an Old crafty Knave of a Friar, who
knew Stone and the Virtue of St. Francis too well, to expect this should be
true, drawing near, scared our Sham-Saint out of his Hole: And having caused
him to be seized, the rest of the Fraternity, with their knotty Cords on his
bare Back, soon made him know, he was not made of Stone, and wish he had been
as hard as the Image, or Senceless, as was the Saint; nay, turned into the very
Image of which he lately was the Representation.

At last, by the Intercession of Friends, The Bishop's See is now removed to
Rochell.
of which Geoffroy d' Estissac Bishop of Maillezais is said to have been one;
be obtained Pope Clement VII's Permission to leave the beggarly Fellowship of
St. Francis, for the Wealthy and more easy Order of St. Bennet, and was
entertained in that Bishop's Chapter, that is, the Abbey of Maillezais. But his
Mercurial Temper prevailing after he had lived sometime there, he also left it,
and laying down the regular Habit, to take that which is worn by secular
Priests, he rambled up and down a while, till at last he fixed at Montpellier,
took all his Degrees as a Physician in that University, and practiced Physic
with Reputation. And by his Epistle before the Translation of the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates, Quum anno Superiore Monspessuli Aphorismos Hippocratis, and
deinceps Galeni artem Medicam frequenti auditorio public enarrarem, Antistes
clarissime, annotaveram loca aliquot in quibus interpretes mihi non admodum
satisfaciebant. Collatis enim eorum traductionibus cum exemplari graecanico
quod, praeter ea quae vulgo circumferuntur, habebam vetustissimum, literisque
Jonicis elegantissime, castigatissimeque exaratum, comperi illos quam plurima
omisisse, quaedam exotica and notha adjecisse, quaedam minus expressisse, pauca
invertisse verius quam vertisse, etc. F. Rabelaesus in Hippocr. Aphor.
and some Works of Galen, which he Published and Dedicated to the Bishop of
Maillezais in 1532, he tells him that he publicly read Physic in that
University to a Numerous Auditory.

It Is vulgarly said, that Rabelais having Published some Physical Tract, which
did not sell, upon the disappointed Book-seller's Complaint to him, told him,
that since the World did not know how to value a good Book, they would
undoubtedly like a bad one, and that accordingly he would write something that
would make him large amends; upon which he Composed his Gargantua and
Pantagruel, by which the Bookseller got an Estate. But either this is an
Error, or Rabelais must have been more imposed on them our Sir Walter Rauleigh
was by his selfish Stationer, since the abovementioned Translation, which was
Printed by the Famous Gryphius of Lions at first in 1532. was reprinted many
times since, particularly in 1543. of which Date, I have an an Edition of it;
which was undoubtedly before Rabelais began to write his Gargantua, and none
ever mentioned any other Tract of Physic by him; and also when he speaks of his
Annotations on the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, Contendit a me multis verbis ut
eas sinerem in communem studiosorum utilitatem exire.
he says, that Gryphius importuned him very much, to consent, that they might
be printed.

We do not know how he came to leave Montpellier, tho probably he was sent by
its University to solicit for them at Court, and then was invited to stay at
Paris, of which John Du Bellay, his Friend, afterward Cardinal, was not only
Bishop, but Governor; at least, it is certain he attended him in his Embassy to
Pope Paul the III. though I believe that the chief occasion of his going to
Rome, was to put a stop to the Ecclesiastical Censures fulminated against h^^*
for leaving his Convent, and it is thought the Bishop of Maillezais abetted that
desertion, and encouraged him in his Studies at Montpellier, which perhaps made
Rabelais, afterward dedicate to him, Hic non dicam qua ratione adductus sim
id, quicquid est laboris, tibi ut dicarem. Tibi enim jure debetur quicquid
efficere opera mea potest; qui me sic tu^ benignitate usque fovisti ut
quocunque oculos circumf^ram* (...) munificentiae tuae sensibus meis obversetur.
and own then, that he owed all things to him.

It Is likely our Doctor had then a Prospect of the Benefices, with which he
soon afterward was gratified by that Cardinal; and for that Reason was glad to
be eased of the Censures, under which he lay, which made him incapable of
enjoying any thing. The Bishop of Montpellier himself was a Protestant, and
might have kept always his Bishopric, had he written as Mystically as Rabelais.
The Cardinal Chastillon also, was not only a Protestant, but Married as well as
John de Montluc, Bishop of Valence; yet as well as many others in those Times,
who were against the Errors of the Church of Rome in their Hearts, they had
Benefices in it, and favored the Reformation perhaps more than those who
openly professed it. So Rabelais seems to me to have passed into Italy only in
the quality of a penitent Monk, being first obliged to submit to his Abbot and
the Orders of the Convent which he had left many Years, else had he been then
Physician to Cardinal Du Bellay, then Ambassador to the Pope, he would not have
Recommended himself to the Alms of his Superior, Epist: de Rabel. Page 5. p. 49.
the Bishop of Maillezais, as he does in his Letters to that Prelate, to whom
he writes, that the last Money which he had caused him to receive, was almost
gone; Et si n'en ay rien despendu en Meschance^e. Epist. de Rabel. page 49.
tho, says he, I have put none of it to an ill Use. Neither would he have added
that he used constantly to Eat either with Cardinal Du Bellay, or the Bishop of
Mascon, who had succeeded him in the Embassy (doubtless upon the other 's
Promotion to the Rank of Cardinal) but that much M^ney was spent in Dispatches,
Clothes and Chamber-Rent; which shows also, that tho he as a Friend did Eat
with one of those two, yet he paid for his Lodging elsewhere. By these Letters
which Messieurs de Saint Marthe, Gentlemen Famous for Learning, have not
disdained to publish with their learned and curious Observatio^s of ten times
their length, We see that Rabelais held also a private Correspondence in
Characters with the Bishop of Maillezais, to whom they are directed, and that
the Bishop was far from being bigoted to Popery. We also know by them, that
Rabelais obtained his Absolution of Pope Paul the III. the 17th. of January
1536. whereby he had leave given him to return to Maillezais, and to practice
Physic, either at Rome, or elsewhere; that is, without any gain, and only by
Charity. We also find that he had gained the Esteem of Cardinal de Genutiis
esteemed the Ornament of the College, Sadoletus Ital. Sacr. T. 3.
and Cardinal Simone^ta, eminent for Virtue, and other worthy Prelates, besides
that of Du Bellay and the Bishop of Mascon, who procured him his Bulls gratis,
and had even offered him to make use of their King's Name, had it been needful.

It Is reported, That Bishop Du Bellay, as King Francis the First 's Ambassador,
when he had Audience of Paul III. having kissed that Pope's Slipper, which
Ceremony is by some called, Adoration; all the rest of his Retinue did the
same; if we except Rabelais, who fixed as a Pillar, on which he leaned, said,
that if the Ambassador, who was a very great Lord in France, was unworthy to
kiss the Pope's Feet, they might even let down his Holinesses Breeches, and
washed his A -- and then he might presume to kiss something about him.

Another time, That Cardinal having brought him, with the rest of his Retinue
to that Pope, that they might beg some Grace of his Holiness, Rabelais, being
bid to make his Demand, only begged, that his Holiness would be pleased to
Excommunicate him.

So strange a Request having caused much surprise; he was Ordered to say why he
made it. It Is the same of whom Alstedius and others write, it was said in 1540.
Paulo III. Optimo Maximo in terris Deo.
Then Addressing himself to that Pope, who was doubtless a great Man, and had
nothing of the Moroseness of many others: May it please your Holiness, said he,
I am a Frenchman of a little Town, called, Chinon, whose Inhabitants are
thought somewhat too subject to be thrown into a sort of unpleasant Bon-Fires;
and indeed, a good Number of honest Men, and amongst the rest, some of my
Relations, have been fairly Burned there already: Now would your Holiness but
Excommunicate me, I would be sure never to Burn. My reason is, that, passing
through the Tarentese, where the Cold was very great, in the way to this City
with my Lord Cardinal Du Bellay, having reached a little Hurr, where an Old
Woman lived, we prayed her to make a Fire to warm us, but she burned all the
Straw of her Bed to kindle a Faggot, yet could not make it burn; so that at
last, after many Imprecations, she cried, without doubt this Faggot was
Excommunicated by the Pope 's own Mouth, since it will not burn: In short, we
were obliged to go on without warming our selves. Now if it pleased your
Holiness, bu^ to Excommunicate me thus, I might go safely to my Country. By
this, he not only in a jesting manner, exposed the Roman Clergy's persecuting
Temper, but seemed to allude to the Inefficacy of the former Pope's
Excommunications in England, and chiefly in Germany; where they only served to
warn our Henry the VIII and on the other side, the Lutherans, to secure
themselves against the attempts of their Enemies.

He that would not spare the Pope to his Face, was doubtless not less liberal
of his biting Iokes to others: Particul. de la vie de Rabelais, impre. devant
ses Oeuures.
Insomuch, that he was obliged to leave Rome without much preparation; not
thinking himself safe among the Italians, who of all Men, love and forgive
raillery the least, when they are the subject of it.

So being come as far as Lions in his way to Paris, very indifferently
Accoutred, and no Money* to proceed, whether he had been Robbed, or had spent
all his Stock; he, who had a peculiar love for Ease and good Eating, and no
less Zeal for good Drinking, found himself in dismal Circumstances. So he had
recourse to a Stratagem which might have been of dangerous Consequence to one
less known than Rabelais.

Being Lodged at the Tower and Angel, a Famous Inn in that City, he took some
of the Ashes in the Chimney, and having wrapped them up in several little
papers, on one of them be writ Poison to kill the King, in another, Poison to
kill the Queen, in a third, Poison to kill the Duke of Orleans, and having on
the Change met a young Merchant, told him, That being skilled in Physiognomy he
plainly saw that he had a great desire to get an Estate easily; therefore, if
he would come to his Inn, he would put him in a way to gain a Hundred Thousand
Crowns; the greedy Merchant was very ready. So when he had Treated our Doctor,
he came to the main point, that is, how to get the Hundred Thousand Crowns;
Then Rabelais, after the other Bottle or two, pretending a great deal of Caution,
at last showed him the papers of Powder, and proposed to him, to make use of
them according to their Superscriptions, which the other promised, and they
appointed to meet the next day, to take Measures about it; but the too
Credulous, though honest, Trader, immediately ran to a Judge, who having heard
the Information, immediately sent to secure Rabelais, the Dauphin having been
Poisoned some time before; so the Doctor with his Powder was seized, and being
examined by the Judge, gave no answer to the Accusation, safe that, he told the
young Merchant, that he had never thought him fit to keep a Secret, and only
desired them to secure what was in the Papers, and send him to the King, for he
had strange things to say to him.

Accordingly, he is carefully sent to Paris, and handsomely treated by the way
on free Cost, as are all the King 's Prisoners, and being come to Paris, was
immediately brought before the King, who knowing him, asked him, what he had
done to be brought in that Condition, and where he had left the Cardinal Du
Bellay. Upon this the Judge made his Report, showed the Bills with the Powder,
and the Informations which he had drawn, Rabelais on his side told his Case,
took some of all the Powders before the King; which being found to be only
harmless Wood Ashes, pleaded for Rabelais so effectually, that the business
ended in Mirth, and the poor Judge was only laughed at for his Pains.

Though this Story be Printed before many Editions of Rabelais, somewhat
otherwise than I here give it, I would not any more be answerable for its
Truth, than for that of many more which Tradition ascribes to him. When a Man
has once been very famous for Jests and merry Adventures, he is made to adopt
all the Jests that want a Father, and many times such as are unworthy of him.
For this Reason I will omit many Stories which some indeed relate of Rabelais*
but which few can assure or believe to be true. Yet since the witty Sayings,
merry Triflings and the Accounts of the indifferent Actions of Great Men, have
found not only their Historians but their Readers, from Tully's Puns, to the
false Witticisms, insipid Drolling, and empty insignificant Remarks, that make
up the greatest part of the Scaligeriana, and some others of those unequal
Collections of Weeds and Flowers, whose Titles end in ana; we may with greater
Reason relate the Jests of Rabelais, whose Life as well as his Writings have
been thought a continual Jest* and this would not s^em to be the Life of
Rabelais, did not some Comical Stories make a part of it.

Neither were his Jests sometimes less productive of Good, than the deep
Earnest of others. Of which the University of Montpellier furnishes us with an
Instance: None being admitted to the Degree of Doctor of Physic there, Grand
Diction. Historiq.
who has not first put on the Gown and Cap of Dr. Rabelais, Voyage de l'Europe,
T. 1.
which are preserved in the Castle of Mo^ac in that City. The Cause of this
uncommon Veneration for the Memory of that Learned Man, is said to be this:

Some Scholars having occasioned an extraordinary Disorder in that City,
Partic. delavie. de Rabelais.
Anthony Du Prat, Cardinal, Archbishop of Sens, then Lord Chancellor of France,
upon Complaint made of it, caused the University to be deprived of part of its
Privileges. Upon this, none was thought fitter to be sent to Paris to solicit
their Restitution than our Doctor, who, by his Wit, Learning and Eloquence, as
also by the Friends which they had purchased him at Court, seemed made to
obtain any thing. When he came to Paris about it, the Difficulty lay in gaining
Audience of the Chancellor, who was so incensed, that he refused to hear any
thing in Behalf of the University of Montpellier. So Rabelais having vainly
tried to be admitted, at last put on his Red Gown and Doctor's Cap; and thus
Accoutred, came to the Chancellor's Palace, on St. Austin's Key; but the Porter
and some other Servants mistook him for a Madman* So Rabelais having, in a
peremptory Tone, been asked there, who he was, let his impertinent Querist
know, that he was the Gentleman who usually had the Honor to flea He-Calves;
and that, if he had a mind to be first flead, he had best make haste and strip
immediately. Then being asked some other Questions, he answered in Latin, which
the other understanding not, one of the Chancellor's Officers that could speak
that Tongue was brought, who addressing himself to our Doctor in Latin, was
answered by him in Greek, which the other understanding as little as the first
did Latin, a third was fetched who could speak Greek; but he no sooner spoke in
that Language to Rabelais, but that he was answered in Hebrew; and one who
understood Hebrew being with much Difficulty procured, Rabelais spoke to him in
Syriac: Thus having exhausted all the Learning of the Family, the Chancellor,
who was told, that there was a merry Fool at his Gate who had outdone
every-one, not only in Languages, but in smartness of Repartees, desired that
he might be brought in. 'Twas a little before Dinner. Then Rabelais shifting
the Farcical Scene into one more serious, addressed himself to the Chancellor
with much Respect, and having first made his Excuse for his forced Buffoonry,
in a most Eloquent and Learned Speech, so effectually pleaded the Cause of his
University, that the Chancellor, at once ravished and persuaded, not only
promised the Restitution of the Abolished Privileges, but made the Doctor sit
down at Table with him as a particular Mark of his Esteem.

Much about that time, hearing with what Facility, for the sake of a small Sum
of Money, the Faculty of Orange (some say Orleans) admitted Ignorant
Pretenders, as Doctors of Physic not only without examining, but even without
seeing them; Rabelais sent the usual Fees, and had one received Doctor there
unseen, by the Name of Doctor Johannes Caballus, and let the wise Professors
and the World know afterward, what a worthy Member they had admitted into
their Body, since that very Doctor was his Horse Jack; or, as some say, his
Mule: For if there are various Lections, there may well be also various
Traditions of the same Passage.

Though I know that it as little becomes a Chaste Historian to launch into large
Digressions, as to advance Things without good Authorities, I cannot forbear
mentioning something very particular concerning that very Numerical Doctor, I
mean, Joannes Caballus: And that I may not be thought to relate Stories without
Authorities, I will make bold to quote that of a Book written Stylo maxim
Rabelaesano, viz. Le Moyen de Parvenir; I remember to have read the Story in a
less Apocriphal Author, but Time has blotted his Name out of my Memory.

Rabelais being at Paris, and more careful of himself than of his Mule, had
trusted it to the Care of a Printer's Men, desiring them at least not to let it
want Water. But having perhaps forgot to make them drink, they also easily,
though uncharitably forgot the Brute. At three days end the Creature having
drank as little Water as its Master, a young unlucky Boy took a Fancy to get on
its back, even like the Miller's Daughter, without a Saddle; another Truand
Scholar begged to get behind him, so did a third and eke a fourth. Thus these
Four being mounted like Aymond's Four Sons a Horse back on a Mule, without
Bridle or Halter, the real and living Emblem of Folly, the Grave Animal walked
leasurely down St. James's street, till it came near a Church, toward which it
moved, drawn by the magnetic Virtue of the Water, which it smelt at a
considerable Distance, in the Holy Water Pot, which is always near the Porch.
And in vain our Four Riders kicked and called, in spite of them the Headstrong
thirsty Beast made up to the Holy Element; and though the Church was almost
full of People, it being Sunday and Sermon time, notwithstanding all
Opposition, the bold Monster dipped its saucy Snout in the Sanctified Cistern.
The People that were near it, were not a little amazed at the Impudence of that
Sacrilegious Animal, deservedly cursed with Sterility, though it were but for
this one Crime; Many took him for a Spectrum that bore some Souls, formerly
Heretical, but now Penitent, that came to seek the sweet Refrigeratory of the
Saints, out of the more than Hellish Flames of Purgatory. So the unconcerned
Mule took a swinging Draught of Holy Liquor, yet did not like it so well, there
being always Salt in it, as to take a second Dose; but, having somewhat allayed
its raging Thirst, modestly withdrew, with her two ^race of Youngsters. However
the thing did not end thus; for the Brute was seized, and Rabelais being
thought none of the greatest Admirers of the Romish Fopperies, was shrewdly
suspected of having laid the Design of that Scandalous Adventure. Nor was the
rude Four-legg'd Joannes Caballus released out of the Pound, till its Master
had dearly paid for its Drink.

As he Ridiculed the Superstition of Priests, he also was extremely free in his
Reflections on the Monks, and truly he knew them too well to Love and Esteem
them; he is said not to have been able to refrain his Satirical Temper, even
while he was reading public Service; and instead of Qui maechantur cum illa, as
the Vulgate has it, to have said aloud, Qui monachantur cum illa.

It Is also said, That as he was kneeling once at Church, before the Statue of
King Charles the Eighth, a Monk came and said to him, That doub^less he mistook
that King's Statue for that of some Saint; but Rabelais immediately replied, I
am not so much a Monk (Blockhead I mean) as thou think me; nor yet so blind,
as not to know, that I kneel before the representation of King Charles the
VIII. for whose Soul I Prayed, because he brought the Pox out of Naples into
this Kingdom, by which means, I, and other Physicians have been considerable
Gainers.

Several of these being once Assembled to consult about an Hypocondriac humor,
which confined Cardinal Du Bellay to his Bed; they at last resolved, that an
Aperitive Decoction should be prepared, to be frequently taken with some Syrup,
by the Patient. Now Rabelais who was his Physician, perhaps not being of their
Opinion, while the rest of our Learned Doctors were still discoursing in their
Scientific Iargon, to deserve the large Fee, caused a Fire to be made in the
Yard, and on it to be set a Kettle-ful of Water, into which he had put as many
Keys as he could get: And while he was very busy in stirring them about with a
Stick, the Doctors coming down, saw him, and asked what he was doing? Following
your Directions, replied he. How, in the Name of Gulen? cried one of them* you
are for something that may be very aperitive, returned Rabelais, and, by
Hippocrates, I think you will own that nothing can be more Aperitive than Keys,
unless you would have me send to the Arcenal for some pieces of Cannon. This
odd Fancy being immediately related to the sick Cardinal, set him into such a
fit of Laughing, that it helped more to cure him than the Prescription; and
what made the Jest the more pertinent, was, that Keys are made of Iron and
Steel, which with Water are the chief Ingredients in Chalibeat Medicines.

Hearing that the grave John Calvin, somewhat prejudiced against him, for his
biting Iokes, had played on his Name by the way of Anagram; saying Rabelaesius,
Rabie laeus; he with an admirable presence of mind, immediately returned the
Complement in the same kind, saying, Calvin Jan cul, adding, that there was
Anagram for Anagram, and that a Studied trifle only deserved to be paid back
with one worse, ex tempore.

Thus, while like Democritus, he made himself Me^ry with the Impertinences of
Mankind; nothing was able to allay his Mirth, unless it were the thought of a
Reckoning, at the time that he paid it; then indeed, he was thought somewhat
serious, though probably 'twas partly that those who were to receive it, might
not impose on him and the Company, and because he generally found his Purse not
over full. However, the time of paying the Shot in a Tavern among good Fellows,
or Pantagruelists, is still called in France, le quart d' heure de Rabelais;
that is, Rabelais's quarter of an hour.

Yet his Enemies, the Monks and some others tell us, that he seemed much less
Concerned when he paid the grand Shot of Life, than when he discharged a small
Tavern Reckoning: For they say, that he faced Death with an unconcerned and
careless Countenance; and in short, that he Died just as he Lived. They relate
the thing thus.

Rabelais being very Sick, Cardinal Du Bellay sent his Page to him, to have an
account of his condition; his answer was, Tell my Lord in what Circumstances
thou find me; Jem'en vay chercher un grand Peut-estre. Il est au nid de la
Pie. Which verbatim Englished, is; I am going to seek, or look for a great May
Be (Doubt or Uncertainty). He is in the Pie 's Nest, etc.
I am just going to leap into the Dark. He is up in the Cock-Loft bid him keep
where he is. As for thee, thou'^t always be a Fool: Let down the Curtain, the
Farce is done. A little before this, he had called for his Domino, so some in
France call a sort of Hood which Curates wear, saying, put me on my Domino, for
I am cold; besides, I will Die in it, for, Beati qui in Domino moriuntur. An
Author who styles Rabelais, Thev. Hist. de Iean Clopinel!
a Man of Excellent Learning, Writes, that he being importuned by some to sign
a Will, whereby they had made him bestow on them Legacies that exceeded his
Ability, He to be no more disturbed, complied at last with their Desires; but
when they came to ask him where they should find a Fund answerable to what he
gave; as for that, replied he, You must do like the Spaniel, look about and
search; then, adds that Author, having said, Draw the Curtain, the Farce is
over, he Died. Likewise, a Monk not only tells us, P. de St. Romuald Rel.
Feuillent.
that he ended his Life with that ^est, but that he left a Paper Sealed up,
wherein were found three Articles, (...) his Last-Will, I owe much, I have
nothing, I give the rest to the Poor.

This last Story, or that before it, must undoubtedly be false; and perhaps
both are so, as well as the Message by the Page; though Freigius relates also,
Comment in Orat. Cic. Tom. 1.
that Rabelais said, when he was Dying, Draw the Curtain, etc. But, if he said
so, many great Men have said much the same. Thus Augustus near his Death, asked
his Friends, Nunquid vitae mimum commode peregisset.
Whether he had not very well Acted the Farce of Life? And Demonax, one of the
best Philosophers, when he saw that he could not, by reason of his great Age,
live any longer, without being a Burden to others as well as to himself, said
to those that were near him, what the Herald used to say when the public Games
were ended, You may withdraw, Lucian.
the Show is over, and refusing to Eat, kept his usual Gayety to the ^ast, and
set himself at Ease.

I wave many other Stories, concerning Rabelais, which seem as Inconsistent and
Fabulous as the Legends of Symeon the Metaphrast. St. Xavier's Miracles, or the
Traditions of the Monks, our witty Satyrist's irreconcilable Enemies. We ought
not easily to believe that ^e, who even in the most Licentious Places of his
Merry Composures is thought by the Judicious to have generally a design to
expose Villainy, and in the Places that are Graver, as also in his Letters,
displays all the Moderation and Judgment of a good Man; we ought not, I say, to
believe, that such a Man in his seventieth Year, can have abandoned himself to
those Excesses; being Curate of a large Parish near Paris, Prebend of St. Maur
des Fossez in that City, and honored, and loved by many Persons equally
eminent for Virtue, Learning and Quality.

'Twas by a Person, who with those three advantages, was also a great
Statesman, and a very good Latin Poet, I mean, John Cardinal Du Bellay Bishop
of Paris, who knew Rabelais from his Youth, that he was taken from the
Profession of Physic, to be employed by that Prelate in his most Secret
Negotiations; 'Twas he that knew him best, yet he thought him not unworthy of
being one of the Prebends of a Famous Chapter in a Metropolis, and Curate of
Meudon in his Diocese.

'Twas doubtless in that pleasant Retreat, that he composed his Gargantua and
Pantagruel; though some say 'twas at that House called Douiniere already
mentioned, and that the Neighboring Abbey of Seville, whose Monks lived not
then according to the Austerity of their Rule, is partly the Subject of i^,
which causes him, They say* to make so often mention of the Monks the Staff of
the Cross, and the Vineyard of Seville; as also of Basche, Learn, Panzoust,
etc. which are Places near that Abbey.

The Freedom which Rabelais has used in that Work, could not but raise it many
Enemies: Which caused him to give an Account in his Dedicatory Epistle, Oeuures
de Rabel. Epist. Dedic. live. 4.
to Odet Cardinal of Chastillon, his Friend, of the Motive that induced him to
Write it. There he tells him, that though his Lordship knew how much he was
daily Importuned to continue it by several great Persons, who alleged, that
many, who languish'd through Grief or Sickness, reading it, had received
extraordinary Ease and Comfort; yet, the Calumnies of a sort of uncharitable
Men, who said, it was full of Heresies, though they could not show any there
without perverting the Sense, had so far Conquered his Patience, that he had
resolved to write no more on that subject. But that his Lordship having told
him, that King Francis had found the reports of his Enemies to be unjust, as
well as King Henry the (...), then Reigning, who therefore had granted to that
Cardinal his Privilege, and particular Protection for the Author of those
Mithologies; now, without any fear, under so Glorious and Powerful a Pa^ronage,
he securely presumed to write on.

And indeed, it is observable, that in the Book to which that Epistle is
prefixed, he has more freely than in the rest exposed the Monks, Priests, Pope,
Decretals, Council of Trent then sitting, etc.

That Epistle is Dated the 28. of January 1552. and some write that he Died in
1553. By this Epigram, Thres. Chronol. de St. Romuald.
Printed before his last Book, Rabelais seems to have been Dead before it was
Published.

Rabelais est il mort? Voicy encor un Livre!
Non, sa meilleure part a repris ses esprits,
Pour nous fair present de l'un de ses escrits
Qui le rend enter nous immortel and fait vivre
This seems to be a kind of an Anagram perhaps made by the great Civilian
Tiraqueau.
Nature quite.

This Satirical Work, employed him only at his spare hours, for he tells us,
that he spent no time in Composing it, but that which he usually allowed
himself for Eating; yet it has deserved the Commendations of the best of
serious Writers, and particularly of the great Thuanus, whose approbation alone
is a Panegyric. And if we have not many other serious Tracts by its Author, the
private Affairs of Cardinal Du Bellay, in which he was employed, and his
profession as a Physician and a Curate, may be supposed to be the Cause of it
Yet he Published a Latin Version of the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, and with them
some of Galen's Works, which for its faithfulness and purity of Style, has been
much esteemed by the best Judges of both: Nor is Vorstius, who attempted the
same, s^^d to have succeeded so well. Rabelais also Wrote several French and
Latin Epistles, in an excellent Sty^e, to several Great and Learned Men, and
particularly, to Cardinal de Chastillon, the Bishop of Maillezais, and Andrew
Tiraqueau, the Famous Civilian, Thresor. Chron. de St. R^muald.
who is said Yearly to have given a Book, and by one Wife, a Son to the World,
Others more probably reduce the Number to Ten Sons, at the Birth of each of
whom he Published a Learned Polio.
during Thirty Years, though he never drank any thing but Water; in which he
differed much from his Friend Rabelais. Those Epistles do not only show, that
he was a Man fit for Negotiations, but that he had gained at Rome, the
Friendship of several Eminent Prelates. He likewise writ a Book called
Sciomachia, and of the Feasts made at Rome, in the Palace of Cardinal Du
Bellay for the Birth of the Duke of Orleans: Printed at Lions in 8o by Sebast
Gryphius 1549, And there is an Almanac for the Year 1553, Calculated by him
for the Meridian of Lions, and printed there, which shows, that he was not only
a Grammarian, Poet, Philosopher, Physician, Civilian, and Theologian, but also
an Astronomer. Besides, he was a very great Linguist, being well skilled in the
French, German, Italian, Spanish, Latin, Greek and Hebrew Tongues, and we see
in his Letters, that he also understood Arabic, which he had learned at Rome of
a Bishop of Caramith.

Some Write that Rabelais Died at Meudon, but Dom Pierre de St. Romuald, says,
that Dr. Guy Patin, Royal Professor at Paris, who was a great admirer of
Rabelais, assured him, that he caused himself to be brought from his Cure to
Paris, where he lies Buried in St Paul's Churchyard, at the foot of a great
Tree, still to be seen there (1660). He Died in a House in the Street, called,
La Rue des Jardins in St. Paul's Parish at Paris, about the Year 1553. Aged
seventy Years. But his Fame will never Die.

Estienne Pasquier Advocate General, one of the most learned and judicious
Writers of his Age, Joachim Du Bellay Archdeacon of Paris, Named to the
Arch-bishopric of Bordeaux, Peter Boulanger, Peter Ronsard, once Prince of the
French Poets, Jean Antoine de Baif, and many more of the best pens of his Age,
honored his Memory with Epitaphs, the two latter in French. That by Ronsard,
being too long, I omit; here is that by Baif.

Pluton, Prince du noir Empire,
Ou les tiens ne rient jamais,
Recois aujourd' huy Rabelais,
Et les tiens auront de quoy rire.
Here are Four others in Latin; of which the two first are to be found in
Pasquier.

Pasq. Recueil des Portraits.
Ille ego Gallorum Gallus Democritus, illo
Gratius, aut si quid Gallia progenuit.
Sic homines, sic and coelestia Numina lusi,
Vix homines, vix ut Numina laesa putes.
Pasq. Live. des Tomb.
Sive tibi sit Lucianus alter,
Sive sit Cynicus, quid hospes ad te?
Hac unus Rabelaesius facetus,
Nugarum Pater, artifexque mirus,
Quicquid is fuerit, recumbit urna.
Somnus, and ingluvies, Bacchusque Venusque Jocusque
Numina, dum vixi, grata fuere mihi.
Caetera quis nescit? Fuit Ars mihi cura medendi,
Maxima ridendi sed mihi cura fuit.
Tu quoque non lacrymas, sed risum solve, Viator,
Si gratus nostris Manibus esse velis.
Non Rabelaesius solus
Sed aula, Ecclesia,
Et omnis Mundus
Agunt Histrioniam.
A great number of Learned Men have made mention of him in their Writings, as
Will. Bude Master of the Requests, alias, Budaeus in Epistolis Graecis. Jac.
Aug. de Thou, President in the Court of Parliament at Paris, alias Thuanus,
Hist. Lib. 38. and Commentar. de vita sua, lib. 6. Theod. B^za, Clement. Maro^,
who inscribed to him an Imitation in French of the 21st. Epig. of Martial's
Fifth Book, Si te cum mihi, Chare Martialis, etc. Hugh Salel, that Translated
Homer's Iliad into French. Stephen Dolet, a French and Latin Poet, burned for
being a Protestant at Paris, 1545. Peter Ronsard. Stephen Pasquier in his
Recherches de la France, and in the First and Second Books of his Lettres. Jean
Cecile Frey. Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, in his Book of the Progress of
Learning. Andrew Du Chesne, in his Book des Antiqui^ez de France. Thevet, Hist.
de Jean Clopinel: Gab. Mic. de la Roche Maillet, Vie des Illust. Personnages:
Fran. Grude, Seigneur de la Croix du Maine, in his Biblioteque. Ant. du Verdier
Sieur de Vauprivas Conseiller du Roy, in his Bibl. Universelle. Franc. Ranchin
Dr. of Physic at Montpellier. Scaevola de Saint Marthe, Conseiller du Roy,
etc. alias Samarthanus, lib. primo Elog. Clarorum Virorum. Sir William Temple,
in the Second Part of his Miscellan. C. Sorel, First Historiographer of France,
in his Biblioteque Francoise. Dr. Ant* Van Dale, De Oraculis and
Consecrationibus. Monsieur Costar, dans son Apologie^ M. Menage. Romuald, in
the Third part of his Thresor Chronologique; and several others named in a Book
called Floretum Philosophicum, that mentions many particulars of his Life; and
the Names of those that have spoke of him. A Curate of Meudon, in Honor of his
Predecessor, also caused to be Printed whatever is writ in his Praise, which
Books I have not been able to find. There is also a large Account of Rabelais
in the Grand Historical French Dictionary.

Some Learned Men's OPINION OF Dr. RABELAIS^
De Rabelaeso, clarorum aliquot Scriptorum Testimonia.
Guilielmus Budaeus, in Epistolis Graecis.
O Deum immortalem, and sodalitatis Praesulem, nostraeque amicitiae Principem!
Quidnam est illud quod andivimus? Te etenim o caput mihi exoptatum, and
Rabalaesum Theseum tuum intelligo ab istis elegantiae and venustatis osoribus
Sodalibus vestris obturbatos propter vehemens circa literas Graecas studium,
quam plurimis gravibusque malis vexari. Papae, o in faustam virorum
delirationem! Qui usque adeo sunt animo ineleganti ac stupido, ut, quibus
cohonestari universum Sodalitium vestrum convenerat, multumque sapere, quippe
qui exiguo temporis Spatio ad doctrinae fastigium pervenerint, eosdem sane
calumniose insimulando, in ipsosque conjurando finem imponere conati sunt
ornatissimae exercitationi. Et post alia. Vale and salutato meo nomine quater
Rabalaesum scitum and industrium vel sermon si praesto sit aut per Epistolas
denuncians. --

Viri Illustriss. Iac. Aug. Thuani in Supremo Gall^arum Senatu Praesidis.
Commentariorum de vita sua. lib. 6.
CHinone hospitium habebat ( Thuanus) in domo oppidi amplissima, quae quondam
Francisci Rabalaesi suit, qui litteris Graecis, Latinisque instructissimus, and
Medicinae quam profitebatur peritissimus, postremo omni serio studio omisso se
totus vitae solutae ac gulae mancipavit and ridendi artem hominis, sicut ipse
ai^bat propriam, amplexus, Democritica liberate, and scur^ili interdum
dicacitate, scriptum ingeniosissimum fecio, quo vitae regnique cunctos Ordines
quasi in scenam sub fictis nominibus produxit and populo deridendos propinavit.
Hominis ridiculi qui tota vita ac scriptis, ridendi aliis materiam praebuit,
memoria a Thuano and. Calignono hic renovata est, cum belle cum Rabelaesi
Manibus actum uterque dicerer, quod Domus ejus publico diversorio, in quo
perpetuae commessationes erant, hortus adjacens ad ludum oppidanis per dies
festos se exercentibus, projectum in hortum despiciens, in quo, cum litteris
operam dabat, libros habere and studere solitus erat, vinariae cellae
inserviret. Ex eaque occasion Thuanus a Calignono inviratus, hoc Carmen
extemporaneum fecit.

Ipse Rabelaesus loquitur.
Sic vixi, ut vixisse mihi jocus, atque legenti
Quos vivus scripsi, sit jocus usque jocos.
Per risum atque jocos homini data vita fruenda,
Inter amarescit seria fell magis.
Et nunc ne placidos laedant quoque seria manes
Cavit Echionii provida cura Dei.
Nam quae a patre domus fuerat Chinone relicta,
Qua vitreo Lemovix amne Vigenna fluit,
Postquam abii, communis in usum versa tabernae,
Laetisico strepitu nocte dieque sonat.
Ridet in hac hospes pernox, ridetur, in horto,
Cum populus festo cessat in urbe die.
Tibiaque inflato saltantes incitat utre
Tibia Pictonicos docta ciere modos.
Et quae Musaeum domino, quae cella libellis
Nectareo spumat nunc apotheca mero.
Sic mihi post minimum vitae tam suaviter actum
Dent hodie ad priscos fata redire jocos;
Non alia patrias aedes mercede locare,
Vendere non alia condition velim.
Theodorus Beza, de Francisco Rabelaesio.
QUI sic Nugatur, tractantem ut seria vincat,
Seria cum faciet, dic rogo quantus erit?
Scaevola Samarthanus ex Libro primo Elogiorum Gallorum Doctrina Illustrium.
F. Rabelesaeus -- Impulsu quorumdam Procerum, qui urbana ejus dicacitate
plurimum oblectabantur, Monasterii claustra juvenis transiliit, demumque in
ridendis hominum actionibus totus fuit. Cum enim, pro ea qua pollebat Linguarum
and Medicinae Scientia, multa graviter and erudite posset scribere, quod and
Hippocratis Aphorismi ab illo casta fide traducta, and aliquot Epistolae nitido
Stylo conscriptae satis indicant, Lucianum tamen aemulari maluit, ad cujus
exemplum ea Sermon Patrio finxit, quae nugae esse videntur, sed ejusmodi tamen
sunt ut Lectorem quemlibet eruditum capiant, and incredibili quadam voluptate
perfundant. Neque solum erat in scribendo salis and facetiarum plenus, verum
and eandem jocandi libertatem apud quemlibet and in omni sermon retinebat;
adeo ut Romam Joanne Bellajo Cardinale profectus, and in Pauli III. conspectum
venire jussus, ne ipsi quidem Pontifici Maximo pepercerit. Atque hunc
intemperantiae suae causam ingeniose praetexebat, quod cum sanitati
conservandae nihil magis officiat quam maeror and aegrimonia, prudentis Medici
parts sint non minus in mentibus hominum exhilarandis, quam in corporibus
curandis laborare.

Anton. Van Dale; De Oraculis and Consecrationibus, p. 341.
DE Oraculis and Sortibus inter alia scripsit per Lusum and Jocum doctissimus
and mag^us ille Gallus Rabelaesius, cujus nugae saepius multorum doctorum seria
vincunt, in vita and gestis Gargantuae and Pantagruelis, tam docte meo judicio,
quam lepide ac false.

Sir William Temple in his Miscellanea; Second Part.
THE great Wits among the Moderns have been, in my Opinion, and in their
several Kinds; of the French Rabelais, and Montagne -- Rabelais seems* to have
been Father of the Ridicule, a Man of excellent and universal Learning, as well
as Wit; and though he had too much Game given him for Satyr in that Age, by the
Customs of Courts and of Convents, of Processes and of Wars, of Schools and of
Camps, of Romances and Legends, yet he must be confessed to have kept up his vein
of Ridicule, by saying many things so Smutty and Profane, that a pious Man
could not have afforded, though he had never so much of that Coin about him:
And it were to be wished, that the Wits who have imitated him, had not put too
much value upon a Dress, that better Understandings would not wear (at least in
public) and upon a compass they gave themselves, which some other Men cannot
take.

Mr. l'Abbe Costar, dans son Apology, A Monsieur Menage, Page 149.
RAbelais est autant a la mode quil fut jamais. Ses railleries sont agreables
d'un Agreement qui ne finira point tant qu'il y aura Sur la Terre d' habiles
Rieurs. Les modes and les habillemens changeront toujours, mais non pas celles
des bons contes and des bons mots qui se soustiennent d'eux mesmes, and qui
sont en effet de bonnes chooses. Ceux de Plaute and de Lucien quelques vieux
qu'ils foient, ne laissent pas de conserver la fleur and la Grace quils avoient
dans leur nouveau^e.

M. Estienne Pasquier, Conseiller du Roy, Avocat General en sa Chamber des
Comptes a Paris.
Au Livre de ses Recherches de la France.
JE mettray enter les Poets du mesme Temps Francois Rabelais: Car combien
qu'il ait crit en prose les Faits heroiques de Gargantua and Pantagruel, il
estoit mis au rangdes Poets, comme l'prend la responce que Marot fit a Sagon
sous le nom de Fripelipes fon Valet.

Je ne voy point qu'un Saint Gelais,
Un Heroet, un Rabelais,
Un Brodeau, un Seve, un Chapuy.
Voisent escrivant contre luy.
Aux gayetez qu'il mit en lumiere, se mocquans de toute chose il serendit le
Nompareil! Dema part je recognoitray franchement avoir l'esprit si folastre,
que jene me lassay jamais de le lire, and ne le leu jamais que je n'y trouvasse
matierede rire, and d'en fair mon profit tout ensemble.

PREFACE^
Wherein is given an Account of the Design and Nature of this Work, and a Key
to some of its most difficult Passages.
THE History of Gargantua and Pantagruel, has always been esteemed a
Masterpiece of Wit and Learning, by the best Judges of both. Even the most
grave and reserved among the Learned in many Countries, but particularly in
France, have thought it worthy to hold a place in their Closets, and have past
many hours in private with that diverting and instructive Companion. And as for
those whose Age and Profession did not incline them to be reserved, all France
can witness that there has been but few of them who could not be said to have
their Rabelais almost by heart: Since Mirth could hardly be complete among
those that love it, unless their good Cheer were seasoned with some of
Rabelais's Wit.

Fifty large Editions of that Book have not sufficed the World, and though the
Language in which it is writ, be not easily unstood now by those who only
converse with modern French Books, yet it has been reprinted several Times
lately in France and Holland, even in its antiquated Style.

Indeed some are of Opinion, That the odd and quaint Terms used in that Book,
add not a little to the Satisfaction which is found in its perusal; but yet
this can only be said of such of them, as are understood; and when a Reader
meets with many words that are unintelligible (I mean to him that makes it not
his business to know the meaning of dark and obsolete Expressions) the Pleasure
which what he understands yields him, is in a greater measure allayed by his
disappo^ntment; of which we have Instances when we read Chaucer, and other
Books, which we do not thoroughly understand.

Sir Thomas Vrwhart has avoided that obscurity in this following Translation of
Rabelais, so that most English Readers may now understand that Author in our
Tongue, better then many of the French can do in theirs. To do him justice it
was necessary, that a Person not only Master of the French, but also of much
Leisure and Fancy should undertake the Task. The Translator was not only happy
in their things, but also in being a learned Physician, and having, besides,
some French Men near him, who understood Rabelais very well, and could explain
to him the most difficult words; and I think that, before the first and second
Books of Rabelais, which are all that was formerly printed of that Author in
English, there were some Verses by Men of that Nation in praise of his
Translation.

It was too kindly received, not to have encouraged him to English the
remaining three Books, or at least the Third (the fourth and fifth being in a
manner distinct, as being Pantagruel's Voyage.) Accordingly he translated the
third Book, and probably would have finished the whole, had not Death prevented
him. So the said third Book being found long after in Manuscript among his
Papers somewhat incorrect, a Gentleman who is not only a very great Linguist,
but also deservedly famous for his ingenious and learned Composures, was lately
pleased to revise it, as well as the two first which had been published about
thirty years ago, and are extremely scarce. He thought it necessary to make
considerable Alterations, that the Translation might have the smartness, genuin
Sense, and the very Style and Air of the Original; but yet to preserve the
latter, he has not thought fit to alter the Style of the Translation, which
suits as exactly with that of the Author as possible, neither affecting the
politeness of the most nice and refined of our Modern English Writers, nor yet
the roughness of our antiquated Authors, but such a Medium as might neither
shock the Ears of the first, nor displease those who would have an exact
imitation of the style of Rabelais.

Since the first Edition of those two Books of Rabelais was so favorably
entertained, without the third, without any account of the Author, or any
Observations to discover that mysterious History; It Is hoped that they will not
meet with a worse usage, now they appear again so much improved, with the
addition of a third, never printed before in English, and a large account of
the Author's Life; but principally since we have here an Explication of the
Enigmatic Sense of part of that admirable Mythologist's Works, both which have
been so long wanted, though never till now published in any Language.

THE ingenious of our Age, as well as those who lived when Rabelais composed
his Gargantua and Pantagruel, have been extremely desirous of discovering the
Truths which are hid under the dark veil of Allegories in that incomparable
work. The great Thuanus found it worthy of being mentioned in his excellent
History, as a most ingenious Satyr on Persons who were the most distinguished
in the Kingdom of France by their Quality and Employments, and without doubt
he, who was the best of all our Modern Historians, and lived soon after it was
writ, had traced the private Design of Rabelais, and found out the true Names
of the Persons whom he has introduced on his Scene, with Names not only
imaginary, but generally ridiculous, and whose Actions he represents as
ridiculous as those Names. But as it would have been dangerous, having unmasked
those Persons, to have exposed them to public view, in a Kingdom where they
were so powerful; and as most of the Adventures which are mystically
represented by Rabelais, relate to the affairs of Religion, so those few who
have understood the true sense of that Satyr, have not dared to reveal it.

In the late Editions, some learned Men have given us a Vocabulary, wherein
they explain the Names and Terms in it which are originally, Greek, Latin,
Hebrew, or of other Tongues, that the Text might thus be made more
intelligible, and their work may be useful to those who do not understand those
Tongues. But they have not bad the same success in their pretended Explications
of the Names which Rabelais has given to the real Actors in this Farce; and
thus they have indeed framed a Key, but, if I may use the Allegory, 'twas
without having known the Wards and Springs of the Lock. What I advance, will
doubtless be owned to be true by those who may have observed that by that Key,
none can discover in those Pythagorical Symbols (as they are called in the
Author's Prologue to the first Book) any Event that has a Relation to the
History of those to whom the Names mentioned by Rabelais, have been applied by
those that made that pretended Key. They tell us in it, that King Grangousier
is the same as King Lewis the 12th. of France, that Gargantua is Francis the
first, and that Henry the second, is the true Name of Pantagruel; but we
discover none of Lewis the twelfth's Features in King Grangousier, who does
none of the Actions which History ascribes to that Prince, so that the King of
Siam, or the Cham of Tartary, might as reasonably be imagined to be
Grangousier, as Lewis the twelfth; as much may be said of Gargantua, and of
Pantagruel, who do none of the things that have been remarked by Historians, as
done by the Kings, Francis the first, and Henry the second of France.

This Reason which of its self is very strong, will much more appear to be
such, if we reflect on the Author's Words in the Prologue to the first Book. In
the perusal of this Treatise; says he, you shall find another kind of Taste,
and a Doctrine of a more profound and abstruse Consideration, which will
disclose to you the most glorious Doctrine and dreadful Mysteries, as well in
what concerns your Religion, as matters of the public State and Life
Oeconomical; Mysteries, which as he tells us, are the Juice and Substantial
Marrow of his Work. To this Reason I add another as strong and evident. It is,
that we find in Grangousier, Gargantua and Pantagruel, Characters that visibly
distinguish them from the three Kings of France, which I have named, and from
all the other Kings their Predecessors.

In the first Place, Grangousier's Kingdom is not France but a State
particularly distinct from it, which Gargantua and Pantagruel call Vtopia.

Secondly, Gargantua is not born in the Kingdom of France, but in that of
Vtopia.

Thirdly, He leaves Paris, called back by his Father, that he might come to the
Relief of his Country, which was attacked by Picrochole's Army.

And finally, Francis the First is distinguished from Gargantua in the 39 th.
Chap. of the first Book, when Friar Ihon des Entoumeures, says in the Presence
of Gargantua, and eating at his Table, had I been in the time of Jesus Christ,
I would have kept him from being taken by the Jews in the Garden of Olivet, and
the Devil fail me, if I should have failed to cut off the Hams of these
Gentlemen Apostles, who ran away so basely after they had well supped, and left
their good Master in the Lurch; I hate that Man worse than Poison that offers
to run away, when he should fight and lay stoutly about him. Oh if I were but
King of France for fourscore or an hundred Years, by G -- I should whip like
cut tail Dogs these Run aways of Pavia, a Plague take them, etc.

But if Francis the First is not Gargantua, likewise Pantagruel is not Henry
the Second; and if it were needful I would easily show, That the Authors of
that pretended Key have not only been mistaken in those Names, but in all the
others, which they undertook to decypher, and that they only spoke at random
without the least Grounds or Authorities from History.

All things are right so far; but the difficulty lies not there, we ought to
show* who are the Princes that are hid under the Names of Grangousier,
Gargantua and Pantagruel, if yet we may suppose them to be Princes. But such a
Discovery cannot be very easily made, because most of their Actions are only
described in Allegories, and in so confused and enigmatic a Manner, that we do
not know where to fix. This must be granted; yet it is not an impossible thing;
and if we can but once unmark Panurge, who is the ridiculous Hero of the Piece,
we may soon guess by the Servant, and the Air and Figure of his Master, who
Pantagruel is,

We find these four Characters in Panurge,

1. He is well skilled in the Greek Hebrew and Latin Tongues, he speaks High
and Low Dutch, Polish, Spanish, Portuguese, English, Italian, etc.

2. He is learned, understanding, politic, sharp, cunning, and deceitful in the
highest Degree.

3. He publicly professes the Popish Religion, tho he in reality laughs at it,
and is nothing less than a Papist.

4. His chief Concern next to that of Eating is a Marriage, which he has a
desire, yet is afraid to contract, least he should meet with his Match; that
is, a Wife even as bad as himself.

I do not know if those who, by the pretended Key, have been induced to believe
that Panurge was the Cardinal of Amboise in a Disguise, have been pleased to
observe these four qualities; but I am sure that nothing of all this can be
applied to that Prelate, unless it be, that in general he was an able Minister
of State. But all four were found in John de Montluc Bishop of Valence and Die,
who was the eldest Brother of the Marschal de Montluc the most violent Enemy
which the Hugonots had in those Days.

1. Historians assure us, that he understood the Eastern Tongues, as also the
Greek and the Latin, Brantosme. Ec-Beza Hist. cles.
the best of any Man in his time; and in sixteen Embassies, to many Princes of
Europe, to whom he was sent in Germany, England, Scotland, Poland,
Constantinople, he doubtless learned the living Tongues which he did not know
before.

2. He gained a great Reputation in all those Embassies, and his Wit, his
Skill, his Penetration and his Prudence, in observing a Conduct that contented
all Persons, were universally admired. But he even out did himself in the most
difficult of all those Embassies, which was that of Poland, to the Throne of
which Kingdom he caused Henry de Valois Duke of Anjou, to be raised in spite
of the difficulties, which the Massacre of Paris that was wholly laid to his
Charge in Poland (he having been one of the chief Promoters of it) created
concerning his Election. His Toils and his happy Success in those important
Negotiations, caused him to take this Latin Verse for his Motto, Quae Regio in
terris nostri non plena laboris?

3. The whole Kingdom of France, and particularly the Court, knew that he was a
Calvinist, and he himself did not make a Mystery of it, as appears by his
preaching their Doctrine once before the Queen, Brantosme. Dupleix. Sponde.
Maimbourg. Beza.
in a Hat and Cloak, after the manner of the Calvinists, which caused the
Constable of Mon^morency to say aloud, Why do not they pull that Minister out
of the Pulpit? Nay he was even condemned by Pius IV. as an Heretic, but that
Pope having not assigned him Judges in partibus according to the Laws of the
Kingdom, he kept his Bishopric, and the Dean of Valence, who had accused him
of being a Calvinist, not being well able to make good his Charge, Montluc, who
had mighty Friends, caused him to be punished for it; also after his Death, his
Contract of Marriage with a Gentlewoman called Anne Martin was found, yet he
still kept in the Roman Church, and still enjoyed the Revenues of his
Bishopric, as if he had been the most bigoted Papist in that Kingdom. The
Considerations that kept him from abjuring solemnly the errors of the Church of
Rome were, that Calvin let him know, that according to his Reformation, there
could be no Bishops; he owned that this Obstacle would not perhaps have
hindered him from leaving that Communion, could his Kitchen have followed him
in the other; excepting that, he was altogether for a Reformation, and in all
things favored (...) Professors, and it is what Rabelais has observed when he
makes him conclude all his Discourses in many Languages, with saying, that
Venture famelicus auriculis carere dicitur; at this time, Book 2. Chap. 9
I am in a very urgent necessity to feed, my Teeth are sharp, my Belly empty,
my Throat dry, and my Stomach fierce and burning; all is ready, if you will but
set me to work, it will be as good as a Balsamum for sore Eyes, to see me guleh
and raven it; for God's sake give order for it.

4. His chief Concern, next to that of living plentifully, was that of his
Marriage, and as we have observed, he Married, and had a Son whom he owned, and
who was afterward legitimated by the Parliament; it is the same who is famous
in History by the name of Balagny, and who was afterward Prince of Cambray:
his Father caused him to be sent into Poland, concerning the Duke of Anjou's
Election, of which we have spoke, and he was very serviceable to that Duke in
it. Now, it is that Marriage of the Bishop of Valence, that so much perplexes
him by the name of Panurge, in Rabelais's third Book, and which is the occasion
of Pantagruel's Voyage to the Holy Bottle in the fourth and fifth.

It Is much to be admired how a Bishop, that openly sided with the Calvinists,
who was also a Monk, yet married, and living with his Wife whom he had
regularly wedded, could enjoy one of the best Bishoprics in France, and some
of the chief Employments at Court. He must doubtless have been extremely
cunning, and have had a very particular Talent to keep those envied posts in
the Church and State, in spite of all those disavantages, in the midst of so
many storms raised against him and the Reformation, by Enemies that had all the
Forces of the Kingdom in their Power, and could do whatever they pleased.

This Prudence and Craftiness is described to the Life by our Author, when he
makes Panurge relate, how he had been broached upon a Spit by the Turks, all
larded like a Rabbet, and in that manner was roasting alive; when calling on
God, that he might deliver him out of the pains wherein they detained him for
his sincerity in the maintenance of his Law, the Turn-spit fell asleep by the
Divine Will; and Panurge having taken in his Teeth a Firebrand by the end
where it was not burned, cast it into the Lap of his Roaster; with another set
the House on Fire, broached on the Spit the Turkish Lord who designed to devour
him, and at last got away, though pursued by a great number of Dogs, who smelt
his leacherous half roasted Flesh; and he threw the Beacon, with which he had
been larded, among them.

It Is observable, that there he exclaims against the Turks about their
abstaining from Wine, which perhaps may refer to the Church of Rome's denying
the Cup in the Eucharist to the Laity, at which particularly Montluc was
offended. To lard a Man is a Metaphor often used by the French, to signify, to
accuse and reproach, and so he was even before he had his Bishopric; throwing
a Firebrand with his Mouth on the Turn-spit's Lap, may be the hot words which
he used to clear himself, and with which he charged his Adversaries; and his
spitting and burning the Turkish Lord, may perhaps mean the advantage which he
had over them. Book 3. Chapter 7.
The Spectacles, which afterward he wore on his Cap, may signify the Caution
which he was always obliged to take to avoid a surprise, Lapuce a'l oreille
and his having a Flea in his Ear, in French signifies the same. His forbearing
to wear any longer his Magnificent Codpiece, and clothing himself in four,
French Else of a course brown Russet Cloth, shows that as he was a Monk, he
could not wear a Codpiece as was the fashon in those Days, for the Laity; or
perhaps it denotes his affecting to imitate the simplicity of Garb, which was
observable in Calvinist Preachers.

This Subaltern Hero of the Farce, now found to be the Bishop of Valence by the
Circumstances and Qualifications already discovered, that cannot properly
belong to any other, may help us to know not only Pantagruel, to whom he had
devoted himself, but also Gargantua and Grangousier the Father and Grandfather
of Pantagruel.

History assures us, that Montluc Bishop of Valence owed his advancement to
Marguerite Devalois, Queen of Navarre and Sister to King Francis the I. She
took him out of a Monastery where he was no more than a Iacobin Friar, and sent
him to Rome, whereby he was raised to the Rank of an Ambassador, which was the
first step to his Advancement.

Thus Pantagruel should be Anthony de Bourbon Duke of Vendosme, King Henry the
IV.'s Father, and Lewis the XIV's great Grandfather. He was married to Ieanne
de Albret the only Daughter of the said Queen Margaret, and of Henry d' Albret
King of Navarre. Thus he became their Son, and King of Navarre after the Death
of the said Henry d' Albret whom I take to be Gargantua: consequently his
Father John d' Albret King of Navarre, excommunicated by Pope Julius the III.
and deprived of the best part of his Kingdom by Ferdinand King of of Arragon,
should be Grangousier.

The Verses before the third Book discover, that Pantagruel is Anthony d'
Bourbon, afterward King of Navarre. The Author dedicates it to the Soul of the
deceased Queen of Navarre, Margaret Devalois, who died in Britany in the Year
1549. She had openly professed the Protestant Religion; and in 1534 her
Ministers, of whom the most famous were Girard Rufly (since Bishop of Oleron in
Navarre) Couraud and Berthaud, Hist. de Iean Crespin.
preached publicly at Paris by her direction, upon which a fierce Persecution
ensued. Her Learning, and the Agreableness of her Temper were so extraordinary
as well as her Virtue, that she was sti^^d, The Tenth Muse and the fourth
Grace, she has written several Books: Particularly, one of Poetry called
Marguerite des Marguerites, and another in Prose called the Hexameron or Les
Nouuelles No^^elles: Of which Novels some might in this Age seem too free to be
penned by a Lady, but yet the reputation of her Virtue has always been very
great, which shows that tho in that Age both Sexes were less reserved in their
writings than we are generally in this, they were not more remiss in their
Actions. Among many Epitaphs, She was honored with that which follow^.

Quae fui exemplum coelestis nobile form^^,
In quam tot lauds, tot co^ere bona,
Margareta sub hoc tegitur Valesia saxo.
I, nunc atque mori numina posse nega?
I thought fit to premise this concerning that Princess, that the following
Verses might be better understood.

Francois Rabelais. A l' Esprit de la Reine de Navarre.
ESprit abstrait, ravy, and ecstatie,
Qui frequentant les cieux ton origin,
As delaisse ton host and domestic,
Ton corpse concords, qui tant se morigine
A tes edits, en vie peregrine,
Sans Sentiment, et comme en apathie*
Voudrois point fair quelque sortie
De ton manoir divin, perpetuel,
Et ca-bas voir vne tierce party
Des faits joyeux du bon Pantagruel.
Francis Rabelais, To the Soul of the Queen of Navarre.
ABstracted Spirit, rapt with Ecstasies,
Soul, now familiar in thy native Skies;
Who did thy flight from thy weak Mansion sake,
And thy kind Mate, thy other self, forsake;
Who by thy Rules himself so wisely guides,
And here, as in a foreign World, resides,
From sense of its fantastic Pleasures free,
Since thou his Soul art fled, in Apathy!
Would thou not leave a while the heavenly plain,
And our World with thy Presence grace again,
To see this Book, where a third Part I tell,
Of the rare Deeds of good Pantagruel.
This Corpse concords, this conjugate Body, that grows so conformable to that
Queen's Rules and leads the Life of a Traveller who only desires to arrive at
his Journey's end, being as it were in Apathy: What should it be but Henry d'
Albret, who had survived that Queen, his Consort, and could love nothing after
her in this World? Endeavoring at the same time to wea^ himself from its
Vanities, to aspire to a better according to that wise Princess's pious.
Admonitions; nor can the good Pantagruel be any other than Anthony de Bourbon,
whom we have already named.

To this Proof I add another, which admits of no Reply; it is, That the
Language which Pantagruel owns to be that of Vtopia and his Country, is the
same, that is spoken in the Provinces of Bearn and Gascony; the first of which
was yet enjoyed by the King of Navarre: Panurge having spoke to him in that
Language; Book 2. Chap. 9.
Methinks I understand him, said Pantagruel; for either it is the Language of
my Country of Utopia, or it sounds very like it: Now those who are acquainted
with the different Dialects of the French Tongue, need but read to find, that
Panurge had spoke in that of Gascony. Agonou don't oussys vous desdaignez
algarou, etc.

Besides, Gargantua, who is King of Vtopia, is said to be born in a State near
the Bibarois, by which the Author perhaps does not only allude to bibere
(drinking) but to Bigorre, a Province, which was still possessed by the King of
Navarre, or at least to the Vivarez, which may be reckoned among the Provinces
that are not far distant from that of Foix, which also belonged to that King;
his Mother being Catherine de Foix. That in which Gargantua was born is Beusse,
which though it also alludes to drinking, yet by the transmutation of B into V
(generally made by those Nations as well as by many others) seems to be the
ancient Name of Albret, viz. Vasat^^. I might add, That Grangousier is
described as one that was well furnished with H^ms of Bayonne, Sawsages of
Bigorre* and Rouargue, Book 1. Chap. 3.
etc. but none of Bolonia; for he feared the Lombard B^osone (or poisoned Bit,
the Pope being indeed his Enemy.) We are told, that he could not endure the
Spaniards, and mention is made also by Grangousier, Book 1. Chapter 8.
of the Wine that grows, not, says he, in Britany, Book 1. Chapter 13.
but in this good Country of Verron, which seems to be Bearn. I might instance
more of this; but as I know how little we ought to rely upon likeness of Names
to find out Places and Colonies, I will only insist upon the word Vtopia, which
is the name of Grangousier's Kingdom, and by which the Author means Navarre, of
which Gargantua was properly only Titular King, the best part of that Kingdom
with Pampelune, its capital City, being in the King of Spain's Hands: So that
State was, as it were, no more on Earth as to any benefit he enjoyed by it; and
it is what the Word Vtopia, from (...) and (...), signifies, viz. that is not
found, or, a place not to be found. We have therefore here four Actors in the
Pantagruelian F^rce, three Kings of Navarre and the Bishop of Valence bred up
and raised in that House; we might add two Person^ mutae, Catherine de Foix
Queen of Navarre matried to John d' Albret, and she therefore should be
Gargam^ll^, as Margaret de Valois married to his Son Henry King of Navarre
should be Badebec.

Picrochole is doubtless the King of Spain, who deprived John d' Albret of that
part of Navarre which is on the side of the Pyrene^^ Mountains that is next to
Spain. This appears by the name of Picrochole, and by the universal Monarchy,
of which he thought himself secure.

The word Picrochole is made up of two, (...) bitter, and (...) choler, bile or
gaul, to denote the Temper of that King, who was nothing but Bitterness and
Gaul. This doubly fits Charles the Fifth, first with Relation to Francis the
First, against whom ^he conceived an immortal hatred; and to Henry d' Albret,
whose Kingdom he possessed and whom he lulled with the hopes of a Restitutition
which he never designed; which was one of the chief Causes of the War that was
kindled between that Emperor and Charles the Fifth, which lasted during both
their Reigns. Besides, Charles the Fifth was troubled from time to time with an
overflowing of Bile; so that finding himself decaying, and not likely to live
much longer, after he had raised the siege of Mets, as he had done that of
Marseille before, being commonly as unfortunate as his Generals were
successful, he shut himself up in a (...), where that distemper was the chief
Cause of his Death. The hope of (...) Monarchy, with which that Emperor
flattered himself was a Chimaera that possessed his mind till he resigned his
Crown, and which he seemed to have assigned with it, to Philip the II* his Son
and Successors.

This Frenzy, which in his Thirst of Empire possessed him wholly, Book 1. Chapter
33.
is very pleasantly ridiculed by Rabelais. The Duke of Small Thrash, The Earl
Swa^^^-Buckler, and Captain (...) make Picrochole (in Rodomontados) conquer
Tall the Nations in the Universe. I suppose that our Satyrist means by these
three some Grandees of Spain* for, their King Picrochole bids them be covered.
After many imaginary Victories, they speak of erecting two Pillars, to
perpetuate his Memory, at the Streights of Gibraltar; by which he ridicules
Charles the V.'s Devise which was two Pillars with plus Vltra for the Moto:
Then they make him go to (...) and Algier, (which Charles the V. did) march to
Rome and cause the Pope to dye for Fear, whereat Picrochole is pleased, because
he will not then kiss his Pyantoufle, and longs to be at Loretto. Accordingly
we know that in 1527 his Army had taken Rome by storm, plundered it and its
Churches, ravished the Nuns if any would be ravished, and having almost starved
the Pope, at last took him Prisoner, which Actions of a Catholic Kings Army,
Sandoval a Spanish Author, only terms opra non Santa. Then Picrochole fancying
himself Master already of so many Nations, most royally gratifies those who so
easily made him Conquer them; to this he gives Caramania, Suria to that, and
Palestine to the third; till at last a wise old Officer speaks to him much as
Cyneas did to Pyrrhu^, and with as little Success as that Philosopher.

As it was not our Author's Design to to give us a regular History of all that
happened in his Time, he did not tie himself up to Chronology, and sometimes
joined Events which have but little Relation to each other. Many times also the
Characters are double, as perhaps is that of Picrochole. In the Menagiana
lately published, which is a Collection of Sayings, Reparties and Observations
by the learned Menage, every one of them attested by Men of Leaning, and
Credit, we are told that Messieurs de Saint Marthe have told him, that the
Picrochole of Rabelais was their Grand Father, who was a Physician at
Fron^evaut. These M^de St. Marthe are the worthy Sons of the famous
Samarthanus, who gave so high a Character of Rabelais among the most celebrated
Men of France, and who themselves have honored his Letters with large Notes,
and showed all the Marks of the greatest respect for his Memory; so that I am
apt to believe that they would not fix such a Character on their Grandfather,
had there not been some Grounds for it. Much less would they have said this to
Monsieur Menage, who doubtless understood Rabelais very well, since I find by
the Catalogue of his Works in Manuscript, that he has written a Book of
Observations on Rabelais, which I wish were Printed; for they must doubtless be
very curious; no less ought to be expected from that learned Author of the
Origines de la Languo Francoise, and of the Origini della Lingua Italiana, as
also of the curious Observations on the Aminta of Tasso, not to speak of his
Diogenes Laertius, and many others. As he was most skilled in Etymologies, and
a Man of the greatest Reading and Memory in France, he had doub^less made too
many discoveries in our Author, to have believed what Messieurs Saint Marthe
said to him, were, there not some Grounds for it. We may then suppose that
Rabelais had the wit so to describe pleasant incidents that past among Men of
Learning, or his Neighbors in and near Chinon, as that at the same time, some
great Acti^^, in Church or State should be represented or satiriz'd; just as
Monsieur De Benserade, in his Verses for the solemn Masks at the French Court
has made his King, representing Jupiter, say what equally might be said of that
Heathen God, or of that Monarch.

Thus the Astrea of the Lord D'urfe, which has charmed all the ingenious of
both Sexes, and is still the admiration of the most knowing, merely as a
Romance, has been discovered long ago by some few, to have throughout it a
foundation of Truth. But as it only contains the private Amors of some Persons
of the first quality in that Kingdom, and even those of its noble Author, he
had so disguised the Truths which he describes, that few had the double
pleasure of seeing them reconciled to the ou^ward Fictions; Oeuures De. d^
Patru. V. 2. 1692.
till among the Works of the greatest Orator of his time, the late Monsieur
Patru of the French Academy, they had a Key to a part of that incomparable
pastoral, which he says he had from its Author: And none that have known Patru,
or read his Works or Boileau's, will have any reason to doubt of what he says.
He tells us, that the Author of Astrea to make his Truths more agreeable, has
interwove them, with mere fictions, which yet are generally only the Veils that
hide some Truths, which might otherwise not so properly appear in such ^ Work;
sometimes he gives as a part of the chief Intreague of a Person, such Actions
as that Person transacted at another time, or on another occasion; and on the
other side, he sometimes divides one History, so that under different Names
still he means but one Person; thus Diana and Astrea, Celadon and Silvander are
the same.

We ought not to forget that Barclay in his Argenis which is the history of
France, in Henry the IV. 's time, does the same; Polyarchus and Archombrotus
being but one.

As in Astrea when two Lovers marry the Author only means, that they love each
other; so when in ours, Panurge desires to marry and consults about it, we may
suppose him already married and afraid of being prosecuted about it.

And if our Author has changed the Places and Order of Times, and set before
what should go after, and that last which should have been first, it is no more
than what the judicious Patru allows to his, as a thing, says he, that it
always used in all those sorts of Works; and thus he makes that last, but six
Months which held out fifteen Years and with him Chartres in France, and Malta
are but one.

Rabelais, who had more reason to write mystically than any, may then be
allowed equal Freedom in his Allegories; and without fixing only the Character
of Picrochole, on Charles the V we may believe that it refers as well to his
Predecessor, (...) King of Arragon, and of Cas^ile my Queen Isabella his Wife;
that deprived John d' Albret of his kingdom of Navarre; for that Spaniard was
as bitter an Enemy, as cunning, and at least as fa^al to the house of Navarre,
as his Successor.

John d' Albret was an open hearted, magnificent, generous Prince; but easy,
and ^elying wholly on hi^ Ministers, being given to his Pleasures, which often
consisted in going privately to eat and drink with his Subjects, and inviting
himself to their Houses; howeever he loved Books, and was a great lover of
Herald^y, nicely observing the Pedigrees, Coats and Badges of Honor of
Families, which perhaps makes Rabelais open his Scene* with refering us to the
great Pantagruelian Chronicle (by which he begins his second Book) for the
knowledge of that Genealogy and Antiquity of Race, by which Gargantua is
descended to us, how the Giants were born in this World, and how from them by a
direct Line issued Gargantua; then he bids us not take it ill, if he for the
present passes it by, though the Subject be such, that the oftener it were
remembered, the more it will please your Worships* by which he exposes that
Prince's and some Gentlemen's continual Application to a vain Search, into the
dark and fabulous Times for Pedigrees, as Rabelais says, from the Giants* for
many would be derived from something greater than Man. Then he makes his King^
Giants, because they are so in Power, and sometimes what serves the whole Court
and attendants is by him applied wholly to the King* as Eating, Clothing,
Strength. And then by that he ridicules the Romances of those days, where
Giants are always brought in, as well as Magicians, Witches, single Men routing
whole Armies, and a thousand other such fabulous Stories. He has also ridiculed
the variety of doubtful, though ancient Originals, in the odd discovery of the
Manuscript; and in the 9. Chap. the distinction of Colors and Liveries, which
took up that Prince's time, due to higher Employments, as worthily as the rest
of Heraldry. There he tells us, that Gargantua's Colors or Liveries were white
and blew, by which his Father would give to understand, that his Son was to him
a Heavenly Joy. Thence with as much Fancy as Judgment, he takes an Opportunity
to laugh at the lame and punning Devises or Impreses of those Days, in which
however, Paul Jove had already given Rules to make better; yet after all, I
believe that by Gargantua's Colors, Rabelais also alludes to K. Henry d'
Albret, and Marguerite his Queen, who were sincerely for a Reformation; so the
White may signify Innocence, Candor and Sincerity, and the Blew, Piety or
Heavenly Love. Perhaps also as Epist. de Rabelais.
Godefroy d Estissac Bishop of Maillezais in his Coat, gave paled Argent and
Azur of six Pieces, he had a mind to celebrate the colors of his Patron.

The account of Gargantua's youthful Age, Chap. 11. agrees very well with that
which Historians give us of the way of bringing up Henry IV. of France,
Mezeray. Hardouinde Perefix. hist. Henry IV.
by his Grandfather, Henry d' Albret, who is the same with Gargantua That
great Monarch was in his tender age inured by that old Prince to all sorts of
Hardships, for he caused him to be kept in the Country, where he ordered they
should let him run among the poor Country Boys, which the young Prince did,
sometimes without Shoos or Hat, being fed with the coursest fare; so that
having by those means contracted a good habit of Body, he was afterward so
hardened to Fatigues, so Vigilant and active, and so easily pleased with the
most homely Dier, that it did not a little contribute to the advantage which he
had over the League, whose Chief the Duke de Mayenne was of a Disposition
altogether different. Now, it is very probable that Henry d' Albert was himself
brought up much after the manner which he chose for his Grandson; for we read
that he was not only an ingenious and understanding Prince, generous and
liberal even to Magnificence, but also very warlike and hardy.

The Education of Gargantua, by the Sophisters is a Satyr on those Men, Chapter 21.
Book 1
and the tedious Methods of the Schools, showing the little improvement that
was made in Henry d' Albret's Studies, as long as he was under Popish
Governors, and the ill Life that the young Gentlemen of the Roman Church led;
as on the contrary, the benefit of having good Tutors, and the difference
between the Romans and the Protestants, Chapter 33. Book 1.
carefully and piously educated at the Dawn of the Reformation; for there is no
doubt, that tho Henry d' Albret did not dare to profess it, the People in
Navarre, being all Papists, and there being obstacles enough to the recovery of
that Kingdom, lost by his Father, without raising more, yet he heartily hated
the Popish Principles, and the King of Arragon and Castille, who merely on the
pretense of John d' Albret's alliance with Lewis XII. at the time of his
Excommunication, had seized his Country and held it by the Pope's Gift; so we
find that the Reformers no sooner preached against Bulls and Indulgences, the
taking away the Cup in the Eucharist, and Transubstantiation, but that
Marguerite, the Wife of K. Henry d' Albret, and Sister to Francis the first,
owned her self to be one of the new Opinion, and as powerfully defended its
Professors as she could. Any one may see by the two Chapters of Gargantua's
Education by Ponocrates, that the Author treats of a Protestant Prince, and of
Gargantua's being brought to a reformed state of Life; for he says, that when
Ponocrates knew Gargantua 's vicious manner of living, he resolved to bring him
up in a much different way, and requested a learned Physician of that Time,
called Master Theodorus, seriously to perpend how to bring him to a better
course; he says, that the said Physician purged him canonically, with
Anticyrian Hellebore, by which Medicine, he cleared all that foulness and
perverse habit of his Brain, and by this means Ponocrates made him forget all
that he had learned under his ancient Preceptors. Theodorus is a very proper
Name for a Divine, signifying Gift of God, from (...) and (...), and that great
Master of Thought, Father Malebranche, gives it to the Divine who is one of the
Interlocutors in the admirable Metaphysical Dialogues, which he calls
Conversations Chrestiennes; so that as Rabelais tells us, Theodorus was a
Physician for the mind, that is, one of the new Preachers, and perhaps
Berthaud, that of Queen Marguerite.

By the Anticyrian Hellebore, with which he purged Gargantua's Brain, (...)
potestas, apud Suidam.
may be meant powerful Arguments drawn from Reason, and the Scripture opposed
to the Authority of the Popish Church; after this Purge we find Gargantua
awaked at four in the Morning, and while they were rubbing him, some Chapter of
the holy Scripture aloud and clearly with a Pronunciation fit for the matter
read to him, and according to the purpose and argument of that Lesson,
oftentimes giving himself to Worship, Adore, Pray and send up his Supplications
to that good God, whose Word did show his Majesty and mavelous Judgment. That
Chapter and the next are admirable, as well as many more, nor can we ever have
a more perfect Idea of the Education of a Prince, than is that of his
Gargantua, whom he represents all along as a Man of great Honor, Sense,
Courage and Piety; whereas under his other Masters, in the Chapters before, we
find him idle, and playing at all sorts of Games. Nothing can better
demonstrate the great Genius and Prudence of our Author who could submit to get
together so many odd Names, of trifling things, to keep himself out of Danger,
and grace the Counterpart which is so judicious and so grave; he had told us
first, that Gargantua under his former Pedagogues, after a good Breakfast went
to Church, a huge greasy Breviary being carried before him in a great Basket;
that there he heard 26 or 30 Masses; that this while came his Martin Mumbler
(Chaplain) muffled about the Chin (that is with his Cow) round as a Hoop, and
his Breath pretty well antidoted with the Vine-Tree-Syrop, that with him he
mumbled all his Kyriels, and as he went from the Church, santring along through
the Cloisters, ridled more of St. Claude's Patinotres, then sixteen Hermits
could have done. So that there we find him a Papist, and in the following
Chapter, as I have said a Protestant.

Without doubt, the Sophisters under whom Gargantua did not improve were some
noted Men in his Age, Chap. 14. Book 1.
I have not yet discovered who they were.

As for Don Philip of Marais Viceroy of Papeligosse, who advises Grangousier to
put his Son under another Discipline, Chapter 15. Book 1.
he may perhaps be Philip, Son to the Marschall of Navarre; the Title of Don
being taken by the Navarrois, and Marais seems Marechall.

Gargantua is sent with Ponocrates to Paris by his Father, that they might
know, Chapter 15. and 16.
says he, what was the study of the young Men in France; this shows that
Gangousier was not King of it, and that Gargantua was a Stranger there.

Many who take him to be Francis the First, think that his huge great Mare is
Madam d'Estampes, that King's Mistress, and explain that Mare's skirmishing
with her Tail, whereby she overthrew all the Wood in the Country of Beauce, by
a Gift which they say, he made her of some of its Forests. They say also, That
the King was desirous to buy her a Necklace of Pearls; and that partly on that
account he would have got some Money of the Citizens of Paris; but they being
unwilling to comply with his demand, the King and his Mistress threatened to
sell the Bells of our Lady's Church (the Cathedral) to buy his Lady a Necklace:
And that this has given occasion to say, Chap. 17. Book 1.
That Gargantua designed to hang those Bells at his Mare's Neck.

Though, as I have said, Gargantua be not Francis the First, I might believe
that Rabelais had a mind to make us merry with the recital of such an
Adventure, were it not certain that the said King has read his Book, and would
hardly have liked such a Passage, had he been himself an Actor there; but,
besides, History relates nothing of this Nature of him; nor has the Story of
the Bells the resemblance of Truth.

As for the blow with the Mare's Tail, it might as well belong to Henry d'
Albret, who has not been without a Mistress. Had I been able to get some
certain Books, and had the Bookseller not been impatient, by reason of the
Term, I would have done my Endeavors to unriddle that Enigma; but having
hardly a Fortnights time, to make my Observations, and finish the Author's Life
and this Preface, I must put off that Inquiry till some other Opportunity, and
then what further Discoveries I may make, may be published with those on the
fourth and fifth Books, which contain Pantagruel's Voyage to the holy Bottle,
as beautiful at least as these three.

I will however, offer here a Conjecture on that story of the Bells; we find in
the 17, 18 and 19th. Chapters of the first Book, that Master Ianotus de
Bragmardo a Sophister is sent to Gargantua to recover the Bells, and makes a
wretched Speech to him about it; I am sensible that 'twas partly his Design to
ridicule the Universities, which at that time deserved no better in France. But
in particular, I believe that he aimed at Cenalis, a Doctor of Sorbonne, and
afterward Bishop of Auranches, for I find that this Prelate had writ a
Treatise wonderfully pleasant, Hist. de Iean Crespin.
concerning the Signs, whereby the true Church may be distinguished from the
false; in it he waves the preaching of the Gospel, and Administration of the
Sacraments, and pretends to prove that Bells are the signs which essentially
distinguish the Church of Rome from the Reformed, who at that time had none,
and used to assemble privately at the letting off of a Musket in the High
Street, which was a sign by which they knew that it was time to meet to perform
Divine Service. Cenalis on this, triumphs, as if he had gained his Point, and
runs on in a long Antithesis, to prove that Bells are the signs of the true
Church, and Guns the mark of the bad; all Bells, says he, sound; but all Guns
thunder, all Bells have a melodious Sound, all Guns make a dreadful Noise;
Bells open Heaven, Guns open Hell; Bells drive away Clouds and Thunder, Guns
raise Clouds, and mock the Thunder. He has a great deal more such Stuff, to
prove that the Church of Rome is the true Church, because forsooth, it has
Bells, which the other had not.

The taking away the Bells of a Place, implys its Conquest, and even Towns that
have Articled are obliged to redeem their Bells; perhaps the taking away the
great Bells at Paris, was the taking away the Privileges of its University, or
some other; for Paris may only be named for a Blind. Thus the Master Beggar of
the Friars of St. Anthony, coming for some Hog's Purtenance ( St. Anthony's Hog
is always pictured with a Bell at its Neck) who to be heard afar off, and to
make the Beacon shake in the very Chimneys, had a mind to filch and carry those
Bells away privily but was hindered by their weight; that Master Beggar, I say,
must be the head of some Monks, perhaps of that Order in the Fauxbourg St.
Antoine, who would have been substituted to those that had been deprived, and
the Petition of Master Ianotus is the pardon which the University begs, perhaps
for some affront resented by the Prince; for those that escaped the Flood,
cried we are washed Par ris, that is, for having laughed. Rabelais, en passant,
there severely inveighs against the grumblers and factious Spirits at Paris:
Which makes me think that whether the Scene lies there or elsewhere as in
Gascoigny, some people of which Country were Henry d' Albret's Subjects, still
this was a remarkable Event. In the Prologue to the fourth Book, Jupiter busied
about the Affairs of Mankind, cries, Here are the Gascons Cursing, Damning and
Renouncing, demanding the re-establishment of their Bells; I suppose that more
is meant than Bells, or he would not have used the word, Re-establishment.

But it is time to speak of the great strife and debate raised betwixt the
Cake-bakers of Learn, Chap. 25. Book 1.
and those of Gargantua 's Country; whereupon were waged great Wars. We may
easily apply many things concerning these Wars to those of Navarre, between the
House of d'Albret, and King Ferdinand and Charles the fifth. Thus Les Truans,
or as this Translation renders it, the Inhabitants of Learn, who, by the
command of Picrochole their King, invaded and plundered Vtopia, Gargantua's
Country, are the Spanish Soldiers, and Learn is Spain. The word Truand in old
French, signifies an idle lazy Fellow, which hits pretty well the Spaniards
Character, the Author having made choice of that name of a place near Chinon,
because it alludes to the Lake Lerna, where Hercules destroyed the Lernaean
Hydra, which did so much hurt in the Country of Argos, that thence came the
Proverb, (...), Malorum Lerna. Thus Spain was a Lerna of Ills, to all Europe,
while, like France now, it aspired to universal Monarchy, but it was so more
particularly to Navarre in July 1512, when King John d' Albret and Queen
Catharine de Foix the lawful Sovereign were dispossessed by Ferdinand King of
Arragon, almost without any resistance. The said King John, desirous of Peace,
sent Don Alphonso Carillo, Constable of Navarre, in the quality of his
Ambassador to Ferdinand, to prevent the approaching mischief; Hist. de Navar.
par C. Secretaire and Interpret. du Roy.
but he was so ill received, says the History of Navarre, Dedicated to King
Henry IV. and printed with his Privilege, that he was glad to return to his
King with speed, and related to him that there was no hope left to persuade the
King of Arragon to a Peace, and that Lewis de Beaumont, Earl of Lerins, who had
forsaken Navarre, daily encouraged Ferdinand to attack that Kingdom. So that
this Embassy resembles much that of Vlric Gallet to Picrochole who swears by
St. James, the Saint of the Spaniards. In November 1512. Francis Duke of
Angoulesme, afterward King, was sent with King John d' Albret, by Lewis XII.
to recover Navarre, having with him several of the greatest Lords in France,
and a great Army, which possessed it self of many Places, but the rigor of the
Season obliged them to raise the Siege of Pampelune. And in 1521. another Army
under the Command of Andrew de Foix, Lord of Asperault, entered Navarre, and
wholly regained it, Memoires de Martin du Bellay.
but it was lost again soon after by the imprudence of that General, and the
Avarice of St. Colombe, one of his chief Officers.

Those that will narrowly examine History, will find that many particulars of
the Wars in the first Book of Rabelais, may be reconciled to those of Navarre;
but I believe that he means something more than a Description of the Fights
among the Soldiers, by the debate raised betwixt the Cake-sellers or Fouassiers
of Learn, and the Shepherds of Gargantua. Those Shepherds or Pastors, should be
the Lutheran and Calvinist Ministers, whom John and Henry d' Albert favored,
being the more disposed to adhere to the reviving Gospel which they preached,
by the provoking Remembrance of the Pope's and King of Spain's injurious usage;
and for that Reason, Queen Margarite did not only profess the Protestant
Religion, but after the Death of Henry d' Albert, Queen Jane their Daughter,
Married to Anthony de Bourbon, was a Zealous Defender of it till she died, and
her Son Henry, afterward raised to the Throne of France, publicly owned
himself a Protestant, till his impatient desire of being peaceably seated on
it, made him leave the better Party to pacify the worse.

The Cake sellers of Learn are the Priests, and other Ecclesiastics of Spain;
as also all the Missificators of the Church of Rome. Rabelais calls them
Cake-mongers, or Fouassiers, by reason of the Host, or Sacramental Wafer, which
is made of Dough, between a pair of Irons, like the Cakes or Fouasses in
Poitou, where Rabelais lived, and is said to be transubstantiated into the
Corpus-Christi, when consecrated by the Priest.

The Subject of the Debate, as Rabelais terms it, between those Cake-sellers
and the Shepherds is the first's refusal to supply the latter with Cakes, to
eat with the Grapes which they watched. For as Rabelais observes, It Is a
Celestial Food, to eat for Breakfast, fresh Cakes with Grapes, by which he
alludes to the way of receiving the Communion among the Protestants, who
generally take that Celestial Food fasting, and always with the juice of the
Grape, that is, with Wine, according to the Evangelical Institution. Now the
Cake-mongers or Popish Priests would not consent to give Cakes, that is to say,
Bread, but would only give the accidents of the Cakes, or to speak in their own
Phrase, the accidents of the Bread, and it is well known that this was the
chief occasion of our separation from the Church of Rome.

Upon the reasonable request of the Shepherds, the Cake-sellers, instead of
granting it, presently fall to railing and reviling, adding, after a whole
Litany of comical, though defamatory Epithetes, that course unraung'd Bread, or
some of the great brown Household Loaf was good enough for such Shepherds,
meaning that the gross Notions of Transubstantiation ought ^o satisfy the
Vulgar. The Shepherds reply modestly enough, and say that the others used
formerly to let them have Cakes, by which must be understood, the times that
preceded the Doctrine of Transubstantion. Then Marquet one of the Cake-Merchants
treacherously invites Forgier to come to him for Cakes, but instead of them,
only gives him a swindging Lash with his Whip, over-thwart the Legs, whereupon
he is rewarded by the other with a broken Pate, and falls down from his Mare,
more like a dead then like a living Man, wholly unfit to strike another blow.

These two Combatants are the Controverstists of both parties; the Papist
immediately begins to rail and abuse his Adversary. The Lutheran confounds him
in his replys, and for a blow with a Whip treacherously given, very fairly
disables his Enemy.

This is the Judgment that Rabelais, a Man of Wit and Learning impartially
passes on the Writers of both Parties. If any would seek a greater Mystery in
that Grand Debate as Rabelais calls it, which term I believe he would hardly
have used for a real Fight, let them imagine that he there describes the
Conference at Reinburgh, where Melancthon, Bucer and Pistorius debated of
Religion against Eccius, Julius Pflug and John Gropper, and handled them much
as Forgier did Marquet.

But this Exploit of Forgier being inconsiderable, if compared to those of
Friar Ihon des Entomeures, or of the Funnels, as some corruptly call him, we
should endeavor to discover who is that brave Monk that makes such rare Work
with those that took away the Grapes of the Vineyard. By the pretended Key
which I think fit to give you after this, since it will hardly make up a Page;
we are told, that our Friar Ihon is the Cardinal of Lorraine, Brother to the
Duke of Guise; but that Conjecture is certainly groundless; for though the
Princes of his House were generally very brave, yet that Cardinal never
affected to show his Courage in martial Achievements, and was never seen to
girt himself for War, or to fight for the Cause which he most espoused;
besides, had he been to have fought, it would have been for Picrochole. It
would be more reasonable to believe that Friar Ihon is Odet de Coligny Cardinal
de Chastillon, Archbishop of Toulouse, Bishop and Earl of Beauuais, Abbot of
St. Benign, of Dijon, of Fleury, of Ferrieres and of Vaux de Cernay: For, that
Prelate was a Man of Courage, no ways inferior to his Younger Brothers, the
Admiral and the Lord d' Andelot. Besides, he was an Enemy to Spain and a Friend
to Navarre; Vide Thuan. Samarthan. Ciacon. Du Bouchet. d' Aubigne, lib. 4.
Sponde in annal. Hist. Eccles. Beza. Petrameller.
then he was a Protestant, and helped his Brothers, doing great Service to
those of his Party; and was married to Elizabeth de Hauteville, Dame de Thore,
a Lady of great Quality. Pope Pius IV. in a private Consistory deprived him,
for adhering to his Brothers, but he neither valued the Pope nor his Censures;
he died in England in 1571, and lies interred in Canterbury Cathedral, having
been made a Cardinal by Clement VII. at his and Francis I.'s Interview at
Marseilles in 1533. I own that what he did for the Protestant Cause was chiefly
after the Death of Rabelais, and that some have represented him as a Man wholly
given to his Ease; but Rabelais, whose best Friend he was, knew his
Inclinations, even when he composed this Work, which made him dedicate the
Fourth part of it to him: And it is chiefly to that brave Cardinal that we are
obliged for that Book, and the last of this mysterious History; Lib. 4. Epist.
Dedicat.
since without the King's Protection, which he obtained for Rabelais, he had
resolved to write no more, as I have already observed. And for his being
addicted to his Pleasures, that exactly answers the Name of his Abbey of
Theleme, of which those that are Members do what they please, according to
their only Rule, Do what thou will, and to the Name of the Abbey, (...),
Volontas. Perhaps Rabelais had also a regard to (...), which often signifies a
Nuptial Chamber, to show that our valiant Monk was married; thus the
Description of the Abbey shows us a model of a Society free from all the Ties
of others, yet more honest by the innate Virtues of its Members; therefore its
Inscription excludes all Monks and Friars, inviting in all those that expound
the holy Gospel faithfully, though others murmur against them. Indeed I must
confess, that he makes his Friar swear very much, but this was to expose that
Vice which, as well as many others, reigned among Ecclesiastics* in his Age.
Besides, the Cardinal had been a Soldier, and the Men of that Profession were
doubtless not more reserved then, than they are now. I will give an instance of
it that falls naturally into this Subject, and is the more proper, being of one
who was also a Cardinal, a Bishop, a Lord, an Abbot, Married, a Soldier, a
Friend to the House of Navarre, engaged in its Wars, and who perhaps may come
in for his share of Friar Ihon. I speak this of Caesar Borgia, the Son of Pope
Alexander VI. who having made his escape out of Prison at Medina del Campo,
came in 1506 to his Brother in Law John d' Albret, King of Navarre. Being
Bishop of Pampeluna its Capital, he resigned it, as well as his Cardinal's Cap
and other Benefices, to lead a Military Life; and, after many Engagements in
other Countries, was killed, Hist. de Navarre.
being with King John at the Siege of the Castle of Viane, which held for Lewis
de Beaumont Earl of Lerins, Constable of Navarre, who had rebelled against King
John. That Earl having thrown a Convoy into the Castle, Caesar Borgia who
desired to fight him at the Head of his Men, cried, Ou est, ou est ce
C^mtereau? Ie jure Dieu, qu'aujourd'huy ^e le feray mourir ou le prendray
prisonier: Ie ne cesseray ^usques a ce qu'il soit entierement destruit, and ne
pardonneray ny sauveray la vie a aucun des siens: Tout passera par l' epee
jusques aux chiens and aux chats. That is; Where is, where is this petty Earl?
By G -- I will this day kill or take him: I will not rest till I have wholly
destroyed him: Nor will I spare one Creature that is his; all, to the very Dogs
and Cats, shall die by the Sword. It cannot be supposed that Rabelais drew his
Friar Ihon by this Man, but it is not unlikely that he had a mind to bring him
in, by giving some of his Qualifications to his Monk; for there is no doubt
that our Author made his Characters double as much as he could, as it were,
stowing three, and perhaps* five, in the place of one for want of Room; not
altogether like an Actor who plays three different Parts in the same Piece, nor
like Scaramouch, who acts various Parts in the same Clothes, but like that
Pantomime in Lucian, who represented several Things at once; and was said to
have five different Souls in one Body. Thus, if Picrochole, besides the
Characters of King Ferdinand of Arragon, and of Charles the Fifth, includes
that of Dr. de St. Marthe of Frontevaut, as his Grand Sons said to Menagius,
Brother Ihon may also be some Monk of the Abbey where Rabelais had lived.

I presume to say more, though, as all that I have said already, I humbly offer
it as bare and uncertain Conjectures; why may we not suppose that our Author
has a mind to give us, after his manner, a Sketch of the great Luther? He was
also a Monk, and a jolly one too; being* as Rabelais says, A Clerk even to the
Teeth in matter of Breviary. The Vineyard, and consequently the Wine which is
saved, is the Cup in the Communion, which, through his means, when taken away
by the Popish Priests, was in spite of Charles the Emperor, also King of
Spain, and his Soldiers, restored to the Protestants in Germany. The Prior, who
calls Friar Ihon drunken Fellow, for troubling the divine Service, may be the
Pope and the superior Clergy.

Then Friar Ihon throwing off his great Monk's Habit, and laying hold on the
Staff of the Cross, is Luther's leaving his Monastery, to rely on Christian
Weapons, the Merit of his Redeemer. The Victory obtained against those that
disorderly ravaged the Vineyard and took away the Grapes, is his baffling the
Arguments of his Opposers; and their being out of Order, means the Ignorance of
the Papists. The little Monkitos that profer their help to Friar Ihon, and who
leaving their outer-Habits and Costs upon the Rails, made an end of those whom
he had already crushed, are those Monks and other of the Clergy, much inferior
to Luther, who followed his Reformation, and wrote against those whom he had in
a manner wholly confuted.

It Is known, That at the Council of Trent the Germans thirsted very much after
the Wine in the Eucharist, and that they were as eager for the abolishing of
the Cannons that enjoined Celibacy to the Clergy, as for the Restitution of the
Cup to the Laity. They used to have the Words of of our Savior, Bibite ex hoc
omnes, marked in golden Characters in all their Bibles, and made Songs and
Lampoons on the Robbers of the Cup, as they called them. They had also a design
to have Cups in all their Standards and Ensigns of War, and the Picture of the
Cup in all the Churches of their Communion, as the Hussites of Bohemia had
done, which occasioned this Distic by a Poet of the Roman Church.

Tot pingit Calices Bohemorum terra per urbes,
Vt credas Bacchi numina sola coli.
Indeed, what is said of Friar Ihon, Chap. 41, 42 and 43. may induce us to
believe, that the Man who has the greatest share in the Character of the Monk
did not absolutely cast off his Frock, but far from it, we see that the Friar
kept it on to preserve himself from his Enemies, and desired no other Armor
for Back and Breast, and after Gargantua's Followers had armed him Cap-a-pie
against his Will, his Armor was the cause of an unlucky Accident, which made
him call for help, and swear that he was betrayed, while he remained hanged by
the Ears on a Tree. So he afterward threw away his Armor, and took to him the
Staft of the Cross; holding himself invulnerable with his Monkish Habit.
Accordingly when Captain Drawforth is sent by Picrochole with 1600 Horsemen
thoroughly besprinkled with holy water, and who to be distinguished from their
Enemies, wore a Stole instead of a Scarf (for so it should have been in the 43.
Chapter, and not Star as it is there printed) we find that Friar Ihon having
frighted them all away, Draw-forth only excepted, that bold Enemy, with his
utmost strength could not make his Lance pierce our Monk's Frock, and was soon
knocked down by him with the staff of the Cross; and found out to be a Priest
by his Stole.

This confirms what has been said, that, all this War is chiefly a dispute of
Religion; and this part of it seems to relate to Cardinal Chastillon, because
he was secure within his Ecclesiastical habit; the Author sometimes, as I have
said, joining several Characters together. Thus the Monk's discourse at Table
is not only applicable to that Cardinal but also to Montluc Bishop of Valence,
who makes his first appearance on our Doctor's stage, in the second act by the
name of Panurge; for Friar Ihon being desired to pull off his Frock; Let me
alone with it, replies he, I Will drink the better while it is on, It makes all my
Body Iocund, did I lay it aside, I should lose my appetite: So, Many in those
days, as well as in these, loved the Benefice more then they hated the
Religion. Some will say that the request made then to Friar Ihon was only, that
he should ease himself of his monastic Frock while he was at Table, but
Rabelais would not have made his Monk refuse such a request; he knew that some
of the Princes of the Clergy had in his time, at the French Court, and in the
King's Presence taken a greater liberty; for there had been a Ball in Lewis the
XII's Reign, where two Cardinals danced before him, among the rest; and in
another given him by Ioanne-Iacomo Trivulse, several Princes and great Lords
had danced in Fryar's habit. The Monk talks with a great deal of Freedom at
Gargantua's Table, and swears that he kept open house at Paris for six Months;
then he talks of a Friar that is become a hard Students then says that for his
part he studies not at all, justifying himself for this conduct in false Latin;
after this he abruptly starts a new matter, and lets his Fancy run after hares,
hawks and hounds, and thus he goes on by sallies, and admirably humors the way
of talking of the young Courts Abbots in France. Now probably the Cardinal who
did not set up for a Man of Learning, being of great Quality, allowed himself
Liberty accordingly, making hunting one of his Recreations; B. 1. Chapter 40.
and indeed what Gargantua says concerning Fryar-Ihon, in the next Chapter,
hits Cardinal Chastillon's Character exactly: There having taxed most Monks
with mumbling out great store of Legends and Psalms, which they understand not
at all, and interlarding many Paternotres, with ten times as many Ave-maries
without thinking upon or apprehending the meaning of what they say, which he
calls mocking of God and not Prayers; he says, that all true Christians in all
places, and at all times send up their Prayers to God, and the Spirit prays
and intercedes for them and God is gracious to them: Now such a one, adds he,
is our Fryar-Jhon, he is no Bigot etc.

What Grangousier says to the French Pilgrims, shows that he also was no
Biggot, and was not King of France; when speaking of some superstitious
Preachers, one of whom had called him Heretic, he adds, I wonder that your King
should suffer them in their Sermons to publish such Scandalous Doctrine in his
Dominions. Then Fryar-Ihon, says to the Pilgrims, that while they thus are upon
their Pilgrimage, the Monks will have a Fling at their Wives. After that,
Grangousier bids them not be so ready to undertake those idle and unprofitable
journyes, but go home and live as St. Paul directs them, and then God will
guard them from Evils which they think to avoid by Pilgrimages.

What has been observed, puts it beyond all doubt, that our jesting Author was
indeed in Earnest when he said, that he mystically treated of the most high
Sacraments, and dreadful secrets, in what concerns our Religion, I know, that
immediately after this, he passes off with a Banter what he had assured very
seriously; but this was an admirable piece of Prudence; and who ever will
narrowly examine his writings will find, that this Virtue is inseparably joined
with his wit, so that his Enemies never could have any advantage over him.

But not to comment upon several other Places in his first Book, that the
ingenious may have the pleasure of unriddling the rest of it themselves, I will
only add, that his manner of ending it is a Master piece surpassing, the artful
evasion, which as I have now observed, is in its Introduction.

It is an Enigma, as indeed is the whole Work, I could only have wished that it
had been proper to have put it into a more modish Dress (for then doubtless it
would have more generally have pleased) But I suppose that the Gentleman who
revised this Translation thought it not fit to give the Graces of our Modern
Enigmas to the Translation of a prophetical Riddle in the style of Merlin.
Gargantua piously fetches a very deep sigh, when he has heard it read, and
says, that he perceives by it, that it is not now only, that People called to
the Faith of the Gospel, are persecuted; but happy is the Man that shall not be
scandalized, but shall always continue to the end, in aiming at the Mark, which
God by his dear Son has set before us etc. Upon this the Monk asks him, what he
thought was signified by the Riddle? What? says Gargantua, the Decrease and
Propagation of the Divine Truth; That is not my Exposition, says the Monk, it
is the style of the Prophet Merlin; make as many grave Allegories, and Tropes
as you will; I can conceive no other meaning in it, but a description of a Set
at Tennis in dark and obscure Terms. By this Riddle which he expounds he
cunningly seems to insinuate that all the rest of his Book, which he has not
explained, wholly consists of trifles; and what is most remarkable, is that he
illustrates the Truths which he had concealed by the very Passage wherewith he
pretends to make them pass for Fables, and thus blinds with too much light,
those Enemies of Truth, who would not have failed to have burned him alive, in
that persecuting Age, had he had less Wit and Prudence than they showed
Ignorance and Malice.

I need not enlarge much on the other Books by reason of the Discoveries made
in the first that relate to them. The first Chapter of the second, gives us
Pantagruel's Pedigree from the Giants: It has been observed by a Learned Man
some Years ago, that the word Giant, which the Interpreters of the Scripture
have set in their Versions, stands there for another that means no more then
Prince in the Hebrew; so perhaps our Author was the more ready to make his
Princes Giants; tho as I have said, his chief design was tacitly to censure in
this John d' Albret, and such others as (like one in Britany, that took for his
Motto, Antequam Abraham esset sum) were too proud of an uncertain empty Name.
His description of the Original of Giants, and the story of Hurtali's
bestriding the Ark, is to mock those in the Thalmud and other Legends of the
Rabbis; for he tells us, that when this happened the Calends were found in the
Greek Almanacs, and all know that ad Graecas Calendas, is as much as to say,
Never; for the Greeks never reckoned by Calends. Yet, what he tells us of the
Earth's Fertility in Medlars, after it had been embrued with the Blood of the
Just, may be Allegorical: And those who, by feeding on that fair large
delicious Fruit, became Monstrous, may be the converts of that Age, who by the
Popish World were looked upon as Monsters. The Blood of Martyrs, which was
profusedly spilt in that Age, has always been thought Prolific even to a
Proverb, and the word Mesles in French and Medlars in English, equally import
Meddling; thus in French, Il se Mesle de nos affairs, he medles with our
Business; so the Medlars may be those who busied themselves most about the
Reformation.

The Great Drought at the Birth of Pantagruel, is that almost universal cry of
the Layty, for the Restitution of the Cup in the Sacrament, at the time that
Anthony de Bourbon Duke of Vandosme, was married to the Heiress of Navarre,
which was in October. 1548, the Council of Trent then sitting. For, thence we
must date his Birth, since by that match he afterward gained the Title of
King, besides Bearn, Bigorre, Albret, and several other Territories; and we are
told, Book 3. Chap. 48. that Pantagruel at the very first Minute of his Birth,
was no less tall than the Herb Pantagruelion (which unquestionably is Hemp) and
a little before that, it is said that its height is commonly of five or six
foot. The Death of Queen Margarite his Mother in Law, that soon followed, made
our Author say, that when Pantagruel was born, Gargantua was much perplexed,
seeing his Wife Dead, at which he made many Lamentations. Perhaps this also
alludes to the Birth of King Edward the Sixth, which caused the Death of his
Mother, Queen Jane Seymour. King Henry the Eighth is said to have comforted
himself, with saying that he could get another Wife, but was not sure to get
another Son: Thus, here we find Gargantua much grieved, and joyful by fits,
like Talboy in the Play, but at last comforting himself with the thoughts of
his Wife's Happiness, and his own, in having a Son, and saying that he must now
cast about how to get another Wife, and will stay at home and rock his Son.

In the sixth Chapter, we find Pantagruel discoursing with a Limosin, who
affected to speak in learned Phrase. Rabelais had in the foregoing Chapter,
satiris'd many Persons, and given a hint of some abuses in the Universities of
France; in this he mocks some of the Writers of that Age, who to appear
learned, wholly filled their Works with Latin Words, to which they gave a
French Inflection. But this Pedantic Iargon was more particularly affected by
one Helisaine of Limoges, who as Boileau, says of Ronsard, en Francois parlant,
Greek et Latin (speaking Greek and Latin in French) thought to have refined his
Mother Tongue: So Rabelais, to prevent the spreading of that Contagion, has not
only brought that Limousin Author on his Pantagruelian Stage, but wrote a
Letter in Verse, all in that Style, in the name of the Limousin Scholar,
printed at the end of the Pantagruelian Prognostication. Pasquier, who lived at
that time, has made the like Observation on that Chapter, when in his second
Book of Letters, p. 53. he says, -- pour l'ornement de nostre langue, et nous
aider mesmes du Grec et du Latin, non pour les escorcher ineptement comme fit
sur nostre jeune age, Helisaine, don't nostre gentil Rabelais s'est mocque fort
a propos en la person de l'escolier Limosin qu'il introduct parlan^ a
Pantagruel en un language escorche Latin.

The 7th. Chapter wherein he gives a Catalogue of the Books in St. Victor's
Library is admirable, and would require a large Comment, it being a Satyr
against many Writers and great Affairs in that Age, as well as against those
who either make Collections of bad Books, or seek no others in Libraries; but I
have not leisure to read over a great number of Books, that ought to be
consulted for such a Task.

The Cause which was pleaded before Pantagruel by the Lords Suck-fizle and
Kiss-Breech, Book 2. Chap. 10, 11, 13, 14.
seems to be a Mock of the famous Trial, concerning two Dutchies, four
Counties, two Vi-counties, and many Baronies and Lordships, to which Loyse de
Savoye, the Mother of Francis the first, laid Claim Charles de Bourbon
Constable of France, was possessed of them, but because he had refused to marry
her, she made use of some Titles, which she had to them, to perplex him, and
though she could not even with the King her Son's Favor, cast the Constable,
yet they were sequestered into the King's Hands, and the final determination put
off. Pasquier in his Recherches, observes, that when Guillaume Poyet,
afterward Chancellor, and Francois de Monthelon, afterward Lord Keeper, then
the two most famous Counselors of the Age, pleaded the Cause; the first for
Plantiff, the other for Defendant: They armed themselves with a pedantic Iuris
prudence borrowed from a parcel of Italian School Boys, whom some call Doctors
at Laws, true Hatchers of Law Suits; (such was the Rhetoric of that Time) and
as it is easy to stray in a thick Wood, so, with a confused heap of various
Quotations, instead of explaining the Cause, they perplexed it, and filled it
with darkness. Upon this, by the united Voice of the People, the Name of the
Plantiff was owned to contain the Truth of the Case; that is, Loyse de Savoye*
Loy se desavoye, The Law goes astray; which is perhaps the happiest Anagram
tha^ ever was, fot it is made without changing the Order of the Letters, and
only by dividing the Words otherwise than they are in the Name.

The 18, 19 and 20th Chapters treat of a great Scholar of England, who came to
argue by Signs with Pantagruel, and was overcome by Panurge. I do not well know
on whom to fix the Character of Thaumast that Scholar, whose Name may not only
signify an Admirer, an admirable Person, or one of those Schoolmen, who
follow the Doctrine of Thomas Aquinas, in opposition to that of Scotus: And I
find as little Reason to think, that any would have come to confer with Anthony
de Bourbon, of Geomancy, Philosophy and the Cabalistic Art. Indeed, Sir Thomas
Moore, went Ambassador to Francis the First, and Erasmus, who lived some time
in England, also came to Paris; but I cannot think, that either may pass for
the Thaumast of Rabelais. Perhaps he has made him an English Man, merely on
purpose to disguise the Story; and I would have had some thoughts of Henricus
Cornelius Agrippa, who came to France and died there; but I will prove, when I
examine the Third Book, that he has brought him on the Stage by the Name of
Her-trippa. So it is not impossible but that he may have meant Hieronimus Cardan
of Milan, who flourished in that Age, and was another dark Cabalistic Author.
The first has said, Occult. Philos. l. 1. c. 6. That he knew how to communicate
his Thoughts by the species of Sight in a magical Way, as Pythagoras was said
to do, by writing any thing in the Body of the Moon, so as it should be legible
to another at a vast distance; and he pretends to tell us the method of it in
his Book, De vanitate Scientiarum. Cardan also has writ concerning private Ways
of imparting our Thoughts, Sub^ilit. l. 17. and De Variet. Rerum, lib. 12. but
these ways of signifying our Thoughts by Gestures, called by the Learned Bishop
Wilkins Semaeology, are almost of infinite Variety, according as the several
Fancies of Men shall impose Significations upon such Signs as are capable of
sufficient difference. And the Venerable Bede has made a Book only of that,
commonly styled Arthrologia, or Dactylologia; which he calls, Lib. de loquela
per gestum digitorum, sive de indigitatione: So that perhaps our Author made
his Thaumast an English Man, not to reflect on Beda, but because that Learned
Father is the most Ancient and Famous Author that has written a Book on that
Subject.

I have Read of a public Debate much like that of Thaumast and Panurge, and as
probable, said to have been held at Geneva. The Agressor lifted up his Arm and
closed three of his Fingers and his Thumb, and pointed with the remaining
Finger at his Opponent; who immediately pointed at him again with two. Then the
other showed him two Fingers and one Thumb; whereupon his Antagonist shook his
closed Fist at him. Upon this the Aggressor showed him an Apple; and the other
looking into his Pocket found a bit of Bread, and in a scornful way let him see
it; which made him that began the Dispute yield himself vanquished. Now when
the Conqueror was desired to relate what their Signs signified; He with whom I
disputed, said he, threatened first to put out one of my Eyes, and I gave him to
understand, that I would put out both his: Then he threatened to tear both mine,
and take off my Nose; upon which I showed him my Fist, to let him know, that I
would knock him down: And as he perceived that I was angry, he offered me an
Apple to pacify me as they do Children; but I showed him, that I scorned his
Present, and that I had Bread, which was fitter for a Man.

After all, Montluc, who is our Panurge, may have had some Dispute about the
Signs of the true Religion, or the two Sacraments of the Protestants, and the
seven of the Romans, they being properly called Signs, and such a thing not
being recorded by Historians, like many others that relate to this Work, it may
not be possible to discover it.

The Dipsodes that had besieged the City of the Amaurots, Book 2. Chap. 23.
are the Flemings and other Subjects of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, that
made Inroads into Picardy, and the adjacent Territories, of which Anthony of
Bourbon was not only Governor, but had considerable Lordships in those Parts.
The Flemings have always been brisk Topers; and for this Reason are called
Dipsodes, from (...) Sitio, (...) Thirsty; and he calls Picardy and Artois the
Land of the Amaurots, from the word (...) obscurus or evanidus; perhaps because
they are in the North of France; or that part of them were in the hands of the
Enemy. Terouenne may well be called now (...), as that word is taken for being
vanished and obliterated: For, Charles the Fifth utterly destroyed it. Sandoval
tells us, That the Spaniards took it by Escalada, that is, having scaled the
Walls, and that they flew over them like the swiftest and most towering Birds;
yet as he says, that they went up with Ladders, this must be reckoned a very
odd way of flying.

In 1543, which was some Years before that fine City was ruined, Mem. de Guil.
du Bellay.
Anthony de Bourbon Duke of Vendosme hearing that it was ill stored with
Provisions, assembled his Army, and with Francis of Lorrain Duke of Aumale, the
Duke of Guise's Eldest Son, the Duke de Nevers, Marshal du Biez and several
other Lords, marched to its Relief with good Success; having in spite of the
Enemy supplied the Place with all manner of Necessaries.

In the mean time, several of the Lords and other Officers in his Camp used to
Skirmish; and once particularly having long tried to draw the Flemings out,
these at last engaged them; they were much more Numerous, yet the French got
the Better, and cut off a great Number of their Enemies: This perhaps may be
the Victory which the Gentlemen Attendants of Pantagruel obtained over Six
hundred and threescore Horsemen, Chap. 25. And a Trophy was raised, Chap. 27.
for a Memorial of those Gentlemen's Victory.

The next Exploit is that in the 29th. Chapter, where we find how Pantagruel
discomfited the Three hundred Giants armed with Freestone, and Loupgarou their
Captain. The Death of Loupgarou in the presence of his Giants, may relate to
the taking of Liliers, a Town between Bapaume and Air: It molested very much
the Country that belonged to the French, and was seated near a Marsh; yet
notwithstanding the Advantage of the Season, and its resolute Garrison, the
Duke of Vendosme having caused a large Breach to be made, and being ready to
storm the Place, the Besieged desired to Capitulate, and after many Parlies
surrendered the Town on dishonorable Terms.

By Accident the Ammunitions of the Besiegers had taken Fire, and even some of
the Carriages of the Artillery were burned; which may perhaps have made our
Author say in the foregoing Chapter, that Carpalin having set on Fire the
Enemy's Ammunition, the flame having reached the Place where was their
Artillery, he was in great danger of being burned; or perhaps, this alludes to
the Duke of Vendosme's setting Liliers on fire and destroying it quite, after
he had taken it. For our Author writes not like an Historian but like a Poet,
who ought not to be blamed for Anachronisms; nor have the best Critics censured
Virgil for that about Dido and Ene^^, between the Time of whose Lives whole
Ages are reckoned by Chronologists. However it is certain, that the Relief of
Terouenne, and then the Surrender of Liliers were Anthony de Bourbon's two
first Exploits; the one soon after the other; then the Three hundred Giants
armed with Freestone, which Pantagruel struck down like a Mason, by breaking
their stony Armor, mowing them down with the dead Body of Loupgarou, are a
great number of Castles about Liliers, Terouenne, Saint Omer, Air and Bethune,
which Anthony of Bourbon demolished immediately after he had taken Liliers, and
then passed through Terouenne, which is the City of the Amaurots which he went
to relieve; by whose Inhabitants Pantagruel is so nobly received in the 31th.
we may also suppose, that by King Anarchus, Rabelais means the plundering
lawless Boors that sheltered themselves in those Castles, who were afterward
reduced to sell Herbs. This is, Anarchus's being reduced to cry green Sauce in
a Canvas Iacket.

The Duke of Vendosme marched next, without any resistance, through the Upper
Artois, took Bapaume in his Way, which is doubtless the Almyrods, called so
from (...) Salsuginosus, or salted People, Book 2. Chapter 32.
who resolved to hold out against Pantagruel; yet only to have honorable
Conditions. It seems to me, that this is meant of the Castle of that Town which
held out against the Duke only for Terms, all the Inhabitants of the Town being
retired into that small place, where there was but one Well, whose Water had
been altogether Exhausted in two Days (to which, perhaps, relates the Salt
which Pantagruel put into the Mouths of his Enemies) and they were ready to
submit to Mercy, Memoires de Guil. du Bellay. Live. 10.
with Halters at their Necks; but the King, who had already sent matny
Expresses to the Duke, ordering him to march to join him with all speed, and
neither to Stop at Bapaume or any where else, sent him angrily fresh Orders,
wherein he charged him of his Allegiance, to join him that Day at Chasteau in
Cambrezis on pain of incurring his Displeasure. So the Duke, to the great Joy
of the Besieged and his greater Sorrow, raised his Camp, and came to the King.
Neither does our Author speak of the Surrender of the Almyrods; but makes
Pantagruel's Forces be overtaken with a great shower of Rain, and then tells us
how Pantagruel covered a whole Army with his Tongue: For they began, says he,
to shiver and tremble, to crowd, press and thrust close to one another; which
when he saw, he bid his Captains tell them, that it was nothing; however, that
they should put themselves into Order, and he would cover them; and he drew out
his Tongue only half way, and covered them all. I find that the Duke, before he
took Liliers and besieged the Castle of Bapaume, sent to the King to desire him
to send a Months Pay to his Forces, and then he could take some Frontier Towns,
and even Bapaume; but the King sent him no Money, and, on the contrary, ordered
him to march on to meet him; but before he had that Answer, he had taken
Liliers. So his Soldiers, who wanted their Pay and Clothes, being also vexed
for having, by the King's Fault, missed taking the Booty in the Castle of
Bapaume, were displeased and in bad Circumstances; but upon this the Duke spoke
to the King, and got them their Arrears and Clothes: And this is what Rabelais
calls covering an Army with his Tongue. As for what follows, it seems an
imitation of Lucian's Whale in his true History, as the News which Epistemon
brings from Hell in the 30th Chapter is also a Copy of that Author; and what
ours says he saw in Pantagruel's Mouth, is only to blind the rest; which seems
to me so plain, like most of the Discoveries I here publish, that I wonder that
none ever gave an Account of any of them in the space of above One hundred and
Forty Years.

The Sickness of Pantagruel Chapter 33. is his disgust upon this disappointment
at Bapaume; or some real sickness that seized him.

There the Author concludes his second Book, that was published sometime after
the First, which we may perceive by what he tells us of the Monks, and their
bigoted Cullies, who had already tried to find something in it that might
render him obnoxious to the Law; which caused him to be somewhat more reserved
in matters of Religion in that and the following, than he was afterward in the
fourth and fifth. Yet we find a Prayer in the twenty ninth Chapter which shows
that his Pantagruel, Anthony de Bourbon, was for the Protestant Religion, but
did not openly profess it. Accordingly, Historians grant that he was a
Calvinist, even long before Rabelais dyed: And tho for his Interest (as he
thought,) he afterward sided with the French-Court against the Protestant
Party, yet after he had been mortally wounded at the Siege of Roan, Beza Hist.
Eccles.
he complained of being deceived; and ordered one of his Servants who was a
Protestant to bring a Minister to him, but the other not being able to do it in
those persecuting Times, he commanded him to pray by him after the manner of
the Reformed Church, which the other did to that unfortunate King's
satisfaction; Cardinal de Bourbon his Brother being then present.

Panurge is the chief actor in the third act of our Pantagruelian Play; we find
him there much perplexed with uncertainties; his mind fluctuating between the
desire of entering into a matrimonial Engagement and the fear of having occasion
to repent it. To be eased of his doubt, he consults several Persons, all famous
for some particular skill in removing Anxieties of mind; and there our Learned
and Ingenious Satyrist displays his knowledge and his fancy to admiration, as
has been observed by the Learned Van Dale in the passage which I have given you
out of his Book de Oraculis, after the Account of our Author's Life.

But before that, we find Pantagruel in the first Chapter transporting a Colony
of Vtopians into Dipsodie; for which Rabelais gives a very good Reason and
proves himself a Master at Politics as well as at other Things. To explain that
passage, we must know, that the Duke of Vendosme garrisoned out of Picrady some
of the Places that had been taken in Artois, fixing also there some of his
Vassals and Tenants, who were very numerous there abouts; and as he was born
among them viz. at La Fere in 1518* he had a particular love for them.

In the second Chapter Panurge is made Lord of salmygondin in Dipsodie, and
wastes his Revenue before it comes in: I can apply this to nothing but the
gift of some Benefice to Montluc by the Duke of Vendosme or the Queen of
Navarre, afterward his Mother in Law; which Benefice not being sufficient to
supply him in his Extravagances, something more considerable was bestowed on
him; which having set him at Ease gave him occasion to reflect on his former
ill conduct and grow more thrifty: So that afterward he entertained some
thoughts of Marriage and probably was married, when Rabelais wrote.

Among those whom Panurge consults, the Sybil of Panzoust is the first whose
right name is difficult to be discovered. The pretended Key in the French makes
her a Court Lady; but its Author seems never to have read Rabelais, or at least
not to have understood him, if we may judge of it by the Names which he, in
spite of Reason, has set against some of those in our Author. Among four or
five short Explanations of as many Passages in Rabelais, also printed in the
French, one of them tells us, that by the Sybil of Panzoust, our Author means a
Gentlewoman of that Place, near Chinon, who died very old, and always lived
single tho importuned by her Friends to marry when she was young. But Rabelais
having in this Book very artfully made his Panurge consult Men of different
Professions famous in his Time, to be eased of his doubt, I do not believe that
he would have begun by a Woman altogether unknown to the learned World: Yet
not, but that he may have made choice of the Name of Panzoust to double the
Character, if he knew that such an Antiquated She-thing, lived there. I have
endeavored to discover who might be that Sybill, but dare not positively fix
that Character on any. St. Therese, a Spanish Nun, who lived in that Age, might
come in for a share, she has writ several Books, and was already famous when
Rabelais lived, she had very odd notions, and discovered perhaps as much
madness as sanctity. I find another noted crack'd-brain Bigotte, who was old at
that Time and lived at Venice: It Is one whom several great Men have mentioned by
the name of Virgo Venetas. Guillaume Postel, amongst the rest, a very learned
Jesuit and very famous in that Age for Philosophy, calls her Mother Ioane, and
had such a veneration for her, that he thought the Reparation of the Female
Sex, not yet perfected, and that such a glorious Work was reserved for her; but
Florimond de Raymond excuses him in this, and says, that he only designed to
praise her, for the great services which she had done him in his Travels. There
is another, for whom I would certainly believe the Sybil's Character made, were
I sure that our Author and she were Contemporaries: Her name is Magdelen de la
Croix she was a Nun, and had so well gained the reputation of being a Saint,
that she was consulted as a Sybil by the greatest Kings and Princes in Europe;
but at last she proved a Sorceress and was burned. If I am not mistaken Dr.
Henry More has made mention of her; and I have read her History among several
others in a Book called Histoires Tragiques. But as I am forced to quote those
Books by memory, like many others which I cannot conveniently procure, I must
refer the Reader to them for further satisfaction.

In the one and twentieth Chapter Panurge consulteth with Raminagrobis an old
French Poet, who was almost upon the very last moment of his Life. This Poet
was William Cretin Treasurer of the King's Chapel, who had lived under Charles
the VIII. Lewis the XII. and Francis the I. as may be seen by his Works. Never
was Man more celebrated by the Writers of his Age. John le Maire dedicated to
him his three Books of the Illustrations of France, and speaks of him as of the
Man to whom he owed all things Geoffroy Tore in his Champ fleury says, that
Cretin in his Chronicles of France had outdone Homer and Virgil. And even Maro^
inscribed to him his Epigrams. Here are the four first verses of Marot to him.

L' homme Sotart et non Scavant,
Comme un Rotisseur qui lave oye,
La Fault d' autruy nonce avaunt
Qu'il la cognoisse, ou qui'l la voye: etc.
All their Beauty (if they can be said to have any) consists in their Rich or
rather punning Rhimes; and truly that Epigram is unworthy of Marot: It Is
probable that as Cretin was then old he was respected by the young Fry, who yet
outlived their Error; for never did Man sooner lose after his Death, the Fame
which he had gained during his Life: And the Reason which caused Marot to write
to him in such equivocal Rhimes, was doubtless, because Cretin affected much
that way of Writing. Here are four of Cretin's Lines which in his Book are
followed by 122 more such.

Par ces vins verds Atropos a trop os
Des corpse humains ruez envers en verse,
Don't un quidam aspre aux pots apropos
A fort blasme ses tours pervers par verse. etc.
I never saw more Rhyme with so little sense. For this Reason, Rabelais who (as
Pasquier says) had more Judgment and Learning than all those that wrote French
in his time, has exposed that riming old Man: And to leave us no room to doubt
of it, the Rondeau which Raminagrobis gives to Panurge upon his irresolution as
to his marriage, Prenez la ne la prenez pas etc. that is, Take, or not take
her, off or on, etc. is taken out of Cretin, who had addressed it to Guillaume de
Refuge who had asked his advice, being in the same perplexity. However Rabelais
makes him dye like a good Protestant, and afterward turns off cunningly what
the other had said against the Popish Clergy, who would not let him dye in
Peace; and to show more plainly that this is said of Cretin, Rabelais says at
the beginning of the four and twentieth Chapter Laissans la Villaumere, that
is, having left Villaumere, which relates to William, that Poet's name.

I ought not to omit a Remark printed in the last Dutch Edition of this Book
concerning what Panurge says of Cretin. He is by the Virtue of an Ox, an arrant
Heretic; a thorough-pac'd rivitted Heretic, I say, a rooted Combustible
Heretic, one as fit to burn, as the little wooden Clock at Rochel, his Soul
goes to thirty thousand Cart-full of Devils. Rabelais there reflects on the
Sentence of Death passed on one of the First that owned himself a Protestant at
Rochell. He was a Watch-maker, and had made a Clock all of Wood, which was
esteemed an admirable Piece; but because it was the Work of one condemned for
Heresy, the Judges ordered by the said sentence that the Clock should be burned
by the common hangman, and it was burned accordingly; we must also observe that
the adjective Clavele that is, full of Nails or Rivitted, is brought in because
that Watch-maker who was very famous for his Zeal, was named Clavele.

In the 24th. Chapter Panurge consults Epistemon, who perhaps may be Guillaume
Ruffy, Bishop of Oleron, one of Queen Margarite's Ministers, who had been
sometime in Prison for preaching the Reformation, and was afterward made
Bishop in the King of Navarre's Territories, having without doubt dissembled
like many others. Thus his descent into Hell, in the second Book, may be his
Prison: I own, that he is with Pantagruel in the Wars, but so is Panurge, and
this is done to disguise the Characters; I am the more apt to believe him a
Clergy Man, because he understands Hebrew very well, which few among the Layty
do, and none else, in our Author, besides Panurge, who calls him his dear
Gossip; then his Name denotes him to be a thinking, considering Man, and as he
was Pantagruel's Pedagogue, so probably Ruffy initiated or instructed the Duke,
in the Doctrine of the new Preachers.

Enguerrant, whom Rabelais taxes with making a tedious and impertinent
Digression about a Spaniard, is Enguerrant de Monstrelet, who wrote La
Chronique and Annals de France.

In the same Chapter he speaks of the four Ogygian Islands near the Haven of
Sammalo; by this he seems to mean Iersey, Gernsey, Sark, and Alderney. As Queen
Margaret lived a while, and died in Britanny, our Actors may be thought
sometimes to stroul thither. Calypso was said to live at the Island Ogygia;
Lucian amongst the rest places her there, and Plutarch mentions it in the Book
of the Face that appears in the Circle of the Moon.

Her-Trippa, is undoubtedly Henricus Cornelius Agrippa burlesqued. Her is
Henricus or Herricus, or perhaps alludes to Here, because he was a German, and
Agrippa is turned into Trippa, to play upon the word Tripe. But for a farther
Proof, we need but look into Agrippa's Book, de Occult. Philosoph. Lib. 1. Cap.
7. de quatuor elementorum, Divinationibus, and we shall find the very words
used by Rabelais of Pyromancy, Aeromancy, Hydromancy, etc. Besides, Agrippa
came to Francis the First, whom our Author calls the great King to distinguish
him from that of Navarre.

Friar John des Entosmures, or, of the Funnels, as he is called in this
Translation, advises Panurge to marry, and whether by that brave Monk we
understand Cardinal Chastillon or Martin Luther, the Character is kept, since
both were Married; neither was the latter wholly free from Friar John's
swearing Faculty, if it be true that being once reproved about it, he replied,
condonate mihi hoc qui fui monachus. Entomeures has doubtless been mistaken for
Entonnoir, a Funnel, but the true Etymology, is from (...) to cut and make
incisions, which was our Monk's delight, who is described as a mighty
Trencher-man.

In the following Chapters, a Theologian Physician, Lawyer and Philosopher are
consulted.

Hippothadeus, the Theologian, may perhaps be Philip Shwartzerd, alias
Melancthon; for he speaks too much like a Protestant to be the King's
Confessor, neither could Montluc be supposed to desire his Advice.

Rondibilis the Physician is doubtless Gulielmus Rondeletius. Thuanus remarks,
in the thirty eighth Book of his History, that Will. Rondelet of Montpellier,
died 1566, and that though he was a learned Physician, Rabelais had satiris'd
him; he adds, that indeed the Works of Rondelet, do not answer the Expectation,
which the World had of him, nor the Reputation which he had gained; and his
Treatise of Fishes, which is the best that bears his Name, was chiefly the Work
of Will. Pelissier, Bishop of Montpelier, who was cast into Prison for being a
Protestant. However, Rabelais makes him display much Learning in his Discourse
to Panurge.

I am not so certain of the Man whom Trouillogan personates, he calls him an
Ephectic and Pyrrhonian Philosopher. I find that Petrus Ramus, or De la Ramee,
afterward Massacred at Paris, had written a Book against Aristotle, and we
have also his Logic; but as he is mentioned by Jupiter in the Prologue to the
fourth Book, by the name of Rameau, where his dispute with Petrus Galandius,
and his being named Peter are also mentioned, I am in doubt about it. Moliere
has imitated the Scene between Trouillogan and Panurge, in one of his Plays,
and Mr. Dela Fontaine, the story of Hans Carvell, and that of the Devil of
Pope-feague-land, in his inimitable Contes and Nouvelles.

There was a Iack-pudding in France in that Age, called Triboulet, but I
believe that the Fool, whom our Author describes in the 38. Chapter, is one
more considerable, though less famous. I cannot guess why he has heaped up so
many Adjectives on that Fool, unless it be to show the excess of his Folly, and
to mock some of the Authors of that Age, who often bestowed a large train of
such unnecessary Attendants, on a single Noun Substantive.

Marotte is a word very much used by the French, signifying a Fools Bauble or
Club, and the word ^ou, given by Rabelais to Triboulet implys a mad,
crack'd-brain'd, or inconsiderate Man, and also a Jester; the word Idiot, being
more used in French, for what we properly call a Fool: Now Clement Marot, the
best Poet in the Reign of Francis the First, whose Valet-de Chamber he was
Styled, was a notable Iester, and is said to have played many merry Tricks that
relished somewhat of Extravagance: Besides, many among the Vulgar, mistaking
the Enthusiasm of Poets for Madness, have but a small Opinion of the Wisdom of
most of them. But these Considerations do not seem to me strong enough to make
me believe that Rabelais would have passed so severe a Censure on that Poet,
who was then but lately dead, an Exile for his Religion, and had made
honorable mention of him in his Works, they being undoubtedly intimate Friends.

Judge Bridlegoose, who decided Causes by the Chance of Dice; and was Arraigned
for Prevarication at the Bar of the Parliament of Mirelingois, resembles much a
Judge of Montmartre, who they say could neither Write nor Read, yet had been a
Judge many Years, and being once called into Question in a superior Court,
owned his Ignorance as to the Point of Writing and Reading, but affirmed that
he knew the Law; and desiring that the Cause of which an Appeal had been made
from his Jurisdiction might be examined, he was found to have done Justice, and
his Sentence and Authority were confirmed. Rabelais takes Notice of such a
Story, as is that of his Bridlegoose, vulgarly reported of the Provost of
Montlehery: But though he may allude to it, and to that of the Bailiff of
Montmartre, which perhaps may be the same, I believe that his Bridlegoose is a
Man of greater Consequence. Considering the strong Intercession made for him by
Pantagruel, and the others whom he shows on his Stage, he may be Guillaume
Poyet, who by the favor of Loyse de Savoye, the King's Mother, his Client, had
been made Lord Chancellor of France, and in 1545, being convinced of several
Abuses and Prevarications, was deprived of his Office.

I have said before, that the Herb Pantagruelion is Hemp; Rabelais makes
Pantagruel load a great quantity of it on Board his Ships, and indeed it is one
of the most useful things in the World, not only at Sea, but also at Land. The
curious and pleasing Description of that Plant, makes up the rest of this Third
Book.

HAD not the following Translation of the three first Books of Rabelais been
ready to be published, before I was desired to give an Account of them and of
his Life, I might have printed my Observations at the End of each Chapter, and
have given a more exact Commentary. However I hope that I have said enough to
show, that what appears trivial and foolish in that Work, is generally Grave
and of Moment, when seriously examined. Yet as I dare not offer my Conjectures
as certainties, principally on a Book which has been so universally read and
admired, and never till now attempted to be explained, I humbly submit all I
have said to the Judgment of the Learned; to whom I will esteem my self much
obliged, if they will be pleased either to let me know wherein I have erred, or
communicate to me their Remarks on this Work, which may be printed with the two
remaining Books, with their Names, if they please, and a thankful
Acknowledgment of the Favor.

Having first done my Endeavor to satisfy the Reader concerning the Meaning
of that mysterious History, I hope to be now the more patiently suffered to
give some Account of the Nature of the Fable, the Style and the Design of it.

MANKIND is naturally addicted to the Love of Fables. Long before Learning had
been brought into Greece and Italy, the Egyptians, Persians, Arabians and other
Eastern Nations, to Enhance the value of Truths, which they did not think fit
to be prostituted to the Vulgar, hid them under the Veils of Allegories and
Apologues; Quia sciunt inimicam esse naturae apertam nudamque expositionem sui;
quae, sicut vulgaribus hominum sensibus intellectum sui vario rerum tegmine
operimentoque substraxit, ita a prudentibus ar cana sua voluit per fabulosa
tractari. Macrob. In somn. Scip. Lib. 1.
they also used sometimes to lay aside the Study and Speculation of high
mysteries to divert themselves with framing Stories which had nothing of Truth
in them, and no other design than most of our Romances. Also in the Decay of
Learning, which followed that of the Roman Empire for want of true History and
solid Knowledge, Men fed their Minds with gross Fictions, such as are the
Legends of Monks, and the old sorts of Romances. Thus two opposite ways, barren
Ignorance and Luxuriant Learning leading Men often the same End, that is the
study of Fables, their Number is as great as their Original is Ancient.

Herodotus says, That the Greeks had from Egypt their Mythologic Theology.
Homer brought from thence that Inclination to Fables, which made him invent
many things about the Original and Employments of his Gods; and Pythagoras and
Plato learned also there to disguise their Philosophy.

Thus our Author calls his Writings Pythagorical Symbols in the Prologue to his
first Book; and not without Reason, since as I have made it appear, the chief
part of them is mysteriously writ. But what those Ancient Philosophers did through
a Reverence of Nature, ours did through Necessity; being forced to keep such a
Medium as that he might be understood by all Readers in most parts of his Book,
yet by few Persons in others, and might secure himself from the attacks of his
Enemies by the Ambiguity of his Sense.

Lucian tells us, that Fables were so much in vogue in Assyria and Arabia that
there were persons whose only Profession i^ was to explain them to the People;
and Erpenius assures that all the World together never produced so many Poets
as the Latter. As for Persia, Strabo says that Teachers there used to give to
their Disciples Precepts of Morality wrapped up in Fictions. The Gymnosophists of
India are said, by Diogenes Lae^tius, to have delivered their Philosophy in
Enigmas. So that the learned Huetius thinks, that when Horace said, Fabulosus
Hydaspes, 'twas chiefly because its Spring is in Persia, and its Mouth in
India, Countries through which it flows, whose Inhabitants were Lovers of
Fables: And indeed it was from the Persians, as that Prelate observes, that
those of Miletum in Ionia learned first to frame those amorous Fictions which
were afterward famous through Greece and Italy, by the name of Milesian
Fables, which with Millions more of such insignificant voluminous Lies are lost
and forgotten, as well as their Authors; the name of the best of whom called
^ristides, hardly survives his Writings. He lived doubtless before Marius and
Syllas's Wars; for Sisenna, a Roman Historian, had Latiniz'd his Fables, which
were very obscene, yet long the delight of the Romans. Photius in his
Bibliotheque, has given an extract of a fabulous Story composed by Antonius
Diogenes, whom he thinks to have lived sometime after Alexander: It treats in
Prose of the Loves of Dinias and Dercyllis, in imitation of Homer's Odysseis,
and relates many incredible Adventures; its Author also makes mention of one
Antiphanes who before had written in that Nature, and who perhaps, may be a
Comic Poet, whom the Geographer Stephanus says to have writ some such Relations.

These are thought to have been the modells of what Lucius, Lucian, Iamblichus,
Achilles, Tatius and Damascius have written in that kind, not to speak of
Heliodorus, Bishop of Tricca, who under Arcadius and Honorius, wrote the
Adventures of Theagenes and Chariclea, some passages of which have been copied
by Guarini, and the Author of Astrea.

Our Britains about that time have not been behind hand with other Nations in
writing such Books. Theleisin, whom Some place among the Bards, because he made
some Propheci^s in Verse, lived about the middle of the sixth Century, and as
well as Melkin wrote fabulous Histories in Welsh, of Britain, King Arthur,
Merlin, and the Knights of the round Table. Those of Ieoffrey of Monmouth, have
not much more the appearance of Truth; and as much may be said of what Gildas a
Welsh Monk writ of King Arthur, Perceval and Lancelot.

The French sometime after, had also their famous Romance of the Heroic Deeds
of Charles the Great, and his Paladins, Huet Orig. des Romans.
said to be the Work of Turpin, Archbishop of Rheims; but it was written above
two Hundred Years after him, and was followed by many more as false, which yet
pleased the people of those times, more simple and ignorant yet than those who
wrote them. Then none endeavoring to get good Memoirs to write true History,
and Men finding matter more easily in their Fancy; Historians degenerated into
Romancers, and the Latin Tongue fell into as much contempt as Truth had done
before. Then the Troubadours, Comics and Contours of Provence, Iean de
Nostredame. Viedes Poets Proven^aux.
who were the writers that practiced what is still called in the Southern parts
of France, Le guay Saber, or the Gay Science, spread all over that Kingdom
their Stories and new sort of Poetry, of all kinds, composed in the Roman
Language, which was a mixtu^e of the Gallic. Tentonick, and Latin Tongues, in
which the (...) was superior, so that to distinguish it from that usually
spoken through the other parts of the Gauls, it kept the name of Roman.

The Germans, as Tacitus relates, used to sing the Heroic Deeds of Hercules,
when they went to fight. The ancient Inhabitants of Denmark, Sweeden and
Norway, had fabulous Stories which they engraved in old Runic Characters upon
large Stones, of which some are still to be seen. The most usual diversion at
their Feasts was to sing in rhiming Verse the brave Deeds of their ancient
Giants. These Stories used to draw Tears from the Eyes of the Company, and
after that, being well warmed with good Cheer, to their Tears succeeded Cries
and Howlings, till all at last fell in confusion under the Table. The Kings and
Princes of Denmark, Norway, and the neighboring Countries had always their
Scaldri, thus were called their Poets, who used extempore to make Verses in
Rhyme, embellished with Fictions and Allegories, Appendix de Literatura Runica.
upon all Memorable Events, and those were immediately learned, and sung by the
People: Even some of the Kings and Queens of those Countries were Scaldri: As
Olaus Wormius tells us.

The Indians, Iapanese and Chinese have an infinite Number of Poets and Fables,
and the latter esteem almost Rustic any other way than that of Apologues in
their Conversation.

Even the Turks, to fit themselves for Love or War, have not only the Persian
Romances, but Fables of their own devising, and will tell you that Roland was a
Turk, whose Sword they still preserve at Bursa with Veneration, relating the
particulars of his Life, and the great things he did in the Levant.

The Americans are great Lovers of Fables, and near Canada the most wild among
them, after their Feasts, generally desire the oldest or the greatest Wit of
the Company to invent and relate to them some strange Story. Beavers, Foxes,
Racoons, and other Animals generally come in for a share in the Fiction, and
the hearers are very attentive to their Adventures, the Relation of which they
never interrupt but by their Applause, and thus Days and Nights are past with
equal satisfaction to the Speaker and the Hearers. The People of Florida,
Cumana and Perou excite themselves to work, and to martial exploits by Songs
and fabulous Narrations of the great Achievements of their Predecessors.
Whatever they relate of their Origin is full of Fictions; but in this those of
Perou far out-lye the rest, and have their Poets to whom they give a Name that
answers to that of Inventors. Also those of Madagascar have Men who stroul from
House to House to recite their Composures; and those of Guinea have their
tellers of Fables, like those of the Northern Parts of America.

Thus, as observes Huetius, from whom I have borrowed part of these Historical
Observations on Fables, no Nation can well attribute to it self the Original of
them. Since all equally have been addicted to invent some in the most ancient
Times; there is only this Difference, that what was the Fruit of the Ignorance
of some Nations, even in Europe, has been that of the Politeness of the
Persians, the Ionians and the Greeks.

When Rabelais lived all the foolish Romances that had been made in the
barbarous Ages that preceded his were very much read; therefore, as he had a
design to give a very great latitude to his Satyr, he thought he could not do
better than to give it the form of those lying Stories, the better to secure
himself from Danger, and at once show their Absurdities; also to cause his Book
to be* the more read, having perceived that nothing pleased the People better
than such Writings; the Wise and Learned being delighted by the Morality under
the Allegories, and the rest by their odness. This was a good Design, and it
proved as Effectual to make those who had any sense throw away those gross
Fables stuffed with wretched Tales of Giants, Magicians and Adventurous
Knights, as Miguel de Cervantes's Don Quixot proved in his Country to root out
Knight-Errantry.

Thu^ Lucian before him, in his Story of the Ass, enlarged afterward by the
Philosopher Apuleius, had ridiculed Lucius of Patras, and, to make it the more
obvious, called that Fable by the name of that Mythologist, who had writ a Book
of strange Metamorphoses, which he foolishly believed to be true. Rabelais
seems also to have imitated Lucian's true History, called so by its Author, by
Antiphrasis; though some have thought that he had joined it to the Treatise in
which he gives Precepts to write History well, as an Example of his Rules: But
he declares at the beginning of that incredible History, That his only design
was to expose many Poets, Historians and Philosophers, who, with inpunity,
related false Things as Truth, and used, upon unfaithful Relations, to treat of
foreign Countries, as Ctesias and Iambulus had done.

But our History is not altogether an Imitation of that of Lucian, though it
participates of its Nature. It Is Dramatic also, as that Greek Author says of
some of his Works; a mixture of Dialogue and Comedy; of serious Matter and of
the Ridicule; of Plays of all sorts, whether Trabeatae, Pretextatae, Palliatae,
Togatae, Attellanae, Tabernariae, etc. It Is the Satyrica of the Greeks; the
Archaea, the Media and the Nova Comoedia: For sometimes great things are
treated by our Author in a manner equal to their Grandeur; at others they are
brought down to the Level of the Planipedia: Now and then little more than
Mirth is meant: Often also particular Persons are reflected on by Name; at
others they appear masked and disguised; and frequently, as in the new Comedy
of the Greeks, the Characters are general. It Is likewise Hilarotragoedia; that
sort of Dramatic Composures which Rhinthon of of Taras, Suidas, in (...).
about the Reign of the first Ptolomy, is said to have invented; which
doubtless got him that Name of (...) given him by Stephanus Bysantius, which
some render Iocator, but is thought by Hesychius to signify Scurra. This
Rhinthon's Fables, Ad Prolog. Adelph.
of which Donatus makes mention in his Notes on Terence, and which Suidas says
were Thirty eight in Number, still in being when Spephanus writ, were imitated
at Rome: And as that Geographer says, that Rhinthon turned Tragic Things into
Ridicule, an Italian Critic thinks that the Hilarotragoedia was only una
tragedia contrafatta e di grave ridotta al piacevole; Ragion. dello Academ.
Aldean.
e di tragedia, per dir cosi, fatta Comedia; that is, a Tragedy turned into a
Comedy or a Farce. Preface sur les Caesar's de Iuli-
But the Learned Spanheim more properly thinks that Rhinthon had joined the
comic Mirth of the Greek* Satyric Plays and Interludes to the gravity of
Tragedy which may by that have got the name of Mixta.

Our Rabelais's Work is also a Satyr of the kind of those which from Menippus
were called Menippaean by his imitator Varro, the most learned among the
Romans; having given that Name to that which he made, because, like that Cynic
Philosopher, in it he had treated of grave Matters in a merry joking Style.
That Satyr, Et tamen in illis veteribus nostris, quae Menippum imitati, non
interpretati, quadam hilaritate conspersimus, multa admista ex intima
philosophia, multa dialectice dicta. Academ. Quaest. L. 1.
or as Tully calls it, that Poema varium et elegans was at once a mixture of
Prose and several sorts of Verse; of Greek and of Latin; of Philology and of
Philosophy. That Orator makes him give some account of its design and variety;
and without Doubt that Work was far more esteemable than the Examples which he
followed; if, as Diogenes Laertius says, those of Menippus were made merely to
excite Men to Laugh, consisting chiefly of Parodiae, or Verses out of famous
Authors, and generally Homer, Euripides and such others inverted, and tagg'd
together sometimes like the Cento of Ausonius, and often in the Nature of our
Mock Songs. Yet since Strabo says that by them he got the Name of (...) or
Ioco-serius, Lib. 16.
we may believe that there was a morality in them; but that, as in our
Rabelais, not being obvious, some thought them trifling; like many in our Age
who find it much easier to Judge and find fault than to understand.

I could wish that among the other sorts of Writing which, in something, have
been imitated by our Author, I might not reckon Petronius Arbiter; Yet I only
say this as to his immodesty; for, otherwise, as that Consul under some Amorous
Fictions has concealed a close and Ingenious Satyr on the vices that reigned in
Nero's Court, and was as nice and good a Judge of polite Learning as of
dissolute Pleasures, without doubt he is to be followed and admired: And indeed
his Fable was esteemed to be like the Greek Satyric Poems which Plato says
consisted of Fictions whose hidden sense differed very much from the
superficial signification of the Words; since Macrobius, while he distinguishes
Fables, made barely to please from those that at once divert and instruct, has
placed that of Petronius among the latter.

Our Author 's Works are also an Imitation of Democritus and of Socrates, if we
may compare Writings with Actions; for those two Philosophers used to be still
merry, and freely ridiculed what ever was a fit Subject of Rallery: For this
reason Quintilian says of the latter, Etiam vita unversa Ironiam habere
videtur, qualis est vita Socratis; and that great Philosopher, who had deserved
the Name of the Wisest of Men, was called Scurra by Zeno, as Tully renders it:
Yet Plato and Xenophon his Scholars have not only transmitted to us some of his
admirable expressions but also imitated them; De Dictione Ludicra.
and we may apply to Rabelais what Vavassor said of that wise Man; Constans ac
perpetuus irrisor Mortalium.

In this, his Work somewhat differs from the greatest part of the Satires of
the Roman^; for he seldom leaves his Ridiculing for their angry Railing. Their
chief Design is less to rally than excite either Indignation or Hatred, facit
indignatio versum. Which caused an Ancient Grammarian to say, Iuven. Satyr. 1.
Satyra dicitur carmen apud Romanos nunc quidem maledicum; thus calling Satire
a railing or slandering Poem: Diomed. Lib. 3. Gram.
And Ovid excusing himself for not having writ any, gives it the Epithete of
biting.

Non ego mordaci distrinxi carmine quemquam.
Nec meus ullius crimina versus habet.
Accordingly the Authors of the Roman Satires generally keep the Character of
Censors. Horace has given the gayest Air of them all to his Satires, and in
that of Nasidienus, the Description of the fight between Sarmentus and Messius,
as also in some others, has affected a comic Style; he also tells us that Satyr
ought to be sometimes treated gayly, and at others sullenly or gravely; Et
sermon opus est modo tristi saepe jocoso. Yet in other places he speaks of the
Sharpness of his Satyrs, and owns that they were an ill-natured or malicious
kind of Writing.

Lib. 2. Sat 1. -- tristi laedere versu,
Pantolabum scurram, Nomentanumque nepotem.
Then he takes notice of the Complaint of some against him.

-- Lividus and mordax videor tibi. He also observes that it is not enough to
make a hearer laugh.

Ergo non satis est risu diducere rictum, Auditoris.

Sat. 10. Lib. 1. Far from this, he says it is a commendable thing to fill a
Man with shame, and as he calls it, to bark at him if he deserves it.

Si quis opprobiis dignum latraverit. -- This causes another Satyrist speaking
of Lucilius, whose Imitator he was as well as Horace, to say, Ense velut
stricto, quoties Lucilius ardens
Infremuit, rubet auditor cui frigida men's
Criminibus. --
Juvenal Sat 1.

The same in another place, reflecting on the depraved manners of his Age,
cries, Difficile est Satyram non scribere. By which he sufficiently shows what
was the Object and Design of those sorts of Poems.

Now Rabelais chiefly pursues his Subject by jesting and exposing, ridiculing
and despising what he thinks deserves such an usage; and it is but seldom that
he makes use of railing, or sullen biting Reproofs. Yet as he has done it in
some places, we may well say that his Work has something of the Roman Satyr.

In short, it is a mixture, or if I may use the Expression, an Ollio of all the
Merry, Serious, Satirical and diverting ways of Writing, that have hitherto
been used. But still Mirth is predominant in the Composition, and like a
pleasing Tartness, gives the whole such a relish, Mr. Tate, Preface to a Duke
and no Duke.
that we ever feed on it with an eager Appetite, and can never be cloyed with
it. It Is Farce, as our Laureat in his late curious Preface, concerning that way
of Writing, judiciously observes of some of Ben Iohnson's, but such Farce, as
bequeaths that Blessing (pronounced by Horace) on him that shall attempt the
like.

-- sudet multum frustraque laboret
Ausus idem.
For, as it is there observed, the Business of Farce extends beyond Nature and
Probability. But then there are so few improbabilities that will appear
pleasant in the Representation, that it will strain the best Invention to find
them out, and require the nicest Judgment to manage them when they are
conceived. Extravagant and monstrous Fancies are but sick Dreams that rather
torment than divert the Mind, but when Extravagancy and Improbability happen to
please at all, they do it to purpose, because they strike our Thought with
greatest Surprise.

Pasquier, the most judicious Critic that France had in his Time, was very
apprehensive of this, and illustrates it with two Examples that concern too
much our Author, and the Point in Question, not to be inserted here. It Is in
one of his Letters to the Poet Ronsard. Lettr. de Pasquier Live. 1.
Il n'y a cel^y de nous qui ne scache combien le d^cte Rabelais en folastrant
sagement sur son Gargantua et Pantagruel gaigna de grace parmy le peuple. Il se
trouua peu apres deux Singes qui se persuaderent d' en pouuoir fair tout
autant; l' un sou^s le nom de Leon l' Adulfy en ses propos rustiques. L'autre
sans nom en son Livre des Fanfreluches. Mais autant y profita l'un que l'autre;
s' estant la memoire de ces deux Livres perdue.

That is; All know to what degree the learned Rabelais gained the Esteem of the
Nation by his wise Drolling on his Gargantua and Pantagruel; soon after started
up a couple of Apes who conceived that they could do as much; viz. Leon l'
Adulfy in his Propos Rustiques, and the Anonymous Author of Fanfreluches. But
as ill did the one succeed as the other; the Memory of those two Books being
lost.

This Work of Rabelais is doubtless an Original by imitating and joining in one
so many others. To imitate it, is not only periculosae plenu^ opus aleae, but
almost an impossible task; nor is it easily to be defined. We see that it is
Historical, Romantic, Allegorical, Comical, Satirical; But as sometimes all
these kinds of Writing are united in one Passage, a^ others they appear
severally.

I might say that it is partly Dramatic: For there appears in it a great deal
of Action: The Dialogues, of which it is full, are as many lively Scenes:
Europe is the Stage, and all Mankind is the Subject: The Author with his Witty
Drolling Prologues comes in between every act, as the Silen^ and the Satyri did
in the Greek Satyric Plays. Or, if you had rather have it so, he supplys the
place of the Chorus in some of the Old Comedies: The five Books answer exactly
the five Acts; and it might perhaps as easily be made appear by a D' acier that
he has managed his Drama regularly, as by a Bossu that the Father of Epic
Poetry has observed a Just Conduct in his Iliads.

It has the Form of an History, or rather of Romances, which it tacitly
ridicules, I mean such of them as those Ages produced which preceded the
Restoration of Learning, that chiefly happened when our Author lived; your
Amadis de Gaul, Lancelot du Lac, Tristan, Kyrie Eleison of Montauban, etc. For
then Kyrie Eleison and Deuteronomy were taken for the names of Saints; somewhat
like the Epitomizers of Gesner's Bibliotheque, who have ascribed Amadis to one
Acuerdo Olvido, not knowing that these two Words, which they found on the Title
page of the French version of that Book, were the Translators Spanish Motto,
that signifies Remembrance, Oblivion. Our Author seems to have mimick'd those
Books, even in their Titles, in their Division into Chapters, and in the odd
Accounts of their Contents. I am much mistaken if in many places he has not
also affected their Style; tho in others he displays all the Purity and
Elegancy which the French-Tongue, which he has much improved, had at that Time.

As for the mixture of odd, Burlesque, Barbarous, Latin, Greek and obsolete
Words which is seen in his Book, it is justifiable, as it serves to add to the
Diversion of the Reader, pleased generally the more, the greater is the
Variety, principally in so odd a Work.

About Twenty Years before it was composed, Theophilus Folengi a Monk, born at
Mantua of a Noble Family, who is hardly known now otherwise than by the name of
Merlinus Coccaius, had put out his Liber Macaronicorum, which is a Poetical
Rhapsody made up of Words of different Languages, and treating of pleasant
Matters in a Comical Style: The word Macarone in Italian signifies a Jolly
Clown, and Macaroni a sort of Cakes made with course Meal, Eggs and Cheese,
Eleg. p. 72.
as Thomasin observes. He published also another Work which he called Il libro
della Gatta in the same Style, and another only Macaronic in part, called Chaos
del tri per uno.

A learned Critic has esteemed that sort of Writing to be a third kind of
Burlesque. Naude Judgment des pieces contre Mazarin.
Nor was Folengi only followed by his Countrymen, as Gaurinus Capella in his
Macarone de Rimini against Cabri Re de Gogue magogue, in 1526, and Caesar
Vrsinus, who calls himself Stopinus in his Capriccia Macaronica 1536, For the
learned William Drummond Author of the History of Scotland, and of some divine
Poems, has left us an ingenious Macaronie Poem called Polemo-Middinia, printed
at the Theater at Oxford, 1691.

Rabelais has imitated and improved some fine Passages of that of Coccaius, as
well as his Style; Though Mr. Baillet in his Judgment des Scavans, thinks that
it would be an impossible Task to preserve its Beauties in a Translation.

The Italians affect those mixed sorts of Languages in their Burlesque Poetry.
They have one sort which they call Pedantesca from the Name of the Persons of
whom it most treats and whom it imitates; Greek, Latin and Italian making up
the Composition with an Italian Termination. Some have celebrated the Amors of
Grammarians and of others in that Italogrecolatin Tongue; and I have seen a
Book in Prose in that Idiom of Idioms, entitled Hipnerotomachia di Polifilo;
Cioe, combattimento di amore in Sogno; or, The Fight of Love in a Dream.

Dante is full of Latin and Provenzale, of which he boasts, saying, Namque
locutus sum in Lingua trina; and Petrarch, though more sparing of Latin, has
many French and Provensale Words, even whole Lines of the latter, ponendovene
anche* de i versi in^eri, says one of his Country Men; And, besides a great
Number of Books of Burlesque Poetry and Prose, which they have in Lingua
Bergamesca, Bolognese, Paduana, Venetiana, Bresciana, Veronese, Genouese,
Napolitana, Romana, Ciciliana, Sarda, etc, they sometimes have mixed several of
those Dialects together.

This mixture of Languages, and of odd and fantastic Terms, has been censured
by Vavassor, chiefly, because he pretends that the Ancients never used it,
though none will deny that they mixed Words and Verses of different kinds that
has read of their Satura Lanx, or the (...). Diomedes says, Satyra est carmen
quod ex variis poematibus constat, and Lucilius whom Pliny says to have first
found out Stylum Nasi, the way of speaking used in Plays, wrote in a low and
vulgar Style, mixed sometimes with Greek. Plautus has Punic words, and Cicero
has Greek particularly in his Epistles. But to show that odd words, such as are
found in our Author's Burlesque Writings, have been used by the Ancients, we
need but consult Diogenes Laertius, and we shall find that Democritus allowed
himself as great a Liberty in using odd Expressions, as in laughing at Mankind.
For he had so many particular Words, that a Greek Author made a Dictionary of
them; his Biographer relates some of them, and Hesychius, has preserved also
one or two, which he had probably out of that Dictionary, that has been lost.
Vavassor himself, owns that Aristophanes has verba inusitata, composita ex
multis verbis and sonantibus, and that in his Plays, Persae, Triballi, Scythae,
patria and barbara voce utuntur, Laco and Thessalus. That Comic Poet has indeed
many Words as strange as Rabelais, as (...), from which the Latin have made
coaxare; then (...), which are the various Voices of Birds. Then he has
Diminutives, as (...); and if Rabelais has very long Words, so has
Aristophanes, as his (...), and many others, among which, the longest is made
up of twenty eight, and begins by (...). etc. Also in the Anthologia,
Grammarians are called (...), and there is an Epigram by an ancient Poet, all
in such Burlesque against Philosophers, which begins thus, O (...),
(...), etc.


A great number of long Decomposites are found in Greek Authors, and if the
Latins have used them less, it is because their Tongue was not so happy in
linking Words together, as Quintilian observes. Yet we have many in Plautus
that are downright Burlesque of the the same kind, as Ferritribaces,
Servilicolae, Plagipatide, Cluninstaridysarchides, etc.

What shall we think of the Parodiae of which Aristophanes and Lucian are full,
and which Julian has used in his Caesar's, as many more among the Greeks have
done; those Witticisms being a part of the Salt, which they so much desired in
all Jocose and Satirical Composures.

As for the Puns, Clenches, Conundrums, Quibbles, and all such other Dregs or
Bastard sorts of Wit, that here and there have crept in among the infinite
number of our Auhor's ingenious and just Conceptions, I will not Apologize in
their Behalf, otherwise then by showing that Aristophanes and Plautus have
strewed them more lavishly through their Works, which are partly of the Nature
of this. Nor is it necessary to mention the great Tully, and many more among
the Ancients that allowed themselves the Freedom of using them; many of those
dropped in Conversation by that Orator having been thought w^^thy to be made
public. They were doubtless better liked in those times, than they are now,
and we find them in as great a Number in almost all the Writers, of the last
Age, that pretended to Wit; nor have Rhetoricans refused to teach or use the
Figure Antanaclasis. So though we may mislike the Pun, we may admire the
Author, since these are but so many small Spots which far from darkning him,
illustrate the Beauties by which they are placed.

None can mislike the great number of various Images which he gives of the same
Things, or the long train of verbs, or substantives, which he often sets
together; Indeed in another Work they might be thought redundant. Ambiti^sa
ornamenta rescindenda sunt; But here those Terms, tho they are often Technical,
and therefore instructing, are only used to cause Mirth: And they become our
Author so well that we seldom read them over without laughing.

Mirth being so desirable a thing, so beneficial to the Body, and to the Mind,
and laughing one of the distinguishing Characters of Mankind, our Author may be
said not to have advantaged the World a little in composing this merry
Treatise. He justifies himself in his Dedication to Cardinal Chastillon for his
Comical Expressions, by representing the ease which many disconlate and sick
persons had received by them; and he say^ before his first Book Le R^re est le
propre de l' homme; or, as it has been Englished; Laugh only, so to show thy
self a Man. Even Caesar had writ a whole Book of merry and witty Sayings; and
Balsac a great Enemy to Burlesque has said que ce n'estoit paspeu meriter du
genre humain, que de rejouir quelquefois Auguste; That Mankind was not a little
obliged to the Man who sometimes could make Augustus merry. That Emperor, as
Macrobius tells us, did not think it below him sometimes to write Lampoons, and
made one on Pollio* who, knowing it, said; at ego taceo, non est enim facile in
eum conscribere qui potest pros^ribere.

Horace afte^ he has said, that it is not enough to make a Hearer laugh, (...),
and est quaedam haec quoque v^^tus.

Nor has (...) only aimed at Mirth; tho he has partly ^^de it subse^vient to
his chief Design. He kn^w ^ha^ the learned and the ^gnorant, by different
motives, delight in Fables, and that the love of Mirth being universal, the
only way to cause his sentiments to be most known and followed, was to give
them a merry Dress. The Counsel of Trent begun to ^it in 1545 and then our
Author begun to write. The Restoration of Learning had made the most knowing
among the Clergy, and the Layety desire that Primitive Christianity might also
be restored. Accordingly I find that when Rabelais was at Rome in 1536, the
Cardinal of Trent, Lettres de Rabelais a l' Evesque de Maillezais.
who was a German came thither to press the Pope to a Council, and in our
Author's presence said to Cardinal Du Bellay that the Pope refused to grant a
Council, but that he would repent it, for the Christian Princes would take away
what they had given to the Church. The universal Cry was for the Restitution of
the C^p to the Layety, and of Marriage, to the Clergy; against Indulgences,
Pardons etc. This caused Rabelais to put out these Pithagorical Symhols as he
calls them: That while some of the great ones privately and the Protestants
publicly, were endeavoring a thorough-Reformation, he might insinuate a
Contempt of the Church of Rome's Fopperies ch^efly in the Clergy of France, and
those that were at the Council of Trent, as also in such of the Layety as had
wit enough to find out his meaning. And this is what he means, in the Prologue
to his 3. Book, by the comical Account which he gives of Diogenes, who seeing
the Inhabitants of Corinth all very busy in their preparations for the War, and
himself not invited to help them, roul'd and tossed about his Tub, that he
might not be said to be Idle. For, says Rabelais, I held it not a little
disgraceful to be only an Idle Spectator of so many valorous eloquent and
warlike Persons who in the View and Sight of all Europe, act this Notable
Interlude or Tragicomedy. By the word, Eloquent, we may easily Judge that this
notable Interlude is the Council then sitting. He knew that in 1534, Calvin
having dedicated his Institution to Francis the I. the Bigots about him
cunningly persuaded that King not to read that excellent Work nor its
incomparable Preface; tho he was otherwise not very religious, having made a
League with the Turks, and joined his Fleet to that of Barbarossa, as also
charged his Children in 1535 on pain of incurring his Curse to revenge his
wrongs on Charles the V. whom he used to call Satan's eldest Son. So, Memoires
de Castelnau.
partly that his Book might not have the same fate, he made it mysterious; and
indeed that King had it read to him inspight of those who told him it was
heretical. But he was so imbroyl'd in Wars that perhaps he dared not favor the
Reformed, for fear of being served by the Pope like the King of Navarre.
However even his Mother Loyse de Savoye, what Divotion soever she showed to
Popish Fopperies, seems to have had but little Respect for them. For, in her
Journal writ with her own hand and kept still in the Chambredes Comptes at
Paris are found these words concerning St. Francis de Paul; Friar Francois de
Paul fu^parmoy canonise; a tout le, moins jenpayay la Tax; that is,
Fryar-John de Paul was sainted by me; at least I paid the Fees For making him
a Saint. Yet our Author wrote not so darkly but that the Ingenious of that Age
could know his meaning, for the very antidoted Conundrums which are the 2.
Chapter, of his first Book, show that he treated of Religion, as he had said in
the Prologue before it. The first Stanza may perhaps be only designed to make
the rest pass for a Banter; but the second mentions the Pope and Calvin
plainly; the first, whose Slipper it is more meritorious to kiss than to gain
Pardons; and the other, from the depth issued were they fish for Roaches, that
is, the Lake at Geneva, who said, Sirs, for God's sake let us forbear doing
this; in the French, Qui dit Messieurs pour Dieu nous en gardons. I have not
the leisure to examine now the other Stanzaes, though I can explain some of
them. But to show that Rabelais was understood when he writ, we need but read
the Verses printed in the French before his second Book; they are by Hugues
Salel, a Man of great Wit and Learning, who, as I have said, had translated
Homer's Iliads: In them he encourages the Author to write on, and tells him,
that under a pleasing Foundation he had so well described useful Matters, that
if he was not rewarded here below, he should be rewarded in Heaven.

Gross Superstition proceeds from Ignorance; so next to the First he exposes
the Latter; but I need not come to particulars: I may say that he has satirised
all sorts of Vice, and consequently all sorts of Men; we find them all
promiscuously on his Scene, as in Bay's grand Dance in the Rehearsal, Kings,
Cardinals, Ladies, Aldermen, Soldiers, etc.

He saw that Vice was not to be conquered in a Declamatory War, and that the
angry railing Lectures of some well-meaning Men, were seldom as effectual to
make it give Ground, as the gay yet pointed Ralleries of those who seem
unconcerned; the latter convincing us effectually, while the others with their
passionate Invectives persuade ^s of nothing but that they are too angry to
direct others.

This gay way of moralizing has also nothing of the dry mortifying method of
those Philosophers who, striving to demonstrate their Principles by Causes and
a long Series of Arguments, only rack the mind; but its Art and delicacy is not
perceived by every Reader: Consequently many People will not easily find out
the inward Beauties of the Works of Rabelais; But he did not intend that every
one should perceive them; tho every one may be extremely diverted by the
outward and obvious Wit and Humor. We may say of those hidden graces, what a
Learned Man says of those in Horace's Satires. Heinsius de Satyra Horatiana.
Quae cum animae plebeiae percurrunt, nec venustatem vident, nec necessitatem
argumenti intelligunt. Eruditi, praeter incredibilem leporem, ad principium quo
nititur recurrunt. The figure Oximorum by which things at first appear foolish,
tho they are sharp and witty, is such a Master pice in Rhetoric as can be
perceived by none but the Skillfull. Painting has its Grotesque and bold
Touches which seem irregular to the Vulgar, only pleased with their odness;
while Masters, through the antic Features and rough Strokes, discover an exact
Proportion, a Softness and a Boldness together, which charm them to an
unspeakable degree. So in artful Jests and Ironies, in that lusus animi and
judicious extravagance, what seems mean and absurd is most in sight and strikes
the Vulgar; but better Judgments under that course outside discover exquisite
Wit, just and sublime Thoughts, vast Learning, and the most profound Reasonings
of Philosophy. Our Author's first Prologue has lead me to this Observation, by
that which he makes concerning Socrates. Sorbiere, who was a Man not much given
to praise the Living, Sorberiana.
and much less the Dead, applys this to Rabelais, owning that his Satire is the
most learned and universal that ever was writ; and that it also so powerfully
inclines our Minds to Mirth, that almost all those whom he had known, that had
been much conversant with it, had gained by it is means a Method of thinking
agreably on the most profound and melancholic Matters. Thus it teaches us to
bear Adversities gallantly, and to make them our diversion rather than attack
them directly, and with a Concern which they are not worthy to cause. Ridiculum
acri before ac melius magnas plerumque secat res, says Horace.

It Is true, that those whose Temper enclines them to a Stoical Severity, will
not have the same taste; and indeed, rallying seldom or never become them; but
those who would benefit themselves by the perusal of Rabelais, need not imitate
his Buffoonry, and it is enough if it inwardly move us, and spread there such
Seeds of Joy as will produce on all sorts of Subjects an infinite number* of
pleasant Reflections. In those places that are most Dangerous, a judicious
Reader will curb his Thoughts and Desires, considering that the way is
slippery, and thus will easily be safe, with wise Refections, moderating his
Affections. It Is even better to drink some too strong Wines, tempering them
with Water, which makes them but the more Pleasant, then to confine our selves
to flat and insipid Liquors, which neither affect the Palate, nor cheer us
within. The Roman Ladies used to view the Wrastlers naked in the Cirque, and
one of them discreetly said, that a vertuos Woman was not more scandalized at
their Sight, then at that of a Statue, of which great numbers were naked in all
Places.

Thus the sight of those Females at Sparta who danced naked, being only covered
with the public honesty, made no ill Impression on the Beholders. We may pass
over with as much ease, the impurities of our Historian, as we forgive to
excellent Painters nudities, which they too faithfully represent; and we may
only admire and fix our Eyes on the other parts of the Piece, Omnia Sana Sanis.
The Wise can benefit themselves even by the worst of Books, like those Ducks of
Pontus, Lib. 17. Cap. 16.
to whom, as Aulus Gellius says, Poisons are ^ather wholesome than hurtful, or
those Bees of Pliny, that being gifted by Nature with the Virtue of the Psylli,
could usefully feed on the juice and substance of the most venomous Weeds. Lib.
21. Cap. 13.
The Learned Jesuit, who, in favor of his Friend Balsac, writ a Treatise
against Burlesque, cannot forbear granting as much; F. Vavassor. de Ludicra
Dictione.
since he says, Scriptores nostri quovis e genere librorum, etiam non
optimorum, aucupantur vtilitatem aliquam, and omnes undique stosculos delibant;
quo fere pacto princeps olim Poetarum legere se gemmas ex Enniano stercore
dicebat.

The Age in which our Author wrote, was not so reserved in Words as this, and
perhaps he has not so much followed his own Genius in making use of gross, or
loose expressions as he has endeavored to accommodate his way of Writing to
the Humor of the People, not excepting a part of the Clergy of those Times.
Now we ought not to blame those Authors who wrote in former Ages, for differing
from us in several Things; since they followed Customs and Manners which were
then generally received, though now they seem to us improper or unjust. To
discover all the Beauties in their Works, we must a while lay aside the
Thoughts of our Practice, if it contradicts theirs; otherwise, all Books will
be very short-lived; and the best Writers, being disheartened with the Thoughts
of the speedy Oblivion or contempt of their Works, will no longer strive to
deserve an immortal Fame, which fantastic Posterity would deny them.

Some would altogether forbid the perusal of our Author: Du Verdier, in his
Biblioteque, which gives an account of all those that had writ in French, till
about the Year 1585, has inserted a large invective made against Rabelais, by
an Author whom I have discovered to be Schoock; In fab. Hamel. p. 31.
These are his Words, Vtinam vel apud illos sit Rabelesus cum suo
Pantagruelismo, ut scurrilis hominis scurrili voce abutar. Certe, si quid
callet bonae artis, cogatur in eas tandem se exercere alioqui tam impius homo
quam public suis nefariis libellis p^stilens, etc. Neque semel deploravi
hominis sortem, qui in tanta literarum luce tam densis sese vi^icrum tenebris
immergit. Others, principally of the Papist Clergy, have not been more kind to
him, of which he himself, complains in some places of his Book, much like an
Author whom he accuses of filching, in his 1st. Prologue. It Is Angelus
Politian, a famous Latin Poet who lived a little before him, and was also a
Priest and a Prebend; he was a great admirer of Plautus, whose perusal the
Florentine Preachers would not allow in the Universities. So partly on that
account, he expresses himself in these Terms. Epist. Lib. 7.

Sed qui nos damnant, histirones sunt maximi,
Nam Curios simulant, vivunt Bacchanalia.
Hi sunt praecipue quidam clamosi, leves,
Cucullati, lignipedes cincti funibus,
Superciliosum, incurvicervicum pecus;
Qui, quod ab aliis and ^abitu and victu dissentiunt,
Tristique vultu vendunt sanctimonias,
Censuram sibi quandam, and Tyrannidem occupant,
Pavidamque plebem territant minaciis.
In which Verses by the way, he has made use of a word, which an ancient
Critic, Cum (...) mirati sumus, incurvicervicum vix a risu defendimus.
Quintilian.
also an admirer of Plautus, mentions as Burlesque. But to show that our
Author's way of Writing, is not of the kind of those which ancient
Philososophers have condemned, we need but consider that there is at least as
much boldness and impurity in that very Plautus, and the ancient Greek Comedy.
Yet Cicero, whom all must grant to be a great Judge of good Writing and
Morality, speaking of the merry o^ ridiculing way of writing which was to be
condemned, opposes to it that of Plautus, the ancient Comedy, and the Books of
the Disciples of Socrates. These are his Words, Duplex omnino est jocandi
genus: Vnum, ^^berale, petulans, flagitiosum, obscaenum: Alterum, elegans,
urbanum, ingeniosum, facetum. Quo genere non modo Plautus noster and Atticorum
antiqua comoedia, sed etiam Philosophorum Socraticorum libri referti sunt.

After all, as I could wish that some Expressions, which I will not only call
too bold and too free, but even immodest and Profane; had not been in this
Book, I would not have those Persons to read it, whose Lives are so well
regulated, that they would not employ a moment, of which they might not give an
account without Blushing; nor those whose Minds not being ripened by Years and
Study, are most susceptible of dangerous Impressions. Doubtless, they may do
much better, than to read this Book.

Some therefore will think that either it was not to be Translated, or ought to
have been translated otherwise; and that as, in the most handsome Faces, there
is always some Line which we could wish were not there; so if those things
which here may shock some persons had been omitted or softened, it would more
justly, and more generally have pleased; I suppose that the Translator would
have done so, had he not been afraid to have taken out some Material Thing hid
under the Veil of some unhappy Expression, instead of taking away a bare Trifle.

But as what may be blameable in this Book, bears no proportion with the almost
infinite number of admirable and useful Things, which are to be found in it,
the Ingenious ought not to be deprived of it. Lucian's works, notwithstanding a
Thousand Passages in them, against Modesty and Religion, have been handed down
to us by the Primitive Christians; which they would not have done, had they not
been sensible that they could do much more good than harm.

The Art of Writing has caused much Mischief, which made the Ancients say, that
its Inventor had sown Serpent's Teeth; yet who would be without the use of
Letters? We may as well cut out our Tongue, that World of Wickedness, as it is
called in Scripture* Weak Minds may turn good things to the worst use; and even
sacred Writings have produced ill Effects: Readers are often more blameable
than Authors, and should like Bees gather Honey out of Poetical Flowers,
instead of sucking the Poison like Spiders. The cause of the ill Actions of
most Men is not in Books, but in the wicked Disposition of their Hearts: And
the soft Melancholy with which the most chaste Romances often cloud the Mind,
thus making way for violent Passions, is much more to be feared than a work of
this Nature.

As long as those and some of our Plays are in the Hands of the weaker Sex;
that Catullus, Ovid, Iuvenal and Martial are learned by Heart in Schools by
Men-Children, and a thousand other Books more dangerous prostituted to the
ignorant Vulgar; Rabelais's Works, in which there is more Morality as well as
more Wit and Learning, than in most that are read, may be allowed a place among
the Best. Verbis offendi morbi aut imbecillitatis argumentum est, says Cicero:
And we may say for our Author, like Ausonius, Cui hic Ludus noster non placet
ne legerit; aut cum legerit obliviscatur: Aut non oblitus ignoscat. A learned
and pious English Man, who was a Bishop in France in the old Times, Joan.
Saresberiensis, in Policratico. de. Nugis Curial.
and wrote almost as freely as Rabelais, says, Multitudinis imperitae non
formido judicia, meis tamen rogo parcant opusculis -- In quibus fuit propos^ti
semper a nugis ad bona transire seria. Solomon bids us not speak in the Ears of
a Fool, for he will despise the wisdom of our words: A^ our Author speaks to
none of those, his Book may be as useful as it is diverting; provided, as I
have said, that a Reader curb his Thoughts in some few Passages; which a Man of
Sense will easily do, and I recommend it to no others.

PETER MOTTEUX.

At the end of the late French Edi^ions of Rabelais, without the least reason,
the Dipsodes were said to be Lorains; Fryar-Ihon was said to be Cardinal de
Lorraine; Gargantua was said to be Francis I. Grangousier was said to be Lo^is
XII. Great Mare of Gargantua, Madam de Estampes. Hertrippa, a great Magician*
Hippothadeus, the King's Confessor. Learn Bresse. Loupgarou, Amiens.
Pantagruel, Henry II. Sybil of Panzoust, a Court Lady. Panurge, Cardinal de
Amboise. Pichrocole, Piedmont. Salmygondin, Benefices. Theleme, Protocole of
the Council of Trent. Xenomanes, the Chancellor.

These are all the Names said to belong to these three Books, and unjustly
called a Key to them.

ERRATA In the Life and Preface.
PAge. 4. l. 32 For near, read to. Page. 22. l. 7. For laeus, read laesus,
Page. 38. l. 12. For False read Salse. Page. 56 (which should be 57) Line 17.
And our World with thy presence grace again read, And with thy presence grace
our World again.

A Familiar Epistle To Mr. Baldwin On his publishing the Translation OF
RABELAIS.
What Is here? Plain-dealing Rabelais come abroad,
Spruc'd up with Cost, and in the newest Mode!
Dick* art thou mad? have no Consideration!
Still playing 'th' honest Wight in thy Vocation,
And Printing dangerous Truths to serve the Nation.
The Times need such a Satyrist, you will Say,
As does impartially about him lay,
And Rablais spares no Knave that comes in's Way.
Dick, thou meanst well, and well thy Author meant;
He lash't the former Age -- but what is the Event?
Has Reformation of one Vice ensued?
No! -- Whipping makes old Lechers but more lewd.
Have public Cheats or private since been found
To lose, or Truth to get an Inch of Ground?
Thy Rabelais, Quixot's hum'rous Author too,
Have done what ridiculing Wit could do;
Have Vanity exposed in true Grotesque,
But might as well have preached as writ Burlesque.
Quevedo to the former Pair admit
To make a great Triumvirate of Wit:
One Convert show by what all Three have writ.
Is banished Justice since to Earth arrived?
Religion or Morality revived?
Havoc in Field encroaching Tyrants make,
With Drum and Trumpet keep the World awake.
Repair to the Hall, and There the clamorous Bar
Presents you with another Scene of War.
As Conjured up by some infernal Charm,
Attorneys, Petti-foggers, Pleaders swarm.
A Block-head must be fee'd, and waited on,
For that Advice by which you are Undone.
While Plaintiff and Defendant madly strive,
Both Parties starve to make the Locusts thrive.
They who belong to the Lott'ry of the Law
Are only safe, while Blanks the Clients draw.
Or, Tell me, is our Tribe of Quacks decreased?
Or less the Catalogue of the Deceased!
Are Bullets more destructive than the Pill?
Therefore, Add Doctor to the Weekly-Bill.
Has Biggottry to make a Man turn Sot,
Or Priestcraft how to menage Fools forgot?
Or is not, when a Pastor shifts his Place,
A fatter Benefice the Call of Grace?
Have ye never seen a Drone possess at ease
What would provide for Ten Industrious Bees?
The Plodding Citt grows Rich: -- his graceless Son
Turns Wit and Beau, drinks, whores, and is is undone.
What Rank or Sex (for, Dick, thou love to speak
The best of Matters) their old Measures break?
How very Few quit their accustomed Round,
That first does others, then Themselves confound?
Towns, Countries are but Copies of each other,
One half's Impertinence, and what is the other:
But Speech and Mode's refined -- Ay, to our Cost!
Breeding's improved, Integrity is lost.
Your humble Servant Sir -- The Courtiers Note,
That Is in plain English -- Sir, I Will cut your Throat.
Believe me Sir, your Friend or y' are unjust:
An Ass you are if you believe or trust.
He calls you back -- Depend upon it as done;
His next Words are -- The Credulous Coxcomb's gone.
Say, is the very Sphere of Learning free?
Still old Abuses reign, and still we see
Science made Cant, and Nonsense Mystery.
Blind Form and Custom in the Van appear
Of every Order, Interest in the Rear.
Pimps, Pandars, Stallions, Buffoons, Parasites,
Setters, Suborners, Sharpers, Pillory-Knights,
Cheats, Cullies, Bravoes, Cowards, Hypocrites;
This Spawn, with more that of their Rank you will find,
Make half the Gallamaufry of Mankind.
Unjust or vain Desires, our Minds employ;
But senseless Cares the Miser's Rest destroy,
Who fears to lose what he can never enjoy.
Why starv'st thou, Wretch? -- I Am Thrif^y and would save --
For whom? For those will Piss upon the Grave.
Make but your Will, fall sick and speechless lie,
You Will see their kind Returns before you di^
Your Heirs, Executors, and Legatees
Will all disperse, what you bequeathed to seize;
Not one to raise you, fainting in your Bed,
Or lift the cordial Julep to your Head.
The Fool and Wit, when once deprived of Breath,
Have equal Sense, and both the Jest of Death.
What difference, when into Earth's Clutches got,
Between the Slothful and the Busy Sot?
Betwixt Ambition, Fortunate or Crossed,
To have Gained Never, or for Ever Lost?
What e're on Earth engages our Esteem,
Our Fear, or Anger, All Is a Sick-Man's Dream.
The World's a Farce, which does with Youth begin,
Most Men have Parts in the Fantastic Scene,
A Natural Scaramouch or Harleq^u in.
The Number of Spectators are but Few,
Who unconcerned the frantic Medley View.
Yet -- As by witty Rabelais it is Expressed,
Life's Idle Droll's an entertaining Jest.
N. Tate.

TO The Excellent Translator OF RABELAIS.
AS when at first the jarring Seeds began
TO unite, and kindly ripen into Man,
Just was the Work, and goodly the Design,
Each Feature graceful, and each part Divine;
But still the beauteous Piece was incomplete,
Nor had the Sense engaged it for its Sea^:
There wanted something to command the whole,
Inform the Mass, and warm it with a Soul;
Till Heavenly Fire, descending from Above,
Breathed Life throughout, and made its Organs move:
Thence every Nerve performed the Task enjoined,
And Man towr'd upward with his Face, and governed with his Mind:
So fared it with our English Rabelais, when
His injured Honors summoned forth thy Pen.
Pensive and sad, the dark'ned Genius lay,
Nor could one pointed thought through British Fogs convey.
Former Translators (good Men!) could not bear
That any Foe such pointed Teeth should wear;
With their own Wit they softened his, and thence
The nervous Satyr shrunk to feeble Sense.
Our Scriblers thus paid France with equal Wrong,
And made unjust Reprisals on her Tongue.
Whilst she destroyed her Neighbors with her Swords,
They made as great a Slaughter on her Words.
But now each Page with native Luster shines,
And Gallic Thoughts adorn the British Lines.
Thou giv'st an Author, and renew'st his Flame,
Translating so as to appear the same.
The same the vigorous Heat, and sprightly Fire,
The same the Sting, and every Grace entire.
That even his blustering Gargantua.
Hero cannot disown
The Justice done our Language and his own.
Thou make our rugged Tongue to Rules submit
Dissolving inharmonious Words to Wit.
So just and smooth each burly Word is spun,
Rabelais would own his nicest Touch outdone.
So when with powerful Wan the Prophet struck
The stubborn Mount, and wounded through the Rock,
The barren Flint, dissolving, opened wide
Its vanquished Breast, and melted to a Tide.
And the rough Summit (which but just before
Impending Ruin and Destruction bore)
Gave way, while from its Womb the Water burst,
And stopped loud Israel's Clamours, and appeased their Thirst.
Oct. the 2 d. 1693. WILLIAM PITTIS, Fellow of New College in Oxon

ON The Incomparable WORKS OF THE LEARNED Dr. RABELAIS^
THis Rabelais (as loud Fame does bellow)
Was once a very learned Fellow.
Fellow! No; Doctor I should call him;
For, sure I cannot enough extol him.
He writ a swinging Book of Physic,
To cure Folks of Catarrh and Phthisic;
Of Stone, Gouts, Dropsies and of Agues,
And other Woes which daily plague us.
But soon as ever he understood
That writing Sense would do no good,
He strove to scribble seeming Nonsense,
TO oblige the People in their own Sense:
Changing his method of Advising,
And fell to Metagrobolifing.
Hey* What a Pox is That? (youll say)
Why, look for it in your Scapula!
And if you do not find it There;
Why -- what a Devil do I care?
To Garagantua make Apology,
See if he will show you th'Etymology!
How! Garagantua! That Is such Bombast,
(Cries one) as never Brain yet compast.
Such Brains (it may be, Child!) as thine,
That reach not to his great design.
It Is Aist'ry and instructive Satyr;
But thou know nothing of the matter.
Read Polexander and Grand Cyrus
(Whose florid Fooleries quite tire us)
They Are fit for thee: Whose Gust effeminate
Nothing can please, but Mead or Lemonade.
Those Tales like Truths such Fops esteem;
And Truth like this a Lydo's seem.
Dom Quixot with his Sanco cannot weigh
The ponderous Worth of Garagantua.
I speak to you of every Rank here;
The gainful Bankrupt, griping Banquier,
(The selfish Statesman, flattering Courtier,
(Who make all honest Men such sport here)
The honest Lawyer, pious Parson,
(Of which I fear, you will find scarce one)
The Whore of Honor, fluttering Gallant,
The dastard Soldier, Bully valiant,
The silent Bishop, pampered Cardinal,
(Who, when he is Pope (some say) can pardon all)
The Judge, the Hangman, Lord and Peasant*
(All I can think upon at present)
Ye lofty and ye peerless Rabble*
Y' are all the Moral of his Fable.
In one piece all these he has nicked here.
Pray don't find fault then with your Picture!
For, being thus joined, each of's may const're,
We make a very pretty Monster.
ALEX. OLDIS.

ON THE WORKS OF RABELAIS TRANSLATED.
HArd are their Tasks and hasardous their Lots,
Who in Translation drudge for envious Sots;
That even to thought could make but faint pretense,
Nor could converse, unless at their Expense.
Yet strait the easy Benefit forget,
Condemn their Labors while they steal their Wit.
Fame's Lott'ry none would play at were they wise;
The Stake's too weighty and too rare a Prize.
All other Trades some certain aim pursue,
And in a surer Choice their Wisdom show.
The wiser Merchant with expected gain
Sates his Ambition, and rewards his Pain:
Jewels set off his Luxury; and Gold,
The Seed of Discord, since its Age of old,
Whose all commanding Power can Princes sway,
Is but his Servant, does his Will obey.
Not so, the Men who useful Arts convey,
And foreign Sense to their own World display.
They too are Merchants (though with different Fate)
For they import the Wit which they translate.
Poor their reward; yet is it not secure,
No Laws the Learned's Property immure.
Touch but the other, you confusion breed,
And Magna Charta through their Wounds will bleed;
Their Injuries at once whole Nations rouse,
And Princes Swords their Quarrel^ must espouse.
Only the Learned to all exposed a Prey,
Steer through more dangerous Seas their doub^ful way.
Each envious Breath does their smooth Course molest,
And frequent Piracies their Coasts infest.
Some few have safe the Rocks of Censure past,
And in the Road of Fame their Anchors cast.
The ancient Treasures these have made our own;
Thus Aesop is familiar with the Town:
Inspired with English by a learned Penoil,
His moral Beasts instruct our brutish Men.
Thus while our Wits do in his Cause engage,
Iuvenal's pointed Satyrs lash our Age.
Oh might but Horace on our Nation smile,
And laugh its Follies from our happy Isle:
Would the same Pens but vindicate his Fame,
Restore his Spi^its and revive his Flame;
Not let him languish in unjust Despair,
Maimed in his Thoughts, and sp'd of all his Air;
Nor walk like discontented Ghosts the Town
Shunned by his Friends, and to himself scarce known.
To our raw Youth his Wit might be displayed,
And (...) Mother Tongue his Sense conveyed.
(...) no longer would admire the Chime,
And Fops find something more than empty Rhyme.
Lucian expects to wear the English Dress,
And Rab'lais waits the Leisure of the Press.
Our Age, with Joy, may in this Pair behold
The modern Wit corrival to the Old.
Men's Follies both in a true Light display
With equal Wit, though a far different Way.
Singly the Greek of Numbers not afraid,
Does (like bold Knights) with open Force invade.
He pulls the snarling Cynic from his Herd,
And strings his Fiddle-stick with his grave Beard.
Then to his Jig a medley Crowd advance,
Kings, Tyrants, Conqu'rors lead the antic Dance.
But in warm Bosoms Rab'lais, fondly bred,
Like a tame Snake, does unseen Venom shed;
His wanton Twinings yet such Pleasure bring
They hug the Viper, though they feel his Sting.
Bitten by this Tarantula they lie
In tickling Pain, and even laughing die.
So feeble Dotards scourge the sluggish Part
For Provocation, and forgive the Art
That whets their Letchery, although (...) smart.
By this one Author, France, you are honored more
Than all thy envied Wealth, and ravished Store;
His Memory no Time shall ever blot,
That shall be fresh, when all thy Conquests are forgot.
Thus Spain does still in her Cervantes shine,
Nor can her Indies boast so rich a Mine.
On this Translation Rab'lais shall look down,
Pleased with his Wit in all its Graces shown.
He like a Champion in the Front shall stand,
While injured Authors all with Pen in Hand*
Defy the snarling Critics of this Land.
No longer shall lean Poet tamely sit,
And hear fat Fools profane his darling Wit;
His Muse shall rouse, and in poetic Rage,
Drive Fops and foppish Critics off the Stage.
I. DRAKE

ON The most diverting WORKS OF THE LEARNED Dr. RABELAIS^
WHile some in wise Men's Garbs are mad,
Or gravely dull, that is near as bad;
Rabelais, a Foe to melancholy,
Is Wisdom in the Garb of Folly.
Though your grave Brutes can never find
The Fruit within the prickly Rind.
But if none else for Wise must pass,
Sure, nothing's wiser than an Ass.
As dull by Nature or Disaster,
When Rhimers laugh, it is like their Master,
And that is not often! For, we hear,
Apollo laughs but once a Year:
Scarce can he have so often occasion,
So woeful is each Wight's Oblation:
Whence, sympathising with their Rhimes,
They make us duller than the Times.
But who ever reads our Doctor's Chronicle
Must laugh, though not in sense Ironical.
Who always reads it, will appear
To laugh indeed but once a year;
But that is as once a day feeds Glutton,
From Morn to Night, till out-flies Button.
As in kind House, by Mob called Bawdy,
Old Sinner crawls to Punk that is gaudy,
Whom charitable fat old Woman
Has taught to be unkind to no Man;
He Would play, but cannot, till, by Flogging;
Roused Limberham keeps briskly jogging.
Jirk'd by his Hackney beyond Reason,
Yet pleased the more, the more she lays on:
So I who, plied with Rhyme each hour,
Have Will to laugh, but scarce have Power,
Even I, must laugh when I read Rabelais,
More pleased than Cull, on whom his Drab lays.
Pleased even to pain, as well as he,
Yet fear lest others laugh at me.
This Simile, you will cry, 's not good,
Nor goes on all Four as it should.
But why on all Four should it go,
While I its Dad must plod on two?
What though in the midst of Deed of Pravity,
Like new sworn May'r Cull keeps his Gravity?
If he laughs not at Face that is upper,
Yet Mirth's at the other down the Crupper;
And to please either with a jirk,
A dose of Rabelais does the work.
While some Collegiate Farrier's Skill in
Curing lies in methodic Killing,
And indeed rids Men of all Evil,
If it is not one to go to the Devil,
You pay not only for his Bill,
(Your Pass your Recipe into Hell)
But must even pay for the damned Poison,
Which for his Sport your Corpse he tries on.
Well may the Wretches be called Patients,
Who must endure their Operations!
But Rabelais, learned in Kitchen Physic,
Never lets those who consult him be sick:
Choice Bills of Fare his only Bills,
His Potions Wine, and Mirth his Pills;
Playsters of warm Guts, gentle Frictions,
His iatraliptical Prescriptions,
Reader
Would thou have all Quacks to forsake thee,
And make 'em lean, as they would make thee?
Read Rabelais; but, lest Laughing hurt thee,
First leak a while, then tightly girt thee;
Else, if thou burst not, sure it i^,
Thou will at least thy self bepiss.
PETER MOTTEUX

A LIST OF Some of the Names mentioned in the First, Second and Third Books of
Rabelais, explained in the Preface.
THe Antidoted Conundrums,
Grangousier, Gargamelle, Gargantua, Badebec, Pantagruel, Panurge, Friar John
of the Funnels. Vtopia, Beusse, Verron, Bibarois, Pichrocole, Learn Cake-Bakers
of Learn, The Cakes, Truands of Learn, Philip Marais, Viceroy of Popeligosse,
Theodorus, the Physician for the Brain, White and Blew, Gargantua's Colors,
Epistemon, Anticyrian Hellebore. Vine of Se^ille, Ianotus de Bragmardo,
Gargantua's Mare, Master Beggar of St. Anthony, Vlric Gallet, Giants,
Gargantua's Sheherds, The Medlars The Thirstiness of Gargantua, and the Drought
at Pantagruel's Birth, The Limosin Scholar, The Catalogue of the Books in St.
Victors Library at Paris, The Cause between Kiss-Breech and Suck Fizzle.
Kiss-Breech, Suck-Fizzle, Thaumast the English Scholar, The Dypsodes, The City
of the Amaurotes The Amaurotes, Loup garou The Giants Armed with Freestone
King Anarchus made to Cry green Sawse in a Canvas Iacket, The Almyrods
Pantagruel covering an Army with his Tongue, The sickness of Pantagruel The
Colony of Vtopians sent into Dypsodi^, Salmigondin Sybill of Panzoust
Raminagrobis Enguerrant The Oxygian Islands Sammal^ Her-Trippa Hippo-thadeus
Rondibilis Trouillogan Triboulet Judge Bridlegoose Herb Pantagruelion,
A Satire on the Pope, Emperor, etc.
John d' Albret King of Navarre. Catharine de Foix, Q. of Navarre. Henry d'
Albret King of Navarre. Margaret de Valois his Queen. Anthony de Bourbon.
Montluc Bp. of Valence. Cardinal Castillon, also Martin Luther. Navarre.
Albret. Bearn. Vivarez. King of Spain. Spain. The Popish Priests. Bread in
Communion. The Spanish Army. Philip, Son to the Marshall of Navar. Berthaud, a
Protestant Divine. Innocence, Piety, Bp. of Maillezais Colors. Ruffy, Bp. of
Oleron. The Holy Scripture. Cup in the Eucharist. Cenalis Bp. of Avranches.
Also a head of a College. A Lady. The Provincial Fath. of that Order. Constable
of Navar: Also Vlric Zuinglius. Princes. Lutheran Preachers. The Reformers. The
Cry for the Restitution of the Wine in the Eucharist. Helisaine, a pedantic
Au^hor. A Satire on some Books in that Library, now one of the best in France.
Trial between the Mother of Fran. I. and Constable. Bourbon. Poyet, Chancellor.
Monthelon Ld. Keeper Sr. Thomas Moor and Hieronimus Cardan. Netherlanders.
Terouenne, Picardy. The Town of Liliers. Castles near Liliers, St. Omer etc.
Boors tha^ Sheltered themselves there; Bapaume. A. of Bourbon obtaining Cloths
for his Army. His Disgust. His Vassals in Picardy settled in the Low Countries.
Montluc's Abbey. St. Therese a Nun Virgo Veneta. Cretin an Old Poet;
Monstrelet, Historiogr^pher. Iersey, Gernsey, etc. St. Malo. Henry Corn.
Agrippa. Philip Melancthon, Rondeletus a Physician. Petrus Ramus. A Jester thus
named. Chancellor Poyet. Hemp.
THE AUTHOR'S PROLOGUE TO THE FIRST BOOK.
MOST Noble and Illustrious Drinkers, and you thrice precious Pockified blades;
(for to you, and none else do I dedicate my Writings) Alcibiades, in that
Dialogue of Plato's, which is entitled, The Banquet, whilst he was se^ting
forth the Praises of his Schoolmaster Socrates (without all question the Prince
of Philosophers) amongst other Discourses to that purpose said, that he
resembled the Silenes. Silenes of old were little Boxes, like those we now may
see in the Shops of Apothecaries, painted on the outside with wanton toyish
Figures, as Harpies, Satyrs, bridled Geese, horned Hares, sadled Ducks, flying
Goats, Thiller Hearts, and other such like counterfeited Pictures at pleasure,
to excite People unto Laughter, as Silenus himself, who was the Foster-father
of good Bacchus, was wont to do, but within those capricious Caskets were
carefully preserved and kept many rich and fine Drugs, such as Balm,
Ambergreece, Amamon, Musk, Civet, with several kinds of Precious Stones and
other things of great price. Just such another thing was Socrates, for to have
eyed his outside, and esteemed of him by his exterior appearance, you would not
have given the peel of an Onion for him, so deformed he was in Body, and
ridiculous in his Gesture: He had a sharp pointed Nose, with the look of a
Bull, and Countenance of a Fool: He was in his Carriage simple, boarish in his
Apparel, in Fortune poor, unhappy in his Wives, unfit for all Offices in the
Commonwealth, always laughing, tippling and merry carousing to every one, with
continual gibes and jeers, the better by those means to conceal his divine
Knowledge. Now opening this Box you would have found within it a heavenly and
inestimable Drug, a more then human Understanding, an admirable Virtue,
matchless Learning, invincible Courage, unimitable Sobriety, certain
Contentment of Mind, perfect Assurance and an incredible Misregard of all that
for which Men commonly do so much watch, run, fail, fight, travel, toil and
turmoil themselves.

Whereunto (in your Opinion) does this little flourish of a Preamble tend? For
so much as you, my good Disciples, and some other jolly Fools of Ease and
Leisure, reading the pleasant Titles of some Books of our Invention, as
Gargantua, Pantagruel, Whippot, the Dignity of Cod-peeces, Of Pease and Bacon,
with a Commentary, etc. are too ready to judge, that there is nothing in them
but Jests, Mockeries, lascivious Discourse and recreative Lies; because the
outside (which is the Title) is usually (without any farther enquiry)
entertained with Scoffing and Derision. But truly it is very unbeseeming to
make so slight account of the works of Men, seeing your selves avouch that it
is not the Habit makes the Monk; many being Monasterially accoutred, who
inwardly are nothing less than Monachal; and that there are of those that wear
Spanish Caps, who have but little of the Valor of Spaniards in them. Therefore
is it, that you must open the Book, and seriously consider of the matter
treated in it, then shall you find that it contains Things of far higher
value then the Box did promise; that is to say, that the Subject thereof is not
so foolish, as by the Title at the first sight it would appear to be.

And put the case that in the literal Sense you meet with Matters that are
light and ludicrous, and suitable enough to their Inscriptions; yet must not
you stop there, as at the Melody of the charming Sirens; but endeavor to
interpret that in a sublimer Sense, which possibly you might think was spoken
in the Iollity of Heart. Did you ever pick the Lock of a Cupboard to steal a
Bottle of Wine out of it? Tell me truly, and if you did call to mind the
Countenance which then you had? Or did you ever see a Dog with a Marrow-bone in
his Mouth (the Beast of all other, says Plato, lib. 2. de Republica, the most
Philosophical) if you have seen him, you might have remarked with what Caution
and Circumspectness he wards and watches it; with what care he keeps it; how
fervently he holds it; how prudently he gobbets it; with what affection he
breaks it; and with what diligence he sucks it. To what end all this? What
moves him to take all these pains? What are the hopes of his Labor? What does
he expect to reap thereby? Nothing but a little Marrow. True it is, that this
little is more savoury and delicious then the great quantities of other Sorts
of Meat, because the marrow ( as Galen testifies, 5. facult. not. and 11. de
usu partium) is a nourishment most perfectly elaboured by Nature.

In imitation of this Dog, it becomes you to be wise, to smell, feel and have
in estimation these fair goodly Books, stuffed with high Conceptions, that seem
easy and superficial, but are not so readily fathomed; and then like him you
must, by a sedulous Lecture, and frequent Meditation, break the Bone, and suck
out the substantial Marrow; that is, my allegorical Sense, or the things I to
my self propose to be signified by these Pythagorical Symbols; with assured
hope, that in so doing, you will at last attain to be both very wise and very
brave; for in the perusal of this Treatise, you shall find another kind of
Taste, and a Dictrin of a more profound and abstruse consideration, which will
disclose unto you the most glorious Doctrine, and dreadful Mysteries, as well in
what concerns your Religion, as Matters of the public State and Life
oeconomical.

Do you believe upon your Conscience, that Homer whilst he was a couching his
Iliads and Odysses, had any thought upon those Allegories, which Plutarch,
Heraclides, Ponticus, Fristatius, Cornutus squeezed out of him, and which
Politian filched again from them. If that is your Faith, you shall never be of
my Church; who hold that those Mysteries were as little dreamed of by Homer, as
the Gospel-Sacraments were by Ovid in his Metamorphosis; Fere lubin croq lardon.
though a certain Gulligut By Friar Lubin here is meant Tho. Walls, an
English- man, a Benedictin, who wrote such a Treatise.
Friar and true Bacon-eater, would have undertaken to prove it, if perhaps he
had met with as very Fools as himself (and as the Proverb says) a Lid worthy of
such a Kettle.

If you give any Credit to him, why are you not as kind to these jovial new
Chronicles of mine? Albeit when I did dictate them, I thought upon no more than
you, who possibly were drinking (the whilst) as I was: For in the composing of
this Masterly Book, I never lost nor bestowed any more, nor any other time than
what was appointed to serve me for taking of my bodily Refection, that is,
whilst I was eating and drinking.

And indeed, that is the fit^est and most proper hour, wherein to write these
high Matters and deep Sciences, as Homer knew very well, the Paragon of all
Philologues, and Ennius, the Father of the Latin Poets (as Horace calls him)
although a certain sneaking Iobernol objected, that his Verses savored more of
the Wine than of the Oil.

A certain Addle-headed Cocks-comb says the same of my Books; Turlupin.
but a turd for him. The fragrant Odor of the Wine; Oh how much more
sparkling, warming, charming, celestial and delicious it is, than of Oil! And I
will glory as much when it is said of me, that I have spent more on Wine than
Oil, as did Demosthenes, when it was told him, That his Expense on Oil was
greater than on Wine.

I truly held it for an honor to be called and reputed a good Fellow, a
pleasant Companion, or Merry Andrew; for under this name am I welcome in all
choice Companies of Pantagruelists. It was upbraided to Demosthenes by an
envious surly Knave, that his Orations did smell like the Sarpler, or Clout
that had stopped a musty Oil Vessel. Therefore I pray interpret you all my
Deeds and Sayings in the perfectest Sense; reverence the Cheese-like brain that
feeds you with all these jolly Maggots, and do what lies in you to keep me
always merry. Be frolic now my Lads, cheer up your Hearts, and joyfully read
the rest, with all the Ease of your Body and Comfort to your Reins. But
hearken, Ioltheads, O dickens take ye, off with your Bumper, I will do you
Reason, pull away, Supernaculum.

TO THE READER.
RAbelais had studied much, and looked about,
And found the World not worth one serious Thought.
So, Reader, howsoever pert thou art,
Take this along he lays it not to heart.
Beforehand with you here, he reads your doom,
And damns Mankind, past, present and to come.
Be Knaves or Fools, that either squint or drivel,
Blindfold he throws and gives you to the Devil.
He saw what beastly farce this World was grown,
That Sense and all Humanity were gone.
Reason from thee; that never was his care;
He would as soon chop Logic with a Bear.
But for the Laughing part, he bids thee strain;
Laugh only so to show thy self a Man.
CHAP. I. Of the Genealogy and Antiquity of GARGANTUA.
I Must refer you to the great Chronicle of Pantagruel for the knowledge of
that Genealogy and Antiquity of Race by which Gargantua is descended unto us:
In it you may understand more at large how the Giants were born in this World,
and how from them by a direct Line issued Gargantua the Father of Pantagruel.
And do not take it ill, if for this time I pass by it, although the Subject be
such, that the oftener it were rememb'red, the more it would please your
Worships: According to the Authority of Plato in Philebo and Gorgias; and of
Flaccus, who says, That there is some kind of Matters (such as these are
without doubt) which the frequentlier they be repeated, still prove the more
delectable.

Would to God every one had as certain knowledge of his Genealogy si^ce the
time of the Ark of Noah until this Age. I think many are at this Day Emperors,
Kings, Dukes, Princes and Popes on the Earth, whose Extraction is from some
Porters and Pardon-pedlars; as on the contrary many are now poor wandering
Beggars, wretched and miserable; who are descended of the Blood and Lineage of
great Kings and Emperors, occasioned (as I conceive it) by the Revolution of
Kingdoms and Empires; From the Assyrians to the Medes; From the Medes to the
Persians; From the Persians to the Macedonians; From the Macedonians to the
Romans; From the Romans to the Greeks; From the Greeks to the Franks.


And to give you some hints concerning my self, who speak unto you; I cannot
think but I am come of the Race of some rich King or Prince in former Times;
for never yet saw you any Man that had a greater desire to be a King, and to be
rich, than I have; and to the end only, that I may make good Cheer, do nothing,
nor care for any thing, and plentifully enrich my Friends, and all honest and
learned Men: But herein do I comfort my self, that in the other World I shall
be all this; yea, and greater too than at this present I dare wish: As for you,
with the same or a better conceit enjoy your selves in your distresses; and
drink fresh if you can come by it.

But returning to our Subject, I say, that by the especial care of Heaven, the
Antiquity and Genealogy of a Gargantua has been reserved for our use, more
full and perfect than any other except that of the Messiah, whereof I mean not
to speak; for it belongs not unto my Province; and the Devils (that is to say)
the false Accusers and Church-vermin will be upon my Jacket. This Genealogy was
found by John Andrew in a Meadow, which he had near the Pole-arch, under the
Olive Tree, as you go to Marsay. Where, as they were casting up some Ditches,
the diggers with their Mattocks struck against a great brazen Tomb,
unmeasurably along, for they could never find the end thereof, by reason that
it entered too far within the Sluices of Vienne. Opening this Tomb, in a certain
place thereof, sealed on the top with the mark of a Goblet, about which was
written in Hetrurian Letters HIC BIBITVR, they found nine Flaggons set in such
order as they use to rank their Kyles in Gascony; of which that which was
placed in the middle, had under it a big, greasy, great, gray, jolly, small,
moudy little Pamphlet, smelling stronger, but no better then Roses.

In that Book the said Genealogy was found written all at length, in a Chancery
hand, not in Paper, not in Parchment nor in wax, but in the Bark of an
Elm-tree; yet so worn with the long tract of time, that hardly could three
Letters together be there perfectly discerned.

I (though unworthy) was sent for thither, and with much help of those
Spectacles, whereby the art of reading dim Writings, and Letters that do not
clearly appear to the sight, is practiced, as Aristotle teaches it; did
translate the Book as you may see in your Pantagruelising, that is to say, in
drinking stiffly to your own hearts desire; and reading the dreadful and
horrific Acts of Pantagruel. At the end of the Book there was a little Treatise
entitled the Antidoted Conundrums. The Rats and Moths, or (that I may not lie)
other wicked Vermin, had nimbed off the beginning, the rest I have hereto
subjoyned, for the Reverence I bear to Antiquity.

CHAP. II. THE Antidoted Conundrums, Found in an ancient Monument.
....... The Cymbrians overcomer
Pass thr... the Air, to shun the dew of Summer;
... At his coming... great Tubs were filled,
.... Fresh Butter down in showers distilled.
..... His Grandam overwhelmed; so hey
Aloud he cried,............
His Whiskers all beray'd, to make him madder;
So banged the Pitcher, till they reared the Ladder.
To lick his slipper, some told was much better,
Than to gain Pardons and the merit greater.
In the mean time a crafty Chuff approaches,
From the depth issued, where they fish for Roches;
Who said, Good Sirs, some of them let us save,
The Eel is here, and in this hollow Cave
You Will find, if that our looks on it demur,
A great waste in the bottom of his Fur.
To read this Chapter when he did begin,
Nothing but a Calves Horns where found therein.
I feel (quoth he) the Mitre which does hold
My head so chill, it makes my brains take cold.
Being with the Perfume of a Turnup warmed,
To stay by chimney Hearths himself he armed,
Provided that a new Thill Horse they made
Of every Person of a hair-brained Head.
St. Patrick's Hole employed their wise Discourse;
And Elden Hole, with twenty thousand worse.
If any skill might bring them to a Skar,
So as no Cough reciprocate the Air.
Since every Man unseemly did it find,
To see them gaping thus at every wind.
For if perhaps they handsomely were closed
For pledges they to Men might be exposed.
In this arrest by Hercules the Raven
Was slain at his return from Lybia Haven.
Why am not I, said Minos, there invited,
Unless it be my self not once omitted.
And then it is their Mind I do no more
Of Frogs and Oysters send them any store.
In case they spare my Life and prove but civil,
I give their sale of Distaffs to the Devil.
To quell him comes Q. R. who limping frets
At the safe pass of trixy Crackarets,
The Boulter, the grand Cyclops Cousin, those
Did Massacre, whilst each one wiped his Nose.
Few Ingles in this fallow Ground are bred,
But on a Tanners Mill are winnowed.
Run thither all of you, the alarms sound clear,
You shall have more than you had the last Year.
Short while thereafter was the Bird of Jove
Resolved to speak, though dism^^ it should prove.
Yet was afraid when he saw them (...),
They should o'rthrow quite, (...), the Empire.
He rather chus'd the fire from Heaven to steal,
To Boats where were Red Herrings put to sale;
Then to be calm against those who strive to brave us,
And to the Massorets fond words enslave us.
All this at last concluded gallantly,
In spite of Ate and her Hern-like Thigh,
Who sitting saw Penthesilea taken,
In her old Age for a Cresse-selling Queen.
Each one cried out thou filthy Collier toad
Does it become thee to be found abroad?
Thou have the Roman Standard filtch'd away,
Which they in Rags of Parchment did display.
Juno was born, who under the Rainbow
Was a Bird-catching with her Duck below.
When her with such a grievous trick they plied,
That she had almost been transmogrify'd.
The bargain was that of that throat full she
Should of Proserpina have too Eggs free:
And if that she thereafter should be found,
She to a Haw-thorn hill should be fast bound.
Seven Months thereafter lacking twenty two,
He that of old did Carthage Town undo:
Did bravely midst them all himself advance,
Requiring of them his Inheritance.
Although they justly made up the division,
According to the Shooe-welt-laws decision;
By distributing store of Brews and Beef
To those poor Fellows that did Pen the Brief.
The Year will come, marked by a Turkish Bow,
Five Spindles yarnd* and three Pot-bottoms too,
Wherein of a discourteous King the Dock
Shall peppered be under an Hermits Frock.
Ah that for one she Hypocrite you must
Permit so many Acres to be lost.
Cease, cease, this Visard may become another,
Withdraw your selves unto the Serpents Brother.
The Day is past; so he that is shall Reign,
And his good Friends, all kindly entertain.
No rash or heady Prince shall domineer;
Peace and good Will must Triumph every where.
And all the Solas, promised long ago
To Heavens choice Guests, in mighty streams will flow.
And every Garron foundered never so long,
Shall with the Royal Palfreys praunce along.
And this continue shall from time to time,
Till Mars be fettred for an unknown Crime.
Then shall one come who others will surpass,
Delightful, pleasing, matchless, full of Grace.
Cheer up your Hearts, approach to this Repast,
All trusty Frinds of mine; for he is deceast,
Who would not for a World return again,
So highly shall time past be cried up then.
He who was made of Wax shall lodge each Member
Close by the hinges of a block of Timber.
We then no more shall Master, Master, whoot,
The Swagger who the alarm Bell holds out.
Could one seize on the Dagger which he bears,
Heads would be free from tingling in the Ears;
To baffle the whole Storehouse of Abuses;
And thus farewell Apollo and the Muses.
CHAP. III. How Gargantua was carried eleven Months in his Mothers Belly.
GRangousier was a Good Fellow in his time, and notable Jester; he loved to
drink neat, as much as any man that then was in the world, and would willingly
eat Saltmeat: to this intent he was ordinarily well furnished with Gammons of
Bacon, both of Westphalia, Mayence and Bayone; with store of dried Neats
Tongues, plenty of Links, Chitterlings and Puddings in their Season; together
with Salt Beef and Mustard, a good deal of Botargos, great provision of
Sauciges, not of Bolonia (for he feared the Lombard Boccone) but of Bigorre,
Longaulnay, Brene, and Rouargue. In the vigor of his age he married Gargamelle,
Daughter to the King of the Parpaillons, a Jolly Pug, and well mouthed Wench.
These two did often times do the two backed Beast together, joyfully rubbing
and frotting their Bacon against one another, insofar, that at last she became
great with Child of a fair Son, and went with him unto the eleventh month, for
so long, yea longer may a Woman carry her great Belly; especially when it is
some Masterpiece of nature, and a person predestined to the performance, in
his due time, of great Exploits, as Homer says, that the Child which Neptune
begot upon the Nymph, was born a whole year after the conception; that is, in
the twelfth month; for as Aulus Gellius says, Lib. 3. this long time was
suitable to the majesty of Neptune; that in it the child might receive his form
in perfection. For the like reason Jupiter made the Night, wherein he lay with
Alcmena, last forty eight hours; a shorter time not being sufficient for the
forging of Hercules, who was to rid the world of the Monsters, and the Tyrants.
My Masters, the ancient Pantagruelists have confirmed that which I say, and
withal declared it to be not only possible, but also maintained the Legitimacy
of the Infant, born of a woman in the eleventh month after the decease of her
Husband. Hippocrates lib. de Alimento. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 5. Plautus in
Cistellaria. Marcus Varro, in his Satyr inscribed the Testament, alleging the
Authority of Aristotle on this occasion Censorinus, lib. de die Natali. Arist.
lib. 7. cap. 3, and 4. de Natura Animalium. Gellius, lib. 3. cap. 16. Servius
in Ecl. upon that Verse of Virgil, Matri longa december, etc. and a thousand other
Fools, whose number has been increased by the Lawyers F. de suis and Legit. l.
intestato, S. fin. And in authen. de restitut. and ea. quae patit. in 11 mense.
Moreover upon these Grounds have they foisted in their Robidilardick Law,
Gallus F. de lib. and post and l. septimo F. de Stat. homin.
And some other Laws which at this time I dare not name; by means whereof the
widows may, without danger, play at the close buttock game, with might and
main, and as hard as they can for the space of the first two months after the
decease of their husbands. I pray you, my good lusty springal lads, if you find
any of these females, that are worth the pains of untying the Cod-piece-point,
get up, and bring them to me; for if they happen within the third month to
conceive, the child shall be heir to the deceased, and the mother shall pass
for an honest woman.

When she is known to have conceived, thrust forward boldly, spare her not
whatever betide you, seeing the paunch is full. As Iulia the Daughter of the
Emperor Octavian never prostituted her self to her Belly-bumpers, but when she
found her self with child; after the manner of Ships that receive not their
Steers-man, till they have their Ballast and Lading. And if any blame the women
for that after Pregnancy, they still continue buxome, and push for more;
whereas any beast, a Cow or Mare will kick and flounce, and admit no farther
courtship from the Bull or Stallion: The Answer will be, Why, They are Beasts,
and know no better. As Populia heretofore answered, according to the relation
of Macrobius Lib. 2. Saturnal. If the Devil will not have them to bag, he
must wring hard the Spigot, and stop the Bung hole.

CHAP. IV. How Gargamelle, being big with Gargantua, did eat a huge deal of
Tripes.
THE occasion and manner how Gargamelle was brought to bed, and delivered of
her child, was thus: and if you do not believe it, I wish your bum-gut fall
out. Her bum-gut indeed, or fundament escaped her in an afternoon, on the third
day of February, with having eaten at dinner to many Godebillios, Godebillios
are the fat tripes of coiros; coiros are Beeves fatned in the Ox-stalls, and
Guimo meadows; Guimo meadows are those that may be moved twice a year; of those
fat Beeves they had killed three hundred sixty seven thousand and fourteen, to
be salted at Shrovetide; that in the entering of the Spring they might have
plenty of powdered Beef, wherewith to season their mouths at the beginning of
their meals, and to taste their Wine the better.

They had abundance of Tripes as you have heard, and they were so delicious,
that every one licked his fingers. But as the Devil would have it, there was no
possibility to keep them long sweet, and to let them stink was not so
commendable or handsome, it was herefore concluded, that they should be all of
them gulched up, without any waste. To this effect they invited all the
Burghers of Sainais, of Suille, of the Roche Clermand, of Vaugaudry, without
omitting the Boudray, Monpensier, the Guedevede, and other their neighbors;
all stiff drinkers, brave fellows, and good players at the kyles. The Goodman
Grangousier took great pleasure in their company, and commanded there should be
no want nor pinching for any thing: nevertheless he bade his wife eat
sparingly, because she was near her time, and that these Tripes were no very
commendable meat; they would fain (said he) be at the chewing of ordure, who
eat the bag that contained it. Notwithstanding these admonitions, she did eat
sixteen quarters, two bushels, three pecks and a pipkin full. What a filthy
deal of Lob lolly was here, to swell and wamble in her Guts?

After Dinner they all went tag-rag together to the willow-grove, where, on the
green grass, to the sound of the merry Flutes, and pleasant Bag-pipes, they
danced so gallantly, that it was a sweet and heavenly sport to see them so
frolic.

CHAP. V. How they chirped over their Cups.
THEN did they fall upon the chat of Belly-timber and drinking; and forthwith
began Flaggons to go, Gammons to trot, goblets to fly, great bowls to ting,
Glasses to ring, draw, reach, fill, mix, give it me without water, so my
friend, so, whip me off this Glass neatly, bring me hither some Claret, a full
weeping Glass till it run over, a cessation and truce with thirst. Ha thou
false Fever, will thou not be gone? By my Figgins, Godmother, I cannot as yet
enter in the humor of being merry, nor drink so currently as I would; you have
caught a cold, Gammer; yea forsooth, Sir; by the belly of Sanct Buff let us
talk of our drink, I never drink but at my hours, like the Popes Mule; and I
never drink but in my Breviary, like good father Gardien. Which was first,
thirst or drinking? Thirst, for who in the time of innocence would have drunk
without being a thirst? nay, Sir, it was drinking; for privatio praesupponit
habitum. I am learned you see, Faecundi calices quem non fecere disertum? We
poor innocents drink but too much without thirst. Not I truly, who am a sinner,
for I never drink without thirst, either present, or future, to prevent it (as
you know) I drink for the thirst to come; I drink eternally, this is to me an
eternity of drinking, and drinking of an eternity. Let us sing, let us drink,
now for a Catch, dust it away, where is my Nogging? what, it seems I do not
drink by Proxy. Do you wet your selves to dry, or do you dry to wet you? Pish,
I understand not the Rhetoric (Theoric I should say) but I help my self
somewhat by the Practice. Enough; I sup, I wet, I humect, I moisten my Gullet,
I drink, and all for fear of dying; drink always and you shall never die. If I
drink not, I am a-ground, and lost. I am sta^k dead without drink, and my Soul
ready to fly into some Marish amongst Frogs; the Soul never dwells in a dry
place, drougth kills it.

O you Butlers, Creators of new Forms, make me of no drinker a drinker, a
perennity and everlastingness of sprinkling, and bedewing me through these my
parched and sinnewy Bowels. He drinks in vain that feels not the pleasure of
it: This enters into my Veins; the pissing Tools shall have none on it. I
would willingly wash the tripes of the Calf which I reer'd this morning. I have
pretty well now balasted my stomach, if the Papers of my Bonds and Bills could
drink as well as I do, my Creditors would have their Hands full. Hold up your
dagger-hand; that hand of yours spoils your Nose. O how many other such will go
in here before this go out; what, drink so shallow? It is enough to streak both
girds and pettrel. This is called a cup of dissimulation.

What difference is there between a Bottle and a Flaggon? great difference: The
Bottle is stopped with a stopple, and Flaccon a vis. Our Fathers drank lustily,
and emptied their Cans; this is Bien chie chante, Well cack'd, well sung. Come,
let us drink: Will you send nothing to the River? here is one going to wash the
Tripes. I drink no more than a sponge. I drink like a Templer Knight. And I
tanquam sponsus. And I sicut terra sine aqua. Give me a Synonymon for a Gammon
of Bacon; it is the Compulsory of drinkers; it is a Pully; by a Pully-rope Wine
is let down into a Cellar, and by a Gammon into the Stomach. Ha now Boys
hither; some drink some drink; there is no trouble in it. Respice personam;
pone pro duos, bus non est in usu. If I could get up as well as I can swallow
down, I had been long ever now very high in the Air.

Thus became Tom toss-pot rich: Thus went in the Taylor's stitch: Thus did
Bacchus conquer the India: Thus Philosophy, Melinde. A little Rain allays a
great deal of Wind; long tippling breaks the Thunder. But if there came such
liquor from my Buttock, would you not suck the Udder? Here, Page, fill, I
prithee forget me not when it comes to my turn; and I will enter the Election I
have made of thee into the very Register of my heart. Sup Simon; pull away,
there is somewhat in the Pot. I appeal from thirst, and disclaim its
Jurisdiction. Page, sue out my Appeal in form. This remnant is the bottom of
the Glass must follow its Leader. I was wont heretofore to drink out all, but
now I leave nothing. Make not such haste; we must carry all along with us. Ha
day, here are tripes fit for our sport; Godebillios of the dun Ox with the
blach streak. O for God's sake let us lash them soundly, yet thriftily. Drink,
or I will, No, no, drink I beseech you; Sparrows will not eat unless you bob
them on the tail; nor can I drink if I be not fairly spoke to. Lagonaedatera,
there is not a Cunniborow in all my Body, where this Wine does not ferret out
my thirst. Ho, this will bang it soundly; but this shall banish it utterly. Let
us make Proclamation by the sound of Flaggons and Bottles, that whoever has
lost his thirst come not hither to seek it. Long spits are to be voided without
doors. The great God made the Planets, and we make the Platters neat. I have
the word of the Gospel in my mouth, Sitio. The stone called Asbestos, is not
more unquenchable, then the thirst of my Paternity. Appetite comes with eating,
says Angeston; but the thirst goes away with drinking. I have a remedy against
thirst, quite contrary to that which is good against the biting of a mad Dog:
Keep running after a Dog, and he will never bite you, drink always before the
thirst, and it will never come upon you. There I catch you, I awake you. Argus
had a hundred Eyes for his sight; a Butler should have (like Briareus) a
hundred hands wherewith to fill us Wine indefatigably. Ha now Lads, let us wet,
it will be time to dry hereafter. White Wine here, Wine Boys, pour out all, par
le Diable, fill, I say, fill and fill till it be full. My tongue peels.
Lanstrinque, to thee Countryman, I drink to thee good Fellow, Camrade to thee,
lusty, lively, ha, la, la, that was drunk to some purpose, and bravely gulped
over. O lachryma Christi, it is of the best Grape; I faith, pure Greek, Greek,
O the fine white Wine, upon my Conscience it is a kind of Taff^tas Wine, him,
him, it is of one ear, well wrought, and of good Wool. Courage Camrade, up thy
Heart, Billy, we will not be Beasted at this bout, for I have got one trick, ex
hoc in hoc, there is no Enchantment nor Charm there, every one of you has seen
it, my Prentiship is out, I am a free Man at this Trade. I am an Abbot ( Pshaw
I should say) O the drinkers, those that are a dry; O poor thirsty Souls! Good
Page, my Friend, fill me here some, and crown the Cup, I prithee, a la
Cardinale; Natura abhorret vacuum. Would you say that a fly could drink in
this? A la mode de Bretagne. Clear off, neat, supernaculum, swill it over
heartily, no deceit in a Brimmer; Nectar and Ambrosia.

CHAP. VI. How Gargantua was born in a strange manner.
WHilst they were on this Discourse, and pleasant Tattle of drinking,
Gargamelle began to be a little unweil in her lower Parts; whereupon
Grangousier arose from off the Grass, and fell to comfort her very honestly and
kindly; suspecting that she was in Travel, and told her that it was best for
her to sit down upon the Grass under the Willows; because she was like very
shortly to see young feet; and that therefore it was convenient she should
pluck up her Spirits, and take a good Heart at the new coming of her Baby;
saying to her withal, that although the pain was somewhat grievous to her, it
would be but of short continuance; and that the succeeding joy would quickly
remove that sorrow, in such sort that she should not so much as remember it. On
with a Sheep; courage (quoth he) dispatch this Boy, and we will speedily fall
to work for the making of another. Ha (said she) so well as you speak at your
own ease, you that are Men; well then, in the name of God, I Will do my best,
seeing you will have it so; but would to God that it were cut off from you:
What? (said Grangousier) Ha (said she) you are a good Man indeed, you
understand it well enough. What my member? (said he) Udrookers, if it please
you, that shall be done instantly; cause bring hither a Knife. Alas, (said she)
the Lord forbid, I pray Jesus to forgive me, I did not say it from my Heart, do
it not any kind of harm, neither more nor less for my speaking: But I am like
to have work enough to day, and all for your Member, yet God bless both you and
it.

Courage, courage (said he) take you no care of the matter, let the four
foremost Oxon do the work I will yet go drink one whiffe more, and if in the
mean time any thing befall you, I will be so near, that at the first whistling
in your fist, I shall be with you. A little while after she began to groan,
lament and cry, then suddenly came the Midwives from all quarters, who groping
her below, found some Peloderies of a bad savor indeed; this they thought had
been the Child; but it was her Fundament that was slipped out with the
molification of her Intestinum rectum, which you call the Bumgut; and that
merely by eating of too many tripes, as we have showed you before: Whereupon an
old ugly trot in the Company, who was reputed a notable Physician, and was come
from Brispaille near to Saint Gnou threescore Years before, made her so
horrible a restrictive, and binding Medicine, whereby all her Arse-pipes were
so opilated, stopped, obstructed and contracted, that you could hardly have
opened and enlarged them with your Teeth: Which is a terrible thing to think
upon; seeing the Devil at Mass at Saint Martins was puzzled with the like Task ^
when with his Teeth he lengthened out the Parchment whereon he wrote the tittle
tattle of two young mangy Whores.

The effect of this was, that the Cotyldons of her Matrix were all loosened
above, through which the Child sprung up and leapt, and so entering into the
Vena cava, did climb by the Diaphragm even above her Shoulders (where that Vein
divides it self into two) and from thence taking his way toward the left side,
issued forth at her left Ear. As soon as he was born, he cried not as other
Babes use to do, miez, miez, miez, miez, but with a high, sturdy and big voice
shouted aloud, Some drink, some drink, some drink, as inviting all the World to
drink with him; the noise hereof was so extremely great, that it was heard in
both the Countries at once, of Beauce and Bibarois. I doubt me that you do not
thoroughly believe the truth of this strange Nativity, though you believe it not
I care not much: But an honest Man, and of good judgment believes still what
is told him, and that which he finds written.

Is this beyond our Law, or our Faith? against Reason or the Holy Scripture?
For my part, I fi^d nothing in the Sacred Bible that is against it; but tell me
if it had been the Will of God, would you say that he could not do it?
Grammercy; I beseech you never Dum-found or Embarrass your Heads with these
idle Conceits: For I tell you, it is not impossible with God; and, if he
pleased, all Women henceforth should bring forth their Children at the Ear: Was
not Bacchus engendered out of the very Thigh of Jupiter? Did not R^quetaillade
come out at his Mothers heel? and Crocmoush from the slipper of his Nurse? Was
not Minerva born of the Brain, even through the Ear of Jove? Adonis of the Ba^k
of a Myrrh-tree? and Castor and Pollux of the doupe of that Egg which was laid
and hatched by Leda? But you would wonder more, and with far greater amazement,
if I should now present you with that Chapter of Plinius, wherein he treats
of strange Births, and contrary to nature; and yet am not I so impudent a Liar
as he was. Read the seventh Book of his Natural History, chap. 4. and trouble
not my head any more about this.

CHAP. VII. After what manner Gargantua had his Name given him; and how he
tippled, bibbed and curried the Can.
THE good Man Grangousier drinking and making merry with the rest, heard the
horrible noise which his Son had made as he entered into the Light of this
World, when he cried out, Some drink, some drink, some drink; whereupon he said
in French, Que grand tuas and souple le gousier, that is to say, How great and
nimble a throat thou have; which the Company hearing, said, that verily the
Child ought to be called Gargantua; because it was the first word that after
his birth his Father had spoke in imitation, and at the Example of the ancient
Hebrews; whereunto he condescended, and his Mother was very well pleased
therewith; in the mean while, to quiet the Child, they gave him to drink a
tirelarigot, that is, till his throat was like to crack with it; then was he
carried to the Font, and there baptized, according to the manner of good
Christians.

Immediately thereafter were appointed for him Seventeen thousand nine hundred
and thirteen Cows of the Towns of Pautille and Breemond to furnish him with
milk in ordinary; for it was impossible to find a Nurse sufficient for him in
all the Country, considering the great quantity of milk that was requisite for
his nourishment: although there were not wanting some Doctors of the Opinion of
Scotus; who affirmed that his own Mother gave him suck, and that she could draw
out of her Breasts one Thousand four hundred two Pipes and nine Pails of milk
at every time.

Which indeed is not probable, and this point has been found duggishly
scandalous and offensive to tender Ears, for that it favored a little of
Heresy: Thus was he handled for one Year and ten Months, after which time, by
the Advice of Physicians, they began to carry him Abroad, and then was made for
him a fine little Cart drawn with Oxen, of the Invention of Ian Denio; wherein
they led him hither and thither with great joy, and he was worth the seeing;
for he was a fine Boy, had a burly Physiognomy, and almost ten Chins; he cried
very little, but beshit himself every hour: For to speak truly of him, he was
wonderfully flegmatic in his Posteriors, both by reason of his natural
Complexion, and the accidental disposition which had befallen him by his too
much quaffing of the Septembral Juice. Yet without a cause did not he sip one
drop; for if he happened to be vexed, angry, displeased or sorry; if he did
fret, if he did weep, if he did cry, and what grievous quarter soever he kept,
bring him some drink, he would be instantly pacified, come to his own Temper,
be in a good humor again, and as still and quiet as ever. One of his
Governesses told me (swearing by her Fig) how he was so accustomed to this kind
of way, that, at the sound of Pints and Flaggons, he would on a sudden fall
into an Ecstacy, as if he had then tasted of the Joys of Paradise; so that they
upon consideration of this his divine Complexion, would every Morning to cheer
him up, play with a Knife upon the Glasses, on the Bottles with their stopples,
and on the Pottle-pots with their lids and covers, at the sound whereof he
became gay, did leap for joy, would loll and rock himself in the Cradle, then
nod with his head, monocordising his Fingers, and barytonising with his Tail.

CHAP. VIII. How they Apparelled Gargantua.
BEing of this Age, his Father ordained to have Clothes made to him in his own
Livery, which was White and Blew. To work then went the Tailors, and with great
expedition were those Clothes made, cut and sewed, according to the Fashion
that was then in vogue. I find by the ancient Records, to be seen in the
Chamber of Accounts at Montforeo, that he was accounted in manner as follows.
To make him every Shirt of his, were taken up Nine hundred Else of Chetelero
Linen, and Two hundred for the Guissets, in manner of Cushions, which they put
under his Armpits; his Shirt was not gathered nor plaited, for the plaiting of
Shirts was not found out, till the Seamstresses (when the point of their
Needles was broken) began to work and occupy with the tail. There were taken up
for his Doublet, Eight hundred and thirteen Else of white Satin, and for his
Points Fifteen hundred and nine Dogs Skins and a half. Then was it that Men
began to tie their Breeches to their Doublets, and not their Doublets to their
Breeches; for it is against Nature, as has most amply been showed by Ocham
upon the Explonibles of Master Hautechaussade.

For his Breeches were taken up Eleven hundred and five Else, and a third of
white broad Cloth. They were cut in form of Pillars, chamfred, channel'd, and
pinked behind, that they might not overheat his Reins: And were within the
panes, puffed out with the lining of as much blew Damask as was needful; and
remark, that he had very good Knee-rowlers, proportionable to the rest of his
stature.

For his Cod-piece were used Sixteen Else and a quarter of the same Cloth, and
it was fashioned on the top like unto a triumphant Arch, most gallantly
fastened with two enameled Clasps, in each of which was set a great Emerauld,
as big as an Orange; for, as says Orpheus lib. de lapidibus, and Plinius lib.
ultimo, it has an erective Virtue and comfortative of the natural Member. The
J^ct or out-standing of his Codpiece, was of the length of a yard, jagged and
pinked, and withal bagging, and strouting out with the blew damask Lining,
after the manner of his Breeches: but had you seen the fair Embroidery of the
small Needlework purl, and the curiously interlaced Knots, by the Goldsmiths
Art, set out and trimmed with rich Diamonds, precious Rubies, fine Turquoises,
costly Emeraulds and Persian Pearls: You would have compared it to a fair
Cornucopia, or Horn of abundance, such as you see in Antics, or as Rhea gave to
the two Nymphs, Amalthea and Ida, the Nurses of Jupiter.

And like to that Horn of Abundance, it was still gallant, succulent, droppy,
sappy, pithy, lively, always flourishing, always fructifying, full of Juice,
full of Flower, full of Fruit, and all manner of delight. Blessed Lady! 'Twould
have done one good to have seen it: But I will tell you more of it in the Book
which I have made of the Dignity of Codpieces. One thing I will tell you, that
as it was both long and large, so was it well furnished and provided within,
nothing like unto the Hypocritical Codpieces, of some fond Wooers and
Wench-courters, which are stuffed only with wind, to the great prejudice of the
female Sex.

For his Shoes, were taken up four hundred and six Else of blew
Crimson-velvet, and were very neatly cut by parallel Lines, joined in uniform
Cylinders: For the soling of them were made use of Eleven hundred Hides of
brown Cows, shapen like the tail of a Keeling.

For his Coat were taken up Eighteen hundred Else of blew Velvet, died in
grain, embroidered in its Borders with fair Gilliflowers, in the middle decked
with silver Purle, intermixed with plates of Gold, and store of Pearls, hereby
showing, that in his time he would prove an especial good Fellow, and singular
Whip can.

His Girdle was made of Three hundred Else and a half of silken Serge, half
white and half blew, if I mistake it not. His Sword was not of Valentia, nor
his Dagger of Saragosa, for his Father could not endure these Hidalgos
borrachos maranisados como diablos; but he had a fair Sword made of Wood, and
the Dagger of boiled Leather, as well painted and gilded as any Man could wish.

His Purse was made of the Cod of an Elephant, which was given him by Herre
Praecontal, Proconsul of Lybia.

For his Gown were employed Nine thousand six hundred Else, wanting two thirds,
of blew Velvet, as before, all so diagonally purled, that by true perspective
issued thence an unnamed Color, like that you see in the Necks of Turtle-doves
or Turkey-cocks, which wonderfully rejoices the Eyes of the Beholders. For his
Bonnet or Cap were taken up Three hundred two Else, and a Quarter of white
Velvet, and the form thereof was wide and round, of the bigness of his Head;
for his Father said, that the Caps of the Mirabaise fashion, made like the
Cover of a Pasty, would one time or other bring a mischief on those that wore
them. For his Plume, he wore a fair great blew Feather, plucked from an
Onocrotal of the Country of Hircania the wild, very prettily hanging down over
his right Ear: For the Jewel or broach which in his Cap he carried, he had in a
Cake of Gold, weighing threescore and eight Marks, a fair piece of Enameled,
wherein was portrayed a Man's Body with two Heads, looking toward one another,
four Arms, four Feet, two Arses, such as Plato in Symposio says, was the
mystical beginning of Man's Nature; and about it was written in Ionic Letters,
(...).

To wear about his Neck, he had a golden Chain, weighing Twenty five thousand
and sixty three Marks of Gold, the link thereof being made after the manner of
great Berries, amongst which were set in work green Jaspers engraven, and cut
Dragon like, all environed with Beams and Sparks, as King Nicepsos of old was
wont to wear them, and it reached down to the very bust of the rising of his
Belly, whereby he reaped great benefit all his life long, as the Greek
Physicians knew well enough. For his Gloves were put in work sixteen Otters
Skins, and three of Laugarous or Men-eating Wolves, for the bordering of them:
And of this stuff were they made, by the appointment of the Cabalists of
Sanlono. As for the Rings which his Father would have him to wear to renew the
ancient mark of Nobility: He had on the forefinger of his left hand a
Carbuncle as big as an Ostrige's Egg, inchased very daintily in Gold of the
fineness of a Turkey Seraph. Upon the middle finger of the same hand, he had a
Ring made of four Metals together, of the strongest fashion that ever was seen;
so that the steel did not crash against the Gold, nor the Silver crush the
Copper. All this was made by Captain Chappins, and Alcofribas his Operator. On
the Medical Finger of his Right Hand, he had a Ring made Spire-ways, wherein
was set a perfect baleu Ruby, a pointed Diamond, and a Poison Emerauld of an
inestimable Value; for Hans-carvel the King of Milinda's Jeweller, esteemed
them at the rate of Threescore nine Millions eight hundred ninety four thousand
and eighteen French Crowns of Berrie, and at so much did the Jews of Auspurg
prize them.

CHAP. IX. The Colors and Liveries of Gargantua.
GArgantua's Colors were White and Blew, as I have showed you before, by which
his Father would give us to understand, that his Son to him was a heavenly Joy,
for the White did signify Gladness, Pleasure, Delight and Rejoicing, and the
Blew, Celelestial things. I know well enough, that in reading this you laugh at
the old Toaper, and hold this Exposition of Colors to be very extravagant, and
utterly disagreeable to reason, because White is said to signify Faith, and
Blew Constancy. But without moving, vexing, heating, or putting you in a chase
(for the Weather is dangerous) answer me if it please you; for no other
compulsory way of arguing will I use toward you, or any else; only now and
then I will mention a word or two of my Bottle.

What is it that induces you? What stirs you up to believe, or who told you
that White signifies Faith; and Blew Constancy? An old paultry Book, say you,
sold by the hawking Pedlars and Balladmongers, Entitled, The Blason of
Colors: Who made it? Whoever it was, he was wise in that he did not set his
Name to it; I know not what I should rather admire in him, his Presumption, or
his Folly. His Presumption, for that he should without Reason, without Cause,
or without any appearance of Truth, have dared to prescribe by private
Authority, what things should be denoted and signified by the Color. Which is
the Custom of Tyrants, who will have their Will to bear sway instead of Equity;
and not of the Wise and Learned, who with the evidence of Reason satisfy their
Readers.

His Folly and want of Wit, in that he thought, that without any other
demonstration or sufficient Argument the World would be pleased to make his
blockish and ridiculous Impositions, the rule of their Devices. In effect,
according to the Proverb, To shitten Tails, Turd never fails; he has found (it
seems) some simple Ninny in those rude times of old, when high Bonnet were in
fashion; who gave some trust to his Writings, according to which they shaped
their Apophthegms and Mottos, trapped and caparisoned their Mules and
Sumpter-horses, apparelled their Pages, quartered their Breeches, bordered
their Gloves, fringed the Courtains and Vallens of their Beds, painted their
Ensigns, composed Songs, and which is worse, placed many deceitful juglings,
and unworthy base tricks clandestinely, amongst the chastest Matrons. In the
like darkness and mist of Ignorance, are wrapped up these vainglorious
Courtiers, and name-transposers, who going about in their Impresa's, to
signify Espoir, has portrayed a Sphere: Birds Pens for Pins: Ancholie for
Melancholy: A horned Moon or Cressant, to show the increasing of ones Fortune:
A Bench broken, to signify Bankrupt: Non, and a corslet for non dur habit,
otherwise non durabit, it shall not last: Un lit san ciel, for Un licencie;
which are Equivocals so absurd and witless, so barbarous and clownish, that a
Fox's Tail should be pinned at his Back, and a Fool's Cap be given to every one
that should henceforth offer, after the restitution of Learning, to make use of
any such Fopperies in France.

By the same Reasons (if Reasons I should call them, and not Ravings rather)
might I cause paint a painer, to signify that I am in pain: a Pot of Mustard,
that my Heart is much tardy; one pissing upwards for a Bishop; the bottom of a
pair of Breeches for a Vessel full of Farthings; a Codpiece (as the English
bears it) for the Tail of a Cod-fish; and a Dog's Turd, for the dainty Turret,
wherein lies the Love of my Sweetheart.

Far otherwise did heretofore the Sages of Egypt, when they wrote by Letters,
which they called Hieroglyphics, which none understood who were not skilled in
the Virtue, Property and Nature of the Things represented by them: Of which
Orus Apollon has in Greek composed two Books, and Polyphilus in his Dream of
Love set down more: In France you have a taste of them, in the Device or
Impresa of my Lord Admiral, which was carried before that time by Octavian
Augustus. But my little Skiff amongst these unpleasant Gulfs and Shoals, will
sail no further, therefore must I return to the Port from whence I came; yet do
I hope one Day to write more at large of these things, and to show both by
Philosophical Arguments and Authorities, received and approved of, by and from
all Antiquity, what, and how many Colors there are in Nature, and what may be
signified by every one of them, if God save the mould of my Cap, which is my
best Wine-pot, as my Grandam said.

CHAP. X. Of that which is signified by the Colors, White and Blew.
THe White therefore signifies Joy, Solace and Gladness, and that not at
random, but upon just and very good Grounds; Which you may perceive to be true,
if laying aside all prejudicate Affections, you will but give ear, to what
presently I shall expound unto you.

Aristotle says, That supposing two things, contrary in their kind, as Good
and Evil, Virtue and Vice, Heat and Cold, White and Black, Pleasure and Pain,
Joy and Grief: And so of others, if you couple them in such manner, that the
contrary of one kind may agree in reason with the contrary of the other; it
must follow by consequence, that the other contrary must answer to the remanent
opposite to that wherewith it is conferred; as for examples, Virtue and Vice
are contrary in one kind, so are Good and Evil; if one of the contraries of the
first kind, be consonant to one of those of the second, as Virtue and Goodness,
for it is clear that Virtue is good, so shall the other two contraries (which
are Evil and Vice) have the same connection, for Vice is evil.

This Logical Rule being understood, take these two contraries, Joy and
Sadness; then these other two, White and Black, for they are Physically
contrary: If so be then that Black do signify Grief, by good reason then
should White import Joy. Nor is this signification instituted by human
Imposition, but by the universal consent of the World received, which
Philosophers call Ius Gentium, the Law of Nations, or an uncontrollable right,
of force in all Countries whatsoever; for you know well enough, that all People
and all Languages and Nations (except the ancient Syracusans, and certain
Argives, who had cross and thwarting Souls) when they mean outwardly to give
evidence of their sorrow, go in Black; and all mourning is done with Black,
which general consent is not without some Argument and Reason in Nature, the
which every Man may by himself very suddenly comprehend, without the
Instruction of any; and this we call the Law of Nature; By virtue of the same
natural Instinct, we know that by White all the World has understood Joy,
Gladness, Mirth, Pleasure and Delight.

In former times, the Thracians and Grecians did mark their good, propitious
and fortunate days with white stones; and their sad, dismal and unfortunate
ones with black; is not the night mournful, sad and melancholic? it is black
and dark by the privation of light; does not the light comfort all the World?
and it is more white than any thing else, which to prove, I could direct you to
the book of Laurentius Valla against Bartolus, but an Evangelical Testimony I
hope will content you, Mat. 7. it is said, that at the transfiguration of our
Lord, Vestimenta ejus facta sunt alba sicut lux, his apparel was made white
like the light; by which lightsom whiteness he gave his three Apostles to
understand the Idea and figure of the eternal Joys* for by the light are all
Men comforted, according to the Word of the old Woman, who although she had
never a tooth in her head, was wont to say, Bona lux: and Tobit, chap. 5. after
he had lost his sight, when Raphael saluted him, answered, What Joy can I have,
that do not see the Light of Heaven? In that color did the Angels testify the
Joy of the whole World, at the Resurrection of our Savior, John 20. and at his
Ascension, Acts 1. with the like color of Vesture did St. John the Evangelist,
Apoc. 4.7. see the faithful Clothed in the Heavenly and Blessed Jerusalem.

Read the Ancient both Greek and Latin Histories, and you shall find that the
Town of Alba (the first Patron of Rome) was founded, and so Named by Reason of
a White Sow, that was seen there. You shall likewise find in those stories,
that when any Man, after he had Vanquished his Enemies, was by decree of the
Senate, to enter into Rome, triumphantly, he usually rode in a Chariot, drawn
by White-Horses: Which in the Ovation, Triumph, was also the custom; for by no
sign or color would they so significantly express the Joy of their coming, as
by the White: You shall there also find, how Paricles, the Generals of the
Athenians, would needs have that part of his Army, unto whose Lot befell the
White Beans, to spend the whole Day in Mirth, Pleasure and Ease, whilst the
rest were a Fighting. A thousand other Examples and Places could I allege to
this Purpose, but that it is not here, where, I should do it.

By understanding hereof, you may resolve one Problem, which Alexander
Aphrodiseus has accounted unanswerable, why the Lion who with his only Cry and
Roaring, affrights all Beasts, dreads and fears only a White Cock? for (as
Proclus says, libro de Sacrificio and Magia,) it is because the Presence, of
the Virtue, of the Sun; which is the Organ and Promptuarie, of all terrestrial
and Syderial light does more Symbolize, and agree with a White Cock, as well in
regard of that color, as of his Property and Specifical quality, then with a
Lion. He says furthermore, that Devils have been often seen in the shape of
Lions, which at the sight of a White Cock have presently vanished. This is the
cause why the Gauli, Gauls or Galathians (so are the Frenchmen called, because
they are naturally white as Milk, which the Greeks call Gala) do willingly wear
in their Caps white Feathers; for by Nature they are of a candid disposition,
merry, kind, gracious and well-beloved, and for their Cognizance and Arms have
the whitest Flower of any, the Flower de Luce or Lilie.

If you demand, how by White, Nature would have us understand Joy and Gladness?
I answer, that the Analogy and Uniformity is thus, for as the White does
outwardly disperse and scatter the rays of the Sight, whereby the Optic Spirits
are manifestly dissolved, according to the Opinion of Aristotle in his Problems
and perspective Treatises; as you may likewise perceive by Experience, when you
pass over Mountains covered with Snow, how you will complain that you cannot
see well! as Xenophon writes to have happened to his Men, and as Galen very
largely declares, lib. 10. de usu partium: Just so the Heart with excessive
Joy is inwardly dilated, and suffers a manifest dissolution of the vital
Spirits; which may go so far on, that it may thereby be deprived of its
Nourishment, and by consequence of Life it self. By this Pericharie or
extremity of Gladness, as Galen says, lib. 12. method. lib. 5. de locis
affectis, and lib. 2. de symptomatum causis. And as it has come to pass in
former times, witness Marcus Tullius lib. 1. quaest. Tuscui. Verrius,
Aristotle, Titus Livius in his relation of the Battle of Canna, Plinius lib. 7.
cap. 32. and 34. A. Gellius lib. 3. cap. 15. and many other Writers of Diagoras
the Rhodian, Chilon, Sophocles, Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, Philippides,
Philemon, Polycrates, Philipion, M. Iuventi; and others who died with Joy, and
as Avicen speaks, in 2. Canon. and lib. de virib. cordis, of the Saffron,
that it does so rejoice the Heart, that if you take of it excessively, it will
by an excessive dissolution and dilatation, deprive it altogether of Life, Here
peruse Alex. Aphrodiseus lib. 1. Probl. cap. 19. and that for a cause: But
what? it seems I am entered further into this point then I intended at the
first: here therefore will I strike Sail, referring the rest to that Book of
mine, which handles this matter to the full. Mean while, in a word I will tell
you, that Blew does certainly signify Heaven and heavenly Things, by the same
very tokens and symbols, that White signifies Joy and Pleasure.

CHAP. XI. Of the youthful age of Gargantua.
GArgantua, from three Years upwards unto five, was brought up and Instructed,
in all Convenient Discipline, by the Commandment of his Father; and spent that
time like the other little Child^en of the Country; that is, in Drinking,
Eating and Sleeping, in Eating, Sleeping and Drinking, and in Sleeping,
Drinking and Eating: Still he wallowed and rolled up and down himself in the
mire, and dirt; he blurred and sullied his nose with Filth, he blotted and
smutch't his Face with any kind of nasty stuff, he trod down his Shoes in
the Heel, lay with his Mouth open to Catch Gnats, and ran a hawking after the
Butterflies; the Empire whereof belonged to his Father. He pissed in his Shoes,
shit in his Shirt, and wiped his nose on his sleeve: He did let his Snot and
Snivel fall in his Pottage, and dabled, padled and slabbered every where. He
would drink in his Slipper, and ordinarily rub his Belly against a Panier: He
would pick his Teeth, with a wooden Shoe; wipe his breech with his Finger,
washed his Hands in his Broth, and combed his Head with a broken Ladle. He
would sit down betwixt two stools and his Arse to the ground; would cover
himself with a wet sack, drink in his Potage, gnaw the bone he could not
swallow, eat his Cake without bread, bite laughing, and laugh biteing, spit in
the dish, fart in his fist, piss against the wind; and hide himself in the
Water for fear of Rain: He would strike before the Iron was hot, would blow in
the dust till it filled his Eyes: Be often in the dumps, and frig and wriggle
it. He would flay the Fox, say the Apes Paternoster, would Run at Mutton, and
turn the Hogs to the Hay. He would beat the Dogs before the Lion; put the
Plough before the Oxen; and claw where it did not itch. He would leap before he
looked, at Midsummer-Moon, spend his Michaelmas Rent: And take misreckoning for
good payment. By griping, all would hold fast nothing, and always eat his white
bread first. He shooed the Geese, tickled himself to make himself laugh, was
Cook-Ruffing in the Kitching, would sing Magnificat at Matines, and found it
was an Enemy of God, would turn to account. He would eat Cabbage, and shite
Colly-flowers; catch Fish in a Dish of Milk, and make them all Cripples: He
would tear the Paper: Race the Records, then trust his heels for his security:
He would pull at the Kids-leather, or vomit up his Dinner, then reckon without
his Host: He would beat the Bushes without catching the Birds, thought the Moon
was made of green Cheese, and that every thing was Gold that glisters. He would
sooner go to the Mill than to Mass; took a Bit in the Morning to be better than
nothing all day; would eat his Cake and have his Cake; and was better fed than
taught; he always looked a given Horse in the Mouth; would tell a Tale of a
Tub; throw the Helm after the Hatchet; when the Steed was stolen, would shut the
Stable-door, and bring his Hogs to a Fair Market: By robbing Peter he paid
Paul, he kept the Moon from Wolves, and was ready to catch Larks, if ever the
Heavens should fall: He did make of Necessity Virtue, of such Bread such
Pottage, and cared as little for the peeled as for the shaven: Every Morning he
did cast up his gorge, his Fathers little Dogs eat out of the Dish with him,
and he with them: He would bite their Ears, and they would scratch his Nose: He
would blow in their Arses, and they would lick his chaps.

But hearken good Fellows, may ye be sick of the Mulligrubs, with eating chopped
Hay, if now ye do not listen: This little Lecher was always groping his Nurses
and Governesses, upside down, arswise, topsiturvy, harribourr quet, with a
Yacco haic, hyck-gio, handling them very rudely in jumbling and tumbling them
to keep them going; for he had already begun to exercise the Tools, and put the
Codpiece in practice; which Codpiece his Governesses did every day deck up and
adorn with fair Nosegays, curious Ribbans, sweet Flowers, and fine silken
Tufts, and very pleasantly would pass their time, in taking, you know what,
between their Fingers, and dandling it like a little Baby; then did they burst
out in laughing, when they saw it lift up its ears, as if the sport had liked
them. One of them would call it her Pillicock, her Fiddle-diddle, her Staff of
Love, her Tickle-gizzard, her Gentle-tilter. Another, her Sugar-plum, her
Kingo, her old Rowley, her Touch-tripe, her Flap-dowdle. Another again, her
Branch of Coral, her Placket-racket, her Cyprian Scepter, her Tit bit, her Bob
Lady. And some of the other Women would give these Names, My Roger, my
Cockatoo, my Nimble-wimble, Bush-beater, Claw-buttock, Eves-dropper, Pick-lock,
Pioneer, Bully-ruffin, Smell-smock, Trouble-gusset, my lusty Live Saucage, my
Crimson Chitterlin, Rump-splitter, Shove-devel, downright to it, stiff and
stout, in and to, at-her-agen, my Cony-borow-ferret, Wily-beguiley, my pretty
Rogue; It belongs to me, said one: It is mine, said the other: What, quoth a
third, shall I have no share in it? by my faith I will cut it off then, Ha, to
cut it off, (said the other,) would be a scurvy business: Madam, is it your way
to cut off little Childrens things; were his cut off, he would be then Master
bob, that he might play and sport himself, after the manner of the other little
Children of the Country, they made him a goodly whirle-gig of the wings of the
windmil of Myrebalais.

CHAP. XII. Of Gargantua's wooden Horses.
Afterward, that he might be all his lifetime a good Rider, they made for him
a fair great Horse of wood, which he did make leap, curvet, yerk out behind,
and skip forwards, all at a time, to pace, trot, rack, gallop, amble, to play
the hobbie, the hackney-guelding, go the gate of the Camel, and of the wild
Asss: He made him also change his color of Hair, as the Monks of Coultibo
(according to the variety of their holy days) use to do their Clothes, from
Bay, Brown, to Sorrel, Daple-gray, Mouse-dun, Deer-colour, Roan, cow-colour,
gingioline, skued-colour, pybal'd, and the color of the savage Elk.

Himself of an huge big post, made a hunting Nag; and another for daily
service, of the beam of a Vine-press; and of a great Oak, made up a Mule, with
housson for his Chamber. Besides this, he had ten or twelve spare Horses and
seven Horses for post; and all these were lodged in his own Chamber, close by
his bedside. One day the Lord of Breadinbag, came to visit Gargantua's Father;
in great bravery, and with a gallant train; and at the same time, to see him,
came likewise the Duke of Fry meal, and the Earl of Wetgullet. The House,
truly for so many guests at once was somewhat narrow, but especially the
Stables. Whereupon the Stewards and Gentlemen of Horse to the Lord Breadinbag
(to know if there were any other empty stables in the house;) came to
Gargantua, a little young lad, and secretly asked him where the Stables of the
great Horses were, thinking that Children would be ready to tell all. And then
he led them up along the stairs of the Castle, passing by the second Hall unto
a broad great Gallery, by which they entered into a large Tower, and as they
were going up at another pair of stairs, said the Gentleman of Horse to the
Steward, this Child deceives us, for the Stables are never on the top of the
House. You may be mistaken (said the Steward,) for I know some places at Lions,
at the Basmette, at Chaunon, and elsewhere, which have their Stables at the
very tops of the Houses; so it may be, that behind the Houses there is a way to
come to this ascent; but I will question him further: Then said he to
Gargantua, my pretty little boy, whither do you lead us? to the stable (said
he) of my great Horss, we are almost come to it, we have but these stairs to go
up at; then leading them along another great Hall, he brought them into his
chamber, and opening the door said unto them, this is the stable that you ask
for, this is my gennet, this is my gelding, this is my courser, and this my
pad; and laid on them with a great Cudgel, I will bestow upon you (said he)
this Frizeland horse: I had him from Francfort, yet will I give him you; for he
is a pretty little Nag, and will go very well, with a Cast of Gosehawk, half a
dozen Spaniels, and a Brace of Greyhounds; thus are you King of the Hares and
Patridges for all this Winter. By St. John (said they) what a couple of Puts
has he made us? what Monkeys? Hold, hold, Gentlemen, said he, you must show
your Tails 'ere ye pass for Monkeys. Judge you now, whether they had most
cause, either to hide their heads for shame, or to laugh for company; as they
were going down again thus amazed, he asked them, Will you have a whimwham?
What is that, said they? It is (said he) five turds to make you a muzzel: To
day (said the Steward) though we happen to be roasted, we shall not be burnt,
for we are pretty well basted and larded in my opinion. O my jolly daper boy,
thou have given us a Gudgeon, I hope to see thee Pope before I die: I think so
(said he) my self; and then shall you be a Puppy, and this gentle popinjeay pop
into some Office under me. Well, well (said the Gentleman of the Horse.) But
(said Gargantua) guess how many stitches there are in my Mothers Smock: Sixteen
(quoth the Gentleman) You do not speak Gospel (said Gargantua) for there is
sent before, and sent behind, and you did reckon them ill, considering the two
under holes: When (said the Gentleman) Even then (said Gargantua) when they
made a shovel of your Nose to take up a quarter of dirt, and of your Throat a
Funnel, wherewith to put it into another Vessel, because the bottom of the old
one was out. Cocksbod (said the steward) we have met with a Prater. Farewell
(Master tatler) God keep you from harm, now your mouth is so mellow.

Thus going down in great haste, under the Arch of the Stairs, they let fall
the great Leaver, which he had put upon their backs; vvhereupon Gargantua
said, what a Devil, you are (it seems) but bad horsemen, that suffer your
bilder to fail you, when you need him most. If you were to go from hence to
Chausas, whether had you rather ride on a Goose, or lead a Sow in a Leash? I
had rather drink (said the Gentleman of Horse) with this they entered into the
lower^Hall, where the company was, and relating to them this new Story, made
them laugh like a swarm of Flies.

CHAP. XIII. How Gargantua's wonderful Understanding became known to his Father
Grangousier, by the Invention of a Torchcul, or Wipe-breech.
ABout the end of the Fifth Year, Grangousier returning from the Conquest of
the Canarians, went by the way to see his Son Gargantua; there was he filled
with Joy, as such a Father might be at the sight of such a Child of his. And
whilst he kissed him and embraced him, he asked many childish Questions of him
about diverse matters, and drank very freely with him and with his Governesses,
of whom in great earnest, he asked among other things, whether they had been
careful to keep him clean and sweet? To this Gargantua answered, that he had
taken such a course for that himself, that in all the Country there was not to
be found a cleanlier Boy then he. How is that (said Grangousier) I have
(answered Gargantua) by a long and curious Experience found out a means to wipe
my Bum, the most Lordly, the most Excellent, and the most Convenient that ever
was seen: What is it? (said Grangousier) how is it? I will tell you by and by
(said Gargantua) once I did wipe me with a Gentlewomans Velvet Mask, and found
it to be good; for the softness of the Silk was very voluptuous and pleasant to
my Fundament. Another time with one of their Hoods, and in like manner that was
comfortable: At another time with a Ladies Neck-kerchief, and after that I
wiped me with some ear-pieces of hers made of crimson Satin, but there was
such a number of golden Spangles in them (turdy round things, a Pox take them)
that they fetched away all the Skin off my Tail with a vengeance. Now I wish
St. Anthony's Fire burn the Bumgut of the Goldsmith that made them, and of her
that wore them. This hurt I cured by wiping my self with a Pages Cap, garnished
with a Feather after the Switzers fashion.

Afterward, in dunging behind a bush, I found a March-Cat, and with it wiped
my Breech, but her Claws were so sharp that they scratched and exulcerated all
my Perinee; of this I recovered the next Morning thereafter, by wiping my self
with my Mother's Gloves, of a most excellent Perfume and Scent of the Arabian
Benin. After that I wiped me with Sage, with Fennil, with Anet, with Marjoram,
with Roses, with Gourd-Leaves, with Beets, with Colewort, with Leaves of the
Vine-tree, with Mallows, Wool-blade (which is a Tail-scarlet) with Lettice and
with Spinach Leaves. All this did very great good to my Leg. Then with Mercury,
with Pursly, with Nettles, with Comfrey; but that gave me the Bloody Flux of
Lumbardy, which I healed by wiping me with my Braguette. Then I wiped my Tail
in the Sheets, in the Coverlet, in the Curtains, with a Cushion, with Arras
Hangings, with a green Carpet, with a Table-cloath, with a Napkin, with a
Handkerchief, with a Combing-cloath, in all which I found more Pleasure than do
the Mangy Dogs when you rub them. Yea, but (said Grangousier) which Torchecul
did thou find to be the best? I was coming to it (said Gargantua) and by and
by shall you hear the tu autem, and know the whole Mystery and Knot of the
Matter. I wiped my self with Hay, with Straw, with Thatch-rushes, with Flax,
with Wool, with Paper; but, Tousiours laisse aux couillons esmorche,
Qui son ord cul de papier torche.
Who his foul Tail with paper wipes,
Shall at his Ballocks leave some chips.


What (said Grangousier) my little Rogue, have thou been at the Pot, that thou
do rhyme already? Yes, yes, my Lord the King (answered Gargantua) I can rhyme
out of measure; I can rhyme and chime, and clink till I stink again. Hark what
our Privy says to the Skiters: Shittard
Squirtard
Crackard
Turdous,
Thy bung
Has flung
Some dung
On us.
Filthard
Cackard
Stinkard,
St. Anthony fire thy Arsebone,
If thy
Dirty
Toby
Thou do not wipe ever thou be gone.


Will you have any more of it? Yes, yes (answered Grangousier.) Then said
Gargantua, A Roundlay.
A shiting, I found yesterday
The Tax I to my Arse should pay;
The Bung-hole breathed so vile a funk,
That one would wonder how I stunk:
O had but then some brave Signior
Brought her to me I waited for,
A shiting.
I would have cleft her Watergap,
And joined it close to my Flipflap;
Whilst she had with her Fingers guarded
My foul Nockandrow, all bemerded
A shiting.


Now say that I can do nothing, by the Merdi, they are not of my making, but I
heard them of this good old Grandam, that you see here, and ever since have
retained them in the Budget of my Memory.

Let us return to our Business, said Grangousier: What (said Gargantua) to
skite? No (said Grangousier) but to wipe our Tail: But (said Gargantua) will
not you be content to pay a Punchion of Britton-Wine, if I do not blank and
gravel you in this matter, and put you to a nonplus? Yes truly, said
Grangousier.

There is no need of wiping ones Tail (said Gargantua) but when it is foul;
foul it cannot be unless one have been a skiting; skite then we must before we
wipe our Tails. O my pretty little waggish Boy (said Grangousier) what an
excellent Wit thou have? I will make thee very shortly proceed Doctor in the
Belles Lettres, and by G --, for thou have more Wit than Age.

Now, I prithee, go on in this Bumfodder Discourse; and, by my Beard, I swear,
for one Puncheon thou shall have threescore Pipes, I mean of the good Breton
Wine, not that which grows in Britain, but in the good Country of Verron.
Afterward I wiped my Bum (said Gargantua) with a Kerchief, with a Pillow, with
a Pantoufle, with a Pouch, with a Panier, but that was a wicked and unpleasant
wipe-Breech; then with a Hat; of Hats, note that some are shorn, and others
shaggy, some velveted, others covered with taffities and others with satin,
the best of all these is the shaggy Hat, for it makes a very neat abstersion of
the fecal matter.

Afterward I wiped my Tail with a Hen, with a Cock, with a Pullet, with a
Calves Skin, with a Hare, with a Pigeon, with a Cormorant, with an Attorney's
Bag, with a Montero, with a Coif, with a Faulconer's Lure; but to conclude, I
say and maintain* that of all Torcheculs, Arsewisps, Bumfodders, Tail-napkins,
Bunghole-cleansers and wipe-breeches, there is none in the World comparable to
the Neck of a Goose, that is well douned, if you hold her head betwixt your
Legs: And believe me therein upon mine Honor; for you will thereby feel in
your Nockhole a most wonderful pleasure, both in regard of the softness of the
said Down, and of the temperate heat of the Goose; which is easily communicated
to the Bumgut, and the rest of the Intestines, insofar as to come even to the
Regions of the Heart and Brains.

And think not, that the Felicity of the Heroes and Demigods in the Elysian
Fields, consists either in their Asphodele, Ambrosia, or Nectar, as our old
Women here use to say; but in this (according to my judgment) that they wipe
their Tails with the Neck of a Goose, holding her Head betwixt their Legs, and
such is the Opinion of Master John of Scotland.

CHAP. XIV. How Gargantua was taught Latin by a Sophister.
THE good Man Grangousier, having heard this discourse, was ravished with
Admiration, considering the high reach, and mavelous understanding of his Son
Gargantua, and said to his Governesses. Philip King of Macedon knew the great
Wit of his Son Alexander, by his skilful managing of a Horse; for his Horse
Bucephalus was so fierce and unruly, that none durst adventure to ride him;
after that he had given to his Riders such devilish falls, breaking the Neck
of this Man, the other Man's Leg, braining one, and cracking another's
Jaw Bone. This by Alexander being considered, one day in the Hippodrome (which
was a place appointed for the breaking and managing of great Horses) he
perceived that the fury of the Horse proceeded merely from the fear he had of
his own shadow; whereupon getting on his back, he run him against the Sun, so
that the shadow fell behind, and by that means tamed the Horse, and brought him
to his hand. Whereby his Father perceiving his mavelous Capacity and divine
Insight, caused him most carefully to be instructed by Aristotle; who at that
time was highly renowned above all the Philosophers of Greece. After the same
manner, I tell you, that by this only discourse, which now I have here had
before you with my Son Gargantua; I know that his Understanding does
participate of some Divinity; and that if he be well taught, and have that
Education which is fitting, he will attain to a supreme degree of Wisdom.
Therefore will I commit him to some learned Man, to have him indoctrinated
according to his Capacity, and will spare no cost.

Presently they appointed him a great Sophister-Doctor, called Master Tubal
Holophernes, who taught him his ABC, so well, that he could say it by heart
backwards; and about this he was Five Years and three Months.

Then read he to him, Donat, facet, theodolet, and Alanus in parabolis: About
this he was Thirteen Years six Months and two Weeks. But you must remark, that
in the mean time he did learn to write in Gottish Characters, and that he wrote
all his Books; for the Art of Printing was not then in use.

And did ordinarily carry a great Pen and Inkhorn, weighing above Seven
thousand Quintals, the Pen-case whereof was as big and as long as the great
Pillar of Enay; and the Horn was hanged to it in great Iron Chains, it being
of the vvideness to hold a Tun of Merchand Ware.

After that was read unto him the Book de modis significandi, with the
Commentaries of Hurtbise, of Fasquin, of Tropifeu, of Gaulhaut, of John Calf,
of Billonio, of Berlinguandus, and a rabble of others; and herein he spent more
then Eighteen Years and eleven Months, and was so well versed therein, that to
try Masteries in School-disputes with his Condisciples, he would recite it by
heart backwards: And did sometimes prove on his Fingers ends to his Mother,
Quod de modis significandi non erat scientia. Then was read to him the Compost,
on which he spent Sixteen Years and two Months. And at that very time, which
was in the Year 1420, his said Praeceptor died of the Pox.

Afterward he got an old coughing Fellow to teach him, named Master Iobelin
Bride, who read unto him Hugotio, Flebard, Grecism, the Doctrinal, the Pars,
the Quid est, the Supplementum, Marmoretus de moribus in mensa servandis,
Seneca de quatuor virtutibus cardinalibus, Passaventus cum commento; and Dormi
secure for the Holy Days, and other such llke stuff; by reading whereof he
became as wise as any we ever since baked in an Oven.

CHAP. XV. How Gargantua was put under other Schoolmasters.
AT the last his Father perceived, that indeed he studied hard, and that
although he spent all his time therein, yet for all that did he profit nothing;
but which is worse, grew thereby a Fool, a Sot, a Doult and Block-head;
whereof making a heavy complaint to Don Philip of Marays, Viceroy of
Papeligosse, he found that it were better for his Son to learn nothing at all,
then to be taught such like Books, under such Schoolmasters, because their
Knowledge was nothing but all Trifle, and their Wisdom Foppery, serving only to
basterdize good and noble Spirits, and to corrupt the Flower of Youth. That it
is so, take (said he) any Young Boy of this time, who has only studied two
Years; if he have not a better Judgment, a better Discourse, and that expressed
in better Terms then your Son, with a compleater Carriage and Civility to all
manner of persons, account me for ever hereafter a very clounch, and
baconslicer of Brene. This pleased Grangousier very well and he commanded that
it should be done.

At night at supper, the said Don Philip brought in a young Page of his, of
Ville-gouges, called Eudemon, so neat, so trim, so handsome in his Apparel, so
spruce, with his Hair in so good Order, and so sweet and comely in his
behavior, that he had the resemblance of a little Angel more than of a human
Creature. Then he said to Grangousier, Do you see this young Boy? He is not as
yet full twelve years old; let us try (if it like you) what difference there is
betwixt the knowledge of the Dunces Mateologian of old time, and the young Lads
that are now. The Trial pleased Grangousier, and he commanded the Page to
begin. Then Eudemon, asking leave of the Viceroy his Master, so to do, with
his Cap in his hand, a clear and open countenance, beautiful and ruddy Lips,
his Eyes steady, and his Looks fixed upon Gargantua, with a youthful modesty;
standing up strait on his feet, began to commend him; first for his Virtue and
good Manners; secondly for his knowledge; thirdly, for his Nobility; fourthly,
for his bodily accomplishments; and in the fifth place, most sweetly exhorted
him to reverence his Father with all due observancy, who was so careful to
have him well brought up; in the end he prayed him, that he would vouchsafe to
admit of him amongst the least of his Servants; for other Favor at that time
desired he none of Heaven, but that he might do him some grateful and
acceptable Service; all this was by him delivered with such proper gestures,
such distinct Pronunciation, so pleasant a Delivery, in such exquisite fine
Terms, and so good Latin, that he seemed rather a Gracchus, a Cicero, an
Aemilius of the time past, then a youth of this Age. But all the countenance
that Gargantua kept was, that he fell to crying like a Cow, and cast down his
Face, hiding it with his Cap, nor could they possibly draw one word from him,
no more than a Fart from a dead Ass.

Whereat his Father was so grievously vexed, that he would have killed Master
Iobelin, but the said Don Philip vvith-held him from it by fair persuasions, so
that at length he pacifyed his Wrath. Then Grangousier commanded he should be
paid his Wages, that they should wittle him up soundly, Sophister-like, and
then give him to all the Devils in Hell: At least (said he) to day, shall it
not cost him much to his Host, if by chance he should dye as drunk as an
Englishman. Master Iobelin being gone out of the house, Grangousier consulted
with the Viceroy what Schoo^-master they should choose for him, and it was
betwixt them resolved, that Ponocrates the Tutor of Eudemon should have the
charge, and that they should go altogether to Paris, to know what was the
study of the young Men of France at that time.

CHAP. XVI. How Gargantua was sent to Paris, and of the huge great Mare that he
rode on; How she destroyed the Oxe-flies of the Beauce.
IN the same season Fayoles, the fourth King of Numidia, sent out of the
Country of Africa to Grangousier, the most hideously great Mare that ever was
seen, and of the strangest Form (for you know well enough) how it is said,
that Africa always is productive of some new thing. She was as big as six
Elephants, and had her feet cloven, into toes, like Julius Caesar's horse, with
slouch-hanging ears, like the goats in Languedoc, and a little horn on her
buttock, she was of a burnt sorel hue, with a little mixture of daple gray
spots, but above all she had a horrible tail; for it was little more or less,
then every whit, as great as the Steeple of St. Mark besides Langes; and
squared as that is, with tuffs and hair plaits, wrought within one another, no
otherwise then as the beards are upon the ears of corn.

If you wonder at this, wonder rather at the Tails of the Scythian Rams, which
weighed above thirty pounds each, and of the Su^ian Sheep, who need (if ^enaud
say true) a little cart at their heels to bear up their Tail, it is so long and
heavy. You Country wenches have no such Tails: And she was brought by Sea in
three Carricks and a Brigantine unto the Harbor of Olone in Thalmondois. When
Grangousier saw her, Here is (said he) what is fit to carry my Son to Paris.
So now, in the name of God, all will be well, he will one day be a great
Scholar; were it not for Dunces, we should all be Doctors. The next Morning
(after they had drunk, you must understand) they took their Journey; Gargantua,
his Pedagogue, Ponoorates, and their Equipage, and with them Eudemon, the young
Page; and because the weather was fair and temperate, his Father caused to be
made him a pair of dun boots; Babin calls them buskins. Thus did they merrily
pass their time in traveling on their highway, always making good cheer, and
and were very pleasant till they came a little above Orleans, in which place
there was a forest of five and thirty leagues long, and seventeen in breadth,
or thereabouts. This Forest was most horribly, fertile and copious in
Dorflies, Hornets and Wasps, so that it was a very Purgatory for the poor
Mares, Asses and Horses: But Gargantua's Mare did avenge her self handsomely, of
all the outrages therein committed upon Beasts of her quality, and that by a
trick whereof they had no suspicion. For as, soon as ever they were entered into
the said Forest, and that the Wasps had given the assault, she drew out her
tail, and therewith skirmishing, did so sweep them, that she overthrew all the
Wood along and athwart, here and there, this way and that way, longwise and
sidewise, over and under, and felled every where the wood with as much ease, as
a mower does the grass, in such sort* that never since has there been there,
neither Wood, nor Wasp^: For all the Country was h^^^by reduced to a plain
champian-Field. Which Gargantua took great pleasure to behold, and said to his
company no more but this, Ie trove beauce, I find this pretty; whereupon that
country has been ever since that time called Beauce. But all the breakfast
the Mare got that day, was but a little yawning and gaping, in memory, whereof
the Gentlemen of Beauce do as yet to this day break their fast with gaping,
which they find to be very good, and do spit the better for it. At last they
came to Paris, where Gargantua refresh't himself two or three days, making very
merry with his folks, and enquiring what Men of learning there* were then in
the City and what wine they drunk there.

CHAP. XVII. How Gargantua paid his Beverage to the Parisians, and how he took
away the great Bells of our Lady's Church.
SOme few days after that they had refresht themselves, he went to see the
City, and was beheld of every Body there with great Admiration. For the People
of Paris are such Fools, such Puppies and Naturals, that a Jugler, a Carrier of
Indulgences, a Sumpter-horse, a Mule with his Bells, a Blind Fiddler in the
middle of a cross Lane, shall draw a greater confluence of People together,
than an Evangelical Preacher. And they pressed so hard upon him, that he was
constrained to rest himself upon the Steeple of our Lady's Church; at which
place, seeing so many about him, he said with a loud Voice, I believe that
these Buzzards will have me to pay them here my Welcome hither, and my Beverage:
It is but good reason, I will now give them their Wine, but it shall be only a
Par ris, that is, in Sport. Then smiling, he untied his goodly Codpiece, and
lugging out his Roger into the open Air, he so bitterly all to bepist them,
that he drowned Two hundred and sixty thousand, four hundred and eighteen,
besides the Women and little Children.

Some nevertheless of the Company escaped this Piss-flood by mere speed of
Foot, who when they were at the higher end of the University, sweating,
coughing, spitting and out of breath, they began to swear and curse, some in
good hot earnest, and others Par ris, Carimari, Carimara; Golynoly, Golynolo;
Ods-Bodikins, we are washed Par ris, from whence that City has been ever since
called Paris; whose name formerly was Leucotia (as Strabo testifies, lib.
quarto) which in Greek is Whiteness, because of the white Thighs of the Ladies
of that place. And forasmuch as at this imposition of a new name, all the
People that were there, swore every one by the Sancts of his Parish, the
Parisians, which are patched up of all Nations, and all manner of Men, are by
Nature good at Swearing, and not a little domineering; whereupon Ioanninus de
Barrauco libro de copiositate reverent^arum, thinks that they are called
Parisians, from the Greek, as one would say, Bold Talkers.

This done, he considered the great Bells, which were in the said Steeple, and
made them ring very harmoniously; which whilst he was doing, it came into his
Mind, that they would serve very well for tingling Tantans to hang about his
Mares Neck, when she should be sent back to his Father (as he intended) loaded
with Brie Cheese and fresh Herring; and indeed he forthwith carried them to his
Lodging. In the mean while there came a Master beggar of the Friars of St.
Anthony, for some Hogs Purtenance; who that he might be heard afar-off, and to
make the Bacon shake in the very Chimneys, had a mind to these Bells, and made
account to filch them away privily. Nevertheless, he left them behind very
honestly, not for that they were too hot, but that they were somewhat too heavy
for his carriage. This was not he of Bourg, for he was too good a Friend of
mine.

All the City was in an Uproar, they being (as you know) upon any slight
occasion, so ready to Uproars and Insurrections, that foreign Nations wonder at
the Patience of the Kings of France, who do not by good Justice restrain them
from such tumultuous Courses, seeing the manifold inconveniences which thence
arise from day to day. Would to God I knew the Shop, wherein are forged these
Divisions, and factious Combinations, that I might bring them to light in the
confraternities of my Parish. Believe for a truth, that the place wherein the
people (gathered together) were thus sulfur'd, moiled and bepist, was called
Nesle, where then was (but now is no more) the Oracle of Leucotia. There was
the case proposed, and the inconvenience showed of carrying away the Bells.

After all their ergos, with their pro and con, it was concluded in Baralipton,
that they should send the oldest and most sufficient of the Faculty unto
Gargantua, to signify unto him the great and horrible prejudice they sustain
by the want of those Bells; and notwithstanding the good reasons given in by
some of the University, why this charge was fitter for an Orator than a
Sophister, there was chosen for this purpose our Master Ianotus de Bragmardo.

CHAP. XVIII. How Janotus de Bragmardo was sent to Gargantua, to recover the
great Bells.
MAster Ianotus, with his Hair cut round as a Dish, his Liripoop on his Head,
after the old fashion; and having sufficiently antidoted his Stomach with
Kitchen-Cordials, and holy Water of the Cellar, convoyed himself to the Lodging
of Gargantua, driving before him three red muzled Beadles, and draging after
him five or six Artless Masters, all thoroughly bedagled with the Mire of the
Streets. At their entry Ponocrates met them, who was afraid, seeing them so
disguised, and thought they had been some Maskers out of their Wits; which
moved him to enquire of one of the said Artless Masters of the Company, what
this Mummery meant? It was answered him, that they desired to have their Bells
restored to them. As soon as Ponocrates heard that, he ran in all haste to
carry the news unto Gargantua, that he might be ready to answer them, and
speedily resolve what was to be done. Gargantua being advertised hereof, called
apart his Schoolmaster Ponocrates, Philotimus Steward of his House, Gymnastes
his Esquire, and Eudemon, and very summarily conferred with them, both of what
he should do, and what answer he should give. They were all of Opinion, that
they should bring them unto the Can-office, and there make them drink like
Roysters, and line their Jackets soundly. And that this Cougher might not be
puffed up with Vainglory, by thinking the Bells were restored at his Request,
they sent (whilst he was plying the Pot) for the Major of the Town, the Rector
of the Faculty, and the Vicar of the Church, unto whom they resolved to deliver
the Bells, before the Sophister had delivered his Commission. After that, in
their hearing, he should make his fine Harangue, which was done, and they being
come, the Sophister was brought into a full Hall, and began as follows, in
coughing.

CHAP. XIX. The Harangue of Master Jonatus de Bragmardo, for the Recovery of
the Bells.
HEM, hem, Gudday Sir, Gudday, and vobis, my Masters, it were but reason that
you should restore to us our Bells: for we have great need of them. Hem, hem,
aihfuhash, we have oftentimes heretofore refused good Money for them of those
of London in Cahors, yea and of those of Bourdeaux in Brie, who would have
bought them for the substantific Quality of the elementary Complexion* which is
intronisicated in the terrestreity of their quidditative nature, to extraneize
the blasting Mists and Whirl winds upon our Vines; indeed not ours, but these
round about us. For if we lose the Liquor of the Grape, we lose all, both Sense
and Law. If you restore them unto us at my request, I shall gain by it six
Basketful of Sauciges, and a fine pair of Breeches, which will do my Legs a
great deal of good, or else they will not keep their promise to me. Ho by gob,
domine, a pair of Breeches is good, and vir sapiens non abhorrebit ^am. Ha, ha,
a pair of Breeches is not so easily got, I have experience of it my self.
Consider, Domine, I have been these Eighteen Days in metagrabolising this brave
Speech, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, and quae sunt Dei, Deo. Ibi jacet
lepus, by my Faith, Domine, if you will sup with me in camera, by cox body,
Charitatis nos faciemus bonum cherubin; ego occidit unum porcum, and ego habet
bonum vino: But of good Wine we cannot make bad Latin. Well, De part Dei date
nobis bellas nostras; Hold, I give you in the name of the Faculty, a Sermones
de utino, that utinam you would give us our Bells. Vultis etiam pardonos? per
diem vos habebitis, and nihil payabiris.

O Sir Domine, Bellagivaminor nobis; verily, est bonum vobis. They are useful
to every body. If they fit your Mare well, so do they do our Faculty; Quae
comparata est jumentis insipientibus, and similis facta est eis, Psalmo nescio
quo. Yet did I quote it in my Note-book; and est unum bonum Achilles, a good
defending Argument, Hem, hem, hem, haikhash; for I prove unto you that you
should give me them. Ego sic argumentor, Omnis bella bellabilis in Bellerio
bellando, bellans bellativo, bellare facit, bellabiliter bellantes. Parisius
habet bellas; ergo gluc. Ha, ha, ha, this is spoken to some purpose; it is in
tertio primae, in Darii, or elsewhere. By my soul, I have seen the time that I
could play the Devil in arguing, but now I am much failed; and henceforward
want nothing but good Wine, a good Bed, my Back to the Fire, my Belly to the
Table, and a good deep dish.

Hei domine, I beseech you, in nomine Patris, Filii and Spiritus sancti, Amen,
to restore unto us our Bells; and God keep you from evil, and our Lady from
Health; Qui vivit and regnat per omnia secula seculorum, Amen. Hem,
hashch^hhawk sash, qzrchremhemhash. Verum enim vero, quandoquidem, dubio
procul, aedepol, quoniam, ita, certe, meus deus filius. A Town without Bells is
like a blind Man without a Staff, an Ass without a Crupper, and a Cow without
Cymbals; therefore be assured, until you have restored them unto us, we will
never leave crying after you, like a blind Man that has lost his Staff,
braying like an Ass without a Crupper, and making a noise like a Cow without
Cymbals. A certain Latinisator dwelling near the Hospital, said once, producing
the Authority of one Taponnus, I lie, it was Pontanus the secular Poet, who
wished those Bells had been made of Feathers, and the Clapper of a Fox-tail, to
the End they might have begot a Chronicle in the Bowels of his Brain, when he
was about the composing of his carmini-formal Lines; But Nac petetin petetac,
tic, torche Lorgne, more the Deponent says not. He was declared an Heretic; We
make them as of Wax. And valete and plaudite. Calepinus recensus.

CHAP. XX. How the Sophister carried away his Cloth, and how he had a Suit in
Law against the other Masters.
THE Sophister had no sooner ended, but Ponocrates and Eudemon burst out in a
laughing so heartily, that they had almost split with it, and given up the
Ghost, even just as Crassus did, seeing a lubberly Ass eat Thistles; and as
Philemon, who seeing an Ass eat those Figs which were provided for his own
dinner, died with force of Laughing. Together with them Master Ionatus fell a
laughing too as fast as he could, in which mood of laughing they continued so
long, that their Eyes did Water by the vehement concussion of the substance of
the Brain, by which these lachrymal Humidities, being pressed out, glided through
the optic Nerves; and so to the full represented Democritus Heraclitising, and
Heraclitus Democritising.

When they had done laughing, Gargantua consulted with the prime of his
Retinue, what should be done. There Ponocrates was of Opinion, that they should
make this fair Orator drink again, and seeing he had showed them more Pastime,
and made them laugh more than a natural. Fool could have done, that they should
give him Ten Basket full of Sauciges, mentioned in his Jolly Harangue, with a
pair of Hose, three hundred great Billets for the Fire, five and twenty
Hogsheds of Wine, a good large Down-bed, and a deep capacious Dish, which he
said were necessary for his old Age.

All this was done as they did appoint; only Gargantua doubting that they could
not quickly find out Breeches fit for his wearing, because he knew not what
fashion would best become the said Orator, whether the ma^tingal Fashion,
wherein is a spunge-hole with a draw Bridge, for the more easy caguing; or the
fashion of the Mariners, for the greater solace and comfort of his Kidneys* or
that of the Switzers, which keeps warm the Belly-tabret; or round Breeches with
strait cannions, having in the Seat a piece like a Cods Tail; all which
considered, for fear of over hea^ing his Reins, he caused to be given him seven
Else of white Cloth for the linings. The Wood was carried by the Porters, the
Masters of Arts carried the Sauciges and the Dishes, and Master Ianotus himself
would carry the Cloth. One of the said Masters* (called Iesse Bandouille)
showed him that it was not seemly nor decent for one of his Degree and Quality
to do so, and that therefore he should deliver it to one of them* Ha, said
Ianotus, Blockhead, Blockhead, thou do not conclude in modo and figura; for
lo, to this end serve the Suppositions, and parva Logicalia: Pannus, pro quo
supponit? Confuse (said Bandouille) and distributive. I do not ask thee (said
Ionatus) Blockhead, quomodo supponit, but pro qui? It is Blockhead, pro tibiis
meis, and therefore I will carry it, Egomet, sicut suppositum, portat
appositum; so did he carry it away very close, as Patelin did his Cloth. The
best was, that when this Cougher in a full Assembly held at the Mathurins, had
with great confidence demanded his Breeches and Sauciges, and that they were
flatly denied him, because he had them of Gargantua, according to the
Informations thereupon taken; he showed them that this was gratis, and out of
pure liberality, by which they were not in any sort quit of their Promises.
Notwithstanding this it was answered him, that he should be content with
Reason, without expectation of any other Bribe there. Reason? (said Ianotus) we
use none of that here, unlucky Traitors, you are not worth the hanging; the
Earth bears not more arrant Villains then you are, I know it well enough;
Halt not before Cripples; I have practiced wickedness with you. By God's Rattle
I will inform the King of the Enormous Abuses that are forged here, and carried
under hand by you, and let me be a Leper if he do not burn you alive like
Bougres, Traitors, Heretics and Suducers, Enemies to God and Virtue.

Upon these words they framed Articles against them; he on the other side cited
them to appear: In sum, the Process was retained by the Court, and there it is
yet depending. Hereupon the Magisters made a vow, never to rub off the Dirt
from either Shoes or Clothes: Master Ianotus with his Adherents, vowed never
to blow their Noses, until Judgment were given by a definitive Sentence.

By reason of those Vows, both Parties continue Dirty and Snotty to this Day;
for the Court has not yet fully looked into all the Proceedings: So that the
Judgment is not like to be declared till latter Lammas; that is to say, Never.
So you find that they do more then Nature, and contrary to their own Articles:
The Articles of Paris maintain, that to God alone belongs infinity, and Nature
produces nothing that is Immortal; for she puts an end and period to all
things by her engendered, according to the Saying, Omnia orta cadunt, etc. But
these Thick-mist-swallowers make the Suits in Law, depending before them, both
Infinite and Immortal; in doing whereof, they have given occasion to, and
verified the Saying of, Chilo the Lacedaemonian, consecrated at Delphos, That
Misery goes along with Lawsuits, and Suitors are miserable; for sooner shall
they attain to the End of their Lives, than to the Final Decision of their
pretended Rights.

CHAP. XXI. The Study of Gargantua, according to the Discipline of his
Schoolmasters the Sophisters.
THE first day being thus spent, and the Bells put up again in their own place,
the Citizens of Paris, in acknowledgment of this Courtesy, offered to maintain
and feed his Mare as long as he pleased; which Gargantua took in good part, and
they sent her to graze in the Forest of Biere. I think she is not there now.
This done, he with all his heart submitted his study to the discretion of
Ponocrates; who first of all appointed that he should do as he was accustomed,
to the end it might be underdood by what means, in so long time, his old
Masters had made him such a Sot and Puppy. He disposed therefore of his time in
such fashion, that ordinarily he did awake betwixt eight or nine a clock,
whether it was day or not (for so had his ancient Governors ordained) alleging
that which David says; Vanam est vobis ante lucem surgere. Then did he tumble
and toss, wag his Legs and wallow in the Bed sometime, the better to stir up
and rouse his vital Spirits, and apparelled himself according to the Season:
But willingly he would wear a great long Gown of thick Freeze, furred with
Fox-Skins. Afterward he combed his Head with a Comb de al-main, which is the
four Fingers and the Thumb; for his Praeceptors had said, That to comb himself
otherways, to wash and make himself neat, was to lose time in this World. Then
he dung'd, pist, spued, belched, cracked, yawn'd, spitted, cough'd, vexed,
sneez'd and snotted himself like an Archdeacon: And to fortify against the
Fog and bad air, went to breakfast, having some good fried Tripes, fair Rashers
on the Coals, good Gamons of Bacon, store of good minced Meat, and a great deal
of sippet-Brewis, made up of the Fat of the Beef-pot, laid upon Bread, Cheese
and chopped Parsley strewn together.

Ponocrates showed him, that he ought not to eat so soon after rising out of
his Bed, unless he had performed some Exercise beforehand: Gargantua answered,
What have not I sufficiently well exercised my self? I have wallow'd and rolled
my self six or seven turns in my Bed, before I rose: Is not that enough? Pope
Alexander did so, by the advice of a Jew his Physician, and lived till his
dying day in despite of his Enemies. My first Masters have used me to it,
saying, That to eat Breakfast made a good memory; and therefore they drank
first. I am very well after it, and dine but the better. And Master Tubal (who
was the first Licentiat at Paris) told me, That it was not enough to run apace,
but to set forth betimes. So the total Welfare of our humidity does not depend
upon drinking, switter, swatter like Ducks, but in being at it early in the
Morning. Vnde versus, Lener matin n' est point bon heur,
Boire matin est le meilleur.
To rise betimes is good for nothing,
To drink betimes is Meat and Clothing.


After a good Breakfast he went to Church, and they carried to him in a great
Basket, a huge Breviary, weighing what in Grease, Clasps, Parchment and Cover,
little more or less than Eleven hundred and six Pounds. There he heard six and
twenty or thirty Masses: This while, to the same place came his Mattin-mumbler,
muffled up about the Chin, round as an Hoop, and his breath pretty well
antidoted with the Vine-tree-sirrup. With him he mumbled all his Kiriels, which
he so curiously thumbed and fingered, that there fell not so much as one Bead
of them to the Ground. As he went from the Church they brought him upon a Dray
drawn with Oxen, a confused heap of Patinotres of Sante Claude, every one of
the bigness of a Hatblock; and sauntring along through the Cloisters, Galleries
or Garden, he riddled over more of them than sixteen Hermites would have done.
Then did he study some paltry half-hour with his Eyes fixed upon his Book; but
(as the Comedy has it) His mind was in the Kitchen. Pissing then a whole pot
full, he sat down at Table; and because he was naturally flegmatic, he began
his Meal with some dozens of Gammons, dried Neats Tongues, Botargos, Sauciges
and such other forerunners of Wine; in the mean while, four of his Folks did
cast into his mouth one after another continually mustard by whole shovels
full. Immediately after that, he drank a horrible draught of White Wind for the
comfort of his Kidneys. When that was done, he eat according to the Season,
Meat agreeable to his Appetite; and then left off eating when his Belly was
like to crack for fullness. As for his drinking, he had in that neither end nor
rule; for he was wont to say, That the limits and bounds of drinking were, that
a Man might drink till the Cork of his Shoes swells up half a foot high.

CHAP. XXII. The Games of Gargantua.
THen with a starched phys mumbling over some Scraps of a scurvie grace, he
washed his Hand in fresh wine, picked his Teeth with the foot of a hog, and
talked merrily with his People; then the Carpet being spread, they brought
plenty of Cards, many Dice, with great store and abundance of checkers and
chess-boards.

There he played.

At Flusse. At Primero. At the beast. At the rifle. At trump. At the prick and
spare not. At the hundred. At the peenie. At the unfortunate Woman. At the fib.
At the pass ten. At one and thirty. At post and pair, or even and sequence. At
three hundred. At the unlucky man. At the last couple in Hell. At the hock. At
the surly. At the Lanskenet. At the cukoe. At puff, or let him speak that
has it: At take nothing and throw out. At the marriage. At the frolic or
Jackdaw. At the opinion. At who does the one, does the other. At the sequences.
At the Ivory bundles. At the tarots. At losing load him. At he is gulled and
esto. At the torture. At the handruf. At the click. At honors. At Love. At the
chesse. At Reynold the Fox. At the squares. At the cowes. At the Lottery. At
the chance or mum-chance. At three dice or maniest bleaks. At the Tables. At
the Nivinivinack. At the lurch. At doublets or queens-game. At the failie. At
the French Tictac. At the long Tables or Ferkeering. At feldown. At Tods body.
At needs must. At the Dames or Draughts. At bob and mow. At primus secundus. At
mark-knife. At the keys. At span-counter. At even and odd. At cross or pile.
At ball and huckle-bones. At Ivory balls. At the billiards. At bob and hit. At
the Owl. At the charming of the hare. At pull yet a little. At trudgepig. At
the Magatapies. At the horn. At the flower Oer Shrove-tide ox. At the
Madge-owlet. At pinch without Laughing. At prickle me tickle me. At the
unshoing of the Ass. At the cocksess. At hari hohi. At I set me down. At earl
beardie. At the old mode. At draw the spit. At put out. At gossip lend me your
sack. At ramcod ball. At thrust out the harlot. At marfeil figs. At nicknamrie.
At stick and hole. At book or him, or flaying the Fox. At the branching it. At
trill Madam or graple my Lady. At the Cat selling. At blow the Coal. At the
rewedding. At the quick and dead judge. At unoven the iron. At the false clown.
At the flints, or at the ninestones. At to the crutch hulch back. At the Sanct
is found. At hinch, pinch and laugh not. At the leek. At Bumdockdousse. At the
loosegig. At the hoop. At the sow. At belly to belly. At the dales or straths.
At the twigs. At the quoits. At I Am for that. At tilt at weekie. At nine pins.
At the cock quintin* At tip and hurl. At the flat bowls. At the veere and
tourn. At rogue and ruffian. At bumbatch touch. At the mysterious trough. At
the short bowls. At the daple gray. At cock and crank it. At break-pot. At my
desire. At twirlie whirlietrill. At the rush bundles. At the short staff. At
the whirling gigge At hide and seek, or are you all hid. At the picket. At the
blank. At the care sin. At the pilfrers. At prison bars. At have at the nuts.
At cherrie-pit. At rub and rice. At whip top. At the casting top. At the
hobgobling. At the O wonderful. At the soilile smutchie. At fast and loose. At
sutchbreech. At the broom-beesom. At St. Cosme I come to adore thee. At the
lusty brown boy. At I take you naping. At fair and softly passes lent. At the
forked oak. At trusse. At the wolfes tail. At bum to busse, or nose in breech.
At Geordie give me my lance. At swagaie, waggie or shoggieshou. At stook and
rook, shear, and threave. At the birch. At the musse. At the dillie dilli
darling. At ox moudie. At purpose in purpose. At nine less. At blind-man buff.
At the fallen bridges. At bridle nick. At the white at buts. At thwack swinge
him. At apple, pear, plum. At mumgi. At the toad. At cricket. At the pounding
stick. At jack and the box. At the queens. At the trades. At heads and points.
At the vine-tree hug. At black be thy fall. At ho the distaff. At Joane Tomson.
At the boulting cloth. At the oats seed. At greedi glutton. At the morish
dance. At feebi. At the whole frisk and gambole. At battabum, or riding of the
while mare. At Hind the Plowman. At the good mawkin. At the dead beast. At
climb the ladder Billie. At the dying hog. At the salt doup. At the pretty
pigeon. At barley break. At the bavine. At the bush leap. At crossing At the
hardit arsepursie. At the harrowers nest. At forward hey. At the fig. At
gunshot crack. At musteard peel. At the gome. At the relapse. At jog breech, or
pricle him forward. At knockpate. At the Cornish cough. At the crane dance. At
slash and cut. At bobbing, or the flirt on the nose. At the larks. At fill
iping.
After he had thus well played, shufl'd, cog'd and thrown away his Time, it was
thought fit to drink a little and that was every Man eleven bumpers: And so
make much of himself and stretch upon a fair bench, or a good larg bed, and
there sleep for two or three hours together, without thinking or speaking any
hurt: after he was awakened he would shake his Ears a little and then they
brought him fresh wine, he drank better then ever, Ponocrates showed him, that
it was an ill diet to drink after sleeping^ It is (answered Gargantua,) the very
life of the Patriarchs and holy Fathers. For naturally I sleep: Salt and sleep
to me is so many Gamons.

Then began he to study a little and out came the Patenotres: Which the more
formally to dispatch, he got upon an old Mule, which had served nine Kings; and
so mumbling with his Mouth, nodding and dodling his Head, would go see a coney
ferretted or caught in a grinne. At his return he went into the Kitchen, to
know what roast meat was one the spit: and supped very well upon my conscience;
and commonly did invite some of his neighbors that were good drinkers, with
whom carousing merrily, they told stories of all sorts, from the old to the
new. Amongst others, he had for domestics the Lord of Fouille, of Grouville, of
Griviot and of Marigny. After supper were brought into the room the fair wooden
Gos^els, and the books of the four Kings, that is to say, the Tables and Cards,
with a deal of Cock-alls, Mumblety-Pegs and Wheels of Fortune; or else they
went to see the wenches thereabouts with their Wakes, their Junckettings and
little Collations, then to sleep without control till eight a clock the next
Morning.

CHAP. XXIII. How Gargantua was instructed by Ponnocrates and in such sort
disciplinated that he lost not one hour of the Day.
WHen Ponocrates knew Gargantua's vicious manner of living, he resolved to
bring him up in another-gats way; but for a while bore with him, considering,
That nature cannot endure a sudden change, without great violence. Therefore to
begin his work the better, he requested a learned Physician of that time,
called Master Theodorus, seriously to perpend (if it were possible) how to
bring Gargantua unto a better course; the said Physician purged him canonically
with Anticyrian Hellebore, by which Medicine he cleansed all that Foulness and
perverse Habit of his Brain. By this means also Ponocrates made him forget all
that he had learned under his ancient Praeceptors, as Timotheus, did to his
Scholars, who had been instructed under other Musicians: To do this the better,
they brought him into the company of learned Men, which stirred in him an
Emulation and Desire to whet his wit and improve his parts and to bend his
study another way; so as that the World might have a value from him. And
afterward he put himself into such a road that he lost not any one hour in the
day, but employed all his time in Learning and honest Knowledge. Gargantua
awaked about four a clock in the Morning; whilst they were in rubbing of him,
there was read unto him some Chapter of the holy Scripture aloud and clearly
with a Pronunciation fit for the matter, and hereunto was appointed a young
Page born in Basche, named Anagnostes, according to the purpose and argument of
that Lesson, he often times gave himself to worship, adore, pray and send up
his Supplications to that good God, whose Word did show his Majesty and
mavelous Judgment. Then went he unto the secret places to make excretion of
his natural digestions; there his Master repeated what had been read,
expounding unto him the most obscure and difficult points: In returning, they
considered the face of the sky, if it was such as they had observed it the
night before, and into what Signs the Sun was entering, as also the Moon for
that day. This done, he was apparelled, combed, curled, trimmed and perfumed,
during which time they repeated to him the Lessons of the day before; he
himself said them by heart, and upon them would ground some practical Cases
concerning the Estate of Man, which he would prosecute sometimes two or three
hours, but ordinarily they ceased as soon as he was fully clothed. Then for
three good hours he had a Lecture read unto him: This done, they went forth
still conferring of the substance of the Lecture either unto a Field near the
university called the Brack, or unto the meadows where they played at the ball,
tennis and at the Pelitrigone, most gallantly exercising their Bodies, as
formerly they had done their minds: All their play was but in liberty, for they
left off when they pleased and that was commonly when they did sweat over all
their Body, or were otherways weary. Then were they very well wiped and rubbed,
shifted their shirts and walking soberly, went to see if dinner were ready:
Whilst they stayed for that, they did clearly and eloquetnly pronounce some
sentences that they have retained of the Lecture, in the mean time Master
Appetite, came, and then very orderly sat they down at Table. At the beginning
of the meal, there was read some pleasant History of the warlike actions of
former times, until he had taken a glass of Wine. Then (if they thought good,)
they continued reading, or began to discourse merrily together; speaking first
of the virtue, propriety, efficacy and nature of all that was served in at the
table: of Bread, of Wine, of Water, of Salt, of Fleshes, Fishes, Fruits, Herbs,
Roots, and of their dressing; by means whereof, he learned in a little time all
the passages competent for this that were to be found in Pliny, Athenaeus,
Dioscorides, Julius Pollux, Galen, Porphirie, Oppian, Polybius, Heliodore,
Aristotle, Elian and others. Whilst they talked of these things, many times to
be more certain, they caused the very books to be brought to the Table and so
well and perfectly did he in his memory retain the things abovesaid, that in
those Days there was not a Physician, that knew half so much as he did.
Afterward they conferred of the lessons read, in the Morning, and ending their
repast with some conserve or marmelade of quinces: he picked his teeth with
mastic tooth-pickers; washed his hands and eyes with fair fresh water, and gave
thanks unto God in some neat Hymn, made in the praise of the divine bounty and
munificence. This done, they brought in cards, not to play, but to learn a
thousand pretty tricks, and new inventions, which were all grounded upon
Arithmetic. By this means he fell in love with that numerical science and every
day after dinner and supper he past his time in it as pleasantly, as he was
wont to do at cards and dice: So that at last he understood so well both the
Theory and Practical part thereof; that Tunstal the Englishman, who had written
very largely of that purpose, confessed that verily in comparison of him he
understood no more high Dutch.

And not only in that, but in the other Mathematical Seiences, as Geometry,
Astronomy, Music, etc. For in waiting on the concoction, and attending the
digestion of his food, they made a thousand pretty instruments and Geometrical
figures, and did in some measure practice the Astronomical Canons.

After this, they recreated themselves with singing musically, in four or five
parts, or upon a set theme or ground at random, as it best pleased them; in
matter of musical instruments, he learned to play upon the Lute, the Virginals,
the Harp, the Allman Flute with nine holes, the Viol and the Sackbut. This hour
thus spent, and digestion finished, he did purg his body of natural excrements,
then betook himself to his principal study for three hours together, or more,
as well to repeat his morning Lectures, as to proceed in the book he had in
Hand, as also to write handsomely, to draw and form the Antic and Roman Letters.
This being done, they went abroad, and with them a young Gentleman of Tourain,
named the Esquire Gymnast, who taught him the Art of riding, changing then his
clothes, he rode a Naples courser, a Dutch roussin, a Spanish gennet, a barded
or trapped steed, then a light fleet Horse, unto whom he gave a hundred
carieres, made him go the high faults, bounding in the air, free the ditch with
a skip, leap over a style or pale, turn short in a ring both to the right and
left hand. There he broke not his lance; for it is the greatest foolery in the
world, to say I have broken ten lances at tile, or in fight, a Carpenter can do
even as much; but it is a glorious and praiseworthy Action, with one lance to
break and overthrow ten Enemies: Therefore with a sharp, stiff, strong and well
steeled lance, would he usually force up a door, pierce a harness, beat down a
tree, carry away the ring, lift up a cuirasier saddle, with the male coat and
gantlet; all this he did in complete arms from head to foot. As for the
prancing flourishes, and smacking popisms, for the better cherishing of the
horse, commonly used in riding, none did them better then he. The great Vaulter
of Ferrara was but as an Ape compared to him. He was singularly skilful in
leaping nimbly from one horse to another, without putting foot to ground, and
these horses were called desultori^s; he could likewise from either side, with
a lance in his hand, leap on horseback without stirrups, and rule the horse at
his pleasure without a Bridle, for such things are useful in military
Engagements. Another day he exercised the battel-ax, which he so dexterously
wielded, both in the nimble, strong and smooth Management of that weapon, and
that in all the Feats practiseable by it, that he past Knight of Arms in the
field, and at all Essays.

Then tossed he the pike, played with the two handed Sword, with the Backsword,
with the Spanish tuck, the dagger, poiniard, armed, unarmed, with a buckler,
with a cloak, with a targuet.

Then would he hunt the Heart, the Roe-buck, the Bear, the fallow Deer, the
wild Boar, the Hare, the Phesant, the Partridg and the Bustard. He played at
the Baloon and made it bound in the air, both with fist and foot.

He wrestled, ran, jumped, not at three steps and a leap, nor at the Hears
leap, nor yet at the Almenes; for (said Gymnast,) these jumps are for the wars
altogether unprofitable, and of no use; but at one leap he would skip over a
Ditch, spring over a Hedge, mount six paces upon a Wall, ramp and grapple after
this fashon up against a window, of the full height of a lance. He did swim in
deep Waters on his belly, on his back, sidewise, with all his body, with his
feet only, with one Hand in the Air, wherein he held a book, crossing thus the
breadth of the River of Seina, without wetting it and dragged along his cloak
with his Teeth, as did Julius Caesar; then with the help of one Hand, he entered
forcibly into a boat, from whence he cast himself again headlong into the
Water, sounded the depths, hollowed the rocks, and plunged into the pits and
gulphs. Then turned he the boat about, governed it, led it swiftly or slowly
with the stream, and against the stream, stopped it in its course, guided it
with one Hand, and with the other laid hard about him with a huge great Oar,
hoised the sail, hied up along the mast by the shrouds, ran upon the edge of
the decks, set the compass in order, tackled the boulins, and steerr'd the
helm. Coming out of the Water, he ran furiously up against a Hill, and with the
same alacrity and swiftness ran down again; he climed up at trees like a cat,
and leaped from the one to the other like a squirrel; he did pull down the
great boughs and branches like another Milo; then with two sharp well-steeled
Daggers, and two tried Bodkins, would he run up by the wall to the very top of
a House like a cat; then suddenly came down from the top to the bottom, with
such an even composition of members, that by the fall he would catch no harm.

He did cast the dart, through the bar, put the stone, practice the javelin,
the boar-spear or partisan and the halbard; he broke the strongest bows in
drawing, bended against his breast, the greatest cross-bows of steel, took his
aim by the eye with the hand-gun, and shot well, traversed and planted the
Canon, shot at but-marks, at the papgay from below upwards, from above
downwards, then before him, sideways and behind him, like the Parthians.

They tied a cable-rope to the top of a high Tower, by one end whereof hanging
near the ground, he wrought himself with his hands to the very top: Then upon
the same tract came down so sturdily and firm that you could not on a plain
meadow have run with more assurance. They set up a great pole fixed upon two
trees, there would he hang by his Hands, and with them alone, his Feet touching
at nothing, would go back and fore along the foresaid rope with so great
swiftness, that hardly could one overtake him with running and then to exercise
his breast and lungs, he would shout like all the Devils in hell: I heard him
once call Eudemon, from St. Victors, gate to Monmertre: Stentor had never such
a Voice at the siege of Troy.

Then for the strengthening of his nerves or sinews, they made him two great
sows of lead, each of them weighing eight thousand and seven hundred kint^ls,
which they called Alteres; those he took up from the ground in each Hand one,
then lifted them up over his head, and held them so without stirring three
quarters of an Hour and more, which was an inimitable force.

He fought at Barriers with the stoutest and most vigorous Champions: And when
it came to the cope he stood so sturdily on his Feet, that he abandoned himself
unto the strongest, in case they could remove him from his place, as Milo, was
wont to do of old. In whose imitation likewise he held a Pomgranat in his hand,
to give it unto him that could take it from him. The time being thus bestowed,
and himself rubbed, cleansed, wiped and refresht with other clothes, he
returned fair and softly and passing through certain Meadows, or other grassy
places, beheld the trees and plants, comparing them with what is written of
them in the books of the Ancients, such as Theophrast, Dioscorides, Marinus,
Pliny, Nicander, Macer and Galen, and carried home to the house great handfuls
of them, whereof a young Page called Rizotomos had charge; together with little
Mattocks, Pickaxes, Grubbing hooks, Cabbies, Pruning knives, and other
Instruments requisite for gardning. Being come to their lodging, whilst supper
was making ready, they repeated certain passages of that which had been read,
and set down at table. Here remark that his dinner was sober and thrifty, for
he did then eat only to prevent the gnawings of his stomach, but his supper was
copious and large; for he took then as much as was fit to maintain and nourish
him; which indeed is the true diet prescribed by the Art of good and sound
Physic. Although a rabble of loggerheaded Physicians, nuzzeled in the brabling
shop of Sophisters, counsel the contrary. During that repast was continued the
lesson read at dinner as long as they thought good; the rest was spent in good
discourse, learned and profitable: After that they had given thanks he set
himself to sing vocally, and play upon harmonious instruments, or otherways
passed his time at some pretty sports, made with cards or dice; or in
practicing the feats of Legerdemain, with cups and balls. There they stayed
some nights in frolicking thus and making themselves merriy till it was time to
go to bed and on other nights they would go make visits unto learned men, or to
such as had been travelers in strange and remote Countries. When it was full
night before they retired themselves, they went unto the most open place of the
House to see the face of the sky, and there beheld the Comets, if any were, as
likewise the Figures, Situations, Aspects, Oppositions, and Conjunctions of the
both fixed Stars and Planets.

Then with his Master did he briefly recapitulate after the manner of the
Pythagoreans, that which he had read, seen, learned, done and understood in the
whole course of that day.

Then prayed they unto God the Creator, in falling down before him and
strengthening their faith toward him, and glorifying him for his boundless
bounty and giving thanks unto him for the time that was past, they recommended
themselves to his divine Clemency for the future, which being done, they went
to bed, and betook themselves to their repose.

CHAP. XXIV. How Gargantua spent his time in rainy Weather.
IF it happened that the Weather were any Thing cloudy, foul and rainy, all the
Forenoon was employed, as before specified, according to Custom, with this
difference only, that they had a good clear fire lighted, to correct the
Distempers of the Air: But after dinner, in stead of their wonted Exercitations
they did abide within, and by way of Apotherapie, did recreate themselves in
bottleing up of Hay, in cleaving and sawing of Wood, and in threshing sheaves
of Corn at the Barn. Then they studied the Art of Painting or Carving, or
brought into use the antic play of Tables, as Leonicus has written of it; and
as our good Friend Lascaris plays at it. In playing they examined the
passages of ancient Authors, wherein the said Play is mentioned, or any
metaphor drawn from it. They went likewise to see the drawing of Metals, or the
casting of great Ordnance; how the Lapidaries did work, as also the Goldsmiths
and Cutters of precious Stones: Nor did they omit to visit the Alchymists,
Money-coiners, Upholsters, Weavers, Velvet-workers, Watchmakers,
Looking-glass-framers, Printers, Organists, and other such kind of Artificers,
and every where giving them somewhat to drink, did learn and consider the
Industry and Invention of the Trades.

They went also to hear the public Lectures, the solemn Commencements, the
Repeti^ions, the Acclamations, the Pleadings of the gentle Lawyers, and Sermons
of Evangelical Preachers.

He went through the Halls and Places appointed for fencing, and there played
against the Masters themselves at all Weapons, and showed them by Experience,
that he knew as much in it as (yea more then) they. And instead of Simpling,
they visited the Shops of Druggists, Herbalists and Apothecaries, and
diligently considered the Fruits, Roots, Leaves, Gums, Seeds, the Grease and
Ointments of some foreign Parts, as also how they did adulterate them. He went
to see the Juglers, Tumblers, Mountebanks and Quacksalvers; and considered
their cunning, their shifts, their summer saults and smooth tongue, especially
of those of Chauny in Picardy, who are naturally great Praters, and will Banter
and Lie as fast as a Dog can trot.

Being returned home, they did eat at Supper more soberly than at other times;
and meats more desic^ative and extenuating; to the end that the intemperate
moisture of the Air, communicated to the Bodyly a necessary confinity, might by
this means be corrected; and that they might not receive any prejudice for want
of their ordinary bodily Exercise.

Thus was Gargantua governed, and kept on in this course of Education, from day
to day profiting, as you understand such a young Man of his Age and good Sense,
so kept to his Exercise, may well do. Which although at the beginning it seemed
difficult, became a little after so sweet, so easy, and so delightful, that it
seemed rather the Recreation of a King, then the study of a Scholar,
Nevertheless Ponocrates, to divert him from this vehement intension of the
Spirits, thought fit once in a Month, upon some fair and clear day to go out of
the City betimes in the Morning, either toward Gentilly, or Boulogne, or to
Montrouge, or Charenton bridge, or to Vanures, or St. Clou, and there spend all
the day long in making the greatest cheer that could be devised, sporting,
making merry, drinking healths, playing, singing, dancing, tumbling in some
fair Meadow, unnestling of Sparrows, taking of Quails, and fishing for Frogs
and Crabs.

But although that day was past without Books or Lecture, yet was it not spent
without profit; for in the said Meadows they usually repeated certain pleasant
Verses of Virgi^'s Agriculture, of Hesiod and of Politian's Husbandry, would
set a broach some witty Latin Epigrams, then immediately turned them into
Roundlays and Songs in the French Language. In their Feasting, they would
sometimes separate the Water from the Wine that was therewith mixed, as Cato
teaches de re rustica, and Pliny with an Ivy Cup, would wash the Wine in a
Basin full of Water, then take it out again with a Funnel as pure as ever. They
made the Water go from one Glass to another, and contrived a thousand little
automatary Engines, that is to say, moving of themselves.

CHAP. XXV. How there was great Strife and Debate raised betwixt the
Cake-bakers of Learn, and those of Gargantua's Country; whereupon were waged
great Wars.
AT that time, which was the Season of Vintage, in the beginning of Harvest,
when the Country-Shepherds were set to keep the Vines, and hinder the Starlings
from eating up the Grapes: As some Cake-bakers of Learn happened* to pass along
in the broad high way, driving unto the City Ten or Twelve Horses loaded with
Cakes, the said Shepherds courteously entreated them to give them some for
their Money, as the price then ruled in the Market. For here it is to be
remarked, That it is a Celestial Food to eat for Breakfast hot fresh Cakes with
Grapes, especially the frail Clusters, the great red Grapes, Muscadine, the
Verjuice Grape, and the Luskard, for those that are costive in their Belly;
because it will make them gush out, and squirt the length of a Hunter's staff,
like the very tap of a Barrel; and oftentimes thinking to let a squib, they
did all-to-besquatter and conskite themselves, whereupon they are commonly
called the Vintage-thinkers.

The Cake-bakers were in nothing inclinable to their Request; but (which was
worse) did injure them most outragiously, calling them prattling Gablers,
lickorous Gluttons, freckled Bittors, mangy Rascals, shite-abed Scoundrels,
drunken Roysters, sly Knaves, drowsy Loiterers, slapsauce Fellows,
slabberdegullion Druggels, lubbardly Louts, cousining Foxes, ruffian Rogues,
paultry Customers, sycophant Varlets, drawlatch Hoydons, flouting Milk sops,
jeering Companions, staring Clowns, forlorn Snakes, ninny Lobcocks, scurvy
Sneaksbies, fondling Fops, base Loons, saucy Coxcombs, idle Lusks, scoffing
Braggards, noddy Meacocks, blockish Grutnols, Doddipol Iolt heads, jobernol
Goosecaps, foolish Loggerheads, slutch Calf lollies, grout-head Gnatsnapper,
Lob dotterels, gaping Changelings, codshead Loobies, woodcock Slangams,
ninny-hammer Flycatchers, noddipeak Simpletons, turgy Gut, shitten Shepherds,
and other such defamatory Epithetes, saying further, that it was not for them
to eat of these dainty Cakes, but might very well content themselves with the
course unraunged Bread, or to eat of the great brown Household Loaf. To which
provoking words, one amongst them, called Forgier (an honest Fellow of his
person, and a notable Springal) made answer very calmly thus; How long is it
since you have got Horns, that you are become so proud? Indeed formerly you
were wont to give us some freely, and will you not now let us have some for our
Money? This is not the part of good Neighbors, neither do we serve you thus
when you come hither to buy our good Corn, whereof you make your Cakes and
Buns: Besides that, we would have given you to the bargain some of our Grapes,
but by his Zounds, you may chance to repent it, and possibly have need of us at
another time, when we shall use you after the like manner, and therefore
remember it.

Then Marquet, a prime Man in the Confraternity of the Cake-bakers, said unto
him, Yea, Sir, thou art pretty well crest^risen this Morning, thou did eat
yesternight too much millet and bolymoug, come hither Sirrah, come hither, I
will give thee some Cakes: Whereupon Forgier dreading no harm, in all
simplicity went toward him, and drew a Six Pence out of his Leather Sachel,
thinking that Marquet would have sold him some of his Cakes; but instead of
Cakes, he gave him with his Whip such a rude lash overthwart the Legs, that the
marks remained; then would have fled away, but Forgier cried out as loud as he
could, O Murder, Murder, help, help, help, and in the mean time threw a great
Cudgel after him, which he carried under his arm, wherewith he hit him in the
Coronal Joint of his head, upon the Crotaphic Artery of the right side thereof,
so forcibly, that Marquet fell down from his Mare, more like a dead then living
Man.

Mean while the Farmers and Country Swains that were watching their Walnuts
near to that place, came running with their great Poles and long Staves, and
laid such load on these Cake-bakers, as if they had been to thresh upon green
Rye. The other Shepherds and Shepherddesses hearing the lamentable shout of
Forgier, came with their slings and slackies following them, and throwing great
stones at them, as thick as Hail. At last these overtook them, and took from
them about four or five dozen of their Cakes: Nevertheless they paid for them
the ordinary price, and gave them over and above one hundred Eggs, and three
Baskets full of Mulberries. Then did the Cake-bakers help to get Marquet
mounted upon his Mare again, who was most shrewdly wounded; and forthwith they
returned to Learn, changing the resolution they had to go to Pareille,
threatening very sharp and boistrously the Cowherds, Shepherds and Farmers of
Sevile and Sinays, This done, the Shepherds and Shepherddesses made merry with
these Cakes and fine Grapes, and sported themselves together at the sound of
the pretty small Pipe, scoffing and laughing at those vainglorious
Cake-bakers, who had that day met with a Mischief for want of crossing
themselves with a good hand in the Morning. Nor did they forget to apply to
Forgier's Leg some fair great red and medicinal Grapes, and so handsomely dressed
it and bound it up, that he was quickly cured.

CHAP. XXVI. How the Inhabitants of Learn, by the commandment of Picrochole
their King, assaulted the Shepherds of Gargantua, unexpectedly and on a sudden.
THE Cake-bakers being returned to Learn, went presently, before they did
either eat or drink, to the Capitol, and there before their King called
Pichrochole, the third of that name, made their complaint, showing their
Paniers broken, their Caps all crumpled, their Coats torn, their Cakes taken
away, but above all, Marquet most enormously wounded, saying, that all that
mischief was done by the Shepherds and Herdsmen of Grangousier, near the broad
high way beyond Sevile.

Picrochole incontinent grew angry and furious; and, without asking any
further, what, how, why or wherefore? commanded the Ban and Arrier Ban to be
sounded throughout all his Country, that all his Vassals of what condition
soever, should upon pain of the halter come in the best arms they could, unto
the great place before the Castle, at the hour of Noon, and the better to
expedite his design, he caused the Drum to be beat about the Town. Whilst his
dinner was making ready, he went himself to see his Artillery mounted upon the
Carriage, to display his Colors, and set up the great royal Standard, and
loaded Wains with store of Ammunition both for the Field and for the Belly,
Arms and Victuals. At dinner he dispatched his Commissions, and by his express
Edict my Lord Shagrag was appointed to command the Vanguard, wherein were
numbered Sixteen thousand and fourteen Harquebusiers, together with Thirty
thousand eleven Volunteers. The great Tonquedillion, Master of the Horse, had
the charge of the Ordnance, wherein were reckoned Nine hundred and fourteen of
Brass, in Cannons, Double-cannons, Basilisks, Serpentines, Culverins, Bombards,
Falcons, Passevolans, Spiroles, and other sort of great Guns. The Reerguard was
committed to the Duke of Scrapegood: In the main Battle was the King, and the
Princes of his Kingdom. Thus being hastily equipped, before they would set
forward, they sent Three hundred light Horsemen under the Conduct of Captain
Swillwind, to discover the Country, clear the Avenues, and see whether there
was any ambush laid for them. But after they had made diligent search, they
found all the Land round about in Peace and Quiet, without any meeting or
convention at all; which Picrochole understanding, commanded that every one
should march speedily under his Colors. Then in all disorder, without keeping
either rank or file, they took the Fields, one amongst another, wasting,
spoiling, destroying and making havoc of all where ever they went, not sparing
poor nor rich, privileged nor unprivileged Places, Church or Laity, drove away
Oxen and Cows, Bulls, Calves, Heifers, Wethers, Ewes, Lambs, Goats, Kids, Hens,
Capons, Chickens, Geese, Ganders, Goslings, Hogs, Swine, Pigs and such like.
Beating down the Walnuts, plucking the Grapes, tearing the Hedges, shaking the
Fruit Trees, and committing such incomparable abuses, that the like abomination
was never heard of. Nevertheless, they met with none to resist them; for every
one submitted to their mercy; beseeching them, that they might be dealt with
courteously; in regard that they had always carried themselves, as became good
and loving Neighbors; and that they had never been guilty of any wrong or
outrage done upon them, to be thus suddenly surprised, troubled and disquieted,
and that if they would not desist, God would punish them very shortly. To which
Expostulations Remonstrances no other answer was made, but that they would
teach them to eat Cakes.

CHAP. XXVII. How a Monk of Sevile saved the Closs of the Abbey from being
Ravaged by the Enemy.
SO much they did, and so far they went pillaging and stealing, that at last
they came to Sevile where they robbing both Men and Women, and took all they
could catch: Nothing was either too hot or too heavy for them. Although the
Plague was there in the most part of all the Houses, they nevertheless entered
every where; then plundered and carried away all that was within; and yet for
all this not one of them took any hurt, which is a most wonderful case. For the
Curates, Vicars, Preachers, Physicians, Chirurgions and Apothecaries, who went
to visit, to dress, to cure, to heal, to preach unto, and admonish those that
were sick were all dead of the Infection; and these devilish Robbers and
Murderers caught never any harm at all. Whence comes this to pass (my Masters)
I beseech you think upon it?

The Town being thus pillaged, they went unto the Abbey with a horrible noise
and tumult, but they found it shut and made fast against them. Whereupon the
Body of the Army marched forward toward a Ford called the Sue de vede, except
seven Companies of Foot, and Two hundred Lanciers, who staying there, broke
down the Walls of the Closs, to waste, spoil and make havoc of all the Vines
and Vintage within that place. The Monks (poor Devils) knew not in that
extremity to which of all their Sancts they should vow themselves;
nevertheless, at all adventures they rang the Bells ad capitulum capitulantes.
There it was decreed, that they should make a fair Procession, stuffed with
good Lectures, Prayers and Litanies, contra hostium insidias, and jolly
Responses pro pace.

There was then in the Abbey a claustral Monk, called Freer John de
Entoumeures, young, gallant, frisk, lusty, nimble, quick, active, bold,
adventurous, resolute, tall, lean, wide-mouthed, long nosed, a rare mumbler of
Mattins, unbridler of Masses, and runner over of Vigils: And to conclude
summarily in a word, a right Monk, if ever there were any, since the Monking
World monked a Monkery. For the rest a Clerk, even to the Teeth, in matter of
Breviary. This Monk hearing the noise that the Enemy made within the enclosure
of the Vineyard, went out to see what they were doing; and perceiving that they
were cutting and gathering the Grapes, whereon was grounded the foundation of
all their next Years Wine, returned unto the Quire of the Church where the
other Monks were, all amazed and astonished like so many Bell-melters, whom
when he heard sing, im, nim, pe, ne, ne, ne, ne, need, tum, ne, number, number, ini,
i, mi, co, o, no, o, o, neno, ne, no, no, no, rum, nenum, number. This is (said
he) Bien chie chante, Well shit, well sung, by the Virtue of God, why do not
you sing Paniers farewell, Vintage is done; the Devil snatch me if they be not
already within the middle of our Closs, and cut so well both Vines and Grapes,
that, by cods body, there will not be found for these four Years to come so
much as a gleaning in it. By the Belly of Sanct James, what shall we ( poor
Devils) drink the while? Lord God! da mihi potum. Then said the Prior of the
Convent, What should this drunken Fellow do here, let him be carried to Prison
for troubling the Divine Service: Nay, said the Monk, the Wine Service, let us
behave our selves so, that it be not troubled; for you your self, my Lord
Prior, love to drink of the best, and so does every honest Man. Never yet did a
Man of worth dislike good Wine, it is a monastical Apophthegm. But these
Responses that you chant here by G -- are not in Season. Wherefore is it that
our Devotions were instituted to be short in the time of Harvest and Vintage,
and long in the Advent and all the Winter.

The late Friar, Messepelosse of good memory, a true zealous Man (or the Devil
take me) of our Religion, told me, and I remember it well, how the reason was,
That in this Season we might press and make the Wine, and in Winter whiff it
up. Hark you, my Masters, you that love the Wine, Cops Body, follow me, for
Sanct Anthony burn me as freely as a Faggot, if they taste one drop of the
Liquor, that will not now come and fight in defense of the Vine. Hogs Belly,
the Goods of the Church! Ha, no, no: What the Devil would have Sanct Thomas of
England died for them; if I die, shall not I be a Sanct likewise? Yet will not
I die for all this, but send others a-packing.

As he spoke this, he threw off his great Monks habit, and laid hold upon the
staff of the Cross, which was made of the Heart of a Sorbaple-tree, it being of
the length of a Lance, round, of a full gripe, and a little powdered with
Flower de luce, almost all defaced and worn out. Thus went he out in a fair
long-skirted Jacket, putting his Frock scarfways athwart his Breast, and with
his staff of the Cross, laid on so lustily, upon his Enemies, who without any
Order, or Ensign, or Trumpet, or Drum, were busied in gathering the Grapes of
the Vineyard; for the Cornets, Guidons and Ensign-bearers, had laid down their
Standards, Banners and Colors by the Wall-sides: The Drummers had knocked out
the Heads of their Drums on one end, to fill them with Grapes: The Trumpeters
were loaded with great Bundles of Bunches, and huge knots of Clusters: In sum,
every one of them was out of array, and all in disorder. He hurried therefore
upon them so rudely, without crying gare or beware, that he overthrew them like
Hogs, tumbled them over like Swine, striking athwart and along, and by one
means or other, laid so about him, after the old fashion of Fencing, that to
some he beat out their Brains, to others he crushed their Arms, battered their
Legs, and bethwack'd their sides till their Ribs cracked with it; to others
again he unjointed the Spondyles of the Neck, disfigured their Chaps, gash'd
their Faces, made their Cheeks hang flapping over their Chin, and so swing'd
and belammed them, that they fell down before him like Hay before a Mower: To
some others he spoiled the frame of their Kidneys, marred their Backs, broke
their Thigh bones, pash'd in their Noses, poach'd out their Eyes, cleft their
Mandibules, tore their Jaws, dung in their Teeth into their Throat, shook
asunder their Omoplates or Shoulder Blade* sphacelated their Shins, mortified
their Shanks, inflamed their Ankles, heaved off of the Hinges, their Ishies,
their Sciatica or Hip-gout, dislocated the Joints of their Knees, squatter'd
into pieces the boughts or pestles of their Thighs, and so thump'd, mawl'd and
be labored them every where, that never was corn so thick and threefold
thresh'd upon by Plowmens Flails, as were the pitifully disjointed Members of
their mangled Bodies, under the merciless baton of the cross.

If any offered to hide himself amongst the thickest of the Vines, he laid him
squat as a Flounder, bruised the Ridge of his Back, and dashed his Reins like a
Dog. If any thought by flight to escape, he made his Head to fly in pieces by
the Lambdoidal commissure. If any one did scramble up into a Tree, thinking
there to be safe, he rent up his Perinee, and impaled him in at the Fundament.
If any one of his old acquaintance happened to cry out, Ha, Friar John my
Friend, Friar John, quarter, quarter, I yield my self to you; to you I render
my self: So thou shall (said he) per force, and thy Soul to all the Devils in
Hell, then suddenly gave them Dronos. If any was so rash and full of temerity
as to resist him to his Face, then was it he did show the strength of his
Muscles; for without more ado he did transpierce him, by running him in at the
Breast, through the mediastine and the Heart. Others again he so quashed and be
bump'd, that with a sound bounce under the hollow of their short Ribs, he
overturned their Stomachs, so that they died immediately. To some with a smart
souse on the Epigaster, he would make their Midrif swag, then redoubling the
blow, gave them such a home push on the Navel, that he made their Puddings to
gush out. To others through their Ballocks he pierced their Bum-gut, and left
not Bowel, Tripe nor Intral in their Body, that had not felt the impetuosity,
fierceness and fury of his Violence. Believe that it was the most horrible
Spectacle that ever one saw: Some cried unto Sanct Barbe, others to St. George;
O the holy Lady Nytouch, said one, the good Sanctess; O our Lady of Succors,
said another, help, help: Others cried, Our Lady of Cunaut, of Loretta, of good
Tidings, on the other side of the Water St. Mary over: some vowed a Pilgrimage
to St. James, and others to the holy Handkerchief at Chamberry, which three
Month; after that burnt so well in the fire, that they could not get one thread
of it saved: Others sent up their Vows to St. Cadouin, others to St. John d'
Angelie, and to St. Eutropius of Xantes: Others again invoked St. Mesmes of
Chinon, St. Martin of Candes, St. Clouod of Sinays, the holy Relics of
Laurezay, with a Thousand other jolly little Sancts and Santrels. Some died
without speaking, others spoke without dying; some died in speaking, others
spoke in dying. Others shouted aloud, Confession, Confession, Confiteor,
miserere, in manus. So great was the cry of the wounded, that the Prior of the
Abbey with all his Monks came forth; who when they saw these poor Wretches so
slain amongst the Vines, and wounded to death, confessed some of them. But
whilst the Priests were busied in confessing them, the little Monkeys ran all
to the place where Friar John was, and asked him, wherein he would be pleased
to require their assistance?

To which he answered, that they should cut the Throats of those he had thrown
down upon the ground. They presently leaving their outer Habits and Cowls upon
the Rails, began to throttle and make an end of those whom he had already
crushed. Can you tell with what Instruments they did it? with fair Gulli^s,
which are little ^u^ch-back'd Demi-knives, wherewith the little Boys in our
Country cut ripe Walnuts in two.

In the mean time Friar John with his formidable baton of the Cross, got to the
breach which the Enemies had made, and there stood to snatch up those that
endeavored to escape. Some of the Monkitos carried the Standards, Banners,
Ensigns, Guidons and Colors into their Cells and Chambers, to make Garters of
them. But when those that had been shriven, would have gone out at the gap of
the said Breach, the sturdy Monk quashed and felled them down with blows,
saying, These Men have had Confession and are peni^ent Souls, they have got
their Absolution, and gained the Pardons: They go into Paradise as straight as
a sickle, or as the way is to Fare (like Crooked-Lane at Eastcheap.)

Thus by his Prowess and Valor were discomfited all those of the Army that
entered into the Closs of the Abbey, unto the number of Thirteen thousand six
hundred twenty and two, besides the Women and little Children, which is always
to be understood. Never did Maugis the Hermit bear himself more valiantly with
his Pilgrims staff against the Saracens, of whom is written in the Acts of the
four Sons of Haymon, then did this Monk against his Enemies with the staff of
the Cross.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Picrochole stormed and took by assault the Rock Clermond,
and of Grangousier's unwillingness and aversion from the Undertaking of War.
WHilst the Monk did thus skirmish, as we have said, against those which were
entered within the Closs; Picrochole in great haste passed the Ford Vede, with
all his Soldiery, and set upon the Rock Clermond, where there was made him no
resistance at all: And because it was already Night, he resolved to quarter
himself and his Army in that Town, and to refresh himself of his pugnative
Choler. In the Morning he stormed and took the Bulwarks and Castle, which
afterward he fortified with Rampires, and furnished with all Ammunition
requisite, intending to make his retreat there, if he should happen to be
otherwise worsted; for it was a strong place, both by Art and Nature, in regard
of the stance and situation of it. But let us leave them there, and to return
to our good Gargantua, who is at Paris very assiduous and earnest at the study
of good Letters, and athletical Exercitations, and to the good old Man
Grangousier his Father, who after Supper warmeth his Ballocks by a good, clear,
great fire, and whilst his Chestnut a are a-rosting, is very serious in drawing
scratches on the Hearth, with a stick burnt at the one end, wherewith they did
stir up the fire, telling to his Wife and the rest of the Family pleasant old
Stories and Tales of of former times.

Whilst he was thus employed, one of the Shepherds which did keep the Vines
(named Pillot) came toward him, and to the full related the enormous abuses
which were committed, and the excessive spoil that was made by Picrochole King
of Learn, upon his Lands and Territories, and how he had pillaged, wasted and
ravaged all the Country, except the enclosure at Sevile, which Friar John des
Entoumeures to his great honor had preserved: And that at the same present
time the said King was in the Rock Clermond: And there with great Industry and
Circumspection, was strengthening himself and his whole Army. Halas, halas,
alas (said Grangousier) what is this good People? Do I dream, or is it true
that they tell me? Picrochole my ancient Friend of old time, of my own Kindred
and Alliance, comes he to invade me? What moves him? What provokes him? What
sets him on? What drives him to it? Who has given him this Counsel? Ho, ho,
ho, ho, ho, my God, my Savior, help me, inspire me, and advise me what I shall
do. I protest, I swear before thee, so be thou favorable to me, if ever I did
him or his Subjects any damage or displeasure, or committed any the least
Robbery in his Country; but on the contrary I have succored and supplied him
with Men, Money, Friendship and Counsel upon any occasion, wherein I could be
steadable for his good; that he has therefore at this nick of time so outraged
and wronged me, it cannot be but by the malevolent and wicked Spirit. Good God,
thou know my Courage, for nothing can be hidden from thee; if perhaps he be
grown mad, and that thou have sent him hither to me for the better recovery and
re-establishment of his brain: Grant me power and wisdom to bring him to the
yoke of thy holy will by good discipline. Ho, ho, ho, ho, my good People, my
Friends and my faithful Servants, must I hinder you from helping me? Alas, my
old age required henceforward nothing else but rest, and all the days of my
Life I have labored for nothing so much as Peace: But now I must (I see it
well) load with Arms my poor, weary and feeble shoulders; and take in my
trembling hand the Lance and Horseman's Mace, to succor and protect my honest
Subjects: Reason will have it so; for by their labor am I maintained, and with
their sweat am I nourished, I, my Children and my Family. This notwithstanding,
I will not undertake War, until I have first tried all the ways and means of
Peace; that I resolve upon.

Then assembled he his Counsel, and proposed the matter, as it was indeed,
whereupon it was concluded, that they should send some discreet Man unto
Picrochole, to know wherefore he had thus suddenly broken the Peace, and
invaded those Lands unto which he had no Right nor Title. Furthermore, that
they should send for Gargantua, and those under his command, for the
Preservation of of the Country, and Defense thereof now at need. All this
pleased Grangousier very well, and he commanded that so it should be done.
Presently therefore he sent Basque, his Lackey, to fetch Gargantua with all
diligence, and wrote to him as follows.

CHAP. XXIX. The Tenor of the Letter which Grangousier wrote to his Son
Gargantua.
THe fervency of thy studies did require, that I should not in along time
recall thee from that Philosophical rest thou now enjoyest: If the confidence
reposed in our Friends and ancient Confederates, had not at this present
Disappointed the assurances of my old age. But seeing such is my fatal Destiny,
that I should be now disquieted by those in whom I trusted most: I am forced to
call thee back to defend the People and Goods, which by the right of Nature
belong unto thee; for even as Arms are weak abroad if there be not Counsel at
home; so is that Study vain, and Counsel unprofitable, which in a due and
convenient time is not by Virtue executed and put in effect. My Intention is
not to Provoke, but Appease: Not to Assault, but to Defend: Not to Conquer, but
to preserve my faithful Subjects and hereditary Dominions; into which
Picrochole is entered in a hostile manner without any Ground or Cause, and from
day to day pursues his furious Enterprise with great height of Insolence, that
is intolerable to freeborn Spirits.

I have endeavored to moderate his tyrannical Choler, offering him all that
which I thought might give him Satisfaction: And oftentimes have I sent
lovingly unto him, to understand wherein, by whom, and how he found himself to
be wronged; But of him could I obtain no other answer, but a mere defiance; and
that in my Lands he did pretend only to the right of a civil Correspondency and
good Behavior. Whereby I knew that the Eternal God has given him over to the
disposure of his own free Will and sensual Appetite; which cannot choose but be
wicked, if by divine Grace it be not continually guided: And to contain him
within his Duty, and bring him to know himself, has sent him hither to me by a
grievous Token. Therefore, my Beloved Son, as soon as thou, can, upon sight
of these Letters, repair hither with all diligence, to succor not me so much
(which nevertheless by natural Piety thou ought to do) as thine own People,
which by reason thou ought to save and preserve. The Exploit shall be done
with as little Effusion of Blood as may be; and if possible, by Means more
expedient, by Policy and Stratagems of War. We shall save all the Souls, and
send them home merry unto their own Houses. My dearest Son, the Peace of Jesus
Christ our Redeemer be with thee; salute from me Ponocrates, Gymnastes and
Eudemon; the Twentieth of September,

Thy Father Grangousier.

CHAP. XXX. How Ulrich Gallet was sent unto Picrochole.
THE Letters being dictated, signed and sealed, Grangousier ordained that
Vlrich Gallet (Master of the Requests) a very wise and discreet Man, of whose
Prudence and found Judgment he had made trial in several difficult and
debateful matters) to go unto Picrochole, to show what had been resolved
amongst them. At the same hour departed the good Man Gallet, and having past
the Ford, asked the Miller, in what condition Picrochole was? who answered,
That his Soldiers had left neither Cock nor Hen; that they were retired and
shut up into the Rock Clermond, and that he would not advise him to go any
further for fear of the Scouts, because they were enormously furious; which he
easily believed, and therefore lodged that night with the Miller.

The next morning he went with a Trumpeter to the Gate of the Castle, and
required the Guards he might be admitted to speak with the King, of somewhat
that concerned him. These words being told unto the King, he would by no means
consent that they should open the Gate; but getting upon the top of the
Bulwark, said unto the Ambassador, What is the news? what have you to say? Then
the Ambassador began to speak as follows.

CHAP. XXXI. The Speech made by Gallet to Picrochole.
THere cannot arise amongst Men a juster cause of Grief, then when they receive
hurt and damage* where they may justly expect for favor and good will; and not
without cause (though without reason) have many, after they had fallen into
such a calamitous accident, esteemed this indignity less supportable then the
loss of their own Lives; in such sort, that if they could not by force of Arms
or otherwise correct it, they have deprived themselves of this Light.

It is therefore no wonder if King Grangousier, my Master be full of high
displeasure, and much disquieted in mind upon thy outrageous and hostile
coming; but truly it would be a marvel, if he were not sensible of, and moved
with the incomparable Abuses and Injuries perpetrated by thee and thine upon
those of his Country, toward whom there has been no Example of Inhumanity
omitted. Which in it self is to him so grievous for the cordial Affection,
wherewith he has always cherished his Subjects, that more it cannot be to any
mortal Man; yet in this (above human Apprehension) is it to him the more
grievous, that these Wrongs and sad Offenses have been committed by thee and
thine, who time out of mind, from all antiquity, thou and thy Predecessors have
been in a continual League and Amity with him, and all his Ancestors; which,
even until this time, you have as sacred together inviolably preserved, kept
and maintained so well, that not he and his only, but the very barbarous
Nations of the Poictevins, Bretons, Manceaux, and those that dwell beyond the
Isles of the Canaries, and that of Isabella, have thought it as easy to pull
down the Firmament, and to set up depths above the Clouds, as to make a breach
in your Alliance; and have been so afraid of it in their Enterprises, that they
have never dared to provoke, incense or indamage the one for fear of the other.
Nay, which is more, this sacred League has so filled the World, that there are
few Nations at this day inhabiting throughout all the Continent and Isles of
the Ocean, who have not ambitiously aspired to be received into it, upon your
own Covenants and Conditions, holding your joint Confederacy in as high Esteem
as their own Territories and Dominions; in such sort, that from the memory of
Man, there has not been either Prince or League so wild and proud, that durst
have offered to invade, I say not your Countries, but not so much as those of
your Confederates. And if by rash and heady Counsel they have attempted any new
design against them, as soon as they heard the Name and Title of your Alliance,
they have suddenly desisted from their Enprises. What Rage and Madness
therefore does now incite thee, all old Alliance infringed, all Amity trod
under foot, and all right violated, thus in a hostil manner to invade his
Country, without having been by him or his in any thing prejudiced, wronged or
provoked? Where is Faith? Where is Law? Where is Reason? Where is Humanity?
Where is the fear of God? Do thou think that these atr^cious Abuses are
hidden from the eternal Spirits, and the Supreme God, who is the just rewarder
of all our Undertakings? If thou so think, thou deceivest thy self; for all
things shall come to pass, as in his incomprehensible Judgment he has
appointed.

Is it thy fatal Destiny, or influences of the Stars that would put an end to
thy so long enjoyed Ease and Rest? For that all things have their end and
period, so as that when they are come to the superlative point of their
greatest height, they are in a trice tumbled down again, as not being able to
abide long in that state. This is the Conclusion and End of those who cannot by
Reason and Temperance moderate their Fortunes and Prosperities. But if it be
predestined that thy Happiness and Ease must now come to an end, must it
needs be by wronging my King? him by whom thou were established? If thy House
must come to ruin, should it therefore in its fall crush the heels of him that
set it up? The matter is so unreasonable, and so dissonant from common Sense,
that hardly can it be conceived by human Understanding, and altogether
incredible unto Strangers, till by the certain and undoubted effects thereof it
be made apparent, that nothing is either sacred or holy to those, who having
emancipated themselves from God and Reason, do merely follow the perverse
affections of their own depraved nature.

If any wrong had been done by us to thy Subjects and Dominions; if we had
favored thy Ill-willers; if we had not assisted thee in thy Need; if thy Name
and Reputation had been wounded by us; or (to speak more truly) if the
calumniating Spirit, tempting to induce thee to Evil, had by false Illusions
and deceitful Fantasies, put into thy Conceit the impression of a thought, that
we had done unto thee any thing unworthy of our ancient Correspondence and
Friendship, thou ought first to have enquired out the Truth, and afterward
by a seasonable warning to admonish us thereof; and we should have so satisfied
thee, according to thine own hearts desire, that thou should have had
occasion to be contented. But, O Eternal God, what is thy enterprise? Would
thou like a perfidious Tyrant, thus spoil and lay waste my Masters Kingdom?
Have thou found him so silly and blockish, that he would not; or so destitute
of Men and Money, of Counsel and Skill in military Discipline, that he cannot
withstand thy unjustly Invasion? March hence presently, and to morrow some time
of the Day retreat unto thine own Country, without doing any kind of Violence
or disorderly act by the way; and pay withal a Thousand Besans of Gold, for
reparation of Damages thou have done in his Country: Half thou shall pay to
morrow, and the other half at the Ides of May next coming, leaving with us in
the mean time for Hostages, the Dukes of Turnebank, Lowbuttock and Small-trash:
together with the Prince of Itches, and Viscount of Snatch-bit.

CHAP. XXXII. How Grangousier to buy Peace, caused the Cakes to be restored.
WITH that the good Man Gallet held his peace, but Picrochole to all his
Discourse answered nothing but Come and fetch them, come and fetch them; They
have Ballocks fair and soft, they will knead some Cakes for you. Then returned
he to Grangousier, whom he found upon his Knees bare-headed, crouching in a
little Corner of his Cabinet, and humbly praying unto God, that he would
vouchsafe to assuage the Choler of Picrochole, and bring him to the rule of
reason without proceeding by force. When the good Man came back, he asked him,
Ha, my Friend, my Friend, what News do you bring me? There is neither Hope nor
Remedy (said Gallet) the Man is quite out of his Wits, and forsaken of God. Yea
but (said Grangousier) my Friend, what cause does he pretend for his Outrages?
He did not show me any cause at all (said Gallet) only that in a great Anger,
he spoke some words of Cakes. I cannot tell if they have done any wrong to his
Cake-bakers. I will know (said Grangousier) the matter thoroughly, before I
resolve any more upon what is to be done. Then sent he to learn concerning that
business, and found by true information, that some of his Men had taken
violently some Cakes from Picrochole's People, and that Marquet had his Head
broken: That nevertheless all was well paid, and that the said Marquet had
first hurt Forgior with a stroke of his Whip athwart the Legs; and it seemed
good to his whole Counsel, that he should defend himself with all his Might.
Notwithstanding all this (said Grangousier) seeing the question is but about a
few Cakes, I will labor to content him; for I am very unwilling to wage War
against him. He enquired then what quantity of Cakes they had taken away, and
understanding that it was but some four or five dozen, he commanded five
cart-Loads of them to be baked that same night, and, that there should be one
full of Cakes, made with fine butter, fine yolks of eggs, fine saffron and fine
spice, to be bestowed upon Marquet; unto whom likewise he directed to be given
seven hundred thousand and three Philips, for reparation of his losses, and for
satisfaction of the Surgeon that had dressed his wound; and furthermore
settled upon him and his for ever in Freehold the Apple-Orchard called La
Pomardiore; for the conveyance and passing of all which was sent Gallet, who by
the way as they went made them gather near the willow trees great store of
boughs, canes and reeds, wherewith all the Cariers were enjoined to garnish and
deck their Carts, and each of them to carry one in his hand, as himself
likewise did, thereby to give all Men to understand, that they demanded but
Peace, and that they came to buy it.

Being come to the gate, they required to speak with Picrochole from
Grangousier. Picrochole would not so much as let them in, nor go to speak with
them, but sent them word that he was busy, and that they should deliver their
mind to Captain Tonquedillon, who was then planting a piece of Ordnance upon
the Wall. Then said the good Man unto him, My Lord, to ease you of all this
labor, and to take away all excuses why you may not return unto our former
Alliance, we do here presently restore unto you the Cakes upon which the
quarrel arose; five dozen did our People take away, they were well paid for; we
love Peace so well, that we restore unto you five Cartloads, of which this Cart
shall be for Marquet, who does most complain; besides to content him entirely,
here are seven hundred thousand and three Philips, which I deliver to him; and
for the Losses he may pretend to have sustained, I resign for ever the Farm of
the Pomardere, to be possessed in Fee-simple by him and his for ever, without
the payment of any duty, or acknowledgment of homage, fealty, fine or service
whatsoever; and here is the Deed of Conveyance, and for God's sake let us live
henceforward in Peace; and go you home merrily into your own Country from this
place, unto which you have no right at all, as your selves must needs confess,
and let us be good Friends as before. Tonquedillon related all this to
Picrochole, and more and more exasperated his courage, saying to him, These
Clowns are afraid to some purpose, by cocks Grangousier conskites himself for
fear; the poor drinker he is not skilled in warfare, nor has he any stomach
for it, he knows better how to empty the Flaggons, that is his Art. I am of
opinion that it is fit we send back the Carts and the Money; and for the rest,
that very speedily we fortify our selves here, then prosecute our fortune. But
what do they think to have to do wlth a ninnie-whoop, to feed you thus with
cakes? You may see what it is, the good Usage and great Familiarity which you
have had with them heretofore, has made you contemptible in their Eyes;
ungenton purget purgentom rustius unget.

Sa, sa, sa, (said Picrochole,) by St. James you have given a true character of
them. One thing I will advise you (said Tonquedillon,) we are here but badly
victualled and very slenderly provided which stores for the Mouth: If
Grangousier should come to besiege us, I would go presently and pluck out of
all your soldiers heads and mine own all the teeth except three to each of us,
and with them alone we should make an end of our provision, but too soon.

We shall have (said Picrochole) but too much sustenance and feeding-stuff;
came we hither to eat or to fight? To fight indeed (said Tonquedillon) yet from
the panch comes the dance, and where famine rules force is exiled. Leave off
your prating (said Picrochole) and forthwith seize upon what they have brought.
Then took the Money and Cakes, Oxen and Carts, and sent away the Messengers,
without speaking a word, only that they would come no more so near, for a
reason that would be told them the morrow after. Thus without doing any thing,
returned they to Grangousier, and related the whole matter unto him, subjoyning
that there was no hope left to draw them to Peace, but by sharp and fierce Wars.

CHAP. XXXIII. How some Ministers of Picrochole, by Hair-brained Counsel put
him in extreme Danger.
THE Carts being unloaded, and the Money and Cakes secured, there came before
Picrochole, the Duke of Small-trash, the Earl Swash-buckler and Captain
Durtaille, who said unto him, Sir, this day we make you the happiest, the most
warlike and chivalrous Prince that ever was since the death of Alexander of
Macedonia. Be covered, be covered (said Picrochole) cry you mercy (said they)
we do but our Duty: The manner is thus, you shall leave some Captain here to
have the charge of this Garrison, with a Party competent for keeping of the
place, which besides its natural strength, its made stronger by the rampires
and fortresses of your devising. Your Army you are to divide into two parts, as
you know very well how to do; one part thereof, shall fall upon Grangousier and
his forces; by it shall he be easily, at the very first shock routed and then
shall you get Money by heaps, for the Clown had store of ready Coin. Clown we
call him, because, A noble and generous Prince, had never a penny and that to
hoard up Treasure, is the part of a Clown. The other part of the Army, in the
mean Time shall draw toward Onys, Xaintouge, Angoulosme and Cascony; then
march to Perigrout, Medos and Elanes, taking wherever you come without
resistance, Towns, Castles and Forts. Afterward to Bayonne, St. Ihon de luz,
to F^entarabia, where you shall seize upon all the Ships and coasting along
Galicia and Portugal, shall pillage all the maritine Places, (...) unto Lisbon,
where you shall be supplied (...) necessaries befitting a Conqueror. By
Copsodi Spain will yield, for they are but a race of Loobies. Then are you to
pass by the streights of Gibralter, where you shall erect two Pillars more
stately then those of Hercules, to the perpetual memory of your Name and the
narrow Entrance, there shall be called the Picrochonical Sea.

Having past the Picrochonical sea, behold, Barbarossa yields himself your
slave. I will (said Picrochole) give him fair quarter. Yea (said they) so that
he be content to be christened. And you shall conquer the Kingdoms of Tunes, of
Hippos, Argier, Bomine, Corode, yea all Barbary. Furthermore, you shall take
into your hands Majorca, Minorca, Sardinia, Corsica, with the other Islands of
the Ligustic and Balcarian Seas. Going along on the left Hand, you shall
Subdue, all Gallia Narbonensis, Provence, the Allobrogians, Genua, Florence,
Luca, and then God buy Rome, our poor Monsieur the Pope dies now for fear. By
my faith (said Picrochole,) I will not Then kiss his Pantuffle.

Italy being thus taken, behold, Naples, Calabria, Aputia and Sicilie, all
ransacked and Malta too. I wish those Jovial, Quondam Knights of Rhodes, would
but come to resist you, that we might see their Urine. I would (said
Picrochole) very willingly go to Loretta. No, no, (said they) that shall be at
our return. From thence we will sail Eastwards, and take Candia, Cyprus,
Rhodes, and the Cyclade Island, and set upon Morea. It is ours by (...), the
Lord preserve Jerusalem; for (...) Sultan, is not comparable to you in Power: I
will then (said he,) cause Solomon's Temple to be built. No, (said they) not
yet, have a little patience, stay a while, be never too sudden in your
enterpriss.

Can you tell what Octavian Augustus said, Festina lent; it is requisite that
you first have the lesser Asia, Carra, Lycia, Pamphilia, Cilicia, Lydia,
Phrygia, Mysia, Bithinia, Cara, Zia, Satalia, Samagaria, Castamena, Luga,
Sanasta, even unto Euphrates. Shall we see (said Picrochole,) Babylon and Mount
Sinai? There is no need (said they) at this time; have we not hurried up and
down, traveled and toiled enough, in having transfreted and past over the
Hircanian Sea, marched along the two Armenias and the three Arabias? By my
faith (said he) we have played the Fools, and are undone. Ha, poor Souls!
What Is the matter, said they? What shall we have (said he) to drink in these
deserts? for Julian Augustus, with his whole Army died there for thirst, as
they say. We have already (said they) given order for that: In the Siriac Sea,
you have nine thousand and fourteen great ships, laden with the best wines, in
the world; they arrived at Port-Ioppa, there you shall find two and twenty
thousand Camels, and sixteen hundred Elephants, which you shall find at one
hunting about Sigelmes, when you enter into Libia; and besides this, you will
have all the Macca Caravane, will not they furnish you sufficiently with wine?
Yes, but (said he) we shall not drink it fresh, that (said they,) is for a
little fish, but a mighty Man, a pretender, one that aspires to the Monarchy of
the World cannot always have his ease. God be thanked, that you and your men,
are come safe and sound unto the banks of the rive^ Tigris.

But (said he) what does that part of our Army in the mean time, which
overthrows that worthy Swill-pot, Grangousier? They are not idle (said they) we
shall meet with them by and by, they shall have won you Britany, Normandy,
Flanders, Haynault, Brabant, Artois, Holland, Zealand, they have past the Rhine
over the bellies of the Switsers and Lanskenets, and a party of these has
subdued Luxemburg, Lorrain, Champaign and Savoy, even to Lions, in which place
they have met with your forces, returning from the naval Conquests of the
Mediterranean Sea; and have rallied again in Bohemia, after they had plundered
and sacked Suevia, Wittemburg, Bavaria, Austria, Moravia and Styria. Then they
set fiercely together upon Lubeck, Norway, Swedeland, Rye, Denmark* Guitland,
Greenland, the Sterlins, even unto the frozen Sea. This done, they conquered
the Isles of Orkney and subdued Scotland, England and Ireland. From thence
sailing through the sandy Sea, and by the Sarmates, they have vanquished and
overcome Prussia, Poland, Lituania, Russia, Walachia, Transylvania, Hungaria,
Bulgaria, Turquieland and are now at Constantinople. Come (said Picrochole) let
us go join with them quickly for I will be Emperor of Trebezonde also; shall
we not kill all these dog Turks and Mahumetans? What a devil should we do else,
said they; and you shall give their Goods and Lands to such as shall have
served you honestly. Reason (said he) will have it so, that is but just; I give
unto you the Caramania, Surie and all the Palestine. Ha, Sir (said they) it is
your goodness: Grammercie, God grant you may always prosper. There was present
at the time an old Gentleman, well experienced in in the Wars, a stern
Soldier, and who had been in many great hazards, named Echephron, who hearing
this discourse, said, I do grealty doubt that all this enterprise will be like
the tail of the pitcher full of Milk, wherewith a Shomaker made himself rich in
conceit; but when the pitcher was broken, he had not whereupon to dine. What do
you pretend by these large Conquests? what shall be the end of so many labors
and crosses? Thus it shall be (said Picrochole) that when we return we shall
sit down, rest and be merry. But (said Echephron,) if by chance you should
never come back, for the voyage is long and dangerous, where it not better for
us to take our rest now, then unnecessarily to expose our selves to so many
dangers? O (said Swashbuckler,) by G -- here is a good dotard, come let us go
hide our selves in the corner of a Chimney and there spend the whole time of
our life amongst Ladies, in threading of pea^ls, or spinning like Sardanapalus.
He that nothing ventures, has neither Horse nor Mule (said Solomon) He who
adventureth too much (said Echepron) loses both Horse and Mule, as Malchon
answered. Enough (said Picrochole,) go forward; I fear nothing but that these
Devilish Legions of Grangousier, whilst we are in Mesopotamia, will come on
our backs and charge upon our rear, what remedy then? A very good one (said
Durtaille) send a pretty round Commission to the Muscoviters. And they bring
instantly into the Field for you four hundred and fifty thousand choice
fighting Men. O that you would but make me your Lieutenant General, how I
should truss up the Rogues with discipline? I fret, I charge, I strike, I take,
I kill, I slay, I play the Devil. On, on (said Picrochole) he that loves me,
follow me.

CHAP. XXXIV. How Gargantua left the City of Paris to Succor his Country, and
how Gymnast encountered with the Enemy.
IN this same very hour, Gargantua (who was gone out of Paris, as soon as he
had read his Father's Letters) coming upon his great mare had already past the
Nunnery-bridge himself; Ponocrates, Gymnast and Eudemon, to go along with him
took Posthorses: The rest of his Train came after him by even journeys,
bringing with them all his Books and Philosophical Instruments. As soon as he
had alighted at Parille, he was informed by a Farmer of Gouget, how Picrochole
had fortified himself within the Rock Clermond; and had sent Captain Tripet
with a great Army to set upon the Wood of Vede and Vaugaudry; and that they had
already plundered the whole Country, not leaving Cock nor Hen, even as far as
to the Winepress of Billiard; and that it was a strange thing, and hardly to be
credited, what ravage they had committed over all the Land; which so affrighted
Gargantua, that he knew not what to say, nor what to do. But Ponocrates
counseled him to go unto the Lord of Vauguyon, who at all times had been their
Friend and Confederate; and that by him they should be better advised in their
Business: Which they did incontinently, and found him very willing to assist
them; and he was of opinion that they should send some one of his Company, to
scout along and discover the Country, to learn in what condition and posture
the Enemy was, that they might take Counsel, and proceed according to the
present occasion. Gymnast offering himself to go; whereupon it was concluded,
that for his safety, and the better expedition, he should have with him some
one that knew the Ways, Avenues, Turnings, Windings and Rivers thereabout. Then
away went he and Prelingot, Gentleman of Vauguyon's Horse, who scouted and
espied on all quarters without any fear. In the mean time Gargantua took a
little refreshment, eat somewhat himself, the like did those that were with
him, and caused to give to his Mare a Picotine of Oats, that is, Threescore and
fourteen Quarters and three Bushels. Gymnast and his Camrade rode so long, that
at last they met with the Enemies Forces, all scattered and out of order,
Plundering, Stealing, Robbing and Pillaging all they could lay their Hands on:
And as far off as they could perceive him, they ran thronging upon the back of
one another in all haste toward him, to unload him of his Money, and untruss
his Portmantles. Then cried he out unto them (My Masters) I am a poor Devil, I
desire you to spare me, I have yet one Crown left, come, we must drink it; for
it is aurum potabile, and this Horse here shall be sold to pay my welcome;
afterward take me for one of your own; for never yet was there any Man that
knew better how to take, lard, roast and dress, yea by G -- to tear asunder and
devour a Hen, then I that am here: And for my Beverage I drink to all good
Fellows. With that he unscrued his Leathern Bottle, and without putting in his
Nose drank very handsomely; the Rogues looked upon him, opening their Throats a
Foot wide, and putting out their Tongues like Greyhounds, in hopes to drink
after him: But Captain Tripet, in the very nick, came running to him to see who
it was. To him Gymnast offered his Bottle, saying, Hold, Captain, drink boldly
and spare not; I have been thy taster, it is Wine of La fay monjau. What (says
Tripet) this Fellow gybes and flouts us; who art thou? (said Tripet) I am (said
Gymnast) a poor Devil ( pauvre diable.) Ha (said Tripet) seeing thou art a poor
Devil, it is reason that thou should be permitted to go whither-soever thou will, for all poor Devils pass every where without toll or tax; but it is not
the custom of poor Devils to be so well mounted, therefore, Sir Devil, come
down, and let me have your Horse, and if he do not carry me well, you, Master
Devil, must do it; for I love a Life that such a Devil as you should carry me
away.

CHAP. XXXV. How Gymnast very nimbly killed Captain Tripet, and others of
Picrochole's Men
WHen they heard these words, some amongst them began to be afraid, and blessed
themselves with both hands, thinking indeed that he had been a Devil disguised:
Insomuch that one of them, named Good John, Captain of the trained Bands took
his Psalter out of his Codpiece, and cried out aloud, Hagios ho Theos. If thou
be of God speak, if thou be of the other Spirit avoid hence, and get thee
going. Yet he went not away; which words being heard by all the Soldiers that
were there, diverse of them being a little inwardly terrified, departed from the
place: All this did Gymnast very well remark and consider, and therefore making
as if he would have alighted from off his Horse, as he was poising himself on
the mounting side, he most nimbly (with his short Sword by his Thigh) shifting
his feet in the stirrup, performed the stirrup-leather feat, whereby after the
inclining of his Body downwards, he forthwith launched himself aloft in the
Air, and placed both his Feet together on the Saddle, standing upright with his
back turned toward the Horse's head; Now (said he) my case goes backward. Then
suddenly in the same very posture wherein he was, he fetched a gambole upon one
foot, and turning to the left hand, failed not to carry his Body perfectly
round, just into its former stance, without missing one jot. Ha (said Tripet) I
will not do that at this time, and not without cause. Well (said Gymnast) I
have failed, I will undo this leap: Then with a mavelous strength and
agility, turning toward the right hand he fetched another frisking gambole, as
before, which done, he set his right hand thumb upon the hind bow of the
Saddle, raised him up, and sprung in the Air, poising and upholding his whole
Body, upon the Muscle and Nerve of the said Thumb; and so turned and whirled
himself about three times. At the fourth reversing his Body, and overturning it
upside down, and foreside back, without touching any thing he brought himself
betwixt the Horse's two Ears, springing with al^ his Body into the Air, upon
the Thumb of his left Hand, and in that posture turning like a Windmill, did
most actively do that trick which is called the Mill^r's Pass. After this,
clapping his right Hand flat upon the middle of the Saddle, he gave himself
such a jerking swing, that he thereby seated himself upon the Crupper, after
the manner of Gentlewomen.

This done, he easily past his right Leg over the Saddle, and placed himself
like one that rides in Croup: But (said he) it were better for me to get into
the Saddle; then putting the Thumbs of both Hands upon the Crupper before him,
and thereupon leaning himself, as upon the only Supporters of his Body, he
incontinently turned heels over Head in the Air, and straight found himself
betwixt the bow of the Saddle in a good seat. Then with a Summer-sault
springing into the Air again, he fell to stand with both his Feet close
together upon the Saddle, and there made above a hundred frisks, turns and
demi-pommads, with his Arms held out across, and in so doing cried out aloud, I
rage, I rage, Devils, I am stark mad; Devils, I am mad, hold me, Devils, hold
me; hold, Devils, hold, hold.

Whilst he was thus vaulting, the Rogues in great astonishment said to one
another, By Cocks death, he is a Goblin or a Devil thus disguised; Ab host
maligno libera nos, Domine, and ran away as in a total rout, looking now and
then behind them like a Dog that had stolen a Pudding.

Then Gymnast spying his advantage, alighted from his Horse, drew his Sword,
and laid on great Blows upon the thickest, and highest crested amongst them,
and overthrew them in great heaps, hurt, wounded and bruised, being resisted by
no body, they thinking he had been a starved Devil, as well in regard of his
wonderful feats in vaulting, which they had seen, as for the Talk Tripet had
with him, calling him poor Devil. Only Tripet would have traitorously cleft his
head with his Fauchion; but he was well armed, and felt nothing of the Blow,
but the weight of the stroke; whereupon turning suddenly about, he gave Tripet
a home thrust, and upon the back of that, whilst he was about to ward his Head
from a slash, he ran him in at the Breast with a hit, which at once cut his
Stomach, the Colon, and the half of his Liver, wherewith he fell to the ground;
and in falling gushed forth above four Pottles of Pottage, and his Soul mingled
with the Pottage.

This done, Gymnast withdrew himself, very wisely considering, that a case of
great adventure and hazard, should not be pursued unto its utmost period, and
that it becomes all Cavaliers modestly to use their good Fortune, without
troubling or stretching it too far. Wherefore getting to Horse, he gave him the
Spur, taking the right way unto Vauguyon; and Prelingot with him.

CHAP. XXXVI. How Gargantua demolished the Castle at the Ford of Vede, and how
they past the Ford.
AS soon as he came thither, he related the Estate and Condition wherein they
had found the Enemy, and the Stratagem which he alone had used against all
their multitude; affirming that they were but rascally Rogues, Plunderers,
Thieves and Robbers, ignorant of all military Discipline, and that they might
boldly set forward unto the Field; it being an easy matter to fell and strike
them down like Beasts, then Gargantua mounted his great Mare, accompanied as we
have said before, and finding in his way a high and great Tree (which commonly
was called St. Martin's Tree, because heretofore St. Martin planted a Pilgrim's
staff there; which grew to that height and greatness) said, This is that which
I lacked; this Tree shall serve me both for a Staff and Lance: With that he
pulled it up easily, plucked it off the Boughs, and trimed it at his pleasure.
In the mean time his Mare pissed to ease her Belly, but it was in such
abundance, that it did overflow the Country Seven Leagues, and all the flood
ran glib away toward the Ford of Vede, wherewith the Water was so swollen,
that all the Forces the Enemy had there, were with great horror drowned, except
some who had taken the way on the left hand toward the Hills. Gargantua being
come to the Wood of Vede, was informed by Eudemon, that there was some
remainder of the Enemy within the Castle, which to know, Gargantua cried out as
loud as he was able, Are you there, or are you not there? If you be there, be
there no more; and if you be not there, I have no more to say. But a Ruffian
Gunner at the Portcullis, let fly a Cannot-ball at him, and hit him with that
shot most furiously on the right Temple of his head, yet did him no more hurt,
then if he had but cast a Grape-stone at him: What is this? (said Gargantua) do
yo throw at us Grape-stones here? The Vintage shall cost you dear, thinking
indeed that the Bullet had been the stone of a Grape.

Those who were within the Castle, being till then busy at the pillage, when
they heard this noise, ran to the Towers and Fortresses, from whence they shot
at him above Nine thousand and five and twenty Falconshot and Harcabusades,
aiming all at his Head; and so thick did they shoot at him, that he cried out,
Ponocrates my Friend, These Flies are like to put out mine Eyes; give me a
Branch of those Willow-trees to drive them away, thinking that the Bullets and
Stones shot out of the great Ordnance had been but Dun-flies. Ponocrates looked
and saw there were no other Flies, but great shot which they had shot from the
Castle. Then was it that he rusht with his great Tree against the Castle, and
with mighty blows overthrew both Towers and Fortresses, and laid all level with
the Ground, by which means all that were within were slain and broken in pieces.

Going from thence, they came to the Bridge at the Mill, where they found all
the Ford covered with dead Bodies, so thick, that they had choked up the Mill,
and stopped the current of its Water; and these were those that were destroyed
in the Urinal Deluge of the Mare. There they were at a stand, consulting how
they might pass without hindrance by these dead Carcasses. But Gymnast said, If
the Devils have past there, I will pass well enough. The Devils have past there
(said Eudemon) to carry away the damned Souls. By St. Rhenian (said Ponocrates)
then by necessary consequence he shall pass there. Yes, yes (said Gymnastes) or
I shall stick in the way. Then setting Spurs to his Horse, he past through
freely, his Horse not fearing, nor being any ways affrighted at the sight of
the dead Bodies. For he had accustomed him (according to the Doctrine of Aelian)
not to fear Armor, nor the Carcasses of dead Men; and that not by killing Men
as Diomedes did the Thracians, or as Ulysses did in throwing the Corpses of his
Enemies at his Horses feet, as Homer says; but by putting a Jack a-lent
amongst his hay, and making him go over it ordinarily, when he gave him his
Oats.

The other three followed him very close, except Eudemon only, whose Horses far
forefoot sank up to the Knee in the Paunch of a great fat Chuff, who lay there
upon his back drowned, and could not get it out. There was he pestered, until
Gargantua with the end of his Staff thrust down the rest of the Villain's
Tripes into the Water, whilst the Horse pulled out his Foot; and (which is a
wonderful thing in Hippiatry) the said Horse was thoroughly cured of a Ringbone
which he had in that Foot, by this touch of the burst guts of that great Looby.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Gargantua in combing his Head made the great Cannon-ball
fall out of his Hair.
HAving got over the River of Vede, they came very shortly after to
Grangousier's Castle, who waited for them with great longing; at their coming
there was such Hugging and Embracing, never was seen a more joyful Company; for
Supplementum supplementi Chronicorum, says, that Gargamelle died there with
joy. For my part, truly I cannot tell, neither do I care very much for her, nor
for any body else. The truth was, that Gargantua in shifting his Clothes, and
combing his Head with a Comb Nine hundred Foot long, and the teeth all Tusks of
Elephants, whole and entire, he made fall at every rake above seven Balls that
stuck in his Hair, at the razing of the Castle at the Wood of Vede. Which his
Father Grangousier seeing, thought they had been Lice, and said unto him, What,
my dear Son, have thou brought us thus far some short-winged Hawks of the
College of Montague? I did not mean that thou should reside there. Then
answered Ponocrates, My Sovereign Lord, think not that I have placed him in
that lousy College, which they call Montague; I had rather have put him
amongst the Grave-diggers of Sanct Innocent, so enormous is the Cruelty and
Villainy that I have known there; for the Gally-slaves are far better used
amongst the Moors and Tartars, the Murderers in the criminal Dungeons, yea the
very Dogs in your House, then are poor wretched Students in the aforesaid
College. And, were I King of Paris, the Devil take me if I would not set it on
fire, and burn both Principal and Regents, for suffering this Inhumanity to be
exercised before their Eyes. Then taking up one of these Bullets, he said,
these are Cannon-shot, which your Son Gargantua has lately received by the
Treachery of your Enemies, as he was passing before the Wood of Vede.

But they have been so rewarded, that they are all destroyed in the Ruin of the
Castle, as were the Philistines by the Policy of Sampson, and those whom the
Tower of Silohim slew, as it is written Luc. 13. My opinion is, that we pursue
them whilst the luck is on our side, for Occasion has all her Hair on her
Forehead, when she is past you may not recall her; she is bald in the hind part
of her Head, and never returns again. Truly (said Grangousier) it shall not
be at this time; for I will make you a Feast this Night, and bid you welcome.

This said, they made ready Supper, and of extraordinary besides his daily
fare, were roasted sixteen Oxen, three Heifers, two and thirty Calves,
threescore and three fat Kids, fourscore and fifteen Wethers, three hundred
Barrow-pigs sowced in sweet Wine, elevenscore Partridges, seven hundred Snites
and Woodcocks, four hundred Loudon and Cornwal-Capons, six thousand Pullets and
as many Pigeons, six hundred crammed Hens, fourteen hundred Liverets, three
hundred and three Buzzards, and one thousand and seven hundred Cockrels. For
Venison, they could not so suddenly come by it, only eleven wild Boars, which
the Abbot of Turpenay sent, and eighteen fallow Deer which the Lord of Gramount
bestowed; together with sevenscore Phesants which were sent by the Lord of
Essars; and some dozens of Queests, Coushots, Ringdoves and Woodculvers;
River-fowl, Teals and Awteals, Bittorns, Courts, Plovers, Francolins,
Briganders, Tyrasons, young Lapwings, tame Ducks, Shovelers, Woodlanders,
Herons, Moor-Hens, Criels, Storks, Canepetiers, Oronges, Flamans, which are
Phaenicopters, Terrigoles, Turkies, Arbens, Coots, Solingeese, Curlews,
Termagants and Water-wagtails, with a great deal of Cream, Curds and fresh
Cheese, and store of Soupe, Pottages and Brewis with variety. Without doubt
there was meat enough, and it was handsomely dressed by Snapsauce, Hotchpot and
Brayverjuice, Grangousier's Cooks. Ieken, Trudg apace and Clean-glass, were
very careful to fill them drink.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Gargantua did eat up six Pilgrims in a Sallet.
THE Story requires, that we relate which happened unto six Pilgrims, who came
from Sebastian near to Nantes: and who for shelter that night, being afraid of
the Enemy, had hid themselves in the Garden upon the chichling Pease, among the
Cabbages and Lettices. Gargantua finding himself somewhat dry, asked whether
they could get any Lettice to make him a Sallet; and hearing that there were
the greatest and fairest in the Country (for they were as great as Plum-trees,
or as Walnut-trees) he would go thi^her himself, and brought thence in his hand
what he thought good, and withal carried away the six Pilgrims, who were in so
great fear, they did not dare to speak nor cough.

Washing them therefore first at the Fountain, the Pilgrims said one to another
softly, What shall we do? we are almost drowned here amongst these Lettice,
shall we speak? But if we speak, he will kill us for Spies. And as they were
thus deliberating what to do, Gargantua put them with the Lettice into a
platter of the House, as large as the huge Tun of the Cister^ians, which done,
with Oil, Vinegar and Salt he eat them up, to refresh himself a little before
Supper; and had already swallowed up five of the Pilgrims, the sixth being in
the Platter, totally hid under a Lettice, except his Staff that appeared, and
nothing else. Which Grangousier seeing, said to Gargantua, I think that is the
Horn of a Shell-snail, do not eat it. Why not (said Gargantua) they are good
all this Month, which he no sooner said, but drawing up the Staff, and
therewith taking up the Pilgrim, he eat him very well, then drank a terrible
draught of excellent White Wind, and expected Supper to be brought up.

The Pilgrims thus devoured, made shift to save themselves as well as they
could, by withdrawing their bodies out of the reach of the Grinders of his
Teeth, but could not escape from thinking they had been put in the lowest
Dungeon of a Prison. And when Gargantua whiffed the great draught, they thought
to have been drowned in his mouth, and the flood of Wine had almost carried
them away into the Gulf of his Stomach. Nevertheless skipping with their
Staves, as St. Michael's Palmers use to do, they sheltered themselves from the
danger of that Inundation, under the Banks of his Teeth. But one of them by
chance, groping or sounding the Country with his staff, to try whether they
were in safety or no, struck hard against the cleft of a hollow tooth, and hit
the mandibulary Sinew, or nerve of the Jaw, which put Gargantua to very great
pain, so that he began to cry for the rage that he felt. To ease himself
therefore of his smarting ach, he called for his Tooth-picker, and rubbing
toward a young Walnut-tree, unnestled you my Gentlemen Pilgrims.

For he caught one by the Legs, another by the scrip, another by the Pocket,
another by the Scarf, another by the band of the Breeches, and the poor Fellow
that had hurt him with the staff, him he hooked to him by the Codpiece, which
snatch nevertheless did him a great deal of good, for it broke upon him a pocky
botch he had in the Groin, which grievously tormented him ever since they were
past Ancenis. The Pilgrims thus dislodged ran away athwart the plain a pretty
fast pace, and the pain ceased, even just at the time when by Eudemon he was
called to Supper, for all was ready. I will go then (said he) and piss away my
misfortune, which he did do in such a copious measure, that the Urin taking
away the Feet from the Pilgrims, they were carried along with the stream unto
the bank of a tuft of Trees: Upon which, as soon as they had taken footing, and
that for their self-preservation they had run a little out of the road, they on
a sudden fell all six, except Fourniller, into a trap that had been made to
take Wolves by a train; out of which they escaped nevertheless by the industry
of the said Fourniller, who broke all the snares and ropes. Being gone from
thence, they lay all the rest of that night in a Lodge near unto Coudry, where
they were comforted in their Miseries, by the gracious words of one of their
Company, called Sweertogo, who showed them that this adventure had been
foretold by the Prophet David, Psalm. Quum exurgerent homines in nos, forte
vivos deglutissent nos; when we were eaten in the Sallet, with Salt, Oil and
Vinegar. Quum irasceretur furor eorum in nos, forsitan aqua abforbuisset nos;
when he drank the great draught. Torrentem pertransivit anima nostra; when the
stream of his water carried us to the thicket. Forsitan pertransisset anima
nostra aquam intolerabilem; that is, the water of his Urin, the flood whereof
cutting our way, took our feet from us. Benedictus Dominus qui non dedit nos in
captionem dentibus eorum: Anima nostra sicut passer erepta est de laqueo
venantium; when we fell in the trap. Laqueus contritus est, by Fourniller. Et
nos liberati sumus. Adjutorium nostrum, etc.

CHAP. XXXIX. How the Monk was feasted by Gargantua, and of the jovial
discourse they had at supper.
WHen Gargantua was set down at table, and all of them had somewhat stayed
their stomacs; Grangousier began to relate the source and cause of the War,
raised between him and Picrocbole and came to tell how Friar Ihon of des
Entoumeures, the Funnels, had triumphed at the defense of the Close of the
Abbey, and extolled him for his valor above Camillus, Scipio, Pompey, Caesar
and Themistocles. Then Gargantua desired that he might be presently sent for,
to the End that with him they might consult of what was to be done, whereupon
by a Joint consent the Master^d' Hotel, went for him and brought him along
merrily, with his staff of the Cross upon Grangousier's Mule. When he was come
a thousand huggings, a thousand embracements, a thousand good days were given:
Ha Friar Ihon my friend, Friar Ihon, my brave cousin Friar Ihon, from the
Divil, let me clip thee about the neck; let me have thee in my Arms and must
gripe thee, (my Cod) till thy back crack; and Friar Ihon the gladdest Man in
the world, never was Man made welcomer, never was any more courteously and
graciously received then Friar Ihon. Come, come (said Gargantua) a stool here
close by meat this end; with all my Heart (said the Monk) seeing you will have
it so; Some water (Page) fill, my boy fill, it is to refresh my Liver; give me
some ( child) to gargle my throat withal, Deposita cappa, (said Gymnast) let us
pull of this frock. Ho by G -- Gentleman (said the Monk) there is a Chapter in
statutis Ordinis, which opposes my laying of it down: Pish (said Gymnast) a
fig for your Chapter, this frock breaks both your shoulders, put it off; my
friend (said the Monk,) let me alone with it, for by G -- I Will drink the better
that it is on, it makes all my Body jocund: If I should lay it aside, the
waggish Pages would cut to themselves garters out of it, as I was once served
at Coulaines; and which is worse, I should lose my appetite, but if in this
habit I set down at Table, I will drink by G -- both to thee and to thy horse,
and so courage, frolic, God save the company, I have already supt, yet I will
eat never a whit the less for that, for I have a paved stomac, as hollow as St.
Benet's boot, always open like a Lawyers pouch. Of all fishes but the Tench,
take the wing of a Partridg, or the thigh of a Nunn, does no^ he die like a
good fellow that dies with a stiff Catso? Our Prior loves exceedingly the white
of a Capon: in that (said Gymnast) he does not resemble the Foxes; for of the
C^pons, Hens and Pullets which they carry away, they never eat the white: Why?
(said the Monk) Because (said Gymnast) they have no Cooks to dress them, and if
they be not competently made ready, they remain red and not white; the redness
of meats being a token that they have not got enough of the fire, except the
Shrimps, Lobsters, Crabs and Crayfishes, which are Cardinalised with boiling;
Gods Fish (said the Monk) the Porter of our Abbey then has not his head
well-boyled, for his Eyes are as red as a mazer made of an Alder-tree. The
thigh of this Leveret is good for those that have the Gout. Some natural
Philosophy; ha, ha, what is the reason that the Thighs of a Gentlewoman are
always fresh and cool? This Problem (said Gargantua) is neither in Aristotle,
in Alexander Aphrodiseus, nor in Plutarch. There are three Causes (said the
Monk) by which that place is naturally refreshed. Primo, because the water runs
all along it. Secundo, because it is a shady place, obscure and dark, upon
which the Sun never shines. And thirdly, because it is continually blown upon,
and aired by a reverberation from the backdoor, by the fan of the smock, and
flipflap of the Codpiece. And lusty my Lads, some bousing liquor, Page; so,
Crack, crack, crack. O what a good God have we, that gives us this excellent
Juice! I call him to witness, if I had been in the time of Jesus Christ, I
would have kept him from being taken by the Jews in the Garden of Olivet; and
the Devil fail me, if I should have failed to cut off the hams of these
Gentlemen Apostles, who ran away so basely after they had well supped, and left
their good Master in the lurch. I hate that Man worse then poison that offers
to run away, when he should fight and lay stoutly about him. Oh that I were but
King of France for fourscore or an hundred years! by G -- I should whip like
curtail-dogs these run-aways of Pavie. A plague take them, why did they not
choose rather to die there than to leave their good Prince in that pinch and
necessity? Is it not better and more honorable to perish in fighting valiantly
than to live in disgrace by a cowardly running away? We are like to eat no
great store of goslings this year, therefore, friend, reach me some of that
roasted pig there.

Diavolo, is there no more must? no more sweet Wine? Germinavit radix Iesse, I
renounce my Life, I die for thirst. This Wine is none of the worst.; what Wine
drink you at Paris? I give my self to the Devil, if I did not once keep open
house at Paris for all comers six Months together. Do you know Friar Claude of
the high kildrekins? Oh the good Fellow that he is! but what Fly has stung him
of late, he is become so hard a Student? for my part I study not at all. In our
Abbey we never study for fear of the mumps. Our late Abbot was wont to say,
that it is a monstrous thing to see a learned Monk, by G -- Master my friend,
Magis Magnos, clericos non sunt, magis magnos sapientes. You never saw so many
hares as there are this Year. I could not any where come by a goshawk nor
tassel of falcon; my Lord Beloniere promised me a Lanner, but he wrote to me
not long ago, that he was become pursie: The Patridges will so multiply
henceforth, that they will go near to eat up our ears; I take no delight in the
stalking-horse, for I catch such cold, that I am like to founder my self at
that sport, if I do not run, toil, travel and trot about, I am not well at
ease. True it is, that in Leaping over Hedges and Bushes my Frock leaves always
some of its Wool behind it; I have recovered a dainty Greyhound; I give him to
the Devil if he suffer a hare to escape him. A groom was leading him to my Lord
Hunt-little, and I robbed him of him; did I ill? No Friar Ihon, (said Gymnast,)
no by all the devils that are, no. So (said the Monk) do I attest these same
devils so long as they last, virtue G -- what could that gowty Limpard have
done with so fine a Dog? by the body of G -- he is better pleased, when one
presents him with a good yoke of Oxen. How now? (said Ponocrates,) you swear,
Friar Ihon; It is only (said the Monk) but to grace and adorn my speech; they
are colors of a Ciceronian Rhetoric.

CHAP. XL. Why Monks are the outcasts of the world? and wherefore some have
bigger noses then others?
BY the faith of a Christian (said Eudemon) I am highly transported, when, I
consider what an honest Fellow this Monk is; for he makes us all merry. How is
it then that they exclude the Monks, from all good Companies? calling them
feast-troublers, as the Bees drive away the drones from their Hives? Ignavum
fucos, pecus (said Maro) a presepibus arcent. Here-unto answered Gargantua,
there is nothing so true, as that the Frock and Cowle draw to them the
Opprobries, Injuries and Maledictions of the World, just as the Wind called
Cecias attracts the Clouds, the peremptory reason is, because they eat the Turd
of the World, that is to say, they feed upon the Sins of the people: And as a
noysom thing, they are cast in^o the Privies; that is the Convents and Abbyes,
separated from civil conversation, as the Privies and Retreats of a House are;
but if you conceive how an Ape in a family is always mocked, and provokingly
incensed, you shall easily apprehend how Monks are shunned of all Men, both
young and old: the Ape keeps not the House as a Dog does. He draws not in the
Plow as the Ox, he yields neither Milk nor Wool as the Sheep; he carries no
burden as a Horse does; that which he does, is only to conskit, spoil and
defile all, which is the cause wherefore he has of all men mocks, frumperies
and bastonadoes.

After the same manner a Monk (I mean those little, idle lazy Monks) do not
labor and work, as do the Peasant and Artificer, does not ward and defend the
Country, as does the Soldier cures not the sick and diseased, as the
Physician does; does neither preach nor teach, as do the Evangelical Doctors
and Schoolmasters; does not import commodities and things necessary for the
Commonwealth, as the Merchant does; therefore ^s it, that by, and of, all Men
they are hooted at, hated and abhorred. Yea, but (said Grangousier,) they pray
to God for us. Nothing less (answered Gargantua:) True it is, with a tingle
tangle, jangling of bells they trouble and disquiet all their neighbors about
them. Right (said the Monk) a Mass, a Matine, a Vesper well rung and half said.
They mumble out great store of Legends and Psalms, by them not at all
understood: they say many Pa^enotres, interlarded with ave-maries, without
thinking upon, or apprehending the meaning of, what it is they say, which truly
I call mocking of God, and not Prayers. But so help them God, as they Pray for
us, and not for being afraid to lose their Victuals, their Manchots, and good
fat Pottage. All true Christians, of all estates and conditions, in all Places
and at all times send up their Prayers to God and the Spirit; prays and
intercedeth for them, and God is gracious to them. Now such a one is our good
Friar Ihon, therefore every Man desires to have him in his company, he is no
bigot, he is not for division; he is an honest Heart, plain, resolute, good
Fellow, he travels, he labors, he defends the oppressed, comforts the
afflicted helps the needy and keeps the Close of the Abbey: Nay (said the Monk)
I do a great deal more then that; for whilst we are in dispatching our Matines
and Anniversaries, in the Quire; I make withal, some cross bowstrings, polish
glasse-Bottles and Boults; I twist Lines and weave purse-Nets, wherein to catch
coneys. I am never idle; but Hola, Fill, Fill, some Drink, some Drink, here
bring the Fruit; these Chestnuts are of the Wood of Estrox, and with good new
Wine, will make you a Composer of Bumsonnets. You are not yet well liquor'd; by
G -- I drink at all Fords like a Promoters horse. Friar Ihon (said Gymnast)
take away the snot that hangs at your Nose. Ha, ha (said the Monk) am not I in
danger of drowning, seeing I am in water even to the Nose? No, no, quare? quia,
though it comes out thence abundantly, yet there never goes in any; for it is
well antidoted with Syrrup of the Vine.

O my friend, he that has winter-boots made of such leather, may boldly fish
for Oysters, for they will never take Water. What is the cause (said Gargantua)
that Friar Ihon has such a goodly Nose? Because (said Grangousier) that God
would have it so, who frames us in such form, and for such end, as is most
agreeable to his divine Will, even as a Potter fashioneth his Vessels. Because
(said Ponocrates) he came with the first to the Fair of Noses, and therefore
made choice of the fairest and and the greatest. Pish (said the Monk) that is
not the reason of it, but, according to the true Monastical Philosophy, it is
because my Nurse had soft teats, by virtue whereof, whilst she gave me suck, my
nose did sink in as in so much Butter. The hard Breasts of Nurses make children
short-nosed. But hey gay, Ad formam nasi cognoscitur ad te levavi. I am for no
sweet Stuff with my Tipple, Boy; Item, rather some tosts.

CHAP. XLI. How the Monk made Gargantua sleep, and of his Hours and Breviaries.
SUpper being ended, they consulted of the business in hand, and concluded that
about midnight they should fall unawares upon the enemy, to know what manner of
watch and ward they kept; and in the mean while take a little rest, the better
to refresh themselves. But Gargantua could not sleep by any means, on which
side soever he turned himself. Whereupon the Monk said to him, I never sleep
soundly, but when I am at Sermon or Prayers. Let us therefore begin, you and I,
the seven penitential Psalms, to try whether you shall not quickly fall asleep.
The conceit pleased Gargantua very well, and beginning the first of these
Psalms, as soon as they came to Beati quorum, they fell asleep both the one and
the other. But the Monk for his being formerly accustomed to the hour of
Claustral matines, failed not to awake a little before midnight, and being up
himself awaked all the rest, in singing aloud, and with a full clear voice, the
song, Awake, O Reinian, awake;
Awake, O Reinian, Ho*
Get up for a Pot and a Cake;
With a diddle dum, diddle dum, do.


When they were all rowsed and up, he said, My Masters, it is a usual saying,
that we begin Matines with coughing, and supper with drinking; let us now (in
doing clean contrarily) begin our Matines, with drinking, and at Night before
supper, we shall cough as hard as we can. What? (said Gargantua) to drink so
soon after sleep, this is not to live by the rule of Physicians; for you ought
first to scour and cleanse your stomac of all its superfluities: O rot your
Physicians, said the Monk, a hundred devils leap into my body, if there be not
more old Drunkards, then old Physicians. I have made this paction and covenant
with my Appetite, that it always lies down, and goes to Bed with me (for of
that I take very good care) and then it also rises with me the next Morning,
tend your cures as much as you will, I will get me to my tiring. What tiring do
you mean (said Gargantua?) My Breviary (said the Monk) for just as the
Falconers, before they feed their Hawks, do make them tire at a hens leg, to
purge their Brains of phlegm, and sharpen them to a good Appetite; so by taking
this jolly little Breviary, in the Morning I scour all my Lungs, and find my
self ready to drink.

After what manner (said Gargantua) do you say these belly heures of yours?
After the manner of Whipfield, said the Monk, by three Psalms, and three
Lessons, or nothing at all, he that will. I never tie my self to hours, les
heures are made for the Man, and not the Man for les heures; therefore is it
that I make my Prayers in fashion of stirrup-leathers; I shorten or lengthen
them when I think good. Brevis Oration penetrat coelos, and long a potatio
evacuat Scyphos.

Where is that written? by my faith (said Ponocrates) I cannot tell, my
Pillicock, but thou art worth gold; like you Sir, said the Monk; but venite,
apotemus. Then made they ready rashers on the Coals in abundance, and good fat
Brewis with Sippets; and the Monk drank at pleasure. Some kept him company, and
did as he did; others let it alone. Afterward every Man began to arm and equip
himself for battle, and they armed the Monk against his Will; for he desired no
other Armor for Back and Breast, but his frock, nor any other weapon in his
hand, but the staff of the Cross; yet at their pleasure was he armed cap a-pe,
and mounted upon one of the best Horses in the Kingdom, with a good slashing
sable by his side, together with him were Gargantua, Ponocrates, Gymnast,
Eudemon, and five and twenty more of the most resolute and adventurous of
Grangousier's house, all armed at proof with their lances in their hands,
mounted like St. George, and every one of them having a harquebuse behind him.

CHAP. XLII. How the Monk encouraged his Fellow-Champions, and how he hanged
upon a Tree.
THus went out those valiant Champions on their adventure, in full resolution,
to know what enterprise they should undertake and what to be aware of, in the
day of the great and horrible battle. And the Monk encouraged them saying, my
Children do not fear, nor doubt, I will conduct you safely: God and Sanct
Benedict be with us. If I had strength answerable to my courage, by sdeath I
would plume them for you like ducks. I fear nothing but the great Ordnance; yet
I know a Prayer, which the subsexton of our Abbey taught me, that will preserve
a man from the violence of guns and all manner of fire engines; but it will do
me no good, because I do not believe it. However, my staff of the Cross, will
be the devil Parblen, whoever is a Duck, amongst you, I give my self to the
Devil, if I do not make a Monk of him in my stead, and hamper him within my
Frock; which is a cure for cowardice.

Did you never hear of my Lord Meurles his Greyhound, which was not worth a
straw in the fields; he put a Frock about his neck, by the body of G -- there
was neither Hare nor Fox that could escape him, and which is more, he lined all
the bitches in the Country, though before that he was feeble-reined, and ex
frigidis and Maleficiatis.

The Monk uttering these words in choler, as he past under a walnut-Tree, in
his way toward the Causey, he broached the vizor of his Helmet, on the stump
of a great branch of the Tree; nevertheless, he set his spurs so fiercely to
the Horse, who was full of mettle and quick on the spur, that he bounded
forwards and the Monk going about to ungrapple his vizor, let go his hold of
the bridle and so hanged by his hand upon the bough, whilst his horse stole
away from under him. By this means was the Monk left, hanging on the
walnut-Tree, and crying for help, murder, murder, swearing also that he was
betrayed. Eudemon, perceived him first and calling Gargantua, said, Sir, come
and see Absalom hanging. Gargantua being come, considered the countenance of
the Monk, and in what posture he hanged; wherefore he said to Eudemon, You were
mistaken in comparing him to Absalom; for Absalom hung by his Hair, but this
shaveling Monk hangs by the Ears. Help me (said the Monk*) in the devils
Name, is this a time for you to flout, you seem to me the decretalist
Preachers, who say, that whosoever shall see his neighbor in danger of death,
ought upon pain of trisulk excommunication, rather to admonish him to make
Confession and put his Conscience in the state of Grace, then to help him.

And therefore when I shall see them fallen into a river, and ready to be
drowned, instead of lending them my hand and pulling them out, I shall make
them a fine long Sermon de contemptu mundi, and fuga seculi, and when they are
stark dead, then go go fish for them. Be quiet (said Gymnast) and stir not, my
Minion; I am now coming to unhang thee, for thou art a pretty little gentle
Monachus, Monachus, in claustro non valet ova duo, sed quando est extra been
valet triginta. I have seen above five hundred hanged, but I never saw any hang
with so good a Grace; truly if I had so good a one, I would willingly hang thus
all my lifetime. What (said the Monk) have you almost done preaching? help me
in the name of God, seeing you will not in the name of the other spirit, or by
the habit which I wear, you shall repent it, tempore and loco praelibatis.

Then Gymnast alighted from his horse, and climbing up the walnut-Tree, lifted
up the Monk with one hand, by the gushets of his Armor under the Armpits, and
with the other undid his Vizor from the stump of the broken Branch, which done,
he let him fall to the Ground, and himself after. As soon as the Monk was down,
he put off all his Armor, and threw away one piece after another about the
Field, and taking to him again his Staff of the Cross, remounted up to his
Horse, which Eudemon had caught in his running away. Then went they on merrily,
riding on the high way.

CHAP. XLIII. How the Scouts and fore-Party of Picrochole were met with by
Gargantua, and how the Monk slew Captain Drawforth, and then was taken Prisoner
by his Enemies.
PIcrochole at the relation of those who had escaped out of the broil and
defeat, wherein Tripet was untriped, grew very angry that the Devils should
have so run upon his Men, and held all that night a Counsel of War, Hastueau
Touquedillon.
at which Rashcalf and Touchfaucet concluded his power to be such, that he was
able to defeat all the Devils of Hell, if they should come to justle with his
Forces. This Picrochole did not fully believe, though he doubted not much of
it. Therefore sent he under the command and conduct of the Count Drawforth, for
discovering of the Country, the number of sixteen hundred Horsemen, all
well-mounted upon light Horses for skirmish, and thoroughly besprinkled with
Holy Water; and every one for their cognizance had a Star in his Scarf, to
serve at all adventures, in case they should happen to encounter with Devils;
that by the Virtue, as well of that Gregorian Water, as of the Stars, they
might make the Devils disappear and vanish.

In this Equipage, they made an excursion upon the Country, till they came near
to Vauguyon, and to the Hospital, but could never find any body to speak unto;
whereupon they returned a little back, and by chance in a Shepherds Cottage
near to Coudray, they found five Pilgrims; these they carried away bound and
manacled, as if they had been Spies, for all the Exclamations, Adjurations and
Requests that they could make. Being come down from thence toward Seville,
they were heard by Gargantua, who said then unto those that were with him;
Camerades and Fellow Soldiers, we have here met with an Encounter, and they
are ten times in number more than we: Shall we charge them or no? What a Devil
(said the Monk) shall we do else? Do you esteem Men by their number, rather
than by their valor and prowess? With this he cried out, Charge, Devils,
charge. Which when the Enemies heard, they thought certainly that they had been
very Devils, and therefore even then began all of them to run away as hard as
they could drive, Draw-forth only excepted, who immediately settled his Lance
on its rest, and therewith hit the Monk with all his force on the very middle
of his Breast, but coming against his horrific Frock, the point of the Iron,
being with the blow either broke off or blunted, it was in matter of Execution,
as if you had struck against an Anvil with a little Wax-candle. Then did the
Monk with his Staff of the Cross give him such a sturdy thump and whirret
betwixt his Neck and Shoulders, upon the Acromion bone, that he made him lose
both sense and motion, and fall down stone dead at his Horses feet. And seeing
the Star which he wore on his Scarf, he said unto Gargantua, these Men are but
Priests, which is but the beginning of a Monk, by St. Ihon, I am a perfect
Monk, I will kill them like flies. Then ran he after them at a swift and full
Gallop, till he overtook the Rear, and felled them down like Tree-leaves,
striking athwart and along and every way. Gymnast presently asked Gargantua
if they should pursue them. To whom Gargantua answered, by no means; for,
according to right military Discipline, you must never drive your Enemy unto
Despair. For that such a strait does multiply his Force, and increase his
Courage, which was before broken and cast down. Neither is there any better
help for Men that are out of heart, toiled and spent, then to hope for no
Favor at all. How many Victories have been taken out of the Hands of the
Victors by the vanquished, when they would not rest satisfied with reason, but
attempt to put all to the Sword, and totally to destroy all their Enemies,
without leaving so much as one to carry home News of the defeat of his Fellows.
Open therefore unto your Enemies all the Gates and Ways, and make to them a
bridge of Silver rather then fail, that you may be rid of them. Yea, but (said
Gymnast) they have the Monk: Have they the Monk? (said Gargantua) Upon mine
honor then it will prove to their cost: But to prevent all dangers, let us not
yet retreat, but halt here quietly; for I think I do already understand the
Policy of our Enemies, they are truly more directed by Chance and mere Fortune,
then by good Advice and Counsel. In the mean while, whilst these made a stop
under the Walnut-trees, the Monk pursued on the Chase, charging all he
overtook, and giving quarter to none, until he met with a Trooper, who carried
behind him one of the poor Pilgrims, and there would have rifled him. The
Pilgrim, in hope of relief at the sight of the Monk, cried out, Ha, my Lord
Prior, my good Friend, my Lord Prior, save me, I beseech you, save me. Which
words being heard by those that rode in the Van, they instantly faced about,
and seeing there was no body but the Monk that made this great havoc and
slaughter among them, they lodged him with blows as thick as they use to do an
Ass with Wood: But of all this he felt nothing, especially when they struck
upon his Frock, his Skin was so hard. Then they committed him to two of the
Marshal's Men to keep, and looking about, saw no body coming against them,
whereupon they thought that Gargantua and his Party were fled. Then was it that
they rode as hard as they could toward the Walnut-Trees to meet with them, and
left the Monk there all alone, with his two foresaid Men to guard him.
Gargantua heard the noise and neighing of the Horses, and said to his Men,
Camerades, I hear the track and beating of the Enemies Horse-feet, and withal
perceive that some of them come in a Troop and full Body against us; let us
rally and close here, then set forward in order, and by this means we shall be
able to receive their Charge, to their loss and our honor.

CHAP. XLIV. How the Monk rid himself of his Keepers, and how Picrochole's
Forlorn Hope was defeated.
THE Monk seeing them break off thus without Order, conjectured that they were
to set upon Gargantua and those that were with him, and was wonderfully grieved
that he could not succor them. Then considered he the countenance of the two
Keepers in whose custody he was, who would have willingly run after the Troops
to get some Booty and Plunder, and were always looking toward the Valley unto
which they were going. Farther, he Syllogised, saying, These Men are but badly
skilled in matters of War, for they have not required my Parol; neither have
they taken my Sword from me. Suddenly hereafter he drew his long Sword,
wherewith he gave the Keeper which held him, on the right side such a sound
slash, that he cut clean through the jugularie veins, and the sphagitid
arteries of the neck with the gargareon, even unto the two Adenes, and
redoubling the blow, he opened the spinal marrow betwixt the second and the
third vertebrae; there fell down that Keeper stark dead to the ground. Then the
Monk reining his Horse to the left, ran upon the other, who seeing his fellow
dead, and the Monk to have the advantage of him, cried with a loud Voice, Ha,
my Lord Prior, quarter; I yield, my Lord Prior, quarter, quarter; my good
Friend, my Lord Prior: And the Monk cried likewise, My Lord Posterior, my
Friend, my Lord Posterior, you shall have it upon your Posteriorums. Ha, said
the Keeper, my Lord Prior, my dear Lord Prior, I pray God make you an Abbot. By
the Habit (said the Monk) which I wear, I will here make you a Cardinal. What
do you use to pay Ransoms to Religious Men? You shall have by and by, a red Hat
of my giving: And the fellow cried, Ha, my Lord Prior, my Lord Prior, my Lord
Abbot that shall be my Lord Cardinal, my Lord All. Ha, ha, hes, no my Lord
Prior, my good little Lord the Prior, I yield, render and deliever my self up
to you. And I deliver thee (said the Monk) to all the Devils in Hell; then at
one stroke he struck off his Head; cutting his Scalp upon the Temple-bones, and
lifting up the two bones Bregmatis, together with the sagittal Commissure, as
also a great part of the Coronal Bone; by which terrible blow likewise he cut
the two Meninges, and made a deep wound in the two posterior Ventricles of the
Brain; so that the Cranium abode hanging upon his Shoulders, by the Skin of the
Pericranium behind, in form of a Doctor's Bonnet, black without and red within.
Thus fell he down also to the ground stark dead.

And presently the Monk gave his Horse the Spur, and kept the way that the
Enemy held, who had met with Gargantua and his Companions in the broad
Highway, and were so diminished of their number, for the enormous slaughter
that Gargantua had made with his great Tree amongst them, as also Gymnast,
Ponocrates, Eudemon and the rest, that they began to retreat disorderly and in
great haste, as Men altogether affrighted and troubled in both Sense and
Understanding; and as if they had seen the very proper Species and Form of
Death before their Eyes. Or rather as when you see an Ass with a brizze under
his Tail, or Fly that stings him, run hither and thither without keeping any
path or way, throwing down his load to the ground, breaking his Bridle and
Reins, and taking no breath nor rest, and no Man can tell what ails him, for
they see not any thing touch him. So fled these People, destitute of Wit,
without knowing any cause of flying, only pursued by a panic terror, which in
their minds they had conceived. The Monk perceiving that their whole intent was
to betake themselves to their Heels, alighted from his Horse, and got upon a
big large Rock, which was in the way, and with his great Brackmard Sword laid
such load upon those runaways, and with main strength fetching a compass with
his Arm without feigning or sparing, slew and overthrew so many, that his Sword
broke in two pieces. Then thought he within himself that he had slain and
killed sufficiently, and that the rest should escape to carry News. Therefore
he took up a battle-ax of those that lay there dead, and got upon the Rock
again, passing his time to see the Enemy thus flying, and to tumble himself
amongst the dead Bodies, only that he suffered none to carry Pike, Sword, Lance
nor Gun with him, and those who carried the Pilgrims bound, he made to alight,
and gave their Horses unto the said Pilgrims, keeping them there with him under
the Hedge, and also Touchefaucet, who was then his Prisoner.

CHAP. XLV. How the Monk carried along with him the Pilgrims, and of the good
words that Grangousier gave them.
THIS Skirmish being ended, Gargantua retreated with his Men, excepting the
Monk, and about the dawning of the day they came unto Grangousier, who in his
Bed was praying unto God for their Safety and Victory. And seeing them all safe
and sound, he embraced them lovingly, and asked what was become of the Monk?
Gargantua answered him, that without doubt the Enemies had the Monk? Then have
they mischief and ill luck, said Grangousier, which was very true. Therefore is
it a common Proverb to this day* To give a Man the Monk. Then commanded he a
good Breakfast to be provided for their refreshment. When all was ready, they
called Gargantua, but he was so aggrieved that the Monk was not to be heard of,
that he would neither eat nor drink. In the mean while the Monk comes, and from
the Gate of the outer Court cries out aloud, Fresh Wine, fresh Wine, Gymnast,
my Friend. Gymnast went out and saw that it was Friar Ihon, who brought along
with him five Pilgrims, and Touchefaucet Prisoners. Whereupon Gargantua
likewise went forth to meet him, and all of them made him the best welcome that
possibly they could, and brought him before Grangousier, who asked him of all
his adventures. The Monk told him all, both how he was taken, how he rid
himself of his Keepers, of the slaughter he had made by the way, and how he had
rescued the Pilgrims, and brought along with him Captain Touchefaucet. Then did
they altogether fall to banqueting most merrily. In the mean time Grangousier
asked the Pilgrims what Countrymen they were, whence they came, and whither
they went? Sweertogo in the name of the rest answered, My Sovereign Lord, I am
of Saint Genou in Berry, this Man is of Patvau, this other is of Onzay, this of
Argy, and this Man of Villebrenin. We came from Saint Sebastian near Nantes,
and are now returning, as we best may, by easy Journeys. Yea, but said
Grangousier, what went you to do at St. Sebastian? We went (said Sweertogo) to
offer up unto that Sanct our Vows against the Plague. Ah poor Men (said
Grangousier) do you think that the Plague comes from St. Sebastian? Yes truly
(answered Sweertogo) our Preachers tell us so indeed. But is it so? said
Grangousier. Do the false Prophets teach you such abuses? Do they thus
blaspheme the Sancts and Holy Men of God, as to make them like unto the Devils,
who do nothing but hurt unto Mankind? as Homer writes, that the Plague was
sent into the Camp of the Greeks by Apollo; and as the Poets feign a great
rabble of Vejoves and mischievous Gods. So did a certain old Hypocrite Preach
at Sinay, that Saint Antony sent the fire into Men's Legs; that Saint Eutropius
made Men hydropic; St. Clida^, Fools; and that St. Genou made them goutish. But
I punished him so exemplarily, though he called me Heretic for it, that since
that time no such Hypocritical Rogue durst set his Foot within my Territories.
And truly I wonder that your King should suffer them in their Sermons to
publish such scandalous Doctrine in his Dominions. For they deserve to be
chastised with greater severity then those who by Magical Art, or any other
Device, have brought the Pestilence into a Country* the Pest kills but the
Bodies, but such abominable Impostors empoison our very Souls. As he spoke
these words, in came the Monk very resolute; and asked them, whence are you,
you poor Wretches? of St. Genou (said they.) And how (said the Monk) does the
Abbot Gullicut, that true toaper, and the Monks, what cheer make they?
Morbleau, they will have a fling at your Wives, whilst you are upon your gadding
Pilgrimage. Hin, hen (said Sweertogo) I am not afraid of mine; for he that
shall see her by day, will never break his Neck to come to her in the
nighttime. Yea marry (said the Monk) now you have hit it; let her be as ugly as
ever was Proserpina, she will not keep her Arse dry, if there dwell any Monks
near her. For a good Carpenter will make use of any kind of Timber. Let me be
peppered with the Pox, if you find not all your Wives with Child at your
return: For the very shadow of an Abbey-steeple is prolific.

It is (said Gargantua) like the Water of Nilus in Egypt, if you believe Strabo
and Pliny, lib. 7. cap 3. What Virtue will there be then in their Bullets of
Concupiscence, their Habits and their Bodies?

Then (said Grangousier) go your ways, poor Men in the Name of God the Creator,
to whom I pray to guide you perpetually* and henceforward be not so ready to
undertake these idle and unprofitable Journeys. Look to your Families, labor
every Man in his vocation, instruct your Children, and live as the good Apostle
St. Paul directs you. In doing whereof, God, his Angels and Sancts will guard
and protect you, and no Evil or Plague at any time shall befall you.

Then Gargantua led them into the Hall to take their Refection; but the
Pilgrims did nothing but sigh, and said to Gargantua; O how happy is that Land
which has such a Man for their Lord! We have been more edified and instructed
by the talk which he has had with us, then by all the Sermons that ever were
preached in our Town. This is (said Gargantua) that which Plato says, lib. 5.
de Republ. That those Commonwealths are happy, whose Rulers Philosophize, and
whose Philosophers Rule. Then caused he their Wallets to to be filled with
Victuals, and their Bottles with Wine, and gave unto each of them a Horse to
ease them upon the way, together with some Pence to live upon.

CHAP. XLVI. How Grangousier did very kindly entertain Touchefaucet his
Prisoner.
TOuchefaucet was presented unto Grangousier, and by him examined upon the
enterprise and attempt of Picrochole, what it was he could pretend to, by this
tumultuary invasion; whereunto he answered, that his end and purpose was to
conquer all the Country, if he could, for the injury done to his Cake bakers.
It is too great an undertaking said Grangousier and (as the Proverb is.) He
that gripes too much holds fast but little; the time is not now so to conquer
Kingdoms, to the loss of our nearest Christian brother, this imitation of the
ancient Herculeses, Alexanders, Hannibals, Scipios, Caesar's and other such
Heroes, is quite contrary to the Profession of the Gospel of Christ, by the
which we are commanded to preserve, keep, rule and govern every Man his own
Country and Lands, and not in a hostile manner to Invade others, and that which
heretofore the Saracens and Barbarians called Prowess, we do now call Robbery
and Wickedness. It would have been more commendable in him to have contained
himself within the bounds of his own territories, royally geverning them then
to insult and domineer in mine, pillaging and plundering every where, for by
ruling his own with discretion, he might have increast his greatness, but by
robbing me he cannot escape destruction. Go your ways in the name of God, do
what is righteous; show your King what is amiss, and never counsel him with
regard unto your own particular profit for with the public will also be
swallowed up the private. As for your ransom, I do freely remit it to you and
will that your Arms and Horse be restored to you; so should good neighbors do
and ancient friends, seeing this our difference is not properly War, as Plato,
lib. 5. de repub. would not have it called War but Sedition not when the Greeks
took up Arms against one another, and therefore when such combustions should
arise, his advice was to behave themselves with all discretion and modesty.
Although you call it War, it is but superficial; it enters not into the
inmost cabinet of our hearts; for neither of us has been wronged in his
honor, nor is there any question betwixt us in the main; but only how to
redress, by the by, some pretty faults committed by our Men; I mean, both yours
and ours, which although you knew, you ought to let pass; for these quarrelsom
persons deserve rather to be contemned then mentioned, especially seeing I
offered them satisfaction according to the wrong.

God shall be the just Judge of our variances, whom I beseech by death, rather
to take me out of this Life, and to permit my goods to perish and be destroyed
before mine Eyes, then that by me or mine he should in any sort be wronged.
These words uttered, he called the Monk, and before them all spoke thus unto
him: Friar Ihon, my good friend, is it you that took Prisoner the Captain
Touchfaucet here present? Sir, said the Monk, seeing himself is here and that he
is of the Years of discretion, I had rather you should know it by his
confession then by any words of mine. Then said Touchfaucet, my Sovereign Lord
it is he indeed that took me, and I do therefore most freely yield my self his
Prisoner. Have you put him to any ransom, said Grangousier to the Monk? No
(said the Monk,) of that I take no care: How much would you have, for having
taken him? nothing, nothing said the Monk? I am not swayed by that, nor do I
regard it. Then Grangousier commanded, that in presence of Touchfaucet, should
be delivered to the Monk for taking him, the some of threescore and two
thousand saluts, which was done, whilst they made a colation to the said
Touchfaucet; of whom Grangousier asked, if he would stay with him, or if he
loved rather to return to his King. Touchfaucet answered, that he was content
to take whatever course he would advise him to: Then said Grangousier) return
unto your King, and, God be with you.

Then gave him an excellent Sword a Vienna blade, with a golden scabbard
wrought with Vine-branch* like flourishes, of fine Goldsmiths work, and a
Collar of gold, weighing seven hundred and two thousand marks garnished, with
precious stones of the finest sort, esteemed at a hundred and sixty thousand
Ducats, and ten thousand Crowns more, as an honorable present.

After this talk, Touchfaucet got to his Horse, and Gargantua for his safety
allowed him the guard of thirty Men at Arms, and six score Archers to attend
him, under the conduct of Gymnast, to bring him even unto the gate of the rock
Clermond, if there were need. As Soon as he was gone, the Monk restored unto
Grangousier the threescore and two thousand Saluts, which he had received,
saying, Sir it is not as yet the time for you to give such gifts, stay till
this War be at an end, for none can tell what accidents may occur, and War
begun without good provision of Money beforehand is but a as blast that will
quickly pass away: Coin is the sinews of War. Well then (said Grangousier) at
the end I will content you by some honest recompense; as also all those who
shall do me good service.

CHAP. XLVII. How Grangousier sent for his Legions and how Touchfaucet slew
Rashcalf, and was afterward executed by the command of Pricochole.
ABout this same time those of Bess of the old Market, of St. James bourg, of
the Draggage, of Parille, of the Rivers, of the Rocks St. Pol, of the
Vaubreton, of Pautille, of the Brahemont, of Clainbridge, of Cravant, of
Grammount, of the Town at the Badgerholes, of Hu^mes, of Serge, of Husse, of
St. Livant, of Panzoust, of the Coldraux, of Vernon, of Coulaines, of Chose, of
Varenes, of Bourgueil, of the Bouchard Claud, of the Croulay, of Narsie, of
Cand, of Monsoreau and other bordering places, sent Ambassadors unto
Grangousier, to tell him that they were advised of the great wrongs which
Picrochole had done him; and in regard of their Ancient Confederacy, offered
him what assistance they could afford, both in Men, Money, Victuals and
Ammunition and other necessaries for War. The money which by the joint agreement
of them all was sent unto him, amounted to sixscore and fourteen Millions, two
Crowns and a half of pure Gold.

The forces wherewith they did assist him, did consist in fifteen thousand
Cuirasiers, two and thirty thousand light Horsemen, fourscore and nine thousand
Dragoons and a hundred and forty thousand Voluntier Adventurers. These had
with them a eleven thousand and two hundred Cannons, double Cannons, Basilisks,
and of Pioneers they had seven and forty thousand all Victualled and paid for
six Months and four Days of advance; which offer Gargantua did not altogether
refuse, nor wholly accept of; but giving them hearty thanks, said, that he
would compound and order the War by such a device, that there should not be
found great need to put so many honest Men to trouble, in the Managing of it.
And therefore was content, at that time to give order only for bringing along
the Legions, which he maintained at his ordinary Garison-Towns of the
Deerniere, Chavignie, of Granot, and of Quinquenais, amounting to the number of
two thousand Cuirasiers, threescore and six thousand Foot-Souldires, six and
twenty thousand Dragoons, attended by two hundred pieces of great Ordnance, two
and twenty thousand Pioneers, and six thousand light Horsemen, all drawn up in
Troops, so well befitted and accommodated with their commissaries, sutlers,
ferriers, harness-makers, and other such like necessary Members in a military
Camp; so fully instructed in the Art of Warfare, so perfectly knowing and
following their colors, so ready to hear and obey their Captains, so nimble to
run, so strong at their charging so prudent in their adventures, and every Day
so well Disciplined, that they seemed rather to be a consort of Organ pipes, or
mutual concord of the Wheels of a Clock, then an Infantry and Cavalry, or Army
of Soldiers.

Touchfaucet immediately after his return, presen^ed himself before Picrochole,
and related unto him at large all that he had done and seen, and at last
endeavored to persuade him with strong and forcible arguments to capitulate
and make an agreement with Grangousier, whom he found to be the honestest Man
in the World, saying further, that it was neither right nor reason thus to
trouble his Neighbors, of whom they never received any thing but good; and in
regard of the main Point, that they should never be able to go through stitch
with that War, but to their great Damage and Mischief; for the Forces of
Picrochole were not so considerable, but that Grangousier could easily
overthrow them.

He had not well done speaking, when Rashcalf said out aloud; Unhappy is that
Prince, which is by such Men served, who are so easily corrupted as I know
Touchfaucet is; for I see his courage so Changed, that he had willingly joined
with our enemies to fight against us and betray us, if they would have received
him, but as Virtue is of all, both Friends and Foes, praised and esteemed; so
is Wickedness soon known and suspected; and although it happen the Enemies do
make use thereof for their profit yet have they always the wicked, and the
Traitors in abomination.

Touchfaucet being at these words very impatient drew out his sword, and
therewith ran Rashcalf through the body, a little under the Nipple of his left
side, whereof he died presently, and pulling back his Sword out of his Body,
said Boldly, So let him perish that shall a faithful servant blame, Picrochole
incontinently grew furious, and seeing Touchfaucets new Sword and his scabbard
so richly Diapred with flourishes of most excellent Workmanship, said, Did they
give thee this Weapon, so Felloniously therewith to kill before my Face, my so
good friend Rashcalf? then immediately command'd he his Guard to hew him in
pieces, which was instantly done, and that so cruelly, that the Chamber was all
died with Blood: Afterward he appointed the Corpse of Rashcalf to be
honorably, buried and that of Touchfaucet to be cast over the Wall into the
Ditch.

The news of these Excessive Violences were quickly spread through all the
Army; whereupon many began to murmur against Picrochole, Insofar, that
Pinchpennie said to him, My sovereign Lord, I know not what the Issue of this
enterprise will be; I see your Men much dejected and not well resolved in their
Minds, by considering that we are here very ill provided of Victuals, and that
our number is already much deminished by three or four Sallies: Furthermore,
great Supplies and Recruits come daily into your Enemies; but we so moulder
away, that if we be once Besieged, I do not see how we can escape a total
destruction. Tush, pish (said Picrochole) you are like the Melun Eeles, you cry
before they come to you: Let them come, let them come, if they dare,

CHAP. XLVIII. How Gargantua set upon Picrochole, within the Rock Clermond, and
utterly defeated the Army of the said Picrochole.
GArgantua had the Charge of the whole Army, and his Father Grangousier stayed
in his Castle; who encouraging them with good Words, promised great rewards
unto those that should do any notable service. As Soon as they had gained the
Ford of Vede, Boats and Bridges speedily made, they past over in a trice; then
considering the situation of the Town, which was on a high and advantageous
place, Gargantua thought fit to call his Counsel, and pass that night in
deliberation upon what was to be done: But Gymnast said unto him, My sovereign
Lord, such is the Nature and Complexion of the French, that they are worth
nothing, but at the first push. Then are they more fierce then Devils; but if
they be wearied with delays, they prove more faint then Women; my Opinion is
therefore, that now presently after your Men have taken breath, and some small
refection, you give Order for a resolute Assault. The advice was found very
good, and for effectuating thereof, he brought forth his Army into the plain
Field, and placed the reserves on the Skirt or Rising of a little Hill. The
Monk took along with him six Companies of Foot and two hundred Horsemen well
armed and with great diligence crossed the Marish, and valiantly got up to the
top of the green Hillock, even to the Highway which leads to Loudin. Whilst
the assault was thus begun, Picrochole's Men could not tell well which was best
to Issue out, and receive the Assailants, or keep within the Town and not to
stir: Himself in the mean time without deliberation, sallied forth in a rage
with the Cavalry of his Guard, who were forthwith received and royally
entertained with great Cannon-shot, that fell upon them like hail from the high
grounds, on which the Artillery was planted; whereupon the Gargantuists betook
themselves unto the Valleys, to give the Ordnance leave to play and range with
the larger scope.

Those of the Town defended themselves as well as they could, but their shot
past over, without doing any hurt at all. Some of Picrocholes Men that had
escaped our Artillery, set most fiercely upon our Soldiers, but prevailed
little; for they were all let in betwixt the Files, and there knocked down to
the Ground. Which their Fellow Soldiers seeing, they would have retreated, but
the Monk having seized upon the Pass, by the which they were to return, they
run away and fled in all the Disorder and Confusion that could be imagined.

Some would have pursued after them, and followed the Chase, but the Monk
withheld-them, apprehending that in their pursuit the Pursuers might lose their
ranks, and so give occasion to the Besieged to sally out of the Town upon them.
Then staying there some space, and none coming against him, he sent the Duke
Phrontist, to advise Gargantua to advance toward the Hill upon the left hand,
to hinder Picrochole's retreat at that Gate; which Gargantua did with all
Expedition, and sent thither four Brigades under the conduct of Sebast, which
had no sooner reached the top of the Hill, but they met Picrochole in the
Teeth, and those that were with him scattered.

Then charged they upon them stoutly, yet were they much indamaged by those
that were upon the Walls, who galled them with all manner of Shot, both from
the great Ordnance, small Guns and Bows. Which Gargantua perceiving, he went
with a strong Party to their relief, and with his Artillery began to thunder so
terribly upon that Canton of the Wall, and so long, that all the strength
within the Town, to maintain and fill up the Breach, was drawn thither. The
Monk seeing that quarter which he kept besieged, void of Men and competent
Guards, and in a manner altogether naked and abandoned, did most magnanimously
on a sudden lead up his Men toward the Fort, and never left it till he had got
up upon it, knowing that such as come to the reserve in a conflict, bring with
them always more fear and terror, then those that deal about them with their
hands in the fight.

Nevertheless he gave no Alarm till all his Soldiers had got within the Wall,
except the two hundred Horsemen, whom he left without to secure his Entry. Then
did he give a most horrible shout, so did all these who were with him, and
immediately thereafter without resistance, putting to the edge of the Sword the
guard that was at that Gate, they opened it to the Horsemen, with whom most
furiously they altogether ran toward the Eastgate, where all the hurly burly
was, and coming close upon them in the Rear, overthrew all their Forces.

The besiged seeing that the Gargantuists had won the Town upon them, and that
they were like to be secure in no corner of it, submitted themselves unto the
mercy of the Monk, and asked for quarter, which the Monk very nobly granted to
them, yet made them lay down their Arms. Then shutting them up within Churches,
gave order to seize upon all the Staves of the Crosses, and placed Men at the
Doors to keep them from coming forth. Then opening the Eastgate, he issued out
to succor and assist Gargantua. But Picrochole thinking it had been some
Relief coming to him from the Town, adventured more forwardly than before, and
was upon the giving of a most desperate Home charge, when Gargantua cried out,
Ha, Friar Ihon, my Friend Friar Ihon, you are come in a good hour; which
unexpected accident so affrighted Picrochole and his Men, that giving all for
lost, they betook themselves to their Heels, and fled on all Hands. Gargantua
chased them till they came near to Vaugaudry, killing and slaying all the way,
and then sounded the retreat.

CHAP. XLIX. How Picrochole in his flight fell into great Misfortunes, and what
Gargantua did after the Battle.
PIcrochole, thus in despair, fled toward the Bouchard Island, and in the way
to Rivere his Horse stumbled and fell down, whereat he was on a sudden so
incensed, that he with his Sword, without more ado, killed him in his Choler.
Then not finding any other whereon to remount, he was about to have taken an
Ass at the Mill that was thereby; but the Millers Men did so baste his Bones,
and so soundly bethwack'd him, that they made him both black and blew with
strokes; then striping him of all his Clothes, gave him a scurvy old Canvas
Jacket wherewith to cover his Nakedness. Thus went along this poor choleric
Wretch, who passing the Water at Porthuaux, and relating his misadventurous
Disasters, was foretold by an old Lourpidon Hag, that his Kingdom should be
restored to him at the coming of the Cocklicranes. What is become of him since
we cannot certainly tell; yet was I told that he is now a Porter at Lions, as
testy and chorelic as ever, and always with great Lamentation enquiring at all
strangers of the coming of the Cocklicranes, expecting assuredly (according to
the old Woman's Prophecy) that at their coming he shall be reestablished in
his Kingdom. The first thing Gargantua did after his return into the Town was
to call the Muster-roll of his Men, which when he had done, he found that there
were very few either killed or wounded, only some few Foot of Captain Tolmeres
Company, and Ponocrates, who was shot with a Musket Ball, through the Doublet.
Then he caused them all at, and in their several, Posts and Divisions, to take
a little Refreshment, which was very plenteously provided for them in the best
Drink and Victuals that could be had for Money; And gave order to the
Treasurers and Commissaries of the Army, to pay for, and defray that Repast,
and that there should be no Outrage at all, nor Abuse committed in the Town,
seeing it was his own. And furthermore commanded, that immediately after the
Soldiers had done with eating and drinking, they should be drawn up on the
Piazza before the Castle, there to receive six months pay: All which was done.
After this by his direction, were brought before him, in the said place, all
those that remained of Picrochole's Party; unto whom in the presence of the
Princes, Nobles and Officers of his Court and Army, he spoke as follows.

CHAP. L. Gargantua's Speech to the Vanquished.
OUR Fore fathers and Ancestors, of all times, have been of this Nature and
Disposition, that upon the winning of a Battle, they have chosen rather for a
sign and memorial of their Triumphs and Victories, to erect Trophies and
Monuments in the Hearts of the Vanquished by Clemency, then by Architecture in
the Lands which they had conquered. For they did hold in greater estimation,
the lively remembrance of Men purchased by liberality, than the dumb
Inscription of Arches, Pillars and Pyramids, subject to the Injury of Storms
and Tempests, and to the Envy of every one. You may very well remember of the
Courtesy, which by them was used toward the Bretons, in the Battle of St.
Aubin of Comier, and at the demolishing of Partenay. You have heard, and
hearing admire their gentle Comportment toward those at the Barriers of
Spaniola, when they had plundered, wasted and ransacked the maritime Borders of
Olone and Talmondois. All this Hemisphere of the World was filled with the
Praises and Congratulations, which your selves and your Fathers made, when
Alpharbal King of Canarre, not satisfied with his own Fortunes, did most
furiously invade the Land of Onyx, and with cruel* Piracies molest all the
Armoric Islands, and confine Regions of Britany. Yet was he in a set naval
Fight justly taken and vanquished by my Father, whom God preserve and protect.
But what? Whereas other Kings and Emperors, yea those who entitle themselves
Catholics, would have dealt roughly with him, kept him a close Prisoner, and
put him to an extreme high ransom: He entreated him very courteously, lodged
him kindly with himself in his own Palace, and out of his incredible mildness
and gentle disposition sent him back with a safe Conduct, laden with Gifts,
laden with Favors, laden with all Offices of Friendship: What fell out upon
it? Being returned into his Country, he called a Parliament, where all the
Princes and States of his Kingdom being assembled, he showed them the Humanity
which he had found in us, and therefore wished them to take such course by way
of Compensation therein, as that the whole World might be edified by the
Example, as well of their honest Graciousness to us, as of our gracious Honesty
toward them. The result hereof was, that it was voted and decreed by an
unanimous Consent, that they should offer up entirely their Lands, Dominions
and Kingdoms, to be disposed of by us according to our Pleasure.

Alpharbal in his own Person, presently returned with Nine Thousand and thirty
eight great Ships of burden, bringing with him the Treasures, not only of his
House and Royal Lineage, but almost of all the Country beside. For he imbarking
himself, to set Sail with a West-North-East Wind, every one in heaps did cast
into the Ship Gold, Silver, Rings, Jewels, Spices, Drugs and Aromatical
Perfumes, Parrets, Pelicans, Monkies, Civet-cats, black-spotted Weesils,
Porcupines, etc. He was accounted no good Mother's Son, that did not cast in
all the rare and precious things he had.

Being safely arrived, he came to my said Father, and would have kissed his Feet:
That Action was found too submissively low, and therefore was not permitted,
but in exchange, he was most cordially embraced: He offered his Presents, they
were not received, because they were too excessive: He yielded himself
voluntarily a Servant and Vassal, and was content his whole Posterity should be
liable to the same Bondage; this was not accepted of, because it seemed not
equitable. He surrendered by Virtue of the Decree of his great Parliamentary
Council, his whole Countries and Kingdoms to him, offering the Deed and
Conveyance, signed, sealed and ratified by all those that were concerned in it.
This was altogether refused, and the Parchments cast into the Fire: In the end,
this free-good Will and simple Meaning of the Canarriens, wrought such
tenderness in my Father's Heart, that he could not abstain from shedding Tears,
and wept most profusely; then by choice words very congruously adapted, strove
in what he could to diminish the estimation of the good offices, which he had
done them, saying, That any Courtesy he had conferred upon them, was not worth
a rush, and what favor so ever he had showed them, he was bound to do it. But
so much the more did Alpharbal augment the repeat thereof: What was the Issue?
whereas for his ransom in the greatest extremity of rigor and most tyrannical
dealing, could not have been exacted above twenty times a hundred thousand
Crowns, and his eldest Sons detained as hostages, till that Sum had been paid,
they made themselves perpetual tributaries, and obliged to give us every Year
two millions of Gold at four and twenty Carats fine: The first Year we received
the whole sum of two Millions; the second Year of their own accord, they paid
freely to us three and twenty hundred thousand Crowns; the third Year six and
twenty hundred thousand; the fourth Year three millions, and do so increase it
always out of their own good will, that we shall be constrained to forbid them
to bring us any more. This is the Nature of gratitude and true thankfulness:
For time which gnaws and diminishes all things else, augments and increases
benefits; because a noble action of liberality done to a Man of reason does
grow continually by his generous thinking of it, and remembering it.

But unwilling therefore any way to degenerate from the hereditary mildness and
clemency of my Parents; I do now forgive you, set you at liberty and every way
make you as frank and free as ever you were before. Moreover, at your going out
of the Gate, you shall have every one of you three Months Pay to bring you home
into your Houses and Families and shall have a safe convoy of six hundred
Cuirasiers and eight thousand Foot under the conduct of Alexander, Esquire of
my body, that the Clubmen of the Country may not do you any Injury. God be with
you; I am sorry from my Heart that Picrochole is not here; for I would have
given him to understand, that this War was undertaken against my Will, and
without any hope to increase either goods or renown; but seeing he is lost and
that no Man can tell where, nor how he went away, It is my will that this
Kingdom remain entire to his Son, who because he is too young (he not being yet
full five Years old) shall be brought up and instructed by the ancient Princes
and learned Men of the Kingdom. And because a Realm, thus desolate, may easily
come to Ruin; if the covetousness and avarice of those, who by their places are
obliged to administer justice in it; but not curbed and restrained: I ordain
and will have it so, that Ponocrates be overseer and superintendent above all
his governors, with whatever power and authority is requisite thereto and that
he be continually with the Child, until he find him able and capable to rule
and govern by himself.

Now I must tell you, that y^u are to understand how a too feeble and diss^lute
Facility in pardoning Evildoers gives them occasion to commit wickedness
afterward more readily; upon this pernicious confidence of receiving favor, I
consider that Moses, the meekest Man that was in his time upon the Earth, did
severely punish the mutinous and seditious People of Israel. I consider
likewise, that Julius Caesar, who was so gracious an Emperor, that Cicero said
of him, That his Fortune had nothing more excellent than that he could, and his
Virtue nothing better than that he would always save and pardon every Man. He
notwithstanding all this, did in certain places, most rigorously punish the
Authors of Rebellion. After the Example of these good Men, it is my Will and
Pleasure, that you deliver over unto me before you depart hence, first, that
fine Fellow Marquet, who was the prime, origin and groundwork of this War, by
his vain Presumption and Overweening. Secondly, his fellow Cakebakers, who were
neglective in checking and reprehending his idle hair-brained Humor in the
instant time. And lastly, all the Counselors, Captains, Officers and Domestics
of Picrochole, who had been Incendiaries or Fomenters of the War, by provoking,
praising or counselling him to come out of his Limits thus to trouble us.

CHAP. LI. How the victorious Gargantuists were recompensed after the Battle.
WHen Gargantua had finished his Speech, the seditious Men whom he required,
were delivered up unto him, except Swashbuckler, Durtaille and Smaltrash, who
ran away six hours before the Battle; one of them as far as to Lanielneck at
one course, another to the Valley of Vire, and the third even unto Logroine,
without looking back, or taking breath by the way. And two of the Cake-bakers,
who were slain in the Fight. Gargantua did them no other hurt, but that he
appointed them to pull at the Presses of his Printing House, which he had newly
set up. Then those who died there he caused to be honorably buried in
Black-soile-Vailey, and Burn-hag-Field, and gave order that the wounded should
be dressed and had care of in his great Hospital or Nosocome. After this,
considering the great prejudice done to the Town and its Inhabitants, he
re-imbursed their Charges, and repaired all the losses, that, by their
Confession upon Oath, could appear they had sustained. And for their better
Defense and Security in times coming, against all sudden Uproars and Invasions,
commanded a strong Citadel to be built there with a competent Garrison to
maintain it. At his departure he did very graciously thank all the Soldiers of
the Brigades, that had been at this overthrow, and sent them back to their
Winter Quarters in their several Stations and Garrisons. The Decumane Legion
only excepted, whom in the Field on that day he saw do some great Exploit, and
their Captains also, whom he brought along with himself unto Grangousier.

At the sight and coming of them, the good Man was so joyful, that it is not
possible fully to describe it, He made them a Feast the most magnificent,
plentiful and delicious that ever was seen since the time of the King Assuerus.
At the taking up of the Table, he distributed amongst them his whole Cupboard
of Plate, which weighed Eight hundred thousand and fourteen Besants of Gold, in
great antic Vessels, huge Pots, large Basins, big Tasses, Cups, Goblets,
Candlesticks, comfit Boxes and other such Plate, all of pure massy Gold,
besides the precious Stones, enameling and workmanship, which by all Men's
estimation was more worth than the matter of the Gold. Then unto every one of
them out of his Coffers caused he to be given the sum of Twelve hundred
thousand Crowns ready Money. And further he gave to each of them for ever and
in perpetuity (unless he should happen to decease without Heirs) such Castles
and neighboring Lands of his as were most commodious for them. To Ponocrates
he gave the Rock Clermond; to Gymnast, the Coudray; to Eudemon, Monpensier;
Rinan, to Tolmere; to Ithibolle, Montsaurean; to Acamas, Cande; Varenes to
Chirovacte; Gravot to Sebast; Quinquenais to Alexander; Legre to Sophrone; and
so of his other Places.

CHAP. LII. How Gargantua caused to be built for the Monk the Abbey of Theleme.
THere was left only the Monk (...) ^^ovide for, whom Gargantua (...) made
Abbot of Seville, but he refused (...) would have given him the Abbey of
Bourgueil, or of Sanct Florent which was better, or both, if it pleased him.
But the Monk gave him a very peremptory answer, that he would never take upon
him the Charge nor Government of Monks. For how shall I be able (said he) to
rule over others, that have not full power and command of my self. If you think
I have done you, or may hereafter do you, any acceptable Service, give me leave
to found an Abbey after my own Mind and Fancy. The motion pleased Gargantua
very well, who thereupon offered him all the Country of Theleme by the River of
Loire, till within two Leagues of the great Forest of Port huaut. The Monk then
requested Gargantua to institute his religious Order contrary to all others.
First then (said Gargantua) you must not build a Wall about your Convent, for
all other Abbeys are strongly walled and mured about. See (said the Monk) and
without cause, where there is Mur before, and Mur behind, there is store of
Murmur, Envy and mutual Conspiracy.

Moreover, seeing there are certain Convents in the World, whereof the Custom
is, if any Woman come (I mean chaste and honest Women) they immediately sweep
the ground which they have trod upon. Therefore was it ordained, that if any
Man or Woman entered into religious Orders, should by chance come within this
new Abbey, all the Rooms should be thoroughly washed and cleansed through which
they had passed. And because in all other Monasteries and Nunneries all is
compassed, limited and regulated by Hours, it was decreed that in this new
Structure there should be neither Clock nor Dial, but that according to the
opportunities and incident occasions, all their Hours should be disposed of.
For (said Gargantua) the greatest loss of time that I know, is, to count the
Hours. What good comes of it? nor can there be any greater dotage in the World,
then for one to guide and direct his Courses by the sound of a Bell, and not by
his own Judgment and Discretion.

Item, Because at that time they put no Women into Nunneries, but such as were
either purblind, blinkards, lame, crooked, ill-favored, misshapen, fools,
senceless, spoiled or corrupt; nor encloister'd any Men, but those that were
either sickly, subject to defluxions, ill-bred louts, simple sots, or peevish
trouble-houses. But to the purpose (said the Monk) A Woman that is neither fair
nor good, to what use serves she? To make a Nun of, said Gargantua. Yea (said
the Monk) and to make shirts and smocks. Therefore was it ordained that into
this Religious Order should be admitted no Women that were not fair, well
featured, and of a sweet disposition: Nor Men that were not comely, personable
and well conditioned.

Item, Because in the Convents of Women, Men come not but underhand, privily
and by stealth; it was therefore enacted, that in this House there shall be no
Women in case there be not Men, nor Men in case there be not Women.

Item, Because both Men and Women that are received into religious Orders after
the expiring of their noviciat or probation-year, were constrained and forced
perpetually to stay there all the days of their life; it was therefore ordered,
that all whatever, Men or Women, admitted within this Abbey, shoul have full
leave to depart with peace and contentment, whenever it should seem good to
them so to do.

Item, For that the religious men and women did ordinarily make three Vows, to
wit, those of Chastity, Poverty and Obedience; it was therefore constituted and
appointed, that in this Convent they might be honorably Married, that they
might be Rich, and live at Liberty. In regard of the legitimate time of the
persons to be initiated, and years under and above, which they were not capable
of reception, the Women were to be admitted from ten till fifteen, and the Men
from twelve to eighteen.

CHAP. LIII. How the Abbey of the Thelemites was Built and Endowed.
FOR the Fabric and Furniture of the Abbey, Gargantua caused to be delivered
out in ready Money Seven and twenty hundred thousand, eight hundred and one and
thirty of those golden Rams of Berrie, which have a Sheep stamped on the one
side, and a flowered Cross on the other. And for every year, until the whole
work were completed, he allotted Threescore and nine thousand Crowns of the
Sun, and as many of the Seven Stars, to be charged all upon the Receipt of the
Custom. For the Foundation and Maintenance thereof for ever, he settled a
perpetual Fee-farm-rent of three and twenty hundred, threescore and nine
thousand, five hundred and fourteen Rose-Nobles, exempted from all homage,
fealty, service or burden whatsoever* and payable every year at the Gate of the
Abbey; and of this by Letters Pa^tents passed a very good Grant. The
Architecture was in a figure Hexagonal, and in such a Fashion, that in every
one of the six Corners there was built a great round Tower of Threescore foot
in diameter; and were all of a like form and bigness. Upon the Northside ran
along the River of Loire, on the bank whereof was situated the Tower called
Arctick. Going toward the East, there was another called Calaer; the next
following Anatole* the next Mesembrine; the next Hesperia, and the last Criere.
Every Tower was distant from other the space of Three hundred and twelve paces.
The whole Aedifice was every where six stories high, reckoning the Cellars
under Ground for one. The second was arched after the fashion of a
basket-handle. The rest were seeled with pure Wainscot, flourished with
Flanders fret-work, in the form of the foot of a Lamp; and covered above with
fine slates, with an indorsement of Lead, carrying the antic figures of little
Puppets, and Animals of all sorts, notably well suited to one another, and
guilt, together with the gutters, which jetting without the Walls, from betwixt
the cross Bars in a diagonal figure, painted with Gold and Azure, reached to
the very ground, where they ended into great Conduit-pipes, which carried all
away unto the River from under the House.

This same building was a hundred times more sumptuous and magnificent than
ever was Bonnivet, Chambourg or Chantillie. For there was in it Nine thousand
three hundred and two and thirty Chambers; every one whereof had a withdrawing
Room, a handsome Closet, a Wardrobe, an Oratory and neat passage, leading into a
great and spacious Hall. Between every Tower, in the midst of the said body of
Building, there was a pair of winding Stairs, whereof the Steps were part of
Porphyry, part of Numidian stone, and part of Serpentine marble; each of those
steps being two and twenty foot in length, and three fingers thick, and the
just number of twelve betwixt every rest* or landing place. In every resting
place were two fair antic Arches where the light came in; and by those they
went into a Cabinet, made even with, and of the breadth of, the said winding,
and the re-ascending above the roofs of the House, ending conically in a
Pavillion. By that vize or winding, they entered on every side into a great
Hall, and from the Halls into the Chambers. From the Arctic Tower unto the
Criere, were the fair great Libraries in Greek, Latin, Hebrew, French, Italian
and Spanish, respectively distributed in their several Cantons, according to
the diversity of these Languages. In the midst there was a wonderful
winding-stair, the entry whereof was without the House, in a Vault or Arch six
fathom broad. It was made in such symmetry and largeness, that six Men at Arms
with their Lances in their Rests, might together in a breast ride all up to the
very top of all the Palace. From the Tower Anatole to the Mesembrine were fair
spacious Galleries, all colored over and painted with the ancient Prowesses,
Histories and Descriptions of the World. In the midst thereof there was
likewise such another Ascent and Gate, as we said there was on the riverside.
Upon that Gate was written in great antic Letters, that which follows.

CHAP. LIVE. The Inscription set upon the great Gate of Theleme.
HEre enter not religious Boobies, Sots,
Impostors, sniveling Hypocrites, Bigots.
Dark-brain-distorted Owls, worse then the Huns
Or Ostrogots, forerunners of Baboons.
Cursed Snakes, dissembled Varlets, seeming Sancts,
Slipshop Caffards, Beggars pretending wants;
Fomenters of Divisions and Debates,
Elsewhere, not here, make sale of your Deceits.
Your filthy Trumperies
Stuffed with pernicious Lies
(Not worth a bubble)
Would only trouble,
Our earthly Paradise.
Your filthy Trumperies.
Here enter not Attorneys, Barretters,
Nor bridle champing-law Practitioners:
Clerks, Commissaries, Scribes nor Pharisees,
Wilful disturbers of the Peoples ease,
Judges, Destroyers, with an unjust breath,
That, like Dogs, worry honest Men to death.
We want not your Demurrers, nor your Pleas;
So, at the Gibet go and seek your Fees.
We are not, for Attendance or Delays;
But would with Ease and Quiet pass our Days.
Lawsuits, debates and wrangling
Hence are exiled, and jangling.
Here we are very
Frolic and merry,
And free from all intangling,
Law suits, debate and wrangling.
Here enter not base pinching Usurers,
Pelf-lickers, everlasting Gatherers;
Gold-graspers, Coin-gripers, Gulpers of Mists,
With Harpy-griping Claws, who, tho your Chests
Vast sums of Money should to you afford,
Would nevertheless be adding to the hoard:
And yet not be content; you cluntchfist dastards,
Insatiable Fiends, and Pluto's bastards;
Greedy devourers, chichy sneakbil Rogues;
Hell-mastiffs gnaw your Bones, you ravenous Dogs.
You beastly looking Fellows,
Reason does plainly tell us,
That we should not
To you allot
Room here, but at the Gallows;
You beastly looking Fellows.
Here enter not, unsociable Weight,
Humoursom Churl, by Day, nor yet by Night.
No grumbling Awf, none of the sharping Trade,
No huffcap Squire, or Brother of the Blade.
A Tartar bred, or in Alsatia Wars,
The Ruffian comes not hither with his Bears.
Elsewhere for shelter scour, ye Bully-rocks,
And Rogues, that rot with Infamy and Pox.
Grace, honor, praise, delight,
Here sojourn day and night.
Sound Bodies lined
With a good mind,
Do here pursue with might
Grace, honor, praise, Delight.
Here enter you, and welcome from our Hearts,
All noble Sparks, endowed with gallant Parts.
This is the glorious place which nobly shall
Afford sufficient to content you all;
Were you a thousand, here you shall not want
For any thing; for what you ask, we grant.
The brave, the witty, here we entertain,
And, in a word, all worthy Gentlemen.
Men of heroic Breasts
Shall taste here of the Feasts,
Both privily
And civily
All you are welcome guests,
Men of heroic Breasts.
Here enter you, pure, honest, faithful, true,
Expounders of the Scriptures old and new;
Whose Glosses do not the plain truth disguise,
And with false light distract or blind our Eyes.
Here shall we find a safe and warm retreat,
When Error beats about, and spreads her Net.
Strange Doctrins here must neither reap nor sow,
But Faith and Charity together grow.
In short, confounded be their first devise,
Who are the Holy Scriptures Enemies.
Here in the Holy Word
Trust all, with one accord;
It will some help afford:
Though you be Knight or Lord,
You may find Shield and Sword
Here in the Holy Word.
Here enter Ladies all of high Degree,
Of goodly Shape, of Humor gay and free;
Of lovely Looks, of sprightly Flesh and Blood:
Here take, here choose, here settle your abode.
Then gent, the brisk, the fair, whoever comes,
With Eyes that sparkle, or whose Beauty blooms.
This Bower is fashioned by a gentle Knight,
Ladies, for you; and innocent Delight.
This is designed a place
For every Charming Grace;
The Witty and the Fair
Hither may all repair;
For every lovely Face
This is designed a Place.
CHAP. LV. What manner of Dwelling the Thelemites had.
IN the middle of the lower Court there was a stately Fountain of fair
Alabaster. Upon the top thereof stood the three Graces, with their Cornucopias,
and did jett out the Water at their Breasts, Mouth, Ears, Eyes and other open
Passages of the Body. The inside of the Buildings in this lower Court stood
upon great Pillars of Cassydonie Stone, and Porphyry Marble, made Arch-ways
after a goodly antic fashion. Within those were spacious Galleries, long and
large, adorned with curious Pictures, the Horns of Bucks and Unicorns; with
Rhinosceroses, Water-horses called Hippopotames, the teeth and tusks of
Elephants, and other things well worth the holding. The Lodging of the Ladies
took up all from the Tower Arctic unto the Gate Mesembrine. The Men possessed
the rest, before the said Lodging of the Ladies, that they might have their
Recreation between the two first Towers. One the outside were placed the
Tilt-yard, the Theater and Natatorie; with most admirable Baths in three
Stages, situated above one another, well furnished with all necessary
Accommodation, and store of Myrtle-water. By the River side was the fair Garden
of Pleasures; and in the midst of that of Labyrinth. Between the two other
Towers were the Courts for the Tennis and the Baloon. Toward the Tower Criere
stood the Orchard full of all Fruit Trees, set and ranged in a quincuncial
Order. At the end of that was the great Park, abounding with all sort of
Venison. Betwixt the third couple of Towers were the Buts and Marks for
shooting with a snap work Gun, an ordinary Bow for common Archery, or with a
Cross-bow. The Office-houses were without the Tower Hesperie, of one story
high. The Stable were beyond the Offices, and before them stood the Falconry,
managed by Ostridge-keepers and Falconers, very expert in the Air. And it was
yearly supplied and furnished by the Candians; Venetians, Sarmates with all
sorts of most excellent Hawks, Eagles, Gerfalcons, Gosehawks, Sacres, Lannier,
Falcons, Spar-hawks, Marlins, and all other kinds of them; so gentle and
perfectly well manned, that flying of themselves sometimes from the Castle for
their own desport, they would not fail to catch whatever they encountered. The
Venerie where the Beagles and Hounds were kept, was a little farther off
drawing toward the Park,

All the Halls, Chambers and Closets or Cabinets were richly hung with
Tapestry, and Hangings of diverse sorts, according to the variety of the Seasons
of the Year. All the Pavements and Floors were covered with green Cloth; the
Beds were all Embroidered: In every back-chamber or withdrawing Room there was
a Looking-glass of pure Crystal set in a frame of fine Gold, garnished all
about with Pearls, and was of such greatness, that it would represent to the
full the whole lineaments and proportion of the person that stood before it. At
the going out of the Halls, which belong to the Ladies Lodgings, were the
Perfumers and Trimmers, through whose Hands the Gallants past when they were to
visit the Ladies. Those sweet Artificers did every Morning furnish the Ladies
Chambers with the Spirit of Roses, Orange-flower-water and Angelica; and to
each of them gave a little precious Casket, vapouring forth the most
odoriferous Exhalations of the choicest aromatical Scents.

CHAP. LVI. How the Men and Women of the religious Order of Theleme were
Apparelled.
THE Ladies at the Foundation of this O^der, were apparelled after their own
Pleasure and Liking. But since that of their own accord and free will they have
reformed themselves, their Accoutrements is in manner as follows. They wore
Stockings of scarlet Crimson, or ingrained purple Die, which reached just three
Inches above the Knee, having a list beautified with exquisite embroideries,
and rare incisions of the Cutters Art. Their Garters were of the color of
their Bracelets, and circled the knee a little, both over and under. Their
Shoes, Pumps and Slippers were either of red, violet or crimson-velvet, pinked
and jagged like Lobster wadles.

Next to their Smock they put on the pretty Kirtle or Vasquin of pure silk
Chamlet: Above that went the taffaty or taby Vardingale, of white, red, tawny,
gray or of any other color: Above this taffaty Petticoat they had another of
Cloth of tissue or brocado, embroidered with fine Gold, and interlaced with
Needle Work, or as they thought good, and according to the temperature and
disposition of the Weather, had their upper coats of Satin, Damask or Velvet,
and those either orange, tawny, green, ash colored, blew, yelow, bright, red,
crimson or white, and so forth; or had them of cloth of Gold, cloth of
Silver, or some other choice stuff, enriched with Purple, or embroidered
according to the dignity of the festival Days and Times wherein they wore them.

Their Gowns being still correspondent to the Season, were either of cloth of
Gold frizled with a silver-raised work; of red Satin, covered with Gold
purple; of taby or taffaty, white, blew, black, tawny, etc. of silk Serge, silk
Chamlet, Velvet, cloth of Silver, silver Tissue, cloth of Gold, gold Wire,
figured Velvet, or figured Satin tinselled* and overcast with golden Threads,
in diverse variously purfled draughts.

In Summer some days instead of Gowns they wore light handsome Mantles, made
either of the stuff of the aforesaid Attire, or like Moresco Rugs, of Violet,
velvet frizled, with a raised work of Gold upon silver Purle; or with a knotted
Cord-work of Gold embroidery, every where garnished with little Indian Pearls.
They always carried a fair Pannache, or plume of Feathers, of the color of
their Muff, bravely adorned and tricked out with glistering Spangles of Gold.
In the Wintertime they had their taffaty Gowns of all Colors, as abovenamed:
And those lined with the rich Furrings of Hind-Wolves, or speckled Linxes,
black-spotted Weesils, martlet-skins of Calabria, Sables, and other costly Furs
of inestimable value. Their Beads, Rings, Bracelets, Collars, Carcanets and
Neck chains were all of precious Stones, such as Carbuncles, Rubies, Baleus,
Diamonds, Saphirs, Emeralds, Turkoises, Garnets, Agates, Berilles and excellent
Margarits, Their Head-dressing also varied with the season of the year,
according to which they decked themselves. In Winter it was of the French
fashion; in the Spring of the Spanish; in Summer of the fashion of Tuscany,
except only upon the holy Days and Sundays, at which time they were accoutred
in the French mode, because they accounted it more honorable, and better
befitting the garb of a matronal pudicity.

The Men were Apparelled after their fashion: Their Stockins were of Tamine, or
of cloth Serge, of white, black, scarlet, or some other ingrain'd Color:
Their Breeches were of Velvet, of the same Color with their Stokins, or very
near, embroidered and cut according to their Fancy. Their Doublet was of cloth
of Gold, of cloth of Silver, of Velvet, Satin, Damask, T^ffa^ies, etc. of the
same colors, cut, embroidered and suitably trimmed up in perfection. The
points were of Silk of the same colors; the tags were of Gold well enamelled.
Their Coats and Jerkins were of cloth of Gold, cloth of Silver, Gold, Tissue
or Velvet embroidered, as they thought fit. Their Gowns were every whit as
costly as those of the Ladies. Their Girdles were of silk, of the color of
their Doublets. Every one had a gallant Sword by his side, the hilt and handle
whereof were gilt, and the scabbard of Velvet of the color of his Breeches,
with a chape of Gold, and pure Goldsmiths work. The Dagger was of the same.
Their Caps or Bonnets were of black Velvet, adorned with Jewels and Buttons of
gold; upon that they wore a white Plume, most pritily and minion-like, parted
by so many rows of gold Spangles, at the end whereof hung dangling in a more
sparkling resplendency fair Rubies, Emeralds, Diamonds, etc. but there was such
a sympathy betwixt the Gallants and the Ladies, that every day they were
apparelled in the same Livery. And that they might not miss, there were certain
Gentlemen appointed to tell the Youths every morning what Vestments the Ladies
would on that day wear; for all was done according to the pleasure of the
Ladies. In these so handsome Clothes and Abiliaments so rich, think not that
either one or other of either Sex did waste any time at all; for the Masters of
the Wardrobes had all their Raiments and Apparel so ready for every Morning,
and the Chamber Ladies so well skilled, that in a trice they would be dressed,
and completely in their clothes from head to foot. And to have those
Accoutrements with the more convenience. There was about the Wood of Theleme a
row of Houses of the extent of half a league, very neat and cleanly, wherein
dwelt the Goldsmiths, Lapidaries, Jewellers, Embroiderers, Tailors,
Gold-drawers, Velvet-weavers, Tapestry-makers and Upholsters, who wrought there
every one in his own Trade, and all for the aforesaid jolly Friars and Nuns of
the new Stamp. They were furnished with Matter and Stuff from the hands of the
Lord Nausiclete, who every year brought them seven Ships from the Perlas and
Cannibal Islands, laden with ingots of Gold, with raw Silk, with Pearls and
precious stones. And if any Unions began to grow old, and lose somewhat of
their natural whiteness and luster, those with their Art did renew, by
tendering them to eat to some pretty Cocks, as they use to give Casting unto
Hawks.

CHAP. LVII. How the Thelemites were governed and of their manner of Living.
ALL their life was spent not in Laws, Statutes or Rules, but according to
their own free Will and Pleasure. They rose out of their Beds, when they
thought good: They did eat, drink, labor, sleep, when they had a mind to it,
and were disposed for it. None did awake them, none did offer to constrain them
to eat, drink, nor to do any other thing; for so had Gargantua established it.
In all their Rule, and strictest tie of their order, there was but this one
clause to be observed.

Do what thou will. Because Men that are free, well-born, well-bred and
conversant in honest companies, have naturally an Instinct and Spur that
prompteth them unto virtuous Actions, and withdraws them from Vice, which is
called honor. Those same Men, when by base subjection and constraint they are
brought under and kept down, turn aside from that noble disposition, by which
they formerly were inclined to Virtue, to shake off and break that bond of
servitude, wherein they are so tyranniously inslaved; for it is agreeable to
the nature of Man to long after things forbidden, and to desire what is denied
us.

By this Liberty they entered into a very laudable emulation, to do all of them
what they saw did please one. If any of the Gallants or Ladies should say, Let
us drink, they would all drink. If any one of them said, Let us play, they all
played. If one said, Let us go a walking into the Fields, they went all. If it
were to go a hawking or a hunting, the Ladies mounted upon dainty well-paced
Nags, seated in a stately Palfrey saddle, carried on their lovely fists
Miniardly begloved every one of them, either a Sparhawk, or a Laneret, or a
Marlin, and the young Gallants carried the other kinds of Haws. So nobly were
they taught, that there was neither he nor she amongst them, but could read,
write, sing, play upon several musical Instruments, speak five or six several
Languages, and compose in them all very quaintly, both in Verse and Prose.
Never were seen so valiant Knights, so noble and worthy, so dextrous and
skilful both on foot and a horseback, more brisk and lively, more nimble and
quick, or better handling all manner of Weapons then were there. Never were
seen Ladies so proper and handsome, so miniard and dainty, less froward, or more
ready with their hand, and with their needle, in every honest and free Action
belonging to that Sex then were there. For this reason when the time came, that
any Man of the said Abbey, either at the request of his Parents, or for some
other cause, had a mind to go out of it, he carried along with him one of the
Ladies, namely her whom he had before that chosen for his Mistress, and were
married together. And if they had formerly in Theleme lived in good Devotion
and Amity, they did continue therein, and increase it to a greater height in
their state of Matrimony: And did entertain that mutual Love till the very last
day of their Life, in no less vigor and fervency, then at the very day of
their Wedding. Here must I not forget to set down unto you a Riddle, which was
found under the Ground, as they were laying the foundation of the Abbey,
engraven in copper Plate and it was thus as follows.

CHAP. LVIII. A Prophetical Riddle in the Style of Merlyn.
POor mortals, who wait for a happy day,
Cheer up your Hearts, and here what I shall say;
If it be lawful firmly to believe,
That the Caelestial Body can us give;
Wisdom to judge of things that are not yet
Or if from Heaven such Wisdom we may get;
As may with confidence make us discourse
Of years to come their destiny and course
I to my Hearer give to understand
That this next Winter, though it be at hand,
Yea and before, there shall appear a race
Of Men, who loath to sit still in one place;
Shall boldly go before all peoples eyes
Suborning Men of diverse qualities,
To draw them unto covenants and sides,
In such a manner that wha^ 're betides,
They Will move you, if you giv^ them ear (no doubt)
With both your friends and kind^ed to fall out;
They make a Vassel to (...) his Lord,
And Children their own Pa^ents, in a Word,
All Reverences shall then be banished,
No true respect to other shall be had.
They Will say that every Man should have his turn,
Both in his going forth, and his return;
And hereupon there shall arise such woes,
Such jarrings and confused toes and froes;
That never were in history such coyles,
Set down as yet such tumults and garboyls;
Then shall you many gallant Men see by
Valor stirred up, and youthful fervencie;
Who trusting too much in their hopeful time,
Live but a while, and perish in their prime;
Neither shall any who this course shall run,
Leave off the Race, which he has once begun;
Till they the Heavens with noise by their contention,
Have filled and with their steps the Earths dimension,
Then those shall have no less authority,
That have no faith, then those that will not lie;
For then shall all be governed by a rude,
Base, ignorant and foolish multitude;
The veriest lowt of all shall be their Judge,
O horrible and dangerous deluge!
Deluge I call it, and that for good reason
For this shall be omitted in no season;
Nor shall the Earth of this foul stir be free,
Till suddenly you in great store shall see
The Waters Issue out with whose streams the
Most moderate of all shall moist'ned be;
And justly too, because they did not spare
The flocks of Beasts that innocentest are;
But did their sinews, and their bowels take,
Not to the Gods a Sacrifice to make;
But usually to serve themselves for sport,
And now consider, I do you exhort.
In such Commotions so continual,
What rest can take the Globe-terrestrial.
Most happy then are they, that can it hold,
And use it carefully as precious gold,
By keeping it in Goal, whence it shall have
No help but him, who being to it gave:
And to increase his mournful accident
The Sun before is set in the occident;
Shall cease to dart upon it any light,
More then in an Eclipse, or in the night;
So that at once its favor shall be gone,
And Liberty with it be left alone;
And yet before it come to ruin thus,
Its quaking shall be as impetuous
As Aetna's was, when Titan's Sons lay under,
And yield when lost, a fearful sound like thunder.
Inarime, did not more quickly move,
When Typheu's did the vast huge hills remove;
And for despite into the Sea them threw.
Thus shall it then be lost by ways not few,
And changed suddenly, when those that have it,
To other Men that after come shall leave it,
Then shall it be high time to cease from this,
So long, so great, so tedious exercise;
For the great Waters now foretold by me,
Will make each think where his retreat shall be;
And yet before that they be clean dispersed,
You may behold in the air where naught was erst,
The burning heat of a great flame to rise,
Lick up the Water, and the enterprise.
It rests after those things to declare,
That those shall sit content, who chosen are;
With all good things, and with celestial Man,
And richly Recompensed every Man;
The others at the last all stripped shall b^,
That after this great work all Men may see
How each shall have his due, this is their lot,
O he is worthy-praise that shrinketh not.
No sooner was this aenigmatical monument read over, but Gargantua fetching a
very deep sigh said unto those that stood by: It is not now only (I perceive)
that People called to the faith of the Gospel, and convinced with the certainty
of Evangelical Truths are persecuted: But happy is that Man that shall not be
scandalized, but shall always continue to the end, in aiming at that Mark,
which God by his dear Son has set before us, without being distracted or
diverted by his carnal affections and depraved Nature.

The Monk then said, What do you think in your Conscience is meant and
signified by this Riddle? What? (said Gargantua) the progress and carrying on
of the Divine Truth. By St. Goderan (said the Monk) that is not my Exposition;
it is the style of the Prophet Merlin; make upon it as many grave allegories
and glosses as you will and dote upon it, you and the rest of the World as long
as you please; for my part, I can conceive no other meaning in it, but a
description of a set at Tennis in dark and obscure terms.

The suborners of Men are the makers of Matches which are commonly friends.
After the two Chases are made, he that was at the upper end of the Tennis-Court
goes out, and the other comes In. They believe the first, that says the Ball
was over or under the Line. The Waters are the Heats that the Players take till
they sweat again. The Cords of the Rackets are made of the Guts of Sheep or
Goats. The Globe-terrestrial is the Tennis-Ball. After playing, when the game
is done, they refresh themselves before a clear fire, and change their shirts,
but very willingly they make all good Cheer, but most merrily those that have
gained; And so farewell.

The End of the first Book.
THE Second BOOK of the WORKS OF Mr. FRANCIS RABELAIS, Doctor in Physic:
Treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the Good PANTAGRUEL.

Written Originally in the FRENCH TONGUE, And now faithfully Translated into
ENGLISH.

By S. T. V. C.

(...);
Mean, speak, and do well.
London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
1694.

RABELAIS TO THE READER.
ELsewhere, I taught Physicians doubtful Skill,
Like other Doctors, how to cure or kill:
Here is my Nostrum, that can never miscarry;
For all I here prescribe, is to be merry*
One Dram of Mirth will sooner mend thy Crasis,
Than twenty bitter Draughts, with scurvy Faces.
Let Chemist or the Galenist prevail;
Yet sure a Course of Mirth is worth 'em all.
No Drug, nor Hellebore, no Rhubarb safe;
O still, the only Physic is to laugh:
To which, if this small Book cannot provoke thee,
Let Pills, let Bolus, Quack, or Ratcliff choke thee.
THE Author's Prologue.
MOst illustrious and thrice valorous Champions, Gentlemen and others, who
willingly apply your Minds to the high flights and harmless sallies of Wit. You
have not long ago seen, read and understood the great and inestimable
Chronicles of the huge Giant Gargantua; and like true Men of Faith, have firmly
believed all that is contained in them, and have very often past your Time
amongst Honorable Ladies and Gentlewomen, telling them fair long Stories when
you were out of all other Talk, for which you are worthy of great Praise and
sempiternal Memory. And I do heartily wish that every Man would lay aside his
own Business, meddle no more with his Profession nor Trade, and throw all
Affairs concerning himself behind his Back, to attend this wholly, without
distracting or troubling his Mind with any thing else, until he have learned
all without Book; that if by chance the Art of Printing should cease, or in
case that in time to come all Books should perish, every Man might truly teach
them to his Children, and deliver them over to his Successors and Survivors
from hand to hand, as a religious Cabal: for there is in it more Profit, than a
Rabble of great pocky Logger-heads are able to discern, who surely understand
far less in these little Merriments, than Raclet did in the Institutes.

I have known great and mighty Lords, and of those not a few, who going a
Deer-hunting, or a hawking after wild Ducks, when the Chase had not encountered
with the Blinks, that were cast in her way to retard her Course, or that the
Hawk did but plain and smoothly fly without moving her Wings, perceiving the
Prey by force of flight to have gained Bounds of her, have been much chafed and
vexed, as you understand well enough; but the Comfort unto which they had
Refuge, and that they might not take cold, who was to relate the inestimable
Deeds of the said Gargantua. There are others in the World, (these are no
flimflam Stories) who being much troubled with the Toothache, after they had
spent their Goods upon Physicians, without receiving at all any ease of their
Pain, have found no more ready Remedy than to put the said Chronicles betwixt
two pieces of Linen Cloth made somewhat hot, and so apply them to the place
that smarteth synapising them with a little Powder of Projection, otherways
called Doribus.

But what shall I say of those poor Men that are plagued with the Pox and the
Gout? O how often have we seen them, even immediately after they were anointed
and thoroughly greased, till their Faces did glister like the Keyhole of a
Powdering-Tub, their Teeth dance like the Iacks of a pair of little Organs or
Virginals when they are played upon, and that they foamed from their very
Throats like a Boar, which the Mongrel Mastiff-hounds have driven in, and
overthrown amongst the Toils: What did they then? All their Consolation was to
have some Page of the said jolly Book read unto them. And we have seen those
who have given themselves to an hundred Punchions of old Devils, in case that
they did not feel a manifest Ease and Asswagement of Pain, at the hearing of
the said Book read, even when they were kept in a Purgatory of Torment; no more
nor less than Women in Travail use to find their Sorrow abated, when the Life
of St. Margarite is read unto them. Is this nothing? find me a Book in any
Language, in any Faculty or Science whatsoever, that has such Virtues,
Properties and Prerogatives, and I will be content to pay you a Chapine of
Tripes. No, my Masters, no, it is peerless, incomparable, and not to be
matched, and this am I resolved for ever to maintain even unto the Fire
exclusive. And those that will pertinaciously hold the contrary Opinion, let
them be accounted Abusers, Predestinators, Impostors and Seducers of the
People. It is very true, that there are found in some noble and famous Books,
certain occult and hidden Properties, in the number of which are reckoned
Whippot, Orlando furioso, Robert the Devil, Fierabras, William without fear,
Huon of Bourdeaux, Monteville, and Matabrune: but they are not comparable to
that which we speak of: And the World has well known by infallible Experience,
the great Emolument and Vtility which it has received by this Gargantuine
Chronicle; for the Printers have sold more of them in two Months time, than
there will be bought of Bibles in nine Years.

I therefore (your humble Slave) being very willing to increase your Solace and
Recreations yet a little more, do offer you for a Present, another Book of the
same stamp, only that it is a little more reasonable and worthy of Credit than
the other was; for think not (unless you wilfully will err against your
Knowledge) that I speak of it as the Jews do of the Law. I was not born under
such a Planet, neither did it ever befall me to lie, or affirm a thing for true
that was not: I speak of it like a jolly Onocrotarie, I should say Preignotary
of the martyrized Lovers, and Croquenotarie of Love: Quod vidimus, testamur. It
is of the horrible and dreadful Feats and Prowesses of Pantagruel, whose Menial
Servant I have been ever since I was a Page till this hour, that by his leave I
am permitted to visit my Cow-Country, and to know if any of my Kindred there be
alive.

And therefore to make an end of this Prologue, even as I give my self fairly
to an hundred Panniers full of Devils, Body and Soul, Tripes and Guts, in case
that I lie so much as one single word in this whole History. In like manner St.
Anthony's Fire burn you, Mawmet's Disease whirl you, the Squinzy choke you,
Botches, Crinckums sink you plumb down to Pegtrantums, Plagues of Sodom and
Gomorrah, cram your pocky Arse with Sorrow, Fire, Brimstone, and Pits
bottomless swallow you all alive, in case you do not firmly believe all that I
shall relate unto you in this present Chronicle.

The Second Book of RABELAIS, Treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the
Good PANTAGRUEL.
CHAP. I. Of the Original and Antiquity of the Great Pantagruel.
IT will not be an idle nor unprofitable thing, seeing we are at leisure to put
you in mind of the Fountain and Original Source, whence is derived unto us the
good Pantagruel; for I see that all good Historiographers have thus handled
their Chronicles, not only the Arabians, Barbarians and Latins, but also the
gentle Greeks, who were eternal Drinkers. You must therefore remark, that at
the beginning of the World (I speak of a long time, it is above forty two
Quarantains of Nights, according to the supputation of the ancient Druids) a
little after that Abel was killed by his Brother Cain, the Earth imbrued with
the Blood of the Just, was one Year so exceeding fertile in all those Fruits
which it usually produces to us, and especially in Medlars, that ever since,
throughout all Ages it has been called the Year of the great Medlars, for
three of them did fill a Bushel. In that Year the Calends were found by the
Grecian Almanacks; there was that Year noth^ng of the Month of March in the
time of Lent, and the middle of August was in May. In the Month of October, as
I take it, or at least September (that I may not err, for I will carefully take
heed of that) was the Week so famous in the Annals, which they call the Week of
the three Thursdays; for it had three of them by means of the irregular
Bissextile, occasioned by the Sun's having tripped and stumbled a little
toward the left hand, like a Debtor afraid of Sergeants; and the Moon varied
from her Course above five Fathom; and the^e was manifestly seen the Motion of
Trepidation in the Firmament, called Aplanes: so that the middle Pleiade
leaving her Fellows, declined toward the Equinoctial; and the Star named
Spic^, left the Constellation of the Virgin to withdraw her self tow^rds the
Balance: which are Cases very terrible, and Matters so hard and difficult,
that Astrologians cannot set their Teeth in them; and indeed their Teeth had
been pretty long if they could have reached thither.

However account you it for a Truth, that every body did then most heartily eat
of these Medlars, for they were fair to the Eye, and in Taste delicious. But
even as Noah that holy Man (to whom we are so much beholden, bound and obliged,
for that he planted to us the Vine, from whence we have that nectarian,
delicious, precious, heavenly, joyful and deifick Liquor, which they call the
Piot, or Tiplage) was deceived in the drinking of it, for he was ignorant of
the great Virtue and Power thereof: So likewise the Men and Women of that time
did delight much in the eating of that fair great Fruit, but diverse and very
different Accidents did ensue thereupon; for there fell upon them all in their
Bodies a most terrible Swelling, but not upon all in the same place; for some
were swollen in the Belly, and their Belly strouted out big like a great Tun;
of whom it is written, Ventrem Omnipotentem; who were all very honest Men, and
merry Blades: and of this Race came St. Fatgulch and Shrovetuesday. Others did
swell at the Shoulders, who in that place were so crump and knobby, that they
were therefore called Montifers, (which is as much as to say Hill-carriers) of
whom you see some yet in the World of diverse Sexes and Degrees. Of this Race
came Aesop, some of whose excellent Words and Deeds you have in Writing, Some
other Puffes did swell in length by the Member, which they call the Labourer of
Nature, in such sort that it grew mavelous long, plump, jolly, lusty,
stirring and Crest-risen in the Antic fashion; so that they made use of it as
of a Girdle, winding it five or six times about their Waste: But if it happened
the foresaid Member to be in good case, spooming with a full Sail, bunt fair
before the Wind, then to have seen those strouting Champions, you would have
taken them for Men that had their Lances settled on their Rest, to run at the
Ring, or tilting Whintam. Of these believe me the Race is utterly lost and
quite extinct, as the Women say; for they do lament continually, that there are
none extant now of those long, plump, etc. you know the rest of the Song.
Others did grow in matter of Ballocks so enormously, that three of them would
fill a Sack; from them are descended the Ballocks of Lorrain, which never dwell
in Codpieces, but fall down to the bottom of the Breeches. Others grew in the
Hams, and to see them, you would have said they had been Cranes, or Flamans, or
else Men walking upon Stilts; the little Schoolboys called these Iambicks. In
others, their Nose did grow so, that it seemed to be the Beak of a Limbeck, in
every part thereof most variously diapred with the twinkling Sparkles of
Crimson-blisters budding forth, and purpled with Pimples all enamaled with
thick-set Wheals of a sanguine Color, bordered with Queules; and such have you
seen the Prebend Panzoul, and Woodenfoot the Physician of Angiers: of which
Race there were few that liked the Ptisane, but all of them were perfect lovers
of the pure septembral Juice. Naso and Ovid had their Extraction from thence,
and all those of whom it is written, Ne reminiscaris. Others grew in Ears,
which they had so big, that out of one would have been stuff enough got to make
a Doublet, a pair of Breeches and a Jacket, whilst with the other they might
have covered themselves as with a Spanish Cloak: and they say, that in
Bourbonois this Race remains yet: And from thence they are called the Ears of
Burbon. Others grew in length of Body, and of those came the Giants, and of
them Pantagruel.

And the first was Chalbroth, who begat Sarabroth, who begat Faribroth, who
begat Hurtali, that was a brave Eater of Pottage, and reigned in the time of
the Elood; who begat Nembroth, who begat Atlas, that with his Shoulders kept
the Sky from falling; who begat Goliath, who begat Erix, that invented the Hocus
Pocus-Plays of Legerdemain; who begat Titius, who begat Eryon, who begat
Poliphemus, who begat Cacos, who begat Etion, the first Man that ever had the
Pox, for not drinking fresh in Summer, as Burtachin witnesses; who begat
Enceladus, who begat Ceus, who begat Tiphaeus, who begat Alaeus, who begat
Othus, who begat Aegeon, who begat Briareus, that had an hundred Hands; who
begat Porphyrio, who begat Adamastor, who begat Anteus, who begat Agatho, who
begat Porus, against whom fought Alexander the Great; who begat Aranthas, who
begat Cabbara, that was the first Inventor of drinking of Healths; who begat
Goliath of Secondille, who begat Offot, that was terribly well-nosed for
drinking at the Barrel-head; who begat Artachaeus, who begat Oromedon, who
begat Gemmagog, the first Inventor of Poulan-Shoes, which are open on the Foot,
and tied over the Instep with a Latchet; who begat Sisyphus, who begat the
Titans, of whom Hercules was born; who begat Enay, the most skilful Man that
ever was, in matter of taking the little Worms out of the Hands; who begat
Fierabras, that was vanquished by Oliver Peer of France, and Rowland's
Camerade; who begat Morgan, the first in the World that played at Dice with
Spectacles; who begat Fracassus, of whom Merlin Coccaius has written, and of
him was born Ferragus; who begat Hapmouche, the first that ever invented the
drying of Neats-Tongues in the Chimney; for before that People salted them as
they do now Gammons of Bacon: who begat Bolivorax, who begat Longis, who begat
Gayoffo, whose Ballocks were of Poplar, and his Pr -- of the Servise, or
Sorb-Apple-Tree: who begat Maschefain, who begat Bruslefer, who begat
An^^ulevent, who begat Galehant, the Inventor of Flagons; who begat
Mirelangant, who begat Gallaffre, who begat Salourdin, who begat Roboast, who
begat Sortibrant of Conimbres, who begat Brusbant of Mommiere, who begat
Bruyer, that was overcome by Ogier the Dane, Peer of France; who begat Mabrun,
who begat Foutasnon, who begat Haquelebas, who begat Vitdegrain, who begat
Grangousier, who begat Gargantua, who begat the noble Pantagruel my Master.
I know that reading this Passage, you will make a doubt within your selves,
and that grounded upon very good Reason, which is this, How is it possible that
this Relation can be true, seeing at the time of the Flood all the World was
destroyed except Noah, and seven Persons more with him in the Ark, into whose
number Hurtali is not admitted: Doubtless the Demand is well made, and very
apparent; but the Answer shall satisfy you, or my Wit is not rightly caulked:
and because I was not at that time to tell you any thing of my own fancy, I
will bring unto you the Authority of the Masorets, good honest Fellows, true
Ballockeering Blades, and exact Hebraical Bagpipers, who affirm that verily the
said Hurtali was not within the Ark of Noah, (neither could he get in, for he
was too big) but he sat astride upon it, with one Leg on the one side, and
another on the other, as little Children used to do upon their wooden Horses;
or as the great Bull of Berne, which was killed at Marinian, did ride for his
Hackney the great Murdering-Piece, a pretty Beast of a fair and pleasant Amble
without all question.

In that posture he, after God, saved the said Ark from danger, for with his
Legs he gave it the Brangle that was needful, and with his Foot turned it
whither he pleased, as a Ship answers her Rudder. Those that were within sent
him up Victuals in abundance by a Chimney, as People very thankfully
acknowledging the Good that he did them: And sometimes they did talk together,
as Varomenippus did to Jupiter, according to the report of Lucian. Have you
understood all this well? Drink then one good draught without Water, for if you
believe it not: No truly do I not, quoth she.

CHAP. II. Of the Nativity of the most dread and redoubted Pantagruel.
GArgantua at the Age of four hundred fourscore forty and four Years begat his
Son Pantagruel, upon his Wife named Badebec, Daughter to the King of the
Amaurots in Vtopia, who died in Childbirth; for he was so wonderfully great
and lumpish, that he could not possibly come forth into the Light of the World,
without thus suffocating his Mother. But that we may fully understand the cause
and reason of the Name of Pantagruel, which at his Baptism was given him, you
are to remark, that in that Year there was so great Drought over all the
Country of Afri^k, that there past thirty and six Months, three Weeks, four
Days, thirteen Hours, and a little more without Rain, but with a Heat so
vehement, that the whole Earth was parched and withered by it: Neither was it
more scorched and dried up with Heat in the days of Elijah, than it was at that
time; for there was not a Tree to be seen, that had either Leaf or Bloom upon
it: the Grass was without Verdure or Greenness, the Rivers were drained, the
Fountains dried up, the poor Fishes abandoned and forsaken by their proper
Element, wandering and crying upon the Ground most horribly: the Birds did fall
down from the Air for want of Moisture and Dew wherewith to refresh them: the
Wolves, Foxes, Hearts, Wild-Boars, Fallow-Deer, Hares, Coneys, Weesils, Brocks,
Badgers, and other such Beasts were found dead in the Fields with their Mouths
open. In respect of Men, there was the Pity, you should have seen them lay out
their Tongues like Hares that have been run six Hours; many did throw
themselves into the Wells; others entered within a Cow's Belly to be in the
Shade; those Homer calls Alibants: all the Country was at a stand, and nothing
could be done; it was a most lamentable case to have seen the Labor of Mortals
in defending themselves from the Vehemence of this horrifick Drought; for they
had work enough to do to save the holy Water in the Churches from being wasted:
but there was such order taken by the Counsel of my Lords the Cardinals, and of
our Holy Father, that none did dare to take above one lick; yet when any one
came into the Church, you should have seen above twenty poor thirsty Fellows
hang upon him that was the Distributer of the Water, and that with a wide open
Throat, gaping for some little drop (like the rich Glutton in St. Luke) that
might fall by, lest any thing should be lost. O how happy was he in that Year
who had a cool Cellar under ground, well plenished with fresh Wine!

The Philosopher reports in moving the Question, Wherefore is it that the
Seawater is salt? That at the time when Phoebus gave the Government of his
resplendent Chariot to his Son Phaeton, the said Phaeton, unskilful in the Art,
and not knowing how to keep the Ecliptick-Line betwixt the two Tropicks of the
Latitude of the Sun's Course, strayed out of his way, and came so near the
Earth, that he dried up all the Countries that were under it, burning a great
part of the Heaven, which the Philosophers call Via lactea, and the Huffsnuffs,
St. James his way; although the most lofty and high-crested Poets affirm that to
be the place where Juno's Milk fell when she gave Suck to Hercules.

The Earth at that time was so excessively heated, that it fell into an
enormous Sweat, yea such an one that made it sweat out the Sea, which is
therefore salt, because all Sweat is salt; and this you cannot but confess to
be true, if you will taste of your own, or of those that have the Pox when they
are put into a sweating, it is all one to me. Just such another case fell out
this same Year; for on a certain Friday, when the whole People were bent upon
their Devotions, and had made goodly Processions, with store of Letanies, and
fair Preachings, and Beseechings of God Almighty to look down with his Eye of
Mercy upon their miserable and disconsolate Condition, there was even then
visibly seen issue out of the Ground great drops of Water, such as fall from a
Man in a top Sweat; and the poor Hoydons began to rejoice, as if it had been a
thing very profitable unto them; for some said that there was not one drop of
Moisture in the Air, whence they might have any Rain, and that the Earth did
supply the default of that. Other learned Men said, that it was a Shower of the
Antipodes, as Seneca says in his fourth Book Quaestionum Naturalium, speaking
of the Source and Spring of Nilus; but they were deceived; for the Procession
being ended, when every one went about to gather of this Dew, and to drink of
it with full Bowls, they found that it was nothing but Pickle, and the very
Brine of Salt, more brackish in Taste than the saltest Water of the Sea: and
because in that very Day Pantagruel was born, his Father gave him that Name;
for Panta in Greek is as much as to say all, and Gruel in the Hagarene Language
does signify thirsty; inferring hereby, that at his Birth the whole World was
adry and thirsty; as likewise foreseeing that he would be some day Supreme Lord
and Sovereign of the thirsty Companions, which was shown to him at that very
same hour by a more evident sign; for when his Mother Badebec was in the
bringing of him forth, and that the Midwives did wait to receive him, there
came first out of her Belly threescore and eight Salt-sellers, every one of
them leading in a Halter a Mule heavy loaded with Salt; after whom issued forth
nine Dromedaries, with great Loads of Gammons of Bacon, and dried Neats-Tongues
on their Backs; then followed seven Camels loaded with Links and Chitterlins,
Hogs-puddings and Sassages; after them came out five great Wains full of Leeks,
Garlic, Onions and Chibols, drawn with five and thirty strong Cart-horses,
which was six for every one, besides the Thiller. At the sight hereof the
Midwives were much amazed; yet some of them said, Lo, here is good Provision,
and indeed we need it, for we drink but lazily, as if our Tongues walked on
Crutches: truly this is a good sign there is nothing here but what is fit for
us, these are the Spurs of Wine that set it a going. As they were tatling thus
together after their own manner of Chat, behold, out comes Pantagruel all hairy
like a Bear; whereupon one of them inspired with a Prophetical Spirit, said,
This will be a terrible Fellow, he is born with all his Hair, he is undoubtedly
to do wonderful things; and if he live, he will be of Age.

CHAP. III. Of the Grief wherewith Gargantua was moved at the Decease of his
Wife Badebec.
WHen Pantagruel was born, there was none more astonished and perplexed than
was his Father Gargantua; for on the one side seeing his Wife Badebec dead, and
on the other side his Son Pantagruel born, so fair and so goodly, he knew not
what to say nor what to do; and the Doubt that troubled his Brain, was to know
whether he should cry for the Death of his Wife, or laugh for the Joy of his
Son: he was hinc inde choked with Sophistical Arguments, for he framed them
very well in modo and figura, but he could not resolve them, remaining pestered
and entangled by this means, like a Mouse caught in a Trap, or Kite snared in
a Gin. Shall I weep? (said he) Yes, for why? my so good Wife is dead, who was
the most this, the most that, that ever was in the World: Never shall I see
her, never shall I recover such another; it is unto me an inestimable Loss! O
my good God, what had I done that thou should thus punish me? Why did thou
not take me away before her? seeing for me to live without her, is but to
languish. Ah, Badebec, Badebec, my Minion, my dear Heart, my Pigsney, my Duck,
my Honey, my little C -- (yet it has in Circumference full six Acres, three
Rods, five Poles, four Yards, two Feet, one Inch and a half of good Woodland
Measure) my tender Peggy, my Codpiece-Darling, my bob and hit, my
Slipshoe-Lovy, never shall I see thee! Ah, poor Pantagruel, thou have lost thy
good Mother, thy sweet Nurse, thy well-beloved Lady! O false Death, how
injurious and despightful have thou been to me? How malicious and outrageous
have I found thee, in taking her from me, my well-beloved Wife, who should of
right have been immortal?

With these words he did cry like a Cow, but on a sudden fell a laughing like a
Calf, when Pantagruel came into his Mind. Ha, my little Son (said he) my
Childilolly, Fedlifondy, Dandlichucky, my Ballocky, my pretty Rogue; O how
jolly thou art, and how much am I bound to my gracious God, that has been
pleased to bestow on me a Son so fair, so spriteful, so lively, so smiling, so
pleasant, and so gentle. Ho, ho, ho, ho, how glad I am? Let us drink, ho, and
put away Melancholy; bring of the best, rinse the Glasses, lay the Cloth, drive
out these Dogs, blow this Fire, light Candles, shut that Door there, cut this
Bread in sippets for Brewis, send away these poor Folks, give them what they
ask; hold my Gown, I will strip my self into my Doublet, ( en cuerpo) to make
the Gossips merry, and keep them company.

As he spoke this, he heard the Letanies and the Memento's of the Priests that
carried his Wife to be buried, which dashed all his Merriment again, and was
suddenly ravished another way, saying, Lord God, must I again contrist my self?
this grieves me, I am no longer young, I grow old, the Weather is dangerous, I
am sick, I faint away; by the Faith of a Gentleman, it were better to cry less,
and drink more.

My Wife is dead, well, by G -- ( da jurandi) I shall not raise her again by my
crying: she is well, she is in Paradise at least, if she be no higher: she
prays to God for us, she is happy, she is above the sense of our Miseries,
nor can our Calamities reach her: What tho she be dead, must not we also die?
the same Debt which she has paid, hangs over our Heads; Nature will require it
of us, and we must all of us some day taste of the same sauce: let her pass
then, and the Lord preserve the Survivors, for I must now cast about how to get
another Wife. But I will tell you what you shall do, said he to the Midwives,
(where be they, good Folks, I cannot see them) go you to my Wife's Interment,
and I will the while rock my Son; for I find my self strangely altered, and in
danger of falling sick: but drink one good Draught first, you will be the
better for it; believe me upon my Honor. They at his requst went to her Burial
and Funeral Obsequies; in the mean while, poor Gargantua staying at home, and
willing to have somewhat in Remembrance of her to be engraven upon her Tomb,
made this Epitaph in the manner as follows.

Dead is the noble Badebec,
Who had a Face like a Rebeck;
A Spanish Body and a Belly
Of Swisserland; she died, I tell ye,
In Childbirth; pray to God that her
He pardon wherein she did err.
Here lies her Body, which did live
Free from all Vice, as I believe;
And did decease at my Bedside,
The Year and Day in which she died.
CHAP. IV. Of the Infancy of Pantagruel.
I Find by the Ancient Historiographers and Poets, that diverse have been born
in this World after very strange manners, which would be too long to repeat;
read therefore the seventh Chapter of Pliny, if you have so much leisure; yet
have you never heard of any so wonderful as that of Pantagruel; for it is a
very difficult matter to believe, how in the little time he was in his Mother's
Belly, he grew both in Body and Strength. That which Hercules did was nothing,
when in his Cradle he slew two Serpents; for those Serpents were but little and
weak: but Pantagruel being ye^ in his Cradle, did far more admirable things,
and more to be amazed at. I pass by here the Relation of how at every one of
his Meals he supped up the Milk of four thousand and six hundred Cows; and how
to make him a Skellet to boil his Milk in, there were set awork all the
Brasiers of Somure in Anjoy, of Villedieu in Normandy, and of Bramont in
Lorrain: and they served in this Whitepot-meat to him in a huge great Bell,
which is yet to be seen in the City of Bourge in Berry, near the Palace: but
his Teeth were already so well grown, and so strengthened in Vigor, that of the
said Bell he bit off a great Morsel, as very plainly does appear till this hour.

One Day in the Morning when they would have made him suck one of his Cows (for
he never had any other Nurse, as the History tells us) he got one of his Arms
loose from the swaddling Bands, wherewith he was kept fast in the Cradle, laid
hold on the said Cow under the left fore-Ham, and grasping her to him, ate up
her Udder and half her Paunch, with the Liver and the Kidneys, and had devoured
all up if she had not cried out most horribly, as if the Wolves had held her by
the Legs: at which Noise Company came in and took away the said Cow from
Pantagruel; yet could they not so well do it, but that the Quarter whereby he
caught her was left in his Hand, of which Quarter he gulp'd up the Flesh in a
trice, even with as much ease as you would eat a Sassage; and that so greedily
with desire of more, that when they would have taken away the Bone from him, he
swallowed it down whole, as a Cormorant would do a little Fish; and afterward
began fumblingly to say, Good, good, good, for he could not yet speak plain,
giving them to understand thereby, that he had found it very good, and that he
did lack but so much more; which when they saw that attended him, they bound
him with great Cable-Ropes, like those that are made at Tain for the Carriage
of Salt to Lions; or such as those are whereby the great French Ship rides at
Anchor in the Road of New Haven in Normandy. But on a certain time, a great
Bear which his Father had bred, got loose, came toward him, began to lick his
Face, for his Nurses had not thoroughly wiped his Chaps; at which unexpected
approach, being on a sudden offended, he as lightly rid himself of those great
Cables, as Samson did of the Hauser Ropes wherewith the Philistines had tied
him, and by your leave, takes up Monsieur the Bear, and tears him to you in
pieces like a Pullet, which served him for a Gorge-full, or good warm Bit for
that Meal.

Whereupon Gargantua fearing lest the Child should hurt himself, caused four
great Chains of Iron to be made to bind him, and so many strong Wooden Arches
unto his Cradle, most firmly stocked and mortaised in huge Frames: Of those
Chains you have one at Rochel, which they drew up at Night betwixt the two
great Towers of the Haven. Another is at Lions; a third at Angiers; and the
fourth was carried way by the Devils to bind Lucifer, who broke his Chains in
those days, by reason of a Cholick that did extraordinarily torment him, taken
with eating a Serjeant's Soul en Fricassee, for his Breakfast: And therefore
you may believe that which Nicolas de Lyra says upon that place of the
Psalter, where it is written, Et Og Regem Basan; that the said Og being yet
little, was so strong and robustious, that they were fain to bind him with
Chains of Iron in his Cradle. Thus continued Pantagruel for a while very calm
and quiet, for he was not able so easily to break those Chains, especially
having no room in the Cradle to give a swing with his Arms. But see what
happened; Once upon a great Holiday, that his Father Gargantua made a sumptuous
Banquet to all the Princes of his Court: I am apt to believe, that the Menial
Officers of the House were so imbusied in waiting each on his proper Service at
the Feast, that no body took care of poor Pantagruel, who was left a reculorum,
behind-hand all alone, and as forsaken. What did he? Hark what he did, good
People; he strove and essayed to break the Chains of the Cradle with his Arms,
but could not, for they were too strong for him; then did he keep with his Feet
such a stamping Stir, and so long, that at last he beat out the lower end of
his Cradle, which notwithstanding was made of a great Post five Foot in square;
and as soon as he had gotten out his Feet, he slid down as well as he could,
till he had got his Soles to the Ground; and then with a mighty force he rose
up, carrying his Cradle upon his Back, bound to him like a Tortoise that crawls
up against a Wall; and to have seen him, you would have thought it had been a
great Carrick of five hundred Tun upon one end. In this manner he entered into
the great Hall, where they were banqueting, and that very boldly, which did
much afright the Company; yet because his Arms were tied in, he could not reach
any thing to eat, but with great Pain stopped now and then a little, to take
with the whole flat of his Tongue some Lick, good Bit or Morsel.

Which when his Father saw, he knew well enough that they had left him without
giving him any thing to eat, and therefore commanded that he should be loosed
from the said Chains, by the Counsel of the Princes and Lords there present:
Besides that, also the Physicians of Gargantua said, that if they did thus keep
him in the Cradle, he would be all his Lifetime subject to the Stone. When he
was unchain'd, they made him to sit down, where after he had fed very well, he
took his Cradle and broke it into more than five hundred thousand pieces with
one Blow of his Fist that he struck in the midst of it, swearing that he would
never come into it again.

CHAP. V. Of the Acts of the noble Pantagruel in his youthful Age.
THus grew Pantagruel from day to day, and to every ones Eye waxed more and
more in all his Dimensions, which made his Father to rejoice by a natural
Affection; therefore caused he to be made for him, whilst he was yet little, a
pretty Cross-bow, wherewith to shoot at small Birds, which now they call the
great Cross-bow at Chantelle. Then he sent him to the School to learn, and to
spend his Youth in Virtue: in the Prosecution of which Design he came first to
Poictiers, where, as he studied and profited very much, he saw that the
Scholars were oftentimes idle, and knew not how to bestow their Time, which
moved him to take such Compassion on them, that one day he took from a long
Ledg of Rocks (called there Passelourdin) a huge great Stone, of about twelve
Fathom square, and fourteen Handfuls thick, and with great Ease set it upon
four Pillars in the midst of a Field to no other end, but that the said
Scholars when they had nothing else to do, might pass their time in getting up
on that Stone, and feast it with store of Gammons, Pasties and Flaggons, and
carve their Names upon it with a Knife; in token of which Deed, till this hour
the Stone is called the lifted Stone: and in remembrance hereof there is none
entered into the Register and Matricular Book of the said University, or
accounted capable of taking any Degree therein, till he have first drunk in the
Caballine Fountain of Croustelles, passed at Passelourdin, and got up upon the
lifted Stone.

Afterward reading the delectable Chronicles of his Ancestors, he found that
Iafrey of Lusinian, called Iafrey with the great Tooth, Grandfather to the
Cousin-in-Law of the eldest Sister of the Aunt of the Son-in-Law of the Uncle
of the good Daughter of his Stepmother, was interred at Maillezais; therefore
he took a Play-day to pay his Respects to him in a Visit; and going from
Poictiers with some of his Companions, they passed by the Guge, visiting the
noble Abbot Ardillon: then by Lusinian, by Sansay, by Celles, by Coalonges, by
Fontenay the Conte, saluting the learned Tiraquean, and from thence arrived at
Maillezais, where he went to see the Sepulcher of the said Iafrey with the
great Tooth, which made him somewhat afraid, looking upon the Portraiture,
representing a Man in an extreme Fury, drawing his great Malchus Faulchion half
way out of his Scabbard. When the reason hereof was demanded, the Chanons of
the said Place told him that there was no other cause of it, but that
Pictoribus atque Poetis, etc. that is to say, that Painters and Poets have
liberty to paint and devise what they list after their own Fancy: but he was
not satisfied with their Answer, and said, He is not thus painted without a
cause; and I suspect that at his Death there was some Wrong done him, whereof
he requires his Kindred to take Revenge; I will enquire further into it, and
then do what shall be reasonable: then he returned not to Poictiers, but would
take a view of the other Universities of France; therefore going to Rochel, he
took Shipping and arrived at Bourdeaux, where he found no great Diversion, only
now and then he would see some Mariners and Lightermen a wrestling on the Key
or Strand by the River side. From thence he came to Toulouse, where he learned
to dance very well, and to play with the two-handed Sword, as the fashion of
the Scholars of the said University is. But he staid not long there, when he
saw that they did cause burn their Regents alive, like Red-herring, saying, Now
God forbid that I should die this Death, for I am by Nature sufficienly dry
already, without being heated any further.

He went then to Monpellier, where he met with the good Wives of Mirevaux, and
good jovial Company withal, and thought to have set himself to the study of
Physic; but he considered that that Calling was too troublesome and
melancholy, and that Physicians did smell of Glisters like old Devils:
therefore he resolved he would study the Laws; but seeing that there were but
three scauld, and one bald-pated Legist in that place, he departed from thence,
and in his way made the Bridge of Guard, and the Amphitheater of Neems in less
than three hours, which nevertheless seems to be more than mortal Man could do.
After that he came to Avignon, where he was not above three days before he fell
in love; for the Women there take great delight in playing at the close
Buttock-Game, because it is Papal Ground; which his Tutor Epistemon perceiving,
he drew him out of that place and brought him to Valence in the Dauphinee,
where he saw no great matter of Recreation, only that the Lubbards of the Town
did beat the Scholars; which so incensed him with Anger, that when upon a
certain very fair Sunday, the People being at their public dancing in the
Streets, and one of the Scholars offering to put himself into the Ring, the
Bumkins would not let him: whereupon Pantagruel taking the Scholar's part, so
belabored them with Blows, and laid such load upon them that he drove them all
before him, even to the Brink of the River Rhosne, and would have there drowned
them, but that they did squat to the Ground, and there lay close a full half
League under the River. The Hole is to be seen there yet.

After that he departed from thence, and in three Strides and one Leap came to
Angiers, where he found himself very well, and would have continued there some
space, but that the Plague drove them away. So from thence he came to Bourges,
where he studied a good long time, and profited very much in the Faculty of the
Laws; and would sometimes say, that Law Books were like a wonderful rich Cloth
of Gold, edged with Fur; for in the World are no goodlier Books to be seen,
more ornate, nor more eloquent than the Texts of the Pandects; but the
bordering of them, that is to say, the Gloss of Accursius, is so vile, mean and
scandalous, that it is nothing but Dirt and Excrement.

Going from Bourges, he came to Orleans, where he found store of sparkish
Scholars that made him great Entertainment at his coming, and with whom he
learned to play at Tennis so well, that he was a Master at that Game: for the
Students there are excellent at it. And sometimes they carried him unto Cupid's
Gardens, there to recreate his Person at the Poussevant, or In and In. As for
breaking his Head with overmuch study, he had an especial care not to do it in
any case for fear of spoiling his Eyes; which he the rather observed, for that
one of the Regents there had often in his Lectures maintained, that nothing
could be so hurtful to the sight, as to have sore Eyes. So one day, when a
Scholar of his Acquaintance (who had of Learning not much more than his
Brethren, tho instead of that he could dance very well, and play at Tennis) was
made a Licentiate in Law, he blazoned the Licentiates of that University in
this manner.

In his Hand is always a Racket,
Or else is his Hand in a Placket:
In a Dance he neatly can trip it;
And for Law, it is all in his Tippet.
CHAP. VI. How Pantagruel met with a Limousin, who affected to speak in learned
Phrase.
UPon a certain day, I know not when, Pantagruel walking after Supper with some
of his Fellow-Students, without that Gate of the City through which we enter on
the Rode to Paris, encountered with a young spruce-like Scholar that was coming
upon the same very way; and after they had saluted one another, asked him thus,
My Friend, from whence come thou now? The Scholar answered him, From the
Alme, inclyte and celebrate Academy, which is vocitated Lutetia. What is the
meaning of this (said Pantagruel) to one of his Men? It is (answered he) from
Paris. Thou come from Paris then (said Pantagruel) and how do you spend your
time there, you my Masters the Students of Paris? The Scholar answered, We
transfretate the Sequan at the Dilucul and Crepuscul; we deambulate by the
Compites and Quadrives of the Vrb; we despumate the Latial Verbocination; and
like verisimularie amorabons; we captat the Benevolence of the Omnijugal,
Omniform, and Omnigenal Foeminine Sex; upon certain Diecules we invisat the
Lupanares, and in a venerian extase inculcate our Veretres, into the
penitissime Recesses of the Pudends of these amicabilissim meretricules: then
do we cauponisate in the meritory Taberns of the Pineapple, the Castle, the
Magdalene, and the Mule, goodly vervecine Spatules perforaminated with
Petrocile: and if by fortune there be Rarity, or penury of Pecune in our
Marsupies; and that they be exhausted of ferruginean Metal for the shot, we
dimit our Codices, and oppugnerat our Vestiments, whilst we prestolate the
coming of the Tabellaries from the Penates, and patriotick Lares. To which
Pantagruel answered, What devilish Language is this? by the Lord, I think thou
art some kind of Heretic. My Lord, No, said the Scholar; for libentissimally
as soon as it illucesceth any minutle slice of the Day; I demigrate into one of
these so well architected Minsters; and there irrorating my self with fair
lustral Water, I mumble off little parcels of some missick Precation of our
Sacrificuls; and submurmurating my horary Precules, I elevate and absterge my
anime from its nocturnal Inquinations. I revere the Olympicols: I latrially
venere the supernal Astripotent: I dilige and redame my Proxims: I observe the
decalogical Precepts; and according to the facultatule of my Vires, I do not
discede from them one late Vnguicule; nevertheless it is veriform, that because
Mammona does not supergurgitate any thing in my Loculs, that I am somewhat rare
and lent to supererrogate the Elemosynes to those Egents, that hostially
queritate their stipe.

Prut, tut, (said Pantagruel) what does this Fool mean to say? I think he is
upon the forging of some diabolical Tongue, and that Inchanter-like he would
charm us. To whom one of his Men said, Without doubt (Sir) this Fellow would
counterfeit the Language of the Parisians, but he does only flay the Latin,
imagining by so doing that he does highly Pindarize it in most eloquent Terms,
and strongly conceiteth himself to be therefore a great Orator in the French,
because he disdaineth the common manner of speaking. To which Pantagruel said,
Is it true? The Scholar answered, My worshipful Lord, my Genie is not apt nate
to that which this flagitious Nebulon says, to excoriate the Tuticle of our
vernacular Gallick, but viceversally I gnave opere, and by vele and rames enite
to locupletate it, with the Latinicome redundance. By G -- (said Pantagruel) I
will teach you to speak: But first come hither, and tell me whence thou art? To
this the Scholar answered: The primeval Origin of my Aves and Ataves, was
indigenary of the Lemonick Regions, where requiesceth the Corpor of the
Hagiotat St. Martial. I understand thee very well (said Pantagruel) when all
comes to all, thou art a Limousin, and thou will here by thy affected Speech
counterfeit the Parisians. Well now, come hither, I must show thee a new Trick,
and handsomely give thee the Combfeat. With this he took him by the Throat,
saying to him, Thou flayest the Latin; by St. John I will make thee flay the
Fox; for I will now flay thee alive. Then began the poor Limousin to cry; Haw,
gwid Maaster, haw, Laord, my Halp, and St. Marshaw, haw, I Am worried: haw, my
Thropple, the Bean of me Cragg is bruck: haw, for Guaads seck, lawt me lean,
Mawster; waw, waw, waw. Now (said Pantagruel) thou speak naturally, and so
let him go; for the poor Limousin had totally berayed, and thoroughly conshit
his Breeches, which were not deep and large, but made a qu^ue de merlus. Then
(said Pantagruel) St. Alipantiu, what civette? Foh, foh, to the Devil with this
Turnep-Eater. How he stinks? and so let him go. But this Hug of Pantagruel's
was such a Terror to him all the Days of his Life, and he had such a Thirst
upon him, that he would often cry out, that Pantagruel held him by the Throat.
And after some few Years he died of the Death Roland, a Work of Divine
Vengeance, showing us that which says the Philosopher, and Aulus Gellius, that
it becomes us to speak according to the common Language; and that we should
(as said Octavian Augustus) shun all strange Words, with as much Care, as
Pilots of Ships avoid the Rocks in the Sea.

CHAP. VII. How Pantagruel came to Paris, and of the choice Books of the
Library of St. Victor.
AFter that Pantagruel had studied very well at Orleans, he resolved to see the
great University of Paris; but before his Departure, he was informed that there
was a huge big Bell at St. Anian, in the said Town of Orleans, under the
Ground, which had been there above two hundred and fourteen Years; for it was
so great that they could not by any device get it so much as above the Ground,
although they used all the means that are found in Vitruvius de Architectura,
Albertus de re aedificatoria, Euclid, Theon, Archimedes, and Hero de ingeniis:
for all that was to no purpose. Wherefore condescending heartily to the humble
Request of the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said Town, he determined to
remove it to the Tower that was erected for it. With that he came to the Place
where it was, and lifted it out of the Ground with his little Finger, as easily
as you would have done a Hawk's Bell: But before he would carry it to the
foresaid Tower, he would needs make some Music with it about the Town, and
ring it along all the Streets, as he carried it in his Hand; wherewith all
the People were very glad: but there happened one great Inconveniency; for with
carrying it so, and ringing it about the Streets, all the good Orleans Wine
turned instantly, and was spoiled; which no Body there did perceive till the
Night following: for every Man found himself so a dry with drinking these flat
Wines, that they did nothing but spit, and that as white as Maltha Cotton,
saying, We have got the Pantagruel, and our very Throats are salted.

This done, he came to Paris with his Retinue, and at his entry every one came
out to see him, (as you know well enough, that the People of Paris are Sots by
Nature, by B flat, and B sharp) and beheld him with great Astonishment, mixed
with no less Fear, that he would carry away the Palace into some other Country
a remotis, as his Father formerly had done the great Bells at our Ladies
Church, to tie about his Mare's Neck. Now after he had stayed there a pretty
space, and studied very well in all the seven Liberal Arts, he said it was a
good Town to live in, but not to die there; for that the Grave-digging Rogues
of St. Innocent, used in frosty Nights to warm their Bums with dead Men's Bones.
In his abode there, he found the Library of St. Victor, very magnificent,
especially in some Books which were there, of which follows the Catalogue: Et
primo, The for Godsake of Salvation. The Cod-piece of the Law. The Slip-shoe of
the Decretals. The Pomegranate of Vice. The Clew-bottom of Theology. The Duster
or Foxtail-flap of Preachers, Composed by Turlupin. The churning Ballock of the
Valiant. The Henbane of the Bishops. Marmoretus de baboonis and apis, cum
Commento Dorbellis. Decretum Vniversitatis Parisiensis super gorgiasitate
muliercularum ad placitum. The Apparition of Sancte Geltrud, to a Nun of
Poissie, being in travel, at the bringing forth of a Child. Ars honest
fartandi in societate, per Marcum Corvinum. The Mustard-pot of Penance. The
Gamashes, alias the Boots of Patience. Formicarium Artium. De brodiorum usu,
and honestate Chopinandi, per Sylvestrem prioratem Jacobinum. The Coosened, or
Gulled in Court. The Frail of the Scriveners. The Marriage-packet. The Cruzie,
or Crucible of Contemplation. The Flimflams of the Law. The Prickle of Wine.
The Spur of Cheese. Ruboffatorium scolarium. Tartaretus de modo cacandi. The
Bravades of Rome. Bricot de differentiis souparum. The Tail-piece Cushion, or
Close-Breech of Discipline. The cobbled Shoe of Humility. The Trevet of good
Thoughts. The Kettle of Magnanimity* The cavilling Intanglements of Confessors.
The Knachfare of the Curates. Reverendi patris fratris Lubini provincialis
Bavardia, de croquendis, lardonibus libri tres. Pasquilli doctoris marmorei de
capreolis cum chardoneta comedendis tempore Papali ab Ecclesia interdicto. The
Invention of the Holy Cross, personated by six wily Priests. The Spectacles of
Pilgrims bound for Rome. Majoris de modo faciendi Puddinos. The Bag-pipe of the
Prelates. Beda de optimitate triparum. The Complaint of the Barresters upon the
Reformation of Confites. The furred Cat of the Solicitors and Attorneys. Of
Pease and Bacon cum Commento. The small Vales, or drinking Money of the
Indulgences. Praeclarissimi juris utriusque Doctoris Maistre pilloti, etc.
Raque denari de bobelinandis glassaccursianae Triflis repetitio
enucidiluculissima. Stratagemata francharchaeri de Baniolet. Carlbumpkinus de
re militari, cum figuris Tevoti. De usu and utilitate flayandi equos and equas,
authore Magistro nostro de quebecu. The Sawciness of Country-Stuarts. M. N.
Rostocostojan Bedanesse de mustarda post prandium servienda, libri quatuor
decim apostillati, per M. Vaurillonis. The Covillage or Ballock-Money of
Promooters. Quaestio subtilissima, utrum Chimaera in vacuo bombistans posset
comedere secundas intentiones, and fuit debatuta per december hebdomadas in
Consilio Constantiensi. The Bridle-champer of the Advocates. Smutchudlamenta
Scoti. The Rasping and hard Scraping of the Cardinals. De calcaribus removendis
Decades undecim, per M. Albericum de rosata. Ejusdem de castramentandis
criminibus, libri tres. The entrance of Antonie de leve into the Territories of
Brasil. Marforii Bacalarii cubantis Roma, de peelandis aut unskinnandis
blurrandisque Cardinalium mulis. The said Author's Apology against those who
alledg that the Popes Mule does eat but a ses Hours. Prognosticatio quae
incipit Silvitrique-billobalata, per M. N. Longecrusion. Bondarini Episcopi de
emulgentiarum profectibus Aeneades novem, cum privilegio Papali ad triennium
and postea non. The Shitabranna of the Maids. The bald Arse of the Widows. The
Cowle or Capouch of the Monks. The mumbling Brimborions of the Coelestine
Friars. The Passage-toll of Beggarliness. The Teeth-chatter or Gum-didder of
lubberly Lusks. The Paring-shovel of the Theologues. The Drench-horn of the
Masters of Arts. The Scullians of Oleam the uninitiated Clerk. Magistri N.
Fripe saucetis de grabellationibus horarum canonicarum libri quadriginta. Culle
butatorium confratriarum, incerto authore. The Rasher of Cormorants. The
Rammishness of the Spaniards, supergivure-gondigaded by Friar Indigo. The
Muttring of pitiful Wretches. Paltronismus rerum Italicarum, authore Magistro
Burnegad. R. Lullius de batisfolagiis Principum. Calibistratorium caffardiae,
authore M. Jacobo Hocstraten hereticometra. Codtickler de magistro nostrandorum
magistro nostratorumque beneventi libri octo galantissimi. The Crackarades of
Bullists, Copists, Scriveners, Clerks, Abbreviators, Notaries and Reporters,
lately compiled by Regis. A perpetual Almanac for those that have the Gout and
the Pox. Manera sweepandi fornacellos, per Mag. Ecciam. The Shable or Cimeterre
of Merchants. The Pleasures of the Monachal Life. The Hotch-pot of Hypocrites.
The History of the Hobgoblins. The ragamuffianisme of the pensionary maimed
Soldiers. The gulling Fibs of Commissaries. The Litter of Treasurers. The
Iuglingatorium of Sophisters. Antipericata metanaparbeuged amphisistationes
Merdicantium. The Periwinkle of Ballad-makers. The Push-forward of the
Alchimists. The Niddy Noddy of the Sachel-loaded Seekers, by Friar
Bindfastatis. The Shackles of Religion. The Racket of Swag-waggers. The
Leaning-stock of old Age. The muzzle of Nobility. The Apes pater noster. The
Crickets and Hawks-Bells of Devotion. The Pot of the Ember-weeks. The Mortar of
the politic Life. The Flap of the Hermites. The Riding-hood of the
Penitentiaries. The Trictrac of the knocking Friars. Blockheadodus de vita and
honestate bragadochiorum. Lyrippii Sorbonici moralisationes, per M. Lupoldum.
The Carrier-horse-Bells of Travelers. The Bibbings of the tippling Bishops.
Terrabilitiones Doctorum Coloniensium ad versus Reuclin. The Cymbals of Ladies.
The Dungers martingale. Whirlingfriskorum Chasemarkerorum, per fratrem
Crackwoodloguetis. The clouted Patches of a stout Heart. The Mummery of the
Robin-good-fellows. Gerson de auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia. The Catalogue
of the nominated and graduated Persons. Jo. Dyrebrodii de terribilitate
excommunicationis libellus acephalos. Ingeniositas invocandi diabolos and
diabolas, per M. Guingolphum. The Gallimafree of the perpetually begging
Friars. The Morris-dance of the Heretics. The Whinings of Cajetan. Muddisnowt
Doctoris cherubici de origin roughfootedarum and wryneckedorum ritibus, libri
septem. Sixty nine fat Breviaries. The Nightmare of the five Orders of
Beggars. The Skinnery of the new Start-ups extracted out of the fallow Butt,
incornifistibulated upon in the Summa Angelica. The Raver in Cases of
Conscience. The fat Belly of the Presidents. The baffling Flowter of the
Abbots. Sutoris adversus eum qui vocaver at eum fripponatorem, and quod
fripponatores non sunt damnati ab Ecclesia. Cacatorium medicorum. The
Chimney-sweeper of Astrology. Campi clysteriorum per paragraph. C. The
Bumsquibcracker of Apothecaries. The Kiss-breech of Surgery. Justitianus de
whiteleperotis tollendis. Antidotarium animae. Merlinus Coccaius de patria
diabolorum.


Of which Library some Books are already printed, and the rest are now at the
Press, in this noble City of Tubinge.

CHAP. VIII. How Pantagruel being at Paris, received Letters from his Father
Gargantua, and the Copy of them.
PAntagruel studied very hard, as you may well conceive, and profited
accordingly; for he had an excellent Understanding and notable Wit, together
with a Capacity in Memory, equal to the measure of twelve Oil-Budgets, or Buts
of Olives. And as he was there abiding one Day, he received a Letter from his
Father in manner as follows.

Most dear Son,
Amongst the Gifts, Graces and Prerogatives with which the Sovereign Plasmator
God Almighty has endowed and adorned Human Nature at the beginning, that seems
to me most singular and excellent, by which we may in a mortal Estate attain to
a kind of Immortality, and in the Course of this transitory Life perpetuate our
Name and Seed; which is done by a Progeny issued from us in the lawful Bonds of
Matrimony: whereby that, in some measure, is restored unto us, which was taken
from us by the Sin of our first Parents; to whom it was said, that because they
had not obeyed the Commandment of God their Creator, they should die, and by
Death should be brought to naught that so stately Frame and Plasmature, wherein
the Man at first had been created.

But by this means of seminal Propagation, which continues in the Children
what was lost in the Parents, and in the Grandchildren that which perished in
their Fathers, and so successively until the Day of the last Judgment, when
Jesus Christ shall have rendered up to God the Father his Kingdom in a peaceable
Condition, out of all Danger and Contamination of Sin: for then shall cease all
Generations and Corruptions, and the Elements leave off their continual
Transmutations; seeing the so much desired Peace shall be attained unto and
enjoyed, and that all things shall be brought to their End and Period. And
therefore not without just and reasonable cause do I give thanks to God my
Savior and Preserver, for that he has enabled me to see my bald old Age
reflourish in thy Youth: for when at his good Pleasure, who rules and governs
all things, my Soul shall leave this mortal Habitation; I shall not account my
self wholly to die, but to pass from one place unto another: Considering that
in and by that, I continue in my visible Image living in the World, visiting
and conversing with People of Honor, and other my good Friends, as I was wont
to do. Which Conversation of mine, although it was not without Sin, (because we
are all of us Trespassers, and therefore ought continually to beseech his
Divine Majesty, to blot our Transgressions out of his Memory) yet was it by the
Help and Grace of God, without all manner of reproach before Men.

Wherefore if those Qualities of the Mind but shine in thee, wherewith I am
endowed, as in thee remains the perfect Image of my Body, thou will be
esteemed by all Men to be the perfect Guardian and Treasure of the Immortality
of our Name: but if otherwise, I shall truly take but small pleasure to see it,
considering that the lesser part of me, which is the Body, would abide in thee:
and the best, to wit, that which is the Soul, and by which our Name continues
blessed amongst Men, would be degenerate and abastardized. This I do not speak
out of any distrust that I have of thy Virtue, which I have heretofore already
tried, but to encourage thee yet more earnestly to proceed from good to better.
And that which I now write unto thee, is not so much that thou should live
in this virtuous Course, as that thou should rejoice in so living and having
lived, and cheer up thy self with the like Resolution in time to come. To the
Prosecution and Accomplishment of which Enterprise and generous Undertaking,
thou may easily remember how that I have spared nothing, but have so helped
thee, as if I had had no other Treasure in this World, but to see thee once in
my Life completely well bred and accomplished, as well in Virtue, Honesty and
Valor, as in all liberal Knowledge and Civility: and so to leave thee after my
Death, as a Mirror, representing the Person of me thy Father; and if not so
excellent, and such indeed as I do wish thee, yet such in Desire.

But although my deceased Father, of happy Memory, Grangousier, had bent his
best Endeavors to make me profit in all Perfection and Political Knowledge, and
that my Labor and Study was fully correspondent to, yea, went beyond his
Desire; nevertheless, as thou may well understand, the time then was not so
proper and fit for Learning as it is at present, neither had I plenty of such
good Masters as thou have had: for that time was darksom, obscured with Clouds
of Ignorance, and savouring a little of the Infelicity and Calamity of the
Goths, who had, wherever they set footing, destroyed all good Literature,
which in my Age has by the Divine Goodness been restored unto its former Light
and Dignity, and that with such Amendment and Increase of Knowledge, that now
hardly should I be admitted unto the first Form of the little Grammar
Schoolboys: I say, I, who in my youthful days was (and that justly) reputed
the most Learned of that Age. Which I do not speak in vain-boasting, although I
might lawfully do it in writing unto thee, by the Authority of Marcus Tullius,
in his Book of Old Age, and the Sentence of Plutarch, in the Book, entitled,
How a Man may praise himself without Envy: but to give thee an emulous
Encouragement to strive yet further.

Now is it that the Minds of Men are qualified with all manner of Discipline,
and the old Sciences revived, which for many Ages were extinct: Now it is that
the learned Languages are to their pristine Purity restored* viz. Greek,
(without which a Man may be ashamed to account himself a Scholar) Hebrew,
Arabic, Chaldaean and Latin. Pri^^ing likewise is now in use, so elegant, and
so correct, that better cannot be imagined, although it was found out but in my
time by Divine Inspiration; as by a Diabolical Suggestion, on the other side,
was the Invention of Ordnance. All the World is full of knowing Men, of most
learned Schoolmasters, and vast Libraries: and it appears to me as a Truth,
that neither in Plato's time, nor Cicero's, nor Papinian's, there was ever such
convenience for Studying, as we see at this Day there is* Nor must any
adventure henceforward to come in public, or represent himself in Company,
that has not been pretty well polished in the Shop of Minerva. I see Robbers,
Hangmen, Free-booters, Tapsters, Ostlers, and such like, of the very Rubbish of
the People, more learned now, than the Doctors and Preachers were in my time.

What shall I say? The very Women and Children have aspired to this Praise and
Celestial Manna of good Learning: Yet so it is, that in the Age I am now of, I
have been constrained to learn the Greek Tongue, which I contemned not like
Cato, but had not the Leisure in my younger Years to attend the Study of it.
And I take much delight in the reading of Plutarch's Morals, the pleasant
Dialogues of Plato, the Monuments of Pausanias, and the Antiquities of
Athenaeus, whilst I wait the Hour wherein God my Creator shall call me, and
command me to depart from this Earth and transitory Pilgrimage. Wherefore (my
Son) I admonish thee, to employ thy Youth to profit as well as thou can, both
in thy Studies and in Virtue. Thou art at Paris, where the laudable Examples of
many brave Men may stir up thy Mind to gallant Actions; and have likewise for
thy Tutor the Learned Epistemon, who by his lively and vocal Documents may
instruct thee in the Arts and Sciences.

I intend, and will have it so, that thou learn the Languages perfectly. First
of all, the Greek, as Quintilian will have it. Secondly, the Latin; and then
the Hebrew, for the Holy Scripture-sake. And then the Chaldee and Arabic
likewise. And that thou frame thy style in Greek in imitation of Plato; and for
the Latin, after Cicero. Let there be no History which thou shall not have
ready in thy Memory; and to help thee therein, the Books of Cosmography will be
very conducible. Of the liberal Arts of Geometry, Arithmetic and Music, I
gave thee some taste when thou were yet little, and not above five or six Years
old; proceed further in them, and learn the Remainder if thou can. As for
Astronomy, study all the Rules thereof; let pass nevertheless the divining and
judicial Astrology, and the Art of Lullius, as being nothing else but plain
Cheat and Vanities. As for the Civil Law, of that I would have thee to know the
Texts by heart, and then to confer them with Philosphy.

Now in matter of the Knowledge of the Works of Nature, I would have thee to
study that exactly; and that so there be no Sea, River or Fountain, of which
thou do not know the Fishes; all the Fowls of the Air, all the several kinds
of Shrubs and Trees, whether in Forests or Orchards: All the Sorts of Herbs and
Flowers that grow upon the Ground: all the various Metals that are hid within
the bowels of the Earth: together with all the diversity of precious Stones,
that are to be seen in the Orient and South-parts of the World; let nothing of
all these be hidden from thee. Then fail not most carefully to peruse the Books
of the Greek, Arabian and Latin Physicians; not despising the Talmudists and
Cabalists; and by frequent Anatomies get thee the perfect Knowledge of the
Microcosm, which is Man. And at some Hours of the Day, apply thy Mind to the
Study of the Holy Scriptures: first in Greek, the New Testament with the
Epistles of the Apostles; and then the Old Testament in Hebrew. In brief, Let
me see thee an Abyss, and bottomless-Pit of Knowledge: for from henceforward, as
thou growest great and becomest a Man, thou must part from this Tranquillity
and Rest of Study: thou must learn Chivalry, Warfare, and the Exercises of the
Field, the better thereby to defend my House and our Friends, and to succor
and protect them at all their Needs against the Invasion and Assaults of
Evildoers.

Furthermore, I will that very shortly thou try how much thou have profited,
which thou can not better do than by maintaining publicly Theses and
Conclusions in all Arts, against all Persons whatsoever, and by haunting the
Company of learned Men, both at Paris and otherwhere. But because, as the wise
Man Solomon says, Wisdom enters not into a malicious Mind; and that Science
without Conscience is but the Ruin of the Soul, it behooves thee to serve, to
love, to fear God, and on him to cast all thy Thoughts and all thy Hope, and by
Faith formed in Charity, to cleave unto him, so that thou may never be
separated from him by thy Sins. Suspect the Abuses of the World: set not thy
Heart upon Vanity; for this Life is transitory, but the Word of the Lord
endures for ever. Be serviceable to all thy Neighbors, and love them as thy
self: reverence thy Praeceptors; shun the Conversation of those whom thou
desire not to resemble, and receive not in vain the Graces which God has
bestowed upon thee. And when thou shall see that thou have attained to all the
Knowledge that is to be acquired in that part, return unto me, that I may see
thee, and give thee my Blessing before I die. My Son, the Peace and Grace of
our Lord be with thee. Amen.

From Vtopia the 17 th Day of the Month of March. Thy Father Gargantua.


These Letters being received and read, Pantagruel plucked up his Heart, took a
fresh Courage to him, and was inflamed with a Desire to profit in his Studies
more than ever: so that if you had seen him, how he took Pains, and how he
advanced in Learning, you would have said that the Vivacity of his Spirit
amidst the Books, was like a great Fire amongst dry Wood; so active it was,
vigorous and indefatigable.

CHAP. IX. How Pantagruel found Panurge, whom he loved all his lifetime.
ONe Day as Pantagruel was taking a Walk without the City, toward St.
Anthony's Abbey, discoursing and philosophating with his own Servants and some
other Scholars, met with a young Man of a very comely Stature, and surpassing
Handsome in all the Lineaments of his Body, but in several parts thereof most
pitifully wounded; in such bad Equipage in matter of his Apparel, which was but
Totters and Rags, and every way so far out of order, that he seemed to have
been a fighting with Mastiff-dogs, from whose Fury he had made an Escape; or to
say better, he looked, in the Condition wherein he then was, like an
Apple-gatherer of the Country of Perch.

As far off as Pantagruel saw him, he said to those that stood by, Do you see
that Man there, who is a coming hither upon the Road from Charanton-Bridg? by
my Faith, he is only poor in Fortune; for I may assure you, that by his
Physiognomy it appears, that Nature has extracted him from some rich and
noble Race, and that too much Curiosity has thrown him upon Adventures, which
possibly have reduced him to this Indigence, Want and Penury. Now as he was
just amongst them, Pantagruel said unto him, Let me entreat you ( Friend) that
you may be pleased to stop here a little, and answer me to that which I shall
ask you, and I am confident you will not think your Time ill bestowed: for I
have an extreme Desire (according to my Ability) to give you some Supply in
this Distress wherein I see you are; because I do very much commiserate your
case, which truly moves me to great pity: Therefore (my Friend) tell me, Who
you are? whence you come? whither you go? what you desire? and what your Name
is? The Companion answered him in the Dutch Tongue, thus;

Yunker got geb euch gluck und heil; ^urwa^ liebor yunker, ich las euch wi^^en
das dar mich wungraft, is it ein arm und erbamlich ding, und were wol darvon
Zusagen welches euch verdrusf^ich Zuceten, und mer zuerzelen were, wiewol die
Poeten und Oratores vortzeiten habengesag^ in item sprichen: und sentenzen das
die gedecktnus des ellendz und armut vortangs erlitten, is it ein grosser lust.
My Friend (said Pantagruel) I have no skill in that Gibberish of yours;
therefore, if you would have us to understand you, speak to us in some other
Language: then did the Drole answer him thus.

Albarildim gotfano dechmin brin alabo dordio falbroth ringuam albaras; nin
porthzadikin almucatin milko prin alelmin en thoth dalheben enfuim: kuthim
alidum alkaim nimbroth deehoth porth min michais im endoch, pruch dal maisulum
hol moth dansrihim lupaldas im voldemoch. Nim hur diavoth mnarbotim dal gousch
palfrapin duch imscoth pruch galeth dal chinon min foulchrich al conin
buthathen does dal prim. Do you understand none of this, said Pantagruel to the
Company? I believe (said Epistemon) that this is the Language of the Antipodes,
and such a hard one that the Devil himself knows not what to make of it. Then,
said Pantagruel, Gossip, I know not if the Walls do comprehend the Meaning of
your words, but none of us here does so much as understand one Syllable of
them: Then said my Blade again,

Signor mio voi vedete per essempio che la cornemusa non suona may, se non ha
il ventre pieno: cosi io parimente non vi so contrare le mie fortune, se prima
il tribulato ventre non ha la folita refectione: alquale e adviso che le mani e
li denti abbi person il loro ordine natural, e del tutto annichilati. To which
Epistemon answered as much of the one as of the other, and nothing of either.
Then said Panurge;

My Lord, if the Generosity of your Mind be suitable to your Body, you would
naturally have pity of me. For Nature made us equal* But Fortune has exalted
some, and othersome has depressed. Nevertheless, though Virtue is despised, and
worthy Men depressed; yet till the end none can be pronounced happy. Yet less
said Pantagruel: Then said my jolly Panurge;

Iona andie gaussa goussy etan beharda er remedio beharde vel sela ysser landa.
Aubar es otoy yes nausu ey nessassu gourray propposiam ordine den. Non yssena
bayte facheria egabe gen herassy badea sadassu noura assia: Aram hon davan
gaulde cydassu nydassuna estou oussye ecvinausoury hin er darstura eguy harm:
Genicoa plasan vadu. Are you there (said Eudemon) Genicoa? To this (said
Carpalin), St. Trinian's Rammer unstitch your Bum, for I had almost understood
it. Then answered Panurge;

Prug frest frinst sorgdmand strochdi dthds page breleland gravot chavygni
pomardiere rusth pkalldracg devinier a pras. Nays; beville balmuch monach drupp
del meupplist rincque drind dodelp up drent loch mine stzincq jald de vins ders
cordelis bur jocst stzampenards. Do you speak Christian, (said Epistemon) or
the Gypsey Language? Nay it is all Banter, said another. Then said Panurge;

Her re je sprexe andeers gheen taele dan kersten taele my dunc nocoans, al en
seg je met even ubord, myven noot velaert glenouch bbat re beglere gheest my
unyt bet mhet richeyt yet waer un je ghevoet match zunch: To which answered
Pantagruel, as much of that. Then said Panurge;

Sennor de tanto hablar yo soy cansado, porque supplico av^estra excellencia
que mire alos precettos Evangelicos, para que ellos muevan vuestra excellencia
a lo que es de consciencia, ysiellos no bastaren paramo ver vuesa excellencia
apiedad, supplico que mire a la piedad natural, laqual yo creoque le mova, como
es de razon, y concesso, no digo mas? Truly (my Friend) I doubt not but you can
speak diverse Languages; but tell us that which you would have us to do for you
in some Tongue, which you conceive we may understand. Then said the Companion;

Mine her, reendog ieg met ingen tunge talede; lyge some boeen, oeg usk wlig
creatuer: mine clee bon och my me legioms mager heb xv duyfer alliguck lalig
hwad tyng mog meest behoff riteres somaer sandeligh mad och dryck: hwar for
forbar me regom lyder offuer megoch besael argyffua meg nogeth off haylketieg
kad styre mine groeendes match lygeruss son mand Cerbero en Souppesor setihr:
soa schal fue loeffue le^ge ockyk salitgth. I think really (said Eusthenes)
that the Goths spoke thus of old: and that, if it pleased God, we would all of
us speak so with our Tail. Then again said Panurge*

Adon seolom lechai in ischar harob hal hebdeca bimeheroh thithe li kikar
lehem: chauchar ublaah aldonaicho neral. To which answered Epistemon, At this
time have I understood him very well; for it is the Hebrew Tongue most
Rhetorically pronounced. Then again said the Gallant;

Eust^ garnancei monon logusin hina pragmata (hem peri emphibetumen) me
prophoros epiphe^^^e: What? (said Carpalim, Pantagruel's Footman) it is Greek,
I have understood him: and how? have thou dwelt any while in Greece? Then said
the Drole again;

Agonou d^nt oussys vous desdaignez algaron: nou denfaron zamist vous mariston
ulbron, fousquez voubrol tam bredaguez maupreton den goulhoust daguez daguez
non croupys fost bardonnoffist nougrou: agou paston tol nalbrol prissys hourtou
los echatonous, prou dehouguys brol pany gouden bascrou noudous caguon^
goutfrengoul oustato^ppassou? Methinks I understand him (said Pantagruel); for
either it is the Language of my Country of Vtopia, or sounds very like it. And
as he was about to have begun some Argument, the Companion said;

Iam toties vos per saera, p^rque deos de asque omnes obtestat^^ sum, ut si
quae vos pietas permovet, egestatem meam sola^emini net hilu^^ proficio clamant
and (...): si nite, quaeso, s^ni^e, vi^i impii, qu^ mo fa^ a v^cant abite: nec
ultra vanis vestris interpellationibus obtundatis, memores veteris illius
adagii, quo venture famelicus auriculis carere dicitur. Well, my Friend, (said
Pantagruel) but cannot you speak French? That I can do (Sir) very well, (said
the Companion) God be thanked: it is my Natural Language and Mother Tongue, for
I was born and bred in my younger Years in the Garden of France, to wit,
Touraine. Then (said Pantagruel) tell us what is your Name, and from whence you
are come; for by my Faith, I have already stamped in my Mind such a deep
Impression of Love toward you, that if you will condescend unto my Will, you
shall not depart out of my Company, and you and I shall make up another Couple
of Friends, such as Aeneas and Achates were. Sir, (said the Companion) my true
and proper Christian Name is Panurge; and now I come out of Turkey, to which
Country I was carried away Prisoner at that time, when they went to Metelin
with a Mischief: And w^ llingly would I relate unto you my Fortunes, which are
more wonderful than those of Ulysses were; but seeing that it pleases you to
retain me with you, I most heartily accept of the Offer, protesting never to
leave you, should you go to all the Devils in Hell. We shall have therefore
more Leisure at another time, and a fitter Opportunity wherein to report them;
for at this present I am in a very urgent necessity to feed, my Teeth are
sharp, my Belly empty, my Throat dry, and my Stomach fierce and burning; all is
ready, if you will but set me to work: It will be as good as a Balsamum for
sore Eyes, to see me gulch and raven it; for God's sake give order for it. Then
Pantagruel commanded that they should carry him home, and provide him good
store of Victuals; which being done, he ate very well that Evening, and
(Capon-like) went early to Bed, then slept until Dinnertime the next Day; so
that he made but three Steps and one Leap from the Bed to the Board.

CHAP. X. How Pantagruel decided a Cause which was wonderfully intricate and
obscure: whereby he was reputed to have a most admirable Judgment.
PAntagruel very well remembering his Father's Letter and Admonitions, would one
Day make trial of his Knowledge. Thereupon, in all the Carresours, Streets and
Corners of the City, he set up Conclusions to the number of nine thousand seven
hundred sixty and four, in all manner of Learning, touching in them the hardest
Doubts that are in any Science. And first of all, in the Fodder-street he held
dispute against all the Regents, Artists and Orators, and did so gallantly,
that he overthrew them, and set them all upon their Tails. He went afterward
to the Sorbon, where he maintained Argument against all the Theologians, for
the space of six Weeks, from four a Clock in the Morning until six in the
Evening, except an Interval of two Hours to refresh themselves, and take their
Repast. And at this were present the greatest part of the Lords of the Court,
the Masters of Requests, Presidents, Counselors, those of the Accounts,
Secretaries, Advocates and others: As also the Sheriffs of the said Town, with
the Physicians and Professors of the Canon Law. Amongst which, it is to be
remarked, that the greatest part were resty and headstrong, and in their
Opinions obstinate; but he took such course with them, that for all their
Ergoes and Fallacies, he put their Backs to the Wall, gravelled them in the
deepest Questions, and made it visibly appear to the World, that compared to
him, they were but Monkies, and a Knot of muffled Calves. Whereupon every Body
began to keep a bustling Noise, and talk of his so mavelous Knowledge, through
all degrees of Persons in both Sexes, even to the very Laundresses, Brokers,
Rostmeat-sellers, Penknife-makers and others; who, when he past along in the
Street, would say, This is he; in which he took delight, as Demosthenes, the
Prince of Greek Orators did, when a mumping old Hag, pointing at him with her
Fingers, said, This is the Man.

Now at this same very time there was a Suit in Law, depending in Court between
two great Lords, of which one was called my Lord Kissebreech, Plaintiff, of one
side; and the other my Lord Suckfist, Defendant, of the other; whose
Controversy was so high and difficult in Law, that the Court of Parliament
could make nothing of it. And therefore by the Commandment of the King, there
were assembled four of the greatest, and most learned of all the Parliaments of
France, together with the great Council, and all the principal Regents of the
Universities, not only of France, but of England also and Italy, such as Jason,
Philippus-Decius, Petrus de Petronibus, and a Rabble of other old Rabanists.
Who being thus met together, after they had thereupon consulted for the space
of six and forty Weeks, finding that they could not fasten their Teeth in it,
nor with such clearness understand the Case, as that they might in any manner
of way be able to right it, or take up the Difference betwixt the two aforesaid
Parties, it did so grievously vex them, that they most villanously conshit
themselves for shame. In this great Extremity, one amongst them named Du
Douhait, the learned of all, and more expert and prudent than any of the
rest, whilst one Day they were thus at their Wits end, all-to-be-dunced and
philogrobolized in their Brains, said unto them; We have been here (my Masters)
good long space without doing any thing else, than trifle away both Time and
Money, and can nevertheless find neither Brim nor Bottom in this Matter: for
the more we study about it, the less we understand therein, which is a great
Shame and Disgrace to us, and a heavy Burthern to our Consciences; yea such,
that in my Opinion we shall not rid our selves of it without Dishonor, unless
we take some other course; for we do nothing but dote in our Consultations.

See therefore what I have thought upon: You have heard much talking of that
worthy Personage named Master Pantagruel, who has been found to be learned
above the Capacity of this present Age, by the Proofs he gave in those great
Disputations, which he held publicly against all Men. My Opinion is, that we
send for him, to confer with him about this Business; for never any Man will
encompass the bringing of it to an end, if he do it not.

Hereunto all the Counselors and Doctors willingly agreed, and according to
that their Result, having instantly sent for him, they entreated him to be
pleased to canvass the Process, and sift it thoroughly; that after a deep Search
and narrow Examination of all the Points thereof, he might forthwith make the
Report unto them, such as he shall think good in true and legal Knowledge. To
this effect they delivered into his Hands the Bags wherein were the Writs and
Pancarts concerning that Suit, which for Bulk and Weight were almost enough to
lade four great stoned Asses. But Pantagruel said unto them, Are the two Lords,
between whom this Debate and Process is, yet living? it was answered him, Yes:
To what a Devil then (said he) serve so many paultry Heaps, and Bundles of
Papers and Copies which you give me? Is it not better to hear their Controversy
from their own Mouths, whilst they are Face to Face before us, than to read
these vile Fopperies, which are nothing but Chicaneries, Deceits, diabolical
Cozenages of Cepola, pernicious Slights, and Subversions of Equity? For I am
sure, that you, and all those through whose Hands this Process has past, have
by your Devices added what you could to it pro and contra; in such sort, that
although their Difference perhaps was clear and easy enough to determine at
first, you have perplexed and puzzled the Cause, by the frivolous, sottish,
unreasonable, and foolish Reasons and Opinions of Accursius, Baldus, Bartolus,
de Castro, de Imola, Hippolytus, Panormo, Bertachin, Alexander, Curtius, and
those other old Mastiffs, who never understood the least Law of the Pandects,
they being but mere Blockheads and great Tithe-calves, ignorant of all that
which was needful for the understanding of the Laws. For (as it is most
certain) they had not the Knowledge either of the Greek or Latin Tongue, but
only of the Gothic and Barbarian. The Laws nevertheless were first taken from
the Greeks, according to the Testimony of Vlpian. l. poster. de origin juris,
which we likewise may perceive by that all the Laws are full of Greek Words and
Sentences. And then we find that they are reduced into a Latin Style, the most
elegant and ornate, that whole Language is able to afford, without excepting
that of any that ever wrote therein; nay, not of Salust, Varro, Cicero, Seneca,
Titus Livius, nor Quintilian. How then could these old Dotards be able to
understand aright the Text of the Laws, who never in their time had looked upon
a good Latin Book, as does evidently enough appear by the Rudeness of their
Style; which is fitter for a Chimney-sweeper, a Cook or a Scullion, than for a
Iurisconsult and Doctor in the Laws?

Furthermore; Seeing the Laws are excerpted out of the middle of Moral and
Natural Philosophy, how should these Fools have understood it, that have by G
-- studied less in Philosophy than my Mule? in respect of Humane Learning, and
the Knowledge of Antiquities and Histories, they were truly laden with those
Faculties as a Toad is with Feathers: and yet of all this the Laws are so full,
that without it they cannot be understood; as I intend more fully to show unto
you in a peculiar Treatise, which on that purpose I am about to publish.
Therefore if you will that I meddle in this Process; First, cause all these
Papers to be burnt: Secondly, Make the two Gentlemen come personally before me;
and afterward, when I shall have heard them, I will tell you my Opinion freely
without any Fiction or Dissimulation whatsoever.

Some amongst them did contradict this Motion, as you know that in all
Companies there are more Fools than wise Men, and that the greater part always
surmounts the better; as says Titus Livius, in speaking of the Carthaginians.
But the foresaid Du Douhait held the contrary Opinion, maintaining that
Pantagruel had said well, and what was right, in affirming that these Records,
Bills of Inquest, Replies, Rejoinders, Exceptions, Depositions, and other such
Diableries of Truth-intangling Writs, were but Engines wherewith to overthrow
Justice, and unnecessarily to prolong such Suits as did depend before them; and
that therefore the Devil would carry them all away to Hell, if they did not
take another Course, and proceeded not in times coming according to the
Prescripts of Evangelical and Philosophical Equity. In fine, all the Papers
were burnt, and the two Gentlemen summoned and personally convented. At whose
Appearance before the Court, Pantagruel said unto them, Are you they that have
this great Difference betwixt you? Yes, (my Lord) said they. Which of you (said
Pantagruel) is the Plaintiff? It is I, said my Lord Kissebreech. Go too then,
my Friend, (said he) and relate your Matter unto me from Point to Point,
according to the real Truth, or else (by Cocks Body) if I find you to lie so
much as in one word, I will make you shorter by the Head, and take it from off
your Shoulders, to show others by your Example, that in Justice and Judgment
Men ought to speak nothing but the Truth; therefore take heed you do not add
nor impair any thing in the Narration of your Case. Begin.

CHAP. XI. How the Lords of Kissebreech and Suckfist, did plead before
Pantagruel without Advocates.
THen began Kissebreech in manner as follows: My Lord, it is true, that a
good Woman of my House carried Eggs to the Market to sell. Be covered
Kissebreech, said Pantagruel. Thanks to you, my Lord, said the Lord
Kissebreech: But to the purpose, There passed betwixt the two Tropicks, the Sum
of three Pence toward the Zenith, and a halfpenny; forasmuch as the Riph^an
Mountains had been that Year oppressed with a great Sterility of counterfeit
Gudgions, and shows without Substance, by means of the babbling Tattle, and fond
Fibs, seditiously raised between the Gibblegablers, and Accursian
Gibberish-mongers, for the Rebellion of the Swissers, who had assembled
themselves to the full number of the Bum-bees, and Myrmidons, to go a
handsel-getting on the first Day of the new Year, at that very time when they
give Brewis to the Oxen, and deliver the Key of the Coals to the Country-girls,
for serving in of the Oats to the Dogs. All the Night long they did nothing
else (keeping their Hands still upon the Pot) but dispatch Bulls a-foot, and
Bulls a-horseback, to stop the Boats: for the Tailors and Sales-men would have
made of the stolen Shreds a goodly Sagbut to cover the face of the Ocean,
which then was great with Child of a Potful of Cabbidge, according to the
Opinion of the Hay-bundle-makers: but the Physicians said, that by the Urine
they could discern no manifest Sign of the Bustard's Pace, nor how to eat
double-tongued Mattocks with Mustard, unless the Lords and Gentlemen of the
Court should be pleased to give by B. mol express command to the Pox, not to
run about any longer, in gleaning up of Copper-smiths and Tinkers; for the
Jobernolls had already a pretty good beginning in their Dance of the British
Gig, called the Estrindore, to a perfect Diapason, with one Foot in the Fire,
and their Head in the middle, as good Man Ragot was wont to say.

Ha, (my Masters) God moderates all things, and disposes of them at his
Pleasure; so that against unlucky Fortune a Carter broke his frisking Whip,
which was all the Wind-Instrument he had: this was done at his return from the
little paultry Town, even then when Master Amitus of Cresseplots was
licentiated, and had past his Degrees in all Dullery and Blockishness,
according to this Sentence of the Canonists, Beati Dunces, quoniam ipsi
stumblaverunt. But that which makes Lent to be so high, by St. Fiacre of Bry,
is for nothing else, but that the Pentecost never comes but to my cost: yet on
before there, hoe: a little Rain stills a great Wind; and we must think so,
seeing that the Sergeant has propounded the Matter so far above my reach, that
the Clerks and Secondaries could not with the Benefit thereof lick their
Fingers feathered with Gaunders, so orbicularly, as they were wont in other
things to do. And we do manifestly see, that every one acknowledges himself to
be in the Error, wherewith another has been charged, reserving only those
Cases whereby we are obliged to take an ocular Inspection in a prospective
Glass of these things, toward the place in the Chimney, where hangs the Sign
of the Wine of forty Girths, which have been always accounted very necessary
for the number of twenty Panels and Pack-saddles of the bankrupt
Protectionaries of five Years respit: howsoever, at least he that would not let
fly the Fowl before the Cheese-cakes, ought in Law to have discovered his
Reason why not; for the Memory is often lost with a wayward Shooing. Well, God
keep Theobald Mitain from all danger. Then said Pantagruel, Hold there: Ho, my
Friend, soft and fair, speak at leisure, and soberly, without putting your self
in choler: I understand the Case, go on. Now then, (my Lord) said Kissebreech,
the foresaid good Woman, saying her gaudez and audinos, could not cover her
self with a treacherous Back-blow, ascending by the Wounds and Passions of the
Privileges of the University; unless by the Virtue of a Warming-pan she had
angelically fomented every part of her Body, in covering them with a Hedge of
Garden-Beds: then giving in a swift unavoidable Thrust very near to the place
where they sell the old Rags, whereof the Painters of Flanders make great use,
when they are about neatly to clap on Shoes on Grasshoppers, Locusts, Cigals,
and such like Fly-fowls; so strange to us, that I am wonderfully astonished why
the World does not lay, seeing it is so good to hatch.

Here the Lord of Suckfist would have interrupted him and spoken somewhat;
whereupon Pantagruel said unto him, St, by St. Anthony's Belly, does it become
thee to speak without Command? I sweat here, and crack my Brain to understand
the Proceeding of your mutual Difference, and yet thou come to trouble and
disquiet me. Peace, in the Devil's Name, Peace; thou shall be permitted to
speak thy Belly-full when this Man has done, and no sooner. Go on, (said he to
Kissebreech) speak calmly, and do not over-heat your self with too much haste.

I perceiving then (said Kissebreech) that the pragmatical Sanction did make no
mention of it, and that the holy Pope to every one gave liberty to fart at his
own ease, if that the Blankets had no Streaks, wherein the Liars were to be
crossed with a Ruffian-like Crew: and the Rainbow being newly sharpened at
Milan to bring forth Larks, gave his full consent that the good Woman should
tread down the Heel of the Hipgut-pangs, by virtue of a solemn Protestation put
in by the little testiculated or codsted Fishes; which to tell the truth, were
at that time very necessary for understanding the Syntax and Construction of
old Boots. Therefore John Calfe, her Cousin-gervais once removed, with a Log
from the Woodstack, very seriously advised her not to put her self into the
hazard of quagswagging in the Lee, to be scoured with a buck of Linen Clothes,
till first she had kindled the Paper: this Counsel she laid hold on, because he
desired her to take nothing, and throw out, for Non de ponte vadit, qui cum
sapientia cadit. Matters thus standing, seeing the Members of that Committee
did not fully agree amongst themselves in casting up the number of the Almany
Whistles, whereof were framed those Spectacles for Princes, which have been
lately printed at Antwerp. I must needs think that it makes a bad return of the
Writ, and that the adverse Party is not to be believed, in sacer verbo dotis.
For that having a great Desire to obey the Pleasure of the King, I armed my
self from Toe to Top with Belly-furniture, of the Soles of good
Venison-pasties, to go see how my Grape-gatherers and Vintagers had pinked and
cut full of small Holes their high Coped-caps, to lecher it the better, and
play at in and in. And indeed the time was very dangerous in coming from the
Fair, in so far that many trained Bow-men were cast at the Muster, and quite
rejected, although the Chimney-tops were high enough, according to the
proportion of the Windgalls, and the Malaunders Lamibaudichon. And by this
means there was that Year great abundance throughout all the Country of Artois,
of tawny buzzing Beetles, to the no small profit of the
Gentlemen-great-stick-faggot-carriers, when they did eat without disdaining the
Cocklicranes, till their Belly was like to crack with it again. As for my part,
such is my Christian Charity toward my Neighbors, that I could wish from my
Heart every one had as good a Voice, it would make us play the better at the
Tennis and the Baloon. And truly (my Lord) to express the real Truth without
Dissimulation, I cannot but say, that those petty subtle Devices, which are
found out in the etymologizing of Patins, would descend more easily into the
River of Seine, to serve for ever at the Millers-Bridg, as it was heretofore
decreed by the King of the Canarrians, which is to be seen in the Registry and
Records within the Clerks Office of this House.

And therefore (my Lord) I do most humbly require, that by your Lordship there
may be said and declared upon the Case what is reasonable, with Costs, Damages
and Interest. Then said Pantagruel, My Friend, is this all you have to say?
Kissebreech answered, Yes, (my Lord); for I have told all the tuautem, and have
not varied at all upon mine Honor in so much as one single word. You then
(said Pantagruel) my Lord of Suckfist, say what you will, and be brief, without
omitting nevertheless any thing that may serve to the purpose.

CHAP. XII. How the Lord of Suckfist pleaded before Pantagruel.
THen began the Lord Suckfist in manner as follows: My Lord, and you my
Masters, if the Iniquity of Men were as easily seen in categorical Judgment, as
we can discern Flies in a Milk-pot, the World's four Oxen had not been so eaten
up with Rats, nor had so many Ears upon the Earth been nibbled away so
scurvily. For although all that my Adversary has spoken be of Down, in so much
as concerns the Letter and History of the Factum; yet nevertheless, the
Subtilties, the Fineness, the little sly Intanglements are hid under the
Rose-pot.

Should I endure, that, when I am eating my Pottage, equal with the best, and
that without either thinking or speaking any manner of ill, they rudely come to
vex, trouble, and perplex my Brains, ringing in my Ears that old Jingle, He
that will in his Pottage drink,
When he is dead, shall not see one Wink.
And, good Lady! how many great Captains have we seen in the Day of Battle,
when in open field the Sacrament was distributed in Lunchions of the sanctified
Bread of the Confraternity, the more honestly to nod their Heads, play on the
Lute, crack with their Tails, and make pretty little platform Leaps? But now
the World is unshackled from the Corners of the Packs of Leicester, one flies
out lewdly and becomes debauched; another likewise five, four and two, and that
at such random, that if the Court take not some course therein, it will make as
bad a Season in matter of Gleaning this Year, as ever it made, or it will make
Goblets. If any poor Creature go to the Stoves to illuminate his Muzzle with a
Cow-shard, or to buy Winter-boots, and that the Sergeants passing by, or those
of the Watch happen to receive the Decoction of a Clyster, or the fecal Matter
of a Close-stool, upon their Rustling-wrangling-clutter-keeping Masterships,
should any because of that make bold to clip the Shillings and Testers, and fry
the wooden Dishes? Sometimes when we think one thing, God does another; and
when the Sun is set, all Beasts are in the Shade. Let me never be believed
again, if I do not gallantly prove it by several People that have seen the
Light of the Day.

In the Year thirty and six, buying a Dutch Curtail, which was a middle sized
Horse, both high and short, of a Wool good enough, and died in Grain, as the
Goldsmiths assured me, although the Notary put an etc. in it: I told really,
that I was not a Clerk of so much Learning as to snatch at the Moon with my
Teeth; but as for the Butter-firkin, where Vulcanian's Deeds and Evidences were
sealed, the Rumor was, and the Report thereof went current, that Salt-Beef
will make one find the way to the Wine without a Candle, though it were hid in
the bottom of a Collier's Sack, and that with his Drawers on he were mounted on
a barbed Horse furnished with a Fronstal, and such Arms, Thighs and Leg-pieces
as are requisite for the well frying and broiling of a swaggering Sawciness.
Here is a Sheep's Head, and it is well they make a Proverb of this, that it is
good to see black Cows in burnt Wood, when one attains to the Enjoyment of his
Love. I had a Consultation upon this Point with my Masters the Clerks, who for
Resolution concluded in frisesomorum, that there is nothing like to mowing in
the Summer, and sweeping clean away in Water, well garnished with Paper, Ink,
Pens and Penknives of Lions upon the River of Rosne; dolopym dolop of, tarabin
tarabas, tut prut pish: for incontinently after that Armor begins to smell of
Garlic, the Rust will go near to eat the Liver, not of him that wears it; and
then do they nothing else but withstand others Courses, and wry-neckedly set up
their Bristles against one another, in lightly passing over their Afternoon's
Sleep: and this is that which makes Salt so dear. My Lords, believe not, when
the said good Woman had with Birdlime, caught the shovelar Fowl, the better
before a Serjeant's Witness, to deliver the younger Son's Portion to him, that
the Sheep's Pluck, or Hog's Haslet, did dodg and shrink back in the Usurers
Purses, or that there could be any thing better to preserve one from the
Cannibals, than to take a Rope of Onions, knit with three hundred Turnips, and
a little of a Calf's Chaldern of the best Allay that the Alchymists have: and
that they lute and calcine these Pantoffles, muf in muf out. Mouflin mouflard,
with the fine Sauce of the Juice of the Rabblerout, whilst they hide themselves
in some petty Moldwarp-hole, saving always the Bacon. Now if the Dice will not
favor you with any other Throw but Ambesace, and the Chance of three at the
great end, mark well the Ace; then take me your Dame, settle her in a Corner of
the Bed, and whisk me her up drille trille, there, there; then a hearty Draught
of the best, despicando grenovillibus, in despite of the Frogs; whose fair
course bebuskined Stockins shall be set apart for the little mued Goslings,
which fatned in a Coop, take delight to sport themselves at the wagtail Game,
waiting for the beating of the Metal, and heating of the Wax by the slavering
Drivellers of Consolation.

Very true it is, that the four Oxen which are in debate, and whereof mention
was made, were somewhat short in memory: nevertheless, to understand the gamme
aright, they feared neither the Cormorant nor Mallard of Savoy, which put the
good People of my Country in great hope, that their Children sometime should
become very skilful in Algorism; therefore is it, that by a Law Rubric and
special Sentence thereof, that we cannot fail to take the Wolf, if we make our
Hedges higher than the Windmill, whereof somewhat was spoken by the Plaintiff.
But the great Devil did envy it, and put the High Dutch far behind, who played
the Devils in swilling down and tippling at the good Liquor, trink mien here,
trink, trink, by two of my Table-men in the Corner-point I have gained the
lurch; for it is not probable, nor is there any appearance of Truth in this
Saying, That at Paris upon a little Bridge the Hen is proportionable: and were
they as copped and high-crested as marish Whoops, if veritably they did not
sacrifice the Printers Pumpet-balls at Moreb, with a new Edg set upon them by
Text Letters, or those of a swift-writing Hand, it is all one to me, so that
the Headband of the Book breed not Moths or Worms in it. And put the case, that
at the coupling together of the Buck-hounds, the little Puppies should have
waxed proud before the Notary could have given an account of the Serving of his
Writ by the Cabalistick Art, it will necessarily follow (under Correction of
the better Judgment of the Court) that six Acres of Medow-ground of the
greatest breadth, will make three Butts of fine Ink, without paying ready
Money. Considering that at the Funeral of King Charles, we might have had the
fathom in open market for Deuce-ace: this I may affirm with a safe Conscience
upon my Oath of Wool.

And I see ordinarily in all good Bag-pipes, that when they go to the
counterfeiting of the chirping of small Birds, by swinging a Broom three times
about a Chimney, and putting his Name upon Record, they do nothing but bend a
Cross-bow backward, and wind a Horn, if perhaps it be too hot, and that by
making it fast to a Rope he was to draw, immediately after the sight of the
Letters, the Cows were restored to him. Such another Sentence after the
homeliest Manner was pronounced in the seventeenth Year, because of the bad
Government of Louzefougarouse; whereunto it may please the Court to have
regard. I desire to be rightly understood; for truly I say not, but that in all
Equity, and with an upright Conscience, those may very well be dispossessed, who
drink holy Water, as one would do a Weaver's Shuttle, whereof Suppositories are
made to those that will not resign, but on the terms of ell and tell, and
giving of one thing for another. Tunc (my Lords) quid juris pro minoribus? for
the common Custom of the Salick Law is such, that the first Incendiary or
Firebrand of Sedition, that flays the Cow, and wipes his Nose in a full
Consort of Music, without blowing in the Cobler's Stitches, should in the time
of the Nightmare sublimate the Penury of his Member by Moss gathered when
People are like to founder themselves at the Mass at Midnight, to give the
Estrapade to these White-wines of Anjou, that do Gambetta, Neck to Neck, after
the Fashion of Britany. Concluding as before with Costs, Damages and Interests.

After that the Lord of Suckfist had ended, Pantagruel said to the Lord of
Kissebreech, My Friend, have you a mind to make any Reply to what is said? No,
(my Lord) answered Kissebreech; for I have spoke all I intended, and nothing
but the Truth, therefore put an end for God's sake to our Difference, for we
are here at great Charge.

CHAP. XIII. How Pantagruel gave Judgment upon the Difference of the two Lords.
THen Pantagruel rising up, assembled all the Presidents, Counselors and
Doctors that were there, and said unto them; Come now, (my Masters) you have
heard (vivae vocis oraculo) the Controversy that is in question, what do you
think of it? They answered him, We have indeed heard it, but have not
understood the Devil so much as one Circumstance of the Case; and therefore we
beseech you una voce, and in courtesy request you, that you would give Sentence
as you think good; and ex nunc prout ex tunc, we are satisfied with it, and do
ratify it with our full Consents. Well, my Masters (said Pantagruel) seeing you
are so pleased, I will do it: but I do not truly find the Case so difficult as
you make it: Your Paragraph Caton, the Law Frater, the Law Gallus, the Law
Quinque pedum, the Law Vinum, the Law Si Dominus, the Law Matter, the Law Mulier
bona, the Law Si quis, the Law Pomponius, the Law Fundi, the Law Emptor, the
Law Praetor, the Law Venditor, and a great many others are far more intricate
in my Opinion. After he had spoke this, he walked a turn or two about the Hall,
plodding very profoundly as one may think; for he did groan like an Ass, whilst
they girth him too hard, with the very Intensiveness of considering how he was
bound in Conscience to do right to both Parties, without varying or accepting
of Persons. Then he returned, sat down, and began to pronounce Sentence as
follows:

Having seen, heard, calculated and well considered of the Difference between
the Lords of Kissebreech and Suckfist; the Court says unto them, that in
regard of the sudden Shivering of the Flickermouse, bravely declining from the
estival Solstice, to attempt by private means the surprizal of toyish Trifles
in those, who are a little unwel for having taken a Draught too much, through
the lewd Demeanor and Vexation of the Beetles, that inhabit the Diarodal
Climate of an hypocritical Ape on Horseback, bending a Cross-bow backwards. The
Plaintiff truly had just cause to calfet, and stop the Chinks of the Gallion,
which the good Woman blew up with Wind, having one Foot shod and the other
bare, re-imbursing and restoring to him low and stiff in his Conscience, as
many Bladder-nuts and wild Pistaches as there is of Hair in eighteen Cows, with
as much for the Embroiderer, and so much for that. He is likewise declared
innocent of the Case privileged from the Knapdardies, into the danger whereof
it was thought he had incurred; because he could not jocundly and with fullness
of Freedom untruss and dung, by the decision of a pair of Gloves perfumed with
the Scent of Bum-gunshot, at the Walnut-tree Taper, as is usual in his Country
of Mirobalois. Slacking therefore the Top-sail, and letting go the Boulin with
the Brazen-bullets, wherewith the Mariners did by way of Protestation bake in
Paste-meat great store of Pulse, interquilted with the Dormouse, whose Hawks
Bells were made with a puntinaria, after the manner of Hungary or Flanders
Lace, and which his Brother-in-Law carried in a Panier, lying near to three
Chevrons or bordered Gueules, whilst he was clean out of heart, drooping and
crestfallen by the too narrow sifting, canvassing, and curious examining of the
Matter, in the angulary Dog-hole of nasty Scoundrels, from whence we shoot at
the vermiformal Popingay, with the Flap made of a Fox-tail.

But in that he charge the Defendant, that he was a Botcher, Cheese-eater,
and Trimmer of Man's Flesh imbalmed; which in the arsiversy swagfal tumble was
not found true, as by the Defendant was very well discussed.

The Court therefore does condemn and amerce him in three Poringers of Curds,
well cemented and closed together, shining like Pearls, and cod-pieced after
the Fashion of the Country, to be paid unto the said Defendant about the
middle of August in May: but on the other part, the Defendant shall be bound to
furnish him with Hay and Stubble, for stopping the Caltrops of his Throat,
troubled and impulregafized, with Gabardines garbeled shufflingly, and Friends
as before, without Costs and for cause.

Which Sentence being pronounced, the two Parties departed both contented with
the Decree; which was a thing almost incredible: for it never came to pass
since the great Rain; nor shall the like occur in thirteen Jubilees hereafter,
that two Parties contradictorily contending in Judgment, be equally satisfied
and well pleased with the definitive Sentence. As for the Counselors, and
other Doctors in the Law that were there present, they were all so ravivished
with Admiration at the more than Humane Wisdom of Pantagruel, which they did
most clearly perceive to be in him, by his so accurate Decision of this so
difficult and thorny Cause, that their Spirits, with the Extremity of the
Rapture, being elevated above the pitch of actuating the Organs of the Body,
they fell into a Trance and sudden Ecstasy, wherein they stayed for the space of
three long Hours; and had been so as yet in that Condition, had not some good
People fetched store of Vinegar and Rose Water to bring them again unto their
former Sense and Understanding. For the which God be praised every where; And
so be it.

CHAP. XIV. How Panurge related the manner how he escaped out of the Hands of
the Turks.
THe great Wit and Judgment of Pantagruel was immediately after this made known
unto all the World, by setting forth his Praises in Print, and putting upon
Record this late wonderful Proof he has given thereof amongst the Rolls of the
Crown, and Registers of the Palace, in such sort, that every Body began to say,
that Solomon, who by a probable Guess only, without any further certainty,
caused the Child to be delivered to its own Mother, showed never in his time
such a Masterpiece of Wisdom, as the good Pantagruel had done: happy are we
therefore that have him in our Country. And indeed they would have made him
thereupon Master of the Requests, and President in the Court: but he refused
all, very graciously thanking them for their Offer; for (said he) there is too
much Slavery in these Offices, and very hardly can they be saved that do
exercise them, considering the great Corruption that is amongst Men. Which
makes me believe, if the empty Seats of Angels be not filled with other kind of
People than those, we shall not have the final Judgment these seven thousand
sixty and seven Jubilees yet to come; and so Cusanus will be deceived in his
Conjecture. Remember that I have told you of it, and given you fair
Advertisement in time and place convenient.

But if you have any Hogsheads of good Wine, I willingly will accept of a
Present of that; which they very heartily did do, in sending him of the best
that was in the City, and he drank reasonably well. But poor Panurge bibbed and
bowsed of it most villainously; for he was as dry as a Red herring, as lean as
a Rake, and like a poor, lank, slender Cat, walked gingerly as if he had trod
upon Eggs: so that by some one being admonished, in the midst of his Draught of
a large deep Bowl, full of excellent Claret, with these words, Fair and softly
Gossip, you suck up as if you were mad: I give thee to the Devil, (said he)
thou have not found here thy little tippling Sippers of Paris, that drink no
more than the Chaffinch, and never take in their Beak full of Liquor, till they
be bobbed on the Tails after the manner of the Sparrows. O Companion, if I
could mount up as well as I can get down, I had been long e're this above the
Sphere of the Moon with Empedocles. But I cannot tell what a Devil this means.
This Wine is so good and delicious, that the more I drink thereof, the more I
am a-thirst. I believe that the Shadow of my Master Pantagruel makes Men
a-thirsty, as the Moon does the Catarrs and Defluxions. At which word the
Company began to laugh. Which Pantagruel perceiving, said, Panurge, what is
that which moves you to laugh so? Sir, said he, I was telling them that these
devilish Turks are very unhappy, in that they never drink one drop of Wine; and
that though there were no other harm in all Mahomet's Alcoran, yet for this one
base Point of Abstinence from Wine, which therein is commanded, I would not
submit my self unto their Law. But now tell me (said Pantagruel) how you
escaped out of their Hands. By G --, Sir, (said Panurge) I will not lie to you
in one word.

The rascally Turks had broached me upon a Spit all larded like a Rabbet, (for
I was so dry and meagre, that otherwise of my Flesh they would have made but
very bad Meat) and in this manner began to roast me alive. As they were thus
roasting me, I recommended my self unto the Divine Grace, having in my Mind the
good St. Lawrence, and always hoped in God that he would deliver me out of this
Torment, which came to pass, and that very strangely: for as I did commit my
self with all my Heart unto God, crying, Lord God help me, Lord God save me,
Lord God take me out of this Pain and hellish Torture, wherein these traitorous
Dogs detain me for my Sincerity in the Maintenance of thy Law; the Turn-spit
fell asleep by the Divine Will, or else by the Virtue of some good Mercury, who
cunningly brought Argus into a Sleep for all his hundred Eyes. When I saw that
he did no longer turn me in roasting, I looked upon him, and perceived that he
was fast asleep, then took I up in my Teeth a Firebrand by the end where it
was not burnt, and cast it into the Lap of my Roaster; and another did I throw
as well as I could under a Field-bed, that was placed near to the Chimney,
wherein was the Straw-bed of my Master Turn-spit; presently the Fire took hold
in the Straw, and from the Straw to the Bed, and from the Bed to the Loft,
which was planked and cieled with Firr, after the fashion of the foot of a
Lamp. But the best was, that the Fire which I had cast into the Lap of my
paultry Roaster, burnt all his Groin, and was beginning to cease upon his
Cullions, when he became sensible of the danger; for his Smelling was not so
bad, but that he felt it sooner than he could have seen Daylight. Then
suddenly getting up, and in a great Amazement running to the Window, he cried
out to the Streets as high as he could, Dalbaroth, Dalbaroth, Dalbaroth; which
is as much to say, Fire, Fire, Fire: incontinently turning about, he came
straight toward me, to throw me quite into the Fire; and to that effect, had
already cut the Ropes, wherewith my Hands were tied, and was undoing the Cords
from off my Feet; when the Master of the House hearing him cry, Fire, and
smelling the Smoke from the very Street where he was walking with some other
Baashaws and Mustaphaes, ran with all the speed he had to save what he could,
and to carry away his Jewels. Yet such was his Rage, (before he could well
resolve how to go about it) that he caught the Broach whereon I was spitted,
and therewith killed my Roaster stark dead, of which Wound he died there for
want of Government or otherwise; for he ran him in with the Spit a little above
the Navel, toward the right Flank, till he pierced the third Lappet of his
Liver, and the Blow flanting upwards from the Diaphragme, through which it had
made Penetration; the Spit past athwart the Pericardium, and came out above at
his Shoulders, betwixt the Spondyls and the left Homoplat.

True it is, (for I will not lie) that in drawing the Spit out of my Body, I
fell to the Ground near unto the Andirons, and so by the Fall took some hurt;
which indeed had been greater, but that the Lardons, or little Slices of Bacon,
wherewith I was stuck, kept off the Blow. My Baashaw then seeing the Case to be
desperate, his House burnt without Remission, and all his Goods lost, gave
himself over unto all the Devils in Hell, calling upon some of them by their
Names, Gringoth, Astaroth, Rapp^lus and Gribonillis, nine several times; which
when I saw, I had above six Pennyworth of Fear, dreading that the Devils would
come even then to carry away this Fool, and seeing me so near him would perhaps
snatch me up too. I am ready (thought I) half roasted, and my Lardons will be
the cause of my Mischief; for these Devils are very lickorous of Lardons,
according to the Authority which you have of the Philosopher Iamblicus and
Murmault, in the Apology of Bossuris, adulterated pro magistros nostros. But
for my better security I made the sign of the Cross, crying, Hageos, athanatos,
hotheos, and none came: At which, my Rogue Baashaw being very much aggrieved,
would in transpiercing his Heart with my Spit have killed himself; and to that
purpose had set it against his Breast, but it could not enter, because it was
not sharp enough. Whereupon I perceiving that he was not like to work upon his
Body the Effect which he intended, although he did not spare all the Force he
had to thrust it forward, came up to him and said, Master Bugrino, thou do
here but trifle away thy time, for thou will never kill thy self thus as thou
do. Well, thou may hurt or bruise somewhat within thee, so as to make
thee languish all thy Lifetime most pitifully amongst the Hands of the
Chirurgions; but if thou will be counseled by me, I will kill thee clear
outright, so that thou shall not so much as feel it; and trust me, for I have
killed a great many others, who never have complained afterward. Ha, my
Friend, said he, I prithee do so, and for thy pains I will give thee my
Cod-piece; take, here it is, there are six hundred Seraphs in it, and some fine
Diamonds, and most excellent Rubies. And where are they, said Epistemon? By St.
John (said Panurge) they are a good way hence, if they always keep going: But
where is the last Year's Snow? This was the greatest care that Villon the
Parisian Poet took. Make an end (said Pantagruel) that we may know how thou
did dress thy Baashaw: By the Faith of an honest Man (said Panurge) I do not
lie in one word; I swadled him in a scurvy Swathel-binding, which I found lying
there half burnt, and with my Cords tied him Royster-like both Hand and Foot,
in such sort that he was not able to winse; then past my Spit through his
Throat, and hanged him thereon, fastening the end thereof at two great Hooks or
Cramp-irons, upon which they did hang their Halberds; and then kindling a fair
Fire under him, did flame you up my Milourt, as they use to do dry Herrings in
a Chimney: with this, taking his Budget, and a little Javelin that was upon the
foresaid Hooks, I ran away a fair Gallop-rake, and God he knows how I did smell
my Shoulder of Mutton.

When I was come down into the Street, I found every Body come to put out the
Fire with store of Water, and seeing me so half-roasted, they did naturally
pity my Case, and threw all their Water upon me, which by a most joyful
refreshing of me, did me very much good. Then did they present me with some
Victuals, but I could not eat much, because they gave me nothing to drink but
Water after their fashion. Other hurt they did me none, only one little
villainous Turkey knob-brested Rogue, came to snatch away some of my Lardons; but
I gave him such a sturdy Thump, and sound Rap on the Fingers, with all the
weight of my Javelin, that he came no mote the second time. Shortly after this,
there came toward me a pretty young Corinthian Wench, who brought me a Box
full of Conserves, of round Mirabolan Plums, called Emblicks, and looked upon
my poor Roger with an Eye of great Compassion, as it was Flea-bitten and pinked
with the Sparkles of the Fire from whence it came, for it reached no further in
length (believe me) than my Knees. But note, that this Roasting cured me
entirely of a Sciatica, whereunto I had been subject above seven Years before,
upon that side which my Roaster, by falling asleep, suffered to be burnt.

Now whilst they were thus busy about me, the Fire triumphed, never ask, How?
for it took hold on above two thousand Houses; which one of them espying, cried
out, saying, By Mahooms Belly all the City is on fire, and we do nevertheless
stand gazing here, without offering to make any Relief. Upon this, every one
ran to save his own. For my part, I took my way toward the Gate. When I was
got upon the Knap of a little Hillock, not far off, I turned me about as did
Lot's Wife, and looking back, saw all the City burning in a fair Fire; whereat
I was so glad, that I had almost beshit my self for Joy: but God punished me
well for it. How? said Pantagruel. Thus, said Panurge; for when with Pleasure I
beheld this jolly Fire, jesting with my self, and saying, Ha poor Flies, ha
poor Mice, you will have a bad Winter of it this Year; the Fire is in your
Reeks, it is in your Bed-straw: Out came more than six, yea more than thirteen
hundred and eleven Dogs great and small, altogether out of the Town, flying
away from the Fire. At the first Approach they ran all upon me, being carried
on by the Scent of my leacherous half-roasted Flesh, and had even then devoured
me in a trice, if my good Angel had not well inspired me with the Instruction
of a Remedy, very sovereign against the Pain of the Teeth. And wherefore (said
Pantagruel) were thou afraid of the Pain of the Teeth? were thou not cured of
thy Rheums? By Palm Sunday (said Panurge) is there any greater Pain of the
Teeth than when the Dogs have you by the Legs? But on a sudden (as my good
Angel directed me) I thought upon my Lardons, and threw them into the midst of
the Field among them: then did the Dogs run, and fight with one another at fair
Teeth, which should have the Lardons: by this means they left me, and I left
them also bustling with, and haring one another. Thus did I escape frolic and
lively, Grammerie Roast-meat and Cookery.

CHAP. XV. How Panurge showed a very new way to build the Walls of Paris.
PAntagruel one Day to refresh himself of his Study, went a walking toward St.
Marcel's Suburbs, to see the Extravagancy of the Gobeline Building, and to
taste of their spiced Bread. Panurge was with him, having always a Flaggon
under his Gown, and a good Slice of a Gammon of Bacon; for without this he
never went, saying, That it was his Lifeguard; other Sword carried he none.
And when Pantagruel would have given him one, he answered, that he needed none,
for that it would but heat his Feius. Yea, but (said Epistemon) if thou
should be set upon, how would thou defend thy self? With great brodkin
Blows, answered he, provided Thrusts were forbidden. At their return, Panurge
considered the Walls of the City of Paris, and in derision said to Pantagruel,
See what fair Walls here are! O how strong they are, and well fitted to keep
Geese in a Coop to fatten them! by my Beard they are very sorry Walls for such
a City as this is; for a Cow with one Fart would go near to overthrow above six
fathoms of them. O my Friend (said Pantagruel) do thou know what Agesilaus
said, when he was asked, Why the great City of Lacedemon was not enclosed with
Walls? showing them the Inhabitants and Citizens, so strong, so well armed, and
so expert in Military Discipline; Lo here (said he) the Walls of the City:
Signifying thereby, that there is no Wall but of Bones, and that Towns and
Cities cannot have a surer Wall, nor better Fortification than the Prowess and
Virtue of the Citizens and Inhabitants. So is this City so strong, by the great
number of Warlike People that are in it, that they care not for making any
other Walls.

Besides, whosoever would go about to wall it* as Strasbourg, Orleans or
Ferrara, would find it almost impossible, the Cost and Charges would be so
excessive. Yea, but (said Panurge) it is good nevertheless to have an outside
of Stone, when we are invaded by our Enemies, were it but to ask, Who is below
there? As for the enormous Expense, which you say would be needful for
undertaking the great Work of walling this City about, if the Gentlemen of the
Town will be pleased to give me a good rough Cup of Wine, I will show them a
pretty, strange and new way how they may build them good cheap. How, said
Pantagruel? Do not speak of it then, (answered Panurge) and I will tell it you.
I see that the what do you Call-ums of the Women of this Country, are better
cheap than Stones: of them should the Walls be built, ranging them in good
Symmetry by the Rules of Architecture, and placing the largest in the first
Ranks, then sloping downwards Ridg-ways, like the Back of an Ass; the middle
sized ones must be ranked next, and last of all the least and smallest. This
done, there must be a fine little interlacing of them, like Points of Diamonds,
as is to be seen in the great Tower of Bourges, with a like number of the lusty
Catfoes that dwell in amongst the claustral Cod-pieces. What Devil were able to
overthrow such Walls? there is no Metal like it to resist Blows, in so far that
if Culverin-shot should come to grase upon it, you would incontinently see
distill from thence the blessed Fruit of the great Pox, as small as Rain. Beware
in the name of the Devils, and hold off. Furthermore, No Thunderbolt or
Lightning would fall upon it; for why? they are all either blessed or
consecrated. I see but one Inconveniency in it. Ho, ho, ha, ha, ha, (said
Pantagruel) and what is that? It is that the Flies would be so lickorish of
them, to a Wonder, and would quickly gather there together, and there leave
their Ordure and Excretions, and so all the Work would be spoiled. But see how
that might be remedied: they must be wiped and made rid of the Flies with fair
Fox-tails, or good great Ass-pizzles of Provence. And to this purpose I will
tell you (as we go to Supper) a brave Example set down by Frater Lubinus, libro
de compotationibus mendicantium.

In the time that the Beasts did speak, (which is not yet three Days ago) a
poor Lion walking through the Forest of Bieure, and saying his own little
private Devotions, past under a Tree where there was a roguish Collier gotten
up to cut down Wood: who seeing the Lion, cast his Hatchet at him, and wounded
him enormously in one of his Legs: whereupon the Lion halting, so long toiled
and turmoiled himself in roaming up and down the Forest to find help, till at
last he met with a Carpenter, who willingly looked upon his Wound, cleansed it
as well as he could, and filled it with Moss, telling him that he must wipe his
Wound well, that the Flies might not do their Excrements in it, whilst he
should go search for some Millefoil, commonly called the Carpenter's Herb. The
Lion being thus healed, walked along in the Forest; at what time, a
sempiternous old Hag was picking up, and gathering some Sticks in the said
Forest, who seeing the Lion coming toward her, for fear fell down backwards,
in such sort, that the Wind blew up her Gown, Coats and Smock even as far as
above her Shoulders. Which the Lion perceiving, for pity ran to see whether she
had taken any hurt by the Fall; and thereupon considering her what you call it,
said, O poor Woman, who has thus wounded thee? which Words when he had spoken,
he espied a Fox, whom he called to come to him, saying, Gossip Renard, hau,
hither, hither, and for cause.

When the Fox was come, he said unto him, My Gossip and Friend, they have hurt
this good Woman here between the Legs most villanously, and there is a manifest
Solution of Continuity; see how great a Wound it is, even from the Tail up to
the Navel, in measure four, nay full five Hand-fulls and a half; this is the
Blow of an Hatchet, I doubt me it is an old Wound, and therefore that the Flies
may not get into it, wipe it lustily well and hard, I prithee, both within and
without; thou have a good Tail and long; wipe, my Friend, wipe, I beseech thee,
and in the mean while I will go get some Moss to put into it. For thus ought we
to succor and help one another. Wipe it hard, thus, my Friend, wipe it well,
for this Wound must be often wiped, otherwise the Party cannot be at ease. Go
to, wipe well, my little Gossip, wipe, God has furnished thee with a Tail;
thou have a long one, and of a Bigness proportionable, wipe hard and be not
weary. A good Wiper, who in wiping continually, wipeth with his Wipard, by
Wasps shall never be wounded. Wipe, my pretty Minion, wipe, my little Bully, I
will not stay long. Then went he to get store of Moss; and when he was a little
way off, he cried out in speaking to the Fox thus, Wipe well still, Gossip,
wipe, and let it never grieve thee to wipe well, my little Gossip, I will put
thee into Service to be Wiper to Don Pedro de Castille; wipe, only wipe, and no
more. The poor Fox wiped as hard as he could, here and there, within and
without: but the false old Trot did so fizzle and foist, that she stunk like a
hundred Devils. Which put the poor Fox to a great deal of ill ease; for he knew
not to what side to turn himself, to escape the unsavory Perfume of this old
Woman's postern Blasts. And whilst to that effect he was shifting hither and
thither, without knowing how to shun the Annoyance of those unwholesom Gusts,
he saw that behind there was yet another Hole, not so great as that which he
did wipe, out of which came this filthy and infectious Air. The Lion at last
returned, bringing with him of Moss more than eighteen Packs would hold, and
began to put it into the Wound, with a Staff which he had provided for that
purpose; and had already put in full sixteen Packs and a half, at which he was
amazed: What a Devil? (said he) this Wound is very deep, it would hold above
two Cart-loads of Moss. The Fox perceiving this, said unto the Lion, O Gossip
Lion, my Friend, I pray thee do not put in all thy Moss there, keep somewhat;
for there is yet here another little Hole, that stinks like five hundred
Devils. I am almost choked with the smell thereof, it is so pestiferous and
impoisoning.

In this manner (said Panurge) must these Walls be kept from the Flies; and
Wages allowed to some for wiping of them. Then said Pantagruel, How do thou
know that the privy Parts of Women are at such a cheap Rate? for in this City
there are many virtuous, honest and chaste Women besides the Maids. Et ubi
prenus, said Panurge? I will give you my Opinion of it, and that upon certain
and assured Knowledge. I do not brag that I have bumbasted four hundred and
seventeen, since I came into this City, though it be but nine days ago. But
this very Morning I met with a good Fellow, who in a Wallet, such as Aesop's
was, carried two little Girls of two or three years old at the most, one
before, and the other behind. He demanded Alms of me, but I made him answer,
that I had more Cods than Pence. Afterward I asked him, good Man, these two
Girls are they Maids? Brother, said he, I have carried them thus these two
years, and in regard of her that is before, whom I see continually, in my
Opinion she is a Virgin, nevertheless I will not put my Finger in the Fire for
it; as for her that is behind, doubtless I can say nothing. Indeed (said
Pantagruel) thou art a merry Companion, I will have thee to be apparelled in my
Livery: and therefore caused him to be clothed most gallantly according to the
Fashion that then was; only that Panurge would have the Cod-piece of his
Breeches three Foot-long, and in shape square, not round, which was done, and
was well worth the seeing. Oftentimes was he wont to say that the World had
not yet known the Emolument and Utility that is in wearing great Cod-pieces;
but Time would one day teach it them, as all things have been invented in time.

God keep from hurt (said he) the good Fellow whose great Cod-piece has saved
his Life. God keep from hurt him, whose great Cod-piece has been worth to him
in one day, one hundred threescore thousand and nine Crowns. God keep from hurt
him, who by his great Cod-piece has saved a whole City from dying by Famine.
And by G -- I will make a Book of the Commodity of great Cod-pieces, when I
shall have more leisure. And indeed he composed a fair great Book with Figures,
but it is not printed as yet that I know of.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Qualities and Conditions of Panurge.
PAnurge was of a middle Stature, not too high nor too low, and had somewhat an
Aquiline Nose, made like the Handle of a Razor. He was at that time five and
thirty Years old or thereabouts, fine to gild like a leaden Dagger; for he was
a very gallant Man of his Person, only that he was a little lewd, and naturally
subject to a kind of Disease, which at that time they called Lack of Money; a
Malady Nompareil: yet notwithstanding he had threescore and three Tricks to
help himself at his need. Of which, the most honorable and most ordinary, was
by the way of filching; for he was a quarrelsom Fellow, a Sharper, Drinker,
Royster, Scowrer, and a very dissolute and debauched Fellow, if there were any
in Paris; otherwise, and in all Matters else, the best Man in the World. And he
was still contriving some Plot, and devising Mischief against the Sergeants and
the Watch.

At one time he assembled three or four especial good Hacksters and roaring
Boys; made them in the Evening drink like Templers, afterward led them till
they came under St. Genevieve, or about the College of Navar; and at the Hour
that the Watch was coming up that way, which he knew by putting his Sword upon
the Pavement, and his Ear by it, and when he heard his Sword shake, it was an
infallible Sign that the Watch was near at that instant: then he and his
Companions took a Tumbrel or Dung-cart, and gave it the Brangle, hurling it
with all their Force down the Hill, and so overthrew all the poor Watchmen like
Pigs, and then ran away upon the other side; for in less than two days, he knew
all the Streets, Lanes and Turnings in Paris, as well as his Deus de^.

At another time he made in some fair Place, where the said Watch was to pass,
a Train of Gunpowder, and at the very instant that they went along, set fire
to it, and then made himself Sport to see what good Grace they had in running
away, thinking that St. Anthony's. Fire had caught them by the Legs. As for the
poor Masters of Arts, he did persecute them above all others. When he
encountered with any of them upon the Street, he would never fail to put some
Trick or other upon them; sometimes putting a fried Turd in their Graduate
Hoods; at other times pinning on little Fox-tails, or Hares-ears behind them,
or some such other roguish Prank. One Day that they were appointed all to meet
in the Fodder-street, he made a Borbonnesa Tart, made of store of G^^lick, of
Assa foetida, of Castoreum, of Dogs Turds very warm; which he steeped, tempered
and liquifi'd in the corrupt Matter of pocky Biles, and pestiferous Botch^s;
and very early in the Morning, therewith anointed all the Pavement, in such
sort, that the Devil could not have endured it. Which made all these good
People, there to lay up their Gorges, and vomit what was upon their Stomachs
before all the World, as if they had flayed the Fox. And ten or twelve of them
died of the Plague; fourteen became Lepers, eighteen grew Lousy, and above
seven and twenty had the Pox, but he did not care a Button for it. He commonly
carried a Whip under his Gown, wherewith he whipped without remission the Pages,
whom he found carrying Wine to their Masters, to make them mend their pace. In
his Coat he had above six and twenty little Fabs and Pockets always full, one
with some Lead-water, and a little Knife as sharp as a Glover's Needle,
wherewith he used to cut Purses: Another with some kind of bitter Stuff, which
he threw into the Eyes of those he met: Another with Clotburs, penned with
little Geese or Capons Feathers, which he cast upon the Gowns and Caps of
honest People; and often made them fair Horns, which they wore about all the
City, sometimes all their Life. Very often also upon the Women's Hoods would he
stick in the hind-part somewhat made in the Shape of a Man's Member. In another
he had a great many little Horns full of Fleas (...) Lice, which he borrowed
from the (...) of St. Innocent, and cast them (...) ^mall Canes or Quills to
write with* unto the Necks of the daintiest Gentlewomen (...) could find, yea
even in the Church, for he never seated himself above in the Quire, but always
sat in the Body of the Church amongst the Women, both at Mass, at Vespres, and
at Sermon. In another, he used to have good store of Hooks and Buckles, where
withal he would couple Men and Women together, that sat in company close to
one another; but especially those that wore Gowns of Crimson Taffaties, that
when they were about to go away, they might rent all their Gowns. In another,
he had a Squib furnished with Tinder, Matches, Stones to strike Fire, and all
other Tackling necessary for it. In another, two or three burning Glasses,
wherewith he made both Men and Women sometimes mad, and in the Church put them
quite out of Countenance; for he said that there was but an Antistrophe between
a Woman; folle a la mess, and molle a la fesse.

In another, he had a good deal of Needles and Thread, wherewith he did a
thousand little devilish Pranks. One time at the entry of the Palace unto the
great Hall, where a Cordelier was to say Mass to the Counselors; he did help
to apparel him, and put on his Vestments; but in the accoutring of him, he
sowed on his Alb, Surplice or Stole, to his Gown and Shirt, and then withdrew
himself, when the said Lords of the Court, or Counselors, came to hear the
said Mass: but when it came to the Ite, missa est, that the poor Frater would
have laid by his Stole, or Surplice, he plucked off withal both his Frock and
Shirt which were well sowed together, and thereby stripping himself up to the
very Shoulders, showed his what do you Call-um to all the World, which was no
small one, as you may imagine: and the Friar still kept haling, but so much the
more did he discover himself, and lay open his Back-parts, till one of the
Lords of the Court said, How now, what is the matter? will this good Father make
us here an Offering of his Tail to kiss it? nay, St. Anthony's Fire kiss it for
us. From thenceforth was made an Ordinance that the poor Fathers should never
disrobe themselves any more before the World, but in their Vestry-room,
especially in the presence of Women, lest it should tempt them to the Sin of
Longing, and disordinate Desire. The People then asked, why it was the Friars
had so long and large Genitories? the said Panurge resolved the Problem very
neatly, saying, That which makes Asses to have such great Ears, is that their
Dams did put no Biggins on their Heads, as Alliaco mentions in his
Suppositions; by the like Reason, that which makes the Generation-Tools of
those fair Fraters so long, is, for that they ware no bottomed Breeches, and
therefore their jolly Member having no Impediment, hangs dangling at liberty,
as far as it can reach, with a wigle-wagle down to their Knees, as Woman carry
their Patinotre Beads. And the cause wherefore they have it so correspondently
great, is, that in this constant wig-wagging the Humors of the Body descend
into the said Member: for according to the Legists, Agitation and continual
Motion is cause of Attraction.

Item, He had another Pocket full of itching Powder, called Stone-allum;
whereof he would cast some into the Backs of those Women, whom he judged to be
most beautiful and stately, which did so ticklishly gall them, that some would
strip themselves in the open view of the World, and others dance like a Cock
upon hot Embers, or a Drum-stick on a Taber: others again ran about the
Streets, and he would run after them: to such as were in the stripping Vein, he
would very civilly come to offer his Attendance, and cover them with his Cloak,
like a courteous and very gracious Man.

Item, In another he had a little Leather-bottle full of old Oil; wherewith,
when he saw any Man or Woman in a rich new handsome Suit, he would grease,
smutch and spoil all the best parts of it under color and pretense of touching
them, saying, This is good Cloth, this is good Satin, good Taffaties; Madam,
God give you all that your noble Heart desires: you have a new Suit, pretty
Sir; and you a new Gown* sweet Mistress, God give you Joy of it, and maintain
you in all Prosperity; and with this would lay his Hand upon their Shoulder; at
which touch such a villainous Spot was left behind, so enormously engraven to
Perpetuity in the very Soul, Body and Reputation, that the Devil himself could
never have taken it away. Then upon his departing, he would say, Madam, take
heed you do not fall, for there is a filthy great Hole before you.

Another he had all full of Euphorbium, very finely pulverized: in that Powder
did he lay a fair Handkerchief curiously wrought, which he had stolen from a
pretty Seamstress of the Palace, in taking away a Louse from off her Bosom,
which he had put there himself. And when he came into the Company of some good
Ladies, he would trifle them into a Discourse of some fine Workmanship of
Bone-lace; then immediately put his Hand into their Bosom, askking them, And
this Work, is it of Flanders, or of Hainault? and then drew out his
Handkerchief, and said, Hold, hold, look what Work here is* it is of Foutiman
or of Foutarabia: and shaking it hard at their Nose, made them sneeze for four
^lours without ceasing. In the mean while he would fart like a Horse, and the
Women would laugh, and say, How now, do you fart Panurge? No, no, Madam, (said
he) I do but tune my Tail to the plain Song of the Music, which you make with
your Nose. In another he had a Picklock, a Pelican, a Crampiron, a Crook, and
some other Iron Tools, wherewith there was no Door nor Coffer which he would
not pick open. He had another full of little Cups, wherewith he played very
artificially; for he had his Fingers made to his Hand, like those of Minerva or
Arachne, and had heretofore cried Triacle. And when he changed a Teston,
Cardecu, or any other piece of Money, the Changer had been more subtle than a
Fox, if Panurge had not at every time made five or six Sols, vanish away
invisibly, openly and manifestly, without making any Hurt or Lesion, whereof
the Changer should have felt nothing but the Wind.

CHAP. XVII. How Panurge gained the Pardons, and married the old Women; and of
the Suit in Law which he had at Paris.
ONe Day I found Panurge very much out of countenance, melancholic and silent,
which made me suspect that he had no Money; whereupon I said unto him, Panurge
you are sick, as I do very well perceive by your Physiognomy; and I know the
Disease, you have a Flux in your Purse; but take no care, I have yet seven
Pence halfpenny, that never saw Father nor Mother, which shall not be wanting
no more than the Pox in your necessity. Whereunto he answered me, Well, well,
for Money, one Day I shall have but too much; for I have a Philosopher's Stone,
which attracts Money out of Men's Purses, as the Adamant does Iron. But will you
go with me to gain the Pardons, said he? By my Faith (said I) I am no great
Pardon-taker in this World; if I shall be any such in the other, I cannot tell.
Yet let us go in God's Name, it is but one Farthing more or less. But (said he)
lend me then a Farthing upon interest? No, no, (said I) I will give it you
freely, and from my Heart, Grates vobis dominos, said he.

So we went along, beginning at St. Gervase, and I got the Pardons at the first
Box only; for in those Matters very little contenteth me. Then did I say my
small Suffrages, and the Prayers of St. Brigid; but he gained them at all the
Boxes, and always gave Money to every one of the Pardoners. From thence we went
to our Ladies Church, to St. John's, to St. Anthony's, and so to the other
Churches, where there was a Banquet of Pardons; for my part, I gained no more
of them. But he at all the Boxes kissed the Relics, and gave at every one. To
be brief, when we were returned, he brought me to drink at the Castle-Tavern,
and there showed me ten or twelve of his little Bags full of Money; at which I
blessed my self, and made the Sign of the Cross, saying, Where have you recovered
so much Money in so little time? Unto which he answered me, that he had taken
it out of the Basins of the Pardons. For in giving them the first Farthing
(said he) I put it in with such slight of hand, and so dexterously, that it
appeared to be a Threepence; thus with one Hand I took Threepence, Nine-pence
or Sixpence at the least, and with the other as much, and so through all the
Churches where we have been.

Yea, but (said I) you damn your self like a Snake, and are withal a Thief and
sacrilegious Person. True, (said he) in your Opinion, but I am not of that
Mind; for the Pardoners do give me it, when they say unto me in presenting the
Relics to kiss, Centuplum accipies; that is, that for one Penny I should take
a hundred. For Accipies is spoken according to the manner of the Hebrews, who
use the future Tense instead of the Imperative, as you have in the Law, Diliges
Dominum; that is, dilige: Even so when the Pardon-Bearer says to me, Centuplum
accipies; his meaning is, Centuplum accipe: and so does Rabbi Kimi, and Rabbi
Aben Ezra expound it, and all the Massorets, and ibi Bartholus.

Moreover, Pope Sixtus gave me fifteen hundred Francks of yearly Pension upon
his Ecclesiastical Revenues and Treasure, for having cured him of a Canckrous
Botch, which did so torment him, that he thought to have been a Cripple by it
all his life. Thus I do pay my self at my own hand (for otherways I get
nothing) upon the said Ecclesiastical Treasure.

Ho, my Friend! (said he) if thou did know how well I feathered my Nest, by
the Pope's Bull of the Croisade, thou would wonder exceedingly. It was worth
to me above six thousand Florins. And what a Devil is become of them? said I;
for of that Money thou have not one Halfpenny. They returned from whence they
came, (said he) they did no more but change their Master.

But I employed at least three thousand of them in marrying (not young Virgins,
for they find but too many Husbands) but great old sempiternous Trots, which
had not so much as one Tooth in their Heads. And that out of the Consideration
I had, that these good old Women had very well spent the time of their Youth in
playing at the Close-buttock-game to all Comers, serving the foremost first,
till no Man would have any more dealing with them. And by G -- I will have
their Skin-coat shaken once yet before they die. By this means, to one I gave a
hundred Florins, to another six score, to another three hundred, according as
they were infamous, detestable and abominable. For by how much the more
horrible and execrable they were, so much the more must I needs have given
them, otherways the Devil would not have jum'd them. Presently I went to some
great and fat Wood-porters, or such like, and did my self make the Match; but
before I did show him the old Hags, I made a fair muster to him of the Crowns,
saying, Good Fellow, see what I will give thee, if thou will but condescend to
dufle, dinfredaille, or lecher it one good bout. Then began the poor Rogues to
gape like old Mules, and I caused to be provided for them a Banquet, with Drink
of the best, and store of Spiceries, to put the old Women in rut and heat of
Lust. To be short, they occupied all like good Souls; only to those that were
horribly ugly and ill-favored, I caused their Heads to be put within a Bag, to
hide their Face.

Besides all this, I have lost a great deal in Suits of Law. And what Lawsuits
could thou have, said I? thou have neither House nor Lands. My Friend, (said
he) the Gentlewomen of this City had found out, by the instigation of the Devil
of Hell, a manner of high-mounted Gorgets, and Neckerchiefs for Women, which
did so closely cover their Bosoms, that Men could no more put their Hands
under; for they had put the Slit behind, and those Neckcloths were wholly shut
before; whereat the poor sad contemplative Lovers were much discontented. Upon
a fair Tuesday, I presented a Petition to the Court, making my self a Party
against the said Gentlewomen, and showing the great Interest that I pretended
therein, protesting that by the same reason, I would cause the Cod-piece of my
Breeches to be sowed behind, if the Court would not take order for it. In sum,
the Gentlewomen put in their Defenses, showed the Grounds they went upon, and
constituted their Attorney for the prosecuting of the Cause; but I pursued them
so vigorously, that by a Sentence of the Court it was decreed, those high
Neckcloths should be no longer worn, if they were not a little cleft and open
before: but it cost me a good Sum of Money. I had another very filthy and
beastly Process against Master Fohfoh and his Deputies, that they should no
more read privily the Pipe, Punehon, nor quart of Sentences; but in fair
full-day, and that in the Fodder-Schools, in face of the Arrian Sophisters,
where I was ordained to pay the Charges, by reason of some Clause mistaken in
the Relation of the Sergeant.

Another time I framed a Complaint to the Court, against the Mules of the
Presidents, Counselors and others, tending to this purpose; that when in the
lower Court of the Palace, they left them to champ on their Bridles, some Bibs
might be made for them, that with their Drivelling they might not spoil the
Pavement, to the end, that the Pages of the Palace might play upon it at Dice,
or Coxbody at their own ease, without spoiling their Breeches at the Knees. And
for this I had a fair Decree, but it cost me dear. Now reckon up what Expense I
was at in little Banquets, which from Day to Day I made to the Pages of the
Palace. And to what end, said I? My Friend (said he) thou have no pass-time at
all in this World, I have more than the King; and if thou will join thy self
with me, we will do the Devil together.

No, no, (said I) by St. Adauras that will I not, for thou will be hanged one
time or another. And thou (said he) wilt be interred sometime or other. Now
which is most honorable, the Air or the Earth? Ho, gross Pecore.

Whilst the Pages are at their Banqueting, I keep their Mules, and to some one
I cut the Stirrup-leather of the Mounting side, till it hang but by a thin
Strap or Thread, that when the great Puff-guts of the Counselor or some other
has taken his Swing to get up, he may fall flat on his Side like a Pork, and
so furnish the Spectators with more than a hundred Francks worth of Laughter.
But I laugh yet further, to think how at his home-coming the Master-page is to
be whipped like green Rye, which makes me not to repent what I have bestowed in
feasting them. In brief, he had (as I said before) threescore and three Ways to
acquire Money, but he had two hundred and fourteen to spend it, besides his
Drinking.

CHAP XVIII. How a great Scholar of England would have argued against
Pantagruel, and was overcome by Panurge.
IN that same time a certain learned Man, named Thaumast, hearing the Fame and
Renown of Pantagruel's incomparable Knowledge, came out of his own Country of
England, with an Intent only to see him, to try thereby, and prove, whether his
Knowledge in Effect was so great as it was reported to be. In this Resolution,
being arrived at Paris, he went forthwith unto the House of Pantagruel, who was
lodged in the Palace of St. Denis, and was then walking in the Garden with
Panurge, philosophizing after the Fashion of the Peripateticks At his first
Entrance he startled, and was almost out of his Wits for Fear, seeing him so
great and so tall; then did he salute him courteously, as the Manner is, and
said unto him, Very true it is, says Plato the Prince of Philosophers, that if
the Image of Knowledge and Wisdom were corporeal and visible to the Eyes of
Mortals, it would stir up all the World to admire her. Which we may the rather
believe, that the very bare Report thereof, scattered in the Air, if it happen
to be received into the Ears of Men, who for being studious, and Lovers of
virtuous things, are called Philosophers, does not suffer them to sleep nor
rest in Quiet, but so pricketh them up, and sets them on fire, to run unto the
Place where the Person is, in whom the said Knowledge is said to have built her
Temple, and uttered her Oracles; as it was manifestly shown unto us in the
Queen of Sheba, who came from the utmost Borders of the East and Persian Sea,
to see the Order of Solomon's House, and to hear his Wisdom. In Anacharsis, who
came out of Scythia, even unto Athens, to see Solon. In Pythagoras, who
traveled far to visit the Memphitical Vaticinators. In Platon, who went a
great way off to see the Magicians of Egypt, and Architas of Tarentum. In
Apollonius Tianeus, who went as far as unto Mount Caucasus, passed along the
Scythians, the Massagetes, the Indians, and sailed over the great River Phison,
even to the Brachmans, to see Hiarchas: As likewise unto Babylon, Chaldea,
Media, Assyria, Parthia, Syria, Phaenicia, Arabia, Palestina and Alexandria,
even unto Aethiopia, to see the Gymnosophists. The like Example have we of
Titus Livius, whom to see and hear diverse studious Persons, came to Rome, from
the Confines of France and Spain. I dare not reckon my self in the Number of
those so excellent Persons, but well would be called studious, and a Lover, not
only of Learning, but of learned Men also. And indeed, having heard the Report
of your so inestimable Knowledge, I have left my Country, my Friends, my Kindred
and my House, and am come thus far, valuing at nothing the length of the Way,
the Tediousness of the Sea, nor Strangeness of the Land, and that only to see
you, and to confer with you about some Passages in Philosophy, of Geomancie,
and of the Cabalistick Art; whereof I am doubtful, and cannot satisfy my Mind;
which if you can resolve, I yield my self unto you for a Slave henceforward,
together with all my Posterity; for other Gift have I none, that I can esteem a
Recompense sufficient for so great a Favor. I will reduce them into Writing,
and to Morrow publish them to all the learned Men in the City, that we may
dispute publicly before them.

But see in what manner, I mean that we shall dispute. I will not argue pro and
contra, as do the sottish Sophisters of this Town, and other Places. Likewise I
will not dispute after the manner of the Academicks, by Declamation. Nor yet by
Numbers, as Pythagoras was wont to do, and as Picus de la mirandula did of late
at Rome. But I will dispute by Signs only, without speaking; for the Matters
are so abstruse, hard and arduous, that Words proceeding from the Mouth of Man,
will never be sufficient for unfolding of them to my liking. May it therefore
please your Magnificence to be there, it shall be at the great Hall of Navarre,
at seven a Clock in the Morning. When he had spoke these Words, Pantagruel very
honorably said unto him, Sir, of the Graces that God has bestowed upon me, I
would not deny to communicate unto any Man to my Power; for whatever comes from
him is good, and his Pleasure is, that it should be increased when we come
amongst Men worthy and fit to receive this celestial Manna of honest
Literature. In which Number, because that in this Time (as I do already very
plainly perceive) thou hold the first Rank, I give thee Notice that at all
Hours thou shall find me ready to condescend to every one of thy Requests,
according to my poor Ability: although I ought rather to learn of thee, than
thou of me; but as thou have protested, we will confer of these Doubts
together, and will seek out the Resolution, even unto the bottom of that
undrainable Well, where Heraclitus says the Truth lies hidden. And I do highly
commend the manner of arguing which thou have proposed, to wit, by Signs
without speaking; for by this Means thou and I shall understand one another
well enough, and yet shall be free from this clapping of Hands, which these
blockish Sophisters make, when any of the Arguers has gotten the better of the
Argument. Now to Morrow I will not fail to meet thee at the Place and Hour that
thou have appointed; but let me entreat thee that there be not any Strife or
Uproar between us, and that we seek not the Honor and Applause of Men, but the
Truth only. To which Thaumast answered, The Lord God maintain you in his Favor
and Grace; and instead of my Thankfulness to you, pour down his Blessings upon
you, for that your Highness and magnificent Greatness has not d^sdained to
descend to the Grant of the Request of my poor Baseness; so farewell till to
Morrow. Farewell, said Pantagruel. Gentlemen, you that read this present
Discourse, think not that ever Men were more elevated and transported in their
Thoughts, than all this Night were both Thaumast and Pantagruel: for Thaumast
said to the Keeper of the House of Cluny, where he was lodged, that in all his
Life he had never known himself so dry as he was that Night: I think (said he)
that Pantagruel held me by the Throat: Give Order, I pray you, that we may have
some Drink, and see that some fresh Water be brought to us to gargle my Palate.

On the other side Pantagruel stretched his Wits as high as he could, entering
into very deep and serious Meditations, and did nothing all that Night but plod
upon, and turn over the Book of Beda, de Numeris and Signis. Plotius's Book, de
Inenarrabilibus. The Book of Proclus, de Magia. The Book of Artemidorus, (...).
Of Anaxagaras, (...). Dinatius, (...). The Books of Philistion. Hipponax,
(...); and a Rabble of others, so long, that Panurge said unto him,

My Lord, leave all these Thoughts, and go to Bed; for I perceive your Spirits
to be so troubled by a too intensive bending of them, that you may easily fall
into some Quotidian Fever with this so excessive thinking and plodding: but
having first drank twenty five, or thirty good Draughts, retire your self and
sleep your fill; for in the Morning I will argue against, and answer your
Monsieur the Englishman; and if I drive him not ad metam non loqui, then call
me Knave. Yea but (said he) my Friend Panurge, he is marvellously learned, how
will thou be able to answer him? Very well, (answered Panurge) I pray you talk
no more of it, but let me alone; is any Man so learned as the Devils are? No,
indeed (said Pantagruel) without God's especial Grace. Yet for all that (said
Panurge) I have argued against them, gravelled and blanked them in Disputation,
and laid them so squat upon their Tails, that I have made them look like
Monkies: therefore be assured, that to Morrow I will make this vainglorious
Englishman to skite Vinegar before all the World. So Panurge spent the Night
with tippling amongst the Pages, and played away all the Points of his Breeches
at primus secundus, and at Peck-point. Yet when the appointed Time was come, he
failed not to conduct his Master Pantagruel to the Place, unto which (believe
me) there was neither great nor small in Paris but came, thinking with
themselves that this devilish Pantagruel, who had overthrown and vanquished in
Dispute all these doting freshwater Sophisters, would now get full Payment, and
be tickled to some purpose; for this Englishman is another Devil of a
Disputant; we will see who will be Conqueror.

Thus all being assembled, Thaumast stayed for them; and then when Pantagruel
and Panurge came into the Hall, all the Schoolboys, Professors of Arts,
Senior-Sophisters and Batchelors began to clap their Hands, as their scurvy
Custom is: but Pantagruel cried out with a loud Voice, as if it had been the
Sound of a double Cannon, saying, Peace, with a Devil to you, Peace; by G --
you Rogues, if you trouble me here, I will cut off the Heads of every one of
you. At which Words they remained all daunted and astonished, like so many
Ducks, and durst not do so much as cough, although they had swallowed fifteen
Pounds o^ Feathers: withal they grew so dry with this only Voice, that they
laid out their Tongues a full half Foot beyond their Mouths, as if Pantagruel
had salted all their Throats. Then began Panurge to speak, saying to the
Englishman, Sir, are you come hither to dispute contentiously in those
Propositions you have set down, or otherways but to learn and know the Truth?
To which answered Thaumast, Sir, no other thing brought me hither, but the
great Desire I had to learn, and to know that of which I have doubted all my
Life long, and have neither found Book nor Man able to content me in the
Resolution of those Doubts which I have proposed. And as for disputing
contentiously, I will not do it, for it is too base a thing, and therefore
leave it to those sottish Sophisters, who in their Disputes do not search for
the Truth, but for Contradiction only and Debate. Then said Panurge, If I who
am but a mean and inconsiderable Disciple of my Master my Lord Pantagruel,
content and satisfy you in all and every thing, it were a thing below my said
Master, wherewith to trouble him: therefore is it fitter that he be Chairman,
and sit as a Judge and Moderator of our Discourse and Purpose, and give you
Satisfaction in many things, wherein perhaps I shall be wanting to your
Expectation. Truly (said Thaumast) it is very well said: begin then. Now you
must note that Panurge had set at the End of his long Codpiece a pretty Tuft of
red Silk, as also of white, green and blew, and within it had put a fair Orange.

CHAP. XIX. How Panurge put to a nonplus the Englishman that argued by Signs.
EVery Body then taking heed, and harkning with great Silence, the Englishman
lift up on high into the Air his two Hands severally, clinching in all the Tops
of his Fingers together, after the manner they call en Chinonnois, the Hens
Arse, and struck the one Hand on the other by the Nails four several times:
then he opening them, struck the one with the flat of the other, till it
yielded a clashing Noise, and that only once: again in joining them as before
he struck twice, and afterward four times in opening them; then did he lay
them joined, and extended the one toward the other, as if he had been devoutly
to send up his Prayers unto God. Panurge suddenly lifted up in the Air his
right Hand, and put the Thumb thereof into the Nostril of the same Side,
holding his four Fingers straight out, and closed orderly in a parallel Line to
the Point of his Nose, shutting the left Eye wholly, and making the other wink
with a profound Depression of the Eyebrows and Eyelids. Then lifted he up his
left Hand, with hard wringing and stretching forth his four Fingers, and
elevating his Thumb, which he held in a Line directly correspondent to the
Situation of his right Hand, with the Distance of a Cubit and a half between
them. This done, in the same Form he abased toward the Ground, both the one
and the other Hand. Lastly, he held them in the midst, as aiming right at the
English-man's Nose. And if Mercury, said the Englishman --: there Panurge
interrupted him, and said, You have spoken Mask.

Then made the Englishman this Sign, his left Hand all open he lifted up into
the Air, then instantly shut into his Fist the four Fingers thereof, and his
Thumb extended at length he placed upon the Gristle of his Nose. Presently
after he lifted up his right Hand all open, and all open abased and bent it
downwards, putting the Thumb thereof in the very Place where the little Finger
of the left Hand did close in the Fist, and the four right-Hand-Fingers he
softly moved in the Air. Then contrarily he did with the right Hand what he had
done with the left, and with the left what he had done with the right.

Panurge being not a whit amazed at this, drew out into the Air his Trismegist
Codpiece with the left Hand, and with his right drew forth a Trunchion of a
white Ox-rib, and two Pieces of Wood of a like Form, one of black Eben, and the
other of Incarnation Brasil, and put them betwixt the Fingers of that Hand in
good Symmetrie: then knocking them together, made such a Noise as the Lepers of
Britainie use to do with their clappering Clickets, yet better resounding, and
far more harmonious, and with his Tongue contracted in his Mouth, did very
merrily warble it, always looking fixedly upon the Englishman. The Divines,
Physicians and Chirurgions that were there, thought that by this Sign he would
have inferred that the Englishman was a Leper. The Counselors, Lawyers and
Decretalists conceived, that by doing this, he would have concluded some kind
of mortal Felicity to consist in Leprosy, as the Lord maintained heretofore.

The Englishman for all this was nothing daunted, but holding up his two Hands
in the Air, kept them in such Form, that he closed the three Master-fingers in
his Fist; and passing his Thumbs through his indical and middle Fingers, his
auriculary Fingers remained extended and stretched out, and so presented he
them to Panurge: then joined he them so, that the right Thumb touched the left,
and the left little Finger touched the right. Hereat Panurge, without speaking
one Word, lift up his Hands and made this Sign.

He put the Nail of the Forefinger of his left Hand, to the Nail of the Thumb
of the same, making in the middle of the Distance as it were a Buckle, and of
his right Hand shut up all the Fingers into his Fist, except the Forefinger
which he often thrust in and out through the said two others of the left Hand:
then stretched he out the Forefinger and middle Finger or medical of his right
Hand, holding them asunder as much as he could, and thrusting them toward
Thaumast. Then did he put the Thumb of his left Hand upon the Corner of his
left Eye, stretching out all his Hand like the Wing of a Bird, or the Fin of a
Fish, and moving it very daintily this way and that way; he did as much with
his right Hand upon the Corner of his right Eye. Thaumast began then to wax
somewhat pale, and to tremble, and made him this Sign.

With the middle Finger of his right Hand he struck against the Muscle of the
Palm or Pulp, which is under the Thumb: then put he the Forefinger of the right
Hand in the like Buckle of the left, but he put it under and not over, as
Panurge did. Then Panurge knocked one Hand against another, and blowed in his
Palm, and put again the Forefinger of his right Hand into the Overture or Mouth
of the left, pulling it often in and out: then held he out his Chin, most
intensively looking upon Thaumast. The People there which understood nothing in
the other Signs, knew very well what therein he demanded, without speaking a
Word to Thaumast: What do you mean by that? In Effect, Thaumast then began to
sweat great Drops, and seemed to all the Spectators a Man strangely ravished in
high Contemplation. Then he bethought himself, and put all the Nails of his
left Hand against those of his right, opening his Fingers as if they had been
Semicircles, and with this Sign lift up his Hands as high as he could.
Whereupon Panurge presently put the Thumb of his right Hand under his Jaws, and
the little Finger thereof in the Mouth of the left Hand, and in this Posture
made his Teeth to sound very melodiously, the upper against the lower. With
this Thaumast with great Toil and Vexation of Spirit rose up, but in rising let
a great Bakers Fart, for the Bran came after; and pissing withal very strong
Vinegar, stunk like all the Devils in Hell. The Company began to stop their
Nose; for he had conskitted himself with mere Anguish and Perplexity. Then
lifted he up his right Hand, clinching it in such sort, that he brought the
Ends of all his Fingers to meet together; and his left Hand he laid flat upon
his Breast. Whereat Panurge drew out his long Codpiece with his Tuft, and
stretched it forth a Cubit and a half, holding it in the Air with his right
Hand, and with his left took out his Orange, and casting it up into the Air
seven times, at the eighth he hid it in the Fist of his right Hand, holding it
steadily up on high, and then began to shake his fair Codpiece, showing it to
Thaumast.

After that Thaumast began to puff up his two Cheeks like a Player on a
Bagpipe, and blew as if he had been to puff up a Pig's Bladder. Whereupon
Panurge put one Finger of his left Hand in his Nockandrow, and with his Mouth
sucked in the Air, in such a manner as when one eats Oysters in the Shell, or
when we sup up our Broth: this done, he opened his Mouth somewhat, and struck
his right Hand flat upon it, making therewith a great and a deep Sound, as if
it came from the Superficies of the Diaphragma through the Trachiartere: and
this he did for sixteen Times; but Thaumast did always keep blowing like a
Goose. Then Panurge put the Forefinger of his right Hand into his Mouth,
pressing it very hard to the Muscles thereof: then he drew it out, and withal
made a great Noise, as when little Boys shoot Pellets out of the Pot-cannons
made of the hollow Sticks of the Branch of an Elder-tree; and he did it nine
times.

Then Thaumast cried out, Ha, my Masters, a great Secret: with this he put in
his Hand up to the Elbow; then drew out a Dagger that he had, holding it by the
Point downwards. Whereat Panurge took his long Codpiece, and shook it as hard
as he could against his Thighs; then put his two Hands intwined in manner of a
Comb upon his Head, laying out his Tongue as far as he was able; and turning
his Eyes in his Head, like a Goat that is ready to die. Ha, I understand (said
Thaumast) but what? making such a Sign, that he put the Haft of his Dagger
against his Breast, and upon the Point thereof the flat of his Hand, turning in
a little the Ends of his Fingers; whereat Panurge held down his Head on the
left side, and put his middle Finger into his right Ear, holding up his Thumb
bolt upright; then he crossed his two Arms upon his Breast, and coughed five
times, and at the fifth time he struck his right Foot against the Ground: then
he lift up his left Arm, and closing all his Fingers into his Fist, held his
Thumb against his Forehead, striking with his right Hand six times against his
Breast. But Thaumast, as not content therewith, put the Thumb of his left Hand
upon the Top of his Nose, shutting the rest of his said Hand. Whereupon Panurge
set his two Master-fingers upon each side of his Mouth, drawing it as much as
he was able, and widening it so, that he showed all his Teeth: and with his two
Thumbs plucked down his two Eyelids very low, making therewith a very
ill-favored Countenance, as it seemed to the Company.

CHAP. XX. How Thaumast relates the Virtues and Knowledge of Panurge.
THen Thaumast rose up, and putting off his Cap, did very kindly thank the said
Panurge, and with a loud Voice said unto all the People that were there, My
Lords, Gentlemen, and others, at this time may I to some good Purpose speak
that Evangelical Word, Et ecce plus quam Solomon hic. You have here in your
Presence an incomparable Treasure, that is, my Lord Pantagruel, whose great
Renown has brought me hither, out of the very Heart of England, to confer with
him about the insoluble Problems, both in Magic, Alchymy, the Caballe,
Geomancy, Astrology and Philosophy, which I had in my Mind. But at present I am
angry, even with Fame it self, which I think was envious to him, for that it
did not declare the thousandth Part of the Worth that indeed is in him. You
have seen how his Disciple only has satisfied me, and has told me more than I
asked of him: besides, he has opened unto me and resolved other inestimable
Doubts, wherein I can assure you he has to me discovered the very true Well,
Fountain and Abyss of the Encyclopedeia of Learning; yea in such a sort, that I
did not think I should ever have found a Man that could have made his Skill
appear, in so much as the first Elements of that concerning which we disputed
by Signs, without speaking either Word or half Word. But in fine, I will reduce
into Writing that which we have said and concluded, that the World may not take
them to be Fooleries, and will hereafter cause them to be printed, that every
one may learn as I have done. Judge then what the Master had been able to say,
seeing the Disciple has done so valiantly; for, Non est Discipulus super
Magistrum. Howsoever God be praised, and I do very humbly thank you for the
Honor that you have done us at this Act: God reward you for it eternally. The
like Thanks gave Pantagruel to all the Company; and going from thence, he
carried Thaumast to Dinner with him, and believe that they drank as much as
their Skins could hold; or, as the Phrase is, with unbottomed Bellies, (for in
that Age they made fast their Bellies with Buttons, as we do now the Collars of
our Doublets) even till they neither knew where they were, nor whence they
came. Blessed Lady, how they did carouze it, and pluck (as we say) at the Kids
Leather; and Flaggons to trot, and they to toot, Draw, give (Page) some Wine;
here, reach hither, fill with a Devil, so? There was not one but did drink five
and twenty or thirty Pipes, can you tell how? even sicut terra sine aqua; for
the Weather was hot; and besides that, they were very dry. In Matter of the
Exposition of the Propositions set down by Thaumast; and the Signification of
the Signs which they used in their Disputation, I would have set them down for
you according to their own Relation; but I have been told that Thaumast made a
great Book of it, imprinted at London, wherein he has set down all without
omitting any thing, and therefore at this Time I do pass by it.

CHAP. XXI. How Panurge was in love with a Lady of Paris.
PAnurge began to be in great Reputation in the City of Paris, by Means of this
Disputation, wherein he prevailed against the Englishman, and from thenceforth
made his Codpiece to be very useful to him, to which Effect he had it pinked
with pretty little Embroideries, after the Romanesca Fashion: And the World did
praise him publicly, in so far that there was a Song made of him, which little
Children did use to sing when they went to fetch Mustard. He was withal made
welcome in all Companies of Ladies and Gentlewomen; so that at last he became
presumptuous, and went about to bring to his lure one of the greatest Ladies in
the City: And indeed leaving a Rabble of long Prologues and Protestations,
which ordinarily these dolent contemplative Lent-lovers make, who never meddle
with the Flesh; one Day he said unto her, Madam, it would be a very great
Benefit to the Commonwealth, delightful to you, honorable to your Progeny, and
necessary for me, that I cover you for the propagating of my Race; and believe
it, for Experience will teach it you. The Lady at this Word thrust him back
above a hundred Leagues, saying, You mischievous Fool, is it for you to talk
thus unto me? whom do you think you have in hand? be gone, never to come in my
Sight again; for if one thing were not, I would have your Legs and Arms cut off.

Well, (said he) that were all one to me, to want both Legs and Arms, provided
you and I had but one merry bout together at the brangle Buttock-game; for here
within is (in showing her his long Codpiece) Master John Thursday, who will
play you such an Antic, that you shall feel the Sweetness thereof even to the
very Marrow of your Bones: He is a Gallant, and does so well know how to find
out all the Corners, Creeks and ingrained Inmates in your carnal Trap, that
after him there needs no Broom, he will sweep so well before, and leave nothing to
his Followers to work upon. Whereunto the Lady answered, Go Villain, go, if you
speak to me one such Word more, I will cry out, and make you to be knocked down
with Blows. Ha, (said he) you are not so bad as you say, no, or else I am
deceived in your Physiognomy; for sooner shall the Earth mount up unto the
Heavens, and the highest Heavens descend unto the Hells, and all the Course of
Nature be quite perverted* than that in so great Beauty and Neatness as in you
is, there should be one Drop of Gall or Malice: They say indeed, that hardly
shall a Man ever see a fair Woman that is not also stubborn; yet that is spoke
only of those vulgar Beauties, but yours is so excellent, so singular, and so
heavenly, that I believe Nature has given it you as a Paragon and Masterpiece
of her Art, to make us know what she can do, when she will employ all her
Skill, and all her Power. There is nothing in you but Honey, but Sugar, but a
sweet and celestial Manna. To you it was to whom Paris ought to have adjudged
the golden Apple, not to Venus, no nor to Juno, nor to Minerva; for never was
there so much Magnificence in Juno, so much Wisdom in Minerva, nor so much
Comeliness in Venus, as there is in you.

O heavenly Gods and Goddesses! how happy shall that Man be to whom you will
grant the Favor to embrace her, to kiss her, and to rub his Bacon with hers?
by G -- that shall be I, I know it well; for she loves me already her Belly
full, I am sure of it; and so was I predestined to it by the Fairies. And
therefore that we lose no Time, put on, thrust out your Gamons: Then he would
have embraced her; but she made as if she would put out her Head at the Window,
to call her Neighbors for Help. Then Panurge on a sudden ran out, and in his
running away said, Madam, stay here till I come again, I will go call them my
self, do not you take so much Pains. Thus went he away, not much caring for the
Repulse he had got, nor made he any whit the worse cheer for it. The next Day
he came to the Church, at the Time that she went to Mass; at the Door he gave
her some of the Holy Water, bowing himself very low before her: afterward he
kneeled down by her very familiarly, and said unto her, Madam, know that I am
so amorous of you, that I can neither piss nor dung for love: I do not know
(Lady) what you mean, but if I should take any hurt by it, how much would you
be to blame?

Go, said she, go, I do not care, let me alone to say my Prayers. Ay but (said
he) equivocate upon a Beaumon le viconte. I cannot, said she. It is, said he, a
beau con le vit monte: and upon this pray to God to give you that which your
noble Heart desires; and I pray you give me these Patenotres. Take them (said
she) and trouble me no longer. This done, she would have taken off her
Patenotres, which were made of a kind of yellow Stone called Cestrin, and
adorned with great Spots of Gold; but Panurge nimbly drew out one of his
Knives, wherewith he cut them off very handsomely; and whilst he was going away
to carry them to the Brokers, he said to her, Will you have my Knife? No, no,
said she. But (said he) to the Point, I am at your Commandment, Body and Goods,
Tripes and Bowels.

In the mean time the Lady was not well content with the Want of her
Patinotres, for they were one of her Implements to keep her Countenance by in
the Church; then thought with her self, this bold flouting Royster is some
giddy, fantastical, lightheaded Fool of a strange Country; I shall never
recover my Patenotres again, what will my Husband say? he will no doubt be
angry with me; but I will tell him that a Thief has cut them off from my Hands
in the Church, which he will easily believe, seeing the End of the Ribbon left
at my Girdle. After Dinner Panurge went to see her, carrying in his Sleeve a
great Purse full of Palace-crowns, (called Counters) and began to say unto her,
Which of us two loves other best, you me, or I you? Whereunto she answered, As
for me, I do not hate you; for as God commands, I love all the World. But to
the Point, (said he) are not you in love with me? I have (said she) told you so
many times already, that you should talk so no more to me; and if you speak of
it again, I will teach you, that I am not one to be talked unto dishonestly:
get you hence packing, and deliver me my Patenotres, that my Husband may not
ask me for them.

How now, (Madam) said he, your Patenotres? Nay, by mine Oath I will not do so,
but I will give you others; had you rather have them of Gold well enamelled in
great round Knobs, or after the manner of Love-knots, or otherwise all massive,
like great Ingots; or if you had rather have them of Ebene, of Iacinth, or of
grained Gold, with the Marks of fine Turkoises, or of fair Topazes, marked with
fine Saphirs, or of baleu Rubies, with great Marks of Diamonds of eight and
twenty Squares? No, no, all this is too little. I know a fair Bracelet of fine
Emeraulds, marked with spotted Ambergris, and at the Buckle a Persian Pearl as
big as an Orange; it will not cost above five and twenty thousand Ducats, I
will make you a Present of it, for I have ready Coin enough; and withal he made
a Noise with his Counters as if they had been French Crowns.

Will you have a Piece of Velvet, either of the Violet Color, or of Crimson
died in Grain; or a piece of broached or crimson Satin? Will you have Chains,
Gold, Tablets, Rings? You need no more but say, Yes; so far as fifty thousand
Ducats may reach, it is but as nothing to me. By the Virtue of which Words he
made the Water come in her Mouth. But she said unto him, No, I thank you, I
will have nothing of you. By G -- said he, but I will have somewhat of you; yet
shall it be that which shall cost you nothing, neither shall you have a jot the
less, when you have given it: hold, (showing his long Codpiece) this is Master
John Goodfellow, that asks for Lodging, and with that would have embraced her;
but she began to cry out, yet not very loud. Then Panurge put off his
counterfeit Garb, changed his false Visage, and said unto her, You will not
then otherways let me do a little, a Turd for you, you do not deserve so much
Good, nor so much Honor: but by G -- I will make the Dogs ride you, and with
this he ran away as fast as he could, for fear of Blows, whereof he was
naturally fearful.

CHAP. XXII. How Panurge served the Parisian Lady a Trick that pleased her not
very well.
NOW you must note that the next Day was the great Festival of Corpus Christi,
called the Sacre, wherein all Women put on their best Apparel; and on that Day
the said Lady was clothed in a rich Gown of Crimson-Sattin, under which she
wore a very costly white Velvet Petticoat.

Now on the Vigil, Panurge searched so long of one side and another, that he
found a hot or salt Bitch, which when he had tied her with his Girdle, he led
to his Chamber, and fed her very well all that Day and Night; in the Morning
thereafter he killed her, and took that Part of her which the Greek Geomanciers
know, and cut it into several Pieces as small as he could; then carrying it
away as close as might be, he went to the Place where the Lady was to come
along to follow the Procession, as the Custom is upon the said Holy Day. And
when she came in, Panurge sprinkled some holy Water on her, saluting her very
courteously. Then a little while after she had said her petty Devotions, he sat
down close by her upon the same Bench, and gave her this Roundlay in Writing,
in manner as follows.

A Roundlay.
Lady for once, because my Case
I told you, am I out of Grace?
That you should so severely call
Me to be gone for Good and all,
Who never had deserved your Frown
By Word, Deed, Letter, or Lampoon.
You might deny me what I sought,
And not have called me all to naught,
Because I would have had a Bout,
Lady for once.
It hurts you not that I complain
Of my intolerable Pain;
Of bloody Wound, and deadly Dart,
Wherewith your Beauty thrills my Heart*
And since from thence my Torment came,
O grant some little of that same,
Lady for once.
And as she was opening this Paper to see what it was, Panurge very promptly
and lightly scattered the Drug that he had upon her in diverse Places, but
especially in the Plaits of her Sleeves, and of her Gown: then said he unto
her, Madam, the poor Lovers are not always at ease. As for me, I hope that
those heavy Nights, those Pains and Troubles which I suffer for Love of you,
shall be a Deduction to me of so much Pain in Purgatory: yet at the least pray
to God to give me Patience in my Misery. Panurge had no sooner spoke this, but
all the Dogs that were in the Church came running to this Lady with the Smell
of the Drugs that he had strowed upon her, both small and great, big and
little, all came, laying out their Member; smelling to her, and pissing every
where upon her; it was the greatest Villainy in the World.

Panurge made some Offers of driving them away; then took his leave of her, and
withdrew himself into a Chapel or Oratory of the said Church, to see the
Sport; for these villainous Dogs did compiss all her Habiliaments, and left none
of her Attire unbesprinkled with their Staling, in so much that a tall
Greyhound pissed upon her Head; others in her Sleeves; others on her
Crupper-piece; and the little ones pissed upon her Pattains: so that all the
Women that were round about her had much ado to save her. Whereat Panurge very
heartily laughing, he said to one of the Lords of the City, I believe that the
same Lady is hot, or else that some Greyhound has covered her lately. And
when he saw that all the Dogs were flocking about her, yarring at the
Retardment of their Access to her, and every way keeping such a Coil with her
as they are wont to do about a proud or salt Bitch; he forthwith departed from
thence, and went to call Pantagruel; not forgetting in his way along all the
Streets through which he went, where he found any Dogs, to give them a Bang with
his Foot, saying, Will you not go with your Fellows to the Wedding? Away hence,
avaunt, avaunt, with a Devil avaunt. And being come home, he said to Pantagruel,
Master, I pray you come and see all the Dogs of the Country, how they are
assembled about a Lady, the fairest in the City, and would dufle and line her.
Whereunto Pantagruel willingly condescended, and saw the Mystery, which he
found very pretty and strange. But the best was at the Procession, in which
were seen above six hundred thousand and fourteen Dogs about her, which did
very much trouble and molest her; and whithersoever she passed, those Dogs that
came afresh, tracing her Footsteps, followed her at the Heels, and pissed in
the way where her Gown had touched.

All the World stood gazing at this Spectacle, considering the Countenance of
those Dogs, who leaping up got about her Neck, and spoiled all her gorgeous
Accoutrements, for the which she could find no Remedy, but to retire unto her
House, which was a Palace. Thither she went, and the Dogs after her; she ran to
hide her self, but the Chamber-maids could not abstain from Laughing. When she
was entered into the House, and had shut the Door upon her self, all the Dogs
came running, of half a League round, and did so well bepiss the Gate of her
House, that there they made a Stream with their Urine, wherein a Duck might
have very well swimmed, and it is the same Current that now runs at St. Victor,
in which Gobelin dies Scarlet, for the specifical Virtue of these Piss-Dogs,
as our Master Doribus did heretofore preach publicly. So may God help you; a
Mill would have ground Corn with it; yet not so much as those of Basacle at
Toulouse.

CHAP. XXIII. How Pantagruel departed from Paris, hearing News that the
Dipsodes had invaded the Land of the Amaurots: and the Cause wherefore the
Leagues are so short in France.
A Little while after Pantagruel heard News that his Father Gargantua had been
translated into the Land of the Fairies by Morgue, as heretofore were Oger and
Arthur: and that the Report of his Translation being spread abroad, the
Dipsodes had issued out beyond their Borders, with Inrodes had wasted a great
part of Vtopia, and at that very time had besieged the great City of the
Amaurots. Whereupon departing from Paris, without bidding any Man farewell, for
the Business required Diligence, he came to Rowen.

Now Pantagruel in his Journey, seeing that the Leagues of that little
Territory about Paris, called France, were very short in regard of those of
other Countries, demanded the cause and reason of it from Panurge; who told him
a Story which Marotus du Lac Monachus set down in the Acts of the Kings of
Canarre; saying, that in old times Countries were not distinguished into
Leagues, Miles, Furlongs, nor Parasanges, until that King Pharamond divided
them, which was done in manner as follows. The said King chose at Paris a
hundred fair, gallant, lusty, brisk young Men, all resolute and bold
Adventurers in Cupid's Duels, together with a hundred comely, pretty, handsome,
lovely and well complexioned Wenches of Picardy, all which he caused to be well
entertained, and highly fed for the space of eight days; then having called for
them, he delivered to every one of the young Men his Wench, with store of Money
to defray their Charges, and this Injunction besides, to go unto diverse Places
here and there. And wheresoever they should bi^cot and thrum their Wenches,
that they setting a Stone there, it should be accounted for a League. Thus went
away those brave Fellows and sprightly Blades most merrily, and because they
were fresh, and had been at rest, they were jumming and tumbling almost at
every Field's end, and this is the Cause why the Leagues about Paris are so
short. But when they had gone a great way, and were now as weary as poor
Devils, all the Oil in their Lamps being almost spent, they did not chink and
dufle so often, but contented themselves, (I mean for the Men's part) with one
scurvy paultry Bout in a day. And this is that which makes the Leagues in
Britany, Delanes, Germany, and other more remote Countries so long. Other Men
give other Reasons for it, but this seems to me of all other the best. To which
Pantagruel willingly adhered. Parting from Rowen, they arrived at Honfleur, and
there took shipping, Pantagruel, Panurge, Epistemon, Eusthenes and Carpalim.

In which Place, waiting for a favorable Wind, and caulking their Ship, he
received from a Lady of Paris (that had formerly been kept by him a long time)
a Letter directed on the outside thus:

To the best Beloved of the Fair, And the least Loyal of the Brave. PNTGRL.

CHAP. XXIV. A Letter which a Messenger brought to Pantagruel from a Lady of
Paris; together with the Exposition of a Posy, written in a Gold-Ring.
WHen Pantagruel had read the Superscription, he was much amazed, and therefore
demanded of the said Messenger the Name of her that had sent it. Then opened he
the Letter, and found nothing written in it, nor otherways enclosed, but only a
Gold Ring, with a square Table-Diamond. Wondering at this, he called Panurge to
him, and showed him the case; whereupon Panurge told him, that the Leaf of
Paper was written upon, but with such Cunning and Artifice, that no Man could
see the Writing at the first sight; therefore to find it out, he set it by the
Fire, to see if it was made with Sal Almoniack soaked in Water: then put he it
into the Water, to see if the Letter was written with the Juice of Tithymalle.
After that he held it up against the Candle, to see if it was written with the
Juice of white Onions.

Then he rubbed one part of it with Oil of Nuts, to see if it were not written
with the Lee of a Fig Tree: and another part of it with the Milk of a Woman
giving Suck to her eldest Daughter, to see if it was written with the Blood of
red Toads, or green Earth-frogs. Afterward he rubbed one Corner with the Ashes
of a Swallow's Nest, to see if it were not written with the Dew that is found
within the Herb Alcakengy, called the Winter-cherry. He rubbed after that one
end with Ear-wax, to see if it were not written with the Gall of a Raven. Then
did he dip it into Vinegar, to try if it was not written with the Juice of the
Garden Spurge. After that he greased it with the Fat of a Bat or Flittermouse,
to see if it was not written with the Sperm of a Whale, which some call
Ambergris. Then put it very fairly into a Basin full of fresh Water, and
forthwith took it out, to see whether it were written with Stone-allum. But
after all Experiments, when he perceived that he could find out nothing, he
called the Messenger, and asked him, Good Fellow, the Lady that sent thee
hither, did she not give thee a Staff to bring with thee? thinking that it had
been according to the Conceit, whereof Aulus Gellius makes mention; and the
Messenger answered him, No, Sir. Then Panurge would have caused his Head to be
shaven, to see whether the Lady had written upon his bald Pate, with the hard
Lee whereof Soap is made, that which she meant; but perceiving that his Hair
was very long, he forbore, considering that it could not have grown to so great
a length in so short a time.

Then he said to Pantagruel, Master, by the Virtue of G -- I cannot tell what
to do nor say in it. For to know whether there be any thing written upon this
or no, I have made use of a good part of that which Master Francisco di Nianto,
the Tuscan sets down, who has written the Manner of reading Letters that do
not appear. That which Zoroastes published, Peri grammaton acriton. And
Calphurnius Bassus de literis illigibilibus. But I can see nothing, nor do I
believe that there is any thing else in it than the Ring. Let us therefore look
upon it; which when they had done, they found this in Hebrew written within,
Lamach sabathani; whereupon they called Epistemon, and asked him what that
meant? to which he answered, that they were Hebrew Words, signifying, Wherefore
have thou forsaken me? Upon that Panurge suddenly replied, I know the Mystery,
do you see this Diamond? it is a false one. This then is the Exposition of that
which the Lady means, Diamant faux; that is, false Lover, why have thou
forsaken me? Which Interpretation Pantagruel presently understood, and withal
remembering, that at his Departure he had not bid the Lady farewell; he was very
sorry, and would fain have returned to Paris, to make his Peace with her. But
Epistemon put him in mind of Aeneas's Departure from Dido, and the Saying of
Heraclitus of Tarentum, That the Ship being at anchor when need requires, we
must cut the Cable rather than lose time about untying of it. And that he
should lay aside all other Thoughts to succor the City of his Nativity, which
was then in danger. And indeed within an Hour after that, the Wind arose at the
North North-west; wherewith they hoised Sail, and put out, even into the main
Sea; so that within few Days, passing by Porto Sancto, and by the Maderas, they
went Ashore in the Canary Islands: Parting from thence, they passed by
Capobianco, by Senege, by Capoverde, by Gambre, by Sagres, by Melli, by the Cap
di buona Speranza, and set ashore again in the Kingdom of Melinda: parting from
thence, they sailed away with a Tramoutan or Northerly Wind, passing by Meden,
by Vti, by Vden, by Gelasim, by the Isles of the Fairies, and along the
Kingdom of Achory, till at last they arrived at the Port of Vtopia, distant
from the City of the Amaurots three Leagues and somewhat more.

When they were ashore, and pretty well refreshed, Pantagruel said, Gentlemen,
the City is not far from hence, therefore were it not amiss before we set
forward, to advise well what is to be done, that we be not like the Athenians,
who never took Counsel until after the Fact: Are you resolved to live and die
with me? Yes, Sir, said they all, and be as confident of us, as of your own
Fingers. Well, (said he) there is but one thing that keeps my Mind in great
doubt and suspense, which is this, that I know not in what Order nor of what
Number the Enemy is, that lays siege to the City; for if I were certain of
that, I should go forward, and set on with the better assurance. Let us
therefore consult together, and bethink our selves by what means we may come to
this Intelligence. Whereunto they all said, Let us go thither and see, and stay
you here for us; for this very Day, without further respite, do we make account
to bring you a certain Report thereof.

My self (said Panurge) will undertake to enter into their Camp, within the
very midst of their Guards, unespied by their Watch, and merrily feast and
lecher it at their cost, without being known of any, to see the Artillery and
the Tents of all the Captains, and thrust my self in with a grave and magnifick
Carriage, amongst all their Troops and Companies, without being discovered, the
Devil would not be able to peck me out with all his Circumventions: for I am of
the Race of Zopyrus.

And I (said Epistemon) know all the Plots and Stratagems of the valiant
Captains, and warlike Champions of former Ages, together with all the Tricks
and Subtilties of the Art of War. I will go, and though I be detected and
revealed, I will escape, by making them believe of you whatever I please; for I
am of the Race of Sinon.

I (said Eusthenes) will enter and set upon them in their Trenches, in spite
of their Sentries, and all their Guards; for I will tread upon their Bellies,
and break their Legs and Arms, yea though they were every whit as strong as the
Devil himself; for I am of the Race of Hercules.

And I (said Carpalin) will get in there, if the Birds can enter; for I am so
nimble of Body, and light withal, that I shall have leaped over their Trenches,
and ran clean through all their Camp, before that they perceive me: neither do
I fear Shot, nor Arrow, nor Horse, how swift soever, were he the Pegasus of
Persee, or ^acolet, being assured that I shall be able to make a safe and sound
escape before them all without any hurt. I will undertake to walk upon the Ears
of Corn, or Grass in the Meadows, without making either of them do so much as
bow under me; for I am of the Race of Camilla the Amazone.

CHAP XXV. How Panurge, Carpalin, Eusthenes and Epistemon, (the Gentlemen
Attendants of Pantagruel) vanquished and discomfited six hundred and threescore
Horsemen very cunningly.
AS he was speaking this, they perceived six hundred and threescore light
Horsemen, gallantly mounted, who came to discover what Ship and Company it was
that was newly arrived in the Harbor; and came in a full Gallop to take them
if they had been able. Then said Pantagruel, my Lads, retire your selves unto
the Ship, here are some of our Enemies coming apace, but I will kill them here
before you like Beasts, although they were ten times so many; in the mean time
withdraw your selves, and take your sport at it. Then answered Panurge, No,
Sir, there is no reason that you should do so; but on the contrary, retire you
unto the Ship, both you and the rest; for I alone will here discomfit them, but
we must not linger, come, set forward. Whereunto the others said, It is well
advised; Sir, withdraw your self, and we will help Panurge here, so shall you
know what we are able to do. Then said Pantagruel, Well, I am content, but if
that you be too weak, I will not fail to come to your assistance.

With this Panurge took two great Cables of the Ship, and tied them to the
Capstane which was on the Deck toward the Hatches, and fastened them in the
Ground, making a long Circuit, the one further off, the other within that. Then
said he to Epistemon, Go aboard the Ship, and when I give you a Call, turn
about the Capstane upon the Orlop diligently, drawing unto you the two
Cable-robes. And said to Eusthenes, and to Carpalin, My Bullies, stay you here,
and offer your selves freely to your Enemies, do as they bid you, and make as
if you would yield unto them: but take heed you come not within the Compass of
the Ropes; be sure to keep your selves free of them. And presently he went
aboard the Ship, and took a Bundle of Straw, and a Barrel of Gunpowder,
strewed it round about the Compass of the Cords, and stood by with a Brand of
Fire or Match lighted in his Hand. Presently came the Horsemen with great
Fury, and the foremost ran almost home to the Ship; and by reason of the
Slipperiness of the Bank, they fell they and their Horses, to the number of
four and forty; which the rest seeing, came on, thinking that Resistance had
been made them at their arrival. But Panurge said unto them, My Masters, I
believe that you have hurt your selves; I pray you pardon us, for it is not our
Fault, but the Slipperiness of the Seawater that is always flowing: we submit
our selves to your good pleasure: So said likewise his two other Fellows, and
Epistemon that was upon the Deck. In the mean time, Panurge withdrew himself,
and seeing that they were all within the Compass of the Cables, and that his
two Companions were retired, making room for all those Horses which came in a
Crowd, thronging upon the Neck of one another to see the Ship, and such as were
in it, cried out on a sudden to Epistemon, Draw, draw. Then began Epistemon to
wind about the Capstane, by doing whereof the two Cables so entangled and
impestered the Legs of the Horses, that they were all of them thrown down to
the Ground easily, together with their Riders. But they seeing that, drew their
Swords, and would have cut them. Whereupon Panurge set Fire to the Train, and
there burnt them up all like damned Souls, both Men and Horses, not one
escaping save one alone; who being mounted on a fleet Turkey Courser, by mere
speed in Flight got himself out of the Circle of the Ropes. But when Carpalin
perceived him, he ran after him with such Nimbleness and Celerity, that he
overtook him in less than a hundred Paces; than leaping close behind him upon
the Crupper of his Horse, clasped him in his Arms, and brought him back to the
Ship.

This Exploit being ended, Pantagruel was very jovial, and wondrously commended
the Industry of these Gentlemen, whom he called his Fellow Soldiers, and made
them refresh themselves, and feed well and merrily upon the Seashore, and
drink heartily with their Bellies upon the Ground, and their Prisoner with
them, whom they admitted to that Familiarity; only that the poor Devil was not
well assured but that Pantagruel would have eaten him up whole; which,
considering the Wideness of his Mouth, and Capacity of his Throat, was no great
matter for him to have done; for he could have done it, as easily as you would
eat a small Comfit, he showing no more in his Throat than would a Grain of
Millet-Seed in the Mouth of an Ass.

CHAP. XXVI. How Pantagruel and his Company were weary in eating still salt
Meats: and how Carpalin went a hunting to have some Venison.
THus as they talked and chatted together, Carpalin said, And by the Belly of
St. Quenet, shall we never eat any Venison? this salt Meat makes me horribly
dry. I will go fetch you a Quarter of one of those Horses which we have burnt,
it is well roasted already. As he was rising up to go about it, he perceived
under the side of a Wood a fair great Roe-Buck, which was come out of his Fort
(as I conceive) at the sight of Panurge's fire. Him did he pursue and run after
with as much Vigor and Swiftness as if it had been a Bolt out of a Crossbow,
and caught him in a moment; and whilst he was in his Course, he with his Hands
took in the Air four great Bustards, seven Bitterns, six and twenty gray
Partridges, two and thirty red legged Ones, sixteen Pheasants, nine Woodcocks,
nineteen Herons, two and thirty Coushots and Ring-Doves: and with his Feet
killed ten or twelve Hares and Rabbets, which were then at relief, and pretty
big withal. Eighteen Rayles in a knot together, with fifteen young wild Boars,
two little Bevers, and three great Foxes. So striking the Kid with his Fauchion
athwart the Head, he killed him, and bearing him on his Back, he in his return
took up his Hares, Rayls, and young wild Boa^s, and as far off as he could be
heard, cried out, and said, Panurge, my Friend, Vinegar, Vinegar. Then the good
Pantagruel, thinking he had fainted, commanded them to provide him some
Vinegar. But Panurge knew well that there was some good Prey in hands, and
forthwith showed unto noble Pantagruel how he was bearing upon his Back a fair
Roe-Buck, and all his Girdle bordered with Hares; then immediately did
Epistemon make in the name of the nine Muses, nine antic wooden Spits.
Eusthenes did help to flay, and Panurge placed two great Cuirasier Saddles in
such sort, that they served for Andirons; and making their Prisoner to be their
Cook, they roasted their Venison by the Fire, wherein the Horsemen were burnt.
And making great C^ear, with a good deal of Vinegar, the Devil a one of them
did forbear from his Victuals; it was a triumphant and incomparable Spectacle
to see how they ravened and devoured. Then said Pantagruel, Would to God every
one of you had two Pairs of Sacring Bells hanging at your Chin, and that I had
at mine the great Clocks of Ren^s, of Poit^ers, of Tours, and of Cambray, to
see what a Peal they would ^ing with the Wagging of our Chaps.

But, said Panurge, it were better we thought a little upon our business, and
by what means we might get the upper hand of our Enemies^ That is well
remembered, said Pantagruel; therefore spoke he thus to the Prisoner, My Friend,
tell us here the truth, and do not lie to us at all, if thou would not be
slayed alive, for it is I that eat the little Children: relate unto us at full,
the Order, the Number, and the Strength of the Army. To which the Prisoner
answered, Sir, know for a truth that in the Army there are three hundred
Giants, all armed with Armor of proof, and wonderful great: nevertheless, not
fully so great as you, except one that is their head, named Loup-garou, who is
armed from Head to Foot with Cyclopical Annvils. Furthermore, one hundred
threescore and three thousand Foot, all armed with the Skins of Hobgoblins,
strong and valiant Men; eleven thousand four hundred Cuirasiers; three thousand
six hundred double Canons, and Harque-busiers without number; fourscore and
fourteen thousand Pioneers: one hundred and fifty thousand Whores* fair like
Goddesses, (that is for me, said Panurge.) Whereof some are Amazons, some
Lionnoises, others Parisiennes, Taurangelles, Angevines* Poictevines, Normands,
and high Dutch; there are of them of all Countries and all Languages.

Yea, but (said Pantagruel) is the King there? Yes, Sir, (said the Prisoner) he
is there in Person, and we call him Anarchus, King of the Dipsodes; which is as
much to say, as thirsty People; for you never saw Men more thirsty, nor more
willing to drink; and his Tent is guarded by the Giants. It is enough, (said
Pantagruel) come brave Boys, are you resolved to go with me? To which Panurge
answered, God confound him that leaves you. I have already bethought my self
how I will kill them all like Pigs, and so that the Devil one Leg of them shall
escape. But I am somewhat troubled about one thing. And what is that? said
Pantagruel: It is (said Panurge) how I shall be able to set forward to the
jusling and bragmardising of all the Whores that be there this Afternoon, in
such sort, that there escape not one unbumped by me; breasted and jum'd after
the ordinary Fashion of Man and Women. Ha, ha, ha, ha, said Pantagruel.

And Carpalin said, The Devil take these Sink-holes, if by G -- I do not
bumbast some one of them.

And I, (said Eusthenes) what do you make of me? who since we came from Rowen
have never been wound up that my Needle could mount above to ten or eleven a
Clock, now stiff and strong, like a hundred Devils? Truly, (said Panurge) thou
shall have of the fattest, and of those that are most plump, and in the case.

How now, (said Epistemon) every one shall ride, and I must lead the Ass? the
Devil take him that will do so. We will make use of the right of War, Qui
potest capere, capiat. No, no, said Panurge, but tie thine Ass to a Crook, and
ride as the World does. And the good Pantagruel laughed at all this, and said
unto them, You reckon without your Host. I am much afraid, that before it be
Night I shall see you in such taking, that you will have no great stomach to
ride* but more like to be rode upon, with sound Blows of Pike and Lance.

Enough of that, said Epistemon, I will not fall to bring them to you, either
to roast or boil, to fry or put in Paste. They are not so many in number as were
in the Army of Xerxes; for he had thirty hundred thousand sighting Men, if you
will believe Herodotus and Trogus Pompeius; and yet Themistocles with a few Men
overthrew them all. For God's sake take you no care for that. Cobsminnie,
Cobsminnie, (said Panurge) my Cod-piece alone shall suffice to overthrow all
the Men: and St. Sweephole that dwells within it, shall lay all the Women squat
upon their Backs. Up then my Lads (said Pantagruel) and let us march along.

CHAP. XXVII. How Pantagruel set up one Trophee in memorial of their Valor,
and Panurge another in remembrance of the Hares. How Pantagruel likewise with
his Farts begat little Men, and with his Fisgs little Women. And how Panurge
broke a great Staff over two Glasses.
BEfore we depart hence, (said Pantagruel) in remembrance of the Exploit that
you have now performed, I will in this Place erect a fair Trophee. Then every
Man amongst them with great Joy, and fine little Country-Songs, set up a huge
big Post; whereunto they hanged a great Cuirasier Saddle, the Fronstal of a
barbed Horse, Bridle-bosses, Pully-pieces for the Knees, Stirrup-leathers,
Spurs, Stirrups, a Coat of Male, a Corslet tempered with Steel, a Battel-axe, a
strong, short, and sharp Horseman's Sword; a Gantlet, a Horseman's Mace,
Gushet-armour for the Arms-pits, Leg-harness, and a Gorget, with all other
Furniture needful for a triumphant Arch, or Trophee. And then Pantagruel for an
eternal Memorial, wrote this victorial Ditton, as follows: Here four bold
Champions had a Rubbers
With sixty, and six hundred Lubbers;
Destroyed 'em all, yet when they fought 'em,
Had not their Arms, but Wits about 'em:
So played the Skoundrels such a Trick,
Old Scipio never knew the like.
Learn hence, Kings, Dukes, all, great and little;
It Is Wit, not Strength, that wins the Battle.
For Victory,
As all agree,
Hangs on the Beck
Of Powers above,
Who surely move
The Proud to check.
The Strong are baffled, without question,
Or doubt of any that is a Christian.
And he ('it is only he) can have it,
Who has the Grace, and Faith to crave it.


Whilst Pantagruel was writing these foresaid Verses, Panurge halved, and fixed
upon a great Stake, the Horns of a Roe-buck, together with the Skin, and the
right Fore^oot thereof; the Ears of three Levrets, the Chine of a Coney, the
Jaws of a Hare, the Wings of two Bustards, the Feet of four Queest-doves, a
Bottle full of Vinegar, a Horn wherein to put Salt, a wooden Spit, a larding
Stick, a scurvy Kettle full of Holes, a dripping Pan, a Skillet to make Sauce
in, an earthen Salt-cellar, and a Goblet of Beauvais. Then in Imitation of
Pantagruel's Verses and Trophee, wrote that which follows: Here four brave
Topers sitting on their Bums,
With Flaggons, nobler Noise than Drums,
Carows'd it, bows'd it, tossed the Liquor,
Each seemed a Bacchus-Priest, or Vicar:
Hares, Coneys, Bustards, Pigs were brought 'em,
With Jugs and Pipkins strewn about 'em;
For Trophee-Spoils to each good Fellow.
That is hereafter to be Mellow.
In every Creed,
It Is on all hands agreed,
And plainly confessed;
When the Weather is hot,
That we stick to the Pot,
And drink of the best.
First note, that in your Bill of Fare,
Sauce be provided for the Rare.
But Vinegar the most extol;
It Is of an Hare the very Soul.


Then (said Pantagruel), Come, my Lads, let us be gone, we have stayed here too
long about our Victuals; for very seldom does it fall out, that the greatest
Eaters do the most Martial Exploits. There is no Shadow like that of flying
Colors, no Smoke like that of Horses, no Clattering like that of Armor. At
this Epistemon began to smile, and said, There is no Shadow like that of the
Kitchen, no Smoke like that of Pasties, and no Clattering like that of Goblets.
Unto which answered Panurge, There is no Shadow like that of Courtains, no
Smoke like that of Women's Breasts, and no Clattering like that of Ballocks:
then forthwith rising up he gave a Fart, a Leap, and a Whistle, and most
joyfully cried out aloud, Ever live, Pantagruel. When Pantagruel saw that, he
would have done as much; but with the Fart that he let, the Earth trembled nine
Leagues about; wherewith, and with the corrupted Air, he begot above three and
fifty thousand little Men, ill favored Dwarfs; and with one Fisg that he let,
he made as many little Women, crouching down, as you shall see in diverse
places, which never grow but like Cows Tails downwards, or like the Limosin
Radishes, round. How now, (said Panurge) are your Farts so fertile? by G -- here
be brave farted Men, and fisgued Women; let them be married together, they will
beget fine Hornets and Dorflies. So did Pantagruel, and called them Pigmies.
Those he sent to live in an Island thereby, where since that time they are
increased mightily: but the Cranes make War with them continually, against
which they do most courageously defend themselves; for these little Ends of Men
and Dandiprats, (whom in Scotland they call Whiphandles, and Knots of a
Tar-barrel) are commonly very teasty and choleric. The Physical Reason
whereof, is, because their Heart is near their Turd.

At this same time, Panurge took two drinking Glasses that were there, both of
one bigness, and filled them with Water up to the brim, and set one of them
upon one Stool, and the other upon another, placing them above five Foot from
one another: then he took the Staff of a Javelin, about five Foot and a half
long, and put it upon the two Glasses, so that the two ends of the Staff did
come just to the Brims of the Glasses. This done, he took a great Stake, and
said to Pantagruel, and to the rest; My Masters, behold, how easily we shall
have the Victory over our Enemies; for just as I shall break this Staff here
upon these Glasses, with^out either breaking or crazing of them; nay, which is
more, without spilling one drop of the Water that is within them, even so shall
we break the Heads of our Dipsodes, without receiving any of us any Wound or
Loss in our Person or Goods. But that you may not think there is any Witchcraft
in this, hold (said he to Eusthenes) strike upon the midst as hard as thou
can with this Log. Eusthenes did so, and the Staff broke in two pieces, and
not one drop of the Water fell out of the Glasses. Then said he, I know a great
many such other Tricks, let us now therefore march boldly.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Pantagruel got the Victory very strangely over the Dipsodes,
and the Giants
AFter all this Talk Pantagruel took the Prisoner to him, and sent him away,
saying, Go thou unto thy King in his Camp, and tell him Tidings of what thou
have seen, and let him resolve to feast me to Morrow about Noon; for as soon as
my Galleys shall come, which will be to Morrow at farthest, I will prove unto
him by eighteen hundred Thousand fighting Men, and seven thousand Giants, all
of them greater than I am; that he has done foolishly and against Reason, thus
to invade my Country: wherein Pantagruel feigned that he had an Army at Sea.
But the Prisoner answered, That he would yield himself to be his Slave; and
that he was content never to return to his own People, but rather with
Pantagruel to fight against them; and for God's sake besought him, that he
might be permitted so to do. Whereunto Pantagruel would not give Consent, but
commanded him to depart thence speedily, and be gone, as he had told him, and
to that Effect gave him a Box full of Euphorbium, together with some Grains of
the black Chameleon Thistle, steeped in Aqua vitae, and made up into the
Condiment of a wet Sucket, commanding him to carry it to his King, and to say
unto him, that if he were able to eat one Ounce of that without drinking after
it, he might then be able to resist him, without any Fear or Apprehension of
Danger.

The Prisoner then besought him with joint Hands, that in the Hour of the
Battle he would have Compassion upon him. Whereat Pantagruel said unto him,
After that thou have delivered all unto the King, put thy whole Confidence in
God, and he will not forsake thee: Because, although for my Part I be mighty,
as thou may see, and have an infinite Number of Men in Arms, I do
nevertheless trust neither in my Force nor in mine Industry, but all my
Confidence is in God my Protector, who does never forsake those that in him do
put their Trust and Confidence. This done, the Prisoner requested him that he
would be contented with some reasonable Composition for his Ransom. To which
Pantagruel answered, that his End was not to rob nor ransom Men, but to enrich
them, and reduce them to total Liberty: Go thy way (said he) in the Peace of
the living God, and never follow evil Company, lest some Mischief befall thee.
The Prisoner being gone, Pantagruel said to his Men, Gentlemen, I have made
this Prisoner believe that we have an Army at Sea, as also that we will not
assault them till to Morrow at Noon, to the end, that they doubting of the
great Arrival of our Men, may spend this Night in providing and strengthening
themselves; but in the mean time my Intention is, that we charge them about the
Hour of the first Sleep.

Let us leave Pantagruel here with his Apostles, and speak of King Anarchus and
his Army. When the Prisoner was come, he went unto the King, and told him how
there was a great Giant come, called Pantagruel, who had overthrown, and made
to be cruelly roasted all the six hundred and fifty nine Horsemen, and he alone
escaped to bring the News. Besides that, he was charged by the said Giant to
tell him, that the next Day about Noon he must make a Dinner ready for him, for
at that Hour he was resolved to set upon him. Then did he give him that Box
wherein were those Confitures; but as soon as he had swallowed down one
spoonful of them, he was taken with such a Heat in the Throat, together with an
Ulceration in the Flap of the Top of the Windpipe, that his Tongue peeled with
it in such Sort, that for all they could do unto him, he found no Ease at all,
but by drinking only without Cessation: for as soon as ever he took the Goblet
from his Head, his Tongue was on a Fire; and therefore they did nothing but
still pour in Wine into his Throat with a Funnel.

Which when his Captains, Bashaws, and Guard of his Body did see, they tasted
of the same Drugs, to try whether on them they would have the same Operation or
no: but it so befell them as it had done their King; and they plied the Flagon
so well, that the Noise ran throughout all the Camp, how the Prisoner was
returned; that the next Day they were to have an Assault; that the King and his
Captains did already prepare themselves for it, together with his Guards, and
that with carowsing lustily, and quaffing as hard as they could. Every Man
therefore in the Army began to tipple, ply the Pot, swill and guzzle, till in
fine they fell asleep like Pigs, all out of Order throughout the whole Camp.

Let us now return to the good Pantagruel, and relate how he carried himself in
this Business. Departing from the Place of the Trophies, he took the Mast of
their Ship in his Hand like a Pilgrim's Staff, and put within the Top of it two
hundred and thirty seven Punchions of White Wind of Anjou, the rest was of
Rowen; and tied up to his Girdle the Bark all full of Salt, as easily as the
Lanskennets carry their little Panniers; and so set onward on his way with his
Fellow Soldiers. When he was come near to the Enemies Camp, Panurge said unto
him, Sir, if you would do well, let down this White Wind of Anjou from the
Scuttle of the Mast of the Ship, that we may all drink thereof, like Britains.

Hereunto Pantagruel very willingly consented, and they drank so neat, that
there was not so much as one poor Drop left of two hundred and thirty seven
Punchions, except one leathern Bottle of Tours, which Panurge filled for
himself, (for he called that his Vade mecum) and some scurvy Lees of Wine in
the bottom, which served him in stead of Vinegar. After they had whitled and
curried the Can pretty handsomely, Panurge gave Pantagruel to eat some devilish
Drugs, compounded of Lithotripton, Nephrocatarticon, the Marmalade of Quinces,
with Cantharides, and other Diuretics. This done, Pantagruel said to Carpalin,
Go into the City, scrambling like a Cat up against the Wall, as you can well
do, and tell them that now presently they come out, and charge their Enemies as
rudely as they can; and having said so, come down, taking a lighted Torch with
you, wherewith you shall set on fire all the Tents and Pavilions in the Camp;
then cry as loud as you are able with your great Voice, and then come away from
thence. Yea but, said Carpalin, were it not good to nail all their Ordnance?
No, no, (said Pantagruel) only blow up all their Powder. Carpalin obeying him,
departed suddenly, and did as he was appointed by Pantagruel; and all the
Combatants came forth that were in the City: And when he had set fire in the
Tents and Pavilions, he passed so lightly through them, and so highly and
profoundly did they snort and sleep, that they never perceived him. He came to
the Place where their Artillery was, and set their Munition on fire; but here
was the Danger, the Fire was so sudden, that poor Carpalin had almost been
burnt* and had it not been for his wonderful Agility, he had been fried like a
roasting Pig; but he departed away so speedily, that a Bolt or Arrow out of a
Crossbow could not have had a swifter Motion. When he was clear of their
Trenches, he shouted aloud, and cried out so dreadfully, and with such
Amazement to the Hearers, that it seemed all the Devils of Hell had been let
loose. At which Noise the Enemies awaked, but can you tell how? even no less
astonished than are Monks at the ringing of the first Peal to Matins, which in
Lusonnois is called Rubbalock.

In the mean time Pantagruel began to sow the Salt that he had in his Bark, and
because they slept with an open gaping Mouth, he filled all their Throats with
it, so that those poor Wretches were by it made to cough like Foxes. Ha,
Pantagruel, how thou addest greater Heat to the Firebrand that is in us.
Suddenly Pantagruel had will to piss, by Means of the Drugs which Panurge had
given him, and pissed amidst the Camp so well and so copiously, that he drowned
them all, and there was a particular Deluge ten Leagues round about; the
History says, if his Father's great Mare had been there, and pissed likewise,
it would undoubtedly have been a more enormous Deluge than that of Deucalion;
for she did never piss but she made a River, greater than is either the Rhosne
or the Danube; which those that were come out of the City, seeing, said, They
are all cruelly slain, see how the Blood runs along: but they were deceived, in
thinking Pantagruel's Urine had been the Blood of their Enemies; for they could
not see but by the Light of the Fire of the Pavilions, and some small Light of
the Moon.

The Enemies after that they were awaked, seeing on one side the Fire in the
Camp, and on the other the Inundation of the urinal Deluge, could not tell what
to say, nor what to think: Some said, that it was the End of the World, and the
final Judgment, which ought to be by Fire. Others again thought, that the
Sea-Gods, Neptune, Protheus, Triton, and the rest of them, did persecute them,
for that indeed they found it to be like Seawater and Salt.

O who were able now condignly ^o relate how Pantagruel did demean himself
against the three hundred Giants: O my Muse, my Calliope, my Thalia, inspire me
at this time, restore unto me my Spirits, for this is the Logical Bridge of
Asses; here is the Pit^al, here is the Difficulty, to have Ability enough to
express the horrible Battle that was fought: Ah, would to God that I had now a
Bottle of the best Wine that ever those drank who shall read this so veridical
History.

CHAP. XXIX. How Pantagruel discomfited the three hundred Giants armed with
Freestone, and Loupgarou their Captain.
THE Giants seeing all their Camp drowned, carried away their King Anarchus
upon their Backs, as well as they could out of the Fort, as Aenea^ did to his
Father Anchises, in the time of the Conflagration of Troy. When Panurge
perceived them, he said to Pantagruel, Sir* yonder are the Giants coming forth
against you, lay on them with your Mast gallantly, like an old Fencer; for now
is the time that you must show your self a brave and an honest Man: And for our
part we will not fail you; I my self will kill to you a good many boldly
enough; for why, David killed Goliath very easily; and then this great Lecher
Eusthenes, who is stronger than four Oxen, will not spare himself: Be of good
Courage therefore, and valiant; charge amongst them with Point and Edg, and by
all manner of Means. Well, (said Pantagruel) of Courage I have more than for
fifty Franks; but let us be wise* for Hercules never undertook against two that
is well cack'd, well scummered: (said Panurge) do you compare your self with
Hercules? You have by G -- more Strength in your Teeth, and more Scent in your
Burn, than ever Hercules had in all his Body and Soul: so much is a Man worth
as he esteems himself. Whilst they spoke those Words, behold Loupgarou was come
with all his Giants, who seeing Pantagruel in a manner alone, was carried away
with Temerity and Presumption, for Hopes that he had to kill the good Man:
whereupon he said to his Companions the Giants, You Wenchers of the
Low Country, by Mahoon, if any of you undertake to fight against these Men
here, I will put you cruelly to Death: It is my Will that you let me fight
single; in the mean time you shall have good Sport to look upon us. Then all
the other Giants retired with their King to the Place where the Flagons stood,
and Panurge and his Camerades with them, who counterfeited those that have had
the Pox, for he wreathed about his Mouth, shrunk up his Fingers, and with a
harsh and hoarse Voice said unto them, I forsake -- od (Fellow Soldiers) if I
would have it to be believed, that we make any War at all; give us somewhat to
eat with you, whilst our Masters fight against one another. To this the King
and Giants jointly condescended, and accordingly made them to banquet with them.

In the mean time Panurge told them the Follies of Turpin, the Examples of St.
Nicholas, and the Tale of a Tub. Loupgarou then set forward toward Pantagruel,
with a Mace all of Steel, and that of the best sort, weighing nine thousand
seven hundred Kintals, and two Quarterons, at the End whereof were thirteen
pointed Diamonds, the least whereof was as big as the greatest Bell of our
Ladies Church at Paris, (there might want perhaps the Thickness of a Nail, or
(at most that I may not lie) of the Back of those Knives which they call
Cut-lugs, but for a little off or on, more or less, it is no Matter) and it was
enchanted in such sort, that it could never break, but contrarily all that it
did touch did break immediately. Thus then as he appoached with great
Fierceness and Pride of Heart, Pantagruel casting up his Eyes to Heaven,
recommended himself to God with all his Soul, making such a Vow as follows;

O thou Lord God, who have always been my Protector and my Savior, thou see
the Distress wherein I am at this Time: Nothing brings me hither but a natural
Zeal, which thou have permitted unto Mortals; to keep and defend themselves,
their Wives and Children, Country and Family, in case thy own proper Cause were
not in question, which is the Faith; for in such a Business thou will have no
Coadjutors, only a Catholic Confession and Service of thy Word, and have
forbidden us all Arming and Defense: for thou art the Almighty, who in thine
own Cause, and where thine own Business is taken to Heart, can defend it far
beyond all that we can conceive; thou who have thousand thousands of hundreds
of Millions of Legions of Angels, the least of which is able to kill all mortal
Men, and turn about the Heavens and Earth at his Pleasure, as heretofore it
very plainly appeared in the Army of Sennacherib. If it may please thee
therefore at this time to assist me, as my whole Trust and Confidence is in
thee alone, I vow unto thee, that in all Countries whatsoever, wherein I shall
have any Power or Authority, whether in this of Vtopia, or elsewhere, I will
cause thy holy Gospel to be purely, simply and entirely preached; so that the
Abuses of a Rabble of Hypocrites and false Prophets, who by humane
Constitutions and depraved Inventions have impoisoned all the World, shall be
quite exterminated from about me. This Vow was no sooner made, but there was
heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Hoc f^c, and vinces; that is to say, Do
this, and thou shall overcome.

Then Pantagruel seeing that Loupgarou with his Mouth wide open was drawing
near to him, went against him boldly, and cried out as loud as he was able,
Thou die, Villain, thou die; purposing by his horrible Cry to make him
afraid, according to the Discipline of the Lacedaemonians. Withal, he
immediately cast at him out of his Bark which he wore at his Girdle, eighteen
Cags, and four Bushels of Salt, wherewith he filled both his Mouth, Throat,
Nose and Eyes. At this Loupgarou was so highly incensed, that most fiercely
setting upon him, he thought even then with a Blow of his Mace to have beat out
his Brains: but Pantagruel was very nimble, and had always a quick Foot and a
quick Eye, and therefore with his left Foot did he step back one Pace, yet not
so nimbly, but that the Blow falling upon the Bark, broke it in four thousand
fourscore and six Pieces, and threw all the rest of the Salt about the Ground.
Pantagruel seeing that, most gallantly displayed the Vigor of his Arms, and
according to the Art of the Axe, gave him with the great End of his Mast a
home-thrust a little above the Breast; then bringing along the Blow to the left
side with a Slash, struck him between the Neck and Shoulders: After that,
advancing his right Foot, he gave him a Push upon the Couillons, with the upper
End of his said Mast, wherewith breaking the Scuttle, on the Top thereof he
spilt three or four Punchions of Wine that were left therein.

Upon that Loupgarou thought that he had pierced his Bladder, and that the Wine
that came forth had been his Urine: Pantagruel being not content with this,
would have doubled it by a side-blow; but Loupgarou lifting up his Mace,
advanced one Step upon him, and with all his Force would have dashed it upon
Pantagruel, wherein (to speak the Truth) he so sprightfully carried himself,
that if God had not succored the good Pantagruel, he had been cloven from the
top of his Head to the bottom of his Milt; but the Blow glanced to the right
side by the brisk Nimbleness of Pantagruel, and his Mace sank into the Ground
above threescore and thirteen Foot, through a huge Rock, out of which the Fire
did issue greater than nine thousand and six Tuns. Pantagruel seeing him busy
about plucking out his Mace, which stuck in the Ground between the Rocks, ran
upon him, and would have clean cut off his Head, if by Mischance his Mast had
not touched a little against the Stock of Loupgarou's Mace, which was
enchanted, as we have said before: by this means his Mast broke off about
three-handfuls above his Hands, whereat he stood amazed like a Bell-founder,
and cried out, Ah Panurge, where art thou? Panurge seeing that, said to the
King and the Giants, By G -- they will hurt one another if they be not parted;
but the Giants were as merry as if they had been at a Wedding: Then Carpalin
would have risen from thence to help his Master, but one of the Giants said
unto him, By Golfarin the Nephew of Mahoon, if thou stir hence I will put thee
in the bottom of my Breeches instead of a Suppository, which cannot choose but
do me good; for in my Belly I am very costive, and cannot well cagar without
gnashing my Teeth, and making many filthy Faces.

Then Pantagruel, thus destitute of a Staff, took up the End of his Mast,
striking athwart and along upon the Giant, but he did him no more hurt than
you would do with a Filip upon a Smith's Anvil. In the time Loupgarou was
drawing his Mace out of the Ground, and having already plucked it out, was
ready therewith to have struck Pantagruel, who being very quick in turning,
avoided all his Blows in taking only the defensive Part in hand, until on a
sudden he saw that Loupgarou did threaten him with these Words, saying, Now,
Villain, will no^ I fail to chop thee a^ small as minced Meat, and keep thee
henceforth from ^ver making any more poor Men athirst. Then without any more
ado Pantagruel struck him such a Blow with his Foot against the Belly, that he
made him fall backwards, his Heels over his Head, and dragged him thus along at
flay-buttock above a flight-shot. Then Loupgarou cried out, bleeding at the
Throat, Mahoon, Mahoon, Mahoon, at which Noise all the Giants arose to succor
him; but Panurge said unto them, Gentlemen, do not go, if you will believe me,
for our Master is mad, and strikes athwart and along, he cares not where, he
will do you a Mischief; but the Giants made no Account of it, seeing that
Pantagruel had never a Staff.

And when Pantagruel saw those Giants approach very near unto him, he took
Loupgarou by the two Feet, and lift up his Body like a Pike in the Air,
wherewith (it being harnished with Anvils) he laid such heavy load amongst
those Giants, armed with Freestone, that striking them down as a Mason does
little Knobs of Stones, there was not one of them that stood before him, whom
he threw not flat to the Ground; and by the breaking of this stony Armor there
was made such a horrible Rumble, as put me in mind of the Fall of the
Butter-tower of St. Stephen's at Bourge, when it melted before the Sun.
Panurge, with Carpalin and Eusthenes, did cut in the mean time the Throats ^f
those that were struck down; in such sort, that there escaped not one.
Pantagruel to any Man's sight was like a Mower, who with his Sith, which was
Loupgarou, cut down the Meddow Grass, to wit the Giants. But with this fencing
of Pantagruel's, Loupgarou lost his Head, which happened when Pantagruel struck
down one whose Name was Riflandouille, who was armed cap-a-pe with
Grison-stones, one Chip whereof splintring abroad cut off Epistemon's Neck
clean and fair. For otherwise the most part of them were but lightly armed with
a kind of sandy Brittle-stone, and the rest with Slaits. At last, when he saw
that they were all dead, he threw the Body of Loupgarou as hard as he could
against the City, where falling like a Frog upon his Belly, in the great
Piazza, he with the fall killed a singed He-cat, a wet She-cat, a farting Duck,
and a brideled Goose.

CHAP. XXX. How Epistemon, who had his Head cut off, was finely healed by
Panurge; and of the News which he brought from the Devils, and damned People in
Hell.
THis Gigantal Victory being ended, Pantagruel withdrew himself to the place of
the Flagons, and called for Panurge and the rest, who came unto him safe and
sound, except Eusthenes, (whom one of the Giants had scratched a little in the
Face, whilst he was about the cutting of his Throat) and Epistemon, who
appeared not at all. Whereat Pantagruel was so aggrieved that he would have
killed himself. But Panurge said unto him, Nay, Sir, stay a while, and we will
search for him amongst the Dead, and find out the truth of all. Thus as they
went seeking after him, they found him stark dead, with his Head between his
Arms all bloody. Then Eusthenes cried out, Ah cruel Death! have thou taken from
me the perfectest amongst Men? At which words Pantagruel rose up with the
greatest Grief that ever any Man did see, and said to Panurge, Ha, my Friend,
the Prophecy of your two Glasses, and the Javelin Staff was a great deal too
deceitful. But Panurge answered, My dear Bullies all, weep not one drop more;
for he being yet all hot, I will make him as sound as ever he was. In saying
this, he took the Head, and held it warm fore-gainst his Cod-piece, that the
Wind might not enter into it. Eusthenes and Carpalin carried the Body to the
place where they had banqueted, not out of any hope that ever he would recover,
but that Pantagruel might see it.

Nevertheless, Panurge gave him very good comfort, saying, If I do not heal
him, I will be content to lose my Head, (which is a Fool's Wager) leave off
therefore crying, and help me. Then cleansed he his Neck very well with pure
White Wind; and after that, took his Head, and into it synapised some Powder of
Diamerdis, which he always carried about him in one of his Bags. Afterward, he
anointed it with I know not what Ointment, and set it on very just, Vein
against Vein, Sinew against Sinew, and Spondyle against Spondyle, that he might
not be Wry-necked, (for such People he mortally hated); this done, he gave it
round about some fifteen or sixteen Stitches with a Needle, that it might not
fall off again; then on all sides, and every where, he put a little Ointment on
it, which he called Resuscitative.

Suddenly Epistemon began to breath, then opened his Eyes, yawned, sneezed, and
afterward let a great Houshold-Fart. Whereupon Panurge said, Now certainly he
is healed, and therefore gave him to drink a large full Glass of strong
White Wind, with a sugared Toast. In this Fashion was Epistemon finely healed,
only that he was, somewhat hoarse for above three Weeks together, and had a dry
Cough of which he could not be rid, but by the force of continual drinking. And
now he began to speak, and said that he had seen the Devil, had spoken with
Lucifer familiarly, and had been very merry in Hell, and in the Elysian Fields;
affirming very seriously before them all, that the Devils were boon Companions,
and merry Fellows: but in respect of the Damned, he said he was very sorry that
Panurge had so soon called him back into this World again; for (said he) I took
wonderful delight to see them. How so, said Pantagruel? because they do not use
them there (said Epistemon) so badly as you think they do. Their Estate and
Condition of living is but only changed after a very strange manner.

For I saw Alexander the Great there mending old Stockins, whereby he got but a
very poor Living.

Xerxes was a Crier of Mustard. Romulus, a Salter and Patcher of Patins. Numa,
a Nail-smith. Tarquin, a Porter. Piso, a clownish Swain. Sylla, a Ferry-man.
Cyrus, a Cowheard. Themistocles, a Glass-maker. Epaminondas, a Maker of
Looking-glasses. Brutus and Cassius, Surveyors of Land. Demosthenes, a
Vine-dresser. Cicero, a Fire-kindler. Fabius, a Threader of Patenotres.
Artaxerxes, a Rope-maker. Aeneas, a Miller. Achilles was a scauld-pated Maker
of Hay-bundles. Agamemnon, a Lick-box. Ulysses, a Hay-mower. Nestor, a
Forester. Darius, a Gold-finder. Ancus Martius, a Ship-trimmer. Camillus, a
Foot-post. Marcellus, a Sheller of Beans. Drusus, a Taker of Money at the Doors
of Play Houses. Scipio Africanus, a Crier of Lee in a Wooden-slipper. Asdrubal,
a Lantern-maker. Hannibal, a Kettle-maker and Seller of Eggshells. Priamus, a
Seller of old Clouts. Lancelot of the Lake, was a Flayer of dead Horses.
All the Knights of the Round-table were poor Day-labourers, employed to row
over the Rivers of Cocytus, Phlegeton, Styx, Acheron and Lethe, when Messieurs
the Devils had a mind to recreate themselves upon the Water; as in the like
Occasion are hired the Boat-men at Lions, the Gonde^eers of Venice, and Oars at
London; but with this Difference, that these poor Knights have only for their
Fare a Bob or Flirt on the Nose, and in the Evening a Morsel of coarse moldy
Bread.

Trajan was a Fisher of Frogs. Antoninus, a Lacquey. Commodus, a Jeat-maker.
Pertinax, a Peeler of Wall-nuts. Lucullus, a Maker of Rattles and Hawks-Bells.
Justinian, a Pedlar. Hector, a Snap-sauce Scullion. Paris was a poor Beggar.
Camlyses, a Mule-driver. Nero, a base blind Fiddler. Fierabras was his
Serving-man, who did him a thousand mischievous Tricks, and would make him eat
of the brown Bread, and drink of the turned Wine, when himself did both eat and
drink of the best. Julius Caesar and Pompey, were Boat-wrights and Tighters of
Ships. Valentine and Orson did serve in the Stoves of Hell, and were
Sweat-Rubbers in Hot-houses. Giglan and Govian were poor Swineherds. Iafrey
with the great Tooth, was a Tinder-maker, and Seller of Matches. Godfrey de
Bullion, a Hood-maker. Jason was a Bracelet-maker. Don Pietro de Castille, a
Carrier of Indulgences. Morgan, a Beer-brewer. Huon of Bourdeaux, a Hooper of
Barrels. Pyrrhus, a Kitchin-scullion. Antiochus, a Chimney-sweeper. Octavian, a
Scraper of Parchment. Nerva, a Mariner. Pope Julius was a Crier of
Pudding-pies; but he left off wearing there his great buggerly Beard. John of
Paris was a Greaser of Boots. Arthur of Britain, an Ungreaser of Caps. Pierce
Forest, a Carrier of Faggots. Pope Boniface the Eighth, a Scummer of Pots.
Pope Nicholas the third, a Maker of Paper. Pope Alexander, a Rat-catcher. Pope
Sixtus, an Anointer of those that have the Pox.
What, (said Pantagruel) have they the Pox there too? Surely (said Epistemon) I
never saw so many; there are there I think above a hundred Millions. For
believe, that those who have not had the Pox in this World, must have it in the
other.

Cotsbody (said Panurge) then am I free; for I have been as far as the Hole of
Gibralter, reached unto the outmost Bounds of Hercules, and gathered of the
ripest.

Ogier the Dane was a Furbisher of Armor. The King Tigranes, a Mender of
thatched Houses. Galien Restored, a Taker of Moldwarps. The four Sons of Aymon,
were all Tooth-drawers. Pope Calixtus, was the Barber of a Woman's sine quo
non. Pope Urban, a Bacon-pecker. Melusina was a Kitchen Drudg-Wench.
Mettabrune, a Laundress. Cleopatra, a Crier of Onions. Helene, a Broker for
Chamber-maids. Semiramis, the Beggars Lice-killer. Dido did sell Mushroms.
Pentasilea sold Cresses. Lucretia was an Alehouse Keeper. Hortensia, a
Spinstress. Livia, a Grater of Verdigreece.
After this manner those that had been great Lords and Ladies here, got but a
poor scurvy wretched Living there below. And on the contrary, the Philosophers
and others, who in this World had been altogether indigent and wanting, were
great Lords there in their turn. I saw Diogenes there strout it out most
pompously, and in great magnificence, with a rich purple Gown on him, and a
golden Scepter in his Right Hand. And which is more, he would now and then make
Alexander the Great mad, so enormously would he abuse him, when he had not well
patched his Breeches; for he used to pay his Skin with sound Bastinadoes. I saw
Epictetus there most gallantly apparelled after the French Fashion, sitting
under a pleasant Arbor, with store of handsome Gentlewomen, frolicking,
drinking, dancing, and making good Cheer, with abundance of Crowns of the Sun.
Above the Lattice were written these Verses for his Device: Sauter, dancer,
fair les tours,
Et boiue vin blanc, and vermeil;
Et ne fair rien tous les iours,
Que compter les escuts au soleil.
To dance, to skip, and to play,
The best White and Claret to swill,
And nothing to do all the Day,
But rouling in Money, at will.


When he saw me, he invited me to drink with him very courteously, and I being
willing to be entreated, we ripled and chopined together most Theologically. In
the mean time came Cyrus to beg one Farthing of him for the honor of Mercury,
therewith to buy a few Onions for his Supper. No, no, said Epictetus, I do not
use in my Almsgiving to bestow Farthings; hold thou Varlet, there is a Crown
for thee, be an honest Man. Cyrus was exceeding glad to have met with such a
Booty. But the other poor Rogues, the Kings that are there below, as Alexander,
Darius, and others, stole it away from him by night. I saw Pathelin the
Treasurer of Rhadamantus, who in cheapning the Pudding-pyes that Pope Julius
cried, asked him, How much a Dozen? Three Blanks, said the Pope: Nay, (said
Pathelin) three Blows with a Cudgel; lay them down here you Rascal, and go
fetch more. The poor Pope went away weeping; who when he came to his Master the
Pye-maker, told him that they had taken away his Pudding-pyes. Whereupon his
Master gave him such a sound Lash with an Eele-skin, that his own would have
been worth nothing to make Bag-pipe-bags of. I saw Master John le Maire, there
personate the Pope in such fashion, that he made all the poor Kings and Popes
of this World kiss his Feet; and taking great State upon him, gave them his
Benediction, saying, Get the Pardons, Rogues, get the Pardons, they are good
cheap: I absolve you of Bread and Pottage, and dispense with you to be never
good for any thing: then calling Caille^ and Triboulet, to them he spoke these
words, My Lords the Cardinals dispatch their Bulls, to wit, to each of them a
Blow with a Cudgel upon the Reins. Which accordingly was forthwith performed.

I heard Master Francis Villon ask Xerxes, How much the Mess of Mustard? A
Farthing, said Xerxes. To which the said Villon answered, The Pox take thee for
a Villain: as much of square^ar'd Wheat is not worth half that Price, and now
thou offerest to inhance the Price of Victuals; with this he pist in his Pot as
the Mustard-makers of Paris use to do. I saw the Francarcher de Baignolet, who
was one of the Inquisition against Heretics. When he saw Pierce-Forrest making
water against a Wall, on which was painted the Fire of St. Anthony, declared
him Heretic, and would have caused him to be burnt alive, had it not been for
Morgant, who for his Proficiat and other small Fees, gave him nine Tuns of Beer.

Well, (said Pantagruel) reserve all these fair Stories for another time, only
tell us how the Usurers are there handled. I saw them (said Epistemon) all very
busily employed in seeking of rusty Pins, and old Nails in the Kennels of the
Streets, as you see poor wretched Rogues do in this World; but the quintal or
hundred Weight of this old Iron Ware, is there valued but at the price of a
Cantle of Bread; and yet they have but a very bad Dispatch and Riddance in the
Sale of it: Thus the poor Misers are sometimes three whole Weeks without eating
one Morsel or Crumb of Bread, and yet work both Day and Night looking for the
fair to come: nevertheless, of all this Labor, Toil and Misery, they reckon
nothing; so cursedly active they are in the prosecution of that their base
Calling, in hopes at the end of the Year, to earn some scurvy Penny by it.

Come, (said Pantagruel) let us now make our selves merry one bout, and drink
(my Lads) I beseech you, for it is very good drinking all this Month. Then did
they uncase their Flagons by Heaps and Dozens, and with their Leaguer-provision
made excellent good Cheer. But the poor King Anarchus could not all this while
settle himself toward any fit of Mirth: whereupon Panurge said, Of what Trade
shall we make my Lord the King here, that he may be skilful in the Art, when he
goes thither to sojourn, amongst all the Devils of Hell? Indeed (said
Pantagruel) that was well advised of thee, do with him what thou will: I give
him to thee. Grammercy (said Panurge) the Present is not to be refused, and I
love it from you.

CHAP. XXXI. How Pantagruel entered into the City of the Amaurots, and how
Panurge married King Anarchus to an old Lantern-carrying Hag, and made him a
Crier of Green-sauce.
AFter this wonderful Victory, Pantagruel sent Carpalin unto the City of the
Amaurots, to declare and signify unto them how the King Anarchus was taken
Prisoner, and all the Enemies of the City overthrown; which News when they
heard, all the Inhabitants of the City came forth to meet him in good order,
and with a great triumphant Pomp, conducting him with a heavenly Joy into the
City, where innumerable Bonfires were kindled everywhere, and fair round
Tables furnished with store of good Victuals, set out in the middle of the
Streets. This was a Renewing of the Golden-Age: so good was the Cheer which
then they made.

But Pantagruel having assembled the whole Senate, and Common-Council-Men of
the Town, said (My Masters) we must now strike the Iron whilst it is hot; it is
therefore my Will, that before we frolic it any longer, we advise how to
assault and take the whole Kingdom of the Dipsodes. To which effect, let those
that will go with me provide themselves against to Morrow after drinking; for
then will I begin to march. Not that I need any more Men than I have to help me
to conquer it; for I could make it as sure that way as if I had it already, but
I see this City is so full of Inhabitants, that they scarce can turn in the
Streets: I will therefore carry them as a Colony into Dipsody, and will give
them all that Country, which is fair, wealthy, fruitful and pleasant, above all
other Countries in the World, as many of you can tell who have been there
heretofore. Every one of you therefore that will go along, let him provide
himself as I have said. This Counsel and Resolution being published in the
City, the next Morning there assembled in the Piazza, before the Palace, to the
number of Eighteen hundred fifty six thousand and eleven, besides Women and
little Children. Thus began they to march straight into Dipsody, in such good
order as did the People of Israel when they departed out of Egypt, to pass over
the Red Sea.

But before we proceed any further, I will tell you how Panurge handled his
Prisoner the King Anarchus. For having remembered that which Epistemon had
related, how the Kings and rich Men in this World were used in the Elysian
Fields, and how they got their Living there by base and ignoble Trades; he
therefore one day apparelled his King in a pretty little Canvass Doublet, all
jagged and pinked like the Tippet of a light Horse-man's Cap, together with a
Pair of large Mariner's Breeches, and Stockins without Shoes: For (said he)
they would but spoil his Sight; and a little peach-coloured Bonnet, with a
great Capon's Feather in it. I lie, for I think he had two: and a very handsome
Girdle, de pers and vert; saying, that such a Livery did become him well, for
that he had always been perverse. And in this Plight bringing him before
Pantagruel, said unto him, Do you know this Royster? No indeed, said
Pantagruel. It is (said Panurge) my Lord, the King of the clowted Hose. I
intend to make him an honest Man. These Devils of Kings here are but as so many
Calves; they know nothing, and are good for nothing but to do a thousand
Mischiefs to their poor Subjects, and to trouble all the World with War for
their unjust and detestable Pleasure. I will put him to a Trade, and make him a
Crier of Green-sauce. Go to, begin and cry; Do you lack any Green-sauce? and
the poor Devil cried. That is too low (said Panurge); then took him by the Ear,
saying, Sing higher in Ge, sol, re, ut. So, so, (poor Wretch) thou have a good
Throat: Thou could never have been so happy had thou continued longer King.

And Pantagruel made himself merry with all this. For I dare boldly say, that
he was the best little Gaffer that was to be seen between this and the end of a
Staff. Thus was Anarchus made a good Crier of Green-sauce. Two Days thereafter,
Panurge married him with an old Lantern-carrying Hag; and he himself made the
Wedding with fine Sheeps-Heads, brave Haslets with Mustard, gallant Salligots
with Garlic, of which he sent five Horse-loads unto Pantagruel; which he ate
up all, he found them so appetizing. And for their Drink, they had a kind of
small well-watered Wine, and some Sorbapple-cider. And to make them dance, he
hired a blind Man that made Music to them with a Windbroach.

After Dinner he led them to the Palace, and showed them to Pantagruel, and
said, pointing to the married Woman, You need not fear that she will crack.
Why? said Pantagruel. Because, said Panurge, she is well slit and broke up
already. What do you mean by that? said Pantagruel. Do not you see, said
Panurge, that the Chestnuts which are roasted in the Fire, if they be whole,
they crack as if they were mad* and to keep them from cracking, they make an
Incision in them, and slit them: So this new Bride is in her lower Parts well
slit before, and therefore will not crack behind.

Pantagruel gave them a little Lodge near the Lower-street, and a Mortar of
Stone wherein to bray and pound their Sauce. And in this manner did they do
their little Business, he being as pretty a Crier of Green-sauce as ever was
seen in the Country of Vtopia. But I have been told since, that his Wife does
beat him like Plaster, and the poor Sot dares not defend himself, he is so
simple.

CHAP. XXXII. How Pantagruel with his Tongue covered a whole Army, and what the
Author saw in his Mouth.
THus as Pantagruel with all his Army had entered into the Country of the
Dipsodes, every one was glad of it, and incontinently rendered themselves unto
him, bringing him out of their own good Wills the Keys of all the Cities where
he went, the Almirods only excepted; who being resolved to hold out against
him, made answer to his Heralds that they would not yield but upon very
honorable and good Conditions.

What, (said Pantagruel) do they ask any better Terms than the Hand at the Pot,
and the Glass in their Fist? Come let us go sack them, and put them all to the
Sword. Then did they put themselves in good order, as being fully determined to
give an Assault. But by the way passing through a large Field, they were
overtaken with a great Shower of Rain. Whereat they began to shiver and
tremble, to crowd, press and thrust close to one another. When Pantagruel saw
that, he made their Captains tell them, that it was nothing, and that he saw
well above the Clouds, that it would be nothing but a little Dew* but
howsoever, that they should put themselves in order, and he would cover them.
Then did they put themselves in a close order, and stood as near to other as
they could; and Pantagruel drew out his Tongue only halfway, and covered them
all, as a Hen does her Chickens.

In the mean time I who relate to you these so veritable Stories, hid my self
under a Burdock-leaf, which was not much less in Largeness than the Arch of the
Bridge of Montrible: but when I saw them thus covered, I went toward them to
shelter my self likewise, which I could not do; for that (as the Saying is) at
the Yards End there is no Cloth left. Then as well as I could, I got upon it,
and went along full two Leagues upon his Tongue, and so long marched, that at
last I came into his Mouth: But O Gods and Goddesses, what did I see there?
Jupiter confound me with his trisulk Lightning if I lie: I walked there as they
do in Sophie at Constantinople, and saw there great Rocks like the Mountains in
Denmark, I believe that those were his Teeth; I saw also fair Medows, large
Forests, great and strong Cities, not a jot less than Lions or Poictiers: The
first Man I met with there was a good honest Fellow planting Colworts; whereat
being very much amazed, I asked him, My Friend, what do thou make here? I
plant Colworts, said he: But how, and wherewith said I? Ha Sir, said he, every
one cannot have his Ballocks as heavy as a Mortar; neither can we be all rich:
thus do I get my poor Living, and carry them to the Market to sell in the City
which is here behind. Jesus! (said I) is there here a new World? Sure (said he)
it is never a jot new, but it is commonly reported, that without this there is
an Earth, whereof the Inhabitants enjoy the Light of a Sun and a Moon; and that
it is full of, and replenished with very good Commodies; but yet this is more
ancient than that. Yea, but (said I) my Friend, what is the Name of that City
whither thou carriest thy Colworts to sell? It is called Alpharage, (said he)
and all the Indwellers are Christians, very honest Men, and will make you good
cheer. To be brief, I resolved to go thither. Now in my way I met with a Fellow
that was lying in wait to catch Pigeons, of whom I asked, (My Friend) from
whence come these Pigeons? Sir, (said he) they come from the other World. Then
I thought that when Pantagruel yawned, the Pigeons went into his Mouth in whole
Flocks, thinking that it had been a Pigeon-House.

Then I went into the City, which I found fair, very strong, and seated in a
good Air; but at my Entry the Guard demanded of me my Pass or Ticket; whereat I
was much astonished, and asked them, ( My Masters) is there any Danger of the
Plague here? O Lord, (said they) they die hard by here so fast, that the Cart
runs about the Streets. Good God! (said I) and where? whereunto they answered,
That it was in Larinx and Phaerinx, which are two great Cities, such as Rowen
and Nantz, rich and of great Trading: and the Cause of the Plague was by a
stinking and infectious Exhalation which lately vapoured out of the Abismes,
whereof there have died above two and twenty hundred and threescore thousand
and sixteen Persons within this Seven night. Then I considered, calculated and
found, that it was a rank and unsavory Breathing, which came out of
Pantagruel's Stomach when he did eat so much Garlic, as we have aforesaid.

Parting from thence I passed amongst the Rocks, which were his Teeth, and
never left walking till I got upon one of them, and there I found the
pleasantest Places in the World, great large Tennis-courts, fair Galleries,
sweet Meddows, store of Vines, and an infinite Number of Banqueting Summer
Outhouses in the Fields, after the Italian Fashion, full of Pleasure and
Delight, where I stayed full four Months, and never made better cheer in my
Life as then. After that I went down by the hinder Teeth to come to the Chaps;
but in the way I was robbed by Thieves in a great Forest that is in the
Territory toward the Ears. Then (after a little further traveling) I fell
upon a pretty petty Village, (truly I have forgot the Name of it) where I was
yet merrier than ever, and got some certain Money to live by, can you tell how?
by Sleeping: for there they hire Men by the Day to sleep, and they get by it
six Pence a Day; but they that can snort hard get at least Nine-pence. How I
had been robbed in the Valley I informed the Senators, who told me that in very
truth the People of that side were bad Livers, and naturally thievish; whereby
I perceived well, that as we have with us the Countries Cisalpine and
Transalpine, so have they there the Countries Cidentine and Tradentine, that
is, behither and beyond the Teeth: but it is far better living on this side,
and the Air is purer. There I began to think, that it is very true which is
commonly said, that the one half of the World knows not how the other half
lives. Seeing none before my self had ever written of that Country, wherein
are above five and twenty Kingdoms inhabited, besides Deserts, and a great Arm
of the Sea. I have composed a great Book, entitled, The History of the
Gorgians, because they dwell in the Gorge of my Master Pantagruel.

At last I was willing to return, and passing by his Beard, I cast my self upon
his Shoulders, and from thence slid down to the Ground, and fell before him. As
soon as I was perceived by him, he asked me, Whence come thou, Alcosribas? I
answered him, Out of your Mouth, my Lord? And how long have thou been there,
said he? Since the time (said I) that you went against the Almirods; that is,
about six Months ago, said he. And wherewith did thou live? what did thou
drink? I answered, My Lord, of the same that you did, and of the daintiest
Morsels that passed through your Throat I took Toll. Yea, but said he, where
did thou shite? In your Throat (my Lord) said I. Ha, ha, thou art a merry
Fellow, said he. We have with the Help of God conquered all the Land of the
Dipsodes, I will give thee the Chastellein of Salmigo^din. Grammercy, my Lord,
said I, you gratify me beyond all that I have deserved of you.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Pantagruel became sick, and the manner how he was recovered.
A While after this the good Pantagruel fell sick, and had such an Illness in
his Stomach, that he could neither eat nor drink: and because Mischief seldom
comes alone, he had got also the hot Piss, which tormented him more than you
would believe. His Physicians nevertheless helped him very well, and with store
of Lenitives and diuretic Drugs made him piss away his Pain: His Urine was so
hot, that since that time it is not yet cold; and you have of it in diverse
Places of France, according to the Course that it took, and they are called the
hot Baths, as at Coderets; at Limous; at Dast; at Ballervie; at Nerie; at
Bourbonansie; and elsewhere. In Italy, at Mongros; at Appone; at Sancto Petro
de Padua; at St. Helen; at Casa Nuova: At St. Bartolomee in the County of
Boulogne: at the Lorrette; and a thousand other Places.

And I wonder much at a Rabble of foolish Philosophers and Physicians, who
spend their time in disputing, whence the Heat of the said Waters comes,
whether it be by reason of Borax, or Sulphur, or Alum, or Saltpeter, that is
within the Mine; for they do nothing but dote, and better were it for them to
rub their Arse against a Thistle, than to waste away their time thus in
disputing of that whereof they know not the Original: for the Resolution is
easy, neither need we to enquire any further, than that the said Baths came by
a (...) Piss of the good Pantagruel.

Now to tell you after what manner he was cured of his principal Disease, I let
pass how for a Minorative, he took four hundred pound Weight of Colophoniack
Scammonee; six score and eighteen Cart-loads of Caffia; eleven thousand and
nine hundred pound Weight of Rubarb, besides other confused Jumblings of sundry
Drugs. You must understand, that by the Advice of the Physicians, it was
ordered that what did offend his Stomach should be taken away; and therefore
they made seventeen great Balls of Copper, each whereof was bigger than that
which is to be seen on the top of St. Peter's Needle at Rome, and in such sort,
that they did open in the midst, and shut with a Spring. Into one of them
entered one of his Men, carrying a Lanthorn and a Torch lighted, and so
Pantagruel swallowed him down like a little Pill: Into seven others went seven
Country-fellows, having every one of them a Shovel on his Neck: Into nine
others entered nine Wood-carriers, having each of them a Basket hung at his
Neck, and so were they swallowed down like Pills: When they were in his
Stomach, every one undid his Spring, and came out of their Cabins: the first
whereof was he that carried the Lanthorn, and so they fell more than half a
League into a^most horrible Gulf, more stinking and infectious than ever was
Mephitis, or the Marshes of Camerina, or the abominably unsavory Lake of
Sorbona, whereof Strabo makes mention. And had it not been, that they had very
well antidoted their Stomach, Heart and Wine-pot, which is called the Noddle,
they had been altogether suffocated and choked with these detestable Vapors:
O what a Perfume! O what an Evaporation wherewith to bewray the Masks or
Muflers of young mangy Queans! After that with groping and smelling they came
near to the fecal Matter and the corrupted Humors. Finally, they found a
Montjoy, or Heap of Ordure and Filth; then fell the Pioneers to work to dig it
up, and the rest with their Shovels filled the Baskets; and when all was
cleansed, every one retired himself into his Ball.

This done, Pantagruel enforcing himself to a Vomit, very easily brought them
out, and they made no more show in his Mouth than a Fart in yours: But when
they came merrily out of their Pills, I thought upon the Grecians coming out of
the Trojan Horse. By this Means was ^he healed, and brought unto his former
State and Convalescence. And of these brazen Pills you have one at Orleans,
upon the Steeple of the Holy Cross Church.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Conclusion of this present Book, and the Excuse of the Author.
NOw (my Masters) you have heard a Beginning of the horrifick History of my
Lord and Master Pantagruel. Here will I make an end of the first Book. My Head
aches a little, and I perceive that the Registers of my Brain are somewhat
jumbled and disordered with this Septembral Juice. You shall have the rest of
the History at Frankfort Mart next coming, and there shall you see how Panurge
was married and made a Cuckold within a Month after his Wedding: how Pantagruel
found out the Philosopher's Stone, the Manner how he found it, and the Way how
to use it: How he past over the Caspian Mountains, and how he sailed through
the Atlantic Sea, defeated the Cannibals, and conquered the Isles of Perles;
how he married the Daughter of the King of India, called Presian; how he fought
against the Devil, and burnt up five Chambers of Hell, ransacked the great
black Chamber, threw Proserpina into the Fire, broke five Teeth of Lucifer, and
the Horn that was in his Arse. How he visited the Regions of the Moon, to know
whether indeed the Moon were not entire and whole; or if the Women had three
Quarters of it in their Heads, and a thousand other little Merriments all
veritable. These are brave things truly: Good Night, Gentlemen, Perdonate mi,
and think not so much upon my Faults, that you forget your own. If you say to
me, (Master) it would seem that you were not very wise in writing to us these
flimflam Stories, and pleasant Fooleries;

I answer you, that you are not much wiser to spend your time in reading them.
Nevertheless, if you read them to make your selves merry, as in manner of
Pastime I wrote them, you and I both are far more worthy of Pardon than a great
Rabble of squint-minded Fellows, counterfeit Saints, demure Lookers,
Hypocrites, Zealots, tough Friars, Buskin-Monks, and other such Sects of Men,
who disguise themselves like Maskers to deceive the World: for whilst they give
the common People to understand, that they are busied about nothing but
Contemplation and Devotion in Fastings and Maceration of their Sensuality, and
that only to sustain and aliment the small Frailty of their Humanity; it is so
far otherwise, that on the contrary (God knows) what cheer they make, Et Curios
simulant, sed bacchanalia vivunt. You may read it in great Letters, in the
coloring of their red Snowts, and gulching Bellies as big as a Tun, unless it
be when they perfume themselves with Sulphur. As for their Study it is wholly
taken up in reading of Pantagruelin Books, not so much to pass the Time
merriiy, as to hurt some one or other mischievously, to wit, in articling,
sole-articling, wry-neckifying, buttock-stirring, ballocking, and
diabliculating, that is calumniating: wherein they are like unto the poor
Rogues of a Village, that are busy in stirring up and scraping in the Ordure
and Filth of little Children in the Season of Cherries and Guinds, and that
only to find the Kernels, that they may sell them to the Druggists, to make
thereof Pomander-Oil. Fly from these Men, abhor and hate them as much as I do,
and upon my Faith you will find your selves the better for it. And if you
desire to be good Pantagruelists, (that is to say, to live in Peace, Joy,
Health, making your selves always merry) never trust those Men that always peep
out at one Hole.

The End of the Second Book of RABELAIS.
FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE WORKS OF Mr. Francis Rabelais, Doctor in Physic.

Containing the Heroic Deeds of Pantagruel the Son of Gargantua.

Now faithfully Translated into English; by the unimitable Pen of Sir Thomas
Vrwhart, Knight. and Bar.

The Translator of the Two First BOOKS.

Never before Printed.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, 1693.

Francis Rabelais to the Soul of the deceased Queen of Navarre.
ABstracted Soul, ravished with ecstasies,
Gone back, and now familiar in the Skies.
Thy former Host, thy Body, leaving quite,
Which to obey thee always took delight;
Obsequious, ready. Now from motion free,
Senseless, and as it were, in Apathy.
Would thou not issue forth, for a short space,
From that Divine, Eternal, Heavenly place,
To see the third part, in this earthy Cell,
Of the brave Acts of good Pantagruel.
The Third Book of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the good Pantagruel.
The AUTHOR's Prologue.
GOOD People, most Illustrious Drinkers, and you thrice precious gouty
Gentlemen. Did you ever see Diogenes the Cynick Philosopher, if you have seen
him, you then had your Eyes in your Head, or I am very much out of my
Understanding and Logical Sense. It is a gallant thing to see the clearness of
(Wine, Gold) the Sun. I Will be judged by the blind born so renowned in the
Sacred Scriptures; who having at his choice to ask whatever he would from him
who is Almighty, and whose Word in an Instant is effectually performed, asked
nothing else but that he might see. Item you are not young, which is a
competent Quality for you to Philosophat more than Physically in Wine (not in
vain) and henceforwards to be of the Bacchick Council; to the end that opining
there, you may give your Opinion faithfully of the Substance, Color, excellent
Odor, Eminency, Propriety, Faculty, Virtue, and effectual Dignity of the said
blessed and desired Liquor.

If you have not seen him (as I am easily induced to believe that you have not)
at least you have heard some talk of him. For through the Air, and the whole
extent of this Hemisphere of the Heavens has his Report and Fame, even until
this present time, remained very memorable and renowned. Then all of you are
derived from the Phrygian Blood (if I be not deceived) if you have not so many
Crowns as Midas had, yet have you something (I know not what) of him, which the
Persians of old esteemed more of in all their Otacusts, and which was more
desired by the Emperor Antonine; and gave occasion thereafter to the Basilisco
at Rohan to be Surnamed Goodly ears. If you have not heard of him, I will
presently tell you a Story to make your Wine relish: Drink then, so, to the
purpose; hearken now whilst I give you notice (to the end that you may not like
Infidels be by your simplicity abused) that in his time he was a rare
Philosopher, and the chearfullest of a thousand: If he had some Imperfection,
so have you, so have we; for there is nothing (but God) that is perfect: Yet so
it was, that by Alexander the Great (although he had Aristotle for his
Instructor and Domestic) was he held in such Estimation, that he wished if he
had not been Alexander to have been Diogenes the Sinopian.

When Philip King of Macedon enterprised the Siege and Ruin of Corinth, the
Corinthians having received certain Intelligence by their Spies, that he with a
numerous Army in Battle Rank was coming against them, were all of them (not
without cause) most terribly afraid; and therefore were not neglective of their
Duty, in doing their best Endeavors to put themselves in a fit posture to
resist his Hostile Approach, and defend their own City.

Some from the Fields brought into the Fortified Places their Movables,
Bestial, Corn, Wine, Fruit, Victuals, and other necessary Provision.

Others did fortify and rampire their Walls, set up little Fortresses,
Bastions, squared Ravelins, dug Trenches, cleansed Countermines, fenced
themselves with Gabions, contrived Platforms, emptied Casemates, barricado'd
the false Brayes, erected the Cavalliers, repaired the Contrescarfes,
plastered the Courtines, lengthned Ravelins, stopped Parapets, mortaised
Barbacans, assured the Port-culleys, fastened the Herses, Sarasinesks and
Cataracks, placed their Centries, and doubled their Patrouille.

Every one did watch and ward, and not one was exempted from carrying the
Basket.

Some polished Corselets, varnished Backs and Breasts, cleaned the Head-pieces,
Mail-Coats, Brigandins, Salads, Helmets, Murrions, Jacks, Gushets, Gorgets,
Hoguines, Brassars, and Cuissars, Corseletts, Haubergeons, Shields, Bucklers,
Targuets, Greves, Gantlets and Spurs.

Others made ready Bows, Slings, Crossbows, Pellets, Catapults, Migrames or
Fireballs, Firebrands, Balists, Scorpions, and other such Warlike Engines,
expugnatorie, and destructive to the Hellepolists.

They sharpened and prepared Spears, Staves, Pikes, Brown^Bills, Halberts, Long
Hooks, Lances, Zagages, Quarterstaves, Eelspears, Partisans, Troutstaves,
Clubs, Battle-axes, Maces, Darts, Dartlets, Glaves, Javelins, Javelots, and
Trunchions.

They set Edges upon Cimeters, Cutlasses, Badelans, Back-swords, Tucks,
Rapiers, Bayonets, Arrow-heads, Dags, Daggers, Mandousians, Poigniards,
Whinyards, Knives, Skenes, Sables, Chipping Knives, and Raillons.

Every Man exercised his Weapon, every Man scowred off the Rust from his
natural Hanger: Nor was there a Woman amongst them (though never so reserved or
old) who made not her Harnish to be well furbished; as you know the Corinthian
Women of old were reputed very courageous Combatants.

Diogenes seeing them all so warm at work, and himself not employed by the
Magistrates in any business whatsoever, he did very seriously (for many days
together, without speaking one Word) consider, and contemplate the Countenance
of his Fellow-Citizens.

Then on a sudden, as if he had been roused up and inspired by a Martial
Spirit, he girded his Cloak, scarf-ways, about his Left Arm, tucked up his
Sleeves to the Elbow, trussed himself like a Clown gathering Apples, and giving
to one of his old Acquaintance his Wallet, Books, and Opistrographs, away went
he out of Town toward a little Hill or Promontory of Corinth called Cranie;
and there on the Strand, a pretty level place, did he roll his Jolly Tub, which
served him for an House to shelter him from the Injuries of the Weather: There,
I say, in a great Vehemence of Spirit, did he turn it, veer it, wheel it, whirl
it, frisk it, jumble it, shuffle it, huddle it, tumble it, hurry it, joult it,
justle it, overthrow it, evert it, invert it, subvert it, overturn it, beat it,
thwack it, bump it, batter it, knock it, thrust it, push it, jert it, shock it,
shake it, toss it, throw it, overthrow it up-side down, topsiturvy, arsiturvy,
tread it, trample it, stamp it, tap it, ting it, ring it, tingle it, towl it,
sound it, resound it, stop it, shut it, unbung it, close it, unstopple it. And
then again in a mighty bustle he bandy'd it, slubber'd it, hacked it, whitled
it, way'd it, darted it, hurled it, staggered it, reeled it, swing'd it,
brangled it, tottered it, lifted it, heaved it, transformed it, transfigur'd
it, transposed it, transplaced it, reared it, raised it, hoised it, washed it,
dighted it, cleansed it, rinced it, nailed it, settled it, fastened it, shackled
it, fettered it, levelled it, blocked it, tugged it, tew'd it, carried it,
bedash'd it, beray'd it, parched it, mounted it, broached it, nicked it,
notch'd it, bespattered it, decked it, adorned it, trimmed it, garnished it,
gaged it, furnished it, boar'd it, pierced it, trap'd it, rumbled it, slid it
down the Hill, and precipitated it from the very height of the Cranie; then
from the foot to the top (like another Sisyphus with his Stone) bore it up
again, and every way so banged it and belabour'd it, that it was ten thousand
to one he had not struck the bottom of it out.

Which when one of his Friends had seen, and asked him why he did so toil his
Body, perplex his Spirit, and torment his Tub? The Philosopher's Answer was,
That not being employed in any other Charge by the Republic, he thought it
expedient to thunder and storm it so tempestuously upon his Tub, that amongst a
People so fervently busy, and earnest at work, he alone might not seem a
loytering Slug and lasie Fellow. To the same purpose may I say of my self, Tho
I be rid from Fear,
I am not void of Care.
For perceiving no Account to be made of me toward the Discharge of a Trust of
any great Concernment, and considering that through all the parts of this most
noble Kingdom of France, both on this and on the other side of the Mountains,
every one is most diligently exercised and busied; some in the fortifying of
their own Native Country, for its Defense; others, in the repulsing of their
Enemies by an Offensive War; and all this with a Policy so excellent, and such
admirable Order, so manifestly profitable for the future, whereby France shall
have its Frontiers most magnifically enlarged* and the Frenches assured of a
long and well-grounded Peace, that very little* withholds me from the Opinion
of good Heraclitus, which affirms War to be the Father of all good things;
and therefore do I believe that War is in Latin called Bellum, not by
Antiphrasis, as some Patchers of old rusty Latin would have us to think;
because in War there is little Beauty to be seen, but absolutely and simply;
for that in War appears all that is good and graceful, and that by the Wars
is purged out all manner of Wickedness and Deformity. For Proof whereof the
wise and pacifick Solomon could no better represent the unspeakable Perfection
of the Divine Wisdom, than by comparing it to the due disposure and ranking of
an Army in Battle Array, well provided and ordered.

Therefore by reason of my Weakness and Inability, being reputed by my
Compatriots unfit for the Offensive part of Warfare; and on the other side,
being no way employed in matter of the Defensive, although it had been but to
carry Burdens, fill Ditches, or break Clods, either whereof had been to me
indifferent, I held it not a little disgraceful to be only an Idle Spectator of
so many valorous, eloquent and warlike Persons, who in the view and sight of
all Europe act this notable Interlude or Tragicomedy, and not make some Effort
toward the Performance of this, nothing at all remains for me to be done. In
my Opinion, little Honor is due to such as are mere Lookers on, liberal of
their Eyes, and of their Purse parsimonious; who conceal their Crowns, and hide
their Silver; scratching their Head with one Finger like grumbling Puppies,
gaping at the Flies like Tithe Calves; clapping down their Ears like Arcadian
Asses at the Melody of Musicians, who with their very Countenances in the depth
of silence express their Consent to the Prosopopeie.

Having made this Choice and Election, it seemed to me that my Exercise therein
would be neither unprofitable nor troublesome to any, whilst I should thus set
agoing my Diogenical Tub, which is all that is left me safe from the Shipwreck
of my former Misfortunes.

At this dingle dangle wagging of my Tub, what would you have me to do? By the
Virgin that tucks up her Sleeve, I know not as yet: Stay a little till I suck
up a Draught of this Bottle, it is my true and only Helicon; it is my Caballine
Fountain; it is my sole Entousiasm. Drinking thus I meditate, discourse,
resolve and conclude. After that the Epilogue is made, I laugh, I write, I
compose, and drink again. Cynius drinking wrote, and wriing drank. Aschylus (if
Plutarch in his Symposiaes merit any Faith) drank composing, and drinking
composed. Homer never wrote fasting, and Cato never wrote till after he had
drunk. These Passages I have brought before you, to the end you may not say
that I live without the Example of Men well praised, and better. prised. It is
good and fresh enough, even (as if you would say) it is entering upon the Second
Degree. God the good God Sabbath (that is to say, the God of Armies) be praised
for it eternally. If you after the same manner would take one great Draught, or
two little ones, whilst you have your Gown about you. I truly find no kind of
Inconveniency in it, provided you send up to God for all some small scantling
of Thanks.

Since then my Luck or Destiny is such as you have heard, for it is not for
every body to go to Corinth, I am fully resolved to be so little idle and
unprofitable, that I will set my self to serve the one and the other sort of
People, amongst the Diggers, Pioniers and Rampire-builders, I will do as did
Neptune and Apollo at Troy under Laomedon, or as did Renault of Mountauban in
his latter days: I will serve the Masons, I Will set on the Pot to boil for the
Bricklayers; and whilst the minced Meat is making ready at the sound of my
small Pipe, I Will measure the Muzzle of the musing Dotards. Thus did Amphion
with the Melody of his Harp, found, build and finish the great and renowned
City of Thebes.

For the use of the Warriors I am about to broach off new my Barrel to give
them a taste, (which by two former Volumes of mine, if by the deceitfulness and
falsehood of Printers they had not been jumbled, marred and spoiled, you would
have very well relished) and draw unto them of the growth of our own trippery
Pastimes, a gallant third part of a Gallon, and consequently a jolly cheerful
Quart of Pantagruelick Sentences, which you may lawfully call (if you please)
Diogenical; and shall have me (seeing I cannot be their Fellow-Soldier) for
their faithful Butler, refreshing and cheering, according to my little power,
their return from the Alarms of the Enemy; as also for an indefatigable
Extoller of their Martial Exploits and Glorious Achievements. I shall not fail
therein par lapathium acutum de dieu, if Mars fail not in Lent, which the
cunning Lecher (I warrant you) will be loath to do.

I remember nevertheless to have read, that Ptolomee the Son of Lagus one day,
amongst the many Spoils and Booties, which by his Victories he had acquired,
presenting to the Egyptians in the open view of the People, a Bactrian Camel
all black, and a party-colored Slave, in such sort, as that the one half of
his Body was black, and the other white, not in partition of breadth by the
Diaphragma, as was that Woman consecrated to the Indian Venus, whom the Tyanean
Philosopher did see between the River Hydaspes, and mount Caucasus, but in a
perpendicular Dimension of Altitude; which were things never before that seen
in Egypt. He expected by the show of these Novelties to win the love of the
People. But what happened thereupon? At the production of the Camel they were all
affrighted, and offended at the sight of the party-colored Man: Some scoffed
at him as a detestible Monster brought forth by the Error of Nature. In a
word, of the Hope which he had to please these Egyptians, and by such means to
increase the Affection which they naturally bore him, he was altogether
frustrate and disappointed; understanding fully by their Deportments, that they
took more pleasure and delight in things that were proper, handsome and perfect,
than in misshapen, monstrous and ridiculous Creatures; since which time he had
both the Slave and the Camel in such dislike that very shortly thereafter,
either through Negligence, or for want of ordinary Sustenance, they did
exchange their Life with Death.

This Example, My Cake will be Dough, and for my Venus I shall have but some
deformed Puppy, puts me in a suspense between hope and fear, misdoubting
that for the Contentment which I aim at, I will but reap what shall be most
distastful to me; instead of serving them, I shall but vex them, and offend
them whom I purpose to exhilerate; resembling in this dubious Adventure
Euclion's Cook, so renowned by Plautus in his Pot; and by Ausonius in his
Griphon, and by diverse others; which Cook, for having by his scraping,
discovered a Treasure, had his Hide well curry'd. Put the case I get no Anger
by it, though formerly such things fell out, and the like may occur again: Yet,
by Hercules, it will not. So I perceive in them all one, and the same
specifical Form, and the like individual Proprieties, which our Ancestors
called Pantagruelism; by virtue whereof they will bear with any thing that
flows from a good, free, and loyal Heart. I have seen them ordinarily take
good will in part of payment, and remain satisfied therewith, when one was not
able to do better. Having dispatched this point, I return to my Barrel.

Up my Lads, to this Wine, spare it not; drink Boys, and trowl it off at full
Bowls; if you do not think it good, let it alone. I am not like those officious
and importunate Sots, who by Force, Outrage and Violence constrain an easy
good-natured Fellow to whiffle, quaff, carouse, and what is worse. All honest
Tiplers, all honest gouty Men, all such as are adry, coming to this little
Barrel of mine, need not drink thereof, if it please them not; but if they have
a mind to it, and that the Wine prove agreeable to the Tastes of their
worshipful Worships, let them drink frankly, freely and boldly, without paying
any thing, and welcome. This is my Decree, my Statute and Ordinance; and let
none fear there shall be any want of Wine as at the Marriage of Cana in
Galilee; for how much soever you shall draw forth at the Faucet, so much shall
I tun in at the Bung. Thus shall the Barrel remain inexhaustible; it has a
lively Spring and perpetual Current. Such was the Beverage contained within the
Cup of Tantalus, which was figuratively represented amongst the Bracman Sages.
Such was in Iberia the Mountain of Salt so highly written of by Cato. Such was
the Branch of Gold consecrated to the subterranean Goddess, which Virgil treats
of so sublimely. It is a true Cornu-copia of Merriment and Railery. If at any
time it seem to you to be emptied to the very Lees, yet shall it not for all
that be drawn wholly dry; good Hope remains there at the bottom, as in
Pandora's Bottle; and not despair, as in the Punction of the Danaids. Remark
well what I have said, and what manner of People they be whom I do invite; for
to the end that none be deceived, I (in imitation of Lucilius, who did protest
that he wrote only to his own Tarentias and Consentius, have not pierced this
Vessel for any else, but you honest Men, who are Drinkers of the First Edition,
and gouty Blades of the highest degree. The great Dorophages, Bribe-mongers,
have (on their hands) occupation enough, and enough on the Hooks, for their
Venison. There may they follow their Prey; here is no Garbage for them. You
Pettifoggers, Garbellers, and Masters of Chicanery, speak not to me I beseech
you, in the name of, and for the Reverence you bear to the Four Hips that
engendered you, and to the Quickening Peg which at that time conjoined them. As
for Hypocrites, much less; although they were all of them unsound in Body,
pockify'd, scurfie, furnished with unquenchable Thirst, and insatiable Eating;
because indeed they are not of good but of evil, and of that evil, from which
we daily pray to God to deliver us. And albeit we see them sometimes
counterfeit Devotion, yet never did Old Age make pretty Moppet. Hence Mastiffs,
Dogs in a Doublet, get you behind, aloof Villains, out of my Sunshine; Curs, to
the Devil. Do you jog hither, wagging your Tails, so pant at my Wine, and
bepiss my Barrel? Look here is the Cudgel, which Diogines, in his last Will,
ordained to be set by him after his Death, for beating away, crushing the
Reins, and breaking the Backs of these Bustuary Hobgoblins, and Cerberian
Hell Hounds. Pack you hence therefore you Hypocrites to your Sheep-dogs, get
you gone you Dissemblers to the Devil. Hay! What, are you there yet? I renounce
my part of Papimanie. If I snatch you, Grr, Grrr, Grrrrrr. Avaunt, Avaunt, will
you not be gone? May you never shit till you be soundly lashed with Stirrup
Leather, never piss but by the Strapado, nor be otherways warmed, than by the
Bastinado.

CHAP. I. How Pantagruel transported a Colony of Utopians into Dypsodie.
PAntagruel having wholly subdued the Land of Dypsodie, transported thereunto a
Colony of Utopians, to the number of 9876543210 Men, besides the Women and
little Children, Artificers of all Trades, and Professors of all Sciences; to
people, cultivate and improve that Country, which otherways was ill inhabited,
and in the greatest part thereof but a mere Desert and Wilderness; and did
transport them so much for the excessive multitude of Men and Women which were
in Utopia, multiplied (for number) like Grasshoppers upon the face of the Land.
You understand well enough, nor is it needful further to explain it to you,
that the Utopian Men had so rank and fruitful Genetories, and that the Utopian
Women carried Matrixes so ample, so glutonous, so tenaciously retentive, and so
Architectonically cellulated, that at the end of every Ninth Month Seven
Children at the least (what Male what Female) were brought forth by every
Married Woman, in imitation of the People of Israel in Egypt, if Anthony de
Lira be to be trusted. Nor yet was this Transplantation made so much for the
Fertility of the Soil, the Wholsomness of the Air, or Commodity of the Country
of Dypsodie, as to retain that Rebellious People within the bounds of their
Duty and Obedience, by this new Transport of his ancient and most faithful
Subjects, who from all time out of mind, never knew, acknowledged, owned or
served any other Sovereign Lord but him; and who likewise from the very instant
of their Birth, as soon as they were entered into this World, had, with the Milk
of their Mothers and Nurses, sucked in the Sweetness, Humanity and Mildness of
his Government, to which they were all of them so nourished and habituated,
that there was nothing surer, than that they would sooner abandon their Lives,
than swerve from this singular and primitive Obedience naturally due to their
Prince, whithersoever they should be dispersed or removed.

And not only should they, and their Children successively descending from
their Blood, be such, but also would keep and maintain in this same Fealty, and
obsequious Observance, all the Nations lately annexed to his Empire; which so
truly came to pass, that therein he was not disappointed of his intent. For if
the Utopians were before their Transplantation thither dutiful and faithful
Subjects, the Dypsodes, after some few days conversing with them, were every
whit as (if not more) loyal than they; and that by virtue of I know not what
natural Fervency incident to all Humane Creatures at the beginning of any
labor wherein they took delight; solemnly attesting the Heavens, and supreme
Intelligences of their being only sorry, that no sooner unto their knowledge
had arrived the great Renown of the good Pantagruel.

Remark therefore here (honest Drinkers) that the manner of preserving and
retaining Countries newly Conquered in Obedience, is not (as has been the
Erroneous Opinion of some Tyrannical Spirits to their own Detriment and
Dishonor) to pillage, plunder, force, spoil, trouble, oppress, vex, disquiet,
ruin and destroy the People, ruling, governing and keeping them in awe with
Rods of Iron; and (in a word) eating and devouring them, after the fashion that
Homer calls an unjust and wicked King, (...), that is to say, a Devourer of his
People.

I will not bring you to this purpose the Testimony of Ancient Writers; it
shall suffice to put you in mind of what your Fathers have seen thereof, and
your selves too, if you be not very Babes. Newborn, they must be given suck to,
rocked in a Cradle, and dandled. Trees newly planted must be supported,
underpropped, strengthened and defended against all Tempests, Mischiefs,
Injuries and Calamities. And one lately saved from a long and dangerous
Sickness, and new upon his Recovery, must be forborne, spared and cherished, in
such sort, that they may harbor in their own Breasts this Opinion, that there
is not in the World a King or a Prince, who does not desire fewer Enemies, and
more Friends.

Thus Osiris the great King of the Egyptians, conquered almost the whole Earth,
not so much by Force of Arms, as by easing the People of their Troubles,
teaching them how to live well, and honestly giving them good Laws, and using
them with all possible Affability, Courtesy, Gentleness and Liberality:
Therefore was he by all Men deservedly Entitled, The Great King Evergetes
(that is to say Benefactor) which Style he obtained by virtue of the Command of
Jupiter to Pamyla.

And in effect, Hesiod, in his Hierarchy placed the good Demons (call them
Angels if you will, or Geniuses) as Intercessors and Mediators betwixt the Gods
and Men, they being of a degree inferior to the Gods, but superior to Men;
and for that through their Hands the Riches and Benefits we get from Heaven are
dealt to us; and that they are continually doing us good, and still protecting
us from evil. He says, that they exercise the Offices of Kings; because to do
always good, and never ill, is an Act most singularly Royal.

Just such another was the Emperor of the Universe, Alexander the Macedonian.
After this manner was Hercules Sovereign Possessor of the whole Continent,
relieving Men from monstrous Oppressions, Exactions and Tyrannies; governing
them with Discretion, maintaining them in Equity and Justice, instructing them
with seasonable Policies and wholesome Laws, convenient for, and suitable to the
Soil, Climate and Disposition of the Country, supplying where was wanting,
abating what was superfluous, and pardoning all that was past, with a
sempiternal forgetfulness of all preceding Offenses, as was the Amnestie of the
Athenians, when by the Prowess, Valor and Industry of Thrasybulus, the Tyrants
were exterminated; afterward at Rome by Cicero exposed, and renewed under the
Emperor Aurelian. These are the Philtres, Allurements, Iynges, Inveiglements,
Baits, and Enticements of Love, by the means whereof that may be peaceably
revived, which was painfully acquired. Nor can a Conqueror Reign more happily,
whether he be a Monarch, Emperor, King, Prince or Philosopher, than by making
his Justice to second his Valor. His Valor shows it self in Victory and
Conquest; his Justice will appear in the good Will and Affection of the People,
when he makes Laws, publishes Ordinances, establishes Religion, and does
what is right to every one, as the noble Poet Virgil writes of Octavian
Augustus.

-- Victorque volentes
Per populos dat jura.
Therefore is it that Homer in his Iliads calls a good Prince and great King
(...), that is, The Ornament of the People.

Such was the Consideration of Numa Pompilius the Second King of the Romans, a
just Politician and wise Philosopher, when he ordained that to God Terminus, on
the day of his Festival called Terminales, nothing should be Sacrificed that
had died; teaching us thereby, that the Bounds, Limits and Frontiers of
Kingdoms should be guarded, and preserved in Peace, Amity and Meekness, without
polluting our Hands with Blood and Robbery: Who does otherways, shall not only
lose what he has gained, but also be loaded with this Scandal and Reproach,
That he is an unjust and wicked Purchaser, and his Acquests perish with him,
Iuxta illud malae parta, male dilabuntur. And although during his whole
Lifetime, he should have peaceable possession thereof; yet if what has been
so acquired moulder away in the Hands of his Heirs the same Opproby, Scandal
and Imputation will be charged upon the Defunct, and his Memory remain accursed
for his unjust and unwarrantable Conquest, Iuxta illud, de male quaesitis vix
gaudet tertius haeres.

Remark, likewise, Gentlemen, you Gouty Feoffees in this main Point worthy of
your Observation, how by these means Pantagruel of one Angel made two, which
was a Contingency opposite to the Council of Charlemaine, who made two Devils
of one, when he transplanted the Saxons into Flanders, and the Flemins into
Saxony. For not being able to keep in such Subjection the Saxons, whose
Dominion he had joined to the Empire, but that ever and anon they would break
forth into open Rebellion, if he should casually be drawn into Spain, or other
remote Kingdoms: He caused them to be brought unto his own Country of Flanders,
the Inhabitants whereof did naturally obey him; and transported the Haynaults
and Flemens, his ancient loving Subjects, into Saxony, not mistrusting their
Loyalty, now that they were transplanted into a strange Land. But it happened
that the Saxons persisted in their Rebellion and primitive Obstinacy; and the
Flemins dwelling in Saxony did imbibe the stubborn Manners and Conditions of
the Saxons.

CHAP. II. How Panurge was made Lord of Salmygoudin in Dypsodie, and did waste
his Revenue before it came in.
WHilst Pantagruel was giving Order for the Government of all Dypsodie, he
assigned to Panurge the Lairdship of Salmygoudin, which was yearly worth
6789106789 Ryals of certain Rent, besides the uncertain Revenue of the Locusts
and Periwinkles, amounting one year with another to the value of 435768, or
2435769 French Crowns of Berry. Sometimes it did amount to 1230554321 Seraphs
when it was a good Year, and that Locusts and Periwinkles were in request; but
that was not every Year.

Now his Worship, the new Lord, husbanded this his Estate so providently well
and prudently, that in less than fourteen days he wasted and dilapidated all
the certain and uncertain Revenue of his Lairdship for three whole Years: Yet
did not he properly dilapidate it, as you might say, in founding of
Monasteries, building of Churches, erecting of Colleges, and setting up of
Hospitals, or casting his Bacon-Flitches to the Dogs; but spent it in a
thousand little Banquets and jolly Collations, keeping open House for all
Comers and Goers; yea, to all good Fellows, young Girls, and pretty Wenches;
felling Timber, burning the great Logs for the Sale of the Ashes, borrowing
Money beforehand, buying dear, selling cheap, and eating his Corn (as it were)
whilst it was but Grass.

Pantagruel being advertised of this his Lavishness, was in good sooth no way
offended at the matter, angry nor sorry; for I once told you, and again tell it
you, that he was the best, little, great Goodman that ever girded a Sword to
his Side; he took all things in good part, and interpreted every Action to the
best Sense: He never vexed nor disquieted himself with the least pretense of
Dislike to any thing; because he knew that he must have most grossly abandoned
the Divine Mansion of Reason, if he had permitted his Mind to be never so
little grieved, afflicted or altered at any occasion whatsoever. For all the
Goods that the Heaven covers, and that the Earth contains in all their
Dimensions of Height, Depth, Breadth and Length, are not of so much worth, as
that we should for them disturb or disorder our Affections, trouble or perplex
our Senses or Spirits.

He drew only Panurge aside, and then making to him a sweet Remonstrance and
mild Admonition, very gently represented before him in strong Arguments, That
if he should continue in such an unthrifty course of living, and not become a
better Mesnagier, it would prove altogether impossible for him, or at least
hughly difficult at any time to make him rich. Rich! answered Panurge, Have you
fixed your Thoughts there? Have you underraken the Task to enrich me in this
World? Set your Mind to live merrily in the Name of God and good Folks, let no
other Cark nor Care be harbored within the Sacro sanctified Domicile of your
Celestial Brain. May the Calmness and Tranquillity thereof be never incommodated
with, or over-shadowed by any frowning Clouds of fullen Imaginations and
displeasing Annoyance. For if you live joyful, meery, jocund and glad, I cannot
be but rich enough. Every body cries up thrift, thrift, and good Husbandry; but
many speak of Robin Hood that never shot in his Bow; and talk of that Virtue of
Mesnagery, who know not what belong to it. It is by me that they must be
advised. From me therefore take this Advertisement and Information, that what
is imputed to me for a Vice, has been done in imitation of the University and
Parliament of Paris, places in which is to be found the true Spring and Source
of the lively Idea of Pantheology, and all manner of Justice. Let him be
counted an Heretic that doubts thereof, and does not firmly believe it: Yet
they in one day eat up their Bishop, or the Revenue of the Bishopric (is it
not all one) for a whole year; yea, sometimes for two. This is done on the day
he makes his Entry, and is installed: Nor is there any place for an Excuse; for
he cannot avoid it, unless he would be houted at and stoned for his Parsimony.

It has been also esteemed an act flowing from the Habit of the Four Cardinal
Virtues. Of Prudence in borrowing Money beforehand; for none knows what may
fall out; who is able to tell if the World shall last yet three years? But
although it should continue longer, is there any Man so foolish, as to have the
Confidence to promise himself three years?

What fool so confident to say,
That he shall live one other day?
Of Commutative Justice, in buying dear (I say upon trust) and selling good
cheap, (that is, for ready Money) what says Cato in his Book of Husbandry to
this purpose? The Father of a Family (says he) must be a perpetual Seller; by
which means it is impossible but that at last he shall become rich, if he have
of vendible Ware enough still ready for sale.

Of Distributive Justice it does partake, in giving Entertainment to good
(remark good) and gentle Fellows, whom Fortune had Shipwrack'd (like Ulysses)
upon the Rock of a hungry Stomach without provision of Sustenance: And likewise
to the good (remark the good) and young Wenches: For according to the Sentence
of Hippocrates, Youth is impatient of Hunger, chiefly if it be vigorous,
lively, frolic, brisk, stirring and bouncing; which wanton Lasses willingly
and heartily devote themselves to the pleasure of Honest Men; and are in so far
both Platonic and Ciceronian, that they do acknowledge their being born into
this World, not to be for themselves alone, but that in their proper Persons
their Acquaintance may claim one share, and their Friends another.

The Virtue of Fortitude appears therein by the cutting down and overthrowing
of the great Trees, like a second Milo making Havoc of the dark Forests, which
did serve only to furnish Dens, Caves, and Shelter to Wolves, wild Boars and
Foxes; and afford Receptacles, withdrawing Corners and Refuges to Robbers,
Thieves and Murderers; lurking holes and sculking places for Cutthroat
Assassinators; secret obscure Shops for Coiners of false money, and safe
Retreats for Heretics, laying them even and level with the plain Champian
Fields and pleasant Heathy Ground, at the sound of the Hau-bois and Bagpipes
playing, reeks with the high and stately Timber, and preparing Seats and
Benches for the Eve of the dreadful day of Judgment.

I gave thereby proof of my Temperance in eating my Corn whilst it was but
Grass, like an Hermit feeding upon Sallets and Roots, that so affranchising my
self from the Yoke of sensual Appetites to the utter disclaiming of their
Sovereignty, I might the better reserve somewhat in store, for the relief of
the lame, blind, cripple, maimed, needy, poor and wanting Wretches.

In taking this course I save the Expense of the Weed-grubbers, who gain Money;
of the Reapers in Harvest-time, who drink lustily, and without Water; of
Gleaners, who will expect their Cakes and Bannocks of Threshers, who leave no
Garlic, Scallions, Leeks nor Onyons in our Gardens, (by the Authority of
Thestilis in Virgil) and of the Millers, who are generally Thieves; and of the
Bakers, who are little better; is the small Saving or Frugality; besides the
mischief and damage of the Field-mice, the decay of Barns, and the destruction
usually made by Weesils and other Vermin.

Of Corn in the Blade. You may make good green Sauce of a light Concoction, and
easy Digestion, which recreates the Brain, and exhilerates the Animal Spirits,
rejoices the Sight, opens the Appetite, delights the taste, comfort the
Heart, tickleth the Tongue, cheareth the Countenance, striking a fresh and
lively Color, strengthening the Muscles, tempers the Blood, disburthens the
Midrif, refreshes the Liver, disobstructs the Spleen, eases the Kidneys,
suppleth the Reins, quickens the Joints of the Back, cleanses the
Urine-Conduits, dilates the Spermatick Vessels, shortens the Cremasters,
purges the Bladder, puffs up the Genitories, corrects the prepuce, hardens
the Nut, and rectifies that Member. It will make you have a current Belly to
trot, fart, dung, piss, sneeze, cough, spit, belch, spew, yawn, snuff, blow,
breath, snort, sweat, and set taunt your Robin, with a thousand other rare
advantages. I understand you very well (says Pantagruel) you would thereby
infer, that those of a mean Spirit and shallow Capacity, have not the skill to
spend* much in a short time: You are not the first in whose Conceit that
Heresy has entered: Nero maintained it, and above all Mortals admired most his
Uncle Caius Caligula, for having in few days, by a most wonderfully pregnant
Invention, totally spent all the Goods and Patrimony which Tiberius had left
him.

But instead of observing the Sumptuous Supper-curbing Laws of the Romans, to
wit, the Orchia, the Fannia, the Didia, the Licinia, the Cornelia, the
Lepidiana, the Antia, and of the Corinthians; by the which they were inhibited,
under pain of great punishment, not to spend more in one year than their annual
Revenue did amount to. You have offered up the Oblation of Protervia, which was
with the Romans such a Sacrifice as the Paschal Lamb was amongst the Jews,
wherein all that was eatable was to be eaten, and the remainder to be thrown
into the Fire, without reserving any thing for the next day. I may very justly
say of you, as Cato did of Albidius, who after that he had by a most
extravagant Expense wasted all the Means and Possessions he had to one only
House, he fairly set it on Fire, that he might the better say, Consummatum est.
Even just as since his time St. Thomas Aquinas did when he had eaten up the
whole Lamprey, although there was no necessity in it.

CHAP. III. How Panurge praises the Debtors and Borrowers.
BUT, quoth Pantagruel, when will you be out of Debt? At the next ensuing Term
of the Greek Calends, answered Panurge, when all the World shall be content,
and that it be your Fate to become your own Heir. The Lord forbid that I should
be out of Debt, as if, indeed, I could not be trusted. Who leaves not some
Leaven over night, will hardly have paste the next morning.

Be still indebted to some body or other, that there may be some body always to
pray for you; that the Giver of all good things may grant unto you a blessed,
long, and prosperous Life, fearing if Fortune should deal crosly with you, that
it might be his chance to come short of being paid by you; he will always speak
good of you in every Company, ever and anon purchase new Creditors unto you; to
the end that through their means you may make a shift by borrowing from Peter
to pay Paul, and with other folks Earth fill up his Ditch. When of old in the
Region of the Gauls, by the Institution of the Druids, the Servants, Slaves and
Bondmen were burnt quick at the Funerals and Obsequies of their Lords and
Masters; had not they fear enough, think you, that their Lords and Masters
should die? for per force, they were to die with them for Company. Did not they
uncessantly send up their Supplications to their great God Mercury, as likewise
unto Dis the Father of Wealth, to lengthen out their days, and preserve them
long in health? Were not they very careful to entertain them well, punctually
to look unto them, and to attend them faithfully and circumspectly? For by
those means were they to live together at least until the hour of Death.
Believe me, your Creditors with a more fervent Devotion will beseech Almighty
God to prolong your Life, they being of nothing more afraid than that you
should die; for that they are more concerned for the Sleeve than the Arm, and
love Silver better than their own Lives; as it evidently appears by the
Usurers of Landerousse, who not long since hanged themselves, because the price
of the Corn and Wines was fallen, by the return of a gracious Season. To this
Pantagruel answering nothing, Panurge went on in his Discourse, saying, Truly,
and in good sooth (Sir,) when I ponder my Destiny aright, and think well upon
it, you put me shrewdly to my Plunges, and have me at a Bay in twitting me with
the Reproach of my Debts and Creditors: And yet did I, in this only respect and
consideration of being a Debtor, esteem my self worshipful, reverend and
formidable. For against the Opinion of most Philosophers, that of nothing
arises nothing; yet without having bottomed on so much as that which is called
the First Matter, did I out of nothing become such Maker and Creator, that I
have created, what? a gay number of fair and jolly Creditors. Nay, Creditors (I
will maintain it, even to the very Fire it self exclusively) are fair and
goodly Creatures. Who lends nothing is an ugly and wicked Creature, and an
accursed Imp of the Infernal Old Nick. And there is made, what? Debts: A thing
most precious and dainty, of great Use and Antiquity. Debts (I say) surmounting
the number of Syllables which may result from the Combinations of all the
Consonants, with each of the Vowels heretofore projected, reckoned and
calculated by the Noble Xenocrates. To judge of the perfection of Debtors by
the Numerosity of their Creditors, is the readiest way for entering into the
Mysteries of Practical Arithmetic.

You can hardly imagine how glad I am, when every Morning I perceive my self
environed and surrounded with Brigades of Creditors; humble, fawning, and full
of their Reverences: And whilst I remark, that as I look more favorably upon,
and give a chearfuller Countenance to one than to another, the Fellow thereupon
builds a Conceit that he shall be the first Dispatched, and the foremost in
the Date of Payment; and he valueth my Smiles at the rate of ready Money. It
seems unto me, that I then act and personate the God of the Passion of
Saumure, accompanied with his Angels and Cherubims.

These are my Flatterers, my Soothers, my Claw backs, my Smoothers, my
Parasites, my Saluters, my Givers of good Morrows, and perpetual Orators; which
makes me verily think, that the supreamest Height of Heroic Virtue, described
by Hesiode, consists in being a Debtor, wherein I held the first degree in my
Commencement. Which Dignity though all Humane Creatures seem to aim at, and
aspire thereto, few nevertheless, because of the difficulties in the way, and
encumbrances of hard Passages are able to reach it, as is easily perceivable by
the ardent desire and vehement longing harbored in the Breast of every one, to
be still creating more Debts, and the new Creditors.

Yet does it not lie in the power of every one to be a Debtor. To acquire
Creditors is not at the Disposure of each Man's Arbitriment. You nevertheless
would deprive me of this sublime Felicity. You ask me when I will be out of
Debt. Well, to go yet further on, and possibly worse in your Conceit, may Sanct
Bablin, the good Sanct, snatch me, if I have not all my Lifetime held Debt to
be as an Union or Conjunction of the Heavens with the Earth, and the whole
Cement whereby the Race of Mankind is kept together; yea, of such Virtue and
Efficacy, that, I say, the whole Progeny of Adam would very suddenly perish
without it. Therefore, perhaps, I do not think amiss, when I repute it to be
the great Soul of the Universe, which (according to the Opinion of the
Academicks) vivifyeth all manner of things. In Confirmation whereof, that you
may the better believe it to be so, represent unto your self, without any
prejudicacy of Spirit, in a clear and serene Fancy, the Idea and Form of some
other World than this; take if you please, and lay hold on the thirtieth of
those which the Philosopher Methrodorus did enumerate, wherein it is to be
supposed there is no Debtor or Creditor, that is to say, a World without Debts.

There amongst the Planets will be no regular Course, all will be in Disorder,
Jupiter reckoning himself to be nothing indebted unto Saturn, will go near to
detrude him out of his Sphere, and with the Homerick Chain will be like to hang
up the Intelligences, Gods, Heavens, Demons, Heroes, Devils, Earth and Sea
together with the other Elements. Saturn no doubt combining with Mars will
reduce that so disturbed World into a Chaos of Confusion.

Mercury then would be no more subjected to the other Planets; he would scorn
to be any longer their Camillus, as he was of old termed in the Hetrurian
Tongue; for it is to be imagined that he is no way a Debtor to them.

Venus will be no more Venerable, because she shall have lent nothing. The Moon
will remain bloody and obscure: For to what end should the Sun impart unto her
any of his Light? He owed her nothing. Nor yet will the Sun shine upon the
Earth, nor the Stars send down any good Influence, because the Terrestrial
Globe has desisted from sending up their wonted Nourishment by Vapors and
Exhalations, wherewith Heraclitus said the Stoics proved Cicero maintained
they were cherished and alimented. There would likeways be in such a World no
manner of Symbolization, Alteration, nor Transmutation amongst the Elements;
for the one will not esteem it self obliged to the other, as having borrowed
nothing at all from it. Earth then will not become Water, Water will not be
changed into Air, of Air will be made no Fire, and Fire will afford no Heat
unto the Earth; the Earth will produce nothing but Monsters, Titans, Giants; no
Rain will descend upon it, nor Light shine thereon; no Wind will blow there,
nor will there be in it any Summer or Harvest. Lu^^fer will break loose, and
issuing forth of the depth of Hell, accompanied with his Furies, Fiends and
Horned Devils, will go about to unnestle and drive out of Heaven all the Gods,
as well of the greater as of the lesser Nations. Such a World without lending,
will be no better than a Dog-kennel, a place of Contention and Wrangling, more
unruly and irregular than that of the Rector of Paris; a Devil of an
Hurly-burly, and more disordered Confusion, than that of the Plagues of Douay.
Men will not then salute one another; it will be but lost labor to expect Aid
or Succor from any, or to cry, Fire, Water, Murder, for none will put to
their helping Hand. Why? He lent no Money, there is nothing due to him. No body
is concerned in his Burning, in his Shipwreck, in his Ruin, or in his Death;
and that because he hitherto had lent nothing, and would never thereafter have
lent any thing. In short, Faith, Hope and Charity would be quite banished from
such a World; for Men are born to relieve and assist one another; and in their
stead should succeed and be introduced Defiance, Disdain and Rancour, with the
most execrable Troop of all Evils, all Imprecations and all Miseries. Whereupon
you will think, and that not amiss, that Pandora had there spilt her unlucky
Bottle. Men unto Men will be Wolves, Hobthrushers and Goblins, (as were Lycaon,
Bellorophon, Nebuchodonosor) Plunderers, Highway Robbers, Cutthroats,
Rapperees, Murderers, Payloners, Assassinators, lewd, wicked, malevolent,
pernicious Haters, set against every body, like to Ismael, Metabus, or Timon
the Athenian, who for that cause was named Misanthropos; in such sort, that it
would prove much more easy in Nature to have Fish entertained in the Air, and
Bullocks fed in the bottom of the Ocean, than to support or tolerate a rascally
Rabble of People that will not Lend. These Fellows (I vow) do I hate with a
perfect Hatred; and if conform to the pattern of this grievous, peevish and
perverse World which lends nothing, you figure and liken the little World,
which is Man, you will find in him a terrible justling Coil and Clutter: The
Head will not lend the sight of his Eyes to guide the Feet and Hands; the Legs
will refuse to bear up the Body; the Hands will leave off working any more for
the rest of the Members; the Heart will be weary of its continual Motion for
the beating of the Pulse, and will no longer lend his Assistance; the Lungs
will withdraw the use of their Bellows; the Liver will desist from convoying
any more Blood through the Veins for the good of the whole; the Bladder will
not be indebted to the Kidneys, so that the Urine thereby will be totally
stopped. The Brains, in the interim, considering this unnatural course, will
fall into a raving Dotage, and withold all feeling from the Sinews, and
Motion from the Muscles: Briefly, in such a World without Order and Array,
owing nothing, lending nothing, and borrowing nothing, you would see a more
dangerous Conspiration than that which Esope exposed in his Apologue. Such a
World will perish undoubtedly; and not only perish, but perish very quickly.
Were it Asculapius himself, his Body would immediately rot, and the chafing
Soul full of Indignation take its Flight to all the Devils of Hell after my
Money.

CHAP. IV. Panurge continues his Discourse in the praise of Borrowers and
Lenders.
ON the contrary, be pleased to represent unto your Fancy another World,
wherein every one lends, and every one owes, all are Debtors, and all
Creditors. O how great will that Harmony be, which shall thereby result from
the regular Motions of the Heavens! Methinks I hear it every whit as well as
ever Plato did. What Sympathy will there be amongst the Elements? O how
delectable then unto Nature will be our own Works and Productions? Whilst Ceres
appears laden with Corn, Bacchus with Wines, Flora with Flowers, Pomona with
Fruits, and Juno fair in a clear Air, wholesome and pleasant: I lose my self in
this high Contemplation.

Then will among the Race of Mankind Peace, Love, Benevolence, Fidelity,
Tranquillity, Rest, Banquets, Feastings, Joy, Gladness, Gold, Silver, single
Money, Chains, Rings, with other Ware, and Chaffer of that nature be found to
trot from hand to hand; no Suits at Law, no Wars, no Strife, Debate, nor
wrangling; none will be there an Usurer, none will be there a Pinch-penny, a
Scrape-good Wretch, or churlish hard-hearted Refuser. Good God! Will not this
be the Golden Age in the Reign of Saturn? The true Idea of the Olympic
Regions, wherein all Virtues cease; Charity alone rules, governs,
domineereth and triumphs? All will be fair and goodly People there, all just
and virtuous.

O happy World! O People of that World most happy! Yea, thrice and four times
blessed is that People! I think in very deed that I am amongst them, and swear
to you, by my good Forsooth, that if this glorious aforesaid World had a Pope,
abounding with Cardinals, that so he might have the Association of a Sacred
College, in the space of very few years you should be sure to see the Sancts
much thicker in the Roll, more numerous, wonder-working and mirifick, more
Services, more Vows, more Staves and Wax-Candles than are all those in the Nine
Bishoprics of Britany, St. Yves only excepted. Consider (Sir) I pray you, how
the noble Patelin, having a mind to Deity, and extol even to the Third Heavens
the Father of William Iosseaume, said no more but this, And he did lend his
Goods to those who were desirous of them.

O the fine Saying! Now let our Microcosm be fancied conform to this Model in
all its Members; lending, borrowing and owing, (that is to say) according to
its own Nature: For Nature has not to any other end created Man, but to owe,
borrow and lend; no greater is the Harmony amongst the Heavenly Spheres, than
that which shall be found in its well-ordered Policy. The Intention of the
Founder of this Microcosm is, to have a Soul therein to be entertained, which
is lodged there, as a Guest with its Host, it may live there for a while. Life
consists in Blood, Blood is the Seat of the Soul; therefore the chiefest Work
of the Microcosm, is, to be making Blood continually.

At this Forge are exercised all the Members of the Body; none is exempted from
Labor, each operates apart, and does its proper Office. And such is their
Hierarchy, that perpetually the one borrows from the other, the one lends the
other, and the one is the others Debtor. The stuff and matter convenient which
Nature gives to be turned into Blood is Bread and Wine. All kind of nourishing
Victuals is understood to be comprehended in these two, and from hence in the
Gothish Tongue is called Companage. To find out this Meat and Drink, to prepare
and boil it, the Hands are put to Work, the Feet do walk and bear up the whole
Bulk of the Corporal Mass; the Eyes guide and conduct all; the Appetite in the
Orifice of the Stomach, by means of little sowrish black Humor (called
Melancholy) which is transmitted thereto from the Milt, gives warning to shut
in the Food. The Tongue does make the first Essay, and tastes it; the Teeth do
chaw it, and the Stomach does receive, digest and chylifie it; the Mesaraick
Veins suck out of it what is good and fit, leaving behind the Excrements, which
are, through special Conduits for that purpose, voided by an expulsive Faculty;
thereafter it is carried to the Liver, where it being changed again, it by the
virtue of that new Transmutation becomes Blood. What Joy, conjecture you, will
then be found amongst those Officers, when they see this Rivolet of Gold, which
is their sole Restorative? No greater is the Joy of Alchimists, when after long
Travel, Toil and Expense, they see in their Furnaces the Transmutation: Then is
it that every Member does prepare it self, and strive anew to purify and to
refine this Treasure. The Kidneys through the emulgent Veins draw that Aquosity
from thence which you call Urine, and there send it away through the Ureters to
be slipped downwards; where, in a lower Recepticle, and proper for it, (to wit,
the Bladder) it is kept, and stays there until an opportunity to void it out
in his due time. The Spleen draws from the Blood its Terrestrial part, viz.
The Grounds, Lees or thick Substance settled in the bottom thereof, which you
term Melancholy: The Bottle of the Gall substracts from thence all the
superfluous Choler; whence it is brought to another Shop or Workhouse to be
yet better purified and fined, that is, the Heart, which by its agitation of
Diastolick and Systolick Motions so neatly subtilizeth and inflames it, that in
the right side Ventricle it is brought to perfection, and through the Veins is
sent to all the Members; each parcel of the Body draws it then unto its self,
and after its own fashion is cherished and alimented by it: Feet, Hands,
Thighs, Arms, Eyes, Ears, Back, Breast, yea, all; and then it is, that who
before were Lenders, now become Debtors. The Heart does in its left side
Ventricle so thinnifie the Blood, that it thereby obtains the Name of
Spiritual; which being sent through the Arteries to all the Members of the
Body, serves to warm and winnow the other Blood which runs through the
Veins: The Lights never cease with its Lappets and Bellows to cool and refresh
it; in acknowledgment of which good the Heart through the Arterial Vein imparts
unto it the choicest of its Blood: At last it is made so fine and subtle within
the Rete Mirabilis, that thereafter those Animal Spirits are framed and
composed of it; by means whereof the Imagination, Discourse, Judgment,
Resolution, Deliberation, Ratrocination and Memory have their Rise, Actings and
Operations.

Cops body, I sink, I drown, I perish, I wander astray, and quite fly out of my
self, when I enter into the Consideration of the profound Abyss of this World,
thus lending, thus owing. Believe me, it is a Divine thing to lend, to owe an
Heroic Virtue. Yet is not this all; this little World thus lending, owing and
borrowing, is so good and charitable, that no sooner is the above-specified
Alimentation finished, but that it forthwith projecteth, and has already
forecast, how it shall lend to those who are not as yet born, and by that Loan
endeavor, what it may, to eternize it self, and multiply in Images like the
Pattern, that is, Children. To this end every Member has of the choicest and
most precious of its Nourishment, pare and cut off a Portion, then instantly
dispatcheth it downwards to that place, where Nature has prepared for it very
fit Vessels and Receptacles, through which descending to the Genitories by long
Ambages, Circuits and Flexuosities, it receives a competent Form, and Rooms
apt enough both in the Man and Woman for the future Conservation and
perpetuating of Humane kind. All this is done by Loans and Debts of the one
unto the other; and hence have we this word, the Debt of Marriage. Nature does
reckon Pain to the Refuser, with a most grievous Vexation to his Members, and
an outrageous Fury amidst his Senses. But on the other part, to the Lender a
set Reward, accompanied with Pleasure, Joy, Solace, Mirth and merry Glee.

CHAP. V. How Pantagruel altogether abhors the Debtors and Borrowers.
I Understand you very well, (quoth Pantagruel) and take you to be very good at
Topics, and thoroughly affectioned to your own Cause: But preach it up, and
patrocinate it; prattle on it, and defend it as much as you will, even from
hence to the next Whitsuntide, if you please so to do, yet in the end will you
be astonished to find how you shall have gained no ground at all upon me, nor
persuaded me by your fair Speeches and smooth Talk to enter never so little
into the Thraldom of Debt. You shall owe to none (says the Holy Apostle) any
thing save Love, Friendship and a mutual Benevolence.

You serve me here, I confess, with fine Graphides and Diatyposes, Descriptions
and Figures, which truly please me very well: But let me tell you, if you will
represent unto your Fancy an impudent blustering Bully and an importunate
Borrower, entering afresh and newly into a Town already advertised of his
Manners, you shall find that at his Ingress the Citizens will be more hideously
affrighted and amazed, and in a greater terror and fear, dread and trembling,
than if the Pest it self should step into it in the very same Garb and
Accoutrement wherein the Tyanaean Philosopher found it within the City of
Ephesus. And I am fully confirmed in the Opinion, that the Persians erred not,
when they said, That the Second Vice was to Lie, the first being that of owing
Money. For in very truth, Debts and Lying are ordinarily joined together. I
will nevertheless not from hence infer, that none must owe any thing, or lend
any thing. For who so rich can be, that sometimes may not owe; or who can be so
poor, that sometimes may not lend?

Let the occasion notwithstanding in that case (as Plato very wisely says,
and ordains in his Laws) be such, that none be permitted to draw any Water
out of his Neighbor's Well, until first, they by continual digging and delving
into their own proper Ground, shall have hit upon a kind of Potters Earth,
which is called Ceramite, and there had found no source or drop of Water; for
that sort of Earth, by reason of its Substance, which is fat, strong, firm and
close; so retains its Humidity, that it does not easily evaporate it by any
outward excursion or evaporation.

In good sooth, it is a great shame to choose rather to be still borrowing in
all places from every one, than to work and win. Then only in my Judgment
should one lend, when the diligent, toiling and industrious Person is no longer
able by his labor to make any Purchase unto himself, or otherwise, when by
mischance he has suddenly fallen into an unexpected loss of his Goods.

Howsoever let us leave this Discourse, and from henceforwards do not hang upon
Creditors, nor tie your self to them; I make account for the time past to rid
you freely of them, and from their Bondage to deliver you. The least I should
in this point, (quoth Panurge) is to thank you, though it be the most I can do:
And if Gratitude and Thanksgiving be to be estimated and prized by the
Affection of the Benefactor, that is to be done infinitely and sempiternally;
for the love which you bear me of your own accord and free Grace, without any
merit of mine, goes far beyond the reach of any price or value; it transcends
all weight, all number, all measure, it is endless and everlasting; therefore
should I offer to commensurate and adjust it, either to the size and proportion
of your own noble and gracious Deeds, or yet to the Contentment and Delight of
the obliged Receivers, I would come off but very faintly and flaggingly. You
have verily done me a great deal of good, and multiplied your Favors on me
more frequently than was fitting to one of my condition. You have been more
bountiful toward me than I have deserved, and your Courtesies have by far
surpassed the extent of my merits, I must needs confess it. But it is not, as
you suppose, in the proposed matter: For there it is not where I itch, it is
not there where it fretteth, hurts or vexes me; for henceforth being quit and
out of Debt, what Countenance will I be able to keep? You may imagine that it
will become me very ill, for the first month, because I have never hitherto
been brought up or accustomed to it, I am very much afraid of it. Furthermore,
there shall not one hereafter, Native of the Country of Salmigondy, but he
shall level the Shot toward my Nose; all the back-cracking Fellows of the
World, in discharging of their Postern Petarades, use commonly to say, Voila
pour les quitters; that is, For the quit. My Life will be of very short
continuance, I do foresee it, I recommend to you the making of my Epitaph; for
I perceive I will die confected in the very stinch of Farts. If at any time to
come, by way of restorative to such good Women as shall happen to be troubled
with the grievous pain of the Wind-Cholick, the ordinary Medicaments prove
nothing effectual, the Mummy of all my befarted Body will straight be as a
present Remedy appointed by the Physicians; whereof they taking any small
Modicum, it will incontinently for their Ease afford them a Rattle of Bum-shot,
like a Sal of Muskets.

Therefore would I beseech you to leave me some few Centuries of Debts; as King
Louis the Eleventh, exempting from Suits in Law the Reverend Milles d' Illiers,
Bishop of Chartre, was by the said Bishop most earnestly solicited to leave
him some few for the Exercise of his mind. I had rather give them all my
Revenue of the Periwinkles, together with the other Incomes of the Locusts,
albeit I should not thereby have any parcel abated from off the principal Sums
which I owe. Let us wave this matter (quoth Pantagruel) I have told it you over
again.

CHAP. VI. Why new Married Men were privileged from going to the Wars.
BUT, in the Interim, asked Panurge, by what Law was it constituted, ordained
and established, that such as should plant a new Vineyard, those that should
build a new House, and the new married Men should be exempted and discharged
from the Duty of Warfare for the first year? By the Law (answered Pantagruel)
of Moses. Why (replied Panurge) the lately married? As for the Vine-Planters,
I am now too old to reflect on them; my Condition, at this present, induces me
to remain satisfied with the care of Vintage, finishing and turning the Grapes
into Wine: Nor are these pretty new Builders of Dead Stones written or pricked
down in my Book of Life; it is all with Live Stones that I set up, and erect
the Fabrics of my Architecture, to wit, Men. It was (according to my Opinion,
quoth Pantagruel) to the end, First, That the fresh married Folks should for
the first year reap a full and complete Fruition of their Pleasures in their
mutual exercise of the act of Love, in such sort, that in waiting more at
leisure on the production of Posterity, and propagating of their Progeny, they
might the better increase their Race, and make Provision of new Heirs. That if
in the years thereafter the Men should, upon their undergoing of some Military
Adventure, happen to be killed, their Names and Coats of Arms might continue
with their Children in the same Families: And next that, the Wives thereby,
coming to know whether they were barren or fruitful (for one years Trial, in
regard of the maturity of Age, wherein; of old, they married, was held
sufficient for the Discovery) they might pitch the more suitably, in case of
their first Husbands Decease, upon a Second Match. The fertile Women to be
wedded to those who desire to multiply their Issue; and the steril ones to such
other Mates, as misregarding the storing of their own Lineage, choose them only
for their Virtues, Learning, Genteel Behavior, Domestic Consolation,
management of the House, and Matrimonial Conveniences and Comforts, and such
like. The Preacher of Varennes (says Panarge) detest and abhor the Second
Marriages, as altogether foolish and dishonest.

Foolish and dishonest, (quoth Pantagruel) a plague take such Preachers! Yea
but (quoth Panurge) the like Mischief also befall the Friar, Charmer, who in a
full Auditory, making a Sermon at Perille, and therein abominating the
Reiteration of Marriage, and the entering again in the Bonds of a Nuptial Tie,
did swear and heartily give himself to the swiftest Devil in Hell, if he had
not rather choose, and would much more willingly undertake the unmaidning or
depucelating of a hundred Virgins, than the simple Drudgery of one Widow. Truly
I find your Reason in that point right good, and strongly grounded.

But what would you think, if the Cause why this Exemption or Immunity was
granted, had no other Foundation, but that, during the whole space of the said
first year, they so lustily bobbed it with their Female Consorts, (as both
Reason and Equity require they should do) that they had drained and evacuated
their Spermatick Vessels; and were become thereby altogether feeble, weak,
emasculated, drooping and flaggingly pithless; yea, in such sort, that they in
the day of Battle, like Ducks which plunge over Head and Ears, would sooner
hide themselves behind the Baggage than in the Company of valiant Fighters and
daring Military Combatants, appear where stern Bellona deals her Blows, and
moves a bustling Noise of Thwacks and Thumps. Nor is it to be thought that
under the Standard of Mars they will so much as once strike a fair Stroke,
because their most considerable Knocks have been already jerked and whirrited
within the Curtines of his Sweetheart Venus.

In confirmation whereof, amongst other Relics and Monuments of Antiquity, we
now as yet often see, that in all great Houses, after the expiring of some few
days, these young married Blades are readily sent away to visit their Uncles,
that in the Absence of their Wives, reposing themselves a little, they may
recover their decayed Strength by the Recruit of a fresh Supply, the more
vigorous to return again, and face about to renew the dueling Shock and
Conflict of an amorous Dalliance: Albeit (for the greater part) they have
neither Uncle nor Aunt to go to.

Just so did the King Crackart, after the Battle of the Cornets, not cashier
us, (speaking properly) I mean me and the Quailecaller, but for our Refreshment
remanded us to our Houses; and he is as yet seeking after his own. My
Grandfathers Godmother was wont to say to me when I was a Boy, Patonisters and
Oraisons
Sont pour ceux-la qui les retiennent.
Un fiffre en frenaisons
Est plus fort que deux qui en viennent.
Not Orisons nor Patrenotres
Shall ever disorder my Brain.
One Cadet, to the Field as he flutters,
Is worth two when they end the Campagn.


That which prompteth me to that Opinion, is, that the Vine-Planters did seldom
eat of the Grapes, or drink of the Wine of their Labor, till the first year
was wholly elapsed: During all which time also the Builders did hardly inhabit
their new structured Dwelling places, for fear of dying suffocated through want
of Respiration; as Galen has most learnedly remarked, in the Second Book of
the Difficulty of Breathing. Under favor, Sir, I have not asked this Question
without Cause causing, and Reason truly very ratiocinant. Be not offended I
pray you.

CHAP. VII. How Panurge had a Flea in his Ear, and forbore to wear any longer
his magnificent Codpiece.
PAnurge the day thereafter, caused pierce his right Ear, after the Pewish
Fashion, and thereto clasped a little Gold Ring, of a Fearny-like kind of
Workmanship, in the Beazil or Collet whereof was set and inchased a Flea; and
to the end you may be rid of all Doubts, you are to know that the Flea was
black. O what a brave thing it is, in every case and circumstance of a matter,
to be thoroughly well informed! The Sum of the Expense hereof, being cast up,
brought in, and laid down upon his Council Board Carpet, was found to amount to
no more quarterly than the Charge of the Nuptials of a Hircanian Tigress; even
as you would say 600000 Maravedis. At these vast Costs and excessive
Disbursements, as soon as he perceived himself to be out of Debt, he fretted
much; and afterward, as Tyrants and Lawyers use to do, he nourished and fed
her with the Sweat and Blood of his Subjects and Clients.

He then took four French Else of a course brown Russet Cloth, and therein
apparelling himself, as with a long, plain-seemed and single-stitched Gown,
left off the wearing of his Breeches, and tied a pair of Spectacles to his Cap.
In this Equipage did he present himself before Pantagruel; to whom this
Disguise appeared the more strange, that he did not, as before, see that
goodly, fair and stately Codpiece, which was the sole Anchor of Hope, wherein
he was wonted to rely, and last Refuge he had 'midst all the Waves and
boisterous Billows, which a stormy Cloud in a cross Fortune would raise up
against him. Honest Pantagruel, not understanding the Mystery, asked him by way
of interrogatory, what he did intend to personate in that newfangled
Prosopopeia? I have (answered Panurge) a Flea in mine Ear, and have a mind to
marry. In a good time (quoth Pantagruel) you have told me joyful Tidings; yet
would not I hold a red hot Iron in my hand for all the Gladness of them. But it
is not the fashion of Lovers to be accoutred in such dangling Vestments, so as
to have their Shirts flagging down over their Knees, without Breeches, and with
a long Robe of a dark brown mingled Hue, which is a Color never used, in
Talarian Garments amongst any Persons of Honor, Quality or Virtue. If some
Heretical Persons and Schismatical Sectaries have at any time formerly been so
arrayed and clothed, (though many have imputed such a kind of Dress to
Cosenage, Cheat, Imposture, and an Affectation of Tyranny upon credulous Minds
of the rude Multitude) I will nevertheless not blame them for it, nor in that
point judge rashly or sinistrously of them; every one overflowingly abounds
in his own Sense and Fancy: Yea, in things of a Foreign Consideration,
altogether extrinsical and indifferent, which in and of themselves are neither
commendable nor bad, because they proceed not from the Interior of the Thoughts
and Heart, which is the Shop of all Good and Evil. Of Goodness, if it be
upright, and that its Affections be regulated by the pure and clean Spirit of
Righteousness; and on the other side, of Wickedness, if its Inclinations,
straying beyond the bounds of Equity be corrupted and depraved by the Malice
and Suggestions of the Devil. It is only the Novelty and new-fangledness
thereof which I dislike, together with the Contempt of common Custom, and the
Fashion which is in use.

The Color (answered Panurge) is convenient, for it is conform to that of my
Council Board Carpet, therefore will I henceforth hold me with it, and more
narrowly and circumspectly than ever hitherto I have done, look to my Affairs
and Business. Seeing I am once out of Debt, you never yet saw Man more
unpleasing then I will be, if God help me not. Lo here be my Spectacles. To see
me afar off, you would readily say, that it were Friar Burgess. I believe
certainly, that in the next ensuing Year, I shall once more preach the
Croisade, Bounce Buckram. Do you see this Russet? doubt not but there lurketh
under it some hid Property and occult Virtue, known to very few in the World. I
did not take it on before this Morning; and nevertheless, am already in a rage
of Lust, mad after a Wife, and vehemently hot upon untying the Codpiece-point,
I itch, I tingle, I wriggle, and long exceedingly to be married; that without
the danger of Cudgel-blows, I may labor my Female Copes-mate with the hard
push of a Bull-horned Devil. O the provident and thrifty Husband that I then
will be! After my Death, with all Honor and Respect due to my Frugality, will
they burn the Sacred Bulk of my Body, of purpose to preserve the Ashes thereof,
in memory of the choicest Pattern that ever was, of a perfectly wary, and
complete Householder. Cops-body, this is not the Carpet whereon my Treasurer
shall be allowed to play false in his Accounts with me, by setting down an X
for an V, or an L for an S; for in that case, should I make a hail of
Fifti-cuffs to fly into his face. Look upon me (Sir) both before and behind, it
is made after the manner of a Toge, which was the ancient fashion of the Romans
in time of Peace. I took the Mode, Shape, and Form thereof in Trajan's Column
at Rome, as also in the Triumphant Arch of Septimus Severus. I am tired of the
Wars, weary of wearing Buff-coats, Cassocks, and Hoquetons. My Shoulders are
pitifully worn, and bruised with the carrying of Harness; let Armor cease, and
the Long Robe bear sway: at least it must be so for the whole space of the
succeeding Years. If I be married as yesterday, by the Mosaic Law, you
evidenced, in what concerns the Breeches: my great Aunt Laurence did long ago
tell me, that the Breeches were only ordained for the use of the Codpiece, and
to no other end; which I, upon a no less forcible consequence, give Credit to,
every whit as well, as to the Saying of the fine Fellow Galen, who in his Ninth
Book Of the Use, and Employment of our Members, alleges, That the Head was
made for the Eyes: for Nature might have placed our Heads in our Knees or
Elbows, but having beforehand determined that the Eyes should serve to
discover things from afar, she for the better enabling them to execute their
designed Office, fixed them in the Head (as on the top of a long Pole) in the
most eminent part of all the Body: no otherwise then we see the Phares, or high
Towers erected in the Mouths of Havens, that Navigators may the further off
perceive with ease the Lights of the nightly Fires and Lanterns. And because I
would gladly, for some short while (a Year at least) take a little rest and
breathing-time from the toylsome Labor of the Military Profession; that is to
say, be married, I have desisted from wearing any more a Codpiece, and
consequently have laid aside my Breeches: for the Codpiece is the principal and
most especial Piece of Armor that a Warrior does carry; and therefore do I
maintain even to the Fire (exclusively, understand you me) that no Turks can
properly be said to be armed Men, in regard that Codpieces are by their Law
forbidden to be worn.

CHAP. VIII. Why the Codpiece is held to be the chief piece of Armor amongst
Warriors.
WIll you maintain (quoth Pantagruel) that the Codpiece is the chief piece of a
Military Harness? It is a new kind of Doctrine very paradoxical: for we say at
Spurs begins the arming of a Man. Sir, I maintain it, (answered Panurge) and
not wrongfully do I maintain it. Behold how Nature having a fervent desire
after its Production of Plants, Trees, Shrubs, Herbs, Sponges, and plant
Animals, to eternize, and continue them unto all Succession of Ages (in their
several Kinds, or Sorts at least, although the Individuals perish) unruinable,
and in an everlasting Being, has most curiously armed and fenced their Buds,
Sprouts, Shutes, and Seeds, wherein the abovementioned perpetuity consists,
by strengthening, covering, guarding, and fortifying them with an admirable
industry, with Husks, Cases, Scurfs, and Swads, Hulls, Cods, Stones, Films,
Cartels, Shells, Ears, Rinds, Barks, Skins, Ridges, and Prickles, which serve
them instead of strong, fair, and natural Codpieces: as is manifestly apparent
in Pease, Beans, Fasels, Pomegranates, Peaches, Cottons, Gourds, Pumpions,
Melons, Corn, Lemons, Almonds, Walnuts, Filberts, and Chestnuts; as likewise in
all Plants, Slips, or Sets whatsoever, wherein it is plainly and evidently
seen, that the Sperm and Semenae is more closely veiled, overshadowed,
corroborated, and thoroughly harnessed than any other part, portion, or parcel
of the whole.

Nature nevertheless did not after that manner provide for the sempiternizing
of Human Race: but on the contrary created Man naked, tender, and frail,
without either offensive or defensive Arms; and that in the Estate of
Innocence, in the first Age of all, which was the Golden Season; not as a
Plant, but living Creature, born for Peace, not War, and brought forth into the
World with an unquestionable Right and Title to the plenary fruition and
enjoyment of all Fruits and Vegetables; as also to a certain calm and gentle
Rule and Dominion over all Kinds of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Reptils, and
Insects. Yet afterward it happening in the time of the Iron Age, under the Reign
of Jupiter, when to the multiplication of mischievous Actions, wickedness and
malice began to take root and footing within the then perverted Hearts of Men,
that the Earth began to bring forth Nettles, Thistles, Thorns, Briars, and such
other stubborn and rebellious Vegetables to the Nature of Man; nor scarce was
there any Animal, which by a fatal disposition did not then revolt from him,
and tacitly conspire, and covenant with one another to serve him no longer,
(nor in case of their ability to resist) to do him any manner of Obedience, but
rather (to the uttermost of their power) to annoy him with all the hurt and
harm they could. The Man then, that he might maintain his primimitive Right and
Prerogative, and continue his Sway and Dominion over all, both Vegetable and
Sensitive Creatures; and knowing of a truth, that he could not be well
accommodated as he ought, without the servitude and subjection of several
Animals, bethought himself, that of necessity he must needs put on Arms, and
make provision of Harness against Wars and Violence. By the holy Saint
Babingoose, (cried out Pantagruel) you are become, since the last Rain, a great
Lifre lofre, Philosopher, I should say. Take Notice, Sir, (quoth Panurge) when
Dame Nature had prompted him to his own Arming, what part of the Body it was,
where, by her Inspiration, he clapped on the first Harness: It was forsooth by
the double pluck of my little Dog the Ballock, and good Senor Don Priapos
Stabo-stando, which done, he was content, and sought no more. This is certified
by the Testimony of the great Hebrew Captain Philosopher Moses, who affirms,
That he fenced that Member with a brave and gallant Codpiece, most exquisitely
framed, and by right curious Devices of a notably pregnant Invention, made up
and composed of Fig-tree-leaves, which by reason of their solid stiffness,
incisory notches, curled frisling, sleeked smoothness, large ampleness,
together with their color, smell, virtue, and faculty, were exceeding proper,
and fit for the covering and arming of the Sachels of Generation, the hideously
big Lorram Cullions being from thence only excepted; which swaggring down to
the lowermost bottom of the Breeches, cannot abide (for being quite out of all
order and method) the stately fashion of the high and lofty Codpiece; as is
manifest, by the Noble Valentin Viardiere, whom I found at Nancie, on the First
Day of May (the more flauntingly to gallantrize it afterward) rubbing his
Ballocks, spread out upon a Table after the manner of a Spanish Cloak.
Wherefore it is, that none should henceforth say, who would not speak
improperly, when any Country-Bumpkin hyeth to the Wars, Have a care, (my
Roysters, of the Wine-pot, that is the Scull, but have a care (my Royster) of
the Milk-pot; that is, the Testicles. By the whole Rabble of the horned Fiends
of Hell, the Head being cut off, that single Person only thereby dies: but if
the Ballocks be marred, the whole Race of Humane Kind would forthwith perish,
and be lost for ever.

This was the motive which incited the goodly Writer Galen, Lib. 1. De
Spermate, to aver with boldness, That it were better (that is to say, a less
evil) to have no Heart at all, than to be quite destitute of Genitories: for
there is laid up, conserved, and put in store, as in a Secessive Repository,
and Sacred Warehouse, the Semenae, and Original Source of the whole Offspring
of Mankind. Therefore would I be apt to believe, for less than a hundred
Franks, that those are the very same Stones, by means whereof Deucalion and
Pyrrha restored the Humane Race, in peopling with Men and Women the World,
which a little before that, had been drowned in the overflowing Waves of a
Poetical Deluge. This stirred up the valiant Justinian, L. 1.4. De Cagotis
tollendis, to collocate his Summum Bonum, in Braguibus, and Braguetis. For
this, and other Causes, the Lord Humphry de Merville, following of his King to
a certain Warlike Expedition, whilst he was in trying upon his own Person a new
Suit of Armor, for of his old rusty Harness he could make no more use, by
reason that some few Years since, the Skin of his Belly was a great way removed
from his Kidneys, his Lady thereupon in the profound musing of a contemplative
Spirit, very maturely considering that he had but small care of the Staff of
Love, and Packet of Marriage, seeing he did no otherways arm that part of the
Body, then with Links of Mail, advised him to shield, fence, and gabionate it
with a big tilting Helmet, which she had lying in her Closet, to her otherways
utterly unprofitable. On this Lady was penned these subsequent Verses; which
are extant in the Third Book of the Shi^brana of paultry Wenches. When Yoland
saw her Spouse, equipt for Fight,
And, save the Codpiece, all in Armor dight,
My Dear, she cried, Why, pray, of all the rest
Is that exposed, you know I love the best?
Was she to blame for an ill-manag'd fear?
Or rather pious, conscionable Care:
Wise Lady, She! in hurly-burly Fight,
Can any tell where random Blows may hit?
Leave off then (Sir) from being astonished, and wonder no more at this new
manner of decking and trimming up of my self as you now see me.

CHAP. IX. How Panurge asks Counsel of Pantagruel whether he should marry,
Yea, or No.
TO this Pantagruel replying nothing, Panurge prosecuted the Discourse he had
already broached, and therewithal fetching, as far from the bottom of his
Heart, a very deep sigh, said, My Lord and Master, you have heard the Design I
am upon, which is to marry, if by some disastrous mischance, all the Holes in
the World be not shut up, stopped, closed, and bush'd. I humbly beseech you for
the Affection which of a long time you have born me, to give me your best
Advice therein. Then (answered Pantagruel) seeing you have so decreed, taken
deliberation thereon, and that the matter is fully determined, what need is
there of any further Talk thereof, but forthwith to put it into execution what
you have resolved. Yea, but (quoth Panurge) I would be loath to act any thing
therein without your Counsel had thereto. It is my Judgment also (quoth
Pantagruel) and I advise you to it. Nevertheless (quoth Panurge) if I
understood aright that it were much better for me to remain a Batchellor as I
am, than to run headlong upon new hair-brained Undertakings of Conjugal
Adventure, I would rather choose not to marry, quoth Pantagruel. Then do not
marry. Yea, but (quoth Panurge) would you have me so solitarily drive out the
whole Course of my Life, without the Comfort of a Matrimonial Consort? You know
it is written, Vae soli, and a single Person is never seen to reap the Joy and
Solace that is found with married Folks. Then marry, in the Name of God, quoth
Pantagruel. But if (quoth Panurge) my Wife should make me a Cuckold; as it is
not unknown unto you, how this has been a very plentiful Year in the
production of that kind of Cattle; I would fly out, and grow impatient, beyond
all measure and mean. I love Cuckolds with my Heart, for they seem unto me to
be of a right honest Conversation, and I, truly, do very willingly frequent
their Company: but should I die for it, I would not be one of their number,
that is a Point for me of a two-sore prickling Point. Then do not marry (quoth
Pantagruel) for without all controversy, this Sentence of Seneca is infallibly
true, What thou to others shall have done, others will do the like to thee. Do
you (quoth Panurge) aver that without all exceptions? Yes, truly, (quoth
Pantagruel) without all exception. Ho, ho (says Panurge) by the Wrath of a
little Devil, his meaning is, either in this World, or in the other, which is
to come. Yet seeing I can no more want a Wife, then a blind Man his Staff, the
Funnel must be in agitation, without which manner of Occupation I cannot live.
Were it not a great deal better for me to apply and associate my self to some
one honest, lovely, and virtuous Woman, then (as I do) by a new change of
Females every Day, run a hazard of being Bastinadoed, or (which is worse) of
the Great Pox, if not of both together: For never (be it spoken, by their
Husbands leave and favor) had I enjoyment yet of an honest Woman. Marry then
in God's Name, quoth Pantagruel. But if (quoth Panurge) it were the Will of
God, and that my Destiny did unluckily lead me to marry an honest Woman who
should beat me, I would be stored with more than two third parts of the
Patience of Job, if I were not stark mad by it, and quite distracted with such
rugged Dealings: for it has been told me, that those exceeding honest Women
have ordinarily very wicked Head-pieces; therefore is it that their Family
lacks not for good Vinegar. Yet in that case should it go worse with me, if I
did not then in such sort bang her Back and Breast, so thumpingly bethwack her
Gillets, to wit, her Arms, Legs, Head, Lights, Liver, and Milt, with her other
Intrails, and mangle, jag, and slash her Coats, so after the Cross billet
fashion, that the greatest Devil of Hell should wait at the Gate for the
reception of her damned Soul. I could make a shift for this Year to wave such
molestation and disquiet, and be content to lay aside that trouble, and not to
be engaged in it.

Do not marry then, answered Pantagruel. Yea, but (quoth Panurge) considering
the Condition wherein I now am, out of Debt and Unmarried; mark what I say,
free from all Debt, in an ill hour (for were I deeply on the Score, my
Creditors would be but too careful of my Paternity) but being quit, and not
married, no Body will be so regardful of me, or carry toward me a Love like
that which is said to be in a Conjugal Affection. And if by some mishap I
should fall sick, I would be looked to very waywardly. The wise Man says, Where
there is no Woman (I mean the Mother of a Family, and Wife in the Union of a
lawful Wedlock) the Crazy and Diseased are in danger of being ill used, and of
having much brabling and strife about them: as by clear Experience has been
made apparent in the Persons of Popes, Legates, Cardinals* Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Priests and Monks: but there, assure your self, you shall not find me.
Marry then in the Name of God, answered Pantagruel. But if (quoth Panurge)
being ill at ease, and possibly through that Distemper, made unable to discharge
the Matrimonial Duty that is incumbent to an active Husband, my Wife, impatient
of that drooping Sickness, and faint Fits, of a pining Languishment, should
abandon and prostitute herself to the Embraces of another Man, and not only
then not help and assist me in my extremity and need, but withal f^out at, and
make sport of that my grievous Distress and Calamity; or peradventure, (which
is worse) imbezzle my Goods, and steal from me, as I have seen it oftentimes
befall unto the lot of many other Men, it were enough to undo me utterly, to
fill brimfull the Cup of my Misfortune, and make me play the Mad-pate Reeks of
Bedlam. Do not marry then (quoth Pantagruel). Yea, but (says Panurge) I shall
never by any other means come to have lawful Sons and Daughters, in whom I may
harbor some hope of perpetuating my Name and Arms, and to whom also I may
leave and bequeath my Inheritances and purchased Goods, (of which latter sort
you need not doubt, but that in some one or other of these Mornings, I will
make a fair and goodly show) that so I may cheer up and make merry, when
otherways I should be plunged into a pievish sullen Mood of pensive sullenness,
as I do perceive daily by the gentle and loving Carriage of your kind and
gracious Father toward you; as all honest Folks use to do at their own Homes,
and private Dwelling-houses. For being free from Debt, and yet not married, if
casually I should fret and be angry, although the cause of my Grief and
Displeasure were never so just, I am afraid instead of Consolation, that I
should meet with nothing else but Scoffs, Frumps, Gibes, and Mocks at my
disastrous Fortune. Marry then in the Name of God, quoth Pantagruel.

CHAP. X. How Pantagruel represents unto Panurge the difficulty of giving
Advice in the matter of Marriage; and to that purpose mentions somewhat of
the Homerick and Virgilian Lotteries.
YOur Counsel (quoth Panurge) under your Correction and Favor, seems unto me
not unlike to the Song of Gammer Yeabynay; it is full of Sarcasms, Mockqueries,
bitter Taunts, nipping Bobs, derisive Quips, biting Jerks, and contradictory
Iterations, the one part destroying the other. I know not (quoth Pantagruel)
which of all my Answers to lay hold on; for your Proposals are so full of ifs
and buts, that I can ground nothing on them, nor pitch upon any solid and
positive Determination satisfactory to what is demanded by them. Are not you
assured within your self of what you have a mind to? the chief and main point
of the whole matter lies there; all the rest is merely casual, and totally
depends upon the fatal Disposition of the Heavens.

We see some so happy in the fortune of this Nuptial Encounter, that their
Family shines (as it were) with the radiant Effulgency of an Idea, Model or
Representation of the Joys of Paradise; and perceive others again to be so
unluckily matched in the Conjugal Yoke, that those very basest of Devils, which
tempt the Hermits that inhabit the Deserts of Thebaida and Montserrat, are not
more miserable than they. It is therefore expedient, seeing you are resolved
for once to take a trial of the state of Marriage, that, with shut Eyes, bowing
your Head, and kissing the Ground, you put the business to a Venture, and give
it a fair hazard in recommending the success of the residue to the disposure of
Almighty God. It lies not in my power to give you any other manner of
Assurance, or otherways to certify you of what shall ensue on this your
Undertaking. Nevertheless (if it please you) this you may do, Bring hither
Virgil's Poems, that after having opened the Book, and without Fingers severed
the Leaves thereof three several times, we may, according to the number agreed
upon betwixt our selves, explore the future Hap of your intended Marriage: For
frequently, by a Homerick Lottery, have many hit upon their Destinies; as is
testified in the Person of Socrates, who, whilst he was in Prison, hearing the
Recitation of this Verse of Homer said of Achilles, in the Ninth of the Iliads,
(...).
We, the third day, to fertile Pthia came.
Thereby foresaw that on the third subsequent day he was to die: Of the truth
whereof he assured Aschines, as Plato, in Critone; Cicero, in primo de
Divinatione; Diogines Laertius, and others, have to the full recorded in their
Works. The like is also witnessed by Opilius Macrinus, to whom, being desirous
to know if he should be the Roman Emperor, befell, by chance of Lot, this
Sentence in the eighth of the Iliads, (...),
(...).
Dotard, new Warriors urge thee to be gone.
Thy Life decays, and old Age weighs thee down.


In Fact, he being then somewhat Ancient, had hardly enjoyed the Sovereignty of
the Empire for the space of Fourteen Months, when by Heliogabulus (then both
young and strong) he was disposess'd thereof, thrust out of all, and killed.
Brutus also does bear witness of another Experiment of this nature, who
willing, through this exploratory way by Lot, to learn what the Event and Issue
should be of the Pharsalian Battle, wherein he perished, he casually encountered
on this Verse, said of Patroclus in the Sixteenth of the Iliads, (...).
Fate, and Latona's Son have shot me dead.


And accordingly Apollo was the Fieldword in the dreadful Day of that Fight.
Diverse notable things of old have likeways been foretold and known by casting
of Virgilian Lots; yea, in matters of no less importance than the obtaining of
the Roman Empire, as it happened to Alexander Severus, who trying his Fortune
at the said kind of Lottery, did hit upon this Verse written in the Sixth of
the Aeneids, Tu regere imperio populos Roman momento.
Know, Roman, that thy business is to Reign.


He within very few years thereafter was effectually and in good earnest
created and installed Roman Emperor. A semblable Story thereto is related of
Adrian, who being hughly perplexed within himself, out of a longing Humor to
know in what Account he was with the Emperor Trajan, and how large the measure
of that Affection was which he did bear unto him, had recourse after the manner
above specified, to the Maronian Lottery, which by hap hazard tendered him
these Lines out of the Sixth of the Aeneids, Quis procul ille autem ramis
insignis olivae
Sacra ferens? nosco crines incanaque menta
Regis Romani.
But who is he, conspicuous from afar,
With Olive Boughs, that does his Offerings bear?
By the white Hair and Beard I know him plain,
The Roman King.
Shortly thereafter was he adopted by Trajan, and succeeded to him in the
Empire. Moreover to the Lot of the praiseworthy Emperor Claudius befell this
Line of Virgil, written in the Sixth of his Aeneids, Tertia dum Latio regnantem
viderit aestas,
Whilst the third Summer saw him Reign, a King
In Latium.


And in effect he did not Reign above two years. To the said Claudian also,
enquiring concerning his Brother Quintilius, whom he proposed as a Colleague
with himself in the Empire, happened the Responce following in the sixth of the
Aeneids, Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata.
-- Whom Fate let us see,
And would no longer suffer him to be.
And it so fell out; for he was killed on the Seventeenth day after he had
attained unto the management of the Emperial Charge. The very same Lot also,
with the like misluck, did betide the Emperor Gordian the younger. To Claudius
Albinus, being very sollicitous to understand somewhat of his future
Adventures, did occur this Saying, which is written in the sixth of the
Aeneids, Hic rem Romanam magno turbante tumultu
Sistet Eques, etc.
The Romans boiling with tumultuous rage,
This Warrior shall the dangerous Storm assuage:
With Victories he the Carthaginian mawls,
And with strong hand shall crush the Rebel Gauls.


Likeways when the Emperor D. Claudius, Aurelian's Predecessor* did with great
eagerness research after the Fate to come of his Posterity, his hap was to
alight on this Verse in the first of the Aeneids, Hic ego nec metas rerum, nec
tempore pono.
No bounds are to be set, no limits here.
Which was fulfilled by the goodly Genealogical Row of his Race. When Mr. Peter
Amy did in like manner explore and make trial, if he should escape the Ambush
of the Hobgoblins, who lay in wait all-to-bemawl him, he fell upon this Verse
in the third of the Aeneids,, Hugh fuge credules terras, fuge Littus avarum!
Oh flee the bloody Land, the wicked Shore!
Which Counsel he obeying, safe and sound forthwith avoided all these
Ambuscades.

Were it not to shun Prolixity, I could enumerate a thousand such like
Adventures, which conform to the Dictate and Verdict of the Verse, have by that
manner of Lot-casting encounter befallen to the curious Researchers of them. Do
not you nevertheless imagine, lest you should be deluded, that I would upon
this kind of Fortune flinging Proof infer an uncontrolable, and not to be
gainsaid Infallibility* of Truth.

CHAP. XI. How Pantagruel shows the Trial of ones Fortune by the throwing of
Dice to be unlawful.
IT would be sooner done (quoth Panurge) and more expeditely, if we should try
the matter at the chance of three fair Dice. (Quoth Pantagruel) that sort of
Lottery is deceitful, abusive, illicitous, and exceedingly scandalous; never
trust in it; the accursed Book of the Recreation of Dice was a great while ago
excogitated in Achaia near Bourre, by that ancient Enemy to Mankind, the
Infernal Calumniator, who before the Statue or Massive Image of the Bourraick
Hercules, did of old, and does in several places of the World as yet, make many
simple Souls to err and fall into his Snares. You know how my Father Gargantua
has forbidden it over all his Kingdoms and Dominions; how he has caused burn
the Moulds and Draughts thereof, and altogether suppressed, abolished, driven
forth and cast it out of the Land, as a most dangerous Plague and Infection to
any well-polished State or Commonwealth. What I have told you of Dice, I say
the same of the Play at Cockall. It is a Lottery of the like Guile and
Deceitfulness; and therefore do not for convincing of me, allege in opposition
to this my Opinion, or bring in the Example of the fortunate Cast of Teberius,
within the Fountain of Appona, at the Oracle of Gerion. These are the baited
Hooks by which the Devil attracts and draws unto him the foolish Souls of
silly People into eternal Perdition.

Nevertheless to satisfy your Humor in some measure, I am content you throw
three Dice upon this Table, that according to the number of the Blots which
shall happen to be cast up, we may hit upon a Verse of that Page, which in the
setting open of the Book you shall have pitched upon.

Have you any Dice in your Pocket? A whole Bag full, answered Panurge, that is
Provision against the Devil, as is expounded by Merlin Coccajus, Lib. 2. De
Patria Diabolorum, the Devil would be sure to take me napping; and very much at
unawares, if he should find me without Dice. With this the three Dice being
taken out, produced and thrown, they fell so pat upon the lower Points, that
the Cast was Five, Six and Five. These are (quoth Panurge) Sixteen in all. Let
us take the Sixteenth Line of the Page, the number pleases me very well; I
hope we shall have a prosperous and happy Chance. May I be thrown amidst all
the Devils of Hell, even as a great Bowl cast athwart at a Set of Nine Pins, or
Cannon-ball shot among a Batalion of Foot, in case so many times I do not boult
my future Wife the first Night of our Marriage. Of that, forsooth, I make no
doubt at all: (quoth Pantagruel) You needed not to have rapped forth such a
horrid Imprecation, the sooner to procure Credit for the Performance of so
small a business, seeing possibly the first Bout will be amiss, and that you
know is usually at Tennis called Fifteen. At the next justling Turn you may
readily amend that Fault, and so complete your Reckoning of Sixteen. Is it so
(quoth Panurge) that you understand the matter? and must my Words be thus
interpreted? Nay, believe me, never yet was any Solecism committed by that
valiant Champion, who often has for me in Belly-dale stood Centry at the
Hypogastrian Crany. Did you ever hitherto find me in the Confraternity of the
Faulty? Never, I trow; never, nor ever shall, for ever and a day. I do the Feat
like a goodly Friar, or Father Confessor without Default: And therein am I
willing to be judged by the Players. He had no sooner spoke these Words, than
the Works of Virgil were brought in: But before the Book was laid open, Panurge
said to Pantagruel, My Heart, like the Furch of a Heart in Rut, does beat within
my Breast. Be pleased to feel and grope my Pulse a little on this Artery of my
Left Arm; at its frequent Rise and Fall you would say that they swinge and
belabour me after the manner of a Probationer posed, and put to a peremptory
Trial in the Examination of his Sufficiency for the Discharge of the Learned
Duty of a Graduate in some Eminent Degree in the College of the Sorbonists.

But would not you hold it expedient, before we proceeded any further, that we
should invocate Hercules and the Tenitian. Goddesses, who in the Chamber of
Lots are said to Rule, sit in Judgment, and bear a Presidential Sway? Neither
him nor them, (answered Pantagruel) only open up the Leaves of the Book with
your Fingers, and set your Nails awork.

CHAP. XII. How Pantagruel does explore by the Virgilian Lottery what Fortune
Panurge shall have in his Marriage.
THen at the opening of the Book in the Sixteenth Row of the Lines of the
disclosed Page, did Panurge encounter upon this following Verse: Nec Deus hunc
mensa Dea nec Dignata cubili est.
The God him from his Table banished,
Nor would the Goddess have him in her Bed.


This Response (quoth Pantagruel) makes not very much for your benefit or
advantage: for it plainly signifies and denotes, that your Wife shall be a
Strumpet, and your self by consequence a Cuckold; the Goddess, whom you shall
not find propitious nor favorable unto you, is Minerva, a most redoubtable and
dreadful Virgin, a powerful and fulminating Goddess, an Enemy to Cuckolds, and
effeminate Youngsters, to Cuckold-makers and Adulterers: the God is Jupiter, a
terrible and Thunder-striking God from Heaven; and withal, it is to be
remarked, that conform to the Doctrine of the ancient Hetrurians, the Manubes
(for so did they call the darting Hurls, or slinging Casts of the Vulcanian
Thunderbolts) did only appertain to her, and to Jupiter her Father Capital.
This was verified in the Conflagration of the Ships of Ajax Oileus, nor does
this fulminating Power belong to any other of the Olympic Gods; Men therefore
stand not in such fear of them. Moreover, I will tell you, and you may take it
as extracted out of the profoundest Mysteries of Mythology, that when the
Giants had enterprized the waging of a War against the Power of the Celestial
Orbs, the Gods at first did laugh at those Attempts, and scorned such
despicable Enemies, who were in their conceit, not strong enough to cope in
Feats of Warfare with their Pages: but when they saw by the Gigantine labor
the high Hill Pelion set on lofty Ossa, and that the Mount Olympus was made
shake to be erected on the top of both.

Then was it that Jupiter held a Parliament, or General Convention, wherein it
was unanimously resolved upon, and condescended to by all the Gods, that they
should worthily and valiantly stand to their Defense. And because they had
often seen Battles lost by the cumbersome lets and disturbing encumbrances of
Women, confusedly hudled in amongst Armies, it was at that time Decreed and
Enacted, That they should expel and drive out of Heaven into Egypt, and the
Confines of Nile, that whole Crew of Goddesses disguized in the shapes of
Weezils, Polcats, Bats, Shrew-Mice, Ferrets, Fulmarts, and other such like odd
Transformations, only Minerva was reserved to participate with Jupiter in the
horrifick fulminating Power; as being the Goddess both of War and Learning, of
Arts and Arms, of Counsel and Dispatch; a Goddess armed from her Birth, a
Goddess dreaded in Heaven, in the Air, by Sea and Land. By the Belly of Saint
Buff (quoth Panurge) should I be Vulcan, whom the Poet blazons! Nay, I am
neither a Cripple, Coyner of false Money, nor Smith as he was.

My Wife possibly will be as comely and handsome as ever was his Venus, but not
a Whore like her, nor I a Cuckold like him.

The crook-leg'd slovenly Slave, made himself to be declared a Cuckold by a
definitive Sentence, and Judgment, in the open view of all the Gods: for this
cause ought you to interpret the aforementioned Verse quite contrary to what
you have said. This Lot imports, that my Wife will be honest, virtuous,
chaste, loyal, and faithful; not armed, surly, waiward, cross, giddy, humorous,
heady, hairbrain'd, or extracted out of the Brains, as was the Goddess Pallas:
nor shall this fair jolly Jupiter be my Corrival, he shall never dip his Bread
in my Broth, though we should sit together at one Table.

Consider his Exploits and gallant Actions, he was the manifest Ruffian,
Wencher, Whoremonger, and most infamous Cuckold-maker that ever breathed: he
did always lecher it like a Boar, and no wonder, for he was fostered by a Sow
in the Isle of Candia, (if Agathocles the Babylonian be not a Liar) and more
rammishly lascivious then a Buck, whence it is that he is said by others, to
have been suckled and fed with the Milk of the Amalthaean Goat. By the virtue
of Acheron, he jusled, bulled, and lastauriated in one day the third part of
the World, Beasts and People, Floods and Mountains, that was Europa.

For this grand subagitatory Achievement, the Animonians caused, draw,
delineate, and paint him in the figure and shape of a Ram, ramming, and horned
Ram. But I know well enough how to shield and preserve my self from that horned
Champion: he will not, trust me, have to deal in my Person, with a sottish,
dunsical Amphytrion; nor with a silly witless Argus, for all his hundred
Spectacles; nor yet with the cowardly Meacock Acrisius; the simple Goosecap
Lyrus of Thebes; the doting Blockhead Agenor; the phlegmatic Pea-Goose Aesop;
rough-footed Lycaon; the luskish misshapen Corytus of Tuscany; nor with the
large backed and strong reined Atlas: let him alter, change, transform, and
metamorphose himself into a hundred various shapes and figures; into a Swan, a
Bull, a Satyr, a Shower of Gold, or into a Cuckoo, as he did when he unmaiden'd
his Sister Juno; into an Eagle, Ram, or Dove, as when he was enamoured of the
Virgin Phthia, who then dwelt in the Aegean Territory; into Fire, a Serpent;
yea, even into a Flea, into Epicurian and Democratical Atoms, or more
Magistronostralistically, into those sly Intentions of the Mind, which in ^he
(...) are called Second No^ions* (...) in the nick, and take (...)

And would you know what I would do unto him, even that which to his Father
Coelum, Saturn did, ( Seneca foretold it of me, and Lactantius has confirmed
it) what the Goddess Rhea did to Athis; I would make him two Stone lighter, rid
him of his Cyprian Cimbals, and cut so close and neatly by the Breech, that
there should not remain thereof so much as one --, so cleanly would I shave
him: and disable him for ever from being Pope; for Testiculos non habet. Hold
there, said Pantagruel, Hoc, soft and fair (my Lad) enough of that, cast up,
turn over the Leaves, and try your Fortune for the second time. Then did he
fall upon this ensuing Verse.

Membra quatit, gelidusque coit formidine sanguis.
His Joints and Members quake, he becomes pale,
And sudden Fear does his cold Blood congeal.
This imports (quoth Pantagruel) that she will soundly bang your Back and
Belly. Clean and quite contrary (answered Panurge) it is of me that he
prognosticates, in saying that I will beat her like a Tiger, if she vex me. Sir
Martin Wagstaff will perform that Office, and in default of a Cudgel, the Devil
gulp him, if I should not eat her up quick, as Candaul the Lydian King did his
Wife, whom he ravened and devoured.

You are very stout, says Pantagruel, and courageous, Hercules himself durst
hardly adventure to scuffle with you in this your raging Fury: nor is it
strange; for the Ian is worth two and two in fight against Hercules are too too
strong. Am I a Ian? quoth Panurge. No, no, (answered Pantagruel) my Mind was
only running upon the lurch and tricktrack. Thereafter did he hit, at the third
opening of the Book, upon this Verse.

Faemineo Praedae, and spoliorum ardebat amore.
After the Spoil and Pillage (as in Fire)
He burnt with a strong Feminine Desire.
This portendeth (quoth Pantagruel) that she will steal your Goods, and rob
you. Hence this, according to these three drawn Lots, will be your future
Destiny, (I clearly see it) you will be a Cuckold, you will be beaten, and you
will be robbed. Nay, it is quite otherways, (quoth Panurge) for it is certain
that this Verse Presageth, that she will love me with a Perfect liking: nor did
the Satyr-writing Poet lie in proof hereof, when he affirmed, That a Woman
burning with extreme Affection, takes sometimes pleasure to steal from her
Sweetheart. And what I pray you? a Glove, a Point, or some such trifling Toy of
no importance, to make him keep a gentle kind of stirring in the research and
quest thereof: in like manner these small scolding Debates, and petty brabling
Contentions, which frequently we see spring up, and for a certain space boil
very hot betwixt a couple of high-spirited Lovers, are nothing else but
recreative Diversions for their refreshment, spurs to, and incentives of a more
fervent Amity than ever. As for example: We do sometimes see Cutlers with
Hammers mawl their finest Whetstones, therewith to sharpen their Iron Tools the
better.

And therefore do I think, that these three Lots make much for my advantage;
which if not, I from their Sentence totally appeal. There is no appellation
(quoth Pantagruel) from the Decrees of Fate or Destiny, of Lot or Chance: as is
recorded by our ancient Lawyers, witness Baldus, Lib. ult. Cap. de Leg. The
reason hereof is, Fortune does not acknowledge a Superior, to whom an Appeal
may be made from her, or any of her Substitutes^ And in this case the Pupil
cannot be restored to his Right in full, as openly by the said Author is
alleged in L. ait praetor, Paragrult. H. de minor.

CHAP. XIII. How Pantagruel advises Panurge to try the future good or bad luck
of his Marriage by Dreams.
NOW seeing we cannot agree together in the manner of expounding or
interpreting the Sense of the Virgilian Lots, let us bend our course another
way, and try a new sort of Divination. Of what kind? (asked Panurge.) Of a good
Ancient and and Authentic Fashion, (answered Pantagruel) it is by Dreams: For
in Dreaming such Circumstances and Conditions being thereto adhibited, as are
clearly enough described by Hippocrates, in Lib. (...), by Plato, Plotin,
Iamblicus, Sinesius, Aristotle, Xenophon, Galene, Plutarch, Artemidorus,
Valdianus, Herophilus, G. Calaper, Theocritus, Pliny, Athenaeus, and others,
the Soul does often times foresee what is to come.

How true this is, you may conceive by a very vulgar and familiar Example; as
when you see that at such a time as Suckling Babes, well nourished, fed and
fostred with good Milk, sleep soundly and profoundly, the Nurses in the interim
get leave to sport themselves, and are licentiated to recreate their Fancies at
what Range to them shall seem most fitting and expedient; their Presence,
Sedulity and Attendance on the Cradle being, during all that space, held
unnecessary.

Even just so, when our Body is at rest, that the Concoction is every where
accomplished, and that, till it awake, it lacks for nothing, our Soul
delights to disport it self, and is well-pleased in that Frolic to take a
review of its Native Country, which is the Heavens, where it receives a most
notable Participation of its first beginning with an Imbuement from its Divine
Source, and in Contemplation of that Infinite and Intellectual Sphere, whereof
the Center is every where, and the Circumference in no place of the universal
World, to wit, God, according to the Doctrine of Hermes Trismegistus, to whom
no new thing happens, whom nothing that is past escapes, and unto whom all
things are alike present, remarketh not only what is preterit, and gone in the
inferior Course and Agitation of sublunary matters, but withal takes notice
what is to come; then bringing a Relation of those future Events unto the Body
by the outward Senses and exterior Organs, it is divulged abroad unto the
hearing of others. Whereupon the Owner of that Soul deserves to be termed a
Vatiemator, or Prophet.

Nevertheless the truth is, that the Soul is seldom able to report those things
in such Sincerity as it has seen them, by reason of the Imperfection and
Frailty of the Corporeal Senses, which obstruct the effectuating of that
Office; even as the Moon does not communicate unto this Earth of ours that
Light which she receives from the Sun with so much Splendour, Heat, Vigor,
Purity and Liveliness as it was given her. Hence it is requisite for the better
reading, explaining and unfolding of these Somniatory Vaticiations and
Predictions of that nature, that a dexterous, learned, skilful, wise,
industrious, expert, rational and peremptory Expounder or Interpreter be
pitched upon, such a one as by the Greeks is called Onirocrit, or Oniropolist.

For this cause Heraclitus was wont to say, that nothing is by Dreams revealed
to us, that nothing is by Dreams concealed from us, and that only we thereby
have a mystical Signification and secret Evidence of things to come, either for
own prosperous or unlucky Fortune, or for the favorable or disastrous Success
of another. The Sacred Scriptures testify no less, and profane Histories
assure us of it, in both which are exposed to our view a thousand several kinds
of strange Adventures, which have befallen pat according to the nature of the
Dream, and that as well to the Party Dreamer as to others. The Atlantic
People, and those that inhabit the Land of Thasos, (one of the Cyclades) are of
this grand Commodity deprived; for in their Countries none yet ever dreamed. Of
this sort Cleon of Daulia, Thrasymedes; and in our days the Learned Frenchman
Villanovanus, neither of all which knew what Dreaming was.

Fail not therefore to morrow, when the jolly and fair Aurora with her rosy
Fingers draws aside the Curtains of the Night, to drive away the sable Shades
of Darkness, to bend your Spirits wholly to the task of sleeping sound, and
thereto apply your self. In the mean while you must denude your Mind of every
Humane Passion or Affection, such as are Love and Hatred, Fear and Hope; for as
of old the great Vaticinator, most famous and renowned Prophet Proteus was not
able in his Disguise or Transformation into Fire, Water, a Tiger, a Dragon, and
other such like uncouth Shapes and Visors to presage any thing that was to
come, till he was restored to his own first natural and kindly Form. Just so
does Man; for at his reception of the Art of Divination, and Faculty of
prognosticating future things, that part in him which is the most Divine, (to
wit, the (...), or Men's) must be calm, peaceable, untroubled, quiet, still,
hushed, and not imbusied or distracted with Foreign, Soul-disturbing
Preturbations. I am content, (quoth Panurge.) But I pray you, Sir, must I this
Evening, e're I go to Bed, eat much or little? I do not ask this without Cause:
For if I sup not well, large, round and amply, my sleeping is not worth a
forked Turnep; all the Night long I then but dose and rave, and in my
slumbering Fits talk idle Nonsense, my Thoughts being in a dull brown Study,
and as deep in their Dumps as is my Belly hollow.

Not to sup (answered Pantagruel) were best for you, considering the state of
your Complexion, and healthy Constitution of your Body. A certain very ancient
Prophet named Amphiaraus, wished such as had a mind by Dreams to be imbued with
any Oracles, for Four and Twenty Hours to taste no Victuals, and to abstain
from Wine three days together; yet shall not you be put to such a sharp, hard,
rigorous and extreme sparing Diet.

I am truly right apt to believe, that a Man whose Stomach is repleat with
various Cheer, and in a manner surfeited with drinking, is hardly able to
conceive aright of Spiritual things; yet am not I of the Opinion of those, who
after long and pertinacious Fastings, think by such means to enter more
profoundly into the Speculation of Celestial Mysteries. You may very well
remember how my Father Gargantua, (whom here for Honor sake I name) has often
told us, that the Writings of abstinent, abstemious, and long-fasting Hermits,
were every whit as saltless, dry, jejune and insipid, as were there Bodies when
they did compose them. It is a most difficult thing for the Spirits to be in a
good plight, serene and lively, when there is nothing in the Body but a kind of
Voidness and Inanity: Seeing the Philosophers with the Physicians jointly
affirm, that the Spirits which are styled Animal, spring from, and have their
constant practice in, and through the Arterial Blood, refined and purified to
the Life within the admirable Net, which wonderfully framed lies under the
Ventricles and Tunnels of the Brain. He gave us also the Example of the
Philosopher, who, when he thought most seriously to have withdrawn himself unto
a solitary Privacy, far from the rusling clutterments of the tumultuous and
confused World, the better to improve his Theory, to contrive, comment and
ratiocinate, was, notwithstanding his uttermost endeavors to free himself from
all untoward noises, surrounded and environed about so with the barking of
Currs, bawling of Mastiffs, bleating of Sheep, prating of Parrets, tatling of
Jackdaws, grunting of Swine, girning of Boars, yelping of Foxes, mewing of
Cats, cheeping of Mice, squeaking of Weasils, croaking of Frogs, crowing of
Cocks, kekling of Hens, calling of Partridges, chanting of Swans, chattering of
Jays, peeping of Chickens, singing of Larks, creaking of Geese, chirping of
Swallows, clucking of Moorfowls, cucking of Cuckows, bumling of Bees, rammage
of Hawks, chi^ming of Linots, croaking of Ravens, screeching of Owls, whicking
of Pigs, gushing of Hogs, curring of Pigeons, grumbling of Cushet-doves,
howling of Panthers, curkling of Quails, chirping of Sparrows, crackling of
Crows, nuzzing of Camels, wheening of Whelps, buzzing of Dromedaries, mumbling
of Rabets, cricking of Ferrets, humming of Wasps, mioling of Tigers, bruzzing
of Bears, sussing of Kitnings, clamring of Scarfes, whimpring of Fullmarts,
boing of Buffalos, warbling of Nightingales, quavering of Meavises, drintling
of Turkies, coniating of Storks, frantling of Peacocks, clattering of Mag-pyes,
murmuring of Stock-doves, crouting of Cormorants, cigling of Locusts, charming
of Beagles, guarring of Puppies, snarling of Messens, rantling of Rats,
guerieting of Apes, snuttering of Monkies, pioling of Pelicanes, quecking of
Ducks, yelling of Wolves, roaring of Lions, neighing of Horses, crying of
Elephants, hissing of Serpents, and wailing of Turtles, that he was much more
troubled, than if he had been in the middle of the Crowd at the Fair of
Fontenoy or Niort.

Just so is it with those who are tormented with the grievous pangs of Hunger;
the Stomach begins to gnaw, (and bark as it were) the Eyes to look dim, and the
Veins, by greedily sucking some refection to themselves from the proper
substance of all the Members of a Fleshy Consistence; violently pull down and
draw back that vagrant, roaming Spirit, careless and neglecting of his Nurse
and natural Host, which is the Body. As when a Hawk upon the Fist, willing to
take her Flight by a soaring aloft into the open spacious Air, is on a sudden
drawn back by a Leash tied to her Feet.

To this purpose also did he allege unto us the Authority of Homer, the Father
of all Philosophy, who said, that the Grecians did not put an end to their
mournful mood for the Death of Patroclus, the most intimate Friend of Achilles,
till Hunger in a rage declared her self, and their Bellies protested to furnish
no more Tears unto their Grief. For from Bodies emptied and mecerated by long
Fasting, there could not be such supply of Moisture and brackish Drops, as
might be proper on that occasion.

Mediocrity at all times is commendable; nor in this case are you to abandon
it. You may take a little Supper, but thereat must you not eat of a Hare, nor
of any other Flesh: You are likewise to abstain from Beans, from the Preak, (by
some called the Polyp) as also from Coleworts, Cabbidge, and all other such
like windy Victuals, which may endanger the troubling of your Brains, and the
dimning or casting a kind of Mist over your Animal Spirits: For as a
Looking-glass cannot exhibit the Semblance or Representation of the Object set
before it, and exposed, to have its Image to the life expressed, if that the
polished sleekedness thereof be darkened by gross Breathings, dampish Vapors,
and foggy, thick, infectious Exhalations; even so the Fancy cannot well receive
the impression of the likeness of those things, which Divination does afford by
Dreams, if any way the Body be annoyed or troubled with the fumish Steam of
Meat, which it had taken in a while before; because betwixt these two there
still has been a mutual Sympathy and Fellow-^eeling, of an indissolubly knit
Affection. You shall eat good Eusebian and Bergamot-Pears* one Apple of the
short-shank Pepin-kind, a parcel of the little Plums of Tours, and some few
Cherries of the growth of my Orchard: Nor shall you need to fear, that
thereupon will ensue doubtful Dreams, fallacious, uncertain, and not to be
trusted to, as by some Peripatetick Philosophers has been related; for that,
say they, Men do more copiously in the Season of Harvest feed on Fruitages,
then at any other time. The same is mystically taught us by the ancient
Prophets and Poets, who allege, That all vain and deceitful Dreams lie hid and
in covert, under the Leaves which are spread on the ground: by reason that the
Leaves fall from the Trees, in the Autumnal Quarter: for the natural fervor,
which abounding in ripe, fresh, recent Fruits, comes by the quickness of its
ebullition, to be with ease evaporated into the Animal parts of the dreaming
Person (the Experiment is obvious in most) is a pretty while before it be
expired, dissolved, and evanished. As for your Drink, you are to have it of the
fair, pure Water of my Fountain.

The Condition (quoth Panurge) is very hard: nevertheless, cost what price it
will, or whatsoever come of it, I heartily condescend thereto; protesting, that
I shall to morrow break my Fast betimes, after my somniatory Exercitations;
furthermore, I recommend my self to Homer's two Gates, to Morpheus, to Iselon,
to Phautasus, and unto Phabetor. If they in this my great need succor me, and
grant me that assistance which is fitting, I will, in honor of them all, erect
a jolly, gentiel Altar, composed of the softest Down. If I were now in Laconia,
in the Temple of Juno, betwixt Oetile and Thalamis, she suddenly would
disintangle my Perplexity, resolve me of my Doubts, and cheer me up with fair
and jovial Dreams in a deep Sleep. Then did he say thus unto Pantagruel: Sir,
were it not expedient for my purpose, to put a Branch or two of curious Laurel
betwixt the Quilt and Bolster of my Bed, under the Pillow on which my Head must
lean? There is no need at all of that (quoth Pantagruel) for besides that it is
a thing very superstitious, the Cheat thereof has been at large discovered
unto us, in the Writings of Serapion, Ascalonites, Antiphon, Philochorus,
Artemon, and Fulgentius Placiades. I could say as much to you of the Left
Shoulder of a Crocodile, as also of a Camelion, without prejudice be it spoken
to the Credit which is due to the Opinion of old Democritus; and likewise of
the Stone of the Bactrians, called Eumerites, and of the Hamonian Horn: for so
by the Aethiopians is termed a certain precious Stone, colored like Gold, and
in the fashion, shape, form, and proportion of a Ram's Horn, as the Horn of
Jupiter Hammon is reported to have been: they over-and-above assuredly
affirming, that the Dreams of those who carry it about them are no less
veri^able and infallible, than the Truth of the Divine Oracles. Nor is this
much unlike to what Homer and Virgil wrote of these two Gates of Sleep: to
which you have been pleased to recommend the management of what you have in
hand. The one is of Ivory, which sets in confused, doubtful, and uncertain
Dreams; for through Ivory, how small and slender it soever be, we can see
nothing, the density, opacity, and close compactedness of its material parts,
hindering the penetration of the visual Rays, and the reception of the
Speciesses of such things as are visible: the other is of Horn, at which an
entry is made to sure and certain Dreams, even as through Horn, by reason of
the diaphanous splendor, and bright transparency thereof, the Species of all
Objects of the sight distinctly pass, and so without confusion appear, that
they are clearly seen. Your meaning is, and you would thereby infer (quoth
Friar John) that the Dreams of all horned Cuckolds (of which number Panurge, by
the help of God, and his future Wife, is without controversy to be one) are
always true and infallible.

CHAP. XIV. Panurge's Dream, with the Interpretation thereof.
AT Seven a Clock of the next following Morning, Panurge did not fail to
present himself before Pantagruel, in whose Chamber were at that time
Epistemon, Friar John of the Funnels, Ponocrates, Eudemon, Carpalin, and
others, to whom, at the entry of Panurge, Pantagruel said, Lo, here comes our
Dreamer. That word (quoth Epistemon) in ancient times cost very much, and was
dearly sold to the Children of Jacob. Then, said Panurge, I have been plunged
into my dumps so deeply, as if I had been lodged with Gaffer Noddy cap: dreamed
indeed I have, and that right lustily; but I could take a long with me no more
thereof, that I did goodly understand, save only, that I in my Vision had a
pretty, fair, young, gallant, handsome Woman, who no less lovingly and kindly
treated and entertained me, hugged, cherished, cocker'd, dandled, and made much
of me, as if I had been another neat dillidarling Minion, like Adonis: never
was Man more glad then I was then, my joy at that time was incomperable; she
flattred me, tickled me, stroaked me, groped me, frizled me, curled me, kissed
me, embraced me, laid her Hands about my Neck, and now and then made jestingly,
pretty little Horns above my Forehead: I told her in the like disport, as I did
play the Fool with her, that she should rather place and fix them in a little
below mine Eyes, that I might see the better what I should stick at, with them:
for being so situated, Momus then would find no fault therewith, as he did once
with the position of the Horns of Bulls. The wanton, toying Girl,
notwithstanding any remonstrance of mine to the contrary, did always drive and
thrust them further in: yet thereby (which to me seemed wonderful) she did not
do me any hurt at all. A little after, though I know not how, I thought I was
transformed into a Tabor, and she into a Chough.

My sleeping there being interrupted, I awaked in a start, angry, displeased,
perplexed, chafing, and very wroth. There have you a large-Platter-full of
Dreams, make thereupon good Cheer, and, if you please, spare not to interpret
them according to the Understanding which you may have in them. Come Carpalin,
let us to Breakfast. To my sense and meaning, (quoth Pantagruel) if I have
skill or knowledge in the Art of Divination by Dreams, your Wife will not
really, and to the outward appearance of the World, plant, or set Horns, and
stick them fast in your Forehead, after a visible manner, as Satyrs use to wear
and carry them; but she will be so far from preserving herself Loyal in the
discharge and observance of a Conjugal Duty, that on the contrary she will
violate her plighted Faith, break her Marriage-Oath, infringe all Matrimonial
Ties, prostitute her Body to the Dalliance of other Men, and so make you a
Cuckold. This point is clearly and manifestly explained and expounded by
Artemidorus, just as I have related it. Nor will there be any metamorphosis, or
transmutation made of you into a Drum, or Tabor, but you will surely be as
soundly beaten as e're was Tabor at a merry Wedding: nor yet will she be
changed into a Chough, but will steal from you, chiefly in the Night, as is the
nature of that thievish Bird. Hereby may you perceive your Dreams to be in
every jot conform and agreeable to the Virgilian Lots: A Cuckold you will be,
beaten and robbed. Then cried out Father John with a loud Voice: He tells the
truth; upon my Conscience, thou will be a Cuckold, an honest one, I warrant
thee; O the brave Horns that will be born by thee! Ha, ha, ha. Our good Master
De Cornilius, God save thee, and shield thee; Will thou be pleased to preach
but two words of a Sermon to us, and I will go through the Parish Church to
gather up Alms for the poor.

You are (quoth Panurge) very far mistaken in your Interpretation; for the
matter is quite contrary to your sense thereof; my Dream presageth, that I
shall by Marriage be stored with plenty of all manner of Goods, the hornifying
of me showing, that I will possess a Cornucopia, that Amalthaean Horn, which is
called, The Horn of Abundance, whereof the fruition did still portend the
Wealth of the Enjoyer. You possibly will say, that they are rather like to be
Satyrs Horns; for you of these did make some mention. Amen, Amen, Fiat siat, ad
differentiam papae. Thus shall I have my Touch-her-home still ready; my Staff
of Love sempiternally in a good case, will, Satyr-like, be never toyled out; a
thing which all Men wish for, and send up their Prayers to that purpose, but
such a thing as nevertheless is granted but to a few; hence does it follow by a
consequence as clear as the Sunbeams, that I will never be in the danger of
being made a Cuckold, for the defect hereof is, Causa sine qua non; yea, the
sole cause (as many think) of making Husbands Cuckolds* What makes poor
scoundrel Rogues to beg (I pray you)? Is it not because they have not enough at
home, wherewith to fill their Bellies, and their Poaks. What is it makes the
Wolves to leave the Woods? Is it not the want of Flesh Meat. What makes Women
Whores? you understand me well enough. And herein may I very well submit my
Opinion to the Judgment of learned Lawyers, Presidents, Counselors, Advocates,
Procurers, Attorneys, and other Glossers and Commentators on the venerable
Rubric, De Frigidis, and maleficiatis. You are in truth, Sir, as it seems to
me (excuse my boldness if I have transgressed) in a most palpable and absurd
Error, to attribute my Horns to Cuckoldry: Diana wears them on her Head after
the manner of a Cressant, is she a Cuequean for that? How the Devil can she be
cuckolded, who never yet was married? Speak somewhat more correctly, I beseech
you, least she being offended, furnish you with a pair of Horns, shapen by the
Pattern of those which she made for Actaeon. The goodly Bacchus also carries
Horns; Pan, Jupiter Hammon, with a great many others, are they all Cuckolds? If
Jove be a Cuckold, Juno is a Whore: this follows by the Figure Metalepsis. As
to call a Child in the presence of his Father and Mother, a Bastard, or Whore's
Son, is tacitly and under-board, no less than if he had said openly, the Father
is a Cuckold, and his Wife a Punk. Let our Discourse come nearer to the
purpose: The Horns that my Wife did make me are Horns of Abundance, planted and
grafted in my Head for the increase and shooting up of all good things: this
will I affirm for truth, upon my Word, and pawn my Faith and Credit both upon
it; as for the rest, I will be no less joyful, frolic, glad, cheerful, merry,
jolly, and gamesome then a well-bended Tabor in the Hands of a good Drummer, at
a Nuptial Feast, still making a noise, still rolling, still buzzing and
cracking. Believe me, Sir, in that consists none of my least good Fortunes.
And my Wife will be jocund, feat, count, neat, quaint, dainty, trim, tricked
up, brisk, smirk and smug, even as a pretty little Cornish Chough: who will not
believe this, let Hell or the Gallows be the Burden of his Christmas Carol.

I remark (quoth Pantagruel) the last point or particle which you did speak of,
and having seriously conferred it with the first, find that at the beginning
you were delighted with the sweetness of your Dream; but in the end* and final
closure of it, you startingly awaked, and on a sudden were forthwith vexed in
Choler, and annoyed. Yea, (quoth Panurge) the reason of that was, because I had
fasted too long. Flatter not your self (quoth Pantagruel) all will go to ruin:
know for a certain truth, that every Sleep that ends with a starting, and
leaves the Person irksome, grieved, and fretting, does either signify a
present evil, or otherways presageth, and portendeth a future imminent mishap.
To signify an Evil, that is to say, to show some Sickness hardly curable, a
kind of pestilentious, or malignant Bile, Botch, or Sore, lying and lurking,
hid, occult, and latent within the very Center of the Body, which many times
does by the means of Sleep (whose nature is to reinforce, and strengthen the
Faculty and Virtue of Concoction) begin according to the Theorems of Physic to
declare itself, and moves toward the outward Superficies. At this sad stirring
is the Sleeper's rest and ease disturbed and broken, whereof the first feeling
and stinging smart admonishes, that he must patiently endure great pain and
trouble, and thereunto provide some remedy: as when we say proverbially to
incense Hornets, to move a stinking Puddle, and to awake a sleeping Lion,
instead of these more usual expressions, and of a more familiar and plain
meaning, to provoke angry Persons, to make a thing the worse by meddling with
it, and to irritate a testy choleric Man when he is at quiet. On the other
part, to presage or foretell an Evil, especially in what concerns the
Exploits of the Soul, in matter of Somnial Divinations, is as much to say, as
that it gives us to understand, that some dismal Fortune or Mischance is
destinated and prepared for us, which shortly will not fail to come to pass. A
clear and evident Example hereof is to be found in the Dream, and dreadful
awaking of Hecuba, as likewise in that of Euridice, the Wife of Orpheus,
(neither of which was sooner finished, says Cunius) but that incontinently
thereafter they awaked in a start, and were affrighted horribly; thereupon
these Accidents ensued, Hecuba had her Husband Priamus, together with her
Children, slain before her eyes, and saw then the Destruction of her Country;
and Euridice died speedily thereafter, in a most miserable manner. Aeneas
dreaming that he spoke to Hector a little after his Decease, did on a sudden in
a great start awake, and was afraid: now hereupon did follow this event; Troy
that same Night was spoiled, sacked, and burnt. At another time the same
Aeneas, dreaming that he saw his familiar Geniuses and Penates, in a ghastly
fright and astonishment awaked, of which terror and amazement the issue was,
that the very next day subsequent, by a most horrible Tempest on the Sea, he
was like to have perished, and been castaway. Moreover, Turnus being prompted,
instigated, and stirred up, by the fantastic Vision of an infernal Fury, to
enter into a bloody War against Aeneas, awaked in a start much troubled and
disquieted in Spirit, in sequel whereof, after many notable and famous Routs,
Defeats and Discomfitures in open Field, he came at last to be killed in a
single Combat, by the said Aeneas. A thousand other instances I could afford,
if it were needful, of this matter. Whilst I relate these Stories of Aeneas,
remark the saying of Fabius Pictor, who faithfully averred, That nothing had at
any time befallen unto, was done, or enterprized by him, whereof he preallably
had not Notice, and beforehand fore seen it to the full, by sure Predictions,
altogether founded on the Oracles of Somnial Divination. To this there is no
want of pregnant Reasons, no more then of Examples: for if Repose and Rest in
Sleeping be a special Gift and Favor of the Gods, as is maintained by the
Philosophers, and by the Poet attested in these Lines: Then Sleep, that
heavenly Gift, came to refresh,
Of humane Laborers, the wearied Flesh.
Such a Gift or Benefit can never finish or terminate in wrath and indignation,
without portending some unlucky Fate, and most disastrous Fortune to ensue;
otherways it were a Molestation, and not an Ease; a Scourge and not a Gift, at
least, proceeding from the Gods above, but from the infernal Devils our
Enemies, according to the common vulgar Saying.

Suppose the Lord, Father, or Master of a Family, sitting at a very sumptuous
Dinner, furnished with all manner of good Cheer, and having at his entry to the
Table his Appetite sharp set upon his Victuals, whereof there was great plenty,
should be seen rise in a start, and on a sudden fling out of his Chair,
abandoning his Meat, frighted, appalled, and in a horrid terror, who should
not know the cause hereof would wonder, and be astonished exceedingly: But
what? he heard his Male Servants cry, Fire, fire, fire, fire; his Serving Maids
and Woman yell, Stop Thief, stop Thief; and all his Children shout as loud as
ever they could, Murder, O Murder, Murder. Then was it not high time for him
to leave his Banqueting, for application of a Remedy in have, and to give
speedy Order for succouring of his distressed Household. Truly, I remember, that
the Cabalists and Massorats, Interpreters of the Sacred Scriptures, in treating
how with verity one might judge of Evangelical Apparitions (because oftentimes
the Angel of Satan is disguized and transfigured into an Angel of Light) said,
That the difference of these two mainly did consist in this: the favorable and
comforting Angel uses in his appearing unto Man at first to terrify and
hugely affright him; but in the end he brings Consolation, leaves the Person
who has seen him, joyful, well pleased, fully content, and satisfied: on the
other side, the Angel of Perdition, that wicked, devilish, and malignant
Spirit, at his appearance unto any Person, in the beginning cheareth up the
Heart of his Beholder, but at last forsakes him, and leaves him troubled,
angry, and perplexed.

CHAP. XV. Panurge's Excuse and Exposition of the Monastic Mystery concerning
Powdered Beef.
THE Lord save those who see, and do not hear, (quoth Panurge) I see you well
enough, but know not what it is that you have said: the Hunger-starved Belly
wants Ears: For lack of Victuals, before God, I roar, bray, yell and fume as
in a furious Madness. I have performed too hard a Task to day, an extrordinary
Work indeed: He shall be craftier, and do far greater Wonders than ever did Mr.
Mush, who shall be able any more this year to bring me on the Stage of
Preparation for a dreaming Verdict. Fie; not to sup at all, that is the Devil.
Pox take that Fashion. Come Friar John, let us go break our Fast; for if I hit
on such a round Refection in the morning* as will serve thoroughly to fill the
Mill-hopper and Hogshide of my Stomach, and furnish it with Meat and Drink
sufficient, then at a pinch, as in the case of some extreme necessity which
presses, I could make a shift that day to forbear Dining. But not to Sup: A
Plague-rot that base Custom, which is an Error offensive to Nature. That Lady
made the Day for Exercise, to travel, work, wait on and labor in each his
Negotiation and Employment; and that we may with the more Fervency and Ardour
prosecute our business, she sets before us a clear burning Candle, to wit, the
Suns Resplendency: And at Night, when she begins to take the Light from us, she
thereby tacitly implies no less, than if she would have spoken thus unto us: My
Lads and Lasses, all of you are good and honest Folks, you have wrought well to
day, toiled and turmoiled enough, the Night approaches, therefore cast off
these moiling Cares of yours, desist from all your swinking painful Labors,
and set your Minds how to refresh your Bodies in the renewing of their Vigor
with good Bread, choice Wine, and store of wholesome Meats; then may you take
some Sport and Recreation, and after that lie down and rest your selves, that
you may strongly, nimbly, lustily, and with the more Alacrity to morrow attend
on your Affairs as formerly.

Falconers in like manner, when they have fed their Hawks, will not suffer them
to fly on a full Gorge, but let them on a Perch abide a little, that they may
rouse, bait, tour and soar the better. That good Pope, who was the first
Instituter of Fasting, understood this well enough; for he ordained that our
Fast should reach but to the hour of Noon; all the remainder of that day was at
our disposure, freely to eat and feed at any time thereof. In ancient times
there were but few that dined, as you would say, some Church men, Monks and
Canons; for they have little other Occupation; each day is a Festival unto
them; who diligently heed the Claustral Proverb, De missa ad mensam. They do
not use to linger and defer their sitting down and placing of themselves at
Table, only so long as they have a mind in waiting for the coming of the Abbot;
so they fell to without Ceremony, Terms or Conditions; and every body supped,
unless it were some vain, conceited, dreaming Dotard. Hence was a Supper called
Caena, which shows that it is common to all sorts of People. Thou know it
well, Friar John. Come let us go, my dear Friend in the name of all the Devils
of the Infernal Regions, let us go: The Gnawings of my Stomach, in this rage of
Hunger, are so taring, that they make it bark like a Mastiff. Let us throw some
Bread and Beef into his Throat to pacify him, as once the Sibyl did to
Cerberus. Thou likest best Monastical Browess, the prime, the flower of the
Pot. I am for the solid, principal Verb that comes after: The good brown Loaf,
always accompanied with a round slice of the Nine-lecture-poudred Labourer. I
know thy meaning, (answered Friar John) this Metaphor is extracted out of the
Claustral Kettle; the Labourer is the Ox, that has wrought and done the
Labor; after the fashion of Nine Lectures, that is to say, most exquisitely
well and thoroughly boiled. These holy Religious Fathers, by a certain
Cabalistick Institution of the Ancients, not written, but carefully by
Tradition conveyed from hand to hand, rising betimes to go to Morning Prayers,
were wont to flourish that their matutinal. Devotion with some certain notable
Preambles before their entry into the Church, viz. They dunged in the
Dungeries, pissed in the Pisseries, spit in the Spitteries, melodiously coughed
in the Cougheries, and doted in their Doteries, that to the Divine Service they
might not bring any thing that was unclean or foul.

These things thus done* they very zealously made their repair to the Holy
Chapel, (for so was, in their canting Language, termed the Covent Kitchen)
where they with no small earnestness, had Care that the Beef Pot should be put
on the Crook for the Breakfast of the Religious Brothers of our Lord and
Savior; and the Fire they would kindle under the Pot themselves. Now the
Matines consisting of Nine Lessons, was so incumbent on them, that they must
have risen the rather for the more expedite dispatching of them all. The sooner
that they rose, the sharper was their Appetite, and the Barkings of their
Stomachs, and the Gnawings increase in the like proportion, and consequently
made these Godly Men thrice more a hungered and a-thirst, than when their
Matines were hemmed over only with three Lessons.

The more betimes they rose by the said Cabal, the sooner was the Beef Pot put
on; the longer that the Beef was on the Fire, the better it was boiled; the
more it boiled, it was the tenderer; the tenderer that it was, the less it
troubled the Teeth, delighted more the Palats, less charged the Stomach, and
nourished our good Religious Men the more substantially; which is the only end
and prime intention of the first Founders, as appears by this, That they eat
not to live, but live to eat, and in this World have nothing but their Life.
Let us go, Panurge.

Now have I understood thee, (quoth Panurge) my Plushcod Friar, my Caballine
and Claustral Ballock. I freely quit the Costs, Interest and Charges, seeing
you have so egregiously commented upon the most especial Chapter of the
Culinary and Monastic Cabal. Come along, my Garpalin, and you Friar John, my
Leather-dresser: Good morrow to you all, my good Lords: I have dreamed too much
to have so little. Let us go. Panurge had no sooner done speaking, than
Epistemon with a loud Voice said these Words: It is a very ordinary and common
thing amongst Men to conceive, foresee, know and presage the misfortune, bad
luck or disaster of another; but to have the understanding, providence,
knowledge and prediction of a Man's own mishap is very scarce and rare to be
found any where. This is exceeding judiciously and prudently deciphered by Esop
in his Apologues, who there affirms, That every Man in the World carries
about his Neck a Wallet, in the Fore-bag whereof were contained the Faults and
Mischances of others, always exposed to his view and knowledge; and in the
other Scrip thereof, which hangs behind, are kept the Bearers proper
Transgressions, and inauspicious Adventures, at no time seen by him, nor
thought upon, unless he be a person that has a favorable Aspect from the
Heavens.

CHAP. XVI. How Pantagruel advises Panurge to consult with the Sibyl of
Panzoust.
A Little while thereafter Pantagruel sent for Panurge, and said unto him, The
Affection which I bear you being now inveterate, and settled in my Mind by a
long continuance of time, prompteth me to the serious consideration of your
Welfare and Profit; in order whereto remark what I have thought thereon: It
has been told me that at Panzoust near Crouly, dwells a very famous Sibyl,
who is endowed with the skill of foretelling all things to come. Take Epestimon
in your Company, repair toward her, and hear what she will say unto you. She
is possibly (quoth Epistemon) she is some Canidia, Sagane or Pythonisse, either
whereof with us is vulgarly called a Witch. I being the more easily induced to
give Credit to the truth of this Character of her, that the place of her Abode
is vilely stained with the abominable repute of abounding more with Sorcerers
and Witches than ever did the Plains of Thessaly. I should not, to my thinking,
go thither willingly, for that it seems to me a thing unwarrantable, and
altogether forbidden in the Law of Moses. We are not Jews, (quoth Pantagruel)
nor is it a matter judiciously confessed by her, nor authentically proved by
others that she is a Witch. Let us for the present suspend our Judgment, and
defer till after your return from thence, the sifting and garbeling of those
Niceties. Do we know but that she may be an Eleventh Sibyl, or a Second
Cassandra? But although she were neither, and she did not merit the Name or
Title of any of these Renowned Prophetesses, what Hazard, in the Name of God,
do you run, by offering to talk and confer with her of the instant Perplexity
and Perturbation of your Thoughts? Seeing especially (and which is most of all)
she is in the Estimation of those that are acquainted with her, held to know
more, and to be of a deeper reach of Understanding, than is either customary to
the Country wherein she lives, or to the Sex whereof she is. What hindrance,
hurt or harm does the laudable desire of Knowledge bring to any Man, were it
from a Sot, a Pot, a Fool, a Stool, a Winter Mittam, a Truckle for a Pully, the
Lid of a Goldsmiths Crucible, an Oil-Bottle, or old Slipper? You may remember
to have read, or heard at least, that Alexander the Great, immediately after
his having obtained a glorious Victory over the King Darius in Arbeles, refused
in the Presence of the splendid and illustrious Courtiers that were about him,
to give Audience to a poor certain despicable-like Fellow, who through the
Soilicitations and Mediatio^ of some of his Royal Attendants* was admitted
humbly to beg that Grace and Favor of him: But sore did he repent, although in
vain, a thousand and ten thousand times thereafter, the surly State which he
then took upon him to the Denial of so just a Suit, the Grant whereof would
have been worth unto him the value of a Brace of potent Cities. He was indeed
Victorious in Persia, but withal so far distant from Macedonia, his Hereditary
Kingdom, that the Joy of the one did not expel the extreme Grief, which through
occasion of the other he had inwardly conceived; for not being able with all
his Power to find or invent a convenient Mean and Expedient, how to get or come
by the certainty of any News from thence; both by reason of the huge remoteness
of the places from one to another, as also because of the impeditive
Interposition of many great Rivers, the interjacent Obstacle of diverse wild
Deserts, and obstructive Interjection of sundry almost inaccessible Mountains.
Whilst he was in this sad quandary and sollicitous pensiveness, which, you may
suppose, could not be of a small Vexation to him; considering that it was a
matter of no great difficulty to run over his whole Native Soil, possess his
Country, seize on his Kingdom, install a new King in the Throne, and plant
thereon Foreign Colonies, long before he could come to have any Advertisement
of it. For obviating the Jeopardy of so dreadful Inconveniency, and putting a
fit Remedy thereto, a certain Sydonian Merchant of a low Stature, but high
Fancy, very poor in show, and to the outward appearance of little or no
Account, having presented himself before him, went about to affirm and declare,
that he had excogitated and hit upon a ready mean and way, by the which those
of his Territories at home should come to the certain notice of his Indian
Victories, and himself be perfectly informed of the state and condition of
Egypt and Macedonia within less then five days. Whereupon the said Alexander,
plunged into a sullen Animadvertency of mind, through his rash Opinion of the
Improbability of performing a so strange and impossible-like Undertaking,
dismissed the Merchant without giving ear to what he had to say, and villify'd
him. What could it have cost him to hearken unto what the honest Man had
invented and contrived for his good? What Detriment, Annoyance, Damage or Loss
could he have undergone to listen to the Discovery of that Secret, which the
good Fellow would have most willingly revealed unto him? Nature, I am
persuaded, did not without a cause frame our Eyes open, putting thereto no Gate
at all, nor shutting them up with any manner of Enclosures, as she has done
unto the Tongue, the Eyes, and other such out-jetting parts of the Body: The
Cause, as I imagine, is, to the end that every Day and every Night, and that
^ontinually, we may be ready to hear, and by a perpetual hearing apt to learn:
For of all the Senses, it is the fittest for the reception of the knowledge of
Arts, Sciences and Disciplines; and it may be, that Man was an Angel, (that is
to say, a Messenger sent from God) as Raphael was to Toby. Too suddenly did he
contemn, despise and misregard him; but too long thereafter, by an untimely and
too late Repentance did he do Penance for it. You say very well, (answered
Epistemon) yet shall you never for all that induce me to believe, that it can
tend any way to the Advantage or Commodity of a Man, to take Advice and Counsel
of a Woman, namely, of such a Woman, and the Woman of such a Country. Truly I
have found (quoth Panurge) a great deal of good in the Counsel of Women,
chiefly in that of the Old Wives amongst them; who for every time I consult
with them, I readily get a Stool or two extraordinary, to the great Solace of
my Bum-gut passage. They are as Slothounds in the Infallibility of their Scent,
and in their Sayings no less Sententious than the Rubricks of the Law.
Therefore in my Conceit it is not an improper kind of Speech to call them Sage
or Wise Women. In confirmation of which Opinion of mine, the customary style of
my Language allows them the Denomination of Presage Women. The Epithet of
Sage is due unto them, because they are surpassing dextrous in the knowledge of
most things^ And I give them the Title of Presage, for that they Divinely
foresee, and certainly foretell future Contingencies, and Events of things to
come. Sometimes I call them not Maunettes, but Monettes, from their wholesome
Monitions. Whether it be so, ask Pythagoras, Socrates, Empedocles, and our
Master Ortuinus. I furthermore praise and commend above the Skies the ancient
memorable Institution of the pristine Germans, who ordained the Responces and
Documents of Old Women to be highly extolled, most cordially reverenced, and
prised at a rate, in nothing inferior to the weight, test and standerd of the
Sanctuary: And as they were respectfully prudent in receiving of these sound
Advices, so by honoring and following them did they prove no less fortunate in
the happy Success of all their Endeavors. Witness the Old Wife Antinia, and
the good Mother Villed, in the days of Vespasian. You need not any way doubt,
but that Feminine Old Age is always fructifying in Qualities Sublime, I would
have said Sibylline. Let us go, by the help; let us go, by the Virtue. God, let
us go. Farewell, Friar John, I recommend the care of my Codpiece to you. Well,
(quoth Epistemon) I will follow you, with this protestation nevertheless, that
if I happen to get a sure information, or otherways find, that she does use any
kind of Charm or Enchantment in her Responses, it may not be imputed to me for
a blame to leave you at the Gate of her House, without accompanying you any
further in.

CHAP. XVII. How Panurge spoke to the Sybil of Panzoust.
THeir Voyage was three days Journeying, on the third whereof was shown unto
them the House of the Vaticinatress standing on the knap or top of a Hill,
under a large and spacious Walnut-Tree. Without great difficulty they entered
into that straw-thatch'd Cottage, scurvily built, naughtily movabled, and all
besmoaked. It matters not, (quoth Epistemon) Heraclitus, the grand Scotist, and
tenebrous darksome Philosopher, was nothing astonished at his Introit into such
a course and paultry Habitation; for he did usually show forth unto his
Sectators and Disciples, That the Gods made as cheerfully their Residence in
these mean homely Mansions, as in sumptuous, magnifick Palaces, replenished
with all manner of delight, pomp, and pleasure. I withal do really believe,
that the Dewlling Place of the so famous and renowned Hecate, was just such
another petty Cell as this is, when she made a Feast therein to the valiant
Theseus. And that of no other better Structure was the Coat or Cabin of Hyreus,
or Oaenopion, wherein Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury were not ashamed, all three
together, to harbor and sojourn a whole Night, and there to take a full and
hearty Repast; for the payment of the Shot they thankfully ed Orion.

They finding the ancient Woman, at a corner of her own Chimney, Epistemon
said, She is indeed a true Sybil, and the lively Pourtraict of one represented
by the (...) of Homer. The old Hag was in a pitiful bad plight and condition,
in matter of the outward state and complexion of her Body, the ragged and
tottred Equipage of her Person, in the point of Accoutrement, and beggarly poor
Provision of Fare for her Diet and Entertainment; for she was ill apparelled,
worse nourished, Toothless, Blear-eyed, Crook-shoulder'd, snotty, her Nose
still dropping, and herself still drooping, faint, and pithless. Whilst in this
woefully wretched case she was making ready for her Dinner, Porridge of wrinkled
green Colworts, with a bit skin of yellow Bacon, mixed with a twice before
crooked sort of watrish, unsavory Broth, extracted out of bare and hollow
Bones. Epistemon said, By the Cross of a Groat, we are to blame, nor shall we
get from her any Responce at all: for we have not brought along with us the
Branch of Gold. I have (quoth Panurge) provided pretty well for that, for here
I have it within my Bag, in the substance of a Gold Ring, accompanied with some
fair Pieces of small Money. No sooner were these words spoken, when Panurge
coming up toward her, after the Ceremonial performance of a profound and
humble Salutation, presented her with six Neats-Tongues dried in the Smoke, a
great Butter-pot full of fresh Cheese, a Boracho furnished with good Beverage,
and a Rams Cod stored with Single Pence, newly coined: At last he, with a low
Curtsie, put on her Medical Finger, a pretty handsome Golden Ring, whereinto
was right artificially inchased a precious Toadstone of Beausse. This done, in
few words, and very succinctly did he set open, and expose unto her the motive
Reason of his coming, most civilly and courteously entreating her, that she
might be pleased to vouchsafe to give him an ample and plenary Intelligence,
concerning the future good luck of his intended Marriage.

The old Trot for a while remained silent, pensive, and girning like a Dog,
then, after she had set her withered Breech upon the bottom of a Bushel, she
took into her Hands three old Spindles, which when she had turned and whirled
betwixt her Fingers very diversely, and after several fashions, she pryed more
narrowly into, by the trial of their points; the sharpest whereof she retained
in her hand, and threw the other two under a Stone Trough; after this she took
a pair of Yarn Windles, which she nine times unintermittedly veered, and
frisked about, then at the ninth revolution or turn, without touching them any
more, maturely perpending the manner of their motion, she very demurely waited
on their repose and cessation from any further stirring. In sequel whereof, she
pulled off one of her wooden Pattens, put her Apron over her Head, as a Priest
use to do his Amice, when he is going to sing Mass, and with a kind of antic,
gaudy, party-colored String, knit it under her Neck. Being thus covered and
muffled, she whiffed off a lusty good Draught out of the Borachoe, took three
several Pence forth of the Ram Cod Fob, put them into so many Walnut-shells,
which she set down upon the bottom of a Feather-pot; and then after she had
given them three Whisks of a Broom Besom a-thwart the Chimney, casting into the
Fire half a Bevin of long Heather, together with a Branch of dry Laurel, she
observed with a very hush, and coy silence, in what form they did burn, and
saw, that although they were in a flame, they made no kind of noise, or
crackling din, hereupon she gave a most hideous and horribly dreadful shout,
muttering betwixt her Teeth some few barbarous words, of a strange termination.

This so terrified Panurge, that he forthwith said to Epistemon, The Devil
mince me into a Gally-mafry, if I do not tremble for fear. I do not think but
that I am now enchanted; for she utters not her Voice in the terms of any
Christian Language. O look, I pray you, how she seems unto me, to be by three
full spans higher than she was, when she began to hood her self with her Apron.

What means this restless wagging of her slouchy Chaps? What can be the
signification of the uneven shrugging of her hulchy Shoulders? to what end does
she quaver with her Lips, like a Monkey in the dismembring of a Lobster? My
Ears through horror glow; ah! how they tingle. I think I hear the skreaking of
Proserpina; the Devils are breaking loose to be all here. O the foul, ugly, and
deformed Beasts! Let us run away! by the Hook of God, I am like to die for
fear! I do not love the Devils; they vex me, and are unpleasant Fellows. Now
let us fly, and betake us to our heels. Farewell Gammer; Thanks and Grammercy
for your Goods. I will not marry, no, believe me, I will not; I fairly quit my
Interest therein, and totally abandon and renounce it, from this time forward,
even as much as at present. With this, as he endeavored to make an escape out
of the room, the old Crone did anticipate his flight, and make him stop; the
way how she prevented him was this: whilst in her hand she held the Spindle,
she flung out to a Back-yard close by her Lodge, where after she had peeled off
the Barks of an old Sycamore, three several times, she very summarily, upon
eight Leaves which dropped from thence, wrote with the Spindle-point some curt,
and briefly couched Verses, which she threw into the Air, then said unto them,
Search after them if you will; find them if you can; the fatal Destinies of
your Marriage written in them.

No sooner had she done thus speaking, when she did withdraw herself unto her
lurking Hole, where on the upper Seat of the Porch, she tucked up her Gown, her
Coats and Smock, as high as her Armpits, and gave them a full inspection of the
Nockandroe: which being perceived by Panurge, he said to Epistemon, Gods
Bodekins, I see the Sybil's Hole. She suddenly then bolted the Gate behind her,
and was never since seen any more. They jointly ran in have after the fallen
and dispersed Leaves, and gathered them at last, though not without great
labor and toil, for the Wind had scattered them amongst the Thorn-bushes of
the Valley. When they had ranged them each after other in their due places,
they found out their Sentence, as it is metrified in this Ocstatick: Thy Fame
upheld,
Even so, so:
And she with Child
Of thee: No.
Thy Good End
Suck she shall,
And flay thee, Friend,
But not all.


CHAP. XVIII. How Pantagruel, and Panurge did diversely Expound the Verses of
the Sybil of Panzoust.
THE Leaves being thus collected, and orderly disposed, Epistemon and Panurge
returned to Pantagruel's Court, partly well pleased, and other part
discontented: glad for their being come back, and vexed for the trouble they
had sustained by the way, which they found to be craggy, rugged, stony, rough,
and ill adjusted. They made an ample and full Relation of their Voyage, unto
Pantagruel; as likewise of the Estate and Condition of the Sybil. Then having
presented to him the Leaves of the Sycamore, they show him the short and
twattle Verses that were written in them. Pantagruel having read and considered
the whole sum and substance of the matter, fetched from his Heart a deep and
heavy Sigh, then said to Panurge: You are now, forsooth, in a good taking, and
have brought your Hogs to a fine Market: the Prophecy of the Sybil does
explain and lay out before us, the same very Predictions which have been
denotated, foretold, and presaged to us by the Decree of the Virgilian Lots,
and the Verdict of your own proper Dreams: to wit, that you shall be very much
disgraced, shamed, and discredited by your Wife: for that she will make you a
Cuckold in prostituting herself to others, being big with Child by another than
you; will steal from you a great deal of your Goods, and will beat you,
scratch, and bruise you, even from plucking the skin in apart from off you;
will leave the Print of her Blows in some Member of your Body. You understand
as much (answered Panurge) in the veritable Interpretation, and Expounding of
recent Prophesies, as a Sow in the matter of Spicery. Be not offended (Sir, I
beseech you) that I speak thus boldly; for I find myself a little in Choler,
and that not without cause, seeing it is the contrary that is true; take heed,
and give attentive Ear unto my words: The old Wife said, that as the Bean is
not seen till first it be unhuskt, and that its swad or hull be shaled, and
pilled from off it: so is it that my virtue and transcendent worth will never
come by the Mouth of Fame, to be blazed abroad proportionable to the height,
extent, and measure of the excellency thereof, until preallably I get a Wife,
and make the full half of a married Couple. How many times have I heard you
say, that the Function of a Magistrate, or Office of Dignity, discovers the
Merits, Parts, and Endowments of the Person so advanced and promoted, and what
is in him: that is to say, we are then best able to judge aright of the
Deservings of a Man, when he is called to the management of Affairs: for when
before he lived in a private Condition, we could have no more certain knowledge
of him, then of a Bean within his Husk. And thus stands the first Article
explained: otherways could you imagine, that the good Fame, Repute, and
Estimation of an Honest Man, should depend upon the Tail of a Whore?

Now to the meaning of the Second Article: My Wife will be with Child, (here
lies the prime Felicity of Marriage) but not of me. Copsody, that I do believe
indeed: It will be of a pretty little Infant: O how heartily I shall love it! I
do already dote upon it; for it will be my dainty Fedle-darling, my gentiel
Dilli-minion. From thenceforth no Vexation, Care, or Grief, shall take such
deep impression in my Heart, how hugely great or vehement soever it otherways
appear; but that it shall evanish forthwith, at the sight of that my future
Babe; and at the hearing of the Chat and Prating of its Childish Gibbridge: And
blessed be the Old Wife. By my truly, I have a mind to settle some good Revenue
or Pension upon her, out of the readiest Increase of the Lands of my
Salmigondinois; not an inconstant, and uncertain Rent-seek, like that of
witless, giddy-headed Batchellors, but sure and fixed, of the nature of the
well-payed Incomes of Regenting Doctors.

If this Interpretation does not please you, think you my Wife will bear me in
her Flanks: Conceive with me, and be of me delivered, as Women use in Childbed
to bring forth their Young Ones: so as that it may be said, Panurge is a second
Bacchus, he has been twice born; he is re-born, as was Hypolitus, as was
Proteus, one time of Thetis; and secondly, of the Mother of the Philosopher
Apollonius: as were the two Palices, near the Flood Samethoe, in Sicily: his
Wife was big of Child with him. In him is renewed and begun again the
Palintocy, and of the Megariens, and the Palingenesie of Democritus. Fie upon
such Errors, to hear stuff of that nature rends mine Ears.

The words of the third Article are: She will suck me at my best End. Why not?
that pleases me right well. You know the thing, I need not tell you, that it
is my intercrural Pudding with one end. I swear and promise, that in what I
can, I will preserve it sappy, full of juice, and as well victualled for her
use as may be; she shall not suck me, I believe, in vain, nor be destitute of
her allowance; there shall her justum both in Peck and Lippy be furnished to
the full eternally. You expound this passage allegorically, and interpret it to
Theft and Larceny. I love the Exposition, and the Allegory pleases me; but not
according to the Sense whereto you stretch it. It may be that the sincerity of
the Affection which you bear me* moves you to harbor in your Breast those
refractory thoughts concerning me, with a suspicion of my Adversity to come. We
have this saying from the Learned, That a marvelously fearful thing is Love,
and that true Love is never without fear. But (Sir) according to my Judgment,
you do understand both of and by your self, that here Stealth signifies
nothing else, no more then in a thousand other places of Greek and Latin, Old
and Modern Writings, but the sweet fruits of amorous Dalliance, which Venus
likes best, when reaped in secret, and culled by fervent Lovers filchingly.

Why so? I prithee tell: Because when the Feat of the loose Coat Skirmish
happens to be done underhand and privily, between two well-disposed, athwart
the Steps of a Pair of Stairs, lurkingly, and in covert, behind a Suit of
Hangings, or close hid and trussed upon an unbound Faggot, it is more pleasing
to the Cyprian Goddess, (and to me also, I speak this without prejudice to any
better, or more sound Opinion) then to perform that Culbusting Art, after the
Cynick manner, in the view of the clear Sunshine, or in a rich Tent, under a
precious stately Canopy, within a glorious and sublime Pavilion, or yet on a
soft Couch betwixt rich Curtains of Cloth of Gold, without affrightment, at
long intermediate Respits, enjoying of Pleasures and Delights a Bellyfull, all
at great ease, with a huge fly-flap Fan of Crimson Satin, and a Bunch of
Feathers of some East-Indian Ostrich, serving to give Chase unto the Flies all
round about: whilst; in the Interim, the Female picks her Teeth with a stiff
Straw, picked even then from out of the bottom of the Bed she lies on.

If you be not content with this my Exposition, are you of the mind that my
Wife will suck and sup me up as People use to gulp and swallow Oysters out of
the Shell? Or as the Cilician Women, according to the Testimony of Dioscorides,
were wont to do the Grain of Alkermes? Assuredly that is an Error. Who seizes
on it, does neither gulch up, nor swill down; but takes away what has been
packed up, catches, snatcheth, and plies the Play of Hey pass, Repass.

The Fourth Article does imply, That my Wife will flay me, but not at all. O
the fine Word! You interpret this to beating Strokes and Blows. Speak wisely:
Will you eat a Pudding? Sir, I beseech you to raise up your Spirits above the
low-sized pitch of earthly Thoughts unto that hight of sublime Contemplation,
which reaches to the Apprehension of the Mysteries and Wonders of Dame Nature.
And here be pleased to condemn your self, by a renouncing of those Errors which
you have committed very grossly, and somewhat perversely, in expounding the
Prophetic Sayings of the Holy Sybil. Yet put the case (albeit I yield not to
it) that by the Instigation of the Devil, my Wife should go about to wrong me,
make me a Cuckold downwards to the very Breech, disgrace me otherways, steal my
Goods from me; yea, and lay violently her Hands upon me; she nevertheless
should fail of her Attempts, and not attain to the proposed end of her
unreasonable Undertakings.

The Reason which induces me hereto, is grounded totally on this last Point,
which is extracted from the profoundest Privacies of a Monastic Pantheology,
as good Friar Arther Wagtaile told me once upon a Monday morning; as we were
(if I have not forgot) eating a Bushel of Trotter-pies; and I remember well it
rained hard: God give him the good Morrow.

The Women at the beginning of the World, or a little after, conspired to flay
the Men quick, because they found the Spirit of Mankind inclined to domineer
it, and bear rule over them upon the face of the whole Earth; and in pursuit of
this their Resolution, promised, confirmed, sworn and covenanted amongst them
all, by the pure Faith they owe to the nocturnal Sanct Rogero. But O the vain
Enterprises of Women! O the great Fragility of that Sex Feminine! They did
begin to flay the Man, or pill him, (as says Catullus) at that Member which of
all the Body they loved best; to wit, the nervous and cavernous Cane; and that
above five thousand years ago; yet have they not of that small part alone
flayed any more till this hour but the Head: In mere despite whereof the Jews
snip off that parcel of the Skin in Circumcision, choosing far rather to be
called Clip-yards, Raskals, than to be flayed by Women, as are other Nations.
My Wife, according to this Female Covenant, will flay it to me, if it be not so
already. I heartily grant my Consent thereto, but will not give her leave to
flay it all: Nay, truly will I not, my noble King. Yea, but (quoth Epistemon)
you say nothing of her most dreadful Cries and Exclamations, when she and we
both saw the Lawrel-bough burn without yielding any noise or crackling. You
know it is a very dismal Omen, an inauspicious sign, unlucky judice, and token
formidable, bad, disastrous, and most unhappy, as is certified by Propertius,
Tibullus, the quick Philosopher Porphyrius, Eustachius on the Iliads of Homer,
and by many others.

Verily, verily, (quoth Panurge) brave are the Allegations which you bring me,
and Testimonies of two-footed Calves. These Men were Fools, as they were Poets;
and Dotards, as they were Philosophers; full of Folly, as they were of
Philosophy.

CHAP. XIX. How Pantagruel praises the Counsel of Dumb Men.
PAntagruel, when this Discourse was ended, held for a pretty while his Peace,
seeming to be exceeding sad and pensive, then said to Panurge, the malignant
Spirit misleads, beguileth and seduceth you. I have read that in times past the
surest and most veritable Oracles were not those which either were delivered in
Writing, or uttered by word of Mouth in speaking: For many times, in their
Interpretation, right witty, learned and ingenious Men have been deceived through
Amphibolories, Equivoks, and Obscurity of Words, no less than by the brevity of
their Sentences. For which cause Apollo, the God of Vaticination, was Surnamed
(...). Those which were represented then by Signs and outward Gestures were
accounted the truest and the most infallible. Such was the Opinion of
Heraclitus: And Iupitur did himself in this manner give forth in Amon
frequently Predictions: Nor was he single in this Practice; for Apollo did the
like amongst the Assyrians. His prophesying thus unto those People, moved them
to paint him with a large long Beard, and Clothes beseeming an old settled
Person, of a most posed, stayed and grave Behavior; not naked, young and
beardless, as he was pourtrayed most usually amongst the Graecians. Let us make
trial of this kind of Fatidicency; and go you take Advice of some dumb Person
without any speaking. I am content, (quoth Panurge.) But, says Pantagruel, it
were requisite that the Dumb you consult with be such as have been deaf from
the hour of their Nativity, and consequently dumb; for none can be so lively,
natural, and kindly dumb, as he who never heard.

How is it, (quoth Panurge) that you conceive this matter? If you apprehend it
so, that never any spoke, who had not before heard the Speech of others, I will
from that Antecedent bring you to infer very logically a most absurd and
paradoxical Conclusion. But let it pass; I will not insist on it. You do not
then believe what Herodotus wrote of two Children, who at the special Command
and Appointment of Psammeticus King of Egypt, having been kept in a petty
Country Cottage, where they were nourished and entertained in a perpetual
silence, did at last, after a certain long space of time, pronounce this word
Be, which in the Phrygian Language signifies Bread. Nothing less (quoth
Pantagruel) do I believe, than that it is a mere abusing of our Understandings
to give Credit to the words of those, who say that there is any such thing as a
Natural Language. All Speeches have had their primary Origin from the Arbitrary
Institutions, Accords and Agreements of Nations in their respective
Condescendments to what should be noted and betokened by them. An Articulate
Voice (according to the Dialecticians) has naturally no signification at all;
for that the sense and meaning thereof did totally depend upon the good will
and pleasure of the first Deviser and Imposer of it. I do not tell you this
without a Cause; for Bartholus, Lib. 5. de Verb. Oblig. very seriously
reports, that even in his time there was in Cugubia one named Sir Nello de
Gabrielis, who although he by a sad mischance became altogether deaf,
understood nevertheless every one that talked in the Italian Dialect howsoever
he expressed himself; and that only by looking on his external Gestures, and
casting an attentive Eye upon the diverse motions of his Lips and Chaps. I have
read, I remember also, in a very literate and eloquent Author, that Turidates
King of Armenia, in the days of Nero, made a Voyage to Rome, where he was
received with great Honor and Solemnity, and with all manner of Pomp and
Magnificence: Yea, to the end there might be a sempiternal Amity and
Correspondence preserved betwixt him and the Roman Senate; there was no
remarkable thing in the whole City which was not shown unto him.

At his Departure the Emperor bestowed upon him many ample Donatives of an
inestimable Value: And besides, the more entirely to testify his Affection
toward him, heartily entrusted him to be pleased to make choice of any
whatsoever thing in Rome was most agreeable to his Fancy; with a Promise
juramentally confirmed, That he should not be refused of his Demand. Thereupon,
after a suitable Return of Thanks for a so gracious Offer, he required a
certain Iack-pudding, whom he had seen to act his part most egregiously upon
the Stage, and whose meaning (albeit he knew not what it was he had spoken) he
understood perfectly enough by the Signs and Gesticulations which he had made.
And for this Suit of his, in that he asked nothing else, he gave this Reason,
That in the several wide and spacious Dominions, which were reduced under the
Sway and Authority of his Sovereign Government, there were sundry Countries and
Nations much differing from one another in Language, with whom, whether he was
to speak unto them, or give any Answer to their Requests, he was always
necessitated to make use of diverse sorts of Truchmen and Interpreters: Now with
this Man alone, sufficient for supplying all their places, will that great
Inconveniency hereafter be totally removed; seeing he is such a fine
Gesticulator, and in the Practice of Chirology an Artist so complete, expert
and dextrous, that with his very Fingers he does speak. Howsoever you are to
pitch upon such a dumb Bone as is deaf by nature, and from his Birth; to the
end that his Gestures and Signs may be the more vively and truly Prophetic,
and not counterfeit by the intermixture of some adulterate Luster and
Affectation. Yet whether this dumb Person shall be of the Male or Female Sex is
in your Option, lies at your Discretion, and altogether depends on your own
Election.

I would more willingly (quoth Panurge) consult with and be advised by a Dumb
Woman, were it not that I am afraid of two things. The first is, That the
greater part of Women, whatever it be that they see, do always represent unto
their Fancies, think and imagine, that it has some relation to the sugared
entering of the goodly Ithypallos, and graffing in the Cleft of the overturned
Tree, the quick-set Imp of the Pin of Copulation. Whatever Signs, Shows or
Gestures we shall make, or whatever our Behavior, Carriage or Demeanor shall
happen to be in their view and Presence, they will interpret the whole in
reference to the act of Androgynation, and the culbatizing Exercise, by which
means we shall be abusively disappointed of our Designs, in regard that she
will take all our Signs for nothing else but Tokens and Representations of our
Desire to entice her unto the Lists of a Cyprian Combat, or Catsenconny
Skirmish.

Do you remember what happened at Rome two hundred and threescore Years after the
Foundation thereof? A young Roman Gentleman encountering by chance at the Foot
of Mount Celion with a beautiful Latin-Lady named Verona, who from her very
Cradle upwards had always been both deaf and dumb, very civilly asked her, (not
without a Chironomatick Italianising of his Demand, with various Jectigation of
his Fingers, and other Gesticulations, as yet customary amongst the Speakers of
that Country) what Senators in her Descent from the top of the Hill she had met
with going up thither. For you are to conceive, that he knowing no more of her
Deafness than Dumbness, was ignorant of both. She in the mean time, who neither
heard nor understood so much as one word of what he had said, straight
imagined, by all that she could apprehend in the lovely Gesture of his manual
Signs, that what he then required of her was, what her self had a great mind
to, even that which a Young Man does naturally desire of a Woman. Then was it,
that by Signs (which in all occurrences of Venerial Love are incomparably more
attractive, valid and efficacious than Words) she beckned to him to come along
with her to her House; which when he had done, she drew him aside to a privy
Room, and then made a most lively alluring Sign unto him, to show that the Game
did please her. Whereupon, without any more Advertisement, or so much as the
uttering of one Word on either side, they fell to, and bringuardised it lustily.

The other Cause of my being averse from consulting with dumb Women, is, that
to our Signs they would make no answer at all, but suddenly fall backwards in a
divarication posture, to intimate thereby unto us the reality of their consent
to the supposed motion of our tacit Demands. Or if they should chance to make
any contre-signs responsory to our Propositions, they would prove so foolish,
impertinent, and ridiculous, that by them our selves should easily judge their
thoughts to have no excursion beyond the duffling Academy. You know very well
how at Croquiniole, when the religious Nun, sister Fatbum, was made big with
Child by the young Stifly-Stantor, her Pregnancy came to be known, and she
cited by the Abbess, and in a full Convention of the Convent, accused of
Incest. Her excuse was, That she did not consent thereto, but that it was done
by the violence and impetuous force of the Friar Stifly-stand-to^t. Hereto the
Abbess very austerely replying, Thou naughty wicked Girl, why did thou not
cry, a Rape, a Rape, then should all of us have run to thy Succor. Her answer
was, That the Rape was committed in the Dorter, where she durst not cry,
because it was a place of sempiternal Silence. But (quoth the Abbess) thou
roguish Wench, why did not thou then make some sign to those that were in the
next Chamber beside thee? To this she answered, That with her Buttocks she made
a sign unto them, as vigorously as she could, yet never one of them did so much
as offer to come to her help and assistance. But (quoth the Abbess) thou scurvy
baggage, why did not thou tell it me immediately after the perpetration of
the Fact, that so we might orderly, regularly, and canonically have accused
him? I would have done so, had the case been mine, for the clearer
manifestation of mine Innocence. I truly, Madam, would have done the like with
all my heart and soul, (quoth Sister Fatbum) but that fearing I should remain
in Sin, and in the hazard of Eternal Damnation, if prevented by a sudden Death,
I did confess my self to the Father Friar before he went out of the Room, who
for my Penance, enjoined me not to tell it, or reveal the matter unto any. It
were a most enormous and horrid Offense, detestable before God and the Angels,
to reveal a Confession: such an abominable Wickedness would have possibly
brought down Fire from Heaven, wherewith to have burnt the whole Nunnery, and
sent us all headlong to the bottomless Pit, to bear company with Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram. You will not (quoth Pantagruel) with all your Jesting make me
laugh; I know that all Monks, Friars, and Nuns had rather violate and infringe
the highest of the Commandments of God, then break the least of their
Provincial Statutes.

Take you therefore Goatsnose, a Man very fit for your present purpose; for he
is, and has been, both dumb and deaf from the very remotest Infancy of his
Childhood.

CHAP. XX. How Goatsnose by signs makes answer to Panurge.
Goatsnose being sent for, came the day thereafter to Pantagruel's Court; at
his arrival to which Panurge gave him a fat Calf, the half of a Hog, two
Punchions of Wine, one Load of Corn, and thirty Franks of small Money: then
having brought him before Pantatgruel, in presence of the Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber, he made this sign unto him. He yawned along time, and in yawning
made without his mouth with the thumb of his right hand the figure of the Greek
Letter Tau by frequent reiterations. Afterward he lifted up his eyes to
Heavenwards, then turned them in his Head like a Shee-goat in the painful fit
of an absolute Birth, in doing whereof he did cough and sigh exceeding heavily:
This done, after that he had made demonstration of the want of his Codpiece, he
from under his shirt took his Placket-racket in a full gripe, making it
therewithal clack very melodiously betwixt his Thighs: then no sooner had he
with his Body stooped a little forwards, and bowed his left Knee, but that
immediately thereupon holding both his Arms on his Breast, in a loose
faint-like Posture, the one over the other, he paused awhile. Goatsnose looked
wistly upon him, and having heedfully enough viewed him all over, he lifted up
into the Air his left Hand, the whole fingers whereof he retained fist-ways
closed together, except the Thumb and the Forefinger, whose Nails he softly
joined and coupled to one another. I understand (quoth Pantagruel) what he
means by that sign: it denotes marriage, and withal the number thirty,
according to the Profession of Pythagorians, you will be married. Thanks to you
(quoth Panurge) in turning himself toward Goatsnose, my little Sewer, pretty
Masters-mate, dainty Baily, curious Sergeant-Marshal, and jolly
Catchpole-leader. Then did he lift higher up than before his said left Hand,
stretching out all the five Fingers thereof, and severing them as wide from one
another as he possibly could get done. Here (says Pantagruel) does he more
amply and fully insinuate unto us, by the Token which he shows forth of the
Quinary number, that you shall be married. Yea, that you shall not only be
affianced, betrothed, wedded, and married, but that you shall furthermore
cohabit, and live jollily and merrily with your Wife; for Pythagoras called
five the Nuptial Number, which together with marriage, signifies the
Consummation of Matrimony, because it is composed of a ternary the first of the
odd, and binary, the first of the even Numbers, as of a Male and Female knit
and united together. In very deed it was the fashion of old in the City of Rome
at Marriage Festivals to light five wax Tapers, nor was it permitted to kindle
any more at the magnifick Nuptials of the most Potent and Wealthy; nor yet any
fewer at the penurious Weddings of the Poorest and most Abject of the World.
Moreover in times past, the Heathen, or Paynius implored the Assistance of five
Deities, or of one helpful (at least) in five several good Offices to those
that were to be married: of this sort were the Nuptial Jove, Juno, President of
the Feast, the fair Venus, Pitho the Goddess of Eloquence and Persuasion, and
Diana, whose aid and succor was required to the labor of Childbearing. Then
shouted Panurge, O the gentile Goatsnose, I will give him a Farm near Gnais,
and a Windmill hard by Mirebalais. Hereupon the dumb Fellow sneezeth with an
impetuous vehemence, and huge concussion of the Spirits of the whole Body,
withdrawing himself in so doing with a jerting turn toward the left hand. By
the Body of a Fox new slain (quoth Pantagruel) what is that? this makes
nothing for your advantage; for he betokens thereby that your marriage will
be inauspicious and unfortunate. This snezing (according to the Doctrine of
Terpsion, is the Socratick Demon) if done toward the right side, it imports
and portendeth, that boldly, and with all assurance, one may go whither he
will, and do what he lists, according to what deliberation he shall be
pleased to have thereupon taken: his entries in the beginning, progress in his
proceedings, and success in the events and issues will be all lucky, good, and
happy. The quite contrary thereto is thereby implied and presaged, if it be
done toward the left. You (quoth Panurge) do take always the matter at the
worst, and continually, like another Davus, casts in new disturbances and
obstructions; nor ever yet did I know this old paultry Terpsion worthy of
citation, but in points only of Cosenage and Imposture. Nevertheless (quoth
Pantagruel) Cicero has written I know not what to the same purpose in his
Second Book of Divination.

Panurge then turning himself toward Goatsnose made this sign unto him. He
inverted his Eyelids upwards, wrinched his Jaws from the right to the left
side, and drew forth his Tongue half out of his Mouth; this done, he posited
his left Hand wholly open (the mid-finger wholly excepted, which was
perpendicularly placed upon the Palm thereof) and set it just in the room where
his Codpiece had been. Then did he keep his right Hand altogether shut up in a
fist, save only the Thumb, which he straight turned backwards directly under
the right Arm-pit, and settled it afterward on that most eminent part of the
Buttocks which the Arabs call the Alkatim. Suddenly thereafter he made this
interchange, he held his right Hand after the manner of the left, and posited
it on the place wherein his Codpiece sometime was, and retaining his left Hand
in the form and fashion of the right, he placed it upon his Alkatim: this
altering of Hands did he reiterate nine several times; at the last whereof, he
reseated his Eyelids into their own first natural position. Then doing the like
also with his Jaws and Tongue, he did cast a squinting look upon Goatsnose,
diddering and shivering his Chaps, as Apes use to do nowadays, and Rabbets,
whilst almost starved with hunger, they are eating Oats in the Sheaf.

Then was it that Goatsnose lifting up into the Air his right Hand wholly open
and displayed, put the Thumb thereof, even close unto its first articulation,
between the two third Joints of the middle and ring fingers, pressing about the
said Thumb thereof very hard with them both, and whilst the remainent Joints
were contracted and shrunk in toward the Wrist, he stretched forth with as
much straitness as he could, the fore and little fingers. That hand thus framed
and disposed of, he laid and posited upon Panurge's Navel, moving withal
continually the aforesaid Thumb, and bearing up, supporting, or under-propping
that Hand upon the above specified, and fore and little fingers, as upon two
Legs. Thereafter did he make in this posture his Hand by little and little,
and by degrees and pauses, successively to mount from athwart the Belly to the
Stomach, from whence he made it to ascend to the Breast, even upwards to
Panurges's Neck, still gaining ground, till having reached his Chin he had put
within the concave of his Mouth his aforementioned Thumb: then fiercely
brandishing the whole Hand, which he made to rub and grate against his Nose, he
heaved it further up, and made the fashion, as if with the Thumb thereof he
would have put out his Eyes. With this Panurge grew a little angry, and went
about to withdraw, and rid himself from this ruggedly untoward dumb Devil. But
Goatsnose in the mean time prosecuting the intended purpose of his
Prognosticatory Response, touched very rudely with the abovementioned shaking
Thumb, now his Eyes, then his Forehead, and after that, the borders and corners
of his Cap. At last Panurge cried out, saying, Before God, Master-Fool, if you
do not let me alone, or that you will presume to vex me any more, you shall
receive from the best hand I have a Mask, wherewith to cover your rascally
scoundred Face, you paultry shitten Varlet. Then said Friar Ihon, he is deaf,
and does not understand what thou say unto him. Bulliballock, make sign to
him of a hail of Fisticuffs upon the Muzzle.

What the Devil (quoth Panurge) means this busy restless Fellow? what is it
that this Polypragmonetick Ardelione to all the Fiends of Hell does aim at? he
has almost thrust out mine Eyes, as if he had been to potch them in a Skillet
with Butter and Eggs, by God, da Iurandi, I will feast you with flirts and raps
on the Snout, interlarded with a double row of bobs and finger filipings? Then
did he leave him in giving him by way of Salve a Volley of Farts for his
Farewell. Goatsnose perceiving Panurge thus to slip away from him, got before
him, and by mere strength enforcing him to stand, made this sign unto him. He
let fall his right Arm toward his Knee on the same side as low as he could, and
raising all the fingers of that Hand into a close fist, past his dexterer Thumb
betwixt the foremost and mid-fingers thereto belonging. Then scrubbing and
swindging a little with his left Hand along, and upon the uppermost in the
very bought of the Elbow of the said dexter Arm, the whole Cubit thereof by
leisure fair, and softly, at these thumpatory warnings, did raise and elevate
it self even to the Elbow, and above it, on a sudden did he then let it fall
down as low as before: and after that, at certain intervals and such spaces of
time, raising and abasing it, he made a show thereof to Panurge. This so
incensed Panurge, that he forthwith lifted his Hand to have stricken him the
dumb Royster, and given him a sound whirret on the Ear, but that the respect
and reverence which he carried to the Presence of Pantagruel restrained his
Choler, and kept his Fury within bounds and limits. Then said Pantagruel, If
the bare signs now vex and trouble you, how much more grievously will you be
perplexed and disquieted with the real things, which by them are represented
and signified. All Truths agree, and are consonant with one another; this dumb
Fellow Prophesies and Foretells that you will be married, cuckolded, beaten
and robbed. As for the marriage (quoth Panurge) I yield thereto, and
acknowledge the verity of that point of his Prediction; as for the rest I
utterly abjure and deny it: and believe Sir, I beseech you, if it may please
you so to do, that in the matter of Wives and Horses, never any Man was
predestined to a better Fortune than I.

CHAP. XXI. How Panurge consulteth with an old French Poet, named Raminagrobis.
I Never thought (said Pantagruel) to have encountered with any Man so
headstrong in his Apprehensions, or in his Opinions so wilful, as I have found
you to be, and see you are. Nevertheless, the better to clear and extricate
your Doubts, let us try all courses, and leave no stone unturned, nor wind
unsailed by. Take good heed to what I am to say unto you, the Swans, which are
Fouls consecrated to Apollo, never chant but in the hour of their approaching
Death, especially in the Meander Flood, which is a River that runs along
some of the Territories of Phrygia. This I say, because Elianus and Alexander
Wyndius write, that they had seen several Swans in other places die, but never
heard any of them sing, or chant before their death. However, it passes for
current that the imminent death of a Swan is presaged by his foregoing Song,
and that no Swan dies until preallably he have Sung.

After the same manner Poets, who are under the protection of Apollo, when they
are drawing near their latter end, do ordinarily become Prophets, and by the
inspiration of that God sing sweetly, in vaticinating things which are to come.
It has been likeways told me frequently, That old decrepit Men upon the Brinks
of Charon's Banks, do usher their Decease with a disclosure, all at ease (to
those that are desirous of such Informations) of the determinate and assured
truth of future Accidents and Contingencies. I remember also that Aristophanes,
in a certain Comedy of his, calls folks Sybils, (...), for as when being upon
a Peer by the Shore, we see afar off Mariners, Seafaring men, and other
Travelers along the curled Waves of Azure Thetis within their Ships, we then
consider them in silence only, and seldom proceed any further than to wish them
a happy and prosperous Arrival: but when they do approach near to the Haven,
and come to wet their Keels within their Harbor, then both with words and
gestures we salute them, and heartily congratulate their Access safe to the
Port wherein we are our selves. Just so the Angels, Heroes, and good Demons
(according to the Doctrine of Platonicks) when they see Mortals drawing near
unto the Harbor of the Grave, as the most sure and calmest Port of any, full
of Repose, Ease, Rest, Tranquillity; free from the Troubles and Sollicitudes of
this tumultuous and tempestuous World; then is it that they with alacrity Hale
and Salute them, Cherish and Comfort them, and speaking to them lovingly, begin
even then to bless them with Illuminations, and to communicate unto them the
abstrusest Mysteries of Divination. I will not offer here to confound your
Memory by quoting antic Examples of Isaac, of Jacob, of Patroclus toward
Hector, of Hector toward Achilles, of Polymnester toward Agamemnon, of
Hecuba, of the Phodian renowned by Possidonius, of Calanus the Indian toward
Alexander the Great, of Orodes toward Mezentius, and of many others; it shall
suffice for the present, that I commemorate unto you the learned and valiant
Knight and Cavalier William of Ballay, late Lord of Langcy, who died on the
Hill of Tarara, the Tenth of January, in the Climacterick year of his Age, and
of our Supputation 1543. according to the Roman Account. The last three or four
hours of his Life he did employ in the serious utterance of a very pithy
Discourse, whilst with a clear Judgment, and Spirit void of all Trouble, he did
foretell several important Things, whereof a great deal is come to pass, and
the rest we wait for. Howbeit, his Prophesies did at that time seem unto us
somewhat strange, absurd, and unlikely; because there did not then appear any
sign of efficacy enough to engage our Faith to the belief of what he did
prognosticate.

We have hear near to the Town of Villomer, a Man that is both Old and a Poet,
to wit, Raminogrobis, who to his Second Wife espoused my Lady Broadsow, on whom
he begot the fair Basoche; it has been told me, he is a dying, and so near
unto his latter end, that he is almost upon the very last moment, point, and
article thereof; repair thither as fast as you can, and be ready to give an
attentive Ear to what he shall chant unto you: it may be, that you shall obtain
from him what you desire, and that Apollo will be pleased, by his means, to
clear your scruples. I am content (quoth Panurge) let us go thither Epistemon,
and that both instantly and in all have, least otherways his Death prevent our
coming. Will thou come along with us, Friar Ihon? Yes, that I will, (quoth
Friar Ihon) right heartily to do thee a Courtesy, my Billy-ballocks; for I
love thee with the best of my Milt and Liver. Thereupon, incontinently, without
any further lingering to the way, they all three went, and quickly thereafter
(for they made good speed) arriving at the Poetical Habitation, they found the
jolly Old Man, albeit in the Agony of his Departure from this World, looking
cheerfully, with an open Countenance, splendid Aspect, and Behavior full of
alacrity. After that Panurge had very civilly saluted him, he in a free Gift
did present him with a Gold Ring, which he even then put upon the Medical
Finger of his Left Hand, in the Collet or Bezle whereof was inchased an
Oriental Sapphire, very fair and large. Then, in imitation of Socrates, did he
make an Oblation unto him of a fair White Cock; which was no sooner set upon
the Tester of his Bed, then that with a high raised Head and Crest, lustily
shaking his Feather-Coat, he crowed Stentoriphonically loud. This done, Panurge
very courteously required of him, that he would vouchsafe to favor him with
the Grant and Report of his Sense and Judgment, touching the future Destiny of
his intended Marriage. For answer hereto, when the honest Old Man had forthwith
commanded Pen, Paper, and Ink to be brought unto him, and that he was at the
same Call conveniently served with all the three, he wrote these following
Verses: Take, or not take her,
Off, or on:
Handy-dandy is your Lot.
When her Name you write, you blot.
It Is undone, when all is done,
Ended e're it was begun:
Hardly Gallop, if you Trot,
Set not forward when you Run,
Nor be single, though alone,
Take, or not take her.
Before you Eat, begin to Fast;
For what shall be was never past.
Say, unsay, gainsay, save your Breath:
Then wish at once her Life and Death.
Take, or not take her.
These Lines he gave out of his own Hands unto them, saying unto them, Go my
Lads in Peace, the great God of the highest Heavens be your Guardian and
Preserver; and do not offer any more to trouble or disquiet me with this or any
other Business whatsoever. I have this same very day (which is the last both of
May and of me) with a great deal of labor, toil, and difficulty, chased out of
my House a rabble of filthy, unclean, and plaguily pestilentious Rake-hells,
black Beasts, dusk, dun, white, ash-colored, speckled, and a foul Vermin of
other hues, whose obtrusive importunity would not permit me to die at my own
ease: for by fraudulent and deceitful pricklings, ravenous, Harpy-like
graspings, waspish stingings, and suchlike unwelcome Approaches, forged in the
Shop of I know not what kind of Insatiabilities; they went about to withdraw,
and call me out of those sweet Thoughts, wherein I was already beginning to
repose myself, and acquiesce in the Contemplation and Vision; yea, almost in
the very touch and taste of the Happiness and Felicity which the good God has
prepared for his faithful Saints, and Elect in the other Life, and State of
Immortality. Turn out of their Courses, and eschew them, step forth of their
ways, and do not resemble them, mean while, let me be no more troubled by you,
but leave me now in silence, I beseech you.

CHAP. XXII. How Panurge Patrocinates and Defends the Order of the Begging
Friars.
PAnurge, at his issuing forth of Raminagobris's Chamber, said, as if he had
been horribly affrighted, by the Virtue of God, I believe that he is an
Heretic, the Devil take me, if I do not; he does so villanously rail at the
Mendicant Friars, and Iacobins: who are the two Hemispheres of the Christian
World; by whose Gyronomonick Circumbilvaginations, as by two Celivagous
Filopendulums, all the Autonomatick Metagrobolism of the Romish Church, when
tottering and emblustricated with the Gibble gabble Gibbrish of this odious
Error and Heresy, is homocentrically poysed. But what harm in the Devil's
Name, have these poor Devils the Capucins and Minims done unto him? Are not
these beggarly Devils sufficiently wretched already? Who can imagine that these
poor Snakes, the very Extracts of Ichthyophagy, are not thoroughly enough
besmoaked and besmeared with Misery, Distress, and Calamity? Do thou think,
Friar Ihon, by thy Faith, that he is in the State of Salvation? He goes,
before God, as surely damned to Thirty thousand baskets full of Devils, as a
Pruning-Bill to the lopping of a Vine-Branch.

To revile with opprobrious Speeches the good and courageous Props and Pillars
of the Church, is that to be called a Poetical Fury? I cannot rest satisfied
with him, he sins grossly, and blasphemeth against the true Religion. I am
very much offended at his scandalizing Words, and contumelious Obloquy. I do
not care a straw (quoth Friar Ihon) for what he has said; for although every
body should twit and jerk them, it were but a just retalia^^on, seeing all
Persons are served by them with the like Sauce: therefore do I pretend no
Interest therein. Let us see nevertheless what he has written. Panurge very
attentively read the Paper which the Old Man had penned, then said to his two
Fellow-Travellers, The poor Drinker doteth: howsoever, I excuse him; for that I
believe he is now drawing near to the end, and final closure of his Life: Let
us go make his Epitaph.

By the Answer which he has given us, I am not, I protest, one jot wiser then
I was, hearken here Epistemon, my little Bully, do not thou hold him to be
very Resolute in his Responsory Verdicts? he is a witty, quick, and subtle
Sophister. I will lay an even Wager, that he is a miscreant Apostate. By the
Belly of a stalled Ox, how careful he is not to be mistaken in his words.

He answered but by Disjunctives, therefore can it not be true which he says;
for the verity of such like Propositions is inherent only in one of its two
Members. O the cozening Pratler that he is! I wonder if Santiago of Bressure be
one of these cogging Shirks. Such was of old (quoth Epistemon) the Custom of
the grand Vaticina^or and Prophet Teresias, who used always (by way of a
Preface) to say openly and plainly, at the beginning of his Divinations and
Predictions, that what he was to tell would either come to pass, or not: And
such is truly the style of all prudently presaging Prognosticators. He was
nevertheless (quoth Panurge) so unfortunately misadventrous in the Lot of his
own Destiny, that Juno thrust out both his eyes.

Yes, (answered Epistemon) and that merely out of a spite and spleen, for
having pronounced his award more veritably then she, upon the Question which
was merrily proposed by Jupiter. But (quoth Panurge) what Arch-Devil is it that
has possessed this Master Raminagrobis, that so unreasonably, and without any
occasion, he should have so snappishly, and bitterly inveighed against these
poor honest Father, Iacobins, Minors, and Minims? It vexes me grievously, I
assure you; nor am I able to conceal my indignation. He has transgressed most
enormously; his Soul goes infallibly to thirty thousand Panniers full of
Devils.

I understand you not (quoth Epistemon) and it disliketh me very much, that you
should so absurdly and perversely interpret that of the Friar Mendicants, which
by the harmless Poet was spoken of black Beasts, dun, and other sorts of other
colored Animals. He is not in my Opinion guilty of such a sophistical and
fantastic Allegory, as by that Phrase of his to have meaned the Begging
Brothers; he in down right Terms speaks absolutely and properly of Fleas,
Punies, Hand-worms, Flies, Gnats, and other suchlike scurvy Vermin, whereof
some are black, some dun, some ash-colored, some tawny, and some brown and
dusky, all noisome, molesting, tyrannous, cumbersome, and unpleasing Creatures,
not only to sick and diseased Folks, but to those also who are of a sound,
vigorous, and healthful Temperament and Constitution. It is not unlike, that he
may have the Ascarids, and the Lumbricks, and Worms within the Intrails of his
Body. Possibly does he suffer (as is frequent and usual amongst the Egyptians,
together with all those who inhabit the Erythraean Confines, and dwell along
the Shores and Coasts of the Red Sea) some four prickings, and smart stingings
in his Arms and Legs of those little speckled Dragons, which the Arabians call
Meden. You are to blame for offering to expound his Words otherways, and wrong
the ingenuous Poet, and outragiously abuse and miscall the said Fraters, by an
imputation of baseness undeservedly laid to their charge. We still should in
suchlike Discourses of fatiloquent Southsayers, interpret all things to the
best. Will you teach me (quoth Panurge) how to discern Flies among Milk, or
show your Father the way how to beget Children: He is, by the Virtue of God, an
arrant Heretic, a resolute formal Heretic; I say, a rooted combustible
Heretic, one as fit to burn as the little wooden Clock at Rochel. His Soul
goes to Thirty thousand Carts-full of Devils. Would you know whither?
Cocks-body, my Friend, straight under Proserpina's Close-stool, to the very
middle of the self-same infernal Pan, within which she, by an excrementitious
evacuation voideth the fecal stuff of her stinching Clysters, and that just
upon the left side of the great Cauldron of three fathom height, hard by the
Claws and Talons of Lucifer, in the very darkest of the passage which leads
toward the Black Chamber of Demigorgon. Oh the Villain!

CHAP. XXIII. How Panurge makes the motion of a Return to Raminagrobis.
LET us return, quoth Panurge, not ceasing, to the uttermost of our Abilities,
to ply him with wholesome Admonitions, for the furtherance of his Salvation.
Let us go back for God's sake, let us go in the Name of God: it will be a very
meritorious Work, and of great Charity in us to deal so in the matter, and
provide so well for him, that albeit he come to lose both Body and Life, he may
at least escape the risk and danger of the eternal Damnation of his Soul. We
will by our holy persuasions bring him to a sense and feeling of his Escapes,
induce him to acknowledge his Faults, move him to a cordial Repentance of his
Errors, and stir up in him such a sincere Contrition of Heart for his Offenses,
as will prompt him with all earnestness to cry Mercy, and to beg Pardon at the
Hands of the good Fathers, as well of the absent, as of such as are present:
Whereupon we will take Instrument formally and authentically extended, to the
end he be not, after his Decease, declared an Heretic, and condemned, as were
the Hobgoblins of the Provost's Wife of Orleans, to the undergoing of such
Punishments, Pains and Tortures, as are due to, and inflicted on those that
inhabit the horrid Cells of the infernal Regions: and withal incline,
instigate, and persuade him to bequeath, and leave in Legacy (by way of an
amends and satisfaction for the outrage and injury done) to those good
Religious Fathers, throughout all the Convents, Cloisters, and Monastries of
this Province, many Bribes, a great deal of Mass-singing, store of Obits, and
that sempiternally, on the Anniversary Day of his Decease, every one of them
all be furnished with a quintuple Allowance: and that the great Borrachoe,
replenished with the best Liquor, trudge apace along the Tables, as well of the
young Duckling, Monkito's, Lay-Brothers, and lowermost degree of the
Abbey-Lubbards, as of the Learned Priests, and Reverend Clerks. The very
meanest of the Novices, and Mitiants unto the Order being equally admitted to
the benefit of those Funerary and Obsequial Festivals, with the aged Rectors,
and professed Fathers; this is the surest ordinary means, whereby from God he
may obtain forgiveness.

Ho, ho, I am quite mistaken, I digress from the purpose, and fly out of my
Discourse, as if my Spirits were a wool-gathering. The Devil take me, if I go
thither. Virtue, God, the Chamber is already full of Devils. O what a swinging,
thwacking Noise is now amongst them! O the terrible Coyl that they keep!
Hearken, do you not hear the rustling thumping bustle of their Strokes and
Blows, as they scuffle with one another, like true Devils indeed, who shall
gulp up the Raminogrobis Soul, and be the first Bringer of it, whilst it is
hot, to Monsieur Lucifer. Beware, and get you hence: for my part, I will not go
thither; the Devil roast me if I go. Who knows but that these hungry mad Devils
may in the have of their rage and fury of their impatience, take a quid for a
quo, and instead of Raminagrobis snatch up poor Panurge frank and free? Though
formerly, when I was deep in Debt, they always failed. Get you hence: I will
not go thither. Before God, the very bare apprehension thereof is like to kill
me. To be in the place where there are greedy, famished, and hunger-starved
Devils; amongst factious Devils: amidst trading and trafficking Devils: O the
Lord preserve me! Get you hence, I dare pawn my Credit on it, that no Iacobin,
Cordelier, Carme Capucin, Theatin, or Minim, will bestow any personal Presence
at his Interment. The wiser they, because he has ordained nothing for them in
his latter Will and Testament.

The Devil take me, if I go thither; if he be damned to his own loss and
hindrance be it. What the Deuce moved him to be so snappish and depravedly bent
against the good Fathers of the true Religion? Why did he cast them off, reject
them, and drive them quite out of his Chamber, even in that very nick of time
when he stood in greatest need of the aid, suffrage, and assistance of their
devout Prayers, and holy Admonitions? Why did not he by Testament leave them,
at least, some jolly Lumps and Cantles of substantial Meat, a parcel of
Cheek-puffing Victuals, and a litttle Belly-Timber, and Provision for the Guts
of these poor Folks, who have nothing but their Life in this World.

Let him go thither, who will; the Devil take me, if I go; for if I should, the
Devil would not fail to snatch me up. Cancro: Ho, the Pox! Get you hence, Friar
Ihon; Art thou content that Thirty thousand Waineload of Devils should get away
with thee at this same very instant? If thou be, at my Request, do these Three
things: First, Give me thy Purse; for besides, that thy Money is marked with
Crosses, and the Cross is an Enemy to Charms, the same may befall to thee,
which not long ago happened to Ihon Dodin, Collector of the Excise of Coudray,
at the Ford of Vede, when the Soldiers broak the Planks. This moneyed Fellow
meeting at the very Brink of the Bank of the Ford, with Friar Adam Crankcod, a
Franciscan Observantin of Mirebeau, promised him a new Frock, provided, that in
the transporting of him over the Water, he would bear him upon his Neck and
Shoulders, after the manner of carrying dead Goats: for he was a lusty,
strong-limb'd, sturdy Rogue.

The Condition being agreed upon, Friar Crankcod trusseth himself up to his
very Ballocks, and lays upon his Back like a fair little Saint Christopher,
the load of the said Supplicant Dodin, and so carried him gayly and with a good
Will; as Aeneas bore his Father Anchises through the Conflagration of Troy,
singing in the mean while a pretty Ave maris Stella. When they were in the very
deepest place of all the Foord, a little above the Master-wheel of the
Water-Mill, he asked if he had any Coin about him. Yes, (quoth Dodin) a whole
Bag full; and that he needed not to mistrust his Ability in the performance of
the Promise, which he had made unto him, concerning a new Frock. How! (quoth
Friar Cranckcod) thou know well enough, that by the express Rules, Canons
and Injunctions of our Order, we are forbidden to carry on us any kind of
Money: Thou art truly unhappy, for having made me in this point to commit a
heinous Trespass. Why did thou not leave thy Purse with the Miller? Without
fail thou shall presently receive thy Reward for it; and if ever hereafter I
may but lay hold upon thee within the Limits of our Chancel at Mirebeau, thou
shall have the Miserere even to the Vitulos. With this suddenly discharging
himself of his Burden, he throws me down your Dodin headlong.

Take Example by this Dodin, my dear Friend Friar John, to the end that the
Devils may the better carry thee away at thine own ease. Give me thy Purse.
Carry no manner of Cross upon thee. Therein lies an evident and manifestly
apparent Danger: For if you have any Silver coined with a Cross upon it, they
will cast thee down headlong upon some Rocks; as the Eagles use to do with the
Tortoises for the breaking of their Shells, as the bald Pate of the Poet
Eschilus can sufficiently bear witness. Such a Fall would hurt thee very sore
by Sweet Bully, and I would be sorry for it; or otherways they will let thee
fall, and tumble down into the high swollen Waves of some capacious Sea, I know
not where; but I warrant thee far enough hence, (as Icarus fell) which from thy
Name would afterward get the Denomination of the Funnelian Sea.

Secondly, Out of Debt: For the Devils carry a great liking to those that are
out of Debt. I have sore felt the experience thereof in mine own particular;
for now the lecherous Varlets are always wooing me, courting me, and making
much of me, which they never did when I was all to pieces. The Soul of one in
Debt is insipid, dry, and heretical altogether.

Thirdly, With the Cowl and Domino de Grobis, return to Raminagrobis; and in
case, being thus qualified, Thirty Thousand Boats full of Devils forthwith come
not to carry thee quite away, I shall be content to be at the charge of paying
for the Pint and Faggot. Now if for the more Security thou would some
Associate to bear thee Company, let not me be the Comrade thou searchest for,
think not to get a Fellow-Traveller of me; nay, do not, I advise thee for the
best. Get you hence; I will not go thither; the Devil take me if I go.
Notwithstanding all the Fright that you are in, (quoth Friar Ihon) I would not
care so much, as might possibly be expected I should, if I once had but my
Sword in my hand. Thou have verily hit the Nail on the Head, (quoth Panurge)
and speak like a Learned Doctor, subtle, and well skilled in the Art of
Devilry.

At the time when I was a Student in the University of Tolouse, that same
Reverend Father in the Devil, Picarris, Rector of the Diabological Faculty, was
wont to tell us, that the Devils did naturally fear the bright glancing of
Swords, as much as the Splendor and Light of the Sun. In Confirmation of the
Verity whereof he related this Story, That Hercules at his Descent into Hell to
all the Devils of those Regions, did not by half so much terrify them with his
Club and Lion's Skin, as afterward Aeneas did with his clear shining Armor
upon him, and his Sword in his hand well furbished and unrusted, by the Aid,
Council and Assistance of the Sybilla Cumana. That was perhaps the reason why
the Senior Ihon Iacomo di Trivulcio, whilst he was a dying at Chartres, called
for his Cutlass, and died with a Drawn Sword in his hand, laying about him
along and athwart around the Bed, and every where within his reach, like a
stout, doughty, valorous and Knight-like Cavaleer: By which resolute manner of
Fence he scared away and put to flight all the Devils that were then lying in
wait for his Soul at the passage of his Death. When the Malsorets and Cabalists
are asked, Why it is that none of all the Devils do at any time enter into the
Terestrial Paradise? Their Answer has been, is, and will be still, That there
is a Cherubin standing at the Gate thereof with a Flame-like glistering Sword
in his hand. Although to speak in the true Diabological Sense or Phrase of
Toledo, I must needs confess and acknowledge, that veritably the Devils cannot
be killed, or die by the stroke of a Sword. I do nevertheless avow and
maintain, according to the Doctrine of the said Diabology, that they may suffer
a Solution of Continuity; (as if with thy Shable thou should cut athwart the
Flamme of a burning Fire, or the gross opacous Exhalations of a thick and
obscure Smoke) and cry out, like very Devils, at their Sense and Feeling of
this Dissolution, which in real Deed I must averr and affirm is devilishly
painful, smarting and dolorous.

When thou see the impetuous Shock of two Armies, and vehement Violence of
the Push in their horrid Encounter with one another; do thou think,
Balockasso, that so horrible a noise as is heard there proceeds from the
Voice and Shouts of Men? The dashing and joulting of Harnish? The clattering
and clashing of Armies? The hacking and slashing of Battle-Axes? The justling
and crashing of Pikes? The bustling and breaking of Lances? The Clamor and
Skrieks of the Wounded? The sound and din of Drums? The Clangour and Shrilness
of Trumpets? The neighing and rushing in of Horses? with the fearful Claps and
thundering of all sorts of Guns, from the Double Canon to the Pocket Pistol
inclusively? I cannot, Goodly, deny, but that in these various things which I
have rehearsed, there may be somewhat occasionative of the huge Yell and
Tintamarre of the two engaged Bodies.

But the most fearful and tumultuous Coil and Stir, the terriblest and most
boisterous Garboil and Hurry, the chiefest rustling Black Santus of all, and
most principal Hurly Burly, springs from the grievously plangorous howling
and lowing of Devils, who Pell-mell, in a hand-over-head Confusion, waiting for
the poor Souls of the maimed and hurt Soldiery, receive unawares some Strokes
with Swords, and so by those means suffering a Solution of, and Division in the
Continuity of their Aerial and Invisible Substances: As if some Lackey,
snatching at the Lard-slices, stuck in a piece of Roast-meat on the Spit,
should get from Mr. Greazyfist a good rap on the Knuckles with a Cudgel, they
cry out and shout like Devils. Even as Mars did, when he was hurt by Diomedes
at the Siege of Troy, who (as Homer testifies of him) did then raise his Voice
more horrifically loud, and sonoriferously high, than ten thousand Men together
would have been able to do. What makes all this for our present purpose? I
have been speaking here of well-furbished Armor and bright shining Swords. But
so is it not (Friar Ihon) with thy Weapon; for by a long discontinuance of
Work, cessation from Labor, desisting from making it officiate, and putting it
into that practice wherein it had been formerly accustomed; and in a word, for
want of occupation, it is, upon my Faith, become more rusty than the Keyhole
of an old Poudering-Tub. Therefore it is expedient that you do one of these
two, either furbish your Weapon bravely, and as it ought to be, or otherwise
have a care that in the rusty case it is in, you do not presume to return to
the House of Raminagrobis. For my part, I vow I will not go thither, the Devil
take me if I go.

CHAP. XXIV. How Panurge consulteth with Epistemon.
HAving left the Town of Villomere, as they were upon their return toward
Pant^gruel, Panurge in addressing his Discourse to Epistemon, spoke thus: My
most ancient Friend and Gossip, thou see the perplexity of my Thoughts, and
know many Remedies for the removal thereof; art thou not able to help and
succor me? Epistemon thereupon taking the Speech in hand, represented unto
Panurge, how the open Voice and common Fame of the whole Country did run upon
no other Discourse, but the derision and mockery of his new Disguise; wherefore
his Counsel unto him was that he would in the first place be pleased to make
use of a little Hellebore, for the purging of his Brain of that peccant ^umour,
which through that extravagant and fantastic Mummery of his had furnished the
People with a too just occasion of flouting and gibbing, jeering and scoffing
him; and that next he would resume his ordinary Fashion of Accoutrement, and go
apparelled as he was wont to do. I am (quoth Panurge) my dear Gossip Epistemon,
of a mind and resolution to Marry, but am afraid of being a Cuckold, and to be
unfortunate in my Wedlock: For this cause have I made a Vow to young St.
Francis, (who at Plessiletours is much reverenced of all Women, earnestly cried
unto by them, and with great Devotion; for he was the first Founder of the
Confraternity of good Men, whom they naturally covet, affect and long for) to
wear Spectacles in my Cap, and to carry no Codpiece in my Breeches, until the
present Inquietude and Perturbation of my Spirits be fully settled.

Truly (quoth Epistemon) that is a pretty jolly Vow, of Thirteen to a Dozen: It
is a shame to you, and I wonder much at it, that you do not return unto your
self, and recall your Senses from this their wild swarving and straying abroad
to that rest and stilness which becomes a virtuous Man. This whimsical Conceit
of yours brings me to the remembrance of a solemn Promise made by the
Shaghaired Argives, who having in their Controversy against the Lacedaemonians
for the Terretory of Tyree lost the Battle, which they hoped should have
decided it for their Advantage, vowed to carry never any hair on their Heads,
till preallably they had recovered the loss of both their Honor and Lands: As
likewise to the memory of the Vow of a pleasant Spaniard called Michel Doris,
who vowed to carry in his Hat a piece of the Shin of his Leg, till he should be
revenged of him who had struck it off. Yet do not I know which of these two
deserves most to wear a Green and Yellow Hood with a Hares Ears tied to it,
either the aforesaid vainglorious Champion, or that Euguerrant, who having
forgot the art and manner of writing Histories, set down by the Samosatian
Philosopher, makes a most tediously long Narrative and Relation thereof: For
at the first reading of such a profuse Discourse, one would think it had been
broached for the introducing of a Story of great importance and moment
concerning the waging of some formidable War, or the notable change and
mutation of potent States and Kingdoms; but in conclusion, the World laugheth
at the capricious Champion, at the Englishman who had affronted him, as also
at their Scribler Euguerrant, more driveling at the Mouth than a Mustard-pot.
The Jest and Scorn thereof is not unlike to that of the Mountain of Horace,
which by the Poet was made to cry out and lament most enormously as a Woman in
the Pangs and Labor of Childbirth, at which deplorable and exorbitant Cries
and Lamentations the whole Neighborhood being assembled in expectation to see
some mavelous monstrous Production, could at last perceive no other but the
paultry ridiculous Mouse.

Your mousing (quoth Panurge) will not make me leave my musing why Folks should
be so frumpishly disposed, seeing I am certainly persuaded that some flout, who
merit to be flouted at; yet as my Vow imports so will I do. It is now a long
time since, by Jupiter Philos, we did swear Faith and Amity to one another:
Give me your Advice, and tell me your Opinion freely, Should I marry or no?
Truly (quoth Epistemon) the case is hazardous, and the danger so eminently
apparent, that I find my self too weak and insufficient to give you a punctual
and peremptory resolution therein; and if ever it was true, the Judgment is
difficult in matters of the Medicinal Art, what was said by Hippocrates of
Lango, it is certainly so in this case. True it is, that in my Brain there are
some rolling Fancies, by means whereof somewhat may be pitched upon of a
seeming efficacy to the disintangling your mind of those dubious Apprehensions
wherewith it is perplexed; but they do not thoroughly satisfy me. Some of the
Platonic Sect affirm, that whosoever is able to see his proper Genius, may
know his own Destiny. I understand not their Doctrine; nor do I think that you
adhere to them; there is a palpable Abuse. I have seen the experience of it in
a very curious Gentleman of the Country of Estrangowre. This is one of the
Points. There is yet another not much better. If there were any Authority now
in the Oracles of Jupiter Ammon; of Apollo in Lebadia, Delphos, Delos, Cyrra,
Patara, Tegires, Preneste, Lycia, Colophon, or in the Castalian Fountain; near
Antiochia in Syria; between the Branchidians; of Bacchus, in Dodona; of Mercure
in Phares; near Parras; of Apis, in Egypt; of Serapis in Canorie; of Faunus in
Menalia, and Albunes near Tivoly; of Tiresias in Orchomenie; of Mosus in
Silicia; of Orpheus in Lisbos; and of Trophonius in Lucadia. I would in that
case advise you, and possibly not, to go thither for their Judgment concerning
the Design and Enterprise you have in hand. But you know that they are all of
them become as dumb as so many Fishes, since the Advent of that Savior King,
whose coming to this World has made all Oracles and Prophesies to cease; as
the approach of the Suns radiant Beams expels Goblins, Bugbears,
Hobthrushes, Broams, Schriech-Owl-Mates, Night-walking Spirits, and Tenebrions.
These now are gone; but although they were as yet in continuance, and in the
same Power, Rule and Request that formerly they were, yet would not I counsel
you to be too credulous in putting any Trust in their Responses: Too many Folks
have been deceived thereby. It stands furthermore upon Record, how Agrippina
did charge the fair Lollia with the Crime of having interrogated the Oracle of
Apollo Clarius, to understand if she should be at any time married to the
Emperor Claudius; for which Cause she was first banished, and thereafter put to
a shameful and ignominious Death.

But (says Panurge) let us do better; the Ogygian Islands are not far distant
from the Haven of Sammalo: Let us, after that we shall have spoken to our King,
make a Voyage thither. In one of these four Isles, to wit, that which has its
primest Aspect toward the Sun setting, it is reported, (and I have read in
good Antic and Authentic Authors) that there reside many Soothsayers,
Fortune Tellers, Vaticinators, Prophets, and Diviners of things to come; that
Saturn inhabiteth that place, bound with fair Chains of Gold, and within the
Concavity of a Golden Rock, being nourished with Divine Ambrosie and Nectar,
which are daily in great store and abundance transmitted to him from the
Heavens, by I do not well know what kind of Fowls (it may be that they are the
same Ravens, which in the Deserts are said to have fed St. Paul, the first
Hermit) he very clearly foretells unto every one, who is desirous to be
certified of the condition of his Lot, what his Destiny will be, and what
future Chance the Fates have ordained for him: for the Parques, or Weerd
Sisters do not twist, spin, or draw out a Thread; nor yet does Jupiter perpend,
project, or deliberate any thing, which the good old Celestial Father knows
not to the full, even whilst he is a sleep: This will be a very summary
Abbreviation of our Labor, if we but hearken unto him a little upon the
serious debate and canvassing of this my perplexity. That is (answered
Epistemon) a Gullery too evident, a plain Abuse* and Fib too fabulous. I will
not go, not I, I will not go.

CHAP. XXV. How Panurge consulteth with Her Trippa.
NEvertheless, (quoth Epistemon, continuing his Discourse) I will tell you what
you may do, if you will believe me, before we return to our King: Hard by here,
in the Brown-wheat Island, dwells Her Trippa; you know how by the Arts of
Astrology, Geomancy, Chiromancy, Metopomancy, and others of a like stuff and
nature, he foretells all things to come: Let us talk a little, and confer
with him about your Business. Of that (answered Panurge) I know nothing: but of
this much concerning him I am assured, that one day, and that not long since,
whilst he was prating to the Great King, of Celestial, Sublime, and
Transcendent Things, the Lackqueys and Footboys of the Court, upon the upper
Steps of Stairs between two Doors, jumbled, one after another, as often as they
listed, his Wife; who is passable fair, and a pretty snug Hussie. Thus he who
seemed very clearly to see all Heavenly and Terrestrial Things without
Spectacles, who discoursed boldly of Adventures past, with great confidence
opened up present Cases and Accidents, and stoutly professed the presaging of
all future Events and Contingencies, and was not able with all the Skill and
Cunning that he had, to perceive the Bumbasting of his Wife, whom he reputed to
be very chaste; and has not till this hour, got Notice of any thing to the
contrary. Yet let us go to him, seeing you will have it so: for surely we can
never learn too much. They on the very next ensuing Day, came to Her Trippa's
Lodging. Panurge, by way of Donative, presented him with a long Gown lined all
thorough with Wolves-skins, with a short Sword mounted with a gilded Hilt, and
covered with a Velvet Scabbard, and with fifty good single Angels: then in a
familiar and friendly way did he ask of him his Opinion touching the Affair. At
the very first Her Trippa looking on him very wistly in the face, said unto
him: Thou have the Metoposcopy, and Physiognomy of a Cuckold; I say, of a
notorious and infamous Cuckold. With this casting an eye upon Panurge's right
Hand in all the parts thereof, he said, This rugged Draught which I see here,
just under the Mount of Jove, was never yet but in the Hand of a Cuckold.
Afterward, he with a White Lead Pen, swiftly, and hastily drew a certain
Number of diverse kinds of Points, which by Rules of Geomancy he coupled and
joined together, then said, Truth it self is not truer, then that it is
certain, thou will be a Cuckold, a little after thy Marriage. That being done,
he asked of Panurge the Horoscope of his Nativity; which was no sooner by
Panurge tendered unto him, then that, erecting a Figure, he very promptly and
speedily formed and fashioned a complete Fabric of the Houses of Heaven, in
all their parts, whereof when he had considered the Situation and the Aspects
in their Triplicities, he fetched a deep sigh, and said: I have clearly enough
already discovered unto you the Fate of your Cuckoldry, which is unavoidable,
you cannot escape it; and here have I got of new a further assurance thereof,
so that I may now hardily pronounce, and affirm without any scruple or
hesitation at all, that thou will be a Cuckold; that furthermore, thou will be
beaten by thine own Wife, and that she will purloyn, filch, and steal of thy
Goods from thee; for I find the Seventh House, in all its Aspects, of a
malignant Influence, and every one of the Planets threatening thee with
Disgrace, according as they stand seated toward one another, in relation to
the Horned Signs of Aries, Taurus, and Capricorn: In the Fourth House I find
Jupiter in a Decadence, as also in a Tetragonal Aspect to Saturn, associated
with Mercury: thou will be soundly peppered, my good honest Fellow, I warrant
thee. I will be: (answered Panurge) a Plague rot thee, thou old Fool, and
doting Sot, how graceless and unpleasant thou art.

When all Cuckolds shall be at a General Rendezvous, thou should be their
Standard Bearer. But whence comes this Ciron-worm betwixt these two Fingers?
This Panurge said, putting the Forefinger of his Left Hand, betwixt the Fore
and Mid-finger of the Right, which he thrust out toward Her Trippa, holding
them open after the manner of two Horns, and shutting into a Fist his Thumb,
with the other Fingers. Then in turning to Epistemon, he said, Lo here the true
Ollus of Martial, who addicted and devoted himself wholly to the observing the
Miseries, Crosses, and Calamities of others, whilst his own Wife, in the
Interim, did keep an open Bawdy House.

This Varlet is poorer then ever was Irus, and yet he is a proud, vaunting,
arrogant, self-conceited, overweening, and more insupportable then Seventeen
Devils; in one word, (...), which term of old was applied to the like beggarly
strutting Coxcombs.

Come, let us leave this Madpash Bedlam, this hair-brained Fop, and give him
leave to rave and dose his Belly-full, with his private and intimately
acquainted Devils; who, if they were not the very worst of all the infernal
Fiends, would never have daigned to serve such a knavish, barking Cur as this
is. He has not learnt the first Precept of Philosophy, which is, Know thy
Self: for whilst he braggeth and boasts, that he can discern the least Mote
in the Eye of another, he is not able to see the huge Block that puts out the
sight of both his Eyes. This is such another Polypragmon, as is by Plutarch
described: He is of the nature of the Lamian Witches, who in foreign Places,
in the Houses of Strangers, in Public, and amongst the common People, had a
sharper and more piercing Inspection into their Affairs then any Lync; but at
home in their own proper Dwelling-Mansions, were blinder then Mold-Warps, and
saw nothing at all: for their Custom was at their return from abroad, when they
were by themselves in private to take their Eyes out of their Head, from whence
they were as easily removable as a Pair of Spectacles from their Nose, and to
lay them up into a wooden Slipper, which for that purpose did hang behind the
Door of their Lodging.

Panurge had no sooner done speaking, when Her Trippa took into his Hand a
Tamarisk Branch. In this (quoth Epistemon) he does very well, right, and like
an Artist, for Nicander calls it the Divinatory Tree. Have you a mind (quoth
Her Trippa) to have the truth of the matter yet more fully and amply disclosed
unto you by Pyromancy, by Aeromancy, (whereof Aristophanes in his Clouds makes
great estimation) by Hydromancy, by Leconomancy, of old in prime request
amongst the Assyrians, and thoroughly tried by Hermolaus Barbarus: Come hither,
and I will show thee in this Platter-full of fair Fountain Water, thy future
Wife, lechering, and sercroupierising it with two swaggering Ruffians, one
after another. Yea, but have a special care (quoth Panurge) when thou come to
put thy Nose within mine Arse, that thou forget not to pull off thy Spectacles.
Her Trippa going on in his Discourse, said by Catoptromancy, likewise held in
such account by the Emperor Didius Iulianus, that by means thereof he ever and
anon foresaw all that which at any time did happen or befall unto him: Thou
shall not need to put on thy Spectacles, for in a Mirror thou will see her as
clearly and manifestly. Nebrundiated, and Billibodring-it, as if I should show
it in the Fountain of the Temple of Minerva near Parras. By Coscinomancy, most
religiously observed of old, amidst the Ceremonies of the ancient Romans. Let
us have a Sieve and Shiers, and thou shall see Devils. By Alphitomancy, cried
up by Theocritus in his Pharmeketria. By Alentomancy, mixing the Flower of
Wheat with Oatmeal, By Astragalomancy, whereof I have the Plots and Models all
at hand ready for the purpose. By Tyromancy, whereof we make some Proof in a
great Brehemont Cheese, which I here keep by me: By Giromancy, if thou should
turn round Circles, thou might assure thy self from me, that they would fall
always on the wrong side: By Sternomancy, which makes nothing for thy
Advantage, for thou have an ill proportioned Stomach: By Libanomancy, for the
which we shall need but a little Frankincense: By Gastromancy, which kind of
ventral Fatiloquency was for a long time together used in Ferrara by Lady
Giacoma Rodogina, the Eugastrimythian Prophetess: By Cephalomancy, often
practiced amongst the High Germans in their boiling of an Asses Head upon
burning Coals: By Ceromancy, where by the means of Wax dissolved into Water,
thou shall see the Figure, Pourtrait and lively Representation of thy future
Wife, and of her Fredin Fredaliatory Belly thumping Blades: By Capnomancy; O
the gallantest and most excellent of all Secrets! By Axionomancy, we want only
a Hatchet and a Jeat-stone to be laid together upon a quick Fire of hot Embers.
O how bravely Homer was versed in the practice hereof toward Penelope's
Suitors! By Onymancy; for that we have Oil and Wax: By Tephromancy, thou will
see the Ashes thus aloft dispersed, exhibiting thy Wife in a fine Posture: By
Botonomancy, for the nonce I have some few Leaves in reserve: By Sicomancy; O
Divine Art in Fig Tree Leaves! By Icthiomancy, in ancient times so celebrated,
and put in use by Tiresias and Polydamas, with the like certainty of event as
was tried of old at the Dina-ditch within that Grove consecrated to Apollo,
which is in the Territory of the Lycians: By Choiramancy. Let us have a great
many Hogs, and thou shall have the Bladder of one of them: By Cheromomancy, as
the Bean is found in the Cake at the Epiphany Vigil: By Anthropomancy,
practiced by the Roman Emperor Heliagobulus; it is somewhat irksom, but thou will endure it well enough, seeing thou art destinated to be a Cuckold: By a
Sybilline Stichomancy: By Onomatomancy: How do they call thee! Chaw, turd;
(quoth Panurge) or yet by Alectryomancy. If I should here with a Compass draw a
round, and in looking upon thee, and considering thy Lot, divide the
Circumference thereof into four and twenty equal parts, then form a several
Letter of the Alphabet upon every one of them; and lastly, posit a Barley Corn
or two upon each of these so disposed Letters, I durst promise upon my Faith
and Honesty, that if a young Virgin Cock be permitted to range along and
athwart them, he should only eat the Grains which are set and placed upon these
Letters, A. C.u.c.k.o.l.d. T.h.o.u. s.h.a.l.t. b.e. And that as fatidically, as
under the Emperor Valence, most perplexedly desirous to know the Name of him,
who should be his Successor to the Empire, the Cock Vaticinating and
Alectryomantick, are up the Pickles that were posited on the Letters T.h.e.o.d.
Or for the more certainty, will you have a trial of your Fortune by the Art of
Aruspiciny? by Augury? or by Extispicine? By Turdispicine, quoth Panurge; or
yet by the Mystery of Negromancy? I will, if you please, suddenly set up again,
and revive some one lately deceased, as Apollonius of Tyan did to Achilles, and
the Pythoniss in the Presence of Saul; which Body so raised up and requickned,
will tell us the Sum of all you shall require of him; no more nor less than at
the Invocation of Erictho, a certain defunct Person foretold to Pompy the whole
progress and issue of the fatal Battle fought in the Pharsalian Fields? Or if
you be afraid of the Dead, as commonly all Cuckolds are, I will make use of the
Faculty of Sciomancy. Go, get thee gone (quoth Panurge) thou Frantic Ass, to
the Devil, and be buggered, filthy Bordachio that thou art, by some Albanian,
for a Steeple-crown'd Hat. Why the Devil did not thou counsel me as well to
hold an Emerald, or the Stone of a Hyena under my Tongue? Or to furnish and
provide my self with Tongues of Whoops, and Hearts of Green Frogs? Or to eat of
the Liver and Milt of some Dragon? To the end that by those means I might at
the chanting and chirping of Swans and other Fowls, understand the Substance of
my future Lot and Destiny, as did of old the Arabians in the Country of
Mesopotamia? Fifteen brace of Devils seize upon the Body and Soul of this
horned, Renegado, miscreant Cuckold, the Inchanter, Witch, and Sorcerer of
Antichrist to all the Devils of Hell.

Let us return toward our King: I am sure he will not be well pleased with us,
if he once come to get notice that we have been in the Kennel of this muffled
Devil. I repent my being come hither. I would willingly dispense with a Hundred
Nobles, and Fourteen Yeomans, on condition that he who not long since did blow
in the bottom of my Breeches, should instantly with his squirting Spittle
inluminate his Mustaches. O Lord God now! how the Villain has besmoaked me
with Vexation and Anger, with Charms and Witchcraft, and with a terrible Coyl
and Stir of Infernal and Tartarian Devils! The Devil take him: say Amen; and
let us go drink. I shall not have any Appetite for my Victuals (how good Cheer
soever I make) these two days to come, hardly these four.

CHAP. XXVI. How Panurge consulteth with Friar Ihon of the Funnels.
PAnurge was indeed very much troubled in mind, and disquieted at the words of
Her Trippa, and therefore as she passed by the little Village of Hugmes, after
he had made his Address to Friar Ihon, in pecking at, rubbing and scratching
his own left Ear, he said unto him, Keep me a little jovial and merry, my dear
and sweet Bully, for I find my Brains altogether metagrabolized and confounded,
and my Spirits in a most dunsical puzzle at the bitter talk of this Devilish,
Hellish, Damned Fool: Hearken, my dainty Cod.

Mellow C. Lead-coloured C. Knurled C. Suborned C. Desired C. Stuffed C.
Speckled C. Finely metall'd C. Arabian-like C. Trussed up Greyhound-like C.
Mounted C. Sleeked C. Diapred C. Spotted C. Master C. Seeded C. Lusty C. Jupped
C. Milked C. Calfeted C. Raised C. Odd C. Steeled C. Stale C. Orange-tawny C.
Imbroidered C. Glazed C. Interlarded C. Burger-like C. Impoudred C. Ebenized C.
Brasiliated C. Organized C. Passable. Trunkified C. Furious C. Packed C. Hooded
C. Varnished C. Renowned C. Matted C. Genetive C. Gigantal C. Oval C. Claustral
C. Viril C. Stayed C. Massive C. Manual C. Absolute C. Well-set C. Gemel C.
Turkish C. Burning C. Thwacking C. Urgent C. Handsome C. Prompt C. Fortunate C.
Boxewood C. Latten C. Unbridled C. Hooked C. Researched C. Encompassed C.
Strouting out C. Jolly C. Lively C. Gerundive C. Franked C. Polished C. Poudred
Beef C. Positive C. Spared C. Bold C. Lascivious C. Gluttonous C. Resolute C.
Cabbage-like C. Courteous C. Fertile C. Whizzing C. Neat C. Common C. Brisk C.
Quick C. Barelike C. Partitional C. Patronymick C. Cockney C. Auromercuriated
C. Robust C. Appetizing C. Succourable C. Redoutable C. Affable C. Memorable C.
Palpable C. Barbable C. Tragical C. Transpontine C. Digestive C. Active C.
Vital C. Magistral C. Monachal C. Subtle C. Hammering C. Clashing C. Tingling
C. Usual C. Exquisite C. Trim C. Succulent C. Factious C. Clammy C. Fat C.
High-prised C. Requisite C. Laycod C. Hand-filling C. Insuperable C. Agreeable
C. Formidable C. Profitable C. Notable C. Musculous C. Subsidiary C. Satyrick
C. Repercussive C. Convulsive C. Restorative C. Masculinating C. Incarnative C.
Sigillative C. Sallying C. Plump C. Thundering C. Lechering C. Fulminating C.
Sparkling C. Ramming C. Lusty C. Household C. Pretty C. Astrolabian C.
Algebraical C. Venust C. Aromatizing C. Trixy C. Paillard C. Gaillard C.
Broaching C. Adle C. Syndicated C. Boulting C. Snorting C. Pilfring C. Shaking
C. Bobbing C. Chiveted C. Fumbling C. Topsiturvying C. Raging C. Piled up C.
Filled up C. Manly C. Idle C. Membrous C. Strong C. Twin C. Belabouring C.
Gentil C. Stirring C. Confident C. Nimble C. Roundheaded C. Figging C. Helpful
C. Spruce C. Plucking C. Ramage C. Fine C. Fierce C. Brawny C. Count C.
Repaired C. Soft C. Wild C. Renewed C. Quaint C. Starting C. Fleshy C.
Auxiliary C. New vamped C. Improved C. Malling C. Sounding C. Batled C. Burly
C. Seditious C. Wardian C. Protective C. Twinkling C. Able C. Algoristical C.
Odoriferous C. Pranked C. Jocund C. Routing C. Purloyning C. Frolic C. Wagging
C. Ruffling C. Jumbling C. Rumbling C. Thumping C. Bumping C. C^ingeling C.
Berumpling C. Jogging C. Nobbing C. Touzing C. Tumbling C. Fambling C.
Overturning C. Shooting C. Culeting C. Jagged C. Pinked C. Arsiversing C.
Polished C. Slasht C. Hamed C. Leisurely C. Cut C. Smooth C. Depending C.
Independent C. Lingering C. Rapping C. Reverend C. Nodding C. Disseminating C.
Affecting C. Affected C. Grapled C. Stuffed C. Well-fed C. Flourished C. Fallow
C. Sudden C. Grasp-full C. Swillpow C. Crushing C. Creaking C. Dilting C. Ready
C. Vigorous C. Scoulking C. Superlative C. Clashing C. Wagging C. Scriplike C.
Encremaster'd C. Bouncing C. Levelling C. Fly-flap C. Perinae tegminal C.
Squat-couching C. Short-hung C. The hypogastrian C. Witness bearing C.
Testigerous C. Instrumental C.
My Harcabuzing Cod, and Buttock-stirring Ballock, Friar Ihon, my Friend: I do
carry a singular respect unto thee, and honor thee with all my Heart, thy
Counsel I hold for a choice and delicate Morsel, therefore have I reserved it
for the last Bit. Give me thy Advice freely, I beseech thee; Should I marry, or
no? Friar Ihon very merrily, and with a sprightly cheerfulness made this Answer
to him: Marry, in the Devil's Name, Why not? What the Devil else should thou
do, but marry? Take thee a Wife, and furbish her Harnish to some tune: Swinge
her Skin-coat, as if thou were beating on Stock Fish; and let the repercussion
of thy Clapper from her resounding Metal, make a Noise, as if a double Peal of
Chiming-Bells were hung at the Cremasters of thy Ballocks. As I say Marry, so
do I understand, that thou should fall to work as speedily as may be: yea, my
meaning is, that thou ought to be so quick and forward therein, as on this
same very day, before Sunset, to cause, proclaim thy Banes of Matrimony, and
make provision of Bedsteads. By the Blood of a Hog's-pudding, till when would
thou delay the acting of a Husband's part? Do thou not know, and is it not
daily told unto thee, that the end of the World approaches? We are nearer it
by three Poles, and half a Fathom, then we were two days ago. The Antichrist is
already born, at least it is so reported by many: the truth is, that hitherto
the effects of his wrath have not reached further then to the scratching of his
Nurse and Governesses: his Nails are not sharp enough as yet, nor have his
Claws attained to their full growth; he is little.

Crescat; Nos qui vivimus, multiplicemur. It is written so, and it is holy
stuff, I warrant you: The truth whereof is like to last as long as a Sack of
Corn may be had for a Penny, and a Punction of pure Wine for Threepence. Would
thou be content to be found with thy Genitories full in the Day of Judgment?
Dum veneris judicari. Thou have (quoth Panurge) a right, clear, and neat
Spirit, Friar Ihon, my Metropolitan ^od; thou speakst in very deed pertinently,
and to purpose: That belike was the reason which moved Leander of Abydos in
Asia, whilst he was swimming through the Hellespontick Sea, to make a Visit to
his Sweetheart Hero of Sestus in Europe, to pray unto Neptune, and all the
other Marine Gods, thus: Now, whilst I go, have pity on me,
And at my back returning drown me.
He was loath, it seems, to die with his Cods over-gorged: He was to be
commended, therefore do I promise, that from henceforth no Malefactor shall by
Justice be executed within my Jurisdiction of Salmigondinois, who shall not,
for a day or two at least before, he be permitted to culbut, and foraminate,
Onocrotalwise, that there remain not in all his Vessels, to write a great Greek
(...); such a precious thing should not be foolishly cast away; he will perhaps
therewith beget a Male, and so depart the more contentedly out of this Life,
that he shall have left behind him one for one.

CHAP. XXVII. How Friar Ihon merrily, and sportingly counsels Panurge.
BY Saint Rigomet (quoth Friar Ihon) I do advise thee to nothing, my dear
Friend Panurge) which I would not do my self, were I in thy place: only have a
special care, and take good heed thou soulder well together the Joints of the
double backed, and two bellied Beast, and fortify thy Nerves so strongly, that
there be no discontinuance in the Knocks of the Venerian thwacking, else thou
art lost, poor Soul: for if there pass long intervals betwixt the Priapising
Feats, and that thou make an intermission of too large a time, that will befall
thee, which betides the Nurses, if they desist from giving suck to Children,
they lose their Milk; and if continually thou do not hold thy Aspersory Tool in
exercise, and keep thy Mental going, thy Lacticinian Nectar will be gone, and
it will serve thee only as a Pipe to piss out at, and thy Cods for a Wallet of
lesser value then a Beggars Scrip. This is a certain truth I tell thee, Friend,
and doubt not of it; for my self have seen the sad experiment thereof in many,
who cannot now do what they would, because before they did not what they might
have done: Ex desuetudine amittuntur Privilegia: Non-usage oftentimes destroys
ones Right, say the learned Doctors of the Law: therefore, my Billy, entertain
as well as possibly thou can, that Hypogastrian, lower sort of Troglodytick
People, that their chief pleasure may be placed in the case of sempiternal
laboring. Give order that henceforth they live not like adle Gentlemen, idly
upon their Rents and Revenues, but that they may work for their Livelyhoood, by
breaking ground within the Paphian Trenches. Nay truly (answered Panurge) Friar
Ihon, my left Ballock, I will believe thee, for thou dealest plain with me, and
fallest downright square upon the business, without going about the Bush with
frivolous circumstances, and unnecessary reservations. Thou with the splendor
of a piercing Wit, have dissipated all the louring Clouds of anxious
Apprehensions and Suspicions, which did intimidate and terrify me: therefore
the Heavens be pleased to grant to thee, at all She-conflicts, a stiff-standing
Fortune. Well then, as thou have said, so will I do, I will, in good Faith,
Marry; in that point there shall be no failing, I promise thee, and shall have
always by me pretty Girls clothed with the Name of my Wives Waiting-Maids, that
lying under thy Wings, thou may be Night-Protector of their Sisterhood.

Let this serve for the first part of the Sermon. Hearken (quoth Friar Ihon) to
the Oracle of the Bells of Varenes; What say they? I hear and understand them
(quoth Panurge) their Sound is by my Thirst, more uprightly fatidical, then
that of Jove's Great Kettles in Dodona. Hearken; Take thee a Wife, take thee a
Wife, and marry, marry, marry: for if thou marry, thou shall find good therein,
herein, here in a Wife thou shall find good; so marry, marry. I will assure
thee, that I shall be married, all the Elements invite and prompt me to it: let
this Word be to thee a Brazen Wall, by diffidence not to be broken thorough. As
for the Second part of this our Doctrine: Thou seem in some measure to
mistrust the readiness of my Paternity, in the practicing of my Placket-Racket
within the Aphrodisian Tennis-Court at all times fitting, as if the stiff God
of Gardens were not favorable to me. I pray thee, favor me so much as to
believe, that I still have him at a beck, attending always my Commandments,
docile, obedient, vigorous, and active in all things, and everywhere, and
never stubborn or refractory to my will or pleasure.

I need no more, but to let go the Reins, and slacken the Leash, which is the
Belly-point, and when the Game is shown unto him, say, Hey, Jack, to thy Booty,
he will not fail even then to flesh himself upon his Prey, and tuzle it to some
purpose. Hereby you may perceive, although my future Wife were as unsatiable
and gluttonous in her Voluptuousness, and the Delights of Venery, as ever was
the Empress Messalina, or yet the Marchioness in England; and I desire thee to
give credit to it, that I lack not for what is requisite to over^oy the Stomach
of her Lust, but have wherewith aboundingly to please her.

I am not ignorant that Solomon said, who indeed of that matter speaks
Clerk-like, and learnedly: as also how Aristotle after him declared for a
truth, That for the greater part, the Lechery of a Woman is ravenous and
unsatisfiable: nevertheless, let such as are my Friends, who read those
passages, receive from me for a most real verity, that I for such a Gill, have
a fit Jack; and that, if Women's things cannot be satiated, I have an Instrument
indefatigable; an Implement as copious in the giving, as can in craving be
their Vade Mecums. Do not here produce ancient Examples of the Paragons of
Paillardise, and offer to match with my Testiculatory Ability, the Priapaean
Prowess of the fabulous Fornicators, Hercules, Proculus, Caesar, and Mahomet,
who in his Alchoran does vaunt, that in his Cods he had the vigor of
Threescore Bully Ruffians; but let no zealous Christian trust the Rogue, the
filthy ribald Rascal is a Liar. Shall thou need to urge Authorities, or bring
forth the Instance of the Indian Prince, of whom Theophrastus Plinius, and
Athenaeus testify, that with the help of a certain Herb, he was able, and had
given frequent Experiments thereof, to toss his sinewy Piece of Generation, in
the Act of carnal Concupiscence, above Threescore and ten times in the space of
Four and twenty hours. Of that I believe nothing, the number is supposititious,
and too prodigally foisted in: Give no Faith unto it, I beseech thee, but
prithee trust me in this, and thy credulity therein shall not be wronged; for
it is true, and Probatum est, that my Pionier of Nature, the sacred
Ithyphallian Champion, is of all stiff-intruding Blades the primest: Come
hither my Ballockette, and hearken, Did thou ever see the Monk of Castres
Cowl? when in any House it was laid down, whether openly in the view of all, or
covertly out of the sight of any, such was the ineffable Virtue thereof for
excitating and stirring up the People of both Sexes unto Lechery, that the
whole Inhabitants and Indwellers, not only of that, but likeways of all the
circumjacent places thereto, within three Leagues around it, did suddenly enter
into Rut, both Beasts and Folks, Men and Women, even to the Dogs and Hogs, Rats
and Cats.

I swear to thee, that many times heretofore I have perceived, and found in my
Codpiece a certain kind of Energy, or efficacious Virtue, much more irregular,
and of a greater Anomaly, then what I have related: I will not speak to thee
either of House or Cottage, nor of Church or Market, but only tell thee, that
once at the Representation of the Passion, which was acted at Saint Mexents; I
had no sooner entered within the Pit of the Theater, but that forthwith, by the
virtue and occult property of it, on a sudden all that were there, both Players
and Spectators, did fall into such an exorbitant Temptation of Lust, that there
was not Angel, Man, Devil, nor Deviless, upon the place, who would not then
have Bricollitched it with all their Heart and Soul.

The Prompter forsook his Copy, he who played Michael's part, came down to
rights, the Devils issued out of Hell, and carried along with them most of the
pretty little Girls that were there; yea, Lucifer got out of his Fetters; in a
word: seeing the huge Disorder, I disparked my self forth of that enclosed
place, in imitation of Cato the Censor, who perceiving by reason of his
presence, the Floralian Festivals out of order, withdrew himself.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Friar Ihon comfort Panurge in the douhtful matter of
Cuckoldry.
I Understand thee well enough, said Friar Ihon; but time makes all things
plain. The most durable Marbre or Porphyr is subject to Old Age and Decay.
Though for the present thou possibly be not weary of the Exercise, yet is it
like, I will hear thee confess a few years hence, that thy Cods hang dangling
downwards for want of a better Truss. I see thee waxing a little hoar-headed
already; thy Beard by the Distinctions of gray, white, tawny and black, has to
my thinking the resemblance of a Map of the Terrestrial Globe, or Geographical
Cart. Look attentively upon, and take Inspection of what I shall show unto
thee. Behold there Asia, here are Tygris and Euphrates. Lo there Africa; here
is the Mountain of the Moon, yonder thou may perceive the Fenny Marsh of
Nilus. On this side lies Europe: Do thou not see the Abbey of Tileme? This
little Tuft, which is altogether white, is the Hyperborean Hills. By the thirst
of my Throple, Friend, when Snow is on the Mountains, I say the Head and the
Chin, there is not then any considerable Heat to be expected in the Valleys and
Low Countries of the Codpiece. By the Kibes of thy Heels (quoth Panurge) thou
do not understand the Topics. When Snow is on the tops of the Hills,
Lightning, Thunder, Tempest, Whirlwinds, Storms, Hurricanes, and all the Devils
of Hell rage in the Valleys. Would thou see the experience thereof, go to the
Territory of the Swissers, and earnestly perpend with thy self there the
Situation of the Lake of Wendelberliok, about four Leagues distant from Berne,
on the Syon-side of the Land. Thou twittest me with my Gray Heirs, yet
considerest not how I am of the Nature of Leeks, which with a white Head carry
a green, fresh, straight, and vigorous Tail.

The truth is nevertheless, (why should I deny it) that I now and then discern
in my self some indicative Signs of Old Age. Tell this, I prithee, to no body,
but let it be kept very close and secret betwixt us two; for I find the Wine
much sweeter now, more savoury to my taste, and unto my Palate of a better
relish than formerly I was wont to do; and withal, besides mine accustomed
manner, I have a more dreadful Apprehension than I ever heretofore have had of
lighting on bad Wine. Note and observe that this does argue and portend I know
not what of the West and Occident of my time, and signifies that the South and
Meridian of mine Age is past. But what then? my Gentle Companion, that does but
betoken that I will hereafter drink so much the more. That is not, the Devil
hale it, the thing that I fear; nor is there where my Shoo pinches. The thing
that I doubt most, and have greatest reason to dread and suspect, is, that
through some long absence of our King Pantagruel (to whom I must needs bear
Company, should he go to all the Devils of Berathrum) my future Wife shall make
me a Cuckold. This is, in truth, the long and the short on it: For I am by all
those whom I have spoke to menaced and threatened with a Horned Fortune; and all
of them affirm, it is the Lot to which from Heaven I am predestined. Every
one (answered Friar Ihon) that would be a Cuckold, is not one: If it be thy
Fate to be hereafter of the number of that Horned Cattle, then may I conclude
with an Ergo, thy Wife will be beautiful, and Ergo, thou will be kindly used by
her: Likewise with this Ergo thou shall be blissed with the fruition of many
Friends and Well-willers: And finally with this other Ergo thou shall be saved,
and have a place in Paradise. These are Monachal Topics and Maxims of the
Cloister: Thou may take more liberty to sin: Thou shall be more at ease than
ever: There will be nevertheless left for thee, nothing diminished, but thy
Goods shall increase notably: And if so be it was preordinated for thee,
would thou be so impious as not to acquiesce in thy Destiny? Speak thou jaded
Cod, Faded C. Moldy C. Musty C. Paultery C. Senseless C. Foundred C.
Distempred C. Berayed C. Inveigled C. Dangling C. Stupid C. Seedless C. Soaked
C. Lowting C. Discouraged C. Surfeited C. Peevish C. Translated C. Forlorn C.
Unsavory C. Worm-eaten C. Overtoiled C. Miserable C. Steeped C. Kneaded with
cold Water C. Appealant C. Swagging C. Withered C. Broken reined C. Defective
C. Crestfallen C. Felled C. Fleeted C. Cloyed C. Squeezed C. Resty C. Pounded
C. Loose C. Coldish C. Peckled C. Churned C. Filiped C. Singlefied C. Begrimed
C. Wrinkled C. Fainted C. Extenuated C. Grim C. Wasted C. Inflamed C. Unhinged
C. Scurfie C. Stradling C. Putrified C. Maimed C. Overlechered C. Druggely C.
Mitified C. Goat-ridden C. Weakened C. Asse-ridden C. Puff-pasted C. St.
Anthonified C. Untriped C. Blasted C. Cut off C. Beveraged C. Scarified C.
Dashed C. Slasht C. Infeebled C. Whore-hunting C. Deteriorated C. Chil C.
Scrupulous C. Crazed C. Tasteless C. Hacked C. Flaggy C. Scrubby C. Drained C.
Haled C. Lolling C. Drenched C. Burst C. Stirred up C. Mitred C. Pedlingly
furnished C. Rusty C. Exhausted C. Perplexed C. Unhelved C. Fizled C. Leaprous
C. Bruised C. Spadonick C. Boughty C. Mealy C. Wrangling C. Gangreened C.
Crustrisen C. Ragged C. Quelled C. Bragodochio C. Beggarly C. Trepanned C.
Bedusked C. Emasculated C. Corked C. Transparent C. Vile C. Antidated C.
Chopped C. Pinked C. Cup-glassified C. Fruitless C. Riven C. Pursie C. Fusty C.
Jadish C. Fistulous C. Languishing C. Maleficiated C. Hectic C. Worn out C.
Ill-favored C. Duncified C. Macerated C. Paralytick C. Degraded C. Benumbed C.
Bat-like C. Fart-shotten C. Sunburned C. Pacified C. Blunted C. Rankling tasted
C. Rooted out C. Costive C. Hailed on C. Cuffed C. Buffeted C. Whirreted C.
Robbed C. Neglected C. Lame C. Confused C. Unsavory C. Overthrown C. Boulted
C. Trod under C. Desolate C. Declining C. Stinching C. Sorrowful C. Murdered
C. Matachin-like C. Besotted C. Customerless C. Minced C. Exulcerated C.
Patched C. Stupefied C. Annihilated C. Spent C. Foiled C. Aguish C. Disfigured
C. Disabled C. Forcedless C. Censured C. Cut C. Rifled C. Undone C. Corrected
C. Slit C. Skittish C. Spungy C. Botched C. Dejected C. Jagged C. Pining C.
Deformed C. Mischieved C. Cobled C. Imbased C. Ransacked C. Despised C. Mangy
C. Abased C. Supine C. Mended C. Dismayed C. Harsh C. Beaten C. Barred C.
Abandoned C. Confounded C. Lowtish C. Born down C. Sparred C. Abashed C.
Unseasonable C. Oppressed C. Grated C. Falling away C. Smalcut C. Disordered C.
Lattised C. Ruined C. Exasperated C. Rejected C. Belammed C. Fabricitant C.
Perused C. Emasculated C. Roughly handled C. Examined C. Crakt C. Waiward C.
Hagled C. Gleaning C. Ill-favored C. Pulled C. Drooping C. Faint C. Parched C.
Paultry C. Cankred C. Void C. Vexed C. Bestunk C. Crooked C. Brabling C. Rotten
C. Anxious C. Clouted C. Tired C. Proud C. Fractured C. Melancholy C. Coxcombly
C. Base C. Bleaked C. Detested C. Diaphanous C. Unworthy C. Checked C. Mangled
C. Turned over C. Harried C. Flawed C. Froward C. Ugly C. Drawn C. Riven C.
Distasteful C. Hanging C. Broken C. Limber C. Effeminate C. Kindled C.
Evacuated C. Grieved C. Carking C. Disorderly C. Empty C. Disquieted C.
Besysted C. Confounded C. Hooked C. Diverous C. Wearied C. Sad C. Cross C.
Vainglorious C. Poor C. Brown C. Shrunkin C. Abhorred C. Troubled C. Scornful
C. Dishonest C. Reproved C. Cocketed C. Filthy C. Shred C. Chawned C.
Short-winded C. Branchless C. Chapped C. Failing C. Deficient C. Lean C.
Consumed C. Used C. Puzzled C. Allayed C. Spoiled C. Clagged C. Palsey-strucken
C. Amazed C. Bedunsed C. Extirpated C. Banged C. Stripped C. Hoary C. Winnowed
C. Decayed C. Disastrous C. Unhandsom C. Stummed C. Barren C. Wretched C.
Feeble C. Cast down C. Stopped C. Kept under C. Stubborn C. Ground C. Retchless
C. Weather-beaten C. Flayed C. Bauld C. Tossed C. Flapping C. Cleft C. Meagre
C. Dumpified C. Suppressed C. Hagged C. Jawped C. Havocked C. Astonished C.
Dulled C. Slow C. Plucked up C. Constipated C. Blown C. Blockify'd C. Pommeled
C. All-to-be mawl'd C. Fallen away C. Unlucky C. Steril C. Beshitten C.
Appeased C. Caitive C. Woeful C. Unseemly C. Heavy C. Weak C. Prostrated C.
Uncomely C. Naughty C. Laid flat C. Suffocated C. Held down C. Barked C.
Hairless C. Flamping C. Hooded C. Wormy C. Besysted C. Faulty C. Bemealed C.
Mortified C. Scurvy C. Bescabbed C. Torn C. Subdued C. Sneaking C. Bare C.
Swart C. Smutched C. Raised up C. Chopped C. Flirted C. Blained C. Blotted C.
Sunk in C. Ghastly C. Unpointed C. Beblistered C. Wizened C. Begger-plated C.
Douf C. Clarty C. Lumpish C. Abject C. Side C. Choked up C. Backward C. Prolix
C. Spotted C. Crumpled C. Frumpled C. State C. Corrupted C. Beflowred C. Amated
C. Blackish C. Underlaid C. Loathing C. Ill-filled C. Bobbed C. Mated C. Tawny
C. Whealed C. Besmeared C. Hollow C. Pantless C. Guizened C. Demiss C.
Refractory C. Rensie C. Frowning C. Limping C. Raveled C. Rammish C. Gaunt C.
Beskimmered C. Scraggy C. Lank C. Swashring C. Moyling C. Swinking C. Harried
C. Tugged C. Towed C. Misused C. Adamitical C.


Balockatso to the Devil, my dear Friend Panurge, seeing it is so decreed by
the Gods, would thou invert the course of the Planets, and make them
retrograde? Would thou disorder all the Celestial Spheres? blame the
Intelligences, blunt the Spindles, joint the Wherves, slander the Spinning
Quills, reproach the Bobbins, revile the Clew-bottoms, and finally ravel and
untwist all the Threads of both the warp and the waft of the weer'd Sister
Parques? What a Pox to thy Bones do thou mean, stony Cod? thou would if
thou could, a great deal worse than the Giants of old intended to have done*
Come hither, Billicullion; Whether would thou be Jealous without cause, or be
a Cuckold and know nothing of it? Neither the one nor the other (quoth Panurge)
would I choose to be: But if I get an inkling of the matter, I will provide
well enough, or there shall not be one stick of Wood within Five hundred
Leagues about me, whereof to make a Cudgel. In good Faith (Friar Ihon) I speak
now seriously unto thee, I think it will be my best not to marry: Hearken to
what the Bells do tell me, now that we are nearer to them: Do not Marry, Marry
not, not, not, not, not; Marry, Marry not, not, not, not, not: If thou Marry,
thou will miscarry, carry, carry* thou wilt repent it, resent it, sent it: if
thou Marry, thou a Cuckold, a Cou-cou-Cuckoe, Cou-cou-Cuckold thou shall be. By
the worthy Wrath of God I begin to be angry; this Campanilian Oracle fretteth
me to the Guts, a March-Hare was never in such a Chaff as I am. O how I am
vexed! you Monks and Friars of the Cowl-pated, and Hood-poll'd Fraternity, have
you no Remedy nor Salve against this Malady of Graffing Horns in Heads? Has
Nature so abandoned Humane-kind, and of her help left us so destitute, that
married Men cannot know how to sail through the Seas of this mortal Life, and
be safe from the Whirlpools, Quicksands, Rocks, and Banks, that lie along the
Coast of Cornwall.

I will (said Friar Ihon) show thee a way, and teach thee an expedient, by
means whereof thy Wife shall never make thee a Cuckold without thy knowledge,
and thine own consent. Do me the favor, I pray thee, (quoth Panurge) my pretty
soft downy Cod; now tell it, Billy, tell it, I beseech thee. Take (quoth Friar
Ihon) Hans Carvel's Ring upon thy Finger, who was the King of Melinda's chief
Jeweller; besides that, this Hans Carvel had the Reputation of being very
skilful and expert in the Lapidary's Profession, he was a studious, learned,
and ingenious Man, a Scientifick Person, full of Knowledge, a great
Philosopher, of a sound Judgment, of a prime Wit, good Sense, clear Spirited,
an honest Creature, Courteous, Charitable, Giver of Alms, and of a Jovial
Humor, a Boon Companion, and a Merry Blade, if ever there was any in the
World: He was somewhat Gorbellied, had a little Shake in his Head, and in
effect unwieldy of his Body; in his Old Age he took to Wife the Bailiff of
Concordat's Daughter, a young, fair, jolly, gallant, spruce, frisk, brisk,
neat, feat, smirk ^^ug, count, quaint, gay, fine, trixy, tri^^, decent, proper,
graceful, handsome, beautiful, comely; and kind, a little too much to her
Neighbors and Acquaintance.

Hereupon it fell out, after the expiring of a scantling of Weeks, that Master
Carvel became as jealous as a Tygar, and entered into a very profound suspicion,
that his new-married Gixy did keep a Buttock-stirring with others: to prevent
which inconveniency, he did tell her many tragical Stories of the total Ruin
of several Kingdoms by Adultery; did read unto her the Legend of chaste Wives;
then made some Lectures to her in the praise of the choice Virtue of Pucidity,
and did present her with a Book in Commendation of Conjugal Fidelity: wherein
the wickedness of all licentious Women was odiously detested; and withal, he
gave her a Chain enriched with pure Oriental Saphires. Notwithstanding all
this, he found her always more and more inclined to the reception of her
Neighbor Copes-mates, that day by day his Jealousy increased; in sequel
whereof, one Night as he was lying by her, whilst in his Sleep the rambling
Fancies of the leacherous Deportments of his Wife, did take up the Celluls, of
his Brain, he dreamt that he encountered with the Devil, to whom he had
discovered to the full the buzzing of his Head, and suspicion that his Wife did
tread her Shoe awry; the Devil, he thought, in this perplexity, did for his
comfort, give him a Ring, and therewithal did kindly put it on his
Middle-finger, saying, Hans Carvel, I give thee this Ring, whilst thou carriest
it upon that Finger, thy Wife shall never carnally be known by any other then
thy self, without thy special knowledge and consent. Grammercy (quoth Hans
Carvel) my Lord Devil, I renounce Mahomet, if ever it shall come off my Finger.
The Devil vanished, as is his Custom, and then Hans Carvel full of Joy awaking,
found that his Middle-finger was as far as it could reach within the
What-do-you-call-it of his Wife. I did forget to tell thee, how his Wife, as
soon as she had felt the Finger there, said in recoyling her Buttocks, Off,
yes, nay, tut, pish, tush, aye, Lord, that is not the thing which should be put
up in that place. With this Hans Carvel thought that some pilferring Fellow was
about to take the Ring from him.

Is not this an Infallible and Sovereign Antidote? therefore, if thou will
believe me, in imitation of this Example, never fail to have continually the
Ring of thy Wife's Commodity upon thy Finger. When that was said, their
Discourse and their Way ended.

CHAP. XXIX. How Pantagruel Convocated together a Theologian, Physician,
Lawyer, and Philosopher, for extricating Panurge out of the perplexity wherein
he was.
NO sooner were they come into the Royal Palace, but they, to the full, made
Report unto Pantagruel of the Success of their Expedition; they show him the
Response of Paminagrobis. When Pantagruel had read it over and over again, the
oftener he perused it, being the better pleased therewith; he said, in
addressing his Speech to Panurge, I have not as yet seen any Answer framed to
your Demand, which affords me more Contentment: for in this his succinct Copy
of Verses, he summarily, and briefly, yet fully enough expresses, how he would
have us to understand, that every one in the Project and Enterprise of
Marriage, ought to be his own Carver, sole Arbitrator of his proper Thoughts,
and from himself alone take Counsel in the main and peremptory closure of what
his Determination should be, in either his assent to, or dissent from it. Such
always has been my Opinion to you, and when at first you spoke thereof to me,
I truly told you this same very thing; but tacitly you scorned my Advice, and
would not harbor it within your mind. I know for certain, and therefore may I
with the greater confidence utter my conception of it, that Philauty, or Self
love, is that which blinds your Judgment, and deceives you.

Let us do otherways, and that is this: Whatever we are, or have, consists in
Three Things: the Soul, the Body, and the Goods: now for the preservation of
these Three, there are Three sorts of Learned Men ordained, each respectively
to have care of that one which is recommended to his charge. Theologues are
appointed for the Soul, Physicians for the Welfare of the Body, and Lawyers for
the Safety of our Goods: hence it is, that it is my Resolution to have on
Sunday next with me at Dinner, a Divine, a Physician, and a Lawyer, that with
those Three assembled thus together, we may in every Point and Particle, confer
at large of your Perplexity. By Saint Picot (answered Panurge) we never shall
do any good that way: I see it already, and you see your self how the World is
vilely abused, as when with a Fox-tayl one claps another's Breech, to cajole
him. We give our Souls to keep to the Theologues, who for the greater part are
Heretics: Our Bodies we commit to the Physicians, who never themselves take
any Physic: and then we entrust our Goods to Lawyers, who never go to Law
against one another. You speak like a Courtier (quoth Pantagruel) but the first
Point of your Assertion is to be denied: for we daily see how good Theologues
make it their chief Business, their whole and sole Employment, by their Deeds,
their Words, and Writings, to extirpate Errors and Heresies out of the Hearts
of Men; and in their stead profoundly plant the true and lively Faith. The
Second Point you spoke of I commend: for whereas the Professors of the Art of
Medicine, give so good order to the Prophylactick, or Conservative part of
their Faculty, in what concerns their proper Healths, that they stand in no
need of making use of the other Branch, which is the Curative, or Therapentick,
by Medicaments. As for the Third, I grant it to be true: for Learned Advocates
and Counselors at Law, are so much taken up with the Affairs of others in
their Consultations, Pleadings, and suchlike Patrocinations of those who are
their Clients, that they have no leisure to attend any Controversies of their
own. Therefore, on the next ensuing Sunday, let the Divine be our godly Father
Hippothadee, the Physician our honest Master Rondibilis, and the Legist our
good Friend Bridlegoose: nor will it be (to my thinking) amiss, that we enter
into the Pythagorick Field, and choose for an Assistant to the Three aforenamed
Doctors, our ancient faithful Acquaintance, the Philosopher Trouillogan;
especially seeing a perfect Philosopher, such as is Trouiilogan, is able
positively to resolve all whatsoever Doubts you can propose. Carpalin, have you
a care to have them here all Four on Sunday next at Dinner, without fail.

I believe (quoth Epistemon) that throughout the whole Country, in all the
Corners thereof, you could not have pitched upon such other Four: which I speak
not so much in regard of the most excellent Qualifications and Accomplishments
wherewith all of them are endowed for the respective Discharge and Management
of each his own Vocation and Calling, (wherein without all doubt or
controversy, they are the Paragons of the Land, and surpass all others) as for
that Rondibilis is marrried now, who before was not: Hippothadee was not
before, nor is yet: Bridlegoose was married once, but is not now: and
Trouillogan is married now, who wedded was to another Wife before. Sir, if it
may stand with your good liking, I will ease Carpalin of some parcel of his
Labor, and invite Bridlegoose my self, with whom I of a long time have had a
very intimate familiarity, and unto whom I am to speak on the behalf of a
pretty hopeful Youth, who now studieth at Toulouse, under the most learned,
virtuous Doctor Boissonnet. Do what you deem most expedient (quoth Pantagruel)
and tell me, if my Recommendation can in any thing be steadable for the
promoval of the good of that Youth, or otherways serve for bettering of the
Dignity and Office of the worthy Boissonet, whom I do so love and respect, for
one of the ablest and most sufficient in his way, that any where are extant.
Sir, I will use therein my best Endeavors, and heartily bestir my self about
it.

CHAP. XXX. How the Theologue, Hippothadee, gives Counsel to Panurge in the
matter and business of his Nuptial Enterprise.
THE Dinner on the subsequent Sunday was no sooner made ready, than that the
aforementioned invited Guests gave thereto their Appearance, all of them;
Bridlegoose only excepted, who was the Deputy Governor of the Fonspeton. At the
ushering in of the Second Service, Panurge making a low Reverence, spoke thus:
Gentlemen, the Question I am to propound unto you shall be uttered in very few
Words; Should I marry or no? If my Doubt herein be not resolved by you, I shall
hold it altogether insolvable, as are the Insolubilia de Aliaco; for all of you
are elected, chosen, and culled out from amongst others, every one in his own
Condition and Quality, like so many picked Peace on a Carpet.

The Father Hippothada, in obedience to the bidding of Pantagruel, and with
much Courtesy to the Company, answered exceeding modestly, after this manner:
My Friend, you are pleased to ask Counsel of us; but first you must consult
with your self. Do you find any trouble or disquiet in your Body by the
importunate stings and pricklings of the Flesh? That I do (quoth Panurge) in a
hugely strong and almost irresistible measure: Be not offended, I beseech you,
good Father, at the freedom of my Expression. No truly, Friend, not I, (quoth
Hippothadee) there is no reason why I should be displeased therewith: But in
this Carnal Strife and Debate of yours, have you obtained from God the Gift and
special Grace of Continency? In good Faith, not, (quoth Panurge.) My Counsel to
you in that case (my Friend) is, that you marry, (quoth Hippothadee) for you
should rather choose to marry once, than to burn still in Fires of
Concupiscence. Then Panurge, with a jovial Heart and a loud Voice, cried out,
That is spoke gallantly, without circumbilivaginating about and about, and
never hit it in its centred Point. Grammercy, my good Father. In truth I am
resolved now to marry, and without fail I shall do it quickly. I invite you to
my Wedding; by the Body of a Hen, we shall make good Cheer, and be as merry as
Crickets: You shall wear the Bridegroom's Colors; and if we eat a Goose, my
Wife shall not roast for me. I will entreat you to lead up the first Dance of
the Brides Maids, if it may please you to do me so much Favor and Honor.
There rests yet a small Difficulty, a little Scruple, yea, even less than
nothing, whereof I humbly crave your Resolution; Shall I be a Cuckold, Father,
yea or no? By no means, (answered Hippothadee) will you be Cuckolded, if it
please God. O the Lord help us now, (quoth Panurge) whither are we driven to,
good Folks? To the Conditionals, which according to the Rules and Precepts of
the Dialectick Faculty, admit of all contradictions and impossibilities. If my
Transalpine Mule had Wings, my Transalpine Mule would fly. If it please God I
shall not be a Cockold, but I shall be a Cuckold if it please him. Good God, if
this were a condition which I knew how to prevent, my Hopes should be as high
as ever, nor would I despair: But you here send me to God's Privy Council, to
the Closet of his little Pleasures. You my French Countrymen, which is the way
you take to go thither?

My honest Father, I believe it will be your best not to come to my Wedding:
The clutter and dingle dangle noise of Marriage Guests will but disturb you,
and break the serious Fancies of your Brain. You love Repose, with Solitude and
Silence; I really believe you will not come. And then you Dance but
indifferently, and would be out of Countenance at the first Entry. I will send
you some good things to your Chamber, together with the Bride's Favor, and
there you may drink our Health, if it may stand with your good liking. My
Friend (quoth Hippothadee) take my Words in the Sense wherein I meaned them,
and do not misinterpret me. When I tell you, if it please God, do I to you any
wrong therein? Is it an ill Expression? Is it a Blaspheming Clause or Reserve
any way scandalous unto the World? Do not we thereby honor the Lord God
Almighty, Creator, Pretector and Conserver of all things? Is not that a mean,
whereby we do acknowledge him to be the sole Giver of all whatsoever is good?
Do not we in that manifest our Faith, that we believe all things to depend upon
his infinite and incomprehensible Bounty? and that without him nothing can be
produced, nor after its Production be of any value, force, or power, without
the concurring aid and favor of his assisting Grace? Is it not a canonical and
authentic Exception, worthy to be premised to all our Undertakings? Is it not
expedient that what we propose unto our selves, be still referred to what shall
be disposed of by the Sacred Will of God, unto which all things must acquiesce
in the Heavens as well as on the Earth? Is not that verily a sanctifying of his
Holy Name? My Friend, you shall not be a Cuckold, if it please God, nor shall
we need to despair of the knowledge of his good Will and Pleasure herein, as if
it were such an abstruse and mysteriously hidden Secret, that for the clear
understanding thereof it were necessary to consult with those of his Celestial
Privy Council, or expressly make a Voyage unto the Empyrean Chamber, where Order
is given for the effectuating of his most holy Pleasures.

The great God has done us this good, that he has declared and revealed them
to us openly and plainly, and described them in the Holy Bible. There will you
find that you shall never be a Cuckold, that is to say, your Wife shall never
be a Strumpet, if you make choice of one of a commendable Extraction, descended
of honest Parents, and instructed in all Piety and Virtue: Such a one as has
not at any time hanted or frequented the Company or Conversation of those that
are of corrupt and depraved Manners; one loving and fearing God, who takes a
singular delight in drawing near to him by Faith, and the cordial observing of
his Sacred Commandments: And finally, one who standing in awe of the Divine
Majesty, of the most High, will be loath to offend him, and lose the favorable
kindness of his Grace through any defect of Faith, or transgression against the
Ordinances of his Holy Law, wherein Adultery is most rigorously forbidden, and
a close Adherence to her Husband alone most strictly and severely enjoined;
yea, in such sort, that she is to cherish, serve and love him above any thing,
next to God, that meriteth to be beloved. In the interim, for the better
schooling of her in these Instructions, and that the wholesome Doctrine of a
Matrimonial Duty may take the deeper Root in her Mind, you must needs carry
your self so on your part, and your behavior is to be such, that you are to go
before her in a good Example, by entertaining her unfeignedly with a Conjugal
Amity, by continually approving your self in all your Words and Actions a
faithful and discreet Husband; and by living not only at home, and privately
with your own Household and Family, but in the face also of all Men, and open
view of the World, devotely, virtuously and chastely, as you would have her on
her side to deport and demean her self toward you, as becomes a Godly, Loyal
and Respectful Wife, who makes Conscience to keep inviolable the Tie of a
Matrimonial Oath.

For as that Looking-glass is not the best, which is most decked with Gold and
Precious Stones, but that which represents to the Eye the liveliest shapes of
Objects set before it: Even so that Wife should not be most esteemed who
richest is, and of the noblest Race, but she who fearing God, conforms her self
nearest unto the Humor of her Husband.

Consider how the Moon does not borrow her Light from Jupiter, Mars, Mercury,
or any other of the Planets; nor yet from any of those Splendid Stars which are
set in the spangled Firmament; but from her Husband only, the bright Sun, which
she receives from him more or less, according to the manner of his Aspect, and
variously bestowed Eradiations. Just so should you be a Pattern to your Wife in
Virtue, goodly Zeal and true Devotion, that by your Radiance in darting on her
the Aspect of an Exemplary Goodness, she, in your imitation, may outshine the
Luminaries of all other Women. To this effect you daily must implore God's
Grace to the Protection of you both. You would have me then (quoth Panurge,
twisting the Whiskers of his Beard on either side with the Thumb and
Forefinger of his Left Hand) to espouse and take to Wife the prudent frugal
Woman described by Solomon: Without all doubt she is dead, and truly to my best
remembrance I never saw her; the Lord forgive me. Nevertheless I thank you,
Father; eat this slice of Marchpane, it will help your Disgestion; then shall
you be presented with a Cup of Claret Hypocras, which is right healthful and
stomached. Let us proceed.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Physician Rondibilis counsels Panurge.
PAnurge continuing his Discourse, said, The first word which was spoken by him
who guelded the Lubbardly quaffing Monks of Saussiniac, after that he had
unstoned Friar Corcil, was this, To the rest. In like manner, I say, to the
rest. Therefore I beseech you, my good Master Rondibilis, should I marry or
not? By the raking pace of my Mule, quoth Rondibilis, I know not what Answer to
make to this Problem of yours.

You say that you feel in you the pricking Stings of Sensuality, by which you
are stirred up to Venery. I find in our Faculty of Medicine, and we have
founded our Opinion therein upon the deliberate Resolution and final Decision
of the ancient Platonicks, that Carnal Concupiscence is cooled and quelled five
several ways.

First, By the means of Wine. I shall easily believe that, (quoth Friar Ihon)
for when I am well whitled with the Juice of the Grape, I care for nothing else
so I may sleep. When I say (quoth Rondibilis) that Wine abateth Lust, my
meaning is, Wine immoderately taken; for by Intemperancy proceeding from the
excessive drinking of Strong Liquor, there is brought upon the Body of such a
Swill-down Bouser a chilness in the Blood, a slackening in the Sinews, a
Dissipation of the Generative Seed, a numbness and hebetation of the Senses,
with a perversive wriness and Convulsion of the Muscles; all which are great
Lets and Impediments to the Act of Generation. Hence it is that Bacchus, the
God of Bibbers, Tiplers and Drunkards is most commonly painted Beardless, and
clad in a Woman's Habit, as a Person altogether Effeminate, or like a libbed
Eunuch. Wine nevertheless taken moderately works quite contrary Effects, as
is implied by the old Proverb, which says, That Venus takes cold when not
accompanied with Ceres and Bacchus. This Opinion is of great Antiquity, as
appears by the Testimony of Diodorus the Sicilian, and confirmed by
Pausanias, and universally held amongst the Lampsacians, that Don Priapos was
the Son of Bacchus and Venus.

Secondly, The Fervency of Lust is abated by certain Drugs, Plants, Herbs and
Roots, which make the Taker cold, maleficiated, unfit for, and unable to
perform the Act of Generation; as has been often experimented in the
Water-Lilly, Heraclea, Agnus Castus, Willow-twigs, Hemp-stalks, Woodbind, Honey
suckle, Tamarisk, Chastree, Mandrake, Bennet, Kecbuglosse, the Skin of a
Hippopatam, and many other such, which by convenient Doses proportioned to the
peccant Humor and Constitution of the Patient, being duly and seasonably
received within the Body, what by their Elementary Virtues on the one side, and
peculiar Properties on the other, do either benumb, mortify and beclumpse with
Cold the prolifick Semence; or scatter and disperse the Spirits, which ought to
have gone along with, and conducted the Sperm to the places destinated and
appointed for its reception. Or lastly, Shut up, stop and obstruct the ways,
passages and conduits through which the Seed should have been expelled,
evacuated and ejected. We have nevertheless of those Ingredients, which being
of a contrary Operation, heat the Blood, bend the Nerves, unite the Spirits,
quicken the Senses, strengthen the Muscles, and thereby rouse up, provoke,
excite and enable a Man to the vigorous Accomplishment of the Feat of Amorous
Dalliance. I have no need of those, (quoth Panurge) God be thanked, and you my
good Master. Howsoever I pray you take no exception or offense at these my
words; for what I have said was not out of any ill Will I did bear to you, the
Lord he knows.

Thirdly, The Ardour of Lechery is very much subdued and mated by frequent
Labor and continual Toiling: For by painful Exercises and laborious working,
so great a Dissolution is brought upon the whole Body, that the Blood which
runs along the Channels of the Veins thereof, for the Nourishment and
Alimentation of each of its Members, has neither time, leisure nor power to
afford the Seminal Resudation, or superfluity of the third Concoction, which
Nature most carefully reserves for the conservation of the Individual, whose
Preservation she more heedfully regards than the propagating of the Species,
and the multiplication of Humane Kind. Whence it is, that Diana is said to be
chaste, because she is never idle, but always busied about her Hunting, For the
same reason was a Camp, or Leaguer of old called Castrum, as if they would have
said Castum: because the Soldiers, Wrestlers, Runners, Throwers of the Bar, and
other suchlike Athletick Champions, as are usually seen in a Military
Circumvallation, do uncessantly travel and turmoil, and are in a perpetual stir
and agitation. To this purpose Hippocrates also writes in his Book, De Aere
Aqua and locis: That in his time there were People in Scythia as impotent as
Eunuchs, in the discharge of a Venerian Exploit; because that without any
cessation, pause, or respit, they were never from off Horseback, or otherways
assiduously employed in some troublesome and molesting Drudgery.

On the other part, in opposition and repugnancy hereto, the Philosophers say,
That Idleness is the Mother of Luxury. When it was asked Ovid, Why Egistus
became an Adulterer? he made no other Answer but this: Because he was idle. Who
were able to rid the World of Loytring and Laziness, might easily frustrate and
disappoint Cupid of all his Designs, Aims, Engines, and Devices, and so disable
and appall him, that his Bow, Quiver, and Darts should from thenceforth be a
mere needless Load and Burden to him: for that it could not then lie in his
power to strike, or wound any of either Sex, with all the Arms he had. He is
not, I believe, so expert an Archer, as that he can hit the Cranes flying in
the Air, or yet the young Stags skipping through the Thickets, as the Parthians
knew well how to do; that is to say, People moyling, sinking, and hurrying up
and down, restless, and without repose. He must have those hushed, still, quiet,
lying at a stay, lither, and full of ease, whom he is able, though his Mother
help him, to touch, much less to pierce with all his Arrows, in confirmation
hereof, Theophrastus being asked on a time, What kind of Beast or Thing he
judged a toyish, wanton Love to be? he made Answer, That it was a Passion of
idle and sluggish Spirits. From which pretty Description of ticking Love-tricks
that of Diogenes's hatching was not very discrepant, when he defined Leachery,
Occupation of Folks destitute of all other Occupation.

For this cause the Syconian Engraver, Canachus, being desirous to give us to
understand, that Sloth, Drouziness, Negligence, and Laziness were the prime
Guardians and Governesses of Ribaldry, made the Statue of Venus (not standing,
as other Stone-Cutters had used to do, but) sitting.

Fourthly, The tickling pricks of Incontinency are blunted by an eager Study;
for from thence proceeds an incredible resolution of the Spirits, that
oftentimes there do not remain so many behind as may suffice to push and thrust
forwards the Generative Resudation to the places thereto appropriated, and
therewithal inflate the Cavernous Nerve; whose office is to ejaculate the
Moisture for the Propagation of Humane Progeny. Least you should think it is
not so, be pleased but to contemplate a little the Form, Fashion, and Carriage
of a Man exceeding earnestly set upon some Learned Meditation, and deeply
plunged therein, and you shall see how all the Arteries of his Brains are
stretched forth, and bent like the String of a Cross-bow, the more promptly,
dexterously, and copiously to suppeditate, furnish, and supply him with store
of Spirits, sufficient to replenish, and fill up the Ventricles, Seats,
Tunnels, Mansions, Receptacles, and Celluls of the common Sense; of the
Imagination, Apprehension, and Fancy; of the Ratiocination, Arguing, and
Resolution; as likewise of the Memory, Recordation, and Remembrance; and with
great alacrity, nimbleness, and agility to run, pass, and course from the one
to the other, through those Pipes, Windings, and Conduits, which to skilful
Anatomists are perceivable, at the end of the Wonderful Net, where all the
Arteries close in a terminating Point: which Arteries taking their rise and
origin from the left Capsul of the Heart, bring through several Circuits,
Ambages, and Anfractuosities, the Vital, to subtilize and refine them to the
Aetherial Purity of Animal Spirits. Nay, in such a studiously musing Person,
you may espy so extravagant Raptures of one, as it were, out of himself, that
all his Natural Faculties for that time will seem to be suspended from each
their proper charge and office, and his exterior Senses to be at a stand. In a
word, you cannot otherways choose then think, that he is by an extraordinary
Ecstasy quite transported out of what he was, or should be; and that Socrates
did not speak improperly, when he said, That Philosophy was nothing else but a
Meditation upon Death. This possibly is the reason, why Democritus deprived
himself of the Sense of Seeing, prizing at a much lower rate the loss of his
Sight, than the diminution of his Contemplations; which he frequently had found
disturbed by the vagrant, flying-out strayings of his unsettled and roving Eyes.
Therefore is it, that Pallas, the Goddess of Wisdom, Tutress, and Guardianess
of such as are diligently studious, and painfully industrious, is, and has
been still accounted a Virgin. The Muses upon the same consideration are
esteemed perpetual Maids: and the Graces for the like reason, have been held to
continue in a sempiternal Pudicity.

I remember to have read, that Cupid on a time being asked of his Mother Venus,
why he did not assault and set upon the Muses, his Answer was, That he found
them so fair, so sweet, so fine, so neat, so wise, so learned, so modest, so
discreet, so courteous, so virtuous, and so continually busied and employed:
One in the Speculation of the Stars; another in the Supputation of Numbers; the
Third in the Dimension of Geometrical Quantities; the Fourth in the Composition
of Heroic Poems; the Fifth in the jovial Interludes of a Comic Strain; the
Sixth in the stately Gravity of a Tragic Vein; the Seventh in the Melodious
Disposition of Musical Airs; the Eighth in the compleatest manner of Writing
Histories, and Books on all sorts of Subjects; and the Ninth in the Mysteries,
Secrets, and Curiosities of all Sciences, Faculties, Disciplines, and Arts
whatsoever, whether Liberal or Mechanic; that ap^proaching near unto them, he
unbended his Bow, shut his Quiver, and extinguished his Torch, through mere
shame and fear, that by mischance he might do them some hurt or prejudice:
which done, he thereafter put off the Fillet wherewith his Eyes were bound, to
look them in the Face, and to hear their Melody and Poetic Odes. There took he
the greatest pleasure in the World; that many times he was transported with
their Beauty and pretty Behavior, and charmed asleep by the Harmony: so far
was he from assaulting them, or interrupting their Studies. Under this Article
may be comprised, what Hippocrates wrote in the aforecited Treatise concerning
the Scythians, as also that in a Book of his entitled, Of Breeding and
Production; where he has affirmed, all such Men to be unfit for Generation, as
have their Parotid Arteries cut; whose Situation is beside the Ears: for the
reason given already, when I was speaking of the resolution of the Spirits, and
of that Spiritual Blood, whereof the Arteries are the sole and proper
Receptacles; and that likewise he does maintain a large portion of the
Parastatick Liquor, to issue and descend from the Brains and Backbone.

Fifthly, By the too frequent reiteration of the Act of Venery. There did I
wait for you (quoth Panurge) and shall willingly apply it to my self, whilst
any one that pleases may, for me, make use of any of the four preceding. That
is the very same thing (quoth Friar Ihon) which Father Scyllino, Prior of Saint
Victor, at Marseilles, calls by the Name of Maceration, and taming of the
Flesh. I am of the same Opinion; and so was the Hermit of Saint Radegonde, a
little above Chinon: for (quoth he) the Hermites of Thebaida can no more aptly
or expediently macerate and bring down the Pride of their Bodies, daunt and
mortify their leacherous Sensuality, or depress and overcome the stubbornness
and rebellion of the Flesh, then by dufling and fanferluching it Five and
twenty, or Thirty times a day. I see Panurge, quoth Rondibilis, neatly
featured, and proportioned in all the Members of his Body, of a good
temperament in his Humors, well complexioned in his Spirits, of a competent
Age, in an opportune Time, and of a reasonably forward Mind to be married:
truly, if he encounter with a Wife of the like Nature, Temperament, and
Constitution, he may beget upon her Children worthy of some Transpontine
Monarchy; and the sooner he marry, it will be the better for him, and the more
conducible for his Profit, if he would see and have his Children in his own
time well provided for. Sir, my worthy Master (quoth Panurge) I will do it, do
not you doubt thereof; and that quickly enough, I warrant you. Nevertheless,
whilst you were busied in the uttering of your Learned Discourse, this Flea
which I have in mine Ear, has tickled me more then ever. I retain you in the
Number of my Festival Guests, and promise you, that we shall not want for
Mirth, and Good Cheer enough; yea, over and above the ordinary Rate. And, if it
may please you, desire your Wife to come along with you, together with her
She-Friends and Neighbors: That is to be understood, and there shall be fair
Play.

CHAP. XXXII. How Rondibilis declares Cuckoldry to be naturally one of the
Appendances of Marriage.
THere remains as yet, quoth Panurge going on in his Discourse, one small
scruple to be cleared: you have seen heretofore, I doubt not, in the Roman
Standards, S. P. Q. R. Si, Peu, Que, Rien: Shall not I be a Cuckold? By the
Haven of Safety, cried out Rondibilis, what is this you ask of me? If you shall
be a Cuckold: My Noble Friend, I am married, and you are like to be so very
speedily: therefore be pleased from my Experiment in the matter, to write in
your Brain, with a Steel-pen, this subsequent Ditton, There is no married Man
who does not run the hazard of being made a Cuckold. Cuckoldry naturally
attends Marriage; the Shadow does not more naturally follow the Body, then
Cuckoldry ensues after Marriage, to place fair Horns upon the Husband's Heads.

And when you shall happen to hear any Man pronounce these three Words: He is
Married: if you then say he is, has been, shall be, or may be a Cuckold, you
will not be accounted an unskilful Artist in framing of true Consequences.
Tripes and Bowels of all the Devils, cries Panurge, what do you tell me? My
dear Friend, (answered Rondibilis) as Hippocrates, on a time, was in the very
nick of setting forwards from Lango to Polystilo, to Visit the Philosopher
Democritus, he wrote a familiar Letter to his Friend Dionoys, wherein he
desired him, That he would during the interval of his absence, carry his Wife
to the House of her Father and Mother, who were an honorable Couple, and of
good Repute; because I would not have her at my Home, (said he) to make abode
in Solitude: yet notwithstanding this her Residence beside her Parents, do not
fail (quoth he) with a most heedful care and circumspection to pry into her
ways, and to espy what places she shall go to with her Mother, and who those be
that shall repair unto her: Not (quoth he) that I do mistrust her Virtue, or
that I seem to have any diffidence of her Pudicity, and chaste Behavior; for
of that I have frequently had good and real proofs: but I must freely tell you,
She is a Woman: there lies the suspicion.

My worthy Friend, the Nature of Women is set forth before our Eyes, and
represented to us by the Moon, in diverse other things, as well as in this, that
they squat, sculck, constrain their own Inclinations, and with all the Cunning
they can, dissemble and play the Hypocrite in the sight and presence of their
Husbands; who come no sooner to be out of the way, but that forthwith they take
their advantage, pass the time merrily, desist from all labor, frolic it, gad
abroad; lay aside their counterfeit Garb, and openly declare and manifest the
interior of their Dispositions; even as the Moon, when she is in Conjunction
with the Sun, is neither seen in the Heavens, nor on the Earth, but in her
Opposition, when remotest from him, shines in her greatest fullness, and wholly
appears in her brightest splendor whilst it is Night: Thus Women are but
Women.

When I say Womankind, I speak of a Sex so frail, so variable, so changeable,
so fickle, inconstant, and imperfect, that in my Opinion, Nature (under favor
nevertheless of the prime Honor and Reverence which is due unto her) did in a
manner mistake the Road which she had traced formerly, and stray exceedingly
from that Excellence of Providential Judgment, by the which she had created and
formed all other things, when she built, framed, and made up the Woman. And
having thought upon it a Hundred and five times, I know not what else to
determine therein, save only that in the devising, hammering, forging, and
composing of the Woman, she has had a much tenderer regard, and by a great
deal more respectful heed to the delightful Consortship, and sociable
Delectation of the Man, than to the Perfection and Accomplishment of the
individual Womanishness, or Mul^ebrity. The Divine Philosopher Plato, was
doubtful in what Rank of living Creatures to place and collocate them, whither
amongst the Rational Animals, by elevating them to an upper Seat in the
Specifical Classis of Humanity; or with the Irrational, by degrading them to a
lower Bench on the opposite side, of a Brutal kind, and mere Bestiality: for
Nature has posited in a privy, secret, and intestine place of their Bodies, a
sort of Member (by some not impertinently termed an Animal) which is not to be
found in Men. Therein sometimes are engendered certain Humors so saltish,
brackish, clammy, sharp, nipping, tearing, prickling, and most eagerly
tickling, that by their stinging Acrimony, rending Nitrosity, figging Itch,
wrigling Mordicancy, and smarting Salsitude, (for the said Member is altogether
sinewy, and of a most quick and lively feeling) their whole Body is shaken and
ebrangled, their Senses totally ravished and transported, the operations of
their Judgment and Understanding utterly confounded, and all disordinate
Passions and Perturbations of the Mind thoroughly and absolutely allowed,
admitted, and approved of; yea, in such sort, that if Nature had not been so
favorable unto them, as to have sprinkled their Forehead with a little
Tincture of Bashfulness and Modesty, you should see them in a so frantic mood
run mad after Lechery, and hye apace up and down with have and Lust, in quest
of, and to fix some Chamber-Standard in their Paphian Ground, that never did
the Pretides, Mimallonides, nor Lyaean Thyads deport themselves in the time of
their Bacchanalian Festivals, more shamelesly, or with a so affronted and
brazen-faced Impudency; because this terrible Animal is knit unto, and has an
Union with all the chief and most principal parts of the Body, as to Anatomists
is evident* Let it not here be thought strange that I should call it an Animal,
seeing therein I do no otherwise than follow and adhere to the Doctrine of the
Academick and Peripatetick Philosophers. For if a proper Motion be a certain
mark and infallible token of the Life and Animation of the Mover, (as Aristotle
writes) and that any such thing as moves of its self ought to be held
Animated, and of a Living Nature; then assuredly Plato with very good reason
did give it the Denomination of an Animal; for that he perceived and observed
in it the proper and self-stirring motions of Suffocation, Precipitation,
Corrugation, and of Indignation, so extremely violent, that oftentimes by them
is taken and removed from the Women all other sense and moving whatsoever, as
if she were in a swounding Lipothymy, benumming Sincop, Epileptick, Apoplectick
Palsy, and true resemblance of a palefaced Death.

Furthermore, in the said Member there is a manifest discerning Faculty of
Scents and Odours very perceptible to Women, who feel it fly from what is rank
and unsavory, and follow fragrant and Aromatic Smells. It is not unknown to
me how Cl. Gallen striveth with might and main, to prove that these are not
proper and particular Notions proceeding intrinsically from the thing it self,
but accidentally, and by chance. Nor has it escaped my notice, how others of
that Sect have labored hardly, yea, to the utmost of their Abilities, to
demonstrate that it is not a sensitive discerning or perception in it of the
difference of Wafts and Smells, but merely a various manner of Virtue and
Efficacy, passing forth and flowing from the diversity of odoriferous
Substances applied near unto it. Nevertheless, if you will studiously examine,
and seriously ponder and weigh in Critolaus's Balance the strength of their
Reasons and Arguments, you shall find that they, not only in this, but in
several other matters also of the like nature, have spoken at random, and
rather out of an ambitious Envy to check and reprehend their Betters, than for
any design to make enquiry into the solid Truth.

I will not launch my little Skif any further into the wide Ocean of this
Dispute, only will I tell you that the Praise and Commendation is not mean and
slender which is due to those honest and good Women, who living chastely and
without blame, have had the power and virtue to curb, range and subdue that
unbridled, heady and wild Animal to an obedient, submissive and obsequious
yielding unto Reason. Therefore here will I make an end of my Discourse
thereon, when I shall have told you, that the said Animal being once satiated
(if it be possible that it can be contented or satisfied) by that Aliment,
which Nature has provided for it out of the Epididymal Storehouse of Man, all
its former and irregular and disordered Motions are at an end, laid and
assuaged; all its vehement and unruly Longings lulled, pacified and quieted;
and all the furious and raging Lusts, Appetites and Desires thereof appeased,
suppressed, calmed and extinguished. For this cause let it seem nothing strange
unto you, if we be in a perpetual Danger of being Cuckolds; that is to say,
such of us as have not wherewithal fully to satisfy the Appetite and
Expectation of that voracious Animal. Ods Fish! (quoth Panurge) have you no
preventive Cure in all your Medicinal Art for hindering ones ^ead to be
Horny-graffed at home, whilst his Feet are plodding abroad? Yes that I have, my
gallant Friend, (answered Rondibilis) and that which is a Sovereign Remedy,
whereof I frequently make use my self; and that you may the better relish, it
is set down and written in the Book of a most famous Author, whose Renown is of
a standing of two thousand Years. Hearken and take good heed: You are (quoth
Panurge) by Cocks-Hobby, a right honest Man, and I love you with all my heart;
eat a little of this Quince-Pye, it is very proper and convenient for the
shutting up of the Orifice of the Ventricle of the Stomach, because of a kind
of astringent Stypticity, which is in that sort of Fruit, and is helpful to the
first Concoction. But what? I think I speak Latin before Clerks. Stay, fill, I
give you somewhat to drink out of this Nestorian Goblet. Will you have another
Draught of white Hippocras? Be not afraid of the Squinzy, No: There is neither
Squinant, Ginger nor Grains in it; only a little choice Cinnamon, and some of
the best refined Sugar, with the delicious White Wind of the Growth of that
Vine, which was set in the Slips of the great Sorbaple, above the Wallnut-tree.

CHAP. XXXIII. Rondibilis the Physician's Cure of Cuckoldry.
AT that time (quoth Randibilis) when Iupitur took a view of the state of his
Olympic House and Family, and that he had made the Calender of all the Gods
and Goddesses, appointing unto the Festival of every one of them its proper day
and season, establishing certain fixed places and stations for the pronouncing
of Oracles, and relief of traveling Pilgrims, and ordaining Victims,
Immolations and Sacrifices suitable and correspondent to the Dignity and Nature
of the worshipped and adored Deity. Did not he do (asked Panurge) therein, as
Tintouille the Bishop of Auxerre is said once to have done? This Noble Prelate
loved entirely the pure Liquor of the Grape, as every honest and judicious Man
does; therefore was it that he had an especial care and regard to the Bud of
the Vine-tree, as to the great Grandfather of Bacchus. But so it is, that for
sundry Years together he saw a most pitiful Havoc, Desolation and Destruction
made amongst the Sprouts, Shootings, Buds, Blossoms and Sciens of the Vines by
hoary Frosts, Dank-fogs, hot Mists, unseasonable Colds, chill Blasts, thick
Hail, and other calamitous Chances of foul Weather happening, as he thought, by
the dismal inauspiciousness of the Holy Days of St George, St. Mary, St. Paul,
St. Eutrope, Holy Rood, the Ascension, and other Festivals, in that time when
the Sun passes under the Sign of Taurus; and thereupon harbored in his Mind
this Opinion, that the aforementioned Saints were Saint Hail-flingers, Saint
Frost-senders, Saint Fogmongers, and Saint Spoilers of the Vine-buds; for which
cause be went about to have transmitted their Feasts from the Spring to the
Winter, to be Celebrated between Christmas and Epiphany, (so the Mother of the
three Kings called it) allowing them with all Honor and Reverence the liberty
then to freeze, hail and rain as much as they would; for that he knew that at
such a time Frost was rather profitable than hurtful to the Vine-buds, and in
their steads to have placed the Festivals of St. Christopher, St. John the
Baptist, St. Magdalene, St. Ann, St. Domingo, and St. Lawrence; yea, and to
have gone so far as to collocate and transpose the middle of August in, and to
the beginning of May; because during the whole Space of their Solemnity, there
was so little danger of hoary Frosts and cold Mists, that no Artificers are
then held in greater Request, than the Afforder of refrigerating Inventions,
Makers of Junkets, fit Disposers of cooling Shades, Composers of green Arbours,
and Refreshers of Wine.

Jupiter (said Rondibilis) forgot the poor Devil Cuckoldry, who was then in the
Court at Paris, very eagerly soliciting a pedling Suit at Law for one of his
Vassals and Tenants; within some few days thereafter, (I have forgot how many)
when he got full notice of the Trick, which in his Absence was done unto him,
he instantly desisted from prosecuting Legal Processes, in the behalf of
others, full of Solicitude to pursue after his own business, lest he should be
fore-closed: And thereupon he appeared personally at the Tribunal of the great
Jupiter, displayed before him the importance of his preceding Merits; together
with the acceptable Services, which in Obedience to his Commandments he had
formerly performed; and therefore, in all humility, begged of him, that he
would be pleased not to leave him alone amongst all the Sacred Potentates,
destitute and void of Honor, Reverence, Sacrifices and festival Ceremonies. To
this Petition Jupiter's Answer was excusatory, That all the Places and Offices
of his House were bestowed. Nevertheless so importuned was he by the continual
Supplications of Monsieur Cuckoldry, that he, in fine, placed him in the Rank,
List, Roll, Rubric and Catalogue; and appointed Honors, Sacrifices and
Festival Rites to be observed on Earth in great Devotion, and tendered to him
with Solemnity.

The Feast, because there was no void, empty nor vacant place in all the
Calender, was to be celebrated jointly with, and on the same day that had been
consecrated to the Goddess Jealousy: His Power and Dominion should be over
Married Folks, especially such as had handsome Wives: His Sacrifices were to be
Suspicion, Diffidence, Mistrust, a lowering powting Sullenness, Watchings,
Wardings, Researchings, Plyings, Explorations, together with the Way-layings,
Ambushes, narrow Observations, and malicious Doggings of the Husband's Scouts
and Espials of the most privy Actions of their Wives. Herewithal every married
Man was expressly and rigorously commanded to reverence, honor and worship him;
to celebrate and solemnize his Festival with twice more respect than that of
another Saint or Deity, and to immolate unto him with all Sincerity and
Alacrity of Heart the abovementioned Sacrifices and Oblations, under pain of
severe Censures, Threatenings, and Comminations of these subsequent Fines,
Mulcts, Amerciaments, Penalties and Punishments to be inflicted on the
Delinquents; that Monsieur Cuckoldry should never be favorable nor propitious
to them; that he should never help, aid, supply, succor nor grant them any
subventitious Furtherance, auxiliary Suffrage, or adminiculary Assistance; that
he should never hold in any Reckoning Account or Estimation; that he should
never daign to enter within their Houses, neither at the Doors, Windows, nor
any other place thereof; that he should never haunt nor frequent their
Companies or Conversations; how frequently soever they should invocate him, and
call upon his Name; and that not only he should leave and abandon them to rot
alone with their Wives in a sempiternal Solitariness, without the benefit of
the diversion of any Copesmate or Corrival at all; but should withal shun and
eschew them, fly from them, and eternally forsake and reject them as impious
Heretics and Sacrilegious Persons, according to the accustomed manner of other
Gods, toward such as are too slack in offering up the Duties and Reverences
which ought to be performed respectively to their Divinities: As is evidently
apparent in Bacchus toward negligent Vine-dressers; in Ceres against idle
Plow-men and Tillers of the Ground; in Pomona to unworthy Fruiterers and
Custard-mongers; in Neptune toward dissolute Mariners and Seafaring Men; in
Vulcan toward loytering Smiths and Forge-men; and so throughout the rest.

Now, on the contrary, this infallible Promise was added, that unto all those
who should make a Holy Day of the above-recited Festival, and cease from all
manner of worldly Work and Negotiation, lay aside all their own most important
occasions, and to be so wretchless, heedless, and careless of what might
concern the management of their proper Affairs, as to mind nothing else but a
suspicious espying and prying into the secret Deportments of their Wives, and
how to koop, shut up, hold at under, and deal cruelly and austeerly with them,
by all the Harshness and Hardships that an implacable, and every way inexorable
Jealousy can devise and suggest, conform to the Sacred Ordinances of the
aforementioned Sacrifices and Oblations, he should be continually favorable
to them, should love them, sociably converse with them, should be Day and Night
in their Houses, and never leave them destitute of his Presence. Now I have
said, and you have heard my Cure.

Ha, ha, ha, (quoth Capalin laughing) this is a remedy yet more apt and proper
than Hans Carvel's Ring: The Devil take me if I do not believe it. The Humor,
Inclination and Nature of Women is like the Thunder, whose Force in its Bolt,
or otherways, burns, bruiseth and breaks only hard, massive and resisting
Objects, without staying or stopping at soft, empty and yielding matters: For
it pasheth into pieces the Steel Sword, without doing any hurt to the Velvet
Scabbard which insheatheth it: It rusheth also, and consumes the Bones,
without wounding or end^mmaging the Flesh, wherewith they are veiled and
covered: Just so it is, that Women for the greater part never bend the
Contention, Subtilty, and contradictory Disposition of their Spirits, unless it
be to do what is prohibited and forbidden.

Verily, (quoth Hippothadee) some of of our Doctors averr for a truth, that the
first Woman of the World, whom the Hebrews call Eve, had hardly been induced or
allured into the Temptation of eating of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, if it
had not been forbidden her so to do. And that you may give the more Credit to
the Validity of this Opinion, consider how the cautelous and wily Tempter did
commemorate unto her, for an antecedent to his Enthymeme, the Prohibition which
was made to taste it, as being desirous to infer from thence, It it forbidden
thee; therefore thou should eat of it, else thou can not be a Woman.

CHAP. XXXIV. How Women ordinarily have the greatest longing after things
prohibited.
WHEN I was (quoth Carpalin) a Whoremaster at Orleans, the whole Art of
Rhetoric in all its Tropes and Figures, was not able to afford unto me a
Color or Flourish of greater force and value; nor could I by any other form or
manner of Elocution pitch upon a more persuasive Argument for bringing young
beautiful married Ladies into the Snares of Adultery, through alluring and
enticing them to taste with me of Amorous Delights, then with a lively
Sprightfulness to tell them in downright terms, and to remonstrate to them,
(with a great show of Detestation of a Crime so horrid) how their Husbands were
jealous. This was none of my Invention: It is written, and we have Laws,
Examples, Reasons and daily Experiences confirmative of the same. If this
Belief once enter into their Noddles, their Husbands will infallibly be
Cuckolds; yea, by God, will they, (without swearing) although they should do
like Semiramis, Pasiphae, Egesta, the Women of the Isle Mandez in Egypt, and
other such like Queanish flurting Harlots, mentioned in the Writings of
Herodotus, Strabo, and such like Puppies.

Truly (quoth Panocrates) I have heard it related, and it has been told me for
a Verity, that Pope Ihon 22. passing on a day through the Abbey of Toucherome,
was in all Humility required and besought by the Abbess, and other discreet
Mothers of the said Convent, to grant them an Indulgence, by means whereof they
might confess themselves to one another, alleging, That Religious Women were
subject to some petty secret Slips and Imperfections, which would be a foul and
burning shame for them to discover and to reveal to Men, how Sacerdotal soever
their Function were: but that they would freelier, more familiarly, and with
greater cheerfulness, open to each other their Offenses, Faults, and Escapes,
under the Seal of Confession. There is not any thing (answered the Pope)
fitting for you to impetrate of me, which I would not most willingly condescend
unto: but I find one inconvenience; you know, Confession should be kept secret:
and Women are not able to do so. Exceeding well (quoth they) most Holy Father,
and much more closely then the best of Men.

The said Pope on the very same day, gave them in keeping a pretty Box, wherein
he purposely caused a little Linnet to be put, willing them very gently and
courteously to lock it up in some sure and hidden place; and promising them, by
the Faith of a Pope, that he should yield to their Request, if they would keep
secret what was enclosed within that deposited Box: enjoining them withal, not
to presume one way nor other, directly or indirectly, to go about the opening
thereof, under pain of the highest Ecclesiastical Censure, Eternal
Excommunication. The Prohibition was no sooner made, but that they did all of
them boil with a most ardent desire to know, and see what kind of thing it was
that was within it: they thought long already, that the Pope was not gone, to
the end they might jointly, with the more leisure and ease apply themselves to
the Box-opening Curiosity.

The Holy Father, after he had given them his Benediction, retired and withdrew
himself to the Pontifical Lodgings of his own Palace; but he was hardly gone
three Steps from without the Gates of their Cloister, when the good Ladies
throngingly, and as in a hudled Crowd, pressing hard on the Backs of one
another, ran thrusting and shoving who should be first at the setting open of
the forbidden Box, and descrying of the Quod latitat within.

On the very next day thereafter, the Pope made them another Visit, of a full
design, purpose, and intention (as they imagined) to dispatch the Grant of
their sought and wished-for Indulgence: but before he would enter into any Chat
or Communing with them, he commanded the Casket to be brought unto him: it was
done so accordingly; but by your leave, the Bird was no more there. Then was
it, that the Pope did represent to their Maternities, how hard a matter and
difficult it was for them to keep Secrets revealed to them in Confession,
unmanifested to the Ears of others; seeing for the space of Four and twenty
hours they were not able to lay up in secret a Box, which he had highly
recommended to their Discretion, Charge and Custody.

Welcome, in good Faith, my dear Master, welcome: It did me good to hear you
talk, the Lord be praised for all. I do not remember to have seen you before
now, since the last tim^ that you acted at Monpelliers, with our ancient
Friends, Anthony Saporra, Guy Bourguyer, Balthazar Noyer, Tolly, Ihon Quentin,
Francis Robinet, Ihon Perdrier, and Francis Rabelais, the Moral Comedy of him
who had espoused and married a Dumb Wife. I was there, quoth Epistemon, the
good honest Man, her Husband, was very earnestly urgent to have the Fillet of
her Tongue untied, and would needs have her speak by any means: at his desire,
some pains were taken on her, and partly by the industry of the Physician,
other part by the expertness of the Surgeon, the Encyliglotte, which she had
under her Tongue, being cut, she spoke and spoke again; yea, within few hours
she spoke so loud, so much, so fiercely, and so long, that her poor Husband
returned to the same Physician for a Recipe to make her hold her Peace: There
are (quoth the Physician) many proper Remedies in our Art, to make dumb Women
speak, but there are none, that ever I could learn therein, to make them
silent. The only Cure which I have found out, is their Husband's Deafness. The
Wretch became within few Weeks thereafter, by Virtue of some Drugs, Charms or
Enchantments, which the Physician had prescribed unto him, so deaf, that he
could not have heard the Thundering of Nineteen hundred Canons at a Salve. His
Wife perceiving, that indeed he was as deaf as a Door-nail, and that her
Scolding was but in vain, since that he heard her not, she grew stark mad.

Some time after, the Doctor asked for his Fee of the Husband; who answered,
That truly he was deaf, and so was not able to understand what the tenure of
his Demand might be. Whereupon the Leech bedusted him with a little, I know not
what, sort of Powder; which rendered him a Fool immediately: so great was the
stultificating Virtue of that strange kind of pulverized Dose. Then did this
Fool of a Husband, and his mad Wife join together, falling on the Doctor and
the Surgeon, did so scratch, bethwack, and bang them, that they were left half
dead upon the place, so furious were the Blows which they received: I never in
my Lifetime laughed so much, as at the acting of that Buffoonry.

Let us come to where we left off, quoth Panurge) your Words* being translated
from the Clapper-dudgions to plain English, do signify, that it is not very
inexpedient that I marry, and that I should not care for being a Cuckold. You
have there hit the Nail on the Head. I believe, Master Doctor, that on the Day
of my Marriage you will be so much taken up with your Patients, or otherways so
seriously employed, that we shall not enjoy your Company: Sir, I will heartily
excuse your absence.

Stercus and urina medici sunt prandia prima.
Ex aliis paleas ex is it is collige grana.
You are mistaken (quoth Rondibilis) in the Second Verse of our Distich; for it
ought to run thus: Nobis sunt signa vobis sunt prandia digna.

If my Wife at any time prove to be unwell, and ill at ease, I will look upon
the Water which she shall have made in an Urinal-glass, (quoth Rondibilis)
grope her Pulse, and see the disposition of her Hypogaster, together with her
Umbilicary Parts. According to the Prescript Rule of Hippocrates, 2. Aph. 35.
before I proceed any further in the Cure of her Distemper. No, no, (quoth
Panurge) that will be but to little purpose; such a Feat is for the Practice of
us that are Lawyers, who have the Rubric, De Ventre inspiciendo: Do not
therefore trouble your self about it, (Master Doctor) I will provide for her a
Plaster of warm Guts. Do not neglect your more urgent occasions other-where,
for coming to my Wedding, I will send you some supply of Victuals to your own
House, without putting you to the trouble of coming abroad, and you shall
always be my special Friend. With this approaching somewhat nearer to him, he
clapped into his Hand, without the speaking of so much as one word, four Rose
Nobles. Rondibilis did shut his Fist upon them right kindly; yet as if it had
displeased him to make acceptance of such Golden Presents; he in a start, as if
he had been wroth, said, He, he* he, he he, th^^e was no need of any thing, I
(...) nevertheless; From wicked Folks, I never get enough; and I from honest
People refuse nothing. I shall be always, Sir, at your Command. Provided that I
pay you well, quoth Panurge. That (quoth Rondibilis) is understood.

CHAP. XXXV. How the Philosopher Trouillogan handles the difficulty of
Marriage.
AS this Discourse was ended, Pantagruel said to the Philosopher Trouillogan,
Our loyal, honest, true and trusty Friend, the Lamp from hand to hand is come
to you; it falls to your turn to give an Answer, Should Panurge, pray you,
marry, yea or no? He should do both, quoth Trouillogan. What say you, asked
Panurge? That which you have heard, answered Trouillogan. What have I heard?
replied Panurge. That which I have said, replied Trouillogan. Ha, ha, ha, are
we come to that pass, quoth Panurge? Let it go nevertheless, I do not value it
at a rush, seeing we can make no better of the Game. But howsoever tell me,
Should I marry or no? Neither the one nor the other, answered Trouillogan. The
Devil take me, quoth Panurge, if these odd Answers do not make me dote, and may
be snatch me presently away, if I do understand you. Stay awhile until I fasten
these Spectacles of mine on this left Ear, that I may hear you better. With
this Pantagruel perceived at the Door of the great Hall, (which was that day
their Dining Room) Gargantua's little Dog, whose Name was Kyne; for so was
Toby's Dog called, as is Recorded. Then did he say to these who were there
present, Our King is not far off, let us all rise. That word was scarcely
sooner uttered, than that Gargantua with his Ro^al Presence graced that
banqueting and stately Hall. Each of their Guests arose to do their King that
Reverence and Duty which became them. After that Gargantua had most affably
saluted all the Gentlemen there present, he said, Good Friends, I beg this
Favor of you, and therein you will very much oblige me, that you leave not the
places where you sat, nor quit the Discourse you were upon.

Let a Chair be brought hither unto this end of the Table, and reach me a Cup
full of the strongest and best Wine you have, that I may drink to all the
Company. You are in Faith, all welcome, Gentlemen. Now let me know what Talk you
were about. To this Pantagruel answered, That at the beginning of the Second
Service Panurge had proposed a Problematick Theme, to wit, Whether he should
marry, or not marry? That Father Hippothadee, and Doctor Rondibilis had already
dispatched their Resolutions thereupon; and that just as his Majesty was coming
in, the faithful Trouillogan, in the delivery of his Opinion, has thus far
proceeded, that when Panurge asked, whether he ought to marry, yea or no. At
first he made this Answer, Both together. When this same Question was again
propounded, his second Answer was, Not the one nor the other. Panurge
exclaimeth, that those Answers are full of Repugnancies and Contradictions,
protesting that he understands them not, nor what it is that can be meaned by
them. If I be not mistaken, quoth Gargantua, I understand it very well: The
Answer is not unlike to that which was once made by a Philosopher in ancient
times, who being interrogated, if he had a Woman, whom they named him, to his
Wife; I have her, quoth he, but she has not me; possessing her, by her I am
not possessed. Such another Answer, quoth Pantagruel, was once made by a certain
bouncing Wench of Sparta, who being asked, if at any time she had had to do
with a Man? No, (quoth she) but sometimes Men have to do with me. Well then
(quoth Rondibilis) let it be a Neuter in Physic; as when we say a body is
Neuter, when it is neither sick nor healthful; and a Mean in Philosophy; that
by an Abnegation of both Extremes, and this by the Participation of the one and
of the other: Even as when lukewarm Water is said to be both hot and cold; or
rather, as when Time makes the Partition, and equally divides betwixt the two,
a while in the one, another while, as long, in the other opposite extremity.
The holy Apostle, (quoth Hippothadee) seems, as I conceive, to have more
clearly explained this Point, when he said, Those that are married, let them be
as if they were not married; and those that have Wives, let them be as if they
had no Wives at all. I thus interterpret (quoth Pantagruel) the having and not
having of a Wife. To have a Wife, is to have the use of her in such a way as
Nature has ordained, which is for the Aid, Society and Solace of Man, and
propagating of his Race: To have no Wife is not to be uxorious, play the
Coward, and be lazy about her, and not for her sake to distain the Luster of
that Affection which Man owes to God; or yet for her to leave those Offices and
Duties which he owes unto his Country, unto his Friends and Kindred; or for her
to abandon and forsake his precious Studies, and other businesses of Account,
to wait still on her Will, her Beck, and her Buttocks. If we be pleased in this
Sense to take having and not having of a Wife, we shall indeed find no
Repugnancy nor Contradiction in the Terms at all.

CHAP. XXXVI. A Continuation of the Answer of the Ephectick and Pyrronian
Philosopher Trouillogan.
YOU speak wisely, quoth Panurge, if the Moon were green Cheese; such a Tale
once pissed my Goose: I do not think but that I am let down into that dark Pit,
in the lowermost bottom whereof the truth was hid, according to the saying of
Heraclitus. I see no whit at all, I hear nothing, understand as little, my
Senses are altogether dulled and blunted; truly I do very shrewdly suspect that
I am enchanted. I will now alter the former style of my Discourse, and talk to
him in another Strain. Our trusty Friend, stir not, nor imburse any; but let us
vary the Chance, and speak without Disjunctives: I see already that these loose
and ill-joined Members of an Eunuciation do vex, trouble and perplex you.

Now go on, in the Name of God, Should I marry?

Trouillogan. There is some likelihood therein.


Panurge. But if I do not marry?


Trouil. I see in that no Inconvenience.


Pan. You do not?


Trouil. None, truly, if my Eyes deceive me not.


Pan. Yea, but I find more than Five Hundred.


Trouil. Reckon them.


Pan. This is an Impropriety of Speech, I confess; for I do no more thereby,
but take a certain for an uncertain Number, and posit the determinate Term for
what is indeterminate. When I say therefore Five Hundred, my meaning is, many.


Trouil. I hear you.


Pan. Is it possible for me to live without a Wife, in the Name of all the
Subterranean Devils?


Trouil. Away with these filthy Beasts.


Pan. Let it be then in the Name of God; for my Salmigondinish People use to
say, To lie alone without a Wife, is certainly a brutish Life. And such a Life
also was it assevered to be by Dido in her Lamentations.


Trouil. At your Command,


Pan. By the Pody Cody, I have fished fair; where are we now? But will you tell
me? Shall I marry?


Trouil. Perhaps.


Pan. Shall I thrive or speed well withal?


Trouil. According to the Encounter.


Pan. But if in my Adventure I encounter aright, as I hope I will, shall I be
fortunate?


Trouil. Enough.


Pan. Let us turn the clean contrary way, and brush our former Words against
the Wool; what if I encounter ill?


Trouil. Then blame not me.


Pan. But, of Courtesy, be pleased to give me some Advice: I heartily beseech
you, what must I do?


Trouil. Even what thou will.


Pan. Wishy, washy; Trolly, trolly.


Trouil. Do not Invocate the Name of any thing, I pray you.


Pan. In the Name of God, let it be so: my Actions shall be regulated by the
Rule and Square of your Counsel: What is it that you advise and counsel me to
do?


Trouil. Nothing.


Pan. Shall I marry?


Trouil. I have no hand in it.


Pan. Then shall I not marry?


Trouil. I cannot help it.


Pan. If I never marry, I shall never be a Cuckold,


Trouil. I thought so.


Pan. But put the case that I be married.


Trouil. Where shall we put it?


Pan. Admit it be so then, and take my meaning in that sense.


Trouil. I am otherways employed.


Pan. By the Death of a Hog, and Mother of a Toad, O Lord, if I durst hazard
upon a little Fling at the swearing Game, though privily and under Thumb, it
would lighten the Burden of my Heart, and ease my Lights and Reins
exceedingly; a little Patience nevertheless is requisite. Well then, if I
marry, I shall be a Cuckold.


Trouil. One would say so.


Pan. Yet if my Wife prove a virtuous, wise, discreet and chaste Woman, I shall
never be Cuckolded.


Trouil. I think you speak congruously.


Pan. Hearken.


Trouil. As much as you will.


Pan. Will she be discreet and chaste? This is the only Point I would be
resolved in?


Trouil. I question it.


Pan. You never saw her?


Trouil. Not that I know of.


Pan. Why do you then doubt of that which you know not?


Trouil. For a Cause.


Pan. And if you should know her.


Trouil. Yet more.


Pan. Page, my pretty little Darling, take here my Cap, I give it thee: Have a
care you do not break the Spectacles that are in it; go down to the lower
Court: Swear there half an hour for me, and I shall in compensation of that
Favor swear hereafter for thee as much as thou will. But who shall Cuckold me?


Trouil. Some body.


Pan. By the Belly of the wooden Horse at Troy, Master Somebody, I shall bang,
belam thee, and claw thee well for thy labor.


Trouil. You say so.


Pan. Nay, nay, that Nick in the dark Celler, who has no White in his Eye,
carry me quite away with him, if, in that case, whenever I go abroad from the
Palace of my Domestic Residence, I do not with as much Circumspection, as they
use to ring Mares in our Country to keep them from being sallied by Stoned
Horses, clap a Bergamasco Lock upon my Wife.


Trouillogan. Talk better.


Panurge. It is Bien chien chie chante, well cacked, and cackled; shitten, and
sung in matter of Talk: Let us resolve on somewhat.


Trouillogan. I do not gainsay it.


Panurge. Have a little patience, seeing I cannot on this side draw any Blood
of you. I will try, if with the Launcet of my Judgment, I be able to bleed you
in another Vein. Are you married, or are you not?


Trouillogan. Neither the one nor the other, and both together.


Panurge. O the good God help us; by the Death of a Buffle-ox, I sweat with the
toil and travel that I am put to, and find my Digestion broke off, disturbed,
and interrupted for all my Phrenes, Metaphrenes, and Diaphragmes, Back, Belly,
Midrif, Muscles, Veins, and Sinews are held in a suspense, and for a while
discharged from their proper Offices, to stretch forth their several Powers and
Abilities, for Incornifistibulating, and laying up into the Hamper of my
Understanding, your various Sayings and Answers.


Trouillogan. I shall be no hinderer thereof.


Panurge. Tush, for shame: our faithful Friend, speak, Are you married?


Trouillogan. I think so.


Panurge. You were also married before you had this Wife.


Trouillogan. It is possible.


Panurge. Had you good Luck in your First Marriage?


Trouillogan. It is not impossible.


Panurge. How thrive you with this Second Wife of yours?


Trouillogan. Even as it pleases my Fatal Destiny.


Panurge. But what in good earnest? tell me: Do you prosper well with her?


Trouillogan* It is likely


Panurge. Come on, in the Name of God: I vow by the Burden of Saint
Christopher, that I had rather undertake the fetching of a Fart forth of the
Belly of a dead Ass, then to draw out of you a positive and determinate
Resolution: yet shall I be sure at this time to have a snatch at you, and get
my Claws over you. Our trusty Friend, let us shame the Devil of Hell, and
confess the verity: Were you ever a Cuckold? I say, you who are here, and not
that other you who plays below in the Tennis-Court?


Trouillogan. No, if it was not predestined.


Panurge. By the Flesh, Blood, and Body, I swear, reswear, forswear, abjure,
and renounce, he evades and avoids, shifts, and escapes me, and quite slips and
winds himself out of my Gripes and Clutches.


At these words Gargantua arose, and said, Praised be the good God in all
things, but especially for bringing the World into that height of Refinedness,
beyond what it was when I first came to be acquainted therewith, that now the
Learned and most Prudent Philosophers are not ashamed to be seen entering in
at the Porches and Frontispieces of the Schools of the Pyrronian, Aporetick,
Sceptick, and Eph^ctick Sects: Blessed be the Holy Name of God, veritably, it
is like henceforth to be found an Enterprise of much more easy undertaking, to
catch Lions by the Neck, Horses by the Main, Oxen by the Horns* Bulls by the
Muzzle, Wolves by the Tail, Goats by the Beard, and flying Birds by the Feet,
then to entrap such Philosophers in their words. Farewell, my worthy, dear, and
honest Friends.

When he had done thus speaking, he withdrew himself from the Company;
Pantagruel, and others with him would have followed and accompanied him, but he
would not permit them so to do. No sooner was Gargantua departed out of the
Banquetting-Hall, then that Pantagruel said to the invited Guests: Plato's
Timee, at the Beginning always of a solemn Festival Convention, was wont to
count those that were called thereto; we on the contrary, shall at the Closure
and End of this Treatment, reckon up our Number, One, Two, Three; Where is the
Fourth? I miss my Friend Bridlegoose: Was not he sent for? Epistemon answered,
That he had been at his House to bid and invite him; but could not meet with
him: for that a Messenger from the Parliament of Mirlingois, in Mirlingues, was
come from him, with a Writ of Summons, to cite and warn him personally to
appear before the Reverend Senators of the High Court there, to vindicate and
justify himself at the Bar, of the Crime of Prevarication laid to his charge,
and to be peremptorily instanced against him in a certain Decree, Judgment, or
Sentence lately awarded, given and pronounced by him: and that therefore he had
taken Horse, and departed in great have from his own House; to the end, that
without peril or danger of falling into a default, or contumacy, he might be
the better able to keep the prefixed and appointed time.

I will (quoth Pantagruel) understand how that matter goes; it is now above
Forty Years, that he has been constantly the Judge of Fonsbeton: during which
space of time, he has given Four thousand Definitive Sentences: of Two
thousand three hundred and nine whereof, although Appeal was made by the
Parties whom he had judicially condemned from his inferior Judicatory, to the
Supreme Court of the Parliament of Mirlingois, in Mirlingues they were all of
them nevertheless confirmed, ratified and approved of by an Order, Decree, and
final Sentence of the said Sovereign Court, to the casting of the Appellants,
and utter overthrow of the Suits wherein they had been foiled at Law, for ever
and a day: that now in his Old Age he should be personally summoned* who in all
the foregoing time of his Life, has demeaned himself so unblamably in the
Discharge of the Office and Vocation he had been called unto; it cannot
assuredly be, that such a change has happened without some notorious
Misfortune and Disaster: I am resolved to help and assist him in Equity and
Justice to the uttermost extent of my power and ability. I know the Malice,
Despite, and Wickedness of the World to be so much more nowadays exaspered,
increased, and aggravated by what it was not long since, that the best Cause
that is, how just and equitable soever it be, stands in great need to be
succored, aided and supported. Therefore presently, from this very instant
forth, do I purpose, till I see the event and closure thereof, most heedfully
to attend and wait upon it, for ^^ar of some underhand tricky Surprizal,
^^^villing, Pettifoggery, or fallacious Qui^ks in Law, to his detriment, hurt,
or disadvantage.

Then Dinner being done, and the Tables drawn and removed, when Pantagruel had
very cordially and affectionately thanked his invited Guests, for the Favor
which he had enjoyed of their Company, he presented them with several rich and
costly Gifts, such as Jewels, Rings set with precious Stones, Gold and Silver
Vessels, with a great deal of other sort of Plate besides; and lastly, taking
of them all his Leave, retired himself into an inner Chamber.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Pantagruel persuaded Panurge to take Counsel of a Fool.
WHen Pantagruel had withdrawn himself, he by a little sloping Window in one of
the Galleries, perceived Panurge in a Lobbey not far from thence, walking
alone, with the Gesture, Carriage, and Garb of a fond Dotard, raving, wagging,
and shaking his Hands, dandling, lolling, and nodding with his Head, like a Cow
bellowing for her Calf; and having then called him nearer, spoke unto him thus:
You are at this present (as I think) not unlike to a Mouse entangled in a
snare, who the more that she goes about to rid and unwind herself out of the
Gin wherein she is caught, by endeavoring to clear and deliver her feet from
the Pitch whereto they stick, the foulier she is bewrayed with it, and the more
strongly pestered therein; even so is it with you: for the more that you
labor, strive, and enforce your se^f to disincumber, incumber, and extricate
your Thoughts out of the implicating Involutions and Fetterings of the grievous
and lamentable Gins and Springs of Anguish and Perplexity; the greater
difficulty there is in the relieving of you, and you remain faster bound then
ever: nor do I know or the removal of this Inconveniency, any Remedy but one.

Take heed; I have often heard it said in a Vulgar Proverb, The Wise may be
instructed by a Fool. Seeing the Answers and Responses of sage and judicious
Men, have in no manner of way satisfied you, take Advice of some Fool; and
possibly by so doing, you may come to get that Council which will be agreeable
to your own Heart's desire and contentment. You know how by the Advice and
Council and Prediction of Fools, many Kings, Princes, States, and Commonwealths
have been preferved, several Battles gained, and diverse doubts of a most
perplexed Intricacy resolved: I am not so diffident of your Memory, as to hold
it needful to refresh it with a Quotation of Examples; nor do I so far
undervalue your Judgment, but that I think it will acquiesce in the Reason of
this my subsequent Discourse.

As he who narrowly takes heed to what concerns the dextrous Management of his
private Affairs, domestic Businesses, and those Adoes which are confined
within the streight-lac'd compass of one Family: who is attentive, vigilant,
and active in the oeconomick Rule of his own House; whose frugal Spirit never
strays from home; who loses no occasion, whereby he may purchase to himself
more Riches, and build up new Heaps of Treasure on his former Wealth; and who
knows warily how to prevent the Inconveniences of Poverty, is called a worldly
Wise Man, though perhaps in the Second Judgment of the Intelligences which are
above, he be esteemed a Fool. So on the contrary, is he most like (even in the
thoughts of all Celestial Spirits) to be not only sage, but to presage Events
to come by Divine Inspiration, who laying quite aside those Cares which are
conducible to his Body, or his Fortunes, and as it were departing from himself,
rids all his Senses of Terrene Affections, and clears his Fancies of those
plodding Studies, which harbor in the Minds of Thriving Men: all which
Neglects of Sublunary Things are vulgarly imputed Folly.

After this manner, the Son of Picus, King of the Latins, that great Southsayer
Faunus, was called Fatuus, by the witless Rabble of the common People. The like
we dail^ see practiced amongst the Comic Players, whose Drammatick Rolls, in
distribution of the Personages, appoint the acting of the Fool to him who is
the wisest of the Troop. In approbation also of this fashion the Mathematicians
allow the very same Horoscope to Princes, and to Sots. Whereof a right pregnant
instance by them is given in the Nativities of Aeneas and Choraebus; the latter
of which two is by Euphorion said to have been a Fool: and yet had with the
former the same Aspects, and heavenly Genethlick Influences.

I shall not, I suppose, swerve much from the purpose in hand, if I relate unto
you, what Ihon Andrew said upon the Return of a Papal Writ, which was directed
to the Mayor of Rochel; and Burgesses after him by Panorm, upon the same
Pontifical Canon; Barbatia, on the Pandects, and recently by Jason, in his
Councels, concerning Seyny Ihon the noted Fool of Paris, and Caillets
fore-great Grandfather. The Case is this:

At Paris, in (...) Roast-meat Cookery of the Petit (...), before the Cook-Shop
of one (...) Roast-meat Sellers of that Lane, a (...) hungry Porter was eating
his Bread, after he had by Parcels kept it a while above the Reek and Steam of
a fat Goose on the Spit, turning at a great Fire, and found it so besmoaked
with the Vapor, to be savoury; which the Cook observing, took no notice, till
after having ravined his Penny Loaf, whereof no Morsel had been unsmoakified,
he was about discamping and going away; but by your leave, as the Fellow
thought to have departed thence shot-free, the Master-Cook laid hold upon him
by the Gorget, demanded payment for the Smoke of his Roast-meat. The Porter
answered, that he had sustained no loss at all; that by what he had done there
was no Diminution made of the Flesh, that he had taken nothing of his, and that
therefore he was not indebted to him in any thing: As for the Smoke in
question, that, although he had not been there, it would howsoever have been
evaporated: besides that, before that time it had never been seen nor heard,
that Roast-meat Smoke was sold upon the Streets of Paris. The Cook hereto
replied, That he was not obliged nor any way bound to feed and nourish for
naught a Porter whom he had never seen before with the Smoke of his Roast-meat;
and thereupon swore, that if he would not forthwith content and satisfy him
with present Payment for the Repast which he had thereby got, that he would
take his crooked Staves from off his Back; which instead of having Loads
thereafter laid upon them, should serve for Fuel to his Kitchen Fires. Whilst
he was going about so to do, and to have pulled them to him by one of the
bottom Rungs, which he had caught in his Hand, the sturdy Porter got out of his
Gripes, drew forth the knotty Cudgel, and stood to his own Defense. The
Altercation waxed hot in Words, which moved the gaping Hoydons of the sottish
Parisians to run from all parts thereabouts to see what the issue would be of
that babbling Strife and Contention. In the interim of this Dispute, to very
good purpose Seiny Ihon the Fool and Citizen of Paris, happened to be there, whom
the Cook perceiving, said to the Porter, Will thou refer and submit unto the
noble Seiny Ihon, the Decision of the Difference and Controversy which is
betwixt us? Yes, by the Blood of a Goose, answered the Porter, I am content.
Seiny Ihon the Fool, finding that the Cook and Porter had compromised the
Determination of their Variance and Debate to the Discretion of his Award and
Arbitriment; after that the Reasons on either side whereupon was grounded the
mutual fierceness of their brawling Jar had been to the full displayed and laid
open before him, commanded the Porter to draw out of the Fab of his Belt a
piece of Money, if he had it. Whereupon the Porter immediately without delay,
in Reverence to the Authority of such a Judicious Umpire, put the tenth part of
a Silver Phillip into his hand. This little Phillip Seiny Ihon took, then set
it on his Left Shoulder, to try by feeling if it was of a sufficient weight;
after that, laying it on the palm of his hand he made it ring and tingle, to
understand by the Ear if it was of a good Alloy in the Metal whereof it was
composed: Thereafter he put it to the Ball or Apple of his Left Eye, to explore
by the sight if it was well stamped and marked; all which being done, in a
profound Silence of the whole doltish People, who were there Spectators of this
Pageantry, to the great Hope of the Cooks, and Despair of the Porters
Prevalency in the Suit that was in agitation, he finally caused the Porter to
make it sound several times upon the Stall of the Cooks Shop. Then with a
Presidential Majesty holding his Babble (Scepter-like) in his Hand, muffling his
Head with a Hood of Martern Skins, each side whereof had the resemblance of an
Apes Face, sprucified up with Ears of pasted Paper, and having about his Neck a
bucked Ruff, raised, furrowed, and ridged, with Ponting Sticks of the shape and
fashion of small Organ Pipes; he first with all the force of his Lungs Coughed
two or three times, and then with an audible Voice pronounced this following
Sentence, The Court declares, that the Porter, who ate his Bread at the Smoke
of the roast, has civilly paid the Cook with the sound of his Money: And the
said Court Ordains, that every one return to his own home, and attend his
proper business, without Cost and Charges, and for a Cause. This Verdict, Award
and Arbitriment of the Parisian Fool, did appear so equitable, yea, so
admirable to the aforesaid Doctors, that they very much doubted, if the matter
had been brought before the Sessions for Justice of the said place, or that the
Judges of the Rota at Rome had been Umpires therein; or yet that the
Areopagites themselves had been the Deciders thereof, if by any one part, or
all of them together, it had been so judicially sententiated and awarded.
Therefore advise if you will be counseled by a Fool.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Triboulet is set forth and blazed by Pantagruel and Panurge.
BY my Soul, quoth Panurge, that Overture pleases me exceedingly well; I will
therefore lay hold thereon, and embrace it. At the very motioning thereof my
very Right Entral seems to be widened and enlarged, which was but just now
hard bound, contracted and costive: but as we have hitherto made choice of the
purest and most refined Cream of Wisdom and Sapience for our Counsel, so would
I now have to preside and bear the prime Sway in our Consultation, as were a
Fool in the supreme degree. Triboulet (quoth Pantagruel) is completely foolish,
as I conceive. Yes truly (answered Panurge) he is properly and totally a Fool,
a Pantagruel. Panurge. Fatal f. Jovial f. Natural f. Mercurial f. Celectial f.
Lunatic f. Erratick f. Ducal f. Excentrick f. Common f. Aetherial and Junonian
f. Lordly f. Palatin f. Arctick f. Principal f. Heroic f. Pretorian f. Gemial
f. Ellected f. Inconstant f. Courtly f. Earthly f. Primipilary f. Solacious and
sporting f. Triumphant f. Vulgar f. Jocund and wanton f. Domestic f. Exemplary
s. Pimpled f. Rare outlandish f. Freckled f. Satrapal f. Bell-tinging f. Civil
f. Laughing and lecherous f. Popular f. Familiar f. Nimming and filching f.
Notable f. Favourized f. Unpressed f. Latinized f. First broached f. Ordinary
f. Augustal f. Transcendent f. Cesarine f. Rising f. Imperial f. Papal f. Royal
f. Consistorian f. Patriarchal f. Conclavist f. Original f. Bullist f. Loyal f.
Synodal f. Episcopal f. Doting and raving f. Doctoral f. Singular and
surpassing f. Monachal f. Fiscal f. Special and excelling f. Extravagant f.
Writhed f. Metaphysical f. Canonical f. Scatical f. Such another f.
Predicamental and Catagorick f. Graduated f. Commensal f. Predicable and
enunciatory f. Primolicentiated f. Trainbairing f. Decumane and Superlative f.
Supererrogating f. Collateral f. Dutiful and officious f. Haunch and side f.
Nestling, ninny and youngling f. Optical and perspective f. Flitting, giddy and
unsteddy f. Algoristick f. Algebraical f. Brancher, novice and Cockney f.
Cabalistical and Massoretical f. Hagard, cross and froward f. Talmudical f.
Algamalized f. Gentle, mild and tractable f. Compendious f. Abbreviated f.
Mail-coated f. Hyperbolical f. Pilfring and purloining f. Anatomastical f.
Allegorical f. Tail-grown f. Tropological f. Gray-peckled f. Pleonasmical f.
Micher pincrust f. Capital f. Heteroclit f. Hair brained f. Summist f. Cordial
f. Abbridging f. Intimate f. Morrish f. Hepatick f. Leaden-sealed f. Cushotten
and swilling f. Mandatory f. Compassionate f. Splenetick f. Titulary f. Windy
f. Crooching, showking, ducking f. Ligitimate f. Azymathal f. Grim, stern,
harsh, and wayward f. Almicautarized f. Proportioned f. Well-hung and timbred
f. Chinnified f. Swollen and puffed up f. Ill-clawed, pounced and pawed f.
Overcockrifed lid and lified f. Well-stoned f. Crabbed and unpleasing f.
Corallery f. Eastern f. Winded and tainted f. Sublime f. Crimson f.
Kitchin-haunting f. Ingrained f. Lofty and stately f. City f. Spitrack f.
Basely acoutred f. Architrave f. Mast-headed f. Pedestal f. Modal f. Tetragonal
f. Second notial f. Renowned f. Cheerful and buxom f. Reumatick f. Flaunting
and braggadochio f. Solemn f. Annual f. Egregious f. Festival f. Humorous and
capricious f. Recreative f. Boorish and counterfeit f. Rude, gross and absurd
f. Pleasant f. Large measured f. Privileged f. Babble f. Rustical f. Downright
f. Proper and peculiar f. Broad-listed f. Downsical-bearing f. Ever ready f.
Diapatonal f. Stale and overworn f. Resolute f. Hieroglyphical f. Saucy and
swaggering f. Authentic f. Worty f. Full bulked f. Precious f. Gallant and
vainglorious f. Fanatic f. Fantastical f. Gorgeous and gaudy f. Symphatiok f.
Panick f. Continual and intermitting f. Limbicked and distilled f. Rebasing and
roundling f. Comportable f. Wretched and heartless f. Prototypal and
precedenting f. Fooded f. Prating f. Thick and threefold f. Catechetick f.
Cacodoxical f. Damasked f. Meridional f. Fearny f. Nocturnal f. Unleavened f.
Occidental f. Barytonant f. Trifling f. Pink and spot-poudered f. Astrological
and Figure-flinging f. Musket-proof f. Cenethliack and Horoscopal f. Pedantick
f. Strouting f. Knavish f. Wood f. Idiot f. Greedy f. Blockish f. Senseless f.
Beetle-headed f. Godderlich f. Crotesk f. Obstinate f. Impertinent f.
Contradictory f. Quarrelsom f. Pedagogical f. Unmannerly f. Daft f. Captious
and Sophistical f. Drunken f. Peevish f. Soritick f. Prodigal f. Catholoproton
f. Rash f. Hoti and Diots f. Plodding f. Aplos and Catati f.

Pantagruel. If there was any reason why at Rome the Quirinal Holiday, of old,
was called the Feast of Fools; I know not why me may not for the like cause
institute in France the Tribouletick Festivals, to be Celebrated and Selemnized
over all the Land.


Panurge. If all Fools carried Cruppers.


Pantagruel. If he were the God Fatuus, of whom we have already made mention,
the Husband of the Goddess Fatua, his Father would be Good Day, and his
Grandmother Good Even.


Panurge. If all Fools paced, albeit he be somewhat wry-legged, he would
overlay at least a Fathom at every Rake. Let us go toward him without any
further lingering or delay, we shall have no doubt some fine Resolution of him.
I am ready to go, and long for the issue of our Progress impatiently. I must
needs (quoth Pantagruel) according to my former Resolution of him, be present
at Bridlegoose's Trial: Nevertheless, whilst I shall be upon my Journey toward
Mirelingues, which is on the other side of the River of Loire, I will dispatch
Carpalin to bring along with him from Blois the Fool Triboulet. Then was
Carpalin instantly sent away, and Pantagruel at the same time attended by his
Domestics, Panurge, Epistemon, Ponocrates, Friar Ihon, Gymnast, Rysotome, and
others, marched forward on the the High Road to Marlingues.


CHAP. XXXIX. How Pantagruel was present at the Trial of Judge Bridlegoose, who
decided Causes and Controversies in Law, by the Chance and Fortune of the Dice.
ON the Day following, precisely at the Hour appointed, Pantagruel came to
Merlingues: At his Arrival the Presidents, Senators, and Counselors prayed him
to do them the Honor to enter in with them, to hear the Decision of all the
Causes, Arguments, and Reasons, which Bridlegoose in his own Defense would
produce, why he had pronounced a certain Sentence against the Subsidy-Assessor,
Toucheronde; which did not seem very equitable to that Centumviral Court.
Pantagruel very willingly condescended to their desire, and accordingly entering
in, found Bridlegoose sitting within the middle of the Enclosure of the said
Court of Justice; who immediately upon the coming of Pantrgruel, accompanied
with the Senatorian Members of that worshipful Judicatory, arose, went to the
Bar, had his Indictment read, and for all his Reasons, Defenses, and Excuses,
answered nothing else, but that he was become Old, and that his Sight of late
was very much failed, and become dimner then it was wont to be; instancing
therewithal many Miseries and Calamities, which Old Age brings along with it,
and are concomitant to wrinkled Elders; which not, par Archi d' LXXVI.C. tanta:
by reason of which Infirmity he was not able so distinctly and clearly to
discern the Points and Blots of the Dice, as formerly he had been accustomed to
do: whence it might very well have happened, said he, as old dim-sighted Isaac
took Jacob for Esau, that I after the same manner, at the Decision of Causes
and Controversies in Law, should have been mistaken in taking a Quatre for a
Cinque, or Tree for a Deuce: This, I beseech your Worship (quoth he) to take
into your serious Consideration, and to have the more favorable Opinion of my
Uprightness, (notwithstanding the Prevarication whereof I am accused, in the
matter of Toucherondy's Sentence) that at the time of that Decrees pronouncing,
I only had made use of my small Dice; and your Worships (said he) knew very
well, how by the most Authentic Rules of the Law, it is provided, That the
Imperfections of Nature should never be imputed unto any for Crimes and
Transgressions; as appears, F. de re Mil. L. qui cum uno F. de Reg. Iur. L.
fere F. de aedit. edict. per totum, F. de term. Mo. L. Divus Adrianus, resolved
by LU. TO. ML. Si Vero. F. Sol. Mat. And who would offer to do otherways,
should not thereby accuse the Man, but Nature, and the All-seeing Providence of
God, as is evident in L. Maximum Vitium C. de Liber praeter.

What kind of Dice (quoth Trinquamelle, grand President of the said Court) do
you mean, my Friend Bridle-goose? The Dice (quoth Bridlegoose) of Sentences at
Law, Decrees, and peremptory Judgments, Alea Iudiciorum, whereof is written,
Per Doct. 26. qu. 2. Ca. Sors L. nec emptio F. de contrahen. empt. L. quod
debetur. F. de pecu, and ibi Bart. And which your Worships do as well as I,
use, in this glorious Sovereign Court of yours: so do all other righteous
Judges in their Decision of Processes, and Final Determination of Legal
Differences, observing that which has been said thereof, by D. Henri.
Ferraudet. and not. Gl. MC. si de sort. il and L. sed cum ambo F. de rud. ubi
Doc. Where mark, that Chance and Fortune, are good, honest, profitable and
necessary for ending of, and putting a final closure to Dissensions and Debates
in Suits at Law. The same has more clearly been declared by Bal. Barto. and
Alex. C. communia de L. Si duo. But how is it that you do these things? (asked
Tirquemel.) I very briefly (quoth Bridlegoose) shall answer you, according to
the Doctrine and Instructions of L. ampliorem par in refutatoriis C. de Appell.
Which is conform to what is said in Il. 1. L. 2. F. quod met. cau. gaudent.
brevitate moderni. My Practice is therein the same with that of your other
Worships, and as the Custom of the Judicatory requires, unto which our Law
commands us to have regard, and by the Rule thereof still to direct and
regulate our Actions and Procedures. Ut not. extra de consuet. C. ex literis,
and ibi Iano: for having well and exactly seen, surveyed, overlooked, reviewed,
recognized, read, and read over again, turned and tossed over, seriously
perused and examined the Bills of Complaint, Accusations, Impeachments,
Indictments, Warnings, Citations, Summonings, Comparitions, Appearances,
Mandates, Commissions, Delegations, Instructions, Informations, Inquests,
Preparatories, Productions, Evidences, Proofs, Allegations, Depositions, cross
Speeches, Contradictions, Supplications, Requests, Petitions, Enquiries,
Instruments of the Deposition of Witnesses, Rejoinders, Replies, Confirmations
of former Assertions, Duplies, Triplies, Answers to Rejoinders, Writings,
Deeds, Reproaches, disabling of Exceptions taken, Grievances, Salvation-Bills,
Re-examination of Witnesses, Confronting of them together, Declarations,
Denunciations, Libels, Certificates, Royal Missives, Letters of Appeal, Letters
of Attorney, Instruments of Compulsion, Delinatories, Anticipatories,
Evocations, Messages, Dimissions, Issues, Exceptions, dilatory Pleas, Demurs,
Compositions, Injunctions, Reliefs, Reports, Returns, Confessions,
Acknowledgments, Exploits, Executions, and other suchlike Confects and
Spiceries, both at the one and the other side, as a good Judge ought to do,
conform to what has been noted thereupon. Sper de ordinario. Paragr. 3. and
Tit. de Offi. O. in Paragr. fin. and de prescriptis Praesent* a Parag. 1. I
posit on the end of a Table, in my Closet, all the Poaks and Bags of the
Defendant, and then allow unto him the first hazard of the Dice; according to
the usual manner of your other Worships. And it is mentioned, L. Favorabiliores
F. de Reg. Iur. and in d. cum sunt eo. Tit. Lib. 6. which says, Quum sunt
partium Iura obscura, reo potius favendum est quam actori. That being done, I
thereafter lay down upon the other end of the same Table, the Bags and Sachels
of the Plaintiff, (as your other Worships are accustomed to do) Visum Visu,
just over against one another: for, Opposi^a juxta se potest clarius
elucescunt: ut not. in L. Parag. Videamus F. de his qui sunt sui vel alieni
juris, and in L Munerum. Mixta F. de mun. and hon. Then do I likeways, and
semblably throw the Dice for him, and forthwith livre him his chance. But
(quoth Trigamelle) my Friend, how come you to know, understand, and resolve the
obscurity of these various and seeming contrary Passages in Law, which are laid
claim to by the Suitors, and pleading Parties? Even just (quoth Bridlegoose)
after the fashion of your other Worships: to wit, when there are many Bags on
the one side, and on the other, I then use my little small Dice (after the
customary manner of your other Worships) in obedience to the Law. Semper in
stipulationibus F. de Reg. Iur. The Law verified, verifieth that, Eo tit.
semper in obscuris quod minimum est sequimur: Canonized in C. in obscuris cod.
Tit. Lib. 6. I have other large great Dice, fair, and goodly ones, which I
employ in the fashion that your other Worships use to do, when the matter is
more plain, clear, and liquid: that is to say, when there are fewer Bags. But
when you have done all these fine things (quoth Triquamel) how do you, my
Friend, award your Decrees, and pronounce Judgment? Even as your other Worships
(answered Bridlegoose) for I give out Sentence in his favor, unto whom has
befallen the best Chance by Dice; Judiciary, Tribunian, Pretorial, what comes
first: So our Laws command. F. qui pot. in Pig. L. Potior. L. Creditor. C. de
Cons. L. 1. and de Reg. Iur on U. Qui prior est jure.

CHAP. XL. How Bridlegoose gives Reasons, why he looked upon those Law-Actions
which he decided by the Chance of the Dice.
YEa, but (quoth Trinquamel) my Friend, seeing it is by the Lot, Chance, and
Throw of the Dice that you award your Judgments and Sentences, why do not you
livre up these fair Throws and Chances the very same Day and Hour, without any
further procrastination or delay, that the controverting Party-pleaders appear
before you? To what use can those Writings serve you, those Papers, and other
Procedures contained in the Bags and Poaks of the Law-Suitors? To the very same
use (quoth Bridle-goose) that they serve your other Worships. They are behooful
unto me, and serve my turn in three things very exquisite, requisite, and
authentical. First, For Formality-sake, the omission whereof, that it makes
all whatever is done, to be of no force nor value, is excellently well proved,
by Spec. tit. de inst. edi. and tit. de rescript. praesent. Besides, that it is
not unknown to you, who have had many more Experiments thereof then I, how
oftentimes in Judicial Proceedings, the Formalities utterly destroy the
Materialities and Substances of the Causes and Matters agitated; for Forma
mutata, mutatur substantia F. ad exh. L. Iulianus F. ad. leg. Pals. si is qui
Quadraginta. Et extra de deci. C. ad audientiam. Et de Cel. Miss. C. in quadam.

Secondly, They are useful and steadable to me, (even as unto your other
Worships) in lieu of some other honest and healthful Exercise. The late Master
Othoman Vadat, a prime Physician, as you would say, Cod. de Commit. and Archi.
Lib. 12. has frequently told me, That the lack and default of Bodily Exercise,
is the chief, if not the sole and only cause of the little Health, and short
Lives of all Officers of Justice, such as your Worships and I am. Which
Observation was singularly well, before him, noted and remarked by Bartholus in
Lib. 1. C. de Sent. quae pro eo quod: therefore is it, that the Practice of
suchlike Exercitations is appointed to be laid hold on by your other Worships,
and consequently not to be denied unto me, who am of the same Profession: Quia
accessurum naturam sequitur principalis, de Reg. Iur. L. 7. and L cum
principalis, and L. nihil dolo F. eo tit. F. de fide juss. L. fide Iuss. and
extra de Officio de L. Cap. 1. Let certain honest, and recreative Sports and
Plays of Corporeal Exercises be allowed and approved of; and so far, Ut omnes
obed. in prius Coll. 7. and F. de praescript. ver L. gratuitatem and L. 1. Cod.
de Spe. L. 11. Such also is the Opinion of D. Thom. in Secunda, Secundae Q.
168. Quoted in very good purpose, by D. at de Rosa; who, Fuit magnus Practicus,
and a solemn Doctor, as Barbaria attesteth in Principiis Consil. Wherefore the
Reason is evidently and clearly deduced, and set down before us, in Gloss. in
praemio F. par ne autem tertii. Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis. In very
deed, one, in the Year a Thousand four hundred fourscore and sixth, having a
Business concerning the Portion and Inheritance of a younger Brother, depending
in the Court and Chamber of the Four High Treasurers of France, whereinto
as soon as ever I got leave to enter by a Pecuniary Permission of the Usher
thereof, as your other Worships know very well, that Pecunia obediant omnia;
and there says, Baldus, in L. Singularia. F. si cert. pet. and lol. in L.
receptitia. Cod. de constit. pecuni. and card. in cler. 1. de Baptism. I found
them all recreating and diverting themselves at the Play called Musse, either
before or after Dinner; to me, truly, it is a thing altogether indifferent,
whether of the two it was, provided that Hic not. that the Game of the Musse is
honest, healthful, ancient, and lawful: A Muscho inventore, de quo Cod. de
perhaere L. si post motam: and Muscarii. Such as play and sport it at the
Musse, are excusable in and by Law, Lib. 1. C. de excus. artific. lib. 10. And
at the very same time was Master Tielman Picquet, one of the Players of that
Game of Musse: there is nothing that I do better remember; for he laughed
heartily, when his Fellow Members of the aforesaid Judicial Chamber, spoiled
their Caps in swinging of his Shoulders; he, nevertheless, did even then say
unto them, that the banging and flapping of him to the wast, and havoc of
their Caps, should not at their return from the Palace to their own Houses,
excuse them from their Wives: Part 1. extra de praesum. and ibi glos. Now
resolutory loquendo, I should say, according to the style and phrase of your
other Worships, that there is no Exercise, Sport, Game, Play, nor Recreation in
all this Palatine, Palacial, or Parliamentary World, more ariomatizing and
fragrant, then to empty and void Bags and Purses: turn over Papers and
Writings: quote Margins and Backs of Scrolls and Rolls; fill Panniers, and take
inspection of Causes: Ex Bart. and Joan. de prad. in L. falsa de condit. and
Demost. F.

Thirdly, I consider as your own Worships use to do, that Time ripeneth and
brings all things to maturity, that by Time every thing comes to be made
manifest and patent, and that Time is the Father of Truth and Virtue. Gloss. in
I. cod. de Servit. authent. de restit. and ea quae pa. and spe tit. de requis.
cons. Therefore is it, that after the manner and fashion of your other
Worships, I defer, protract, delay, prolong, intermit, surcease, pause, linger,
suspend, prorogate, drive out, wyre-draw, and shift off the Time of giving a
Definitive Sentence, to the end that the Suit or Process, being well vanned and
winnowed, tossed and canvassed to and fro; narrowly, precisely, and nearly
garbelled, sifted, searched and examined: and on all Hands exactly argued,
disputed and debated, may, by success of Time come at last to its full ripeness
and maturity: by means whereof, when the fatal hazard of the Dice ensues
thereupon, the Parties cast or condemned by the said Aleatory Chance, will with
much greater patience, and more mildly and gently endure, and bear up the
disastrous Load of their Misfortune, then if they had been sentenced at their
first arrival unto the Court: as, Not. gl. F. de excus. tut. L. tria onera.
Portatur leviter quod portas quisque libenter. On the other part, to pass a
Decree or Sentence, when the action is raw, crude, green, unripe, and
unprepared as at the beginning, a danger would ensue of a no less
inconveniency, then that which the Physicians have been wont to say, befalls
to him in whom an Imposthume is pierced before it be ripe; or unto any other
whose Body is purged of a strong predominating Humor, before its digestion: for
as it is written, In Authent. haec consist. in nos. de constit. princip. So is
the same repeated, In gloss. in C. caeterum extr. quod medicamenta morbis
exhibent. hoc jura negotiis. Nature furthermore admonishes and teaches us, to
gather and reap, eat and feed on Fruits when they are ripe, and not before.
Instit. de re di paragr. is ad quem and F. de action. empt. L. Iulianus. To
marry likeways our Daughters when they are ripe, and no sooner. F. de donation
inter vir. and uxor. L. cum his status paragr. si quia sponsa and 21 q. C. sic
ut dicit. gl.

Iam matura thoro plenis adoleverat annis Virginitas. And in a word, she
instructs us to do nothing of any considerable Importance, but in a full
maturity and ripeness. 23 q. 2 paragr. ult. and 23. de C. ultimo.

CHAP. XLI. How Bridlegoose relates the History of the Reconcilers of Parties
at variance in matters of Law.
I Remember to the same purpose (quoth Bridlegoose, in continuing his
Discourse) that in the time when at Poictiers I was a Student of Law under
Crocadium Iuris, there was at Smerva one Peter Dandin, a very honest Man,
careful Labourer of the Ground, fine Singer in a Church-Desk, of good Repute
and Credit, and older than the most aged of all your Worships; who was wont to
say, that he had seen the great and goodly Good Man the Council of Lateran,
with his wide and broad brimmed Red Hat: As also, that he had beheld and looked
upon the fair and beautiful Pragmatical Sanction, his Wife, with her huge
Rosary or Patenotrian Chapelet of Jeat-beads, hanging at a large Sky-colored
Ribbond. This honest Man compounded, attoned and agreed more Differencies,
Controversies and Variances at Law than had been determined, voided and
finished during his time in the whole Palace of Poictiers, in the Auditory of
Montmorillon, and in the Townhouse of the old Partenay. This amicable
Disposition of his rendered him Venerable, and of great Estimation, Sway, Power
and Authority throughout all the neighboring places of Chauvinie, Nouaille,
Vivonne, Mezeaux, Estables, and other bordering and circumjacent Towns,
Villages, and Hamlets: All their Debates were pacified by him; he put an end to
their brabling Suits at Law, and wrangling Differences. By his Advice and
Counsels were Accords and Reconcilements no less firmly made, than if the
Verdict of a Sovereign Judge had been interposed therein, although, in very
deed, he was no Judge at all, but a right honest Man, as you may well conceive.
Arg. in L. si Anius F. de Iure jur. and de verbis obligatorii sit continuus.

There was not a Hog killed within three Parishes of him, whereof he had not
some part of the Haslet and Puddings. He was almost every day invited either to
a Marriage, Banquet, Christning Feast, an uprising or Women-Churching Treatment,
a Birth-day's Anniversary Solemnity, a merry Frollick Gossiping, or otherways
to some delicious Entertainment in a Tavern, to make some Accord and Agreement
between Persons at odds, and in debate with one another. Remark what I say; for
he never yet settled and compounded a Difference betwixt any two at variance,
but he straight made the Parties agreed and pacified, to drink together, as a
sure and infallible Token and Symbol of a perfect and completely well cemented
Reconciliation, sign of a sound and sincere Amity and proper Mark of a new Joy
and Gladness to follow thereupon. Ut Not. per F. de Peri and com. rei. ven. L.
1. He had a Son whose Name was Tenot Dandin, a lusty young sturdy frisking
Royster, so help me God, who likewise (in imitation of his Peacemaking Father,
would have undertaken and meddled with the taking up of Variances, and deciding
of Controversies betwixt disagreeing and contentious Parties, Pleaders as you
know.

Saepe solet similis filius esse patri.
Et sequitur leviter filia matris iter.
Ut ait gloss. vi, quaest. I. C. siquis g. de cons. disc. v. C. 2. fin. and
est. int. per dict. cod. de impu. and aliis substit. L. vir. and L. Legitimae.
F. de stat. hom. gloss. in L. quod si nolit. de adi L. quisquis C. ad leg. Iure
Majest. excipio filius a moniali susceptos ex Monacho per gloss. in C.
impudicas 27 quaestione. And such was his Confidence to have no worse Success
than his Father, he assumed unto himself the Title of Law-strife-setler. He was
likeways in these pacificatory Negotiations so active and vigilant; for
Vigilantibus Iura subveniunt ex L. pupillus F. quae in fraud. cred. and ibi. L.
non enim and instit. m. proaem. That when he had smelt, heard, and fully
understood; ut F. si quando paufec. L. Agaso q. in verbo offecit, id est nasum
ad culum posuit. That there was any where in the Country a debatable matter at
Law, he would incontinently thrust in his Advice, and so forwardly intrude his
Opinion in the business, that he made no Bones of making offer, and taking upon
him to decide it, how difficult soever it might happen to be, to the full
Contentment and Satisfaction of both Parties: It is written, Qui non laborat
non manducat. And the said Gl. F. de damn. infect. L. si quamvis: And Currere
plus que lae pas vetulam compellit egestas. Gloss. F. de lib. agnosco. L. si
quis pro quo facit. L. si plures C. de Codd incert. But so huge great was his
Misfortune in this his Undertaking, that he never composed any difference, how
little soever you may imagine it might have been, but that instead of
reconciling the Parties at odds, he did incense, irritate and exasperate them
to a higher point of Dissension and Enmity than ever they were at before. Your
Worships know I doubt not that, Sermo datur cunctis animi sapientia paucis.

Gl. F. de alien in mun. cause. fa. lib. 2. This administered unto the
Tavern-keepers, Wine-drawers and Vintners of Smerva an occasion to say, that
under him they had not in the space of a whole year so much Reconciliation-Wine
(for so were they pleased to call the good Wine of Leguge) as under his Father
they had done in one half hours time. It happened a little while thereafter, that
he made a most heavy regret thereof to his Father, attributing the Causes of
his bad Success in pacificatory Enterprises to the Perversity, Stubbornness,
froward, cross and backward Inclinations of the People of his time, roundly,
boldly and irreverently upbraiding, that if but a score of Years before the
World had been so wayward, obstinate, pervicacious, implacable, and out of all
Square, Frame and Order as it was then, his Father had never attained to, and
acquired the Honor and Title of Strife-appeaser, so irrefragably, inviolably
and irrevocably as he has done; in doing whereof Tenot did heinously
transgress against the Law which prohibiteth Children to reproach the Actions
of their Parents. Per gl. and Barth. L. 3. par agr. si quis F. de cond. ob
cause. and authent. de Nupt. par sed quod sancitum Col. 3. meant. To this the
honest old Father answered thus: My Son Dandin, when Don oportet takes place,
this is the course which we must trace, Gl. C. de Appel. L. eos etiam: For the
Road that you went upon was not the way to the Fullers Mill, nor in any part
thereof was the Form to be found wherein the Hare did sit. Thou have not the
skill and dexterity of settling and composing Differences. Why? Because thou
take them at the beginning, in the very Infancy and Bud as it were, when they
are green, raw, and indigestible; yet I know handsomely and seatly how to
compose and settle them all. Why? Because I take them at their Decadence, in
their Weaning, and when they are pretty well digested. So says Gl. dulcior est
fructus post multa pericula ductus. L. non moritturus C. de contrahend. and
commit. stip. Did thou ever hear the vulgar Proverb, Happy is the Physician
whose coming is desired at the declension of a Disease? For the Sickness being
come to a Crisis, is then upon the decreasing hand, and drawing toward an end,
although the Physician should not repair thither for the Cure thereof; whereby
though Nature wholly do the Work, he bears away the Palm and Praise thereof. My
Pleaders after the same manner, before I did interpose my Judgment in the
reconciling of them, were waxing faint in their Contestations, their
Altercation Heat was much abated, and in declining from their former Strife,
they of themselves inclined to a firm Accommodation of their Differences;
because there wanted Fuel to that Fire of burning, Rancour and despightful
Wrangling, whereof the lower sort of Lawyers were the Kindlers: That is to say,
their Purses were emptied of Coin, they had not a Win in their Fab, nor Penny
in their Bag, wherewith to solicit and present their Actions.

Deficiente pecu deficit omne, nia. There wanted then nothing but some Brother
to supply the place of a Parunymph, Braul broker, Proxenete or Mediator, who
acting his part dexterously, should be the first Broacher of the Motion of an
Agreement, for saving both the one and the other Party from that hurtful and
pernicious Shame, whereof he could not have avoided the Imputation, when it
should have been said, that he was the first who yielded and spoke of a
Reconcilement; and that therefore his Cause not being good, and being sensible
where his Shoe did pinch him, was willing to break the Ice, and make the
greater haste to prepare the way for a Condescendment to an amicable and
friendly Treaty. Then was it that I came in pudding time, ( Dandin my Son) nor
is the fat of Bacon more relishing to boiled Pease, than was my Verdict then
agreeable to them: This was my Luck, my Profit and good Fortune. I tell thee,
my Jolly Son Dandin, that by this Rule and Method I could settle a firm Peace,
or at least clap up a Cessation of Arms and Truce for many years to come
betwixt the Great King and the Venetian State; the Emperor and the Cantons of
Swisserland; the English and the Scots; and betwixt the Pope and the
Ferrarians. Shall I go yet further: Yea, as I would have God to help me,
betwixt the Turk and the Sophy, the Tartars and the Muscoviters. Remark well
what I am to say unto thee, I would take them at that very instant nick of
time, when both those of the one and the other side should be weary and tired
of making War, when they had voided and emptied their own Cashes and Coffers of
all Treasure and Coin, drained and exhausted the Purses and Bags of their
Subjects, sold and morgaged their Domains and proper Inheritances, and totally
wasted, spent and consumed the Munition, Furniture, Provision and Victuals that
were necessary for the continuance of a Military Expedition. There I am sure,
by God, or by his Mother, that would they, would they, in spite of all their
Teeths, they should be forced to take a little Respit and Breathing time, to
moderate the Fury and cruel Rage of their ambitious Aims. This is the Doctrine
in Gl. 37. d. c. si quando.

Odero, si potero, si non invitus amabo. CHAP. XLII. How Suits at Law are bred
at first, and how they come afterward to their perfect growth.
FOR this Cause (quoth Bridlegoose) going on in his Discourse, I temporise and
apply my self to the Times, as your other Worships use to do, waiting patiently
for the Maturity of the Process, full Growth and Perfection thereof in all its
Members; to wit, the Writings and the Bags. Arg. in L. fin. Major. C. commodus,
and de cons. de 1. c. solemnitates, and ibi gl. A Suit in Law at its
Production, Birth and first beginning, seems to me as unto your other
Worships, shapeless, without Form or Fashion, incomplete, ugly and imperfect,
even as a Bare, at his first coming into the World, has neither Hands, Skin,
Hair nor Head, but is merely an inform, rude and ill-favored piece and lump of
Flesh; and would remain still so, if his Dam out of the abundance of her
Af^ection to her hopeful Cub, did not with much liking put his Members into
that Figure and shape which Nature had provided for those of an Arctick and
Ursinal kind. Ut Not. Doct. F. ad L. aliquia 2. in si. Just so when I see, as
your other Worships do, Processes and Suits in Law at their first bringing
forth, to be numberless, without shape, deformed and disfigured; for that then
they consist only of one or two Writings, or Copies of Instruments, through
which Defect they appear unto me as to your other Worships, foul, loathsome,
filthy and misshapen Beasts. But when there are Heaps of these Legiformal
Papers packed, piled, laid up together, impoaked, insacheled, and put up in
Bags, then is it that with a good reason we may term that Suit, to which, as
pieces, parcels, parts, portions and members thereof, they do pertain and
belong, well-formed and fashioned, big limmed, strong set, and in all and each
of its Dimensions most completely membred: Because forma dat. esse. rei L. si
is qui F. ad leg. falcid. in C. cum delicta extra de rescript. Barbaria consil.
Lib. 2. And before him, Balsus in C. ult. extra decons. and L. Iulianus exhib.
and F. ad L. quaesitum F. de leg* 3. The manner is such as is set down in gl.
p. quaest. 1 C. Paulus.

Debile principiam melior fortuna sequetur. Like your other Worships, also the
Sergeants, Catchpoles, Pursevants, Messengers, Summoners, Apparitors, Ushers,
Door-keepers, Pettifoggers, Attorneys, Proctors, Commissioners, Justices of the
Peace, Judge Delegates, Arbitrators, Overseers, Sequestrators, Advocates,
Inquisitors, Jurors, Searchers, Examiners, Notaries, Tabellions, Scribes,
Scriveners, Clerks, Pregnatories, Secondaries, and Expedanean Judges, de quibus
tit. est L. 3. C. by sucking very much, and that exceeding forcibly, and
licking at the Purses of the pleading Parties, they, to the Suits already begot
and engendered, form, fashion and frame Head, Feet, Claws, Talons, Beaks, Bills,
Teeth, Hands, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, Muscles, Humors, and so forth, through
all the Simulary and Dissimilary Parts of the whole; which Parts, Particles,
Pendicles and Appurtenances, are the Law. poaks and Bags, Gl. de Cons. d. 3. C.
accepisti qualis vestis erit, talia cornua gerit. Hic notandum est. That in
this respect the Pleaders, Litigants and Law-Suiters are happier than the
Officers, Ministers and Administrators of Justice: For beatus est dare quam
accipere. F. Com. L. 3. extra de celcb* Miss. cum Matthae and 24. Quaest. 1.
Cap. Od. Gl. Affectum dantis pensat censura tonantis. Thus becomes the Action
or Process, by their care and industry, to be of a complete and goodly bulk,
well shaped, framed, formed, and fashioned according to the Canonical Gloss.
Accipe, sum, cape, sunt verba placentia Papae. Which Speech has been more
clearly explained by Alb. de Res. in verbo Roma. Roma manus rodit, quas rodere
non valet, odit.
Dantes custodit, non dantes spernit, and odit.
The Reason whereof is thought to be this: Ad praesens ova, cras pullis sunt
meliora. Ut est Gl. in L. quum H.F. de Transact. Nor is this all, for the
inconvenience of the contrary is set down in H. C. de Allu. L. F. Quum labor in
damno est, crescit mortalis egestas. In confirmation whereof we find, that the
true Etymology and Exposition of the word Process is Purchase, viz. of good
store of Money to the Lawyers, and of many Poaks, id est, Prou-Sacks, to the
Pleaders, upon which Subject we have most Celestial Quips, Gybes, and Girds.
Litigando jura crescunt, litigando jus acquiritur. Item Gl. in Cap. illud
extrem. de praesumpt. and C. de prob. L. instram. L. non Epistolis L. non nudis.

Et si non prosunt singula, multa juvant. Yea, but (asked Trinquamelle) how do
you proceed, (my Friend) in Criminal Causes, the culpable and guilty Party
being taken and seized upon, Flagrante Crimine? Even as your other Worships use
to do (answered Bridlegoose): First, I permit the Plaintiff to depart from the
Court, enjoining him not to presume to return thither, till he preallably,
should have taken a good sound and profound Sleep, which is to serve for the
prime Entry and Introduction to the Legal carrying on of the Business. In the
next place, a formal Report is to be made to me of his having slept. Thirdly, I
issue forth a Warrant to convent him before me. Fourthly, He is to produce a
sufficient and authentic Attestation, of his having thoroughly and entirely
sleeped, conform to the Gloss. 22. Quest. 7. Si quis cum.

Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. Being thus far advanced in the Formality of
the Process, I find that this Consopiating Act engenders another Act, whence
arises the articulating of a Member; that again produces a Third Act,
fashionative of another Member; which Third bringing forth a Fourth,
Procreative of another Act: New Members in a no fewer Number are shapen and
framed, one still breeding, and begetting another (as Link after Link, the Coat
of Mail at length is made) till thus, Piece after Piece, by little and little,
like Information upon Information, the Process be completely well formed, and
perfect in all his Members. Finally, having proceeded this length, I have
recourse to my Dice, nor is it to be thought, that this interruption, respit,
or interpellation, is by me occasioned without very good reason inducing me
thereunto, and a notable Experience of a most convincing and irrefragable force.

I remember, on a time, that in the Camp at Stockholm, there was a certain
Gascon named Gratianauld, Native of the Town of Saint Sever, who having lost
all his Money at Play, and consecutively being very angry thereat, as you know,
Pecunia est alius sanguis ut ait Anto. de Burtio, MC. accedens 2. extra ut lit.
non contest and Bald. in L. si tuis C. de op. Lib. per not. and L. advocati. C.
de advo. diu. Iud. pecunia est vita hominis and optimus fide jusser in
necessitatibus: Did, at his coming forth of the Gaming-House, in the presence
of the whole Company that was there, with a very loud Voice, speak in his own
Language these following words: Pap. cap. de bious nillots que maux depipes
rous tresire: aresque de pergudes sont les mires bingt, and quovatre bagnelles,
ta pla done rien pies cruz and Patacts, Scy de Gum de bons aulx, qui boille
trequar ambe Iou a Belsambiz. Finding that none would make him any Answer, he
passed from thence to that part of the Leaguer, where the huff, snuff,
honder-sponder, swash-buckling High Germans were, to whom he renewed these very
Terms, provoking them to fight with him; but all the Return he had from them to
his stout Challenge, was only, Der Gasconner that schich, usz. mitt. cim. iedem
zeselage aberer is it genegrer au staclen darum liebem fram ve hend serg au
inverm hausraut. Finding also, that none of that Band of Teutonick Soldiers
offered himself to the Combat; he passed to that Quarter of the Leaguer where
the French Free-booting Adventures were encamped, and reiterating unto them,
what he had before repeated to the Dutch Warriors, challenged them likewise to
fight with him, and therewithal made some pretty little Gasconado frisking
Gambols, to oblige them the more cheerfully and gallantly to cope with him in
the Lists of a Duellizing Engagement; but no Answer at all was made unto him.
Whereupon the Gascon despairing of meeting with any Antagonists, departed from
thence, and laying himself down, not far from the Pavilions of the grand
Christian Cavalier, Crissie fell fast asleep. When he had thoroughly sleeped an
hour or two, another adventurous and all-hazarding Blade of the Forlorn Hope of
the lavishingly wasting Gamesters, having also lost all his Moneys, sallied
forth with a Sword in his Hand, of a firm Resolution to fight with the
aforesaid Gascon, seeing he had lost as well as he. Ploratur lachrym^s amissa
pecunia veris. Says the Gl. de poenitent. distinct. 2. C. sunt plures. To this
effect having made enquiry and search for him throughout the whole Camp, and in
sequel thereof found him asleep, he said unto him, Up, ho, good Fellow, in Name
of all the Devils of Hell rise up, rise up, get up; I have lost my Money as
well as thou have done, let us therefore go fight lustily together, grapple and
scuffle it to some purpose: Thou may see that; and look, my Tuck is no
longer then thy Rapier. The Gascon altogether astonished at his unexpected
provocation, without altering his former Dialect, spoke thus: Cap de Saint
Arnault, qu'au segs tu qui me rebeillez? Que mande taberne te gire: Ho Saint
Siobe Cab. de Gascoigne tapla do my Iou, quand a quest ta quam me bringu estae.
The ventrous Royster inviteth him again to the Duel; but the Gascon, without
condescending to his desire, said only this: Hepauvres Iet' esquinerie ares que
son plat reposat: vene impaur que te pansat comme Iou peusse truquete. Thus in
forgetting his loss, he forgot the eagerness which he had to fight. In
conclusion, after that the other had likeways sleeped a little, they instead of
fighting, and possibly killing one another, went jointly to a Sutler's Tent,
where they drank together very amicably, each upon the pawn of his Sword. Thus
by a little Sleep was pacified the ardent fury of two warlike Champions. There,
Gossip, comes the Golden Word of Ihon Andr. in Cap. ult. de Sent. and rejudic.
L. Sexto.

Sedendo, and dormiendo fit anima prudens. CHAP. XLIII. How Pantagruel excuses
Bridlegoose, in the matter of Sentencing Actions at Law, by the Chance of the
Dice.
WIth this Bridlegoose held his peace. Whereupon Trinquamelle bid them withdraw
from the Court; which accordingly was done: and then directed his Discourse to
Pantagruel, after this manner. It is fitting (most illustrious Prince) not only
by reason of the deep Obligations, wherein this present Parliament, together
with the whole Marquisate of Merlingues, stand bound to your Royal Highness,
for the innumerable Benefits, which as effects of mere Grace, they have
received from your Incomperable Bounty; but for that excellent Wit also, prime
Judgment, and admirable Learning wherewith Almighty God, the Giver of all Good
Things, has most richly qualified and endowed you, we tender and present unto
you the Decision of this new, strange, and Paradoxical Case of Bridlegoose; who
in your presence, to your both hearing and seeing, has plainly confessed his
final judging and determinating of Suits of Law, by the mere Chance and Fortune
of the Dice: therefore do we beseech you, that you may be pleased to give
Sentence therein, as unto you shall seem most just and equitable. To this
Pantagruel answered: Gentlemen, It is not unknown to you, how my Condition is
somewhat remote from the Profession of deciding Law-Controversies; yet seeing
you are pleased to do me the Honor to put that Task upon me, instead of
undergoing the Office of a Judge, I will become your humble Supplicant: I
observe, Gentlemen, in this Bridlegoose, several things, which induce me to
represent before you, that it is my Opinion he should be pardoned. In the First
place, his Old Age. Secondly, His Simplicity: To both which Qualities our
Statute and Common Laws, Civil and Municipal together, allow many excuses for
any slips or escapes, which through the invincible Imperfection of either, have
been inconsiderately stumbled upon by a Person so qualified. Thirdly,
Gentlemen, I must needs display before you another Case, which in Equity and
Justice makes much for the advantage of Bridlegoose: to wit, that this one,
sole, and single fault of his, ought to be quite forgotten, abolished, and
swallowed up, by that immense and vast Ocean of Just Dooms and Sentences, which
heretofore he has given and pronounced: his Demeanours for these Forty Years
and upwards, that he has been a Judge, having been so evenly balanced in the
Scales of Uprightness, that Envy itself, till now, could not have been so
impudent as to accuse and twit him with any Act worthy of a Check or
Reprehension: As if a Drop of the Sea were thrown into the Loire, none could
perceive, or say, that by this single Drop, the whole River should be salt and
brackish.

Truly, it seems unto me, that in the whole Series of Bridlegoose's Juridical
Decrees, there has been, I know not what, of extraordinary savouring of the
unspeakable Benignity of God, that all those his preceding Sentences, Awards,
and Judgments, have been confirmed and approved of by your selves, in this
your own Venerable and Sovereign Court: for it is usual (as you know well) with
him whose ways are inscrutable, to manifest his own ineffable Glory, in
blunting the perspicacy of the Eyes of the Wise, in weakening the Strength of
potent Oppressors, in depressing the Pride of rich Extortioners, and in
erecting, comforting, protecting, supporting, upholding, and shoaring up the
poor, feeble, humble, silly, and foolish Ones of the Earth. But waving all
these matters, I shall only beseech you, not by the Obligations which you
pretend to owe to my Family, for which I thank you; but for that constant and
unfeigned Love and Affection which you have always found in me, both on this
and on the other side of Loire, for the Maintenance and Establishment of your
Places, Offices, and Dignities, that for this one time, you would pardon and
forgive him, upon these two Conditions: First, That he satisfy, or put a
sufficient Surety for the Satisfaction of the Party wronged by the Injustice of
the Sentence in question: for the fulfillment of this Article, I will provide
sufficiently. And Secondly, That for his subsidiary Aid in the weighty Charge
of Administrating Justice, you would be pleased to appoint, and assign unto him
some pretty, little, virtuous Counselor, younger, learneder, and wiser then
he, by the Square and Rule of whose Advice he may regulate, guide, temper and
moderate in times coming all his Judiciary Procedures, or otherways, if you
intend totally to depose him from his Office, and to deprive him altogether of
the State and Dignity of a Judge, I shall cordially entreat you to make a
Present and free Gift of him to me, who shall find in my Kingdoms Charges and
Employments enough wherewith to imbusie him, for the bettering of his own
Fortunes, and furtherance of my Service. In the mean time, I implore the
Creator, Savior and Sanctifyer of all good things, in their Grace, Mercy and
Kindness to preserve you all now and evermore, World without end.

These Words thus spoken, Pantagruel vayling his Cap, and making a Leg with
such a Majestic Garb as became a Person of his paramount Degree and Eminency,
farewell'd Trinquamelle the President, and Master Speaker of that Merlinguesian
Parliament, took his leave of the whole Court, and went out of the Chamber; at
the Door whereof finding Panurge, Epistemon, Friar Ihon, and others, he
forthwith attended by them, walked to the utter Gate, where all them
immediately took Horse to return toward Gargantua. Pantagruel by the way
related to them from point to point, the manner of Bridlegoose's sententiating
Differences at Law. Friar Ihon said, that he had seen Peter Dandin, and was
acquainted with him at that time when he sojourned in the Monastery of Fontaine
le Conte, under the Noble Abbot Ardillon. Gymnast likeways affirmed, that he
was in the Tent of the Grand Christian Cavallier de Cressie, when the Gascon,
after his Sleep, made answer to the Adventurer. Panurge was somewhat
incredulous in the matter of believing, that it was morally possible.
Bridlegoose should have been for such a long space of time so continually
fortunate in that Aleatory way of deciding Law Debates. Epistemon said to
Pantagruel, Such another Story, not much unlike to that, in all the
Circumstances thereof, is vulgarly reported of the Provost of Montlehery. In
good sooth, such a Perpetuity of good Luck is to be wondered at. To have hit
right twice or thrice in a Judgment so given by Hap-hazard* might have fallen
out well enough, especially in Controversies that were ambiguous, intricate,
abstruse, perplexed and obscure.

CHAP. XLIV. How Pantagruel relates a strange History of the Perplexity of
Humane Judgment.
SEeing you talk (quoth Pantagruel) of dark, difficult, hard and knotty
Debates, I will tell you of one controverted before Cneius Dolobella, Proconsul
in Asia. The Case was this.

A Wife in Smyrna had of her first Husband a Child named Abece; he dying, she
after the expiring of a Year and Day, married again, and to her Second Husband
bore a Boy called Edege: A pretty long time thereafter it happened (as you know
the Affection of Step-fathers and Step-dams is very rare, toward the Children
of the first Fathers and Mothers deceased) that this Husband, with the help of
his Son Edege, secretly, wittingly, willingly and treacherously murdered
Abece. The Woman came no sooner to get Information of the Fact, that it might
not go unpunished, she caused kill them both, to revenge the Death of her first
Son. She was Apprehended and carried before Cneius Dolobella, in whose
Presence, she, without dissembling any thing, confessed all that was laid to
her Charge; yet alleged that she had both Right and Reason on her side for the
killing of them. Thus was the state of the Question. He found the business so
dubious and intricate, that he knew not what to determine therein, nor which of
the Parties to incline to. On the one hand, it was an execrable Crime to cut
off at once both her Second Husband and her Son. On the other hand, the Cause
of the Murder seemed to be so natural, as to be grounded upon the Law of
Nations, and the rational Instinct of all the People of the World; seeing they
two together had feloniously and murtherously destroyed her first Son. Not that
they had been in any manner of way* wronged, outraged or injured by him, but
out of an avaricious Intent to possess his Inheritance. In this doubtful
Quandary and Uncertainty what to pitch upon, he sent to the Areopagites then
sitting at Athens, to learn and obtain their Advice and Judgment. That
Judicious Senate very sagely perpending the Reasons of his Perplexity, sent him
word, to summon her personally to compear before him, a precise Hundred Years
thereafter* to answer to some Interrogatories touching certain Points, which
were not contained in the Verbal Defense: Which Resolution of theirs did
import, that it was in their Opinion a so difficult and inextricable a matter,
that they knew not what to say or judge therein. Who had decided that Plea by
the Chance and Fortune of the Dice, could not have erred nor awarded amiss on
which side soever he had past his casting and condemnatory Sentence: If against
the Woman, she deserved Punishment for usurping Sovereign Authority, by taking
that Vengeance at her own hand, the inflicting whereof was only competent to
the Supreme Power, to administer Justice in Criminal Cases: If for her, the
just Resentment of a so atrocious Injury done unto her, in murdering her
innocent Son, did fully excuse and vindicate her of any Trespass or Offense
about that particular committed by her. But this continuation of Bridlegoose
for so many years, still hitting the Nail on the Head, never missing the Mark,
and always judging aright, by the mere throwing of the Dice, and the Chance
thereof, is that which most astonisheth and amazeth me. To answer (quoth
Epistemon) categorically to that which you wonder at, I must ingeniously
confess and avow that I cannot; yet conjecturally to guess at the reason of it,
I would refer the Cause of that marvelously long continued happy Success in the
Judiciary Results of his Definitive Sentences to the favorable Aspect of the
Heavens, and Benignity of the Intelligences; who, out of their love to
Goodness, after having contemplated the pure Simplicity and sincere
Unfeignedness of Judge Bridlegoose in the acknowledgment of his Inabilities,
did regulate that for him by Chance, which by the profoundest Act of his
maturest Deliberation he was not able to reach unto. That likeways which
possibly made him to diffide in his own Skill and Capacity, notwithstanding his
being an expert and understanding Lawyer, for any thing that I know to the
contrary, was the Knowledge and Experience which he had of the Antenomies,
Contrarieties, Antilogies, Contradictions, Traversings and Thwartings of Laws,
Customs, Edicts, Statutes, Orders and Ordinances, in which dangerous
Opposition, Equity and Justice being structured and founded on either of the
opposite Terms, and a Gap being thereby opened for the ushering in of Injustice
and Iniquity, through the various Interpretations of Self ended Lawyers, being
assuredly persuaded that the Infernal Calumniator, who frequently transformeth
himself into the likeness of a Messenger or Angel of Light, makes use of these
cross Glosses and Expositions in the Mouths and Pens of his Ministers and
Servants, the perverse Advocates, bribing Judges, Law-monging Attorneys,
prevaricating Counselors, and other such like Law-wrestling Members of a Court
of Justice, to turn by those means Black to White, Green to Gray, and what is
Straight to a Crooked ply; for the more expedient doing whereof these
Diabolical Ministers make both the Pleading Parties believe that their Cause is
just and righteous; for it is well known that there is no Cause how bad soever,
which does not find an Advocate to patrocinate and defend it, else would there
be no Process in the World, no Suits at Law, nor Pleadings at the Bar. He did
in these Extremities, as I conceive, most humbly recommend the Direction of his
Judicial Proceedings to the upright Judge of Judges, God Almighty; did submit
himself to the Conduct and Guideship of the blessed Spirit, in the Hazard and
Perplexity of the Definitive Sentence; and by this Aleatory Lot, did as it were
implore and explore the Divine Decree of his Good Will and Pleasure, in stead
of that which we call the Final Judgment of a Court. To this effect, to the
better attaining to his purpose, which was to judge righteously, he did in my
Opinion throw and turn the Dice, to the end, that by the Providence aforesaid,
the best Chance might fall to him whose Action was uprightest, and backed with
greatest Reason; in doing whereof he did not stray from the Sense of
Talmudists, who say that there is so little harm in that manner of searching
the Truth, that in the Anxiety and Perplexedness of Humane Wits, God oftentimes
manifests the Secret Pleasure of his Divine Will.

Furthermore, I will neither think nor say, nor can I believe, that the
unstreightness is so irregular, or the Corruption so evident, of those of the
Parliament of Mirlingois in Mirlingues, before whom Bridlegoose was Arraigned
for Prevarication, that they will maintain it to be a worse Practice to have
the Decision of a Suit at Law referred to the Chance and Hazard of a Throw of
the Dice, hab nab, or luck as it will, than to have it remitted to, and past by
the Determination of those whose Hands are full of Blood, and Hearts of wry
Affections. Besides that, their principal Direction in all Law-matters comes to
their Hands from one Tribonian, a wicked, miscreant, barbarous, faithless and
perfidious Knave, so pernicious, injust, avaricious and perverse in his ways,
that it was his ordinary custom to sell Laws, Edicts, Declarations,
Constitutions and Ordinances, as at an Outroop or Putsale, to him who offered
most for them. Thus did he shape Measures for the Pleaders, and cut their
Morsels to them by and out of these little Parcels, Fragments, Bits, Scantlings
and Shreds of the Law now in use, altogether concealing, suppressing,
disannulling and abolishing the remainder, which did make for the total Law;
fearing that if the whole Law were made manifest and laid open to the knowledge
of such as are interessed in it, and the Learned Books of the Ancient Doctors
of the Law, upon the Exposition of the Twelve Tables and Praetorian Edicts, his
villainous Pranks, Naughtiness and vile Impiety should come to the public
notice of the World. Therefore were it better in my Conceit, that is to say,
less inconvenient, that Parties at Variance in any Juridicial Case, should in
the dark march upon Caltropes, then to submit the Determination of what is
their Right to such unhallowed Sentences and horrible Decrees: As Cato in his
time wished and advised, that every Judiciary Court should be paved with
Caltropes.

CHAP. XLV. How Panurge takes Advice of Triboulet.
ON the sixth Day thereafter Pantagruel was returned home, at the very same
hour that Triboulet was by Water come from Blois. Panurge at his Arrival gave
him a Hogs Bladder, puffed up with Wind, and resounding, because of the hard
Pease that were within it: Moreover he did present him with a guilt Wooden
Sword, a hollow Budget made of a Tortoise shell, an Osier Watled Wicker-Bottle
full of Briton Wine, and Five and Twenty Apples of the Orchard of Blanduc^.

If he be such a Fool (quoth Carpalin) as to be won with Apples, there is no
more Wit in his Pate than in the Head of an ordinary Cabbage. Triboulet girded
the Sword and Scrip to his^side, took the Bladder in his Hand, ate some few of
the Apples, and drunk up all the Wine Panurge very wistly and heedfully looking
upon him, said, I never yet saw a Fool, (and I have seen ten thousand Franks
worth of that kind of Cattle) who did not love to drink heartily, and by good
long Draughts. When Triboulet had done with his Drinking, Panurge laid out
before him, and exposed the Sum of the business, wherein he was to require his
Advice in eloquent and choicely-sorted Terms, adorned with Flourishes of
Rhetoric. But before he had altogether done, Triboulet with his Fist gave him
a bouncing Whirret between the Shoulders, rendered back into his Hand again the
empty Bottle, filipped and flirted him on the Nose with the Hogs Bladder; and
lastly, for a final resolution, shaking and wagging his Head strongly and
disorderly, he answered nothing else but this, By God, God; mad Fool, beware
the Monk: Buzansay, Hornepipe. These Words thus finished, he slipped himself
out of the Company, went aside, and rattling the Bladder, took a huge Delight in
the Melody of the rickling, crackling noise of the Pease; after which time it
lay not in the power of them all to draw out of his Chaps the Articulate Sound
of one Syllable; insomuch that when Panurge went about to interrogate him
further, Triboulet drew his Wooden Sword, and would have stuck him therewith. I
have fished fair now, (quoth Panurge) and brought my Pigs to a fine Market.
Have I not got a brave Determination of all my Doubts, and a Responce in all
things agreeable to the Oracle that gave it? He is a great Fool that is not to
be denied; yet is he a greater Fool who brought him hither to me. That Bolt,
quoth Carpalin, levels point blank at me; but of the three I am the greatest
Fool, who did impart the Secret of my Thoughts to such an Idiot Ass and Native
Ninny.

Without putting our selves to any stir or trouble in the least, (quoth
Pantagruel) let us maturely and seriously consider and perpend the Gestures and
Speech which he has made and uttered: In them veritably (quoth he) have I
remarked and observed some excellent and notable Mysteries; yea, of such
important and worth and weight, that I shall never henceforth be astonished,
nor think strange, why the Turks with a great deal of Worship and Reverence,
Honor and Respect Natural Fools, equally with their Primest Doctors, Mufties,
Divines and Prophets. Did not you take heed (quoth he) a little before he
opened his Mouth to speak, what a shogging* shaking and wagging his Head did
keep? By the approved Doctrine of the ancient Philosophers, the customary
Ceremonies of the most expert Magicians, and the received Opinions of the
learnedest Lawyers, such a brangling Agitation and Moving should by us all be
judged to proceed from, and be quickened and suscitated by the coming and
Inspiration of the Prophetizing and Fatielical Spirit, which entering briskly,
and on a sudden, into a shallow Receptacle of a debil Substance (for as you
know, and as the Proverb shows it, a little Head contains not much Brains)
was the cause of that Commotion. This is conform to what is avouched by the
most skilful Physicians, when they affirm, that Shakings and Tremblings fall
upon the Members of a Humane Body, partly because of the Heaviness and violent
Impetuosity of the Burden and Load that is carried, and other part, by reason
of the Weakness and Imbecility that is in the virtue of the bearing Organ: A
manifest Example whereof appears in those, who fasting, are not able to carry
to their Head a great Goblet full of Wine without a trembling and a shaking in
the Hand that holds it. This of old was accounted a Prefiguration and mystical
pointing out of the Pythian Divineress, who used always before the uttering of
a Responce from the Oracle, to shake a Branch of her Domestic Laurel.
Lampridius also testifies, that the Emperor Heliogabulus, to acquire unto
himself the Reputation of a Sooth-sayer, did, on several Holy Days of prime
Solemnity, in the Presence of the Fanatic Rabble, make the Head of his Idol,
by some slight within the Body thereof, publicly to shake. Plautus, in his
Asserie, declares likeways, that Saurius, whithersoever he walked like one
quite distracted of his Wits, keeps such a furious lolling and mad-like
shaking of his Head, that he commonly affrighted those who casually met with
him in his Way. The said Author in another place showing a Reason why Charmides
shook and brangled his Head, assevered that he was transported, and in an
Ecstasy. Catullus after the same manner makes mention in his Berecynthia and
Atys, of the place wherein the Menades, Bacchical Women, She Priests of the
Lyaean God, and demented Prophetesses, carrying Ivy Boughs in their hands, did
shake their Heads. As in the like case amongst the Gauls, the guelded Priests
of Cybele were wont to do in the celebrating of some Festivals, which according
to the sense of the ancient Theologues, have from thence had their
Denomination; for (...) signifies to turn round, whirl about, shake the Head,
and play the part of one that is wry-necked.

Semblably Titus Livius writes, that in the Solemnization time of the
Bacchanalian Fobedayes at Rome, both Men and Women seemed to Prophetize and
Vaticinate, because of an affected kind of wagging of the Head, shrugging of
the Shoulders, and Jectigation of the whole Body, which they used then most
punctually. For the common Voice of the Philosophers, together with the Opinion
of the People, asserteth for an irrefragable Truth, that Vaticination is seldom
by the Heavens bestowed on any, without the Concomitancy of a little Frenzy,
and a Head shaking, not only when the said presaging Virtue is infused, but
when the Person also therewith inspired declares and manifests it unto
others. The Learned Lawyer Iulien, being asked on a time, if that Slave might
be truly esteemed to be healthful and in a good plight, who had not only
conversed with some furious, maniack and enraged People, but in their Company
had also prophesied, yet without a Noddle-shaking Concussion, answered, That
seeing there was no Head-wagging at the time of his Predictions, he might be
held for sound and compotent enough. Is it not daily seen how Schoolmasters,
Teachers, Tutors and Instructors of Children, shake the Heads of their
Disciples, (as one would do a Pot in holding it by the Lugs) that by this
Erection, Vellication, stretching and pulling their Ears, (which according to
the Doctrine of the sage Egyptians, is a Member consecrated to the Memory) they
may stir them up to recollect their scattered Thoughts, bring home those
Fancies of theirs, which perhaps have been extravagantly roaming abroad upon
strange and uncouth Objects, and totally range their Judgments, which possibly
by disordinate Affections have been made wild, to the Rule and Pattean of a
wise, discreet, virtuous and Philosophical Discipline: All which Virgil
acknowledges to be true, in the branglement of Apollo Cynthius.

CHAP. XLVI. How Pantagruel and Panurge diversely interpret the Words of
Triboulet.
HE says you are a Fool; and what kind of Fool? A mad Fool, who in your old Age
would enslave your self to the Bondage of Matrimony, and shut your Pleasures up
within a Wedlock, whose Key some Ruffian* carries in his Codpiece. He says
furthermore, beware of the Monk. Upon mine Honor, it gives me in my mind, that
you will be cuckolded by a Monk. Nay, I will engage mine Honor, which is the
most precious Pawn I could have in my Possession, although I were sole and
peaceable Dominator over all Europe, Asia, and Africa, that if you marry, you
will surely be one of the Horned Brotherhood of Vulcan. Hereby may you perceive
how much I do attribute to the wise Foolery of our Morosoph Triboulet. The
other Oracles and Responses did in the general prognosticate you a Cuckold,
without descending so near to the point of a particular Determination, as to
pitch upon what Vocation, amongst the several sorts of Men, he should profess
who is to be the Copesmate of your Wife, and Hornifyer of your proper self.
Thus noble Triboulet tells it us plainly, from whose Words we may gather with
all ease imaginary, that your Cuckoldry is to be infamous, and so much the more
scandalous, that your Conjugal Bed will be incestuously contaminated with the
Filthiness of a Monkery Lecher. Moreover he says, that you will be the
Hornepipe of Buzansay. That is to say, well horned, hornified and cornuted: And
as Triboulet's Uncle asked from Lewis the Twelfth, for a younger Brother of his
own who lived at Blois, the Hornepipes of Buzansay, for the Organ Pipes,
through the mistake of one Word for another: Even so, whilst you think to marry
a wise, humble, calm, discreet and honest Wife, you shall unhappily stumble
upon one witless, proud, loud, obstreperous, bawling, clamourous, and more
unpleasant than any Buzansay-hornepipe. Consider withal, how he flirted you on
the Nose with the Bladder, and gave you a sound thumping Blow with his Fist
upon the ridge of the Back. This denotates and presageth, that you shall be
banged, beaten and filipped by her; and that also she will steal of your Goods
from you, as you stole the Hogs Bladder from the little Boys of Vaubreton. Plat
contrary (quoth Panurge) not that I would impudently exempt my self from being
a Vassal in the Territory of Folly; I hold of that Jurisdiction, and am subject
thereto, I confess it; and why should I not? for the whole World is foolish. In
the old Lorrain Language (fou for oou) All and Fool were the same thing.
Besides it is avouched by Solomon, that infinite is the number of Fools: From
an Infinity nothing can be deducted or abated; nor yet by the Testimony of
Aristotle, can any thing thereto be added or subjoyned. Therefore were I a mad
Fool, if being a Fool I should not hold my self a Fool. After the same manner
of speaking, we may averr the number of the mad and enraged Folks to be
infinite. Avicenne makes no Bones to assert, that the several kinds of Madness
are infinite.

Though this much of Triboulet's words tend little to my Advantage, how be it
the Prejudice which I sustain thereby be common with me to all other Men, yet
the rest of his Talk and Gesture makes altogether for me. He said to my Wife,
Be weary of the Monky; that is as much, as if he should be chery, and take as
much delight in a Monky as ever did the Lesbia of Catullus in her Sparrow; who
will for his Recreation pass his time no less joyfully at the exercise of
snatching Flies, then heretofore did the merciless Flycatcher Domitian. Withal
he meant by another part of his Discourse, that she should be of a Jovial
Country-like Humor, as gay and pleasing as a harmonious Hornepipe of Saulian
or Buzansy. The veridical Triboulet did therein hint at what I liked well, as
perfectly knowing the Inclinations and Propensions of my Mind, my natural
Disposition, and the Biass of my Interior Passions and Affections: For you may
be assured, that my Humor is much better satisfied and contented with the
pretty frolic rural discheveled Shepheardesses, whose Bums through their
course Canvas Smocks smell of the Claver-grass of the Field, than with those
great Ladies in Magnifick Courts, with their Flandan, Top-knots and Sultana's,
their Polvil, Postillo's and Cosmeticks. The homely sound likeways of a
Rustical Hornepipe, is more agreeable to my Ears, than the curious Warbling and
musical Quavering of Lutes, Teorbes, Viols, Rebecks and Violins. He gave me a
lusty rapping thwack on my Back. What then? Let it pass in the Name and for the
Love of God, as an Abatement of, and Deduction from so much of my future Pains
in Purgatory. He did it not out of any evil intent: He thought belike to have
hit some of the Pages: He is an honest Fool, and an innocent Changeling. It is
a Sin to harbor in the Heart any bad Conceit of him. As for my self, I
heartily pardon him. He flirted me on the Nose: In that there is no harm; for
it imports nothing else, but that betwixt my Wife and me there will occur
some toyish wanton Tricks, which usually happen to all new married Folks.

CHAP. XLVII. How Pantagruel and Panurge resolved to make a Visit to the Oracle
of the Holy Bottle.
THere is as yet another Point (quoth Panurge) which you have not at all
considered on, although it be the chief and principal Head of the matter. He
put the Bottle in my hand, and restored it me again. How interpret you that
Passage? What is the meaning of that? He possibly (quoth Pantagruel) signifies
thereby, that your Wife will be such a Drunkard, as shall daily take in her
Liquor kindly, and ply the Pots and Bottles apace. Quite otherways (quoth
Panurge) for the Bottle was empty. I swear to you, by the prickling brambly
Thorn of St. Fiacre in Brie, that our unique Morosoph, whom I formerly termed
the Lunatic Triboulet, refers me, for attaining to the final Resolution of
my Scruple, to the Response-giving Bottle: Therefore do I renew afresh the
first Vow which I made, and here in your Presence protest and make Oath by Styx
and Acheron, to carry still Spectacles in my Cap, and never to wear a Codpiece
in my Breeches, until upon the Enterprise in hand of my Nuptial Undertaking, I
shall have obtained an Answer from the Holy Bottle. I am acquainted with a
prudent, understanding, and discreet Gentleman, and besides a very good Friend
of mine, who knows the Land, Country, and Place where its Temple and Oracle
is built and posited: He will guide and conduct us thither sure and safely. Let
us go thither, I beseech you: Deny me not, and say not, Nay; reject not the
Suit I make unto you, I entreat you. I will be to you an Achates, a Damis, and
heartily accompany you all along in the whole Voyage, both in your going forth
and coming back. I have of a long time known you to be a great Lover of
Peregrination, desirous still to learn new things, and still to see what you
had never seen before.

Very willingly (quoth Pantagruel) I condescend to your Request. But before we
enter in upon our Progress toward the Accomplishment of so far a Journey,
replenished and fraught with eminent Perils, full of innumerable Hazards, and
every way stored with evident and manifest Dangers. What Dangers (quoth
Panurge) interrupting him? Dangers fly back, run from, and shun me whither
soever I go seven Leagues around: As in the Presence of the Sovereign a
subordinate Magistracy is eclipsed; or as Clouds and Darkness quite evanish at
the bright coming of a Radiant Sun; or as all Sores and Sicknesses did suddenly
depart, at the approach of the Body of St. Martin Aquande: Nevertheless (quoth
Pantagruel) before we adventure to set forwards on the Road of our projected
and intended Voyage, some few Points are to be discussed, expedited and
dispatched. First, Let us send back Triboulet to Blois, (which was instantly
done, after that Pantagruel had given him a Frize Coat.) Secondly, Our Design
must be backed with the Advice and Counsel of the King my Father. And Lastly,
It is most needful and expedient for us, that we search for, and find out some
Sybille to serve us for a Guide, Truchman and Interpreter. To this Panurge made
answer, That his Friend Xenomanes would abundantly suffice for the plenary
Discharge and Performance of the Sybil's Office; and that furthermore, in
passing through the Lanternatory Revelling Country, they should take along with
them a Learned and profitable Lantern, which would be no less useful to them
in their Voyage, than was that of the Sybil to Aeneas in his Descent to the
Elysian Fields. Carpalin in the interim, as he was upon the conducting away of
Triboulet, in his passing by, hearkened a little to the Discourse they were
upon, then spoke out, saying, Ho, Panurge, Master Freeman, take my Lord Debitis
at Calais along with you, for he is Goud-fallot, a good Fellow: He will not
forget those who have been Debitors: These are Lanternes: Thus shall you not
lack for both Fallot and Lantern. I may safely with the little Skill I have
(quoth Pantagruel) prognosticate, that by the way we shall engender no
Melancholy; I clearly perceive it already: The only thing that vexes me is,
that I cannot speak the Lanternatorie Language. I shall (answered Panurge)
speak for you all; I understand it every whit as well as I do mine own Maternal
Tongue, I have been no less used to it than to the Vulgar French.

Briz mara dalgotbrick nubstzenos
Isqufez prusque alboriz crinqs zabac
Mizbe dilbarlkz morp nipp stanch bac
Srombtz, Paurg, walmap quost grufzbac.
Now guess, Friend Epistemon, what this is. They are (quoth Epistemon) Names of
errand Devils, paissant Devils, and rampant Devils. These words of thine, dear
friend of mine, are true (quoth Panurge) yet are they Terms used in the
Language of the Court of the Lanternish People. By the way as we go upon our
Journey I will make to thee a pretty little Dictionary, which notwithstanding
shall not last you much longer than a Pair of new Shoes; thou shall have
learned it sooner than thou can perceive the Dawning of the next subsequent
Morning. What I have said in the foregoing Tetrastick is thus translated out of
the Lanternish Tongue into our Vulgar Dialect.

All Miseries attended me, whilst I
A Lover was, and had no good thereby:
Of better Luck the married People tell,
Panurge is one of those, and knows it well.
There is little more then (quoth Pantagruel) to be done, but that we
understand what the Will of the King my Father will be therein, and purchase
his Consent.

CHAP. XLVIII. How Gargantua shows, that the Children ought not to marry
without the special Knowledge and Advice of their Fathers and Mothers.
NO sooner had Pantagruel entered in at the Door of the Great Hall of the
Castle, than that he encountered full but with the good honest Gargantua coming
forth from the Council Board, unto whom he made a succinct and summary
Narrative of what had passed and occurred worthy of his Observation in his
Travels abroad* since their last Interview: Then, acquainting him with the
Design he had in hand, besought him that it might stand wi^h his good Will and
Pleasure to grant him leave to prosecute and go thorough-stitch with the
Enterprise which he had undertaken. The good Man Gargantua having in one hand
two great Bundles of Petitions, indorsed and answered; and in the other some
remembrancing Notes and Bills, to put him in mind of such other Requests of
Supplicants, which albeit presented, had nevertheless been neither read nor
heard, he gave both to Ulrich Gallet, his ancient and faithful Master of
Requests; then drew aside Pantagruel, and with a Countenance more serene and
jovial than customary, spoke to him thus: I praise God, and have great reason
so to do, my most dear Son, that he has been pleased to entertain in you a
constant Inclination to virtuous Actions. I am well content that the Voyage
which you have motioned to me be by you accomplished, but withal, I could wish
you would have a mind and desire to marry, for that I see you are of competent
years. Panurge in the mean while was in a readiness of preparing and providing
for Remedies, Salves and Cures against all such Lets, Obstacles and Impediments
as he could in the height of his Fancy conceive might by Gargantua be cast in
the way of their Itinerary Design. Is it your Pleasure (most dear Father) that
you speak? (answered Pantagruel) For my part I have not yet thought upon it. In
all this Affair I wholly submit and rest in your good liking and Paternal
Authority: For I shall rather pray unto God that he would throw me down stark
dead at your Feet, in your Pleasure, then that against your pleasure I should
be found married alive. I never yet heard that by any Law, whether Sacred or
Profane, yea, amongst the rudest and most barbarous Nations in the World, it
was allowed and approved of, that Children may be suffered and tolerated to
marry at their own good Will and Pleasure, without the Knowledge, Advice or
Consent asked and had thereto of their Fathers, Mothers, and nearest Kindred.
All Legislators every where upon the Face of the whole Earth, have taken away
and removed this Licentious Liberty from Children, and totally reserved it to
the Discretion of the Parents.

My dearly beloved Son (quoth Gargantua) I believe you, and from my Heart thank
God for having endowed you with the Grace of having both a perfect notice of,
and entire liking to laudable and praise^worthy things; and that through the
Windows of your exterior Senses he has vouchsafed to transmit unto the
interior Faculties of your Mind, nothing but what is good and virtuous. For in
my time there has been found on the Continent a certain Country, wherein are I
know not what kind of Pastophorian Mole-catching Priests, who albeit averse
from engaging their proper Persons into a Matrimonial Duty, like the Pontifical
Flamens of Cibele in Phrygia, as if they were Capons and not Cocks; full of
Lasciviousness, Salacity and Wantonness, who yet have nevertheless, in the
matter of Conjugal Affairs, taken upon them to prescribe Laws and Ordinances to
married Folks. I cannot goodly determine what I should most abhor, detest,
loath and abominate, whether the Tyrannical Presumption of those dreaded
Sacerdotal Molecatchers, who not being willing to contain and coop up
themselves within the Grates and Treillices of their own mysterious Temples, do
deal in, meddle with, obtrude upon, and thrust their Sickles into Harvests of
Secular Businesses quite contrary, and diametrically opposite to the Quality,
State and Condition of their Callings, Professions and Vocations; or the
superstitious Stupidity and senceless Scrupulousness of married Folks, who have
yielded Obedience, and submitted their Bodies, Fortunes and Estates to the
Discretion and Authority of such odious, perverse, barbarous, and unreasonable
Laws. Nor do they see that which is clearer than the Light and Splendor of the
Morning Star, how all these Nuptial and Connubial Sanctions, Statutes and
Ordinances have been decreed, made and instituted, for the sole Benefit, Profit
and Advantage of the Flaminal Mists, and mysterious Flamens, and nothing at all
for the good Utility or Emolument of the silly hood-winked married People;
which administreth unto others a sufficient Cause for rendering these Churchmen
suspicious of Iniquity, and of an unjust and fraudulent manner of dealing, no
more to be connived at nor countenanced, after that it be well weighed in the
Scales of Reason, than if with a reciprocal Temerity the Laics by way of
Compensation would impose Laws to be followed and observed by those Mysts and
Flamens; how they should behave themselves in the making and Performance of
their Rites and Ceremonies, and after what manner they ought to proceed in the
offering up, and immolating of their various Oblations, Victims and Sacrifices;
seeing that besides the Edecimation and Tith-haling of their Goods, they cut
off and take Parings, Shreddings and Clippings of the Gain proceeding from the
Labor of their Hands, and Sweat of their Brows, therewith to entertain
themselves the better. Upon which Consideration in my Opinion; their
Injunctions and Commands would not prove so pernicious and impertinent as those
of the Ecclesiastic Power, unto which they had tendered their blind Obedience.

For as you have very well said, there is no place in the World where legally a
License is granted to the Children to marry without the Advice and Consent of
their Parents and Kindred. Nevertheless by those wicked Laws and Mole-catching
Customs, whereat there is a little hinted in what I have already spoken to you,
there is no scurvy, mezely, leprous or pocky Ruffian, Pander, Knave, Rogue,
Skelm, Robber or Thief, pilloried, whipped and burn-marked in his own Country
for his Crimes and Felonies, who may not violently snatch away and ravish what
Maid soever he had a mind to pitch upon, how noble, how fair, how rich, honest
and chaste soever she be, and that out of the House of her own Father, in his
own Presence, from the Bosom of her Mother, and in the sight and despite of
her Friends and Kindred looking on a so woeful Spectacle, provided that the
Rascal Villain be so cunning as to associate unto himself some Mystical Flamen,
who according to the Covenant made betwixt them two, shall be in hope some day
to participate of the Prey.

Could the Goths, the Scyths, or Messagets do a worse or more cruel Act to any
of the Inhabitants of a Hostile City, when after the loss of many of their most
considerable Commanders, the expense of a great deal of Money, and a long
Siege, they shall have stormed and taken it by a vioolent and impetuous
Assault? May not these Fathers and Mothers (think you) be sorrowful and
heavy-hearted, when they see an unknown Fellow, a Vagabond Stranger, a
barbarous Lowt, a rude Curr, rotten, fleshless, putrified, scraggy, boily,
botchy, poor, a forlorn Caitif and miserable Snake, by an open Rapt, snatched
away before their own Eyes their so fair, delicate, neat, well-behavioured,
richly provided for, and healthful Daughters, on whose Breeding and Education
they had spared no Cost nor Charges, by bringing them up in an honest
Discipline to all the honorable and virtuous Employments becoming one of their
Sex, descended of a noble Parentage, hoping by those commendable and
industrious means in an opportune and convenient time to bestow them on the
worthy Sons of their well-deserving Neighbors and ancient Friends, who had
nourished, entertained, taught, instructed and schooled their Children with the
same Care and Solicitude, to make them Matches fit to attain to the Felicity
of a so happy Marriage; that from them might issue an Offspring and Progeny no
less Heirs to the laudable Endowments and exquisite Qualifications of their
Parents whom they every way resemble, than to their Personal and Real Estates,
Movables and Inheritances? How doleful, trist and plangorous would such a
Sight and Pageantry prove unto them? You shall not need to think that the
Collachrymation of the Romans, and their Confederates, at the Decease of
Germanicus Drusus, was comparable to this Lamentation of theirs? Neither would
I have you to believe, that the Discomfort and Anxiety of the Lacedaemonians,
when the Greek Helen, by the Perfidiousness of the Adulterous Trojan Paris was
privily stolen away out of their Country, was greater or more pitiful than
this ruthful and deplorable Collugency of theirs? You may very well imagine
that Ceres, at the Ravishment of her Daughter Proserpina, was not more
attristed, sad, no^ mournful than they. Trust me, and your own Reason, that the
loss of Osyris was not so regreatable to Isis; nor did Venus so deplore the
Death of Adonis; nor yet did Hercules so bewail the straying of Hylas; nor was
the Rapt of Polyxena more throbbingly resented and condoled by Pryamus and
Hecuba, than this aforesaid Accident would be sympathetically bemoaned,
grievous, ruthful and anxious to the woefully desolate and disconsolate Parents.

Notwithstanding all this, the greater part of so vilely abused Parents, are so
timorous and afraid of Devils and Hobgoblins, and so deeply plunged in
Superstition, that they dare not gainsay nor contradict, much less oppose and
resist those unnatural and impious Actions, when the Mole-catcher has been
present at the perpetrating of the Fact, and a Party Contracter and Covenanter
in that detestable Bargain. What do they do then? They wretchedly stay at their
own miserable Homes, destitute of their well-beloved Daughters; the Fathers
cursing the days and the hours wherein they were married; and the Mothers
howling and crying that it was not their fortune to have brought forth Abortive
Issues, when they happened to be delivered of such unfortunate Girls; and in this
pitiful plight spend at best the remainder of their Time with Tears and Weeping
for those their Children of, and from whom they expected (and with good reason
should have obtained and reaped) in these latter days of theirs, Joy and
Comfort. Other Parents there have been, so impatient of that Affront and
Indignity put upon them and their Families, that, transported with the
Extremity of Passion, in a mad and frantic mood, through the Vehemence of a
grievous Fury and raging Sorrow, have drowned, hanged, killed, and otherways
put violent hands on themselves. Others again of that Parental Relation, have
upon the reception of the like Injury, been of a more magnanimous and heroic
Spirit, who (in imitation, and at the Example of the Children of Jacob,
revenging upon the Sichemits the Rapt of their Sister Dina) having found the
Rascally Ruffian in the Association of his mystical Mole-catcher closely and in
hugger-mugger, conferring, parlying, and coming with their Daughters, for the
suborning, corrupting, depraving, perverting and enticing these innocent,
unexperienced Maids unto filthy Lewdnesses, have, without any further
Advisement on the matter, cut them instantly into pieces, and thereupon
forthwith thrown out upon the Fields their so dismembered Bodies, to serve for
Food unto the Wolves and Ravens. Upon the chivalrous, bold and courageous
Achievement of a so valiant, stout and man-like Act, the other Mole catching
Symmists have been so highly incensed, and have so chaffed, fretted and fumed
thereat, that Bills of Complaint and Accusations having been in a most odious
and detestible manner put in before the competent Judges, the Arm of Secular
Authority has with much Importunity and Impetuosity been by them implored and
required, they proudly contending, that the Servants of God would become
contemptible, if exemplary Punishment were not speedily taken upon the Persons
of the Perpetrators of such an enormous, horrid, sacrilegious, crying, heinous,
and execrable Crime.

Yet neither by Natural Equity, by the Law of Nations, nor by any Imperial Law
whatsoever, has there been found so much as one Rubric, Paragraph, Point or
Tittle, by the which any kind of Chastisement or Correction has been adjudged
due to be inflicted upon any for their Delinquency in that kind. Reason
opposes, and Nature is repugnant: For there is no virtuous Man in the World,
who, both naturally and with good reason, will not be more hugely troubled in
Mind, hearing of the News of the Rapt, Disgrace, Ignominy and Dishonor of his*
Daughter, than of her Death. Now any Man finding in hot Blood, one who with a
forethought Felony has murdered his Daughter, may, without tying himself to
the Formalities and Circumstances of a Legal Proceeding, kill him on a sudden,
and out of hand, without incurring any hazard of being attainted and
apprehended by the Officers of Justice for so doing. What wonder is it then? or
how little strange should it appear to any rational Man, if a Lechering Rogue,
together with his Mole catching Abetter, be entrapped* in the flagrant Act of
suborning his Daughter, and stealing her out of his House, (though her self
consent thereto) that the Father in such a case of Stain and Infamy by them
brought upon his Family, should put them both to a shameful Death, and cast
their Carcasses upon Dunghils to be devoured and eaten up by Dogs and Swine, or
otherwise fling them a little further off to the direption, tearing and rending
asunder of their Joints and Members by the Wild Beasts of the Field.

Dearly beloved Son, have an especial Care, that after my Decease none of these
Laws be received in any of your Kingdoms; for whilst I breath, by the Grace and
Assistance of God I shall give good Order.

Seeing therefore you have totally referred unto my Discretion the Disposure of
you in Marriage, I am fully of an Opinion, that I shall provide sufficiently
well for you in that Point. Make ready and prepare your self for Panurge's
Voyage* Take along with you Epistemon, Friar Ihon, and such others as you will
choose: Do with my Treasures what unto your self shall seem most expedient:
None of your Actions, I promise you, can in any manner of way displease me.
Take out of my Arcenal Thalasse, whatsoever Equipage, Furniture or Provision
you please, together with such Pilots, Mariners and Truchmen, as you have a
mind to; and with the first fair and favorable Wind set sail and make out to
Sea in the Name of God our Savior. In the mean while, during your Absence, I
shall not be neglective of providing a Wife for you, nor of those Preparations,
which are requisite to be made for the more sumptuous solemnizing of your
Nuptials with a most splendid Feast, if ever there was any in the World, since
the days of Assuerus.

CHAP. XLIX. How Pantagruel did put himself in a readiness to go to Sea; and of
the Herb named Pantagruelion.
WIthin very few days after that Pantagruel had taken his Leave of the good
Gargantua, who devoutly prayed for his Sons happy Voyage, he arrived at the
Seaport, near to Sammalo, accompanied with Panurge, Epistemon, Friar Ihon of
the Funnels, Abbot of Theleme, and others of the Royal House, especially with
Xenomanes the great Traveller, and Thwarter of dangerous ways, who was come at
the bidding and appointment of Panurge, of whose Castle wick of Salmigondin he
did hold some petty Inheritance by the Tenure of a Mesnefee. Pantagruel being
come thither, prepared and made ready for launching a Fleet of Ships, to the
number of those which Ajax of Salamine had of old equipped, in Convoy of the
Grecian Soldiery against the Trojan State. He likewise picked out for his use
so many Mariners, Pilots, Sailors, Interpreters, Artificers, Officers and
Soldiers, as he thought fitting; and therewithal made Provision of so much
Victuals of all sorts, Artillery, Munition of diverse kinds, Clothes, Moneys,
and other such Luggage, Stuff, Baggage, Chaffer and Furniture, as he deemed
needful for carrying on the Design of a so tedious, long and perilous Voyage.
Amongst other things, it was observed, how he caused some of his Vessels to be
fraught and loaded with a great quantity of an Herb of his called
Pantagruelion, not only of the green and raw sort of it, but of the confected
also, and of that which was notably well befitted for present use after the
fashion of Conserves. The Herb Pantagruelion has a little Root somewhat hard
and ruff, roundish, terminating in an obtuse and very blunt Point, and having
some of its Veins, Strings or Filaments colored with some spots of white,
never fixes it self into the ground above the profoundness almost of a Cubit,
or Foot and a half; from the Root thereof proceeds the only Stalk, orbicular,
cane^like, green without, whitish within, and hollow like the Stem of Smyrgium,
Olus Atrum, Beans and Gentian, full of long Threads, straight, easy to be
broken, jogged, snipped, nicked and notched a little after the manner of
Pillars and Columns, slightly farrowed, chamfered, guttred and channel'd, and
full of Fibers, or Hairs like Strings, in which consists the chief Value and
Dignity of the Herb, especially in that part thereof which is termed Mesa, as
he would say the M^an; and in that other which has got the Denomination of
Milasea. Its Height is commonly of five or six Foot; yet sometimes it is of
such a tall Growth, as does surpass the length of a Lance, but that is only
when it meets with a sweet, easy, warm, wet and well-soaked Soil, (as is the
ground of the Territory of Olone, and that of Rasea, near to Preneste in
Sabinia) and that it want not for Rain enough about the Season of the Fishers
Holydays, and the Estival Solstice. There are many Trees whose Height is by it
very far exceeded, and you might call it Dendromalache by the Authority of
Theophrastus. The Plant every year perishes; the Tree, neither in the Trunk,
Root, Bark or Boughs, being durable.

From the Stalk of this Pantagruelian Plant there issue forth several large and
great Branches, whose Leaves have thrice as much length as breadth, always
green, roughish and rugged like the Alcanet, or Spanish Buglose, hardish, slit
round about like unto a Sickle, or as the Saxifragum, Betony, and finally
ending as it were in the Points of a Macedonian Spear, or of such a Lancet as
Surgeons commonly make use of in their Phlebotomizing Tiltings. The Figure and
shape of the Leaves thereof is not much different from that of those of the
Ash-tree, or of Egrimony; the Herb it self so being like the Eupatorian Plant,
that many skilful Herbalists have called it the Domestic Eupator, and the
Eupator the wild Pantagruelion. These Leaves are in equal and parallel
Distances spread around the Stalk, by the number in every Rank either of Five
or Seven, Nature having so highly favored and cherished this Plant, that she
has richly adorned it with these two odd, divine and mysterious Numbers. The
Smell thereof is somewhat strong, and not very pleasing to nice, tender and
delicate Noses: The Seed enclosed therein mounteth up to the very top of its
Stalk, and a little above it.

This is a numerous Herb; for there is no less abundance of it than of any
other whatsoever. Some of these Plants are Spherical, some Romboid, and some of
an oblong shape, and all of those either black, bright-coloured or tawny, rude
to the touch, and mantled with a quickly-blasted-away Coat, yet such a one as
is of a delicious Taste and Savor to all shrill and sweetly singing Birds,
such as Linnets, Goldfinches, Larks, Canary Birds, Yellow-hammers, and others
of that Airy chirping Quire; but it would quite extinguish the Natural Heat and
Procreative Virtue of the Semence of any Man, who would eat much, and often of
it. And although, that, of old, amongst the Greeks there was certain kinds of
Fritters and Pancakes, Buns and Tarts made thereof, which commonly for a
lickorish Daintiness were presented the Table after Supper, to delight the
Palate, and make the Wine relish the better. Yet is it of a difficult
Concoction, and offensive to the Stomach; for it engenders bad and unwholsom
Blood, and with its exorbitant Heat wounds them with grievous, hurtful, smart
and noysom Vapors. And as in diverse Plants and Trees there are two Sexes, Male
and Female, which is perceptible in Laurels, Palms, Cypresses, Oaks, Holmes,
the Daffadil, Mandrake, Fearn, the Agarick, Mushrum, Birthwort, Turpentine,
Pennyroyal, Peony, Rose of the Mount, and many other such like. Even so, in
this Herb there is a Male which bears no Flower at all, yet it is very
copious of, and abundant in Seed. There is likeways in it a Female, which has
great store and plenty of whitish Flowers, serviceable to little or no purpose;
nor does it carry in it Seed of any worth at all, at least comparable to that
of the Male. It has also a larger Leaf, and much softer than that of the Male;
nor does it altogether grow to so great a height. This Pantagruelion is to be
sown at the first coming of the Swallows, and is to be plucked out of the
Ground when the Grasshoppers begin to be a little hoarse.

CHAP. L. How the famous Pantagruelion ought to be prepared and wrought.
THE Herb Pantagruelion in September, under the Autumnal Equinox, is dressed
and prepared several ways, according to the various Fancies of the People, and
Diversity of the Climates wherein it grows. The first Instruction which
Pantagruel gave concerning it, was, to divest and dispoil the Stalk and Stem
thereof of all its Flowers and Seeds, to macerate and mortify it in Pond,
Pool, or Lake-water, which is to be made run a little for five days together,
if the Season be dry, and the Water hot; or for full nine or twelve days, if
the weather be cloudish, and the Water cold: Then must it be parched before the
Sun, till it be drained of its Moisture: After this it is in the Shadow, where
the Sun shines not, to be peeled, and its Rind pulled off: Then are the Fibers
and Strings thereof to be parted, (wherein, as we have already said, consists
its prime Virtue, Price, and Efficacy) and severed from the woody part thereof,
which is improfitable, and serves hardly to any other use, than to make a
clear and glistering Blaze, to kindle the Fire, and for the Play, Pastime and
Disport of little Children, to blow up Hogs Bladders, and make them rattle.
Many times some use is made thereof by tippling, sweet-lipped Bibbers, who out
of it frame Quills and Pipes, through which they with their Liquor-attractive
Breath suck up the new dainty Wine from the Bung of the Barrel. Some modern
Pantagruelists, to shun and avoid that manual Labor, which such a separating
and partitional Work would of necessity require, employ certain Catarractick
Instruments, oomposed and formed after the same manner that the froward,
pettish and angry Juno did hold the Fingers of both her hands interwovenly
clenched together, when she would have hindered the Childbirth Delivery of
Alcmena, at the Nativity of Hercules; and athwart those Cataracts they break
and bruise to very Trash the woody parcels, thereby to preserve the better the
Fibers, which are the precious and excellent parts. In, and with this sole
Operation do these acquiesce and are contented, who, contrary to the received
Opinion of the whole Earth, and in in a manner paradoxical to all Philosophers,
gain their Livelihoods backwards, and by recoiling. But those that love to hold
it at a higher rate, and prize it according to its Value, for their own greater
Profit, do the very same which is told us of the recreation of the three fatal
Sister Parques, or of the nocturnal Exercise of the noble Circe; or yet of the
Excuse which Penelope made to her fond wooing Youngsters and effeminate
Courtiers, during the long Absence of her Husband Ulysses.

By these means is this Herb put into a way to display its inestimable Virtues,
whereof I will discover a part: (for to relate all is a thing impossible to do)
I have already interpreted and exposed before you the Denomination thereof. I
find that Plants have their Names given and bestowed upon them after several
ways: Some got the Name of him who first found them out, knew them, sowed them,
improved them by Culture, qualified them to a tractability, and appropriated
them to the uses and subserviences they were fit for: As the Mercuriale from
Mercury, Panacee from Panace the Daughter of Esculapius, in Armois from
Artemis, who is Diana; Eupatorie from the King Eupator; Telephion from
Telephus; Euphorbium from Euphorbus, King Iuba's Physician; Clymenos from
Clymenus; Alchibiadium from Alcibiades; Gentiane from Gentius King of
Sclavonia, and so forth, through a great many other Herbs or Plants. Truly, in
ancient Times, this Prerogative of imposing the Inventors Name upon an Herb
found out by him, was held in a so great account and estimation, that as a
Controversy arose betwixt Neptune and Pallas, from which of them two that Land
should receive its Denomination, which had been equally found out by them both
together, though thereafter it was called and had the Apellation of Athens,
from Athene, which is Minerva: Just so would Lynceus King of Scythia have
treacherously slain the young Triptolemus, whom Ceres had sent to show unto
Mankind the Invention of Corn, which until then had been utterly unknown, to
the end, that after the murder of the Messenger (whose Death he made account
to have kept secret) he might, by imposing with the less suspicion of false
dealing, his own Name upon the said found out Seed, acquire unto himself an
immortal Honor and Glory, for having been the Inventor of a Grain so
profitable and necessary to, and for the use of Humane Life. For the wickedness
of which Treasonable Attempt he was by Ceres transformed into that wild Beast,
which by some is called a Lynx, and by others an Oince. Such also was the
Ambition of others upon the like occasion, as appears by that, very sharp
Wars, and of a long continuance, have been made of old betwixt some Residentary
Kings in Capadocia, upon this only Debate, of whose Name a certain Herb should
have the Appellation; by reason of which difference, so troublesome and
expensive to them all, it was by them called Polemonion, and by us for the same
Cause termed Makebate.

Other Herbs and Plants there are, which retain the Names of the Countries from
whence they were transported: As the Median Apples from Media, where they first
grew; Punick Apples from Punicia, (that is to say, Carthage;) Ligusticum (which
we call Louage) from Liguria the Coast of Genoua; Rubarb from a Flood in
Barbary (as Ammianus attesteth) called Ru; Sautonica from a Region of that
Name; Fenugreek from Greece; Gastanes from a Country so called; Persicarie from
Persia; Sabine from a Territory of that Appellation; Staechas from the Staechad
Islands; Spica Celtica from the Land of the Celtick Gauls; and so throughout a
great many other, which were tedious to enumerate. Some others again have
obtained their Denominations by way of Antiphrasis, or Contrariety; as,
Absinth, because it is contrary to (...); for it is bitter to the taste in
drinking; Holosteon, as if it were all Bones, whilst on the contrary, there is
no frailer, tenderer nor britler Herb in the whole Production of Nature than it.

There are some other sorts of Herbs, which have got their Names from their
Virtues and Operatious; as Aristolochie, because it helps Women in
Childbirth; Lichen, for that it cures the Disease of that name; Mallow,
because it mollifieth; Callithricum, because it makes the Hair of a bright
Color; Alyssum, Ephemerum, Bechium, Nasturtium, Aneban, and so forth through
many more.

Other some there are which have obtained their Names from the admirable
Qualities that are found to be in them; as Heliotropium (which is the Marigold)
because it follows the Sun; so that at the Sun rising it displayeth and
spreads it self out, at his ascending it mounteth, at his declining it waineth;
and when he is set it is close shut; Adianton, because although it grow near
unto watery places, and albeit you should let it lie in Water a long time, it
will nevertheless retain no Moisture nor Humidity; Hierachia, Eringium, and so
throughout a great many more. There are also a great many Herbs, and Plants,
which have retained the very same Names of the Men and Women who have been
metamorphosed and transformed in them; as from Daphne the Laurel is called also
Daphne; Myrrh from Myrrha the Daughter of Cinarus; Pythis from Pythis; Cinara
(which is the Artichock) from one of that name; Narcissus, with Saffran,
Similax, and diverse others.

Many Herbs likewise have got their Names of those things which they seem to
have some Resemblance; as Hippuris, because it has the likeness of a Horses
Tail; Alopecuris, because it represents in similitude the Tail of a Fox;
Psyllion, from a Flea which it resembles; Delphinium, for that it is like a
Dolphin Fish; Buglosse is so called, because it is an Herb like an Oxes Tongue;
Iris, so called, because in its Flowers it has some resemblance of the
Rainbow; Myosata, because it is like the Ear of a Mouse; Coronopus, for that
it is of the likeness of a Crows Foot: A great many other such there are, which
here to recite were needless. Furthermore, as there are Herbs and Plants which
have had their Names from those of Men, so by a reciprocal Denomination have
the Surnames of many Families taken their Origin from them; as the Fabii, a
fabis, Beans; the Pisons, a pisis, Pease; the Lentuli from Lentils; the
Cicerons, a Ciceribus, vel Ciceris, a sort of Pulse called Cichepeason, and so
forth. In some Plants and Herbs the resemblance or likeness has been taken
from a higher Mark or Object, as when we say Venus Navil, Venus Hair, Venus
Tub, Jupiter's Beard, Jupiter's Eye, Mars's Blood, the Hermodactyl or Mercury's
Fingers, which are all of them Names of Herbs, as there are a great many more
of the like Appellation. Others again have received their Denomination from
their Forms; such as the Trefoil, because it is three-leaved; Pentaphylon, for
having five Leaves; Serpolet, because it creeps along the ground; Helixine,
Petast, Myrobalon, which the Arabians call Been, as if you would say an
Ackorne; for it has a kind of resemblance thereto, and withal is very oily.

CHAP. LI. Why is it called Pantagruelion, and of the admirable Virtues thereof.
BY such like means of attaining to a Denomination (the fabulous ways being
only from thence excepted; for the Lord forbid that we should make use of any
Fables in this a so venerable History) is this Herb called Pantagruelion; for
Pantagruel was the Inventor thereof: I do not say of the Plant it self, but of
a certain use which it serves for, exceeding odious and hateful to Thieves and
Robbers, unto whom it is more contrarious and hurtful than the Strangle-weed,
Choakfitch is to the Flax, the Cats-tail to the Brakes, the Sheavgrass to the
Mowers of Hay, the Fitches to the Chickny Pease, the Darnel to Barley, the
Hatchet Fitch to the Lentil Pulse, the Antramium to the Beans, Tares to Wheat,
Ivy to Walls, the Water Lilly to lecherous Monks, the Birchen Rod to the
Scholars of the College of Navarre in Paris, Colewort to the Vine-tree,
Garlic to the Lodestone, Onyons to the sight, Fearn-seed to Women with Child,
Willow Grain to vicious Nuns, the Yew-tree shade to those that sleep under it,
Wolfsbane to Wolves and Libbards, the Smell of Fig Tree to mad Bulls, Hemlock
to Goslings, Purslane to the Teeth, or Oil to Trees: For we have seen many of
those Rogues by virtue and right application of this Herb finish their Lives,
short and long, after the manner of Phillis Queen of Thracia, of Benosus
Emperor of Rome, of Amata King Latinus's Wife, of Iphus, Autolicus, Lycambe,
Arachne, Phaedra, Leda, Achius King of Lydia, and many thousands more; who were
chiefly angry and vexed at this Disaster therein, that without being otherways
sick, evil disposed in their Bodies, by a touch only of the Pantagruelian, they
came on a sudden to have the passage obstructed, and their Pipes (through
which were wont to bolt so many jolly Sayings, and to enter so many luscious
Morsels) stopped, more cleaverly, than ever could have done the Squinancy.

Others have been heard most woefully to lament, at the very instant when
Atropos was about to cut the thread of their Life, that Pantagruel held them by
the Gorge. But (well-a-day) it was not Pantagruel; he never was an Executioner:
It was the Pantagruelian, manufactured and fashioned into an Halter, and
serving in the place and Office of a Cravat. In that verily they solaecized,
and spoke improperly, unless you would excuse them by a Trope, which allows
us to posit the Inventor in the place of the thing invented; as when Ceres is
taken for Bread, and Bacchus put instead of Wine. I swear to you here, by the
good and frolic Words which are to issue out of that Wine-bottle which is a
cooling below in the Copper Vessel full of Fountain Water, that the noble
Pantagruel never snatched any Man by the Throat, unless it was such a one as
was altogether careless and neglective of those obviating Remedies, which were
preventive of the Thirst to come.

It is also termed Pantagruelion by a Similitude: For Pantagruel, at the very
first minute of his Birth, was no less tall than this Herb is long, whereof I
speak unto you, his measure having been then taken the more easy, that he was
born in the Season of the great Drowth, when they were busiest in the gathering
of the said Herb, to wit, at that time when Icarus's Dog, with his fiery
bawling and barking at the Sun, makes the whole World Troglodytick, and
enforces People every where to hide themselves in Dens and subterranean Caves.
It is likeways called Pantagruelion, because of the notable and singular
Qualities, Virtues and Properties thereof: For as Pantagruel has been the
Idea, Pattern, Prototype and Exemplary of all Jovial Perfection and
Accomplishment (in the truth whereof I believe there is none of you, Gentlemen
Drinkers, that puts any Question) so in this Pantagruelion have I found so
much Efficacy and Energy, so much Compleatness and Excellency, so much
Exquisiteness and Ra^ity, and so many admirable Effects and Operations of a
transcendent Nature, that if the Worth and Virtue thereof had been known, when
those Trees, by the relation of the Prophet, made Election of a wooden King, to
rule and govern over them, it without all doubt would have carried away from
all the rest the Plurality of Votes and Suffrages.

Shall I yet say more? If Oxilus the Son of Orius had begotten this Plant upon
his Sister Hamadryas, he had taken more delight in the Value and Perfection of
it alone, then in all his Eight Children, so highly renowned by our ablest
Mythologians, that they have sedulously recommended their Names to the
never-failing Tuition of an eternal Remembrance. The eldest Child was a
Daughter, whose Name was Vine; the next born was a Boy, and his Name was
Fig Tree; the third was called Walnut-tree; the fourth Oak; the fifth
Sorbaple-tree; the sixth Ash; the seventh Poplar; and the last had the Name of
Elm, who was the greatest Surgeon in his time. I shall forbear to tell you, how
the Juice or Sap thereof, being poured and distilled within the Ears, kills
every kind of Vermin, that by any manner of Putrefaction comes to be bred and
engendered there; and destroys also any whatsoever other Animal that shall
have entered in thereat. If likewise you put a little of the said Juice within a
Pale or Bucket full of Water, you shall see the Water instantly turn and grow
thick therewith, as if it were Milk-Curds, whereof the Virtue is so great, that
the Water thus curded is a present Remedy for Horses subject to the Cholick,
and such as strike at their own Flanks. The Root thereof well boiled,
mollifieth the Joints, softneth the hardness of shrunk in Sinews, is every way
comfortable to the Nerves, and good against all Cramps and Convulsions, as
likeways all cold and knotty Gouts. If you would speedily heal a Burning,
whether occasioned by Water or Fire, apply thereto a little raw Pantagruelion,
that is to say, take it so as it comes out of the Ground, without bestowing
any other Preparation or Composition upon it; but have a special Care to change
it for some fresher, in lieu thereof, as soon as you shall find it waxing dry
upon the Sore.

Without this Herb Kitchins would be detested, the Tables of Dining-Rooms
abhorred, although there were great Plenty and Variety of most dainty and
sumptuous Dishes of Meat set down upon them; and the choicest Beds also, how
richly soever adorned with Gold, Silver, Amber, Ivory, Porphyr, and the mixture
of most precious Metals, would without it yield no Delight or Pleasure to the
Reposers in them: Without it Millers could neither carry Wheat, nor any other
kind of Corn, to the Mill; nor would they be able to bring back from thence
Flour, or any other sort of Meal whatsoever. Without it, how could the Papers
and Writs of Lawyers Clients be brought to the Bar? Seldom is the Mortar, Lime
or Plaster brought to the Workhouse without it. Without it how should the
Water be got out of a Draw-Well? In what case would Tabellions, Notaries,
Copists, Makers of Counterpanes, Writers, Clerks, Secretaries, Scriveners, and
such like Persons be without it? Were it not for it, what would become of the
Toll-rates and Rent-rolls? Would not the noble Art of Printing perish without
it? Whereof could the Chassis or Paper-Windows be made? How should the Bells be
rung? The Altars of Isis are adorned therewith; the Pastophorian Priests are
therewith clad and accoutred; and whole Humane Nature covered and wrapped
therein, at its first position and production in, and into this World: All the
Lunifick Trees of Seres, the Bumbast and Cotton Bushes in the Territories near
the Persian Sea and Gulf of Bengala; the Arabian Swans, together with the
Plants of Maltha, do not all of them cloth, attire, and apparel so many
Persons as this one Herb alone. Soldiers are nowadays much better sheltered
under it, than they were in former times, when they lay in Tents covered with
Skins. It overshadows the Theaters and Amphitheaters from the heat of a
scorching Sun: It begirdeth and encompasseth Forests, Chases, Parks, Copses and
Groves, for the pleasure of Hunters: It descends into the Salt and Fresh of
both Sea and River-Waters, for the profit of Fishers: By it are Boots of all
sizes, Buskins, Gamashes, Brodkins, Gambados, Shoes, Pumps, Slippers, and
every cobled Ware wrought and made steddable for the use of Man: By it the Butt
and Rover-bows are strong, the Cross-bows bended, and the Slings made fixed:
And, as if it were an Herb every whit as holy as the Verveine, and reverenced
by Ghosts, Spirits, Hobgoblins, Fiends and Phantoms, the Bodies of deceased Men
are never buried without it.

I will proceed yet further, by the means of this fine Herb, the invisible
Substances are visibly stopped, arrested, taken, detained, and Prisoner-like
committed to their receptive Goals. Heavy and ponderous Weights are by it
heaved, lifted up, turned, veered, drawn, carried, and every way moved quickly,
nimbly and easily, to the great Profit and Emolument of Humane Kind. When I
perpend with my self these and such like mavelous Effects of this wonderful
Herb, it seems strange unto me, how the Invention of so useful a Practice did
escape, through so many bypast Ages, the Knowledge of the Ancient
Philosophers, considering the inestimable Utility which from thence proceeded;
and the immense Labor, which without it, they did undergo in their pristine
Elucubrations. By virtue thereof, through the retention of some Aerial Gusts,
are the huge Rambarges, mighty Gallioons, the large Floyts, the Chiliander, the
Myriander Ships launched from their Stations, and set a going at the Pleasure
and Arbitriment of their Rulers, Conders and Steersmen. By the help thereof
those remote Nations, whom Nature seemed so unwilling to have discovered to us,
and so desirous to have kept them still in abscondito, and hidden from us, that
the ways through which their Countries were to be reached unto, were not only
totally unknown, but judged also to be altogether impermeable and inaccessible,
are now arrived to us, and we to them.

Those Voyages outreached Flights of Birds, and far surpassed the Scope of
Feathered Fowls, how swift soever they had been on the Wing, and
notwithstanding that advantage which they have of us in swimming through the
Air. Taproban has seen the Heaths of Lapland, and both the Iava's the Riphaean
Mountains, wide distant Phebol shall see Theleme, and the Islanders drink of
the Flood Euphrates: By it the chill-mouthed Boreas has surveyed the parched
Mansions of the torrid Auster, and Eurus visited the Regions which Zephirus
has under his Command; yea, in such sort have Interviews been made, by the
assistance of this Sacred Herb, that maugre Longitudes and Latitudes, and all
the Variations of the Zones. The Periaecian People, and Antoecian, Amphiscian,
Heteroscian, and Periscian had often tendered and received mutual Visits to, and
from other, upon all the Climates. These strange Exploits bred such
Astonishment to the Celestial Intelligences, to all the Marine and Terrestrial
Gods, that they were on a sudden all afraid: From which Amazement, when they
saw how, by means of this blessed Pantagruelion, the Arctick People looked upon
the Antarctick, scowred the Atlantic Ocean, passed the Tropicks, pushed
through the Torrid Zone, measured all the Zodiac, sported under the
Equinoctial, having both Poles level with their Horizon; they judged it high
time to call a Council, for their own Safety and Preservation.

The Olympic Gods being all and each of them affrighted at the sight of such
Achievements, said, Pantagruel has shapen Work enough for us, and put us more
to a plunge, and nearer our Wits end, by this sole Herb of his, then did of old
the Aloids, by overturning Mountains. He very speedily is to be married, and
shall have many Children by his Wife: It lies not in our Power to oppose this
Destiny; for it has passed through the Hands and Spindles of the Fatal
Sisters, Necessities inexorable Daughters. Who knows but by his Sons may be
found out an Herb of such another Virtue and prodigious Energy, as that by the
Aid thereof, in using it aright according to their Fathers Skill, they may
contrive a way for Humane Kind to pierce into the high Aerian Clouds, get up
unto the Springhead of the Hail, take an Inspection of the snowy Sources, and
shut and open as they please the Sluices from whence proceed the Floodgates of
the Rain; then prosecuting their Aetherial Voyage, they may step in unto the
Lightning Workhouse and Shop, where all the Thunderbolts are forged, where
seizing on the Magazin of Heaven, and Storehouse of our Warlike Fire Munition,
they may discharge a bouncing Peal or two of thundering Ordinance, for Joy of
their Arrival to these new supernal places; and charging those Tonitrual Guns
afresh, turn the whole force of that Artillery against our selves, wherein we
most confided: Then is it like they will set forward to invade the Territories
of the Moon, whence passing through both Mercury and Venus, the Sun will serve
them for a Torch, to show the way from Mars to Jupiter and Saturn: We shall not
then be able to resist the Impetuosity of their Intrusion, nor put a stoppage
to their entering in at all whatever Regions, Domicils or Mansions of the
Spangled Firmament they shall have any mind to see, to stay in, to travel
through for their Recreation: All the Celestial Signs together, with the
Constellations of the Fixed Stars, will jointly be at their Devotion then: Some
will take up their Lodging at the Ram, some at the Bull, and others at the
Twins; some at the Crab, some at the Lion Inn, and others at the Sign of the
Virgin; some at the Balance, others at the Scorpion, and others will be
quartered at the Archer; some will be harbored at the Goat, some at the
Water-pourer's Sign, some at the Fishes; some will lie at the Crown, some at
the Harp, some at the Golden Eagle and the Dolphin; some at the Flying Horse,
some at the Ship, some at the great, some at the little Bear; and so throughout
the glistning Hostories of the whole twinkling Asteristick Welkin: There will
be Sojourners come from the Earth, who longing after the taste of the sweet
Cream, of their own scumming off, from the best Milk of all the Dairy of the
Galaxy, will set themselves at Table down with us, drink of our Nectar and
Ambrosia, and take to their own Beds at Night for Wives and Concubines our
fairest Goddesses, the only means whereby they can be Deify'd. A Junto hereupon
being convocated, the better to consult upon the manner of obviating a so
dreadful Danger, Jove, sitting in his Presidential Throne, asked the Votes of
all the other Gods, which, after a profound Deliberation amongst themselves on
all Contingencies, they freely gave at last, and then resolved unanimously to
withstand the Shock of all whatsoever sublunary Assaults.

CHAP. LII. How a certain kind of Pantagruelion is of that nature, that the
Fire is not able to consume it.
I Have already related to you great and admirable things; but if you might be
induced to adventure upon the hazard of believing some other Divinity of this
Sacred Pantagruelion, I very willingly would tell it you. Believe it if you
will, or otherways believe it not, I care not which of them you do, they are
both alike to me, it shall be sufficient for my purpose to have told you the
Truth, and the Truth I will tell you: But to enter in thereat, because it is of
a knaggy, difficult and rugged access, this is the Question which I ask of you,
If I had put within this Bottle two Pints, the one of Wine and the other of
Water, thoroughly and exactly mingled together, how would you unmix them? After
what manner would you go about to sever them, and separate the one Liquor from
the other, in such sort, that you render me the Water apart, free from the
Wine, and the Wine also pure, without the Intermixture of one drop of Water;
and both of them in the same measure, quantity and taste that I had embottled
them? Or to state the Question otherways, If your Carr-men and Mariners,
entrusted for the Provision of your Houses, with the bringing of a certain
considerable number of Tuns, Punchions, Pipes, Barrels and Hogsheads of Graves
Wine, or of the Wine of Orleans, Beanne and Mirevaux, should drink out the
half, and afterward with Water fill up the other empty halves of the Vessels
as full as before; as the Limosins use to do in their Carriages by Wains and
Carts of the Wines of Argenton and Sangaultier. After that, how would you part
the Water from the Wine, and purify them both in such a case. I understand you
well enough; your meaning is, that I must do it with an Ivy Funnel: That is
written, it is true, and the Verity thereof explored by a thousand Experiments;
you have learned to do this Feat before I see it: But those that have never
known it, nor at any time have seen the like, would hardly believe that it were
possible. Let us nevertheless proceed.

But put the case we were now living in the Age of Silla, Marius, Caesar, and
other such Roman Emperors; or that we were in the time of our ancient Druids,
whose custom was to burn and calcine the dead Bodies of their Parents and
Lords, and that you had a mind to drink the Ashes or Cinders of your Wives or
Fathers in the infused Liquor of some good White Wind, as Artemisia drunk the
Dust and Ashes of her Husband Mansolus; or otherways, that you did determine to
have them reserved in some fine Urn or Reliquary Pot, how would you save the
Ashes apart, and separate them from those other Cinders and Ashes into which
the Fuel of the Funeral and bustuary Fire has been converted? Answer if you
can; by my Figgins, I believe it will trouble you so to do.

Well, I will dispatch, and tell you, that if you take of this Celestial
Pantagruelion so much as is needful to cover the Body of the Defunct, and after
that you shall have inwrapped and bound therein as hard and closely as you can
the Corpse of the said deceased Persons, and sowed up the Folding-sheet with
thread of the same stuff, throw it into the Fire, how great or ardent soever it
be it matters not a Straw, the Fire through this Pantagruelion will burn the
Body, and reduce to Ashes the Bones thereof, and the Pantagruelion shall be not
only not consumed nor burnt, but also shall neither lose one Atom of the Ashes
enclosed within it, nor receive one Atom of the huge bustuary heap of Ashes
resulting from the blazing Conflagration of things combustible laid round about
it, but shall at last, when taken out of the Fire, be fairer, whiter, and much
cleaner than when you did put it in at first: Therefore it is called Asbeston,
which is as much to say as incombustible. Great plenty is to be found thereof
in Carpasia, as likeways in the Climate Diasienes, at very easy rates. O how
rare and admirable a thing it is, that the Fire which devoureth, consumes and
destroys all such things else, should cleanse, purge and whiten this sole
Pantagruelion Carpasian Asbeston! If you mistrust the Verity of this Relation,
and demand for further Confirmation of my Assertion a Visible Sign, as the
Jews, and such incredulous Infidels use to do; take a fresh Egg, and
orbicularly (or rather ovally) infold it within this Divine Pantagruelion; when
it is so wrapped up, put it in the hot Embers of a Fire, how great or ardent
soever it be, and having left it there as long as you will, you shall at last,
at your taking it out of the Fire, find the Egg roasted hard, and as it were
burnt, without any Alteration, Change, Mutation, or so much as a Calefaction of
the Sacred Pantagruelion: For less than a Million of Pounds Sterling, modified,
taken down and amoderated to the twelfth part of one Four Pence Halfpenny
Farthing, you are able to put it to a trial, and make Proof thereof.

Do not think to overmatch me here, by paragoning with it, in the way of a more
eminent Comparison, the Salamander. That is a Fib; for albeit a little ordinary
Fire, such as is used in Dining-Rooms and Chambers, gladden, cheer up,
exhilerate and quicken it, yet may I warrantably enough assure, that in the
flaming Fire of a Furnace, it will, like any other animated Creature, be
quickly suffocated, choked, consumed and destroyed. We have seen the
Experiment thereof, and Galen many ages ago has clearly demonstrated and
confirmed it, Lib. 3. De tempora mentis. And Dioscorides maintains the same
Doctrine, Lib. 2. Do not here instance in competition with this Sacred Herb the
Feather Alum, or the wooden Tower of Pyrce, which Lucius Sylla was never able
to get burnt; for that Archelaus, Governor of the Town for Mithridates King of
Pontus, had plaistered it all over on the outside with the said Alum. Nor
would I have you to compare therewith the Herb, which Alexander Cornelius
called Fonem, and said that it had some resemblance with that Oak which bears
the Misselto; and that it could neither be consumed, nor receive any manner of
prejudice by Fire, nor by Water, no more than the Misselto, of which was built
(said he) the so renowned Ship Argos. Search where you please for those that
will believe it, I in that Point desire to be excused. Neither would I wish you
to parallel therewith (although I cannot deny but that it is of a very
mavelous Nature) that sort of Tree which grows along the Mountains of
Brianson and Ambrun, which produces out of his Root the good Agarick; from its
Body it yields unto us a so excellent Rosin, that Galen has been bold to
equal it to the Turpentine: Upon the delicate Leaves thereof it retains for
our use that sweet Heavenly Honey, which is called the Manna: And although it
be of a gummy, oily, fat and greasy Substance, it is notwithstanding
unconsumable by any Fire. It is in Greek and Latin called Larix. The Alpinesi
name it Melze. The Antenotides and Venetians term it Larege; which gave
occasion to that Castle in Piedmont to receive the Denomination of Larignum, by
putting Julius Caesar to a stand at his return from amongst the Gauls.

Julius Caesar commanded all the Yeomens, Boors, Hinds, and other Inhabitants
in, near unto, and about the Alps and Piedmont, to bring all manner of Victuals
and Provision for an Army to those places, which on the Military Road he had
appointed to receive them for the use of his marching Soldiery; to which
Ordinance all of them were obedient, save only those as were within the
Garrison of Larignum; who, trusting in the natural Strength of the place, would
not pay their Contribution. The Emperor purposing to chastise them for their
refusal, caused his whole Army to march straight toward that Castle, before
the Gate whereof was erected a Tower, built of huge big Sparrs and Rafters of
the Larch Tree, fast bound together with Pins and Pegs of the same Wood, and
interchangeably laid on one another, after the fashion of a Pile or Stack of
Timber, set up in the Fabric thereof to such an apt and convenient height,
that from the Parapet above the Portcullis they thought with Stones and Leavers
to beat off and drive away such as should approach thereto.

When Caesar had understood that the chief Defense of those within the Castle
did consist in Stones and Clubs, and that it was not an easy matter to sling,
hurl, dart, throw, or cast them so far as to hinder the Approaches, he
forthwith commanded his Men to throw great store of Bavins, Faggots and
Fascines round about the Castle; and when they had made the Heap of a competent
height to put them all in a fair Fire, which was thereupon incontinently done;
the Fire put amidst the Faggots was so great and so high, that it covered the
whole Castle, that they might well imagine the Tower would thereby be
altogether burnt to Dust, and demolished. Nevertheless, contrary to all their
Hopes and Expectations, when the Flame ceased, and that the Faggots were quite
burnt and consumed, the Tower appeared as whole, sound and entire as ever.
Caesar, after a serious Consideration had thereof, commanded a Compass to be
taken, without the distance of a Stone Cast from the Castle round about it
there, with Ditches and Entrenchments to form a Blockade; which when the
Loringians understood, they rendered themselves upon Terms: And then, by a
Relation from them it was that Caesar learned the admirable Nature and Virtue
of this Wood; which, of it self, produces neither Fire, Flame nor Coal; and
would therefore in regard of that rare Quality of Incombustibility, have been
admitted into this Rank and Degree of a true Pantagruelional Plant; and that so
much the rather, for that Pantagruel directed that all the Gates, Doors,
Angiports, Windows, Gutters, frettized and embowed Seelings, Cans, and other
whatsoever wooden Furniture in the Abbey of Theleme should be all materiated of
this kind of Timber* He likeways caused to cover therewith the Sterns, Stems,
Cook-rooms or Laps, Hatches, Decks, Coursies, Bends and Walls of his Carricks,
Ships, Gallioons, Galays, Brigantins, Foysts, Frigates, Crears, Barks, Floyts,
Pinks, Pinnaces, Huys, Catches, Capers, and other Vessels of his Thalassian
Arcenal; were it not that the Wood or Timber of the Larch-tree, being put
within a large and ample Furnace full of huge vehemently flaming Fire,
proceeding from the Fuel of other sorts and kinds of Wood, comes at last to be
corrupted, consumed, dissipated and destroyed, as are Stones in a Lime-kill:
But this Pantagruelion Asbestin is rather by the Fire renewed and cleansed,
than by the Flames thereof consumed or changed. Therefore, Arabians, Indians,
Sabaeans,
Sing not in Hymns and Io Paeans;
Your Incense, Myrrh, or Ebony:
Come, here, a nobler Plant to see;
And carry home, at any rate,
Some Seed, that you may propagate.
If in your Soil it takes, to Heaven
A thousand thousand Thanks be given;
And say with France, it goodly goes
Where the Pantagruelion grows.


The End of the Third Book.
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST PART.
THE Author's Prologue. Page 1. Of the Genealogy and Antiquity of Gargantua.
Chap. 1. p. 1 The Antidoted Conundrums found in an ancient Monument. chapter 2. p.
5 How Gorgantua was carried eleven Months in his Mothers Belly. chapter 3. p 9 How
Gargamelle, being big with Gargantua, did eat a huge deal of Tripe. chapter 4. p.
12 How they chirped over their Cups. chapter 5. p. 14 How Gargantua was born in a
strange manner. chapter 6. p. 19 After what manner Gargantua had his Name given
him; and how he tipled, bibbed and curried the Can. chapter 7. p 23 How they
apparelled Gargantua. chapter 8. p. 26 The Colors and Liveries of Gargantua. chapter 9
p. 31 Of that which is signified by the Colors White and Blew. chapter 10. p. 35
Of the youthful Age of Gargantua chapter 11. p. 41 Of Gargantua's wooden Horses.
chapter 12. p. 45 How Gargantua's wonderful Understanding became known to his
Father Grangousier, by the Invention of a Torchcul or Wipe-breech. chapter 13. p.
49 How Gargantua was taught Latin by a Sophister. chapter 14. p. 55 How Gargantua
was put under other Schoolmasters. chapter 15. p. 58 How Gargantua was sent to
Paris, and of the huge great Mare that he rode on: How she destroyed the
Ox-flies of the Beauce. chapter 16 p. 61 How Gargantua paid his Beverage to the
Parisians, and how he took away the great Bells of our Ladies Church. chapter 17.
p. 64 How Janotus de Bragmardo was sent to Gargantua to recover the great
Bells. chapter 18. p. 67 The Harangue of Mr. Jonatus de Bragmardo, for the recovery
of the Bells. chapter 19. p. 69 How the Sophister carried away his Cloth, and how
he had a Suit in Law against the other Masters. chapter 20. p. 72 The Study of
Gargantua, according to the Discipline of his Schoolmasters the Sophisters.
chapter 21. p. 76 The Games of Gargantua. chapter 22. p. 80 How Gargantua was
instructed by Ponnocrates, and in such sort disciplinated, that he lost not one
hour of the day. chapter 23. p. 86 How Gargantua spent his time in rainy Weather.
chapter 24. p. 97 How there was great Strife and Debate raised betwixt the
Cake-bakers of Learn, and those of Gargantua's Country; whereupon were waged
great Wars. chapter 25. p. 100 How the Inhabitants of Learn, by the Commandment of
Picrochole their King, assaulted the Shepherds of Gargantua unexpectedly and on
a sudden. chapter 26. p. 105 How a Monk of Sevile saved the Closs of the Abbey from
being ravaged by the Enemy. chapter 27. p. 108 How Picrochole stormed and took by
assault the Rock Clermond; and of Grangousiers Unwillingness and Aversion from
the Undertaking of War. chapter 28. p. 116 The Tenor of a Letter which Grangousier
wrote to his Son Gargantua. chapter 29. p. 120 How Ulrich Gallet was sent unto
Picrochole. chapter 30. p. 122 The Speech made by Gallet to Picrochole. chapter 31. p.
123 How Grangousier to buy Peace, caused the Cakes to be restored. chapter 32. p.
127 How some Ministers of Picrochole, by hairbrain'd Counsel put him in extreme
danger. chapter 33. p. 132 How Gargantua left the City of Paris to succor his
Country, and how Gymnast encountered with the Enemy. chapter 34. p. 138 How Gymnast
very nimbly killed Captain Tripet, and others of Picrochole's Men. chapter 35. p.
141. How Gargantua demolished the Castle at the Ford of Vede, and how they
passed the Ford. chapter 36. p. 145 How Gargantua in combing his Head made the
great Cannon Ball fall out of his Hair. chapter ^7. p. 149 How Gargantua did eat up
six Pilgrims in a Sallet. chapter 38. p. 152 How the Monk was feasted by Gargantua,
and of the jovial Discourse they had at Supper. chapter 39. p. 156 Why Monks are
the Outcasts of the World; and wherefore some have bigger Noses than others.
chapter 40. p. 161 How the Monk made Gargantua sleep, and of his Hours and
Breviaries. chapter 41. p. 165 How the Monk encouraged his Fellow Champions, and
how he hanged upon a Tree. chapter 43. p. 168 How the Scouts and Fore-party of
Picrochole were met with by Gargantua, and how the Monk slew Captain Drawforth,
and then was taken Prisoner by his Enemies. chapter 43. p. 171 How the Monk rid
himself of his Keepers, and how Pricochole's Forlorn Hope was defeated. chapter 44.
p. 176 How the Monk carried along with him the Pilgrims, and of the good Words
that Grangousier gave them. chapter 45. p. 179 How Grangousier did very kindly
entertain Touchefaucet his Prisoner. chapter 46. p. 184 How Grangousier sent for
his Legions, and how Touchfaucet slew Rashcalf, and was afterward executed by
the Command of Picrochole. chapter 47. p. 188 How Gargantua set upon Picrochole,
within the Rock Clermond, and utterly defeated the Army of the said Picrochole.
chapter 48. p. 192 How Picrochole in his Flight fell into great Misfortunes, and
what Gargantua did after the Battle. chapter 49. p. 197 Gargantua's Speech to the
Vanquished. chapter 50 p. 199 How the victorious Gargantuists were recompensed
after the Battle. chapter 51. p. 204 How Gargantua caused to be built for the Monk
the Abbey of Theleme. chapter 52. p. 207 How the Abbey of Thelemites was Built and
Endowed. chapter 53. p. 210 The Inscription set upon the great Gate of Theleme. chapter
54. p. 213 What manner of Dwelling the Thelemites had. chapter 55. p. 217 How the
Men and Women of the Religious Order of Theleme were apparelled. chapter 56. p. 219
How the Thelemites governed, and of their manner of Living. chapter 57. p. 224 A
Prophetical Riddle in the Style of Merly^. chapter 58. p. 227
The Table of the Second Part.
THE Author's Prologue. Page 4 The Original and Antiquity of the great
Pantagruel. chapter 9. p. 1 Of the Nativity of the most dread and redoubted
Pantagruel. chapter 2. p. 17 Of the Grief wherewith Gargantua was moved at the
Decease of his Wife Badebec. chapter 3. p. 22 Of the Infancy of Pantagruel. chapter 4.
p. 26 Of the Acts of the Noble Pantagruel in his youthful Age. chapter 5. p. 33 How
Pantagruel met with a Limousin, who affected to speak in Learned Phrase. chapter 6
p. 36 How Pantagruel came to Paris, and of the choice Books of the Library of
St. Victor. chapter 7. p. 40 How Pantagruel being at Paris, received Letters from
his Father Gargantua, and the Copy of them. chapter 8. p. 48 How Pantagruel found
Panurge, whom he loved all his Lifetime. chapter 9. p. 57 How Pontagruel decided a
Cause which was wonderfully intricate and obscure; whereby he was reputed to
have a most admirable Judgment. chapter 10. p. 64 How the Lords of Kissebreech and
Suckfist did plead before Pantagruel without Advocates. chapter 11. p. 71 How the
Lord of Suckfist pleaded before Pantagruel. chapter 12. p. 77 How Pantagruel gave
Judgment upon the Difference of the two Lords. chapter 13. p. 84 How Panurge
related the manner how he escaped out of the hands of the Turks. chapter 15. p. 88
How Panurge showed a very new way to build the Walls of Paris. chapter 15. p. 97 Of
the Qualities and Conditions of Panurge. chapter 16. p. 104 How Panurge gained the
Pardons, and married the old Women; and of the Suit in Law which he had at
Paris. chapter 17. p. 112 How a great Scholar of England would have argued against
Pantagruel, and was overcome by Panurge. chapter 18. p. 118 How Panurge put to a
Nonplus the Englishman that argued by Signs. chapter 19. p. 126 How Thaumast
relates the Virtues and Knowledge of Panurge. chapter 20. p. 133 How Panurge was
in Love with a Lady of Paris. chapter 21. p. 135 How Panurge served the Parisian
Lady a trick that pleased her not very well. chapter 22. p. 141 How Pantagruel
departed from Paris, hearing News that the Dipsodes had invaded the Land of the
Amaurots: and the Cause wherefore the Leagues are so short in France. chapter 23.
p. 146 A Letter which a Messenger brought to Pantagruel from a Lady of Paris;
together with the Exposition of a Posy, written in a Gold Ring. chapter 24. p. 148
How Panurge, Carpalin, Eusthenes and Epistemon (the Gentlemen Attendants of
Pantagruel) vanquished and discomfited Six hundred and threescore Horsemen very
cunningly. chapter 25. p. 154 How Pantagruel and his Company were weary in eating
still salt Meats: and how Carpalin went a hunting to have some Venison. chapter 26.
p. 158 How Pantagruel set up one Trophy in memorial of their Valor, and
Panurge another in remembrance of the Hares. How Pantagruel likewise with his
Farts begat little Men, and with his Fisgs little Women. And how Panurge broke
a great Staff over two Glasses. ch 27. p. 163 How Pantagruel got the Victory
very strangely over the Dipsodes and the Giants. c 28. p. 167 How Pantagruel
discomfited the three hundred Giants armed with Freestone, and Loupgarou their
Captain. chapter 29. p. 174 How Epistemon, who had his Head cut off, was finely
handled by Panurge; and of the News which he brought from the Devils, and
damned People in Hell. chapter 30. p. 182 How Pantagruel entered into the City of
the Amaurots, and how Panurge married K. Anarchus to an old Lantern-carrying
Hag, and made him a Crier of Green-sauce. chapter 31. p. 193 How Pantagruel with
his Tongue covered a whole Army, and what the Author saw in his Mouth. chapter 33.
p. 197 How Pantagruel became sick, and the manner how he was recovered. chapter 33.
p. 202 The Conclusion of this present Book, and the Excuse of the Author. chapter
34. p. 205.
The Table of the Third Part.
THE Author's Prologue. Page 1 How Pantagruel transported a Colony of Utopians
into Dypsodie. chapter 1. p. 18 How Panurge was made Lord of Salmygoudin in
Dypsodie, and did waste his Revenew before it came in. chapter 2. p. 26 How Panurge
praises the Debtors and Borrowers. chapter 3. p. 34 Panurge continues his
Discourse in the praise of Borrowers and Lenders. chapter 4. p. 44 How Pantagruel
altogether abhors the Debtors and Borrowers. chapter 5. p. 51 Why new married
Men were privileged from going to the Wars. chapter 6. p. 56 How Panurge had a
Flea in his Ear, and forbore to wear any longer his magnificent Codpiece. chapter
7. p. 61 Why the Codpiece is held to be the chief piece of Armor amongst
Warriors. chapter 8. p. 67 How Panurge asks Counsel of Pantagruel whether he
should marry, yea or no chapter 9. p. 74 How Pantagruel represents unto Panurge
the difficulty of giving Advice in the matter of Marriage; and to that purpose
mentions somewhat of the Homerick and Virgilian Lotteries. chapter 10. p. 80 How
Pantagruel shows the Trials of ones Fortune by the throwing of Dice to be
unlawful. chapter 11. p. 88 How Pantagruel does explore by the Virgilian Lottery
what Fortune Panurge shall have in his Marriage. chapter 12. p. 92 How Pantagruel
advises Panurge to try the future good or bad luck of his Marriage by Dreams.
chapter 13. p. 100 Panurge's Dream, with the Interpretation thereof. chapter 14. p. 112
Panurge's Excuse and Exposition of the Monastic mystery concerning Powdered
Beef. chapter 15. p. 124 How Pantagruel advises Panurge to consult with the Sibyl
of Panzoust. chapter 16. p. 130 How Panurge spoke to the Sybil of Panzoust. chapter 17.
p. 137 How Pantagruel and Panurge did diversely expound the Verses of the Sybil
of Panzoust. chapter 18. p. 144 How Pantagruel praises the Counsel of dumb Men.
chapter 19. p. 153 How Goatsnose by Signs makes answer to Panurge. chapter 20. p. 162
How Panurge consulteth with an old French Poet, named Raminagrobis. chapter 21. p.
171 How Panurge patrocinates and defends the Order of the begging Friars. chapter
22. p. 178 How Panurge makes the motion of a return to Raminagrobis. chapter 23.
p. 183 How Panurge consulteth with Epistemon. c. 24. p. 194 How Panurge
consulted with Her Trippa. c. 25. p. 201 How Panurge consulted with Friar Ihon
of the Funnels. chapter 26 p. 212 How Friar Ihon merrily and sportingly counsels
Panurge. chapter 27. p. 220 How Friar Ihon comfort Panurge in the doubtful
matter of Cuckoldry. chapter 28. p. 227 How Pantagruel convocated together a
Theologian, Physician, Lawyer and Philosopher for extricating of Panurge out of
the Perplexity wherein he was. chapter 28. p. 242 How the Theologue, Hippothadee,
gives Counsel to Panurge in the matter and business of his Nuptial Enterprise.
chapter 30. p. 247 How the Physician Rondibilis counsels Panurge. chapter 31. p. 225
How Rondibilis declares Cuckoldry to be naturally one of the Appendances of
Marriage. chapter 32. p. 267 Rondibilis the Physicians Cure of Cuckoldry. chapter 33.
p. 276 How Women ordinarily have the greatest longing after things prohibited.
chapter 34. p. 283 How the Philosopher Trouillogan handles the difficulty of
Marriage. chapter 35. p. 291 A Continuation of the Answer of the Ephectick and
Pyrronian Philosopher Trouillogan. chapter 36. p. 196 How Pantagruel persuaded
Panurge to take Counsel of a Fool. chapter 37. p. 307 How Triboulet is set forth
and blazed by Pantagruel and Panurge. chapter 38. p. 315 How Pantagruel was present
at the Trial of Judge Bridlegoose, who decided Causes and Controversies in Law
by the Chance and Fortune of the Dice. chapter 39. p. 322 How Bridlegoose gives
Reasons, why he looked upon those Law-Actions which he decided by the Chance of
the Dice. chapter 40. p. 328 How Bridlegoose relates the History of the
Reconcilers of Parties at variance in matters of Law. chapter 42. p. 334 How Suits
at Law are bred at first, and how they come afterward to their perfect growth.
chapter 42. p. 343 How Pantagruel excuses Bridlegoose in the matter of Sentencing
Actions at Law by the Chance of the Dice. chapter 43. p. 352 How Pantagruel
relates a strange History of the Perplexity of Humane Judgment. chapter 44. p. 358
How Panurge takes Advice of Triboulet. c. 45. p. 365 How Pantagruel and
Panurge dive sly interpret the Words of Triboulet. chapter 46. p. 373 How
Pantagruel nnd Panurge resolved to make a Visit to the Oracle of the Holy
Bottle. chapter 47. p. 376 How Gargantua shows, that the Children ought not to
marry without the special Knowledge and Advice of their Fathers and Mothers.
chapter 48. p. 381 How Pantagruel did put himself in a readiness to go to Sea; and
of the Herb named Pantagruelion. chapter 49. p 394 How the famous Pantagruelion
ought to be prepared and wrought. chapter 50. p. 403 Why it is called
Pantagruelion, and of the admirable Virtues thereof. chapter 51. p 408 How a
certain kind of Pantagruelion is of that nature, that Fire is not able to
consume it. c. 52. p. 421
FINIS.

