A SERMON PREACHED at the ANNIVERSARY-MEETING OF THE CHARTER HOUSE Scholars: AT
THE CHAPEL IN THE Charter House. On Monday, December 13th. 1680.

By NATHANAEL RESBURY, Minister of Wandsworth in the County of Surrey, and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable Arthur E. of Anglesey Lord Privy Seal.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

A SERMON ON Matthew. xxv. v. 40. And the King shall answer and say unto them,
Verily I say unto you, In as much as ye have done it to one of the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it unto Me.
IT has been a mighty outcry in the Church of Rome, and the calumny has
vended amongst the multitude, like other groundless Traditions, that our
Religion is so mere a brag of Faith, that to show how perfectly it disclaims
all kind of dependence upon the merit of good works, it discharges its
Professors from all obligations of doing them; and had not our Ancestry (whiles
governed by the Noble and generous principles of a munificent devotion and
piety) erected such Monuments of the usefulness and excellency of their
Religion, we had had no such august fabrics for performing the Solemnities of
our Worship, as now we have, but had contented our Selves probably with an
ungarnisht (...), some neglected upper-room, which the rage and tyranny of the
Age, made the Apostles and Primitive Christians, through fear of observation,
meet in. Much less had we known what an Hospital had meant, or any useful
communities supported by the alms and pious disposals of such whom the Romish
faith had inspired to it.

But this clamor certainly, as it was only raised before the reformed Religion
had time or capacity of exerting it self in practice in that kind; so it were
strange if it could be kept up now amongst any, but those who have never seen,
or read of the constitutions or manners of a Nation, wherein this Religion is
professed.

For as to the former, I mean our Churches, we have had (God knows) too late
and sad an occasion to show, what the mind conducted by the Protestant Faith
can do, when with so much largeness and alacrity we have rebuilt the Churches
their Hellish rage had burnt; and exceeded in the decency and ornaments of
those places, though not led to it by the blind and ignorant dictates of a fond
and unreasonable Superstition; which we find so inconsistent with it self, that
it can as furiously destroy those foundations, and lay the whole structure in
ashes, the building of which they have insisted on, as one plausible argument
for their Religion, and the devotion of their Ancestry.

As to the latter, I mean the erecting of Hospitals, and constituting other
useful Societies from the mighty supplies which the good and well-dispos'd
minds of those within our Church have thought fit to administer. Were it worth
the while to enumerate what foundations have been laid for the poor and
disabled in Hospitals and Almshouses, for education and encouragement to the
ingenuous in Schools and Colleges, for the painful and industrious in
Corporations and Workhouses, for the maintenance of those that attend at the
Altars, and minister in Holy things; in a word, what large and profuse issues
have been from the wealth and charity of some amongst our selves, for all the
just uses and conveniences of life, from the time of the first Reformation to
this day, it would be found there has been as much life in our faith, for the
product of Good Works, as ever has been in any one Age of the Church, since
the time that a community of goods, made the mutual love of Primitive
Christians, so great and remarkable*

And amongst the rest, I may very well say that this very Place, the memory of
whose Founder we celebrate this day, becomes a standing eviction to the knavery
of that calumny, whereby the Protestant Religion has been scandalized, as a
cold, and barren, and empty name, that has nothing of the thing or substance
of good works in it. A Foundation this is, which having been first laid without
any other Ministry, but that of one single Purse; and having had no other
improvements, but what the products within it self, may have swelled and
increased it to; is beyond all the instances that can be elsewhere given,
either at home or abroad; no one place in Europe probably, or within the whole
diffusions of Christianity, having either beforehand set the like Copy, or
wrote after this, since; the Sum total of this Charity amounting to a far
larger account (as it has served to much greater purposes) than that Cloister
of Carthusians, which formerly had, to so idle and mistaken uses, nestled here.

It is true, the Principles have not been the same upon which have been
grounded this, or other Foundations of our Protestant Charity, with what have
influenced those in the Church of Rome; nor have there been those wretched
artifices used, as consequent to those principles, by which the Brokers for the
Romish Charity have been so successful in the solicits they have made for the
revenues of it. We have not first possessed the World with any frightful
persuasions about the Torments of a Purgatory, pretending it the lot of most
Men to pass through the refinings of that fire into the state of the blessed;
and that the Prayers of some devout Persons secluded from the World to that
purpose, together with some other Ministries, will hasten the dispatches of
those Souls from thence, who have had the devotion, and the fortune to give
liberally toward the maintenance of such Chauntries.

We have no Doctrines that teach any expiatory and atoning merit in such works
as these, so as to give us the opportunity of screwing out of the confessions
of some sinners, such Sums for commutation of Penance, or satisfaction to
Divine Justice as may build a Monastery or add to the supports of one already
built. We erect no Foundations upon the Sins of the People; we dismiss not the
Soul of the unruly Tyrant, who has besmeared himself with the blood of
numberless Innocents, and raised his dominion upon the Necks of just
Proprietors, we dismiss not such an one with this appeasement of conscience,
under all the horrors of his butchery and injustice, that might reasonably rack
and torment him; if you build such a Religious house, or give so much into the
Treasury of the Church, you will find your self absolved there, and so all the
scores of blood and usurpation wiped out for ever.

We do not tell the infamous Lecher, that has done infinite injuries to
Families by his boundless lust, and made himself a stink and abhorrence, by the
Disease that Vengeance allots to that Vice, we do not tell such an one, that
his Charity toward a Nunnery (where the vowed chastity of those Secluses may
recompense for his beastliness) will secure his forgiveness in the other World,
and his reputation in this; Whereas in truth, that very Convent which the Money
of such a Wretch may have endowed or augmented, may prove his Heir in his
filthinesses, as well as his estate; and by a Pile of Skuls of the poor
murdered Infants (begot in those secrecies of Villainy) may raise a proper and
adequate Monument to the Lust of the first Founder.

We do not pretend that those Goods, which the Rapine of some has unjustly
extorted from the right owners, or which the prodigious avarice of others has
congested to the scandal and reproach of himself, or the injury of his
relatives; that such, if converted to Religious uses, when the fate of the
Possessor has set him for ever out of the reach of them, will make him such
friends here, and above too, that the Prayers of the one, and the interest of
the other shall lodge him safely enough in Abraham's bosom.

No, the undesigning plainness of our Doctrines, so directly suited to the
simplicity of the Gospel, has laid bare all the cheats and wheadles of that
kind; and by propounding and clearing up all the true notions of repentance and
faith, and a good life, have made all that sort of disguises so thin and airy,
that we have made our selves incapable of Juggling by such artifices; and what
acts of charity are now performed amongst us; as they are always designed
toward the best and most useful purposes of life; not for the satiating of some
lazy Monks, or idle Gossips, whose sloth, and whose plenty, instead of the
Divine and contemplative life, which they pretend, exposes them to all the
temptations of lust and wantonness: as (I say) the acts of our Charity have not
this tendency, but to better designs, so they are grounded from better
Principles, and promoted by more Christian persuasions in the breasts of the
Donors.

The intentions of our charity are chiefly directed against Idleness the
Nursery of all Vices: or toward the relief of such Persons whom poverty or
other misfortunes may have reduced to the extremest disablements: or, in a
word, the institution of ingenuity in Youth, or composure of thoughtfulness and
solicitude in old Age, that some after a long and cumbersome part acted, may
have the advantage of retiring themselves, where, freed from the cares or the
hazards of this life, they may in all repentance and devotion make up the
reckonings betwixt their Souls and God, and fit themselves for the Summons they
must expect at his Bar: and of such a Nature is this great and almost
unparalled Foundation, where so many Youths may be shaped and modeled for
service in the World, and so many aged Gentlemen drawn off and eased after the
service they have done, and put into circumstances, wherein they need be
thoughtful about nothing but Immortality.

The Principles of which (no question) were, that Humanity and Brotherly love
which the Christian Religion especially teaches; that trust and stewardship
which we are told in the Scriptures, is reposed in great and rich Men; that
affinity and kindred, which bounty and mercifulness has with all other parts
of goodness and righteousness, and, to add no more, that relation and nearness
which the Founder of our Religion, the Blessed Jesus, the Man-Christ does own
with those of our natures, transferring the obligations of all good turns done
to one another, as done unto himself; for so it is in the words of my Text,
Verily I say unto you, In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto Me.

These words are part of the representation which our Lord makes of his
appearing in Judgment at the end of the World, where he pronounces the
different Sentence upon those on the right hand, and on the left; The former he
instates in all the glories of a Kingdom prepared for them from the foundations
of the World, v. 34. The latter he banisheth from his presence and all the
bliss of it, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, v.
41. And the account of this different sentence alleged and explained: viz. the
good deeds that those on the right hand had done, in feeding the hungry and
relieving the stranger, clothing the naked and visiting the sick: and the
neglects that those on the left hand had been guilty of, in all those excellent
services which they had the obligation and opportunity of performing: a v. 35.
ad finem.

I shall take no occasion here to make any remarks upon this great Court of
Judicature, nor consider the nature of the Process: I shall not determine for
or against the conjecture of the learned Grotius, Lactant. Hieron. Theophylact.
who would suppose (for which he also cites some considerable Fathers for
strengthening his presumption) that this Scene of judgment seems only laid for
the Christian World, whiles they that either had not known God, or rejected his
Gospel, were by their disbelief condemned already. All that I shall do, shall
be with a direct eye upon what suits with the nature and reasons of this
Assembly, wherein some of us that have in this place had our first institution
of Youth, and others of us that have had with our Education, our Maintenance
too, do unitedly meet to recognize that bulky charity of our Founder, that has
given us the opportunity of either. So that because throughout this whole Scene
of action represented in the last Judgment, we may observe, partly that no
other instances of life are mentioned or insisted on, but the extent or defect
of Men's charity or good deeds; and partly the mighty acknowledgments which the
Great Judge makes of such good deeds, as if the performance or neglect
redounded upon himself; I shall make this communicative charity the subject of
my remaining Discourse, and as briefly as I can dispatch what I have to say
under two or three Heads, which may abundantly vindicate the Doctrines and the
effects of the Protestant Faith, as by no means foreign to Good Works.

1. First, there is no duty or performance in the whole Christian Law more
expressly prescribed and insisted on, than this of Almsgiving, or doing good to
those that shall stand in need of it. This, I might argue, without mustering up
the various injunctions in the Gospel, that look this way, from what we find
urged in my Text, that our Blessed Lord should account such works, of so
weighty an importance, that he makes it his (...), or the ground of his
sentence, to absolve or condemn Mankind according to what they have done or not
done in this kind. He does not here insist on the Orthodoxy of their Religion,
what Principles or Party they had espoused, how demurely they had lived, what
numbers or length of Prayers they had wonted themselves to, how many Fasts they
had kept, or Sermons they had heard, (though herein the answer of a good
conscience will be abundantly valuable at that day) but the reckoning is made
upon the visits that have been given to the sick, what clothing to the naked,
what food to the hungry, what protection and relief to the oppressed and
indigent? after which Copy the Apostle writes, when he tells us that this is
the Religion indeed; Jam. 1.17.
Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, etc. It is a cheaper and easier
performance to maintain a semblable regard for the duties of the first Table in
our Devotions toward God, than this costly and active part of love toward our
Neighbor, as comprehended in the second Table of the Law. There were those in
our Savior's time, who, while they were devouring Widows houses, Matthew. 23.14.
could, in that very pretense be making long prayers, and it was Saint Basil's
observation since that; Bas. M. in Luc. 12.8.
(...). I have known some that could fast, and pray, and groan, and be very
dextrous at all the guises of a cheap and unexpensive Religion, and yet they
have not the heart to give one Farthing to the Poor. There is nothing new under
the Sun; the observation both of our Savior's and this Father's, is as fresh
and pertinent (God knows) in the Age we live in as ever.

But however disproportioned the lives of some Christians are, or have been to
their Law of Faith; yet have they no more explicit injunctions in any thing
than in this: Our Savior having not only adopted the Moral Law into his, as he
has summed it up under those two great heads of love to God and love to our
Neighbors; Matthew. 22.37-39.
but also explained and extended the obligation of that part that concerns our
Neighbor, even to the loving our enemies, Matthew. 5.44.
and doing good to those that have wished or done us hurt. So gentle, so good
natured a Religion indeed became him whose errand into the World was to
accomplish a charitable work which goes beyond the comprehensions of Angels to
indict just praises to.

To say the truth, this Law of Charity is inseparably indented in humane
nature, to which indeed though the whole Christian Law (so far as it concerns
our practice) does bear a suitableness and correspondency, yet does this
instance of it seem more immediately connate and agreeable, as in relieving any
perplexed and distressed part of humane Nature, we labor in something that is
Natural, that is, the preservation of self, which whiles we withdraw from, we
are in some measure in that unreasonable confederacy represented in Menenius
Agrippa's Apologue, where the rest of the Members would withhold their
ministries from the belly till the whole starved.

And as it is a Law engraven even in humane Nature as so, so let me add, that
it is an eternal Law, that is, it has the eternal and unchangeable reasons of
good in it, viz. of doing good where the necessities of an occasion shall
offer. It is true indeed, such was not the original frame and disposure of
Mankind, but that had it not been for the depravation of humane Nature, this
Law of Beneficence might have been superseded for ever. Providence was not
unequal in the provisions it made, but as the Sun and the Stars which were
always out of the reach of the Ambitious or the Envious, do still diffuse their
universal heat and influence, according to their first ordinance and
appointment, so would all the riches and products of the Earth and of the Sea
have indifferently subserv'd for the abundant supply of all Mortals, there
being enough in the bosom and repository of Nature for every one to have fetched
his sufficiencies; but Ambition and Rapine made the Invasion, and since that,
Power and cunning has secured the acquist, Divine Providence having so far
interposed for the order and government of the World, as to make the liberality
of those who find themselves plentifully possessed, where they diffuse it toward
the attempering the extreme wants of others, and the patience and contentedness
of those whose boundaries are more narrow and straightened, equally a virtue, and
equally well-pleasing in his sight. And this is that now, which makes up the
lovely harmony and gives the beauty of agreement in things so widely different
and disproportioned; when the poor can in a still and quiet submission both
serve and depend upon the Rich, and the Rich do not defeat the expectations of
the Poor, but (as the Apostle expresses it, 2 Cor. 8.14.) one Man's abundance
supplies another man's wants, and in some measure makes the equality. It was a
generous expression of him in Seneca; Ego mea sic habeo ut omnium sint. I do so
far possess what I have, that it is every ones else.

Hence in that economy amongst the Jews, which was so peculiarly of God's
immediate dispensing and regulation, we find the thirtieth part of every Man's
in-come (as may be collected from the various tythings allotted for the Poor)
was the ultimum quod sic; the very least of a necessary charity that must be
set apart for the relief of the needy, and the observation of that charity run
into the account of justice and righteousness; he was not an honest man that
would not be punctual and strict in it: he was one of an evil eye (as the
Jewish Authors express it) that extended not his bounty to something
considerably more. To which purpose (perhaps) we may conjecture the reason why,
when our Christian Law insists upon such strict and repeated commands for our
charity, it prescribes no stated measures for it; because it would not suppose
us bounded by any of the scantlings which former Laws have intimated. But,
first, we have infinitely greater examples before us, than had ever yet been
propounded to the World; such was the Lord of Life and Glory himself, 2 Cor.
8.9.
who though he was rich, yet for our sakes became poor, that we through his
poverty might be made rich. He emptied himself of all that he was vested in, or
had a title to, as to all the riches of his Kingdom above, with all the
imaginable grandeurs of this World below, that by this voluntary beggary of his
own, we, who had been so helplesly and fatally impoverisht, might be not only
restored to our original honors, but to an Inheritance with Himself, beyond
all degrees what we could have pretended to.

Such was that other instance of a large and unbounded Charity in the first
Christians, who, to show how much this was the Doctrine and Life of the
Religion they had engaged in, did quit their own properties so far, Acts 4.34,
35.
where they had any, as by equal portions only, to share with the indigent
Brotherhood; that (as the Apostle applies the passage of the Israelites
gathering Manna in the Wilderness) He that had gathered much, 2 Cor. 8.15.
had nothing over, and he that had gathered little had no lack.

And as we have such transcendent examples built upon the Doctrines of Charity
in our Law of Faith, so we may suppose our selves under obligations of larger
displays of this virtue, than any other Law had yet directed Men to. Which
considerations probably, (besides the exigencies which the Church in its
persecuted state must needs conflict with, before it had the Patronage of Kings
and Emperors) might fill the Pens of the ancient Writers with such large and
importunate Exhortations to Charity; In so much that sometimes they charge such
with rapine that convert what they have, beyond mere necessaries, to their own
use; and therefore represent the richest Men but such Stewards, who are to make
their Accounts to the Poor for all redundancy, beyond what themselves may
modestly need; and at other times do Rhetorically bring the Poor upon the
Stage, as claiming his propriety in that Silk, or that Gold wherein the gaudy
Christian will ruffle it; in those disguised, and various Messes, wherein the
humorsome appetite will play the wanton even to a surfeit, as part of which
should have clothed his nakedness, and relieved his hunger, and the unjust
wast must therefore be accounted for at another Bar. These things, however
perhaps too severely spoke, at least not to pass current without the clearing
up of some cases, which time will not allow to be at present discussed; yet are
in thus much significant, that they teach us what sense the Ancients had of
their obligations to Charity from the Laws of Christianity, and that we have
indeed no boundaries to its diffusiveness, but only the prudent considerations
of our dependencies, that neither our selves nor they should really suffer, or
be impoverished, through our unseasonable liberalities; and yet even as to this
we are prevented all needless and unreasonable fears, by the warranty it has
pleased God to give us, both by his Word and Providence.

2. As there is no duty which is more expressly prescribed by the Christian Law,
than this of Charity, so there are no encouragements wanting to excite us to a
cheerful performance of it, although we suppose no expiation or atonement for
sin, no merit or desert from God by the utmost we can do in it. It is very
true, that such are our circumstances with God, through an antecedent guilt
that has made us so obnoxious, that after all we can do, Luke 17.10.
we must needs say we are unprofitable servants. Sin is of that nature, that it
makes every action of the man who is imbas'd and depraved by it, to be (in
strictest account with God) unlovely and unacceptable; and no future
performances can make up for the defects of former, because the utmost of all
was due at first: However, if we are not amongst the mere Mercenaries and
stipendiaries in Religion, we may find those encouragements to this virtue,
which may render all the wheadles of satisfaction or merit needless and
insignificant toward the making us conversant and exemplary in it.

As to this, I would not use the argument of applause and acceptance amongst
Men, because this is a qualification in our Charity which our Blessed Lord has
expressly prescribed against; though at the same time he assures us this is an
inseparable reward to it. We should not blow the Trumpet before our Alms, to be
seen and applauded by Men, though if we should do so, we should hardly miss of
that reward. Matt. 6.2.
Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. This is an excellency that has
so universal an acceptance amongst Men, that he that has the most abandoned
it himself, either commends, or envies it in another; and the Philosopher spoke
smartly enough when he told the Children of his Benefactor, that he stood upon
even ground with their Father for all his munificence, because he had given him
the credit of it; for all Men spoke well of him for his bounty to Xenocrates.

But this is a thought unworthy the Christian, and therefore ought not to be
urged in this place. However, may I not intimate something of the natural
pleasure that always lives and glowes in the mind thus employed? As it is
hardly separable in the humane Nature, but it must be uneasy and afflicted in
whatsoever it seems miserable in its own kind, so there is as immediate a joy
and well-pleasedness of mind where we are in the least instrumental in its ease
and relief. To make the sad and dejected countenance put on smiles; not only to
still his groans, but turn them into laughter, and to change the complaints and
murmurs of the Poor reduced Caitiff into Thanksgivings to Providence, good
wishes and blessings to our selves, which perhaps may mingle with our own
Prayers (as those of the devout Centurion and prepare a speedier descent of
some signal good to us; Acts 10.4.
what can be more inwardly delightsome and agreeable to a well tempered mind
than this is? There is no good mind that can forbear sharing in another joys,
and interesting it self so far in all the good dews that fall, though they
reach not his own fleece, that even the pleasure he conceives in another
happiness, does still derive something of it to himself. It was the Angelical
temper, to unite in one transported Quire, and make their Songs give notice to
the World how rejoiced they were in the behalf of Man when His Savior was
born: Luke 2.13, 14.
And it is a part of their good natured Heaven still, that they can frame a new
joy at the conversion of a sinner. Luke 15.10.
Much more may it reflect a grateful touch upon the mind, when the Man himself
has been the Benefactor. This is a God-like complacency, when our own full and
entire happiness, gives us not that rest and content, but that we must be
endeavoring, what in us lies, to make others so: God himself rested not in the
perfections of his own bliss, till he had created beings to whom he might
communicate, and make them happy in some derivative effluxes of himself: and
the Blessed Jesus would fill up that eternity of delight he had in the bosom of
his Father, with the pleasure he took in that unspeakable act of Grace, saving
Mankind, by interposing himself betwixt the stroke and death. It is an
indication of the real joys that attend every act of beneficence, when it has
been so much delight to the ever blessed God himself to be thus doing good.
Epicurus who made pleasure his God, yet declared this to be a part of that
pleasure, (...), to be doing good; and he that was God himself, that had lain
in the bosom of Pleasure from all eternity, left this as one of his Maxims when
he taught in the World, which St. Paul quotes from him, either by the help of
Tradition or Revelation: Acts 20.35.
Remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give
than to receive.

I may add (amongst many others) lastly, the grand encouragement in the Text,
that our Lord, the Judge himself will not disdain to own the good that we have
done to any other, as if it had been done unto himself. Heb. 2.11.
He is not ashamed to own the least of his servants under the name and dignity
of his brethren; and to such (whiles we do it with regard to that relation and
affinity with him) he tells us elsewhere that a Cup of cold water is registered
as a gift that shall be accounted for, Matthew. 10.42.
when the rewards come to be distributed.

Oh! wondrous condescension, that the Blessed Jesus should proclaim himself
still walking in rags, or shackled in a Dungeon, and that whiles we are feeding
the Beggar, we make Christ our Guest! who would not gladly pare off all his
superfluities of life, that he might always have ready an entertainment for so
great a Personage when he craves an alms? Had Abraham known the quality of his
Guests while he invited Angels in, he would not have thought his whole
substance a competent entertainment: We have the word of our Lord himself for
it, and may be sure we are treating Him, whiles we relieve the real sufferer
that craves it in his Name. In as much as ye have done it to one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. What an infinite honor is it to
be capable thus of laying up our Treasures in Heaven? to cloth and feed him
whose is the Earth with all its fullness? to relieve and visit him whose is
Heaven it self with all its Joys and Glories? It might well be esteemed one of
the severer parts of the Ecclesiastical censure in the first ages of
Christianity, not to suffer some kind of offenders to cast in their charity
into the offertory; and so Epiphanius tells us, (...). We accept of no
offerings from unjust or wicked men, but from those that live well. It was too
great an honor for such to be permitted to give good Men their alms, or that
such whom Christ had so near a relation to, should be beholding to his enemies.

These Considerations (I say) give Charity and good Works so high an estimate,
that if we seriously entertained them, we need not, with the Church of Rome
make lies our refuge, or make use of their lewd arguments from merit, or
satisfaction, or a quicker dispatch from Purgatory, to animate to well-doing,
because there are sufficient encouragements, we might derive from hence, which
none but the Infidel or most abandoned Sensualist would account trivial, and
not worthy to be governed and persuaded by.

3. Lastly, There are some fair and plausible appearances of this Charity,
which yet really and indeed ought not to be esteemed as so, because they answer
not the true purposes and ends of it. We have some instances amongst our selves
against which our Laws have wisely provided; such are our idle wanderers, who,
though they may have the Plea of hunger, and cold, and nakedness, to urge and
persuade our compassion toward them, yet having hands, and health, and
strength, which by their own industry might labor out a supply to themselves,
our Laws forbid the encouragement of such, and that upon the great Apostolical
Foundation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
that if any would not work, neither should they eat. These are not within the
kindred of our Blessed Lord: Though he was poor, yet was not he idle and
unactive himself, Act. 10.38.
but spent his whole life in the labors of love: He went about doing good; and
so he expects from all his household of faith.

Upon which occasion, I might again reflect upon most of the Religious
Foundations in the Church of Rome; Perhaps the rise and original of such, might
of old have been warrantable enough; whilst the Devotionist in those Societies
had the real opportunities of withdrawing from the World, and contemplating the
future state; and by severest mortifications and self-denial at home, as also
industrious and exemplary instructions abroad might put himself and others into
a ready posture for another World: this was to the true purposes and ends of
Charity, and whoever by their beneficence begun or encouraged such foundations
as these, will be owned by Christ, as having served and supplied Him in those
his Brethren. But what shall we say now to those Nurseries either of Scandal or
Mischief, into which the Religious-houses abroad are even Universally
perverted? where either the luxury and lust of a pampered and well-fed Monk,
the wantonness and dalliances of an idle and unwilling Nun, has been the
scoptick theme of witty and observing Men for some Ages. Or else if in other
Societies they make not idleness their choice, and pretend not so much to the
contemplative, as to the busy and active life; what is the result of this
industry, (especially in these last Ages of Jesuitism) but searching into the
Councils of Kingdoms, and States, and laboring out a mischievous interest from
the intelligence they gain: perplexing and involving the World in Wars and
Blood; making the Thrones of Kings either unsafe or uneasy, contriving
Subversions of Government, or Hellish Massacres, and all for advancing the
Tyranny and Pride of an Apostate Prelate, to whose obedience and interests they
have bound and obliged themselves, by Vows as impious as Hell it self could
invent. The founding and endowing such confederacies as these, is so far from
doing good to the brethren, that it will be found at last a maintenance and
support to the enemies of the Holy Jesus; however they may abuse and presume
upon that Name of his to distinguish the fraternity.

But, thanks be to God, it is not so with us in any of our foundations of
Charity; it is least of all so, in this, which we at present commemorate.

Here the Parent is disburthen'd from the cares and expenses of his Child's
education, and has a moral assurance from the first entry and admission of him
here, that he is not only provided for, but likely to act a very useful and
serviceable part upon the Stage of this World, either in the Church or in the
Commonwealth. And here old age may compose it self, and having disintangled it
self from all the bustles and the snares of an active employed life, may be at
leisure to look backward, and repent of all the miscarriages of times past, and
in doing so, may look forward with a well-grounded hope of closing up the whole
in peace and bliss. Oh what a Crown of Joy is it likely to prove to our
Founder, at the last great Solemnity, when he shall stand at the head of a
numerous happy crowd, who have had the opportunities of living usefully, and
dying successfully, through the ministry of that significant charity of his!

Let me therefore, as an upshot to this discourse, bespeak both the Youth and
the Age of this place, that you would in your different spheres and capacities
think your selves more peculiarly obliged by the bounty of this great Man, and
kind allotments of Providence in giving you a share in it; to answer the ends
and designs of it; the young ones, Eccl. 12.1.
in remembering your Creator now in the days of your Youth, improving the
advantages you have both for Learning and Piety, that His Memory may live in
the fragrant savours of your Lives, and others may be encouraged to multiply
such works, when they discern such excellent effects of it in you. v. 13.
And you Fathers, the Keepers of whose house do now begin to tremble; The
decays of whose age assure you that the flame of life is dwindling and almost
spent off; However you may have lived, make it your whole business to dye well:
Let no pretended cares of life divert you, because the unlabored liberalities
that feed and cloth you now have superseded all; but, as you are in reasons of
Nature hastening to the endless state; so take hold of this season of leisure
and retirement for making up your last periods in that devotion and
seriousness, that when the great Judge shall come to reckon up the good deeds
of our mighty Benefactor, your selves may be amongst the Number he shall point
at, when he owns that they were done to these his brethren. Which God of his
infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with Himself and
Holy Spirit, be given all Praise and Glory for ever. Amen!

THE END.

