I Appoint John Wright, and Richard Chiswel, to Print this REPORT, Perused by
me, According to the Order of the HOUSE of COMMONS; And that no other Person
presume to Print it.

December. 11th. 1680. Wi WILLIAMS, Speaker.

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE, For Receiving INFORMATIONS CONCERNING THE Popish
Plot; Upon the Complaint of Mr. Peter Norris.

Presented to the HOUSE of COMMONS, Upon Thursday the 9th. day of December. 1680.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, at the Crown on Ludgate Hill, and Richard
Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE For Receiving INFORMATIONS Concerning the Popish
Plot, Upon the COMPLAINT of Mr. Peter Norris, presented to the House of COMMONS
upon Thursday December. 9. 1680.
UPon consideration of the Information given at the Bar by Mr. Peter Norris
and Referred to this Committee,

Resolved by this Committee, that the Examination of this matter be Reported
Specially.

This Committee in the first place, after hearing of the said Norris his
Complaint, that several Papers were taken from him, sent for the said Papers
which were informed then to be in a Chest in the Council Chamber, which Papers
were brought to this Committee by an Inventory which the said Norris then
acknowledged to be all, and they still remain with this Committee.

In the next place, they proceeded to examine upon what occasion the said
Norris was sent beyond Sea (...) which not only by the said Papers, but also by
a Certificate delivered to the Chairman of this Committee from the Earl of
Essex, and diverse other Informations as well as the said Norris his
Instructions given by Dr. Tongue, was to fetch over one Dowdall an Irish Priest,
who had been conversant with the Priest in France and Flanders, who managed the
Plot both in England and Ireland, and mixing himself among them, was privy to
the whole Plot, which the said Dowdall by several Letters had made known to Dr.
Tongue which Letters were perused by the Earl of Essex, and also satisfaction
was given by a known Merchant in London, that the said Dowdall was an honest
man, of good understanding, and might be credited.

Then the Committee proceeded to inquire, who at any time had knowledge of the
sending over for the said Dowdall, and found by an Order of Council, bearing
date the eighteenth day of July 1679. that the said Dowdall by the name of
Edward Dowdall, was permitted to come from Dover and stay for a Month, but in
that Order there is no mention of Dowdall's being a Priest. And it likewise
appears to this Committee, that not long after the said Order for his coming
over, Dowdall dyed, and not without suspicion that it was a Violent Death: but
it does not appear to this Committee, that the Death of Dowdall was known in
England till after the Return of Norris, who was sent to fetch the said Dowdall
over, which was about Ten Months after the Date of the said Order of Council.

Upon which, this Committee proceeded to Examine, how it came to pass, that the
said Norris was in such danger beyond Sea; and particularly at his coming
aboard the Pacquett-Boat at Calais, and likewise his Imprisonment at Dover in
the Common Prison, and his being brought from Dover by a Messenger, and they
found the Cause of it to be a Description given of Peter Norris to Secretary
Jenkins the Twenty Ninth of May 1680. in these words, Peter Norris, some call
him Morris a Scotch-man, handsome, neat Face, sanguine Complexion, short Nose,
baldpated, white Wigg, slender Body, little Stature, Civil and Smooth in
Discourse, speaking French; aged Thirty Four Years more or less, Tailor by
Trade: and under this Description, written with another Hand and Ink these
words (viz.) Went into France on Wednesday was three weeks to bring with him a
Priest. Thereupon this Committee proceeded to Examine, who brought this
Description to the said Secretary, and where and by whom it was drawn, with all
the Circumstances that they could find about it. And first they found, that
Thomas Sheridon a Gentleman, who affirmed himself a Protestant born in Ireland,
heretofore employed in Collecting the Revenues there, and lately with the Duke
at his Court at Brussells, and came over with him in the same Yacht, confessed
upon his Examination, that he carried the said Description to the said
Secretary; but it being showed him, he denied the writing any part of it, save
the last Line; but confessed that it was written and brought to him by one
Anthony Day Doctor of Physic to the Late Army in Flanders. Whereupon the said
Sheridon was commanded to produce the said Day, and with him to attend.

Dr. Day and Mr. Sheridon both appearing were examined severally.

And first the said Day, who confessed himself a Papist, and pretended very
little knowledge of Mr. Sheridon, but that coming to give him a visit, which he
had not done of six weeks before, Mr. Sheridon began to discourse of News, and
particularly of the Plot; to which the said Doctor replied, that now the whole
Plot would be discovered and laid open; for he heard there was one gone beyond
Sea to fetch over a Priest that knew of the whole Plot: and does not remember
any thing more at that time but common discourse. But some few days after
meeting with Mr. Sheridon, the said Mr. Sheridon desired him to describe the
person that was so sent over; the said Dr. Day replied, that he knew not the
person that was gone, nor the Priest he was to fetch: but that John Butler,
keeper of a Brandy-shop near the French Ambassadors upon discourse had told
him so; to whom Mr. Sheridon desired him to go and get the description, which
he did accordingly. And the description being showed him, confessed he writ it
from his mouth, save the last line: But says, that person is now dead who gave
him the said Description, but his wife is living.

Mr. Sheridon being then called in and examined, said, He had no great
acquaintance with the said Doctor, and seldom saw him but upon a visit, which
happily might be once a week or the like; Confesses, That the said Doctor told
him as News, the Plot would now be laid open, for there was one sent over into
France to fetch a Priest that knew of the whole Plot: and further says, That
he that went over knew as much of the Plot as any man in England. Whereupon the
said Sheridon Confesses, That he went shortly after; but remembers not how
long, to Secretary Jenkins, and told him that there was one gone over into
France that knew as much of the Plot as any man, and that he went over to fetch
a Priest that also knew the whole Plot, which he the said Sheridon supposed was
to be a Witness: Upon which the said Secretary commanded him the said Sheridon
to give him a description of the person so sent over: but remembers no other
discourse at that time; But that some short time after, but remembers not how
long, he met with Mr. Day, who gave him the description in the presence of Mr.
John Wilson of the Middle Temple, which he shortly after delivered to the
Secretary, and used as he remembers, only these words, Sir, Here is the
description of the person I mentioned to you.

After this Description so delivered to the Secretary, a Letter was written by
Mr. Cook, (which Mr. Secretary declared at the Committee he would take upon
himself) in these words following,

White Hall, May 31. 1680. SIR,
THe Right Honorable Sir Leoline Jenkins, one of his Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, being hastily called this day to wait upon his Majesty at
Windsor, has commanded me to send you the enclosed description of a person,
who, if he shall happen to come from France and land at your Port, Mr.
Secretary says, you will do the King and Kingdom a great service if you will
keep a strict Eye upon him and the company that shall arrive with him, till
they be all brought before Mr. Mayor, or other chief Magistrate of your Town,
whom Mr. Secretary desires to offer the said persons the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy; and in case of their or any of their refusal of the same, to
secure them and deal with them according to Law, giving Mr. Secretary an
account with what speed may be, of all the proceedings in this affair. If such
a person as is here described should come and make no bones of taking the
aforesaid Oaths, yet in case Mr. Mayor or other chief Magistrate before whom
they are brought, shall have reasonable ground to suspect that he is the man so
described, and that he has one or more in his company who may be reasonably
suspected to be Priests, some handsome course is to be taken to detain them
till Mr. Secretary can be acquainted with what is done, and send such further
directions as shall be thought necessary. Mr. Mayors authority, with your
Prudence and Zeal in this matter, will I hope produce a good effect. Upon this
Command I am

SIR, Your very Humble Servant, John Cook.
Pray favor me with a Line that this comes safe to your hands.

Vera Copia.

John Pepper.






Upon which Norris was committed to the Common Prison, as is mentioned in his
Complaint. All which being of more than an ordinary nature, this Committee
thought not fit to give any opinion, but humbly referred it to the Wisdom of
this House.

FINIS.

