Of Closet-Prayer.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, On SUNDAY, Aug. 27. 1693.

By Nathanael Resbury, D. D. Rector of S. Paul-Shadwell, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
MATTHEW. vi. 6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when
thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father,
which sees thee in secret, shall reward thee openly.
THese words are part of our Savior's Discourses in the Mount, wherein he is
cautioning his Followers of those usual Schemes of Hypocrisy, by which the
Pharisees had made themselves so remarkable: of these he gives a twofold
Instance, that of disposing their Alms and Charity, which they were wont to
perform, with sound of trumpet, or open Ostentation to the World, of what they
were a doing; v. 2. and that of praying in the corners of the streets, that
they may be seen of Men. In opposition to which, he directs his Disciples to
affect (at least) so much of Privacy in all Religious Acts, as may make it
evident, their design is chiefly to approve themselves before God, who sees the
heart, and values the act, from the inward intention and design only. When thou
do alms, let not thy left hand know, what thy right hand does, etc. v. 4. and
when thou prayest, enter into thy closet.

It was a frequent Observation our Savior had made elsewhere, of the horrid
Hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, and Chief among the Jews in his time;
against which he denounces so many several Woes, Mat. 23.25, 27. and so on. He
does it in this Chapter, both as to their Alms, and their Devotions. My Text is
concerned with their Hypocrisy, in all their Acts of pretended Devotion, v. 5.
When thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to
pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they
may be seen of men: wherein we may take notice of the posture, and the places
they chose to pray in, in both which they might be most seen; their posture,
standing; the place, the Synagogues and corners of the streets.

As to their posture, of standing at their Prayers: We must not suppose this
was unwarrantable in it self, because it was much in use, both with the Jews
and Christians of old. Insomuch that the very Phrase, sometimes, in Scripture,
for praying in public Solemnities, is, that of standing before the Lord; from
whence, that Jewish Expression, Sine stationibus non subsisteret Mundus, The
World could not subsist, without the standings, or Prayers of the Church. And
the Christians, in the first Ages, had their certain seasons, wherein they
performed their public Services of the Church, standing; whence that term of
their Stationary Days; Quum publicis stationibus Vota sua persolvit Ecclesia,
When the Church performed her Offices of Prayer, by public Stations, or
standing. So that this posture is not reflected on, as unwarrantable in it
self, but as chosen by the Hypocrites of that Age, that they might be the
better seen at their Devotions.

Then, for the place, they not only chose the Synagogues, but stood in the
chief corners of the streets. In triviis (as the Latin has it). Probably, in
places where three or four streets met together, where Passengers in each of
those streets might discern, and reverence their plausible Holiness. Verily,
says our Savior, they have their reward. That is, they have what they aimed
at, and much good may it do 'em. But what good can this poor Recompense do
them, when they shall come to be approved or condemned by him, who knows the
insides of things, and values them accordingly? But thou, when thou prayest,
enter into thy closet, etc.

That which I shall pursue from these words, shall be this, to lay before you
the expediency and reasonableness of secret or closet-Prayer. If you would
approve your selves to God indeed, you must be frequent in your privatest
Retirements for Prayer. The Caution in my Text directs, not only, to enter into
our closets, but, when we are there, to shut our doors about us.

Before I proceed to the Argument; it may not be amiss, briefly to premise,
that as this Ca^^ion, in the Text, does by no means exclude the great duty
incumbent upon us, both as to the Worship of God in public, and also that in
our Families: so, though this direction strictly mentions that of entering into
our closets, and shutting our doors, and praying to God in secret; it does not
so far necessitate our privacy in this Action, that we are bound to take all
imaginable care, that no one in the World should know, or suspect we do it. No,
it may sometimes be of use, that others should understand our practice in this
kind, that they, by our example, might learn, and be encouraged to do the same.
How often may the Parent's, or the Master's known and observed Custom of secret
Prayer, instill a Principle into the Minds of those that are under them, and
that are desirous to imitate them, that they also take up the same way; and
from thence, habituate themselves to those Exercises of Religion, which become
a future ground of their own retired Intimacies and Acquaintance with God.

All the design of this place is, That Men should not take up with a formal and
pompous show of Religion in the Acts of it: that they should not court the Eye
and Observation of the World in all they do of this kind; and make it their
only design to be seen of men: but that they should delight themselves in those
Exercises of Religion, that are less observed by Men, wherein God and their own
Consciences are the chief Parties, and, betwixt these only, it appears, that we
are in earnest.

In pursuing therefore this Subject, I shall do these two things.

I. Show upon what accounts this part of Divine Worship, in our most private
and secret Retirements, becomes so reasonable and necessary a Duty.

II. What ought to be our Carriage and Behavior toward God, in these our
Secrecies of Prayer: Which last may serve for Application of the former.

I. Upon what accounts, this part of Divine Worship, in our most private and
secret Retirements, becomes so reasonable and necessary a Duty. And this may be
argued from these three or four Heads.

1. This mainly avoids the Charge of Hypocrisy in our Profession, or Acts of
Devotion.

2. We have, herein, the greater liberty of particularizing our Wants before
God.

3. We may, with greater collection of Mind and Thoughts, serve God in these
our private Retirements.

4. This special Promise in the Text, That God that sees us in secret, himself
will reward us openly, will appear of great Moment.

1. This Custom of worshipping God in secret, mainly avoids the Charge of
Hypocrisy in our Profession or Acts of Devotion. And this is that, that seems
chiefly the occasion of this Caution in the Text. Our Blessed Savior drives
plainly at it, in both the Instances, of Charity toward the Poor, and Devotion
toward God. In the former, we are not to do as the Hypocrites do, to sound a
Trumpet before us; no, not to let our left hand know what our right hand does.
In the latter we are not to make it our business to pray standing in the
synagogues, or in the corners of the streets, but when we pray, to enter into
our closets, etc. So that to follow the reason of this Duty, as it is
particularly grounded against Hypocrisy in the performance of our Worship
toward God, it will not be amiss to show,

(1.) That Hypocrisy, where it is the only Design and Proposal, in any part of
Religion whatsoever, does actually destroy the true and just end of the whole
undertaking.

(2.) That we cannot so effectually make out our Sincerity in any Acts of
Divine Worship, where they are only in public, and to be seen of men.

(1.) That Hypocrisy, where it is the only Design, in any Act of Religion
whatsoever, does actually destroy the true and just end of the whole
undertaking. For,

First, Such an one does not interest himself in any one Action, or Performance
of Real Religion. His design only (as he is an Hypocrite) is to make a show of
doing that which he intends not. Hence he borrows his name from the
Stageplayer, whose Employment is to personate Men, and Things; that is, to act
their Persons, whom they know themselves not to be; in Things, wherein they
know they are not really concerned. Thus the Hypocrite, in all his Actions that
bear a show and semblance in Religion, his design only is to act a part, and
not to be the Person, or do the Action really, which he seems to be or do.
Thus, when such an one gives Alms, he does but act the part of a truly
charitable Man. He does not give in pity and commiseration to the need of
others; he does not give in conscience toward God, or in tenderness for that
stamp and Image of God, which he sees upon his needy Brother, or from any such
noble and generous Principle, that Religion dictates: But he gives, that he may
avoid the Reproach of a niggardly and penurious Man; he gives, that his Name
may live after him, and may swell in the mouths of others, applauding him as
great and generous, or devout and religious, etc. and so, while his design is
only to personate the Man that is Religiously charitable, he must needs, as to
himself, destroy the true design and end of the Religious Act, because he does
not interest himself at all in it. So, in this Instance in my Text; when the
Hypocrite prays, he only acts the part of the devout Man; he is not concerned
in the Realities of Devotion, because he designs nothing, but that Men might
apprehend him a zealous, holy Man; so that not really doing the Action he
represents, he loses the Privileges, or Rewards of such an Action, because the
Action it self is not really performed by him. Like the Actor upon the Stage,
though he personates the Majesty and Grandeur of a King, the wise Dictates and
Projects of the Statesman, the Valor and Conduct of the Noblest General; yet
does not he by any means receive the real Honors due to any of these
Characters, but, merely the Applause of present Spectators, and a little
Stipend for Bread, which is all he aimed at. So our Savior limits the Reward
of this Actor to the Merits of the Performance, v. 2, 5. Verily, I say unto
you, they have their reward. All they propounded, perhaps, was the Applause of
Men, or establishing to themselves a present Interest, and this they may
attain. But it is then only, when a Man's Sincerity in Worship is discerned by
him that sees into the secrets of Hearts; it is then only, and they are such
only that reap the proper Fruits of Religion, because he that sees them in
secret, will reward them openly. Besides,

Secondly, I may add, Hypocrisy in any Acts of Worship toward God, does offer
so immediate an affront to the High and Holy One, that it must needs destroy
the true ends of that Devotion, it dissembles. For the Hypocrite, in thus
doing, does either befool himself, and think he can mock God, as not discerning
the inwards of his Mind, and so robs him of the Glories of his Omniscience and
Omnipresence; or else, he has those mean thoughts of God, as easy enough to
take up with the foppish shows and ostentations he makes, and so robs him of
the Honor of his infinite Holiness and Wisdom; or else, in a word, plainly
defies God, that be he as holy, or wise, or discerning as he will, yet the Man
will not set his heart aright toward him. Nor will make one step further in
Religion, than what mere outward Show and Ostentation will amount to. Now there
is enough, in any of these Instances of Affront done to the Divine Majesty,
that may justly cut the Hypocrite off from all Pretensions to any good Reward
for these pretended Acts of Devotion.

How daring a Sinner is the Hypocrite, to think that either God does not see,
or if he does see, will not concern himself; or if God does see, and will
interest himself, he cares not; but, if he can attain the present ends of his
dissembling with the World, and God, he will run the hazard of all the rest. No
wonder that in the Holy Scriptures we find Hell marked out as the most proper
and direct portion of the Hypocrite; that whosoever is to be damned to purpose,
has his place assigned there, with the Hypocrite, Matt. 24.51. The Lord of that
servant shall come -- and shall appoint him his portion with the hypocrite,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. So that, we see, the
reasonableness of this Duty of keeping up the Worship of God in secret, and in
our Closets, where God only is privy to it, that we may thereby avoid the
Charge of Hypocrisy in our Profession, when we see in what dangerous
circumstances the Hypocrite stands toward God; especially considering, that
without this custom of worshipping God in secret, we cannot so well justify our
Integrity by all other performances of public Devotion: which is the second
Particular under this Head, which I am now to make out.

(2.) We cannot so effectually make out our Sincerity in any Acts of Devotion,
where they are only in public, and to be seen of men. For in this
conscientious usage, chiefly, we declare, we have no Regard to any thing, but a
sense of our Duty toward God, and the Zeal we have for Communion with himself;
and that, in mere respect to the Obligation that lies upon us, of rendering to
God his just Worship: therefore we retire from the eyes of Men, to perform it;
where no other Motives seemed to influence us, but the Necessity, or the
Pleasure of the Duty. We take no witness to our Devotions but God, and our own
Consciences: and by that, we make it evident, That, as we desire to approve our
selves chiefly to himself and our own minds; so, we expect no Rewards, or
Advantage elsewhere, but from him, who sees in secret, and will reward openly.
It is true, there may be a worm of Hypocrisy at the root of our Devotion, even
in our most secret, and unseen dealings with God; that is, we may please and
satisfy our minds with the thoughts that such a Work, or Duty, is done, and
over, urged to it by the enforcements of natural Conscience, persuading us of
the necessity of something of this kind. But then, as this is less likely, and
we may generally presume, that the conscience of performing the Duty it self,
(which nothing but our regard to God, and his Commands, has influenced) may
also keep awake our care and concernment, as to the frame and disposition of
our minds; that we rest not in a slighty performance only: so, it is too
probable, that where any one is considerably frequent and diligent in attending
public Solemnities (in the mean time never retiring to his Closet) he is
little other than an Hypocrite; at least, he has not this satisfaction to
reflect upon himself, nor this witness within of his own Truth and Sincerity,
as to Religion, and the Fear of God; because there are so many other Reasons
that might induce the Man to join with others in public Solemnities: The
Customs and Fashion of the place we live in, our natural inclination to herd
and associate with one another; a desire to see others, and to be seen of them;
a diverting our selves for such a part of time, that otherwise might hang upon
our hands; our natural Notions of God, and necessity of giving him some kind of
Worship: our making an interest with some good Man, that may be induced to
value us for this appearance of Devotion, etc. These, and other such
considerations as these, may perhaps have force enough to cement us in the
common bond of Worship toward God (and it is well that any considerations do
serve to keep up the face of public Solemnities.) But in this our daily custom
of secret Prayer, there may, perhaps, appear no other motive, that we can
reflect upon, as urging us to it, but the great regard we have to this
indispensable Command of our Blessed Lord, which bids us, when we pray to enter
into our closets, and there shut our doors about us.

So much for this first Head of Argument.

2. I may argue the Reasonableness and Expediency of this great Duty of praying
to the Father in secret, from this consideration, that we have, in such times,
and places as these, the greater liberty of particularizing our wants before
God. There are particular concernments, wherein every pious Soul may interest
Providence, betwixt himself and his gracious Father, of which public Forms are
not inclusive, at least, not plainly expressive of them; nay, such, perhaps, as
may not be very convenient to concern public Societies withal. There may be
some particular circumstances of Guilt, which it is not necessary we should lay
open to the World, in our public Confessions, which yet our gracious Father,
not only allows, but encourages; nay, expects that we should, in frequent Acts
of Repentance, acknowledge before him, and expressly recite them, in order to
our Pardon, and Reconciliation with himself. There are particular wants, that
press and urge us, which we need not trouble a multitude in knowing them; and
particular supplies, and deliverances, and experiences, in this or that
Instance in Providence, which it might be impertinent, and tedious to others to
rehearse in their presence, or return our thanks for them.

But, we have one who is the Author, and Fountain of all our Supplies and
Enjoyments, and will never be wearied out, either with our fresh Supplications,
or repeated Acknowledgments; with him we may have our full, and unupbraided
Liberty of expostulating in all our fears and uneasiness; of pouring out our
Souls in all the meltings of Repentance, the passions of Love, Joy, Submission
and Resignation, with all the vigorous warmth of Converse and Communion with
God. So that, for the convenience of declaring our wants, enlarging our
confessions, repeating our thanks, opening our Souls in all the transports of
Love, and Joy, and most free and affecting Reciprocations of his Love and
Favor, when we pray, we should often enter into our closets, and there shut
the door, and pray to our Father which sees us in secret. And indeed, where
Endearments are great, and the Passions of Love more than ordinarily high, and
mutual, there is a natural desire of Solitude, and Retiredness, that there be
no interruption, no mistaken, mis-apprehended indecencies in the mutual Issues
and Caresses of Love. Oh my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, and in
the secret places of the stairs; let me see thy countenance, and let me hear
thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely -- says
Solomon, Cant. 2.14. How many a long night of Intercourse and Communion with
God, had David! sometimes watering his couch with his penitential Tears; and
sometimes preventing the watches of it to praise God; that he might do both,
more freely and uninterruptedly! It is not probable he could make such
particular confessions of his Murder and Adultery, such frequent declarations
of the weights and burdens of his Soul, in public Solemnities, as he did in
private, betwixt himself and God. Although afterward, for the vindication both
of the Justice and Mercy of God, and for the future Instruction of the Church,
he had them digested into their solemn Services. So that, if we consult our own
particular necessities, Nature it self might, so far, direct us to pursue our
own Interest, as to take the advantage of frequent Retirements in secret, to
lay before God, our immediate and peculiar Concernments. And he that has been
negligent, in opportunities of this nature, does thereby proclaim himself one,
that has as yet been poorly awakened to any sense and concernment for his own
Interests.

3. It is further highly reasonable, That so we may, with greater collection of
Mind and Thoughts, serve God in these our private Retirements. The Apostle
brings this as the Result of his whole Casuistical Discourse, about a married,
and an unmarried State, viz. that all he had alleged, was chiefly with this
design, That they might attend the Lord without distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35.

And as to this Particular; there is certainly great advantage in our private
retiring before God; we make our selves more capable of gathering up the loins
of our Minds, and recollecting our Thoughts to a greater degree of Seriousness
and Consistency, which is the Life and Soul of all Religious Worship whatever.
In public, we may meet with many accidental Advocations, but in private,
seldom any but those of our own Minds, which are so much the better checked,
and kept within bounds, as they have fewer extrinsick Objects to amuze, or
encumber them. So that it is not improper Advice in a modern Author, that
where any live so as to have the conveniences, they would do well, to set
apart one particular place in the House, where no other concernment should be
managed, but their private Acts of Devotion betwixt God and their own Souls;
that so by custom and prescription, all their worldly or vain Thoughts might be
afraid or ashamed to enter, having been so long banished thence. Our Blessed
Lord himself, that needed never any precautions against those vain Avocations,
which the best of Christians are pestered with, yet delighted much in solitude
for Prayer. See Mark 6.46.

4. Lastly, The great Promise in the Text ought to be an abundant Argument for
our frequent retiring into our Closets, to perform our private Supplications
and Prayers there: Thy Father which sees thee in secret, shall reward thee
openly. Wherein there are these two or three things considerable.

(1.) That, be we never so retired, we have to do with one that can see us in
the most secret recesses, to which we can betake our selves.

(2.) That he himself that thus sees us, has undertaken to give us our Reward.

(3.) Not only so, but, in the end, he will do it openly enough.

(1.) Be we never so retired, we have to do with one that can see us in the
most secret recesses, to which we can betake our selves. This may be our
abundant Comfort and Assurance, that we don't scatter our Prayers into a void
and empty space, or mingle our breath, only with the silent. Air, that makes no
returns to the greatest noise, but a thin and unsatisfactory Echo; but we do as
easily with the deep and inward Groans of our Minds, without the utterance of
one word, reach the ears of God, as the most loud and united Exclamations of
greatest Assemblies have ever done. And this, probably, is the Ground of that
Caution, which so immediately follows my Text, v. 7. When ye pray, use not vain
repetitions, as the Heathen do, for they think that they shall be heard for
their much speaking, etc. In which Caution, we are not to suppose, our Savior
forbids all earnest repetition in Prayer, because he himself did three times
together urge the same thing in the same words, when he was in the height of
his Agony, Father, if it be possible, etc. Nor are we from hence to collect,
the unnecessary use of long Prayers, because our Lord himself continued
sometimes all night in prayer. But, in this place, he reproaches particularly
those repetitions, that were used in the Gentile-Worship, with so much Clamor
and Noise, as if by loud, and horrid Exclamations only, their Gods were to be
roused and awakened to their help. Thus their Poets represent those
Heathen-Devotions, in some such Instances as these, when they bring in their
Priests, for a long time together, making their noisy and insignificant
Outcries, (...), without any other addition of any formed Request. It is some
such clamorous, and incondite Devotion as this, that Elijah derides in the
Prophets of Baal; when they were crying from morning to evening, O Baal, hear
us, 1 Kings 18.26, 27, 28. He mocked them, and said, cry aloud: for your God is
either talking, or pursuing, or in a journey, or peradventure he sleeps, and
must be awaked: And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner
with knives, and lancers, till the blood gushed out -- This Custom of loud and
wearisome repetitions, the Comoedian reflects sharply upon; Ohe, jam desine
Deos, Vxor, gratulando obtundere -- Cease, Wife, now at length, wearying the
Gods with thanking them that your Daughter is found again; unless you measure
them by your own Wit, and think they can understand nothing, but what you tell
them an hundred times over.

It is not Clamor, or Noise, that our God is taken with; nor needs he it to
awaken, or make him understand our meaning; for his Ear is in our Closets, and
within our Hearts, to hear and observe the most secret and retired Prayer we
can frame there. Poor Hamah's Prayer, uttered so much in secret betwixt her
Soul and God, that it made Eli judge, she was either drunk, or mad, yet had its
effectual reward and return from God, 1 Samuel 1.13, 20. And the Jews, of whom
the Romans conjectured, that they worshipped nothing but the Clouds, because
when they brake into their Temple, and went to spoil the Inward Sanctuary, and
the Holiest of all, they found no Images of Worship there; yet had the Jews, I
say, the Shecinah, or the Divine and Glorious Presence peculiarly residing in
that inmost Recess; where their Oracles were given, and their Sins atoned and
expiated. This, therefore, in part, may be our encouragement, that he, with
whom we have to do, is present in the most secret Retirements, and equally
hears in our Closets, as in any other place. But further -- As he sees us, so,

(2.) He has also in this Promise undertaken to reward us for those Services,
which no other Eye is privy to. And this we find set in opposition to those
wretched, and trifling Rewards, which Hypocrites, by their public Shows, and
Ostentation of Worship, peculiarly design, viz. the Applause of Men and their
good Opinion -- Verily, they have their reward. They have that they looked for.
But then, as to these more secret and unseen acts of devotion, God himself
undertakes to give out his peculiar rewards, they having had no other regard
but to him only.

And what may we expect when so rich and bounteous a Master undertakes to
dispense it, himself, as a proper recompense! Those only can best tell, who
have met with the pleasurable returns of his Love, in their secrets of converse
with him. Those, who in their Closets, have met with the joys of Pardon, after
long struggles of sorrow and brokenness of Spirit; those, who have met with
great enlargements of mind, and near intimacies of Communion with God, after
long deadness, and indisposition of mind (which has been more afflictive and
discouraging, than all the ill accidents of present Life could have been)
those, who have found the desirable supplies of Grace, for subduing some
unruly Lusts, and to help them, against some very prevalent temptations, which
they have a long time conflicted with; such as these only can tell, what it is
to be at present rewarded by God, in their privatest retirements before him.

How many a pious Soul have entered their Closets weeping, and have born such
precious seed with them, that they have come out thence, bringing their sheaves
with them! (that I may allude to that passage of the Psalmist, Ps. 126.6.) How
many have gone in with a dead and streighten'd heart, that have come out again
full of Heavenly and fervid Affections and Inclinations of mind toward God! And
these are the first Instances of his rewarding them that pray to him in secret.
And such Realities are these, and derive such solid and unquestionable
Pleasures to the mind, that all the fantastic Pleasures and Rewards of this
World, bear no proportion even to these less and unobserved Recompenses, which
such do, at present, meet with from God. But then,

(3.) Lastly, He has further undertaken, not only to give them these secret
and hidden Rewards, which good Men find in the inward Pleasures of their own
minds; but will also, in the great upshot of things, reward them openly. This
oftentimes befalls them in this World, in very signal Returns of Prayer, by many
and evident Answers, in the present Disposals of Divine Providence, when God
has condescended actually to accomplish for such, the desires of their hearts,
that they are capable of triumphing with David, and saying as he did, Ps. 34.6.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and delivered him out of all his
troubles. This is properly an open and public avowing the good Man's secret
Appeals and Addresses to God.

But then, much more openly, may they expect to be rewarded at last, when, in
the presence of Angels, and the whole World of Men, that will stand concerned
at the Bar and Tribunal above, God himself will not disdain to own and
acknowledge the Services, the Acts of Devotion and Worship that some have
performed before him, in the truth and integrity of their minds, when there
were no Witnesses but his Eye only. Lo this is he that made me his trust and
the ground of his dependence, and confidence, and now he finds I have not
failed or forsaken him! Thus David makes his appeals to God as the great
Register of his Prayers and Tears, Ps. 56.8. Put thou my tears into thy bottle;
are they not in thy book? And God himself by his Prophet declares how he will
own such at last, Mal. 3.16, 17. A Book of remembrance was written before him,
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name, and they shall
be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels; and I
will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him.

Happy Souls indeed! when they shall be openly avowed by God, and all the World
shall come to understand their Wisdom, as well as their vast Privileges in
those Secrecies of Communion and Interest, they once kept up betwixt themselves
and God. Which (by the way) might not a little reflect upon the Imprudence and
Folly of the Hypocrite in the management of his own great design. The main
Motive, we see, of his Devotions, is, the Observation and Applause of Men; what
an Honor would such an one reckon it at last, to have God proclaiming his
Faithfulness in serving him, in the presence of the whole World! but this
Reward they have anticipated, in taking up with the feeble Applause of deluded
Men in this World.

And thus much may serve for Enquiry into the Reasons and Grounds of
Obligation, that lies upon us for performing this Duty of entering into our
closets, and there praying to our Father in secret.

II. Come we briefly to consider that Deportment, and Carriage of ours, which
is necessary, in our Secrecies of Address and Communion with God. I shall lay
it before you only in three necessary Requisites.

1. That when we perform these secret Acts of Worship, we take great care to
come with all Purity of Mind.

2. That we do it with all imaginable Humility and Reverence toward God.

3. With all Earnestness and Fervor of Mind, such as we may not be capable of
expressing in our public Solemnities, in the view of others.

1. That when we perform these secret Acts of Worship, we take great care to
come with all Purity of Mind. It is a Rule that should govern all parts of
Devotion; but this more especially, because this is a Duty wherein we pretend
more entirely, against Hypocrisy, and more immediately place our selves before
God, because no other Eye sees us.

It has been the observation of the Heathen Moralists of old, that all the Acts
of Devotion, which wicked Men at any time performed, could not charm the Gods,
but they proved little other than the Sacrifice of Fools. It is an excellent
expression of one amongst them, (...). i.e. The greatest abundance, and
profusest constliness of Oblations, bring no honor to God, except they are
offered by a Divine Mind. For the Gifts and Sacrifices of Fools, or vicious
Men, are no other than mere Food to the Fire they are thrown into. The Holy
Scriptures speak higher, Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind?
Hence that blind Man, whom our Savior had restored to sight, argues with the
Jews, from a common and indisputable Principle of their own, that He must needs
be a good Man, that had done so great a work. Joh. 9.31. Now we know that God
hears not sinners; but if a man be a worshipper of God, and does his will,
him he hears. Hence that Apostolical Injunction, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore
that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands -- It is an Observation that
Philo Judaeus makes of the Essenes, whom he represented as a most Religious
Sect amongst the Jews; (...), etc. They lift up their eyes and hands toward
Heaven; eyes, that have been Religiously restrained from any thing unworthy
that place: and hands, that have been chaste from all the Defilements of Bribery
and unlawful Gain; and therefore are their Prayers of so great Esteem and Value.

Agreeable to which, was that Resolution of the Psalmist, Ps. 26.6. I will wash
mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine altar, O Lord. This ought to
be our especial Concernment, as a most necessary Qualification in all our
Dealings with God, that we lift not up filthy hands, nor breathe out our
Prayers from impure and vicious Minds; because we thereby destroy the Ground
and Foundation of our Hopes and Expectations in Prayer, and expose our Persons
to the displeasure of God, by those very Acts by which we would obtain his
favor. If our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do
those things that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3.21, 22.

2. We are also to do it with all imaginable Humility and Reverence toward God.
And, indeed, it is then chiefly, that we can vindicate to the Searcher of all
Hearts, the truth of that Reverence and Dread we pretend toward him, when we
can equally express it in our closets, where no Eye sees us, as in the view of
a whole Assembly. Alas! every Hypocrite can, in the presence of others,
prostrate himself; and with Eyes lift up, noisie Groans, vehement knocking upon
the Breast, humble gestures of Body, and all the outward Forms and Postures of
Reverence: He can (I say) dress and adorn his Public Devotions, and in these
instances, perhaps, may have the advantage of the more devout and pious Soul.
As the Ape, in its Acts of Imitation, sometimes over-does the Man; or as the
Man of Compliment, in his Courtships and vehement Protestations, will speak and
pretend beyond the Friend. But the unquestionable Proof of Devotion in earnest,
is, when a Man, in his privatest Retirements behaves equally as humbly and
reverently toward God, as if he knew himself within the view of all the World.
He then plainly shows he has a sense of God upon his Mind indeed, and that he
believes he is dealing with that Majesty of Heaven and Earth, before whom the
Angels cover their faces and their feet. It would be an ill return of the
Subject upon his Lord and Sovereign, if, after his Lord should condescend in so
much Favor to him, as to retire from his Nobles and Attendants, to caress him
the freelier in secret; the Subject should forget the distance, and presume
upon all the sacred Characters of Majesty, by a slovenly Familiarity, that
would be no where allowable. How much more then ought we to judge it necessary,
to show all humble and reverend Demeanor toward God, though never so secretly
withdrawn from the World's eye; for he does not call us into these Recesses, to
acquit us of our just Veneration, and Dread of him, but to increase and
maintain it in more abundant Reality. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not
thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, and
thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few, Eccl. 5.20.

3. I add, lastly, we must take care to do it with all earnestness and fervor
of Mind, which perhaps, we are not so capable of expressing, when we are in the
view of others. The presence of others oftentimes restrains the inward
vehemencies of Devotion, that we cannot express our selves with that vigor and
earnestness of Action, which, if we were alone, we might be prompted to. The
truly Religious and Devout Soul is jealous of Show and Ostentation, and through
the Modesty of his Religion, is careful to suppress all those open ways of
acting it, from the observation of others. Like the truly affectionate Joseph,
that would rather choose an inner Room, to vent the Fervours of his Love and
Affection, in a full flow of Tears, than in the presence of his Brethren. But
in our Closets, where no other eye can discern or follow us; we may then be as
fervent and earnest as we will. We may then run into the Embraces of God, as
zealously, and with all the warmth of Affection and Love, as ever two Friends
have done, into one another's Arms, when they have no throng to interrupt or
wonder at their mutual Endearments. We have then better opportunities for
recollecting our wants, or our dangers; as also a larger scope of expressing
and urging them with greater importunity. So that, as we have no pretense for
coldness, or indifferency then, so let it be our care and endeavor, by all
means, to awaken all the Powers of our Souls to the greatest heights of Zeal
and Devotion that we can arrive at, when we are alone with God.

Our Lord himself never prayed so intensely, or wrought himself into so deep an
Agony, as when he was withdrawn from his Disciples, to pour out his Soul toward
Heaven. He then prayed, though in a cold Night, and in the open Air, till he swet
drops of Blood.

Let this be our great Concernment, when we get into our Closets, to give all
the instances we can, of being in earnest then, when we need not be ashamed of
Floods of Tears, or of deepest Groans; but have reason to believe, we have to
do with one that bottles up the one, and pities the other; that keeps a
faithful and advantageous Register of all the Evidences of our Zeal and
Devotion, where we have taken care, that no eye should observe them but his
own. Who as he sees us in secret, will reward us openly.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Glory and
Praise, now and for ever.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately Printed for Tho. Bennet, Two other Sermons before the QUEEN,
by Dr. Resbury.


