Chapman Mayor, etc.
Cur. Special. tent. die Dominica xxi. die October 1688. Annoque Regis Jacobi
Secundi Angl. etc. quarto.
THis Court does desire Mr. Resbury to Print his Sermon Preached this Morning
in the Guildhall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

IMPRIMATUR

October. 22. 1688. Z. Isham R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, AND Court of
Aldermen, IN GUILD HALL CHAPEL. On Sunday the xxi. of October. 1688.

By NATHANAEL RESBVRY, Chaplain to the Right Honorable James Earl of Anglesey.

LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1689.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Chapman Lord Mayor of the City of London, And
to the Court of Aldermen.
My Lord,
I Make bold to Present your Lordship and the Court of Aldermen, with a very
plain Discourse, which should not have adventured this review, but in entire
Obedience to your Lordship's and the Court's Commands for Publishing it. I
confess it is a Noble Subject, and worthy every Man's Nicest Observation and
Wisest thoughts. And your Lordship, with the whole Body of this Great City.
have become a fresh Instance in the Argument, in the late Effects of His
Majesty's good will toward you, and your re-instatement into your Ancient
Privileges and Immunities. So that, (since you have thought fit so to order
it) be pleased to accept this as an humble Congratulation.

May your Lordship, with the whole Body under your Government, prove happy
Instruments in the Ministries of Providence, to promote and further that most
Holy Religion in the Life and Practice, the Profession and Enjoyment of which,
it has hitherto pleased the Divine Hand, to assert and vindicate against all
open or Clandestine Attempts. It is the earnest Prayer of

Your Lordship's Most Devoted, most Humble, and most Obedient Servant. N.
Resbury.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor.
Matthew. VI. 26. Behold the Fowls of the air, they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into Barns; yet your Heavenly Father feeds them; are not ye
much better than they?
THese Words are part of that Collection of discourses, with which our Savior
entertained his Disciples in the Mount: wherein, after having laid down many
and most excellent Instructions about a good life: about the nature and manner
of performing that great Duty of Prayer, etc. He enters upon that most
encouraging subject of Divine Providence, and the immediate Care that God has
over them, sufficient to quiet and lay asleep all those Fears and Presages they
might have, about the great Straits and Dissiculties of Life they might expect
to be reduced to, through the Rage and Spite of their Enemies, enflamed and
embitter'd against them, upon the account of that New Religion they were then
to advance in the World.

Therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what you shall eat,
or what you shall drink; nor yet for your Body what you shall put on; Is not
the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? Behold the Fowls of the
air, etc.

In the words we have these three Observables.

1. The Concern that Divine Providence has in the smallest Contingencies in
this World. The very Fowls of the air are fed by his hand. Behold the Fowls
of the air, etc.

2. Much more the concern it has in all Humane Affairs. Are ye not much better
than they?

3. Most of all in the Well-being of his Church: This I observe, by considering
those to whom our Savior directs his discourse, not only as men, but as his
Followers; and those whom he designed to adopt and constitute as his Church. Of
these as briefly as may be; in their Order.

1. Consider we that Concern that Divine Providence has in the smallest
Contingencies in this World. Behold the Fowls of the air, etc. Our Savior is
preaching to them upon the Mount, and in the open air; and therefore probably
took the occasion from things that were in their present view to treat his
Audience, that by such familiar instances he might render himself more useful,
and his discourses more impressive upon them. Thus, in this place, he observes
from the flight of the Birds over them, the influence that Providence has in
feeding them; and a little afterward, from the prospect of the Fields and
Meadows below them, he exemplifies upon the same argument; and from the verdure
and beauty of the Fields and Lillies which the Divine Hand clothes and adorns,
he gives them encouragement to expect clothing from God, v. 28.29. Consider
the Lillies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin;
and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one
of these: wherefore, if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is,
and to morrow is cast into the Oven; shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of
little Faith?

Here I might undertake the proof of Divine Providence, against the Epicureans
of old, and the Infidels of this present Age; but I shall rather choose to
suppose the thing, and spend that time I have in illustrating the Argument,
believing that some useful Meditations upon so comfortable a Subject, may (in
this place where Providence is (I hope) Universally believed, and perpetually
experimented) be more proper and seasonable.

And thus we may observe, throughout the whole Scriptures, this ascribed to
Divine Providence, as feeding and supporting the meanest of Creatures, that his
tender mercies are over all his works, Ps. 145.9. that he opens his hand, and
satisfies the desire of every living thing, v. 16. that he gives to the Beast
his food, and to the young Ravens that cry, Ps. 147.9. That the Snow, the
Frost, the Winds, and the Waters are gender'd, do melt or flow, according to
the directions of his Word, ibid. v. 16, 17, 18. Nay, our Savior adds, that
though two Sparrows are sold in the Market for one Farthing, yet not one of them
falls to the ground without the appointment of Providence; and from thence
argues the encouragement his Followers might have against all needless and
unreasonable fears, Mat. 10.29, 30. And indeed, this, the Immensity of that
Being, to whom we ascribe so Universal a Providence, secures us effectually in.
So immense and boundless is his Nature, that he fills all places at the same
instant, and beholds all things (as the Schoolmen express it well enough) uno
actu and intuitu, with one act of his Almighty Eye. So that as he had the Ideas
of all things to which he designed to give a Being, in his own great and
comprehensive mind, a long Eternity before he suffered them to be produced; and
this without any travel or burden upon his thoughts; so does he still observe
all Things, and interpose in all Events, without any encumbrance of Business
upon himself, because he is every where, and sees every thing, not
successively, or one space of time after another, as we are fain to do, but at
the same instant moment continually. And well it is for the World indeed, that
it has this Immense and Boundless Nature to depend upon, that this should have
its influence upon the least and meanest of things, in the government and
disposure of all their Natural Motions, for otherwise the very Species of
things could not be long preserved. Such are the Natural Antipathies that some
things have against one the other; such the Natural Tendencies in other things
to consume and destroy themselves, that, unless Providence should have its
perpetual Influence, in directing a Subserviency of one thing to another, in
overruling Sympathies and Antipathies, in Ministering fresh Supplies for
prevention of Decays, Nature might quickly spend it self off, and the whole
World soon run into that Confusion and Jumble, which some have fancied was its
first and ancient Original. There are not the smallest and minutest Causes of
Things, but they have that interest in the great Chain and dependence of the
whole, that were not these smallest things within the Concern and Management of
Providence, the whole could not subsist. Hence Plato, upon this Argument,
demonstrates, by the Examples of a Physician and a Mariner, how necessary it is
for the Preservation of the whole, that there should be a wise and universal
Inspection into the smallest parts. Thus the Physician, did he not observe and
obviate the disorders in the Blood, or the least peccancy of Humor that
disturbs and diseaseth his Patient, he might discourse never so Learnedly of
the Nature of Diseases, of the Composure of the Body, and the Propriety of this
or that Medicament, and yet the Sick Man falls under the burden of his
Distemper into the Grave. So again, should not the Mariner make it his care,
that every the least part of his Ship might be secured from leekage or
foundring, he might run over all the Points of his Compass with a great deal of
accuracy, he might tell of the position of such or such a Rock or Quick-sand
never so punctually, and in all other things foresee and provide against a
Storm never so dexterously, and yet sink in a fatal wreck through the craziness of
any one part: From whence (says that Excellent Philosopher) it is unworthy of
God to think, that he, who through an Infinite Understanding can take care of all
things, should not by a wise inspection into smaller things, direct the
Influence they have for the preservation of the whole.

2. Come we to consider; That if Divine Providence concerns it self in the
smallest Contingencies in this World; how much more does it in all Humane
Affairs? Are not ye much better than they? And so we find the nature of the
Argument is that which we call a minori ad majus. If concerned in the less,
much more in the greater. Is not the Life more than Meat, and the Body than
Raiment? i. e. If Providence has concerned it self to give you a Life, can he
not with more Ease and Likelihood give you Food? If he have Framed so goodly a
Structure as the Body, can he not provide Clothing too? In pursuance of this,
we may observe, First, how it pleases God to represent himself, as showing his
regards to the Poorest and Meanest Station of Mankind, that has been ever yet
Created; Much more then, Secondly, may we suppose him, superintending the
Affairs of whole Nations and Communities of Men, and those whom he has
Ordained as his Vicegerents therein.

1. He has shown his Regards to the very poorest and lowest Degree of Humane
Nature; this we may observe in the Judicial Laws of his own framing amongst the
Jews; he has provided that the Gleanings of every Years Harvest and Vintage,
should be of that Competency, as to become a sufficient support to them, Levit.
19.9, 10. where we find, at the end of that Law, this Sanction particularly, I
am the Lord your God, i. e. I am both their and your Lord God; who own them as
well as you under my Care and Government. I might instance further in that Law
of the Sabbatical Year, wherein Provision was made, that the Land should have
no Tillage, but of its voluntary Fruits, (which in Oliveyards and Vineyards
might be very considerable) and of the shedded Seeds of Corn, (which in those
Countries might without Labor come to an easy Maturity) abundant Provision
might arise to the Poor who were in common to Enjoy it, Levit. 23.10, 11.

And as he takes care for their Maintenance, so for their Defense too; in those
severe Laws against their Oppression, either in withholding their Wages, or
rigidly exacting too great a Pledge in their Necessity of Borrowing; or giving
a just Cause against them to a Wealthy or Powerful Adversary; but I must not be
too large here: However, I cannot but add under this Head, that in the first
Revelations of the Gospel, the Blessed Founder of Christianity it self, put
himself into that Rank and Station; chose out his Apostles from among Poor
Fishermen; made the Lame and Blind (and those too Begging by the Highway side)
the main Subjects of his Divine Miracles. Nay, this he made the Character of
himself as the true Messiah, to those who were sent to enquire concerning him
from John Baptist, the Blind receive their sight, etc. and to the Poor the
Gospel is Preached, Mat. 11.5. In a word, it is the Poor to whom our Kindness or
Churlishness in this World, will be made the great Standard of Judgment, in
that Awful Day of our General Appearance at the Bar of God, Mat. 25.45.
Insomuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

2. If he has shown his Regards to the Poorest and Lowest Degrees of Humane
Nature, much more then to whole Nations and Communities of Men, to overrule all
the Passions, Affections, the Love, the Hatred, the Ambition, the Courage, the
Power, the Designs, and the Interests of Mankind, upon which the Hinge of all
Humane Affairs do turn; so that this Community of People should be Preserved
and Flourish, the other should Decay and Dwindle, Perish, and be Overturned
according to the Pleasure of his Will. He has the very Hearts of Kings, his
Immediate Vicegerents, in his hands, to turn them as the Rivers of Waters,
which way himself pleases. He raises some up for the Defense and Protection
of his Truth and Interests in the World, and others, to show his own power upon
them, in the violent Effects of their Obstinacy and Perverseness, and his
Vengeance; as he is pleased himself to tell us in that Instance of Pharaoh,
Exodus 9.16. This is very evident in all those Revelations of himself, which he
made to his Prophets, pointing out so long beforehand, the Raising and
Establishing such Kings and Kingdoms, Enlarging and Amplifying such Thrones and
Empires, pulling down and Abolishing others; the Histories of which when we
Read and Consult, if we look indeed no higher, we may observe the various
workings of Men's Passions, the Courage of some, and the Cowardice of others;
the strange Vicissitudes of Fortunes in all: the wondrous mutability of Humane
Affairs, the uncertain Condition of the Highest, and of the Lowest too. But
then, look we into the Books of the Prophets, and there we find the immediate
interest that Providence has in all; four hundred years before pointing out a
spot of ground wherein the Israelites should be fixed, and what kind of Nations
should be rooted out to give them room; calling the very Person by name, whom
he designed to make a Great and Illustrious Emperor, two hundred years before
that Person had any Being.

Thus we find in Isaiah, who flourisht 200 years before Cyrus was born, that
says of Cyrus he is my Shepherd, Isa. 44.28. And this he challenges to
himself, beyond the pretenses of all other Gods. Who has declared this from
ancient time? who has told it from that time, have not I the Lord? Isa. 45.21.

And though in these later. Ages of the World, we have perhaps no Prophets, nor
Sons of Prophets, amongst us; yet have we one standing Book of Revelations,
wherein the Fate and Revolution of the Church, and of the World, is unalterably
determined and described; where the Vicissitudes of our own Age may be read in
the Event, though perhaps not so well understood beforehand in the Prediction it
self. Where the Apostasy, the Idolatry, the Ambition, the external Splendour,
and the Bloody Tyranny of the Church of Rome, is no doubt one great Subject of
that Mystic Volume; which how dark and obscure soever it has formerly seemed,
and may yet seem, as to things that are not yet come to pass; yet the Events of
Things give light into the Prophecy, wherein they are concerned, and assure us
what an hand and direction Divine Providence has had in all, and confirming to
us that mighty foundation of Hope; that, as it has pleased God, according to
his Predictions of old, to throw his Church into a warm Furnace of Affliction
for some Ages, yet that she shall come out like tried Gold, and Triumph in all
her determined Glory, over all her Bloody and Insatiable Enemies. And this
leads me to my Third and last Head, which I shall briefly Consider.

3. That Divine Providence is most assuredly concerned in the Well-being of his
Church. This I observe, by considering those to whom our Savior directs his
Discourse; not merely as Men in General, but as his Followers, and those whom
he designed to Adopt and Constitute as his Church. Indeed, his whole management
of this World, his turning and overturning, his raising up some, and putting
others down, is all with peculiar respect to that part of Mankind, which he
calls his Church. It is for her chastisement and correction, for her prospering
and encouragement, for her amendment and reformation, for her increase and
accomplishment, that all the great Affairs and Revolutions of this World, are
directed by God. The Church is his immediate Care in all the applications of
Providence in his Government of the World. This may appear,

1. From that endearing relation he has pleased to own and challenge to
himself with this part of Mankind. He calls them sometimes his Children,
sometimes his Peculiar People, sometimes his Inheritance, sometimes his Spouse;
nay, and sometimes the very Apple of his Eye: all which must give them
undeniable assurance, that God leaves not such, so nearly interested with him,
to the wide World, to blind Chance, or to fortuitous surprizals of calamity and
trouble befalling them; upon no other account, but because it is the Lust and
Will of their Enemies it should be so. No, the blessed Lord of all, has
engaged the Ministry of his Angels for their Protection and Guardianship, that
they are said to pitch their Tents round about those that fear God, Psalm. 34.7.
He has told us that they are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister to
them who are the heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. ult. All which is no mean instance
of the Care he has for, and the Concern he has with them. But then,

Secondly, it might be further illustrated, from the actual Experiences the
Church has in all Ages had of the Interposures of this Providence in its
greatest extremities. This indeed, might run me into an History of the Church,
which would far exceed the bounds of the time I now have. I will only observe
to you, that both the History of the Scriptures, and other Books of Record
handed down to us to this very day, do give us such memorable instances, of
strange and unaccountable Deliverances in the near and immediate dangers that
have seemed to threaten an unavoidable Overthrow; that they have Proclaimed the
Finger of God in all; none but (...), none but the ever-wakeful Care, none but
the Almighty Power could have accomplished them. This very Church which it has
pleased God to Reform and Establish amongst us; what Stories have we to tell,
what Footsteps and Impressions has it pleased Divine Providence to leave, even
amongst us, of its care and vigilance, when the enraged and implacable Enemies
have thought they had laid their Contrivances so deep, that no Eye could have
pierced to the bottom of them; so strong, that no Arm could have broken them;
with such precaution and foresight, that no length of Time should have
weakened or defeated them: But (that I may use the Expression of the Apostle)
he has delivered us, and does deliver, in whom also we trust that he will yet
deliver us. To say the truth, considering that restless and unwearied Rage and
Inveteracy of successive Enemies from one Age to another, the combined and
confederated interests of the greater part of Mankind, against what may always
challenge the name of a little Flock; it is no mean instance of Providence that
there is such a Community as his Church in Being in the World: To see how this
tossed and weather-beaten Vessel, has lived so many Ages in the midst of a
Tempestuous Sea, where she has sprung many a Leak, lost her Tackle, and
frequently been upon the very point of Foundring by mere stress of Weather; the
Winds and the Waves in mutual contention which should most effectually
contribute to the Shipwreck; what account can be given why she had not been
lost before this? but the interposure of Providence; who, that he might
convince the World, that it is his Hand in all this, has frequently turned
what have been the designed Methods of her ruin, to prove the immediate
Occasions of her Salvation and Deliverance: Nay, has made the very blood of
some to become the seed and propagation of others.

Object. And this lays in our way the grand Objection that has been frequently
made, and sometimes by the very best of men; viz. Not only that all things
happen alike to all, there is one event to the Righteous, and to the Wicked,
etc. But that frequently it pleases God to order it, that the Scenes of the
Wicked are all prosperous and gay in this World, whilst those of Good Men,
those who are called and entitled God's Church and peculiar People, are all
cloudy and discouraging; the one seeming to have been made only as Sheep for
the others slaughtering. This once almost staggered even David's Faith, and put
the Prophet Jeremy upon the arguing point with God. As for me (says David) my
feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped, for I was envious at the
Foolish, when I saw the Prosperity of the Wicked, Ps. 73.2, 3. Righteous art
thou, O Lord (says Jeremy) when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee
of thy judgments, wherefore does the way of the Wicked prosper, wherefore are
all they happy which deal very treacherously? Jer. 12.1. As to this we are to
Consider,

1. That the Afflictions even of Good Men, are oftentimes the fruits of their
own doings. There are many Promises for securing the good man's well-being even
in this World, which as they have their several Conditions, so no question
would be more illustriously accomplished here, did they not themselves by their
own follies make them void, and of no effect. Thus their Poverty is sometimes
the chastisement of their Pride and Covetousness; their Reproach and Contempt a
just Recompense to their own peevishness, severe and affected distances, and
the ill usage of other men's good Names. Thus Prove. 11. ult. Behold the
Righteous shall be Recompensed in the Earth, much more the Ungodly and the
Sinner. So that, as to these present Fruits which they reap of their own
Follies, it is so far from bringing into Question the Care or Concern of
Providence, that it enforces the Argument, and adds to the Demonstration; it
shows how careful and vigilant a Father they are Governed by, that will by
seasonable Chastisements reduce their Wanderings, and by a timely Discipline
prevent their undoing themselves. By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the Fruit to take away sin, Isa. 27.9. Whom the Lord
loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6.
The Church it self may at some times need this kind of handling, as the Gold
does the Furnace, a Wound its Corrosives, or a Child the Rod: And it is so far
from giving us any reasonable ground to mistrust Providence, while he permits
his Church to fall under the severities of its Enemies, that it argues his
greater Care, just as it does the Wisdom and Concern of a Father, when he makes
his Child smart under the correction of a Fault. However,

Secondly, His Providence does so effectually superintend the Affairs of the
Church, that it does most assuredly overrule in the Events of things, that the
Issue shall be good; and this answers the whole Objection, We know (says the
Apostle) that all things shall work together for the good of those that love
God, Romans 8.28. This we may depend upon as an undoubted Truth, that all Things
without us, Things which we have no Power over, nor can any ways Order or
Influence our selves, these certainly, how Dark and Unintelligible, how
Contrary and Discouraging soever they may seem at present to us, yet such is
the Care and Indulgence of Providence toward all His, that they shall conspire
together in the End for their real Good; that is, that it shall be really
better for us, that such or such were the circumstances of our Lives, than if
they had been otherwise, or as we had propounded to our selves. What if we our
selves should Dye off in a State of Affliction, and not outlive the Storm,
which it may please God to raise in our own Age; yet may our particular severe
Allotments, have some considerable tendency to the well being of the General,
in the present or succeeding Generation? We are not to limit the Issues of
Providence to the bounds of our own time, for that may be upon the Wheel now,
that may not be wrought off till some Ages hence; and yet what is at this time
befalling his Church, may have its immediate conduciveness to that last upshot;
and all this, because in the Management of that Infinite Providence, to whom
one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8.
What did all the Rage and Spite against the Primitive Church signify, (though
then but a little Flock) but to add to its Numbers, and increase its Interest
in the World? the Innocent Lives and the Heroic Deaths of the first
Professors, won upon Bystanders, and oftentimes provoked them in a Rapture, to
leap out of Infidelity into a Blessed Martyrdom; till at length the Roman
Empire it self, weari'd with its own insignificant Cruelties, submitted to the
Religion it had so long pursued with Rage and Barbarism. What did all the
Severities exercised in Queen Mary's days prove, but that, as the Banishment of
some, issued in the Promotion and Enlargement of the Reformed Religion abroad;
so did the Exemplary Courage of others in the Flames here, introduce the
Universal Profession of it in this Kingdom! which I trust in God will never be
rooted out more. Even particular Persons have so far outlived their own
Sorrows, as to see and own that their Afflictions were the happy Ministries to
their real well-being. Thus David reflects, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. And it is not conceivable, what an united Song to Providence, the
mighty Quire of Happy Souls will be composing in Heaven, when they look back
upon all the different passages of their Lives, upon all the mis-judg'd
Appearances of this World, which they once Mourned and Repined under, when they
see plainly what a tendency every thing that befell them had, to Qualify them
for that State: It is an excellent Expression, a Good and Learned Man has,
nemo judicet de operibus dei, ante quintum actum. It is no good judging of the
Plot till the Play be done. It is the last Act that discovers all the
Intricacies, and brings all the odd and surprising Passages to a pleasing and
joyous conclusion. And now, I shall conclude with an useful Reflection or two
upon the whole.

1. That we would hence learn to make it some part of our Business in the
World, to be observing the Beauties of Providence. It was for this end that God
made the World, and for this very end that he still interposes in the Affairs
of it, that he might gain from the Rational part of his Creation, those just
Revenues of Praise that are due to all the effects of his Wisdom, Goodness,
Power, Justice, and Majesty, which he so visibly Multiplies upon us every day.
It is an Excellent Reflection which the Moralist (though an Heathen) makes,
(...), etc. If we have our Wits and Reason about us, what would become us more
than to praise the Deity, to speak well of him, and to give him thanks. Ought
not (says he) the Gardener when Digging, and the Husbandman when Plowing his
Ground, be still singing this Hymn, (...), etc. great is that God, that has
furnished us with these Instruments to Till the Ground, that has supplied us
with these Hands to labor out our Food and Support, but most of all, that has
endu'd us with Reason to Understand and Consider this, (...), etc. Since then I
have Reason, I will praise my God as becomes me, (...), and I do exhort you all
to join Consort with me in the same Song of Praise. It was worth the
Transcribing, to show how Noble a Resolution an Heathen could take up, of
Praising his Maker in the Contemplation of Providence, a Copy the Christian
need not be ashamed to write after. And certainly, nothing could be a more
delightsom Employment, than to busy our Minds in comparing things with things,
and tracing the Footsteps of Divine Wisdom and Goodness in the various Effects
of differing Causes, and viewing the Beauty and Harmony that is in all at last.
When this vast Fabric of the World was first Adorned and Finished from its
rude and misshapen Mass, then the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons
of God shouted for joy, Job 38.7. For all that God had made was very Good: Let
us then be always bringing up the Chorus, that as all Things he has made are
Good, so all that he has since done is Adorable and Praiseworthy; when we
consider what Order has been maintained, what great things have been all along
brought to pass by hidden and improbable Means, we may justly break out
frequently with that of the Psalmist, the Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice,
and the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof.

2. But withal let us especially be careful, so to behave our selves toward
Providence, as to Entitle our selves to his Peculiar Care, that he may concern
himself to overruled all things for our Real Good. This Doctrine of Providence
has a twofold prospect. The Light Side of the Cloud opens it self, toward
those that have the Conscience of Serving and Fearing God, but the Dark Side of
it turns upon them, who provoke him by the perpetual violation of his Law. Such
as live Viciously, and in a daily contempt of his Just and Reasonable Commands,
as they are sure of the Eye of Providence attending and viewing them, so they
may as reasonably expect the weight of his hand in their Punishment. Solomon
tells us, Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is the reproach of any
People, Pro. 14.34. There is nothing can put us within the compass of danger,
but the Witness that our own Wickedness may bear against us in the presence of
God. It is observable, that though Canaan had been most Faithfully and
Irrevocably promised to Abraham, yet his Posterity could never dispossess the
present Inhabitants, till they had filled up the measures of their sins, which
was 400 Years after that Promise was made. And our Blessed Savior, though he
knew the fatal Period appointed for Jerusalem, yet he bids them even fill up
the measure of their Fathers, Mat. 23.34. And this was forty years after they
had committed that horrid Wickedness of cutting off their own Messiah. God
forbid that we should be esteemed by Providence, as having filled up our
measures yet! But let me tell you, we live in an Age that seems considerably
ripened in the Excesses of Wickedness. An Age, wherein the serious part of
Religion seems grown so much out of date and fashion, that it becomes hardly
worth the while so much as to dissemble it. An Age, wherein men have no
reluctance of showing the worst side outermost, and the Formalist thinks fit to
throw off all his Disguises, when the Atheist can talk boldly, and the
Hypocrite looks upon his Visors and Shapes of Religion as too demure, and so,
rather cross than promote his Interest; when good men themselves grow languid
and remiss, as to all the true Fervor of Religion; and see it so universally
unpracticed, that they have a kind of Modesty and Restraint upon themselves, as
ashamed to appear singular in the warm and devout part which every one
Ridicules. O would God, that while the Rod is as yet but shaking over us, and
the Cloud but rising that threatens a Storm, we may awake from the Lethargick
state that we are in; we may argue our selves into a speedy and Universal
Reformation, from whatever Divine Providence has discerned amiss in us. That
our Profaneness, contempt of Religion, Intemperance, Pride, Uncleaness,
Oppression, rending the Name of God with Oaths and direful Imprecations,
neglect of his Worship, mutual Hatred and bitter Animosities etc. may no longer
lay us open to the Vengeance of Heaven, that it break not out upon us, and
there be no remedy. Thanks be to God, a just zeal for Truth and the simplicity
of the Gospel, has of late something revived amongst us, the dying Spark has
reinkindled, and took new flame from the opposition it has met with; O that a
new Zeal for the life and Practice of that Holy Religion we profess, might
revive too; that men would but generally apply themselves to live as they
profess to believe, then might we expect to be the Darlings of Providence, we
should quickly then find him bringing Light out of our Darkness, Good out of
our Evils, and Order out of all our threatened Confusions.

3. Having taken care by our Universal Repentance and Amendment of Life, to
Entitle our selves to the peculiar care of Divine Providence, let us live upon
the comforts of this Doctrine, that Providence does concern it self in the
well-being of his Church. Let us trust in God, and cast all our care upon him
who cares for us. Let us resign our selves to his wise Conduct in all things,
in patience possessing our Souls, using all the means for our Peace and
security that are warrantable and required, leaving the whole Success to him
that Governs the World, who will take care of his own Glory, which ought to be
our greatest End, and will not fail in the Issue, to make us reap the Fruits of
these our humble dependances. Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

