A REPLY To His GRACE the Duke of Buckingham's LETTER To the Author of a Paper,
Entitled, An Answer to His Graces Discourse, concerning Religion, Toleration,
and Liberty of Conscience.
PErusing a Published Letter subscribed by the Great Name of the Duke of
Buckingham, against the Author of the short Answer to his Graces Discourse of
Religion and Toleration, I could not but be very much delighted to see the
Efforts of so famous a Pen, so strangely and so easily Victorious, over his
Nameless, little, Angry, Harmless, Humble Servant. I confess indeed when I
first Read his Graces admirable Notions and Sentiments of a Deity, and the
whole Systeme of his Graces Divinity so concisely couched in that little
Treatise of his, I could not but think how happy his Grace has made Mankind in
so sublime a Production, from the Genius of so worthy an Author: A Luxuriance
of that Divine kind from so Illustrious a Personage, being truly those unusual,
uncommon Heat-drops in Great Men, that fall as rarely as a Shower in Egypt.

Having paid this just Veneration to that excellen^ Piece, we have here a
second Subject for our no less Admiration, which is, his Graces truly wonderful
nimble way of Confutation: The Nameless, Humble Servant (as he pleases to call
him) being somewhat a Dissenter from his G^aces good Opinion of a Toleration,
has made it, in that short Answer, his endeavor to remind the World of all
those Distractions and Miseries, Rebellion and Regicide, the Murder of the best
of Kings, and the Subversion of three flourishing Kingdoms, that all entered at
no other Door than of a Toleration; and how inevitably the same Inlet would
bring the same Inundation over again; And therefore how just and Reasonable it
is in the Government (contrary to his Graces opinion) to make the Strongest of
Fences against so threatening and fatal a Torrent. To all which, his Grace most
Ingeniously Replies, My Nameless, Angry, etc. I have Read you over and over,
and find, that neither I understand you, nor you me. You mistake the meaning of
His Majesty's Promise, etc. and are very unlucky in three Letters of the French
Word Opiniatre; and therefore I advise you Write English: And so by way of
Short and Sweet, defends his Darling Opinion of a Toleration, against all the
Answerers objections, and the whole Sense of the Government, and Lawmakers
upon that Important point, down from Elizabeth to Charles the Second, and all
this to the Total Rout and Defeat of his unknown Adversary, with a Victory as
expeditious and entire, as the greatest turn of State in the Rehearsal. And
possibly His Grace may affect this more than Ordinary way of Answering in the
Lump, as being too Great to stoop to the controverting of particulars, with so
unequal a Combatant.

However, I am much Astonished to hear his Grace say, To my Confusion I must
own, That I am not able to comprehend what part of my Discourse it is you do
Answer; nor in all yours what it is you mean: But in this you are even with me,
for I perceive you do as little understand any part of what I have Written, tho
I thought it had been in so plain a Style, that a Child of Six years old might
very well have done it. Now the unknown Author is no less confounded than his
Grace, to think that any part of his Answer should be so strangely
unintelligible, especially to so penetrating a Reader as his Grace; neither can
he for the Soul of him find himself guilty of any such strange misunderstanding
of his Graces meanings, in a Style (by his own confession) adapted even to the
Intellects of Readers of Six years old; unless his Graces intention in the
publication of that Piece was wholly for the Instruction of Readers of that
minor Class; and therefore he takes it ill that any thing more super-annuated
should be intermedling with what nothing concerns them. Neither can this
Answerer be made sensible, wherein (as his Grace charges him) he wilfully
mistakes his Majesty's promise to the Church of England; the true meaning of
which (his Grace is pleased to tell us) appears to be, That he would not suffer
any Body to Injure the Church of England, but he did not promise that he would
have the Church of England Persecute every Body else. As I remember, his
Majesty's promise was, To defend and support the Church of England. But how
this unbounded Toleration of his Graces can consist with the supporting the
Church of England, he would do well to instruct us, unless the untying of the
Wolves can be the Defense of the Flock, and the giving a full Loose to all the
Schismatical Bontefeus and Underminers of our Religion and Government, be
maintaining and upholding of it.

But not to be wholly contradictory to his Graces opinion; as his Grace is
pleased to express his great difficulty of Believing himself the same George
Duke of Buckingham which he was Twenty Years ago, there indeed I must join with
him; it being too apparently true, that his Grace has not been the same Five
Years ago that he was Twenty Five; which all Men that have had the Honor of
knowing his Grace at Whitehall in 60, and at Dowgate in 80, will justify for
me, where I leave his Grace, and am

His most Dutiful Humble Servant.

FINIS.
London, Printed by W. D. for Thomas Graves, 1685.


