A REPLY TO THE DEFENSE OF THE BANK: Setting forth the Unreasonableness of
their Slow Payments.

To which is added, 1. The Mischiefs that attend the Buying and Selling
Bank-Notes. 2. The Advantages England will reap by having the Vnclipt Hammered
Money pass Current into the Exchequer by Weight.


In a Letter to his Friend in the Country.

By a true Lover of his Country and the Present Government.

LONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock, and Sold by most Booksellers, 1696.

A Reply to the Defense of the BANK, etc.
SIR,
IT is not without some Reluctance and Scruple that I have undertaken to write
the following Discourse against the Bank, because many People, I know, are of
Opinion, That the Interest of the Government is so interwoven with that of the
Bank, that whatever is said against the latter is implied to be against the
former, whose Happiness and Prosperity, I solemnly profess, none can more
sincerely wish for than my self.

But if the Bank (presuming on the Favor and Obligation of the Government to
justify all their proceedings) are led to the practice of such things as are
diametrically opposite to the Interest and Support of the Nation, and the Ends
for which they were established, and are thereby the chief cause of our present
Hardships which we lie under with respect to the Coin; and since they have the
Confidence to vindicate their present method of paying, though it be far short of
what they paid four or five Months ago, when one tenth part of the new Money
was not coined which we have now, and they, perhaps, near ten times as many
Notes out against them (of which more by and by) I say, to be silent and suffer
these Practices and Vindications thereof to pass without detection, or taking
notice thereof, is tacitly to sit down, and let them act at Discretion,
notwithstanding they are seemingly never so far remote in their actings, from
Reason, Honesty, and good Conscience.

And truly (in all appearance) it is high time there should be a more close
Disquisition made into their proceedings as to Receipts and Payments; which
were the latter good and plausible, according to their Ability, and in due
proportion as they pretend, they would, I think, be so far from endeavoring to
screen and mask the same from the Inspection and Knowledge of the Government,
that it should be the first thing they do, to give a general satisfaction in
this matter, which seems so strange and unaccountable to the most part of
indifferent or unbiased Men: And which would they give public demonstration
of, it would much retrieve their languishing Credit, and encourage the
Government to complete the same.

But I am afraid we shall see no such thing done voluntarily by them, unless it
be by order of Parliament: No! they think themselves in the Right, and express
a great deal of Spleen and Malice, if you do but in the least call their
Process in question; though at the same time, it is plain, that an [ I promise to
pay, etc.] is scarce more minded than if it were [ I promise never to pay, etc.]

To this the Author in his The Defense of the Banker.
Book you demanded my Thoughts of, has been pleased to answer in their
Vindication (one that gets more by them, no doubt, than the generality of
People do) and to ascribe their present slow Payments; 1. To the alteration of
the Coin, and not to any mismanagement of the Directors. 2. To the Clipped Money,
for which the Notes now demanded payment of was given. 3. To the Method which
has been taken to make good the Coins deficiency. page 11.


As to his first Allegation, That the slow Payments of the Bank, are not owing
to the mismanagement of the Directors, I must tell him, That I wish they are
not (in part) owing to their Dishonesty, in applying the Cash to wrong
purposes, etc. which should pay their Notes; however, I believe one may safely
say, That the Discredit they have made themselves, and Miseries they have made
the Nation (especially London) obnoxious to, is in a great measure owing to
their Mismanagement: For their gain is very considerable which they make of
men's Money in the Exchequer, which they should have answered to them six Months
ago; but since their Loan is still going on there, and they have made it a
Custom to satisfy Peoples Demands with little or nothing, they have small
reason either to be forward in receiving the same out, or in paying it if they
had it; which great advantage, had they not long since premeditated, but had
designed to make their Payment, and support the Credit of the Bank by all means
possible, they would never have been so stupid, one would think, to take Clipped
Money into the Bank (to the very last) by Tale, and give their Notes for it
payable at demand; for they might have seen with half an Eye, That if the Bank
receive most of the Clipped Money from the Town, and the Exchequer receive it
from the Bank, and that this Money is to circulate no longer in that specie,
and there is no other to supply the deficiency during the new fabrication of
this old Money, or (at most) nothing but Gold, which possibly, like a great
many other selfish Heads, they resolved not to part with, in hopes that want of
Cash appearing, might induce the Parliament to advance the Nominal Value: I
say, they might easily have perceived without the gift of Prophecy, that
considering the Premises they could not answer the Demands upon them.

Why are they then blamed for not paying their Notes, since it is confessed it
could not be expected from them?

The Answer is very easy, for though by their ill management they had made it
unlikely for them to make Payments according to their way of proceeding, in
taking in the Clipped Money and giving Notes for it at demand; yet had they taken
none in, but of those that would have taken their Notes for it payable at the
end of six Months after Date, they would by that time have been able (in all
probability) to perform their Promises; and though by this means they might not
have had so much Money thrown into their hands, they would however have been no
losers thereby; for by maintaining their Credit in this point, where one person
lays their Cash with them now, a hundred would, which would have made them
much more gainers than they could be losers by refusing the Clipped Money, and
have prevented the many mischiefs come upon the Nation, as well as discredit to
themselves, by buying and selling their Notes; of which more by and by.

But suppose, that notwithstanding they had given their Notes for the Clipped
Money, to pay only at the end of six Months; and could not then have been able
to perform, it would nevertheless (some may say) have been as great a
detraction from their Credit, as their present non-payment is, and themselves
would have been the greater losers by refusing to give their Notes for the
Clipped Money payable at demand; which had they done, they could but have
forfeited their Credit, which they have done notwithstanding their Notes were
only given to pay at the end of six Months?

To this I answer, That had they given their Notes for the Clipped Money payable
at the end of six Months, many would have refused laying their Money with them
on such terms (and indeed it would have been more Men's Interests to have sold
it by weight than to put it in their hands, for I have calculated that the loss
is greater that is occasioned by the slow Payments of the Bank than that of the
difference between New and Clipped Money) which refusal would however have made
their Debts less, and consequently sooner paid. Now if it had so happened that
they could not have answered in Cash the Notes that would have come upon them
at the end of six Months (which would have been strange, considering what great
sums of new Money would have been thrown into their hands) yet they might (and
I think ought in Conscience to) have paid the greatest of their Debts in
Tallies, that so every one might receive his own Money out of the Exchequer,
with the Interest thereof, from the time of demand, and they could not choose
(if they had been willing) but they must have been able to answer all their
lesser Notes in new Money and Guineas, which had they done without making any
defaulcation, they would not only have reaped the advantages I have mentioned
above, but as a consequence thereof they would have had many thousands of
pounds continued in their hands, which by reason of the loss of Credit was
called for out; so that as to this particular of Mismanagement, I Will appeal to
all disinteressed Persons, whether their slow Payments, and consequently our
Misfortunes in this matter) be not owing thereto.

2. The 2d Argument our Author makes use of to vindicate the slow Payments of
the Bank is, [Will those who so impatiently demand payment, be satisfied to
take the same sort of Money their Notes were given for, which was either in
Clipped Money or Guineas at an overvalue?]

I answer, Yes with all their hearts, if the the Bank will allow them the
advantage they have made thereof since it was demanded, (and they would be
gainers thereby, as I have showed before) rather than be plagued with receiving
it as the Bank pleases to pay it, 3 l. of 100 once in three Months, after a day
or two's attendance. But what an unreasonable question is this, for the Notes
were given for the then current Money? (which only is now demanded) and though it
was Clipped, and the Gold above the now current value, yet I believe I may appeal
to their own Consciences, if they paid it not into the King's Exchequer at the
same rate (especially the Silver) they took it from others: And as to the Gold,
if they lost much by it, considering how prudently the Parliament lowred the
same, and how gradually the current value became less; as from 30 s. to 29,
from 29 to 28, etc. till they came to 25 and then to 22 s. I say, if their loss
was great considering this, their Management may yet more justly be blamed. But
I cannot see how they should lose by Guineas; for as I remember, they never
took them but under the current value; nor would they take any, or but few,
while the value of them was declining; so that if the Balance of their
Accounts of Guineas, (were known) which they received and paid from the time of
their being established a Bank to the 10th of April 1696, when Guineas were not
to pass current at above 22 s. I doubt not but they would be found to gain some
thousands of Pounds thereby.

But suppose it were as our Author says, that they did lose by Guineas, so did
many a one, who must not therefore make that an Evasion to avoid paying his
Debts, which I doubt not but the Bank might have found a hundred ways to have
compassed, had they been as good managers for the public as themselves. For
what though the Money paid into the Bank was clipped, does that make them have
one Farthing worth of Tallies less? and consequently, are they a Farthing the
poorer? no one can pretend it. Indeed, had the Bank took it by tale and paid it
only by weight into the Exchequer, their Plea for their present payment had
been more reasonable; but since the King took it from them at the rate they
received it from others, I see no reason why its being clipped should be an
Apology for their slow Payments, since it does not in the least affect them;
and truly, if this is one of the best Arguments that could be suggested to our
Author for the Bank's delay of payment, I may appeal to any body but
themselves, if it had not been both for the Interest of the Bank and Credit of
this Author, that it had not been made public.

But this is not the only thing that is an unnatural consequence of their
giving Notes for the Clipped Money; for our Author (vindicating their present
method of paying) must also prove this great Absurdity, i. e. That their giving
Notes for Clipped Money is the cause why the Bank made better payments five
Months ago than now they do, which is a strange Paradox, That so long ago
they should be able to pay Ten in the Hundred once a Fortnight, and so
proportionably, and yet now, when many thousands of Pounds (that were then out
against them) are paid off; the quantity of new Money now at least ten times as
much as then; and they have called in 40 per cent. and borrowed 20; and yet, I
say, for all this their Payments are not so good now by 9/10 as they were four
or five Months ago!

I cannot but admire they should think People so stupid, as not to take
cognizance of this their unaccountable proceeding in a matter of so great
moment.

In truth I cannot easily be of the Opinion of some, who believe they reserve
their Cash to buy up their own Notes with, and that for that reason they
endeavor to keep them at a high rate by faultering more and more in their
Payments against all Sense and Reason; no, I cannot think they durst presume to
abuse the Nation by any such mercenary and abominable practices.

But it remains a secret to me and most others at present (if their Practices
be just and honorable) how their Payments should be at first 10 per cent. once
a Fortnight, then but 7 or 8 per cent. once in a Month, then to give no Notes
out by Endorsement under 5 pounds, afterward none under 20, then to pay only
according to the Letters of the Alphabet, (and that every Morning) afterward to
pay but about 3 or 4 per cent. once in three Months, which is the present
method of paying according to the Letters of the Alphabet two Days in a Week;
and truly I cannot well see how they can pay less if they make any payment at
all. Wonderful Secret! That as the running Cash of the Nation increases the
Bank should so much decrease and demurr in answering their Notes; and yet how
insolent and boldly do they behave themselves to such as demand payment: Surely
a Grievance like this has rarely been known, and I hope will not long be
suffered, but that the Honorable House of Commons will this Session redress
the same.

3. The third thing this famous Bank-Champion would fain suggest in their
behalf, is, to throw all the Abuses and Mismanagements relating to this matter,
on the Parliament; for, says he, (page 11.) upon Enquiry [ They must needs have
referred it, (viz. their slow Payments) to the Regulation of the Coin, and the
Method which has been taken to make good its Deficiency.]

Impudent Scribler! that dare call in question the Prudent Measures taken by
the Parliament about this Affair.

I doubt not, but had the Regulation been referred to the Sagacity of this
famous Dictator and his conceited Retinue, they would have approved themselves
to be wise enough (as in the Payments they make) for their own Interest,
whatever had been the Consequence, with respect to that of the Public.

Truly the Parliament had a difficult piece of work, and had they therein been
governed by every such ignorant conceited Shatterbrain, as would pretend to
advise in this matter, our Coin would neither have been so good nor plentiful
as now it is; but had the excellent Laws they have made been carefully put in
practice, self-interest laid aside, and every one had aimed at the good of the
Public as they ought to have done, we should long before this time have seen
no want of Money, nor Notes unpaid after demanded.

And here I might easily incert and vindicate the methods taken (in the several
steps thereof) both with respect to calling in the Old and coining the New
Silver money, and also with relation to the lowering the price of Gold, to
confute this saucy Asperser in this particular; but having already done that in
part, in another Treatise of Coin, and intending hereafter to examine and give
a more distinct relation thereof than will be consistent with the designed
brevity of this small Tract, I shall at present omit the same.

In short, it was impossible (I think) the Parliament could contrive the
amending the state of our Coin any better way: For it was not to be expected
they could prophecy that lowering the price of Guinea's should induce some men
so foolishly to hoard them up in hopes that they would this Session advance and
alter the Standard which they had but established the last; nor could any but
some unthinking sort of people hope for any such dishonorable as well as
unprofitable Statute. And setting aside this selfish practice, and that of
buying and selling Bank-Notes (the only two Causes of our seeming want of Cash)
we should certainly have seen the good effects of the Laws made the last
Session relating to Coin, which would (no doubt) have produced the greatest
plenty of the best and most beautiful Money that England (not to say any
Country in the World) was ever possessed of.

PART II.
Gives you an account of some of the many great mischiefs and miseries we lie
under, and are obnoxious to by reason of the buying and selling Bank-Notes.

1. The buying and selling Bank-Notes gives an opportunity to the Bank to buy
and sell their own Notes, whereby they may certainly gain more than by any
other way of employing their Cash; and which should they do, we may be sure
they will reserve to themselves as much for that purpose (and consequently pay
out on their Notes as little) as may be. And if we had an Immence quantity of
Cash, if this practice should be permitted, we should always have a seeming
deficiency; and whether they are guilty of such Irregularities I leave it to
their own Consciences, and those concerned, to examine.

2. The second mischief that attends buying and selling Bank-Notes is, That it
hinders both Monied men and Inland Traders from paying their just Debts in
specie, though they have it by them in never such plenty; for men are grown so
self-interested, that scarce any thing of a Public Spirit appears; and if this
Money-monger can gain 16 or 17 per Cent. as sometimes he may, by converting his
Money into Bank-Notes, this he knows (if the Bank pay but currantly in a Year)
is three times as much advantage to him as he could propose to get by disposing
of it after the common way of Interest; though at the same time, the poor, who
have dependence on him, are great sufferers thereby. And as for the Inland
Trader (I will not say the Merchant, because it may be supposed that what Money
he can spare goes to pay his Foreign Bills) his Servants, Workmen, and
Creditors of all sorts must take Bank-Notes or be Creditors still, though he
probably receives little but New Money or Guinea's, or Silver at 5 s. 2 d. per
Ounce (which is all one) in his Shop or Warehouse, but these are reserved to go
to Market with again to buy more Notes, for this is an encouraging Trade, and
while it is permitted he will make his best advantage thereof let the Poor,
Workman, etc. perish if they will.

3. The permission of this practice of buying and selling Bank-Notes, gives an
opportunity to the Stock-jobbers (especially the Broakers) to raise and fall
the Credit of the Bank as they please, and as best comports with their poor and
base, disingenuous and mercenary tempers; by which the price of these Notes are
wholly governed. And these are the horrid Vipers that have set a value of 150
li. on that which is not worth 5 li. and that made such jobbing work with the
Guinea's about six months ago, which as soon as the Parliament had quashed by
lowering them, they found out this method of buying and selling Bank-Notes,
without whose knavish inventions merely for their own interest, I question
whether either Guinea's or Bank-Notes had come near the prices they have been
sold for, if they had been sold at all.

And it is not only the Brokeage which they gain by these their deceitful
Projects, for though they had not a penny of Money, yet they are great gainers
as well as those that have; by buying (for example) Bank-Notes at 16 or 17 per
Cent. discount, and before the Contract is made and the Money is paid, they can
run the discount down to 12 or 13, then they sell these Notes and get 5 per
Cent. clear, discharging their former Contract; and thus they go on buying and
lowering, then selling and advancing the price as they please, till the whole
Nation suffers, to maintain half a dozen or half a score sordid cheating
Villains! It Is great shame they are suffered, and that it is not made highly
penal for any one to buy or sell any thing in this nature, unless it be Shares
in Joint Stocks, as Hudsons Bay, East India, etc. and even in those, that there
should not be many Regulations and Limitations with respect to these Broakers.

4. Another great mischief attending this practice of buying and selling
Bank-Notes is, Oppression of the poorer sort of people, who at other times on
their Salaries or Employments could live pretty handsomely, but are now reduced
to great straits: as for instance; A Man that had 60 li. per Annum to maintain
his Family with, had formerly 15 li. per Quarter, but being now paid in
Bank-Bills (to part with which, as some others that trade can, is out of his
way) he must therefore be forced to give, suppose but 15 per Cent. discount for
Ready money, to buy necessaries for his Family, this reduces his 15 li. to 12
li. 15 s. and the like loss is sustained by all Workmen and others that are
forced to take Bank-Notes for the payment of their Bills or Debts, which is
extreme hard upon those that had before but just enough to subsist on.

5. Another great Mischief that attends the Buying and Selling Bank-Notes, is,
That it encourages all Factors to defraud their Principals or Imployers; and
this is done insensibly, and without any possibility of being discovered; for
this gives an opportunity to these Factors (whose Employers live at a distance,
and cannot perhaps inspect their Accounts above four times a Year) to sell
Goods for ready Money; and after they have made 15 per cent. profit to
themselves thereby, by converting the same into this sort of Bank-paper, they
can by this means, even an Account of 10000 l. with their Principals and get
1500 l. by the bargain, while he that stands to all losses otherwise, has this
great abuse added thereto.

I might (Sir) give you many more Instances of the dismal Consequences that
attend a Difference between Notes and Money; as that it destroys Paper Credit,
by which a great part of the Trade of this Nation was formerly carried on, etc.
but the particulars above are sufficient to show how necessarily this matter
should be taken into Consideration, and the Abuses rectified; and that I
presume may be done by settling a certain Fund of Credit whereby Notes and
Bills may be again restored, and these Cannibals (I have formerly mentioned)
that live only upon the Ruin and Destruction of their Countrymen, may see
their base and wicked Practices defeated. But till then I reckon you in the
North will be much more happy in these Matters than we in London, because you
may in a short time expect to be supplied with new Money from the Mints of York
and Chester, which nothing can hinder but the want of Bullion; and to prevent
that, I think it would be Prudence in all the better sort of People to bring in
their Plate rather than want Money to pay just Debts, and for other
Necessaries. Indeed I am of Opinion, we have Money enough in the Nation, if
there were care taken that it might circulate, which it would certainly do, if
some methods were taken to prevent exorbitant uses thereof by the
Stock-jobbers, in buying and selling Bank-Notes, etc. and the Statute
restraining Interest to 6 per Cent. per Annum, 12 Car. II. c. 13. were strictly
put in Execution. Which that they may, and we live to see England flourish
under the auspicious Government of His present Majesty, is that I heartily wish
for.

PART III.
As to your Third Demand (Sir) which was my thoughts, Whether it would not be a
disadvantage to the Nation, That our broad hammered Money should pass current
by Weight?

I answer, That it would be an Advantage, provided the Rates for every Ounce
are given that are proposed at present in Parliament; and this I shall
demonstrate to you by showing, 1. How this advantage will arise. 2. By the
Disadvantage to the Nation in general that would attend its passing current by
Tale.


The real advantage that attends the Currancy by Weight (as proposed) will
appear, in that every one that has it may gain, and no one needs to lose
thereby.

For instance, Suppose the unclipt hammered Money current, or otherwise in the
Nation be 500000 l. (as it is no great matter in this case if it be more) and
that this hammered Money is to be paid to the King by the Nation as One Man for
Taxes, etc. the Question is, Whether this 500000 l. if paid by weight at 5 s. 8
d. per Ounce will not exceed the 500000 l. by Tale.

I say it will, and consequently, the Nation will be so far from losing (as
some fancy) that it will gain thereby.

For suppose (as is very rational from what follows) That every Shilling is but
11 d. i. e. wants a Penny of the value of a new milled Shilling; or that the
500000 l. wants 1/12 of the true value of so much new Money, this 1/12 of
500000 l. is 41666 l. 13 s. 4 d. which deducted from the 500000 l. the
remainder is 458333 l. 6 s. 8 d. which is the worth of the 500000 l. unclipt
hammered in new mil'd Money; which 458333 l. 6 s. 8 d. at the Standard-rate of
5 s. weighing 19 dw. 8.51612903, etc. Grains, will weigh 1774189 Ounces, 4 dw.
17 gr. which at 5 s. 8 d. per Ounce is worth 502686 l. 18 s 10 d. Sterling,
which exceeds the supposed Sum of 500000 l. in unclipt hammered Money, by 2686
l. 18 s. 10 d. and which is the Nation's Gain by passing it by weight. And yet
some People that have not well considered this matter, have almost as great
apprehensions of hardship therein, as if they were to part with their unclipt
hammered Money for nothing.

But here two Objections arise, 1. That the Computation of the Deficiency at 1
d. per Shilling is too little, and that it will fall short, not only in all
Sixpences but in some Shillings, which it is known want 2 d.

In answer to this, I say, That if some of these Shillings want 2 d. as many
are of full weight with new ones, so that the mean Arithmetical proportion is
11 d. as I computed; and whereas Sixpences want more of weight than the
Proportion I have allowed for the Shillings, to make up that, I say half Crowns
and Crowns want much less, so that the foregoing Computation will however hold
pretty true.

Obj. 2. What shall they do that have not Money to lend the King, they must
needs lose by paying what they have at 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce.

Answ. None can lose much but they that have much by them at the time this Act
commenceth, and they that have much will not be much abused to lose 1/12 for
the sake of the many Conveniences and Advantages that would attend the having
only new Money and Guineas current. But if they are not wanting to themselves
no one needs to lose, for the King, it is proposed, will take it at 5 s. 8 d.
for Taxes, Loans, Customs, Excise, Stamping Paper, etc. And it is but a small
part of the Nation that have not occasion either actually to pay Money
themselves on some of these accounts; as the Nobility, Gentry, and great
Traders, for Loans; Merchants for Customs, Lawyers for stamping Paper, Brewers
in London, and Victuallers in the Country, for Excise, and all Housekeepers
for Taxes; I say, there are few but must either pay Money these ways, or have
Friends that must, who not having hammered Money of their own, will be willing
(since it is no loss, and they can serve their Friend thereby) to pay it for
them on these accounts. Or, truly it is not unlikely, That those who must pay
the King Money, and have not hammered enough by them, will give 5 s. 4 d. per
Ounce for it rather than pay new, since they can get 4 d. per Ounce by the
bargain: So that I do not see how any one can (notwithstanding their great
fears) avoid gaining by the unclipt hammered Money they have in their Hands
when the Act passes.

But on the other hand, if we consider the National Evils (as things are now
circumstantiated) that would be concomitant of its passing current by Tale, we
shall find them grievous, according to the general Maxim I have elsewhere
mentioned, viz.

When two sorts of Coin are current in the same Nation of like value by
denomination, but not Intrinsically, that which has the least value will be
current, and the other (as much as is possible) will be hoarded.

So that the more hammered Money is current by tale now we have so much better
Money, the worse it will be for us, for so much of the new Milled Money, and
Guineas will certainly be hoarded, which would make us have a more seeming want
thereof than we have at present, and that would be intolerable.

And thus (Sir) I have answered your Request to the utmost of my power in the
short time I am confined to, to apply my thoughts to these Matters, which if
useful to you or any other (especially the public) will abundantly recompense
the pains and trouble taken in writing thereof, by

Your Humble Servant.
Nov. 16. 1696.

