A REPRESENTATION OF THE PREJUDICES That may Arise in TIME FROM AN Intended
Act, CONCERNING Marriages, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1692.

IT IS no Dishonor to the Greatest and Wisest of Assemblies, even a Parliament,
to review and alter their own Acts and Constitutions, whenever it is found by
Experience, that any Inconveniences or Mischiefs follow upon them: But when
Sins are likely to follow, men are neither to venture nor stay for the
Experiment.

Such, many such, both Sins and Inconveniences dangerous and greatly
prejudicial seem but too apparent as the more than accidental Consequences of a
Bill said to be now passing into a Law of the Land, entitled, An Act disabling
Minors to marry without the Consent of their Father or Guardian, and against
their untimely Marriage after the Death of their Father, and for preventing all
Clandestine Marriages.

To show how easily this Act may be eluded or abused, and represent withal the
Sins and Mischiefs that are likely soon to follow it, I shall consider the
Heads of it in an Abstract, that has come to hand, of it, (the Copy at large I
have not seen, nor is it in my Power to procure, and do hope, not to see passed
into a Law).

By the Draught I have seen, it is to be Enacted,

From the 30th. of March 1692. No Son under 18, nor Daughter under 16. shall
Marry or Contract without their Father (if living) or Guardian be present and
consenting to, or without Consent in Writing, signed in the presence of two
Witnesses or more, otherwise the Marriage to be ipso facto void.

I will put the Case, That a Man of 17. years of Age contracts with a Woman of
the same years, the Woman has Consent of her Parents, the Man has not his
Fathers Consent, however these get married. Now is this Marriage by the
Intended Act made ipso facto void, by Reason that the Man had not the Consent
of his Father?

The Question that will arise from such a Case as this, is, Whether such a
Marriage can be made void, so as to secure the Consciences of such as shall be
divorced in such a Case, that they may either Separate, or Marry others to the
better liking of their Parents?

Now it is not I conceive, a very easy matter to prove, That a Man of 17. years
of Age, (who may well be supposed to have at that Age Discretion to know what
he does, and what a Marriage Contract signifies) yet has without the Consent of
his Father contracted himself to a Woman, and gone on deliberately in it, and
actually married her, and known her as a Wife; may yet Lawfully and with a good
Conscience yield to the breaking off this Marriage, be divorced, or take
another Wife, because his Father gave not his Consent to the first Contract he
engaged himself in. No doubt but it was his Duty to have sought and obtained
the Consent of his Father, before he had contracted himself and married; But
that his not having done his Duty in that case to his Father, will afterward
free him of his Contract and Marriage to his Wife, is a Conceit that few men's
Consciences will admit.

The best Casuists have resolved the Marriage to be Valid in foro Conscientiae,
Vid. Grotius de Jure L. 2. cap. 5.
though made without the Consent of Parents and even against it; owning it the
manifest Duty of Children to have the Parents Consent; but if they marry
without, the want of it does by no means invalidate the Contract. When that is
finished, the Man by Gods Law is to forsake Father and Mother and cleave to his
Wife, goes out into another Family, and is not in such subjection as shall
oblige him to break off against his own Inclination, or indeed as can justify
him in Conscience in separating (should he have an Inclination to comply with
his Fathers Will) from the Wife with whom he is become one Flesh.

Some, that have pretended to argue the Invalidity of such Marriages, have
never been able to prove any Thing like it from God's Law; the utmost they have
proved, amounts to no more than this, viz. That it is deducible, and may be
inferred from diverse Passages in Scripture, that Children ought to have their
Parents Consent in Marrying, which all the World owns. But this by no means
proves, that what ought not to have been done may upon no account be valid when
it is done. What is commonly brought as an Argument in the Case to prove the
Nullity from Reason, viz. That a Son cannot alienate or give away his Fathers
Goods without his Consent, much less himself, who is his Fathers Child, is very
trifling. For though he cannot give his Father's Goods, nor alienate them, but
the Law will restore them, and the Son perhaps may not be bound to give them
away, though he had promised to do it, as not being obliged to fulfill an
unlawful Promise; yet if he alienates them to another as his own, and has
received from him, with whom he has contracted for them, an equitable
Consideration; he is obliged in Conscience no doubt to an Equivalent
Restitution, if he does not make good his Promise in their delivery, or
whenever a Law of the Land shall cause the Return of the Goods to the Father.
Besides, the World never yet supposed, I presume, that the Property and
Dominion a man has in his Goods, and that which he has in his Child are of
the same nature or the like extent; or that a Child has no more Power over his
own Body to dispose of that to his own liking, than of his Fathers Goods, in
which he has no manner of Property. The Child no doubt is interessed in his
own Marriage, and therefore is not to be disposed of by the Father in Marriage
against his own Inclinations. And therefore when he understands the Interest
himself has in contracting for the Marriage of himself, and contracteth upon
that Interest of his own without his Father; he is to blame no doubt for
passing by the Interest of his Father, but under no necessity when that is
done, to disclaim what he has acted upon the account of his own Interest in the
Marriage of himself; but under an obligation of Conscience not to rescind the
Contract he has made with another upon it. They who would deny this, must
affirm the Dominion of the Father to be absolute, and at all times the same;
and also that the Child is under the same Restriction at 20, 30, years of Age,
as at 17, whether out of the Father's Family or in it. (A thing it is which the
generality of the World never dreamed of.) The only thing that can be
pretended, if they will not say this, is that the Child at more years may have
more Discretion: But one may have Discretion at 17. which another has not at
20, 30 years of Age: and for that Reason a Time cannot be fixed for the
Validity of a Contract, but the Validity of it in Conscience depends upon a
Man's having the Use of Reason, when he made it; be it at any Age.

'Twill be said I know, The Law of the Land will secure the Conscience in this
case; But it should be first proved, that God allows us to take Man's Law for
our Direction in this matter; otherwise where there shall be found a Repugnancy
between God's Law and any Law of men; They who think in Conscience that they
are to obey God, rather than Man, cannot be persuaded that any Law of the Land
will bear them out in acting against the Law of God. And here in this case
there is so far a Repugnancy, that the Law of Christ says, if a man be Divorced
for other Cause than that of Fornication, and marry another, he commits
Adultery, and causes the Wife to commit Adultery: But the Intended Law of the
Land makes void Marriage, for want of the Consent of the Father of the married
Person; a Cause that we find no Instance of any Divorce for among the Jews,
when their Practice was permitted.

Some may say, This making the Marriage void, is not a Divorce, but the
Declaration of a Nullity in the Marriage; but this I fear is a Subtle
Distinction, that can give little Security to the Conscience. For the thing
will be still in dispute, What makes a Marriage in the sight of God, whether
the Voluntary Action of a Person having the use of Reason, that contracts
himself to a Woman in face of God's Church, and cohabits with her upon it, or
the Consent which his Father shall give to what he does? This the Conscience of
a Voluntary Agent with resolve him in more plainly, than all the Arguings of
subtle Wits in the case.

(2.) But now besides the Snare which the Dissolution of Marriages according to
this Act may prove to Men's Consciences; there may be an Injustice in it in many
Cases to an Innocent Party. As in the Instance proposed before (for Example) of
a Man at 17. marrying a Woman of the same Age.

The Woman may have the Consent of her Parents, or is of Age sufficient,
according to this Law, to marry without them, and may be deceived by the Man,
and told that he has no Father living, or that his Father is consenting, and
made to believe as much; or may not mind to look after it, being of less
discretion than a man of the same Age with her: In such a Case a Marriage may
succeed, and a Cohabitation. Now should a Separation be made after this as by
the Intended Law it may, (no Provision being made to help the Woman in case of
such a Fraud) it would be very hard in many Respects, as She cannot be secured
in Conscience in marrying again, as She has been robbed of her Virginity, as
She may be left with Child, etc. The Innocent Party in such a case would be
manifestly punished for the fault of the other.

3. Again it is by this evident, what advantage likewise a fraudulent Person
might make of this Law, to serve his Ends upon a Woman, and then get a
Separation from her, or throw her off upon any Dislike.

4. In a word, Suits about the Validity of Marriages will very probably be
found endless, considering the many Opportunities ill Men may have by this Act,
to call a Marriage into question, whenever they shall dislike, or be willing to
get rid of their Wives. Which may prove a much greater Evil to Parents, as to
worldly Respects, in the Marriage of their Children, than the Mischiefs which
some may imagine this new Law will prevent.

5. The Children likewise born of such Marriages are left without Provision,
unless it be that which the Law of the Land has already made for Bastards,
which these I suppose are intended to be reputed. And when the Women that are
divorced in such Marriages shall come to be reputed Harlots, as they must in
consequence. That Stain may be more a Prejudice to Families than can at a
distance be apprehended.

By these Instances, any Man that would set himself to consider, may guess at a
multitude of other very dangerous Consequences, prejudicial to Christianity,
and more prejudicial to Families, than the Mischief intended to be quenched,
which may follow upon this Act, through the Inadvertency of many well meaning
Persons, the Endeavors of others to elude, and others to abuse the same.

Son under sixteen, or Daughter under fourteen (their Father being dead) tho
they marry or contract with Guardians Consent, yet such Marriage shall be ipso
facto void.

The Intention of this, I suppose, is to prevent the Fraud and Dishonesty and
Betraying of Trust in Guardians, that they may not, as some perhaps have done,
marry a Minor for Gain, or to their own Relations as others, to the Child's
great Disadvantage, while it is so young as to be supposed not to have the Use
of Reason, to know what the Contract of Marriage signifies, or to assent to
such a Contract. A Crime this, that deserves Punishment by such Forfeitures as
the Guardian is subjected to by this Act in case of betraying his Trust, viz.
Value of a Third Part of the Minors Estate, and perhaps a greater Penalty than
so. But in the making void such Marriages many Consciences may be entangled as
before, and greater Inconveniences happen to the Minor in respect of
Reputation, etc. than the Provision which is made hereby for the Security of
the Estate can recompense.

Minor marrying contrary to the Act, not to have the Benefit of any Law by
reason of such pretended Marriage, but shall lose Right and Title to Goods,
Chattels, Dower, Letters of Administration, etc.

A Punishment somewhat too severe upon Minors, whom this Act supposes not to
have Understanding to Contract for their own Marriage; who cannot therefore
well be supposed to have Foresight enough to prevent the Danger which after
this Law they will incur.

The Father, Guardian or Friend of such Minor may prosecute in the Minors or
their own Name, in Ecclesiastical Courts, and have the Marriage nulled.

A most strange Imposition this is certainly like to be upon the Church, that
the Church shall be enforced to void Marriages according to the Laws of the
Secular Power, when the Trust it has in the matter of Marriages committed to
it, is from the Law of Christ, which has confined all Christians to marry One
to One and the Marriage to be Indissoluble but in Fornication. The Civil Power
may as well be an Enemy to Christianity as not (and that as well professing to
maintain it as professing to persecute it) and to say therefore that God has
left the Consciences of Christians to be secured by the Civil Power, submitting
to what it determines in this case, is to say, that the Consciences of
Christians can be secured in the Dissolving of Marriages, otherwise than
according to the Law of our Lord. Whenever therefore the Law of a Kingdom shall
enforce the Ministers of the Church either to void those Marriages which that
has disanulled, but which are good in the sight of God; or to bless those
second Marriages which this allows, but God's Law makes Adulteries (the Party
that is put away, and not for Adultery remaining alive) it will be a horrible
Breach upon Christianity. When the Church shall be compelled to judge and
disanul Marriages by another Law than that of Christ, and allow of, and bless
others which that forbids. The Act of the Church in the Case will seem to
concur for the securing the Consciences of Christians; wherein when it is
constrained to concur in an unlawful Case, upon whom shall those Souls that are
in danger by that means to perish be chargeable? They who will say upon the
Clergy that shall concur in it (as I doubt not but many of this Age will be
ready enough to say) will it is to be hoped excuse the Clergy, who shall be
afraid to concur in it, for fear of a greater Punishment from God (in being
Partakers with what will open a Door for Adulteries) than that which severe
Governors may inflict to enforce Laws with which in Conscience they cannot
comply.

But besides upon a Divorce in which the Church is Judge, Bond is at present
required by the Canon to be taken, that neither of the separated Parties marry
again, but live single (a Law made for Prevention of designed Adulteries, which
were found to be made use of to void Marriages of set purpose.) And if this
Canon be observed, the Parties separated after such Marriages and Cohibitation
in their Minority, are to be obliged to live single. To which I doubt the
Parents of such Minors will not be over-willing; neither is it, I suppose,
designed; but the Church must have a Constraint laid upon her, and her Canons
must be laid aside at the pleasure of the Secular Power; how well or ill soever
the Concerns of Christianity go in the mean time.

It Is too long to mention the Advantage which the Papists will have against the
Reformation, when Divorces shall become practicable after this manner, who may
have color enough to charge it on us, as the Effect of our denying Marriage to
be a Sacrament.

None to grant Licenses but Vicars-General of the two Archbishopricks Master of
Faculties, Chancellors of each Diocese, and one Deputy of theirs in each
Diocese, with Approbation of the Bishop.

If any grant License to any not being (viz.) above eighteen, if Males, and
sixteen, if Females, without Father or Guardians Consent, personally present,
or his Certificate signed and sealed before a Justice of Peace, and attested
under his Hand and Seal, and by the Oaths of two Witnesses; or to Minor (the
Father being dead) without the Oath of two Witnesses that the said Minor is at
least sixteen, if Male; and fourteen, if Female.

To forfeit five hundred pounds, and to be disabled to hold any Employ. And if
the Deputy does contrary to the Act, he that Deputed him shall be liable to the
Penalty, provided the Bishops be not liable for approving such Deputy.

A Forfeiture this, that a Man would not choose to run the Hazard of, for all
the supposed Advantages or Profits of Fees for granting Licenses. It had been
much more beneficial for Chancellors and their Deputies to have had their
Faculties wholly taken away; and a Law made for Publishing the Banns in all
Marriages, which would more effectually prevent the Mischiefs this Act is
designed for. But this, I suppose, could not be, by reason that Great Men will
not be upon the same Level with the vulgar, but Respect must be had to them
even in Religious Matters, and Ecclesiastics for a poor Reward must serve them
in it, and be answerable for the Inconvencies which follow thereby. From which
its something that the Bishops are exempt, and that the Burden and Danger lies
upon their Offices and the Inferior Clergy.

Whoever marries such Minor, contrary to the Act, to suffer Death as a Felon
without the Benefit of Clergy. Father, Mother, Guardian of Minors may
prosecute, and if none of them do within twelve months, the next of kin shall
sue to have the Party convict of Life. No pardon to be pleaded in Bar of such
Suit.

It is not intelligible by the Abstract I have seen, whether the person so to
suffer Death, be an adult person that have married such Minor, or the Minister
that joins them in Marriage.

If it be the former, and there be no difference whether it be Man adult, or
Woman that gets married to such Minor. A Woman which by this Law is no Minor
after sixteen years of age, should she be prevailed with by a Youth of
seventeen, (who by this Law is reputed a Minor) to marry him without his
Fathers Consent, may come to suffer upon that account.

Yea be it Man or Woman, and be there some kind of Artifice in gaining the
Affection of the Minor, yet when the Contract is voluntary, it seems somewhat
hard, that the Crime shall be punished with death, especially when the Marriage
is made void too, and when Adultery fraudulently committed with a Neighbor's
Wife is not punished with any such severity, tho doubtless a much greater
Crime. If the Party be to be punished with Death, the Marriage need not be made
void; and if the Marriage be it self null, or by the Law may be disanulled, it
merits not a Capital Punishment, while that of Adultery is not punished with it.

The Allowance of the next of Kin to prosecute after twelve Months, if the
Father does not, is much more hard; when the Father shall not have the Power or
Liberty to give an After Consent, if he finds occasion for it: but a Kinsman
(that thirsts after the Inheritance of his Estate perhaps) shall have it in his
Power to convict the Offenders, when the Father who is the injured Person may
be willing to remit the Offense.

But probably this Arguing is upon a Mistake, and it is intended that, Whoever
Minister or Parson shall join such Minor in Marriage he shall suffer Death.

If it be so, methinks any Man of common Humanity should think it very severe,
That when the Guardian aiding in the Marriage of a Minor against his Trust, or
Servant Domestic, or other Parson, who has by Fraud drawn in a Minor to such
Marriage, shall be only punished, some by Forfeitures, others by Imprisonment:
the Minister before whom such Contract is ratifyed (because in an undue manner)
shall be punished with Death: and this too when the Marriage is by Law made
soluble: It Is a very great Crime indeed, a most wicked Action for a Clergyman
to be instrumental in marrying a Minor, that he has reason to think may not
understand what he is going about; or if he does, whom yet he knows to take no
notice of his Duty to his Parents, with whom he should advise, and by whom he
should be directed in so weighty an Affair. But why is it so great? But because
he betrays the Trust the Church has put in him, and this in a Case that cannot
be remedied afterward (the Marriage when once consummate not being soluble.)
But suppose the Marriage may be dissolved again according to this Law, the
Crime is much less than before.

To prevent all Clandestine Marriages.

Minister Marrying without Banus or License, or at any other time than
appointed by Law, and the in Privileged Churches, is to be suspended ab
Officio and Beneficio for the first Offense, and suffer Imprisonment for three
years. The second time to be deprived and incapable of any Preferment for ever.
If not Beneficed he shall be Degraded and Imprisoned.

This seems to comprehend all Clandestine Marriages and makes the Case equal,
whether the Minister has done an Act of Injustice to any Person in
Transgressing the Law or not. It Is severe that when an offense is not against
the End of a Law, that an Infirmity in a Minister in yielding to the
importunity perhaps of a mighty Man in his Parish that over-awes him too, so
far as to ware the Formalities of the Law, shall be punished, as if he had done
the Injustice the Law intends to prevent. The Minister should not yield you will
say; True, yet there is never a Peasant or Mechanic in his Parish, but will
take upon him to declare himself offended, when the stubborn Priest will not
wave the Rules he is to go by, to oblige him; and what Difficulties may a
Clergyman (whose maintenance is strait, and what he has Precarious too) be
brought into by the strictness of this Act?

Minister shall not suffer if License be forged, etc.

It Is a kindness at last that the Minister shall not suffer if License be
forged. But he is still exposed to vexatious suits and molestations and must be
at infinite Trouble to take and keep by him Memorials of the Circumstances of
every Marriage, that he may be able to quit and clear himself, should he be
called to account, as he may be at any time hereafter.

There is no man, if the case were his own, but would desire to be freed from
so hazardous an Office, which though he endeavors to discharge with the utmost
fidelity, shall expose him nevertheless continually to be harassed with suits,
and brought in danger of losing all his Livelihood. Out of common Compassion
therefore one would think such a Burden and such Difficulties should not be
imposed on the Clergy, which they might be eased of too by a Law, that no
Marriage whatsoever be, before the Banns be published three several Sundays in
a full Congregation in the Parishes where the Parties concerned live, and This
to be the Ministers security; that if any Minister married any Persons without
Banns published or notwithstanding Impediment alleged, then the Punishment be
such as is here assigned, which one Provisoe in all probability would prevent
the mischiefs (designed by this Act to be prevented) more effectually than all
the studied Cautions thereof.

And in that Case there would be no snare to men's Consciences as here, where
the Secular Authority takes upon it to void Marriages otherwise than by the Law
of Christ; and to compel the Church to do the same.

Methinks there should be some Compassion for the Clergy as well as for the
People called Quakers, who have not only a favor but an advantage in the close
of this Act; from which, a Man that does not envy them in it may yet take
occasion to Request, that the Consciences of the Clergy be not imposed on, any
more than those of other men; As Experience may ere long evidence that they
will be, where they shall be compelled to concur in the Execution of several
Particulars of this Act.

To make them concur in which is hard at present, it is Provided that this Act
be read in all Churches; a thing that that Man cannot in Conscience comply
with, who does not believe that such Marriages are void by the Law of Christ,
which by this Law of the Land are intended to be Dissolved, or made Null.

A Man that would set about it might write a Volume upon the Sins and
Inconveniences and Mischiefs that may follow this Act, should it pass into a
Law of the Land; which it is to be hoped it never will in a Nation professing
Christianity; should it ever, the Fault will lie heavy somewhere; chiefly upon
those, who by their Place and Station should endeavor for the Interest of the
Church and of Christianity, and yet in this Case are silent and content to let
a Law pass, which has a specious Pretext, but which in time shall make way for
that to become Practicable (which suits the new modelled Opinions of some
Modern Divines, but is widely different from the Law of Christ, and the Sense
of the whole Church interpreting it) viz. That Divorces be for other Causes
than that of Fornication.

FINIS.

