THE TRUE EFFIGIES of the most Eminent PAINTERS AND OTHER ARTISTS That have
Flourished in EUROPE

IEVER DES GEEST

^IET GVLDEN CABIN^

VANDE EDEL VRY SCHILDER ^^

INHOVDENDE

DEN LOF VANDE VERMARST^

SCHILDERS, ARCHITECTE, BELDTHOW^ END PLAETSNYDERS.

VAN DESE E^VW DOOR

CORN: DE BIE NOT^

TOT LIER 1662

t'Antwerpen gedruckt by Ian Meyssens Con^^^ercooper op de Eyermert inden goude
Rexdalder



Abral. a Diepenbeck delin. Cornelis Meyssens sculpsit.

THE TRUE EFFIGIES Of the most Eminent PAINTERS, AND OTHER Famous Artists That
have Flourished in EUROPE.

Curiously Engraven on Copper Plates.

TOGETHER With an Account of the Time when they Lived, the most remarkable
passages of their Lives, and most considerable Works.

Very useful for all such Gentlemen as are Lovers of Art and Ingenuity.

Printed in the Year, MDCXCIV.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA 1715

GEORGIUS D.G. MAG BR. FR. ET HIB. REX F.D.



A short Account of the Lives of the Painters and other Artists Contained in
this BOOK. AS ALSO Of the most Eminent ITALIANS and others, both Ancient and
Modern.
1. and 2. Hubert and John Van Eyck
WEre both born at Maseyck in the Low Countries, upon the Meuse. Hubert about
the year 1366. John not long after, They were the first Inventers of painting
in Oil, whereby the Colors not only receive a Gloss, but are preserved from
fading. John, though he was Scholar to his Brother Hubert, yet by his Industry
excelled him in knowledge of the art, and in his inventions: Witness that
incomparable piece of his in St. John's Church at Ghent, in which are 330
figures, the Faces so well diversified that one cannot but admire at. The
Horses hairs, the leaves of the trees, and herbs are so delicately touched,
that they seem even to wave with the Air. Phillip the 2d of Spain gave 2000
Ducats for a Copy of it, not being able to procure the Original at any price:
Hubert died in the year 1426. And was buried in the Cathedral at Ghent. John
died at Bruges, and was buried there.

3. Hierom Boschius or Ierom Dubois.
Had a peculiar inclination and faney to paint Apparitions and Spirits: In a
piece of his, representing Hell, is most admirably described the horrid shapes
and deformed ugliness of the infernal Spirits, the strange punishments of the
damned in Rivers, as it were, of fire, tempestuously rolling and mingled with
thick darkness and smoke, so that his Painting causes rather a horror mixed with
admiration, than any delight to behold, several of his pieces were carried to
the Escurial, and placed there by order of the K: of Spain. He died about the
year 1500.

4. Roger of Brussels, otherwise called Roger Vander Weyde,
Was the author of those memorable representations of Justice which are to be
seen in the Town Hall of Brussels: The 1st of which represents the Emperor
Trajan in his expedition against the Dacians at the head of his Army, doing
Justice upon the complaint of a poor Woman, against a Soldier that had
murdered her son; The Woman appears prostrate at the Emperor's feet, demanding
Justice, with a countenance that expresses a grief sufficient to excite
compassion in the most obdurate, in the Emperor is to be seen a Severe
Majestic air, that makes his looks terrible, yet seeming moved at the
importunity of the afflicted mother, causes the Soldier to be brought forth, in
whose face appears the: marks of his guilt, and the tokens of death; The
hangman with a fierce and savage look standing by ready to execute the sentence
of death to be pronounced against him. In another, you behold an aged person,
pale and languishing on a purple bed, yet as if wrath supplied force to his
feeble limbs, He seems, as it were, to start up half naked, and with eyes,
though half dead, yet sparkling with indignation, and gnashing his teeth, he
catches by the hair of the head fast hold of a young man of goodly Aspect, and
furiously strikes him to the heart with a Dagger. One would presently imagine
the old man, of the two, to be the Criminal; But the truth of the story will
make it appear otherwise: For, Archambraut Prince of Brabant understanding that
his Nephew and Heir had ravished a young woman, he commanded his Judges to
proceed to punish him according to the severity of the Law; but they slightly
passed it over, because the Criminal was not only the next Heir, but upon the
point of succeeding his dying Uncle. This neglect of theirs so provoked
Archambraut, that having concealed his indignation for some time, and finding
his end approaching, he sent for the young Prince to his bed side, and seeming,
as if he had something to impart to him concerning his succession, he seized
upon him as you have heard, and stabbed him to expiate his Crime with his
blood: This famous Painter died in the year 1529.

5. Theodore Van Harlem
Flourished in the year 1462. As appears by a piece of his at Leyden, upon
which is written in Golden letters in Latin to this effect. Theodore of Harlem
made me at Louvain in the year 1462, God grant him everlasting rest. This is
all that remains of him, yet is enough to evidence that he was an excellent
Artist.

6. Bernard of Brussels
A good Painter of Chaces, Forests and the hunting of wild beasts; Of this sort
are those pieces which he made for the Emperor Charles the 5th, representing
the Forest of Soigne, and the curious Prospects that surround it, in which the
said Emperor, and the most considerable Persons of his Court that attended him
in this noble exercise are drawn to the life. His designs of this kind are so
excellent, that they were adjudged proper to be imitated in the richest
Tapistries that could be made for the Palaces of the Princes of the Austrian
family. There are 16 small pieces of his representing several Princes and
Princesses of the Illustrious House of Orange, which were thought worthy to be
copied by John Jordans one of the best Painters of Antwerp. He lived about the
year 1530.

7. John Mabusius
Was born at Haynaut upon the Sambre, a person of a dissolute and vicious life,
yet an excellent Artist. For his debaucheries the Magistrates of Middleburgh
put him in prison, where he had leisure to invent several curious Designs which
were much esteemed: Two of his Pieces being the Pictures of 2 young Princes,
were brought into England, and placed in the Gallery at Whitehall. He was
Contemporary with Lucas Van Leyden, and his Rival in the art. He died at
Antwerp 1. Oct. 1532. And was buried in the Cathedral.

8. Ioachim Patinier.
Born at Dinant in Flanders, his principal Employment was in Landskips; Albert
Durer had that esteem for him as to draw his Picture to preserve the memory of
so fine a Painter. Notwithstanding the beauty of his Works, he is much blamed
for his disorderly life, being the greatest Drunkard, as he was the best
Painter of his time, never out of a Tavern, until forced by necessity to work
for a supply to his Debaucheries.

9. Quintin Mesius
Was brought up in the profession of a Smith at Antwerp, where falling in love
with one of the Damsels of that Country, and perceiving that his dirty
profession and the noise of his Anvil was dislastful to his Mistress, and that
she preferred a Painter that was his Rival before him, he immediately changed
his hammers and Anvil for pencils and Tables and became so successful that he
soon obtained not only the possession of his Mistress but the name of one of
the most famous Painters of his time. Several of his Pieces have been seen in
England. K. Charles the 1st had an head of Erasmus of his doing in Oval, the
Duke of Buckingham, and Earl of Arundel, had the Pictures of several persons of
Quality in the Low Countries so lively painted that nothing could be more
natural. He died in the year. 1529.

10. Lucas Van Leyden,
So called from the place of his birth, was renowned both for Graving and
Painting; From his youth he gave proofs of his excellent Genius, having, when
he was but 9 years of age, graven several Copper Plates so well as to receive
the Approbation of the most Judicious in that Art. Among many things that
spread his fame, is that fine Picture of the Curing the Blind man by our
Savior, where he brings in several Persons manifesting their attention by
variety of Looks, above all there appears a glorious Majesty in our Savior who
moves toward the poor man with a great deal of Compassion, the Blind man, is
represented to be guided by a Youth, and coming to our Savior in such a manner
as discovers both the sense of his Misery, and his impatience to be cured, he
seems to beg this favor with a hope that diffuses through his Countenance a
Joy mixed with respect and admiration; at the Bottom of the Piece is a Landscape,
which much embellishes and sets off the other Beauties of the Work. He died at
Leyden in the year 1533. In the 39th year of his age, after an Enterview
betwixt him and Mabusius at Middleburgh, where falling out in their Cups,
occasioned by their emulation of each other, Lucas fancied himself to be
poisoned, and with this conceit died.

11. John Holland:
Borne in the Low Countries: A very good Painter of Landskips, Woods, and
Groves, with Satyrs, Nymphs, Faunes, Dryades, and other Rural Gods: He died at
Antwerp about the year. 1540.

12. Iustus Clivensis.
He lived at Antwerp the place of his Nativity in the year. 1554. Happened to be
distempered in his brain, which hindered that perfection he was like otherwise
to have attained unto.

13. Matthew Cock:
Of Antwerp, came behind none of his time in painting Landskips and prospects
of Country Towns and Villages. He died about the year 1560.

14. Henry de Bless.
Borne at a Town called Bovines near Dinant and lived about the year. 1550.
Grew to great perfection without any assistance, but his own happy Genius, and
his diligent observation of Joachim Patiniers Works, whose house he frequently
visited, and got those secrets thence which made his Landskips so deservedly
celebrated. There is at Amsterdam a piece of his of the disciples going to
Emaus, the Passion, the Resurrection, and some others of his Designs, but the
best of his Works were bought up for the Emperor Rodolphus, and transported to
Germany. He Painted an Owl always as a mark of his Pieces, intimating perhaps
thereby, his clear apprehension of the Art amidst the obscurity of his
education.

15. John Mayo commonly called Vermeyen
Borne at Beverwyck in Holland in the year 1500. Was well versed in Designing,
in Geometry and Perspective. The Emperor Charles 5th employed him as his
domestic Painter in designing his Military Expeditions. He was with him at
Turis, where he made a description of the Town as it was besieged by Sea and
land, and the manner of its being taken; From his Designs of this sort was the
Models taken of those curious Tapestries in the Escurial. He was called John
with the great Beard, which he took a great pride to nourish, it was so long
that though he was tall himself, yet he could stand upright when it touched the
ground, The Emperor would sometimes divert himself with seeing it unloosed
playing with the wind and sometimes whisking in the faces of the standers by.
He died at Brussels Anno Domini 1559. aged 59. Years.

16. Peter Coeck
Born at Alost in Flanders, about the beginning of the 16th Century, was the
disciple of Bernard de Bruxels under whom he profited exceedingly: Went into
Turkey with some Merchants where he ventured against the Laws of that Country,
which forbids Images to draw several pieces expressing the manners and customs
of the Turks in their Marriages, Burials, solemn Feasts, the Marching and
incamping of their Armies, all very pleasant to behold; after his return from
Turkey he writ and published some curious Books of Architecture, Geometry, and
Perspective, and translated Sebastio Serli out of Italian.

17. John Schoorel
Was born in a Village called Schoorel, near the Town of Alcmar in Holland, was
the disciple of Mabusius; Having travailed to the Holy land, and viewed the
chiefest rarities of Palestine, particularly the river Jordan, of which he took
a draught upon the place, and made good use of, in Painting the History of
Joshua leading the Israelites through that river, he described the City of
Jerusalem, the Holy Sepulcher and other the most remarkable things there, as
they stand at this day. Pope Adrian the 6th made him overseer of the Belveder,
he Painted the Picture of the said Pope, which is to be seen in the College,
which Adrian founded at Louvain. He was well skilled in Poetry, Music and
Languages; he died 1562. His picture was drawn by Antonio More, from whence the
graven plate is taken.

18. Lambert Lombard
Of the City of Liege, not only attained to a great perfection in Painting, but
also to a great skill in the Mathematics, Geometry and Architecture, as
appears by several of his Designs which have been cut in Wood and Copper by
very good hands for the use of Architects. Many famous persons were brought up
by him, namely Goltzius, Francis Floris, William Cayo, and others. His
Paintings are most of them in the Emperors Palace.

19. Peter Brugel
Was the disciple of Peter Cock, a great observer of the Actions of Boors and
Peasants and very happy in imitating them with his Pencil. In Italy he drew a
prospect of the affrightful Alps, the Torrents, and dismal Precipices there,
which was of good use to him in Painting our Saviors Temptation in the
Wilderness, where he livelily represents the craggy rocks, and steep Mountains,
how some of them hide, as it were, insensibly, their rops in the Clouds, and
foggy mists that surround them. His Tower of Babell is a piece much esteemed,
as also St. Paul's Conversion, and the Massacre of the Innocents, which he has
represented with all the Cruelties of a bloody Tragedy. But his chiefest
Excellency, was in Painting Country Feasts, and the debaucheries of the Boors.
He flourished in the year 1565 and died at Brussels 1570 A person more grave in
his discourse and actions, then in his works, for what Piece soever he made,
though of seriousness and devotion, he could not refrain mingling some
facetious humor or other with it, which was the common Mark whereby his pieces
were known.

20. William Cayo.
Born at Breda; beloved of all for his virtuous manner of life, he chiefly set
himsel to draw faces by the life, which he did with that approbation, that
there was scarce a person of Quality of his time in that Country, but were
drawn by him; That of Cardinal Granvil, and the Prince of Orange, above others
are most admired; The Duke of Alva Governor of the Low Countries at that time
for the K. of Spain sent for him to Brussels to draw his picture, which while
he was doing, struck with horror (as he confessed to some of his friends a
little before his death) at the bloody resolutions and actions of the said
Duke, he fell sick of a fever and died, the same day that the Counts Egmont and
Horn, two of the most Illustrious Persons of the Low Countries lost their
heads.

21. Luke Gassel
Born at Helmont in Brabant. It is observed that the Italians generally excel
in History and great Figures, the Dutch in Landskips, and small, so this our
Painters chief excellency lay in Landskips wherein he knew so admirably well,
how to represent the rugged Rocks the rapid Torrents, and the shady Groves,
giving to all such a delightful Prospect, and so fit a distance, that his
Pieces yield great pleasure and satisfaction to behold. He died at Brussels
about the year. 1560.

22. Francis Floris,
Born at Antwerp. Besides his great Judgment, he was so quick and ready in his
designs, that when Philip the 2d of Spain made his Solemn Entry into Antwerp,
he in one day Painted a large Victory, Embelished with Tropheys of Arms, and
filled with so many other Ornaments, that it was thought to be the work of some
months, and the effect of much labor and study; His Pictures had this peculiar
Ornament that they were most of them enriched with something of Antiquity,
suited most ingeniously to his Subject, as may be seen among many others, in
his Battle of St. Michael, and Lucifer in the Church of Notredam, at Antwerp,
where you see the Devils tumbling headlong from the battlements of heaven, into
a deep Abyss of flaming Sulphur, in such a dreadful and horrid manner, as
seems rather the work of some infernal Pencil, than of any mortal. At Brussels
there is a last Judgment incomparably done. His way of Painting was strong his
fleshy colors full of life, and spirit, his Drapery free, yet so artificially
composed, as to lessen nothing of the proportion or form of the members. In
fine, as he excelled most of his age, he would no doubt have excelled himself,
had he not been too much addicted to mispence of his time, in Intemperance and
debauchery, wherein he sometimes took a pride to bear away the Bell, he died in
the year 1570. or thereabouts, at Antwerp, in the 50th year of his age.

23. Cornelius de Bie,
Was no Painter himself, but the son of an eminent Painter Adrian de Bie, and a
great lover of Art and Ingenuity. Was the first that began the collecting the
Heads of this Book, which was afterward perfected by other hands, in memory
whereof, his own Head is thought not improper to be inserted with the rest.

24. Octavio Venus
Was Born at Leyden, in the year 1558. of a very good Family, his Father being
one of the principal Magistrates of that City, brought up in Learning under
Cardinal Groesbeck, Bishop and Prince of Liege, under whom he profited
exceedingly, in all manner of polite literature. At the same time that he
studied Philosophy, Poetry, and Mathematics; he also exercised himself in
Painting, by the advice and assistance of Thadaeus Zuchero, who foresaw
something extraordinary in his blooming years: At length he became renowned nor
only for his works, which he wrote in Divinity, History and other Sciences, but
for the rare strokes of his Pencil, which recommended him into the service of
the Emperor, the Duke of Bavaria, and the Elector of Cologne, where he was
entertained with respect suitable to his deserts, He was afterward employed by
the Prince of Parma, Governor of the Low Countries, for the King of Spain who
made him his Engineer and Painter. He was of so excellent a disposition, that
it being joined with great Learning and Industry, made him beloved by all the
Court. His Picture of the Archduke Albert, and the Infanta Isabella, drawn in
full proportion, was sent to K. James the 1st of England. Antwerp has several
of his pieces in diverse Churches. He had the glory of forming the mind of
Rubens, the Apelles of the age. He died at Brussels in the year. 1625. Aged
about 71. He left behind him 2 daughters both excellent in their fathers Art,
the eldest named Cornelia who was married to a rich Merchant at Antwerp, the
other. Gertrude, who has signalized both her love to his memory, and her
Pencil, by drawing his Picture in the manner as you see it here represented by
the Graver.

25. Adam Van Dort
Was famous for many magnificent Designs, which are to be seen in the hands of
several Lovers; was taught to paint by his Father Lambert Van Oort. Antwerp was
the place of his Nativity in the year. 1557. And of his burial in the year.
1641.

26. Abraham Blomaert
Was born at a place called Gorcum, in Holland, in the year. 1564. His Father
Cornelius Blomaert was a very good Carver and Architect, and having in his
house the Designs of several great Masters, particularly of Francis Floris, his
son fell to imitating them especially the designs of Floris, making a
discovery, by his own observation alone, of the rare secrets of the Art, so
that he may be said to have formed himself an Artist. Among the many rare
productions of his Pencil, that curious Piece at Vtrecht is very remarkable, of
Apollo and Diana killing the children of Niobe with their Darts, which the
Emperor Rodolphus was so charmed with, that he would not be satisfied till he
got him to make another of the same sort. The Count de Lip had a Banquet of
the Gods very ingeniously designed by him, in which the Faces of Venus, Juno
and Pallas are most incomparable. That Piece of his must not be forgotten,
wherein he has Painted to the life all sorts of Shellfish and Sea Monsters,
with Tritons riding in Triumph in the midst of tempestuous Billows; and at a
great distance Andromeda chained to a rock, and Perseus in the Air, hastening to
her Deliverance: Nothing can be more pleasant than his Landskips, of which,
with other of his Designs, there are several curious Prints to be seen, graven
by the hands of Muller, Saenredan and others.

27. Toby Verhaecht
Excellent also at Landskips, was one of Rubens first Masters, of whom he
learnt that sort of Painting. He was born at Antwerp in the year 1566. And died
in the year 1631. Octavio Venus drew his picture as you see it here represented.

28. Adam Elshamer
Born at Francfort, Anno. 1574. A person of a melancholy temper, delighting
for the most part to be amongst Tombs or ruinous places. His works, though few,
yet appear to be the product of much pains and Judgment; his painting is strong
and master-like. He lived not long, and died poor, yet left a lasting Renown
behind him.

29. Guydo Rheno
A great D^signer and Artist. He that sees those fine Prints which were Etched
with his own hand, will soon find how great a Master he was. He was born at
Bologne, in the year 1574. And died in 1642. This head is after his own
Painting.

30. Peter Paul Rubens.
This famous and renowned person, who was the Ornament and Flower of Painters,
not only in the Low Countries, but in all Europe, was born the 28. June 1577 at
Antwerp, of a considerable family, upon the feast of St. Peter and St. Paul,
whence he had his name. His first Master was Adam Van Noort, one of so ill a
temper, that Rubens was forced to leave him, and betake himself to Octavio
Venus, by whose good Instructions having attained perfection in his Art; he
traviled at 23 years of age to Italy, where he lived 7 years in the service of
the Duke of Mantua, by whom he was employed in several Embassies, amongst
others to Rome, to copy some Pieces of the most famous Masters before him,
wherein he so exactly imitated the Originals, that his Copies were exceedingly
admired. At Rome he made a great Piece for the Church of Notredame,
representing Pope Gregory, and some other Saints, but that proving too little
for the place it was designed for, he drew another and sent the former to the
Abbey of St. Michael at Antwerp, whither he at length returned, and where he
settled, and built a stately House, adorning it with abundance of Statues
brought from Italy, insomuch that it was esteemed the best Fabric of that
opulent City, both in regard of the curiousness of its Structure, and the
Riches of its inside; amongst which was a Cabinet furnished with such variety
of ancient Medals, Agates and other choice Rarities, that it might vie with any
of the most renowned Princes of Europe. In fine, so great were his
accomplishments, not only in Painting, but in other Sciences, that the Kings of
Spain, France, and England, in testimony of his Merits, conferred on him their
several Orders of Knighthood: His most celebrated Pieces are, That of the
Doctors treating of matters of Faith, in the Dominican Church at Antwerp. The
Elevation of the Cross, in another Church there. The taking down our Savior
from the Cross, in the Great Church. Several rare Pieces in the Magnificent
Church of the Jesuits, The two principal whereof are at the great Altar; One
representing St. Ignatius exorcising a Demoniack, the other St. Xavier
preaching to the Indians: At the great Altar of the Church of the Cordeliers,
is an admirable piece of his, Christ crucified between the two Thieves, as also
the Death of St. Francis. His Battle of the Amazons, is an incomparable Piece,
wherein the agility and manner of fighting among the ancients, is represented
so artificially, as ravishes the beholders. But that which added much to his
Fame, was his beautiful embellishments to the Palace of Luxemburgh, in St.
Germains at Paris, built by Mary de Medicis, Queen of France, on the right hand
as one enters the Gallery, is contained the History of that Queens Life,
represented in 21 large Pieces. In which, Art seems to have done its utmost, to
surpass Nature; the vastness of its Design being matter of astonishment to the
most skilful in the Art of Painting, and the delicacy of its stokes, with that
Harmony and Majesty that reigns over the whole, making them despair of ever
attaining so great perfection; Insomuch, that this famous Work has furnished
matter for the most elegant Pens of France to celebrate. He was in England when
K. James I. erected that Magnificent Structure called the ^^^quetting house at
Whitehall; the whole C^eling whereof as it is to be seen at this day, was
Painted and adorned by the hands of this great Master. He Died 30 May 1640. at
the same place he was born.

31. Francis Snyders
Born Anno. Dom. 157^. Was the Disciple of Henry Van Balen. He painted
Hunting-Pieces, Fish, Fruit and other Designs Incomparably well, for which he
was esteemed by several great Princes.

32. William Van Neulant
Born at Antwerp, Anno Dom. 1584. Was reckoned one of the best Poets of his
time, was brought up to Painting by Savery at Amsterdam; afterward he
traveled to Rome, and lived 3 years with Paul Brill; during his abode there he
painted the Ruins of Rome and other Rarities there with great exactness, and
adorned them with many little Figures and Landskips. He also did wonders in
Aqud Fortis. After he had spent some time among the Artists at Antwerp, he
returned to Amsterdam where he died in the year 1635.

33. Sr. Anthony Wandyck.
Was the excellent disciple of that Excellent Mr. Rubens. He received his birth
at Antwerp 22. March 1593. Had his first Instruction under Henry Van Balen, an
Italian Painter; but having seen the admirable Works of Rubens, he left all his
Designs to follow this great Master, as one whom he judged most worthy of his
imitation; Rubens charmed with his Wit, concealed nothing from him that was
necessary to polish him and make him a skilful Artist, being far from envying
or seeking to nip his budding Glory. Whilst he lived with Rubens he painted a
great number of Faces, among the rest, that of Rubens his wife, which is
esteemed one of the best in the Low Countries. He made him 2 Pieces, one
admirably representing the taking of our Savior in the Garden; the other, the
Crowning with Thorns. Having done these for his Master, he traveled into Italy
to see Titians Works. At his return he made that Incomparable piece for the
Monastery of Augustines at Antwerp, of St. Augustine looking steadfastly up into
Heaven, which appears open and all shining with light: The Prince of Orange
hearing his fame, sent for him to draw his own Picture, his Princesses and his
Childrens, which he did to the great satisfaction of that Prince and all that
were Curious. No sooner did these rare Pieces appear in public but the most
considerable persons in Holland were ambitious to be drawn by the hand of this
curious Artist, and the Nobility of England and France sent on purpose for him
that they might participate of the same happiness, and so numerous were they
that Van dyck not being able with his utmost Industry to content them all, drew
only those he had most particular esteem for, or such as gratified him most
considerably. Being arrived in England he was presented to King Charles the
1st, by Sir Kenelm Dighy: The King not only Knighted him, but as a peculiar
M^^^ of his esteem, presented him with a Massy Gold Chain with his Picture set
with Diamonds, and settled a considerable Pension upon him.

He was a lover of all those of his Country, who excelled in any Art, most of
whose Pictures he drew with his own hand, and which have been graven from
thence by the best Gravers of that time, such as Bolfwaert, Vosterman, Pontius,
etc. Some he did himself in Etching. He married one of the fairest and noblest
Ladies of the English Court, Daughter of the Lord Ruthen Earl of Gowry, whose
Father being accused of a Conspiracy against King James the 1st, his Estate was
confiscated, so that he had no great matter of Portion with his Wife, but her
Beauty and Nobility. He died the same year that his Mr. Rubens did, and was
buried in St. Paul's Church, London.

34. Gerard Segars
Was born at Antwerp, and bred up under Abraham Jansens, at the request of some
great lovers of Painting he traveled to Rome, where with great diligence and
pains, he copied some of the Works of the most famous Italian Painters,
furnishing his own Country with what he found most rare amongst them. His
Copies were esteemed not much inferior to the Originals. He was so ravished
with those miracles of art he beheld there, that he could not without great
difficulty be got thence, till Cardinal Zapata, the King of Spains Ambassador
at Rome, with great importunity prevailed upon him to accompany him to Madrid,
where he Presented him to the King, who conferred several Honors upon him as a
Mark of his esteem. He so nearly resembled the best of the Italian Painters in
their greatest Elegance, that when he had finished that incomparable Piece of
the Crucifixion of St. Peter, some of the best Judgments presently took it to
be done by the hands of Michael Angelo Caravaggio. Most of the Churches at
Antwerp are adorned with his Works. He made for the Duke of Newbourgh a picture
of the Blessed Virgin, which pleased him so extraordinarily, that he rewarded
him with a Gold Chain, and a Medal over and above the full price of his Work.
He fixed at last at Antwerp, where he built himself a stately house, and
adorned it with a great Collection of curious Paintings gathered from all
parts, with great cost and industry, and there peaceably ended his days in the
year 1651. about 60 years of age.

35. Adrian Van Vtrecht.
It Is observable that no Town, or Province scarce in the Low Countries, has
produced so many eminent Painters as that one Town of Antwerp, where this
famous person also received his birth 13. January 1599. His chief excellency
lay in Fruit-Pieces, Birds, Beasts either as alive or dead.

36. Adam Willaerts
Was born at Antwerp in the year 1577. a neat Painter of Sea-pieces, Ports,
Havens, Rivers, Ships, Boats, Barks, and little Figures in them,

37. John Bavur
Was born at Stratsbourgh, a delicate Painter in Watercolors, the Duke of
Brassignano sent for him to Rome and entertained him in his service, as did
also the Emperor Ferdinand afterward: He died. Anno Dom. 1640.

38. Nicholas Knypfer
Was brought up at Lypsick by Emanuel Nysen Anno. 1603. painted all sorts of
Figures very artificially. In the year 1630. He we^e to Vtrecht and sojourned
with the famous Abraham Blomaert where he made several Pieces for the King of
Denmark and other Princes and persons of Quality.

39. John Bylert
Was born at Vtrecht of mean Parentage being but the Son of a Glazier, yet
advanced his own fortune by his great merits and industry. His designs are held
to be very good, his figures were indifferent large and very soft.

40. John Van Balen
Was born at Antwerp in the year 1611. a good Painter both in great and small,
had his first instruction under his father Henry Van Balen.

41. Rowland Savery
Painted Landskips, Beasts, Birds, etc. extraordinary fine. He was born in
Flanders and made Painter to the Emperor Rodolphus.

42. Henry Vanderborcht
Was born at Brussels, Anno. 1583. From whence he removed to Frankendale, on
occasion of the troubles that broke out in his own Country, and afterward to
Frankfort. He learned to paint of Giles Valkenborgh. Was a great lover of
Rarities and Antique Curiosities. The Earl of Arundel had him in great esteem
for his rare Collection of Ancient Pieces, and Medals, as also for his painting.

43. Jacob Backer
A good Painter in great, his Designs are good and his Colors lively, a very
good Face-Painter, Was born in the year 1608.

44. Deodate Delmont
Lived sometime with Rubens with whom he traveled to Italy and other parts to
increase his experience; Rubens when he parted from him gave him a large
Testimonial of his Abilities by a public Instrument. He was for several years
Painter and Architect General to the Duke of Newburgh, and afterward he served
the Archduke Albert and the Infanta Isabella in the like quality, until his
death, which happened in the year 1643.

45. David Teniers, Senior,
Born at Antwerp, Anno Dom. 1582. Where having been instructed by such Masters
as Rubens and Elshamer, no wonder if he became famous in this Art, he employed
his time principally in Landskips and Figures both great and small. He died
Anno. 1649.

46. Adrian Van Newlant.
A very good Painter, of small figures and Landskips, there are, several fine
Pieces of his doing, extant, containing the Histories of the Old Testament. His
first beginning was under Peter Isaac, and Francis Baden at Amsterdam: Where he
spent most of his life.

47. Francis of Padoa
An Admirable Painter of great figures, very Copious in his Inventions, Painted
a Face to a miracle, as appears by the Pictures of the Earl of Arundel and his
Countess drawn by him. He lived sometimes at Rome, sometimes at Padoa his
native place.

48. Peter Franchoys
Was a Painter of good esteem. Born at Malines. He died 11. August 1654.

49. John Both,
A good Landscape Painter, in which his Prospects are pleasant, the foreparts
strong and well colored, enriched with Figures of men and Beasts, well
designed, He lived for the most part at Vtrecht the place of his birth.

50. David Beck
Was born Delft in Holland, Painter and of the Bedchamber, to the Queen of
Sweden, by whose direction, he drew the Pictures of the most Illustrious
persons of Christendom.

51. Gerard Honthorst.
Born at Vtrecht anno Do. 1592. Brought up by Abraham Blomaert, was very good
in Designs and in Faces. His sufficiency being known to several Cardinals, he
was employed by them in painting the Rarities that Italy at that time afforded,
He came afterward into England, where King James the first, made use of him in
several Designs to his satisfaction: In Denmark are many fine Pieces of his to
be seen, His last employment was in the service of the Prince of Orange at the
Hague.

52. Thomas Willeborts Bossaert
Born at Berghen ap Zoom in Brabant An. Dom. 1613. following diligently the
examples of the great Painters, that flourished at that time in the same
Country, he fell a Designing when very young in the Books which were intended
him for other Studies, and preferring his Pencil before all things, he drew his
own Picture, (not having then seen 12 years), by the resemblance in a looking
Glass, so like, that those that saw it were amazed, and this he did before he
had the least Instruction, from any one, which his Parents perceiving, sent him
to a Master that he might enjoy his own Inclination, but because his first
Master was but an indifferent Painter, and no ways meet to satisfy his earnest
thirst after Learning, he lest him and betook himself to Gerard Segars, under
whose better Instruction Art perfected what Nature began, proving a most
accomplished Workman after 4 years practice. Antwerp being a place that was as
it were the Seat of Arts and where was a Conflux of many eminent Painters, he
thought most worthy of his Residence, and the fittest place for him to improve
in; There he made such a number of Magnificent Pieces, that gave new Splendor
to the ancient beauty of that wealthy City. Henry Frederick Prince of Orange,
in the year 1642, and his Son, Prince William employed him, in their Service
for several years, in which time he made those excellent Pieces, which were to
be seen at the said Princes Palace at the Hague, and other parts of Holland. He
Painted most Persons of Quality, that were then living. That great Piece of
his, is most admirable, at the Hague, where he represents Mars the God of War,
on one fide, stirred up, and provoked by the Furies; on the other hand, Peace
and concord striving gently to appease and restrain him, among the Figures is
a naked woman, whose flesh seems, so natural, so soft and lively, that the Hand
is apt to be deceived by the Eye, into an endeavor to feell that which seems
to be real Flesh, The Martyrdom of St George in the great Church is also an
admirable Piece. He died in the Flower of his Age and his loss was much
lamented.

53. Bonaventure Peter's
Was born at Antwerp Anno. Dom. 1614. he had a rare Faculty, in Sea Pieces,
sometimes representing a Calm Sea, full of goodly Ships and Galleys riding,
with Pendants and Streamers displayed as it were in Triumph, sometimes an
outrageous Storm, in which, the surious Winds, and foaming billows seem to
contend with each other for Victory, while some shattered bark or sinking Ship
is the Sacrifice that must appease their wrath. His Sea Fights are also very
natural, where he observes as to his Design, an exact order, and decorum amidst
a seeming confusion of Fire, Smoke, blood, Wrecks and Splinters of Ships, etc.
He Painted also prospects of Towns Castles etc. very fine.

54. Francis Wouters
Born in the year. 1614 was the disciple of Rubens, a good Painter of Figures
in small, chiefly naked, and of Landskips; His Merits promoted him to be
Painter to the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, with whose Ambassador, he
travailed into England where, upon the death of the Emperor his Master, in the
year 1637, he was made Painter to King Charles the Second when Prince of Wales,
and lived a considerable time at London in great esteem.

55. Dauiel Segars,
Brother to Gerard, and born at Antwerp, was a Disciple of John Brugell. He had
not scarce his equal among the Ancients or Moderns, for his artificial Painting
of Flowers, which look as fine and gay as Nature her self produces them in the
Spring; when Flora and Pomona Enamels the Fields and Gardens, his Flowers
excelling those which Nature gives in this, that his Roses wither not, but
always keep their blushing Beauty, his Violets never lose their purple, nor his
Lilleys their snowy white, but have received a sort of Immortality by his Hand:
Having a desire to enter himself into the Society of the Jesuits; he was
admitted into their Convent at Antwerp, and was made a Lay-brother; his
Superiors desiring to make advantage of his Industry, set him to Paint those
Histories of their Society, which are to be seen over the Chairs of Confession
in their Church at Antwerp. At Rome he drew the most remarkable Rarities that
he saw either in the Palaces or Gardens there: His Works are no where to be
found, but in Princes Closets, or amongst the Jesuits. Henry Frederick, Prince
of Orange, was so desirous to have something of his hand, that he sent his
Painter Willeborts on purpose to Antwerp to procure some. Segars, by permission
of his Superiors, made him a Present of an Oval Basin filled with flowers,
upon which he Painted here and there several Butterflies and other little
insects, so curiously, that added much to the beauty thereof; The Prince was so
pleased with it, that he sent the Society ten massy pieces of five gold in form
of Oranges richly enameled, and a Painters Pallet, and several handles for
Pencils all of fine Gold: The Princess of Orange had also presented her the
Picture of an Oval basin full of Flowers mingled with Branches of the Orange
Tree laden with Oranges, with which she was so taken that She sent the Fathers
a Cross of Gold enameled, of above a Pound weight.

56. Peter Snyers
Born at Antwerp 1563. A good Painter of Landskips and battles, both in large
and small: Was employed in the service of the Archduke Albert and Isabella and
several other Princes.

57. James Van Es
An Excellent Painter of Fruit-Pieces, Fish, Birds, and Flowers, which he did
extraordinary well to the Life. He lived for the most part at Antwerp, where he
was born.

58. Adrian de Bie.
A Painter of good esteem in great figures and other Designs: Was born in the
year 1594.

59. Adrian Van Venne,
Born at Delft An. Dom. 1599. Had his Instruction at Leyden under Simon Valck
and Jerome Van Die. His chief Excellency lay in Painting in black and white,
The King of Denmark, and Prince of Orange had his Painting in great esteem, the
latter of whom had several pieces of Hunting done by him: He was also a good
Poet as appears by what he writ of that kind.

60. James Iordans
Born at Antwerp 19 Mar. 1594. Was brought up by Adam Van Oert his father in
Law. An Excellent Painter and Designer, particularly in History, Poetic
Fables, Devotion and the like; He drew several curious things for the King of
Sweden and other Princes.

61. Gaspar de Crayer
Was born at Antwerp in the year. 1585. Received his first Instruction under
Raphael Coxie. The most considerable Abbeys in the Low Countries were adorned
with his Paintings: In the the Abbey of Vicoigne is to be seen a Piece of
fifteen foot high, contained in a Chase of Marble, representing the Passion,
extraordinary fine; in that of St. Denis near Mons, is another setting forth,
the manner of beheading that Saint; at Ostend, St. Peter's Fishing. Brussels
being the ordinary place of his abode he did many curious things there. His
Picture of Prince Ferdinand as big, as the life is reputed, the best of his
Preces, which was sent to the King of Spain, Brother of the said Prince;
besides the applause, that Crayer received for this rare Piece of work, he was
rewarded, with a Gold Chain, and a Medal, with a yearly Salary, during his
life; Archduke ^^^pold, being made Governor of the Low Countries, employed
him in diverse curious designs, about the year 1648. which he performed, to his
entire satisfaction.

62. Balthazar Gerbier
Native of Antwerp Anno. 1592. Was at first Painter to the Duke of Buckingham,
and afterward to King Charles I. who Knighted him, and made him his Agent at
Brussels, in the year (...). And at London Master of the Ceremonies.

63. Leonard Bramer
Born at Delft Anno. Dom. 1596. Lived for some time in Italy, in the Court of
the Prince of Farnese, where he wrought several Pieces in great and small, for
him and Cardinal Schalie. At his return to Delft, he made several Pieces for
his Highness Fred rick Henry then Prince of Orange, Count Maurice of Nassait
and other Princes.

64. Cornelius Poulenbourgh
Was born at Vtrecht, an admirable Painter in little Fi^^^^; Beasts and naked
Boys which he made exactly to the life, was curious in painting Ruins,
Landskips and Prospects of places for distant. In the year 1637. King Charles
the first sent for him into England, where he made several pieces for him and
afterward returned to Vtrecht.

65. Erasmus Quelin,
Born at Antwerp 19. Nov. in the year. 1607. Was the disciple of Rubens; a very
good Philosopher, great designer and Architect, and an excellent Master in
Painting in great and small, and well skilled in Perspective.

66. John Casiers
Born also at Antwerp, in the year. 1603. Brought up under Cornelius de Vos, a
rare Master as appears by his Pieces, which he wrought for several Churches,
for the King of Spain, Prince Ferdinand; the Archduke Leopold, and other
great Princes.

67. David Balii
Received his Birth at Leyden, which place he lived in a considerable time, and
made famous by his Works.

68. Herman Saftleven,
Born at Rotterdam, Anno. 16^9. A very good Landscape Painter: At first he
Painted Boors, both Men and Women, Farm houses etc. But his chief de light was
afterward wholly in Landskips. His usual abode was at Vtrecht.

69. John Van Bronchorst
Born at Vtrecht 1603. He learned first of some Painters upon (...), but they
being but sorry Artists, he reaped no great (...) them, by his great diligence
and observation, he became a skilful Master and good Designer, as his work
manifest.

70. Abraham Van Diepenbeck,
Born at Boisleduc, surpassed all that were his Contemporaties in Painting upon
glass (an Art which we have since lost;) afterward he left that sort of
Painting, to imitate his Master Rubens in other curious Designs.

71. Peter Danckers de Ry
Was born at Amsterdam in the year 1605. Was Painter to Vlad^laus the fourth
King of Poland and Swedeland.

72. Daniel Van Heil
Was horn at Brussels Anno Dom. 1604. A good Painter of Landskips, Cities and
Houses on fire, etc.

73. Cornelius Iansens
An Incomparable Face-Painter and a good Designer in great and small, he lived
sometime at Amsterdam and in England, where he Painted several curious Pieces
for the King and Nobility.

74. James d' Artois
Born in Brussels Anno 1613. Where he spent most part of his life, and Painted
Landskips so rarely, that they were esteemed the most pleasant of that kind in
Flanders.

75. Peter Van Lynt
A very good workman both in great and small Figures, in History as well sacred
as profane: Was employed for seven years in the Service of Cardinal Gevasius
Bishop of Ostie and other Persons of note: Painted both in Oil and in Water
colors. He was born at Antwerp in the year 1609.

76. David Ryckaert,
Born also at Antwerp Anno 1613. A great Master in Countrey-designs as in
Stables, Barnes and such like Edifices which he made in small, these were
esteemed worthy the Closet of the Archduke Leopold and other Princes; He had
an especial Excellency in representing the light of a Candle.

77. Nicholas de Helt Stocade,
Born at Nimeguen 1614. Lived first at Rome and at Venice, thence he travailed
to France, where his Pencil produced such Rarities, that he was made Painter to
the French King.

78. Gonzalo Coques,
Born at Antwerp 1618. Was brought up by David Ryckaert Senior, under whom he
improved so much, that King Charles the first of England, the Duke of
Brandenburgh and Prince of Orange took particular notice of him and employed
him: His Designs are excellent, and his pictures in small admirable.

79. David Teniers, Junior,
Was brought up by his father, a most excellent Painter in small figures, and
Landskips. The King of Spain, Archduke of Austria, Bishop of Ghent, Prince of
Orange, and other Persons of Eminency bought up most of his Works, amongst
which that is mightily commended, which he made whilst he was Painter to the
Archduke Leopoldus, of the rich Miser in the Gospel, whom he represents,
carefully surveying his bags of Gold, and turning over his Deeds and Writings,
his wife as carefully sitting by him, and scrupulously weighing each Piece of
gold that seems suspicious, in both is to be seen the effects of sordid
Covetousness, viz. An anxious care of preserving, without any cheerful
enjoyment of their great abundance, whilst Death unseen to both stands behind,
holding forth an Hourglass, whose Sand is almost quite run out.

80. Robert Van Hoeck.
Born at Antwerp; Was by the King of Spain made Comptroller of the
Fortifications in the Low Countries. An extraordinary Artist he was in small
Figures, his Painting much valued, by many eminent Persons for their rarity.

81. John Baptist Van Heil,
Brother of Daniel Van Heil, a good Painter of pieces of Devotion, Poetical
fictions, and Histories, was born at Antwerp in the year 16^9.

82. John Van Thelen
Born at Malines Anno 1618 a Person by birth noble, a disciple of the famous
Daniel Segars, of whom he learned to be a very good Flower-Painter.

83. Peter Meert.
A Painter of no mean reputation, as several of his Pieces to be seen in the
Churches and Halls belonging to the several Companies at Brussels do
sufficiently testify.

84. John Peter's
Was born at Antwerp in the year 1624 where he continued most part of his life,
Painting Sea Pieces, Calmes, Tempests and Sea Fights, also Towns Castles etc.
Very finely, much after the manner of his brother Bonaventure Peter's.

85. John Vender Hecke
Was a famous Flower-Painter as also of Fruits, Beasts, Birds etc. both great
and small; after he had spent some time in Italy, in the service of the Duke of
Bracciano, he returned to Antwerp, and there ended his days.

86. Luke Franchoys,
Born at Malines, a skilful and renowned Painter in great Designs, and drawing
Persons to the life.

87. Charles Van Savoyen,
Born at Antwerp, lived for the most partin Holland; an extraordinary Artist in
small, especially naked Figures, which were much valued: This Head is of his
own Etching.

88. Peter Van Bredal,
Was born at Antwerp Anno Dom. 1630. His Paintings are generally very pleasant
and sine.

89. Henry Vanderhorcht,
Born at Frankendale in the Palatinate, from whence he removed to Franckfort in
the year 1636. The Earl of Arundel passing that way in his Embaisy to the
Emperor, took him with him, and employed him in Italy in collecting what
rarities could be there procured, and afterward brought him to England, where
he continued in his service till the death of the said Earl; after whose
decease he was preferred into the Service of King Charles the second then
Prince of Wales

90 John Myssens
Born at Brussels 17 May 1612. His usual residence was at Antwerp, where,
besides many things which he Painted to the life with singular Judgment, he
traded much in making and selling Prints, in the knowledge whereof he was very
skilful; To all which as you see in many of the heads of this book, he usually
put his name in this manner, Jo. Meyssens excudit.

91. George Van Son,
An Excellent Painter of Fruit and Flowers at Antwerp, where he was born Anno.
Dom. 1622.

92. John Baptist Van Deynum
Born at Antwerp, in the year 1620. His excellency lay most in painting small
Figures to the life in Watercolors. He was honored by the place of his
birth, with the command of a Company of their trained-bands in quality of a
Captain.

93. John Van Keyssel,
Born at Antwerp 1626. a curious Painter of Flowers, and little Insects, etc.
which are much esteemed.

94. Henry Berckmans
Born at Clunder near Willemstadt. Was the disciple of Wouverman the famous
Battle-Painter at Harlem, and of Thomas Willeborts, and James Jordaens at
Antwerp; His Pieces are much valued, especially his Faces by the life: He lived
at Middleburgh in Zealand.

95. Simon Voilet
Was born at Paris, Jan. 8. 1586. He began to be taken notice of, before he was
well fourteen years of age, and travailed when very young to Turkey, at the
instance of the Baron de Sancy Ambassador of France to the Ottoman Port, the
said Ambassador taking him in his retinue to draw the Grand Seignor's Picture,
and the most considerable places about Constantinople; but Voilet at his
arrival, finding the difficulty of performing his Design, by reason of the
Turkish Laws, was forced to take a quite different method, from the usual
practice, and to imprint in his mind by the force of Imagination the Sultans
visage, such as he observed it to be, in his attending the Ambassador at his
audience, and at other times; which he did with so much Accuracy, that his
Draught of it afterward when retired to his Chamber, according to those Ideas
he had before conceived, appeared to resemble the Original as exactly to the
life, as if the Sultan had sat on purpose for it: This was looked upon to be so
extraordinary an effect of Ingenuity, that he was richly rewarded for it, and
was so generally esteemed and applauded by men of Judgment, that diverse Copies
were made of it by several excellent hands. After this he went to Rome, where
he married Virginie Vezzo Vellatrano a Lady of extraordinary beauty, and
skilful in Painting, as appears by many excellent Prints, that are to be seen
after her Designs. During his abode there, he was in good esteem with Pope
Urban the 8th, and the Cardinal his Nephew. At length, at the command of Lewis
the 13th. his natural Prince, he forsook Rome, and the glories thereof, and
returned to France in the year 1628, having left behind him several Monuments
of his Pencil, which were held in equal reputation with some of the best in
Italy, and placed as a Testimony thereof, in the Church of St. Peter's at Rome,
where nothing that is common is suffered to come: His first Employment in his
native Country was at the Palace of Luxembourgh, which he adorned with many
curious Designs. He Painted several fine things for the Louvre, and for the
Galleries and Chapel of Cardinal Richlieu's Palace, and also in his Castle of
Ruell; for the Marshall d' Effiats fine House at Chilly, for the Queens Baths,
and at St. Germains: The King himself was so delighted with the charming
Beauties and Ornaments of his Painting, that he would needs learn of him to
handle the Pencil, and often employed his Royal Hand in Drawing of Pictures,
which he bestowed among his Favorites after he had taken the Pleasure of doing
them, The King of England had so great a fancy for him, that he endeavored by
many Solicitations to get him into his Service, but could not prevail; yet
Vouet sent him some of his Pieces, as an acknowledgment of his respect and
vencration for so great a Prince. He died at the age of 59 years, to the great
grief of a multitude of his Disciples, who in imitation of him have raised
Painting to as great a pitch, and made it as renowned in France, as in any
other part of Europe.

96. Peter Testa,
A famous Roman Painter, excellent in his Designs, especially his Bacchanals,
was unfortunately drowned in the Tyber; whether by accident, or, as some say,
that being Melancholy he three himself in, is uncertain.

97. Peter Breugell
A great Painter of Bows, etc. for his extraordinary humor in representing
several Scenes of Hell, the Fables of Tantalus, Prometheus, Ixi^n, St.
Anthonies Temptation, and the like, was Sir-named the Hellish Brugell.

98. Cornelius le Brun.
Chief Painter in Ordinary to the present French King Lewis XIV. Rector and
Chancellor to the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture in France: His way of
Painting is generally very pleasant, his Designs great and noble. Amongst the
many glorious Ornaments of his Pencil with which France is at this day
enriched; Constantines Triumph over Maxentius; The Stoning of St. Stephen; The
Slaughter of the Innocents and the Battle betwixt Darius and Alexander, with
Alexanders Triumph, in several Pieces, are most considerable; but above all,
that of Alexanders going to Darius his Tent, seems to challenge the precedence,
in which is an example on the one side, of the Instability of Fortune, in the
Mother, Wise, Sister and Daughters of Darius, who from the height of happiness
and honor, saw themselves in one days time reduced to the extremity of Misery,
expecting nothing but Death, or what was worse, Captivity and Slavery; on the
other side, of the great Clemency and Moderation of Alexander toward these
unfortunate Princesses; the Conqueror, at his first entrance into the Tent,
seems to be stopped both by Syfigambis the Mother of Datius, who throws her self
at his Feet, and by a Melancholy Scene, that presents it self to his view, of
several dazzling Objects that seem in various postures to expect their Sentence;
in each Face appears so much Majesty and exquisite Beauty, mingled with an
intense Sorrow, so lively, and with such variety expressed, that it is hard to
discern which is greatest; and he must be very insensible, that can forbear
being moved by the one, or charmed with the other. Alexander seems at first
sight to have laid aside all the roughness of a Soldier, and by the gentleness
of his behavior, and the mildness of his looks, as it were, to promise not
only security to their Persons, but all the respect that could be due to their
high Birth and Quality; so that from henceforth the Vanquished may be said to
be the Victors. In short, this rare Artist seems to have screwed up his Fancy
to the highest pitch, to express a vast variety of Ornaments in one Groupe of
Figures: The Drapery is all over magnificent and rich, suitable to the Persian
Grandeur, and the Luxury that then reigned amongst them; the Colors strong,
the Lights large and great upon the foremost Figures, and then by little and
little falling softer and decreasing under the Tent, which at the end causes a
dark ground, and altogether gives a fine harmony, and an amiable Grace and
Luster to the whole, which appears round as Corregio, elegant as Raphael, and
soft as Vandyke used to do.

99. Cornelius Danckers de Ry.
From Painters our Book now leads us to other Artists, no less renowned in
their several Arts. He was born at Amsterdam in the year 1561. For full forty
years continued Master-Mason and Architect of that famous City, succeeding his
Father Cornelius in that Employ; during which time he finished a great many
noble and superb Edifices, to the great Improvement and enlargement of that
City: He built the New Port at Harlem, the three New Churches there, the
Exchange for Merchants and innumerable other Ornaments to the said place: By
great study and experience he invented a way to build Stone-Bridges upon great
Rivers, without stopping or diverting the Current of the Stream, a proof
whereof he made upon the River of Amsterdam, in the year 1632. by a Bridge 200
Feet in length, and standing upon 7 Arches. He died Anno. Dom. 1634, aged 73
years.

100 Cornelius Cort
both in Holland, in the year 1536. an admirable Master in the art of Graving,
which tho it be the same with Painting, as to us Design, yet differs very much
from it in the Practice; for the one is performed by the gentle touches and
pliableness of the Pencil, the other by the sharpness of the Steel and a steady
hand; Painting has its perfection in the natural application of the Colors to
the body they should represent, the other only in describing its Contours,
Relievos, Lights and Shadows, and though it be reduced only to ^lack and white,
or rather as Artist call it, to Clair-obsture; yet it represents the
Superficies of bodies their Form and Roundness, with no less beauty, force and
elegance, then the best of Pictures. He made Italy for along time, the place of
his residence where he graved the Designs of Raphael Vrbin, Titian and others.
He died at Rome. Anno. Dom, 1578.

101. Theodore Corenhert
Was also an excellent Engraver after the Designs of Martin Hemskirk and
others. Was born at Amtterdam, in the year 1522. Was also a good Poet: He died
Anno. Dom. 1590.

102 Henry de Keyser,
Born at Vtrecht in the year 1565. Was Architect of Amsterdam, and one of the
best Carvers in Holland, of which that Magnificent Tomb of the Vrince of Orange
at Delft and the Town Hall, of Amsterdam are sufficient Iustances. He died in
Amsterdam. 15. May 1621.

103. John Sadeler
Was born a Brussells in the year 1550. attained to a great excellency in
Graving, by his own mere Industry without any to instruct or direct him. His
performance is with much Sweetness and subtilty, as appears by what he has done
for Martin de Vos and others. In the year 1588, he went to Franck fort and
after he had spent some time there, he removto Munichen where the Duke of
Bavaria honored him with a Gold Chain and a Medal. In the year 1595, he went
to Venice where he died of a fever Anno Dom. 1600.

104. Ralph Sadeler.
Brother of John. Born also at Brussells Anno Dom. 1555. a very fine Graver as
may be seen in his Works, particularly in the Jesuit Raderus his lives of the
Bavarian Saints, a book chiefly remarkable for its enrious Cutts; also the Book
of Hermits, which he and his brother John together graved. He sometimes painted
also as well as graved. He accompanied his brother John in his travels to
Munichen, and to Venice in which place he also died.

105. James Matham
Son in law to the famous Henry Golizius, of whom he learnt to Grave, and
attained to great perfection in that art. Was boru at Harlem 15. October 1571.
and died 20. January 1631.

106. James Francquart.
A person of an indefatigable Spirit, so thirsty of Honor that he applied
himself with incredible diligence to Painting, Architecture, Geometry and
Poetry all at one time. After he had satisfied his curiosity in viewing the
rarities of Rome, he was chosen Architect to the Archduke Albert and the
Infanta Isabella, In which Employ, he continued till the death of the said
Arch-Dake; after whose decease he employed the utmost secrets of his art and
skill in erecting to his Memory that stately Maus^leum which is to be seen in
the Church of St Gudule in Brussels, a work so noble, and magnificent that it
was thought worthy to be the subject of a Book, containing a description
thereof, and the Pomp of his Funeral Solempnity, in Copper Cuts. He was
likewise Architect and Ingenier for the Town of Brussels: The form of that
magnificent Church of the Jesuits which stands there, and is reputed one of the
best contrived in the Low-Countres, is of his Design and ordering. Being a man
of no less subtilty in Contrivance and Invention then he was industriou, she
invented a little steel Engine, which with the noise it would make by the
motion of certain Springs at a determinate time, should wake him at what hour
of the night soever, he intended to rise, being set for it accordingly; and at
the same time would light his Candle, by means of a little Match dipped in
brimstone, which took fire at the striking of the Machine: After he had lived
long time at Brussels in much Splendor and Reputation, he died to the great
grief of all true Lovers of art in the Low Countries.

107. Giles Sadeler.
Nephew to John and Raphael was the best Engraver of them all, though they are
not without their due praise, insomuch that he was esteemed worthy to be
Eugraver to three of the German Emperors successively, to wit, Rodolphus,
Matthias, and Ferdinand the Second, and was not only an incomparable Graver,
but a very good Painter, oftentimes Designing and drawing to the life with his
Pencil, several things which he afterward engraved. He lived at Prague in
Bohemia, and there died, Anno Dom. 1629.

108. Henry Hondius,
A good Engraver and Defigner, born at Duffell in Brabant in the year 1573. He
was by extract Noble: Having an inclination to this art, he set himself to
follow the Iustructions of John Wterx, He studied likewise the Mathematics,
Geography, Perspective, Architecture and Fortification under the directions of
the samous Samuel Marelois and others, in all which he attained to good
experience, as appears by his Prints, He lived usually at the Hague.

109. Peterd Iode, Senior
Was born at Antwerp, and brought up by Goltzius; a rate Engraver and excellent
Designer; dwelt for a long time at Rome, where he made several curious Designs.
In the year 1601, he returned to Antwerp his native place where he died 9.
August 1634.

110. Paul Pontius
Was born at Antwerp in the year 1603. Was first brought up by Luke Vosterman,
after which he lived with Rubens. Was an admirable Artist as appears by many of
Rubens his Designs, Vandyke's Heads, and other curious Prints engraven by him.

111. Luke Faydherbe
Was a famous Statuary and Architect, brought up by Rubens, under whose
Instruction, none ever came but proved excellent, in some Art or other. He was
born at Malines, where hsi abode for the most part was.

112. Peter d' Iode, Junior.
Born 22. November 1606. at Antwerp, where he lived under his Fathers
instruction, proved a very delicate Graver; at Paris he and his father together
engraved some choice Pieces for Monsieur Bon-Enfant and the Sieur L' Imago.
Many fine Prints are to be seen of his doing after Rubens, Vandyke and others.

113. James Callot
Was a Gentleman of good esteem in Lorrain, born at Nancy in the year 1594. His
father was Herald at Arms to the Duke of Lorraine. In his youth he learned to
Grave of one Croce, who made the stamps, by which the money of that Country
was coined, after which he sojourned for some time with a Painter of Lorraine
of sufficient ability; who taught him to design well; by whose Instructions
having attained a competent skill and Judgment, he travailed, in Company of
some Gentlemen of Holland, to Italy, and dwelt a considerable time at Rome;
there he applied himself to Etching, finding that more easy to him, and his
performance in it freer then Graving; Which he did with so much application and
industry, that his works were finished to a Miracle, and became the admiration
of all, that had eyes to penetrate into the delicacy and beauty of them: The
Duke of Tuscany one of the most curious and magnificent Princes, at that time
in Europe, sent for him to Florence, and lodged him in his Palace, near his own
Apartment, that he might have the satisfaction of seeing those delightful
Curiosities, he was continually at work upon. Here it was, that he Graved, The
great Market place at Florence, with so much art and skill that it is not easy
to give it it is due commendation: His Miseries of War, The History of our
Saviors passion, The Temptation of St Anthony, with a multitude of others,
show that he was the Miracle of an Artist for Miniature, and had not his fellow
in this kind: He was afterward sent for home, by the Duke of Lorraine, where
he married a Lady of great beauty, rich, and young, with whom he lived the
residue of his life in much content and satisfaction. He died much lamented at
Nancy 23. Mark 1635. Aged 41. Years, and was buried in the Cordeliers Church,
where his loving Consort caused a sumptuous Marble Tomb to be erected to his
memory, with his Effigy and Coat of arms viz. Five golden stars in a field
azure.

114. Leo Van Heil,
A famous Architect at Brussels, where he was born, Anno. Dom. 1605.

115. Peter Verbrugghen
Was renowned for his rare faculty in Carving all manner of figures in Stone:
He lived at Antwerp the place of his birth.

116. Simon Bosboom,
Born at Emden, in the year 1614. a very good Architect and Mason in the
service of the Elector of Brandenburgh.

117. Wencestaus Hollar,
Born at Prague in Bohemia, 1607. Was much addicted to working in Miniature and
Erching, wherein he proved famous. The Earl of Arundell in his return from
Vienna, brought him with him to England, where he lived for some time till the
Wars broke out, and then he retired to Antwerp, and there died.

118. Aertus, Quilinus
Born at St. Trude in the Country of Liege; An Excellent Architect and Carver
in Stone, Wood etc. lived at Antwerp.

119. Stephen de la Belle.
Native of Florence in the year 1614 a very good Painter in Watercolors, and
of rare performance in Etching: Was a person, of great Judgment, and fruitful
Invention. Had the happiness to be brought up by the incomparable Callot. His
Prints are to be seen in great abundance.

120. Dirick Corenhert.
Brother of Theodore by are as well as nature. Both living for along time
together, and performing Designs of like nature

121. Richard Clolin.
Born in the year 1627. A good Geographer, Mathematicion and Graver. His chief
business consisted in making and graving Maps and Geographical Tables.

For the further satisfaction of the Curious in this Noble Art of Painting, it
is thought not improper to subjoin the Character of some Italians and others,
whose names no less deserve to be enrolled in the Book of Fame. And because
their extraordinary merits challenge an account something larger then ordinary,
it is therefore our Design to select only some few of the most eminent amonst
them, lest these sheets should swell to too big a Bulk, or the Reader be tired
with too great Abundance.
I. Masaccio,
BORN in Tuscany: Was the first that gave a sort of action to his Figures,
inspiring a certain Air of life never before seen in Painting, taking thence
all that stiffness which made them formerly look as if they represented
lifeless Statues, rather then living substances. He had also a peculiar
excellency in Drapery, retrenching all that confusion which used to render it
cumbersome and useless. He Painted many fine things both at Florence and at
Rome, of all which the most remarkable was a Piece of St. Peter's baptizing
several Persons in a River naked, amonst which there is one which appears so
prettily and so naturally, as it were, to quiver with cold, that one would
think he saw plainly the shaking of the members and the shivering of the skin:
And indeed such a marvelous elegance and dexterity attended all he did, that
his Example served as a sput to the Industry of Michael Angelo, and Raphael
Vrbin, and kindled that glorious heat in them, that gave life to their
incomparable Works. But that which was most to be admired was that he
performed so many famous things in the compass of a very short life, dying
before he was well 26 years of age. This flower being unhappily nipt in the bud
and basely poisoned by a malicious Villain.

II. Ant^nio de Corregio.
Born in a little Village of Lombardy; A Painter of great diligence and
indefatigableness, who having not seen the beauties of Rome or Florence, yet
made the Roman Majesty appear in his pictures and that force that used to be
seen in those that came out of those flourishing Schools, neglecting nothing
that would add a grace and luster to his Works: In the Capuchins Church at
Parma was the Annunciation Painted upon the Wall in Fresco, so rich a Piece
that when the said Church was to be re-edified, they took care with incredible
pains and cost to remove the whole Wall entire, lest they should lose or deface
so rich an Ornament; There is a Nativity of his most incomparable fine, where
the Body of our Savior appears all resplendent with light, with which the
Shepherds seem to have their Eyes dazzled, covering their faces with their hands
in a decent manner, as not being able to endure the brightness of those Rays. A
Chorus of Angels appear hovering about them in the air, and seeming to
celebrate this glorious Birth with a harmony that one would think nothing less
then the hand of an Angel could represent it so artificially. Julio Romano used
to say of some of his Pieces, that he could not have thought art could have
gone so far. Besides the delicateness of his Coloring, he gave such a
roundness to the Members, and such a delicacy and art in the hairs, that the
most accomplished pens were at a loss to describe the elegance of his Pencil
and the ravishing tenderness of his Nudities; such is his Venus drawn in a
pleasant Landscape, accompanied with Cupids, who are whetting a couple of Arrows
on a stone, one headed with Gold, the other with lead, hard by is a fountain,
pleasantly Spouting forth Water, which washes the feet of the Goddess, and
causes her to seem so really to shiver, that one connot behold it, and be
altogether unconcerned; This rare person having one day overheated himself in a
Journey and drinking cold water by the way fell sick of a fever and died, in
the year 1512 being but 40 years of age. Upon which one made the following
Verses, which for their elegance ought not to be forgotten.

Hujus cum regeret mortales Spiritus artus
Pictoris, Charites supplicuere Jovi:
Non alia pingi dextra, Pater alme, rogamus
Hunc praeter, nulli pingere nos liceat:
Annuit his vot is summi Regnator Olympi
Et Juvenem subito, sydera ad alta tulit,
Vt posset melius Charitum simulachra refer
Praesens, et nudas cerneret inde Deas.
III. Raphael Vrbin,
Surnamed so from the place of his birth, which was on Good Friday Anno Dom.
1480 A person of so sweet a disposition and of so great beauty both of mind and
body, that from his Infancy to his death he was tenderly beloved by all that
knew him; Having heard of the great fame and emulation that was between Michael
Angelo and Leonard de Vinci he travailed to Florence, where the Examples of
those great Spirits so awak^ned his Industry, that he resolved to do his utmost
to equal their Renown, if it were not possible for him to exceed it: At
Florence he met with all that he could desire, to satisfy his generous thirst
of Glory, and with extreme diligence copied all that he could find there worth
his Curiofity and labor, Adding thereto some Inventions of his own; At length
believing Rome to be the firtest Theater for him to discover his Excellency in,
he offered his service to the Pope, by the recommendation of Bramante his near
relation and the Popes Architect. The Pope when he saw the charms of his
Pencill was ravished with the sight, preferring him before all others, and
indeed nothing was ever seen to equal what he has done nigh the Belveder,
where he represents Mount Parnassus and the Quire of Muses in such a manner as
has given astonishment to the ablest Painters: The Fountain of Helicon is
environed with a Wood of Laurel, the leaves whereof seem to move as being
agitated by the blowing of the gentle Zephyrs, in the Air are many winged
Cupids flying to and fro, and gathering the Branches of the sacred Wood, to
compose thereof Garlands for the Muses and the Poets, who appear sitting
beneath at the feet of the sacred Sisters, singing such divine songs as were
inspired by them, There is Virgill, Ovid, Ennius, Tibullus, Catullus,
Propertius, and blind Homer amongst the Ancients, Sappho, Dantes, Petrarch,
Boccace with several others among the Modern, whom one can hardly believe but
are all a live they appear so natural. There is a delicious Landscape adjoining
adjoining which so pleasantly deceives the sight by its ingenious variely and
its distances, that it seems sufficient to invite the beholders to take a turn
in those Enameled Meadows and to seek the Pleasure of those shady Groves that
present themselves to view, with so many charming excellencies and Delights.
And it may be truly said of him, that he has heaped together in his Works,
all that he could conceive to be sublime, and all those accomplishments the
hand is capable of performing. Whilst the Divine Raphael (as he is usually
called) displayed here the Treasures of his Art. Michael Angelo was at work on
the other side of the Popes Chapel, where he kept himself so reserved, that
the Pope himself could scarce get admittance to see his Work, yet Raphael,
found an opportunity by the means of Bramante to make his observations of it;
which when he saw, he much admired at the strength and boldness of his Strokes,
in which he strove to imitate him, so that there arose no small emulation
between these two famous Rivals, yet their way of Painting was very different,
for Raphael fearing he could not be able to equal Michael Angelo in the
strength of his Musculous Nudities, set himself to excel him in the design,
and ordering of his Histories, in the loftness of his Subject, the amiable
sweetness of his Figures, and the beauty of his Faces, and also in a lively
expression of the Passions of the Soul in all which he not only surpassed his
great Competitor, but all that came after him It Is reported there is a Piece of
his, which he made for the people of Palerma, of Christ bearing his Cross,
which was shipwrackt in the Vo^age, and afterward recovered unhurt out of the
Water, and being sent to Palerma, was by the people of that place carried to
Mount Olivet, where it is said to remain to this day, and is more adm^red by
Strangers that pass that way, then the slaming Vesuvius or any other the
singularities of that Country: There are also some curious Pieces in Cartons
now in England, that were designed for Tapistryes, which are by the command of
their present Majesty's King Widia^n and Queen Mary lately set up in
Hampton Court, representing the History of Ananias and Saphira, St. Peter's
walking to our Savior upon the Water, St. Paul's entertainment by the
Inhabitants of Melita after his shipwreck, and other Scripture Histories, by
the hand of this excellent person. Neither must his School of the Philosophers
be forgotten: In which is contained a description of the several sorts of
learned men and Philosophers in the World, disputing with each other; in one
place are the Astrologers making figures and schemes which they send by the
Angel, to the Evangelists to be explained; amongst the rest is Diogenes with
his Cup, which Figure is most excellent, Plato with his Timaeus, and Aristotle
with his Book of Ethics; it is not to be expressed how earnestly and intently
the Astrologers and Geometricians are, severally handling the Instruments of
their particular Sciences, amonst them is a beautiful young man, who seems with
his Arms extended and other Gestures to express his admiration, by this is
meant Frederick the second Duke of Mantua, who was at Rome when Raphael painted
i^ there is also Bramante the Popes Arc^itect, drawing lines upon the ground
with Mathematical Instruments, Zoroaster with a Globe in his hand, and last of
all Raphael himself who appears with a modest look; in every Figure there
appears so much life and Spirit that makes it incomparable. To conclude, He was
a person of a Noble and generous Soul, amiable in his Conversation, delighting
naturally in doing good, well versed in History both sacred and profane, of
which he made good use in all his Works; He died young in the 37th year of his
age, on a Good Friday, the day he was born on.

Hic ille est RAPHAEL, timuit quo s^spite vinci
Rerum summa Parens, and moriente mori.
IV. Andrea del Sarto.
Was one of the most eminent Painters of Florence, which he attained to be
rather by his earnest application to business, and the vivacity of his Spirit,
then by the Instructions of his Master: Having attained to a good sufficiency
in the Art, he was employed by Pope Leo the 10th to Paint the Triumphs of
Julius Caesar, in his Palace of Pogio, together with two other Painters, who
not being able to come near his elegancy, were forced to desist from the
design, and to leave the whole glory thereof to him alone: He was extraordinary
good at Invention as is manifest in those Pieces which contain the story of St.
Philips life where he drew arnonst other things, certain Gamesters under a
Tree, who for their swearing and blaspheming, being reproved by St. Philip,
instead of reforming derided his Admonitions, when on a sudden two of them are
killed by a Thunderclap and the rest terribly frighted, and that the dreadful
effects of this sin might appear more amazing, with wonderful art, he drew a
woman, running out of her House, at the noise of the Thunder, as if she were
frighted out of her wits, also there is a Horse broke loose at the same Noise,
who leaping and bounding in an extraordinary man ner expresses the disorder of
the whole, very naturally and strong: likewise in the story of St. John
Baptists life, where he represents him preaching in the Wilderness to the
Multitude, and shows in the burnt hew of his person the austerity of his life,
and particularly the air of his countenance is full of Spirit and Zeal, the
Auditors appear with great attention (which is variously expressed in several
looks and gestures) as astonished at his Doctrine, and when, he comes to bap^ze
them, it is ^^atvellous to see what have some are making to strip themselves,
others appear already in the Water, but all discovering their earnest desire of
being cleansed from their sins. He is much esteemed by the Italians to this
day, for his rare Pieces which the Florentines preserve with much care and
respect, and this they have shown upon all occasions, even in the midst of the
sury and insolence of the several Factions that took their turns there; for
when they carried fire and desolation through the Suburbs of the City, they
took care to preserve those Pieces of his hand, which were in the Monastery of
St. Salvi, even when they spared not the Churches, nor the Cloisters
themselves: Frederick Duke of Mantoua had a Copy, by his hand, of Pope ^eo the
10ths Picture done by Raphael which was in the Palace of the Medicis in
Florence, and this Copy was the more esteemed, because it was taken for the
Original, Julio Romano seeing it in this Princes Closet, could not forbear
saying, That it was one of Raphaels Masterpieces; and this his mistake was not
rectified until Vasa^i showed him the name of the Copier on the reverse of the
Picture: One of his most accomplished and best Fieces is Abraham's offering up
Isaac, which he did for the King of France: but it happened not to come into
his hands, being otherwise disposed of into the Island of Sicilia, hard by
Naples: During the fiege of Florence some Commanders that were in the city,
having run away with the public money; order was given, to have them exposed,
by being ^ainted upon the Front of the Palace of the ^odesta: and Andrea was
defired to do it; He excused himself in public, and gave the doing thereof to
one of his disciples, but notwithstanding privately went every day in at a Hole
made in the Wall, and came out again by night, so that the work was by him so
finished, that the Persons might be known by every one, and seemed to be alive.
But afterward, the Government ordered them to be wip^d out, having received
satisfaction for the offense: He died of the Plague at Florence, aged 42. years:

V. Leonard de Vinci.
So many and great were the advantages that this famous person received at his
birth, both of mind and body, that he may be looked upon as a Miracle of nature;
for besides au extraordinary beauty of body, and so wonderful a strength that
hewas able with his hands to snap in sunder an Horse shoe, or a Fire-fork, he
was ^ndued with so sharp a Wit, and so subtle and piercing an understanding
that he no sooner applihimself to the study of good Letters, but he became in a
short time very skilful in the Mathematics, Geometry, Music, Painting; Music
first charmed his soul with its divine Harmony, and having naturally a sweet
voice, he often took delight to join it to the sound of his Violin which he
touched with that dexterity, that made his Music to ravish the ears of those
that heard it; but Painting was the Mistress he most adored, for which reason
his father in his youth put him forth to Andrea del Verochio a famous
Florentine Painter, who was a^^onished at his bold beginnings, Verrochio having
begun a piece of the Baptism of St. John, ordered Leonard to paint an Angel
holding up a Curtain in one part thereof, which he performed with such
perfection, that it far surpassed his Masters work, who for vexation to be
excelled by his disciple, thence forth abandoned the Pencil. When he was weary
of Painting, he used to busy himself, in finding out ways how to level
Mountains or make passages through them from one Valley to another, as also by
Machines of his inventing to raise prodigious Weights, draine marshes and such
like projections of his working Brain. One day his father being returned from
his Country house was desired by a friend of his to get him a Target painted
by his Son: whereupon remembering what ^e had read of the Gorgons head and
Medusa's shield, he got together a Collection of Serpents, Lizards, and such
like Animals, from all which put together he made up the figure of an Horrid
Monster whose head, instead of Hairs, was full of Serpents, hizzing out of a
dark Cavern with their poisonous breath, and sending forth fire and smoke out
of its mouth in such a frightful manner that nothing could be more terrible,
His father coming into his Chamber to see what he had made upon the Buckler,
was so frighted when he saw the Piece which Leonard had placed on purpose in an
obscure light, that he recoiled back and could not be induced to enter into the
room till Leonard told him it was only the Piece he came for, which his father
wondering at, caused another to be made to conten: his friend, and sold it for
300 Ducats to the Duke of Milan. After this the said Duke sent for him, to
Milan, where he Painted for the Dominicans there, that admirable Piece of our
Saviors last Supper, in which the Countenances of all the Apostles are
wonderfully expressed, but especially the two James's in whom there appears so
much Majesty and Grace, that endeavyouring afterward to express our Saviors,
he was forced to leave it unfinished, for having a long time pondered upon this
glorious Subject, he thought his Art was insufficient as not having force or
elegance enough to represent the ravishing beauties of that divine Face: The
Apostles in different expressions of their concern and passion seem very
inquisitive and doubtful who might be the Traitor: And designing to represent
Judas with the most lively image of the Treason he plotted in his Heart, he
took a great deal of time to consider by what Strokes he might represent this
Apostate black enough. The Prior of the Convent being vexed at this delay, and
thinking he neglected it when he saw him sometimes half a day doing nothing but
looking upon his Work, that he complained thereof to the Duke, who asking Vinci
the reason of it, He replied, that a Painter ought to consider diligently in
his mind what is agreeable to his purpose, before his Pencill goes to work, that
he wanted but two Countenances to finish, to wit, out Saviors and Judas's, for
our Saviors he had in vain attempted with the utmost of his skill to represent
with that Majesty and worth it ought, the adorable countenance of one who was
both God and man, but that he believed hehad now found a means to give Judas
his true resemblance, and that he thought the surly and malicious look of the
Prior would serve him as a fit pattern for that subject: and indeed represented
some of the features of this ignorant Priest therein, to his great discontent;
The whole work is a Masterpiece of incredible diligence, insomuch that the very
Cloth of the Table is done with so much exactness that Linen it self, shows
not better or finer. He had a marvailous dexterity in drawing persons and
humors by the life from those Ideas he conceived of them upon a transient view,
an example whereof he gave, in the merry postures of certain Clownes which he
had a mind to describe with their ridiculous gestures, for this purpose, he
invited several Rusticks to a splendid Feast, and having made himself and them
merry with the jaice of the Grape, he uttered several Comieal Fancies amongst
them, making them laugh heartily at his facetious Jests, In the mean time he
diligently observed all their gestures and deportment, and what it was that
wrought such Impressions in their mind, and withdrawing to his Chamber, he
painted them in their several humors with so much life and reality that it
occasioned no less mirth to behold their several Grimaces then those Jests did,
that caused them at the banquet. He was well skilled in Anatomy and wrote a
Book upon that Subject, and also another of the Art of Painting which was
Printed in Italian in the year 1650 and since translated into French, wherein
he shows the way to perfection in this Art. He studied likewise Astronomy. When
Francis the first entered in triumph into Milan, Leonard contrived for the
diversion of this Prince a certain Lion cur in Wood, which by certain Springs
within, stalked along in great state for many paces in a great Hall, and at
length stood still before the King, when of a sudden opening its breast,
discovered it full of Flower de Lys's. Amongst the many Faces which he painted
to the life, is one of a Lady of incomparable beauty, which he took so much
pains in, that he spent four Months about it; and lest the Lady should be tired
by such tedious sittings, or by Melancholy, obscure or cloud that brightness
that shone through her sprightly looks, he got Music and Drolls to divert her
all the while, to keep her in constant cheerfulness. This was so rarely,
finished with such an Air of Joy and pleasantness, and the Minutest things so
exactly represented, that it yielded great delight to all that saw it. Francis
the first King of France gave 4000 Crowns for it and placed it at
Fountainbleau, where it still remains: And the rarity of it was so admired,
that the Senate of Florence having built a stately Hall in the public Palace,
made an Order to have it painted by Leonard, who being glad of this occasion to
show, he was no less an Artist then Michael Angelo, in great Des^gns, set about
it, having with much Ingenuity prepared a Machine that instead of a scaffold
carried him up and down in an instant at pleasure, The Subject was, a Battle of
Nicholas Piccinino one of the Duke of Milan's Commanders, never was there seen
such a representation of fury, disorder, and terror as appears there. Among
others, there are some Gentlemen contending for a Standard, where the
furiousness in attacquing and the obstinacy in defending it, is most livelily
and curiously represented; in the thickest of the Conflict appears a couple of
Horses raised upwards on an end, striking with their forelegs, and seeming to
bite each other with that fury as if they were alive, under neath the Horses
feet are two Figures short'ned, lying one upon another; the one with his Arms
raised on high, doing his utmost to strike the other to the Heart with his
Dagger; and the other struggling with his Arms and Legs as earnestly to avoid
it; every where about it is an ingenious variety of Helmets, Breast plates, and
other Arms, and Attirals of War, very agreeable. After this he travailed to
France, where he was received by the King with great kindness: A little after
his arrival, he fell sick of his last sickness, when being visited by the King
he had the honor to expire in the Arms of that great Monarch, as he was
raising himself to receive him with due respect; the King finding him dying,
could not forbear to embrace him in his last Agony, with the utmost affection
and grief imaginable for so great a loss: He died in the 65th year of his age.

VI. Francis Mazzuoli
Was Born at Parma; in his Infancy he lost both his Father and Mother, but was
taken care of by two Uncles, who loved him tenderly, and spared for nothing in
his Education; He seemed from his Cradle to be inclined to this Art, and to be
born for a Pencil; He was no sooner put to School, but instead of minding his
lesson, would be filling papers with diverse figures, which even then he made
exceeding well proportioned; whereupon his Relations seeing something
extraordinary in this his Inc^ination, resolved not to be wanting to such
hopeful begsunings, and therefore put him forth to be instructed by some of the
best Painters thereabouts, so that Mazzuoli, at the age of 16, made such
delicate Pictures, that it was matter of admiration to see so much Perfection
and Elegance in the Work of so young an hand; Hearing the great same of
Raphael, and Michael Angel^, he desired leave of his Uncles to Travel to Rome,
to see their Works. When he was there, that he might manifest to that Academy,
that, it did not possess all the Glory of the Pencil, and the better to please
their delicate Palate, he painted a Madona, with the Child Jesus picking
Flowers out of an Angels Bosom, with utmost care; and that he might yet merit
their further applause, by some furprizing novelty, he drew upon a Piece of
Wood, embossed in Mezzo-Relievo, his own picture, together with the Chamber he
was in, and all its furniture as they appeared to him by the reflection of a
Looking-glass which was of the same bigness with his Wood, and then covered the
whole with a dark sort of color, yet something shining, that represented so
exactly the transparency of a Looking-glass, and the sight was so ingeniously
deceived by it, that one could not presently discern but it was a real
Looking-glass: He made for Pope Clement the Seventh a Piece of the
Circumcision, in which he introduces a threefold different light, with
marvailous subtlety, one comes from the luminous body of the Child Jesus, the
other from certain Torches that lighten the Steps, the third from a Wide
opening where the sight has room to expatiate it selt in a large Perspective.
This industrious persons was so earnest and intent upon his Work, that when
Charles Duke of Bourbon took Rome by Storm, he was insensible of the Town's
disaster, until he saw himself surrounded with the enemies Soldiers in the
Chamber he was painting in, and which was strange, these persons enured to
blood and rapine, were so mollifyed with the delicate Charms of his Art, that
instead of offering violence to him, they promised to protect him, and were as
good as their Word, keeping him secure during all the time of the disorder and
the sacking of the Town. Much after the same manner it is reported to have
happened to Protogenes, When Demetrius laid siege to Rhodes, he continued all
the while the Town was besieging, painting in a House he had without the Walls,
Demetrius sent to know of him how he durst venture himself without the Walls:
I knew very well, said he, oh King, your Quarrel is only with the Rhodians, not
with Arts. The King took him into his Protection, and took so much delight to
see him paint, that he even neglected the care of the Assaults, and the
Conquest of the Town. But to leave this digression, and return to Mazzuoli,
after he had thus escaped being plundered, he retired to Bologne, where,
amongst many others, he gained an extraordinary reputation, by a picture of the
Blessed Virgin which he made for the Pope, in which the Virgin appears, not
only with an astonishing beauty, but with an extraordinary vivacity of
Carnation, that shows it self through a sort of yellow Muslin extreme fine; and
the Head-tire is made with such delicacy and Art, that the Hairs seem loose and
to flow in Curles with the wind. This Piece was so admired, that there were
above fifty Copies made of it immediately, and sent through all Italy. No less
curious was his Picture of the Emperor Charles the fifth with a little Boy
presenting him with a Globe of the World. At last he fell to the unprofitable
study of Alchimy, wherein he spent much time and money to little purpose, and
died in the year 1640, aged but 36. years.

VII. Le Rosso.
When he first set himself to Painting, he was resolved to propose none for his
Imitation but Michael Angelo, and attained to such an habit, that his Paintings
have an extraordinary Roundness, and are very strong; Florence, his native
place, being filled with disturbances and factions, he was obliged to retreat
to places of greater security and quiet: Francis the first King of France,
desiring to have him in his service, sent for him to his Court; thither
therefore he Traveled, and taking Venice in his way, he Painted a rare Piece
for the Poet Aretine, of the Amors of Mars and Venus. Being arrived in France,
he finished many curious Pieces; the most remarkable amongst them are those in
the Galleries at Fountainbleau, some representing the noble actions and
exploits of King Francis the first. Others the Histories of Cleobis and Biton,
Two brothers drawing their Mother, that was extreme ancient, in a Chariot to
the Temple of June: Jupiter and Danae, with the Golden shower: Adonis dying in
the Arm^ of the Graces, and Venus appearing in great despair in a Chariot drawn
by two Doves. The Battle between the Centaurs and Lapithees: A Venus chastizing
Cupid for his forsaking Psyche: Chiron the Centaur instructing Achilles: The
story of Semele's being consumed with Lightning by Jupiter: The Burning of
Troy: A Tempest in a Black and dark night where amidst the light that is caused
by terrible flashes of lightning, one sees the raging fury of the Sea
excellently represented, and the different actions of several men, who
endeavor to save themselves from the Wrack; yet notwithstanding perish
miserably in the Waves: This last is esteemed the best of all that have been
mentioned, and is supposed to design the misfortunes of France in the Battle of
Pavia: But the rarest of all his Works is a Bacchus and a Venus in two several
Pieces; in both which he seems to have aimed at the utmost perfection he was
able: The Bacchus seems so delicately soft and fleshy, that it looks more like
a real body then a Figure represented by Colors only; on one side of it is a
Satyr who lifting up a Curtain, thrusts forward his Goatish Visage, and seems
to be much pleased to behold the jolly Lad; about him are several Antique
Vessels, painted some of Gold, silver, Crystal, and Earth, as the Trophies of
a Bacchanalian Combat, with so great variety of Invention, that makes it
extreme pleasant: He had an excellent way of painting Still-life, of which sort
one is very-famous which he made, containing all that was necessary for the
service of a Royal Feast, ranging in order. Vtensils of all sorts, Cups,
Basins, Candlesticks Salvers, Salt-sellers etc. All of such different forms,
and so curious, that the King caused them to be imitated in silver gilt, and
made use of them in his Reception of the Emperor, Charles the fifth at
Fountainbleau. In fine he grew exceeding rich by the excellency of his
Workmanship, living in much splendour and magnificence, keeping both men and
Horses in great abundance, his House as full of sumptuous and rich furniture as
the greatest Lord, himself was honored by the chiefest of the Court,
reverenced by all lovers of Art, and so beloved by the King, that he often
found him more profuse in his liberality to him, then otherwise; But behold
here the miserable uncertainty of worldly prosperity, in the height of all his
Gran sure and Felicity, of a sudden he fell into a miserable condition by an
unhappy disaster that befell him upon this occasion; It happened that Rosso was
robbed of a considerable sum of money, and a certain Florentine that frequently
haunted his House, as his friend, and a great lover of Art, was suspected by
him of the Robbery, Rosso having great Authority, caused him to be imprisoned
and put to the Torture, where he maintained his Innocence with that constancy
that procured his Release, After which resenting the disgrace with indignation;
and finding his body mangled and broken by the excess of his Tortures, he
prosecuted Rosso with all eagerness imaginable, resolving to leave nothing
unattempted to have his full satisfaction and revenge; Rosso fearing the ill
consequences of so s^erce a pursuit, and struck with remorse at the unjust
treatment of this innocent person; formed a horrid design to make himself away,
which he did by poison that he got a Peasant to bring him from Paris, under a
pretense that he had occasion for it to make a Varnish of. The poison was so
strong that the Peasant had like to have lost his hand in which he carried it.
He had a great understanding in mixing his Colors, and to distribute them in
the lights and shadows of his Drapery with such Art, that few have been able to
imitate them. His Carnation was usually very natural and full of life, and
distinguished as to the Ages and Passions, with mavelous Judgment; Besides
the roundness of his Nudities, he gave to every part its proper and regular
motion, by true observations of the Muscles making it appear he was well versed
in Anatomy, and other like necessary qualifications of a good Painter: He died
Anno Domini 1540,

VIII. Polidore de Caravage.
Was born in Lombardy. In his youth he was in so mean a condition, that he was
forced for his subsistence to be a Common Labourer to Masons, carrying Water
and other necessaries toward building the Galleries of Leo 10th until the
sight of some of John d' Vdines Works excited in him a generous resolution to
free himself from this unseemly Profession, and exchange it for something more
glorious: A happy occasion presented it self to him for this purpose, by the
friendship he had contracted with one of D' Vdines Scholars, who communicated
to him all his Masters good Instructions, and he followed his business so
close, that he soon outstripped his obliging friend, and made himself taken
notice of for a rare Artist: Being more addicted to study greatness of Design,
than the delicacy of Coloring, he associated himself with one Pelegrine, an
experienced Painter of Modena, and they together painted that curious Piece, of
The City of Rome, under the representation of a Woman holding the World in
subjecton, and to which the subject Nations are presenting their Tribute. The
Wrestling of the Olympic Games in the Front of the House of Spinoli, wherein
is perfectly described the strength and agility of Bodies. A sacrifice, with
all its solempnity; The death of Tarpeia, by the Sabines. He also painted near
St. Angelo, the Triumph of Furius Camillus; near to that The History of
Phalaris, the Tyrant of Agrigentum, and the manner of Perillus's suffering the
Torments of the Brazen Bull, which he himself invented for others: Also a
Battle after the ancient manner, full of goodly Inventions: Romulus with his
plough marking out the Boundaries of Rome. The Court of Savelli is adorned by
him with the ravishing of the Sabines, and the defeat of Porsenna by Horatius
Cocles: In Mount Cavallo, is a most curious representation of one of the Vestal
Virgins carrying water to the Temple, in a Sieve for a proof of her Virginity,
another, of the unexspected relief which Furius Camillus brought to Rome, at
the very instant when King Brennus was employed in seeing the Gold weighed
which the vanquished Romans, were to have paid for their ransomes. Indeed Italy
never had a person, that painted more of Antiquity, or more correctly then he:
He thus bestowed his time in Rome for a long space living in great content and
abundance; until the taking and sacking of that Town by the Duke of Bourbon
and his Army, after which he retired to Naples, and then to Messina, where he
still increased so much in Wealth, that it proved the unhappy occesion of his
death, for a Sicilian which he kept in his service, casting a covetous eye upon
his Treasure, took his opportunity in the Night, and strangled him with a
Napkin, and after he had robbed him made his escape for some time, but
afterward this bloody Murderer was discovered and received the due Reward of
his Villainy.

IX. Iulio Romano
Was the disciple of the incomparable Raphael, whom he so entirely loved and
imitated that none of his disciples came nearer the designs of that renowned
person: The first proof of his Ability, was in those curious paintings in Leo
the 10ths Galleries, of the Creation of Adam, and The sacrifice of Noah:
Raphael seeing that he wanted nothing of a complete Painter, instructed him
also in Architecture, and made him the most considerable in that Art next
himself and Buonarota, and his affection toward him was so great, as to make
him his Heir both of his Goods and glory, leaving his whole Estate to him and
one more, upon this condition, that he should finish the History of Constantine
which Raphael had begun in the Pope's Palace, judging none fit or capable but
him alone to perfect a Work suitable to its first beginning: Which he
accordingly set about, after the death of Leo the 10th under the Pontificate of
Clement the 7th: Following his Masters design therein, he divided the History
of this Emperor into four great pieces. The first represents Constantine making
an Oration to his Army, upon the sight of the Cross which appeared to him in
the Air with these words In hoc signo Vinces. The second is the Battle between
him and Maxentius and the defeat of Maxentius, who is seen as he is drowning in
the Tiber, where he was forcibly carried by his high-metalled and unruly Horse,
that flounces and makes violent struglings in the Water. The Soldiers Arms,
and military Ensigns are exactly after the manner of the Ancient Romans, the
Patterns whereof, Julio took from Trajan's and Antonines Pillars: The next is
the Baptism of Constantine by Pope Sylvester; In the 4th is the said Prince at
the feet of the same Prelate, who fits upon his Pontifical chair in St. Peter's
Church, which appears in an admirable Perspective, Constantine presents him
with a Model of Rome in Gold, as a token of his Donation of this City to the
Holy See: After he had finished these he traveled to Mantoae where he was
kindly entertained by the Duke, who bestowed on him at his first coming, a
stately and richly furnished House: This Prince having a de^gh to build a noble
Palace for himself, employed Julio in it, who showed upon this occasio^^ot
only his great skill in Architecture, in the order and design of the building,
but adorned the inside with most exquisite rarities of painting. In some of the
Rooms are described the Amors of Cu^id and Psyche; Their marriage: The
Banquet of the Gods at her Wedding. Venus her anger against Cupid for forsaking
her: The whole surrounded with a Work in Basso-relievo of Fesions, Garlands and
Grotesque Work very curious. In the Room of an Antichamber he painted the fall
of Icarus in such an Invention, that surpassed the Judgment of the best
Artists. He represents him in his flight making toward the Sign Cancer and the
Sun entering into that of Leo, which melts the wax of his Wings, and with the
force of its Beams sets the feathers on fire, which fly about the Air, the
smoke whereof and the crackling as they fly in sparkles looks so natural, that
the sight makes a man almost think he heard them. Terror and amazement appears
in the Countenance of the audacious youth, his body looks as if it were
tumbling headlong from the upper Region of the air with such a swift motion and
with that force, that it seems loose from the Cieling and is apt to fright
those that suddenly enter the room, he seeming to be just falling in that
violent motion upon their heads: Below is the disconsolate Daedalus casting a
ruefull look toward heaven, where he sees and bewails the disastrous
misfortune of his Son: Although these are admirable, yet being resolved to do
his utmost to make something more surprising, he chose for his subject, The
story of the Giants endeavoring to scale Heaven, this was wrought in another
Room of the same Palace most incomparably: In the top he painted a Heaven
environed with Clouds where all the fabulous Deities of the Heathens appear in
various postures expressing different passions. Juno stirrs up the Winds and
Tempests, Pallas prepares for the fight, and seems to consider the success with
uncertainty, Venus in a great fright runs to Mars for assistance, Neptune
secures himself with his Trident, Apollo driving the Charior of the Sun in some
confusion is stopped by the Hours, Diana looks pale and wan fearing the Heavens
should be destroyed, Saturn runs away, to avoid the Confusion, Pan lays hold of
a Nymph, that is making her escape, Bacchus, Silenus and several Satyrs are
seeking places to retreat to; Vulcan having a great Hammer upon his shoulder,
looks with much earnestness upon Hercules who is encouraging Mercury to the
fight, Jupiter appears in the top of all the Roof in an admirable
fore-shortning, and darts his Thunderbolts with a countenance inflamed with
anger. Below all, is the field of Battle, the Giants appear heaping Mountain
upon Mountain to climb up to Heaven, but are hindered by the resistance of some
of the Gods, Jupiter disperses them with his Thunder, Briareus lies grovelling
under a Mountain that he had torn up with the Trees, houses, and other
buildings upon it, others killed with thunderbolts lie stretched out dead in
several postures, amongst the rest one lies languishing and gnawing the ground
and making horrid Grim^ces through the anguish of his pain; through the cleft
of a rock, are several to be seen flying in great confusion up and down the
fields, which Figures appear very strong and pret^y by the light that proceeds
from certain flashes of lightning, some are overwhelmed with Rocks, others
perish under the ruins of Temples and buildings thrown down by Earthquakes:
Among the rest there is a Chimney built so artificially, that one would
conclude it to be part of those ingenious ruins; upon it is Pluto drawn
followed by Furies, who full of terror accompany him to Hell: Several of his
designs have been curiously graven in Copper Plates and published to the World
in prints, of which sort are these that follow; A Chyrurgion cupping a Woman's
shoulder: A Madona traveling to Egypt, where Joseph holds the Ass, while some
Angels pull down the boughs of the Date-trees that Christ may gather fruit: A
She-wolf giving suck to Remus and Romulus: A great Design of a Prison, where
the Prisoners are put to torture in several manners. After this Incomparable
person had lived a considerable time in these Employments at Mantua in great
splendour and renown, he died to the great grief of all that knew him and his
accomplishments, in the year 1546 and in the four and fiftieth year of his age.

X. John D'udine.
Was brought up by Raphael who took a singular affection to him and
communicated to him the most curious secrets of his Art. He was the first
founder or rather restorer of an Invention that had been lost for several ages,
for it happened that while they were digging under the Ruins of the Emperor
Titus his Palace, there was discovered several subterranean Valuts, adorned
with variety of Grotesk work and of Festoons in Basso-relievo, made of firm and
well compacted Plaster, which appeared as sound as if it had been but lately
made, D'udine marvailing at the rarity hereof, se^ himself to consider of the
composition of the Plaster, and so earnestly ben^ ^is mind thereunto, that
after he had made diverse Essays, heat last found out the secret of the ancient
composition of this kind of Plaster, by mingling the Dust or Powder of white
Marble with Limestone, Raphael was the first to whom ^e communicated his
success, who persuaded him to put it, in practice in Leo the Tenth Galleries:
According to his Counsel D'udine made in those Galleries several Birds, fish,
and other fancies in Bosso-relievo with so much grace and Art that when it was
first seen, it was commonly said that this art appeared rather in its
perfection, then in its beginning: In another place of the Popes. Palace he
painted a pretty intermixture of Roses and Greens, with the twinings of a Vine,
through which is to be seen the Azure of a transparent sky, so that the tender
Branches and leaves seem to hang loose from the Picture and to wave to and fro
at the motion of the Wings of several little birds that are drawn fluttering
about it, Art has here so lively imitated Nature, that each seem to have a real
motion: As strange and rare as this may be looked upon to be, yet what he did
for the Cardinal de Medicis Palace in Mount Mario in the judgment of some went
beyond it; In the Cieling he painted several living creatures in Festoons very
fine, in the Garden is a delicate fountain which spouteth forth Water out of
the mouth of a Marble ^lephant; about it are painted to the life a pleasing
Variety of several Shel-fish and Sea Monsters, in imitation of those he had
taken out of a Temple of Neptune, discovered about that time, under the ruins
of an old Palace. Hard by this was another Fountain, where Nature and Art
seemed to strive which could do most to the perfecting the beauty of that
solitude, out of the Cleft of a Rock, isued forth a Water as clear as Crystal
which falling by a rebound upon certain Jaspar-stones, seemed to wash of the
spots, or rather charmed the senses by the mixture of its Silver froth, with
the reflections of stones of various Colors, and the sweet murmuring of its
falling; In the Concavities of the rock were certain little Isicles in
appearance, dangling so artificially, that the Eye could hardly discover this
delightful cheat; on the top of the Rock was a Lion cut in Stone, whose hair
was supplied by the Moss that grew upon it, and which, by the posture it was
in, seemed to Roar: In a Gallery of the Palace of Chigy, which Raphael painted,
were some Festons of Flowers and fruit s^ finely painted by him, as well in
their primitive Greenness, as in their full Maturity, that whoever saw them
were apt to think they were moved by the agitation of the air; the variety of
Colors is very delightful, rejoicing the sight with their curious mixture
which seem to transcend the beautiful variety of the Rainbow; neither has he
omitted to refresh his Flowers with the gentle breezes of the Zephirs, and the
fannings of Aurora's sighs, who seems also to bedew them with her tears, as if
she foresaw that some rude hand would soon crop them; the whole is expressed
with the greatest resemblance and strength imaginable; Thus he lived delighting
in this manner to employ his time, till he was very old, when both his mind and
body being weakened with age, his hand wanted that vigor and elegance which he
performed in his flourishing years. He died Anno Dom. 1564, aged 70 years, and
was buried near his Master Raphael in the Rotunda of Rome.

XI. Michael Angelo Buonarota
Was born 16 Mar, 1474, and descended of an ancient Family of the Earls of
Canossa: His Father having many Children, and but a small Patrimony, was forced
to put them out to some Employment or other to get their living: Michael Angelo
in his youth was much addicted to designing, and drawing Figures upon paper,
which his Father taking notice of, when he was fourteen years old, put him to
Dominick Ghirlandio, a painter of good repute in Florence, under whom he soon
profited beyond all that were of equal standing with him, insomuch that his
Master was astonished at the progress he made; One day finding a design of his
Masters, which was copied by one of them with a Pen, he boldly touched up the
Figures and added a new ornament to his Masters design which was judged very
curious: Another time Girlandio, working upon a great design in the New Church
of St. Maryes, Michael Angelo for his recreation drew a design of the Scaffold,
the Tools, and different postures and figures of the Workmen in their several
Employments, with so much art, and ingenuity, that his Master was astonished at
the sight, and foretold that he would one day be the Miracle of an Artist;
Suitable to his excellency in painting was his ability in Sculpture, of which
kind, he is much applauded for an old Faune of marble, which he made for
Lorenzo de Medicis, laughing with his mouth open, showing his Teeth, some
whereof seemed to he wore out with rottenness; also the Battle of Hercules, and
the Centaurs by the advice of Angelus Politianus; a Hercules for the King of
France: for a Roman Gentleman called Jacopo Gallo, a Cupid of Marble, with the
figure of Bacchus, holding a Cup in his right hand, and in his left a Tigers
skin, and a bunch of grapes, which a Sa^yr endeavors to eat of; in which
figures are a mixture as it were of both sexes, they having the strength of the
men and the toundness and ^leshiness of the women: A Cupid (...), for a
Gentleman of Milan, who sold it for 200 Ducats to the Cardinal St. George:
These curious Works making him become famous, he was sent for to Rome, by Pope
Julius the second to build a sumptuous Tomb, which the said Popedesigned for
himself; but Julius dying before it was perfected, the design was obstructed,
and the figures which Michael Angelo had carved for this Monument were sent to
the French King by whom they were charily preserved and put into the Castle of
Equan, whence they were afterward transp^rted to Richlieu Clement the seventh
coming afterward to be Pope, and designing likewise a Tomb for himself,
Michael Angelo carved him five figures: The first was the Virgin holding the
Child Jesus in her Arms, who turns himself very prettily toward his mothers
bosom; and four others, representing Day and Night; Aurora and Crepusculum,
whereof Aurora is said to be the softest thing in the world. Paul the Third
being promoted to the Pontifical Chair, set him to draw that admirable piece of
the last Judgment in Sixtus's Chapel in the Vatican, where the greatness of
its design is so lofty, and Majestic, and the actions are so Natural, and
agreeable to the subject, that it is impossible to express its perfections, or
give it its due character; on one side is the lively picture of terror and
amazement, on the other side, of joy mixed with grief, fear with hope;
whatsoever the Poets have seigned of the pleasures of the Elysian fields, or of
the Torments of Hell, is there expressed by the bold strokes of his pencil; ^o
that nothing can look more delightful and more terrible both together: It Is
reported, that the Pope coming one day to see it when it was nigh finished,
attended by M^sser Biagis, his Master of the Ceremonies, whose opinion of it
being asked by the Pope, Biagio answered, that in his Judgment, it was a very
undecent thing to expose such a number of naked figures in so sacred a place as
a Chapel, and that it was fitter to be placed in a Bawdy house then in the
Popes Chapel. This displeased Michael Angelo so much that as soon as he was
gone, he drew this Biagio to the life by the help of his memory, placing him
naked in Hell with a great Serpent fastened to his middle, and environed with a
Legion of Devils. And all that Biagio could do, could never get it out, but it
remains there, as they say, to this day. This Work was eight years a finishing,
at the end whereof the people thronged in C^ouds to see it on Christmas day
1541, and showed their admiration of the Artist, by repeated acclamations,
making the Air echo to the name of Michael Angelo. For the Duke of Florence's
Palace he made that curious History of the Battle near Pavia in a Cartoon: In
the piece is a World of naked figures drawn as swimming in the river Arno to
refresh themselves in a time of great hear, while they are thus doing an Alarm
is supposed to be given by the sound of the Trumpe^s and Drums. It Is most
pleasant to see with what have the soldiers get out of the Water to dress
themselves in order to engage the Enemy and assist their Comrades, who appear a
far of attacqued by some of the Enemies Horse, amongst the rest is an old
fellow with a Garland of Ivy about his head, trying to put on his stockings
which he finds great difficulty to do by reason of the wetness of his feet, who
seems to be so earnest and violent that his mouth looks distorted, and all the
Nerves and museles of his body to be strained to get them on. This piece was
most admirably designed, full of curious and strong shortnings and was the
study of all the Painters of that age.

He was a person very studious, and well versed in the Holy Scriptures, and
Historians both Sacred and Profane; well skilled in Philosophy and Poetry, as
appears by some Commentaries he made upon Dantes and Petrarch, and some Italian
Verses very elegantly writ by him to the Lady Marchioness of Pesquara: As he
attained to vast Wealth by his Industry, so he was very liberal and charitable
toward the Poor, often giving large Sums for the marrying of Virgins that were
poor: to one of his Nephews he gave four thousand Ducats at one time, and
another time he bestowed on him ten thousand Ducats. Asking one day one of his
Servants called Vrbino, What he would do after his death? was answered by him,
That he must then endeavor to get another Master: Alas! poor man (says Miehael
Angelo) that shall not be if I can help it, and gave him 2000 Ducats to live
upon. These and such like Noble Qualifications, with which he was endued,
together with his Excellent Parts, made him the Darling of the Age, beloved and
honored by the most considerable Princes of the World; as the Emperor Charles
V. Francis the I. King of France, the Duke of Tuscany, and the Republic of
Venice: Solomon the Magnificent, Emperor of the Turks, endeavored by
extraordinary offers to get him into Turkey, to assist him in some Designs he
had on foot: Cardinal Hippolyto de Medicis seeing him one day taken with the
beauty of a Horse which was in his Stable, sent him the Horse, with (...) Mules
laden with Provender, and a Groom to look after them. Thus having gained a
never dying Fame, and spent a long Life in great content and satisfaction, he
vielded up to Nature the Tribute which was due to her, Feb. 1^th. 1564. aged 90
years, and was buried in the Church of St. Peter Major, being attend to his
Grave by all the Artists of the City.

XI. Citian
Born in the Year 1480. Was the Disciple of Giorgion, whom he so nearly
imitated, while he was under him, that some of his Works were not only supposed
to be his Masters, but the best of them; which so angered him, that he turned
him off, for fear he should one day eclipse the Reputation he had obtained in
the Art; which yet, notwithstanding, he failed not to do; insomuch that the
Senate of Venice taking notice of his Merits, made him Painter to their
Republic; by which Titian was obliged to make with his own hands the Portraits
of all the Doges that were elected in his time, which were to be hung up in the
Palace of St. Mark. Some time after he went to the Duke of Ferrara, for whom
(amongst other things) he made a Venus accompanied with the Graces, and some
Cupids; who never appeared so lovely to the eyes of Paris, as he has
represented her in that Piece; he painted also the said Duke as big as the
Life, leaning with his Elbow on a Piece of Cannon; for which he was well
rewarded, and extremely applauded. After this he returned to Venice, being
obliged thereunto by the Duty of his place, and painted a great many Pieces,
which serve to this day for an Ornament to their Churches, and most sumptuous
Houses; particularly that in the Church of St. Giovanni Epolo, of St. Peter the
Martyr is most considerable; the Saint who is something bigger than the Life,
appears fallen on the Ground in a Wood; a Soldier attacks him, and gives him
such a mortal Wound in the Head, that the horrer of Death appears in his Face,
while his Companion flying, shows an extraordinary apprehension; In the Air are
two Angels environed with a sudden Glory that enlightens the Landscape; which
way of embelishing his Pieces by Landskips he learnt of the German Painters, it
being a thing not usual among the Italians before: Francis the I King of France
coming with an Army into Italy, sent for him to his Camp to draw his picture,
the like he did for the Emperor Charles the fifth armed Cap a pee which was so
highly valued that he recerved ten thousand Crowns for a reward. Also for an
Annunciation, which he presented the said Emperor, he received two thousand
Crowns. In the, year 1546 he was invited to Rome, and presented to the Pope by
Cardinal Farnese, who ordered him a lodging in the Belveder, where seeing so
many glorious productions of Art, he was resolved also to leave some Monuments
of his renowned pencil, which while he was doing, Michael Angelo desirous to be
better acquainted with a person, whose fame he had heard so much of, went often
to see him, and could not deny him the praise that was due to his extraordinary
merit, adding that he excelled in the roundness of his faces and the softness
of his Carnation, and that if Titian had been but acquainted with the
Antiquities of Rome, he would infallibly have surpassed the greatest masters,
of the age. Titian having given satisfaction to the Pope and the best Artists
in Rome returned again to Venice laden with honor and wealth. At his arrival
he drew Mary Queen-Dowager of Hungary A Prometheus chained to mount Caucasus;
Sysiphus rolling the stone in Hell. Tyrius gnawed on by Vulturs. Tantalus
gaping after the Apples that fly away from him, and other excellent Pieces of
the Poetical Fictions, which since came into the possession of Phillip the
second of Spain and were put into the Escurial. Our Savior's last Supper
which he made for the said King Phillip is a piece of extraordinary beauty and
very great, being seven yards long. It is almost incredible what a great number
of Portraits he drew of the several Princes and men of Quality in his time. The
Emperor Charles the fifth who like Alexander would be drawn by none but this
Apelles, was drawn three times by him, for every one of which he received one
thousand Crowns, over and above an annual pension of two thousand Crowns out
of the Chamber of Naples, and the honor of Knighthood, so that he grew
exceeding rich, and arrived to an high degree of honor and reputation; He was
of an admirable Constitution; having never been sick in all his lifetime, ever
pleasant and free; His house was the resort of all the Ingenious, and persons
of the best Quality, he himself being extreme well bred and courteous. He had
so great a love to his Art, that he continued his Labors therein, till he was
fourscore and six years of age, at last he died of the plague at Venice, in the
nineteenth year of his age.

XII. Perin del Vaga.
Seemed to be most unfortunate in respect of his first entrance into the World,
for his father, who had consumed a good estate in extravagancy, was forced for
his subsistence to list himself a Soldier in the service of Charles the Second
King of France, when he made his expedition into Italy; His wife who attended
him in his misfortunes, was delivered of this Child in the Camp, in the middle
of all the Army; He was not above two months old, but the mother dyed of the
plague and his father being forced to follow the Army, he was left alone in a
Village, where he was brought up by the milk of a She-goat; and his father
coming after wards to Bologna, there married a second Wife, who had likewise
lost her Husband and Children by the Plague; this made her take compassion of
this little creature, and having milk of her own, made an end of bringing it
up; It was called Peter, and afterward Perin; and being left by the father in
the hands of some relations at Florence, and they growing weary of keeping him
put him to serve an Apothecary; but not likeing that Trade, he was taken into
the service of a Painter, called Andrea de Ceri, who conceiving good hopes of
the Lad, took all the care imaginable to bring him up, behaving himself rather
like a Father then a Master to him, and at last knowing himself not capable
enough to make him a complete Artist, and finding the Boy very ingenious, he
put him to Ridolph Ghirlandio, one of the best Painters at that time in Italy,
who carried him to Rome, and in a little time he outstripped all the young men
that lived at the same time with Ghirlandio: At length having an aspiring mind
and a mighty inclination to great designs, such as he saw eminent in Michael
Angelo Buonarota, and Raphael; he was inflamed with an incredible desire of
imitating them, as most worthy his ambition and choice; but withal considering
his own poverty and mean condition, and how that to get Bread, he must work
for the Shops of ordinary Painters, it made him almost despair of ever growing
considerable; but at length he surmounted all difficulties, and opened to
himself a way to renown by an obstinate persisting in hard labor, and by an
extraordinary success that attended it, for he divided the week into two Parts,
working one half of it for bread, and setting the other half apart for
Improvements: Having by this extraordinary diligence gained a mighty progress
in the Art, he was readily entertained among the disciples of Raphael, who
never let slip an opportunity of helping forward any ingenious Artist, and he
so easily captivated the affections of that incomparable person, that he
employed him in the Galleries of Leo the tenth where all the best Artists of
Europe were at work in emulation of each other; He was not long amongst them,
but in many things he outdid them and grew in a short time one of the boldest
Designer of all Rome, understanding the Mucles and the difficultest part of the
Art in naked figures: In this Gallery he painted the Battle of ^osuah and the
Amorites a work of, great difficulty in respect of the greatness of the
subject, but it was so well performed by him, and so highly approved of that he
was ordered to do several other of the Histories both of the Old and New
Testament in the same place, in all which their appeared so much beauty and
resplendency that made both the Painter and his work, exceedingly admired and
esteemed. In the Great Hall called la Sala di Pontifici, the Ceiling was
committed to him and John d' Vdine, which they divided into seven Ovalls in
which they painted, the seven Planets each drawn by the Animal that is
appropriated to them by the Poets, As Jupiter by his Eagle, Venus by her Doves,
etc. To which they added the Signs of the Zodiac with several of the other
Caelestial Constellations most of which figures are of Perin's hand. In the
middle of the Roof is a Round in which are four Figures like four VICTORIES,
which hold the Popes Crown and Keys, which figures being shortened extreme
masterly are besides adorned with a most beautiful light Drapery which
discovers very gracefully so much of their naked Arms and Legs, as is decent.
After this he made for the Archbishop of Cyprus certain Faunes, and
Bacchinals: for Seignior Baldafini, the Exploits of the Romans from the time of
Romulus, to that of Numa Pompiltus: for Cardinal Bucci the Prophets Isaiah and
Daniel: after this He worked with Julio Romano and Francisco Penri in Pope
Clement the sevenths Palace, until the sacking of Rome by the Duke of Bourbon,
in which time of public Calamity, Perin was fain to run up and down with his
wife and Child, carrying them from place to place to save them from the fury of
the Soldiers, and at last he himself was taken prisoner and was forced to pay
so great a ransom, with such ill usage that he was like to have run mad, but
at length he got over his misfortunes a second time, for Prince Doria finding
him out, sent for him to Genoa to direct in the building a new Palace which he
designed, and to make the ornaments thereof, Sylvio de Fiesole was employed in
making the Statues, and Perin in the design of the Fabric, and the paintings.
He painted in the first place several Trophies, and pieces of Grotesk and in
the next the Portraits of the most emment Captains of the House of Dorin, all
armed, and over them is written in letters of Gold these words, Magni viri,
maxin^ Duces, optima fecere pro Patria. in another the Shiprack of Aeneas and
his Fleet, in which there are naked figures, both dead and alive, great number
of Galleys and vessels broken and overset, the Sea most terribly raging in high
billows, the Heavens obsecured and all the tokens of a terrible storm, the
whole is surrounded with a curious ornament in Stucco Work, in the second Hall
he represented Jupiter durting his Thurder-bolts at the Giants. And out of
Ovids Fables he chose some of the most delightful of them to adorn four other
Chambers; Some of the other lodgings were painted by his disciples from de,
signs of his preparing for them, insomuch that he made that Palace to be one of
the wonders of Italy, both as to the magnificence of its building and the
beautiful Embelishments of his hand: It was Perins Misfortune to have
dissipated in wine, and women the best part of what should have maintained him
in his old age, to repair which Error he fell into another, which was to make
himself cheap, by undertaking any little piece for a small sum of ready money;
so that being forced to excessive labor, and yet but little coming of it, he
began to grow melancholy, and having no other comfort, but as often as he could,
to get to the Tavern, with a good Companion, and there drown his sorrows in a
Brisk Glass, which being a Custom he had long frequented, he at last drank to
such excess that that together with some other hears of youth brought him to
his end at the age of forty seven years.

XIV. Albert Durer.
Born at Norimbergh, in the year 1470. was both an extraordinary Painter and
Graver: In the Emperor's Palace at Prague, is to be seen a Christ carrying his
Cross, painted by him with much delicacy, which the Town of Norimbergh
presented to the Emperor; also the Adoration of the Three Kings; Two Pieces of
the Passion; in one of which is himself painted with a Roll in his hand, with
this Inscription; Albertus Durerus Noricus faciebat Anno de Viriginis partu
1511. There is also a most ravishing piece of his, of Adam and Eve; upon which
an Ingenious Poet made this Witty Descant; Angelus hos cernens, miratus dix it;
ab horto
Non ita formosos, vos ego depuleram.
At Franckfort there is an Assumption of his in a Monastery, whose
extraordinary beauty brings in a good Revenue to the Religious of that Convent
by the great Liberalities of people that come to see it; although he painted much,
yet his chief Employment was in Graving or Cutting Figures in Wood. Neither was
he less renowned for some Books which he has published, then for his graving or
painting. Posterity will always be oblidged to him for his Book of the
proportion of Bodies. His Rules of Artichecture and of military Discipline is
esteemed worthy the curiosity of Princes and Generals of Armies, He was of that
courteous and affable temper that gained him the love and esteem of all that
knew him: the Emperors Maximilian the first and Charles the fifth especially
signalized their affection to him by many favors. Maximilian one time ordered
him to draw some great design in his presence, upon a Wall, which being above
his reach, and there appearing nothing ready at hand to stand upon, the Emperor
commanded one of his Attendants, to lie down upon the ground that Albert might
stand upon his back, till he had finished the outlines of his design, and left
this person should think himself too much undervalued to serve as a footstool
to a Painter, the Emperor in token how much he valued both the Art and the
Artist, conferred on him a large degree of honor, and imediately made him noble
and gave him for a Coat of Arms. 3 silver Escutcheons in a field of azure. He
died in the year 1628 and was buried at Norimbergh.

XIII. Hans Holbeiu.
Born at Basle in Switzerland. His manner of painting was extraordinary and
unusual, differing both from the ancient and modern way, so that it seems as if
he had not been excited or instructed by any Example from others but followed
the dictates of his own Genius; and though it be doubted (his way being so
peculiar) whether he ever saw any of the rarities of Italy or had any Master to
instruct him, yet nevertheless there is nothing to be seen of his doing, but is
painted to the utmost perfection as is manifest in that piece of his, of Deaths
Dance in the Town Hall of Basle the design whereof he first neatly cut in Wood
and afterward painted, which appeared so fine to the learned Erasmus, that he
requested Holbein to draw his picture, desiring nothing so much as to be
represented by so Judicious an Hand. And perceiving by his rare pieces that he
deserved a more plentiful fortune and a more illustrious place, he persuaded
him to travel to England, promising him considerable advantages from the bounty
of Henry the eight a cherisher of Arts. Holbem at his request set forward for
England, carrying with him Erasmus his picture and Letters of recommendation to
Sir Thomas Moore then Lord Chancellor of England. More received him with Joy,
and kept him for three years in his House; During which time he drew Sir
Thomas's own picture, his wives, childrens and several of his intimate friends
and other near Relations which was hung round the Great Hall of his House,
where the King being invited one day to a sumptuous dinner, and at his first
entrance into the Hall beholding so many ravishing objects, the pictures
seeming almost with as much life as the persons they represented, who were most
of them then present; and admiring at the excellency of the Workman sent for
him and entertained him in his service upon very advantageous Terms. The King
manifested from time to time the singular favor and regard he had for him, and
particularly upon this occasion. Holbein being one day busy upon the picture of
a Lady that belonged to the Court, a certain person of great Quality came to
him to see him paint, Holbein not being willing to be disturbed, opposed his
Entrance in a civil manner, but seeing he would take no denial but attempted to
force his way, giving scope to the brisk humor that is natural to those of his
Nation, he gave him so rude a repulse that the Earl tumbled from the top of
the stairs to the bottom; at the noise of his fall his Attendants flocked about
to revenge the affront that their master had received, and mischief would no
doubt have ensued, had not Holbein jumpt out of the Window and made his escape
to the King to implore his protection, which he did with so good a grace, that
the King sent for the Lord and charged him upon his Allegiance to lay aside all
resentment and that no violence should be offered upon the utmost peril. Some
say he added words to this Effect, Have a care that no mischief befalls him,
for though I can make a Lord when I please yet such a painted if lost can never
be recovered. His masterpiece is that of the, said King as big as the life,
and represents his person so lively that this piece discovers the fierceness of
his looks, and that severity in his Countenance which made him so dreaded by
his subjects; He made also the pictures of Prince Edward and the Princesses
Mary and Elizabeth who successively, one after the other swayed the English
Scepter. He had one thing very remarkable in him which was, that he painted
every thing he did with his left hand. The Plague raging in London, in the year
1554, Holbein was seized therewith, and died in the Six and fiftieth year of
his age.

XV. Anthony de Montfort, Bloclant
Was descended of the Illustrious family of the Viscounts of Montfort, in the
Province of Vtrecht; He learned to paint of Francis Floris whose good
Instructions he had no sooner tasted, but he found so many charms in the Work
of that great Master, and so much reputation to follow his steps, that he never
ceased imitating him, till he had attained to be a complete Artist; He bent
himself chiefly to work upon the like Noble subjects of History with his
Master, after the Italian manner; endeavoring above all to imitate the life,
to observe all the Rules of Perspective and foreshortnings, and to place the
figures well, and in good order; he had an exact Judgment in the composition
and mingling his Colors, so that wanting nothing that might render an Artist
accomplished, there is nothing in his Designs but what is great and lofty, with
all the Embelishments of Art, the truth of which evidently appears in all his
Works, particularly, A Bathsheba bathing her self: The History of Joseph and
his Brethren are very fine: also A Venus which passes for a Masterpiece, in
which, and many others, he comes so near the elegance and artifice of the
Italians, that one would think he had been bred up in the School of Florence,
when indeed he never was above six months in Italy, and had no other Master,
but Floris. He died at Vtrecht, Anno Dom. 1583.

XVI. Henry Goltzius.
Was born in the year 1538 at Mulbracht, in the Country of Juliers; in his
youth having the misfortune to fall into the Fire, his hand was so burnt and
shrives'd that he could never after open it as it should be; however after he
had endeavored a little to manage a Pen he accustomed this lame hand to draw
so well, that his Father hoping he might prove good at Graving, sent him to
learn the grounds of that Art, of Theodore Corenhert. This able teacher
instructed him, not only in the manner of Graving, but together with that
taught him all that was necessary for him to know, both in History and Poetry,
to qualify him for his business; and in a little time, with his good
management, he became capable to sall to work upon his own Invention; After
this he travailed to Venice, Florence, and other parts of Italy, copying as he
went all that he found in the public Monuments to be rare; but at Rome he took
most pains, where he searched after rarities even in places infected with the
Plague, to the great hazard of his life; At Naples he designed, The ancient
Statue of Hercules in the Vice-voys-Palace, and the most eminent Curiosities of
the, adjacent places; amongst the rest the famous Grotto's of Pozzuoli. He
imitated with such success and skill, notwithstanding the lameness of his hand,
the most renowned Gravers of Europe, that he often made his Prints pass for
Albert Durer's, or Lucas Van Leyden's, insomuch that the most experienced
Judgments perceiving how they were deceived by his ingenious way of varying his
manner of Graving, called him the Proteus of the Art; The Passion is done by
him after the manner of Lucas. A Madona in imitation of Durer, which he
dedicated to the Duke of Bavaria, and was rewarded for it with a Gold chain and
a Medal. He drew a Bacchus, with Ceres, Venus and Cupid, with his pen, upon
Vellum, which is now at Rome, and is much esteemed; A Faune in the Emperors
Closet, The taking down our Savior from the Cross, which was sent to the King
of Spain. He was no less happy in his Pencill then he was in working with the
Crayon or his ^en of which sort, his Danae sleeping by Mercury, who watches to
give Jupiter an opportunity of enjoying her, and several others, are highly
valued; Besides his rare painting, for which this famous Master has not come
short of the best Painters of Europe, he has Graven and Published the most
noted Pieces of Hemskirk, Floris, Bloclant and Spranger; which are very useful
for those that would attain to any perfection in the Art of Painting. He
brought up James Matham, Peter D' Jode, and other fine Gravers that have filled
Europe with their delicate Prints.

XVII. Matthew and Paul Brill
Were brethren, both born at Antwerp, and excellent Painters; Matthew, the
eldest, went to Rome, where he was promoted to be Painter to the Pope, and made
in some Halls of the Vatican several Landskips in Fresco, which were greatly
esteemed. Paul envying his Brothers renown, follows him to Rome, and after his
death, succeeded in his Employ. In the year 1682, he made in the Great Hall of
the Popes Palace, a piece in Fresco of sixty eight foot long, representing the
Martyrdom of St. Clement who is bound to an Anchor, and thrown into a River. In
the Popes Chamber he painted six of the most curious Prospects about Rome.
Cardinal Matthio had an Hall adorned round by him with Grotesk work and
Landskips, and for his Brother Hasdruball, he made six great pieces containing
the prospects of his Houses of pleasure; He has left behind him many rare
designs of Ruins and other fancies which have been communicated to the World
in several Prints.

XVIII. Michael Mirevel
Born at Delft in the year 1568. His father in his youth put him to a
Writing-Master to learn to write, where he profited so well, that at eight
years of Age, he was able to write more sorts of Hands, and much neater and
fairer then any Master in the Town. His father being unwilling he should lose
the advantage which so happy a beginning seemed to promise, put him to learn of
Wierx the Art to manage the Crayon and the Graver which this young Artist in a
short time attained to do with as much perfection as he had before done his
Pen, insomuch that he was not quite twelve years of age, when he graved of his
own Invention The History of the Samatan and not much older when he did that of
Judith with the Head of Holofernes. The applause which these. Works generally
received; animated him with fresh courage and inspired him with a desire to try
if he could be as succesful with his Pencill: To this end he went into the
service of Bloclant and learnt of him all that was necessary to be observed in
Coloring, by means whereof he became so eminent in painting of Faces, that he
was looked upon to be the best in the Low Countries in that way: Of this sort
the most esteemed are, his Picture of Prince Maurice of Nassau, of the then
Princess Dowager of Orange; and Prince Henry her Son, which are of an admirable
roundness, and the Carnation very natural and lively. He sometimes took great
delight to paint several sorts of Wild-fowle, and the Accommodations for a
Kitchen; of this Sort there is one in much esteem in Delft. His painting was so
curious and of such reputation, that the Archduke Albert offered him
confiderable advantages to draw him to Brussels; But in vain, for he being a
Zealous Protestant, was unwilling to live in the service of a Prince of the
Roman Communion.

XIX. Barthelomew Spranger.
Was the Son of a rich Merchant at Antwerp, born in the year 1546. He
discovered his first Inclination to painting by drawing several figures when
young in the Book of his fathers Accounts, which though his father, was very
angry at, when he first saw it, yet discovering thereby the bent of his
Inclination, he sent him to a Painter to be instructed, by which means and his
earnest considering the paintings of Floris and also by accustoming himself to
reading Poetry he became at length a very able Painter. After he had spent some
time in France in thus employing his Talent, he passed the Alps and continued
for a while at Milan: There it was that he invented and drew in the ruins of
an old Amphitheatre, A Dance of Witches which procured him so much reputation,
that Don Clavio having bought it and shown it to Cardinal Farnese; the Cardinal
was so taken with it, that he offered a very honorable Allowance to Spranger,
to draw him to Caprarole, that his stately Palace there, might be adorned with
so curious a pencil. But Spranger having a mind to see Rome steered his course
thither, and not long after his arrival there was made Painter to the Pope, and
had a sumptuous lodging assigned him in the Belveder over the Laecoon: Being
thus raised to honor, he raised his mind to attempt something worthy of his
fortune, and in this noble heat of Spirit, he painted that rare Piece of the
last Judgment, upon a large Copperplate of six foot in wideness, where there
are five hundred figures perfectly diversified, and disposed after a most
admirable Order and design, The Pope dying a little after this Piece was
finished, it was placed near his Sepulcher for a perpetual ornament thereto,
and to preserve the memory both of the Pope and of the Painter together: After
this he went into the service of the Emperor Maximilian the second, and after
his death, he was entertained by his Successor Rodolphus, and allowed an
honorable Pension. While he was in this Emperors service he painted for him a
curious Piece of Mercury introducing Psyche into the Council of the Gods: And
another upon Copper representing The City of Rome, under the figure of a Woman
with the Tyber, and upon the borders of the River, a Wolf giving suck to the
two young twins Remus and Romulus. He had one extraordinary faculty, namely so
retentive a Memory that it faithfully preserved the true Jdeas of au object
though he had but once beheld it, by means whereof though he had omitted to
draw or design the rarities of Rome when he was there, yet he made use of
several of them in embelishing his most magnificent Pieces: A certain Gentleman
who had a great affection for a beautiful Lady that belonged to the Countess of
Arembergh, and being but seldom able to get a view of her, entreated him
earnestly to draw her picture, which he did, after he had seen her but once,
with such exactness that resembled every feature to the life, to the no small
satisfaction of the admiring Lover The Emperor keeping his Court at Prague,
Spranger settled there also, and married a wife the daughter of a rich Merchant,
hoping to have Children that might inherit the great wealth he got by his
painting, thereupon he enlarged his House with a stately Front and designing it
to be a place for entertainment of the Arts, he embelished the out side thereof
and the Porch with diverse great Figures as big as the life. The Emperor being
jealous of his working for others, commanded him to paint for none but
himself, and thereupon sent for him to his own Palace, where he took such
extraordinary delight in the inimitable strokes of his pencill that he would
stand by him sometimes for hours together, to see him paint; and to show how
greatly he admired the Excellency of his Art, at a solemn Feast, in presence of
his Courtiers he with his own hand presented him a Gold Chain and a Medall,
and afterward in a public Assembly of the States of the Empire; honored him
and his Posterity with the Title of Nobility: Though his pieces are scarce any
where to be seen but in the Emperors Closet, yet the ingenious Goltzius has
graven and published diverse of them in Prints, among others that incomparable
piece of the Banquet of the Gods at the marriage of Psyche: And Cupid and
Psyche out of Apuletus: After he had got permission in his old age to retire
from Court he painted for a friend, of his an admirable piece of Venus and
Mercury teaching Cupid to read. Having at length survived his wife and all his
children, struck with excessive sorrow for their loss, and overwhelmed with
age, he soon after gave up the Ghost and followed them to their long home.

XX. Henry Cornelius Vroom
Was born at Harlem Anno Them. 1^6^ trav^iling in his younger years to Italy, he
was entertained (...) R^me in the family of the Cardinal d' Medicis, where
meeting with the ^amous Paul Brill, he made an extraordinary progress in
painting, from Rome he went to Venice to paint the Gall^ys and maritime Coasts
of that Courtrey. Having been ^^ee in Spain and ^ound there a good Market for
some of his (...), he resolved to return there again with several of his (...),
and try his good fortune a second time; but in his Volage there arose a furious
Tempest which drove the ship he was in, on the Coast of Portugal and split her
on the rocks, called (...) Barlengos, yet notwithstanding he escaped with five
and twenty more though with great (...) culty. Part of the Wrecks and goods was
thrown up by the waves into an adjoining River, where certain Religious had a
Convent near the Banks of the River, who cou^ing to gather up the spoils and
finding amongst the rest Vroom's Paintings, they were so much in admiration of
the beauty of them, that they could not but bewail the misfortune of those that
had lost so rich a Cargoe, the pieces after they had opened them in their Hall,
and dried, they hung them up there, to feast their eyes with the view of such
delightful Objects. In the mean time these unfortunate persons that had lost
their ship, had scrambled up to the Top of a dreadful Reck, where they were not
only exposed to all the rigours and injuries of the weather, but in apparent
danger to^dy by famine; after they had been three days languishing for want of
food, it was proposed by some amongst them to cast Lots, for one of the
Company, to be made a Sacrifice to satisfy, the hunger of the rest. Vroom
abhoring such a piece of Barbarity and being more ingenious then the rest,
advised them to have patience a little longer, and caused a Cloth to be hung up
at the head of an Oar which they had saved, to implore the assistance of any
that might happen to pass that way: These Fathers who had saved the Pictures
discerning the Signal afar of, set out a Skiffe to their relief: When they
came to them and understood which of them 'twas, that had made, and was the
Owner of those delicate Pictures they caressed him with all the Civilities and
Courtesy imaginable, and after they had carried them to their Cloister and
entertained them with such refreshments as were necessary, they conducted them
to Lisbon, from: thence Vroom went to St. Vbes, where being ready to embarke
for his own Country, he changed of a sudden his resolution, saying to the
Seamen. That that ship would also be cast away, which accordingly happened, just
as it was entering into the Texell. During his abode at St. Vbes he painted
amongst other things, the manner of his own Shipwreck, and the Coast where he
was so near to have perished. After his Return into Holland, being taken notice
of for his peculiar Fancy in making the Horrors of a Storm, and of Seafights,
delightful and pleasant, as they were the Subjects of his Pencil, he was
employed to draw those great Designs of the Engagement between the English-
Fleet and-the-Spanish Armado in the Year 1588; and the Victory which the former
obtained over the latter, which was not only formidable for number, greatness,
and variety of Ships, commanded by Captains of known Experience and Conduct,
manned with great numbers of stout Soldiers, provided of all Necessaries for a
long Expedition, and prepared with such cost and charges, that it might well
seem invincible. The Grandeur of such a Subject excited the Ambition of this
fine Artist to do something answerable, and indeed he has done the whole to
admiration, in ten Pieces designed for Tapistries, each containing what
happened in the ten days which this bloody Conflict lasted. The fury of the
Assailants, and those that are assailed; the lightning of the artificial Fires,
and the thundering of the Cannon, Masts flying in Splinters, Ships on fire,
sinking half burnt, the Terror of the Soldiers, some perishing in the Sea,
others amidst the Flames, the strugling^ of others to save themselves on
Planks, or any thing they could come at, with a thousand different Objects,
that both delight and terrify together in the beholding, manifests that he was
ignorant of nothing that was necessary to represent this dreadful Fight with
all its becoming Circumstances. Besides what he was paid for this Piece of Work
by others, he received 1000 Florins of the Lord Thomas Howard, our English
Admiral. For the States of Holland, he painted the 7th day of this Engagement,
which was the bloodiest; which Prince Maurice of Nassau, and Justin de Nassau,
Admirals of Holland were so pleased with, that they set him to paint the States
Fleet assisting at the Battle of Newport: Vroem represented it first of all
moving with full Sails, in order of Battle toward the Coasts of Flanders;
afterward he shows it at Anchor in Newport-Road, firing with their Cannon
suriously upon the Troops of the Arch. Duke. For this Piece he received an
ample Recompense. After a long Life spent in these pleasant Employments, he
died laden with Honor and Wealth.

XXI. Adrian Brauwer.
Excelled all that ever was before him, in expressing several Comical and
Extravagant Humors: Was a person of a Jovial Disposition, much addicted to
Sensuality and Debauchery. He seldom worked but in a Tavern, where in the heat
of Wine he invented things that gave a true Character of the wildness and
frolicksomness of his Temper; yet with such curiousness and art, that caused
admiration to the gravest and most judicious Painters. Having been robbed by
certain Pirates on the Coast of Holland, and stripped of his Cloths, he got him
a Suit at his Landing made of strong Canvas, upon which he painted several
Flowers and Figures most ingeniously, after the manner of Indian Silks; which
some Ladies seeing, and taking it to be a rich fort of Silk, enquired up and
down amongst the Mercets for some of the same sort, but to no purpose. Some few
days after, Brauw^^ got upon the Stage in the Playhouse at Amsterdam as soon
as the Play was ended; and there taking a wet Cloth in his hand, he wiped out
before them all, the whole Painting, and by showing it was nothing but Canvas,
undeceived them of their former pleasant mistake. Another time perceiving that
his Friends slighted him for the meanness of his Habit, he ordered a rich
Velvet Suit to be made him, such as the wealthy Merchants at Antwerp used to
wear. A Co^sin of his, that happened at that time to be upon his Marriage,
^^^ing him in so good an Equipage, invited him to grace the Wedding with his
Company: Brauwer failed not to be there; and when all the Company much
commended the Bravery and Richness of his Apparel, he snatched up a Dish of
Meat that stood upon the Table, and threw all the Sauce and Grease that was in
it upon his Clothes, saying in a great rage; That it was more fit to bestow the
Good Cheer on his Clothes, since it was for their sake, and not his own that he
was invited: Giving them to understand by this action, though it was ridiculous
and extravagant, that he despised them no less for their Ignorance and Folly,
in making more account of the Shell than the Kernel; and in measuring the
inward Deserts of men by the goodness of their Outside and Apparel. His Clothes
being thus smeared over with Grease, he threw them into the Fire, and hasted
away to the usual place of his resort, to smoke his Pipe, and drink Brandy,
which he was much addicted to. When he had by his continual Excess drained his
Purse, and reduced himself to Extremity, he would draw a Design of some Drunken
Person or other upon Paper, and send it to the Lovers of Art; and if they did
not send him the full Price he demanded, which was sometimrs 100 Crow^^, he
would throw it into the Fire, and after that was burnt, set himself to make
some other odd Fancy, until by this new Frolic he had got his Demand. His
Faintings were usually some Drunken Clown beaten by his Wife; or a Sottish
Fellow with Pot in Hand, smoking Tobacco: Sometimes a Knot of Sharpers playing
at Cards or Dice: Some Young Prodigal endeavoring to decoy a simple Wench: Or
a Drunken Quarrel: So that as Rubens and Vandyke were in his time esteemed the
best for Grave and Magnificent Designs, so was he for such like Facetious
Humors, which though they are not so powerful to excite Laughter, as the
Picture of the Old Woman which Zeuxis painted was to him, who as Plutarch
relates, beholding his Workmanship, and the Comical Figure it made, fell into
such an excessive fit of Laughing, that it suffocated his Spirits, and killed
him, yet the very fight of them may serve for a good Antidote against
Meiancholy. He died at Antwerp in the 30th year of his Age, overwhelmed with
his Intemperance, and so poor, that his Friends were fain to beg for
wherewithal to pay the Charges of his Funeral; although had he been a sober and
discreet person, he might have attained to great Wealth by his Pencil, his
Works were so much esteemed.

FINIS.
ILLVSTRIVM QVOS BELGIVM HABVIT PICTORVM EFFIGIES, AD VIVVM ACCVRATE
DELINEATAE, Nec non, quo quisque tempore et vixerit, et obierit.

ANTVERPLAE, Apud Theodorum Gallaeum.

Cum priuilegio.



portrait of Hubert Van Eyck 1 HVBERTO AB EYCK, IOANNIS FRATRI; PICTORI.
Quas modo communes cum fratre, Huberte, merenti
Attribuit lauds nostra Thalia tibi,
Si non sufficient: addatur et illa, tua quod
Discipulus frater te superauit open
Hoc vestrum docet illud opus Gandense, Philippum
Quod Regem tanto cepit amore sui^:
Eius vt ad patrios mittendum exemplar Iberos
Michael Coxennius Mechlinien insignis hac aetate pictor. obijt an. 1595.
Coxennl fieri iusserit ille manu.


Th. Galle exc.

portrait of John Van Eyck 2 IOANNES AB EYCK, PICTOR.
Ille ego, qui laetos oleo de semine lini
Expresso docui princeps miscere colores,
Huberto cum fratre Nouum stupuere repertum,
Atque ipsi ignotum quondam fortassis Apelli,
Florentes opibus Brugae: mox nostra per omnem
Diffundi late probitas non abnuit orbem.


Th. Galle excud. Dominicus Lampsonius.

portrait of Hierom Baschius 3 HIERONYMO BOSCHIO, PICTORI.
Quid sibi vult, Hieronyme Boschi,
Ille oculus tuus attonitus? quid
Pallor in ore? vesut lemures si,
Spectra Erebi vositantia coram
Aspiceres? Tibi Ditis auari
Crediderim patuisse recessus,
Tartareasque domos: tua quando
Quicquid habet sinus imus Auerni
Tam potuit been pingere dextra.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of Roger Vander Weyde 4 ROGERO, BRVXELLENSI PICTORI.
Non tibi sit laudi, quod multa, and pulchra, Rogere,
Pinxisti, vt poterant tempora far tua:
Digna tamen, nostro quicunque est tempore Pictor,
Ad quoe, si sapiat, respicere vsque velit.
Testes picturae, quae Bruxellense tribunal
De recto Themidis cedere call vetant:
Quam, tua de partis pingendo extrema voluntas
Perpetua est inopum quod medicina fami.
Illa reliquisti terris iam proxima morti:
Haec monumenta polo non moritura micant.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of Theodore Van Harlem 5 THEODORO HARLEMIO, PICTORI.
Huc et ades, Theodore, tuam quoque Belgica semper
Laud nihil ficta tollet ad astra manum;
Jpsa tuis rerum genitrix expressa figuris
Te Natura sibi dum timet art parem.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of Bernard of Brussels 6 BERN. ORLEIO, BRVXELLENSI PICTORI.
Aulica quod sese Bernardo iactet alumno
Bruxella, Attalicas doctissima pingere vestes;
Non tam pictoris, si quis me iudice certet,
Arti debetur, quanquam debetur and arti;
Quam tibi quod carus, Belgarum Margari rectrix,
Dum tibi Apellea nihil est iucundius art,
Aurea peniculis te dante manubria, and aureos
Saepe tulit, cusum paulo ante numisma, Philippos.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of John Mabusius 7 IOANNI MABVSIO, PICTORI.
Tuque adeo nostris saeclum dicere, Mabusi,
Versibus ad graphicen erudijsse tuum.
Nam quis ad aspectum pigmenta politius alter
Florida Apelleis illineret tubulis?
Art alijs, esto, tua tempora cede secutis
Peniculi ductor par tibi rarus erit.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

portrait of Joachim Patinier 8 IOACHIMO DIONATENSI, PICTORI.
Has inter omnes nulla quod viuacius,
Ioachime, imago cernitur
Expressa, quam vultus tui; non hinc modo
Factum est quod illam Curtij
In era dextra incidit, alteram sibi
Quae non timet nunc aemulam:
Sed quod tuam Durorus admirans manum,
Dum rura pingis, et casas,
Olim exarauit in palimpsesto tuos
Vultus ahena cuspide:
Quas aemulatus lineas, se Curtius,
Nedum praeiuit ceteros.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

portrait of Quintin Mesius 9 QVINTINVS MESSIVS, ANTVER: PIANVS PICTOR.
Ante faber fueram Cyclopeus: ast vbi mecum
Ex aequo pictor caepit amare procus:
Seque graves tuditum tonitrus postferre silenti
Peniculo obiecit cauta puella mihi:
Pictorem me fecit amor. Tudes innuit illud
Exiguus, tabulis quae nota certa meis.
Sic, vbi Vulcanum nato Venus arma rogarat,
Pictorem e fabro, sum Poeta, facis.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of Lucas Van Leyden 10 LVCAE LEIDANO, PICTORI.
Tu quoque Durero non par, sed proxime, Luca,
Seu tabulas pingis, seu formas sculpis ahenas,
Ectypa reddentes tenui miranda papyro,
Haud minimam in partem (si qua est ea gloria) nostrae
Accede, and tecum natalis Leida, Camaenae.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of John Holland 11 IOANNI HOLLANDO, PICTORI.
Propria Belgarum laus est hene pingere rura;
Ausoniorum, homines pingere, sieve deos.
Nec mirum: in capite Ausonius, sed Belga cerebrum
Non temere in gnaua fertur habere manu.
Maluit ergo manus Jani been pingere rura;
Quam caput, aut homines, aut male scire deos.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius

portrait of Justus Clivensis 12 IVSTO CLIVENSI ANTVERPIANO PICTORI.
Nostra nec artifices inter te Musa silebit
Belgas, picturae non leave, Just, decus.
Quam propria, nati tam felix art fuisses;
Mansisset sanum si misero cerebrum.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

portrait of Matthew Cork 13 MATTHIAE COCO, ANTVERPIANO, PICTORI, HIERONYMI
FRATRI.
Tu quoque, Matthia, sic pingere rura sciebas,
Vt tibi vix dederint tempora nostra parem.
Ergo, quod artifices inter spectaris et ipse,
Quos immortali Belgica laud colit;
Non in te pietas tantum fraterna, sed arti
Efficit, et merito laus tribuenda tuae.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

portrait of Henry de Bless 14 HENRICO BLESIO, BOVINATI, PICTORI.
Pictorem vrbs dederat Dionatum Eburonia, pictor
Quem proximis dixit poeta versibus.
Illum adeo artificem patriae situs ipse, magistro,
Aptissimus, vix edocente fecerat.
Hanc laudem inuidit vicinae exise Bouinum,
Et rura doctum pingere Henricum dedit.
Sed quantum cedit Dionato exise Bouinum,
Ioachime, tantum cedit Henricus tibi.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

portrait of John Mayo 15 IOANNI MAIO, PICTORI.
Quos homines, quae non Maius loca pinxit, and vrbes,
Visendum late quicquid and Orbis habet;
Dum terra sequiturque mari te, Carole Caesar,
Pingeret vt dextrae fortia facta tuae;
Quae mox Attalicis fulgerent aurea textis,
Materiem artifici sed superante manu?
Nec minus ille sua spectacula praebuit art,
Celso conspicuus vertice grata tibi;
Iussus prolixae detecta volumina barbae
Ostentare suos pendula ad vsque pedes.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of Peter Coeck 16 PETRO COECKE, ALOSTANO, PICTORI.
Pictor eras, nec eras tantum, Petre, pictor, Alostum
Qui facis hac Orbi notius art tuum:
Multa sed accessit multo ars tibi parta labor,
Cuius opus pulchras aedificare domos.
Schastianus Serlius scripsit Italics de Architectura.
Serlius hanc Italos: tu, Serli deinde bilinguis
Interpres, Belgas, Francigenasque doces.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of John Schoorel 17 IOANNES SCORELIVS BATAVVS PICTOR.
Primus ego egregios pictura inuisere Romam
Exemplo docuisse meo per secula Belgas
Cuncta ferar: neque enim iusti dignandus honor
Artificis, qui non graphidas, pigmentaque mill
Consumpsit, tabulasque schola depinxit in illa.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

portrait of Lambert Lombard 18 LAMBERTO LOMBARDO, LEODIENSI, PICTORI ET
ARCHITECTO.
Elogium, ox merito quod te, Lombarde, decobat,
Non libet hic paucis texere versiculis:
Continet hoc ea charta (legi si nostra merentur)
De te quam fecit Lampsoniana graphis.


Th. Galle excud. Vitam eius descripsit Dominicus Lampsonius, Brugis ab Hub.
Goltzio 1565. editam.

portrait of Peter Brugel 19 PETRO BRVEGEL, PICTORI.
Quis nouus hic Hieronymus Orbi
Boschius ingeniosa magistri
Somnia peniculoque, styloque
Tanta imitarier art peritus.
Vt superet tamen interim et illum?
Macte animo, Petre, mactus vt art.
Namque tuo, veterisque magistri
Ridiculo, salibusque referto
In graphices genere inclyta laudum
Praemia vbique, et ab omnibus vllo
Artifice haud leuiora mereris.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

portrait of William Cayo 20 GVILIELMO CAIO, BREDANO, PICTORI.
Quas hominum facies, vt eos te cernere credas,
Expressit Caij pingere docta manus,
(Si tamen excipias vnum, me iudice, Antonius Morus Vltraiectinus, Philippi II.
Hisp. Regis pictor.
Morum)
Culpari Belgae nullius art timent.


Th. Galle excud.

portrait of Luke Gassel 21 LVCAE GASSELIO HELMONTANO PICTORI.
Salve omnes, Luca, ante alios carissime quondam,
Nec leuius proprio culte parente mihi.
Quippe mihi primus graphices datus auctor amandae,
Dum pingis docta rura casasque manu.
Par arti probitasque tuae, candorque, bonorum
Et quicquid mentes ducere amore potest.
Ergo fama tuae virtutis, et artis in aeuum
Viuat, vtroque mihi nomine amate senex.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsontus amico posuit.

portrait of Francis Floris 22 FRANCISCO FLORO, ANTVERPIANO PICTORI.
Si pictor quantum natura, Flore, valebas,
Tantum adiunxisses artis et ipse tibi;
Dum tibi multa libet potius, quam pingere multum,
Nec mora te limae iusta, laborque iuuat;
Cedite, clamarem, pictores, omnibus oris
Quos vel aui, nostri vel genuere patres.


Th. Galle excud. Dom. Lampsonius.

IMAGE DE DIVERSE ^^MMES DESPRIT SUBLIME (...) PAR LEUR ART ET SCI^^^^ ^^^^^VENT
VIVRE ETERNELLE^^^^ ET DES QUELS (...) ^^^ANGE ET RENOM^^^ FAICT ESTONNER LE
MONDE

A ANVERS MIS EN LUMIERE PAR IEAN MEYSSENS PEINCTRE ET VENDEUR DE LART AU
CAMMESTRAET L'AN.M.DC.XLIX



portrait of Cornelius de Bie 23 CORNELIUS DE BIE
Nee dans la ville de Lyere lan 1627. le x. de fevrier, Notaire, Procureur et
Greffier de l'Audience milituir dans laditte ville, Aucteur de ce liver.



N. quellinus pinxit. I. Neijssens excudit.

portrait of Octavio Venus 24 OCTAVIO VAN VEEN
Estoit en son tempre, un de plus florisantes maistres de toute la paijs has,
camm on ^cult cognoistre per un tableau dans l'eglise de Nostre Dame en Anvens,
surlautel de la chappelle de St. Sacramentietant la deeniere gene de nostre
Seigneur, avecq sas apostres. ila ete paintre du prince de Parma, et de
l'Archiduc Albertiet autres princenil futne a Leglen, en lan 1558. et mourut a
Brusselles, lan 1629; le 6. de maij.



Gerl. van Veen pinuit. Aeg^ Ruchel sculpsit. Joan Meyssene excudit.

portrait of Adam Van Dort 25 ADAM VAN OORT
Fut un paintre renomme, en magnifieques ordonances, oe qu'on peut voir^ per
diverses oeuvres qu'on trouve enter les mains des amateurs, il at eu son pere
pour son maistre, nomme Lambert van Oort, il est ne'en Anvers l'an 1557. et il
ymourut lan 1641.



Iacobus lordaene pinxit. Heud suquers sculy. Io. Meijssens exc.

portrait of Abraham Blomaert 26 ABRAHAM BLOMAERT
Un tres vaillant paintre, inventif en grandes, et petites figures paisages, et
animaulx. aussi un bon desseigneur: natif de Gorckom, en l'an 1564.



Her. Blomaert delin. Hen. snijers sculpsit. I Meijssons exculit.

portrait of Toby Verhaecht 27 TOBIE VERHAECHT.
Peintre en peisages fort renomme' par ses rare tableau a'st este primiez
maistre du fameux P. Paul Rubbens est ne a Anuers l'an 1566 et mourut. 1631.



C. van Caukercken se. Octauie Vanus piuxit I. Meyssens excudit

portrait of Adam Elshamer 28 ADAM ELSHEIMER (...)
Natij de Francfort en lan 1574 filid un Tajleur, faisoit son aprentisage a
Francfart Che^ Philippe Oudenbach ^^gran deseignatour, et tres bon painctre,
neaumoins Surpassoit son maistre de beaucoup, estoit d'un Humeur melancolique,
se treuent ordinairement dans les Eglises, ou en quelque Viele Ruin, excrsent
de la facon, son estude, on troue peu de ses aeuures mais ex^rementent
labourees auecque vne grande farce et d'un dium entendement, Il a peu
dessaingue, mais tenant ^u grandmaistre, Touchard sa vie at aste de peu de
(...), niouru^ your, laissent per le monde vne Renomee, qui durer^ a jamais:



W. Hollar fecit. ^^oysens pinxit et excudit,

portrait of Guydo Rheno 29 GUIDO RHENUS
Excelloit engrandes ordonances, (...) esprit abondant: ses inventions sont
asse^ cognues par les estampes, qu'on v^^, de sa main faictes, en cau fort. le
^our de sa nalwite, a ete, a Boloigne 1574: et mourut en lan 1642.



Guide. R henus pinxit. I. Me^ssens f^cit et exoudit.

portrait of Peter Paul Rubens 30 PETRUS PAULUS RUBENS
Tres renemmees mais encor plus noble per les rares don's de les quelles il
etoit pourveutcar cest lui pour qui ^outes art lib^^^uic ont empleije^^ toutes
leur sciense^ pour amasserdans luj^le plus haut de leur pouvoir. certe la
painture aijant faict un compact avec la famespour promulgerses louanges par
tout l'univers^n'a point mancquce enson intention. mass l'Eloquence
accompaignce de la Dignit^et Richesse, la tellem^nt adornee, que le Roij
d'Espaigne, le Roy de France, et le Roij d'Angleterre; en temoinage de ses
merits, lui ont faict l^^oneur de ^our ordresde Chevalerie. An^^s est le
vill^de ceste heureuse nativite, le 28. de Iuirt, 1577. ausi du deplorable iout
de son trespass, 1040, le ^o de mali



I. Meij (...)

portrait of Francis Snyders 31 FRANCOIS SNYDERS
Un tr^^ excellent pointre, en chasses, poissons, et fruicts. il est ne en l'an
1579. en Anvers il a faict ylusieurs magnificques ord^nances des chasses, et
autre admirables ordonances qu^^ les il a paint pour le Roy d' Espaigne, et.
ausi your l'Archiducq Leopolde Wilhelms, et plusieurs autres princes. son
maistre fut Henri van Balen, et ila ^ste long temp en Italy.



Ant. van Dyek pinxit. Io. Mayssens exc.

portrait of William Van Neulant 32 GUILLAUME DE NIEULANT
Natif d'Anars lan 1584 paintre renome partout, il faisoit les ruins de Rome
perfaitement blen, et adornees de petites figures, et paysage^il illuminoit, et
faisait de merpeille en cau fort, il fut enter le meilleurs poets de
sonlempeanant apris sonart che^ Iacq savers a Amstelre dam, lan 1599 et il est
all a Rome, ou il demeuroit 3 aus aupres Paul Bril, et relonant de Rome, l'an
1607, il entr^ didans la confrerie de paintres en Anvers. et aijant demeure
long temp en la dicte ville, il ^^tournoit a Amstelredam, ou il mourut, l^n
1635.



Joan Megssens fecit^t excudit.

portrait of Sr. Anthony Vandyck 33 ANTHOINE VAN DYCK CHEVALLIER DU ROY
DANGLETERRE
E^t ne a Anvere lan 1599. le 22 du moie de mars, a este le v^^y Ph^^nix de
nostre siecle. on voit par tout de ses merveilles soit en pourtraicts ou en
tableaux, don't ila monstre son esprit divin, c'est dommage qua la mort nousa
ravij d'un tell minacle de la nature en un si bas age, il mourut a Londres l'an
1641.



Ant. van Dyck yinxit. Paul. Pontius sculysit. Ie. Meijssens excudit.

portrait of Gerard Segars 34 GERARD SEGERS
Tres expert peinctre en grand il a faict beaucoup de belles pieces
principalament en devotion, a long temps demeure en Itolie comme aussi en
Espaigne don't le Roy lui a honnore du tiltre de serviteur de la maison roijale,
^^ent sa demeure a present en Anvers ville de sa naissance faisant illec de
belles oeuvres.



Gen S^gers pinxit. Pet. de Iode sculpsit. Ia. Meyssens excudit.

portrait of Adrian Van Utrecht 35 ADRIAN VAN UTREOHT
Ne en Anvers, lan 1599 le 12 (...) de Ianuier, il est un paintre fort renome
pertout. son excercice est en fruicts, animauls mortes, et vifs admirabilement,
prince^ palement les poulets, cocqsd Indes, et autres ois^eaz on voit de ses
aeuvres aupres l Empereur, le Roy de Espaigne, et plusieurs autree grandes
princes. et au pais d'Hollande. il at ete en Frunce, Provence, ^^alte, et en
Almaigne. et il se teint en la Ville d'Anvers.



Iean Meijssene pinx Met (...). Come (...) sculp.

portrait of Adam Willaerts 36 ADAM WILLAERTS
Gentil paintre de mers, bateaus, et de petites figures, sur le rivage, ports,
et dans les pelites barcques. il est ne en Anvers en l'an 1577. et il a pris sa
demeure dans la ville d^ Utrecht.



Ad Will^^^s delin. fr. vande steen sculysit. I. Me^^ssens excudit.

portrait of John Babur 37 IEAN GUILLAUME BAUUR
Natif de Stms^urg. il falsoit merveille en la miniature, il a demcure a Rome
che^ le duc de Brassignano. l'an 16^7. il estoit a Venise; ^et de la ilest venu
verse l'Empereur d'Almaigne Ferdinand, a Viene: estant son paintre, mourut l'an
1640.



Io. Guill^l^^^ Bauur pinxit. I. M^^ssens fecit et excudit.

portrait of Nicholas Knypfer 38 NICOLAS KNVPFER.
Peintre artificieux en figures. Il fit son apprentissaige a Lipsic, chez
Emmanuel Nijsen, lan 1603. et du depuis a Magdembourg. Il vint l'an 1630. tenir
sa residence en Vtrecht, c^e^ Abraham Blommart, ou il at mis au iour quantite
de pieces adnirables tant pour le Roij de Dannemarc, comme pour aultres grands
Princes et persons curieuses.



Nicolas Knupser pinxit. P. de Iode sculpsit. Ioannes Menijssem excudit.

portrait of John Bylert 39 IEAN BYLERT
Paintre fort adroict on son art, il faiet lien ses ordenances. ses figures
sent medi^crement grandes, et extrement douces. il est file d'un vilurier,
natif de la ville d'Vtrcht.



Io. Bylert pinxit. Petr. Balleu sculp. Io. Menssens excudit.

portrait of John Van Balen 40 IOHANNLS VAN BALEN
Bon Painctre en petit et en grand, il a este quelque temps en I^alie, a pris
son Commencement aupres son Pore Henderic van Balen, Il fut ne en st^uerv ^an
16^^, ou il ce tientmentinant,



(...) Baleu pinxit (...) Heller (...) I: Menssens excudit

portrait of Rowland Savery 41 ROELANT SAVERY
A ete un paintre extraordinatre des animaux, et autres oyseaux; et les
paijsage^ les quelles il faict, sont bien estimees de les amateurs de la
painture il est natif'de Flandres, il a este peintre du l'Empereur Rudolphe
second.



Adam Willaert^ delin. Io. Me^^ssens fecit et excudit.

portrait of Henry Vanderborcht 42 HENRY VAN DER BORCHT,
De Brusselles ou il naquit l'an is 83, dou il fut, emmene en Allemaigne par
les ^roubses l'an 1586, et apres il at appris la. Peinlure Chez Gilles de
Valckenborgh Es^^nt retou^^ne d' Italy il a demeure a Franckendael u^sques en
l'an 1627 quil est renu demeurer a Francfort an Palatinal; estant aussi un
ainatemy admirable de loute serl^ de varelez et antiquitez anisy, que le Con^e
d'Arondell le Cherischoi^ pour les ^^res pieces et Curiositez quil anoit e^ de
^^y, tant en Medalles que Peintu res et autre sorts d'^lntiquilez,



Henricus van der Borcht junior pincil, (...), Ioannas (...) excudit,

portrait of Jacob Backer 43 IACOP BACKER
Ect un excellent paintre en grandr fort inventif, et bon couloreur qui sentend
tres bien your fair un bon nud: et il est fort adroiet pour fair un
po^rtraict, il est natif de la ville de Haerlingeren l'an 1608 et il se tient a
Amstelredam.



Iac. Backer delin. Pet. Balliu sculp. Io. Meijssens excud.

portrait of Deodate Delmont 44 DEODATE DEL MONT
Noble domestique du Duc de Nieuborg, son peintre et architecae, generale, pour
quelques annees, par l'aduoy des Serenissmes. Archiducs Alberte et Isabelle,
des quelles il fut entretenu sa vie durante, mourut en Anvers l'an 1643.



Deodatus del Mont pinxit. C. Waumans sculp.

portrait of David Teniers, Sr. 45 DAVID TENIERS SENIOR
Nasquit a Anvers lan 1582. ou ayant appris l'art de peinture soubs PP. Rubens,
et Adam Elsh etc. devint Maistre tres excelent et renomme en toutes sorts de
grandes, et petites figures, et paijsages, et mourut l'an 1649.



P. V. Mol pin^it P. V. Leysobetten sculp

portrait of Adrian Van Newlant 46 ADRIAN VAN NIEULANT
Tres bon paintre en petites figures, et paijssages, il a faict beaucoup des
histoires du vieulx testament, il est natif d'Anvers son commencement a este a
Amstelredam, chez Piere Isacx, et aupres Francois Badens, 1609 et maintenent se
tient a Amstelredam, age de 59 an^.



Cor. Ianssene pinxit. C. Waumans sculpsit I. Mayssens ex cudit.

portrait of Francis of Padon 47 FRANCISCO PADOANINO
Natif de Padoa, paintre admirable de grandes figures, il est superflux aux
inventions, bon portraicteur se qu'il at monstre per les po^rtraicts du Conte
d'Arondel, et de sa femme, il se tient ordinairement a Rome, et maintenant il
tient sa demeure a Padoa.



F Pad^anino delin. I Meyssen fecit et excud.

portrait of Peter Franchoys 48 PIERRE FRANCHOYS,
Il estoit fort bon peintre natif de Malines, et mourut le 11. d'Aoust l'an
1654.



Lucas Franchoijs pinxit C. Waumans sculp.

portrait of John Both 49 IEAN BOTH
Bon painctre en paijsages bien ordonees, a la veue bien douces, les devants
fortset bien coulerees garnies des figures, et animaux bien entendues. se
tientmiantenant a Vtrecht ville de sa naissance.



Abr. Willars pinxit. C. Waumans sculysit. I. Meyssens excudit.

portrait of David Beck 50 DAVIT BECK
Peintre, et Valet, de Chamber de la Serenissime Reijne de Sweede, enuoie de Sa
Ma: pour peindre les persons Illustres de la Chrestiente. natif de Delft en
Hollande.



Dauit Beck pinxit Ant. Co^et sculpsit Joan. Meijssens exc.

portrait of Gerard Honthorst 51 GERARD HONTHORST
Est ne a Vtreche lan 1^92. tres bon peinctre en ordonnences et pourin^icts, a
often long temps on Italy y faisant pour plusieurs Candinaulx des chooses
exquises, camme ausst il a faict ^n Angle terre des ceuvres tres ^^lles pour le
Roy, lan voit aneares an la court du Roy de Danemar^^^^ beaucoup de ses
tableaux, il se tienta present a la Haeqe au service de son Altesse le Prince
d'Orange, son maistre estoit Abraham Blommaert.



Gen Hentherst penxit. Pet. de Iode sculy. I^. M^^ssens excudit.

portrait of Thomas Willeborts Bossaert 52 THOMAS WILLEBORTS BOSSAERT
Pein^tra tres^^^omme, travaill admirublement bien en grandes figures, estime
pour pouro^r fair un yourtruict exactement bien, son Altecse le Prince don^nge
Heney Frederic luj a faict fair beaucoup de pieces, comme aussi son filz le
Prince Guillaume, aussi pourd autres Monarques, son maistre estoit Gerard
Segers, est ne de Bergue sur le Zoom lan 1613. et demeur a present a Anvers.



The. Willeborts pinxit. Coeur. Woumans sculysit. Io. Meyssane exeudit.

portrait of Bonaventure Peter's 53 BONAVONTVR PEETERS.
Tres bon Painctre de Mers. Calmes, et Tempests ilsentent bien aux nauires,
galeres, et Batailies sur Ner. Cognoyt l'orisont, ses ^loignements sont douces,
faict bien les Villes, et Chateaux, on voit par tout, Beaucoup de ses aeures,
dans les Maisons des ama^eicts, il est natif d'Anuers, et fut ne en l'an 1614.



Ioannes Meyssen pinxit et excudit. W. Hollar fecit.

portrait of Francis Wouters 54 FRANCOIS WOUTERS
estne a Lyere lan 1614, faict extrement bien les petites figures principa
lement nuexet aussi des paisages, il a este disciple de ^^aul Rubens^ et parson
addres est faict peinctre de l'Empereur d'Allemaigne Ferdinand le 2.^^ sentant
plle avec son Am bassadour on An^letserve, ^u estant arrive rceut la novelle
qu^ sa May, Jmyeri.^^ est ait mort lan 1637. en apres Jutpeinetre et homme de
Chamber du Prince de Galls, ayans demcure quelque temps a Londies sest
retour^ie a A nvers sy faisant valoir parson^art.



Fr. Wouters pin^it. Pet. de Iode seulp. Io. Me^yssens exc.

portrait of Daniel Segars 55 DANIEL SEGERS FRIAR I ESUITE
Un de premiery painctres de nostre temps, en fleurs natureles: il a faict son
aprentisage ch^^ Iean Breugel, l'on trouve de ses chefs d'aeuvres, dans les
courts des grandes seigneurs. l'Empe. reur d'Alamaigne, et l'Archidu^^q,
'Leopolde Guillelme ont beaucoup de ses pleces. S. A. le Prince d'Oraigne Henri
Fredericq ^^j a faict deux presents pour deu^ pieces de sa main, une dixi^s, me
et une crols d'or masif, toutes deux de grande valeur, il teint maintenant sa
residence en I. Luvne pinxit. Anvers dansla maison de proffesse der Peers
Jesuits.



I. Meyssene encudit.

portrait of Peter Snyers 56 PETRVS (...)
Nmquit en Anuers lan^ggs, tres bon (...) en gran^^ et (...) mement ^^en (...)
Aftresse le Frence Carian^^ Infinte d'Espa^gne et dez plus (...) Princes etc.
demeurant a Bruxelles.



D. (...) Heil penxit. Corn. Coukercken ficit.

portrait of James Van Es 57 LACOBVS VAN ES
Peinctre Excellent enfruicts poissons oisea^cz et fleurs les quelles il faict
extremement bien au naburel il demoure a Anuers y estant ne.



Icannes Meyssens pirixit et excudit. We Hollar fecit.

portrait of Adrian de Bie 58 ADRIANVS DE BIE
Paintre bien es time en grandes figures et aultres ordonnances, Pere de
l'Auctheur de ce liver, qu'il at demeure long temps en Italy etc^ne dans la
ville de Lijere en l'an 1594.



Petrus Meert pinxit. Lucas Vorstermans junior sculpsit.

portrait of Adrian Van Venne 59 ADRIAEN VAN VENNE and
Natieff de Delft en l'an 1599 a pris son Commencement aupres de Simon Valck a
layden e^ de la ch^^ Ier^nimus oun Did. Excellent Paintre en blanc^ et no^^r
quitant son Maistre. s'est exerce' de tell facon en son estude quil a faict
der Chefs d^nures pour le Roy de Denemercque ausi Son Altesse le Prince
d'Orange a desbelles Char^s de sa main et Beaiccoup d'^ustres Princes,
etgrandes Seigneurs, mais ces plus bellesounres ^nt este' e^ blancque et noyr
il est bon poet cet quon ^vite per ces livers qui il afaict il tient sa
Residence a la Hayo.



A van V^^^ p^^^^^. W. H^llar fecit. I. Me^^^ens excudit.

portrait of James Jordans 60 IAECQUES IORDAENS
^xcellent peutetre en grand, faict connoistre son esprit releve par sa belle
maniere de peindre, est inventif an tout^ sort dordonait^ es, solt en poisie
histoires en devotion et dautres, il a faict les belles chooses racounantes pour
le Roy de Suede; et plusieurs autres princes et seigneurs, est ne a Anwers lan
1594. le 19. de Maij, a faict son apprentisage chez son ^eaupere Adam van Oort,
tenant sa demeure en la ville de sa naissance.



Ia. Iordaens pinxit. P^t. de Iode sculysit. Ie. Meijssens excudit.

portrait of Gaspar de Crayer 61 GASPAR DE CRAYER
^a^nf d'A^^^ers en l'an 1585. a'este diciple de Raphael Coxcij demeurant a
Bruselles, et at tellement surpass son Majstre en l'art de Paincture, q'uil
s'est rendu un des milieurs maistres de nostre ciecle, don't ces chess d'^^u^res
q'uon poict per tout en sont les tesmoins, principalement a Brusselles, ville
de sa demeure, il a este painctre de son Althest le Prince Cardinal Ferdinan,
dus a: saict son Portraict, et aussj de beaucoup' d'autre Princes, il est encor
slorisent en son estude faisent des belles aeu^res.



Antonius van Dyck pinxit. Iacobus Neefs sculp. Joan. Meyssens excudit.

portrait of Balthazar Gerbier 62 BALTHAZAR GERBIER
Il a faict merveille en illuminature, et a demcure long temp^ en Itali^, il
fut paintre du Duc de Bocquingam et apr^^ du Roy d'Angleterre le quel lui
faisoit Chevalier, par sa virtue; et appresson Agent a Brusselles, en l'an 1630
et a Londres maistre de la cermonie, il est natif d'Anvers lan 1592.



Ant. van Dyck pinxit. Iean. Meijssens excudit.

portrait of Leonard Bramer 63 LEONARD BRAMER
Natif de Delft, en l'an 1596. il a demeure long temps en Italy dedans la
Court du Prince Mario Ferneso, ou il a faict beaucoup des ses aeuvres en grand,
et en petit. il a faict aussi quelques pi^^es pour le Cardinal Schalie.
d'Italie il est revenu a De^ft, et il a faict quelques pieces a Rysewyc your
son Altese le Prince d'Orange Fredric Henri: et your son Exc co Conte Maurice
de Nasou, et autres Princes.



Leon. Bramer pinxit Ant vander Does sculpsit. Io. Meijssens excud.

portrait of Cornelius Poulenbourgh 64 CORNELIO POULENBOURGH
Na^f d.^ V^recht, paintre tres perfaict, et admirable, en petites figures, et
animaux: et l^s enfans nuds il les faict fort naturelles. ses ruins. paysages,
et eslongements sont fort beauz, il a demeure long temps en Italy; et en l'an
1637. il fut demand per le Roy d'Angleterre a Londres, ou il a faict pour le
Roy, quelques tableaux, et la ilsest retire a Vtrecht.



Cor Poulenbourgh delin. Coen Waumans scul^. Io. Meyssens ex^

portrait of Erasmus Quelin 65 ERASMUS QUELLINIUS
Ne d'Anvers lan 1607, le ^9 novembre, il at ete disc^^le de Monsr. PPR. ubene,
estant premierement devenis maistre dedans la Philosophi^ il et ausidans la
Peinturedevenu un maistre excellent, si bien en grand que en petitiet il se
entend fort bien a la perspective, et il est un grand desseignatur et
Archite^te.



Er. Quellinius delin. Petr. de Iode sculp. Io. Me^^ssens excudit.

portrait of John Cosiers 66 IOANNES COSSIERS.
Peinctre, naturel d'Anuers, est nee l'an 1603. Il a eu au commencement de son
art pour maistre Cornil, de Vos. Il est devenue fort excellent. Ce que
tesmoignent assez, ses peinctures quil afait en plusieurs Eglise tant pour le
Roij d'E^paigne, que pour le Prince Cardinal et pour l'Archiducq Leopolde
Guiliame et plusieurs aultres Princes et Seigneurs.



Ioannes lossiers pinxit Ietrus d^ Iode sculpeit Ioannes Me^^ss^^ exc.

portrait of David Balii 67 DAVID BALLII
At eu son origin a Leyden ou il tient encor sa residence. il est un fort bon
peintre en pourtraicts, et en vic coye: estant fort en la desseinne a la plume
etc.



(...) pinxit. Coeur. Waumans sculp. Io. Meyssens exc.

portrait of Herman Saftleven 68 HERMAN SAFTLEVEN
Natif de Rotterdam en l'an 1609. un bon paintre en paijsages. au commencement
il faisoit paijsans, paijsanes, et granges: mais a present ila sa seule de
lectation en paijsagessa residense est en la ville d'Vtrecht.



Hisaft leven p^^^x. Coen. Waumans sculpsit I. Meijssens excudit.

portrait of John Van Bronchorst 69 IEAN VAN BRONCHORST
Natif de la ville de Vtrecht en l'an 1603. aijant apriz chez paintres en
verre, mais des petites maistres, sans quelque bone instruction, per sa grande
diligence est devenu un tres boit paintre. en figures. il est bon deseigneur
comme on peut ^oir^ par ces ce^^r^s.



Io. van Bronchorst delin. Pet. Balliu sculp. Io. Meyssens excudit.

portrait of Abraham Van Diepenbeck 70 ABRAHAM VAN DIEPENBEKE
Eat ne a Bo^^leducq, aqant eij devant exerce pour quelqu^ temps l'art de
p^indre sur les vitres, en qu^i^ il surparse tous ceux de son tempes, mais a
present sest addonne a p^ind^^ toute serte de peincture mesmes aux dess^ins
tres curicusement, aijant au pour mais^^ Pierre Paul Rubb^^e, ^tient so
residence a Anvers.



Abr. a diep^^^^^ p^acit. Paul. Pentius sculpsit. Io. M^^ssens excudit.

portrait of Peter Danckers de Ry 71 PIERRE DANCKERSE DE RY,
Natifs a Amsterdam l'an 1605. Peintre en pourtraict de sa Majte. Vladislaus
iv. du nom Roij de Pologne, et Swede, etc.



^etr. Danckerse de Rij pinxit. Joan Meijssens excud.

portrait of Daniel Van Heil 72 DANIEL VAN HEIL
est ne de Brusselles lan 1604, est bon peinctre en paisages, travaille bien au
vif, de mesme les maisons et villes bruslantes, ce qui se peult cognoistre par
beaucoup de tableaux quil a faict.



Iean Bapt. van Heil pinxit. Fredric Bottat^ sculpsit. Iean Meyssens excudit.

portrait of Cornelius Jansens 73 CORNELIUS IANSSENS
Paintre tres excellent en grandes, et petites ondenances: mais une luster de
po^rtraicts avecq un admirable entendement. la ville d'Amstelredam at le
bonheur de iouir de sa person. il a demeure long temps en Angleterre, ou il a
faict plusiours belles et admirables pieces, pour le Roij et plusieurs autres
grandes seigneurs.



Com. Ianssens pinxit. Coeur. Waumans sculp. Io. Me^ssenc exc.

portrait of James d'Artois 74 IACQVES D'ARTHOIS,
Nasquit en Bruxelles lan 1613. ou il tien sa residence, ses paijsages en
grande et petite form sont tenuz enter les plus plaisans de Flandres.



Iean. Meijssens pinxit et excul. Petr. de Iode sculps^^

portrait of Peter Van Lynt 75 PIERRE VAN LINT.
Trauaille en grand et en petit aux pourtraitures, en Histoires tant
spirituelles que prosines. Il a serui de Peintre au Cardinal Geuasius, Doijen,
et Euesque d'Ostie, part lespace de sept ans, comme ausij a d'aultres grands
Seigneurs. Il peinct a l'huile et a la detrempe, selon qu il a faict en la
Chapelle de Saint Craix en l'Eghse de la Madona del Popolo a Rome. Ell at
a^^^ij fait treis tables d'at^^el a Ostie. Il sert a present de ses pieces le
Roij de Dannemarc. Il naquit l'an 1609. Comri^^en^^^ son still l'an 1619. en
Anucrs, heu de sa naissence, (...) il reside a prosent.



P. van (...) pinx. P. de Iode se^bsit. Io^^^es Meijssens exc.

portrait of David Ryckaert 76 DAVID RYCKAERT
Prit so naissance en Anu^crs lan 1613 il at apris ch^r son pere dou^id
Rijcha^rt (...) maistre en petites figu^res, prinvipalement on eseu^ries et
semblable ^dific^^ cert^^ illu^stes au^y ordonu^nces ru^stiqu^es, ainsi qu^e
son Altesse Jmprerials L'Archid^^ L^^pold, L'^ (...) ser pieces (...) de son
cabinet comms au^si au^tres Princ^^s mais il est sur tou^ts au^tres ^^^^llent
en p^intu^^e de la lu^miers de chandelle.



Dou^id Rijch^^t pi^^it. Friderick (...) Io. Neys^^ens exc^^it.

portrait of Nicholas de Helt Stocade 77 NICOLAS DE HELT STOCADE
Prit sa naisance a Nieumegen en l'an 1614, il a demeure quelque temps a Rome
et a Venise et de la il est venu prendre sa residence en France ou il a faict
des si belles oeuvres qu'il at este estime digne d'estre receu Peintre de Sa
Majesty Tres-christiene



Nicolas de Helt Stocade pinxit. Petr. de Iode sculpsit. Io. Meyssens excudit.

portrait of Gonzalo Coques 78 GONZALO COQVES.
Ne'en Anuers, lan j6j8. at apriz son Art C^^z le Vieur David Rijckaert son
beau Pere, ou il a tellement auance' son estude que le Roij d Angleterre C'at
Emploije pour uuoir de ses pieces. le duc de Brandenborg sen delectoit fort et
le prince Dorange en faisoit grand Cas; ses ordonances sont excellentes, et ses
pourtraicts en petit, admirables.



gonzalo Coques pinxit. paulds pentius schulpsit Ieannes meijssens excud

portrait of David Teniers, Jr. 79 DAVID TENIERS
Un tres excellent peintre en petites figures et paijsages, il a faict des
remar^uables pieces tant pour le Roy d'Espaigne que pour autres Roys, de mesme
pour l'Archiduc Leopolde Guillaume, l'Ev^sque de Gand, et le Prince d'Orange
Guillame et plusiours autres Princes, Seigneurs, et Amatcurs de l'art ont
beaucoup de ses ceuvres, il est ^e d'Anvers lan. 1610. aijant eu son pere pour
maistre.



Dav. Tenters pinxit Pet. de Ibde sculpsit Io. Nevssens excudit.

portrait of Robert Van Hoeck 80 ROBERTUS VAN HOECK,
Controleur des fortifications pour le service de sa Majte. en Flandre etc.
peitre extrcordinaire en petites figures, tresbien estime^ des amateurs et
grands Seigrs. pour leur rarete ne dans la ville d Anvers.



G. Coques p^^xit. C. Caukercken sculpsit

portrait of John Baptist Van Heil 81 IEAN BAPTISTE VAN HEIL
bon peinctre, inventif en ordonances de devotion, poesy et dautres, faict
bien un pourtraict, ce qu'on poult veair a Brusselles don't il est ne^ lan 1609.
et friar de Daniel et Leo van Heil, touts trois encor en vie.



Ie. Bapt. van Heil pinxit. frad. Boltat^ sculpsit. Io. Meijssens exc.

portrait of John Van Thelen 82 IEAN PHILIPPE (...) VAN THIELEN
Seigneur de Couwenberch, etc. il est (...) ne a Malines, l'an 1618. a este
disciple du tres-fameux peintre F. Daniel Zegers (...) de la Compagnie de
Jesus, aupres lequelle il est deuenu peintre tres estime en fleur^^ (...)
dontses tublaux en rendet les tesmoinages.



Erasmus Quellinus pinxit Richard Collin sculpsit

portrait of Peter Meert 83 PETRVS MEERTE Pictor Brucellensis


C. Caukercken fecit.

portrait of John Peter's 84 IOANNES PEETERS
Tres-bon Peintre de Mers, casmes et tempests batailies sur mer, Gaseres,
Villes, et Chateaux etc. fort rares, et bien estimees par tous paijs,
princepasement des amateurs et grands Segnieurs. demeurant en Anuers Ville de
sa naisance, ne l'an 1624.



Luc. Vorster man's junior delineauir et scul^.

portrait of John Venderhecke 85 IOANNES VANDEN HECKE
Paintre tres-renomme^ en grandes et petites figures fleurs, fruicsts, animauz
et^^ltres ordonnances bien Estunez pour leur rarite, quil a demeure plusieurs
ans en Italic et, a este paintre de Ducq: de Bracciaen etc. demeurant en
Anvers.



Cour. (...) sculpit.

portrait of Luke Franchoys 86 LVCAS FRANCHOYS
Peintre tres expert et renomme en grandes ordonnances, et pourtraicts, nee a
Malines.



Lucas Franc^oijs pinxit. Coeur. Waumans sculp.

portrait of Charles Van Savoyen 87 CAROLVS VAN SAVOYEN,
Paintre extraordinaire en petites figures princepalement en nues grandement
estimez Nasquit dans la Ville d'Anvers demeurant en Hollande



C. van Savoijen fecit aqua forn.

portrait of Peter Van Bredal 88 PETRVS VAN BREDAEL.
Ne dans la ville d'Anvers en l'an 1630. Paintre fore plaisant et rare, il at
demeure quelque temps en Espaigne, et aultres provinces.



Abbe deli^tavit. Coeur s^^^urers ^^ul^ait.

portrait of Henry Vanderhorcht 89 HENRY VAN DER BORCHT PEINCTRE,
Ne a Tranchandael au Palatinat, et a cause de la Guerre venu a, Franckfort, eu
lan 1036 pissant le Com^e d'Arvndell Voyagant verse l'Emperour l'emmona et de la
l'enueya eit Thalie Ches Mr ^eti le quel amassa l'A^t Pour le dit Comb, de la
Passant auec l'artr en Angle terre il l'a guard Jusques au deces dai. Comb il
est Seruiteur du Prince de Galls.



Iel annt Meyssens pinxit et excudit. Well^llar fecit, 164^.

portrait of John Myssens 90 IEAN MEYSSENS,
Peinctre natif de Bruxelles l'an 1612. le 17. de May, tient a present sa
residence en la ville d'Anvers, ou pardessus l'exercice du pinceau particulier
en pourtraits, il fait profession de vendre des printes, en la cognoissance
desqueles il est singulieren^trerse.



Joan. Meyssens pinxit. Cornelis Meijssens sculp

portrait of George Van Son 91 GEORGIUS VAN SON
Peintre Excellent en Fruicts, Fleurs etc. qu'il demeure a Anuers ou fut ne en
l'an 1622.



E. Queilim^ pinxit. Coeuraerd. Lan^ers scu^sit.

portrait of John Baptist Van Deynum 92 IEAN BAPTISTE VAN DEYNVM.
Est ne d'Anuers, en l'an 1620. fait extremement bien des petites pourtraits,
paisages et autres figures en miniature, et Capitain d'vne Compagnie des
bourgeois dans la ville d'Anvers, en l'an 1651.



I.B. van Deynum pinxit. Coeur. Weumans scul.

portrait of John Van Keyssel 93 IOANNES VAN KESSEL
Ne dans la Ville d'Anvers en l'an 1626. paintre tres-renomme en fleurs petites
animaux etc. lesquelles sont fort estimez pour leur Curieusite.



E. Questinus pinxit. Alex. V^^t (...) sc^^sit.

portrait of Henry Berckmans 94 HENRY BERCKMANS
Naquit en la Villette de Clunder situee proche de Willemstat. Il fut disciple
de Philippe Wouerman Peintre extraordinaire en Batailles en la ville de Harlem.
Puis apres il fit son apprentissage en Postures ou Figures chez Thomas Will
borts et Iacques Iordaens en Anuers. Ses Pieces sont fort estimees,
particulierement ses Pourtraits. Il tient sa residence a Middelbourg en
Zelande.



H. Berckmans pinxit. C. Waumans sculp. I. Meijssens excudit.

portrait of Simon Voilet 95 Simon Vouet.


portrait of Peter Testa 96 Peeter Testa,


portrait of Peter Breugell 97 Peeter Brugel.


portrait of Cornelius le Brun 98 Cornelis Le Br^n,


portrait of Cornelius Danckers de Ry 99 CORNEILLE DANCKERTS DE RY
Futne a Amstendam lan 1561. mourut 1634. age de 73 ans, a este environ 40 ans
maistre macon et Arckuecte de ceste tant renommee Ville, il vient en la place
du feit son Pere du mesme nom, qui aveil en son vivant servi la Ville dans
ceste mesine charge il a faict une grande nombre de grands et signales
bastimentesyatce que l'a^^nindis sement de la Ville se sit en son temps, ila
bas^l la navelle port de Haerlem, les trois novalles Bglises, (...) Bourse de
merchants, et innummerables ouvrages apartenants a l'ornement de ceste Ville,
il trouva par grande experience linvencion de bastir desponts de yierre sans
restraindre le course de l'eau surdes grandes Rivieres comme il en sit la preuve
len 1632 par dessus ^a Ruiere d'Amstel large de 200 yieds ayant 7. arcqs.



Pet. Da^^^^de Rey doli^. Pet. de Iode seulysis. Io. Meyssent excudi^

portrait of Cornelius Cort 100 CORNELE CORT
Engraveur admirable natif de Hornesen Hollande en l'an 1536. ila demeure long
tempsen Italy faisant beducoup de ses oeuvres pour Raphael d'Vrbin Titian
etylusieurs autres. il mourut a Rome, en las^ 157^.



franc. vande steen sculpsit. I Meijssens excudit.

portrait of Theodore Corenhert 101 THEODOR CORENHERT
A. ete un tresexcellent graveunil a mis en lumiere plusieurs oeuvres de Martin
Hemskercq, et plusieurs aultres. il etoit fort bon poet, natif d'Amstelredam
l'an 1622: et mourut a Dergoude, en l'an 1590.



Fr. vande steen sculpsit. I. Meyssens excudit.

portrait of Henry de Keyser 102 HENRI DE KEYSER
Architecte dela ville d'Amstelredam, il etoit un de mellieurs sculpteure
d'Hollands, qu'on peult voire per le tombeau Zu prince d'Oraiene, qu'il a faiet
a Delst, et le maison de la ville. le iour de sa naisance fut en l'an 1565. le
15 da maij, dans la ville d.^ Vtrecht: et il mourut a Amstelredam lan 162^. la
25 de maij.



I. Meyssene fecit excudit.

portrait of John Sadeler 103 IEAN SADELER
Tres excellent Engraveur, natif de Brusselles en Brubant l'an 1550. il at este
premierem erit damasquineut en fer, mais aijant l'esprit plue eleve, il sat
addonne a la gravure, ou l'art luj a tribue la plus grande douceur et subtilite
du burin: la quelle il at acquise par soij, mesine parsa grande diligence,
tesmoigne les pieces qu'il a faict pour Martin de Vo^, et plusieurs autres. lan
1588. il est all dem^urer a Francfort, et de la a Munich^n en (...), ou le Du^
lui a. faict present d'une chesne d'oravecune madaille, et en lan 1595. (...)
all prendre sa demeure a Venise ou il mourut de la chaude fiebre lan. 1600.



Io. Menssen^^^^.

portrait of Ralph Sadeler 104 RAPHAEL SADELER
Excellent engraveur natif de Brusselles en Brabant, lan 1555. il a este
premicrement lamasquineur en feriet aprez il sat addonn^ aussi a la gravure
suivant l'exemple de son frer Iean^en la quelle il a si bien profit quil est
parvenu a la plus haute degree de la de licatesse, come on peut voire en ses
oeuvres, principalement les saints de Baviere et quelque livres de Heremits
qu'il a fai^t avec son frer Iean, avec qui il est venu demeurer a Munichen en
Baviere, et de la a Venise ou il mourut. il at ete pour quelq^ tempepeintre



Coen^. Waumans sculp. To. Me^ssens excudit.

portrait of James Matham 105 IACOBUS MATHAM.
Beaufils de Henri Goltz. fut ne a Haerlem lan 1571. le 15d October. mourut 1631.
le 20. Ianuier.



Ant vander Does sculp. P. Soutman pinx. I. Meyssens excud.

portrait of James Francquart 106 IACQVE VRANCQVART.
Atenus sa residence a Bruxelles et en son temps fut Archetecte du Serenissime
Archiduc Albert d'Austrice et Ingenieur ordinaire de Bruxelles pour le service
de sa Majeste.



Joan. Meijsseus exc.

portrait of Giles Sadeler 107 AEGIDIVS SADELER
Un de premiers engniveurs de toule le monde, ilest ne en Anvers l'an 1570, il
at apris son art chei ses oncles Ian^et Raphael sadeler, mais il les at
surmonle tant, ainsi ^u'il fut repute dime d'estre lenu engne ve^r de trois
Emyereur^ d'Alle magne do suite, a scaveir Rudely Re. Matthias, et Ferdinande
le deuxisi^e de cette nom. carsilart de la gravure a tribue qu^lque fav^ur
eud^^autrnelle a releves cattuj si per dessue toutes les autres le trouvant
capable non seulemant a la plus haute ^randesse du burin, mais a la plus grande
subtilite et delicatesse aus ordonances, et pourtraites les guelles ilasi bien
faict qu'il est impossible de les assequer avec son entendement: les ^uelles il
a le plus seuvent paint et dessei^nees au naturel devant les engraver, il
demeurait a Prage en Bolleme ou il mourut. lan. 1629.



Ae^idi^^ sadel^e pinxit. Pet. be Iode seulpsit. Io. Meysseus exeud^.

portrait of Henry Hondius 108 HENRICUS HONDIVS
Engmieur, et ^res bon Deseijntateur Natif de Duffel en Brabant l'an 2577. de
Noble Ongine, il at apris a deseynier che^ I^annes: Wierex, il excercoit ausi
en Orpherie, mais il fut tout iour plus incline a la gravure al at qpssi ayris
la Ma^nematique, la Geo: nietrie, Perspectiue, Architecture, et Fortification.
chez le Vi^ux Iean Vredeman Vrise, et aupres Samuel Marelois homme sans
parecil, on il a ^out, bien experimentez monstrant per les aeures, q'on voit de
luij en es tampes, maintenant il demeur^ en la Haije.



Henricus Hondius delincauit. Fredritus B^^^ats fuit. Joan. Meyssens exend.

portrait of Peter d'Jode, Sr. 109 PETRUS DE IODE
A este tres bon engraveur, et desseigneur tres illustre: il a faict plusieurs
chefs des oeuvresil a long temps demeure a Rome, et en lan 1601. retournoit en
Anvers, ville de sa naissance. aijant eu pour maistre Henri Goltz. il mourut
l'an 1634. le 9 d'auoust.



M^fen^inand pinxit P de lode Junior sculpsit. Io. Meyssens ^xcudit.

portrait of Paul Pontius 110 PAULUS DU PONT
Graveur admirable en taille douce, natif d'Anvers l'an 1603. il a faict son
aprentisage chez Lucas Vostermans, et at demeure aupres Monsr. Rubens, au il a
faict quantite de chefs d'oeuvres: aussi pour Monsr. van Dyck. comme on voit
par ses oeuvres.



I. Livens pinxit. I Menssens exc. P. del^de sculpsit.

portrait of Luke Faydherbe 111 LVCAS FAYDHERBE
Statuaire, et Architect tres-renomme pour son grand: esprit, il at este
discipl^ du Noble paintre Pier Paul Rubens, demeurant a Malines Ville de sa
Naisance.



G. Coques pinxit. Pet. de Iode sculp^it.

portrait of Peter d'Jode, Jr. 112 PETRUS DE IODE
Le ieusne, natif d'Anvers en lan 1606, le 22me de novembre: il at apris chez
son pere, et il est devenu un graveur fort delicat. il at este avec son pene
quelque temps a Paris, pour engraver quelques pieces pour Mons Bon enfant, et
St. L'Imago. on trouve plusieurs de ses e stampes en lumiere. il setient en
Anvers.



The. Willeb^rte pinxit. Pe^. de Iode sculpsit. Io. Menssens excudit.

portrait of James Callot 113 IACQ CALLOT
Gennlhome lorainacil sut ne en la ^ille de Nanci, an l'an 1^94 de son
commencement estoit grureur, mais voilant qu il ne scauroit fair p^^ytement
cette science, il sacnnoit a inavailler a I cau fert, enquelle il sa rendu si
extreme, qi^il est une merveille de le voir, on c^gneit son grand^ esprit per
ses oeuvres, come la grand^ march ^de Florence, le^ miseres de la guerre, et
quannte des autr^e. il mourut en la ville de sa naisance, l'an 1635, le 27
(...) de mars.



Mashe deli^. A^^mane sculpsit. 1 Mo^ssens excudit.

portrait of Leo Van Heil 114 LEO VAN HEIL
faict bien en illuminature des fleurs et mouches et autres petites animaux au
naturel, sentend fort bien en l'Architecture et batiments de maisons et en
perspectives, est ne a Brusselles lan 1605.



Io Bayt van Heil pinxit Fred Bot^^t^ sculpsit. Io. Me^ss^n^ excudit.

portrait of Peter Verbrugghen 115 PETRVS VERBRVGGHEN
Sculpteur d'images tres-renome demeurant en Anuers ville de sa naisance.



E. Quellinus pinxit. Coeur: Lauuers sculpsit.

portrait of Simon Bosboom 116 SIMON BOSBOOM
Natif d'Emden en l'an 16 (...) fut bon Architect et tailleur de pierre il at
este employe an service du tresillustre Pnnce Electeur de Brandenburch



Niclaes de Helt Stocade pi^^xit, Petrus de Iode sculp. I^an. Meijsseus excudit

portrait of Wenceslaus Hollar 117 WENCESLAUS HOLLAR
Gentilhomme ne a Prage l'an 1607. a este de nature fort inelin pr l'art de
meniature principa, lement pour ^^clairai^ maic beaucoup relarde par son pere,
lan 1627, il est pari^ de Prage aijan^ dameure an divars lieux en Allamaigne,
il c (...) addonne yourpeu de temys a asclaircir et aplicquer leau forte,
estant party de Coleigne avec l^ Comte d'Arondel ver^ Viann^ et dillec par
Prage verse l'Angleterre, ou aijant ast^ serviteur domesticque du Duc de Iorck,
il sect reti^ de la a cause de la guerre a Anvers ou il reside encores.



I^. Me^ssens pinxit et excudit.

portrait of Aertus Quilinus 118 AERTVS QVELLINVS IVNIOR
Natiff de St. Trude en paijs de Liege Architect et tailleur de Piere, Bois
etc. tres-bien estime et renome pour son gran esprit Demeurant et Anvers.



I. de Duijts p^xit. Coeur. La^^ers scupsit.

portrait of Stephen de la Belle 119 Stessano de la Belle,
natif de Florence en Italy, en l'an 1614, tres bon painctre en petit, ausi
faict merueilies, en l'cau fort d'vn grand esprit tres abondant, en
iriuentions, a faict son comencement aupres Iaccques Callot on voit quantite de
ses estampes par tout.



Stocade poceit, W^oller fecit. I^annes Meyssens. excudit.

portrait of Dirick Corenhert 120 Dirick Gorenhert


portrait of Richard Clolin RCIAHDR CLOILN
Il est nee la present anne 1627. il s'est adonee au pratique de la Geoge
Cosmoge es Math. et a^^es ees taille douce sequel a compris en pouc de temps
est purue. Eccel. len au Cari^^e Geo come lon voy par cees Oeuures lesquelles a
gravee en Errain



Orbis Roma caput bellorum turbine quondam
Obruta cur fremuit? Martis amica suit:
Ast ubi multiplicis sese dedit Artis alumnam,
Celsa Triumphatrix se super astra tulit.



