PANTAGRUEL's VOYAGE TO THE Oracle of the BOTTLE. Being the Fourth and Fifth
Books OF THE WORKS OF FRANCIS RABELAIS, M. D. WITH The Pantagruelian
Prognostication, and other Pieces in Verse and Prose by that Author: Also his
Historical Letters. Completing all his Works that are Extant. Never before
printed in English.

Done out of French by Mr. Motteux.

With Explanatory Remarks on every Chapter by the same Hand.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
1694.

To the Honorable HUGH HARE Esquire
SIR,
I Would not imitate those Authors who fly for Protection to Persons that are
unable, or unwilling to grant it. Your Love for Learning prompting You to
countenance the Well-meant Endeavors of Studious Men, You have condescended to
extend Your Favors even to me. This, SIR, made me so presumptuous as to relish
no other Method of owning the Debt I cannot pay, and at the same time
prepossessing the Reader in my Favor, than by dedicating this Transla^ion of
the best Work of France's g^eatest Wit to You, who have made ^he Copy of the
Masterpiece of one of Italy's best Historians outshine the beautiful Original.
For, whatever my Performance be, most Readers will as little doubt its being
good, because offered to so great a Judge, as they would be apt to mistrust a
Child's Legitimacy, to whom they saw a Man of Nice Honor stand Godfather.
Indeed, as Those who have no Children may be thought more obliged to be thus
Trustees for those of others, and make amends for not begetting any; so Those
whose Pens produce nothing, seem more engaged to take care of the Offspring of
other men's Brains, than those whose fertile Minds, like Yours, are like to
people the learned World with manly and charming Productions. Yet this does not
excuse the latter from appearing in Behalf of those who stand in need of their
charitable good Word, when ushered in to the World. Besides, as He who never
had any Progeny is less likely to secure a good Fame to that of others, than a
Person whose honorable Offspring evinces his Capacity for such a
Christian-like Office; so he who never writ can hardly so effectually save a
Book from Damnation, as one who having enriched the Public with valuable
Pieces, is acknowledged a competent Judge in the matter. Till Occasion calls,
and You consent to leave the Study of the best Ancients and Moderns, to devote
Your Self wholly to what You love more than Your Ease, I mean Your Country, it
hopes, SIR, to be obliged to You for such Presents, the Product of the hours,
that divide those during which You either bless Your Friends with Your
Conversation, or Your Self with that of a Consort, whose outward Graces are
attended with all the Beauties of the Mind. May Your Happiness, like Your
Virtues, admit of no Allay; Be still the Joy of a Noble Father, who doubly
lives, while he sees the Heir to his Honors, already like himself, adorned
with the most essential Nobility, when he sees in You so ripe a Judgment, so
calm and sedate a Mind, in so flourishing a Youth, so universal a Learning
without any Tincture of Affectation or Pedantry, so great a Knowledge of the
World without the least Acquaintance with its Vices; and, above all, so
charming a Modesty, that Virtue which shuns a Luster, yet heightens that of
every other. But that Darling of Yours causes me to draw a Veil over those
other Accomplishments, which, as they endear You to all Mankind, would have
made me ambitious of owning my self Your Admirer, tho I were not otherwise
bound to profess my self with all imaginable Zeal and Respect,

SIR, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, PETER MOTTEUX.

The Translator's Preface.
Reader,
I Don't know what kind of a Preface I must write to find thee Courteous, an
Epithete too often bestowed without a Cause. The Author of this Work has been
as sparing of what we call Good Nature, as most Readers are now adays. So I Am
afraid his Translator and Commentator is not to expect much more than has been
showed them. What Is worse, there are but two sorts of taking Prefaces, as there
are but two kinds of Prologues to Plays; for, Mr. Bays was doubtless in the
right, when he said, That if Thunder and Lightning could not fright an Audience
into Complaisance, the sight of the Poet with a Rope about his Neck, might work
them into Pity. Some indeed have bullied many of you into an Applause, and
railed at your Faults, that you might think them without any; and others, more
safely, have spoken kindly of you, that you might think, or at least speak as
favorably of them, and be flattered into Patience. Now I fancy there is nothing
less difficult to attempt than the first method; for, in this blessed Age, it is
as easy to find a Bully without Courage, as a Whore without Beauty, or a Writer
without Wit; though those qualifications are so necessary in their respective
Professions: The mischief is, that you seldom allow any to rail besides your
selves, and and cannot bear a Pride which shocks your own. As for wheadling you
into a liking of a Work, I must confess it seems the safest way; but tho
Flattery pleases you well when it is particular, you hate it, as little
concerning you, when it is general. Then we Knights of the Quill are a
stiff-neck'd Generation, who as seldom care to seem to doubt the worth of our
Writings, and their being liked, as we love to flatter more than one at a time;
and had rather draw our Pens, and stand ^p for the Beauty of our Works (as some
Errant ^^^ls used to do for that of their Mistresses) to the last drop of our
Ink. And truly this Submission which sometimes wheadles you into Pity, as
seldom decoys you into Love, as the awkward Cringing of an Antiquated Fop, as
Moneyless as he is Ugly, affects an experienced Fair One. Now we as little value
your Pity, as a Lover his Mistress's, well satisfied that it is only a less
uncivil way of dismissing us. But what if neither of these two ways will work
upon you, of which doleful Truth some of our Playwrights stand so many living
Monuments? Why, then truly I can think on no other way at present, but blending
the two into one; and, from this Marriage of huffing and cringing, there will
result a new kind of careless Medley, which, perhaps, will work upon both sorts
of Readers, those who are to be hectored, and those whom we must creep to. At
least it is like to please by its Novelty, and 'twill not be the first Monster
that has pleased you, when regular Nature could not do it.

If uncommon Mirth, lively Wit and deep Learning, wove into wholesome Satire, a
bold, good and vast Design admirably pursued, Truth set out in its true Light,
and a Method how to arrive to its Oracle, can recommend a Work, I am sure This
has enough to please any reasonable Man. The three Books published some time
since, which are in a manner an entire Work, were kindly received* Yet, in the
French they come far short of these two, which are also entire Pieces; for the
Satire is all general here, much more obvious, and consequently more
entertaining. Even my long explanatory Preface was not thought improper, though
I was so far from being allowed Time to make it methodical, that at first only
a few Pages were intended; yet as fast as they were printed I wrote on, till it
proved at last like one of those Towns built little at first, then enlarged,
where you see promiscuously an odd variety of all sorts of irregular Buildings.
I hope the Remarks I give now will not please less; for, as I have translated
the Work which they explain, I had more Time to make them, though as little to
write them. It would be needless to give here a large Account of my
Performance; for, after all, you Readers care no more for this or that Apology,
or Pretense of Mr. Translator, if the Version does not please you, than we do
for a blundering Cook's Excuse after he has spoilt a good Dish in the dressing.
Nor can the First pretend to much Praise, besides that of giving his Author's
Sense in its full Extent, and copying his Style, if it is to be copied; since he
has no share in the Invention or Disposition of what he translates. Yet there
was no small difficulty in doing Rabelais Justice in that double Respect; the
obsolete Words and turns of Phrase, and dark Subjects, often as darkly treated,
make the Sense hard to be understood even by a Frenchman, and it cannot be easy
to give it the free easy Air of an Original; for even what seems most common
Talk in one Language, is what is often the most difficult to be made so in
another; and Horace's Thoughts of Comedy may well be applied to this: Creditur,
ex medio quia res arcessit, habere
Sudoris minimum; sed habet Comoedia tantum
Plus oneris, quanto veniae minus.
Far be it from me for all this to value my self upon hitting the Words of Cant
in which my drolling Author is so luxuriant; for tho such words have stood me
in good stead, I scarce can forbear thinking my self unhappy in having
insensibly hoarded up so much Gibberish and Billinsgate Trash in my Memory; nor
could I forbear asking of my self, as an Italian Cardinal said on another
account, D'onde hai tu pigliato tante Coglionerie? Where the Devil did thou
rake up all these Fripperies?

It was not less difficult to come up to the Author's sublime Expressions. Nor
would I have attempted such a Task, but that I was ambitious of giving a view
of the most valuable Work of the greatest Genius of his Age, to the Mecoenas
and best Genius of This. For I Am not overfond of so ungrateful a Task as
Translating, and would rejoice to see less Versons, and more Originals, so the
latter were not as bad as many of the first are through want of Encouragement.
Some indeed have deservedly gained esteem by Translating; yet not many
condescend to translate, but such as cannot invent; though, to do the first
well, requires often as much Genius as to do the latter.

I wish, Reader, thou may be as willing to do my Author Justice, as I have
strove to do him Right. Yet if thou art a Brother of the Quill, it is ten to one
thou art too much in love with thy own dear Productions to admire those of one
of thy Trade: However, I know three or four who have not such a mighty opinion
of themselves, but I Will not name them, lest I be obliged to place my self among
them. If thou art one of those, who, tho they never write, criticize every one
that does; avaunt -- You Are a professed Enemy of Mankind and of thy self, who
wilt never be pleased nor let any body be so, and know no better way to
Fame, than by striving to lessen that of others; tho, would thou write, thou
might be soon known, even by the Butter-women, and fly through the World in
Band-boxes. If thou art of the Dissembling Tribe, it is thy Office to rail at
those Books which thou hugg'st in a Corner. If thou art one of those
Eves-droppers who would have their Moroseness be counted Gravity, thou wilt
condemn a Mirth which you are past relishing; and I know no other way to quit
the Score, than by writing (as like enough I may) something as dull, or duller
than thy self, if possible. If thou art one of those Critics in Dressing* those
Extempore's of Fortune, who having lost a Relation, and got an Estate, in an
instant set up for Wit and every Extravagance, thou wilt either praise or
discommend this Book, according to the Dictates of Some less foolish than thy
self, perhaps of one of those who, being lodged at the Sign of the Box and
Dice, will know better things, than to recommend to thee a Work which bids thee
beware of his Tricks. This Book might teach thee to leave thy Follies; but some
will say, it does signify much to some Fools whether they are so or not; for
when was there ever a Fool that thought himself one? If thou art one of those
who would put themselves upon us for Learned Men in Greek and Hebrew, yet are
mere Blockh^ads in English, and patch together old pieces of the Ancients, to
get themselves Clothes out of them, thou art too severely maul^d in this Work
to like it. Who then will, some will cry? Nay, besides these, many Societies
that make a great Figure in the World are reflect^d on in this Book; which
caused Rabelais to study to be dark, and even bedaub it with many loose
Expressions, that he might not be thought to have any other Design than to
droll; in a manner bewraying his Book, that his Enemies might not bite it.
Truly, though now the Riddle is expounded, I would advise those who read it,
not to reflect on the Author, lest he be thought to have been beforehand with
them, and they be ranked among those who have nothing to show for their
Honesty, but their Money; nothing for their Religion, but their Dissembling, or
a fat Benefice; nothing for their Wit, but their Dressing; for their Nobility,
but their Title; for their Gentility, but their Sword; for their Courage, but
their Huffing; for their Preferment, but their Assurance; for their Learning,
but their Degrees; or for their Gravity, but their Wrinkles or Dullness. They
had better laugh at one another here, as it is the Custom of the World. Laughing
is of all Professions; the Miser may hoard, the Sp^ndthrift squander, the
Politician plot, the Lawyer wrangle, and the Gamester cheat; still their main
Design is, to be able to laugh at one another; and here they may do it at a
cheap and easy rate. After all, should this Work fail to please the greater
number of Readers, I am sure it cannot miss being liked by those who are for
Witty Mirth, and a chirping Bottle; tho not by those solid Sots who seem to
have drudg'd all their Youth long, only that they might enjoy the sweet
blessing of getting Drunk every night in their old Age. But those men of Sense
and Honor, who love Truth, and the good of Mankind in general above all other
things, will undoubtedly countenance this Work. I Will not gravely insist upon
its usefulness, having said enough of it in the Preface to the First Part. I Will
only add, That as Homer in his Odysses makes his Hero wander ten years through
most Parts of the then known World, so Rabelais in a Three-months-Voyage makes
Pantagruel take a view of almost all sorts of People and Prof^ssions: With this
difference however between the Ancient Mythologist and the Modern, That while
the Odysses has been compared to a setting Sun, in respect to the Iliads,
Rabelais's last Work, which is this Voyage to the Oracle of the Bottle, (by
which he means Truth) is justly thought his Masterpiece; being writ with more
Spirit, Salt and Flame, than the First Part of his Works. At near 70 Years of
Age, his Genius, far from being drain d, seemed to have acquired fresh Vigor,
and new Graces; the more it exerted itself; like those Rivers which grow more
deep, large, majestic and useful by their course. Those, who accuse the French
of being as sparing of their Wit, as lavish of their Words, will find an
Englishman in our Author. I must confess indeed that my Countrymen, and other
Southern Nations, temper the one with the other, in a manner, as they do their
Wine with Water, often just dashing the latter with a little of the first. Now
here, Men love to drink their Wine pure; nay, sometimes it will not satisfy,
unless in its very quintessence, as in Brandies; though an Excess of this
betrays want of Sobriety, as much as an Excess of Wit betrays a want of
Judgment. But I must conclude, lest I be justly taxed with wanting both. I will
only add, That as every Language has its peculiar Graces, seldom or never to be
acquired by a Foreigner, I cannot think I have given my Author those of the
English in every place: But as none compelled me to write, I fear to ask a
Pardon, which yet the generous Temper of this Nation makes me hope to obtain.
Albinus, a Roman, who had written in Greek, desired in his Preface to be
forgiven his Faults of Language; but Cato asked in derision, Whether any had
forced him to write in a Tongue of which he was not an absolute Master?
Lucullus wrote an History in the same Tongue, and said, He had scattered some
false Greek in it, to let the World know it was the work of a Roman. I Will not
say as much of my Writings, in which I study to be as little incorrect as the
hurry of Business, and shortness of Time will permit; but I may better say, as
Tully did of the History of his Consulship, which he also had written in Greek,
That what Errors may be found in the Diction, are crept in against my Intent.
Indeed Livius Andronicus, and Terence, the one a Greek, the other a
Carthaginian, wrote successfully in Latin, and the latter is perhaps the most
perfect Model of the Purity and Urbanity of that Tongue: But I ought not to
hope for the success of those great Men. Yet am I ambitious of being as
subservient to the useful Diversion of the Ingenious of this Nation as I can,
which I have endeavored in this Work, and still do in my Gentleman's Iournal,
with Hopes to attempt some greater Tasks, if ever I am happy enough to have
more Leisure. In the mean Time it will not displease me if it is known that this
is given by one, who though born and educated in France, has the Love and
Veneration of a Loyal Subject for this Nation; One who, by a Fatality, which
with many more made him say, Nos patriam fugimus and dulcia linquimus arva, Is
obliged to make the Language of these happy Regions as natural to him as he
can, and thankfully say with the rest, under this Protestant Government, Deus
nobis haec otia fecit.

Explanatory Remarks ON THE Prologue to the Fourth Book of Rabelais, being the
first of the Voyage to the Oracle of the Bottle.
THE main design of this Prologue is to teach us to be moderate in our Wishes.
The Author brings several Examples to prove what Advantages arise from it;
particularly he makes use of a Fable, in which (after some long but most
diverting Excursions) the Moderation of a poor Country Fellow, who had lost his
Hatchet, and wished only to have it again, was largely rewarded; and others,
who lost theirs on purpose, to be thus made rich, were undone. This is thought
by some, to mean a Gentleman of Poicto^, who came to Paris with his Wife about
some Business, where Francis the First fell in Love with her, and having
bestowed large Sums of Money on the Husband, who some time after returned into
the Country; some of the Neighboring Gentlemen, who had handsome Wives or
Daughters, made their appearance with them at Court, in hopes of the like
Fortune, but instead of it were forced to sneak into the Country, after they
had spent their Estates, which was all they got for their pains.

Jupiter is brought in complaining of Ramus and Galland, who, surrounded with a
swarm of their Scullions, Ragamuffins, Sizers, Vouchers, etc. set together by
the Ears the whole University of Parts. Petrus Ramus, or de la Ramee, was Royal
Philosophy and Oratory Professor at that time; and Petrus Gallandus, or
Galland, Royal Greek Professor; both were Learned Men, and Ramus particularly
famous for Rhetoric and Oratory; he also wrote three Books of Dialectic
Institutions. But what divided the University, was his Elegant, but too
Passionate Animadversions on Aristotle's Physics and Metaphysics; Carpentarius,
Scheckius, and Riolanus, answered him, and particularly the first. I cannot
find that Gallandus wrote against Ramus; yet, either he has done it, or opposed
him viva voce. Priapus is of Opinion, they ought to be turned into Stone, and
associated to their Namesake, Master Peter du Coignet, formerly petrified for
such a Subject. This Du Coignet can be no other than Peter de Coigneres, the
King's Advocate in his Parliament, mentioned by Recherches de Pasqu^er, Lib. 3.
Chap. 27.
Pasquier. In 1329 he caused all the Prelates of France to be summoned before
King Philip, who sat in his Court of Parli^ment attended by several Princes and
Lords. There the Advocate represented many Abuses committed by the
Ecclesiastical Court, which had encroach'd upon the Parliament's Rights, and
used to take Cognizance of all Civil Matters, under diverse pretenses of
Conscience, and unjustly favored those that appealed or removed their Causes
to the Spiritual Court. The Archbishop of Sens* and the Bishop of Autun, spoke
in behalf of the Church's Right, grounded on Custom time out of mind, and of
equal validity to the Law; then proffered to recti^y every thing; and in short,
so cunningly worked upon the King, that he told them he would make no
Innovations, nor would show his Successors a way to molest the Church. This
made the Clergy triumph, as if they had gained their Point, and to be revenged
on Pierre de Cogneres, they got a Monkey hewed out of Stone, and had it set up
in a Corner of Notredame at Paris, which Figure says Pasquier, by a kind of
Pun, was called That is, The chief Cornerstone.
Maitre Pierre du Coignet. So Priapus advises Jupiter to petrify Ramus and
Galland, saying, That Peter du Coignet had been turned into Stone for the same
Cause, that is, for setting the Learned at variance. Tho after all, France is
much obliged to that Advocate, who seems to have laid the Foundation of the
Liberties of the Gallican Church.

In the same Council of the Gods, Jupiter says, Here are the Gascons cursing
and damning, demanding the Restitution of their Bells. I find in du Tillet,
that they had been taken from them in 1548. This is the sense of his words,
which I give at length, because they seem to give light into several Passages
in the first three Books. There was a Tumult in Guienne, which began at
Ang^ulesme by thirty men, but soon great Numbers joined them; and as many at
least rose toward Bourdeaux, in a Rebellious manner, upon account of the Tax
on Salt, from which the said Country used to be exempted. To suppress this
Rebellion, etc. -- After the Ringleaders had been punished with Death, the
Citizens of Bourdeaux, and other places of the same Faction, were deprived of
their Rights and Privileges, Bells, Arms, and Artillery; the Townhouse was
demolished, all the Bells, little or great, were thrown down from the Steeples,
and laid by to be melted down and molded into Canons. He says afterward, In
January 1550, the Rights and Privileges of those of Bourdeaux were restored,
and they had leave to hang their Bells up again, paying a certain Sum of Money.

It appears by this, that this Prologue was written in 1548 or 1549. and I am
apt to believe that these are the Bells for whose Recovery Master Janotus de
Bragmardo, made the Comical Speech in the 19th Chapter of the first Book; the
rather, because Henry d' Albert, King of Navarre (Rabelais's Gargantua) was
then Governor of Guienne, and acted against the Rebels.

The 21st of August, says Du Tillet, in Xaintonge and Angoumois, the People
took Arms on account of the said Tax on Salt, and were so numerous, that they
killed some Collectors, and other Officers, plundered Houses, Towns, and
Castles, and routed the Forces that were sent against them by the King of
Navarre, Governor of Guienne.

Explanatory Remarks ON THE First Chapter of the Fourth Book.
BY Pantagruel and his Attendants, who embarked for the Oracle of the Holy
Bottle, we may understand Anthony Duke of Vendosme, afterward King of Navarre,
setting out of the World of Error, to search after Truth; which Rabelais places
in the Bottle; because, drinking its Wine, we are inspired with Spirit and
Invention, and freely imparting our Sentiments, discover those others.

Tu lene tormentum ingenio admores
Plerumque duro: tu sapientium
Curas and arcanum jocoso
Consilium retegis Lyaeo.
Horat. As much is implied by the Greek Proverb, (...), the Latins In Vino
veritas, and as some have it among us, True Philosophy lies in the Bottle. Our
Author, like skilful Dramatic Writers gives us a hint of his Design in the
first Chapter, when just before Pantagruel set Sail, he makes him and his men
go to Prayers, and sing the 113th Psam, When Israel went out of Egypt; which
Country all know is generally taken in a mystical Sense for Error, or being a
Slave to it.

The Chief Pilot and Xenomanes, an Experienced Traveller, (by whom we may
understand that it is necessary to have good Guides and Counselors to direct us
in such a Search) steer a shorter Course than the Portuguese, by whom may be
meant Superstitious Papists.

Bacbuc is a Bottle in Hebrew, and the ships have all Bottles, Cups, or Wine
Vessels on their Stern, to show that the whole Fleet are for Wine; only one has
a Lantern to confirm what is said, that the guidance of good Lights, i. e.
Learned Men, is requisite in such an Attempt. If we had a mind to say that our
Author had a double meaning all along, as he has in many places, we might
suppose one easily: For this was written at the time of the Council of Trent,
in which the restitution of the Cup to the Laity, and of Marriage to the
Clergy, were debated. Panurge goes to the Oracle of the Bottle near
Lanternland, where the Lanterns, which may be the Clergy, who think themselves
the Lights of the World, held then their Provincial Chapter. His Business is
with the Bottle, to know whether he should marry or no: All his Company there
are made to drink Water, which had the taste of Wine; the word of the Bottle is
Trinch, which is Drink in High Dutch; and Panurge, having drunk, foretells that
he shall be married, as indeed Montluc Bishop of Valence, whom I take to be
Rabelais's Panurge, is owned by all the Historians of his Age to have been; The
application is easy.

On Chapter 2.
AS our Author Satirizes all Conditions of men in this Voyage, he thought he
could not begin better than by reflecting on the Follies and Lies of
Travelers; which he does in this Chapter. The first place at which our
Traveling Pantagruelists touch, is the Island of Medamothy. All the Countries
in this Voyage are Islands, and he styled himself Caloier des Isles hieres, in
the Edition of 1553. Caloier from (...) and (...), probus Sacerdos, a Name
given by those of the Greek Church to Ecclesia^tics; and des Isles hieres, of
the sacred, or great Islands; for (...) stands often for (...). These great
Islands may be the Terraqueous part of the Globe which is wholly surrounded
with the Sea; thus every Island here means the whole World, or at least a
considerable part of it; few places being wholly free from the Persons and
Defects which are ridiculed in this Work.

The Island Medamothi, (...), nusquam, nullo in loco, means an Island that is
nowhere, and so cannot be found; and indeed most Travelers and Seafaring men
are for going where no other went before, still bent on Discoveries; and
accordingly our Pantagruelian Journalist tells us, That till they came to that
Island they saw nothing new. Philophanes, who is King of the Country,
signifies one who desires to be seen: He is made absent from home (as
Travelers are) on account of his Brother Philotheam^n's marriage with the
Infanta of Engys; that is, The Neighborhood: Philotheam^n signifies One who
d^s^res to see things: Thus many travel either to see, or be seen, or for both.
Now as this Kingdom of Medamothi is no where, so those Exotic Rarities which
our Travelers purchase there, are nothing but Fictions and Chimeras. As for
Example; The Face of a man who brings in an Appeal; the Picture of a Servant
who wants a Master; that of Echo drawn to the life; that of the Ideas of
Plato, and the Atoms of Epicurus; that copied from Philomela's Needle Work;
Achilles's Deeds in Seventy eight Pieces of Tapistry, all of Phrygian Silk
imboss'd with Gold and Silver some 24 Foot long, and 20 broad: things which
either are not, never were, or cannot be expressed with the Pencil; as for
example, the Voice of the man who appeals, or who calls (for the French means
both)

The Three Unicorns were thought a Fiction by the most of the Learned, as well
as the Chamele^n-like Tarand (which put me in mind of some Courtiers) till the
Great B^ch^rtus, of whom Roan my Native Town is so justly proud, had proved
that the Unicorn is not a Fabulous Animal. Thus this Island, and what is done
there, are nothing but Fictions and Whimsies, with which Travelers, often much
guilty of them, and the Learned puzzle their Brains, and burden their
Memories; unsatisfied like some of the Fair with any thing that is not strange,
far-fetched and dear-bought.

On Chapter 5.
FRom Panurge's Quarrel with Dindenaut the Drover, whom I have called Dingdong,
and that Sheepmonger's Misfortune, we may raise this Moral; That the private
Broils of Pastors prove often the ruin of their Flocks; foolish, headstrong,
and ready, right or wrong, one and all, to rise and fall with the Bell-weather.
Dingdong's Quack-like Canting Stuff does not hinder him from selling the Sheep
by which he lives.

After all, this may be the Relation of some of the Montluc's Adventures,
burlesqu'd after our Author's way. For as we have observed in the Preface to
the first Three Books, that Bishop of Valence was a Protestant, at least in his
Opinions; every body knew it, and the Marechal de Montluc his Brother made no
Mystery of it in his Memoirs; he was molested more than once about it, and
particularly by the Dean of Valence, of whom we have spoke in the said Preface,
and for whom the Bishop proved too hard, by his Subtilty and Credit, which
inclined him to make use of all possible means to be revenged on one who had
plagued him so long. Thus we find Panurge saying to Friar Ihon, after Dingdong
and his Sheep were all drowned, Harkee me, my Friend Ihon, never did Man do me
a good turn, but I returned, or at least acknowledged it; no, I scorn to be
ungrateful, I never was, nor ever will be: Never did Man do me an ill one
without ruing the day that he did it either in this World, or the next. I am
not yet such an Ass as that comes to.

Our Author to ridicule a foolish Relic that was in great repute in Poictou
in his time, makes Dingdong swear by it in the Seventh Chapter; 'twas called,
The Worthy Vow of Charroux. The People gave that Name to a large wooden Statue,
in the shape of a Man, covered with Plates of Silver, which the Monks kept in a
Corner of their Monastery. They used to show it but every Seventh year, and
then Shoals of People thronged to see it; but none of the Female Sex were
suffered to come near to kiss it; this mighty Blessing was wholly reserved for
Men or Boys: But the Women used to watch to catch the Men who had kissed it at
unawares, and clipped them about the Neck and kis^ them; by which means they were
persuaded they drew to themselves, and sucked in, the virtuous Efficacy which
they had got by touching the Shrine. A tall Lady was so very presumptuous as to
dare kiss that blessed Worthy Vow, and, behold! the angry Wooden Saint in an
instant grew five Foot taller than he was before; at least the People said so,
and the Monks reported it for Gospel Truth. Yet all its Worth and Virtue could
not protect it against the Sieur Bouganet, and other Protestant Gentlemen, who
in the Year 1562. stripped it of its Silver Robes, and since that were called,
The Valets de Chamber of the Worthy Vow of Charroux.

In the same Chapter we have another instance of the strange Superstition of
the Popish Vulgar, when Dingdong says, That Corn grows where ever his Sheep
piss, as if the Lord had pissed there. That Expression is used throughout
France by the Common People, who think all those places thus particularly blessed
where our Savior dropped his Urin, etc. As for instance, his Spittle, it being
said in the Ninth Chapter of St. John, that he spat on the ground, and made
Clay of his Spittle.

I find that Matter crowds upon me, and I might be more Voluminous than a Dutch
Commentator, should I undertake to explain every thing in this incomparable
Work; but I have neither Room, Time, nor Inclination to enlarge much, and will
leave the Reader to find out the meaning of many things that will easily be
understood after the general Idea I have given of this Voyage, and the Sample
in the foregoing Chapters. This made me say nothing of the Third and Fourth;
nor will I speak of several others in the Two Books, which want little or no
Comment.

On Chapter 9.
BY the Island of Enas^^, where such strange Alliances are made, Rabelais at
once exposes unequal Matches, and the dull Jes^s and Stupidity of gross Clowns;
which, as the Latin has it, have no Nose, that is, no Wit. Thus he tells us,
That all the Men. Women, and Children of the Enas'd or Noseless Island, are
like your Carrot-pated Poit^vins, who are a borish sort of People. I must own
that the Comments which Pantagruel's Companions make on their ridiculous manner
of being akin, are little better than the Text. Yet those wretched Quibbles and
Conundrums, are what your Country-Fellows admire mightily, and all this Chapter
would be read (or to speak more properly) be heard read by such People, with as
much Pleasure, as I Translated most of it with Pain. But in the main, the
meaning is admirable; for what more deserves a reproof than the foolish unequal
Marriages made every day, which are as odd Jests, and as improper as some of
those in that Chapter? The Match struck up between the P^ar (which seemed tight
and firm, but was known by some to be flabby) and the soft Cheese is more
natural, and made very often in our World; and bating its Emblem, which is of
the Nature of the Island, there is Salt and Nose in that Conjunction; nor is
there less in that of the old greasy Boot, and the young pliable Buskin; and
the Brogue and the Slipper, which are in a manner a Key to the rest.

On Chapter 10 and 11.
THe Island of Cheli, which comes after that of the Enas'd Alliancers, is as it
were its Antipodes, and the one is as courtly, as the other is clownish. The
word Cheli is Greek, and signifies the Lips, (...); yet those who at the end of
the last French Editions of Rabelais, have explained some of his hard Words,
interpret it peaceful, deriving it from the Hebrew. The Etymological Dictionary
indeed tells me that Shalom, is peace and peaceful in Hebrew, and the French
pronounce ch as we do sh; yet, as the Greek hits better the word Cheli, and the
Sense of the Chapter, I stick to it. Thus it may be called the Island of the
Lips, or of Compliments: King St. Panigon, first of the Name, reigned in that
large well-peopled, fruitful Kingdom, and being attended by the Princes his
Sons, and the Nobles of his Court, comes as far as the Port to receive
Pantagruel, conducts him to his Palace; the Queen, the Princesses, the
Court-Ladies receive him at the Gate; Panigon makes them all salute Pantagruel
and his Men with a Kiss, according to the Civil Custom of the Country; all the
Compliments and Entreaties imaginable are used to persuade Pantagruel to stay
there a day or two; he excuses himself, but is not suffered to go till he and
his Men have drank with the King, all this is Compliment. Friar Ihon alone
inveighs against this formal Stuff, antic Postures and nonsensical
Fiddle-faddle, Cringes, Grimaces, Scrapes, Embraces, Leers, etc. and flinks
into the Kitchins, where there was something more substantial for a Monk, who
does not use to feed on empty Talk. So, tho the Island was Populous, Fertile,
and of large Extent, he admires nothing but the Culinary Laboratories, the
turning of the Spits, the harmonious rattling of the Jacks and F^nders; and is
for criticizing on the Position of the Lard, the Temperature of the Potages,
the Preparation for the Desert, and the Order of the Wine-Service. All the
Eleventh Chapter illustrates that Monastical Inclination to frequent Kitchins.

On Chapter 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16.
ALL these Chapters are occasioned by Pantagruel's passing by Pettifogging, and
give us an Account of the way of Living of the Apparitors, Sergeants, and
Bailiffs, and such inferior Ministers of the Law. Nothing can seem dark in what
our Author has said of them, if we observe what he makes one of Pantagru^'s
Interpreters, or Droggermen relate, That at Rome a world of Folk get an honest
Livelihood by Poisoning, Ribroasting, and Stabbing, but the Catchpol^s earn
theirs by being drub'd; so that if they were long without a tight Lambasting,
the poor Dogs with their Wives and Children would even be starved. Our Author
says this, because in Francis the first's, and Henry the Second's Reigns, That
rascally Tribe had no Income so beneficial, as that which came to them from a
Beating, the Nobility thought it so great an Affront to be cited, or arrested
by that Vermin, that they stood too much on their Punctilio, and for that
reason they severely used those Bailiffs or Apparitors, who came to them to
discharge their Office; and who sometimes were sent out of malice. So when the
Man-catchers, who desired nothing more than to be banged, had been misused,
they had swindging Damages to make them amends. Rabelais exposes the Folly,
Villainy, and Abuse of this Practice on both sides; which has been since so will
redrest, that if the Bailiffs had nothing to depend on but Bastonadoes; those
necessary Evils would long since have all been starved.

Panurge relates a Story of the Lord of Basche, who found out a way to have
those Man-hounds beaten at small cost so furiously, that some of them died of
their Bruises; by which means he rid his House of their Visits; and that Lord
is here said to have encouraged his men with a Story of Francis Villon, who
revenged himself securely on Friar Tappecoue or Tickl^toby, who would not lend
a Cope to some of his Players, who were to Act the Passion, which is acted
still every Year in some Parts of Italy.

As the Betrothing or Nuptials of Basche, grew into a Proverb; so from that
Vi^^on, who was a Famous Poet in the Reign of ^ewis the XIth, but more famous
yet for his Cheats and Villainies; than for his Poetry, came the word Villoner,
which has been long used to signify to Cheat or play some Rogues Trick. I shall
have occasion to take notice of him in my Remarks on the last Chapter of the
Fourth Book.

Pantagruel's Companions are told of two of the honestest Men in all
Catchpole-Land, who were made to cut a Caper on nothing, for stealing the Tools
of the Mass, and hiding them under the Handle of the Parish. This must be some
Sacrilegious Theft of Church-Plate in those times; and by the by, we may see
what esteem Rabelais had for the Catchpoles, since he makes those Rogues the
honestest in all that Country. Friar Ihon says, That this was as mysterious a
way of speaking as St. John's de la Palisse; de la Palisse is the Name of a
Family in France; but he means, de l' Apocalypse. The Handle of the Parish, may
mean the Steeple of the Church; to cut a Caper on nothing, is to be hanged.

On Chapter 17.
FRom Catchpole-Land Pantagruel comes to two Islands, which the Author calls
T^hu and B^hu, from two Hebrew words, which, I am told, are taken out of the
first Chapter of Genesis, where it is said, The Earth was Tohu va Bohu, that is,
void and in Confusion, without Form or Beauty, and in short, a Chaos. This may
well be applied to a Country that is ruined by the War; the Fury of Soldiers on
one side, and the Exactions of Chiefs many times leaving little or nothing
behind them. This makes Rabela^^ say, That the Devil a bit they could find any
thing there to fry ^ith; which is an Expression often used by the French, when
they would say, There is no subsisting in a place.

The Giant Bringu^aril^es or Wide-nostrils had taken away the means of frying
there, by devouring every individual Pan, Skillet, Kettle, Drying Pan,
Dripping-pan, and Brass and Iron Pot in the Land for want of Wind-mills, which
used to be his daily Food: By this Giant we may understand those Gigantick
Bodies of M^n, vast Armies, that bring Terror and Destruction with them
wherever they come; and in particular, those roaring Hectors, Free-booters,
Desperadoes, and Bullying-huff-snuffs, for the most part like those whom
Tacitus styles H^spitibus tantum metuendi, who at the beginning of the War or
Campaign, live profusely at the Husbandman's cost; but when the poor Boor has
been ruined by those unwelcome Gu^sts, they even destroy, and in a manner
devour the Straw of the Beds, and the Pans, Kettles; and in short, whatever
comes in their way.

Rabelais tells us, That at last, Gaffer Wid^nostails was choked with eating a
huge lump of fresh Butter at the Mouth of a hot Oven, by the Advice of
Physicians, which very well represents the destiny of those swaggering Bravoes,
who, when the War is over, too often either take to the Highway, and other bad
Courses, for which they are choked, sometimes for as inconsiderable matters as
a lump of Butter taken from a Higler, or else being reduced to live obscurely
on a narrow Fortune, wast and pine away by the Chimny-corner, half-starv'd with
their small Pittance, and lead a lingering sorrowful Life, worn out with their
former Excesses, the Fatigues of Wars and Old Age; as little regarded as they
were feared much, when by open Violence they lived in Riot and Luxury at the
expense of the Unfortunate.

I am the more inclinable to believe this Chapter is designed to reflect upon
Warriors, by what our Author says, That the Pantagru^lists were told there,
that the King of Cullen in B^hu had routed the Satrapes or Grandees of King
Meeleth, and made sad work with the Fortresses of Belima.

Thence the Fleet sailed by the Islands of Nargues and Zargues, which are words
used by the Vulgar in France, when they would give one a fillip on the Nose;
N^zarder, which signifies as much, means also to give one a public Affront.

Enig and Enig, of which our Satyrist makes two Islands, on whose account
formerly the Landgrave of H^sse was swindg'd often with a vengeance, in
High Dutch (...) with and without. There is but little difference between those
two words, some Germans forming their n like an u; so it is easy to mistake one
for the other; and this happened at the Treaty about the La^^grave of H^sse,
and the Emperor Charles the 5th; for instead of Enig, without Detention of the
Landgrave's Person as was expected; there was found Euig with Detention of his
Person; as much is owned by the Emperor's Agents in the Nineteenth Book of
Sleidan's Commentaries; and, if you will believe them, for want of
Understanding the Tongue rightly, those who mediated the Agreement were led
into that mistake; however, that Landgrave was forced to b^g Charles the
Fifth's pardon on his Knees, when, with the Duke of Saxony, he was routed by
that Emperor's Forces; and the Germans were humbled and made contemptible; as
our Author has hinted in the Prologue to this Book, when he makes Jupiter say,
In yonder Corner are the Saxons, Easterlings, Ostrogoths, and Germans, Nations
formerly invincible; but now Aber Keids, bridled, curbed, and brought under by
a paultry, diminutive, crippled Fellow. He calls him a Cripple, because he was
much troubled with the Gout, and had some Nodosities in the Joints of his Hands
and Feet.

Geleniabin, in Arabic, is Honey of Roses, and Teleniabin, liquid manna, as the
Author of the French Alphabet of Rabalais's hard Words tells us; both these
Ingredients were used formerly in Clysters, which makes our Rabelais say, That
the Fleet sailed by two Islands of that Name, very fine and fruitful in such
Pharmacopean Implements.

On Chapter 18. and the six following.
THESE Chapters contain a Description of a Dreadful Storm which Pantagruel's
Fleet met with; it began immediately after they came up with Nine Sail laden
with all sorts of Monks, who were going to the Council of Chesil to sift and
garble some Articles of Faith against the new Heretics.

This Council can be no other but that of Trent, then sitting, in which such
sorts of Articles were framed; the word Ch^sil, by the transposition of a
single Letter, makes the Hebrew word Chelis, Three; whence comes Ch^lisim,
Thirty, which is Trente in French; and, if you will keep to the number Chelis
or Three, the name of that Town which is Tridentum in Latin, is partly made up
of it; so there is no doubt but in one of those Senses the Author had a mind to
let us know his meaning.

Besides this way of explaining the word Chesil, which, with several other
material Observations, I owe to a Learned and Ingenious Countryman of mine, who
will not give me leave to name him, the Alphabet in the French Rabelais gives
us another which keeps to the name Chesil, but seems to me somewhat
far-fetched: That word, he says, is used by the Hebrews to denote the Star
which the Greek and all our Astronomers call Orion. Chesil comes from Chasal,
to be unconstant. Propert. lib. 2. Eleg. 13. -- Aquosus Orion.
-- Nimbosus Orion.
Virgil 1. Aeneid. (...), commovere, concitare, to stir up and trouble; This
the Ancient Poets, Astrologers and Historians, say is done by Orion; and Pliny,
lib. 18. cap. 28. places it among the dreadful Stars, which stir up Hail,
Storms, and excessive Rains; so, that Commentator on words thinks that Rabelais
has called the Council of Trent the Council of Chesil, to denote that it was a
stormy, unconstant, and troublesome Meeting. Perhaps so.

The Storm in these Chapters is undoubtedly the Cruel Persecution that was
raised in France in the Reign of Henry the Second. It began in 1548. by a kind
of an Inquisition to prosecute the Lutherans; These are Du Tillet's words about
it; I^ fu^ ord^^n^ qu'unae seance extraordinaire se fer^it des Juges a Paris,
p^ur connoi^tre particulierement du faict des H^retiqu^s: En icelle quelques
miserables furent punis de cruels supplices a toute rigu^u^. Du Tillet, Cron. A
br^g. des Rois de France' 1548.
It was ordered that the Judges should meet in an extraordinary manner at Paris
to take particular cognizance of the Case of Heretics. Some Wretches suffered
cruel Punishments inflicted by that Assembly with the utmost rigor.

During that Storm, Pantagruel shows an Heroic stedfastness and constancy of
mind; Friar Ihon an undaunted Courage, and a great Activity; all Pantaguel's
Household do their best to save the Ship, and help one another; Panurge alone
sits on his Tail upon Deck, weeping and howling, and says a thousand ridiculous
things suggested to him by his Fear; sometimes he wishes himself with the
Blessed Fathers, whom they met stearing their Course for the Council of Chesil,
presently he proves as great a Milk sop as most of his Brother Deists do in
such Occasions, and is most mightily godly; then he is for making his Will. In
short, Nothing can be more unaccountable than the Vows, Wishes and Moans of
that Maudling Coward, till the Storm abates, and the Fleet comes in sight of
the Island of the Macreons. Then he plays the good Fellow, and is as busy as
any six, seeming as resolute and active as he was fearful and unmanly before.

The Storm begins just as soon as they have been met by Monks; mention is made
in it of the Thunder's falling on a part of the Ship, which may mean the
Ecclesiastical Censures, and the Pope's Thunderbolts; then, when the Storm
abates, Friar Ihon says, our Devils begin to scamper. I will show that by
Devils Rabel^is has meant the Monks, and persecuting Tempters of the Church of
Rome. As for Panurge's seeming a Papist in the midst of the Storm, its gives us
exactly his Character, for he was doubtless ready enough to make all the
grimaces of a rank Papist in the midst of the Persecution; though, as soon as
was past, he laughed at Saint Nicholas the Water Saint, to whom he had promised
a Chapel, if he escaped, between Cande and Monsoreau, where neither Cow nor
Calf should feed; the word Chapel is equivocal in French, signifying a
Lymbeck; so he says he will throw one in the River, doubtless, that which
drowns up all the Ground between those two Towns, and thus he means to fulfill
his Vow. Perhaps this is also designed to ridicule the Vows and behavior of
Seamen in a Storm.

Pantagruell's holding the Mast of the Ship tight with both his hands all the
while by the Skipper's advice, implies, that as the Family of Navarre, and
particularly Anthony of B^urbon, was best able to protect the Great Ones, who
were embarked together for a Reformation, it was fit he should do it with all
his Power; and accordingly Du Tillet tells us, that none but Miserables (poor
Wretches) suffered. If any one will say, that perhaps Rabelais did not in this
Voyage mean any particular Persons, I hope at least they will grant he has
admirably described the different Behavior of most men in danger, and chiefly
in persecuting Times.

On Chapter 25, 26, 27 and 28.
THE Island of the Macreons, where the Fleet went into Harbor after the Storm,
signifies the Island where men are long-lived. Its Eldest Elderman is named
Ma^rob^us, or long-lived. We are told in the 26th Chapter that it was in the
Dominions of the Ruler of Britain; consequently it was a safe Port against the
Tempest of Persecution, the Reformation being openly professed at that time in
England under King Edward the Sixth. This causes Rabelais to make his
persecuted Fleet take shelter there, and to say that men lived long in that
Island; because none were put to death on account of their Religion.

The Ruins of Temples, Obelisks, Pyramids, Ancient Tombs and Monuments which
they see there, denote the Decay, Downfall and Ruin of Popery, unfrequented, and
left in a dismal solitude. The Souls of the Heroes who are lodged in those
Ruined Mansions, are the true Christians who had cast off the Yoke of Popery,
and of the blind Worship of Saints, many of them Fabulous, to which the
Superstition of the Papists had made them raise Temples, Obelisks and Monuments
as formerly the Heathens did to their false gods.

The Old Macrobius says, That the Death of one of those Heroes had occasioned
the Storm; by which our Author gives us to understand, that Troubles and
Commotions are often raised in Kingdoms at the death of those Eminent Persons
who have governed them under their Kings; and probably, he may have had a mind
to mark the death of Margaret de Valois Queen of Navarre, Sister to King
Francis the first* which happened toward the latter end of the Year 1549.
about a year after the Lady Jane d' Albret, Princess of Navarre, had been
married to Anthony de Bourbon, Duke of Vendosme, Rabelais's Pantagruel. That
Princess, who had always protected the Reformers and the Reformed, as has been
observed in the Preface to the first Three Books, was not less eminent by her
Piety, Wit, Learning, and Virtue, than by her Royal Extraction; Valentine d'
Alsmois, a French Lady, made the following Epitath for her.

Musarum decima and Charitum quarta, inclyta Regum
Et soror and conjux, Margaris illa jacet.
On Chapter 29, 30, 31 and 32.
THE Sneaking Island which Pantagruel sailed by, when he left that of the
Macreons, is the Dwelling of Shrovetide; by which we must understand Lent: For
the Ecclesiastics of the Church of Rome begin their Lent before the Layity;
Shrovetuesday is to them a Day of Humiliation; and is properly the time when
men are shriven Our Author calls it Quaresmeprenant, that is, the Beginning of
Quadragesima; in opposition to Mardigras, Shrovetuesday. The Cardinal de
Lorraine, says a Book called l' Heraclite Francois, made three Clergymen in a
manner Titular Bishops of Metz, Toul and Verdun, reserving the whole Income of
those Bishoprics to himself, and leaving them little of them besides the Title
of Bishops: For this reason they were called les Evesques de Caresmeprenant;
because they looked as meager and starved as if it had been Lent with them all
the year: But I cannot think that our Author reflects here on that Cardinal.
His Design seems rather to expose the Superstition of the Papists about Lent,
and how much the practice of it, their way, shocked good Sense: This made him
run on for two or three Chapters with an odd description of that Ridiculous
Monster; and probably also to secure himself from the Informations of his
Prying Enemies by that mixture of Comical seeming Nonsense. For, as in the time
of Lent the Superstition, Grimaces and Hypocrisy of the Papists are most
observable, and they look on it in a manner as the Basis of the Christian
Religion, 'twould have been dangerous to have attacked them openly in Point.

We find that the wise Xenomanes, one of Pantagruel's most experienced
Companions, advises him not to go where Shrovetide reigned, and says it would
be much out of their way [ to the Oracle of Truth] that there is very lean
Cheer at his Court, that he is a double Shaveling, Banner-bearer to the
Fish-eating Tribe, a Flogger of little Children, because Papists do penance,
and whip themselves then; a Calciner of Ashes, because of Ash Wednesday; that
he swarms with Pardons, Indulgences and Stations; which makes the Author say in
the 31st Chapter, that Shrovetide being married to Mid-lent, only begot a good
number of Local Adverbs; that is, the Stations, the Churches and Chapels,
whither the gulled Mob must go, whence they come, and through which they must
pass to gain the Indulgences. We are told besides, that he never assists at
Weddings, but, give the Devil his d^e, the most industrious Larding-stick and
Scure-maker in forty Kingdoms; because the Butchers have then little else to do
but to make some. Lent is an Enemy to Sawsidges and Chitterlings, because as
well as all other Flesh (I mean dead Flesh) the People are forbid to taste of
any then.

Friar Ihon always daring and hasty, is for destroying Lent; but Panurge still
fearful and wary, is not of his mind, Rabelais calls that Island Tapinois; that
word in French is generally used adverbially with the Preposition en to signify
an underhand way of acting. Some derive it from the Greek Verb (...), humilem
reddo, and so it suits with the true design of Lent, to humble man, and make
him look sneakingly. Besides, Lent, sneaking in some years sooner and others
later, may also for that reason well be said to dwell in Tapinois. The
Ingenious Fable of Nature and her Counterpart is brought i^ to show that those
who enjoin things that shock Nature, as is the Church of Rome^s way of keeping
Lent, have the confidence (...) make Laws contrary to those of God, and the
Impudence to pretend to justify them by Reason: So Rabelais tells us, That
Antiphysts [the Mother of L^nt] begot also the Evesdropping Dissen^^^^rs,
Superstitious Pop^mongers and Priest-ridden Bigots, Scrapers of Benefices, mad
Herb-stinking Hermits, Gulligutted Dunces of the Coul, Church-vermin, Devourers
of the Substance of men, and other deformed and ill-favored Monsters made in
spite of Nature.

On Chapter 33 and 34.
THE Monstrous Physeter or Whirlpool, a huge Fish which dies of the Wounds
given him by Pantagruel near the Wild Island, where lived the Chitterlings,
Shrovetide's mortal Foes, seems to have a relation to the Expiration of Lent,
about which time in France they have conquered all their Stores of salt Fish,
and after which Flesh rules on the Tables; and many are so wild for
Chitterlings, and other Meat, that they get Flesh dressed on Easter-Eve late at
night, and fall too like mad as soon as the Clock strikes Twelve: For that
reason he makes the Fish die near a Flesh Country.

On Chapter 35, and the six following.
PAntagruel lands in the Wild Island to refresh his men whom the Fish had
disordered; he would not come where Shrovetive lived, but goes ashore at the
Dwelling of the Chitterlings, because he did not love Lent. There they pitch
their Tents, fix their Kitchin-Batteries, the Cloth is immediately laid, Supper
brought in, and all eat cheerfully, as is usual after Lent. What happens in
that Island, and the Fight in which the Chitterlings, Sawcidges and Pasty-pans
are mawl'd by Pantagruel and his men, and particularly by the Friar at the head
of the Cooks, partly seems a Comical Allegory, which denotes the Good Cheer at
Easter, after the Lent-keepers have mastered that time of Mortification.
Sawcidges, Chitterlings, etc. which are preserved with Salt, help then to
appease hunger at the same time that they create and heighten thirst.

It Is obvious that the 37th Chapter ridicul^s the method used by some of the
Ancients, and to this day, of foretelling things by the name of Persons. We
find that the Chitterlingonians, knowing at last that Pantagru^l is
Shrovetide's Foe, and a Friend to Carnaval their old Confederate, pay him their
homage, and send under the Conduct of Young Niphleseth Seventy eight Thousand
Royal Chitterlings to Gargantua, who made a Present of them to the Great King
of Paris; but most of them died, and were buried in heaps in a part of Paris,
called to this day the Street paved with Chitterlings; yet at the Request of
the Court-Ladies Young Niphleseth was preserved, honorably used, and since
that married to Heart's Content. We need not understand H^brew to find out what
our Joking Author means by that young Chitterling [ Mentula] Niphleseth, of
whom the Charitable, or rather Selfish, Ladies took such mighty care.

After all, the description of a misunderstanding between the French, and the
Switzers and Germans that had reformed, may be couched under those notions of
Chitterlings. In the 35th Chapter we find a Treaty on foot to reconcile them to
Shrovetide; and as the Council was then sitting, some Concessions were made by
the Pope's P^^^y in case of a likelihood of an Accommodation. Besides, Rabelais
mentions, that Shrovetide (by which may be mean there the Switzers, or Germans
of the Roman Communion) was threatened with being declared bewrayed ( i. e.
Excommunicated) in case he made any League or Agreement with the Chitterlings:
Since which they were grown wonderfully inveterate and obstinate against one
another. He also tells us, that they desired the expulsion of I don't know what
stinking Villains. Murderers and Robbers, that held the Castle of Salloir
(which means a Powdering Tub). These might be Monks and Friars. What Is more, in
the 37th Chapter Rabelais enumerating the Power and Antiquity of
Chitterling-like People, says, Who can t^ll but that the Switzers, now so bold
and resolute, were formerly Chitterlings? For my part I would not take my Oath
to the contrary. Some of the Switzers are now, and were then a wild sort of
People, as our Author calls his Chitterlings, whom he brings in marching up
boldly in Battalia. By the Queen may be meant their Republic, which word is
Feminine in Latin, and in French. The Chitterlings sent by the Queen, are the
Soldiers which Switzerland sent then, as it does still, to the French, many of
which died by change of Air, for want of Mustard ( i. e. Pay) and other
Accidents. And what Xenomanes said, that Chitterlings were double-hearted and
treacherous, suits also very well with their taking side now with the Emperor,
then with the French, and vice versa, in that Age. In the 41st Chapter Gymnast
having lugg'd out his Sword with both his Fists, cut a huge wild Squob Sawcidge
in two. Bless me, says our Historian, how ^at the foul Thief was! it puts me in
mind of the large Bull of Berne that was slain at Marignan, when the drunken
Switzers were so maw'd there: Believe me, it had little less than four inches
Lard on its Pawnch! By this great Bull of Berne is meant Pontiner, a famous
Gigantic fat Captain of the Switzers, who being killed at the Battle of
Marignan, some of the Germans who sided with the French, to show they were
fully revenged on the Switzers, who had been too hard for them in several other
Engagements, run the Points of their Pikes and Lances in that monstrous
Officer's fat Paunch, as Paulus J^vius observes in the Account he gives of that
Battle. I have not leisure to get and peruse some Books which probably would
enable me to give here the Particulars to which this Allegory relates; but I
believe that any one that will examine this narrowly, may find it much as I have
said; and perhaps something more than the expiration of Lent may also be meant
by the killing of the great Fish by Pantagruel.

On Chapter 43, and 44.
THE Island of Ruach, where People live on nothing but Wind, according to the
sense of the Hebrew word, is the Island of Wind, or the vain Island.

It Is an Emblem of the Court, where men feed themselves and are fed by others
with Wind, Compliments, Flattery, Promises, and vain empty Hopes, more than any
where else. The Weathercocks, which are the only Houses in that Island, imply
the uncertain and variable state of Courtiers; First, because the Court is
still where the Prince is, and as the Weathercock is always in motion, now to
the East, and then presently to the West, yet is still fixed in one place, and
only moves round its Center; so the Courtier is still at home when at Court,
yet the Court is sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another. Besides, as
the warm South sometimes gently blows on a Weathercock, and soon the cold North
rudely whirls it about; so the Courtier's House is either cherished, or roughly
blown upon, according to the Prince's Breath.

The Wind-flowers, Rhue, and such Carminative Herbs, which are the only things
sowed there, which scowr them off in that Island, denote the Attendance, Craft
and Pains, which are the Seeds by which we hope to rise and reap Favor at
Court; but when the time of Harvest comes, we find our selves only rid (by a
thorough knowledge of the place, and chiefly by Baulks and Disappointments) of
a great deal of Wind, vain, empty Hopes, that swelled and puffed us up.

The common sort of People who, to feed themselves, make use of Feather, Paper,
or Linen Fans, according to their Abilities, put me in mind of a poor Fellow,
who fed himself a long time with hopes of obtaining a Place worth at least 50
l. a year, only because he knew Sir J. F -- 's Coachman, with whom he spent
some 20 or 30 l. that were his All, in hopes of a Recommendation to his Master,
which his Patron even wanted for himself while he fool^d him out of his money.
Thus the Poor as well as the Rich aim at something generally above their reach.
The Windmills, by the means of which the Rich live, may be designed to denote
the Kings and Princes of those days: Mills with mighty Sails which gave that
nourishing, Wind plentifully, according to the dispositions in which they were
with respect to the Courtiers that continually surrounded them: It also
signifies that the latter sometimes get nothing but Words or Favors, merely
honorary, and void of substance and solidity. Some of those Royal Windmils have
been used to wheel round, with every wind, as readily as Weathercocks, turning
their Backs in an unaccountable manner to those on whom they looked most
favorably but a moment before.

The Age during which our Doctor flourished has given many Instances of this
sad Truth; as Jacques de Baune, Lord of Semblancay, Admiral Chabot, and the
Conestable de Bourbon, who, having all three possessed King Francis the First's
Favor, became the Objects and the Victims of his hatred* The first hanged at
Montfaucon, (the Tyburn of Paris) for a Crime of which Louise de Savoye, the
King's Mother alone was guilty. The second, condemned without Reason to lose
his Head on a Scaffold, and then declared Not Guilty; the sense of which usage
worked so strongly on his mind, that it effected what the Executioner was to
have done. And the third, a Prince of the Blood, and by his great Merit High
Conestable o^ France, (a Trust thought too great there now adays) first
deprived of his Government of the Milanese, his Master being grown jealous of
his Glory, then of the Profits and Exercise of his great Office; and finally of
the vast Estate of the House of Bourbon, which was his Right of Inheritance, as
eldest of that Branch of the Royal Family.

I need not explain what our Author means by the rousing Fart, which the King
of the Island of Ruash pretended had been stolen from him, with which, as with
another Sangreal, he used to perform a world of wonderful Cures in many
dangerous Diseases, distributing to the Patient only as much of it as would
frame a Virgin's Fart: A less Application than that of those who cure a certain
Evil with a wet Finger, as many People in France, and a Kingdom near it fancy.
Our Author did not forget to place these among the Courtiers, and in a manner
tells them, That the pretended Cure does not signify the Thousandth part of a F
-- t. What he says of the Sangreal, is to blame the Credulity of some
superstitious Bigots, who have a groundless Notion of a Relic thus named,
which they say is part of our Savior's Blood wandering about the world
invisible, to all but chaste eyes, and working many miraculous Cures. The best
Authority for such a Belief, says Cotgrave, is the foolish fabulous History of
King Arthur.

On Chapter 45.
BY the Island of the Pope figs, is meant those who followed Luther or Calvin's
Reformation, and chiefly the Germans and the French; they were called the
Gaillard^es at first; principally the first, because they were at first brisk
and m^rry, or gail lard, as when the Lanskenets, generally Protestants,
plundered Rome in 1527; they led several Bishops and Cardinals in their proper
Accoutrements through the Streets on Mules and Asses, with their Faces turned
toward the Tail; throw'd the Host, Relics and Images of Saints about the
Streets, and forced the Pope to buy a Peace with 400000 Ducats, and remain a
Prisoner till it was paid, after he had been almost starved in Castle St
Angelo; where he invited the Cardinals to a Treat of Asse's Flesh, as if it had
been the greatest Dainties imaginable. This our Author calls fair la Figue, to
revile and feague, or say, A Fig for the Pope; and he has ^ngeniously brought
in the Story of the Citizens of Milan, who used an Empress just as the
Landsknechts served the Cardinals, which also is somewhat like the Practice of
the Inquisition, who serve Protestants so. Now when the Emperor Charles V. had
been too hard for the Protestants in Germany, and the Kings Francis I. and
Henry II. had persecuted them in France, they were in a dismal condition, and
under the yoke of the Papimanes, and got the name of Pope-figs; not only
because they had reviled the Pope, but because they were forced to creep to
him, and lay under his lash. The Hail, Storms and Famine that plague them
continually, mean the Persecution; the Hobgoblins and Devils that haunt them,
are the Monks, as the Author insinuates it at the latter end of Chap. 46.

By the Country Fellow who runs into the Holy Water-Stock, and is immersed in
that blessed Pickle all but the tip of the Snout, for fear of being clawed off
by the Devil, we must understand the Constraint in which the Protestants lived,
while, to deliver themselves from the Persecutions of the Popish Hobgoblins,
they were forced to be plunged over head and ears in the superstitious Worship
of the Church of Rome; took Holy Water by handfuls, and hid themselves under
Stoles, which are the Badge of Priesthood: That is to say, they professed
Popery, as they are now forced to do in France; and some even entered into
Orders, and were Priests, Monks, Bishops, and even Cardinals, tho they were far
from being Papists in their hearts.

Brisonnet, Bishop of Meaux, was one of these; for, having silenced the
preaching Franciscans throughout his Diocese, and appointed James Faber, alias
le Fevre of Estaple, Girard Ruffi, Michael Arande, and Martial, to preach
against the Errors of the Church of Rome, he recanted, through fear, as soon as he
was called to an account about it. Ruffi himself did the same, and from a
Lutheran Preacher, became a Roman Bishop; and so did Martial, who being at
first Brisonnet's Disciple, was afterward Penitentiary, or Head-Confessor at
Paris. The Bishop of Valence, our Panurge, was one of those Dissemblers, and
even the great Admiral Chatillon's Brother, Odet, the Cardinal to whom this
Book is dedicated by Rabelais, who himself did like the rest.

On Chapter 46.
THe Stubble and the Leaves of the Radishes, which are all that falls to the
young Devil's share, while the Countryman reaps the profit of the Corn and
Fruit he had sowed in his Field, show that the pretended Papists only gave the
outside and insignificant Forms to the Church of Rome, and that their hearts
and minds were not inclinable to follow its Doctrine. Our Author's honest
boldness is very remarkable, both in this Chapter, and many of the next; he
makes the young Devil say, That at Lucifers first Course, Hobgoblins ( alias
Imps in Cowls) are a standing Dish. He willingly, says the Imp, used to
Breakfast on Students; but alas, I don't know by what ill luck they have of
late joined the Holy Bible to their Studies; so the Devil a one we can get down
among us: And I verily believe, that unless the Ca^ars (i. e. the Hypocrites of
the Tribe of Levi) help us in it, taking from the enlightened Bookmongers, their
St. Paul, either by Threats, Revilings, Force, Violence, or Fire and Faggot, we
shall not be able to hook in any more of them to nibble at below.

The Fosterers, Suttlers, Charcoalmen, and Boiling-cooks of Hell that were
mawl'd and peppered off in the Northern Countries, are the Monks and Priests,
who were routed there, particularly in England.

By the Students of Tre^isonde, he means those of the Popish Universities,
where, as he says, they are tempted by the Devils (by which he means Monks and
Priests, Professors, and their Tutors) to leave Father and Mother, forgo for
ever the established and common Rule of Living, free themselves from obeying
their Lawful Sovereign's Edicts, live in Absolute Liberty, and taking the fine
jovial little Cap of Poetic License, become so many pretty Hobgoblins. The Cap
of License, means their Degrees or the Cowl; and Poetic, is only added to blind
the thing: So the Monks leave Father and Mother, and disclaim all Authority but
the Pope's.

On Chapter 47.
BY the old Woman of Pope-figland, who frights the Devil, and puts him to
flight* the Author means that the Monks and Priests of the Church of Rome were
so ignor^nt, and their Tenants so groundless, that the very Women could make
fools of them even at demonstrative Arguments.

On Chapter 48. and five following.
THe Island of Papimany, is those whose Love and Zeal for the Pope is so
excessive, that it may be counted Madness: The word is made of Papa Pope, and
Mania, Madness, from (...), insanio. Thus in Plutarch, the Andromanes were
Women, whose Love for Men was most blind and furious; that Name being given to
those Lacedaemonian Women, who used to fight before the People with bare
Thighs, whence they were called Phenomerides. This blind Z^al for Popery is
drawn in most lively Colors by our Satirical Painter in all those Chapters;
and particularly appears by the Discourse of the Four Estates of the Country,
the Gentleman, the Lawyer, the Monk, and the Clown, who all give the Pope those
Epithetes which only belong to God, calling that Bishop of Rome, He that is,
and God on Earth. All know that the Pope's Flatterers have been very prodigal
of such Epithetes; principally in Rabelais's time; as to Paul the Third, who,
as Alstedius and others write, was styled, Optimus maximus in terris Deus; and
the following Distich was also made to compliment a Pope, and prove that he was
justly called, God on Earth.

Ense potens gemino, mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus.
The Four Estates are brought in to show that the Pope's Missionaries are of
all sorts of Conditions. Their frantic Zeal does not only make them adore the
Pope, but prostrate themselves at the Feet of those who have seen him. Says
Panurge to them, When they asked him whether he had been blessed with the sight
of that God on Earth; yea, verily, Gentlemen, I have seen three of them, whose
sight has not much bettered me. O thrice and four times happy People, cried the
Papimanes, you are welcome, and more than double welcome, and they would have
kissed Panurge's Feet; saying, they would even the kiss Pope's A -- if ever he
came among them. A^ soon as our Travelers are landed, the People ^^^^ng to see
those blessed Men, who had seen his Holiness's Face. Homenas, Bishop of the
Place^ hastens to them in P^^ti^alibus, with his Train of Church Players,
bearing Crosses, Banners, Standards, Holy Water-pots, and Canopies, such as the
Pope, and the Host use to be under, when they are carried in Procession. The
Mob conducts and attends the Strangers to the Church, where there is not one
word mentioned of God* nor Jesus Christ* or the Gospel; but much of the most
Holy Decretales or Popes Decrees written with the hand of an Angel. Our Author
admirably ridicules the Credulity of those bigoted Papists; then Homenas
mumbles over a Mass, after which, from the Church he leads them to the Tavern,
where he feasts the Strangers with the Money that was gathered during the Mass,
yet not till he had showed them the Pope's Picture, which Epistemon said was
not like the late Popes; for, says he, I have seen them, not thus with their
Pallium, Aumusse and Rochet on, but with Helmets on their Heads, more like the
Top of a Persian Turbant; and while the Christian Commonwealth was in Peace,
they alone were furiously and cruelly making War. H^menas zealously takes their
pa^ (...) ^plies, that then it was against those who trangress'd against their
Decretals, and that whether they were Emperors, Kings, or Commonwealths, he was
immediately to pursue them with Fire and Sword, strip them of their Kingdoms,
anathematize them, and not only destroy their Bodies, those of their Children
and Adherents, but also damn their Souls to the Pit of Hell. Nothing can be
finer than the Feast, and the Discourse of Homenas and his Guests. Young buxom
Lasses wait on them, principally Homenas's Favorite, whom our Author calls
Clerica. Friar Ihon, who leer'd on them side-ways like a Cur that steals a
Capon, liked them better than some of the Bon Christian Pears; so does Homenas,
who is very lavish of that Fruit, like Horace's Calaber, -- Haec porcis hodie
comedenda relinques. But he will by no means be persuaded to part with one of
the Doxies. The most Holy and Heavenly Decretales are celebrated with swindging
Bumpers of good Wine, just as Belshazzar extolled his gods of Gold and Silver.
In short, this Feast is a Triumph in which our Author has described the
voluptuous Life of those esseminate (...) their Superstitions which are ^ation
of their Idleness and Luxury, and then Impious Doctrine, that encourages
Subjects to kill their Lawful Sovereign, and Massacre all those who will not
blindly submit to the Pope, and the blind Idolatrous Worship which he has
invented; by whose means, says our Author, Gold is subtly drawn out of
France to Rome, above Four hundred thousand Ducates every Year. England was
much more fleeced, till it had shaken off the Papal Yoke; and we must own, that
as Doctor Rabelais was very well informed of all these Abuses, no Man ever
described them more to the Life; and the best Protestant Writers have not
equaled him in this, tho they did it out of Interest, and made it their
particular Business. Neither can I tell, whether Rabelais's Boldness be more to
be wondered at in publishing such a Work, while Fires were kindled in every
part of France to burn the Lutherans, than his good Fortune in having escaped
those Flames, to which many were condemned for less every day where he wrote.

On Chap. 55, and 56.
BY the unfrozen or thawed words which Pantagruel and his Company heard at Sea
in open Air, just after they had left the Papimanes, our Author ingeni^usly
describes the freedom which our Navigators took to speak their true sentiments
of the gross Ignorance, blind Zeal, loose Lives, and worse Principles of those
superstitious Papists, as soon as they were out of their reach. For among them
the Pantagruelists did not dare discover their minds, so that their words were
in a manner frozen within their mouths, which Fear and Interest kept shut. But
when they were out of danger, they could no longer thus contain their words,
and then every one distinctly heard them, murmuring words against those Bigots,
very sharp words, bloody words, terrible words, angry words, occasioned by
Reflections made on those Idolatrous Persecutors; and to those words our jolly
Company add some words of Gu^ules, that is, merry words, Jests, pleasant Talk,
probably about the young Wenches so ready to wait on the strangers at Table,
and on the good Bishop a bed.

Those frozen words that thawed, and then were heard, may also mean the Books
published at that time at Geneva and elsewhere against Popery and the
Persecution. Those who fled from it to Places of Safety, with a great deal of
freedom, filled their Writings with such Truths as were not to be spoken among
the bigoted Romanists; and many of those unfortunate men having been used very
cruelly in their Slavery, and having nothing to defend their Cause but their
Pens, while their Adversaries were armed with Fire and Sword, their words could
not but be very sharp. The words which Rabelais says were mere g^^^erish, which
they could not understand, may be the Books that were dark, ill written, and
without judgment, and the words of gu^^^es, or Jests, may be pleasant Books
such as were some of Marot's Epigrams and other Pieces of that nature.

On Chap. 57. and the five following.
THE dwelling of Master Gaster, whose entrance is rugged, craggy, barren, and
unpleasant to the eye, is found at last to be ^ery fertile, healthful, and
delightful, when with much toil the difficult ways on its Borders have been
passed. This Gaster, the first Master of Arts in the world, is the Belly in
Greek. Magister artis, ingenique largitor
Venture --
Persius. Yet our Author tells us that the Muses are the Offspring of Penia,
that is to say, Poverty; I will not pretend to contradict him; neither will any
contradict me, if I say, that at least Poverty is the most common Reward which
their unhappy Favorites reap for all their toilsome Study. The Description of
the Empire of Gaster is very curious; and the Author displays there at once
much Learning, Fancy and Wit. The Gastrolat^rs are those whose God is their
Belly; the Engastrimythes are Parasites, and all those whom their hungry
Bellies cause to say many things against their Consciences; so that they may be
said to speak from the Belly: The word Engastrymithe also means one who by use
and practice can speak as it were out of his Belly, not moving his Lips; and
finally one who has an Evil Spirit speaking out of his Belly.

Rabelais tells us a very remarkable Story of an Italian Woman called Jacoba
Rodogyna, one of those Engastrimy^^^^ whom he had seen at Ferrara in 1513. She
was said to be possessed by an Evil Spirit who loved to be called Cincinnatulo,
and revealed things past to the amazement of those who asked her questions, but
used to lie like a Devil when she pretended to foretell any thing; yet the
People of Quality of the Cisalpine Gaul used to consult her very much.

Father Mabillon in his Musaeum Italicum, speaks of a Magician Woman who had
been thus famous at Milan, where he saw her Tomb: He calls her Guillelmimina;
saying that after her death three Holidays were instituted to her Memory; and
that those of her Sect had declared she was the Holy Ghost that had appeared to
the world in the shape of a Woman; but that at last it was known she was a
Witch, and she was unsainted. Many Saints would have the same Fate, if their
Titles were canonically examined.

The Idol Manduce is the figure of Gluttony, whose Eyes are bigger than its
Belly, and its wide Jaws armed with dreadful Teeth: It Is an Imitation of the
Manducus of the Ancients.

The great number of Dishes of all sorts that are sacrificed to Gaster, show
that Gluttony reigns among all sorts of people, the poor offering their gross
Food, as well as the rich their Dainties; and that course Fare will go down
with Belly-gods, and with all men in general, for want of better. What is
offered him on interlarded Fish days, shows that this Noble Messer Gaster, as
he is called in the French, is a true Papimane, and agrees pretty well with the
Mass, Mess in French, which wants but an r of the word Messer, used in those
times for Monsieur.

On Chap. 63, and 64.
CHaneph is Hypocrisy in Hebrew; so the Island of Chaneph is the Island of the
Hypocrites; accordingly our Author says it was wholly inhabited by Sham-saints,
Spiritual Comedians, Forms of Holiness, Tumblers of Beads, dissembling Mumblers
of Avemaries, and so forth; poor sorry Rogues, who wholly lived on the Alms
that were given them by Passengers, like the Hermit of Lormont, between Blaye
and Bourdeaux: Thus he chiefly places the Orders of Mendicant Friars among the
Hypocrites, because their Convents have no Revenue but Mumping, and so they are
obliged to affect a greater Devotion than those Religious Orders who do not
make a Vow of Poverty as these do.

Our Author tells us that the Pantagruelian Fleet was becalmed when it came in
sight of that Island, and was forced to tack from Larboard to Starboard, and
from Starboard to Larboard, yet could not get ahead, tho they had added
Drablers to their Sails. By this he insinuates that this inferior Crew of
Hypocrites did put a stop to the progress of the Reformation, and the discovery
of Truth in general; as when he himself was misused by some of them in the
Convent of Cordeliers at Fontenay le Comte, merely because he studied Greek.
These Beggarly Tribes had not the power to raise a Storm, like the nine Sail of
Fathers who were going to the Council of Chesil; they could do little more than
hinder the advancement of those who searched after Truth. Thus we find, not
only that the Fleet could not proceed, but that every Ship's Company in a
manner fell asleep, doz'd, and were out of sorts, and off the Hinges. At last
this is remedied by sending to those poor Hypocrites Seventy eight thousand
little Half-Crowns, and by eating and drinking; which perhaps may mean, That
provided those poor hungry Curs have Meat and Drink, or Money to get Food,
which is all they beg, they cease to bark, and will suffer you to go on without
any further Impediment. This has been and is still observable in France and
other parts, among some of those begging Friars; whereas your Jesuits,
Dominicans, Austins, Bernardins, Celestins, Theatins, and others, such as were
in the Nine Sail, are not to be bribed or pacified so easily. One of These
whose Poetry and Criticisms are deservedly esteemed among us, has reflected on
our Author's admirable Satire too severely for a man of his Sense, tho not for
one of his Order; I mean Father Rapin; but who could expect less from a Jesuit,
and a Jesuit too whose Sodality is satiriz'd in this Work? Yet after all, that
able Critic durst not but own that Rapin's Reflect. on Poetry.
it is a most Ingenious Satire.

Panurge asks whether there be not something of the Feminine Gender among them,
and whether they would not take a small Hypocritical Touch by the by? To which
answer is made by Xenomanes, That were there not some pretty, kind-hearted
Hypocritesses, Hermitesses, and Spiritual Actresses, who beget a race of young
Hypocritillons and Sham-sanctitoes, the Island of Chaneph had long since been
without Inhabitants.

This is true in more than one sense; for did not Hypocrites beget others, some
parts of the world would be very thin of people; then those Sham-sanctitoes and
Hermitillons whom our Author means, are chiefly the young bastardly Monastic
Fry, the only Fruit many Nuns bear, by the means of the Father Confessor's kind
applications; for such of those By-blows as escape Abortion, or an untimely
Death, are reared up for a while as the pious Father's or Sister's poor
Relations, and then cag'd with Father or Mother to sing Mattins and Vespers,
and increase the larger Tribe of Hypocrites world without end.

On Chapter 66.
THE Island of Ganabin is the Island of Thieves, from Gannab a Thief in Hebrew*
Xenomanes says, that the people of that Island are all such, and commends
Pantagruel for not going ashore there. Friar John advises Pantagruel to cause a
Gun to be fired, as it were, to salute the Muses of that Antiparnassus. By this
perhaps our Author may have a mind to reflect on most of the Authors of that
Age, who as well as some of this, were very great Plagiaries. The fai^ Fountain
on that Hill may mean the great number of Subjects which might employ their
Pens more to the purpose than in Translating many foolish Romances, as the best
hands of France did at that time. That Spring may also signify the French
Tongue which our Author commends so much in the Prologue to the Fifth Book, and
inveighs against such sorts of Plagiaries, whom he calls Brokers and Retailers
of Ancient Rhapsodies and such moldy Trash, Botchers of old Thredbare stust, a
hundred and a hundred times clouted up and piec'd together: wretched Bunglers,
that can do nothing but new vamp old rusty Saws; beggarly Scavengers, that rake
the muddiest Canals of Antiquity, etc. By which he would encourage his
Countrymen to follow his Example, study it and write something that might
chiefly spring from their Fancies, without being wholly indebted to Foreign
Nations for what they published; yet not disdaining to make improvements from
the Thoughts of the Greek and the Latin Authors, as he himself has done, and
enrich the Moderns with Translations of the best Works of the Ancients.

The large Forest that is round the Fountain, may mean the wild, dark,
entangled voluminous Writings of some of that Age: The Mountain is called
Antiparnassus, in opposition to that where the true Muses were said to dwell;
and is placed in the Island of Thieves properly enough, because Poets, as well
as they, are the Children of Penia or Poverty, according to our Author.

Panurge, who was afraid Pantagruel would land in the Island of Ganabin, uses
all the Arguments which Fear could suggest to a Coward, to persuade him not to
do it, and among other things says. Do not go among'em, I beseech you, 'twere
safer to take a Journey to Hell. Hark! by Cob's Body, I hear 'em ringing the
Alarm Bell most dreadfully, as the Gascons about Bourdeaux used formerly to do
against the Commissaries and Officers for the Tax on Salt, or my Ears tingle.
This refers to what has been said in the Remarks on the Prologue, concerning
the Rebellion at Angoulesme and Bourdeaux.

Rabelais seems to have described part of this War in his second Book, when he
makes Pantagruel leave Paris, to repulse the Dipsodes, who had besieged the
great City of the Amaurotes. For, tho I have proved out of History that what is
said of the Dipsodes, may reasonably be adapted to the War of Picardy; yet I
hope I have showed that our Ingenious Author sometimes describes two things by
one, and so this may relate to two different Actions of the same person.

This Rebellion of Augoumois and B^rdeaux happened about the Time when Anthony
of Bourbon (our Pantagruel) was married to the Queen of Navarre's Daughter. Now
Francis I. that Queen's Brother, and their Father, had been Earls of
Angoulesme, which makes our Author say, in his second Book, that Gargantua's
Queen was the Daughter of the King of the Amaurots. And indeed, as there were
no more Earls of Angoulesme, that Name which signifies being vanished, was not
altogether improper then. Thus Pantagruel comes from Paris to relieve that
Country, and has a Bark full of Salt tied to his Girdle, with which he fills
the mouths of the Dipsodes; which may imply the heat and combustion in which
the People were there about the Tax on Salt; and, because several of those
Mutineers were hanged at Bourdeoux, where they were most outrageous and
stubborn, Rabelais makes Pantagruel the Inventer of the use of Pantagruelion,
which is Hemp, probably because he advised to have many of them put to death.
Indeed I have not yet found that Anthony de Bourbon came thither to assist the
King of Navarre his Father-in-law, Governor of that Country for Henry the
Second of France; but, as the Conestable of Montmorency, who, with that Duke of
Vendosme, had commanded in Picardy that year, came into Xaintonge to punish the
Rebels, it is very likely the Duke came thither also; and perhaps Historians are
silent in the matter, because he only came as a Volunteer, and the Case did not
seem worth employing at once a King of Navarre, a High Conestable of France,
and a Prince of the Royal Family. And this may be the Reason why our Satirical
Historian has chus'd to burlesque that Expedition, for doubtless there could be
no honor to the Duke in being concerned in it, principally under others;
though it were but in complaisance to the Princess of Navarre his new Wife, and
her Royal Parents, the Honey-Moon being then hardly past.

On Chapter 67.
PAnurge's Fear, increased by the noise of the Guns, makes him run mad for a
while, and lay hold on the huge Cat Rodilardus, by which he was scratched. He
says, he took it to be a young soft-chin'd Devil, and thought he had snatched
it up in the great Hutch of Hell, as thievishly as any Sizar of Mountague
College could have done. Rodilardus stands for Croquelardon, Lick-sawce, a
Parasitical Smell-feast. This Passage, doubtless, refers to some of Montluc's
Adventures, hardly to be discovered in our Age; yet known in that during which
he lived. Panurge's Cowardice and Impudence suits pretty well with that Bishop
of Valence's Character; as appears by what I said of his daring to preach
before Queen Catherine of Medicis, with a Hat and Cloak on, like a Geneva
Divine, and then not having the courage to go on, but leaving off in the midst
of his Sermon, (though the Queen abetted him, and her presence secured him) as
soon as the Conestable of Moutmorency spoke two words against his way of
preaching.

Here Rabelais takes an opportunity to bring in a Story, which, as well as some
other things of as odious a nature, I would have omitted, did not many Learned
Men despise a maimed or imperfect Book, as much as some Selfish Women hate a
Male in those Circumstances. That Story is what is said of Edward V. King of
England, and Francis Villon the witty Rogue, of whom I have already spoken.
But, with our Author's good leave, this Story is as false as it is filthy, and
improbable, though we should suppose there is a mistake in the Printing (as
there are thousands even in the best Editions of this Work I have seen yet.)
For none can imagine that Rabelais was so little versed in History, as not to
know that Edward V. died a Child, and can neither have been costive in his Old
Age, nor familiar with Villon: who, according to Pasquier, must have been
hanged before the Reign of that unfortunate Prince, and perhaps before his
Birth. And should any say that Rabelais means Edward the Fourth; I answer, That
he neither died Old, nor could be Droll'd upon at that Rate, by a Bussooning
Inmate; since, though he was not one of the wisest Heads, yet he was one of the
bravest Warriors of his Time, having fought Nine pitched Battles, generally on
Foot, and at last gloriously overcome all his Enemies: So that the Witty Jester
would hardly have offered to have told him, that the sight of Lewis the
Eleventh's Oriflamb, or Royal Standard, would have scared him into a Looseness.
The Verses which Rabelais makes Villon speak, are mentioned as his by Pasquier,
somewhat otherwise than in this Chapter: Je suis Francois, d^nt ce me poise,
Ne de Paris, prez de Pontoise;
Ou, d'une cord d'une toise,
Saura mon col, que m^n cul poise.


Explanatory Remarks ON THE Prologue to the Fifth Book.
THE Author begins this Prologue with a Question, Why People say, that Men are
not such Fools now adays, as they were in the days of yore? He answers it
himself, by a Prophecy out of an imaginary Book, which he calls, The Prelatical
Bagpipe. I give it in French and in English; lest, as it is very dark, I should
be suspected of having mistaken my Author's meanings; for he seems to have had
more than one, and to have banter'd the Reader with a Sham Explanation. Let us
see if we can unriddle it.

The Jubile's Year, when All, like Fools were shorn,
Is about [or above] thirty [ or Trente] Supernumerary.
O Want of Veneration! Fools they seemed;
But, persevering, with long Breves, at last
No more they shall be gaping greedy Fools:
For they shall shell the Shrub's delicious Fruit,
Whose Flower they in the Spring so much had feared.
L'An Jubilee que tout le monde raire
Fadas se feit, est supernumeraire
Au dessus trente: O peu de reverence!
Fat il sembloit; Mais, en perseverance
De longs Brevets, fat plus ne gloux sera:
Car le doux fruict de l'herbe esgoussera,
Don't tant craignoit la flour en prime vere.
The Year of Jubilee was in 1525, under Pope Clement VII. then all Europe
suffered themselves to be shorn or fleeced by the Pardon-Pedlars, the Sellers
of the Court of Rome's Indulgences, and other Trumpery Ware. Is Supernumerary
about [or above] Thirty [or Trente] this means, that Time is past, and such
Years of Jubilee are needless, out of fashion, and cried down after the Year
1530. (or, perhaps, after the Council of Trent^;) by reason of the Change made
by the Restoration of Learning, and the Reformers: So that People were no
longer to be fleeced by the Sellers of Pardons. And indeed, about the Year
1530. King Francis I. invited the Learned to come to Paris, and having procured
several Men well versed in various Studies, fixed them in the University of
Paris. Belleforest and Lambinus say, that in 1531, he established Twelve
Professors for Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Mathematics, Philosophy, Divinity,
Oratory, Physic, etc. But du Tillet, who at large relates what that Prince did
and designed for the Advancement of Learning, says this was in 1530. Besides,
we find in Rat. Tem. Part. I. lib. 6. Multum huic Principi debent Gallicanae
litterae: nam illius liberalitate accitis undique viris emni artium genere
excultis, publicae Scholae honestis stipendiis Lutetiae constitutae sunt Anno
1530. quam in rem hortatoribus usus est Joanne Bella^o. etc. And Genebrard, who
was afterward one of those Professors writes, Anno 1530. Guillelmo Budaeo and
Joanne Bell^^o hertantibus Regios linguarum Professores instituit. In Clemente
VIII. Now, those Learned Men, to whom Petavius gives the Epithetes of Litterati
and Pii, purged the Age of its Foolishness, and very much forwarded the Affairs
of the Reformation: So that in 1530, or at least at the time of the sitting of
the Council of Trent, the Reign of Ignorance may be said to have come to an end.

O want of Veneration! fools they seemed. That is, those who had been foolish
enough to suffer themselves to be sheer'd and fleeced thus, appeared such as
they were, when Ignorance had been expelled, I mean, bigoted Fools; neither
did the Veneration which uses to be paid to the Church, hinder the wiser sort
from laughing at them, or at least from pitying their Silliness.

But, persevering, with long Breves, at last no more they shall be empty greedy
fools. Those long Breves should be the Sacred Books, which may be called so in
opposition to the Roman Breviary, in which their Contents are as maimed,
imperfect and abbreviated, as the vain Imaginations of Superstition are spun
out there to a tedious length; at least they mean the Books written by the
Learned, many of which are long. So the People who appeared foolish, being no
more blinded by a Ridiculous Superstition, will no more gape after it, nor be
greedy of it; being filled with sound Knowledge.

For they shall shell the Shrub's delicious Fruit, whose Flower they in the
Spring so much had feared. That is, They will shell the Beans in Cod; which is
as if he had said, Truth that lay long concealed, and before was known but by a
few, will be revealed to the World; and as much as at first it was hated,
despised and feared, at its first appearance, so much the sweeter and more
delicious will its Fruit prove, when the World shall have had a taste of it.

By these Beans in Cod we may also partly understand our Author's Work. The
Beans are the Mystery, the Cod is the Emblem and outward Dress; which is good
for nothing but to wrap up what is within it; neither ought we to feed upon it,
but solely on what it contains. So we might fix the period of Ignorance, and
the beginning of the New Era, or Restoration of Learning, at the Year 1550. at
which time it began to bear good Fruit, and this Fifth Book was written, though
it was not published till after our Author's death, perhaps because it spoke
too plain. This makes him foretell the speedy oblivion of whole Cartloads of
Books that were dull, dark and mischievous, though they seemed florid,
flourishing and flowery, gay and gaudy as so many Papillons [Butterflies] by
which he seems to play upon the Word Papa, as in Papimany, and in the Sixth
Chapter of the Pantagruelian Prognostication, where the King of the Papil'ons
or Butterflies, undoubtedly means the Pope.

After all, as that pretended Prophesy is written in the style of those of
Nostradamus, it appears at first as dark and unintelligible as that
Astrologer's Rhim'd Whimsies; and though there is a meaning in our Author's,
and none in the dreaming Stargazer's, I would as little have troubled my self
to find out things past in the first, as I would look for things to come in the
latter, were not this needful to confirm what I have said of our Author's
Design, and to show the uniformity of this Mystical Work; which tho much
admired, had doubtless been much more beneficial, if most of it had been
explained soon after it was written. I mean after the Author's death; for, as
to have done that before, would undoubtedly have hastened it, and have exposed
him and his Writings to the Flames; he did not desire to be understood by every
one, and only wrote for the Learned, as the Cardinals Du Bellay, and de
Chastillon, the Bishop of Maillezais, Andrew Tiraquel, his Patrons, and such
men as hated Ignorance, that they might effectually, though underhand, forward
the downfall of Superstition, its Offspring. Therefore, to blind the Vulgar, he
turns off the sense of the Prophesy, and falls a praising Colinet, Marot,
Saingelais, etc. the greatness of whose Wit, and the Elegancy of whose Style,
he extolls to the Skies, not without some little touch of Panegyrical Satire
all the while, as appears by what he says of their Crimsin Alamode Rhetorical
Style. This he chiefly runs upon to insinuate to those whom he feared, that
what he said of the Jubile's Year is only meant of the Improvements made in
Learning, and more particularly in the French Tongue. So we find him begging of
the French Writers, his Contemporaries, that they would be pleased to admit him
as Puny Rhyparographer, or Riffraffscribler of the Sect of Pyrrichus; that
Painter having that Epithete bestowed on him from (...), sordidus, because,
like some of our Modern Boor-Painters, he only drew mean Figures, as
Coblers-stalls, Barbers-shops, and Asses; yet he hints as if he understood by
it the Office of Apologuemonger in France, which Aesop had obtained among the
best Orators and Philosophers in Greece; and at the same time he invites his
Reader to shell this Basketful of Beans in Cod, gathered in the very individual
Garden whence the former came; and says, That observing the great Mysteries, of
which these Books treat, they shall gain a singular Profit and Fame, as in the
like Case was done by Alexander, with the Books of prime Philosophy, composed
by Aristotle; doubtless he means those Acroamatic Books which that Philosopher
made public in such a style as was hardly to be understood; saying, that he
had done it on purpose. Our Author might have said as much, as will appear by
the Remarks on this his last and finest Book.

Explanatory Remarks ON THE First Chapter of the Fifth Book^
THE Ringing Island can mean nothing but the Clergy of the Church of Rome,
whose Mysteries are all performed at the sound of large, middlesiz'd, little,
and very little Bells. They are rung at Matins, Mass, Noon, Vespers, Sermons,
and the Salutation to the Virgin every day, on the Eves or Vigiles of
Holy Days, at Processions and at Stations; and, whenever the Priest lifts up
the Wafer-god, a little Bell is rung, that the People may fall down and adore
that piece of Dough, which, they must believe, made Heaven and Earth, though
'twere made that very morning by the Baker, and some of the same stamp be shown
in every Parish. Besides, when the Priest carries the Viaticum, a diminutive
Bell always tingles before him. Thus Bells are often rung wherever there is a
Monastery, Church, Chapel or Hermitage, to awaken the People's Devotion,
summon them together, dismiss them, and make them come again. Add to this, That
whatever is said of the Ringing Island in the following Chapters, cannot well
be adapted to any thing but the Popish Ecclesiastics; so those who pretended to
explain these Books only by printing at the end of some French Editions twenty
or thirty Names, which (without the least reason) they call a Key, either never
read them, or had a design to impose on the Reader more than our Author; else
they would never have said, that the Ringing Island is England. I own there is
much Ringing there, and the English are famous for making that a Recreation;
but this Book was writ during King Edward the Sixth's Reign, at which time the
Reformation had prevailed here; and though our Author mentions the Knights of
the Garter in the Fifth Chapter, while he speaks of the Knight-hawks of the
Ringing Island, it does not follow that he meant England, since he only places
the Knights of Malta among the Roman Ecclesiastics, which was judiciously done,
because they make a vow never to marry; read the Breviary, and have Livings
like Abbots. Even that Passage proves that the Ringing Island is not England;
since Aedituus makes one of his Island's Knight-hawks look wistfully on the
Pantagru^lian Strangers, to see whether he might not find among their Company a
stately gaudy kind of huge dreadful Birds of Prey, so untoward, that they could
never be brought to the lure, nor to perch on the Glove, (which may mean, that
other Knights claimed a pre-eminence over those of Malta.) Aedituus adds, He is
told there are such in your World who wear goodly Garters below the Knee, with
an Inscription about them which condemns him who shall think ill of it, (qui
mal y pense) to be bewtay'd and conskited. So it is plain there were none such
in the Ringing Island. Then in the Sixth Chapter Aedituus says, that all the
good things which they have in his Island come from every part of the other
World, except some of the Northern Regions, particularly from Touraine, our
Author's Native Country; and that the Income of the Duke of that Country could
not afford him to eat his Belly full of Beans and Beacon, because his
Predecessors had been more than liberal to the Birds of the Ringing Island,
that they might there munch it, twist it, cram it, gorge it, craw it, riot it,
junket it, and tickle it off; stuffing their Puddings with dainty Food, etc.

The Hermit, whom the Pantagruelists met, assured them they should not be
admitted into the Ringing Island, unless they fasted four days, because it was
then one of the four Fasting, or Emberweeks. As that Island is the Popish
Clergy, none enter into it, that is, into Orders, without fasting, and a great
deal of formality; and 'twas judiciously that Rabelais made his Travelers be
admitted there at one of the times prescribed for the admittance of Lai^s into
the Body of the Clergy. Yet he shows, that those Fasts (though commendable in
their Institution) were much abused; and many, like Panurge, are pretty apt to
say, Since you are so sted fast, and have us fast, let us fast, as fast as we
can, and then break fast. Thus only putting a constraint on themselves awhile
(or seeming to put it) to indulge themselves in Gluttony after it.

On Chapter 2.
WHEN Pantagruel and his Attendants have fasted after a strange sort of a
fashion they are kindly received by Albiam Camar, Master Aedituus, or
Sacristan, of the Ringing Island. Camar in Hebrew signifies an Idolatrous
Priest; and St Jerome has made it Aruspex and Aedituus in Latin. We may
observe, by that beginning, what esteem our Author had for the Ringing Island,
with its Sacrifices and Mysteries.

Aedituus acquaints our Stangers with the Metamorphosis of the Siticines and
Sicinnists into Birds. The Siticines and Sicinnists were those that used to
sing mournfully on the Dead, and at Funerals, among the Ancients. Siticines
appellantur qui apud sitos canere soliti essent, hoc est, vita functos and
sepultos. A. Gellius, lib. 2. cap. 20. Consequently, the Clergy of the Church
of Rome, who chiefly subsist by Obits, Trentals and Masses for the rest of the
Souls of the Dead, may well be called by those Names.

We are told that the Siticines were become Birds; those Birds are those
Ecclesiastics, who raise themselves by Contemplation and holiness of Life (if
you will believe them) soaring above the things of this Earth, on which we poor
grovelling Layles crawl. Aedituus would make Pantagruel sensible of this, when
he tells him that those Birds, which looked like men, eat and drank, slept and
bill'd like men, were nothing less than men, being neither Secular nor Layies.

Their spacious, costly, magnificent Cages, admirable in their Architecture,
are their Churches; which appears the plainer by reason of the Bells, which our
Author says were above them.

The variety of the Feathers and Plumes of those Birds, denotes the different
Orders and Cloathings of the Popish Clergy, which distinguish them from each
other: The Benedictins are white the Austins black, the Franciscans gray, the
Bernardins black and white, the Bishops purple, the Cardinals red; some Knights
and Commandeurs are white and blue; and there are Nuns dressed like most of
those, professing the same Orders.

It Is observable that they are all made Birds of Prey, Clerghawks* Monkhawks,
Priesthawks, Abbothawks, Bishhawks, Cardinhawks, and Popehawks; and Clergkites,
Nunkites, Abbeskites, etc.

The wry-neck'd Bigottellos, who had flocked thither during the last three
hundred years, are the Orders of Franciscan and Dominican Friars. Our Author,
who had been a Cordelier, i. e. a Franciscan, and misused by the Fraternity in
the Convent, was well acquainted with their Merit, and speaks experimentally,
which makes him wish for another Hercules to root them out.

On Chapter 3.
THE Popehawk, who, like the Phoenix, is a Species alone, is undoubtedly the
Pope. We have there a true Account of what happened some 1760 Moons, that is
about 140 years before our Author wrote; only to blind this, or perhaps by some
mistake in the Printing, it is made 2760 Moons. I mean the Schism of Avignon,
which lasted Forty years. Three Popes were seen then at the same time, Bennet
the Ninth, Gregory the Twelfth, and Alexander the Fifth. This Schism ended at
the Council of Constance, which began in 1414, and ended in 1419.

On Chapter 4.
AeDituus owns that all the Birds of the Ringing Island are Passengers; there
is a sort of Hawks distinguished by that Name. He adds, that none of them were
bred in that place, but all came from the other world; that is, out of the
Laity, who are styled Worldly Men with respect to the Clergy, who assume that
of Divine. One of the Countries out of which they come, is called Want-o-bread,
and the other, Too-many-of 'em. The first shows, that many will take to any
thing rather than starve; the other, that the Avarice of Unnatural Parents
makes them compel their Children, often the most defective in Body or Mind, to
be Monks, Friars, Priests, etc.

Those Birds who returned to the World are the Monks and Clergymen, who, like
Luther, Calvin, and others, left their Monastical or Ecclesiastical Habits; or
like Rabelais, left their Monasteries. The Feathers found among the Nettles,
mean his Frock and Cowle, which he cast off, and in general those of other
Monks who apostatize (so their Desertion is called by the Church of Rome). What
the Company chanced to light upon there as they looked up and down, for the
discovery of which some People will hardly thank them* may imply this Work,
which exposes all the Mysteries of Monachism.

On Chapter 5.
THE Dumb Knighthawks of the Ringing Island are the Knights of Malta; the mark
which they bear under their Left Wing, is the Cross of their Order, which these
Knights wear on the He^rt, of different Colors* according to the Provinces to
which they belong. They are said to be Dumb, because they do not say Mass, nor
officiate as Priests and Monks; and are only obliged to read every day, or
repeat so^^ parts of their Brevi^y. They have no Females, says Aedituus;
because there are none of their Order, yet they make themselves amends with
others out of every Order: so what is said of the Pock-royals that embroider
their Heads, and undermine the handle of their Faces, is true of many of them
who are not always concerned in Holy Wars. They are all Gentlemen, not shut up
within Monasteries; and, though they sing not, feed, that is, spend and devour
as much as the best two that do; some of their Livings or Commanderies bringing
them in great Sums yearly; and as they make a Vow never to marry, it is not
strange they should meet with such Wounds, when they engage some other Infidels
than the Turks.

I have already spoken en Passant of the Knights of the Garter, of whom our
Author made mention in the same manner. The Knights who wear before their
Plumes le Trophee d' un Calomniateur, that is, the Devil in a String before
their Paunches, are the Knights of the Order of St. Michael, pictured with the
Devil at his Feet. 'Twas the most honorable Order in France in our Author's
time; for that of the Holy Ghost was instituted since, by Henry III. Those who
wear a Ram's Skin, are the Knights of the Order of the Golden Fleece.

On Chapter 6.
THE Author describes how the Birds of the Ringing Island are crammed, and how,
though not one of 'em sets his hand to the Plow, or Tills the Land, whose Fat
he devours* they wallow in plenty, and do nothing but chirp it, whistle it, and
warble it merrily night and day. All this Chapter is a cutting Satire, in which
Rabelais ingeniously exposes the foolish Bigotry of the great Vulgar and the
small, who have undone, and still ruin themselves daily, to maintain those lazy
hypocritical Birds of Prey, in idle Ease, and luxurious Pleasure, though the
ravenous Tribe have nothing to give in return, but insignificant Siti^in
Prayers, and a doubtful Hereafter for a certain Now.

On Chapter 7.
THIS Chapter is not in its due place, neither can I find any in the whole Book
where it could be well brought in; this makes me believe that either it was
designed for some of those which probably Rabelais intended to publish after
this; wherein, as he tells us in the Third Book we were to have an Account of
Panurge's Marriage, and of his being made a Cuckold on his Wedding Night, after
his coming from the Oracle of the Bottle. I can perceive some difference in the
style, and the Sense is lame in some places; so that as this Book was not
printed till after our Author's death, (nor would it have been safe for him to
have published it) I am of Opinion it was found among his Papers, and,
imperfect as it was, ^oisted in any how.

However, the Island of the Apedesers is a Satire on some Courts of Judicature,
whose Members squeeze out the Blood and Substance not only of the wrangling
part of the World, but of those peaceable pers^^^ whom some litigious
Adversaries compel to fall into their Clutches. The little Wire-press, called
Pithies in the Language of the Country, that lay Backwards in a blind Corner,
signifies the B^^v^^^es, Drinking places, which are generally in the very
Buildings where are the Courts of Judicature in France, whither the Lawyers ^o
to refresh themselves at the Expense of the Clients. That Word comes from the
Greek (...), Drink. The Ancients had also a Festival Sacred to Bacchus, which
was called (...) Hogshead. It used to be celebrated at the time of the year
when Tuns and Hogsheads used to be new hoop'd and fitted up, and, while it
lasted, all Comers and Goers drunk Wine gratis, just as they do in France on
St. Martin's Eve. The Athenians kept that Festival in the month which they call
Anthesteron, which is our month of November, as G^za proves it, Lib. de
mensibus Atheniensium. By which it appears, that the Custom used on ^t.
Martin's day in France, on which the Parliaments as well as others make merry,
succeeded to the Pithaegia of the Ancients. All this Chapter may be easily
understood by those who are acquainted with the Customs of France; and, as it
may be applicable also to other Countries, it cannot seem very dark to others.

On Chapter 8.
THIS Chapter ought immediately to follow the Sixth; and is also easily to be
construed. It Is observable, that about midnight, which is the time that many
Monks are to rise to go to Prayers, Aedituus wakes his Guests, that they might
drink; telling them, they should have eaten 3 Breakfasts already, and that if
they would consume the Mouth-Ammunition of that Country, they must rise
betimes; Eat them, says he, they multiply; spare them, they diminish. The lean
Birds, who are singing to them while they are to drink, are the Novices and
sorry Monk-links, who chant at Church Matins or Vespers, while the Great ones
snore or tope.

Panurge, who likes all this well enough, is yet for someting else, and would
mix the Sports of Love with those of Bacchus; and considering, that though
those Ecclesiastics enjoy the latter at their ease, yet they dare not taste of
the first without danger, he brings in the Fable of the Ass, who slighted the
delicious Food of the High-m^tall'd Prancers, because they were not allowed to
be familiar with the Mares. Our Author ingeniously makes Panurge, who was for
copulating in a lawful way, relate this to the Priest, by which he would
insinuate, that 'twere much better for them to have a liberty to marry.

On Chapter 9.
WITH much ado our Travelers get a sight of the Popehawk ('it is Pope Julius the
Third) who sat drooping with his Feathers staring about him, attended by a
Brace of little Cardinhawks and six lusty fusty Bishhawks. Panurge seeing him,
cries, A Curse light on the Hatcher of the Ill Bird, of my word this is a filthy
Whoophooper. A Whoop, or a Hooper, upupa, (...), is a Bird whose Cop or Tufft
of Feathers on its Head is not altogether unlike the Papal Tiara, adorned with
a Triple Crown; the whole delight of that filthy Fowl is to nestle in man's
Ordure; which admirably denotes the Inclinations of many of the Holy Fathers,
and particularly of Julius III. as I will immediately show it.

The Madgehowlet, which was perceived under the Popehawk's Cage, implies either
a Pope of the Female Kind, as Pope Joan (if there ever was any such) or rather
a Donzella, or Concubine; unless some Critic will offer to say, that this
Madgehowlet, which Aedituus swears is no She-thing, but a Male and a noble
Bird, certainly was the Cardinal Innocent, with whom his Holiness Pope Julius
the Third had been passionately in love while he was Legate at Bolonia, and to
whom, as a Reward for his kind Services, he had bestowed a Cardinal's Cap, when
he was advanced to the Papal Chair. Since that, this Noble Cardinal was so very
intimate with that Pope, that Pasquil could not forbear to say, he believed
nothing of all this, and, That Innocent was not handsome enough to be Jupiter
's Ganymede.

The Brace of little Cardinhawks seem to mean either some such young Sparks, or
rather some of that Pope's Bastards, or at least his Predecessor's. Paul the
III. made two of his Bastard Daughter's Sons Cardinals; and Rabelais in his
15th Letter to the Bishop of Ma^^^zais, calls them the little Cardinals de
santa F^ore. That Pope himself, who had kept a Roman Lady della Casa Rufina,
and had a Bastard Son by another, had a Sister once kept by Pope Alexander VI.
who had her drawn like the Virgin Mary. She was married afterward to a
Gentleman, who having notice that the Pope lay with her in his Absence,
afterward stabbed her; so to make her Brother amends, Alexander made him a
Cardinal while he was yet ver^ young, and afterward he was chosen Pope.
Rabelais seems maliciously to pun upon one of those diminutive Cardinals in his
Letters, calling him a Cadinali^ule.

The old Greenheaded Bish hawk snoring with his Mate and three Jolly Bitter
Attendants under an Arbor, so that he could not be waked by the Baxome
Abbel-kite that sung by them like any Linnet, is J^hn de la Casa, Archbishop of
Benevente, and Legate of the Holy See at Venice. He was famous for Poetry, and
wrote a Poem in praise of Sodomy, which he called Opera D^vina; and said in it
that he knew no other Love. His indifference for the Fair is happily expressed
by his snoring near the pretty Abbesskite, that so kindly invites him with her
Syren's Voice, which yet proves too weak an Allurement, and cannot wake him
into a natural Love.

On Chapter 10.
THE Island of Tools treats of Things which are not much less odious than the
Cages of the Popehawk and Bishhawk. There Is a Catch in the Prologue to the
Fourth Book which is in a manner a Key to this Chapter: It Is that which
follows, Since Tools without their Hafts are useless Lumber,
And Hatchets without Helves are of that number,
That one may go in the other, and may match it,
I Will be the Helve, and thou shall be the Hatchet.
The Author says, that those Staves or Plants, which grew up to fit themselves
to Tools, seemed Terrestrial Animals, in no wise so different from brute Beasts
as not to have Flesh and Bone, but their Heads were down, and their Feet
upwards. At the end of the Chapter, he says, I spied behind I don't know what
Bush, I don't know what Folks, doing I don't know what Business, in I don't
know what Posture, scowring I don't know what Tools, in I don't know what
manner, and I don't know what place. This Chapter requires a larger Comment;
but, its Subject being none of the most modest, it is better to leave that to be
done by those who love to dive to the bottom of those Matters.

On Chapter 11.
AFTER the Venereal Games, in the Island of Tools, we have those of Chance, in
the Sharping Island. It Is said to be lean, sandy, barren and unpleasant,
because, in the main seldom any thing is to be got by Games of Hazard,
honestly. What is got at one time is generally lost at another, and goes as
easily as it comes; for most Gamesters, often prodigal of what they have got,
seldom consider, that should their Profits at the Year's end balance their
Losses, they still will be found to have lost their time, and squandered away
part of what should have made the Scales even between Profit and Loss; and so
though they have won much, they are poorer many times than they would have been
had they not played at all. It Is obvious that the two little white square Rocks,
with eight equal Points in the shape of a Cube, are the Dice; the six different
Stories are their six different sides and numbers, that ascend from 1.2.3.4.5
to 6. Of which twenty one Points Rabelais makes so many Devils, because they
tempt and bewitch men so much; though, as he observes, the Land is barren and
unpleasant; for, after all, Gaming is a tedious Repetition of the same thing,
and a continual gazing upon the Dice or Cards without any pleasing Discourse.
Not to speak of the Fear and Agony of the Gamesters, their Toil, when they pass
whole Nights at play, and break their Rest, and not their Fast; their Despair
and Curses when they have lost, the mean Actions by which they debase
themselves, to borrow, or pawn; and the Quarrels, and their sad Consequences
among the greatest Friends on the account of Play. So that Pantagruel's Pilot
was in the right, when he told him that more Wre^ks had happened about those
Square Rocks, than about all the others in the Universe.

After the Games of Hazard, comes another that is as deceitful ^t least; I mean
the Trick of Relics. The Author places them in the Island of Sharping,
because the Church of Rome sharps the Superstitious Layity out of great Sums of
Money by the doubtful Remains of as doubtful Saints, much more than by the real
Relics of the True. Accordingly our Travelers, with a world of pother and
ado, Formalities and Antic Tricks, were blessed at last with a sight of a Phial
of Sangreal, that is, as I have observed on the 43d Chapter of the Fourth Book,
what they impudently pretend to be our Savior's Blood; but after all, 'twas
only the scurvy Face of a roasted Conny. Mr. Emiliane, in his Book of the
Frauds of the Romish Priests, tells us, that such a kind of a Relic is in
Italy to this day: That pretended Blood is shown with great Ceremonies, and
store of Flambeaux, Torches, and Sanctified Tapers, etc. Our Author says, that
they saw nothing worth speaking of in that Island but a good Face set upon an
ill Game, which suits well with the Carriage of those who show such Sham
Relics; accordingly he says they also saw the Shells of the two Eggs formerly
laid and hatched by Laeda; which indeed are most worthy being placed among such
Relics.

The Hats and Caps of the Manufactury of the Place (Chapeaux de Cassade) may be
mentioned to banter some Prelates who had a mind to be Cardinals, and perhaps
were fooled out of the Money which they gave to the Pope's Favorites to that
intent. Avoir des Cassades is a Burlesque Expression; such, as when we say, to
begull'd, or swallow a Gudgeon. Yet, as Rabelais says, that some of the Company
bought a piece of Laeda's Eggshells for a morsel of Bread, and then immediately
adds, that they bought those Hats and Caps, which, he feared, would turn to no
very good account, he may either mean that they were cheated there, or bought
some sham Agnus Dei's, and such Holy Trumpery. Whatever it be, we find, that in
the next Chapter they went through the Wicket; and, for offering to sell them
again, were clapped into Lob's Pound, by order of Gripe-men-all, Archduke of the
Furr'd-Law-Cats.

On Chapter 12.
PAntagruel prudently past by Condemnation with his Fleet, but some of his
Companions more unfortunate or less wise, were stopped at the Wicket, and obliged
to take their Trial. That Wicket is the Inquisition in general; and in
particular, the Court established in 1548. at Paris against the Lutherans; for
we find that the Furr'd-Law-Cats (which mean the Judges, Presidents a Mortier,
i. e. en Parliament) have Mortar-like Caps and Furred Gowns. A Common Mumper
gives an admirable Account of the Place. He speaks of it as of a Hellish Court,
where, without the least regard to Right or Wrong, they imprison, behead, hang
and burn those who fall into their Clutches; where Vice passes for Virtue,
Wickedness for Piety, Treason for Loyalty, and Robbery for Justice; yet
whatever is acted by them, is approved by all men, except the Heretics; and he
charges on its Members all the Woes that infest the World. One would almost
think that ^abelais meant some of the Nobility in the Netherlands by this Noble
Gueux (Noble Beggar) for so he styles him, after he had called him Gueux de
^hastiere, Ostiarius Mendicus, a Common Mumper; which he probably did to hide
his Thought, or turn that of the Reader from the Subject, at the same time that
he speaks to him about it; a method which he has followed almost throughout
this Work. It Is known that the Protestant Nobility, and others in the
Netherlands, got the name of Gueux, i^^e. Beggars, it is said, for opposing
themselves to the setting up of the Inquisition: And though some trace the
original of that Nickname no higher than the time of Margaret of Parma's
Government, some pretend it was given them long before by the Spaniards on that
account. If this be not meant of those Noble Assertors of their Liberties in
the Netherlands, as being written some years before that name of Gu^ux was
universally spread, it must yet be owned that it refers to the persecuting
Courts of Judicature in those times, chiefly to the Inquisition, or at least to
the Tourn^lle, that is, that part of the Courts of Parliament in France that
tries Criminals: For in France men have not the Privilege of being tried by
their J^^ies, o^ their Peers, which Englishm^n enjoy. Gripe-men-all is the Head
of the Inquisition, or perhaps the President of that Count, which used the
Protestants so severely in France in 1548. The Picture over the Chief Seat is
that of Injustice.

On Chapter 13.
PAnurge being brought to the Bar, Gripe^men-all propounds to him a Riddle, and
tells him, That the Earth shall immediately open its Jaws, and swallow him to
quick Damnation* if he don't solve it. This is exactly the practice of the
Inquisition; the Party that is accused is obliged to guess his Crime, and the
Name of his Accusers; and if he guesses amiss, he is certainly undone: but if
he has the Wit or Good Fortune to discover them, he generally comes off better;
and a round Fine, with St. Bennet's Cap, save him from being burned.

Panurge vainly insists on his Innocence; for Gripe-men-all replies, That if he
has nothing better to offer, he will let him know, that it had been better for
him to have fallen into Lucifer's Clutches; that their Laws are like Cobwebs,
in which little silly Flies are caught and destroyed, but too weak to stop
stronger Birds. This may have been spoke on the account of Pantagruel, who
would not pass through the Wicket, that is to say, who would not submit to the
Inquisition.

Gripe-men-all says, When did you hear that for these Three hundred years last
past, any Body ever got out of this Weel without leaving something of his
behind him? This is true enough, if spoken of the Inquisition; and about Three
hundred years before Rabelais wrote, a Court of Inquisition was set up at
Toulouse against the Albigenses, by Lewis the Ninth, called, The Saint.

On Chapter 17.
THE Forward Nation is easily known to be those Boon Companions, who, as the
Author says, love heartily to wind up their Bottom, bang the Pitcher, and lick
the Dish; Men who have been fair Swallowers of Gravy Soupe, Notable Accountants
in matter of Hours, whose whole Lives are one continual Dinner, and who at last
die of too much ^at* of Diseases got by eating or drinking to Excess. This also
reflects upon those who prodigally spend their Estates, and at last crack their
Credits, and are forced to abscond, and thus may, in a manner, be said to be
dead. This Chapter, which now ends with the pleasant Story of the Abbot of
Castillers, who never used to be familiar with his Ma^^s, but when he was dressed
in Pontificalibus, is imperfect; or there is a mistake in the account of its
Contents, which promise a Rel^tion of the danger which Panurge was in, though
not one word of it is mentioned in the whole Book.

On Chapter 18.
TO attain to the knowledge of Truth, it is necessary to take a Survey of every
thing; so our Travelers steering their Course to its Oracle, sail toward the
Queendom of Whims; by which, in general, may be understood all sorts of strange
whimsical Notions, and Alchymy in particular.

Accordingly, as they come near that Country, that is, imitate the fantastic
wavering People that fill their Heads with all the strange Imaginations which
we call Whimsies, some sudden Gusts or Scuds of Wind arise, and the Wind
shifting from Point to Point, is at no certainty: They tack about, the Gusts
increase, and by Fits blow at once from several quarters. This very well
represents an unfix'd Mind, that unmethodically applies itself to many things
at once, then leaves them to think on others, which soon resign the working
Brain to a Crowd of succeeding raw and undigested Notions.

The Master of the Ship orders the Sheers to be let fly, for fear of
oversetting the Ship, and is for running adrift, or temporize, as the Author
calls it; those Gusts not being dangerous. This may mean, that it is not always
proper to oppose altogether the Inclinations of some Men, even while it leads
them to Studies and Attempts that seem insignificant; since time soon weens
them of their darling Follies, and thus they know the better how to distinguish
between the Useful and the Unprofitable.

After all, this may refer to some of those doubtful Points about which the
Learned were as idly busy in that Age, as to this day many in This are about
them and others, placing Religion more in Notions than in Actions, and
neglecting the Practice to talk of the Theory: Such Questions are those of
Free Will, Predestination, Justification, etc. by which the People reap as
little Benefit as the Teachers gain Glory, when they display their learned
Ignorance about them. Pantagruel's Ship that is stranded, or run aground,
endeavoring to weather-coil and break through the Whirlwind, after it has been
tossed by it, is an Image of those who thinking to ease their fluctuating Minds*
at last venture on some new Nation, which at first seems plausible to some, but
they are soon g^^d^^, and do not know how to get oil. The empty Drums which
were on Board the Ship that came from Queen-Whims, which towed the
Pantagru^^^^s off ground, put me in mind of the help which School Divinity
affords in such Doubts; an empty Noise, mere Wind, and that is all, just as
harmonious as the Sound made by the Gravel, and the Seamens Cheers; yet even
that fantastic Relief proves real to some who are whimsically drawn by it, and
by that means are in a fair way to proceed, and being led by the Current, like
our Travelers, arrive at the Queendom of Whims.

On Chapter 19.
THAT place which is also called E^tele^hy, and its Ruler Queen-Whims or
Quintessence, is Alchymy, the pretended Philosophical Stone, as also Quacks,
and all those beggarly Projectors, who, if you will believe them can make you
Rich, and promise Mountains of Gold, whereas they sometimes want Brass to buy
Bread; and more generally this refers to all Addle-headed Students and
Contrivers. All know how infatuated many of the Chemists are with the Lapis,
Aurum Potabile, and a Thousand Remedies, at whose very ^ight* they will tell you.
Diseases disappear. The Leprosy, the Plague, Poisons, though never so
corrosive, the Venereal Disease, the Gout, Pals^^s; In short, all obstinate and
dangerous Evils are cured by them in an unaccountable manner, if you will
believe them. Now Rabelais, who, as Thu^nus says, was a most learned and
experienced Physician, gives us freely to understand that all those Pretenders
are so many Cheats, who sometimes deceive themselves, but generally others. For
this Reason the first Port of that Island whereat he makes his Fleet touch, is
Mate^techny* (...) that the study of foolish improfitable Arts: Yet he makes
those who profess them, give th^i^ Country the Name of E^telechy* from (...),
Actus and ^e^fect^^^* as it is rendered in Aristotle's second Book de Anima.
Tully, Tuscul. l 1. would have it to signify a Perpetual Motion. Now as several
Learned M^n in former Ages have almost as largely descanted upon the Word, as
some in This have lost Time about the Thing, Rabelais reflects upon them for it
in this Chapter; and at the same time those Grammarians, who di^pute so ^otly
about Words and neglect Things, may be (...) as deserving to be placed among
those who apply themselves to unprofitable Studies.

On Chapter 20.
RAbelais ridicules here those Empiri^^ whose chief Talent is Impudence and
Lies, while they pretend to cure ^^ Incurable Diseases; and also those who seek
an Universal Remedy, Rosa^^ucians, Disciples of Trismegistus, Raimond Lullius,
Arnold of Ville^^uve, and such who are said to have understood the great Work
or Ar^^num Philosophicum, and (if you will believe them) the only true Sons of
Wisdom. This makes him say, That Queen-Whims cured ^^ all manner of Diseases
with a Song full as effectually as some Kings rid M^n of the E^il, that takes
its Name from their Dignity; by which he meant, that all those pretended Cures
are just as solid as a Song, and are nothing but vain Talk.

The Qu^en's affected p^d^nti^ Speech, mimics the way of Talk of some of our
Demy-Vertu^sa's, who cannot think any one speaks well, unless he express
himself with far-fetched Metaphors, long Tropes, uncommon Words, per Ambages,
tedious Circonlocutions, and such fulsom stuff. Accordingly we find that
Panurge could not tell how to answer her in the same Cant, neither did
Pantagruel return a word. However they dined never the worse after it, while
the Queen fed on nothing but Categories, Abstractions, Second Intentions,
Metempsycoses, Transcendent Proleps^^s, Expressions, Deceptions, Dreams, etc.
in Greek and Hebrew.

On Chapter 21.
OUR Travelers see the Queen and some of her Subjects, who sift, searse,
boult, range, and pass away Time, and revive ancient Sports. This reflects on
those who wholly apply themselves to the Study of the Customs of the Ancients,
while many times they are ignorant in those of the Moderns; a sort of Book
worms, some of which, conversing with none but the Dead, are hardly qualified
for tho Company of the Living. Our Author, who seldom forgets the Monks, says,
That one of the Queen's Officers cured the Consumptive by turning them into
Monks, by which means they grew fat and plump. What he says of the Nine
Gentlemen who were rid of their Poverty, having a Rope put about their Necks,
at the end of which hanged a Box with Ten thousand Crowns in it, may refer to
some in those Times who either had or fancied they were to have the Collar of
the Order of St. Michael, or some other, bestowed on them with a Pension.

On Chapter 22.
THIS Chapter ridicules those who attempt Impossibilities; accordingly our
Author says they made Blackamoors white, rubbing their Bellies with the bottom
of a Pannier, plowed a sandy Shore with three Couples of Foxes in one Yoke, and
did not lose their Seed; which Undertakings have given occasion to several
Proverbs among the Ancients, to denote Labor in vain, as A^thi^pem dealbar;
arenas arare; laterem lavare; pumice aridius; ex asino lanam, and others which
o^^ Author has purposely mentioned. Some Mathematicians, Dialectitians,
Naturalists and Metaphysicians, are ingeniously satiriz'd in this Chapter.

On Chapter 23.
QVeen-Whims or Quintessence's Supper, is not more substantial than her Dinner;
for she eats nothing but Ambrosia, drinks nothing but Nectar; and the Lords and
Ladies that were there, fared on such Di^hes as Apicius dreamed of All this is
Dream and Poetical Food, and consequently of easy Digestion. An Olla or
Hotchpodge follows, which may represent a mixture of confused Notions jumbled
together. The Cards, Dice, Chequers and B^wls full of Gold (for those who would
play) the Mules in stately Trappings, Velvet Litters and Coaches, are the vain
hopes of those who are subject to Whims, and dream of finding the Philosopher's
Stone.

The Queen tastes and chews nothing; her Praegustators and Masticators (her
Tasters and Chewers) do that for her; and she never visits a Close-stool but by
Proxy. This signifies, That those who employ those Cheats who pretend to make
Gold, swallow every thing that comes from them, without examining the sense of
it, o^ chewing the (...) upon the matter; all goes down glibly with them so
greedy they are of possessing such a mighty Secret. But the Alchymists, whom
they trust, bestir their Grinders lustily in the mean time, and do not feed
altogether on Smoke as do their Patro^s, who are here said never to go to Stool
but by Proxy; because they are only fed with Words and Promises; all vanishes
in Smoke The word Sp^^ziater signifies one who fairly gets S^^t from Brass, by
trying and melting it down.

On Chapter 24.
THE Ball in the manner of a Turnament, which was performed before the Queen,
is a most lively and ingenious description of the Game of Chess. The Floor of
the Hall, which is covered with a large piece of velveted white and yellow
checkered Tapistry, means the Chequer-Board. The 32 young Persons, one half
dressed in Cloth of Gold, and the other in Cloth of Silver, are the 32 Chess-men;
Kings, Queens, Bishops, Knights, Rooks and Pawns. They play three Games, the
two first are won by the Silvered King, and the last by his Adversary.

Our Author, who cannot ^e too much admired for his Art in raising Satirical
Reflections of great moment, most naturally, out of Trifles, where they are
least to be expected, in the midst of this admirable Allegory, seems to have
reflected upon his King Francis's Rashness, which made him be taken Prisoner at
the Battle of Pavia: For, speaking of the Golden Queen, who in this
Latruncularian War (if I may ^se the expression) skirmish'd too boldly, and was
taken, he says, the rest were soon routed after the taking of their Queen; who,
without doubt, from that Time resolved to be more wary, and not venture so far
amidst her Enemies, unless with more Forces to defend her.

He also brought in very pleasantly Cardinal Cusa's Boyish Observation, in his
Simile on a Top or Gigg; and so he has done almost all over this Work.

He is not less Artful in bringing off his ^antagruelists, that they may no
longer be hindered by Whims, from arriving at the Oracle of Truth: For he says,
that while they minded this pleasing Entertainment, and were charmed with the
Melody that played to the Dancers, Queen-Whims vanished; and they strait went
o'board their Ships, the Wind being fair; for had they not (...) Sail
immediately, they could hardly have got off in three quarters of a Moon in the
Wain: That is to say, by the means of Music, ingenious Games, Dancing, and
other innocent Recreations, many ease their Minds of perplexing Thoughts, and
leave those crabbed, whimsical, unprofitable Studies, which wholly possessed
them before; for those idle busy Fancies vanish, like the evil Spirit of Saul,
at the harmonious Sound of Instruments: But should not the Mind after this be
immediately applied to some solid Inquiries that may ingross all its Faculties,
it would be in danger of being taken up again with unnecessary and uncertain
Businesses.

It Is observable that Rabelais has made these Chapters very clear, and almost
sufficient to teach a Man to play at Chess; that his Satirical Allegories
throughout the Work, which are darker, might be thought of no greater moment
than this Ball and Turnament.

On Chapter 26.
THE Island of Odes where the Ways go up and down, is the Subject of this
Chapter. The Author seems p^rtly inclined to droll, by the means of an
H^pallagical Expression, used by the English ^^ well as by the French; while,
speaking (...) Way or Road, we ask, Whither it goes* instead of asking, To what
place Men (...) by that Way? He takes thence an opp^rtunity to banter
Aristotle's saying, That^ Self-moving Things are Animals.

By the By, he gives a Touch to the Schoolmen, when he says, That he (...) one
taken up with a Warrant, for having in spite of Pallas, (invita Minerva) taken
the School-way, which is the longe^^ What he says of Bourges Highway, which
went with the Deliberation of an Abb^ must be understood of that University,
famous for the study of the Civil Law.

He calls it the Island of Ode^ from (...), which signifies a Way or Road* a
Convenience to forward us in a J^urney, as a Wagon, Boat, etc. a Way or Rule of
Living, a Method; and finally, an Ambush on a Road by Robbers. Now in some of
these Senses the Ways may properly enough be said to go up and down; and
allowing to the word Way, the latitude of the Greek word (...), the Enigma will
easily be solved. There may also have been some persons named Chemin, or du
Chemin, in the Castle and Village of Od^s in Big^rre, where Queen Margaret of
Navarre died, and the Author may perhaps allude to their Surname, as common in
France, as Way is in England.

On Chapter 27.
THE Island of the Sandals is the next place which our Tavellers visit.
Rabelais calls it l'Isle des Esclots. Esclot is a Patten, Sandal, or Wooden
Shoe in some parts of France, particularly toward Thol^use. So because it is
the Dwelling of Friars, and many of them wear Sandals or Clogs, I call it the
Island of Sandals. Yet as the word Esclop formerly was used in France for
Esclave, a Slave, I am persuaded that our Author gave that Name of Escl^t to
this Island, chiefly to disguise his Intent, which was to tell us that its
Inhabitants are Esclops, Slaves: For such all Monks become to the will of their
Superiors, by the Vow of Obedience which they are oblig^d to make at their
admission into their respective Sodalities. All this Chapter is ^^most cutting
Satire on Monachism in general, and seems to reflect particularly on the
Jesuits, but the Author has affected to be mystical all along in what may be
applied to them.

The Jesuits may well be called Slaves, considering their Rules; some of which
are These, exhibited in Exercitia Spiritualia Ign. Loyol^, printed at Antwerp.
They must abandon all Judgment of their own, be always ready to obey the Church
of Rome, and believe that Black is White, and White is Black, if She says it:
They ought to regard the Command of their Superior as that of God himself, and
submit to his Government, as though they were mere Machines, or an old man's
Staff, to be moved at his pleasure.

It Was upon this account that Pope Paul III. confirmed the Establishment of
their Society, which was not to exceed 60, in 1540. about Ten years before
Rab^lais wrote this Book. The time of their Institution agrees very well with
what Rabelais says, That Benius III. showed a spick and span-new Monastery to
our Travelers, contrived by him for the Semi-quaver Friars. What is added may
refer to all Monks and Friars in general.

By the Statutes, Bulls and Patents of Queen Whims, they were all ^^st like so
many House-burners: This reflect first on the Pope and his Bulls, as being
Whimsical* for setting up n^^ Monasteries against the hair, while many pulled
them down; and then implies that they burn the Houses where they come; w^^^ing
the Substance of Families, and blowing up the Fire of Division everywhere.

Their quilted Paunches show that they love to stuff their Hides to the purpose.

Their double Codpieces, one before, and the other behind, show, that many a
Monk, and particularly a Jesuit, is ad utrumque paratus; a part post and a
part ante; and may well say, hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim. This
abominable practice of theirs made the Author say, That some dreadful Mysteries
were duly represented by this duplicity of Codpieces; and as he speaks in the
plural, they may also imply, that a Monk does as much work as two others at the
Venereal Exercise.

Their Shoes are round, that they may move forward, backward, or sideways, as
their Interest guides them.

Their Chins are close shaved; to show there is no holding or ^leecing a Monk;
or to speak more plainly, nothing to be got by them.

Their Feet are Iron-shed; because there is no driving them out when once they
get sooting; for they stick close, and firmly keep their hold.

They shave the hind parts of their Poles, from the Crown to the Omoplata, or
the Muscles of the Sh^ulder-blade; that none may take hold of them behind.

They wear sharp Raz^rs at their Waste: This may mean a good Stomach, or that
they cut to the quick whatever lies in their way.

They grind them twice a day, and set them thrice a night, by the means of
their Matius, Vigils, the Office of the Day, etc.

They have a round Ball^on their Feet. This Ball is the World, which they would
gladly bring under their subjection; neither is it strange it should be said to
be on their Feet, in opposition to Fortune that has a Ball under hers: For,
it is said by Friar Ihon, at the end of the Chapter, Ay, ay, this is the World,
and the other is the Counr^y; may I never piss, if this be not an Antichthonian
Land, and our very Antipodes. So that, according to the Vulgar acceptance,
supposing the Earth to be here under our Feet, it must be on or above our
Antipodes.

The Flaps of their Cowles hide their Noses; so they laugh without fear both at
Fortune and the Fortunate: That is, within their Monasteries, they laugh in
their Sleeves at those whose good Fortune inables them, and whose Foolishness
inclines them to help to maintain them in their Idleness.

The hind part of their Heads are always uncovered as are our Faces, and
coarsely daubed over with Eyes and a M^uth: Which denotes the Gri^aces and
Antic Tricks with which they amuse the silly People, in a manner only showing
their Backside to them, while, as we have said, they really laugh to one
another at the gulled Mob's simplicity.

When their hind Face went forward, you would have sworn this had been their
natural (...): That is, By their Vow of Poverty they grow rich* rule by their
Vow of Obedience, are the lewder for their Vow of Chastity, and get forward
when they seem to lose ground.

If they offered to waddle along with their B^llies f^rward^* you would have
thought they were th^^ playing at Blind-man's Buff: Because they are not used
to walk fairly, or act like other People, and are to seek when they must leave
their crooked ways, and go the right way to work.

They are booted and spurred, as it were, to take a Journey to Heaven; but
instead of hastening thither on Horseback, they sleep and snore as soon as it is
Owl-light.

They are obliged to yawn, and that is th^^ first Breakfast; This implies their
Lazin^ss, and perhaps the singing or bawling at Matins.

They wash their hands and mouths; This may be the taking of Holy Water.

Then they sit down on a long Bench, and pick their Teeth, till the Provost
gives the Signal; which heard, they stretch out their Jaws as wide as they can,
and gape and yawn (...) about half an hour, more or less, according to the Day;
This may mean their sitting down while the Office of the Day is read, and then
their singing and quavering.

After this, they went in Procession, going out at another Door than that
through which the^ came into the Church; whence Pantagruel concludes, they are
not such Fools as his Attendants take them to be, having more holes than one to
creep out.

Cogitato mus pusillus quam sit sapiens bestia,
A^tatem qui uni cubili nunquam committit suam;
Quia si unum ostium obsid^atur, aliud perfug^u^^ quaerit.
Plautus. Must. Act. 4. At the Procession, the Idol of Fortune is carried in
State* and the Image of Virtue follows it, carried by a Semiqu^ver, who all the
while besprinkles the Idol with Holy Water; which shows that Fortune goes
before Virtue among the Monks, and that they are lavish of their Incense to
none but the Fortunate.

After the Procession, they went into the Fratry-R^^m, and there kneeled under
the Tables; Because it is the Heaven where reside the only gods they adore,
placed in the Dishes as on so many Thrones. This way of explaining this dark
Passage, appears the more justifiable, considering what Pantagruel says in the
34th Chapter, to the Illustrious Lantern that guided him and his Company
through an Arbor covered over with Leaves and Branches of Vines, and loaded
with Clusters. Jupiter's Priestess, said he, would not, like us, have walked
under this Arbor. There was a (...) Reason (answered the most perspie^^^s
Lantern) that would have hindered her: For had she gone under it, the Wine or
the Grapes of which it is made, that is the same thing, had been over her head,
and then she would have seemed over-topt and mastered by Wine; which signifies,
etc.

They had each of them a Lantern below the Breast and Stomach on which they
leaned. The Lantern should be an empty Belly; for after their Breakfast, which
consisted only of yawning, chanting, and quavering, they had not so filled
themselves as not to want to stuff the Gut.

The huge Sandal, who, while they were in that Posture, used to come in with a
Pitchfork in his hand, and treated them after a fashion, is the Friar, who
always comes in with a Book, in which he reads while they are at Table.

They begin their Meal with Che^se, and end it with Mustard and Lettice; This
shows, like most of this Chapter, that th^se Semiquavers affect a way of living
quite contrary to other Men's; and as Cheese is esteemed heavy Food, and hard to
be digested, when much of it is eaten, principally by itself, and before we are
filled with other things, whose Digestion it might help, so by Cheese may be
meant the Benedicite, or Grace before meat, which is as heavy, tedious and
irksom to the gluttonous hungry Fraternity, as a long-winded Presbyterian Grace
to a half famished Libertine when Dinner's upon the Table.

The Mustard and Lettice with which they end the Meal, is the Agimus, or Grace
after meat, almost as unpleasant to the Semiquavers, who think it unseasonable,
because they are in haste to go about the Recreations mentioned in the next
Chapter. Our Author, according to his Custom of hiding his Touches of Satire in
equivocal expressions, may mean, that this Ceremony after Dinner m^ult tarde,
multiem tardat, is tedious, and les tue, is Death to them; thus punning upon
Moutarde and laitue.

After Dinner, they pass some time in praising those gods who blessed them with
so sweet a Life, and are taken up the rest of the day with Acts of Charity, as
Rubbers at Cuffs, Suiting and Fly-flapping, Worming and Pumping, Tickling,
J^rking and Firking one another, and such other pious Deeds as are contained in
the Twenty eighth Chapter.

Then at Night they bo^t and spur each other, (by which something very odious
seems meant) and clap their Barnicles on the handles of their Faces, which may
imply that they are obliged to look about them for fear of being discovered.

At midnight they are called up by one of their Brother Sandals, and do as in
the daytime.

When they are on Sea and Rivers, they are ^^j^^n'd neither to touch n^r eat
any manner of ^^sh; and to abstain from all manner of Flesh when they are at
Land. That is, Monks use to seem kind to those who are near them, and who
support them, and only bite the absent, yet even this is not always true; but
it is more certain that as they are dainty, they long for things that are not
easily got, as for Example, fresh Meat at Sea and fresh Fish at Land, chiefly
in such inland places as are very remote from Seas or Rivers.

On Chapter 28.
PAnurge asks a Semiquaver Friar many Questions concerning the private Customs
of the Monastic Tribe particularly their Chastity and Sobriety* to which the
good Friar in more than ^^^eonie Terms, gives serious and most p^^tin^nt
Answers: And though nothing but M^nosyllable can be ^ot from ^im he speaks so
fully, clearly, and to the putt o^ that all the 28th Chapter needs no
Commentary. By this affected Brevity, Rabelais ridicules that of some of the
hypocritical Monks when they come among the Laity, which makes Friar Ihon say,
The Dog yelps at another gat's rate when he is among his Bitches, there he is
Polisyllable enough, my Life for yours.

On Chapter 29.
THIS Chapter is full of Reflections upon the keeping of Lent* occasioned by
the Answers of the Semiquaver, who concludes in Monosyllables, that Epistemon
ought to be burned for a rank Heretic, because he inveighs against it and the
Hypocrisy and Tricks of his Brother Cheats, during that Harvest of theirs.

On Chapter 30 and 31.
THE Island of Satin means more than one thing; first it signifies such
Tapistry Work as we call Arras; in which are represented several Hist^r^es,
Fables, and as fabulous Animals and Vegetables such as are many of those of
which the Au^hor spe^ks in th^se two Chapters He displays a great knowledge of
Antiquity in the account he gives us of those matters, and an uncommon Wit and
Judgment in his Remarks.

This Island means chiefly the Works of several Ancient and Modern Authors
mentioned here, who having often spoke by Hearsay, are not to be believed in
many Things, though their Style be as smooth and soft as Satin. We may also
understand by that Land of Satin, the Romances of that Age, filled with
Monsters, and monstrous Tales, and chiefly that of Amadis de Gaul, which was
then very much read the best Writers, as I have already said, having chosen to
translate that Book, to display in it all the Beauties, Copiousness and Graces
which the French Tongue could boast in the Reign of Henry II.

What he says of Hearsay, who kept a School of Vouching, is easily understood;
but every one here does not know that many Natives of Perch, Maine, and some
adjacent Parts of France, are in ill Repute as to the point of Veracity, in the
other Provinces of that Kingdom, where they esteem those Countries the
Nurseries of Affidavit-men, and Pettifoggers; which makes our Author say, that
they lived so well by their trade of Evidencing, that they treated strangers,
and made a great Figure in That Age, in which thing they are perhaps outdone by
Some in This. They advised our Travelers to be as sparing of Truth as
possible, if ever they had a mind to get Court-preferment; but our Author, who
was of another Part of France, could not learn to follow their Directions.

On Chapter 32 and 33.
LAnternland is the Land of Learning, frequented by Batchelors of Arts, M^sters
of Arts, Doctors and Professors in various Studies, Bishops, etc. Thus in the
preceding Chapter, Aristotle is seen in a blind Corner holding a Lantern,
watching, p^ying, cudgelling his Brain, and setting every thing down, with a
pack of Philosophasters about him, like so many Bums by a Head Bailiff, because
he is Lantern of the Peripateticians. Here we have Bartolus, the Lantern of the
Civilians; Epicurus one of the Lanterns of the Stoics.

The Lantern of Rochel on a high Tower, which stood his Fleet in good stead,
casting a great Light, seems to be Geoffr^y d'^stiss^^, Bishop and Lord of
M^^llezais, one of Rabelais's best Patrons, and even for tha^ never to be
forgotten; he would not call him the Lantern of Maillezais, for this had been
too plain and improper, because Maillezais is an Inland Town; but as Rochel was
then the Chief Town in that Diocese, insomuch that the Episcopal See has been
transferred to that Seaport-Town in 1648. he calls him the Lantern of Rochel,
which he places on a high Tower, because that Prelate was Eminent for his
Quality, as well as for his Virtue and Learning We may easily see by Rabelais's
Letters to him, that he was neither a Papist nor a Bigot; and had those which
they wrote to each other in Ciphers been ever Published, I do not doubt but he
would have appeared as much a Friend to the Reformation, as some of the House
of Roch^^^u^^ult, who were the Heirs of his Family. Thus the Lanterns of the
Church are the Bishops, Doctors of Divinity, Deans, Preachers, and all those
who can explain the Sacred Writ, at least it is certain, they apply those words
of the Gospel to themselves, You are the light of the world.

He tells us that the Lanterns held their Provincial Chapter; so this may be
thought by some to refer to the Council of Trent; yet I had rather understand
it of some Meeting of the Clergy in France, or more particularly of the
University of Paris, some of whose best Members may be the Lanterns which
Lighted our Travelers after they had made their Application to the Queen for
one to Conduct them to the Oracle of the Bottle, or rather to the Knowledge of
Truth. Our Author concludes this Book with the Explanation of that Passage,
making the Priestess commend the P^^tagru^^sts for having imitated the
Philosophers in being guided by a good Lantern; adding, that two things are
necessary to arrive safely and pleasantly at the Knowledge o^ God and true
Wisdom; First, God's gracious Guidance, then Man's Assistance.

The Lychnobians, who inhabit a little hamlet near the Port of Lanternland, are
Booksellers; They Live by Lanterns, that is, by the Learned, as the Gulligutted
Friars live by Nuns; that is, they grow as fat by Buying and Selling their
Works, as the hungry Friars do by managing the Concerns of Nuns, of which they
are so greedy. They are studious People; that is, they often Study how to get a
good Copy for little or nothing, contrive a Taking Title, etc. And are as
Honest men as ever sh -- in a Trumpet. I believe this needs no Comment.

On Chapter 34.
BEing lighted and directed by the Lantern [ the Learned] our Travelers at
(...) arrive at the Island where was the Oracles of the Bottle, [Truth] Their
Guide de^^^s them not to be a^^umed whatever they see, because ^^ar disorders
the Mind, and renders us incapable of discovering Truth. They pass through a
large Vineyard, in which are all sorts of Vines, which yield Leaves, Flowers,
and Fruits, all the Year round. There they eat three Grapes, put Vine-leaves in
their Shoes, and take Vine-branches in their hands.

The variety of Vines in this large Vineyard, implies the vast Field through
which the Learned range in the search after Truth: Some Matters like the Leaves
are unprofitable; some like the Flowers pleasant; and others like the Fruit
useful. But they must use even the last moderately (which is implied by the
three Grapes); and at the first entrance into the Regions of Truth, be soberly
wise; the insignificant Leaves must be trod under foot: For this reason they
put some in their Shoes; and also to show they have mastered the Rudiments of
Learning, unless some will say, that the Leaves at their Feet signify their
desire of stepping forward to come to the Oracle of Truth. Vine-branches (which
may well be supposed to have Flowers as well as Leaves) are h^ld by them in
their L^ft-hand, in token of their hopes to reap the Fruit of their Study.

On Chapter 35.
THey go down under Ground through a Plaster'd Vault* on which is coursely
painted a Dance of Women and Satires, wanting on old Silenus, who was grinning
of Horseback on his Ass. This sh^ws, that we must not dwell on the surface or
out^^^e of Things, but dive to their very Center or Bo^tom to come at Truth.
This also may refer to this Work; the Plastered Vault, on which is coursely
daubed a Dance of Women and ^atires, is its literal Sen^e, s^^^^y, drunken,
lewd and satirical Expressions, and our Author is the Silenus, who grins and
laughs at every one. He has ingeniously brought in a Discourse about the
Antiquity of Chin^n, his Native Town, by which he seems at the same time to
ridicule the Fables that are reported in many Towns about their Founders, whom
some make as Ancient as the Patriarch of the highest Pedigree in Wales.

On Chapter 36.
OUr Pilgrims going down the Tetradick Stairs, find a resting place after the
first Step, another resting place after the third, another after the Sixth, and
a fourth resting place after the tenth St^p. This implies, that the Progress
made at first in the way to Truth, is but small, but by degrees a greater is
made, the more we get forwards; so that on the second Day we go twice as far as
we did the first; three times as far on the third; and four times as far on the
fourth; till at last we come to our Journeys end.

On Chapter 37, etc.
THe Description of the Temple, its Gates, Pavement, Walls, Lamps, and
Fountains, is a Masterpiece of Archit^cture, by which the Author showed, that
he knew as well all the Beauties of that Art, as he did those of every other
that deserves the Application of a Man of Sense. If any have a mind to look for
Mysteries in all this, perhaps they may find many, whose discovery will reward
their search. As for me, as I have not had leisure to say more in less room, I
will only say something of it that may give a general Idea of the Author's
design, and so conclude.

Bacbuc, which is the name of the Bottle, and also that of the Priestess who
ministers at the Oracle, is Hebrew, and as we have said, signifies a Bottle.

Our Mysterious Author may perhaps be thought to have had a mind to hint, that
the Hebrew Original or Text of the Bible, is the first Spring of Truth, that
flows out of it into the Versions, as Wine poured out of a Bottle into a Glass
or Cup. Then as on the Po^tal of the Temple* there was written in Characters of
the finest Gold, EN OINO AAHTHEIA, some may think it implies, that the Wine of
Truth is also to be found in the Greek Text of the New Testament, which gives
the name of Wine to Truth, Buy Wine and H^n^y without Money. The two folding
Gates may also be fancied to donor the Old Testament and the New, wh^^h must be
opened to come to the Oracle of Truth Every one will not like this manner of
explaining those Passages; but all, I hope, will approve the following way of
understanding the rest.

The Perspi^^^^us La^tern which lighted and guided our Votaries opens those
Gates; but desires them not to take it amiss, that she does not go into Temple
with them, leaving them wholly to the Conduct of the Priestess Bacbuc; for the
Lantern was not allowed to go in for certain Causes, rather to be concealed
than revealed to Mortals. However she advised them to be resolute and secure.

This Mystical Reason is, That as Truth is hated in this World, most of the
Learned, who know it, are afraid of conversing with it openly, lest this make
many Men their Enemies, spoil their Preferment, ruin them, and perhaps cost
them their Lives. For this reason they come to the very Portal of Truth's
Temple, and even open the Gates to others, yet do not enter within its
Sanctuary.

The greatest Men, both of the Clergy and Laity in France, acted thus in the
Reign of Francis the First, and Henry the Second.

But another cause of the Venerable Lantern's staying without the Temple, was
the piercing Glory which flowed out of the inextinguishable Lamp which filled
that Subterranean Temple with a Light infinitely quicker and clearer than that
of the Sun. So that this extreme Brightness would have utterly dimn'd and
eclipsed that of the Lantern.

The Author ^ould never have concluded better than by saying, That when our
Sages shall wholly apply their Minds to a diligent and studious search after
Truth, beseeching the Hidden God to make himself known to them; that Almighty
Being will do it and impart to them also the Knowledge of his Creatures.

Of the Pantagruelian Prognostication, and other short Pieces.
OUR Author, who was a Learned Astronomer has chiefly ridiculed Astologers in
his Prognostication. He published an Almanac, printed at Lions in 1553, and
perhaps this was printed with it: However, we cannot be fine of this, for it is
not to be procured, no more than some of his Letters, besides his Schiemachy,
and Festivals at Rome, in Cardinal Du Bellay's Palace at the Duke of Orleans's
Birth. I am told, that something of the nature of these Predictions has been
printed here in Poor Robin's Almanac; I do not wonder at it; for as there is
Wit and Satire in this Piece, even one of the most Learned Men in Germany has
not been ashamed to borrow a great deal of it; I mean Joachim Fortius
Rindelbergius, who begins a small Piece of this nature, with the very beginning
of the Second Chapter of this.

Thus he has it in Latin, Proximo an^^ coeci parum aut nihil videbunt, surdi
male audient, muti non loqu^ntur. Ver erit calidum ac humidum, aestas calida
and sicca, autumnus frigidus and si^cus, hyems frigida and sicca. Aestate erunt
quandoque pluviae, interdum fulmina and tomtrua. Bellum erit inter Aueupes and
aves, inter piscatores and pisces, inter canes and lepores, inter feles and
mures, inter lupos and oves, inter Monachos and ova. Multi interibunt pisces,
boves, oves, p^rci, caprae, pu^^* and cap^nes; inter simias, canes and ^qu^s,
mors n^n tantepere sevi^t. Senectus ^^dem anno erit imm^dicabilis propter annos
qui praecesserunt. Non pau^i in^p^a laborabunt, etc. p. 556.

There runs a vein of P^^sia^tism through most of this Work, which is
undoubtedly Rabelais's, tho it is said to be Calculated by Ale fribas Pl^s^^;
for that Name is only ^ ^nagram of the Author's, ^ranc^^s R^belais.

The Epistle said to be written by the Lym^sin, partly in an affected
Fr^nchi^ed Latin, is to ridicule that way of Writing, as appears by the Epigram
after it.

The Cream of Encyclopedic Questions is a trifle, which, like many other more
insignificant of other great Men, has been kept from Oblivion merely for the
sake of it^ Author, and added to his Works, with the Epistles, after his Death,
as appears by the Title Page of some old Editions of the Fifth Book.

The Epistle to the Old Hag, seems to be a sharp Invective against the Church
of Rome.

The Epistle to the Wise Matron, seems to be an Encomium on the Reformed Church.

On Rabelais Explained by Mr. Motteux, and his Translation of the two last
Books.
I.
BEfore the Reign of Avarice and Lust.
When Virtue with unborrow'd Luster shone,
Men were by instinct Temperate and Just,
And Law and Physic useless and unknown.
II.
But quickly, ah! too quickly Vice prevailed;
On Arts and Rule Distempered Mortals thought;
Health in the Mind and in the Body fall'd,
And every hour new Desolations brought.
III.
Through every Vein the gliding Poison ran,
No Cure succeeded, for no Cure could please;
What Miracle could e're restore the man
That loathed the Medicine, charmed with the Disease?
IV.
In vain Physicians labored to beguile
T^^ Stubborn Patient by a kind Deceit;
In vain was all the Moral Sages Toil
To gain the Sinner by a pious Cheat.
V.
Rab'lais at last the noble Secret found;
But, wanting either Courage or Good Will,
He hid the precious Talent under ground,
And all but Mirth and Wit was secret still.
V.
Charmed with the Influence of that powerful Spell,
The languid Patient reared his drooping Head;
Down sunk the ill Genius to his native Hell,
And all his Train of grim Attendants fled.
VII.
Straight all the Humors trace their wonted Rounds,
Through every Nerve the Brain shoots dancing Rays,
The Heart again with sprightly Force rebounds,
And the whole Engine vigorously plays.
VIII.
M^tteux has now unscreen'd the Mystic Veil,
Which Artful Rab'lais over the Treasure drew:
To him who gives what the other did conceal,
An equal Praise, but greater Thanks are due.
IX.
Pedants and Quacks now leave their Queen of Whims,
Cits, Clowns and Courtiers wince, then kiss the Rod,
The Fiery Bigot calmly reads his Crimes,
And Popehawk's battered where he sits as God.
X.
Daring the Attempt, and glorious the Success,
For any other than Motteux would be,
Rab'lais's Wit with equal Force t'express,
And make the Copy with the Text agree.
XI.
But what in others Arrogance had been,
Is but a noble Ardor in his mind;
New Beauties now in every line are seen,
The Stile's enlivened, and the Sense refined.
J. Mitchel, M. D.

On Mr. Motteux's Translation of the two last Books of Rabelais, and his Key to
the whole.
WHEN t^^^less France provoked our Author's Gall
And Rab'lais molded on the dusty Stall,
The Great ^hysician wrote with Artful Rage
To cure the vicious Palate of the Age.
Bitter the Medicine was, but kindly He,
To make it relish, gave it an Allay:
Sweet'ned with seeming Nonsense, down it went;
'Twas tempered well, and answered his intent.
Drenched with a Dose of Satire, all the Age
Recovered in a Laugh; such Pleasantry and Rage
Were wisely mingled in the double-meaning Page.
Mirth seemed predominant, and most it worked;
The Fable tickled, but the Moral lurked.
Too deep it lay, for men of shallow Sense
To fathom; or to find its Excellence.
Rab'lais, the greatest Genius of his Time,
Tho artfully he hid it, wrote sublime:
And such the Thought, and such the Satire is,
It must be found b' a Genius great as his.
And see! it is found! Motteux, with searching Eye
Has dived into the hidden Mystery.
Motteux, whom France and England jointly claim;
Their Claims are just, and both their Pleas the same:
Language They urge; That no Distinction show'th,
He truly seems a Native of them Both.
Much Rab'lais owes, nor less is England's Debt;
England can read, and Rab'lais now is Great.
Thick lay the Mist, but now there shines through all
The Life and Beauties of the Great Original.
The Mist is gone; and every beauteous Line
Does with New Graces, pointed Glories, shine.
So in thick Clouds the Trojan Hero stood;
The Clouds dispersed, and showed a Beauteous God.
Around him all his Mother's Graces moved;
The Crowd admiring gazed, and stricken Dido loved.
New-Colledge in Oxon. Robert Gale.

To Mr. Motteux on his Translation of the two last Books of Rabelais, and his
Key to the whole.
WHEN in an happy Age of circling Time,
To raise the Glory of some envied Clime
Nature intends a Genius; and to strain
Something Divine with less allay of Man;
She rests a C^ntury for the vast Design,
And culls Ideas exquisitely fine,
Till all Perfections in one Soul combine.
To such Expense it does her Skill engage,
One must suffice a Nation, crown an Age.
Such was the mighty Rab'lais, in whose mind
No scattered Gleams of trivial sense we find,
But view the Pourtraiture of Human kind.
All Nature's System! Miniature of Man!
Through every Line the informing Genius ran,
And showed a vast, an universal Vein.
But long his Sense, not Fogs, but Shades did shrowed;
And as a Priest must be to every God,
To guard the Shrine, and draw aside the Cloud;
Many had strove to invade the Mystery,
^ut we at last the destined Flamen see;
You come, and Rab'lais opens to your Key.
It Is true, upon his Basis stands your Praise,
It Is from his Brow that you derive your Bays:
But it is as when with a peculiar Grace
Great Kneller copies an illustrious Face;
Each stroke is Titian, and the mighty Fair
Viewing the Piece, is fearful to compare.
Others had viewed the Wealthy Mine before,
And brought the Bullion to our English Shore,
And stamped it, but allayed it with their own;
Faint was the Mark, and Rab'lais dimly shone.
Tho that which can but his least Image bear
Must be Divine, inevitably rare.
Thus mighty Jove, when Nectar warmed his Blood,
On some inferior Nymph the Grace bestowed,
The Nymph retained the Vigor of the God:
And wheresoever the Ethereal Genius reigns,
Transmits Divinity through all her Veins.
Nor can the Mould so much the God destroy,
But, through some Grace, Jove sparkles in the Boy.
But you admit, Sir, no allay of Fame;
You met your Author with an equal Flame,
Transfused his Air, his Genius in your Lines;
Through every Page the British Rab'lais shines,
Nor sinks below the French, through all the whole,
You, as you share his Country, share his Soul.
Take then our Thanks, the Work's divinely done;
And those whose first Attempts have nobly flown,
Must veil their Lawrells, and the Conquest own.
It Is worthy such an Age, and such a Reign,
Where Wit's upon the stretch, her utmost strain;
An Age where all completed Glories join,
Where Fields with Heroes, Courts with Beauties shine.
Nor does the Wreath upon the Learned Brow
Less fresh, or fast, than on the Hero, grow.
Methinks I see suspended in the Air,
Not Phoebus, (no; we banish him the Chair,)
But some Poetic Angel from the Sky,
Betwixt the Rival Nations, hold on high
The dubious Laurel! Here Great Dryden stands,
And there Boileau, whose undisputed Hands
Reach for the Prize. Thus strive the mighty Pair;
But here some Spirit, friendly to the Fair,
From the French Poet does the Bays rem^ve,
^Who durst Heavens nearest Type defame) to prove,
That Charming Sex has Advocates above.
Here Tate! whose Soul's more eminently taught
To trace the Grandeur of the Roman Thought;
Who best their Air and Sense, and Vigor shows,
And makes them match their Eagle wi^h their Muse.
Here Congreve! whose young Genius could disdain
Nature's slow Compute, and the steps of Man,
Who rose full Zenith, born into his Reign!
Go on, ye British Bards, and only write
With the same Vigor that your King does fight.
Let your Thoughts reach his Actions, match his Power,
The Lawrel's won; for none can higher soar.
And as the Hero conquered on the Boyn,
We, from the Banks of the deserted Seine,
Will bring the Muses, the Illustrious Nine;
To nobler Pleasures upon Isis Stream,
Or the delicious Banks of sacred Cham;
And all shall join to wield the Monarch's Fame.
Trin. Coll. Camb. H. Den.

THE AUTHOR'S Epistle Dedicatory To the most Illustrious PRINCE, And most
Reverend Odet, Cardinal de Chastillon.
YOU know, Most Illustrious Prince, how often I have been and am daily pressed by
great Numbers of Eminent Persons, to proceed in the Pantagruelian Fables; they
tell me that many languishing, sick and disconsolate Persons perusing them,
have deceived their grief, passed their time merrily, and been inspired with
new Joy and Comfort. I commonly answer, that I aimed not at Glory and Applause,
when I diverted my self with writing; but only designed to give by my Pen, to
the absent who labor under Affliction, that little help which at all times I
willingly strive to give to the Present that stand in need of my Art, and
Service. Sometimes I at large relate to them, how Hippocrates in several
places, and particularly in Lib. 6. Epidem. describing the Institution of the
Physician his disciple, and also Soranus of Ephesus, Orbasius, Galen, Hali,
Abbas, and other Authors, have descended to particulars in the prescription of
his Motions, Deportment, Looks, Countenance, Gracefulness, Civility,
Cleanliness of face, Clothes, Beard, Hair* Hands, Mouth, even his very Nails*
As if he were to play the Part of a Lover, in some Comedy, or enter the Lists
to Fight some Enemy. And indeed the practice of Physic is properly enough
compared by Hippocrates to a Fight, and also to a Farce acted between three
Persons, the Patient, the Physician, and the Disease. Which Passage has
sometimes put me in mind of Julia's saying to Augustus her Father. One day she
came before him in a very gorgeous loose lascivious Dress: which very much
displeased him, though he did not much discover his discontent. The next day,
she put on another, and in a modest Garb, such as the chaste Roman Ladies wore,
came into his presence. The kind Father could not then forbear expressing the
pleasure which he took to see her, so much altered, and said to her: Oh! how
much more this Garb becomes, and is commendable in the Daughter of Augustus.
But she, having her excuse ready, answered: This day, Sir, I dressed my self to
please my Father's Eye; yesterday to gratify that of my Husband. Thus,
disguised in looks and garb, nay even, as formerly was the Fashion, with a rich
and pleasant Gown with four sleeves which was called Philonium, according to
Petrus Alexandrinus in 6. Epidem. a Physician might answer to such as might
find the Metamorphosis indecent: Thus have I accoutred my self, not that I am
Proud of appearing in such a Dress; but for the sake of my Patient, whom alone
I wholly design to please, and no ways offend or dissatisfie. There is also a
Passage in our Father Hippocrates, in the Book I have named, which causes Some
to sweat, dispute and labor; not indeed to know whether the Physician's
frowning, discontented, and morose Look render the Patient sad, and his joyful,
serene and pleasing Countenance rejoice him, for experience teaches us that
this is most certain; But whether such Sensations of grief, or pleasure, are
produced by the apprehension of the Patient, observing his motions and
qualities in his Physician, and drawing from thence conjectures of the end, and
catastrophe of his disease, as, by his pleasing Look, joyful and desirable
Events, and by his sorrowful and unpleasing Air, sad and dismal Consequences;
or whether those Sensations be produced by a transfusion of the serene or
gloomy, aerial or terrestrial, joyful or melancholic Spirits of the Physician,
into the Person of the Patient, as it is the Opinion of Plato, Averroes and
others.

Above all things the best Authors have given particular directions to
Physicians about the Words, Discourse, and Converse, which they ought to have
with their Patients, every one aiming at one point, that is, to rejoice them
without offending God, and in no ways whatsoever to vex or displease them.
Which causes Herophilus much to blame that Physician who being asked by a
Patient of his, Shall I dye? impudently made him this Answer: Patroclus died,
whom all allow,
By much, a better Man than you.


Another who had a mind to know the state of his distemper, asking him after
our merry Patelin's way: Well, Doctor, does not my Water tell you I shall dye?
He foolishly answered, No; if Latona the Mother of those lovely Twins, Phoebus
and Diana, begot thee. Galen. lib. 4. Comment. 6. Epidem. blames much also
Quintus his Tutor, who, a certain noble Man of Rome, his Patient saying to him,
You have been at breakfast, my Master, your breath smells of Wine; answered
arrogantly, yours smells of Fever, which is the better smell of the two? Wine
or a putrid Fever? But the Calumny of certain Cannibals Misanthropes, perpetual
Eaves-droppers, has been so foul and excessive, that it had conquered my
patience; and I had resolved not to write one jot more. For the least of their
Detractions were, that my Books are all stuffed with various Heresies, of which
nevertheless they could not show one single Instance; much indeed of Comical
and facetious fooleries, neither offending God nor the King: (And truly I own
they are the Subject, and only Th^me of these Books.) But of heresy, not a
Word, unless they interpreted wrong and against all use of reason, and common
Language, what, I had rather suffer a thousand deaths, if it were possible,
than have thought; as who should make Bread to be stone, a fish to be a
Serpent, and an Egg to be a Scorpion. This, my Lord, emboldned me once to tell
you, as I was complaining of it in your presence, that if I did not esteem my
self a better Christian, than they show themselves toward me, and if my life,
writings, words, nay thoughts betrayed to me one single spark of heresy, or I
should in a detestable manner fall into the Snares of the Spirit of Detraction,
(...) that by their means raises such Crimes against me; I would then like the
Phoenix gather dry Wood, kindle a fire, and burn my self in the midst of it.
You were then pleased to say to me, That King Francis of Eternal memory, had
been made sensible of those false accusations: And that having caused my Books,
(^^^e, I say, because Several false, and infamous have been wickedly laid to
me,) to be carefully, and distinctly read to him by the most learned, and
faithful Anagnost in this Kingdom, he had not sound any Passage suspicious; and
that he abhorred a certain envious, ignorant, hypocritical Informer, who
grounded a mortal heresy on an N put instead of an M by the carelessness of the
Printers.

As much was done by his Son, our most gracious, virtuous, and blessed
Sovereign, Henry, whom Heaven long preserve; so that he granted you his Royal
privilege, and particular protection, for me against my slandering adversaries.

You kindly condescended since, to confirm me these happy News at Paris, and
also lately when you visited my Lord Cardinal du Bellay, who for the benefit of
his health, after a lingering distemper, was retired to St. Maur that place (or
rather Paradise) of salubrity, serenity, convenience, and all desirable
Country-Pleasures.

Thus, my Lord, under so glorious a Patronage, I am emboldened once more to
draw my pen, undaunted now and secure; with hopes that you will still prove to
me against the power of Detraction, a second Galli^ Hercules in Learning,
Prudence, and Eloquence, and Alexicacos in virtue, power and authority; you, of
whom I may truly say what the wise Monarch Solomon says of Moses that great
Prophet, and Captain of Israel; Ecclesiast. 45. A Man fearing and loving God,
who found favor in the sight of all flesh, whose memorial is blessed. God made
him like to the glorious Saints, and magnified him so, that his enemies stood
in fear of him; and for him made Wonders: made him glorious in the sight of
Kings, gave him a Commandment for his People, and by him showed his light; he
sanctified him in his faithfulness, and meekness, and chose him out of all Men.
By him he made us to hear his Voice, and caused by him the Law of life and
knowledge to be given.

Accordingly if I shall be so happy as to hear any one commend those merry
Composures, they shall be adjur'd by me to be obliged, and pay their thanks to
you alone, as also to offer their prayers to Heaven for the continuance and
increase of your Greatness; and to attribute no more to me, than my humble and
ready obedience to your Commands: For by your most honorable Encouragement,
you at once have inspired me with Spirit, and with Invention; and without you
my heart had failed me, and the fountainhead of my Animal Spirits had been
dry. May the Lord keep you in his blessed Mercy.

My Lord, Your most Humble and most Devoted Servant, FRANCIS RABELAIS* Physicia^
Paris this 28 of January. MDLII.
THE AUTHOR'S PROLOGUE TO THE FOURTH BOOK.
GOOD People, God save and keep you: Where are you? I can^t see you; stay --
I Will saddle my Nose with Spectacles -- Oh, oh! 'twill be fair anon, I see you.
Well, you have had a good Vintage, they say; this is (...) bad News to Frank
you may swear; (...) have got an infallible Cure against Thirst, rarely
performed of you, my Friends! You, your Wives, Children, Friends, and Families
are in as good Case as heart can wish; it is well, '^^ as I Would have it: God be
praised for it, and if such be his will, may you long (...) so. For my part I
am thereabout^, thanks to his blessed Goodness; and by the means of a little
Pantagruelism, (which you know is a certain Jollity of Mind pickled in the
scorn of Fortune) you see me now Hale, and Cheery, as sound as a Bell, and
ready to drink, if you will. Would you know why I Am thus, Good People? I Will
even give you a positive answer -- such ^s the Lord's Will, which I obey and
revere; it being said in his word, in great Derision to the Physician,
neglectful of his own Health, Physician, heal thy self.

Galen had some knowledge of the Bible, and had conversed with the Christians
of his time, as appears Lib. 11. De Usu Partium; Lib. 2. de differentiis
Pulsuum, cap. 3, and ibid. Lib. 3. cap. 2. and Lib. de rerum affectibus (if it
be Galen's) Yet 'twas not for any such Veneration of Holy-Writ that he took
Care of his own Health. No, 'twas for fear of being twitted with the saying so
well known among Physicians.

(...).
He boasts of healing (Poor and Rich,
Yet is himself all over Itch.
This made him boldly say, that he did not desire to be esteemed a Physician,
if from his twenty eighth Year to his old Age he had not lived in perfect
health, except some ephemerous Fevers, that last but a Day, and are Cured with
Rest.
Fevers, of which he soon rid himself; Yet he was not naturally of the soundest
Temper, his Stomach being evidently bad. Indeed, as he says Lib. 5. de
Sanitate tuenda, that Physician will hardly be thought very careful of the
health of others, who neglects his own. Asclepiades boasted yet more than this;
for he said that he had articled with Fortune not to be reputed a Physician, if
he could be said to have been sick, since he began to practice Physic, to his
latter Age, which he reached, lusty in all his Members, and Victorious over
Fortune, till at last the Old Gentleman unluckily tumbled down from the Top of
a certain ill-propt and rotten Staircase; and so there was an end of him.

If by some Disaster Health is fled from your Worships to the right or to the
left, above or below, before or behind, within or without, far or near, on this
side or the other side, wheresoever it be, may you presently, with the help of
the Lord meet with it; having found it, may you immediately claim it, seize it
and secure it. The Law allows it; the King would have it so: nay you have my
advice for it; neither more nor less than the Lawmakers of Old did fully
empower a Master to claim and seize his runaway Servant wherever he might be
found. Ods-bodikins, is it not written and warranted by the Ancient Customs of
this so Noble, so rich, so flourishing Realm of France, That the Dead seizes
the Quick? That is, The Death of a Person gives a Right to his Heir to seize
what he has left.
See what has been Declared very lately in that Point by that Learned, Wise,
Courteous, and Just Civiilan Andre Tiraquell, one of the Judges in the most
Honorable Court of Parliament at Paris. Heal^^ is our Life, as Antiphron the
Sicyonian wisely has it, without Health Life is no Life, it is not living Life.
(...). Without Health Life is only a Languishment and an Image of Death.
Therefore, you that want your Health, that is to say, that are Dead, Seize the
Quick; secure Life to your selves, that is to say, Health.

I have this hope in the Lord, that he will hear our Supplications, considering
with what Faith and Zeal we Pray* and that he will grant this our Wi^e, because
it is moderate and mean. Medi^^rity was held by the ancient Sages to be Golden,
that is to say, precious, praised by all Men, and pleasing in all Places. Read
the Sacred Bible, you will find, the Prayers of those who asked moderately were
never unanswered. For example little dapper Zacheus, whose Body and Relics
the Monks of St. Garlic near Orleans boast of having, and nickname him St.
Sylvanus: he only wished to see our Blessed Savior near Jerusalem. 'Twas but a
small Request, and no more than any Body then might pretend to. But alas! he
was but low built, and one of so diminutive a Size among the Crowd could n't so
much as get a Glimpse of him: well then he struts, stands on Tip-Toes, bustles
and be-stiring his stumps, shoves and makes way, and with much ado clambers up
a Sycamor. Upon this, the Lord who knew his sincere Affection, presented
himself to his sight, and was not only seen by him, bat heard also: Nay, what is
more, he came to his House, and blessed his Family.

One of the Sons of the Prophets in Israel felling VVood near the River Jordan,
his Hatchet forsook the Helve and fell to the Bottom of the River; so he prayed
to have it again ('it was but a small Request, mark ye me,) and having a strong
Faith, he did not throw the Hatchet after the Helve, as some Spirits of
Contradiction say by way of scandalous Blunder, but the Helve after the
Hatchet, as you all properly have it. Presently two great Miracles were seen,
up springs the Hatchet from the Bottom of the Water, and fixes it self to its
old acquaintance the Helve. Now had he wished to coach it to Heaven in a Fiery
Chariot like Elias, to multiply in Seed like Abraham, be as rich as Job, strong
as Sampson, and beautiful as Absalom, would he have obtained it, do you think?
IN troth, my Friends, I question it very much.

Now I talk of moderate wishes in point of Hatchet (But hark'e me, be sure you
don't forget when we ought to drink) I Will ^ell you what is written among the
Apologues of wise Aesop the Frenchman, I mean the Phrygian and Trojan, as Max.
Planudes makes him; from which people, according to the most faithful
Chroniclers the noble French are descended: Aelian writes that he was of
Thrace, and Agathias after Herodotus, that he was of Samos; it is all one to
Frank.

In his time lived a poor honest Country Fellow of Gravot, Tom Wellhung by
Name, a VVood-cleaver by Trade, who in that low Drudgery made shift so so, to
pick up a sorry Livelihood. It happened that he lost his Hatchet. Now tell me
who had ever more Cause to be vexed than poor Tom? alas, his whole Estate and
Life depended on his Hatchet; by his Hatchet he earned many a fair Penny of the
best VVood-mongers or Log-Merchants, among whom he went a Jobbing; for want of
his Hatchet he was like to starve, and had Death but met him six Days after
without a Hatchet, the grim Fiend would have mowed him down in the Twinkling of
a Bed-staff. In this sad Case he began to be in a heavy Taking, and called upon
Jupiter with most eloquent Prayers (for you know, Necessity was the Mother of
Eloquence) with the Whites of his Eyes turned up toward Heaven, down on his
Marrowbones, his arms reared high, his fingers stretched wide, and his head
bare, the poor wretch without Ceasing was roaring out by way of Litany at every
Repetition of his Supplications, my Hatchet, Lord Jupiter, ^y Hatchet, my
Hatchet; Only my Hatchet, O Jupiter, or money to buy another, and nothing else;
alas, my poor hatchet!

Jupiter happened then to be holding a grand Council about certain urgent
affairs, and old Gammer Cybele was just giving her opinion, or if you had
rather have it so, it was Young Phoebus the Beau: but in short, Tom's Outcry
and Lamentations were so loud that they were heard with no small amazement at
the Council Board, by the whole Consistory of the Gods. What a Devil have we
below, quoth Jupiter, that howls so horridly? By the Mud of Styx, have n't we
had all along and have n't we here still enough to do to set to rights a world
of damned puzzling Businesses of Consequence? We made an end of the Fray
between Presthan King of Persia, and Soliman the Turkish Emperor; we have
st^pp'd up the Passages between the Tartars and the Moscovites; answered the
Xeriff's Petition, done the same to that of Golgots Rays; the State of Parma's
dispatched, so is that of Maydemburg, that of Mirandola, and that of Africa,
that Town on the Mediterranean which we call Aphrodisium; Tripoli by
carelessness has got a new Master, her hour was come.

Here are the Gascons Cursing and damning, demanding the Restitution of their
Bells.

In yonder Corner are the Saxons, Easterlings, Ostrogoths, and Germans, Nations
formerly invincible, but now Aberkeids, Bridled, Curbed and brought under by a
Paultry Diminutive crippled Fellow; they ask us Revenge, Relief, Restitution of
their former good Sense and Ancient Liberty.

But what shall we do with this same Ramus and this Galland with a Pox to 'em,
who surrounded with a swarm of their Scullions, Blackguard, Ragamussins,
Sizers, Vouchers and Stipulators, set together by the Ears, the whole
University of Paris? I am in a sad quandary about it, and for the Heart's Blood
of me cannot tell yet with whom of the two to side.

Both seem to me notable Fellows, and as true Cods as ever pissed; The one has
Rose-Nobles, I say fine and weighty ones; the other would gladly have some too.
The one knows something: the other's no Dunce. The one loves the better sort of
men, the other's beloved by 'em. The one is an old cunning Fox, the other with
Tongue and Pen, Tooth and Nail falls foul on the ancient Orators and
Philosophers, and barks at them like a Cur.

What think thou of it, say, thou bawdy Priapus? I have found thy Council
just before now, Et habet tua mentula mentem.

King Jupiter, answered Priapus, standing up and taking off his C^wle, his
Snout uncas'd and reared up, fiery and stiffly propt, since you compare the one
to a yelping snarling Cur, and the other to sly Reynard the Fox, my advice is
with submission, that without fretting or puzling your Brains any farther about
'em, without any more a do you even serve 'em both as in the Days of ^ore you
did the Dog and the Fox. How? asked Jupiter, when? who were they? where was it?
You have a rare Memory for ought I see, returned Priapus! This right Worshipful
Father Bacchus, whom we have here Nodding with his Crimson Phyz, to be revenged
on the Thebans, had got a Fairy Fox, who what ever mischief he did, was never
to be caught or wronged by any Beast that wore a Head.

The Noble Vulcan here present had framed a Dog of Monesian Brass, and with
long Puffing and Blowing put the Spirit of Life into him: he gave it you, you
gave it your Miss Europa, Miss Europa gave it Minos, Minos gave it Procris,
Procris gave it Cephalus. He was also of the Fairy kind, so that like the
Lawyers of our age, he was too hard for all other sorts of Creatures, nothing
could escape the Dog: Now who should happen to meet but these two? What do you
think they did? Dog by his Destiny was to take Fox, and Fox by his Fate was not
to be taken.

The Case was brought before your Council; you protested that you would not act
against the Fates; and the Fates were contradictory. In short, the End and
Result of the matter was, that to reconcile two contradictions was an
impossibility in Nature. The very Pang put you into a sweat, same Drops of
which happ'ning to light on the Earth produced what the Mortals call
Collyflowers. All our Noble Consistory for want of a Categorical Solution were
seized with such a horrid Thirst, that above seventy eight Hogsheads of Nectar
were swill'd down at that sitting. At last you took my advice, and
transmogriphy'd 'em into Stones, and immediately got rid of your Perplexity,
and a Truce with Thirst was proclaimed through this vast Olympus. This was the
Year of flabby Cods, near Teumessus between Thebes and Chalcis.

After this manner, it is my Opinion that you should petrify this Dog and this
Fox. The Metamorphosis will not be incongruous; For they both bear the name of
Peter. And because, according to the Lymosin Proverb, To make an Oven's Mouth
there must be three Stones, you may associate them with Master Peter du
Coignet, whom you formerly petrified for the same Cause. Then those three dead
Pieces shall be put in an equilateral Trigone, somewhere in the great Temple at
Paris, in the middle of the Porch, if you will, there to perform the Office of
Extinguishers, and with their Noses put out the lighted Candles, Torches,
Tapers and Flambeaux; since while, they lived, they still lighted ballock-like
the Fire of Faction, Division, Ballock Se^ls, and wrangling among those idle
^earded^Boys, the Students. And this will be an everlasting Monument to show
that those p^ny self-conceited Pedants, Ballock framers, were rather contemned
than condemned by you. Dixi, I have said my Say.

You deal too kindly by them, said Jupiter, for ought I see, Monsieur Priapus.
You don't use to be so kind to every Body, let me tell you: For as they seek to
eternize their names, it would be much better for them to be thus changed into
hard stones, than to return to Earth and putrefaction. But now to other
Matters: Yonder behind us toward the Tuscan Sea, and the Neighborhood of
Mount Appennin, do you see what tragedies are stirred up by certain topping
Ecclesiastical Bullies? This hot ^it will last its time, like the Limosins
ovens, and then will be cooled, but not so fast.

We shall have sport enough with it, but I foresee one inconveniency; for me
thinks we have but little store of Thunder-Ammunition, since the time that you,
my Fellow Gods, for your Pastime, lavished them away to bombard New Antioch, by
my particular permission; as since, after your example, the stout Champions,
who had undertaken to hold the Fortress of Dindenarois against all Comers,
fairly wasted their Powder with shooting at Sparrows; and then, not having
wherewith to defend themselves in time of need, valiantly surrendered to the
Enemy, who were already packing up their Awls, full of madness and despair, and
thought on nothing but a shameful Retreat. Take care this be remedied, Son
Vulcan; Rouse up your drowsy Cyclopes, Asteropes, Brontes, Arges, Polyphemus,
Steropes, Pyracmon, and so forth; set them at work, and make them drink as they
ought.

Never spare liquor to such as are at hot work. Now let us dispatch this
bawling fellow below; you Mercury, go see who it is? And know what he wants.
Mercury looked out at heaven's trap door, through which as I am told, they hear
what is said here below; by the way, one might well enough mistake it for the
scuttle of a Ship; tho Icaromenippus said it was like the mouth of a Well: The
light-heel'd Deity saw that it (...) was honest Tom, who asked for his lost
Hatchet; and accordingly he made his report to the Synod. By Jove, said
Jupiter, we are finely hoped up, as if we had now nothing else to do here but
to restore lost hatchets. Well, he must then have it for all this, for so it is
written in the Book of Fate, (Do you hear?) as well as if it was worth the
whole Duchy of Milan. The truth is, the fellow's Hatchet is as much to him as
a Kingdom to a King. Come, come, let no more words be scattered about it, let
him have his Hatchet again.

Now, Let us make an end of the difference betwixt the Levites and Molecatcher
of Landerousse. Whereabouts were we? Priapus was standing in the chimney
corner, and having heard what Mercury had reported, said in a most courteous
and Jovial manner; King Jupiter, while by your order and particular favor, I
was Garden-keeper general on Earth; I observed that this Word Hatchet is
equivocal to many things: For it signifies a certain instrument, by the means
of which Men fell and cleave Timber. It also signifies (at least I am sure it
did formerly) a Female soundly and frequently
Thumpthumpriggletickletwiddletoby'd: thus I perceived that every Cock of the
game used to call his Doxie his Hatchet, for with that same To^^ (this he said
lugging out and exhibiting his nine inch Knocker) they so strongly and
resolutely shove and drive in their h^lves, that the Females remain free from a
fear Epidemical amongst their Sex, viz. that from the bottom of the Male's
Belly the said Instrument should dangle at his heel for want of such Feminine
props. And I remember, (for I have a Member, and a Memory too, ^y, and a fine
Memory large enough to fill a butter Firkin: I remember, I say, that one day of
^ubilustre [^orn Fair] at the Festivals of Good Man V^lcan in May, I heard
Josquin De^ prez, Olkegan, Hobreths, Agricola, Bru^^el, Camelin, Vigoris, dela
Fage, Bruyer, Prioris, Seguin, dela Rue, Midy, Mou^u, Mouton, Gascoigne,
Loise^, Compere, Penet, Fevin, Rouse^, Richard Fort, Rousseau, Consilion,
Constantio Festi, Jacquet, and* Bercan melodiously singing the following Catch
on a pleasant green.

Long John to bed went to his bride,
And laid a Mallet by his sid^:
What means this Mallet, John, says she?
Why! it is to wedge thee home, quoth he.
Alas! Cried she, the Man's a Fool:
What need you use a wooden Tool?
When Lusty John dos to me come,
He never shoves but with his Bum.
Nine Olympiads, and an Intercalary year after (I have a rare member, I would
say memory, but I often make Blunders in the symbolisation and colligance of
those two words) I heard Adrian Viellard, Gombert, Janequin Arcader, Claudin,
Certon, Machicourt, Auxerre, Villiers, Sandrin, Sohier, Hesdin, Morales,
Passereau, Maille, Maillart, Jacotin, Hurteur, Verdelot, Carpentras, l'
Heriner, Cadeac, Doublet, Vermunt, Bouteiller, Lupi, Pagnier, Millet, Du
Mollin, Alaire, Maraut, Morpin, Gendre, and other merry lovers of Music, in a
private Garden, under some fine shady trees round about a Bulwark of Flaggons,
Gammons, Pasty's, with several Coated Quails, and laced Mutton waggishly
singing.

Since Tools without their hasts are useless Lumber,
And Hatchets without helves are of that Number;
That one may go in the other, and may match it,
I Will be the helve, and thou shall be the Hatchet.
Now would I know what kind of Hatchet this Bawling Tom wants? This threw all
the Venerable Gods and Goddesses into a fit of Laughter like any microcosm of
Flies; and even set limping Vulcan a hopping and jumping smoothly three or four
times for the sake of his Dear. Come, come, said Jupiter to Mercury, run down
immediately, and cast at the poor Fellow's feet three Hatchets; his own,
another of Gold, and a third of Massy Silver, all of one size: Then having left
it to his will to take his choice, if he take his own, and be satisfied with
it, give him the other two. If he take another chop his head off with his own,
and henceforth serve me all those losers of hatchets after that manner. Having
said this, Jupiter, with an awkward turn of his head, like a Jackanapes
swallowing of Pills, made so dreadful a phyz, that all the Vast Olympus quaked
again. Heaven's Foot-Messenger, thanks to his low crowned narrow brim'd Hat,
and plume of Feathers, Heel-pieces, and running Stick with Pidgeon Wings,
flings himself out at Heavens wicket through the idle Deserts of the Air, and in a
trice nimbly alights upon the Earth, and throws at Friend Tom's feet the three
Hatchets; saying to him; th^^ have baw^'d long enough to be a dry, thy Prayers
and request are granted by Jupiter; see which of these three is thy Hatchet,
and take it away with thee. Wellhung lifts up the Goulden Hatchet, peeps upon
it, and finds it very heavy; then s^aring on Mercury, cries Cods ^o^ks this is
none of mine; I will not have it The same he did with the Silver one, and said, it is
not this neither, you may even take them again. At last, he takes up his own
Hatchet, examines the end of the Helve, and finds his mark there; then ravished
with Joy, like a Fox that meets some straggling Poultry, and sneering from the
tip of the nose, he cried by the mass, This is my Hatchet, Master God, if you
will leave it me, I will sacrifice to you a very good and huge pot of Milk,
brim full covered with fine Strawberryes next Ides of May.

Honest Fellow, said Mercury, I leave it thee, take it, and because thou have
wi^h^ and chosen moderately, in ^^int of Hatchet, by Jupiter's com^d, I give
thee these two others; (...) have now wherewith to make thy self rich: Be
honest* Honest Tom g^ve Mercury a whole Cartload of Thanks, and revered the
most great Jupiter. His old Hatchet he fastens c^^se to his Leathern girdle;
and girds it above his Breech like Martin of Cambray: The two others, being
more heavy, he lays on his Shoulder. Thus he plods on trudging over the Fields,
keeping a good countenance amongst his Neighbors and follow Parishioners, with
one merry saying or other after Patelin's way. The next day having put on a
clean white Jacket, he takes on his back the two precious Hatchets, and comes
to Chinon the famous City, noble City, ancient City, yea the first City, in the
World, according to the Judgment and assertion of the most learned Massoreths.
At Chinon he turned his silver Hatchet into fine Testons, Crown pieces and
other white Cash; his golden Hatchet into fine Angels, curious Ducats
substantial Ridders, Spank^rs, and R^s^ Noble^* Then with them purchases a good
Number of Farms, Barns, Houses, Outhouses, Thatch-Houses, Stables, Meadows,
Orchards, Fields, Vineyards, Woods, arable Lands, Pastures, Ponds, Mills,
Gardens, Nurseries, Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Swine, Hogs, Asses, Horses, Hens,
Cocks, Capons, Chickens, Geese, Ganders, Ducks, Drakes, and a World of all
other necessaries, and in a sh^rt time became the richest Man in the Country,
nay even richer than that limping S^rapegood Maulevrier. His Brother Bumpkins
and the Yeomen and other Country-Puts thereabouts, perceiving his good Fortune,
were not a little amazed, insomuch, that their former pity of poor Tom was soon
changed into an Envy of his so great and unexpected Rise; and as they could not
for their Souls devise how this came about, they made it their Business to pry
up and down, and lay their Heads together, to inquire, seek and inform
themselves by what means, in what place, on what day, what hour, how, why and
wherefore he had come by this great Treasure.

At last, hearing it was by Losing his Hatchet, ha, ha! said they, was there no
more to do, but to lose a Hatchet, to make us rich? Mum for that; it is as easy
as pissing a Bed, and will cost but little; are then at this time the
Revolutions of the Heavens, the Constellations of the Firmament, and Aspects of
the Planets such, that whosoever shall lose a Hatchet, shall immediately grow
rich? ha, ha, ha, by Jove, you shall even be lost, an't please you, my dear
Hatchet. With this they all fairly lost their Hatchets out of hand. The Devil
of one that had a Hatchet left; he was not his Mother's Son, that did not lose
his Hatchet. No more was Wood felled or cleav'd in that Country through want of
Hatchets. Nay the Aesopian Apologue even says, that certain petty Country
Gents, of the lower Class, who had sold Wellhung their little Mill and little
Field, to have wherewithal to make a Figure at the next Muster, having been
told that this Treasure was come to him by that only means, sold the only Badge
of their Gentility, their Swords, to purchase Hatchets to go lose them* as the
silly Clodpates did, in hopes to g^i^ (...) of C^i^k by that ^^ss.

You would have truly sworn they had (...) a parcel of your petty spiritual
^^^rers, P^^e-l^^nd selling their All, and borrowing of others to buy store of
Mandates a Pennyworth of a New made Pope.

Now they cried out and ^ray'd and p^a^'d and ^aw^'d and lamented and (...)
Jupiter; my Hatchet! my Hatchet! Jupiter, my Hatchet, on this ^^de, my Hatchet,
on that side my Hatchet, h^, h^, ho, ho, Jupiter, my Hatchet. The Air round
about r^ng again with the Cries and Howlings of these rascally Losers of
Hatchets.

Mercury was nimble in bringing them Hatchets; to each offering that which he
had lost, another of Gold, and a third of Silver.

Every He still was for that of Gold, giving Thanks in abundance to the great
Giver Jupiter; but in the very nick of time, that they bowed and stooped to
take it from the ground, whip, in a trice, Mercury ^^pp'd of^ their heads, as
Jupiter had commanded; and of Heads, thus cut off, the number was just equal to
that of the lost Hatchets.

You see how it is now; you see how it goes with those who in the simplicity of
their hearts wish and desire with Moderation, Take warning by this, all you
greedy, fresh water Shirks, who scorn to wish for any thing under Ten Thousand
Pounds: And do not f^r the future run on impudently, as I have s^metimes heard
you wishing, Would to God, I had now one hundred seventy eight Millions of
Gold; Oh! how I should tickle it off? The Dewse on you, what more might a King,
an Emperor, or a Pope wish for? For that reason, indeed, you see that after you
have made such hopeful wishes, all the good that comes to you of it is the Itch
or the Scab, and not a Cross in your Breeches to scare the Devil that tempts
you to make these Wishes; no more than those two Mumpers, wishers after the
Custom of Paris; one of whom only wished to have in good old Gold as much as
has been spent, bought and sold in Paris since it is first Foundations were
laid, to this hour; all of it valued at the price, sale and rate of the dearest
Year in all that space of Time. Do you think the Fellow was bashful? had he
eaten sour Plums unpeel'd? were his Teeth on edge, I pray you? The other
wished Our Lady's Church brim full of steel Needles, from the flowr to the top
of the roof, and to have as many Ducats as might be crammed into as many bags as
might be sowed with each and every one of those Needles, till they were all
either broke at the point or eye. This is to wish with a vengeance! What think
you of it? What did they get by it, in your Opinion? Why, at night both my
Gentlemen had kyb'd heels, a ^etter in the Chin, a Churchyard Cough in the
Lungs, a Catarrh in the Throat, a swinging Boil at the Rump, and the Devil of
one musty Crust of a brown George the poor Dogs had to scour their Grinders
with* Wish therefore for Mediocrity, and it shall be given unto you, and over
and above yet; that is to say, provided you bestir your selves manfully, and do
your best in the mean time.

Ay, but say you, God might as soon have given me seventy eight thousand as the
thirteenth part of one half; for he is Omnipotent, and a million of Gold is no
more to him than one Farthing? Oh, ho, pray tell me who taught you to talk at
this rate of the Power and Predestination of God, poor silly People? Peace,
Tush, St, St, St, fall down before his sacred Face, and own the Nothingness of
your Nothing.

Upon this, O ye that labor under the affliction of the Gout, I ground my
hopes, firmly believing, that if so it pleases the Divine Goodness, you shall
obtain Health; since you wish and ask for nothing else, at least for the
present. Well, stay yet a little longer with half an Ounce of Patience.

The Genouese do not use, like you, to be satisfied with wishing Health alone,
when after they have all the live long Morning been in a brown study, talked,
pondered, ruminated, and resolved in their Counting-houses, of whom and how
they may squeeze the Ready, and who by their Craft must be hooked in, wheadled,
bubl'd, sharp'd, overreach'd and choused, they go to the Exchange, and greet
one another with a sanita and guadagno, Messer; health and gain to you, Sir.
Health alone will not go down with the greedy Curmudgeons, they over and above
must wis^ for gain, with a Fox to 'em; ay and for the sine Crowns or scudi di
guadagno; Whence, Heaven be praised, it happens many a time, that the silly
Wishers and Woulders are balked and get neither.

Now, my Lads, as you hope for good health, cough once aloud with Lungs of
Leather; Take me off three swindging Bumpers; Prick up your Ears; and you shall
hear me tell Wonders of the noble and good Pantagruel.

The Fourth BOOK OF PANTAGRVEL.
CHAP. I. How Pantagruel went to Sea, to Visit the Oracle of Bacbuc, alias the
Holy Bottle.
IN the Month of June, on Vesta's Holydays, the very numerical day on which
Brutus, conquering Spain, taught its strutting Dons to truckle under him, and
that niggardly Miser Crassus was routed and knocked on the head by the
Parthians, Pantagruel took his leave of the good Gargantua, his Royal Father.
The old Gentleman, according to the laudable Custom of the Primitive
Christians, devoutly prayed for the happy Voyage of his Son and his whole
Company, and then they took Shipping at the Port of Thalassa. Pantagruel had
with him Panurge, Friar Jhon des Entomeures, alias, of the Funnels, Epistemon,
Gymnast, Eusthenes, Rhizotome, Carpalin, cum multis aliis, his ancient Servants
and Domestics. Also Xenomanes, the great Traveller, who had crossed so many
dangerous Roads, Dikes, Ponds, Seas, and so forth, and was come sometime
before, having been sent for by Panurge.

For certain good Causes and Considerations him thereunto moving, he had left
with Gargantua and marked out, in his Great and Universal Hydrographical Chart,
the Course which they were to steer to Visit the Oracle of the Holy Bottle,
Bacbuc. The number of Ships was such as I described in the Third Book, Convoyed
by a like number of Triremes, Men of War, Gallions and Feluccaes well Rigged,
Caulkt, and Stored with a good quantity of Pantagruelion.

All the Officers, Droggermen, Pilots, Captains, Mates, Boatswains,
Mid-Shipmen, Quarter Masters and Sailers, met in the Thalamege, Pantagruel's
principal Flag-Ship, which had in her Stern a huge large Bottle, half Silver
well polished, the other Half Gold, Inamel'd with Carnation, whereby it was
easy to guess that white and red were the colors of the Noble Travelers, and
that they went for the Word of the Bottle.

On the Stern of the Second was a Lanthorn like those of the Ancients,
industriously made with Diaphanous Stone, implying that they were to pass by
Lanternland. The Third Ship had for her Devise a fine deep China Ewre. The
Fourth, a double handed Jar much like an ancient Urn. The Fifth, a famous Kin
made of Sperm of Emerald. The Sixth, a Monk's Murnping Bottle made of the four
Metals together. The Seventh, an Ebony Funnel all imboss'd and wrought with
Gold after the Tauchic manner. The Eighth, an Ivy Goblet very precious, inlaid
with Gold. The Ninth, a Cup of fine Obriz Gold. The Tenth, a Tumbler of
Aromatic Agaloch (you call it Lignum aloes) edged with Cyprian Gold, after the
Azemine make. The Eleventh, a Golden Vine-Tub of Mozaic work. The Twelfth a
Runlet of unpolished Gold, covered with a small Vine of large Indian Pearl of
Topiarian work. Insomuch that there was no Man, however in the Dumps, musty,
sower looked, or Melanchollic he were, not even excepting that blubbering
Whiner Heraclitus, had he been there* but, seeing this Noble Convoy of Ships
and their Devises, must have been seized with present gladness of Heart, and
smiling at the Conceit, have said that the Travelers were all honest Topers,
true Pitcher-men, and have judged by a most sure Prognostication, That their
Voyage both outward and homeward bound, would be performed in Mirth and perfect
Health.

In the (...) where was the general (...), Pantag^^^l (...) a sh^r^ but sweet
Exhortation, w^^ly ^^k'd with Au^^o^^^is from (...) a N^^igation; which ^^ving
ended, with (...) Prayers were said in (...) of ^ll the Burgh^^s of (...), who
had flocked to the Mole to see (...) Shipping. After the Prayers, was
melodiously sung a Psalm of the Holy Kings David, which ^^gins, When Israel
went out of Aeg^pt; and that being ended, Tables were placed upon D^^k, and a
Feast speedily served up. The T^^a^^ssians who had also born a Chorus in the
Psalm, caused store of belly-Timber to be brought out of their Houses. All
drank to them, they drank to all; which was the cause that none of the whole
Company gave up what they had eaten, nor were Sea-sick with a pain at the Head
and Stomach, which inconveniency they could not so easily have prevented by
drinking, for some time before, Salt water either alone or mixed with Wine,
using Quinces, Citronpeel, Juice of Pomgranats, s^wrish Sweetmeats, fasting a
long time, covering their Stomachs with Paper; or following such other idle
Remedies, as foolish Physicians prescribe to those that go to Sea.

Having often renewed their Tiplings, each Mother's Son retired on board his
own Ship, and set Sail all so fast with a merry Gale at South East, to which
point of the Compass the Chief Pilot James B^^^er by Name, had shaped his
Course, and fixed all things accordingly. For seeing that the Oracle of the Holy
Bottle lay near Catay, in the upper India, his advice and that of Xe^^manes
also, was, not to steer the Course which the Portug^se use, while sailing
through the T^rr^^ Z^ne* and Cape Bona Speranza at the S^^^h point of ^^^ck
beyond the Equinoctial Line, and losing sight of the Northern Pole their Guide,
they make a prodigious long Voyage; but rather to keep as near the Parallel of
the said India as possible, and to tack to the Westard of the said Pole, so
that winding under the North, they might find themselves in the Latitude of the
Port of Olone without coming nearer it for fear of being shut up in the Frozen
Sea; whereas following this Canonical Turn by the said Parallel, they must have
that on the right to the Eastward, which at their departure was on their left.

This proved a much shorter Cut* for without Ship-wreck, Danger, or loss of
Men, with uninterrupted good Weather, except one day near the Island of the
Macre^ns, they performed in less than four Months the Voyage of Upper India,
which the Portuguese, with a thousand Inconveniences and innumerable Dangers,
can hardly complete in three Years. And it is my Opinion, with Submission to
better Judgments, that this Course was perhaps steered by those Indians who
Sailed to Germany* and were honorably received by the King of the Swedes,
while Quintus Metel^ Ce^er was Proconsul of the Gauls, as Cor^ Nepos, Pomponius
Mela, and Pliny after the^ tell us.

CHAP. II. How Pantagruel bought many Rarities in the Island of Medamothy.
THat day and the two following, they neither discovered Land nor any thing
new; for they had formerly Sailed that way; but on the fourth they made an
Island called Medamothy, of a fine and delightful Prospect, by reason of the
vast number of Light-Houses and high Marble Towers in its Circuit, which is not
less than that of Canada. Pantagruel, enquiring who Governed there, heard that
it was King Philophanes, absent at that time upon account of the Marriage of
his Brother Philotheamon with the Infanta of the Kingdom of Engys.

Hearing this, he went ashore in the Harbor, and while every Ship's Crew
Watered, passed his time in viewing diverse Animals, Fishes, Birds, and other
exotic and foreign Merchandises which were along the Walks of the Mole, and in
the Markets of the Port. For it was the third day of the great and famous Fair
of the Place, to which the chief Merchants of Africa and Asia resorted. Out of
these Friar Jhon bought him two rare Pictures, in one of which, the Face of a
Man that brings in an Appeal, was drawn to the Life, and in the other, a
Servant that wants a Master, with every needful Particular, Action,
Countenance, Looks, Gate, Feature and D^portment, being an Original, by Master
Charles Charmo^s, Principal Painter to King Megistus; and he paid for them in
the Court Fashion, with Conge and Grimace. Panurge bought a large Picture
copied and done from the Needle Work formerly wrought by Pl^^^mela, showing to
her Sister Progue how her Brother-in Law Tere^s had by force hansel^'d her
Copyhold, and then cut out her Tongue, that she might not (as Women will) tell
tales. I vow and swear by the handle of my Paper Lanthorn, that it was a
gallant, a mi^ific, nay a most admirable P^^ce. Nor do you think, I pray you,
that in it was the Picture of a Man playing the Beast with two Backs with a
Female, this had been too silly and gross; no, no; 'twas another-guise thing,
and much plainer. You may if you please, see it at Theleme on the left hand, as
you go into the high Gallery. Epistem^n bought another wherein were painted to
the Life, the Ideas of Plato and the At^ms of Epicurus. Rizotome purchased
another, wherein Echo was drawn to the Life. Pantagruel caused to be bought by
Gymnast, the Life and Deeds of Achilles in seventy eight pieces of Tapestry
four Fathom long and three Fathom broad, all of Phrygian Silk imbo^s'd with
Gold and Silver; the Work beginning at the Nuptials of Peleus and Thetis,
continuing to the Birth of Achilles; his Youth described by Statius Papinius;
his Warlike Achievements celebrated by Homer; his Death and Exequies written
by Ovid and Quintus Calaber; and ending at the appearance of his Ghost, and
Polyxene's Sacrifice Rehearsed by Euripides.

He also caused to be bought three fine young Unicorns; one of them a Male of a
Chestnut color, and two gray dappled Females; also a Tarand whom he bought of a
Scythian of the Geloni's Country.

A Tarand is an Animal as big as a Bullock, having a Head like a Stag, or a
little bigger, two stately Horns with large Branches, cloven Feet, Hair long
like that of a Furred Muscovite, I mean a Bear, and a Skin almost as hard as
Steel Armor. The Scythian said that there are but few Tarands to be found in
Scythia, because it varieth its color according to the diversity of the places
where it grazes and abides, and represents the color of the Grass, Plants,
Trees, Shrubs, Flowers, Meadows, Rocks, and generally of all things near which
it comes. It has this common with the Sea Pulp, or Polypus, with the Thoes,
with the Wolves of India, and with the Chamaelion which is a kind of a Lizard
so wonderful, that Democritus has written a whole Book of its Figure, and
Anatomy, as also of its Vi^^ and Propriety in Magic. This I can ^ firm, that I
have seen it change its color not only at the approach of things that have a
color, but by its own voluntary impulse, according to its fear or other
affections: ^ for example, upon a green Carpet, I have seen it certainly become
green; but having remained there some time, it turned yellow, blue, tanned, and
purple in course, in the same manner as you see a Turkey Cock's Comb change
color according to its Passions. But what we found most surprising in this
Tarand, is, that not only its Face and Skin, but also its Hair could take
whatever color was about it. Near Panurge with his Kersy Coat, its Hair used
to turn gray; near Pantagruel with his Scarlat Mantle, its Hair and Skin grew
red; near the Pilot dressed after the fashion of the Isiacs of Anubis in Egypt,
its Hair seemed all white; which two colors the Chamaelion cannot borrow.

When the Creature was free from any fear or affection, the color of its Hair
was just such as you see that of the Asses of Meung.

CHAP. III. How Pantagruel received a Letter from his Father Gargantua, and of
the strange way to have speedy News from far distant places.
WHile Pantagruel was taken up with the Purchase of those foreign Animals, the
noise of ten Guns and Culverins, together with a loud and joyful Cheer of all
the Fleet was heard from the Mole. Pantagruel looked toward the Haven, and
perceived that this was occasioned by the Arrival of one of his Father
Gargantua's Celoces, or Advice-Boat named the Chelidonia, because on the Stern
of it, was Carved in Corinthian Brass a Sea Lark, which is a Fish as large as a
Dare-fish of Loire, all Flesh and no Bone, with cartilaginous Wings (like a
Batt's) very long and broad, by the means of which, I have seen them fly about
three Fathom above Water about a Bow-shot. At Marseillis it is called Lendole.
And indeed that Ship was as light as a Lark, so that it rather seemed to fly on
the Sea than to Sail. Mali^^rn, Gargantua's Esquire Carver, was come in her, being
sent expressly by his Master to have an Account of his Son's Health and
Circumstances, and to bring him Credentials. When M^^^corn had Saluted
Pantagruel, before the Prince opened the Letters, the first thing he said to
him, was, Have you here the Gozal, the Heavenly Messenger? Yes, Sir, said he,
here it is swadled up in this Basket. It was a gray Pigeon taken out of
Gargantua's Dove-House, whose youngones were just hatched when the Advice-Boat
was going off.

If any ill Fortune had befallen Pantagruel, he would have fastened some black
Ribbon to its Feet; but because all things had succeeded happily hitherto,
having caused it to be undrest, he tied to its Feet a white Ribbon, and without
any further delay, let it loose. The Pigeon presently flew away cutting the Air
with an incredible speed, as you know that there is no flight like a Pigeon's,
especially when it has Eggs or Young Ones, through the extreme care which
Nature has fixed in it to relieve, and be with its Young; insomuch, that in
less than two hours it compassed in the Air, the long Tract which the Advice
Boat with all her diligence, with Oars and Sails, and a fair Wind, had gone
through in no less than three Days and three Nights, and was seen (as it went
into the Dove-House) in its Nest. Whereupon Gargantua hearing that it had the
white Ribbon on, was joyful and secure of his Son's welfare. This was the
Custom of the Noble Gargantua and Pantagruel, when they would have speedy News
of something of great Concern, as the event of some Battle either by Sea or
Land; the Surrendering or Holding out of some strong Place; the determination of
some difference of Moment; the safe or unhappy Delivery of some Queen or great
Lady; the Death or Recovery of their sick Friends or Allies, and so forth. They
used to take the Gozal, and had it carried from one to another by the Post, to
the places whence they desired to have News. The Gozal bearing either a black
or white Ribbon, according to the Occurrences and Accidents, used to remove
their doubts at its return, making in the space of one hour, more way through
the Air, than thirty Post-Boys could have done in one natural day. May not this
be said to redeem and gain time with a vengeance, think you? For the like
Service therefore, you may believe as a most true thing, that, in the
Dove-Houses of their Farms, there were to be found all the year long, store of
Pigeons hatching Eggs or rearing their young. Which may be easily done in
Aviaries and Voleries, by the help of Saltpeter and the Sacred Herb Vervain.

The Gozal being let fly, Pantagruel perused his Father Gargantua's Letter, the
Contents of which were as follows.

My Dearest Son,
THe Affection that naturally a Father bears a beloved Son, is so much
increased in me, (...) reflecting on the particular Gifts which by the Divine
Goodness have been heaped on thee, that since (...) Departure, it has often
banished all other Thoughts out of my Mind; leaving my Heart wholly possessed
with fear, lest some misfo^tune has attended thy Voyage: for thou know that
fear was ever the attendant of true and sincere Love. Now because (as H^^^od
says) A good beginning of any thing is the half of it; or, well beg^^'s ha^^
done, according to the old saving; to free my Mind from this anxiety, I have
exp^esly dispatched Malicorn, that he may give me a true account of thy Health
at the beginning of thy Voyage. For if it be good, and such as I wish it, I
shall easily foresee the rest.

I have met with some diverting Books, which the Bearer will deliver thee, thou
may read them when thou want^st to unbend and ease thy Mind from thy better
Studies: He will also give thee at large the News at Court. The Peace of the
Lord be with thee. Remember me to Panurge, Friar Jhon, Epistemon, Xenomanes,
Gymnast, and thy other principal Domestics. Dated at our Paternal Seat this
13th day of June. Thy Father and Friend,

Gargantu^.


CHAP. IV. How Pantagruel writ to his Father Gargantua, and sent him several
Curiosities.
PAntagruel having perused the Letter, had a long Conference with the Esquire
Mal^^^, insomuch, that Panurge at last interrupting them, asked him, Pray, Sir,
when do you design to drink? When shall we drink? When shall the Worshipful
Esquire drink? What a Devil have you not talked long en^ugh to drink? It Is a
good motion, answered Pantagruel, go, get us something ready at the next Inn; I
think it is the Centaur. In the mean time he writ to Gargantua as follows, to
be sent by the aforesaid Esquire.

Most Gracious Father,
AS our Senses and Animal Faculties are more discomposed at the News of Events
unexpected, tho desired (even to an immediate dissolution of the Soul from the
Body) than if those accidents had ^^en foreseen; so the coming of Malicorn has
much surprised and disordered me. For I had no hopes to see any of your
Servants, or to ^ear from you, before I had finished our Voyage, and contented
my self with the dear remembrance of your August Majesty, deeply impressed in
the hindmost Ventricle of my Brain, often representing you to my Mind.

But since you have made me happy beyond expectation, by the perusal of your
Graci^us Letter, and the Faith I have in your Esquire has revived my Spirits
by the News of your welfare; I am as it were compelled to do what formerly I
did freely, that is, first to praise the Blessed Redeemer, who by his Divine
Goodness preserves you in this long enjoyment of perfect Health; then to return
you eternal Thanks for the fervent Affection which you have for me your most
humble Son and unprofitable Servant.

Formerly a Roman, named Furnius, said to Augustus who had received his Father
into Favor, and Pardoned him after he had sided with Anthony, that by that
Action the Emperor had reduced him to this extremity, That for want of power to
be Grateful, both while he lived and after it, he should be obliged to be taxed
with Ingratitude: So I may say, That the excess of your Fatherly Affection,
drives me into such a straight, that I shall be forced to li^e and die
ungrateful; unless that Crime be redress^d by the Sentence of the Stoics, who
say, That there are three parts in a Benefit, the one of the Giver, the other
of the Receiver, the third of the Remunerator; and that the Receiver rewards
the Giver when he freely receives the Benefit, and always remembers it; as on
the contrary, That Man is most ungrateful who despises and forgets a Benefit.
Therefore, being overwhelmed with infinite Favors, all proceeding from your
extreme goodness, and on the other side wholly incapable of making the smallest
Return, I hope at least to free my self from the imputation of Ingratitude,
since they can never be blotted out of my Mind; and my Tongue shall never cease
to own, that, to thank you as I ought, transcends my Capacity.

As for us, I have this assurance in the Lord's Mercy and Help, that the end of
our Voyage will be answerable to its beginning, and so it will be entirely
performed in Health and Mirth. I will not fail to set down in a Journal a full
Account of our Navigation, that at our return, you may have an exact Relation
of the whole.

I have found here a Scythian Tarand, an Animal strange and wonderful for the
variations of color on its Skin and Hair, according to the distinction of
neighboring things: It is* a^ tractable and easily kept as a Lamb; be pleased
to accept of it.

I also send you three young Unicorns, which are the tamest of Creatures.

I have conferred with the Esquire, and taught him how they must be fed; these
cannot graze on the Ground, by reason of the long Horn on their Forehead, but
are forced to brouze on Fruit Trees, or on proper Racks, or to be fed by Hand
with Herbs, Sheaves, Apples, Pears, Barley, ^ye, and other Fruits, and Roots
being placed before them.

I am amazed that Ancient Writers should report them to be so Wild, Furious and
Dangerous, and never seen alive: far from it, you will find that they are the
mild^st things in the World, provided they are not maliciously offended.
Likewise, I send you the Life and Deeds of Achilles in curious Tapistry;
assuring you that whatever Rarities of Animals, Plants, Birds, or precious
Stones, and others, I shall be able to find and purchase in our Travels, shall
be brought to you, God milling, whom I beseech by his blessed Grace, to
preserve you. From Medamothy, this 16th of June. P^nurge, Friar Jhon,
Epist^mon, Xenomanes, Gymnast, Eusthenes, Rhiz^tome, and Carpalim, having most
humbly kissed your Hand, return your Salute a thousand times. Your most Dutiful
Son and Servant,

Pantagruel.


While Pantagruel was writing this Letter, Malicorn was made welcome by all with
a thousand goodly Good-Morows and Howd^y's; they c^u^g about him so, that I
cannot tell you how much they made of him, how many Humble Services, how many
from my Love and to my Love were lent with him. Pantagruel having writ his
Letters sat down at Table with him, and afterward presented him with a large
Chain of Gold weighing eight hundred Crowns; between whose Septenary Li^^s,
some large Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds, Turkey Stones, and Unions were
alternatively set in. To each of his Bark's Crew, he ordered to be given five
hundred Crowns. To Gargantua his Father, he sent the Tarand covered with a
Cloth of Gold, br^caded with Satin, and the Tapistry containing the Life and
Deeds (...) Achilles, with the three Unicorns in ^riz'd Clo^h of Go^d
Trappings. And so they l^^t Medamothy. Malicorn to return to Gargantu^;
Pantagruel to proceed in his Voyage, during which, Epistemon read to him the
^^^ks which the Esquire had brought: And because he found them jovial and
pleasant, I shall give you an Account of them, i^ you earnestly desire it.

CHAP. V. How Pantagruel met a Ship with Passengers returning from Lantern-Land.
ON the fifth day we began already to wind by little and little about the
(...), going still farther from the Equinoctial (...) we discovered a Merchant
Man to the Wind ward of us. The joy for this was not small on both sides, in
hopes to hear News from Sea, and those in the Merchant-Man from Land. So we
bore upon 'em, and coming up with them, we Haled them, and finding them to be
Frenchmen of Xaintonge, backed our Sails and lay by to talk to them. Pantagruel
heard that they came from Lantern-Land, which added to his joy, and that of the
whole Fleet. We inquired about the State of that Country, and the way of living
of the Lanterns, and were told, that about the latter end of the following
July, was the time prefixed for the meeting of the General Chapter of the
Lanterns; and that if we arrived there at that time, as we might easily, we
should see a Handsome, Honorable, and Jolly Company of Lanterns, and that great
Preparations were making, as if they intended to Lanternise there to the
purpose. We were told also, That if we touched at the great Kingdom of Gebarin,
we should be Honorably received and Treated by the Sovereign of that Country,
King Ohabe, who as well as all his Subjects, speaks T^urame French.

While we were listening to these News, Panurge fell out with one Dingdong a
Drover o^ Sheep-Merchant of Tailleb^urg. The occasion of the Fray was thus.

This same Dingdong seeing Panurge without a Codpiece, with his Spectacles
fastened to his Cap, said to one of his Comrades, Prithee, look, is not there
here a fine Medal of a Cuckold? Panurge by reason of his Spectacles, as you may
well think, heard more plainly by half with his Ears than usually; which caused
him (hearing this) to say to the saucy Dealer in Mutton, in kind of a Pet;

How the Devil should I be one of the Hornified Fraternity, since I am not yet
a Brother of the Marriage Noose, as thou art, as I guess by thy ill-favored
Phyz?

Yea verily, quoth the Grazier, I am Married, and would not be otherwise for
all the pairs of Spectacles in Europe; nay, not for all the Magnifying
Gim-Cracks in Africa; for I have got me the Cleverest, Prettiest, Handsomest,
Properest, Neatest, Tightest, Honestest, and Soberest piece of Woman's Flesh
for my Wife, that is in all the whole Country of Xaintonge, I Will say that for
her, and a Fart for all the rest. I bring her home a fine and eleven inch long
branch of Red Coral, for her Christmass-Box, what have thou to do with it?
What Is that to thee? Who art thou? Whence come thou, O dark Lanthorn of
Antichrist? Answer if thou art of God? I ask thee, by the way of Question, said
Panurge to him very seriously, if with the Consent and Countenance of all the
Elements, I had Gingumbob'd, Codpiec'd, and Thumpthumpriggledtickledtwid^'d thy
so Clever, so Pretty, so Handsome, so Proper, so Neat, so Tight, so Honest, and
so Sober Female Importance, insomuch, that the Stiff Deity that has no
forecast, Priapus, (who dwells here at Liberty, all Subjection of fastened
Codpieces or Bolts, Bars, and Locks, Abdicated) remained sticking in her
Natural Christmass-Box in such a lamentable manner, that it were never to come
out, but Eternally should stick there, unless thou did pull it out with thy
Teeth; what would thou do? Would thou everlastingly leave it there, or
would thou pluck it out with thy Grinders? Answer me, O thou Ram of Mahomet,
since thou art one of the Devil's Gang. I would, replied the Sheep-Monger, take
thee such a woundy cut on this Spectacle-bearing Lug of thine, with my trusty
Bilbo, as would smite thee dead as a Herring. Thus having taken Pepper in the
Nose, he was lugging out Sword; but alas, Cursed Cows have short Horns, it
stuck in the Scabbard; as you know that at Sea, cold Iron will easily take
rust, by reason of the excessive and Nitrous moistness. Panurge so smitten with
Terror, that his Heart su^k down to his Midriff, scower'd off to Pantagruel for
help: But Friar Jhon laid hand on his slashing Scymiter that was new ground,
and would certainly have dispatched Dingdong to rights, had not the Skipper and
some of his Passengers beseech'd Pantagruel not to suffer such an out rage to
be committed on Board his Ship. So the matter was made up, and Panurge and his
Antagonist shak'd Fists, and drank in course to one another, in token of a
perfect Reconciliation.

CHAP. VI. How the Fray being over, Panurge Cheapened one of Dingdong's Sheep.
THis Quarrel being hushed, Panurge tipp'd the wink upon Epistemon and Friar
Jhon, and taking them aside; Stand at some distance out of the way, said he,
and take your share of the following Scene of Mirth; you shall have rare sport
anon, if my Cake ben't Dough, and my Plot do but take. Then addressing himself
to the Drover, he took off to him a Bumper of good Lantern Wine. The other
pledged him briskly and courteously. This done, Panurge earnestly entreated him
to sell him one of his Sheep: But the other answered him, Is it come to that,
Friend and Neighbor, would you put tricks upon Travelers? Alas, how finely
you love to play upon poor Folk! Nay, you seem a rare Chapman, that is the truth
on it. Oh what a mighty Sheep-Merchant you are! In good faith you look liker one
of the Diving Trade than a buyer of Sheep. Adzookers, what a Blessing it would
be to have ones Purse well lined with Chink near your Worship at a Tripe-House
when it begins to thaw! Humph, Humph, did not we know you well, you might serve
one a slippery trick! Pray do but see, good People, what a mighty Conjurer the
fellow would be reckoned. Patience, said Panurge; but waving that, be so kind
as to sell me one of your Sheep, come, how much? What do you mean, Master of
mine, answered the other? They are long Wool Sheep, from these did Jason take
his Golden Fleece. The Gold of the House of Burgundy was drawn from them.
Zwoons, Man, they are Oriental Sheep, Topping Sheep, Fatted Sheep, Sheep of
Quality. Be it so, said Panurge, but sell me one of them, I beseech you, and
that for a cause, paying you ready Money upon the Nail, in good and lawful
Occidental Current Cash; wilt say how much? Friend, Neighbor, answered the
Seller of Mutton, hark'e me a little, on the other Ear.

Panurge. On which side you please; I hear you.


Dingdong. You are a going to Lantern-Land, they say.


Panurge. Yea verily.


Ding. To See Fashions?


Panurge. Even so.


Ding. And be Merry?


Panurge. And be Merry.


Ding. Your Name is as I take it, Robin Mutton?


Panurge. As you please for that, sweet Sir.


Ding. Nay, without offense.


Panurge. So I would have it.


Ding. You are, as I take it, the King's Jester, are n't you?


Panurge. Ay, ay, any thing.


Ding. Give me your Hand, -- humph, humph, you go to see Fashions, you are the
King's Jester, your Name is Robin Mutton! Do you see this same Ram? His Name
too is Robin. Here Robin, Robin, Robin? Baea, Baea, Baea, has he not a rare
Voice?


Panurge. Ay marry has he, a very fine and harmonious Voice.


Ding. Well, this bargain shall be made between you and me, Friend, and
Neighbor, we will get a pair of Scales, then you Robin Mutton shall be put
into one of them, and Tup Robin into the other. Now I Will hold you a Peck of
Busch Oysters, that in Weight, Value, and Price, he shall outdo you, and you
shall be found light in the very numerical manner, as when you shall be Hanged
and Suspended.

Patience, said Panurge, but you would do (...) your who^e Posterity, if you
would Chaster with me for him, or some other of his Inferiors. I beg it of you;
good your Worship, be so kind. Hark'e, Friend of mine, answered the other, with
the Fleece of these your fine Roan Cloth is to be made, your Lemster superfine
Wool is mine A^se to it; mere Flock in comparison: Of their Skin the best
Cordivant will be made, which shall be sold for Turkey and Montel^mart, or for
Spanish Leather at least. Of the Guts shall be made Fiddle and Harp Strings,
that will sell as dear as if they came from Munican or Aquileia. What do you
think on it, hah? If you please, sell me one of them, said Panurge, and I am
yours for ever. Look, here is ready Cash. What Is the Price? This he said,
exhibiting his Purse stuffed with new Henricuses.


CHAP. VII. Which if you read, you will find how Panurge bargained with Dingdong.
Neighbor, my friend, answered Dingdong, they are meat for none but Kings and
Princes; their Flesh is so delicate, so Savory, and so dainty, that One would
swear, it melted in the Mouth. I bring them out of a Country where the very
Hogs, God be with us, live on nothing but mirabolans. The Sows in their Styes
when they ly in, (saving the honor of this good Company) are fed only with
Orange Flowers. But, said Panurge, drive a Bargain with me for one of them, and
I will pay you for it like a King, upon the honest Word of a true Trojan: come
come, what do you ask? Not so fast, Robin, answered the Trader, these Sheep are
lineally descended from the very family of the Ram that wafted Phrixus and
Hell over the Sea, since called the Hellespont. A Pox on it, said Panurge, you
are Clericus vel addiscens! Ita is a Cabbage, and Vere a Leek, answered the
Merchant. But rr, rrr, rrrr, rrrrr, hoh Robin, rr, rrrrrrr, you don't
understand that Gibberish, do you? Now I think on it, over all the fields, where
they piss, Corn grows as fast as if the Lord had pissed there; they need
neither be tilled, nor dung'd. Besides, Man, your Chemists extract the best
Saltpeter in the World out of their Urin: nay with their very Dung (with
reverence be it spoken,) the Doctors in our Country make Pills that cure
seventy eight kinds of Diseases, the least of which is the Evil of St.
Eutropius of Xaintes, from which good Lord deliver us! Now what do you think
on it, Neighbor, my Friend? The truth is, they cost me money, that they do!
Cost what they will, cried Panurge, trade with me for one of them, paying you
well. Our friend, quoth the quack-like Sheep-man, do but mind the wonders of
Nature that are found in those Animals, even in a member which one would think
were of no use. Take me but these horns, and bray them a little with an
Iron-pestle, or with an Andiron, which you please, it is all one to me; then
bury them wherever you will, provided it be where the Sun may shine, and water
them frequently; in a few months I^le engage you will have the best Asparagus
in the World, not even excepting those of Ravenna. Now come and tell me whether
the horns of you other Knights of the Bulls Feather, have such a virtue and
wonderful propriety?

Patience, said Panurge. I don't know whether you be a Scholar or no, pursued
Dingdong: I have seen a World of Scholars, I say great Scholars that were
cuckolds, I Will assure you. But hark you me, if you were a Scholar, you should
know that in the most inferior members of those Animals (which are the feet,)
there is a bone (which is the heel) the Astragalus, if you will have it so,
wherewith, and with that of no other Creature breathing, except the Indian Ass,
and the Dorcades of Libya, they used in old times to play at the Royal game of
Dice, whereat Augustus the Emperor won above fifty thousand Crowns one
Evening. Now such Cuckolds as you will be hanged e're you get half so much at
it. Patience, said Panurge, but let us dispatch. And when, my Friend and
Neighbor, continued the canting Sheep-seller, shall I have duly praised the
inward Members, the Shoulders, the Legs, the Knuckles, the Neck, the Breast,
the Liver, the Spleen, the Tripes, the Kidneys, the Bladder, wherewith they
make Foot-balls, the Ribs, which serve in Pigmy-land to make little Cross-bows
to pelt the Cranes with Cherry-stones, the Head which with a little Brimstone
serves to make a miraculous decoction to loosen and ease the belly of costive
Dogs. A Turd on it, said the Skipper to his preaching Passinger, what a fidle
fadle have we here? There is too long a Lecture by half, sell him one if thou will; if thou will not, don't let the Man lose more time. I hate a gibble gabble
and a rimble ramble Talk, I am for a Man of Brevity. I will for your sake,
replied the Holder-forth: but then he shall give me three Livers French Money
for each, and pick and choose. It Is a woundy Price, cried Panurge, in our
Country I could have five, nay six for the Money; see that you do not overreach
me, Master. You are not the first Man whom I have known, to have fallen, even
sometime to the indangering, if not breaking of his own Neck, for endeavoring
to rise all at once. A Murrain seize thee for a blockheaded Booby, cried the
angry seller of Sheep; by the worthy vow of our Lady of Charroux: the worst in
this Flock is four times better than those which the Coraxians in Tuitania, a
Country of Spain, used to sell for a Gold Talent each; and how much dos'st thou
think, thou Hyberinan Fool, that a Talent of Gold was worth? Sweet Sir, you
fall into a Passion I see, returned Panurge: Well hold, here is your Money.
Panurge having paid his Money, chose him out of all the Flock a fine topping
Ram, and as he was hawling it along crying out and bleating, all the rest
hearing and bleating in Consort star'd, to see whither their brother-Ram should
be carried. In the mean while the Drover was saying to his Shepherds: Ah! How
well the Knave could choose him out a Ram, the whoreson has skill in Cattle; on
my honest Word I reserved that very piece of Flesh, for the Lord of Cancale,
well knowing his disposition; for the good Man naturally is overjoyed when he
holds a good sized handsome shoulder of Mutton, in stead of a left handed racket
in one hand, with a good sharp Carver in the other; got wot how he belabours
himself then.

CHAP. VIII. How Panurge caused Dingdong and his Sheep to be drowned in the Sea.
ON a Sudden, you would wonder how the thing was so soon done; for my Part I
cannot tell you, for I had not leisure to mind it; our friend Panurge without
any further tittle tattle, throws you his Ram over board into the middle of the
Sea bleating and making a sad noise. Upon this all the other Sheep in the Ship
crying and bleating in the same tone, made all the have they could to leap
nimbly into the Sea one after another, and great was the throng who should leap
in first after their Leader. It was impossible to hinder them; for you know
that it is the Nature of Sheep always to follow the first, wheresoever it goes;
which makes Aristotle lib. 9. de hist. animal. mark them for the most silly and
foolish Animals in the World. Dingdong at his wit's End, and stark staring Mad
like a Man who saw his Sheep destroy and drown themselves before his Face,
strove to hinder and keep them back with might and main, but all in vain; they
all one after the other f^isk'd and jumped into the Sea, and were lost: At last
he laid hold on a huge sturdy one by the fleece upon the deck of the Ship,
hoping to keep it back, and so to save that and the rest; but the Ram was so
strong that it proved too hard for him, and carried its Master into the
Herring-Pond, in spite of his Teeth; where it is supposed he drank somewhat
more than his Fill: So that he was drowned, in the same manner, as one eyed
Polyphemus's Sheep carried out of the Den Ulysses and his Companions: The like
happened to the Shepherds and all their gang, some laying hold on their beloved
Tup, this by the horns, the other by the Legs, a third by the Rump, and others by
the fleece; till in fine they were all of them forced to Sea, and drowned like
so many Rats. Panurge on the gunnel of the Ship with an Oar in his hand, not to
help them, you may swear, but to keep them from swimming to the Ship, and
saving themselves from drowning, preached and canted to them all the while like
any little Friar Maillard, or another Friar John Burgess, laying before them
Rhetorical common places concerning the miseries of this Life, and the
blessings and felicity of the next; assuring them that the Dead were much
happier than the Living in this vale of misery, and promising to erect a
stately Cenotaphe and Honorary Tomb to every one of them on the highest Summit
of Mount Cenis at his return from Lantern land; wishing them nevertheless, in
case they were not yet disposed to shake hands with this Life, and did not like
their salt Liquor, they might have the good luck to meet with some kind Whale
which might set them ashore safe and sound, on some blessed Land of Gotham
after a famous example.

The Ship being cleared of Dingdong and his Tups: Is there ever another
sheepish Soul left lurking on board, cried Panurge? where are those of Toby
Lamb, and Robin Ram that sleep whilst the rest are a feeding? Faith I cannot
tell my self. This was an old coaster's Trick: What think thou of it, Friar
Ihon; hah? Rarely performed, answered Friar Ihon, only methinks that as
formerly in War on the day of Battle, a double Pay was commonly promised the
Soldiers for that Day; for if they overcame, there was enough to pay them; and
if they lost, it would have been shameful for them to demand it, as the
cowardly Foresters did after the Battle of Cerizoles: Likewise, my Friend, you
ought not to have paid your Man, and the Money* had been saved. A Fart for the
Money, said Panurge, have I not had above fifty thousand pounds worth of sport?
Come now, let us begone, the Wind is fair, hark you me, my Friend Ihon, Never did
Man do me a good Turn but I returned or at least acknowledged it: No, I scorn
to be ungrateful, I never was, nor ever will be: Never did Man do me an ill one
without rueing the Day that he did it, either in this World or the next. I am
not yet so much a fool neither. Thou damn'st thy self like any old Devil,
quoth Friar Ihon, It it written Mihi vindictam, etc. matter of breviary, Mark
ye me; that is holy stuff.

CHAP. IX. How Pantagruel Arrived at the Island of Ennasin, and of the strange
ways of being akin in that Country.
WE had still the Wind at South South West, and had been a whole day without
making Land. On the third day at the Flies up-rising, which, you know, is some
two or three hours after the Sun's, we got sight of a Triangular Island very
much like Sicily for its Form and Situation. It was called the Island of
Alliances.

The People there are much like your Carrot-pated Poitevins, save only that all
of them, Men, Women, and Children, have their Noses shaped like an Ace of
Clubs. For that reason the ancient Name of the Country was Ennasin. They were
all akin, as the Mayor of the place told us, at least they boasted so.

You People of the other World, esteem it a wonderful thing, that, out of the
Family of the Fabii at Rome, on a certain day, which was the 13th of February,
at a certain Gate, which was the Porta Carmentalis, since named Scelerata,
formerly situated at the foot of the Capitol, between the Tarpeian Rock and the
Tyber, Marched out against the Veientes of Etruria, three hundred and six Men
bearing Arms, all related to each other, with five thousand other Soldiers
every one of them their Vassals, who were all slain near the River Cremera that
comes out of the Lake of Beccano. Now from this same Country of Ennasin in case
of need, above three hundred thousand all Relations, and of one Family, might
March out. Their degrees of Consanguinity and Alliance are very strange, for
being thus akin and allied to one another, we found that none was either Father
or Mother, Brother or Sister, Uncle or Aunt, Nephew or Niece, Son-in-Law or
Daughter-in-Law, Godfather or God-Mother to the other, unless truly, a tall
flat-nos'd old fellow, who, as I perceived, called a little shitten-ars'd Girl
of three or four years old, Father, and the Child called him Daughter.

Their distinction of degrees of Kindred was thus, a Man used to call a Woman
my Lean Bit* the Woman called him my Porpus. Those, said Friar Jhon, must needs
stink damnably of Fish, when they have rubbed their Bacon one with the other. One
smiling on a young bucksom Baggage, said, good morrow dear Curry-Comb: she to
return him his Civility, said, the like to you my Steed. Hah! Hah! Hah! said
Panurge, that is pretty well in faith, for indeed it stands her in good stead to
Curry-comb this Steed. Another greeted his Buttock with a farewell, my Case: she
replied, adieu Trial. By St. Winifred^s Placket, cried Gymnast, this Case has
been often tried. Another asked a she Friend of his, how is it, Hatchet? she
answered him, at your service, dear Helve. Odds Belly, says Carpalin, this
Helve and this Hatchet are well marched. As we went on, I saw one who, calling
his she Relation, styled her my Crum, and she called him my Crust.

Quoth one to a brisk, plump, juicy Female, I am glad to see you, dear Tap: so
am I to find you so merry, sweet Spiggot, replied she. One called a Wench his
Shovel, she called him her Peal. One named his, my Slipper, and she him, my
Foot. Another my Boot, she my Shasoon.

In the same degree of Kindred, one called his, my Butter, she called him, my
Eggs, and they were akin just like a dish of Buttered Eggs. I heard one call
his, my Tripe, and she him, my ^^ggot. Now I could not for the Hearts Blood of
me pick out or discover what Parentage, Alliance, Affinity, or Consanguinity
was between them, with reference to our Custom, only they told us, that she was
Faggots Tripe. [ Tripe de Faggot, means the smallest sticks in a Faggot.]
Another Complementing his Convenient, said, yours, my Shell; she replied, I was
yours before, sweet Oyster. I reckon, said Carpalim, she has gutted his
Oyster. Another long shank'd ugly Rogue mounted on a pair of high-heel'd Wooden
Slippers, meeting a strapping, fusty squobb'd Dowdy, says he to her, how'st my
Top? she was short upon him, and arrogantly replied, never the better for you,
my Whip. By St. Anthony's Hog, said Xenomanes, I believe so, for how can this
Whip be sufficient to lash this Top.

A College Professor well provided with Cod, and poudered and prink'd up,
having a while discoursed with a great Lady, taking his leave, with these
words, Thank you Sweet Meat; she cried, there needs no thanks, Sower Sauce.
Says Pantagruel, this is not altogether incongruous, for sweet Meat must have
sower Sauce. A Wooden Loggerhead said to a young Wench, it is long since I saw
you Bag, all the better, cried she, Pipe. Set 'em together, said Panurge, then
blow in their Arses, 'twill be a Bag-pipe. We saw after that, a diminutive
hump-back'd Gallant, pretty near us, taking leave of a she Relation of his,
thus, Fare thee well, Friend Hole; she repartee'd, save thee, Friend Peg. Quoth
Friar Jhon, what could they say more, were he all Peg and she all Hole: But now
would I give something to know if every Crany of the Hole can be stopped up with
that same Peg.

A baudy Bachelor talking with an old Trout, was saying, remember it, Rusty
Gun. I will not fail, said she, Scowrer. Do you reckon these two to be akin, said
Pantagruel to the Mayor? I rather take them to be Foes; in our Country a Woman
would take this as a mortal affront. Good People of the other World, replied the
Mayor, you have few such and so near Relations as this Gun and Scowerer are to
one another; for they both came out of one Shop. What, was the Shop their
Mother, quoth Panurge? What Mother said the Mayor, does the Man mean? That must
be some of your Worlds Affinity; we have here neither Father nor Mother: Your
little paultry fellows that live on the other side the Water, poor Rogues, Booted
with wisps of Hay, may indeed have such, but we scorn it. The good Pantagruel
stood gazing and listening, but at those words he had like to have lost all
Patience; (...). M.

Having very exactly viewed the Situation of the Island, and the way of living
of the Ennased Nation, we went to take a Cup of the Creature at a Tavern where
there happened to be a Wedding after the manner of the Country, bating that
shocking Custom, there was special good Cheer.

While we were there, a pleasant Match was struck up bewixt a Female called
Pear (a tight thing as we thought, but by some who knew better things, said to
be quaggy and flabby) and a young soft Male, called Cheese, somewhat sandy. In
our Country indeed we say, Il ne fut one tell marriage, qu'est de la Poire and
du Fremage, There Is no Match like that made between the Pear and the Cheese;
and in many other places good store of such Bargains have been driven. Besides,
when the Women are at their last Prayers, it is to this day a noted saying, That
after Cheese comes nothing.

In another Room I saw them marrying an old greasy Boot to a young pliable
Buskin. Pantagruel was told, that young Buskin took old Boot to have and to
hold, because she was of special Leather, in good case and waxed, seared,
liquor'd and greased to the purpose, even though it had been for the Fisherman
that went to Bed with his Boots on. In another Room below I saw a young Brogue
taking a young Slipper for better for worse: Which, they told us, was neither
for the sake of her Piety, Parts, or Person, but for the fourth comprehensive
P. Portion; the Spankers, Spur Royals, Rose-Nobles, and other Coriander Seed
with which she was quilted all over.

CHAP. X. How Pantagruel went ashore at the Island of Chely, where he saw King
St. Panigon.
WE sailed right before the Wind which we had at West, leaving those odd
Alliancers with their Ace of Clubs Snouts, and having taken height by the Sun,
stood in for Chely, a large Fruitful, Wealthy and well Peopled Island. King St.
Panigon first of the Name Reigned there, and attended by the Princes his Sons,
and the Nobles of his Court, came as far as the Port to receive Pantagruel, and
conducted him to his Palace, near the Gate of which, the Queen attended by the
Princesses her Daughters and the Court Ladies received us. Panigon directed her
and all her Retinue to salute Pantagruel and his Men with a Kiss; for such was
the Civil Custom of the Country, and they were all fairly buss'd accordingly,
except Friar Jhon, who stepped aside and sneaked off among the King's Officers.
Panigon used all the entreaties imaginable, to persuade Pantagruel to tarry
there that day and the next, but he would needs be gone, and excused himself
upon the opportunity of Wind and Weather, which being oftener desired than
enjoyed, ought not to be neglected when it comes. Panigon having heard these
reasons, let us go, but first made us take off some five and twenty or thirty
Bumpers each.

Pantagruel returning to the Port, missed Friar Jhon, and asked why he was not
with the rest of the Company? Panurge could not tell how to excuse him, and
would have gone back to the Palace to call him, when Friar Jhon overtook them,
and merrily cried, Long live the Noble Panigon, as I love my Belly, he minds
good Eating, and keeps a Noble House, and a dainty Kitchen; I have been there,
Boys, every thing goes about by dozens, I was in good hopes to have stuffed my
Puddings there like a Monk* What! always in a Kitchen, Friend? (said
Pantagruel.) By the Belly of St. Cramcapon, quoth the Friar, I understand the
Customs and Ceremonies which are used there, much better than all the formal
Stuff, antic Postures, and nonsensical Fidlefadle that must be used with those
Women, magni, magna, Shittencumshita, Cringes, Grimaces, Scrapes, Bows, and
Congees; double Honors this way, tripple Salutes that way, the Embrace, the
Grasp, the Squeese, the Hug, the Leer, the Smack, baso los manos de vostra
merce, de vostra Maesta. You are most tarabin, taraba^* Stront, that is down
right Dutch, why all this ado? I don't say but a Man might be for a bit by the
by and away, to be doing as well as his Neighbors; but this little nasty
Cringing and Curtising made me as mad as any March Devil. You talk of kissing
Ladies; by the Worthy and Sacred Frock I wear, I seldom venture upon it, lest I
be served as was the Lord of Guyercharcis. What was it? said Pantagruel, I know
him; he is one of the best Friends I have.

He was invited to a Sumptuous Feast; said Friar Jhon, by a Relation and
Neighbor of his, together with all the Gentlemen and Ladies in the
Neighborhood. Now some of the latter, expecting his coming, dressed the Pages in
Women's Cloths, and finified them like any Babies, then ordered them to meet my
Lord at his coming, near the Drawbridge; so the Complementing Monsieur came,
and there kissed the Petticoated Lads with great formality. At last the Ladies
who minded passages in the Gallery, burst out with laughing, and made signs to
the Pages to take off their dress; which the good Lord having observed, the
Devil a bit he durst make up to the true Ladies to kiss them, but said, That
since they had disguised the Pages, by his Great Grand-father's Helmet, these
were certainly the very Footmen and Grooms still more cunningly disguised. Ods
Fish, da Jurand^, why do not we rather remove our humanities into some good
warm Kitchen of God, that Noble Laboratory? and there admire the turning of the
Spits, the harmonious rattling of the Jacks and Fenders, criticize on the
Position of the Lard, the temperature of the Potages, the preparation for the
Dessert, and the order of the Wine Service? Beati Immaculati in via, matter of
Breviary, my Masters.

CHAP. XI. Why Monks love to be in Kitchins.
THIS, said Epistemon, is spoke like a true Monk I mean like a right M^nking
Monk, not a bemonk'd monastical Monkling. Truly you put me in mind of some
passages that happened at Florence some twenty Years ago in a Company of
studious Travelers, fond of visiting the Learned, and seeing the Antiquities
of Italy, among whom I was. As we viewed the situation and beauty of Florence,
the structure of the Dome, the Magnificence of the Churches, and Palaces, We
strove to outdo one another in giving them their due; when a certain Monk of
Amiens, Bernard Lardon by name, quite angry, scandalized, and out of all
Patience, told us, I don't know what the Devil you can find in this same Town,
that is so much to be cried up; For my Part, I have looked and por'd and stared
as well as the best of you, I think my Eye sight's as clear as another body's,
and what can one see after all? There are fine Houses indeed, and that is all.
But the Cage does not feed the Birds: God and Monsieur St. Bernard our good
Patron be with us, in all this same Town I have not seen one poor Lane of
roasting Cooks, and yet I have not a little looked about, and sought for so
necessary a part of a Commonwealth; Ay, and I dare assure you that I have pried
up and down with the exactness of an Informer; as ready to number both to the
right and left how many and on what side we might find most roasting Cooks, as
a Spy would be to reckon the Bastions of a Town: Now at Amiens, in four, nay
five times less ground than we have trod in our contemplations, I could have
shown you above fourteen Streets of roasting Cooks, most ancient, Savoury, and
Aromatic. I cannot imagine what kind of pleasure you can have taken in gazing on
the Lions, and Africans (so methinks you call their Tigers) near the Belfrey,
or in ogling the Porcupines and Estridges, in the Lord Philip Strozzi's Palace.
Faith and Troth, I had rather see a good fat Goose at the Spit. This Porphyry,
those Marbles are fine: I say nothing to the contrary, but our Cheescakes at
Amiens are far better in my mind: These ancient Statues are well made; I am
willing to believe it; but by St. Ferreol of Abbeville, we have young Wenches
in our Country which please me better a thousand times.

What is the reason, asked Friar Ihon, that Monks are always to be found in
Kitchins; and Kings, Emperors and Popes are never there? Is there not, said
Rhizotome, some latent Virtue and specific propriety hid in the Kettles, and
Pans, which as the Lodestone attracts Iron, draws the Monks there, and cannot
attract Emperors, Popes, or Kings? or is it a natural induction and
inclination^, fixed in the frocks and cowles, which of it self leads and
forces those good Religious Men into Kitchins, whether they will or no? He
would speak of forms following matter, as Averr^es names them, answered
Epistemon: Right, said Friar Ihon.

I Will not offer to solve this problem, said Pantagruel; for it is somewhat
ticklish, and you can hardly handle it without coming off scurvily, but I Will
tell you what I have heard.

Antigonus King of Macedon one day coming into one of the Tents, where his
Cooks use to dress his Meat, and finding there Poet Antagoras frying a Conger,
and holding the pan himself, merrily asked him, Pray, Mr. Poet, was Homer
frying Congers when he writ the Deeds of Agamemnon? Antagoras readily answered;
But do you think, Sir, that when Agamemnon did them, he made it his business to
know if any in his Camp were frying Congers? The King thought it an Indecency
that a Poet should be thus a frying in a Kitchen; and the Poet let the King
know that it was a more indecent thing for a King to be found in such a place:
I Will clap another story upon the Neck of this, quoth Panurge, and will tell you
what Briton Villandray answered one day to the Duke of Guise.

They were saying that at a certain Battle of King Francis against Charles the
Fifth, Briton armed Capape to the Teeth, and mounted like St. George; yet
sneack'd off, and played least in sight during the Engagement. Blood and Oons,
answered Briton, I was there and can prove it easily; nay, even where* you, my
Lord, dared not have been. The Duke began to resent this as too rash and saucy;
But Briton easily appeased him, and set them all a laughing. I gad, my Lord
quoth he, I kept out of harm's way; I was all the while with your Page Jack
sculking in a certain place where you had not dared hide your head as I did.
Thus discoursing they got to their Ships, and left the Island of Chely.

CHAP. XII How Pantagruel passed by the Land of Petifogging, and of the strange
way of living among the Catchpoles.
STeering our course forwards the next day we passed by Pettifogging, a Country
all blurred and blotted, so that I could hardly tell what to make on it. There
we saw some Pettifoggers and Catchpoles, Rogues that will hang their Father for
a Groat. They neither invited us to eat or drink, but with a multiplied train
of scrapes and cringes said they were all at our service, for the Legem pone.

One of our Droggermen related to Pantagruel their strange way of living,
diametrically opposed to that of our modern Romans: for at Rome a world of
Folks get an honest livelihood by Poisoning, Drubbing, Lambasting, Stabbing and
Murdering; but the Catchpoles earn theirs by being Thrash'd, so that if they
were long without a tight Lambasting, the poor Dogs with their Wives and
Children would be starved. This is just, quoth Panurge, like those who, as
Galen tells us, cannot erect the Cavernous nerve toward the Equinoctial
Circle, unless they are soundly flogg'd. By St. Patrick's Slipper, who ever
should jirk me so, would soon in stead of setting me right, throw me off the
Saddle, in the Devils Name.

The way is this, said the Interpreter, when a Monk, Levite, close fisted
Usurer or Lawyer owes a grudge to some neighboring Gentleman, he sends to him
one of those Catchpoles or Apparitors, who nabs, or at least cites him, serves
a Writ or Warrant upon him; thumps, abuses and affronts him impudently by
natural instinct, and according to his pious instructions; in so much that if
the Gentleman has but any guts in his Brains, and is not more Stupid than a
Girin Frog, he will find himself obliged either to apply a faggot-stick or his
sword to the Rascal's Jobbornol, give him the gentle lash, or make him cut a
caper out at the Window by way of Correction. This done, Catchpole is rich for
four Months at least, as if Bastinadoes were his real harvest; for the Monk,
Levite, Usurer or Lawyer will reward him roundly, and my Gentleman must pay him
such swindging damages, that his acres may bleed for it, and he be in danger of
miserably rotting within a stone Doublet, as if he had struck the King.

Quoth Panurge, I know an excellent remedy against this; used by the Lord of
Basche; what is it? said Pantagruel. The Lord of Basche, said Panurge, was a
brave honest noble-spirited Gentleman, who at his return from the long war in
which the Duke of Ferrara, with the help of the French, bravely defended
himself against the fury of Pope Julius the II. was every day cited, warned and
prosecuted at the Suit and for the Sport and Fancy of the fat Prior of St.
Louant.

One morning as he was at breakfast with some of his Domestics (for he loved to
be sometimes among them,) he sent for one Loir his Baker and his Spouse, and
for one Oudart the Vicar of his Parish, who was also his Butler, as the custom
was then in France; then said to them before his Gentleman and other Servants:
You all see how I am daily plagued with these rascally Catchpoles, truly if you
do not lend me your helping hand, I am finally resolved to leave the Country,
and go fight for the Sultan, or the Devil, rather than be thus eternally
tees'd. Therefore to be rid of their damned Visits, hereafter, when any of them
come here, be ready you Baker and your Wife, to make your personal appearance
in my great Hall in your wedding Clothes, as if you were going to be affianc'd;
here take these Ducats which I give you to keep you in a fitting Garb. As for
you, Sir Oudart, be sure you make your personal appearance there in your fine
Surplice and Stole, not forgetting your Holy Water, as if you were to wed them.
Be you there also, Trudon, said he to his Drummer, with your Pipe and Taber.
The form of Matrimony must be read, and the Bride kissed, then all of you, as
the Witnesses use to do in this Country, shall give one another the remembrance
of the Wedding, (which you know is to be a blow with your Fist, bidding the
Party struck remember the Nuptials by that token) this will but make you have
the better Stomach to your Supper: But when you come to the Catchpole's turn,
thrash him thrice and three fold, as you would a Sheaf of green Corn, don't
spare him, maul him, drub him, lambast him, swinge him off, I pray you. Here
take these Steel Gantlets covered with Kid, Head, Back, Belly, and Sides, give
him blows innumerable; he that gives him most, shall be my best Friend. Fear
not to be called to an account about it, I Will stand by you; for the blows must
seem to be given in jest, as it is Customary among us at all Weddings.

Ay, but how shall we know the Catchpole, said the Man of God, all sorts of
People daily resort to this Castle? I have taken care of that, replied the
Lord. When some fellow either on foot or on a scurvy Jade, with a large broad
Silver Ring on his Thumb comes to the door, he is certainly a Catchpole: The
Porter having civilly let him in, shall ring the Bell, then be all ready, and
come into the Hall, to act the Tragi-Comedy, whose Plot I have now laid for you.

That numerical day, as Chance would have it, came an old fat ruddy Catchpole;
having knocked at the Gate, and then pissed, as most Men will do, the Porter
soon found him out, by his large greasy Spatterdashes, his Jaded hollow flanked
Mare, his Bag full of Writs and Informations dangling at his Girdle, but above
all, by the large Silver hoop on his left Thumb.

The Porter was civil to him, admitted him in kindly, and rung the Bell
briskly. As soon as the Baker and his Wife heard it, they clapped on their best
Clothes, and made their personal appearance in the Hall, keeping their
Gravities like a new made Judge. The Domine put on his Surplice and Stole, and
as he came out of his Office, met the Catchpole, had him in there, and made him
suck his Face a good while, while the Gantlets were drawing on all hands, and
then told him, you are come just in Pudding time, my Lord is in his right Cue;
we shall feast like Kings anon, here is to be swindging doings, we have a
Wedding in the House, here, drink and cheer up, pull away.

While these two were at it hand to fist, Basche, seeing all his People in the
Hall in their proper Equipage, sends for the Vicar. Oudart comes with the Holy
Water Pot, followed by the Catchpole, who as he came into the Hall, did not
forget to make good store or awkward Cringes, and then served Basche with a
Writ. Basche gave him Grimace for Grimace, slipped an Angel into his Mutton Fist,
and prayed him to asist at the Contract and Ceremony. Which he did. When it was
ended, Thumps and Fisticuffs began to fly about among the Assistants; but when
it came to the Catchpole's turn, they all laid on him so unmercifully with
their Gantlets, that they at last settled him, all stunned, and battered,
bruised and mortified, with one of his Eyes black and blue, eight Ribs bruised,
his Brisket sunk in, his Omoplates in four quarters, his under Jaw Bone in
three pieces, and all this in jest and no harm done. God wot how the Levite
belabour'd him, hiding within the long Sleeve of his Canonical Shirt, his huge
Steel Gantlet lined with Ermin, for he was a strong built Ball, and an old Dog
at Fisticuffs. The Catchpole all of a Bloody Tyger-like hue, with much ado,
crawled home to l'Isle Bouchart, well pleased and edified however with Basche^s
kind reception, and with the help of the good Surgeons of the place, lived as
long as you would have him. From that time to this not a word of the business; the
memory of it was lost with the sound of the Bells that rung for Joy at his
Funeral.

CHAP. XIII. How, like Master Francis Villon, the Lord of Basche commended his
Servants.
THe Catchpole being packed off on blind Sorrel (so he called his one Eyed
Mare) Basche sent for his Lady, her Women and all his Servants into the Arbor
of his Garden; had Wine brought, attended by good store of Pasties, Hams,
Fruit, and other Table-Ammunition for a Nuncion, drank with them joyfully, and
then told them this Story.

Master Francis Villon in his old Age, retired to St. Maixent in Poitou, under
the Patronage of a good honest Abbot of the place. There to make sport for the
Mob, he undertook to get the Passion acted after the way and in the Dialect of
the Country. The parts being distributed, the Play having been rehearsed, and
the Stage prepared, he told the Mayor and Aldermen, that the Mystery might be
ready after Niort Fair, and that there only wanted Properties and necessaries,
but chiefly Clothes fit for the parts; so the Mayor and his Brethren took care
to get them.

Villon, to dress an old Clownish Father Gray Beard, who was to represent God
the Father, begged of Friar Stephen Tickletoby, Sacristan to the Franciscan
Friars of the place, to lend him a Cope and a Stole. Tickletoby refused him,
alleging that by their Provincial Statutes, it was rigorously forbidden to
give or lend any thing to Players* Villon replied, That the Statute reached no
farther than Farces, Drolls, Anticks, loose and dissolute Games, and that he
asked no more than what he had seen allowed at Brussels and other places.
Tickletoby, notwithstanding, peremptorily bid him provide himself elsewhere if
he would, and not to hope for any thing out of his Monastical Wardrobe. Villon
gave an account of this to the Players, as of a most abominable action, adding,
that God would shortly revenge himself, and make an example of Tickletoby.

The Saturday following he had notice given him, that Tickletoby upon the Filly
of the Convent (so they call a young Mare that was never leaped yet) was gone a
Mumping to St. Ligarius, and would be back about two in the afternoon. Knowing
this, he made a Cavalcade of his Devils of the Passion through the Town. They
were all rigged with Wolves, Calves, and Rams Skins, laced and trimmed with
Sheeps Heads, Bulls Feathers, and large Kitchen Tenter-Hooks, girt with broad
Leathern Girdles, whereat hanged dangling huge Cow Bells and Horse Bells which
made a horrid din. Some held in their Claws black Sticks full of Squibs and
Crackers, others had long lighted pieces of wood, upon which at the corner of
every street they flung whole handfuls of Rosin dust, that made a terrible fire
and smoke: having thus led them about, to the great diversion of the Mob, and
the dreadful fear of little Children, he finally carried them to an
entertainment at a Summer House without the Gate that leads to St. Ligarius.

As they came near the place, he spied Tickletoby afar off, coming home from
Mumping, and told them in Maceronic Verse, Hic est Mumpator natus de gente
Cucowli,
Qui solet antiquo scrappas portare a Monks double Pouch.
bisacco.


A Plague on his Fryarship (said the Devils then) the lowsy Beggar would not
lend a poor Cope to the Fatherly Father, let us fright him. Well said, cried
Villon; but let us hide our selves till he comes by, and then change home
briskly with your Squibs and burning Sticks. Tickletoby being come to the
place, they all rushed on a sudden into the Road to meet him, and in a
frightful manner threw fire from all sides upon him and his Filly Foal, ringing
and tingling their Bells, and howling like so many real Devils, hho, hho, hho,
hho, brrou, rrou, rrourrs, r^rourrs hoo, hou, hou, hho, hho, hhoi, Friar
Stephen, don't we play the Devils rarely? The Filly was soon scared out of her
seven Senses, and began to start, to funk it, to squirt it, to trot it, to fart
it, to bound it, to gallop it, to kick it, to spurn it, to calcitrate it, to
winse it, to frisk it, to leap it, to curvet it, with double Jirks, and
bum-motions; in so much that she threw down Tickletoby, though he held fast by
the Tree of the Pack-Saddle with might and main: now his Straps and Stirrups
were of Cord, and on the right side, his Sandal was so entangled and twisted,
that he could not for the Hearts blood of him get out his foot. Thus he was
dragged about by the Filly through the Road, scratching his bare Breech all the
way, she still multiplying her kicks against him, and straying for fear, over
Hedge and Ditch; in so much that she trepan'd his thick Skull so, that his
Cockle Brains were dashed out near the Osanna or High Cross. Then his Arms fell
to pieces, one this way, and the other that way, and even so were his Legs served
at the same time: Then she made a bloody havoc with his Puddings, and being
got to the Convent, brought back only his right Foot and twisted Sandal,
leaving them to guess what was become of the rest.

Villon seeing that things had succeeded as he intended, said to his Devils, you
will Act rarely, Gentlemen Devils, you will Act rarely; I dare engage you will
top your Parts. I defy the Devils of Saumur, Douay, Montmorillon, Langez, St.
Espain, Angers; nay, by Gad, even those of Poictiers, for all their bragging
and vapouring, to match you.

Likewise, Friends, said Basche, I foresee, that hereafter you will act rarely
this Tragical Farce, since the very first time you have so skilfully hampered,
bethwack'd, belamm'd, and bebump'd the Catchpole. From this day I double your
Wages. As for you, my Dear (said he to his Lady) make your Gratifications as
you please; you are my Treasurer, you know. For my part, first and foremost, I
drink to you all. Come on, box it about, it is good and cool. In the second
place, you, Mr. Steward, take this Silver Basin, I give it you freely. Then,
you, my Gentleman of the Horse, take these two Silver gilt Cups, and let not
the Pages be Horse-whip'd these three Months. My Dear, let them have my best
white Plumes of Feathers with the Gold Buckles to them. Sir Oudart, this Silver
Flaggon falls to your share: this other I give to the Cooks. To the Valets de
Chamber, I give this Silver Basket; to the Grooms this Silver gilt Boat; to the
Porter these two Plates: to the Hostlers these ten Porringers. Trudon, take you
these Silver Spoons and this Sugar-Box. You Footmen, take this large Salt.
Serve me well, and I Will remember you. For on the word of a Gentleman, I had
rather bear in War one hundred blows on my Helmet in the Service of my Country,
than be once cited by these Knavish Catchpoles, merely to humor this same
gorbelly'd Prior.

CHAP. XIV. A further Account of (...) were drub'd at Basche's (...)
FOur days after, another young long-shank'd raw-bon'd Catchpole coming to
serve Basche with a Writ at the fat Prior's request, was no sooner at the Gate,
but the Porter smelt him out, and rung the Bell; at whose second pull, all the
Family understood the Mystery. Loire was kneading his D^ugh, his Wife was
sifting Meal; Oudart was toping in his Office; the Gentlemen were playing at
Tennis; the Lord Basche at In and Out with my Lady; the Waitingmen and
Gentlewomen at Push Pin: the Officers at Lanterlue, and the Pages at
Hotcockles, giving one another smart bangs. They were all immediately informed
that a Catchpole was Housed.

Upon this, Oudart put on his Sacerdotal, and Loire and his Wife their Nuptial
Badges. Trudon Pip'd it, and then Taber'd it like mad, all made haste to get
ready, not forgetting the Gantlets. Basche went into the outward Yard; there
the Catchpole meeting him, fell ^n his Marrowbones, begged of him not to take it
ill, if he served him with a Writ at the Suit of the fat Prior; and in a
pathetic Speech, let him know that he was a public person, a Servant to the
Monking Tribe, Apparitor to the Abbatial Mytre, ready to do as much for him,
nay, for the least of his Servants, whenever he would employ and use him.

Nay, truly, said the Lord, you shall not serve your Writ till you have tasted
some of my good Quinquenays Wine and been a Witness to a Wedding which we are
to have this very minute. Let him drink and refresh himself, added he, turning
toward the Levitical Butler, and then bring him into the Hall. After which,
Catchpole well stuffed and moistened, came with Oudart to the place where all
the Actors in the Farce stood ready to begin. The sight of their Game set them
a laughing, and the Messenger of mischief grinn'd also for Company's sake. Then
the Mysterious words were muttered to and by the Couple, their Hands joined,
the Bride buss'd, and all besprinkled with Holy Water. While they were bringing
Wine and Kickshaws, Thumps began to trot about by dozens. The Catchpole gave
the Levite several blows. Oudart who had his Gantlet hid under his Canonical
Shirt draws it on (...), and then (...) ^ll on the (...) a Devil; the (...)
Gantiers dropped on him likewise like so many battering Rams. Remember the
Wedding by this, by that, by these blows, said they. In short they stroak'd him
so to the purpose that he pist Blood out at Mouth, Nose, Ears, and Eyes, and
was bruised, sore, battered, be bump'd, and crippled at the Back, Neck, Breast,
Arms, and so forth. Never did the Batchelors at Avignon in Carnival time play
more melodiously at Raphe, than was then played on the Catchpole's Microcosm:
at last down he fell.

They threw a great deal of Wine on his Snout, tied round the Sleeve of his
Doublet a fine yellow and green Favor, and got him upon his snotty Beast, and
God knows how he got to l'Isle Bouchart, where I cannot truly tell you whether
he was dressed and looked after or no both by his Spouse and the able Doctors
of the Country, for the thing never came to my Ears.

The next day they had a third part to the same Tune, because it did not appear
by the lean Catchpole's Bag, that he had served his Writ. So the fat Prior sent
a new Catchpole at the head of a brace of Bums for his Guard du Corpse to Summon
my Lord. The Porter ringing the Bell, the whole Family was overjoyed, knowing
that it was another Rogue. Basche was at Dinner with his Lady and the
Gentlemen, so he sent for the Catchpole, made him sit by him, and the Bums by
the Women, and made them eat till their Bellies cracked with their Breeches
unbutton'd. The Fruit being served, the Catchpole arose from Table, and before
the Bums cited Basche, Basche kindly asked him for a Copy of the Warant, which
the other had got ready: He then takes Witness and a Copy of the Summons. To
the Catchpole and his Bums he ordered four Ducats for Civility Money. In the
mean time all were withdrawn for the Farce. So Trudon gave the Alarm with his
Tabor. Basche desired the Catchpole to stay and see one of his Servants
married, and witness the Contract of Marriage, paying him his Fee. The
Catchpole slap dash was ready, took out his Ink-horn, got Paper immediately,
and his Bums by him.

Then Loire came into the Hall at one door, and his Wife with the Gentlewomen
at another in Nuptial Accoutrements. Oudart, in Pontifica^ibus takes them both
by the hands, asks them their will; gives them the Matrimonial Blessing, and
was very Liberal of Holy Water. The Contract Written, Signed, and Registered,
on one side was brought Wine and Comfits; on the other; White and
Orange-tau^y-colour'd Favors were distributed; on another, Gantlets privately
handed about.

CHAP. XV. How the Ancient Custom at Nuptials is renewed by the Catchpole.
THe Catchpole having made shift to get down a swindging Streaker of Briton
Wine, said to Basche, Pray, Sir, what do you mean? You do not give one another
the Memento of the Wedding. By St. Joseph's Wooden Shoe all good Customs are
forgot. We find the Form, but the Hare's scamper'd; and the Nest, but the Birds
are flown. There are no true Friends nowadays. You see how in several
Churches the Ancient Laudable Custom of Tippling on account of the blessed St.
O. O. at Christmas is come to nothing. The World is in its Dotage, and
Doomsday is certainly coming all so fast. Now come on; The Wedding, the
Wedding, the Wedding, remember it by this. This he said, striking Basche and
his Lady, then her Women and the Levite. Then the Tabor beat a point of War,
and the Gantlets began to do their Duty, in so much that the Catchpole had his
Crown cracked in no less than nine places. One of the Burns had his right Arm
put out of joint, and the other his upper Jaw Bone or Mandibule dislocated; so
that it hid half his Chin, with a Denudation of the Uvula and sad loss of the
Molar, Masticatory and Canine Teeth. Then the Tabor beat a Retreat; the
Gantlets were carefully hid in a trice, and sweet Meats afresh distributed to
renew the Mirth of the Company. So they all drank to one another, and
especially to the Catchpole and his Bums. But Oudart Cursed and Damned the
Wedding to the pit of Hell, complaining that one of the Bums had utterly
disincornisistibulated his nether Shoulder blade. Nevertheless he scorned to be
thought a Flincher, and made shift to tope to him on the square.

The Jawless Bum shrug'd up his Shoulders, joined his Hands, and by signs begged
his Pardon; for speak he could not. The sham Bridegroom made his moan, That the
crippled Bum had struck him such a horrid thump with his
Shoulder-of-Mutton-Fist on the nether Elbow, that he was grown quite
esperruquanchuzelubelouzerireliced down to his very Heel, to the no small loss
of Mistress Bride.

But what harm had poor I done (cried Trudon hiding his left Eye with his
Kerchief, and showing his Tabor cracked on one side) they were not satisfied
with thus poaching, black-and bluing, and
morrambouzevezengouzequoquemorgasacbaquevezinemaffreliding my poor Eyes, but
they have also broke my harmless Drum. Drums endued are commonly beaten at
Weddings; (and it is sit they should) but Drummers are well entertained, and
never beaten. Now let Beelzebub even take the Drum to make his Devilship a
Nightcap. Brother, said the lame Catchpole, never fret thy self, I will make
thee a present of a fine, large, old Patent which I have here in my Bag to
patch up thy Drum, and for Madam St. Ann's sake I pray thee forgive us. By'r
Lady of River, the blessed Dame, I meant no more harm than the Child unborn.
One of the Querries who hopping and halting like a mumping Cripple, mimick'd
the good limping Lord de la Roche Posay, directed his Discourse to the Bum with
the pouting Jaw, and told him, What, Mr. Manhound, was it not enough thus to
have morcrocastebezasteverestegrigeligoscopapopondrillated us all in our upper
Members with your botch'd Mittens, but you must also apply such
morderegripippiatabirofreluchamburelurecaquelurintimpaniments on our Shinbones
with the hard tops and extremitie^ of your cobbl'd Shoes? Do you call this
Childrens play? By the Mass, it is no Jest. The Bum wringing his Hands, seemed
to beg his Pardon, muttering with his Tongue, mon, mon, mon, vrelon, von, von,
like a Dumb Man. The Bride crying laughed, and laughing cried, because the
Catchpole was not satisfied with drubbing her without choice or distinction of
Members, but had also rudely roused and tous'd her; pulled off her Topping, and
not having the fear of her Husband before his Eyes, treacherously
trepignemanpinillorifrizonoufresturfumbledtumbled and squees'd her lower parts.
The Devil go with it, said Basche, there was much need indeed that this same
Master King (this was the Catchpole's Name) should thus break my Wifes Back:
however I forgive him now; these are little Nuptial Caresses. But this I
plainly perceive, that he cited me like an Angel, and drubb'd me like a Devil.
He has something in him of Friar Thumpwell. Come, for all this I must drink to
him, and to you likewise his trusty Esquires. But said his Lady, why has he
been so very liberal of his manual kindness to me without the least
provocation? I assure you, I by no means like it; but this I dare say for him,
that he has the hardest Knuckles that ever I felt on my Shoulders. The Steward
held his left Arm in a Scarf, as if it had been rent and torn in twain: I think
it was the Devil, said he, that moved me to assist at these Nuptials; shame on
ill luck, I must-needs be meddling, with a Pox, and now see what I have got by
the Bargain, both my Arms are wretchedly engoulevezinemassdandbruis'd. Do you
call this a Wedding? By St. Briget's Tooth, I had rather be at that of a Tom T
-- d-Man; this is of my word even just such another Feast as was that of the
Lapithes, described by the Philosopher of Samosate. One of the Bums had lost
his Tongue. The two other, though they had more need to complain, made their
excuse as well as they could, protesting that they hadt no ill design in this
Dumbfounding; begging that for goodness sake they would forgive them, and so
though they could hardly budge a foot, or wag along, away they crawled. About a
mile from Basche's Seat, the Catchpole found himself somewhat out of sorts. The
Bums got to l'Isle Bouchard, publicly saying, That since they were born, they
had never seen an honester Gentleman than the Lord of Basche, or civiller
People than his, and that they had never been at the like Wedding (which I
verily believe) but that it was their own faults if they had been tickled off
and tossed about from Post to Pillar, since themselves had began the beating.
So they lived I cannot exactly tell you how many days after this. But from that
time to this it was held for a certain truth, That Basche^s Money was more
pestilential, mortal and pernicious to the Catchpoles and Bums, than were
formerly the Aurum Thelosanum, and the Sejan Horse to those that possessed
them. Ever since this, he lived quietly, and Basche's Wedding grew into a
common Proverb.

CHAP. XVI. How Friar Jhon made trial of the Nature of the Catchpoles.
THis Story would seem pleasant enough, said Pantagruel, were we not to have
always the fear of God before our Eyes. It had been better, said Epistemon, if
those Gantle^s had fallen upon the fat Prior: Since he took a pleasure in
spending his Money partly to vex Basche* partly to see those Catchpoles banged,
good lusty thumps would have done well on his shaved Crown, considering the
horrid Concussions now-a days among those puny Judges. What harm had done those
poor Devils the Catchpoles. This puts me in mind, said Pantagruel, of an
ancient Roman named L. Neratius; he was of Noble Blood, and for some time was
rich; but had this Tyrannical Inclination, that whenever he went out of doors,
he caused his Servants to fill their Pockets with Gold and Silver, and meeting
in the street your spruce Gallants and better sort of Beaux, without the least
provocation, for his fancy he used to strike them hard on the Face with his
Fist, and immediately after that, to appease them and hinder them from
complaining to the Magistrates, he would give them as much Money as satisfied
them acaccording to the Law of the twelve Tables. Thus he used to spend his
Revenue, beating People for the price of his Money. By St. Bennet's Sacred
Boot, quoth Friar Jhon, I will know the truth of it presently.

This said, he went on shore, put his hand in his Fob, and took out twenty
Ducats, then said with a loud voice in the hearing of a shoal of the Nation of
Catchpoles, Who will earn twenty Ducats, for being beaten like the Devil? Io,
Io, Io, said they all; you will cripple us for ever, Sir, that is most certain,
but the Money is tempting. With this they were all thronging who should be
first, to be thus pretiously beaten. Friar Jhon singl'd him out of the whole
knot of these Rogues in grain, a red Snout Catchpole, who upon his right Thumb
wore a thick broad Silver Hoop, wherein was set a good large Toadstone. He had
no sooner picked him out from the rest, but I perceived that they all muttered
and grumbl'd, and I heard a young thin-jaw'd Catchpole, a notable Scholar, a
pretty Fellow at his Pen, and, according to public report, much cried up for
his honesty at Doctors Commons, making his complaint, and muttering; because
this same crimson Phyz carried away all the Practice, and that if there were
but a score and a half of Bastinadoes to be got, he would certainly run away
with eight and twenty of them. But all this was looked upon to be nothing but
mere Envy.

Friar Jhon so unmercifully thrash'd, thump'd and belabour'd Red-Snout, Back
and Belly, Sides, Legs and Arms, Head, Feet, and so forth, with the home and
frequently repeated application of one of the best Members of a Faggot, that I
took him to be a dead Man; then he gave him the twenty Ducats; which made the
Dog get on his Legs, pleased like a little King, or two. The rest were saying
to Friar Jhon, Sir, Sir, Brother Devil, if it please you to do us the favor to
beat some of us for less Money, we are all at your Devilship's command, Bags,
Papers, Pens and all. Red-Snout cried out against them, saying with a loud
voice: Body of me, you little Prigs, will you offer to take the Bread out of my
Mouth? will you take my Bargain over my Head? Would you draw and inveigle from
me my Clients and Customers? Take notice, I Summon you before the Official this
day se'night; I will Law and Claw you like any old Devil, that I will. -- Then
turning himself toward Friar Jhon, with a smiling and joyful look, he said to
him, Reverend Father in the Devil, if you have found me a good Hide, and have a
mind to divert your self once more, by beating your humble Servant, I will bate
you half in half this time, rather than lose your Custom, do not spare me I
beseech you; I am all, and more than all yours, good Mr. Devil, Head, Lungs,
Tripes, Guts and Garbage, and that at a Penniworth I Will assure you. Friar Jhon
never heeded his proffers, but even left them. The other Catchpoles were making
Addresses to Panurge, Epistemon, Gymnast, and others, entreating them
charitably to bestow upon their Carcasses a small beating, for otherwise they
were in danger of keeping a long Fast: but none of them had a Stomach to it.
Sometime after, seeking fresh Water for the Ship's Company, we met a couple of
old Female Catchpoles of the place, miserably howling and weeping in Consort.
Pantagruel had kept on Board, and already had caused a Retreat to be sounded.
Thinking they might be related to the Catchpole that was bastinado'd, We asked
them the occasion of their grief. They replied, That they had too much cause to
weep, for that very hour from an exalted Triple Tree, two of the honestest
Gentlemen in Catchpoleland had been made to cut a Caper on nothing. Cut a Caper
on nothing? said Gymnast, my Pages use to cut Capers on the Ground; to cut a
Caper on nothing, should be hanging and choking, or I am out. Ay, ay, said
Friar Jhon, you speak of it like St. John de la Palisse.

We asked them why they treated those worthy Persons with such a choking
Hempen Sallat? They told us they had only borrowed, alias stolen the Tools of
the Mass, and hid them under the handle of the Parish. This is a very
Allegorical way of speaking said Epistemon.

CHAP. XVII. How Pantagruel came to the Island of Tohu and Bohu, and of the
strange death of Widenostrils the Swallower of Windmills.
THAT day Pantagruel came to the two Islands of Tohu and Bohu, where the Devil
a bit we could find any thing to fry with. For, one Widenostrils, a huge Giant
had swallowed every individual Pan, Skillet, Kettle, Drying Pan, dripping-Pan,
and Brass and Iron Pot in the Land, for want of Windmils, which were his daily
food. Whence it happened that somewhat before Day, about the hour of his
digestion, the greedy Churl was taken very ill, with a kind of a Surfeit, or
Crudity of stomach, occasioned (as the Physicians said) by the weakness of the
concocting faculty of his stomach, naturally disposed to digest whole Windmils
at a gust, yet unable to consume perfectly the Pans and Skillets; though it had
indeed pretty well digested the Kettles and Pots, as they said they kn^w by the
Hypostases and Encoresmes of four Tubs of second hand Drink which he had
evacuated, at two different times that morning. They made use of diverse
remedies according to art, to give him ease: But all would not do, the
Distemper prevailed over the remedies, in so much that the famous Widenostrils
died that morning, of so strange a death, that I think you ought no longer to
wonder at that of the Poet Aeschylus's. It had been foretold him by the
Soothsayers, that he would dye on a certain Day, by the ruin of something that
should fall on him; that fatal day being come in its Turn, he removed himself
out of Town, far from all Houses, Trees, or any other things that can fall, and
endanger by their ruin; and stayed in a large field, trusting himself to the
open Sky, there very secure as he thought, unless indeed the Sky should happen
to fall, which he held to be impossible. Yet they say that the Larks are much
afraid of it, for if it should fall, they must all be taken.

The Celix that once lived near the Rhine, (they are our noble valiant French)
in ancient times were also afraid of the Sky's falling; for being asked by
Alexander the great, what they feared most in this World, hoping well they
would say that they feared none but him, considering his great Achievements,
they made answer, That they feared nothing but the Sky's falling; however not
refusing to enter into a confederacy with so brave a King: If you believe
Strabo Lib. 7. and Arrian Lib. 1.

Plutarch also in his book of the Face that appears on the body of the Moon,
speaks of one Phoenaces who very much feared the Moon should fall on Earth, and
pitied those that live under that Planet, as the Aethiopians and Taprobanians,
if so heavy a Mass ever happened to fall on them; and would have feared the
like of Heaven and Earth, had they not been duly propt up and born by the
Atlantic Pillars, as the ancients believed, according to Aristotle's testimony
Lib. 5. Metaphis. Notwithstanding all this, poor Aeschylus was killed by the
fall of the shell of a Tortoise, which falling from betwixt the Claws of an
Eagle high in the Air, just on his head, dashed out his brains.

Neither ought you to wonder at the death of another Poet, I mean old Jolly
Anacreon, who was choked with a grape-stone: nor at that of Fabius the Roman
Praetor who was smothered with a single Goat's-hair as he was supping up a
porringer of Milk. Nor at the death of that bashful Fool who by holding in his
Wind, and for want of letting out a Bumgunshot died suddenly in the presence of
the Emperor Claudius. Nor at that of the Italian buried on the Via Flaminia at
Rome who in his Epitaph, complains that the bite of a she-Puss on his little
Finger was the cause of his death Nor of that of Q. Lecanius Bassus, who dyed
suddenly of so small a prick with a needle on his left thumb, that it could
hardly be descern'd. Nor of Quenelault a Norman Physician who died suddenly at
Montpellier merely for having sideways took a worm out of his hand with a
Penknife. Nor of Philomenes, whose Servant having got him some new Figs, for
the first course of his dinner, whilst he went to fetch wine, a straggling
welhung Ass got into the House, and seeing the figs on the Table, without
further invitation soberly fell to: Philomenes coming into the Room and nicely
observing with what gravity the Ass eat its Dinner, said to his Man who was
come back; since thou have set figs here for this reverent Guest of ours to
eat, methinks it is but reason thou also give him some of this Wine to drink. He
had no sooner said this, but he was so excessively pleased, and fell into so
exorbitant a fit of Laughter, that the use of his spleen took that of his
breath utterly away, and he immediately died. Nor of Spurius Saufeius, who died
supping up a soft Egg as he came out of a bath. Nor of him who, as Boccace
tells us, died suddenly by picking his grinders with a Sage-stalk. Nor of
Philipot Placut, who being brisk and hale, fell dead as he was paying and old
debt; which causes perhaps many not to pay theirs, for fear of the like
accident. Nor of the Painter Zeuxis who killed himself with laughing at the
sight of the Antic Jobbernol of an old hagg drawn by him. Nor in short of a
thousand more of which Authors write, as Verrius, Pliny, Valerius, J. Baptista,
Fulgosius, and Bacabery the elder. In short, Gaffer Widenostrils choked
himself with eating a huge lump of fresh Butter at the mouth of a hot Oven, by
the advice of Physicians.

They likewise told us there, that the King of Cullan in Bohu had routed the
Grandees of King Mecloth, and made sad work with the Fortresses of Belima.

After this, we sailed by the Islands of Nargues and Zargues; also by the
Islands of Teleniabin and Geneliabin, very fine and fruitful in Ingredients for
Clysters: and then by the islands of ^nig and Evig, on whose account formerly
the Landgrave of Hesse was swindg'd off with a vengeance.

CHAP. XVIII. How Pantagruel met with a great Storm at Sea.
THe next day we espied nine Sail that came spooning before the Wind; they were
full of Dominicans, Jesuits, Capuchins, Hermits, Austins, Bernardins,
Celestins, Theatins, Egnatins, Amadeans, Cordeliers, Carmelites, Minims, and
the Devil and all of other holy Monks and Friars, who were going to the Council
of Chesil, to sift and garble some Articles of Faith against the new Heretics;
Panurge was overjoyed to see them, being most certain of good luck, for that
day and a long train of others. So, having courteously saluted the goodly
Fathers, and recommended the salvation of his precious Soul to their Devout
Prayers and private Ejaculations, he caused seventy eight dozen of Westphalia
Hams, Unites of Pots of Caviar, Tens of Bolonia Sawsages, Hundreds of
Botargoes, and Thousands of fine Angels, for the Souls of the dead, to be
thrown on board their Ships. Pantagruel seemed metagraboliz'd, dozing, out of
sorts, and as melancholic as a Cat: Friar Jhon who soon perceived it, was
enquiring of him whence should come this unusual sadness? When the Master,
whose Watch it was, observing the fluttering of the Ancient above the Poop, and
seeing that it began to overcast, judged that we should have Wind, therefore he
bid the Boatswain call hands upon Deck, Officers, Sailers, Foremast Men,
Swabbers, and Cabbin-boys, and even the Passengers; made 'em first settle their
Topsails, take in their Spreet-sail; then he cried, in with your Topsails,
lower the Fore-sail, Tallow under the Parrels, brade up close all them Sails,
strike your Top-Masts to the Cap, make all sure with your Sheeps-feet, Lash
your Guns fast. All this was nimbly done. Immediately it blowed a Storm, the
Sea began to roar, and swell Mountain high: The Rut of the Sea was great, the
Waves breaking upon our Ships Quarter, the North West Wind bluster'd and
over-blow'd; boisterous gusts; dreadful clashings and deadly scuds of Wind
whistled through our Yards, and made our Shrouds rattle again. The Thunder
grumbled so horridly, that you would have thought Heaven had been tumbling
about our Ears; at the same time it Lightened, Rained, Hailed; the Sky lost its
transparent hue, grew dusky, thick and gloomy, so that we had no other light
than that of the Flashes of Lightning and rending of the Clouds: The Hurricans,
Flaws and sudden Whirl-winds began to make a Flame about us by the Lightnings,
Fiery Vapors, and other Aerial Ejaculations. Oh how our Looks were full of
amazement and trouble, while the saucy Winds did rudely lift up above us the
Mountainous Waves of the Main. Believe me, it seemed to us a lively Image of
the Chaos, where Fire, Air, Sea, Land, and all the Elements were in a
refractory confusion. Poor Panurge, having, with the full contents of the
inside of his Doublet, plentifully fed the Fish, greedy enough of such odious
Fare, sat on the Deck all in a heap, with his Nose and Arse together, most
sadly cast down, moping and half dead; invoked and called to his assistance all
the Blessed he and she Saints he could muster up, swore and vowed to Confess in
time and place convenient, and then bawled out frightfully, Steward, Maistre
d'Hostel, see hoe, my Friend, my Father, my Uncle, pr'ythee let us have a piece
of Powdered Beef or Pork, we shall drink but too much anon, for ought I see,
eat little and drink the more shall hereafter be my Motto, I fear. Would to our
dear Lord and to our blessed, worthy, and sacred Lady, I were now, I say, this
very minute of an hour, well on shore on Terra firma, hale and easy. O twice
and thrice happy those that plant Cabbages! O Destinies, why did you not Spin
me for a Cabbage Planter? O how few are they to whom Jupiter has been so
favorable as to Predestinate them to plant Cabbage! They have always one Foot
on the ground, and the other not far from it. Dispute who will of Felicity, and
summum bonum, for my part, whosoever plants Cabbage, is now by my Decree
proclaimed most happy; for as good a reason as the Philosopher Pyrrho being in
the same danger, and seeing a Hog near the shore eating some scattered Oats,
declared it happy in two respects, first, because it had plenty of Oats, and
besides that was on shore. Hah, for a Divine and Princely Habitation, commend
me to the Cows Floor.

Murder! This Wave will sweep us away, blessed Savior! O my Friends! a little
Vinegar. I sweat again with mere agony. Alas, the Misen Sail's split, the
Gallery's washed away, the Masts are sprung, the Main Top Mast Head dives into
the Sea; the Keel is up to the Sun; our Shrouds are almost all broke, and blown
away. Alas! Alas! Where is our main Course? Ael is verlooren by Godt, our Top
Mast is run adrift. Alas! Who shall have this Wreck? Friend, lend me here
behind you one of these Wales. Your Lanthorn is fallen, my Lads. Alas! don't
let go the main tack nor the Bowlin. I hear the Block crack, is it broke? For
the Lord's sake, let us save the Hull, and let all the Rigging be damned. Be be
be bous, bous, bous. Look to the Needle of your Compass, I beseech you, good
Sir Astrophel, and tell us if you can whence comes this Storm, my Hearts's sunk
down below my Midriff. By my troth I am in a sad fright; bou, bou, bou, bous,
bous, I am lost for ever. I conskite my self for mere madness and fear. Bou,
bou, bou, bou, O to to to to to ti. Bou, bou, bou, ou, ou, ou, bou bou, bous. I
sink, I Am drowned, I Am gone, good People, I Am drowned.

CHAP. XIX. What Countenances Panurge and Friar Jhon kept during the Storm.
PAntagruel having first implored the help of the Great and Almighty Deliverer,
and prayed publicly with fervent Devotion, by the Pilot's advice held titely
the Mast of the Ship. Friar Jhon had stripped himself to his Wastcoat, to help
the Seamen. Epistemon, Ponocrates, and the rest did as much. Panurge alone sat
on his Breech upon Deck, weeping, and howling. Friar Jhon espied him, going on
the Quarter Deck, and said to him: Odzoons, Panurge the Calf, Panurge the
Whiner, Panurge the Brayer, would it not become thee much better to lend us
here a helping hand, than to lie lowing like a Cow, as thou do, sitting on
thy Stones like a bald breech'd Baboon? Be, be, be, bous, bous, bous, returned
Panurge, Friar Jhon, my Friend, my good Father, I am drowning, my dear Friend!
I drown; I am a dead Man, my dear Father in God, I am a dead Man, my Friend:
your cutting Hanger cannot save me from this: Alas! Alas! We are above Ela.
Above the pitch, out of Tune, and off the Hindges. Be, be, be, bou, bous. Alas
we are now above G^sol re ut. I sink, I sink, hah my Father, my Uncle, my All.
The water is got into my Shoes by the Collar; bous, bous, bous, paisch, hu,
hu, hu, he, he, he, ha, ha, I drown. Alas! Alas! Hu, hu, hu, hu, hu, hu, hu, be
be bous, bous, bobous, bobous, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. Alas! Alas! Now am I like
your Tumblers, my Feet stand higher than my Head: Would to Heaven I were now
with those good, holy Fathers bound for the Council, whom we met this morning,
so Godly, so Fat, so Merry, so Plump and Comely. Holos, holos, holas, alas,
alas. This Devilish wave ( mea culpa, Deus) I mean this wave of God will sink
our Vessel. Alas, Friar Jhon, my Father, my Friend, Confession, here I am down
on my Knees, Confiteor; your holy Blessing. Come hither and be damned thou
pitiful Devil and help us (said Friar Jhon) who fell a swearing and cursing
like a Tinker; in the name of thirty Legions of black Devils, come, will you
come? Don't let us swear at this time, said Panurge, Holy Father, my Friend,
don't swear I beseech you; to morrow a^ much as you please. Holos, holos, alas,
our Ship leaks. I drown, alas, alas, I will give eighteen hundred thousand
Crowns to any one that will set me on shore all beray'd, and bedawb'd as I am
now, if ever there was a Man in my Country in the like pickle. Confiteor, alas!
a word or two of Testament or Codicil at least. A thousand Devils seize the
Cuckoldy Cow-hearted Mungril, cried Friar Jhon; Ods Belly, art thou talking
here of making thy Will, now we are in danger, and it behooves us to bestir our
stumps lustily, or never. Will thou come, ho Devil? Midship-man my Friend, O
the rare Lieutenant, here Gymnast, here on the Poop. We are by the Mass, all
beshit now, our Light is out. This is hastening to the Devil as fast as it can.
-- Alas, bou, bou, bou, bou, bou, alas, alas, alas, alas, said Panurge, was it
here we were born to perish? Oh! hoh! Good People, I drown, I die. Consummatum
est. I am sped -- Magna, gna, gna, said Friar Jhon. Fie upon him, how ugly the
shitten howler looks. -- Boy, Younker, see hoyh. -- Mind the Pumps, or the
Devil choke thee. -- Have thou hurt thy self? Zoons, here fasten it to one of
these Blocks. On this side in the Devil's name, hay -- so my Boy. -- Ah Friar
Jhon, said Panurge, good Ghostly Father, dear Friend, don't let us swear, you
sin. Oh ho, Oh ho, be be be bous, bous, bhous, I sink, I die, my Friends. I die
in Charity with all the World. Farewell, In manus. Bohous bhous,
bhousowwauwaus. St. Michael of Aure! St. Nicholas! now, now or never. I here
make you a solemn Vow and to our Savior, that if you stand by me but this
time, I mean if you set me ashore out of this danger, I will build you a fine
large little Chapel or two between Cande and Monsoreau, where neither Cow nor
Calf shall feed. Oh ho, Oh ho. Above eighteen Palefuls or two of it are got
down my Gullet, bous, bhous, bhous, bhous, how damned bitter and Salt it is. --
By the virtue (said Friar Jhon) of the Blood, the Flesh, the Belly, the Head,
if I hear thee again howling, thou Cuckoldly Cur, I Will maul thee worse than any
Sea Wolf. Ods fish, why don't we take him up by the Lugs, and throw him over
board to the bottom of the Sea? Here, Sailer, ho honest fellow. Thus, thus, my
Friend, hold fast above. -- In truth here is a sad Lightning and Thundering; I
think that all the Devils are got loose, it is Holy Day with 'em, or else Madam
Proserpine is in Child's labor, all the Devils dance a Morris.

CHAP. XX. How the Pilots were forsaking their Ships in the greatest stress of
Weather.
OH, said Panurge, you sin, Friar Jhon, my former Crony, former, I say, for at
this time I am no more, you are no more. It goes against my Heart to tell it
you; for I believe this swearing does your spleen a great deal of good; as it
is a great ease to a Wood-Cleaver to cry hem, at every blow; and as one who
plays at Nine Pins, is wonderfully helped, if, when he has not thrown his Bowl
right, and is like to make a bad cast, some ingenious stander-by leans and
screws his Body half way about, on that side which the Bowl should have took to
hit the Pins. Nevertheless you offend, my sweet Friend. But what do you think
of eating some kind of Cabirotadoes? Wouldn't this secure us from this Storm? I
have read that the Ministers of the Gods Cabiri so much celebrated by Orpheus,
Appollonius, Pherecides, Strabo, Pausanias, and Herodotus were always secure in
time of Storm. He doats, he raves, the poor Devil, said Friar Jhon. A thousand,
a million, nay, a hundred millions of Devils seize the hornify'd Doddipole.
Lend's a Hand here, hoh, Tiger, would thou? Here on the Sturboard side; Ods
me, thou Buffolo's-Head stuffed with Relics, what Ape's Pater Noster art thou
muttering and chattering here between thy Teeth? That Devil of a Sea Calf is
the cause of all this Storm, and is the only Man who does not lend a helping
Hand. By G -- if I come near thee, I Will fetch thee out by the Head and Ears
with a vengeance, and chastise thee like any Tempestative Devil. Here M^^e, my
Lad, hold fast till I have made a double knot. OF brave Boy! Would to Heaven
thou were Abbot of Talemouze, and that he that is, were Guardian of Croullay.
Hold Brother Ponocrates, you will hurt your self Man. Epistemon, pr'ythee stand
off out of the Hatch-way. Methinks I saw the Thunder fall there but just now.
Con the Ship, so ho -- Mind your Steerage. Well said, thus, thus, steady, keep
her thus, get the Long Boat clear. -- Steady. Ods fish, the Beakhead is stav'd
to pieces. Grumble, Devils, ^ar^, belch, shite a T -- d of the Wave. If this be
Weather, the Devil's a Ram. Nay, by G -- a little more would have washed me
clear away into the Current. I think all the Legions of Devils hold here their
Provincial Chapter, or are Polling, Canvasing and Wrangling for the Election of
a new Rector. -- Starboard; well said. -- Take heed; have a care of your
Noddle, Lad, in the Devil's Name. So ho, Starboard, Starboard. Be, be, be,
bous, bous, bous, cried Panurge, bous, bous, be, be, be, bous, bous, I am lost.
I see neither Heaven nor Earth; of the four Elements we have here only Fire and
Water left. Bou, bou, bou, bous, bous, bous. Would it were the pleasure of the
worthy Divine Bounty, that I were at this present hour in the Close at Seville,
or at Innocent's the Pastry-Cook, over against the painted Wine-Vault at
Chinon, though I were to strip to my Doublet. And bake the petty Pasties my
self.

Honest Man, could not you throw me ashore, you can do a World of good things,
they say. I give you all Salmigondinois, and my large Shore full of Whilks,
Cockles and Periwinkles, if by your industry, I ever set Foot on firm ground.
Alas, alas, I drown. Hark'ee, my Friends, since we cannot get safe into Port,
let us come to an Anchor into some Road, no matter whither. Drop all your
Anchors, let us be out of danger I beseech you. Here honest Tar get you into
the Chains and heave the Lead, an'^ please you. Let us how how many Fathom
water we are in. Sound, Friend, in the Lord Harry's Name: Let us know, whether
a Man might here drink easily without stooping. I am apt to believe One might.
Helm a lee, hoh, cried the Pilot. Helm a lee, a Hand or two at the Helm, About
Ships with her, Helm a lee, Helm a lee. -- Stand off from the Leech of the
Sail. -- Hoh, Belay, here make fast below, hoh, Helm a lee, lash sure the Helm
a lee, and let her drive. Is it come to that, said Pantagruel, our good Savior
then help us. Let her lie under the Sea, cried James Brahier, our chief Mate,
let her drive. To Prayers, to Prayers, let all think on their Souls, and fall
to Prayers; nor hope to sc^pe but by a Miracle. Let us, said Panurge, make some
good pious kind of Vow, alas, alas, alas, bou, bou, be be be bous, bous, bous,
Oho, Oho, Oho, Oho, let us make a Pilgrim; come, come, let every Man club his
penny toward it, come on. Here, here, on this side, said Friar Jhon in the
Devil's name. Let her drive, for the Lord's sake unhang the Rudder, hoh, let
her drive, let her drive, and let us drink, I say of the best and most
cheering, do you hear, Steward, produce, exhibit, for do you see this, and all the
rest will as well go to the Devil out of hand. A pox on that Wind-broaker
Aeolus with his Flusterblusters, Sirrah, Page, bring me here my Drawer (for so
he called his Breviary) stay a little here, hawl Friend, thus. -- Odzoons
here is a deal of Hail and Thunder to no purpose. Hold fast above, I pray you.
When have we All Saints day? I believe it is the unholy holy day of all the
Devil's Crew. Alas, said Panurge, Friar Jhon damns himself here as black as
Buttermilk for the noance. Oh what a good Friend I lose in him. Alas, alas,
this is anothergat^ bout than last year's. We are falling out of Scylla into
Charybdis. Oho! I drown. Confiteor, one poor word or two by way of Testament,
Friar Jhon my Ghostly Father, good Mr. Abstractor, my Crony, my Achates,
Xenomanes, my All. Alas I drown, two words of Testament here upon this Ladder.

CHAP. XXI. A Continuation of the Storm, with a short Discourse on the Subject
of making Testaments at Sea.
TO make ones last Will, said Epistemon, at this time that we ought to bestir
our selves and help our Seamen, on the penalty of being drowned, seems to me as
idle and ridiculous a Maggot as that of some of Caesars's Men, who at their
coming into the Gauls, were mightily busi'd in making Wills and Codicils,
bemoaned their Fortune, and the absence of their Spouses and Friends at Rome,
when it was absolutely necessary for them to run to their Arms, and use their
utmost strength against Ariovistus their Enemy.

This also is to be as silly, as that Jolt-headed Loblolly of a Carter, who,
having laid his Wagon fast in a-Slough, down on his Marrow-bones, was calling
on the strong-Back'd Deity Hercules, might and main, to help him at a dead
lift, but all the while forgot to goad on his Oxen, and lay his. Shoulder to
the Wheels, as it behoved him, as if a Lord have mercy upon us, alone, would
have got his Cart out of the Mire.

What will it signify to make your Will now? For either we shall come off, or
drown for it. If we escape, it will not signify a straw to us; for, Testaments
are of no value, or Authority, but by the death of the Testators. If we are
drowned, will it not be drowned too? Pr'ythee who will transmit it to the
Executors? Some kind Wave will throw it ashore, like Ulysses, replied Panurge,
and some King's Daughter, going to fetch a Walk in the fresco on the Evening,
will find it, and take care to have it proved and fulfilled; Nay, and have some
stately Cenotaph erected to my Memory, as Dido had to that of her good Man
Sichaeus, Aeneas to Deiphobus upon the Trojan shore near Rhoete; Andromache to
Hector in the City of Buthrot; Aristotle to Hermias and Eubulus; the Athenians
to the Poet Euripides; the Romans to Drusus in Germany, and to Alexander
Severus their Emperor in the Gauls; Argentier to Callaischre, Xenocrates to
Lisidices; Timares to his Son Teleutagoras; Eupolis and Aristodice to their Son
Theotimus; Onestes to Timocles; Callimachus to Sopolis the Son of Dioclides,
Catallus to his Brother; Statius to his Father; Germain of Brie to He^ve the
Breton Tarpawlin. Art thou mad said Friar Jhon, to run on at this rate? Help
here, in the name of five hundred thousand millions of Cart-loads of Devils,
help; may a Shanker gnaw thy Moustachio's, and three rows of Pock Royals and
Colly-flowers cover thy Bum and Turd-barrel instead of Breeches and Codpiece.
Codsooks, our Ship is almost overset. Ods death, how shall we clear her? It Is
well if she don't founder. What a Devilish Sea there runs? She Will neither try,
nor hull, the Sea will overtake her, so we shall never escape, the Devil escape
me. Then Pantagruel was heard to make a sad Exclamation, saying with a loud
voice; Lord save us, we perish: Yet not as we would have it, but thy holy Will
be done. The Lord, and the Blessed Virgin be with us, said Panurge. Holos,
alas, I drown, be be be bous, be bous, bous: In manus. Good Heaven, send me
some Dolphin to carry me safe on shore, like a pretty little Arion. I shall
make shift to sound the Harp if it be not unstrung. Let nineteen Legions of
black Devils seize me, said Friar Jhon (the Lord be with us, whispered Panurge
between his chattering Teeth) If I come down to thee, I Will show thee to some
purpose, that the Badge of thy Humanity dangles at a Calves Breech, thou ragged
horned Cuckoldy Booby; mgna, mgnan, mgnan: Come hither and help us thou great
weeping Calf or may thirty millions of Devils leap on thee; will thou come,
Sea-Calf? Fie, how ugly the howling Whelp looks. What always the same Ditty?
Come on now my bonny Drawer. This he said, opening his Breviary, come forward,
thou and I must be somewhat serious for a while, let me peruse thee stiffly.
Beatus vir qui non abiit. Pshaw, I know all this by Heart, let us see the Legend
of Monsieur St. Nicholas.

Horrida Tempestas montem turbavit acutum. Tempest was a mighty flogger of Lads
at Mountague College. If Pedants be damned for whipping poor little innocent
wretches their Scholars, he is, upon my Honor, by this time fixed within
Ixion's Wheel lashing the croptear bobtail'd Cur that gives it motion. If they
are saved for having whipped innocent Lads, he ought to be above the --

CHAP. XXII. An End of the Storm.
Shore, Shore, cried Pantagruel, Land to my Friends, I see Land, pluck up a
good spirit, Boys, it is within a kenning, so we are not far from a Port. -- I
see the Sky clearing up, to the North-wards. -- Look to the South-east! Courage
my Hearts, said the Pilot, now she will bear the hullock of a Sail, the Sea is
much smoother, some hands aloft, to the main Top. -- Put the Helm a weather. --
Steady, Steady. -- Hall your aftermisen bowlins. -- Hawl, Hawl, Hawl. -- Thus,
Thus, and no near. Mind your Steerage, bring your main Tack aboard. -- Clear
your Sheats; Clear your bowlins; Port: Port. Helm a Lee. -- Now, to the Sheat
on the star-Board-side, thou Son of a Whore. Thou art mightily pleased, honest
Fellow, quoth Friar Ihon, with hearing him make mention of thy Mother* Loff,
Loff, cried the Quartermaster that cun'd the Ship, keep her full, Loff the
Helm. Loff, it is, answered the Steer-man; keep her thus. -- Get the Bonnets
fixed. -- Steady, Steady.

That Is well said, said Friar Ihon, now this is something like a Tanzy. Come,
Come, Come, Children be nimble. -- Good. -- Loff, Loff. -- Thus. -- helm a
weather. That Is well said and thought on. Methinks the Storm is almost over. It
was high time, faith; however the Lord be thanked. -- Our Devils begin to
scamper* -- Out with all your Sails. -- Hoist your Sails. -- Hoist. -- That Is
spoke like a Man, Hoist, Hoist. -- Here agod's name honest Ponocrates, you are
a lusty fornicator, the whore-Son, will get none but Boys. Eusthenes, thou art
a notable Fellow. -- Run up to the fore-top Sail. -- Thus, Thus. -- Well said,
I faith, Thus, Thus. I dare not fear any thing all this while, for it is
Holy Day. Vea, Vea, Vea! Husah! This shout of the Seamen is not amiss, and
pleases me, for it is Holy Day: Keep her full, Thus. -- Good. Cheer up my merry
Mates all, cried out Epistemon, I see already Castor on the Right. Be, Be,
Bous, Bous, Bous, said Panurge, I am much afraid it is the Bitch Helen. It Is
truly Mixarchagenas, returned Epistemon, If thou likest better that
denomination which the Argives give him. Ho, Ho! I see Land too; let her bear
in with the Harbor, I see a good many People on the Beach: I see a light on an
Obeliscolychny. Shorten your Sails, said the Pilot, fetch the sounding-Line, we
must double that point of Land, and mind the Sands. -- We are clear off them,
said the Sailers. Soon after, away she goes, quoth the Pilot, and so does the
rest of our Fleet: Help came in good season.

By St. John, said Panurge, This is spoke somewhat like: O the sweet Word!
There Is the Soul of Music in it: Mgna, Mgna, Mgna, said Friar Ihon, If ever
thou taste a drop on it, let the Devil's-Dam taste me thou Ballocky Devil. Here
honest Soul, here is a full Sneacker of the very best. Bring the Flagons, Do
hear, Gymnast, and that same large Pasty Jambic, Gammonic, as you will have it.
-- Take heed you pilot her in Right.

Cheer, up cried out Pantagruel, Cheer up, my Boys: Let Us be our selves again,
do you see yonder close by our Ship, two Barks, three Sloops, five Ships, eight
Pinks, four Yawls, and six Frigates, making toward us, sent by the good People
of the neighboring Island to our Relief. But who is this Vcalegon below, that
cry's and makes such a sad moan. Were it not that I hold the Mast firmly with
both my hands, and keep it streighter than two hundred tacklings. -- I Would. -- It
is (said Friar Ihon) that poor Devil Panurge, who is troubled with a Calf's
ague; he quakes for fear when his belly's full. If, said Pantagruel, he has
been afraid during this dreadful Hurricane, and dangerous Storm, provided
(waving that) he has done his part like a Man, I do not value him a Jot the
less for it. For as to fear in all Encounters, is the mark of a heavy, and
cowardly Heart, as Agamemnon did, who for that reason, is ignominiously taxed
by Achilles with having Dogs Eyes, and a Stags Heart; so, not to fear when the
case is evidently dreadful, is a sign of want or smallness of apprehension.

Now if any thing ought to be feared, in this Life, next to offending God, I
will not say it is death; I will not meddle with the disputes of Socrates and
the Academics, that death of it self is neither bad nor to be feared: But I
will affirm that this kind of death by. Shipwreck is to be feared or nothing
is. For as Homer says, it is a grievous, dreadful, and an unnatural thing to
perish at Sea. And indeed Aeneas, in the Storm that took his fleet near Sicily,
was grieved that he had not died by the hand of the brave Diomedes, and said
that those were three nay four times happy who perished with Troy. No Man here
has lost his Life; the Lord our Savior be eternally praised for it: But in
truth here is a Ship sadly out of order. Well, we must take care to have the
damage repaired. Take heed we do not run a ground and billage her.

CHAP. XXIII. How Panurge played the Good Fellow when the Storm was over.
WHat Cheer ho? fore and aft? quoth Panurge, Oh ho! All is well, the Storm is
over. I beseech ye, be so kind as to let me be the first that is set on shore;
for I would by all means a little untru^s a point. -- Shall I help you still,
here, let me see, I Will coil this Rope; I have plenty of courage, and of fear
as little as may be. Give it me yonder, honest Tar -- No, no, I have not a bit
of fear. Indeed that same Decumane Wave that took us fore and aft somewhat
altered my Pulse. -- Down with your Sails, well said, how now, Friar Jhon, you
do nothing? Is it time for us to drink now? Who can tell but St. Martin's
running Footman Belzebuth may still be hatching us some further mischie^? Shall
I come and help you again? Pork and Pease choke me, if I do not heartily
repent, though too late, not having followed the Doctrine of the good Philosopher
who tells us, That to walk by the Sea, and to navigate by the Shore, are very
safe and pleasant things; just as it is to go on foot when we hold our Horse by
the Bridle. -- Hah, hah, hah, by G -- all goes well. -- Shall I help you here
too? Let me see, I Will do this as it should be, or the Devil's in it.

Epistemon (who had the inside of one of his Hands all fleea'd and bloody,
having held a Tackling with might and main) hearing what Pantagruel had said,
told him, You may believe my Lord, I had my share of fear, as well as Panurge,
yet I spared no pains in lending my helping Hand. I considered, tha^ since by
fatal and unavoidable necessity, w^ must all die, it is the blessed Will of God
th^^ we die this or that ^^ur, and this or that ki^ of death; nevertheless we
ought to implo^, invoke, pray, beseech, and supplicate him; but yet we must not
stop there; it behooves us also to use our endeavors on our side* and, as the
Holy Writ says, to cooperate with him.

You know what C. Flaminius the Consul said, when by Hannibal's Policy he was
penned up near the Lake of Peruse alias Thrasymene, Friends (said he to his
Soldiers) you must not hope to get out of this place barely by Vows or Prayers
to the Gods; no, it is by Fortitude and Strength we must escape, and cut our
selves a way with the edge of our Swords, through the midst of our Enemies.

Salust likewise makes M. Portius Cato say this, The help of the Gods is not
obtained by idle Vows, and Womanish Complaints; it is by Vigilance, Labor, and
repeated Endeavors that all things succeed according to our Wishes and Designs.

If a Man in time of need and danger is negligent, heartless, and lazy, in vain
he implores the Gods; they are then justly angry and incensed against him. The
Devil take me, said Friar Jhon (I Will go his halves, quoth Panurge) if the Close
of Seville had not been all gathered, vintag'd, gleaned and destroyed, if I had
only sung Contra hostium insidias (matter of Breviary) like all the rest of the
Monking Devils, and had not bestir'd my self to save the Vineyard as I did,
dispatching the Truant Piccaroons of Lern^ with the Staff of the Cross.

Let her sink or swim a Gods Name, said Panurge, all is one to Friar Jhon, he
does nothing; his name is Friar Jhon Doelittle; for all he sees me here a
sweating and puffing to help with all my might this honest Tar first of the
Name. -- Hark you me, dear Soul, a word with you -- but pray be not angry; how
thick do you judge the Planks of our Ship to be? Some two good inches and
upwards, returned the Pilot, don't fear. Odskilderkins, said Panurge, it seems
then we are within two Fingers breadth of Damnation. Is this one of the nine
Comforts of Matrimony? Ah, dear Soul, you do well to measure the danger by the
Yard of fear. For my part I have none on it, my name is William Dreadnought. As
for Heart I have more than enough on it; I mean none of your Sheeps Heart; but
of Wolfs Heart, the courage of a Bravoe; by the Pavilion of Mars, I fear
nothing but danger.

CHAP. XXIV. How Panurge was said to have been afraid, without reason, during
the Storm.
GOOD morrow, Gentlemen, said Panurge, Good morrow to you all, You are in very
good health, thanks to Heaven, and your selves? You are all heartily well come,
and in good time. Let us go on shore -- Here, Coxen, get the Ladder over the
Gunnel, Man the sides, Man the pinnace, and get her by the Ships side. -- Shall
I yet lend you a hand here? I am stark mad for want of business, and would work
like any two yoaks of Oxen. -- Truly this is a fine Place, and these look like
a very good People. -- Children, do you want me still in any thing, do not
spare the sweat of my Body, for godsake. Adam (that is man) was made to labor
and work, as the Birds were made to fly, our Lord's Will is that we get our
bread with the sweat of our brows, not idling and doing nothing like this
tatterdemallion of a Monk here, this Friar Jack, who is fain to drink to
hearten himself up, and dies for fear. -- Rare weather. -- I now find the
answer of Anacharsis, the noble Philosopher, very proper; being asked what Ship
he reckoned the safest, he replied that which is in the Harbor: he made a yet
better repartie, said Pantagruel, when some body inquiring which is greater,
the number of the living, or that of the dead? He asked them amongst which of
the two they reckoned? those that are at Sea? ingeniously implying, that they
are continually in danger of death, dying live, and living dye. Portius Cato
also said that there were but three things of which he would repent; That is,
if ever he had trusted his Wife with his secret, if he had idled away a day,
and if he had ever gone by Sea, to a place which he could visit by Land. By
this dignified Frock of mine, said Friar Ihon to Panurge, Friend thou have been
afraid during the Storm, without cause or reason; for thou were not born to be
drowned, but rather to be hanged, and exalted in the Air, or to be roasted in
the midst of a jolly bonfire. My Lord, would you have a good Cloak for the
Rain? Leave me off your Wolf and Badger-skin mantle: Let Panurge but be flead,
and cover your self with his hide. But do not come near the Fire, nor near your
Blacksmith's Forges a God's name, for in a moment you would see it in ashes.
Yet be as long as you please in the Rain, Snow, Hail, nay, by the Devil's
maker, throw your self or dive down to the very bottom of the Water, I Will
engage you will not be wet at all. Have some winter Boots made of it, they will
never take in a drop of Water; make Bladders of it to lay under Boys, to teach
them to swim, instead of Corks, and they will learn without the least danger.
His Skin then, said Pantagruel should be like the herb called, true maidens
Hair, which never takes wet nor moistness, but still keeps dry, though you lay
it at the bottom of the Water as long as you please, and for that reason is
called Adiantos.

Friend Panurge, said Friar Ihon, I pray thee never be afraid of Water, thy
life for mine, thou art threatened with a contrary Element. Ay, ay, replied
Panurge, but the Devil's Cooks dote some times, and are apt to make horrid
blunders as well as others, often putting to boil in water what was designed
to be roasted on the fire, like the head Cooks of our Kitchen, who often lard
Partridges, Queests and Stockdoves with intent to roast them, one would think,
but it happens sometimes, that they even turn the Partridges into the Pot to be
boiled with Cabbages, the Queests with leek Porradge, and the Stockdoves with
Turnips.

But hark you me, good Friends, I protest before this noble Company, that as
for the Chapel which I vowed to Monsieur St. Nicholas, between Cande, and
Monsoreau, I honestly mean that it shall be a Chapel, alias a Lymbeck of
Rosewater, which shall be where neither Cow nor Calf shall be fed, for between
you and I I intend to throw it to the bottom of the Water. Here is a rare Rogue
for ye, said Eusthenes; here is a pure Rogue, a Rogue in grain, a Rogue enough,
a Rogue and a half. He is resolved to make good the Italian Proverb, Passato el
pericolo e gabato el Santo.

The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be;
The Devil was well, and the Devil a Monk he would be.
CHAP. XXV. How after the Storm, Pantagruel went on Shore in the Islands of the
Macreons.
IMmediately after, we went a shore at the Port of an Island, which they called
the Island of the Macreons; the good People of the place received us very
honorably. An old Macrobius (so they called their eldest Elderman) desired
Pantagruel to come to the Townhouse to refresh himself, and eat something, but
he would not budge a foot, from the Mole, till all his Men were landed. After
he had seen them, he gave order they should all change Clothes, and that some
of all the Stores in the Fleet, should be brought on shore that every ships
Crew might live well, which was accordingly done; and God wot how they all
top'd, and carrouz'd; the People of the place brought them Provisions in
abundance The* Pantagrueliests returned them more: As the truth is, their's
were somewhat damaged by the late Storm. When they had well stuffed the insides
of their Doublets, Pantagruel desired every one to lend their help to repair
the damage, which they readily did. It was easy enough to resit there; for all
the inhabitants of the Island were Carpenters, and all such handicrafts as are
seen in the Arsenale at Venice. None but the largest Island was inhabited,
having three Ports, and ten Parishes; the rest being overrun with Wood, and
desert, much like the Forest of Arden. We entreated the old Macrobius to show
us what was worth seeing in the Island, which he did; and in the desert and
dark Forest, We discovered several old ruined Temples, Obeliscs, Pyramids,
Monuments, and ancient Tombs, with diverse Inscriptions, and Epitaphs, some of
them in hieroglyphic Characters, others in the Gothic Dialect, some in the
Arabic, Agarenian, SclaSclavonian and other Tongues: Of which Epistemon took an
exact Account. In the interim Panurge said to Friar Jhon, is this the Island of
the Macreons? Macreon signifies in Greek an old Man, or one much stricken in
years. What Is that to me, said Friar Jhon, how can I help it? I was not in the
Country when they Christened it. Now I think on it, quoth Panurge, I believe the
Name of Makerel [that's a Bawd in French] was derived from it: for, procuring
is the Province of the old, as Buttock-riggling is that of the young. Therefore
I don't know but this may be the Bawdy or Mackrel Island, the original and
Prototype of the Island of that name at Pa^s. Let Us go and drudge for
Cock-Oysters. Old Macrobius asked in the Ionick Tongue, how, and by what
industry and labor Pantagruel got to their Port that day, there having been
such blustering weather, and such a dreadful Storm at Sea. Pantagruel told him,
that the Almighty preserver of mankind had regarded the Simplicity, and sincere
Affection of his Servants, who did not travel for Gain or sordid Profit, the
sole design of their Voyage being a studious desire to know, see, and visit the
Oracle of Bacb^^, and take the word of the Bottle upon some difficulties
offered by one of the Company; nevertheless this had not been without great
Affliction, and evident danger of Shipwreck. After that, he asked him what he
judged to be the cause of that terrible Tempest, and if the adjacent Seas were
thus frequently subject to Storms, as in the Ocean are the Ratz of Sammaieu,
Maumusson, and in the Mediterranean Sea the Gulf of Sataly, Montargentan,
Piombino, Capo Melio in the Morea, the Streights of Gibraltar, Faro di Messina,
and others.

CHAP. XXVI. How the good Macrobius gave us an Account of the Mansion, and
decease of the Heroes.
THE good Macrobius then answered; Friendly strangers, this Island is one of
the Sporades, not of your Sporades that lie in the Carpathian Sea, but one of
the Sporades of the Ocean; in former times rich, frequented, wealthy, populous,
full of Traffic, and in the Dominions of the Ruler of Britain: but now by
Course of time, and in these latter Ages of the world, poor and desolate as you
see. In this dark Forest above Seventy eight thousand Persian Leagues in
Compass, is the dwelling place of the Demons and Heroes, that are grown old,
and we believe that some one of them died Yesterday; since the Comet, which we
saw for three days before together, shines no more: and now it is likely, that
at his Death there arose this horrible Storm; for while they are alive all
Happiness attends both this and the adjacent Islands, and a settled Calm end
Serenity. At the Death of every one ^ them we commonly hear in the Forest ^ud
and mournful groans, and the whole ^^nd is infested with Pestilence,
Earthquakes, laundations and other Calamities; the Air with Fogs and obscurity,
and the Sea with Storms and Hurricanes. What you tell us, seems to me likely
enough, said Pantagruel. For as a Torch or Candle, as long as it has Life
enough and is lighted, shines round about, disperses its Light, delights those
that are near it, yields them its Service and Clear^ess, and never causes any
pain or displeasure; but as soon as it is extinguished, its Smoke and
Evaporation infects the Air, offends the Bystanders, and is noisome to all;
so, as long as those noble and renowned Souls ^^habit their Bodies, Peace,
Profit, Pleasure, and Honor never leave the places where they abide; but as
soon as they leave them, both the Continent and adjacent Islands are annoyed
with great Commotions; in the Air, Fogs, Darkness, Thunder, Hail, Tremblings,
Pulsati^ns, Arietations of the Earth, Storms and Hurricanes at Sea, together
with sad Com^aints amongst the People, Broaching of Re^ons, Changes in
Governments, and Ruins of Commonwealths.

We had a sad instance of this lately, said Eustemon, at the Death of that
valiant and learned Knight William du Bellay, during whose Life France enjoyed
so much Happiness, that all the rest of the world looked upon it with Envy,
sought Friendship with it, and stood in awe of its Power; but soon after his
decease it has for a considerable time been the Scorn of the rest of the world.

Thus, said Pantagruel, Anchises being dead at Drepany in Sicily, Aeneas was
dreadfully tossed and endangered by a Storm, and perhaps for the same reason
Herod, that Tyrant and cruel King of Judea, finding himself near the Pangs of a
horrid kind of Death, for he died of a Phthiriasis, devoured by Vermin and
Lice; as before him died L. Sylla, P^erecides the Syrian Preceptor, Pythagoras,
the Greek Poet Alemaeon and others) and foreseeing that the Jews would make
Bonfires at his Death, caused all the Nobles and Magistrates to be Summoned to
his Seraglio out of all the Cities, Towns, and Castles of Judea, fraudulently
pretending that he had some things of moment to impart to them. They made their
personal Appearance; whereupon he caused them all to be shut up in the
Hippodrome of the Seraglio; then said to his Sister Salome, and Alexander her
Husband; I am certain that the Jews will rejoice at my Death, but, if you will
observe and perform what I will tell you, my Funeral shall be honorable, and
there will be a general Mourning; As soon as you see me dead, let my Guards, to
whom I have already given strict Commission to that purpose, kill all the
Noblemen and Magistrates that are secured in the Hippodrome. By these means all
Jewry shall in spite of themselves be obliged to mourn and lament, and
Foreigners will imagine it to be for my Death, as if some Heroic Soul had left
her Body. A desperate Tyrant wished as much, when he said; When I dye, let
Earth and Fire be mixed together, which was as good as to say, let the whole
world perish: Which saying the Tyrant Nero altered, saying, While I live, as
Suetonius affirms it. This detestable saying, of which Cicero lib. 3. de finib.
and Seneca, lib. 2. de Clementia make mention, is ascribed to the Emperor
Tiberius, by Dion Nicaus and Suidas.

CHAP. XXVII. Pantagruel's Discourse of the Decease of Heroic Souls; and of the
dreadful Prodigies that happened before the Death of the late Lord de Langey.
I Would not, continued Pantagruel, have missed the Storm that has thus
disordered us were I also to have missed the relation of these thing told us by
this good Macrobius. Neither am ^ unwilling to believe what he said of a Co^^
that appears in the Sky some days before such a Decease. For some of those
Souls are so Noble, so Precious, and so Heroic, that Heaven gives us notice of
their departing, some days before it happens. And as a Prudent Physician seeing
by some Symptoms that his Patient draws toward his end, some days before,
gives notice of it to his Wife, Children, Kindred, and Friends, that, in that
little time he has yet to live, they may admonish him to settle all things in
his Family, to tutor and instruct his Children as much as he can, recommend his
Relict to his Friends, in her Widowhood, declare what he knows to be necessary
about a Provision for the Orphans, that he may not be surprised by Death
without making his Will, and may take care of his Soul and Family; In the same
manner the Heavens, as it were, joyful for the approaching reception of those
blessed Souls, seem to make Bonfires by those Comets and blazing Meteors, which
they at the same time kindly design should Prognosticate to us here, that in
few days one of those venerable Souls is to leave her Body, and this
Terrestrial Globe. Not altogether unlike this was what was formerly done at
Athens by the Judges of the Are^pagus. For when they gave their Verdict to cast
or clear the Culprits that were tried before them, they used certain notes
according to the substance of the Sentences; by TH. signifying Condemnation to
Death; by T. Absolution; by A. Ampliation or a Demur, when the case was not
sufficiently examined. Thus having publicly set up those Letters, they eased
the Relations and Friends of the Prisoners, and such others as desired to know
their Doom, of their doubts. Likewise by these Comets, as in etherial
Characters, the Heavens silently say to us, Make haste, Mortals, if you would
know or learn of these blessed Souls any thing concerning the public good, or
your private Interest; for, their Catastrophe is near, which being past, you
will vainly wish for them afterward.

The good natured Heavens still do more; and, that Mankind may be declared
unworthy of the enjoyment of those Renowned Souls, they fright and astonish us
with Prodigies, Monsters, and other foreboding Signs, that thwart the Order of
Nature.

Of this we had an instance several days before the decease of the Heroic Soul
of the Learned and Valiant Chevalier de Langey, of whom you have already
spoken. I remember it, said Epistemon, and my Heart still trembles within me,
when I think on the many dreadful Prodigies that we saw five or six days before
he died. For the Lords of D'ass^^, C^emant, one-ey'd Mailly, St. Ayl,
Villeneu^ue-la Guyart, Master Gabriel, Physician of Sa^^llan, Rabelais, Cohuau,
Massuau, Ma^^rici, Bullou, Cereu alias Bourgmaistre, Francis Proust, Ferron,
Charles Girard, Francis Bourre, and many other Friends and Servants to the
Deceased, all dismayed, gazed on each other without uttering one word; yet not
without foreseeing that France would in a short time be deprived of a Knight so
accomplished and necessary for its Glory and Protection, and that Heaven
claimed him again as its due. By the tufted Tip of my Cowle, cried Friar Jhon,
I am even resolved to become a Scholar before I die. I have a pretty good
Headpiece of my own, you must own. Now pray give me leave to ask you a civil
Question; Can these same Heroes and Demigods you talk of die? May I never be
damned, if I was not so much a Lobcock as to believe they had been Immortal
like so many fine Angels; Heaven forgive me! but this most Reverend Father
Macroby tells us, They die at l^st. We all must, returned Pantagruel.

The Stoics held them all to be Mor^^l, except one, who alone is Immortal,
Impossible, Invisible. Pindar plainly says, That there is no more Thread, that
is to say, no more Life spun from the Distaff and Flax of the hard-hearted
Fates for the Goddesses ^am^d^yades, than there is for those Trees (...) are
preserved by them, which are good sturdy downright Oaks, whence they derived
their Original according to the Opinion of Callimachus and Pausanias in Ph^^i;
with whom concurs Martianus Capella. As for the Demigods, F^^^^s, Satyrs,
Sylvans, Hobgoblins, Aegpanes, N^mphs, Heroes, and Demons, several Men ^a^e,
from the total Sum, which is the res^lt of the diverse Ages Calculated by
He^ied, reckoned their life to be 9720 years, that (...) consisting of four
special numbers orderly arising from one, the same added together ^^d
multiplied by four every way, amounts to forty; these forties being reduced
into Triangles by five times, make up the total of the aforesaid number. See
Plutarch in his Book about the Cessation of Oracles.

This, said Friar Jhon, is not matter of Breviary, I may believe as little or
as much of it as you and I please. I believe, said Pantagruel, that all
Intellectual Souls are exempted from Atropos's Scissers. They are all immortal
whether they be of Angels, of Demons, or Human: Yet I Will tell you a story
concerning this, that is very strange, but is written and affirmed by several
learned Historians.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Pantagruel related a very sad story of the Death of the
Heroes.
EPITHERSES the Father of Emilia^ the Rhetorician, sailing from Greece to
Italy, in a Ship freighted with diverse Goods, and Passengers, at night, the
wind fail'd'em near the Echinades, some Islands that lie between the Morea and
Tunis, and the Vessel was driven near Paxos. When they were got thither, some
of the passengers being asleep, others awake, the rest eating and drinking, a
voice was heard that called aloud, Thamous; which cry surprised them all. This
same Thamous was their Pilot, an Egyptian by birth, but known by name only to
some few Travelers. The voice was heard a second time calling Thamous, in a
frigthful Tone, and none making answer but trembling and remaining silent, the
Voice was heard a third time, more dreadful than before.

This caused Thamous to answer; here am I, What do thou call me for? What
will thou have me do? Then the Voice louder than before, bad him publish when
he should come to Paloda, That the great God Pan was dead.

Epitherses related, that all the Mariners, and Passengers, having heard this
were extremely amazed and frighted; and that consulting among themselves,
whether they had b^st conceal or divulge what the Voice had enjoined, Thamous
said, his advice was, That if they happened to have a fair wind, they sh^u^d
proceed without mentioning a word on it, but if they chanced to be becalmed, he
would publish what he had heard: Now when they were near Paloda they had no
Wind, neither were they in any Current. T^^m^us then getting up on the top of
the Ship's forecastle, and casting his Eyes on the shore, said that he had been
commanded to proclaim, that the great God Pan was dead. The words were hardly
out of his Mouth, when deep Groans, great Lamentations, and Shrieks, not of one
Person but of many together, were heard from the Land.

The News of this, (many being present then) was soon spread at R^me; insomuch
that Tiberius, who was then Emperor, sen^ for this Thamous, and having heard
him, gave credit to his words, and inquiring of the Learned in his Court and at
Rome, who was that Pan? He found by their relation that he was the Son of
Mercury and Penelope, as Herodotus, and Cicero in his third book of the nature
of the Gods, had written before.

For my part, I understand i^ of that great Savior of the Faithful, who was
shamefully put to Death at Jerusalem by the envy and wickedness of the Doctors.
Priests, and Monks of the M^saie Law. And methinks, my Interpretation is not
improper, for he may lawfully be said in the Greek Tongue to be Pan* since he
is our All For all that we are, all that we live, all that we have, all that we
hope, is him, by him* ^^^m him, and in him. He is the good ^an, the great
Shepherd, who as the loving Sheperd C^^yden affirms, has not only a tend^r
Love and Affection for his Sheep, but (...) for their Shepherds. At his death
complaints, sighs, fears and lamentations were (...) ^ad through the whole
Fabric of the univers^, whether Heavens, Land, Sea, or Hell.

The time also concurs with this interpretation of mine; for this most good,
most mighty Pan, our only Savior, dyed near Je^^salem during the Reign of
Tiberius Caesar.

Pantagruel having ended this discourse, remained silent, and full of
Contemplation; a little while after, we saw the tears flow out of his eyes as
big as Ostridg's Eggs. God take me presently if I tell you one single syllable
of a Lie in the matter.

CHAP. XXIX. How Pantagruel sailed by the Sneaking Island where Shrove-tide
reigned.
THE Jovial Fleet being re^^^ed and repar'd, new Stores ^en in, the Macre^ns
over and (...) satisfied, and pleased with the Money spent there by Pantagruel,
our Men in better humor yet then they used to be if possible, we merrily put
to sea the next day near Sunset, with a delicious fresh Gale.

Xenomanes showed us afar off the Sneaking Island where reigned Shrovetide, of
whom Pantagruel had heard much talk formerly; for that Reason, he would gladly
have seen him in Person, had not Xenomanes advised him to the contrary: First
because this would have been much out of our way, and then for the lean Cheer,
which he told us, was to be found at that Prince's Court, and indeed all over
the Island.

You can see nothing there for your Money (said he) but a huge Greedy-Guts, a
tall woundy swallower of hot Wardens and Muscles, a Longshank'd Mole-catcher,
an over grown Bottler of hay, a Mossy-chin'd, Demy-giant, with a double shaven
Crown, of Lantern Breed, a very great Loytering Noddy-peak'd youngster,
Banner-bearer to the Fish-eating Tribe, Dictator of Mustard-land, Flogger of
little Children, Calciner of Ashes, Father and Foster-father to Physicians,
swarming with Pardons, Indulgencies, and Stations; a very honest Man; a good
Catholic and as brim full of Devotion as ever he can hold.

He wee^^ the Three fourth parts of the day, and never ^sts at any Weddings;
but give the Devil his (...), ^e's the most industrious Larding-stick, and
S^^^e-maker in forty Kingdoms.

About Six years ago, as I passed by Sneaking Land, I brought home a large
Scure from thence and made a Present of it to the Butchers of Quande, who set a
great value upon them, and that for a Cause: sometime or other, if ever we live
to come back to our own Country, I will show you two of them fastened on the
great Church Porch. His usual Food is pickled Coats of Mail, salt Helmets and
Head-pieces, and salt Sallads; which sometimes makes him piss Pins and Needles.
As for his Clothing it is Comical enough o^ Conscience, both for make and
color; for he wears Gray and Cold, nothing before, and naught behind, with the
Sleeves of the same.

You will do me a kindness, said Pantagruel, if as you have described his
Cloths, Food, Actions, and Pastimes, you will also give me an Account of his
Shape, and Disposition in all his Parts; Prithee do, dear Cod, said Friar Ihon,
for I have found him in my Breviary, and then follow the moveable Holydays?
With all my heart, answered X^^^manes, We may chance to hear more of him as we
touch at the Wild Island, the Dominion of the Squob Chitterlings his Enemies;
against whom he is eternally at odds, and were it not for the help of the noble
Carnaval their Protector, and good Neighbor, this Meagre-look'd Lozelly
Shrovetide would long before this have made sad work among them, and rooted
them out of their Habitation. Are these same Chitterlings, said Friar Ihon,
Male or Female, Angels or Mortals, Women or Maids? They are, replied Xenomanes,
Female in Sex, Mortal in kind, some of them Maids, others not. The Devil have
me, said Friar Ihon, if I been't for them. What a shameful disorder in Nature
is it not, to make War against Women. Let Us go back, and back the Villain to
pieces. -- What! meddle with Shrovetide, cried Panurge, in the name of
Beelzebub, I am not yet so weary of my Life. No, I Am not yet so mad as that
comes to. Quid juris? Suppose we should find our selves pent up between the
Chitterlings and Shrovetide? between the Anvil and the Hammers? Shankers, and
Buboes; stand off; Godzooks let us make the best of our way. I bid you good
Night, sweet Mr. Shrovetide, I recommend to you the Chitterlings, and pray
don't forget the Puddings.

CHAP. XXX. How Shrovetide is anatomized and described by Xenomanes.
AS for the inward Parts of Shrovetide, said Xenomanes, his Brain, is (at least
it was in my time) in Bigness, Color, Substance and Strength, much like the
left Cod of a He-hand-worm.

The Ventricles of his said Brain, like an Augre.

The Worm-like Excrescence, like a Christmas-Box.

The Membranes, like a Monk's Cowle.

The Funnel, like a Mason's Chissel.

The Fernix, like a Casket.

The Glandula pinealis, like a Bag-pipe.

The Rete Admirabile, like a Gutter.

The Dug-like Proc^sses, like a Patch.

The Tympanums, like a Whirly Gig.

The Rocky bones, like a Goose-wing.

The Nape of the Neck, like a Paper Lanthorn.

The Nerves, like a Pipkin.

The Uvula, like a Sack butt.

The Palate* like a Mittain.

The Spittle, like a Shuttle.

The Almonds, like a Telescope.

The Bridge of his Nose, like a Wheel barrow.

The Head of the Larynx, like a Vintage Basket.

The Stomach, like a Belt.

The Pylorus, like a Pitchfork.

The Windpipe, like an Oyster-knife.

The Throat, like a Pincushion stuffed with Oakham.

The Lungs, like a Prebend's Fur-gown.

The Heart, like a Cope.

The Mediastin, like an earthen Cup.

The Pleura, like a Crows-bill.

The Arteries, like a Watch-coat.

The Midriff, like a Mounteer-Cap.

The Liver, like a double Tongued Mattock.

The Veins, like a Sash-window.

The Spleen, like a Catcal.

The Guts, like a Trammel.

The Gall, like a Coopers Ads.

The Entrails, like a Gantlet.

The Mesentery, like an Abbot's Myter.

The Hungry Gut, like a Button.

The Blind Gut, like a Breast Plate.

The Colon, like a Bridle.

The Arse-Gut, like a Monk's leathern Bottle.

The Kidneys, like a Trowel.

The Loins like a Padlock.

The Vreters like a Pot-hook.

The Emulgent Veins, like two Gilly-flowers.

The Spermatick Vessels* like a Cully-mully-puff.

The Parastata's, like an Ink-pot.

The Bladder, like a Stone-bow.

Its Neck, like a Mill-Clapper.

The Mirach, or lower parts of the Belly, like a High crowned Hat.

The Siphach, or its Inner Rind, like a Wooden Cuff.

The Muscles like a pair of Bellows.

The Tend^ns, like a Hawking Glove.

The Ligaments, like a Tinker's Budget.

The Bones, like three cornered Cheese-Cakes.

The Marrow, like a Wallet.

The Cartilages, like a Field Tortoise, alias a M^le.

The Glandules in the Mouth, like a Pruning-Knife.

The Animal Spirits, like swindging Fifty-cuffs.

The Blood fermenting, like a multiplication of flurts on the Nose.

The Vrin, like a Fig-pecker.

The Sperm, like a hundred of Tenpenny-Nails.

And his Nurse told me, That being Married to Mid-Lent, he only begot a good
number of Local Adverbs, and certain double Fasts.

His Memory he had like a Scarf.

His Common Sense, like a buzzing of Bees.

His Imagination, like the Chime of a Set of Bells.

His Thoughts, like a flight of Starlings.

His Conscience, like the unnestling of a parcel of young Herns.

His Deliberations, like a set of Organs.

His Repentance, like the Carriage of a double Canon.

His Undertakings, like the Ballast of a Galion.

His Understanding, like a torn Breviary.

His Notions, like Snails crawling out of Strawberries.

His Will, like three Filberts in a Porrenger.

His Desire, like six Trusses of Hay.

His Judgment, like a Shoing-horn.

His Discretion, like the truckle of a Pully.

His Reason, like a Cricket.

CHAP. XXXI. Shrovetide's outward parts Anatomized.
SHrovetide, continued Xenomanes, is somewhat better proportioned in his
outward Parts, excepting the seven Ribs which he had over and above the common
shape of Men.

His Toes were like a Virginal on an Organ.

His Nails, like a Gimlet.

His Feet, like a Guitar.

His Heels, like a Club.

The Soles of his Feet, like a Crucible.

His Legs like a Hawk's Lure.

His Knees, like a J^ynt-Ste^l.

His Thighs, like a Steel Cap.

His Hips, like a Wimble.

His Belly as big as a T^^, buttoned after the (...) Fashion, with a Girdle
riding over the middle of his Bosom.

His Navel, like a Cymbal.

His Groyn, like a Minced Pie.

His Member, like a Slipper.

His Purse, like an Oyl-Cruet.

His Genitals, like a Joyners Plainer.

Their Erecting Muscles, like a Racket.

The Perineum, like a Flageolet.

His Arse-hole, like a Crystal-Looking Glass.

His Bum, like a Harrow.

His Loins, like a Butter-pot.

The Peritonaeum, or Caul wherein his Bowels were wrapped, like a Billiard-Table.

His Back, like an overgrown rack-bent Cross-Bow.

The Vertebrae, or Joints of his Backbone, like a Bag-pipe.

His Ribs, like a Spinning-Wheel.

His Brisket, like a Canopy.

His Shoulder-Blades, like a Mortar.

His Breast, like a Game at Nine-pins.

His Paps, like a Horn-Pipe.

His Armpits, like a Chequer.

His Shoulders, like a Hand-barrow.

His Arms, like a Riding-Hood.

His Fingers, like a Brotherhood's Andirons.

The Fibulae, or lesser Bones of his Legs, like a pair of Styles.

His Shin-bones, like Sickles.

His Elbows, like a Mouse-Trap.

His Hands, like a Curry-Comb.

His Neck, like a Talboy.

His Throat, like a Felt to destil Hippocras.

The Knob in his Throat, like a Barrel, where hanged two brazen Wens, very fine
and harmonious, in the shape of an Hourglass.

His Beard, like a Lanthorn.

His Chin, like a Mushrom.

His Ears, like a pair of Gloves.

His Nose, like a Bu^k^n.

His Nostrils, like a Forehead-Cloth.

His Eyebrows like a Dripping-pan.

On his left Brow, was a mark of the shape and bigness of an Vrinal.

His Eyelids, like a Fiddle.

His Eyes, like a Comb-box.

His Optic Nerves, like a Tinder box.

His Forehead, like a false Cup.

His Temples, like the Cock of a Cistern.

His Cheeks, like a pair of Wooden S^^es.

His Jaws, like a Cawdle Cup.

His Teeth, like a Hunter's Staff. Of such Colts Teeth as his, you will find
one at Colonges les Royaux in Poictou, and two at la Brosse in Xaintonge, on
the Celler-door.

His Tongue, like a Jews-Harp.

His Mouth, like a Horse-Cloth.

His Face imbroider'd like a Mule's Pack Saddle.

His Head contrived like a Still.

His Scull, like a Pouch.

The Suturae, or Seams of his Skull, like the Annulus Piscatoris, or the
Fisher's Signet.

His Skin, like a Gabardine.

His Epidermis, or outward Skin, like a Boulting-Cloth.

His Hair, like a Scrubbing-Brush.

His Fur, such as abovesaid.

CHAP. XXXII. A Continuation of Shrovetide's Countenance.
It Is a wonderful thing, continued Xenomanes, to hear and see the State of
Shrovetide.

If he chanced to Spit, it was whole Baskets full of Goldfinches.

If he blowed his Nose, it was pickled Grigs.

When he Wept, it was Ducks with Onion Sauce.

When he Trembled, it was large Venison Pasties.

When he did Sweat, it was Old L^ng with Butter Sauce.

When he Belched, it was Bushels of Oysters.

When he Sneez'd, it was whole Tubs full of Mustard.

When he Cough'd, it was Boxes of Marmalade.

When he Sob'd, it was Watercresses.

When he Yawn'd, it was Pots full of Pickled Pease.

When he Sighed, it was dried Neats Tongues.

When he Whistled, it was a whole Scuttle full of green Apes.

When he Snoar'd, it was a whole Pan-full of fried Beans.

When he Frowned, it was Sows'd-Hogs-Feet.

When he spoke, it was course brown Russet Cloth; so little it was like Crimson
Silk with which Parisatis desired that the words of such as spoke to her Son
Cyrus King of Persia, should be interwoven.

When he Blowed, it was Indulgence-Money boxes.

When he Winked, it was Buttered Buns.

When he Grumbled, it was March Cats.

When he Nodded, 'twas Iron-bound Wagons.

When he made Mouths, it was broken Staves.

When he Muttered, it was Lawyers Revels.

When he Hopp'd about, it was Letters of License and Protections.

When he stepped back, it was Sea Cockle shells.

When he Slabber'd, it was common Ovens.

When he was Hoarse, it was an entry of Morrice-Dancers.

When he broke Wind, it was Dun-Cows-Leather Spatter dashes.

When he Funk'd, it was Washed Leather Boots.

When he scratched himself, it was new Proclamations.

When he sung, it was Pease in Cods.

When he Evacuated, it was Mushroms and Moralles.

When he Puffed* it was Cabbages with Oil, alias Caules Ambolif.

When he Talked, it was the last years Snow.

When he Dreamt, it was of a Cock and a Bull.

When he gave nothing, so much for the Bearer.

If he Thought to himself, it was Whimsies and Maggots.

If he Doz'd, it was Leases of Lands.

What is yet more strange, he used to work doing Nothing, and did nothing, though
he worked; Carous'd Sleeping, and slept carousing, with his Eyes open like the
Hares in our Country, for fear of being taken Napping by the Chitterlings his
inveterate Enemies; Biting he Laughed, and laughing bit; Eat nothing Fasting,
and fasted eating nothing; mumbled upon Suspicion, drank by Imagination; Swam
on the tops of high Steeples, dried his Clothes in Ponds and Rivers; Fished in
the Air, and there used to catch Decumane Lobsters; Hunted at the bottom of the
Herring-Pond, and caught there Ibices, Stamboues, Shamois and other wild Goats;
used to put out the Eyes of all the Crows which he took sneakingly; feared
nothing but his own shadow, and the cries of fat Kids; used to gad abroad some
days like a Truant Schoolboy; played with the Ropes of Bells on Festival days
of Saints; made a Mallet of his fist, and writ on hairy Parchment
Prognostications and Almanacks with his huge Pincase.

Is that the Gentleman, said Friar Jhon, he is my Man: this is the very fellow
I looked for; I Will send him a Challenge immediately. This is, said Pantagruel, a
strange and monstrous sort of a Man, if I may call him a Man. You put me mind
of the form and looks of Amodunt and Dissonance. How were they made said Friar
Jhon? may I be peeled like a raw Onion if ever I heard a word of them. I Will
tell you what I read of them in some ancient Apologues, replied Pantagruel.

Physis (that is to say Nature) at her first Burden, begat Beauty, and
Harmony, without Carnal Copulation, being of her self very Fruitful and
Prolifick: Antiphysis, who ever was the Counter part of Nature, immediately out
of a Malicious spite against her for Beatiful and Honorable Productions, in
opposition, begot Amodunt and Dissonance, by Copulation with Tellumon. Their
Heads were round like a Football, and not gently flatted on both sides like the
common shape of Men. Their Ears stood pricked up like those of Asses; their
Eyes, as hard as those of Crabs, and without Brows, star'd out of their Heads,
fixed on Bones like those of our Heels; their Feet were round like
Tennis-Balls; their Arms and Hands turned backwards toward their Shoulders,
and they walked on their Heads, continually turning round like a B^ll,
topsie-turvy Heels over Head.

Yet (as you know that Apes esteem their Young the handsomest in the World)
Antiphysis extolld her offspring and strove to prove, that their shape was
handsomer and neater, than that of the Children of Physis; saying that thus to
have Spherical Heads, and Feet, and walk in a circular Manner, wheeling round,
had something in it of the perfection of the divine Power, which makes all
beings eternally turn in that fashion; and that to have our Feet uppermost and
the Head below them, was to imitate the Creator of the universe, the Hair being
like the roots, and the Legs like the branches of Man; for Trees are better
planted in the Earth by the roots, than they could be by their branches. By
this demonstration, she implied that her Children were much more to be praised,
for being like a standing Tree, than those of Physis that made the figure of a
Tree upside down: As for the Arms and Hands, she pretended to prove that they
were more justly turned toward the shoulders, because that part of the Body
ought not to be without a defense, while the fore part is duly fenced with
Teeth, which a Man cannot only use to chew, but also to defend himself against
those things that offend him. Thus by the testimony, and astipulation of the
brute Beasts, she drew all the witless herd, and mob of Fools into her opinion,
and was admired by all brainless and nonsensical People.

Since that, she begot the hypocritical Tribes of eves-dropping dissemblers,
superstitious Popemongers and Priestridden biggots, the Frantic Pistole^s, the
Scrapers of Benefices, Apparitors with the Devil in them, and other Grinders
and Squeezers of Livings, your mad Herb-stinking Hermits, gulligu^^ed dunces of
the Cowl, Church-vermin, false zealots, devourers of the Substance of Men, and
many more other deformed and ill favored Monsters, made in spite of Nature.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Pantagruel discovered a Monstrous Physetere, or Whirlpool
near the Wild Island.
ABOUT Sun set coming near the Wild Island, Pantagruel spied afar off a huge
monstrous Physetere, a sort of a Whale (which some call a Whirl pool,) that
came right upon us neighing, snorting, raised above the Waves higher than our
main Tops, and spouting Water all the way into the Air, before it self, like a
large River falling from a Mountain: Pantagruel showed it to the Pilot, and to
Xenomanes.

By the Pilot's advice the Trumpets of the Thalamege were sounded, to warn all
the Fleet to stand close and look to themselves; This Alarm being given, all
the Ships, Gallions, Frigates, Brigantines, (according to their Naval
discipline) placed themselves in the Order and figure of an Y. [ Vpsilon,] the
Letter of Pythagoras, as Cranes do in their flight, and like an Angle, in whose
Cone and Basis the Thalamege placed her self ready to fight smartly: Friar Ihon
with the Granadeers, got on the Forecastle.

Poor Panurge began to Cry and Howl worse then ever Babillebabou, said he,
shruging up his shoulders, quivering all over with fear, There will be the
Devil upon Dun. This is a worse business than That the other Day; let us fly, let
us fly; old Nick take me if it is not Leviathan, described by the noble Prophet
Moses, in the life of Patient Job. It will swallow us all, Ships and Men, Shag,
Rag, and Bobtail, like a dose of Pills. Alas, it will make no more of us, and
we shall hold no more room in its hellish Jaws, than a Sugar-plum in an Asses
Throat. Look, Look, it is upon us, let us wheel off, whip it away and get ashore.
I believe it is the very individual Sea Monster, that was formerly designed to
devour Andromeda; we are all undone. Oh! for some valiant Perseus here now to
kill the Dog.

I Will do it is business presently, said Pantagruel; fear nothing. Odds-belly,
said Panurge, remove the cause of my fear then; when, the Devil, would you have
a Man be afraid, but when there is so much Cause? If your Destiny be such as
Friar Ihon was saying a while ago (replied Pantagruel) you ought to be afraid
of Pyrois, Eous, Aethon and Phlegon the Suns Coach-horses, that breath Fire at
the Nostrils, and not of Physeters, that spout nothing but water at the Snout
and Mouth. Their water will not endanger your Life; and that Element will
rather save and preserve, than hurt or endanger you.

Ay, ay, trust to that, and hang me, quoth Panurge, yours is a very pretty
Fancy; Od's Fish, did I not give you a sufficient account of the Elements
Transmutation, and the Blunders that are made of Roast for Boyld, and Boyld for
Roast? Alas here it is: I Will go hide my self below. We are dead Men every
Mother's Son of us; I see upon our main Top that merciless Hagg Atropos with
her Scizzers new ground, ready to cut our Threads all at one Snip. Oh! how
dreadful and abominable thou art; Thou have drowned a good many, besides us,
who never made their Brags of it. Did it but spout good brisk, dainty,
delicious White Wind, instead of this damned bitter Saltwater, one might better
bear with it, and there would be some cause to be Patient, like that English
Lord who being doomed to dye, and had leave to choose what kind of Death he
would, chose to be drowned in a Butt of M^lmsie. Here it is. -- Oh, oh, Devil,
Sathanas, Leviathan, I cannot abide to look upon thee, thou art so abominable
Ugly. -- Go to the Bar, go take the Pettifoggers.

CHAP. XXXIV. How the monstrous Physetere was slain by Pantagruel.
THE Physetere coming between the Ships and the Gallions, threw water by whole
Tuns upon them, as if it had been the Catadupes of the Nile in Ethiopia. On the
other side, Arrows, Darts, Gleaves, Javelins, Spears, Harping Irons, and
Partizan* fl^w upon it like Hail. Friar Ihon did not spare himself in it.
Panurge was half dead for fear. The Artillery roared and thundered like mad,
and seemed to gawl it in good earnest, but did but little good; for, the great
Iron and Brass-Cannon-shot entering it is Skin, seemed to melt like Tiles in the
Sun.

Pantagruel then considering the weight and Exigency of the matter, stretched
out his Arms, and showed what he could do. You tell us, and it is recorded that
Commod^^ the Roman Emperor could shoot with a Bow so dexterously that at a good
distance he would let fly an Arrow through a Child's fingers, and never touch
them. You also tell us of an Indian Archer, who lived when Alexander the Great
conquered India, and was so skilful in drawing the Bow, that at a considerable
distance he would shoot his Arrows through a Ring, though they were three Cubits
long, and their Iron so large and weighty that with them he used to pierce
steel Cutlasses, thick Shields, steel Breast-plates, and generally what he did
hit, how firm, resisting, hard and strong soever it were. You also tell us
wonders off the Industry of the ancient Francks, who were preferred to all
others in point of Archery, and when they hunted either Black or Dun Beasts,
used to rub the head of their Arrows with Hellebore, because the flesh of the
Venison struck with such an Arrow, was more tender, dainty, wholesome and
delicious, (paring off nevertheless the part that was touched, round about.)
You also talk of the Parthians who used to shoot backwards more dexterously than
other Nations forwards; and also celebrate the Skill of the Scythians in that
Art, who sent once to Darius King of Persia an Ambassador that made him a
present of a Bird, a Frog, a Mouse and five Arrows, without speaking one word;
and being asked, what those Presents meant, and if he had Commission to say any
thing, answered that he had not; Which puzzled and gravelled Darius very much;
till Gobrias one of the seven Captains that had killed the Magi explained it,
saying to Darius, By these Gifts and Offerings the Scythians silently tell you,
that except the Persians like Birds fly up to Heaven, like Mice hide themselves
near the Center of the Earth, or like Frogs dive to the very bottom of Ponds
and Lakes, they shall be destroyed by the Power and Arrows of the Scythians.

The Noble Pantagruel was without Comparison, more admirable yet in the Art of
Shooting and Darting; for with his dreadful Piles and Darts, nearly resembling
the huge Beams that support the Bridges of Nantes, Saumur, Bergerac, and at
Paris the Millers and the Changers Bridges, in length, size, weight, and
Ironwork, he at a Mile's distance would open an Oyster and never touch the
edges; he would snuff a Candle without putting it out, would shoot a Magpy in
the Eye, take off a Boot's under-soal, or a Riding-hood's lining without
soylling them a bit, turn over every leaf of Friar Jhon's Breviary one after
another, and not tear one.

With such Darts, of which there was good store in his Ship, at the first blow
he ran the Physetere in at the Forehead so furiously, that he pierced both its
Jaws and Tongue, so that from that time to this it no more opened its Guttural
Trap-door* nor drew and spouted water. At the second blow he put out its right
Eye, and at the third its left; and we had All the pleasure to see the
Physetere bearing those three Horns in its Forehead, somewhat leaning forwards
in an equilateral Triangle.

Mean while it turned about to and fro staggering and straying like one
stunned, blinded, and taking his leave of the World. Pantagruel not satisfied
with this, let fly another Dart, which took the Monster under the Tail likewise
sloping; then with three other on the Chyne in a perpendicular line divided its
Flank from the Tail to the Snout at an equal distance; then he larded it with
fifty on one side, and after that to make even work, he darted as many on its
other side; so that the Body of the Physetere seemed like the hulk of a Gallion
with three Masts, joined by a competent dimension of its Beams, as if they had
been the Ribs and chainwales of the Keel, which was a pleasant sight. The
Physetere then giving up the Ghost, turned it self upon its back, as all dead
Fishes do, and being thus overturned with the Beams and Darts upside down in
the Sea, it seemed a Scolopendria or Centipede, as that Serpent is described by
the ancient Sage Nicander.

CHAP. XXXV. How Pantagruel went on shore in the Wild Island, the ancient abode
of the Chitterlings.
THe Boat's Crew of the Ship Lantera towed the Physetere ashore on the
Neighboring shore (which happened to be the Wild Island) to make an Anatomical
Dissection of its Body, and save the fat of its Kidneys, which, they said, was
very useful and necessary for the cure of a certain Distemper which they called
want of Money. As for Pantagruel he took no manner of notice of the Monster,
for he had seen many such, nay bigger in the Gallick Ocean. Yet he condescended
to land in the Wild Island, to dry and refresh some of his Men (whom the
Physetere had wetted and bedawb'd) at a small Desert Seaport toward the
South, seated near a fine pleasant Grove, out of which flowed a delicious Brook
of fresh, clear, and purling water. Here they pitched their Tents, and set up
their Kitchins, nor did they spare Fuel.

Every one having shifted, as they thought fi^, Friar Jhon rang the Bell, and
the Cloth was immediately laid, and Supper brought in. Pantagruel eating
cheerfully with his Men* much about the second Course, perceived certain little
sly Chitterlings clammering up a high Tree near the Pantry as still as so many
Mice. Which made him ask Xenomanes, what kind of Creatures these were, taking
them for Squirrels, We^sels, Martins, or Hermins. They are Chitterlings,
replied Xenomanes. This is the Wild Island, or which I spoke to you this
morning: There has been an irreconcilable War this long time between them and
Shrovetide their malicious and ancient Enemy. I believe that the noise of the
Guns which we fired at the Physetere has alarmed 'em, and made them fear their
Enemy was come with his Forces to surprise them, or lay the Island waste, as he
has often attempted to do, though he still came off but blewly; by reason of
the care and vigilance of the Chitterlings, who (as Dido said to Aeneas's
Companions that would have landed at Carthage without her Leave or Knowledge)
were forced to watch and stand upon their Guard, considering the malice of
their Enemy and the Neighborhood of his Territories.

Pray, dear Friend, said Pantagruel, if you find that by some honest means we
may bring this War to an end, and reconcile them together, give me notice of
it, I will use my endeavors in it, with all my Heart, and spare nothing on my
side to moderate and accommodate the points in dispute between both Parties.

That Is impossible at this time, answered Xenomanes. About four years ago
passing Incognito by this Country, I endeavored to make a Peace, or at least a
long Truce among them, and I had certainly brought them to be good Friends and
Neighbors, if both one and the other Parties would have yielded to one single
Article. Shrovetide would not include in the Treaty of Peace the Wild Puddings,
nor the Highland Sawsages their ancient Gossips and Confederates. The
Chitterlings demanded that the Fort of Caques might be under their Government,
as is the Castle of Sulloaoir, and that a parcel of I don't know what stinking
Villains, Murderers, Robbers, that held it then, should be expelled. But they
could not agree in this, and the terms that were offered seemed too hard to
either Party. So the Treaty broke off, and nothing was done. Nevertheless, they
became less severe, and gentler Enemies than they were before: But since the
denunciation of the National Council of Chesil, whereby they were roughly
handled, hampered, and cited, whereby also Shrovetide was declared filthy,
beshitten, and beray'd, in case he made any League, or Agreement with them,
they are grown wonderfully inveterate, Incensed, and Obstinate against one
another, and there is no way to remedy it. You might sooner reconcile Cats and
Rats, or Hounds and Hares together.

CHAP. XXXVI. How the Wild Chitterlings laid an Ambuscado for Pantagruel.
WHile Xenomenes was saying this, Friar Jhon spied twenty five or thirty young
slender-shap'd Chitterlings posting as fast as they could toward their Town,
Citadel, Castle and Fort of Chimney, and said to Pantagruel, I smell a Rat,
there will be here the Devil upon two sticks, or I am much out. These
Worshipful Chitterlings may chance to mistake you for Shrovetide, though you
are not a bit like him. Let us once in our lives leave our Junketing for a
while, and put our selves in a posture to give 'em a Belly full of fighting, if
they would be at that sport. There can be no false Latin in this, said
Xenomanes, Chitterlings are still Chitterlings, always double hearted, and
treacherous.

Pantagruel then arose from Table, to visit and scour the Thicket, and
returned presently, having discovered on the left an Ambuscade of squob
Chitterlings, and on the right about half a League from thence, a large Body of
huge Giant-like armed Chitterlings ranged in Battalia along a little Hill, and
marching furiously toward us at the sound of Bagpipes, Sheep's-Paunches and
Bladders, the merry Fifes and Drums, Trumpets and Clarions, hoping to catch us
as Moss caught his Mare. By the conjecture of seventy eight Standards which we
told, we guessed their number to be two and forty thousand at a modest
computation.

Their O^der, proud Gate, and resolute Looks, m^de us judge that they were none
of your raw paultry Links, but old Warlike Chitterlings and Sawsages. From the
foremost Ranks to the Colors they were all armed Cap a pie with small Arms as
we reckoned them at a distance, yet very sharp, and case-harden'd. Their right
and left Wings were lined with a great number of Forrest-Puddings, heavy
Patti-pans, and Horse Sawsages, all of them tall and proper Islanders,
Banditti, and Wild.

Pantagruel was very much daunted, and not without cause, though Epistemon told
him that it might be the use and custom of the Chitterl^^gonians to welcome and
receive thus in Arms their foreign Friends, as the Noble Kings of France are
received and sal^ted at their first coming into the chief Cities of the
Kingdom, after their advancement to the Crown. Perhaps, said he, it may be the
usual Guard of the Queen of the place; who having notice given her, by the
Junior Chitterlings of the Forlorn-hope, whom you saw on the Tree, of the
arrival of your fine and pompous Fleet, has judged that it was without doubt
some rich and potent Prince, and is come to visit you in Person.

Pantagruel little trusting to this, called a Council to have their advice at
large in this doubtful case. He briefly showed them how this way of reception
with Arms had often under color of Complement and Friendship been fatal to the
Parties so received. Thus, said he, the Emperor Antonius Caracalla at one time
destroyed the Citizens of Alexandria, and at another time cut off the
Attendants of Artabanus King of Persia, under color of Marrying his Daughter;
which by the way did not pass unpunished, for a while after, this cost him his
life.

Thus Jacob's Children destroyed the Sichemites, to revenge the Rape of their
Sister Dina. By such another hypocritical trick, Galienus the Roman Emperor
put to death the Military Men in Constantinople. Thus under color of
Friendship, Antonius enticed Artavasdes King of Armenia, then having caused him
to be bound in heavy Chains, and shackled, at last put him to death.

We find a thousand such instances in History; and K. Charles the 6th is justly
commended for his Prudence to this day, in that, coming back Victorious over
the Ghenters and other Flemmings to his good City of Paris, and when he came to
Bourget, (a League from thence) hearing that the Citizens with their Mallets
(whence they got the name of Maillotius) were Marched out of Town in Battalia
twenty thousand strong, he would not go into the Town till they had laid down
their Arms, and retired to their respective homes, though they protested to him,
that they had taken Arms with no other design, than to receive him with the
greater demonstration of Honor and Respect.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Pantagruel sent for Colonel Mawl-Chitterling, and Colonel
Cut-Pudding, with a discourse well worth your hearing, about the Names of
places and persons.
THE resolution of the Council was, that let things be how they would, it
behooved the Pantagruelists to stand upon their Guard. Therefore Carpalim and
Gymnast were ordered by Pantagruel, to go for the Soldiers that were on board
the Cup-Gally, under the Command of Colonel Mawl-Chitterling, and those on
board the Vine-Tub-Frigat, under the command of Colonel Cut-pudding the
younger. I Will ease Gymnast of that trouble, said Panurge who wanted to be upon
the Run: You may have occasion for him here. By this worthy Frock of mine,
quoth Friar Jhon, thou have a mind to slip thy neck out of the Collar, and
absent thy self from the Fight, thou white liver'd Son of a Dunghill, upon my
virginity thou 'llt never come back. Well, there can be no great loss in thee;
for thou would do nothing here but Howl, Bray, Weep, and dishearten the good
Sholdiers. I Will certainly come back, said Panurge, Friar Ihon, my Ghostly
Father, and speedily too; do but take care that these Plaguey Chitterlings don't
board our Ships; all the while you will be a Fighting, I Will pray heartily for your
Victory after the example of the valiant Captain and guide of the People of
Israel, Moses; having said this he wheeled off.

Then said Epistemon to Pantagruel, the Denomination of these two Colonels of
yours, Mawl-Chitterling and Cut-pudding promises us Assurance, Success and
Victory, if those Chitterlings should chance to set upon us. You take it
rightly, said Pantagruel, and it pleases me to see you foresee and
prognosticate our Victory by the Names of our Colonels.

This Way of foretelling by Names is not new, it was in Old times celebrated,
and religiously observed by the Pythagoreans. Several great Princes and
Emperors have formerly made good use of it, Octavianus Augustus Emperor of the
Romans meeting on a day a Country Fellow named Eutychius, (that is, fortunate)
driving an Ass named Nicon (that is in Greek Victorian) moved by the
Signification of the Ass's, and Ass driver's Names, remained assured of all
Prosperity and Victory.

The Emperor Vespasian, being once all alone at Prayers in the Temple of
Serapis, at the sight and unexpected coming of a certain Servant of his named
Basilides (that is Royal) whom he had left Sick a great way behind, took hopes
and assurance of obtaining the Empire of the R^mans. Reg^lian was chosen
Emperor by the Soldiers for no other reason, but the Signification of his
Name. See the Cratyle of the Divine Plato (By my Thirst I will read it, said
Rhizotome; I hear you so often quote it) see how the Pythagoreans by reason of
the names and numbers conclude that Patroclus was to fall by the hand of
Hector, Hector by Achilles, Achilles by Paris, Paris by Phil^ctetes. I am quite
lost in my understanding, when I reflect upon the admirable Invention of
Pythagoras, who by the number, either even or odd, of the Syllables of every
Noun would tell you of what side a Man was Lame, Hulch-back'd, Blind, Gouty,
troubled with the Palsy, Pleurisy, or any other Distemper incident to humane
kind, allotting even numbers to the Right, and odd ones to the Left side of the
Body.

Indeed, said Epistemon. I saw this way of Syllabising, tried at Xaintes at a
general Procession in the Presence of that Good, Virtuous, Learned and just
President Brian Val^ee Lord of Douhait. When there went by a Man or Woman that
was either Lame, Blind of one Eye, or Hump-back'd, he had an Account brought
him of his or her Name, and if the Syllables of the Name were of an odd number,
immediately without seeing the Persons he declared them to be deformed, Blind,
Lame, or crooked of the Right side; and of the Left, if they were even in
number: and such indeed we ever found them.

By this Syllabical invention, said Pantagruel, the Learned have affirmed, that
Achi^^es kneeling was wounded by the Arrow of Paris in the Right heel, for his
name is of odd Syllables: (here we ought to observe that the Ancients used to
kneel the Right foot.) And that Venus was also wounded before Troy in the Left
hand; for her Name in Greek is (...), of four Syllables, Vulcan lamed of his
Left foot for the same reason; Phillip King of Macedon and Hannibal blind of
the Right eye; not to speak of Sciatica's, broken Bellies, and Hemicrania's,
which may be distinguished by this Pythagorean reason.

But returning to Names, Do but consider how Alexander the Great, Son to King
Philip, of whom we spoke just now, compassed his Undertaking, merely by the
Interpretation of a Name. He had besieged the strong City of Tire, and for
several Weeks battered it with all his Power; but all in vain; his Engines and
Attempts were still baffled by the Tyrians. Which made him finally resolve to
raise the Siege to his great Grief, foreseeing the great Stain, which such a
shameful Retreat would be to his Reputation. In this Anxiety and Agitation of
mind he fell asleep, and dreamed that a Satyr was come into his Tent capering
skipping, and tripping it up and down, with his Goatish hoofs, and that he
strove to lay hold on him. But the Satyr still slipped from him, till at last
having penned him up into a Corner, he took him: With this he awaked, and
telling his Dream to the Philosophers, and Sages of his Court, they let him
know, that it was a Promise of Victory from the Gods, and that he should soon
be Master of Tire; the word Satyros divided in two being Sa Tyros, and
signifying, Tire is thine; and in truth, at the next Onset he took the Town by
Storm, and by a complete Victory, reduced that stubborn People to Subjection.

On the other hand, see how by the Signification of one word, Pompey fell into
despair. Being overcome by Caesar at the Battle of Pharsalia, he had no other
way left to escape but by flight; which attempting by Sea, he arrived near the
Island of Cyprus, and perceived on the shore near the City of Paphos a
beautiful and stately Palace; now asking the Pilot what was the name of it, he
told him, that it was called (...), that is, Evil-King, which struck such a
dread and terror in him, that he fell into Despair, as being assured of loosing
shortly his Life; insomuch that his Complaints, Sighs, and Groans were heard by
the Mariners and other Passengers. And indeed a while after a certain strange
Peasant called Achillas cut off his Head.

To all these Examples might he added what happened to L. Paulus Emilius, when
the Senate elected him Emperor, that is, Chief of the Army which they sent
against Perses King of Macedon; that Evening returning home to prepare for his
Expedition, and kissing a little Daughter of his called Trasia, she seemed
somewhat sad to him. What is the matter, said he, my Chicken, why is my Trasia
thus sad and Melancholy? Daddy, (replied the Child) Persa is dead; this was
the Name of a little Bitch which she loved mightily: hearing this, Paulus took
assurance of a Victory over Perses.

If time would permit us to discourse of the Sacred Hebrew writ, we might find
a hundred noted Passages evidently showing how religiously they observed Proper
names, and their Significations. He had hardly ended this Discourse, when the
two Colonels arrived with their Soldiers, all well armed and resosolute.
Pantagruel made them a short Speech, entreating them to behave themselves
bravely, in case they were attackt; for he could not yet believe that the
Chitterlings were so treacherous, but he bad them by no means to give the first
offense; giving them Carnaval for the watch word.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Chitterlings are not to be slighted by Men.
YOU shake your empty Noddles now, jolly Topers, and don't believe what I tell
you here any more than if it were some Tale of a Tub: Well, well, I cannot help
it. Believe it if you will; if you will not, let it alone. For my part, I very
well know what I saw. It was in the wild Island, in our Voyage to the Holy
Bottle, I tell you the Time and Place, what would you have more? I would have
you call to mind the strength of the ancient Giants that undertook to lay the
high Mountain Pelien on the top of Ossa, and set among those the shady Olympus,
to dash out the Gods Brains, unnestle them, and scour their Heavenly Lodgings.
Their's was no small strength, you may well think, and yet they were nothing
but Chitterlings from the Waste downwards, or at least, Serpents, not to tell a
Lie for the matter.

The Serpent that tempted Eve too was of the Chitterling kind, and yet it is
recorded of him, that he was more subtle than any Beast of the Field. Even so
are Chitterlings: Nay, to this very hour they hold in some Universities that
this same Tempter was the Chitterling called Ithyphallus, or Standing, into
which was transformed bawdy Priapus Arch seducer of Females in Paradise, that
is, a Garden in Greek.

Pray now tell me, Who can tell but that the Switzers now so bold and warlike
were formerly Chitterlings? For my part* I would not take my Oath to the
contrary. The Himantepodes, a Nation very famous in Ethiopia, according to
Pliny's Description, are Chitterlings, and nothing else. If all this will not
satisfy your Worships, or remove your Incredulity, I would have you forthwith
(I mean drinking first, that nothing be done rashly) visit Lusignan, Parthenay,
V^uant, Mervant, and Ponzauges in Poictou. There you will find a Cloud of
Witnesses, not of your Affidavit-Men of the right stamp, but Credible, time out
of mind, that will take their Corporal Oath, on Rigome's Knuckle-bone, that
Mellusine their first Founder, or Foundress, which you please, was Woman from
the Head to the Prick-purse, and thence downwards was a Serpentine Chitterling,
or if you will have it otherwise, a Chitterlingdiz'd Serpent. She nevertheless had
a Gen^e^^ and noble Gate, imitated to this very day by your Hop-Merchants of
Britanny in their Pasp^e and Country Dances.

What do you think was the cause of Erichtho^^^s's being the first Inventor of
Coaches, Litters, and Chariots? Nothing but because Vulcan had begot him with
Chitterlingdiz'd Legs, which to hide, he chose to ride in a Litter rather than
on Horseback; for Chitterlings were not yet in esteem at that time.

The Scythian Nymph Ora was likewise half Woman, and half Chitterling; and yet
seemed so beautiful to Jupiter, that nothing could serve him but he must give
her a touch of his Godship's kindness; and accordingly had a brave Boy by her
called Colaxes, and therefore, I would have you leave off shaking your empty
Noddles at this, as if it were a Story, and firmly believe that nothing is
truer than the Gospel.

CHAP. XXXIX. How Friar Ihon joined with the Cooks to fight the Chitterlings.
Friar Ihon, seeing these furious Chitterlings thus boldly march up, said to
Pantagruel; here will be a rare Battle of Hobby-horses, a pretty kind of
Puppet-show Fight for ought I see; Oh! What mighty Honor and wonderful Glory
will attend our Victory? I would have you only be a bare Spectator of this
Fight, and for any thing else leave me and my men to deal with them. What men?
said Pantagruel. Matter of Breviary, replied Friar Ihon: How came Potiphar who
was Head Cook of Pharoah's Kitchins, he that bought Joseph, and whom the said
Joseph might have made a Cuckold, if he had not been ^ Joseph; how came he I
say, to be made General of all the Horse in the Kingdom of Egypt? Why was
Nabuzardan, King Nebuchadonezo^'s Head-Cook chosen, to the Exclusion of all
other Captains, to besiege and destroy Jerusalem? I hear you, replied
Pantagruel; By St. Christopher's Whiskers, said Friar Ihon, I dare lay a Wager
that it was because they had formerly engaged Ch^tterlings, or Men as little
valued; whom to rout, conquer, and destroy, Cooks are without comparison, more
si^ than C^^rassiers and Gens d' Arms armed at all Points, or all the Horse
and Foot in the world.

You put me in mind said Pantagruel, of what is written amongst the Facetious
and merry Sayings of Cicero. During the more than Civil Wars between Caesar and
Pompey, though he was much Courted by the first he naturally leaned more to the
side of the latter; now one day, hearing that the Pompe^ans in a certain
Rencontre had lost a great many Men, he took a Fancy to visit their Camp. There
he perceived little Strength, less Courage, but much disorder. From that time,
foreseeing that things would go ill with them, as it since happened, he began
to Banter now one and then another, and be very Free of his cutting Jests: so
some of Pompey's Captains playing the good Fellows to show their assurance,
told him, Do you see how many Eagles we have yet? (They were then the Devise of
the Romans in War) They might be of use to you, replied Cicero, if you had to
do with Magpies.

Thus seeing we are to fight Chitterlings, pursued Pantagruel, you infer thence
that it is a Culinary War, and have a mind to join with the Cooks. Well, do as
you please. I Will stay here in the mean time, and wait for the event of the
Battle.

Friar Ihon went that very moment among the Sutlers into the Cooks Tents, and
told them in a pleasing manner, I must see you Crowned with Honor and Triumph
this day, my Lads; To your Arms are reserved such Atchievments, as never yet
were performed within the Memory of Man. Od's Belly, do they make nothing of
the valiant Cooks? Let us go fight yonder fornicating Chitterlings, I Will be
your Captain: But first let us drink, Boys -- come on -- Let us be of good
Cheer. Noble Captain, returned the Kitchen Tribe, this was spoken like your
self, bravely offered: Huzza! we are all at your Excellency's Command, and will
live and dye by you. Live, live, said Friar Ihon, a God's Name; but dye by no
means. That Is the Chitterlings lot, they shall have their Belly full on it: Come
on then, let us put our selves in Order; Nabuzardan's the word.

CHAP. XL. How Friar Jhon fitted up the Sow; and of the Valiant Cooks that went
into it.
THen by Friar Jhon's Order the Engineers and their Workmen fitted up the
great Sow that was in the Ship Leathern-Bottle. It was a wonderful Machine, so
contrived, that by the means of large Engines that were round about it in Rows,
it throw'd forked Iron Bars, and four squared Steel Boults; and in its Hold two
hundred Men at least could easily fight, and be sheltered. It was made after
the Model of the Sow of Riole, by the means of which Bergerac was retaken from
the English in the Reign of Charles the sixth.

Here are the Names of the Noble and Valiant Cooks who went into the Sow, as
the Greeks did into the Trojan Horse.

S^wre Sawoe. Sweet Meat. Greedy Gut. Licorish Chops. Sows'd Pork. Slap Sauce.
Cock-Breth. S^ipstop. Crisp Pig. Greasy Slouch. Fatgut. Bray-mortar.
Lick-sawce. Hog's Foot. Hodgepedge. Carlon^d^e. Sop in Pan. Pick-foul.
Mustard-pot. Calves Pluck. Hogs Haslet. Chopt-phiz. Gallymaufrey.
All these Noble Cooks in their Coat of Arms did bear in a Field Gules, a
Larding-pin Vert, charged with a Chevron Argent.

Lard, Hogs Lard. Nible Lard. Filch Lard. Fat Lard. Pinch Lard. Top Lard. Pick
Lard. Save Lard. Snatch Lard. Gnaw Lard. Scrape Lard. Chew Lard.
Gaillard (by Syncope) born near Rambioullet: The said Culinary Doctor's name
was Gaillard-lard; in the same manner as you use to Idolatrous for Idololatrous.

Stiff Lard. Watch Lard. Sweet Lard. Eat Lard. Snap Lard. Catch Lard. Cut Lard.
Mince Lard. Dainty Lard. Fresh Lard. Rusty Lard. Waste Lard. Ogl-Lard. Weigh
Lard. Gulch Lard. Eye Lard.
Names unknown among the Marranes and Jews.

Balloky. Pick Sallat. Broyl Rasher. Conny Skin. Dainty Chops: Pie Wright.
Pudding-pan. Toss-pot. Mustard Sauce. Claret Sauce. Swill Broth. Thirsty.
Kitchen Stuff. Verjuice. Save Dripping. Water-Creese. Scrape Turnip. Trivet.
Mons^^ur Rag^^st. Crack P^pkin. Scrape Pot. Porridge Pot. Lick Dish. Salt
Gullet. Snail Dresser. Sope-Monger. Brow^s Belly. Chine Picker. Suck Gravy.
Macar^^n. Scure Maker.
Smell-Smock, he was afterward taken from the Kitchen and removed to Chamber
Practice, for the Service of the Noble Cardinal Hunt Venison.

Rot Roast. Dish^lout. Save Sewet. Fire Fumbler. Pillicock. Long Tool. Prick
Pride. Prick-Madam. Pricket. Hogs Gullet. Sir Loyne. Spit Mutton. Friter Friar.
Flesh Smith. Cram Gut. Tuzzymussy. Jacket Liner. Guzzle Drink. Fox Tail. Fly
Flap. Old Grizle. Ruff Belly. Saffron Sauce. Strutting Tom. Slashed Snout.
Smutty Face.
M^ndam that first invented Madam's Sauce, and for that discovery, was thus
called in the Scotch-French Dialect.

Loblolly Slabber Chops. Scum Pot. Gully Guts. Rinse Pot. Drink spiller.
Sloven. Swallow^pitcher. Wafer-Monger. Snap Gobbet. Scurvy Phiz. Trencher-man.
Goodman Goosecap. Munch Turnip. Pudding-bag. Pig-sticker.
Robert, he invented Robert's Sauce, so good and necessary for Roasted Coneys,
Ducks, Fresh Pork, Poach'd Eggs, Salt Fish, and a thousand other such Dishes.

Cold Eel. Thornback. Gurnard. Grumbling Gut. Alms-scrip. Taste all. Scrap
Merchant. Belly timberman. Hashee. Frig palate. Powdering-tub. Drying Pan.
Man-of Dough. Sawce-Doctor. Waste Butter. Shitbreech. Thick Brawn. Tom T -- d.
Moldy Crust. Hasty. Red Herring. Cheese Cake. Big Snout. Lick-finger. Titt
Bit. Sauce box. All Fou^s. Whimwham. Basterest. Gaping Horden. Calf Pinck.
Leather Breeches.
All these Noble Cooks went into the Sow, Merry, Cheery, Hale, Brisk, old Dogs
at Mischief, and ready to fight stoutly; Friar Jhon, ever and anon waving his
huge Scimiter, brought up the Rear, and double-lock'd the Doors on the inside.

CHAP. XLI. How Pantagruel broke the Chitterlings at the Knees.
THe Chitterlings advanced so near, that Pantagruel perceived that they
stretched their Arms, and already began to charge their Lances, which caused
him to send Gymnast to know what they meant, and why they thus, without the
least provocation, came to fall upon their old trusty Friends, who had neither
said nor done the least ill thing to them. Gymnast being advanced near their
Front, bowed very low, and said to them as loud as ever he could; We are
Friends, we are Friends; all, all of us your Friends, yours, and at your
command, we are for Carnaval your old Confederate. Some h^ve since told me,
that he mistook and said Carnaval instead of Carnaval.

Whatever it was, that word was no sooner out of his Mouth, but a huge wild
Squob-Saw^age, starting out of the Front of their main Body, would have gripped
him by the Collar. By the Helmet of Mars, said Gymna^t. I Will swallow thee, but
thou shall only come in in chips and slices; for, big as thou art, thou
could never come in whole. This spoke, he lugs out his trusty Sword,
Kiss-mine-Arse, (so he called it) with both his Fists, and cut the Sawsage in
twain. Bless me, how (...) the soul Thief was! It puts me in mind of the huge
Bull of Berne that was slain at Ma^ignan when the drunken Switzers were so
mawl'd there. Believe me, it had little less than four inches Lard on its
Paunch.

The Sawsage's job being done, a Crowd of others flew upon Gymnast, and had
most scurvily dragged him down, when Pantagruel with his Men came up to his
relief. Then began the Martial Fray, higledy pickledy. Mawi Chitterling did
mawl Chitterlings, Cut Pudding did cut Puddings; Pantagruel did break the
Chitterlings at the Knees; Friar Jhon played at least in sight within his Sow,
viewing and observing all things; when the the Patty-pans that lay in
Ambuscado, most furiously sallied out upon Pantagruel.

Friar Jhon, who lay snug all this while, by that time perceiving the Rout and
Hurlyburly, set open the doors of his Sow, and sallied out with his merry
Greeks, some of them armed with Iron Spits, others with Andirons, Racks,
Fire-Slovel^, Frying-pans, Kettles, Grid Irons, Oven-Forks, Tongs,
Dripping-pans, Brooms, Iron-pots, Mortars, Pestles, all in Battle array like so
many House breakers, hollowing and roaring out all together most frightfully,
Nabuzardan, nabuzardan, nabuzardan. Thus shouting and hooting they fought like
Dragons, and charged through the Patty pans, and Sawsages. The Chitterlings
perceiving this ^^^sh reinforcement, and that the others would be too hard for
'em, betook themselves to their Heels, scampering off with full speed, as if
the Devil had been come for them. Friar Jhon with an Iron Crow knocked them
down as ^ast as Haps; his Men too were not sparing on their side. O! What a
woeful sight it was! The field was all over strow'd with heaps of dead or
wounded Chitterlings; and History relates, that had not Heaven had a hand in
it* the Chitterling Tribe had been ^^tally ^^uted out of the World, by the
Culinary Champions. But there happen^d a wonderful thing, you may believe as
little or as much of it as you please.

From the North flew toward us a huge fat, thick, grizly Swine, with long and
large Wings like those of a Windmil, its Plume^ red Crimson, like those of a
Phenicoptere (which in Languedoc they call Flaman) its Eyes were red and
flaming like a Carbuncle, its Ears green like a Prasin Emerald, its Teeth like
a Topaze, its Tail long and black like Jet, its Feet white, diaphanous, and
transparent like a Diamond, somewhat broad and of the splay-kind, like those of
Geese, and as Queen Dick's used to be at Tholose in the days of Yore. About its
Neck it wore a Gold Collar round which were some Ionian Characters, whereof I
could pick out but two words SYS ATHHNAN: Hog teaching Minerva.

The Sky was clear before, but at that Monster's appearance, it changed so
mightily for the worse, that we were all amazed at it. As soon as the
Chitterlings perceived the s^^ing Hog, down they all threw their Weapons and
fell on their Knees, lifting up their Hands joined together, without speaking
one word, in a posture of Adoration. Friar Jhon and his Party kept on mincing,
felling, braining, mangling, and spitting the Chitterlings like mad* But
Pantagruel sounded a Retreat, and all Hostility ceased.

The Monster, having several times hovered backwards and forwards between the
two A^mies, with a Tail-shot voided above twenty seven B^^s of Mustard on the
ground; then flew away through the Air, crying all the while, Carnaval,
Carnaval, Carnaval.

CHAP. XLII. How Pantagruel held a treaty with Niphleseth Queen of the
Chitterlings.
THE Monster being out of sight, and the two Armies remaining silent,
Pantagruel demanded a parley with the Lady Niphleseth, Queen of the Chitterlings
who was in her Chariot by the Standards, and it was easily granted. The Queen
alighted, cou^teously received Pantagruel, and was glad to see him. Pantagruel
complained to her of this Breach of Peace: But she civilly made her excuse,
telling him that a false information had caused all this mischief, her Spies
having brought her word, that Shrovetide their mortal foe was landed, and spent
his time in examining the Urin of Physet^res.

She therefore entreated him to pard^^ them their offense, telling him, that
Si^ reverence was sooner found in Chitterling* than Gall, and offering, for her
self and (...) her successors, to hold of him, and his, (...) whole Island and
Country, to ob^y him (...) all his Commands, be friends to his (...) and foes
to his foes: And also to ^^^d ev^ry Year, as an acknowledgment of (...)
^^^mage, a tribute of seventy eight thousand Royal Chitterlings, to serve him
at his first Course at Table, six months in the Year; which was punctually
performed. For, the next day, she sent the aforesaid quantity of Royal
Chitterlings, to the good Gargantua, under the Conduct of young Niphleseth,
Infanta of the Island.

The good Gargantua made a Present of them to the great King of Paris. But by
change of Air, and for want of Mustard (the natural Balsam and restorer of
Chitterling^ most of them dyed. By the great Kings particular Grant they were
buried in ^^aps, in a part of Paris, to this day called La ^^e pa^^e d'
Andouilles, The Street pav^d with Chitterlings. At the request of the Ladies at
his Court, young Niphleseth was preserved, honorably used, and since that
married to heart's content; and was the Mother of many Children, for which
heaven be praised.

Pantagruel civilly thanked the Queen, forgave all Offenses, refused the offer
she had made of her Country, and gave her a pretty little Knife; after that, he
asked several nice Questions concerning the Apparition of that ^lyi^g H^g? she
answered that it was the Id^a of Carnaval their Tutelary God in time of War,
first Founder, and Original of all the Chitterling race, for which Reason he
resembled a Hog, for Chiterlings drew their extraction from Hogs.

Pantagruel asking to what purpose, and curative Indication he had voided so
much Mustard on the Earth? The Queen reply^d, that Mustard was their Sang-real,
and c^lestial Balsam, of which laying but a little in the wounds of the fallen
Chitterlings, in a very short time the wounded were healed, and the dead
restored to life. Pantagruel held no further discourse with the Queen, but
retired a ship board. The like did all the Bon Companions with their Implements
of Destruction and their huge Sow.

CHAP. XLIII. How Pantagruel went into the Island of Ruach.
TWO days after, we arrived at the Island of Ruach; and I swear to you by the
Celestial Hen and Chickens that I found the way of living of the People ^o
strange and wonderful, that I cannot for the hearts Blood of me half tell it
you. They live on nothing but Wind, eat nothing but Wind, and drink nothing but
Wind. They have no other Houses but weather-cocks. They sow no other seeds but
the three sorts of Windflowers, Rue, and herbs that may make One break wind to
the purpose, these scowre them off carefully. The common sort of People to feed
themselves, make use of feather, paper, or linen Fans, according to their
Abilities; as for the Rich they live by the means of Wind-mills.

When they would have some noble Treat, the Tables are spread under one or two
Wind-mills. There they feast as merry as beggars, and during the Meal, their
whole talk is commonly of the goodness, excellency salubrity and rarity of
Winds, as you, jolly Topers, in your cups Philosophize and Argue upon Wines.
The one praises the South-east, the other the South-west. This the West and by
South, and this the East and by North; another the West, and another the East,
and so of the rest. As for Lovers, and amorous Sparks, no Gale for them like a
sm^ck Gale: For the sick, they use Bellows, as we use Clysters among us.

Oh! (said to me a little diminutive swollen Bubble) that I had now but a
bladderfull of that same good Languedoc Wind, which they call Cierce: The
famous Physician Scur^^n passing one day by this Country, was telling us that
it is so strong that it will make nothing of overturning a loaded Wagon: Oh!
What good would it not do my oedipodic Leg. The biggest are not the best, but,
said Panurge, rather would I had here a large Butt of that same good Languedoc
Wine that grows at Mireveux, Canteperdrix, and Frontignan.

I saw a good likely sort of a Man there, much resembling Ventrose, tearing and
fuming in a grievous Fret, with a tall burly Groom, and a pimping little Page
of his laying them on, like the Devil, with a buskin: Not knowing the cause of
his anger, at first I thought that all this was by the Doctor's advice, as
being a thing very healthy to the Master to be in a Passion, and to his Man to
be banged for it. But at last I heard him taxing his Man with stealing from him,
like a Rogue as he was, the better half of a large leathern Bag of an excellent
southerly Wind, which he had carefully laid up, like a hidden Reserve, against
the cold weather.

They neither Exonerate, Piss, nor Spit in that Island, but to make amends they
belch, fizle, funk, and give Tailshots in abundance. They are troubled with all
manner of distempers: And indeed all distempers are engendered and proceed from
Ventosities, as Hippocrates demonstrates, lib. de Flatibus. But the most
epidemical among them, is the wind-Colick. The remedies which they use are
large Blisters, whereby they void store of Windiness. They all dye of Dropsies,
and Tympanies, the Men farting, and the Women sizling, so that their Soul takes
her leave at the back door.

Some time after, walking in the Island, we met Three hare-brain'd airy
Fellows, who seemed mightily pufft up, and were to take their pastime, and view
the P^^vers who live on the same die^as themselves, and abound in the Island. I
observed that, as you, true Topers, when you travel carry flasks, leathern
bottles, and small runlets along with you, so each of them had at his girdle a
pretty little pair of bellows. If they happened to want wind, by the help of
those pretty bellows they immediately drew some fresh and cool by Attraction
and Reciprocal Expulsion: For, as you well know, Wind, essentially defined, is
nothing but fluctuating and agitated Air.

A while after we were commanded in the King's name not to receive for three
hours any Man or Women of the Country on board our ships. Some having stole
from him a rousing fart of the very individual Wind which old Goodman Aeolus
the Snoarer gave Ulysses, to Conduct his Ship, when ever it should happen to be
becalmed* which fart the King kept religiously (...) another Sangreal, and
performed a wo^^d of wonderful cures with it, in many dangerous deseases,
letting loose and distribu^ing to the Patient only as much of it as might frame
a Virginal Fart. That is, if you must know, what our Sanctimonials alias Nuns
in their Dialect call ringing backwards.

CHAP. XLIV. How a small Rain lays a high Wind.
PAntagruel commended their Government and way of living, and said to their
Hypenemian Mayor, If you approve Epicurus's Opinion, placing the summum bonum
in pleasure (I mean pleasure that is easy and free from toil) I esteem you
happy; for your Food being Wind, costs you little or nothing; since you need
but blow. True, Sir, returned the Mayor, but alas, nothing is perfect here
below: For too often when we are at Table feeding on some good blessed Wind of
God, as on Celestial Manna, merry as so many Friars, down drops on a sudden
some small Rain, which lays! our Wind, and so robs us of it; thus many a Meal
lost for want of Meat.

Just so, quoth Panurge, Jenin Toss-pot of Quinquenois evacuating some Wine of
his own burning on his Wife's Posteriors, laid the ill fumed Wind that blowed
out of their Center as out of some Magisterial Aeolipyle. Here Is a kind of a
Whim on that Subject which I made formerly.

One Evening, when Toss-pot had been at his Buts,
And Joane his fat Spouse crammed with Turnips her Guts,
Together they pigg'd; nor did Drink so besot him,
But he did what was done when his Daddy begot him.
Now when, to recruit, he would fain have been snoaring,
Joane's backdoor was filthily puffing and roaring:
So for spite he bepiss'd her, and quickly did find,
That a very small Rain lays a very high Wind.
We are also plagued yearly with a very great Calamity, cried the Mayor; for a
Giant called Widenostrils, who lives in the Island of Tohu, comes hither every
spring, to purge by the advice of his Physicians, and swallows us, like so many
Pills, a great number of Windmils and of Bellows also, at which his Mouth
waters exceedingly.

Now this is a sad Mortification to us here, who are fain to fast over three or
four whole Lents every year for this, besides certain petty Lents, Ember-Weeks,
and other Orison and Starving-tides. And have you no Remedy for this, asked
Pantagruel? By the advice of our Mezarims, replied the Mayor, about the time
that he uses to give us a Visit, we Garrison our Windmills with good store of
Cocks and Hens. So the first time that the greedy Thief swallowed them, they
had like to have done his business at once, for they crow'd and cackl'd in his
Maw, and fluttered up and down athwart and along in his Stomach, which threw
the Glutton into an Lipothymy, Cardiac Passion, and dreadful and dangerous
Convulsions, as if some Serpent creeping in at his Mouth, had been frisking in
his Stomach.

Here is a comparative as altogether incongruous and impertinent, cried Friar
Jhon, interrupting them, for I have formerly heard, that if a Serpent chance to
get into a Man's Stomach, it will not do him the least hurt, but will
immediately get out, if you do but hang the Patient by the Heels, and lay a pan
full of warm Milk near his Mouth. You were told this, said Pantagruel, and so
were those who gave you this account; but none ever saw or read of such a Cure.
On the contrary, Hippocrates, in his fifth Book of Epidem. writes, That such a
case happening in his time, the Patient presently died of a Spasm and
Convulsion.

Besides the Cocks and Hens, said the Mayor continuing his Story, all the Foxes
in the Country whipped into Widenostril's Mouth, posting after the Poultry,
which made such a stir with Reynard at their Heels, that he grievously fell
into Fits each minute of an hour.

At last by the advice of a Baden Enchanter, at the time of the Paroxysm, he
used to flea a Fox, by way of Antidote: Since that he took better advice, and
easies himself with taking a Clyster made with a Decoction of Wheat and
Barly-Corns, and of Livers of Goslins; to the first of which the Poultry run,
and the Foxes to the latter. Besides, he swallows some of your Badgers or
Fox-Dogs by the way of Pills and Bolus's. This is our misfortune.

Cease to fear, good People, cried Pantagruel, This huge Widenostrils, this
same Swallower of Windmills, is no more, I Will assure you; he died, being
stifled and choked with eating a lump of fresh Butter, at the Mouth of a hot
Oven by the advice of his Physicians.

CHAP. XLV. How Pantagruel went ashore in the Island of Pope Figg-land.
THe next morning, we arrived at the Island of Popefiggs, formerly a rich and
free People called the Gaillardets, but now alas miserably poor, and under the
Yoke of the Papimen. The occasion of it was this.

On a certain yearly high Holy Day, the Burger-Master, Syndies and topping
Rabbis of the Gaillardets chanced to go into the Neighboring Island of
Papimany to see the Festival, and pass away the time. Now one of them having
espied the Pope's Picture (with the sight of which, according to a laudable
Custom, the People were blessed on High-offering, Holy Days) made mouths at it
and cried, a Fig for it, as a sign of manifest Contempt and Derision. To be
revenged of this Affront, the Papimen some days after, without giving the
others the least warning, to^k Arms, and surpised, destroyed, and ruined the
whole Island of the Gaillardets, putting the Men to the Sword, and sparing none
but the Women and Children, and those too only on Condition to do what the
Inhabitants of Milan were condemned to, by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa.

These had rebelled against him in his absence, and ignominiously turned the
Empress out of the City, mounting her a Horseback on a Mule called Thacor,
with her Breech foremost toward the Old jaded Mules head, and her Face turned
toward the Crupper: Now, Frederick being returned, mastered them, and caused
so careful a Search to be made, that he found out, and got the famous Mule
Thacor. Then the Hangman by his order, clapped a Fig into the Mules Jim-crack,
in the Presence of the enslaved Citts that were brought into the middle of the
great Marketplace, and proclaimed, in the Emperor's Name, with Trumpets, that
whosoever of them would save his own Life, should publicly pull the Fig out
with his Teeth, and after that put it in again in the very individual Cranny
whence he had draw'd it, without using his hands; and that whoever refused to
do this, should presently swing for it, and die in his Shoes. Some sturdy Fools,
standing upon their Punctilio, chose Honorably to be hanged rather than submit
to so shameful, and abominable a Disgrace; and others, less nice in Point of
Ceremony, took heart of Grace, and even resolved to have at the Fig, and a Fig
for it, rather than make a worse Figure with a hempen Collar, and die in the
Air, at so short Warning: accordingly when they had neatly picked out the Fig
with their Teeth from old Thacor's Snatch-blatch, they plainly showed it the
Heads-man, saying, Ecco lo fico, (behold the Fig.)

By the same Ignominy the rest of these poor distressed Guallardets saved their
Bacon, b^coming Tributaries and Slaves, and the Name of Pope-Figs was given
them, because they had said, A Fig for the Pope^s Image. Since this, the poor
Wretches never prosper'd, but every year the Devil was at their Doors, and they
were plagued with Hail, Storms, Famine and all manner of Woes, as an
everlasting Punishment for the Sin of their Ancestors and Relations. Perceiving
the Misery and Calamity of that Generation, we did not care to go further up
into the Country, contenting our selves with going into a little Chapel near
the Haven to take some Holy water. It was dilapidated and ruined, wanting also
a Cover (like St. Peter at Rome) When we were in, as we dipped our Fingers in
the sanctified Cistern, we spied in the middle of that Holy Pickle a Fellow
muffled up with Stoles all under water, like a diving Duck, except the tip of
his Snout to draw his Breath. About him, stood three Priests, true shavelings,
clean shorn and poli'd, who were muttering strange words to the Devils out of a
Conjuring Book.

Pantagruel was not a little amazed at this, and, inquiring what kind of sport
these were at, was told, that, for Three years last past, the Plague had so
dreadfully raged in the Island, that the better half of it had been utterly
depopulated, and the Lands lay Fallow without Owners. Now the mortality being
over, this same Fellow, who was crept into the Holy Tub, having a large piece
of Ground; chanced to be Sowing it with White winter Wheat; at the very minute
of an hour that a kind of a Silly sucking Devil, who could not yet Write or
Read, or Hail and Thunder, unless it were on Parsley or Colworts, had got leave
of his Master Lucifer to go into this Island of Pope-figs, where the Devils
were very familiar with the Men and Women, and often went to take their Pastime.

This same Devil being got thither, di^^cted his Discourse to the Husbandman,
and asked him what he was doing. The poor Man told him, that he was Sowing this
ground with Corn to help him to subsist the next year. Ay, but the Ground is
none of thine, Mr. Plough ^obber, cried the^ Devil, but mine: For, since the
time that you mocked the Pope, all this Land has been proscribed, adjudg'd, and
abandoned to us. However, to sow Corn is not my Province; therefore I will give
thee leave to sow the Field; that is to say, provided we share the Profit. I
will, replied the Farmer. I mean, said the Devil, that, of what the Land shall
bear, two Lots shall be made, one of what shall grow above Ground, the other of
what shall be covered with Earth; the right of choosing belongs to me, for I am
a Devil of noble and ancient Race; thou art a base Clown. I therefore choose
what shall lie under ground, take thou what shall be above. When do thou
reckon to reap, hah? About the middle of July, quoth the Farmer. Well, said the
Devil, I Will not fail thee then: In the mean time, slave as thou ought. Work,
Clown, wo^k: I am going to tempt to the pleasing Sin of whoring, the Nuns of
D^^fart, the Sham-saints of the Cowle, and the Gluttonish Crew; I am more than
sure of these. There needs but meet, and the Job's done; true Fire and Tinder,
touch and take; down falls Nun, and up gets Friar.

CHAP. XLVI. How a Junior Devil was fooled by a Husbandman of Pope-Figland.
ON the middle of July, the Devil came to the place aforesaid, with all his
Crew at his Heels, a whole Quire of the younger Fry of Hell, and having met the
Farmer, said to him; Well, Clod-pate, how have thou done, since I went? Thou
and I must now share the Concern. Ay Master Devil, quoth the Clown, it is but
reason we should. Then he and his Men began to cut and reap the Corn: And on
the other side the Devil's Imps fell to work, grubbing up, and pulling out the
stubble by the Root.

The Countryman had his Corn thrash'd, Winnow'd it, put it into Sacks, and
went with it to Market. The same did the Devil's Servants, and sat them down
there by the Man, to sell their Straw. The Countryman sold off his Corn at a
good rate, and with the Money filled an old kind of a Demy-Buskin, which was
fastened to his Girdle; but the Devil a Sous the Devils took; far from taking
Hansel, they were flouted, and jeered by the Country Louts.

Market being over, quoth the Devil to the Farmer, well Clown thou have choused
me once, it is thy Fault; chouse me twice, 'twill be mine. Nay, good Sir Devil,
replied the Farmer, how can I be said to have choused you since 'twas your
worship that chose first. The truth is that by this trick you thought to cheat
me, hoping that nothing would spring out of the Earth for my share, and that
you should find whole under ground the Corn which I had sowed, and with it
tempt the poor and needy, the close Hypocrite, or the Covetous Gripe, thus
making them fall into your snares. But troth, you must e'n go to School yet,
you are no Conjurer, for ought I see: For, the Corn that was sowed is dead and
rotten, its Corruption having caused the generation of that which you saw me
sell: so you chose the worst, and therefore are cursed in the Gospel. Well,
talk no more on it, quoth the Devil: what can thou sow our Field with for
next Year? If a Man would make the best on it, answered the Ploughman, 'twere
fit he sow it with Radish. Now cried the Devil, thou talkst like an honest
Fellow, Bumpkin, well, sow me good store of Radish, I Will see and keep them safe
from storms, and will not hail a bit on them; but hark 'e me, this time I
bespeak for my share what shall be above ground, what is under shall be thine:
Drudge on, Looby, drudge on. I am going to tempt heretics, their Souls are
dainty victuals when broiled in Rashers and well powdered. My Lord Lucifer has
the griping in the guts, they will make a dainty warm dish for his Honor's Maw.

When the season of Radishes was come, our Devil failed not to meet in the
Field with a train of rascally underlings, all waiting Devils, and finding
there the Farmer and his Men, he began to cut and gather the Leaves of the
Radishes. After him the Farmer with his Spade dug up the Radishes, and clapped
them up into pouches. This done, the Devil, the Farmer, and their gangs hy'd
them to Market, and there (...) Farmer presently made good Money of his
R^dishes; but the poor Devil took nothing, nay what was worse he was made a
common laughing stock by the gaping hoydons. I see thou have played me a scurvy
trick, thou villainous Fellow, (cried the angry Devil,) at last I am fully
resolved even to make an end of the business between thee and my self about the
Ground, and these shall be the Terms; we'll chapperclaw each (...) and whoever
of us two shall first (...) shall quit his share of the Field, which (...)
wholly belong to the Conqueror. I (...) Time for this Trial of Skill on thi^
(...) ^^^night. Assure thy self that I Will cla^ (...) off like a Devil. I was
going to temp^ (...) Fornicators, Bailiffs, Perplexers of (...) Scriveners,
forgers of Deeds, two-handed Counselors, prevaricating Sollicitors, and other
such vermin; but they were so civ^ as to send me word by an Interpreter, that
they are all mine already: Besides, our Master Lucifer is so cloyed with their
Souls, that he often sends them back to the smutty Scullions and slovenly
Devils, of his Kitchen, and they scarce go down with him, unless now and then,
when they are high-season'd.

Some say there is no Breakfast like a Student's, no dinner like a Lawyer's, no
afternoon's nunchion like a Vintner's, no supper like a Tradesman's, no second
supper like a serving Wench's, and none of these Meals together like a
frockifi'd Hobgoblin's. All this is true enough; accordingly at my Lord
Lucifer's first Course Hobgoblings, alias Imps in Cowles, are a standing Dish.
He willingly used to breakfast on Students; but alas, I do not know by what Ill
Luck, they have of late years joined the holy Bible to their Studies; so the
Devil a one we can get down among us, and I verily believe that unless the
Hypocrites of the Tribe of Levi help us in it; taking from the enlightened
Book-mongers their St. Paul, either by Threats, Revilings, Force, Violence,
Fire and Faggot, we shall not be able to hook-in any more of them, to nibble at
below. He dines commonly on Counselors, Mischief-mongers, Multiplyers of
Lawsuits, such as wrest and pervert Right and Law, and Grind and Fleece the
Poor: He never fears to want any of these. But who can endure to be wedded to a
Dish?

He said the other Day at a full Chapter, that he had a great mind to eat the
Soul of one of the Fraternity of the Cowle that had forgot to speak for
himself, in his Sermon, and he promised double Pay, and a large Pension, to any
one that should bring him such a Tit-bit piping-hot. We all went a hunting
after such a Rarity, but came home without the Prey; for they all admonish the
good Women to remember their Convent. As for afternoon Nunchions, he has left
them off, since he was so woefully gripped with the Colic, his Fosterers,
Sutlers, Char-Coalmen, and boiling Cooks having been sadly mawl'd and peppered
off in the Northern Countries.

His high Devil-ship sups very well on Tradesmen, Usurers, Apothecaries,
Cheats, Coyners, and Adulterers of Wares. Now and then when he is on the merry
pin, his second supper is of serving Wenches who, after they have by stealth
soaked their Faces with their Masters good Liquor, fill up the Vessel with it
at second hand, or with other stinking Water.

Well, drudge on, Boor, drudge on; I am going to tempt the Students of
Trebisonde, to leave Father and Mother, forgo for ever the established and
common rule of living; disclaim and free themselves from obeying their lawful
Sovereign's Edicts, live in absolute Liberty, proudly despise every one, laugh
at all Mankind, and taking the fine jovial little Cap of Poetic License, become
so many pretty Hobgoblins.

CHAP. XLVII. How the Devil was deceived by an Old Woman of Popefig-land.
THE Country Lob trudged home very much concerned and thoughtfull, you may
swear; in so much that his good Woman, seeing him thus look moping, ween'd that
something had been stolen from him at market; but when she had heard the cause
of his affliction, and seen his Budget well lined with Coin, she bad him be of
good Cheer, assuring him that he would be never the worse for the scratching Bout
in question, wishing him only to leave her to manage that business and not
trouble his head about it: for she had already contrived how to bring him off
cleaverly. Let the worst, come to the worst, said the Husbandman, it will be
but a scratch, for I Will yield at the first stroke, and quit the Field. Quit a
Fa^t replied the Wife, he shall have none of the Field, rely upon me and be
quiet, let me alone to deal with him. You say he is a pimping little Devil,
that is enough; I Will soon make him give up the Field, I Will warrant you: Indeed
had he been a great Devil, it had been somewhat.

The day that we landed in the Island happened to be that which the Devil had
fixed for the Combat. Now the Countryman, having like a good Catholic very
fairly confessed himself and received, betimes in the morning, by the advice of
his Vicar had hid himself, all but the snout, in the holy Water-stock in the
Posture in which we found him: And just as they were telling us this story,
News came that the old Woman had fooled the Devil, and gained the Field: You
may not be sorry perhaps to hear how this happened.

The Devil, you must know, came to the poor Man's Door and rapping there, cried
so hoe, ho the House, hoe Clod-pate, where art thou? Come out with a vengance,
come out with a wannion, come out and be damned; now for clawing; then briskly
and resolutely entering the House, and not finding the Country Man there, he
spied his Wife lying on the ground pitiously weeping and howling: What Is the
matter? asked the Devil, where is he? What does he? Oh! that I knew where he
is, replied Threescore and five, the wicked Rogue, the Butcherly Dog, the
Murderer? He has spoiled me, I am undone, I dye of what he has done me. How,
cried the Devil, what is it? I Will tickle him off for you by and by. Alas cried
the old Dissembler, he told me, the Butcher, the Tyrant, the Tearer of Devils,
that he had made a match to scratch with you this Day, and to try his Claws,
he did but just touch me with his little Finger, here betwixt the Legs, and has
spoiled me for ever. Oh! I am a dead Woman, I shall never be my self again: do
but see! nay and besides he talked of going to the Smiths to have his Pounces
sharpened and pointed. Alas you are undone, Mr. Devil; good Sir, scamper
quick^y, I am sure he will not stay; save your self, I beseech you: While she said
this, she uncovered her self up to the Chin, after the manner in which the
Persian Women met their Children, who fled from the fight, and plainly showed
her What de'e call them. The frighted Devil, seeing the enormous Solution of
the Continuity in all its dimensions, blessed himself, cried out, Mahon,
Demiourgon, Megaera, Alecto, Persephone: s'Life, catch me here when he comes! I
am gone, God's Death what a gash! I resign him the Field.

Having heard the Catastrophe of the Story, we retired a shipboard not being
willing to stay there any longer. Pantagruel gave to the Poors-Box of the
Fabric of the Church, eighteen thousand gold Royals in commiseration of the
Poverty of the People, and the Calamity of the place.

CHAP. XLVIII. How Pantagruel went ashore at the Island of Papimany.
HAving left the desolate Island of the Popefigs, we sailed for the space of a
day very fairly and merrily, and made the blessed Island of Papimany. As soon
as we had dropped Anchor in the Road, before we had well-moor'd our Ship with
ground Tackle, four Persons in different Garbs rowed toward us in a Skiff. One
of them was dressed like a Monk in his Frock, draggle-tail'd and Booted: The
other like a Falkoner with a Lure and a long-wing'd Hawk on his Fist: the third
like a Solicitor, with a large Bag, full of Informations, Subpoena's,
Breviates Bill^, Writs, Cases, and other Implements of Pettifogging. The fourth
looked like one of your Vine Barbers about Orleans, with a ^an^^e pair of
Canvass Trowzers, a Dosser and a Pruning Knife at his Girdle.

As soon as the Boat had clapped them on Board, they all with one Voice asked,
Have you seen him, good Passengers, have you seen him? Who, asked Pantagruel?
You know who, answered they. Who is it, asked Friar Jhon, 'sblood and ^onds,
I Will thrash him thick and threefold? This he said, thinking that they inquired
after some Robber, Murderer, or Church-breaker. Oh wonderful, cried the four,
do not you foreign People know the One? Sirs, replied Epistemon, we do not
understand those Terms; but if you will be pleased to let us know who you mean,
we'll tell you the truth of the matter without any more ado. We mean, said
they, he that is; did you ever see him? He that is, returned Pantagruel,
according to our Theological Doctrine, is God, who said to Moses, I am that I
am: We never saw him, nor can he be beheld by Mortal Eyes. We meant nothing
less than that supreme God who rules in Heaven, replied they, we spoke of the
God on Earth, did you ever see him? Upon my Honor, cried Carpalim, they mean
the Pope. Ay, ay, answered Panurge, yea verily, Gentlemen, I have seen three of
them, whose sight has not much bettered me. How! cry^d they, our Sacred
Decreta^s inform us, that there never is more than one living. I mean
successively, one after the other, returned Panurge; otherwise I never saw more
than one at a time.

O thrice and four times happy People, cried they, you are welcome and more than
double-welcom! They then kneeled down before us and would have kissed our Feet,
but we would not suffer it, telling them, that, should the Pope come thither in
his own Person, it is all they could do to him. No, certainly, answered they,
for we have already resolved upon the matter. We would kiss his bare Arse,
without boggling at it, and eke his two Pounders; for he has a pair of them,
the Holy Father, that he has; we find it so by our fine Decretals, otherwise he
could not be Pope. So that according to our subtle Decretalin Philosophy, this
is a necessary Consequence; he is Pope, therefore he has Genitories; and,
should Genitories no more be found in the World, the World could no more have a
Pope.

While they were talking thus, Pantagruel inquired of one of their Coxswain's
Crew, who those Persons were? he answered, that they were the four Estates of
the Island, and added that we should be made as welcome as Princes, since we had
seen the Pope. Panurge having been acquainted with this by Pantagruel, said to
him in his Ear, I swear and vow, Sir, it is even so, he that has patience may
compass any thing. Seeing the Pope had done us no good, now in the Devil's
name, 'twill do us a great deal. We then went ashore, and the whole Country,
Men, Women and Children came to meet us as in a solemn Procession. Our four
Estates cried out to them with a loud voice; they have seen him, they have seen
him, they have seen him. That Proclamation being made, all the Mob kneeled down
before us, lifting up their Hands toward Heaven, and crying; O happy Men! O
most happy. And this Acclamation lasted above a quarter of an hour.

Then came the Busby of the place with all his Pedagogues, Usher's, and School
boys, whom he Magisterially flogg'd, as they used to whip Children in our
Country, formerly when some Criminal was hanged, that they might remember it.
This displeased Pantagruel, who said to them; Gentlemen, if you do not leave
off whipping these poor Children, I Am gone. The People were amazed hear- his
Stentorean voice; and I saw a little Hump with long Fingers, say to the
Hypodidascal; what! In the name of Wonder, do all those that see the Pope grow
as tall as yon ^^ge Fellow that threatens us? Ah! How I shall think time long,
till I have seen him too, that I may grow and look as big. In short, the
Acclamations were so great, that H^menas (so they call their Bishop) hastened
thi^her on an unbridled Mule, with green Trappings, attended by his Aposts (as
they said) and his Supposts or Officers, bearing Crosses, Banners, Standards,
Canopies, Torches, Holy Water pots, etc. He too wanted to kiss our Feet (as the
good Christian Va^sinter did to Pope Clement) saying, that one of their
^^^oth^tes, that is one of the Scavengers, Scowrers and Commentators of their
Holy Decretals, had written, that, in the same manner as the Messiah, so long
and so much expected by the Jews, at last appeared among them; so on some happy
day of God the Pope would come into that Island; and that, while they waited
for that blessed time, if any who had seen him at Rome, or elsewhere, chanced
to come among them, they should be sure to make much of them, feast them
plentifully, and Treat them with a great deal of Reverence. However we civilly
desired to be excused.

CHAP. XLIX. How Homenas Bishop of Papimany showed us the Uranopet Decretals.
HOmenas then said to us: It Is enjoined us by our Holy Decretals to visit
Churches first, and Taverns after. Therefore not to decline that fine
Institution, let us go to Church; we shall afterward go to Feast our selves.
Man of God, quoth Friar Jhon, do you go before, we'll follow you, you spoke in
the matter properly and like a good Christian, it is long since we saw any such.
For my part, this rejoices my mind very much, and I verily believe that I shall
have the better Stomach after it; well, it is a happy thing to meet with good
Men! Being come near the Gate of the Church, we spied a huge thick Book, gilt
and covered all over with precious Stones, as Rubies Emeralds, and Pearls,
more, or at least as valuable as those which Augustus consecrated to Jupiter
Capitolinus. This Book hanged in the Air, being fastened with two thick Chains
of Gold to the Zoophore of the Porch. We looked on it, and admired it. As for
Pantagruel he handled it, and dandled it, and turned it as he pleased, for he
could reach it without straining; and he protested, that whenever he touched
it, he was seized with a pleasant tickling at his Fingers end, new Life and
Activity in his Arms, and a violent temptation in his Mind to beat one or two
Sergeants or such Officers, provided they were not of the Shaveling-kind.
Homenas then said to us, The Law was formerly given to the Jews by Moses,
written by God himself; at Delphos before the Portal of Apol^o's Temple, this
Sentence, (...), was found written with a Divine Hand, and sometime after it
was also seen, and as Divinely written and transmitted from Heaven. Cybele's
Shrine was brought out of Heaven into a Field called Penisunt in Phrygia; so
was that of D^^a to Tauris, if you will believe Euripides; the Oriflambe, or
Holy Standard was transmitted out of Heaven to the Noble and most Christian
Kings of France to fight against the Unbelievers. In the Reign of Numa
Pompilius, second King of the Romans, the famous Copper Buckler called Ancile
was seen to descend from Heaven. At Acropolis near Athens, Minerva's Statue
formerly fell from the Empyreal Heaven. In like manner the sacred Decretals,
which you see, were written with the hand of an Angel of the Cherubin-kind; you
Outlandish People will hardly believe this, I fear? Little enough of
Conscience; said Panurge. -- And then, continued Homenas, they were
miraculously transmitted to us here from the very Heaven of Heavens in the same
manner as the River Nile is called Diipetes by Homer the Father of all
Philosophy (the holy Decretals always excepted.) Now because you have seen the
Pope, their Evangelist and everlasting Protector, we will give you leave to see
and kiss them on the Inside, if you think it meet. But then you must fast Three
days before, and Canonically confess, nicely and strictly mustering up, and
inventorising your Sins great and small, so thick that one single Circumstance
of them may not sc^pe you, as our holy Decretals, which you see, direct. This
will take up some time. Man of God, answered Panurge, we have seen and descried
Decrees and eke Decretals enough of Conscience, some on Paper other on
Parchment fine and gay like any painted Paper Lantern, some on Vellom, some in
Manuscript, and others in Print; so you need not take half this Pains to show
us these. We'll take the Good Will for the Deed, and thank you as much as if we
had. Ay Marry, said Homenas, but you never saw these that are Angelically
written. Those in your Country, are only Transcripts from ours, as we find it
written by one of our old Decretaline Scoliasts. For me; Do not spare me, I do
not value the Labor, so I may serve you; do but tell me whether you will be
confessed, and fast only three short little days of God? As for shriving,
answered Panurge, there can be no great harm in it, but this same Fasting,
Master of mine, will hardly down with us at this time; for we have so very much
over-fasted our selves at Sea, that the Spiders have spun their Cobwebs over
our Grinders. Do but look on this good Friar Ihon des Entomeures (Homenas then
courteously Demy-clipp'd him about the Neck) some Moss is growing in his Throat
for want of bestirring and exercising his Chaps. He speaks the Truth, vouched
Friar Ihon, I have so much fasted, that I Am almost grown hump-shoulder'd. Come
then, let us go into the Church, said Homenas, and pray forgive us if for the
Present we do not sing you a fine high Mass: The hour of Midday is past, and
after it our sacred Decretals forbid us to sing Mass, I mean your high and
lawful Mass. But I Will say a low and dry one for you. I had rather have one
moistened with some good Anjou Wine, cried Panurge; fall to, fall to your low
Mass, and dispatch. Od's Bodikins, quoth Friar Ihon, it frets me to the Guts
that I must have an empty Stomach at this time of day. For, had I eaten a good
Breakfast, and fed like a Monk, if he should chance to sing us the Requiem
aeternam dona eis, domine, I had then brought thither Bread and Wine for the
Traits passes, (those that are gone before.) Well, Patience; Pull away, and
save a Tide, short and sweet, I pray you, and this for a Cause.

CHAP. L. How Homenas showed us the Arch-Type, or Representation of a Pope.
MAss being mumbled over, Homenas took a huge bundle of Keys out of a Trunk
near the Head Altar, and put Thirty two of them into so many Key-holes, put
back so many Springs, then with Fourteen more mastered so many Padlocks, and at
last opened an Iron-Window strongly barred above the said Altar. This being
done, in token of great Mystery, he covered himself with wet Sackcloth, and
drawing a Curtain of Crimson Satin, showed us an Image daubed over coursly
enough, to my thinking; then he touched it with a pretty long stick, and made
us all kiss the part of the Stick that had touched the Image. After this he
said to us, What think you of this Image? It is the Likeness of a Pope,
answered Pantagruel; I know it by the Tripple Crown, his Furred Aumusse, his
Rochet, and his Slipper. You are in the right, said Homenas; it is the Idea of
that same good God on Earth, whose coming we devoutly await, and whom we hope
one day to see in this Country. O happy, wished for, and much expected day; and
happy, most happy, you whose propitious Stars have so far favored you as to
let you see the living and real Face of this good God on Earth, by the single
sight of whose Picture we obtain full Remission of all the Sins which we
remember, that we have committed, as also a Third part, and Eighteen
Quarantaines of the Sins which we have forgot: And indeed we only see it on
high annual Holy days.

This caused Pantagruel to say that it was a Work like those which Daedalus
used to make; since though it were deformed and ill drawn, nevertheless some
divine Energy in Point of Pardons lay hid and concealed in it. Thus, said Friar
Ihon, at Seville, the raskally Beggars being one Evening on a Solemn Holyday at
Supper in the Spittle, one bragged of having got Six Blancs, or Two pence
Halfpenny, another Eight Liards or Two pence, a Third Seven Carolus's or Six
pence; but an old Mumper made his Vaunts of having got three Testons, or five
Shillings: Ah, but (cried his Comrades) thou have a Leg of god; as if continued
Friar Ihon, some divine Virtue could lie hid in a stenching ulcerated rotten
Shanck. Pray, said Pantagruel, when you are for telling us some such nauseous
Tale, be so kind as not to forget to provide a Basin, Friar Ihon; I Will assure
you, I had much ado to forbear bringing up my Breakfast: Fie, I wonder a Man of
your Coat is not ashamed to use thus the Sacred name of God in speaking of
things so filthy and abominable; Fie, I say: If among your monking Tribes such
an abuse of Words is allowed, I beseech you leave it there, and do not let it
come out of the Cloisters. Physicians, said Epistemon, thus attribute a kind of
Divinity to some Diseases; Nero also extolled Mushrooms, and in a Greek Proverb
termed them divine Food, because with them he had Poisoned Claudius his
Predecessor. But methinks, Gentlemen, this same Picture is not over-like our
late Popes. For I have seen them, not with their Pallium, Aumusse or Rocket on,
but with Helmets on their Heads, more like the Top of a Persian Turbant; and
while the Christian Commonwealth was in Peace, they alone were most furiously
and cruelly making War. This must have been then, returned Homena^, against the
Rebellious, Heretical Protestants; Reprobates, who are disobedient to the
Holiness of this good God on Earth. It Is not only lawful for him to do so, but
it is enjoined him by the Sacred Decretals, and if any dare transgress one
single Iota against their Commands, whether they be Emperors, Kings, Dukes,
Princes, or Commonwealths, he is immediately to pursue them with Fire and
Sword, strip them of all their Goods, take their Kingdoms from them, proscribe
them, Anathem^tize them, and destroy not only their Bodies, those of their
Children, Relations and others, but Damn also their Souls to the very bottom of
the most hot and burning Caldron in Hell. Here, in the Devil's name, said
Panurge, the People are no Heretics, such as was our Raminagrobis, and as they
are in Germany and England. You are Christians of the best Edition, all picked
and culled, for ought I see. Ay, marry are we, returned Homenas, and for that
reason we shall all be saved. Now let us go and bless our selves with
Holy Water, and then to Dinner.

CHAP. LI. Table-Talk in Praise of the Decretals.
NOw Topers, pray observe that while Homenas was saying his dry Mass, three
Collectors, or Licensed Beggars of the Church, each of them with a large Basin
went round among the People, saying with a loud Voice; Pray remember the
blessed Men who have seen his Face. As we came out of the Temple they brought
their Basins brim full of Papimany Chink to Homenas, who told us that it was
plentifully to Feast with; and that, of this Contribution and voluntary Tax,
one part should be laid out in good Drinking, another in good Eating, and the
remainer in both; according to an admirable Exposition hidden in a Corner of
their Holy Decretals; which was performed to a T, and that at a noted Tavern
not much unlike that of Will's at Amiens. Believe me we tickled it off there
with copious Cramming, and numerous Swilling.

I made two notable Observations at that Dinner; the one that there was not one
Dish served up whether of Cabrittas, Capons, Hogs (of which latter there is
great Plenty in Papimany) Pigeons, Coneys, Leverets, Turkeys or others, without
abundance of Magistral Stuff; the other, that every Course and the Fruit also
were served up by unmarried Females of the Place, tight Lasses, I Will assure
you, Waggish, Fair, Good conditioned, and Comely, Spruce, and fit for Business.
They were clad all in fine long white Albes with two Girts, their Hair
interwoven with narrow Tape, and purple Ribbond, stuck with Roses,
Gilly-flowers Marjoram, Daffidown-Dillies, Thyme and other sweet Flowers.

At every Cadence, they invited us to drink and bang it about, dropping us neat
and gentile Court'sies: nor was the sight of them unwelcome to all the Company;
and as for Friar Ihon, he leer'd on them sideways, like a Cur that steals a
Capon. When the first course was taken off, the Females melodiouly Sung us an
Epode in Praise of the Sacrosanct Decretals; and then the second Course being
served up Homenas joyful and cheery, said to one of the she Buttlers, Light
here, Claricia. Immediately one of the Girls brought him a Tall-boy brim-full
of Extravagant Wine. He took fast hold of it and fetching a deep sigh said to
Pantagruel: My Lord, and you my good Friends, Here Is to ye, with all my Heart:
You are all very welcome. When he had tipp'd that off, and given the Tall-boy
to the pretty Creature, he lifted up his Voice and said; O most holy Decretals,
how good is good Wine found through your Means. This is the best Jest we have
had yet, observed Panurge: But twould still be a better, if they could turn bad
Wine into Good.

O Seraphic Sextum! (continued Homenas^ how necessary are you not to the
Salvation of poor Mortals. O Cherubic Clementinae! How perfectly the perfect
institution of a true Christian is contained and described in you! O Angelical
Extravagants! How many poor Souls that wander up and down in mortal Bodies,
throw this vale of Misery, would perish, were it not for you! When ha! When
shall this special gift of grace be bestowed on Man kind, as to lay aside all
other Studies and Concerns, to use you, to peruse you, to understand you, to
know you by heart, to practice you, to incorporate you, to turn you into blood,
and incenter you into the deepest Ventricles of their Brains the inmost Marrow
of their Bones, and most intricate Labyrinth of their Arteries? Then, ha then,
and no sooner than then, nor otherwise than thus shall the World be happy!
While the old Man was thus running on, Epistemon arose and softly said to
Panurge; For want of a close stool, I must even leave you for a moment or two;
this Stuff has unbung'd the Orifice of my Mustard-Barrel, but I Will not tarry
long.

Then, ah then, continued Homenas, no Hail, Frost, Ice, Snow, Overflowing, or
Vismajor: Then plenty of all earthly goods here below. Then uninterrupted and
eternal Peace throw the universe, an End of all Wars, plunderings, drudgeries,
robbing, ass^sinates, unless it be to destroy these cursed Rebels the Heretics.
Oh then, Rejoicing, Cheerfulness, Jollity, Solace, Sports and delicious
Pleasures, over the Face of the Earth. Oh! What great Learning, inestimable
Erudition, and Godlike Precepts, are knit, linked rivetted and mortais'd in the
Divine Chapters of these eternal Decretals?

Oh! How wonderfully, if you read but one demi Canon, short Paragraph, or
single Observation of these Sacrosanct Decretals, how wonderfully, I say, do
you not perceive to kindle in your Hearts, a furnace of divine Love, Charity
toward your Neighbor (provided he be no Heretic,) bold Contempt of all casual
and sublunary Things, firm Content in all your affections, and extatic
Elevation of Soul even to the third Heaven!

CHAP. LII. A Continuation of the Miracles caused by the Decretals.
WIsely, Brother Timothy, quoth Panurge, did am did am; he says blew; But for
my part I believe as little of it as I can. For, one Day by chance I happened
to read a Chapter of them at Poictiers at the most Decretalipotent Scotch
Doctor's, and old Nick turn me into Burnfodder, if this did not make me so
Hide-bound and costive that, for four or five Days I hardly scumber'd one poor
butt of Sir-reverence, and that too was full as dry and hard, I protest, as
Catullus tells us were those of his Neighbor Furius.

Nec toto decies cacas in anno,
Atque id durius est faba, and lapillis:
Quod tu si manibus teras, fricesque
Non unquam digitum inquinare posses.
Oh, ho, cried Homenas, by'r Lady, it may be you were then in the State of
Mortal sin, my Friend. Well turned, cried Panurge, this was of a new strain e
gad.

One day, said Friar John, at Seville I had applied to my posteriors by the way
of hind-Towel a leaf of an old Clementinae, which our Rent-gatherer John
Guimard had thrown out into the green of our Cloister: now the Devil broyl me
like a Black-pudding if I was n't so abominably plagued with chaps, chawns and
piles at the Fundament, that the Orifice of my poor Nockandroe was in a most
woeful Pickle for I don't know how long. By 'r Lady cried Homenas, 'twas a
plain Punishment of God, for the sin that you had committed in beraying that
sacred Book, which you ought rather to have kissed and adored, I say with an
adoration of Latria, or of Hyperdulia at least: The Panormitan never told a Lie
in the matter.

Says Ponocrates, at Montpelier, John Ch^iiart having bought of the Monks of
St. Olary a delicate set of Decretals written on fine large Parchment of
Lamballe, to beat Gold between the leaves, not so much as a piece that was
beaten in them came to good, but all were dilacerated and spoiled. Mark this,
cried Homenas, 'twas a Divine punishment and vengeance.

At Man's, said Eudemon, Francis Cornu, Apothecary, had turned an old set of
Extravagantes into waste Paper; may I never stir, if whatever was lapt up in
them was not immediately corrupted, rotten and spoiled; incense, Pepper,
Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffro^, Wax, Cassia, Rhubarb, Tamarinds, all, Drugs and
Spices, were lost without exception. Mark, mark, quoth Hamenas, an effect of
Divine Justice! This comes of putting the Sacred Scriptures to such profane
uses.

At Paris, said Carpalim, Snip Groignet the Tailor had turned an old Clementime
into P^^terns and Measures, and all the Clothes that were cut on them were
utterly spoiled and lost^ Gowns, Hoods, Cloaks, Cassocks, Jerkins, J^ckets,
Wastcoats, Capes, Doublets, Petticoats, Corpse de Robes, Vardingals, and so
forth. Snip thinking to cut a Hood would cut you out a Codpiece; instead of a
Cass^ck he would make you a high Crowned Hat; for a Wastcoat he would shape you out a
Rochet; on the Pattern of a Doublet he would make you a thing like a Drying Pan;
then his Journey-men, having stitched it up, did jagg it and pink it at the
bottom, and so it looked like a pan to fry Chestnuts; instead of a Cape he made
a Buskin; for a Vardingale he shaped a Montero-Cap; and thinking to make a
Cloak he would cut out a pair of your big outstroutting Switzers Breeches with
panes like the outside of a Tabor. In so much that Snip was condemned to make
good the Stuffs to all his Customers; and to this day poor Cabbidge's hair
grows through his Hood, and his Arse through his Pocket-holes. Mark, an effect
of Heavenly wrath and vengeance, cried H^menas.

At Cahusac, said Gymnast, a march being made by the Lords of Estissac and
Vicount Lausun to shoot at a Mark, P^^^tou had taken to pieces a set of
Decretals, and set one of the Leaves for the White to shoot at; now I sell, nay
I give and bequeath for ever and aye the Mould of my Doublet to fifteen hundred
Hampers full of black Devils, if ever any Archer in the Country tho they are
singular Marksmen in Gusenne^ could hit the White. Not the least bit of the
Holy Scrible was contaminated or touched; nay, and Sa^^^^^n the Elder who held
Stakes, swore to us* (...) di^ures, hard Fig^ (his greatest Oath that ^e had
openly, visibly and manifestly seen the B^lt of Carquelin moving right to the
round Circle in the middle of the White, and that just on the point when it was
going to hit and enter, it had gone aside above seven foot and four inches wide
of it toward the Bakehouse.

Miracle! (cried Homenas) Miracle, Miracle! Clerica, come Wench, light, light
here, Here Is to you all Gentlemen; I vow you seem to me very sound Christians.
While he said this, the Maidens began to snicker at his Elbow, grinning,
giggling and twittering among themselves. Friar Jhon began to paw, neigh and
whinny at the Snout's end, as one ready to leap, or at least to play the Ass,
and get up and ride tantivy to the Devil like a Beggar on Horseback.

Methinks, said Pantagruel, a Man might have been more out of danger near the
White of which Gymnast spoke, than was formerly Diogenes near another. How Is
that? asked Homenas, what was it? Was he one of our Decretalists? Rarely fallen
in again e'gad, said Epistemon returning from Stool, I see he will hook his
Decretals in, though by the Head and Shoulders.

Diogenes, said Pantagruel, one day for Pastime, went to see some Archers that
shot at Butts, one of whom was so unskilful, that, when it was his turn to
shoot, all the bystanders went aside, lest he should mistake them for the Mark.
Diogenes had seen him shoot extremly wide off it, so when the other was taking
aim a second time, and the People removed at a great distance to the right and
left of the White, he placed himself close by the Mark, holding that place to
be the safest, and that so bad an Archer would certainly rather hit any other.

One of the Lord d'Estissac's Pages at last found out the Charm, pursued
Gymnast, and by his advice Perotou put in another White made up of some Papers
of Pouillac's Law Suit, and then every one shot cleverly.

At Landerousse, said Rhizotome, at John Delif's Wedding were very great
doings, as 'twas then the Custom of the Country. After Supper, several Farces,
Interludes, and Comical Scenes were acted: they had also several Morrice-dances
with Bells and Tabors; and diverse sorts of Masks, and Mummers were let in. My
School-fellows and I, to grace the Festival to the best of our Power (for, fine
white and purple Liveries had been given to all of us in the Morning) contrived
a merry Mask with store of Cockle-shells, shells of Snails, Periwinkles and
such other. Then for want of Cuckoe-pint or Priest-pintle, Lousebur, Clote, and
Paper, we made our selves false Faces with the Leaves of an old Sextum, that
had been thrown by and lay there for any one that would take it up, cutting out
holes for the Eyes, Nose and Mouth. Now did you ever hear the like since you
were born, when we had played our little Boyish Antic Tricks, and came to take
off our sham-faces, we appeared more hideous and ugly than the little Devils
that acted the Passion at Douay: For our Faces were utterly spoiled at the
places which had been touched by those ^eaves; one had there the Small Pox,
another God's Token, or the Plague spot, a third the Crinckums, a fourth the
Measles, a fifth Botches Pushes and Carbuncles; in short, he came off the least
hurt who only lost his Teeth by the b^rgain. Miracle, bawled out Homenas,
Mirac^e!

Hold, hold, cried Rhizotome, it is n't yet time to clap; my Sister Kate, and my
Sister R^n had put the Crepines of their Hoods, their Ruffles, Snoffekins, and
Neck-Ruffs row washed starched and iron'd, into that very Book of Decretals;
for, you must know, it was covered with thick Boards and had strong Clasps;
now, by the virtue of God -- Hold, interrupted Homenas, what God do you mean?
There is but one, answered Rhizotome. In Heaven, I grant, replied Homenas, but
we have another here on Earth, do you see. Ay marry, have we, said Rhizotome, but
on my Soul I protest I had quite forgot it -- well then, by the virtue of God
the Pope, their Pinners, Neck-ruffs, Bibs, Coifs, and other Linen turned as
black as a Char-coalman's Sack. Miracle, cried Homenas! Here, Clerica, light me
here, and pr'ythee, Girl, observe these rare Stories. How comes it to pass
then, asked Friar Jhon, that People say, Ever since Decrees had Tails,
And Gens-d' Arms lugg'd heavy Mails,
Since each Monk would have a Horse,
All went here from bad to worse.
Depuis que Decrets eurent Ales,
Et Gens-d'Armes porterent Males,
Moines allerent a Cheval,
En ce monde abonda a tout mal.


I understand you, answered Homenas; this is one of the quirks and little
satires of the new fangl'd Heretics.

CHAP. LIII. How, by the Virtue of the Decretals, Gold is subtly drawn out of
France to Rome.
I would, said Epistemon, it had cost me a a pint of the best Tripe that ever
can enter into Gut, so we had but compared with the Original, the dreadful
Chapters, Execrabilis. De multa. Si plures. De Annatis per totum. Nisi essent.
Cum ad Monasterium. Quod dilectio. Mandatum; and certain others that draw every
year out of France to Rome, four hundred thousand Ducats and more.

Do you make nothing of this, asked Homenas? Though methinks, after all, it is but
little if we consider that France the most Christian, is the only Nurse, the Sea of Rome has. However find me in the whole World a Book whether of
Philosophy, Physic, Law, Mathematics, or other humane Learning, nay, even, by
my God, of the Holy Scripture it self, that will draw as much Money thence?
None, none, pshaw, tush, blurt, pish, none can: You may look till your Eyes
drop out of your Head; nay, till Doomsday in the afternoon, before you can
find another of that Energy; I Will pass my word for that.

Yet these Devilish Heretics refuse to learn and know it. Burn 'em, tear 'em,
nip 'em with hot Pincers, drown 'em, hang 'em, spit 'em at the Bung-hole, pelt
'em, paut 'em, bruise 'em, beat 'em, cripple 'em, dismember 'em, cut 'm gut
'em, bowell 'em, paunch 'em, thrash 'em, slash 'em, gash 'em, chop 'em, slice
'em, slit 'em, carve 'em, saw 'em, bethwack em, pare 'em, hack 'em, hew 'em,
mince 'em, flea 'em, boil 'em, broyl 'em, roast 'em, toast 'em, bake 'em, fry
'em, crucify 'em, crush 'em, squeeze 'em, grind 'em, batter 'em, burst 'em,
quarter 'em, unlimb 'em, bebump 'em, bethump 'em, belam me'em, belabour 'em,
pepper 'em, spitchcock 'em, and carbonade 'em on Grind irons, these wicked
Heretics; Decretalifuges, Decretalicides, worse than Homicides, worse than
Patricides, Decretalictones of the Devil of Hell.

As for you other good People, I most earnestly pray and beseech you to believe
no other thing, think on, say, undertake, or do no other thing than what is
contained in our Sacred Decretals, and their Corollaries, this fine Sextum,
these fine Clementinae, these fine Extravagantes. O Deific Books! So shall you
enjoy Glory, Honor, Exaltation, Wealth, Dignities, and Preferments in this
World; be revered, and dreaded by all, preferred, Elected, and Chosen above all
Men.

For, there is not under the Cope of Heaven, a condition of Men out of which
you will find Persons fitter to do and handle all things, than those who by
Divine Prescience, Eternal Predestination, have applied themselves to the Study
of the Holy Decretals.

Would you choose a worthy Emperor, a good Captain a fit General in time of War,
one that can well foresee all inconveniences, avoid all dangers, briskly and
bravely bring his Men on to a Breach or Attack, still be on sure grounds,
always overcome without loss of his Men, and know how to make a good use of his
Victory? Take me a Decre^ist. -- No, no, I mean a Decretalist. Ho, the foul
Blunder, whispered Epistemon.

Would you in time of Peace, find a Man capable of wisely governing the State
of a Commonwealh, of a Kingdom, of a Empire, of a Monarchy, sufficient to
maintain the Clergy, Nobility, Senate and Common^ in Wealth, Friendship, Unity,
Obedience, Virtue and Honesty? Take a Decretalist.

Would you find a Man who, by his exemplary Life, Eloquence, and pious
Admonitions* may in a short time without effusion of humane blood Conquer the
Holy Land, and bring over to the Holy Church the misbelieving Turks, Jews,
Tartars, Muscovites, Mammelus, and Sarrabonites? Take me a Decretalist.

What makes in many Countries, the People Rebellious and depraved, Pages saucy
and mischievous, Students sottish and duncical? Nothing but that their
Governors, Esquires, and Tutors were not Decretalists.

But what, on your* Conscience, was it do you think that established, confirmed
and authorized these fine Religious Orders with whom you see the Christian
World every where adorned, graced and illustrated as the Firmament is with its
glorious Stars? The Holy Decretals.

What was it that founded, underpropt, and fixed, and now maintains, nourishes
and feeds the devout Monks and Friars in Convents, Monasteri^s and Abbeys, so
that did they not daily and mightily pray without ceasing* the World would be
in evident danger of returning to its Primitive (...)? The Sacred Decretals.

What (...) the famous and celebrated Patrimony of St. Peter in plenty of all
Temporal, Corporeal and Spiritual Blessings? The Holy Decretals.

What made the Holy Apostolic See and Pope of Rome in all times, and at this
present so dreadful in the Universe, that all Kings, Emperors, Potentates, and
Lords willing nilling must depend on him, hold of him, be Crowned, confirmed,
and Authorized by him, come thither to strike sail, buckle, and fall down
before his Holy Slipper, whose Picture you have seen? The mighty Decretals of
God.

I will discover you a great secret; The Universities of your World have
commonly a Book either open or shut in their Arms and Devises; what Book do you
think it is? Truly, I do not know, answered Pantagruel, I never read it. It is
the Decretals, said Homenas, without which the Privileges of all Universities
would soon be lost. You must own I have taught you this, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

Here Homenas began to b^l^h, to far, to sunk, to laugh, to slaver, and to
swea^; and then he gave his huge greasy four-corner'd Cap to one of the Lasses,
who clapped it (...) her pretty head with a deal of joy after she had lovingly
buss'd it, as a sure token that she should be first married. Vivat, cried
Epistemon, fifat, bibat, pipat.

O Apocalyptic secret, continued Homenas! light, light, Clerica, light here
with doub^^ Lanterns. Now for the Fruit, Virgins.

I was saying then, that giving your selves thus wholly to the Study of the
Holy Decretals, you will gain Wealth and Honor in this World; I add, that in the
next you will infallibly be saved in the blessed Kingdom of Heaven, whose Keys
are given to Our good God and Decretaliarch. O My good God, whom I adore and
never saw, by thy special Grace open unto us, at the Point of Death at least,
this most Sacred Treasure of our Holy Mother Church, whose Protector,
Preserver, Buttler, Chief Larder, Administrator, and Disposer thou art; and
take care, I beseech thee, O Lord, that the precious works of Supererogation,
the goodly Pardons do not fail us in time of need; so that the Devils may not
find an opportunity to gripe our precious Souls, and the dreadful Jaws of Hell
may not swallow us. If we must pass through Purgatory, Thy will be done. It is in
thy Power to draw us out of it when thou please. Here Homenas began to shed
huge hot bri^y Tears, to beat his Breast, and kiss his Thumbs in the shape of a
Cross.

CHAP. LIVE. How Homenas give Pantagruel some Bon-Christian Pears.
EPistemon, Friar Ihon, and Panurge seeing this doleful Catastrophe began under
the cover of their Napkins to cry, Meeow, Meeow, Meeow, feigning to wipe their
Eyes all the while as if they had wept. The Wenches were doubly diligent and
brought Brimmers of Clementine Wine to every one, besides store of Sweetmeats,
and thus the Feasting was revived.

Before we arose from Table, Homenas gave us a great quantity of fair large
Pears; saying, Here, my good Friends, these are singular good Pears, you will
find none such any where else I dare warrant. Every Soil hears not every thing
you know; India alone boasts black Ebony, the best Incense is produced in
Sabaea, the Sphragitid Earth at Lemnos; So this Island is the only Place where
such fine Pears grow. You may, if you please, make Seminaries with their
Pippins, in your Country.

I like their Taste extremely, said Pantagruel; if they were sliced and put
into a Pan on the Fire with Wine and Sugar, I fancy they would be very
wholesome Meat for the Sick as well as for the Healthy; Pray what do you call
'em? No, otherwise than you have heard, replied Homenas; we are a plain
downright sort of People, as God would have it, and call Figs, Figs; Plumbs,
Plumbs; and Pears, Pears. Truly, said Pantagruel, If I live to go home, (which
I hope will be speedily, God willing) I Will set and gras^ some in my Garden in
Touraine by the Banks of the Loire, and will them call Bon-Christian or
Good-Christian Pears; for I never saw better Christians than are these good
Papimans. I Would like him two to one better yet, said Friar Ihon, would he but
give us two or three Cart-loads of yon buxsome Lasses. Why, what would you do
with them, cried Homenas? Quoth Friar Ihon, no harm, Only bleed the
Kind-hearted Souls straight between the two great Toes with certain clever
Lancets of the right stamp; By which Operation Good-Christian Children would be
inoculated upon them, and the Breed be multiplied in our Country, in which
there are not many over good, the more's the Pity.

Nay, verily replied Homenas, We cannot do this, for you would make them tread
their Shoes awry, crack their Pipkins, and spoil their Shapes; you love Mutton
I see, you will run at Sheep, I know you by that same Nose, and Hair of yours,
though I never saw your Face before. Alas, alas, how kind you are! And would you
indeed Damn your precious Soul? Our Decretals forbid this; Ah, I wish you had
them at your Fingers-end. Patience, said Friar Ihon: But, Si tu non vis dare,
praesta quaesumas; matter of Breviary; as for that I defy a^l the world, and I
fear no Man that wears a Head and a Hood, though be were a Ch^^stallin, I mean a
Decretalin Doctor.

Dinner being over, we took our leave of the Right Reverend Homenas, and of all
the good People, humbly giving thanks, and, to make them amends for their kind
Entertainment, Promised them that at our coming to Rome we would make our
Applications so effectualy to the Pope, that he would speedily be sure to come
to Visit them in Person. After this we went of Board.

Pantagruel by an Act of Generosity, and as an Acknowledgment for the sight of
the Pope's Picture, gave Homenas Nine pieces of double friz'd Cloth of Gold, to
be set before the Grates of the Window. He also caused the Church Box for it is
Repairs and Fabric to be quite filled with double-Crowns of Gold, and ordered
Nine hundred and Fourteen Angels to be delivered to each of the Lasses, who had
waited at Table, to buy them Husbands when they could get them.

CHAP. LV. How, Pantagruel being at Sea heard various unfrozen words.
WHen we were at Sea Junketting, Tippling Discoursing, and telling Stories,
Pantagruel rose and stood up to l^ok out; then asked us, Do you (...) nothing,
Gentlemen? Methinks I hear (...) People ^a^king in the Air; yet I can (...)
According to (...) full Ears sucked in the Air, as some of you suck Oysters, to
find if we could hear some sound scattered through the Sky; and to lose none of
it, like the Emperor Antoninus, some of us laid their hands hollow next to
their Ears: But all this would not do, nor could we hear any Voice. Yet
Pantagruel continued to assure us he heard various Voices in the Air, some of
Men, and some of Women.

At last we began to Fancy that we also heard something, or at least that our
Ears tingled, and the more we listened, the plainer we discerned the Voices, so
as to distinguish Articulate Sounds. This mightily frighted us, and not without
cause, since we could see nothing, yet heard such various Sounds and Voices of
Men, Women, Children, Horses, etc. insomuch that Panurge cried out, Cods Belly,
there is no fooling with the Devil, we are all beshit, let us fly. There is some
Ambuscado here abouts. Friar Ihon art thou here, my Love? I pr'y thee, stay by
me old Boy, have thou got thy swindging Tool? See that it do not stick in the
Scabbard, thou never scour'st it half as it should be. We are undone. Hark!
They are Guns, Gad judge me; Let Us fly, I do not say with hands and feet, as
Brutus said at the Battle of Pharsalia, I say with Sails and Oars; Let Us whip
it away, I never find my self to have a bit of Courage at Sea; In Cellars and
elsewhere I have more than enough. Let Us fly, and save our Bacon. I do not say
this for any fear that I have; for I dread nothing but Danger; that I don't: I
always say it that should n't. The Free-Archer of Baignolet said as much. Let Us
hazar'd nothing therefore, I say, lest we come off blowly. Tack about, Helm a
Lee, thou Son of a Bachelor. Would I were now well in Quinquenois, though I were
never to Marry. Have away, let us make all the Sail we can, they will be too hard
for us, we are not able to cope with them, they are ten to our one, I Will
warrant you; Nay, and they are on their Dunghill, while we do not know the
Country. They Will be the Death of of us. We'll lose no Honor by flying;
Demosthenes says, That the Man that runs away may fight another time. At
least, let us retreat to the Lee-ward. Helm a Lee; bring the main Tack aboard,
Hawl the Bowlins, Hoist the Top-Gallants, we are all dead Men; get off in the
Devils name, get off.

Pantagruel hearing the sad Outcry which Panurge made, said, who Talks of
flying? Let Us first see who they are, perhaps they may be Friends; I can
discover no Body yet, though I can see a hundred Miles round me: But let us
consider a little, I have read that a Philosopher named Perron was of Opinion,
that there were several Worlds that touched each other in an Equilateral
Triangle; in whose Center, he said, was the dwelling of Truth, and that the
words, Ideas, Copies and Images of all things past, and to come resided there;
round which was the Age, and that with Success of Time part of them used to
fall on mankind like Rhumes and Mildews, just as the Dew fell on Gideon's
Fleece, till the Age was fulfilled.

I also remember, continued he, that Aristotle affirms Homer's words to be
flying, moving, and consequently animated. Besides, Antiphanes said, that
Plato's Philosophy was like words which being spoken in some Country during a
hard Winter are immediately congealed, frozen up and not heard; for, what Plato
taught young Lads could hardly be understood by them, when they were grown Old.
Now, continued he, we should Philosophise and Search whether this be not the
place where those words are thawed.

You Would wonder very much, should this be the Head and Lyre of Orpheus. When the
Thracian Women had torn him to Pieces, they threw his Head and Lyre into the
River Hebrus; down which they floated to the Euxine Sea, as far as the Island
of Lesbos, the Head continually uttering a doleful Song, as it were, lamenting
the Death of Orpheus, and the Lyre with the Wind's impulse moving its strings,
and Harmoniously Accompanying the Voice. Let Us see if we cannot discover them
hereabouts.

CHAP. XLVI. How among the Frozen Words Pantagruel found some odd ones.
THe Skipper made answer; Be not afraid, my Lord, we are on the Confines of the
Frozen Sea, on which about the beginning of last Winter happened a great and
bloody Fight between the Arimaspians and the Nephelibates. Then the words and
cries of Men and Women, the hacking, slashing, and hewing of Battle-axes, the
shocking, knocking, and joulting of Armours, and Harnesses, the neighing of
Horses, and all other Martial din and noise, froze in the Air; and now the
rigor of the Winter being over by the succeeding serenity and warmth of the
Weather, they melt and are heard.

By jingo, quoth Panurge, the Man talks somewhat like, I believe him; but could
n't we see some of 'em? Methinks I have read that on the edge of the Mountain
on which Moses received the the Judaic Law, the People saw the Voices sensibly.
-- Here, here, said Pantagruel, here are some that are not yet thawed. He then
throw'd us on the Deck whole handfulls of frozen Words, which seemed to us like
your rough Sugar-Plumbs, of many colors, like those used in Heraldry, some
words Gules, [This means also Jests and merry sayings] some Vert, some Azur,
some Black, some Or, [This means also fair words;] and when we had somewhat
warmed them between our Hands, they melted like Snow, and we really heard them,
but could not understand them, for it was a Barbarous Gibberish; one of them
only that was pretty big, having been warmed between Friar Jhon's Hands, gave a
sound much like that of Chestnuts when they are thrown into the fire without
being first cut, which made us all start. This was the report of a Field-piece
in its time, cried Friar Jhon.

Panurge prayed Pantagruel to give him some more; but Pantagruel told him, that
to give words was the part of a Lover. Sell me some then, I pray you, cried
Panurge. That Is the part of a Lawyer, returned Pantagruel. I would sooner sell
you silence, though at a dearer Rate, as Demosthenes formerly sold it by the
means of his Argentangina or Silver Squinsey.

However he threw three or four Handfulls of them on the Deck, among which I
deceived some very sharp words, and some bloody words, which the Pilot said,
used sometimes to go back and recoil to the place whence they came, but 'twas
with a slit wee-sand; we also saw some terrible words, and some others not very
pleasant to the Eye.

When they had been all melted together, we heard a strange noise, hin, hin,
hin, hin, his, tick, tock, taack, brededin, brededack, frr, frr, frr, bou, bou,
bou, bou, bou, bou, bou, bou, track, track, trr, trr, trr, trrr, trrrrrr, on,
on, on, on, on, on, ououououou, gog, magog, and I do not know what other
barbarous words, which the Pilot said, were the noise made by the Charging
Squadrons, the shock and neighing of Horses.

Then we heard some large ones go off like Drums and Fifes, and others like
Clarions and Trumpets. Believe me, we had very good sport with them. I would
fain have saved some merry odd words, and have preserved them in Oil, as Ice
and Snow are kept, and between clean Straw. But Pantagruel would not let me,
saying, that it is a folly to hoard up what we are never like to want, or have
always at hand, odd quaint, merry and fat words of Gules never being scarce
among all good and jovial Pantagruelists.

Panurge somewhat vexed Friar Jhon, and put him in the pouts; for he took him
at his word, while he dreamt of nothing less. This caused the Friar to threaten
him with such a piece of Revenge as was put upon G. Jousseaume, who having
taken the merry Patelin at his word, when he had overbid himself in some Cloth,
was afterward fairly taken by the Horns like a Bullock, by his jovial Chapman,
whom he took at his word like a Man. Panurge well knowing that threat'ned folks
live long, bobb'd, and made mouths at him, in token of Derision, then cried,
would I had here the Word of the Holy Bottle, without being thus obliged to go
further in Pilgrimage to her.

CHAP. LVII. How Pantagruel went ashore at the Dwelling of Gaster the first
Master of Arts in World.
THat day Pantagruel went ashore in an Island which for Situation and Governor
may be said not to have its fellow. When you just come into it, you find it
rugged, craggy, barren, unpleasant to the Eye, painful to the Feet, and almost
as inaccessible as the Mountain of Dauphine, which is somewhat like a
Toad-stool, and was never climbed, as any can remember, by any but Doyac, who
had the charge of King Charles the Eighth's Train of Artillary,

This same Doyac with strange Tools and Engines, gained that Mountain's top,
and there he found an old Ram. It puzzled many a wise Head to guess how it got
thither. Some said that some Eagle, or great Horn-Coot having carried it
thither, while 'twas yet a Lambkin, it had got away and saved it self among the
Bushes.

As for us, having with much toil and sweat overcome the difficult ways at the
entrance, we found the top of the Mountain so fertile, healthful, and pleasant,
that I thought I was then in the true Garden of Eden or Earthly Paradise, about
whose Situation our good Theologues are in such a quandary, and keep such a
pother.

As for Pantagruel, he said, That here was the Seat of Arete (that is as much as
to say, Virtue) described by Hesiod; this however, with submission to better
Judgments. The Ruler of the place was one Master Gaster the first Master of
Arts in this World; for if you believe that Fire is the great Master of Arts,
as Tully writes, you very much wrong him and your self; alas, Tully never
believed this. On the other side, if you fancy Mercury to be the first Inventer
of Arts, as our ancient D^uids believed of old, you are mightily beside the
Mark. The Satirist's Sentence, that affirms Master Gaster to be Master of all
Arts is true. With him peacefully resided old Goody Penia alias Poverty, the
Mother of the Ninty Nine Muses, on whom Porus the Lord of Plenty formerly begot
Love that Noble Child, the Mediator of Heaven and Earth, as Plato affirms in
Symposio.

We were all obliged to pay our homage and swear Allegiance to that migh^y
Sovereign; for he is Imperious, Severe, Blunt, Hard, Uneasy, Inflexible; you
cannot make him believe, represent to him, or persuade him any thing.

He does not hear; and as the Egyptians said, That Harpocrates the God of
Silence named Sigalion in Greek was Astome, that is, without a Mouth; so Gaster
was created without Ears, even like the Image of Jupiter in Candia.

He only speaks by Signs, but those Signs are more readily obeyed by every one,
than the Statutes of Senates, or Commands of Monarchs; neither will he admit
the least Let, or delay in his Summons. You say, that when a Lion roars all
the Beasts at a considerable distance round about, as far as his Roar can be
heard, are seized with a shivering. This is written, It Is true, I have seen it.
I assure you, that at Master Gaster's Command, the very Heavens tremble, and
all the Earth shakes, his Command is called, Do this or dye: Needs must whom
the Devil drives, there is no gainsaying of it.

The Pilot was telling us how on a certain Time, after the manner of the
Members that mutin'd against the Belly, as Aesop describes it, the whole
Kingdom of the Somates went off into a direct Faction against Gaster, resolving
to throw off his Yoke, but they soon found their mistake and most humbly
submitted, for otherwise they had all been Famished.

What Companies soever he is in, none dispute with him for Precedence or
Superiority, he still goes first, tho Kings, Emperors, or even the Pope were
there. So he held the first Place at the Council of Basle, tho some will tell
you that the Council was tumultuous by the Contentions and Ambition of many for
Priority.

Every one is busied, and labors to serve him; And indeed, to make amends for
this, he does this good to Mankind, as to invent for them All Arts, Machines,
Trades, Engines, and Crafts: he even instructs Brutes in Arts which are against
their Nature, making Poets of Ravens, Jack-Daws, chattering Jays, Parrots and
Starlings, and Poetresses of Magpies, teaching them to utter human Languages,
Speak and Sing; and All for the Gut. He reclaims and tames Eagles, Gerfaulcons,
Faulcons gentle, Sakers, Lanniers, Gosse-hawks, Spar-hawks, Merlins, Hagards,
Passengers, Wild rapacious Birds; so that setting them free in the Air,
whenever he thinks fit, as high and as long as he pleases, he keeps them
suspended, straying, flying, hovering and courting him above the Clouds: then
on a sudden he makes them stoop and come down amain from Heaven next to the
Ground; and all for the Gut.

Elephants, Lions, Rhinocerotes, Bears, Horses, Mares, and Dogs, he teaches to
Dance, Prance, Vault, Fight, Swim, hide themselves, fetch and carry what he
pleases; and all for the Gut.

Salt and fresh water Fish, Whales, and the Monsters of the Main, he brings up
from the bottom of the Deep; Wolves he forces out of the Woods, Bears out of
the Rocks, Foxes out of their Holes, and Serpents out of the Ground; and all
for the Gut.

In short, he is so unruly, that in his Rage he devours all Men and Beasts; as
was seen among the Vascons, when Q Metellus besieged them in the Sertorian
Wa^s; among the Saguntines besieged by Hannibal; among the Jews besieged by the
Romans, and Six hundred more; and all for the Gut. When his Regent Penia takes
a Progress, wherever she moves, all Senates are shut up, all Statutes
repealed, all Orders and Proclamations vain; she knows, obeys, and has no Law.
All shun her, in every Place choosing rather to expose themselves to Shipwracks
at Sea, and venture through Fire, Rocks, Caves and Precipices, than be seized
by that most dreadful Tormentor.

CHAP. LVIII. How at the Court of the Master of Ingenuity, Pantagruel detested
the Engastrimythes and the Gastrolaters.
AT the Court of that great Master of Ingenuity, Pantagruel observed two sorts
of troublesome and too officious Apparitors, whom he very much detested. The
first, were called Engastrimythes; the others, Gastrolaters.

The first pretended to be descended of the Ancient Race of Euricles; and for
this brought the Authority of Aristophanes, in his Comedy called, The Wasps;
whence of old they were called Euriclians, as Plato writes, and Plutarch in his
Book of the Cessation of Oracles. In the Holy Decrees 26 Qu. 3. they are styled
Ventriloqui; and the same Name is given them in Ionian by Hippocrates, in his
Fifth Book of Epid. as Men who speak from the Belly. Sophocles calls them
Sternomante^. These were Southsayers, Enchanters, Cheats, who gulled the Mob,
and seemed not to speak and give Answers from the Mouth; but from the Belly.

Such a one, about the Year of our Lord 1513. was Jacoba Rodogina, an Italian
Woman of mean Extract; From whose Belly, we, as well as an infinite Number of
others at Ferrara, and elsewhere, have often heard the Voice of the Evil Spirit
speak, low, feeble and small indeed; but yet very distinct, articulate and
intelligible, when she was sent for, out of Curiosity, by the Lords and Princes
of the Cisalpine Gaul. To remove all Manner of Doubt, and be assured that this
was not a Trick, they used to have her Stripped stark naked, and caused her
Mouth and Nose to be stopped. This Evil Spirit would be called Curl^d-Pate, or
Cincinnatulo, seeming pleased when any called him by that Name; at which, he
was always ready to Answer. If any Spoke to him of things past or present, he
gave pertinent Answers, sometimes to the Amazement of the Hearers; but if of
things to come, then the Devil was gravelled, and used to Lie as fast as a Dog
can Trot. Nay, sometimes he seemed to own his Ignorance, instead of an Answer,
letting out a rouzing ^art, or muttering some words with barbarous and uncouth
Inflexions, and not to be understood.

As for the Gastrolaters, they stuck close to one another in Knots and Gangs.
Some of them Merry, Wanton, and Soft as so many Milksops; others lowering, grim,
dogged, demure and crabbed, all idle, mortal foes to business, spending half
their Time in sleeping, and the rest in doing nothing, a Rentcharge and dead
unnecessary Weight on the Earth, as Hesiod says; afraid (as we judged) of
offending or l^ssening their Paunch. Others were masked, disguised, and so
oddly dressed, that 'twould have done you good to have seen them.

There Is a Saying, and several Ancient Sages write, That the Skill of Nature
appears wonderful in the Pleasure which she seems to have taken in the
Configuration of Sea-shells, so great is their Variety in figures, colors,
streaks, and inimitable shapes, I protest, the Variety we perceived in the
Dresses of the Gastrolatrous Coquillons was not less. They all owned Gaster for
their Supreme God, adored him as a God, offered him Sacrifices as to their
Omnipotent Deity, owned no other God, served, loved, and honored him above all
things.

You would have thought that the Holy Apostle spoke of those, when he said,
Phil. Chap. 3. Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are Enemies of the Cross of Christ: whose End is
Destruction, whose God is their Belly. Pantagruel compared them to the Cyclops
Polyphemus, whom Euripides brings in speaking thus, I only Sacrifice to my self
(not to the Gods) and to this Belly of Mine, the greatest of all the Gods.

CHAP. LIX. Of the ridiculous Statue Manduce; and how, and what the
Gastrolaters Sacrifice to their Ventripotent God.
WHile we fed our Eyes with the sight of the Phyzzes and Actions of these
lozelly Gulligutted Gastrolaters, we on a sudden heard the Sound of a Musical
Instrument called a Bell, at which all of them placed themselves in Rank and
File as for some mighty Battle, every one according to his Office, Degree and
Seniority.

In this Order, they moved toward Master Gaster, after a plump, young, lusty
gorbellied Fellow, who on a long Staff fairly gilt, carried a wooden Statue
grossly carved and as scurvily daubed o'r with Paint, such a one as Plautus,
Juvenal and Pomp. Festus describe it. At Lions during the Carnaval it is called
Maschecrouste, or Gnaw crust; they called this Manduce.

It was a monstrous, ridiculous, hideous Figure, fit to fright little Children:
Its Eves were bigger than its Belly, and its Head larger than all the rest of
its Body, well Mouth-cloven however, having a goodly Pair of wide, broad Jaws,
lined with two Rows of Teeth, upper Teer and under Teer, which, by the Magic of
a small Twine hid in the hollow part of the Golden Staff, were made to clash,
clatter and rattle dreadfully one against another, as they do at Metz with St.
Clement's Dragon.

Coming near the Gastrolaters, I saw they were followed by a great Number of
fat Waiters and Tenders laden with Baskets, Dossers, Hampers, Dishes, Wallets
Pots and Kettles: Then under the Conduct of Manduce, and singing I don't know
what Dithyrambics, Crepalocomes, and Epenons, opening their Baskets and Pots,
they offered their God, White Hippocras with dry Toasts. White-Bread. Brown
Bread. Carbonadoes, six sor^s. Brawn. Sweet-breads. Fricass^es nine sorts.
Monastical Browess. Gravy-soupe. Hotch-pots. Soft-Bread. Household Bread.
Cap^rotadoes. Cold Loins of Veal with Spice. Zinziberine. Beatille Pyes.
Brewess. Marrow Bones, Toast and Cabbidge. Hashes.


Eternal Drink intermixed. Brisk delicate White Wind led the Van, Claret and
Champaign followed, cool, nay, as cold as the very Ice, I say, filled and
offered in large Silver Cups. Then they offered, Chitterlins garnished with
Mustard. Saucidges. Neats Tongues. Hung Beef. Chines and Pease. Hogs-haslets.
Scotch Collops. Puddings. Cervelats. Bolonia Sawcidges. Hams. Brawn-Heads.
Powdered Venison, with Turnips. Pickled Olives.


All this associated with Sempiternal Liquor. Then they housed within his
Muzzle, Legs of Mutton with Shallots. Ollas. Lumber-Pyes, with hot Sauce. Ribs
of Pork, with Onion Sauce. Roast Capons basted with their own Dripping.
Caponets. Caviar and Toast. Fawns, Deer. Hares, Leverets. Partridges, and young
Partridges. Pluvers. Dwarf herons. Teals. Duckers. Bittors. Shovelers.
Curlu^s. Wood-hens. Coots with Leeks. Fat Kids. Shoulders of Mutton with
Capers. Sir-Loins of Beef. Breasts of Veal. Phesants and Phesant poots.
Peacocks. Storks. Woodcocks. Snipes. Hortolans. Turkey-Cocks, Hen-Turkeys and
Turkey-poots. Stock doves, and Wood-culvers. Pigs with Wine sauce. Blackbirds,
Owsels, and Rayles. Moor-hens. B^stards and B^stard poots. Fig peckers. Young
Guiny hens. Flemmings. Cignets. A Renforcement of Vinegar intermixed. Veni^on
P^st^es. Lark Pyes. Dormi^e Pyes. Cabretto Pasties. Roe-buck Pasties. Pigeon
Pyes. Kid Pasties. Capon Pyes. Bacon Pyes. Souc'd Hogs feet. Fried Pasty crust
Forced Capons. Parmesan Cheese. Red and Pale Hippocras. Gold-peaches.
Artichokes. Dry and wet Sweetmeats 78 sorts. Boiled Hens and fat Capons
maronated. Pullets with Eggs. Chickens. Rabbets and sucking Rabbets. Quails and
young Quails. Pigeons Squobbs and Squeakers. Herons and young Herons.
Feldivers. Olaves. Thrushes. Young Sea-Ravens. Geese, Goslins. Queests.
Widgeons. Mavises. Grouses. Turtles. Doe-Connys. Hedge hogs. Snytes. Then large
Puffs. Thistle-Finches. Whore's-Farts. Fritters. Cakes, sixteen sorts. Crisp
Wafers. Quince Tarts. Curds and Cream. Whipped Cream. Preserved Myrabolans.
Gellies. Welsh Barrapyclids. Macaroons. Tarts, twenty sorts. Lemon Cream,
Rasberry Cream, etc. Comfits, 100 Colors. Cream Wafers. Cream Cheese.


Vinegar brought up the Rear to wash the Mouth, and for fear of the Squinsy:
Also Toasts to scower the Grinders.

CHAP. LX. What the Gastrolaters Sacrificed to their God on interlarded
Fish-Days.
PAntagruel did not like this Pack of Rascally Scoundrels with their manifold
Kitchen Sacrifices, and would have been gone, had not Epistemon prevailed with
him to stay and see the End of the Farce; he then asked the Skipper, what the
idle Lobcocks used to sacrifice to their gorbellied God on interlarded
Fish-days? For his first Course, said the Skipper, they give him Caviar.
Botargoes. Fresh Butter. Pease soupe. Spinach. Fresh Herrings full-roed.
Salats, a hundred Varieties, of Creeses, sodden Hop-tops, Bishops-Cods,
Sellery, Sives, Rampions, Jew's-Ears, (a sort of Mushrooms that sprout out of
old Elders) Sparagus, Woodbind, and a World of others. Red-herrings. Pilchards.
Anchovies. Fry of Tunny. Colly flowers. Beans. Salt Salmon. Pickled Griggs.
Oysters in the Shell.


Then he must drink or the Devil would gripe him at the Throat; This therefore
they take care to prevent, and nothing's wanting. Which being done, they give
him Lampreys with Hippocras sauce.

Gurna^ds. Salmon-Trouts. Barbels great and small. Roaches. Cockrells. Menews.
Thornbacks. Sleeves. Sturgeons. Sheath fish. Mackerels. Maids. Plaice. Fried
Oysters. Cockles. Prawnes. Smelts. Rock fish. Gracious Lords. Sword fish.
Skate-fish. Lamprills. ^^gs. Pickerells. Golden Carps. Burbates. Salmons.
Salmon-perls. Dolphins. Barn Trouts. Miller's-Thumbs. Preeks. Bret-fish.
Flounders. Sea nettles. Mullets. Gudgeons. Dabs and Sandings. Haddocks. Carpes.
Pyk^s. Bot^toes. Rochets. Sea-Bears. Sharplings. Tunnyes. Silver Eels. Chevins.
Cray-fish. Pallours. Shrimps. Congers. Porposes. Bases. Shads. Murenes, a sort
of Lampreys. Graylings. Smys. Turbots. Trouts not above a foot long. Salmons.
Meagers. Sea-Breams. Halibuts. Soles. Dog's tongue or Kind-fool. Muskles.
Lobsters. Great-Prawnes. Dace. Bleaks. Tenches. Ombers. Fresh Cods. Dried
Melwells. Darefish. Fausens, and Griggs. Eel-pouts. Tortoises. Serpents, i. e.
Wood-Eeles. Dorces. Moor-game. Pearches. Loaches. Crab fish. Snails and Whelks.
Froggs.
If, when he had crammed all this down his Guttural Trap-door, he did not
immediately make the Fish swim again in his Paunch, Death would pack him off in
a trice; Special care is taken to Antidote his Godship with Vine-tree-Syrup.
Then is Sacrificed to him, Haberdines, Poor-Jack, minglemangled mishmash'd, etc.

Eggs fried, beaten, buttered, poach'd, hardened, boiled, broyl'd, stewed,
sliced, roasted in the Embers, tossed in the Chimney, etc. Stock fish. Green
fish. Sea-Batts. Cod's-Ounds. Sea-Pikes.
Which to concoct and digest the more easily, Vinegar is Multiplied. For the
latter part of their Sacrifices they offer, Rice Milk and hasty Pudding.
Buttered Wheat and Flummery. Watergruel, and Milk-Porradge. Frumenty and
Bony-claber. Stewed Prunes, and baked Bullies. Pistachoes or Fistick-Nuts.
Figgs. Almond-Butter. Skirret-Root. White-Pot. Raisins. Dates. Chestnuts and
Wallnuts. Filberds. Parsenips. Artichoakes.


Perpetuity of Soaking with the whole.

'Twas none of their Fault I Will assure you, if this same God of theirs was not
publicly, preciously and plentifully served in his Sacrifices, better yet than
Heliogabalus's Idol; nay more than Bell and the Dragon in Babylon under King
Balshazzar. Yet Gaster had the Manners to own that he was no God, but a poor,
vile, wretched Creature. And as King Antigonus, first of the Name, when one
Hermodotus, (as Poets will flatter, espepecially Princes) in some of his
Fustian dubbed him a God, and made the Sun adopt him for his Son, said to him,
My Lasanophore, (or in plain English, my Groom of the Close stool) can give
thee the Lie; so Master Gaster very civilly used to send back his Bigoted
Worshipers to his Close-stool, to see, smell, taste, philosophise and examine
what kind of Divinity they could pick out of his Sir-reverence.

CHAP. LXI. How Gaster invented Means to get and preserve Corn.
THose Gastrolatrous Hobgoblins being withdrawn, Pantagruel carefully minded
the Famous Master of Arts, Gaster. You know that by the Institution of Nature,
Bread has been assigned him for Provision and Food, and that as an addition to
this Blessing, he should never want the means to get Bread.

Accordingly, from the beginning he invented the Smith's Art and Husbandry to
manure the ground that it might yield him Corn; he invented Arms, and the Art
of War to defend Corn; Physic and Astronomy, with other parts of Mathematics,
which might be useful to keep Corn a great number of years in safety from the
injuries of the Air, Beasts, Robbers and Purloiners; he invented Water, Wind
and Hand-Mills, and a thousand other Engines to grind Corn, and turn it into
Meal, Leaven to make the Dough ferment, and the use of Salt to give it a
savor, for he knew that nothing bred more Diseases than heavy, unleavened,
unsavory Bread.

He found a way to get Fire to Bake it; Hour-glasses, Dials and Clocks to mark
the time of its Baking; and as some Countries wanted Corn, he contrived means
to convey some out of one Country into another.

He had the Wit to Pimp for Asses and Mares, Animals of different species, that
they might Copulate for the Generation of a third, which we call Mules, more
strong and fit for hard service than the other two. He invented Carts and
Wagons to draw him along with greater ease; and as Seas and Rivers hindered his
Progress, he devised Boats, Galleys and Ships (to the astonishment of the
Elements) to waft him over to barbarous, unknown, and far distant Nations,
thence to bring, or thither to carry Corn.

Besides, seeing that, when he had tilled the ground, some years the Corn
perished in it for want of Rain in due season, in others rotted, or was drowned
by its excess, sometimes spoiled by Hail, eat by Worms in the Ear, or beaten
down by Storms, and so his Stock was destroyed on the ground; we were told that
ever since the days of Yore, he has found out a way to Conjure the Rain down
from Heaven only with cutting certain Grass, common enough in the Field, yet
known to very few, some of which was then shown us: I took it to be the same as
the Plant, one of whose Boughs being dipped by Jove's Priest into the Agrian
Fountain, on the Lycian Mountain in Arcadia in time of Drought, raised Vapors
which gathered into Clouds, and then dissolved into Rain, that kindly moistened
the whole Country.

Our Master of Arts was also said to have found a way to keep the Rain up in
the Air, and make it fall into the Sea; also to annihilate the Hail, suppress
the Winds, and remove Storms as the Methanensians of Troezene used to do. And
as in the Fields Thieves and Plunderers sometimes stole and took by force the
Corn and Bread which others had toiled to get, he invented the Art of Building
Towns, Forts, and Castles, to hoard and secure that staff of Life; on the other
hand, finding none in the Fields, and hearing that it was hoarded up and
secured in Towns, Forts, and Castles, and watched with more care than ever were
the Golden Pippins of the Hesperides, he turned Ingenier, and found ways to
beat, storm, and demolish Forts and Castles, with Machines, and Warlike
Thunderbolts, battering Rams, Balists, and Catapults, whose shapes were shown
us, not over-well understood by our Ingeniers, Architects, and other Disciples
of Vitruvius, as Master Philebert de l'Orme, King Megistus's principal
Architect has owned to us.

And seeing that sometimes all these Tools of Destruction were baffled by the
cunning subtilty, or the subtle, cunning (which you please) of Fortifiers, he
lately Invented Cannons, Fieldpieces, Culverins, Bombards, Basilisko's,
Murdering Instruments that dart Iron, Leaden, and Brazen Balls, some of them
outweighing huge Anvils; this by the means of a most dreadful Powder, whose
Hellish Compound and Effect has even amazed Nature, and made her own her self
outdone by Art; the Oxydracan Thunders, Hails and Storms, by which the people
of that Name immediately destroyed their Enemies in the Field, being but mere
Pot-guns to these. For, one of our great Guns when used, is more dreadful, more
terrible, more diabolical, and maims, tears, breaks, slays, mows down, sweeps
away more Men, and causes a greater Consternation and Destruction than a
hundred Thunderbolts.

CHAP. LXII. How Gaster invented an Art to avoid being hurt or touched by
Cannon Balls.
GAster having secured himself with his Corn within strong Holds, has sometimes
been attacked by Enemies, his Fortresses, by that thrice threefold cursed
Instrument, levelled and destroyed, his dearly beloved Corn and Bread snatched
out of his Mouth, and sacked by a Titannick Force, therefore he then sought
means to preserve his Walls, Bastions, Rampires, and Sconces from Cannon-shot,
and to hinder the Bullets from hitting him, stopping them in their flight, or
at least from doing him, or the Besiegers and Walls any damage; he showed us a
trial of this, which has been since used by Fronton, and is now common among
the Pastimes and harmless Recreations of the Thelemites. I Will tell you how he
went to work, and pray for the future be a little more ready to believe what
Plutarch affirms to have tried; Suppose a Herd of Goats were all scampering as
if the Devil drove 'em, do but put a bit of Eringo into the Mouth of the
hindmost Nanny, and they will all stop stock-still, in the time you can tell
three.

Thus Gaster, having caused a Brass Faulkon to be charged, with a sufficient
quantity of Gunpowder, well purged from its Sulphur, and curiously made up with
fine Camphir, he then had a suitable Ball put into the Piece, with twenty four
little pellets like Hail-shot, some round, some pearl fashion, then taking his
aim, and levelling it at a Page of his, as if he would have hit him on the
Breast, about sixty strides off the Piece, half way between it and the Page in
a right Line, he hanged on a Gibbet by a Rope a very large Side-rite or
iron-like Stone, otherwise called Herculean, formerly found on Ida in Phrygia
by one Magnes as Nicander writes, and commonly called Load stone: Then he gave
Fire to the Prime on the Piece's Touchhole, which in an instant consuming the
Powder, the Ball and Hail-shot were with incredible violence and swiftness
hurried out of the Gun at its Muzzle, that the Air might penetrate to its
Chamber, where otherwise would have been a Vacuum; which Nature abhors so much
that this Universal Machine, Heaven, Air, Land, and Sea would sooner return to
the Primitive Chaos than admit the least void any where. Now the Ball and small
shot which threatened the Page with no less than quick Destruction, lost their
impetuosity, and remained suspended and hovering round the Stone, nor did any
one of them, notwithstanding the fury with which they rushed, reach the Page.

Master Gaster could do more than all this yet, if you will believe me, for he
invented a way how to cause Bullets to fly backwards, and recoyl on those that
sent 'em, with as great a force, and in the very numerical parallel for which
the Guns were planted. And indeed, why should he have thought this difficult,
seeing the Herb Ethiopis opens all Locks whatsoever, and an Echineis or Remora,
a silly weakly Fish, in spite of all the Winds that blow from the 32 Points of
the Compass, will in the midst of a Hurricane make you the biggest First Rate
remain stock still as if she were becalmed, or the Blustering Tribe had blown
their last; nay, and with the Flesh of that Fish preserved with Salt, you may
fish Gold out of the deepest Well that was ever founded with a Plummet, for it
will certainly draw up the precious Metal, since Democritus affirmed it.

Theophrastus believed and experienced that there was an Herb at whose single
touch an Iron Wedge tho never so far driven into a huge log of the hardest Wood
that is, would presently come out, and it is this same Herb your Hickways, alias
Woodpeckers use, when with some mighty Ax any one stops up the hole of their
Nests, which they industriously dig and make in the Trunk of some sturdy Tree.
Since Stags and Hinds when deeply wounded with Darts, Arrows, and Bolts, if
they do but meet the Herb called Dittany, which is common in Candia, and eat a
little of it, presently the shafts come out, and all is well again; even as kind
Venus cured her Beloved By-blow Aeneas, when he was wounded on the right Thigh
with an Arrow by Juturna Turnus's Sister. Since the very Wind of Laurels,
Fig Trees, or Sea-calves, makes the Thunder sheer off, insomuch that it never
strikes them. Since at the sight of a Ram, mad Elephants recover their former
Senses; since mad Bulls coming near wild Fig Trees called Caprifici grow tame,
and will not budge a foot, as if they had the Cramp. Since the Venomous rage of
Vipers is asswag'd, if you but touch them with a Beechen Bough. Since also
Euphorion writes, that in the Isle of Samos, before Juno's Temple was Built
there, he has seen some Beasts called Neades, whose voice made the neighboring
places gape and sink into a Chasm and Abyss. In short, since Elders grow of a
more pleasing sound, and fitter to make Flutes in such places where the crowing
of Cocks is not heard, as the Ancient Sages have writ, and Theophrastus
relates; as if the crowing of a Cock dulled, flatten'd and perverted the Wood
of the Elder, as it is said to astonish and stupify with fear that strong and
resolute Animal, a Lion.

I know that some have understood this of wild Elder, that grows so far from
Towns or Villages that the crowing of Cocks cannot reach near it; and doubtless
that sort ought to be preferred to the stenching common Elder that grows about
decayed and ruined places; but others have understood this in a higher sense,
not litteral, but allegorical, according to the method of the Pythagoreans. As
when it was said that Mercury's Statue could not be made of every sort of Wood,
to which Sentence they give this sense; That God is not to be worshipped in a
vulgar form, but in a chosen and religious manner.

In the same manner by this Elder, which grows far from places where Cocks are
heard, the Ancients meant, that the wise and studious ought not to give their
minds to trivial or vulgar Music, but to that which is Celestial, Divine,
Angelical, more abstracted and brought from remoter parts, that is from a
Region where the crowing of Cocks is not heard; for, to denote a solitary and
unfrequented place, we say, Cocks are never heard to crow there.

CHAP. LXIII. How Pantagruel fell asleep near the Island of Chaneph, and of the
Problems proposed to be solved when he waked.
THE next day merrily pursuing our Voyage we came in sight of the Island of
Chan^ph, where Pantagruel's Ship could not arrive, the Wind chopping about, and
then failing us so that we were becalmed, and could hardly get of head, tacking
about from Starboard to La^board, and from Latboard to Starboard, tho to our
Sails we had added Drablers.

With this accident we were all out of sorts, moping, drooping, metagrabolized
as dull as Dun in the Mire, in Csol fa ut flat out of Tune, off the hinges, and
I don't know howish, without caring to speak one single syllable to each other.

Pantagruel was taking a Nap, slumbering and nodding on the Quarter Deck, by
the Cuddy, with an Heliodorus in his hand, for still 'twas his custom to sleep
better by Book than by Heart.

Epistemon was Conjuring with his Astrolabe to know what Latitude we were in.

Friar Ihon was got into the Cook-room examining by the Ascendant of the Spits,
and the Horoscope of Ragousts and Fricassees what time of day it might then be.

Panurge (sweet Baby!) held a stalk of Pantagruelion, alias Hemp, next his
Tongue, and with it made pretty Bubbles and Bladders.

Gymnast was making Tooth-pickers with Lentisk.

Ponocrates, dozing, doz'd, and dreaming dreamed, tickled himself to make
himself laugh, and with one Finger scratched his Noddle where it did not itch.

Carpalim with a Nut-shell, and a Trencher of Verne, [that's a Card in Gascony]
was making a pretty little merry Windmill, cutting the Card long-ways into four
slips, and fastening them with a Pin to the Unequal of the Nut, and its Concave
to the tarr'd side of the Gunnel of the Ship.

Eusthenes bestriding one of the Guns, was playing on it with his Fingers, as
if it had been a Trump-marine.

Rhizotome with the soft Coat of a Field-Tortoise, alias eclip'd a Mole, was
making himself a Velvet Purse.

Xenomanes was patching up an old weather-beaten Lantern with a Hawk's Jesses.

Our Pilot (good Man!) was pulling Maggots out of the Seamen's Noses.

At last Friar Ihon returning from the Fore-castle, perceived that Pantagruel
was awake. Then breaking this obstinate silence, he briskly and cheerfully
asked him, how a Man should kill Time, and raise good Weather, during a Calm at
Sea?

Panurge, whose Belly thought his Throat cut, backed the Motion presently, and
asked for a Pill to purge Melancholy?

Epistemon also came on, and asked how a Man might be ready to bepiss himself
with Laughing, when he has no heart to be merry?

Gymnast arising, demanded a Remedy for a dimness of Eyes?

Ponocrates, after he had a while rubbed his Noddle, and shak'd his Ears, asked,
How one might avoid Dog-sleep? Hold, cried Pantagruel, the Peripateticks have
wisely made a Rule, that all Problems, Questions and Doubts which are offered
to be solved, ought to be certain, clear, and intelligible; what do you mean by
Dog-sleep? I mean, answered Ponocrates, to sleep fasting in the Sun at
Noonday, as the Dogs do.

Rhizotome, who lay stooping on the Pump, raised his drowsy Head, and lazily
yawning, by natural sympathy, set almost every one in the Ship a yawning too;
then asked for a Remedy against Oscitations and Gapings?

Xenomanes, half puzzled, and tired out with new vamping his antiquated
Lantern, asked, How the Hold of the Stomach might be so well ballasted and
freighted from the Keel to the Main hatch with stores well stowed, that our
humane Vessels might not heeld, or be walt, but well trimmed, and stiff?

Carpalim twirling his diminutive Windmill, asked how many Motions are to be
felt in Nature before a Gentleman may be said to be hungry?

Eusthenes hearing them talk, came from between Decks, and from the Capstern
called out to know why a Man that is fasting, bit by a Serpent also fasting, is
in greater danger of death, than when Man and Serpent have eat their
Breakfasts? Why a Man's fasting-spittle is poisonous to Serpents and venomous
Creatures?

One single solution may serve for all your Problems, Gentlemen, answered
Pantagruel, and one single Medicine for all such symptoms and accidents. My
answer shall be short, not to the you with a long needless train of pedantick
Cant: The Belly has no Ears, nor is it to be filled with fair words; you shall
be answered to content by signs and gestures. As formerly at Rome Tarquin the
Proud, its last King, sent an answer by signs to his Son Sextus, who was among
the Gabii, (saying this, he pulled the string of a little Bell, and Friar Ihon
hurried away to the Cock-room) The Son having sent his Father a Messenger to
know how he might bring the Gabii under a close subjection; the King
mistrusting the Messenger, made him no answer, and only took him into his
Privy-garden, and in his presence with his Sword lopt off the Heads o^ the tall
Poppies that were there. The Express returned without any other dispatch, yet
having related to the Prince what he had seen his Father do, he easily
understood that by those signs he advised him to cut off the Heads of the chief
Men in the Town, the better to keep under the rest of the people.

CHAP. LXIV. How Pantagruel gave no answer to the Problems.
PAntagruel then asked, what sorts of people dwell'd in that Damned Island?
They are, answered Xenomanes, all Hypocrites, holy Mountebanks, Tumblers of
Beads, Mumblers of Ave Mary's, spiritual Comedians, sham Saints, Hermits, all
of them poor Rogues, who like the Hermit of Lormont between Blaye and Bordeaux,
live wholly on Alms given them by Passengers. Catch me there if you can, cried
Panurge, may the Devil's Head-cook conjure my Bum-gut into a pair of Bellows,
if ever you find me among them. Hermits, sham Saints, living Forms of
Mortification, holy Mountebanks, avaunt, in the Name of your Father Satan get
out of my sight; when the Devil's a Hog you shall eat Bacon. I shall not forget
yet a while our fat Concilipetes of Chesil; O that Beelzebub and Astaroth had
counseled them to hang themselves out of the way, and they had do^e't, we had
not then suffered so much by devilish Storms as we did for having seen 'em.
Harkee me, dear Rogue, Xenomanes, my Friend, I pr'y thee are these He^^^i^s,
Hypocrites, and Eves-droppers, Maids ^r Married? Is there any thing of the
Feminine Gender among them? Could a Body Hypocritically take there a small
hypocritical Touch? Will they lie backwards, and let out their forerooms?
There Is a fine question to be asked, cried Pantagruel! Yes, yes, answered
Xenomanes, you may find there many goodly Hypocritesses, ^olly spiritual
Actresses, kind Hermitesses, Women that have a plaguey deal of Religion; then
there is the Copies of 'em, little Hypocritillons, Sham-sanctitos, and
Hermitillons: Foh, away with them, cried Friar Ihon, a young Saint an old
Devil, (mark this, an old saying, and as true a one, as a young Whore an old
Saint. Were there not such, continued Xenomanes, the Isle of Caneph for want of
a multiplication of Progeny, had long ere this been desert and desolate.

Pantagruel sent them by Gymnast in the Pinnace seventy eight thousand fine
pretty little Gold Half-Crowns, of those that are marked with a Lantern. After
this he asked, What Is of Clock? Past nine, answered Epistemon. It Is then the
best time to go to Dinner, said Pantagruel, for the sacred Line so celebrated
by Aristophanes in his Play called Concionatores is at hand, never failing when
the shadow is decempedal.

Formerly among the Persians Dinner time was at a set hour only for Kings; as
for all others, their Appetite and their Belly was their Clock; when that
chim'd, they thought it time to go to Dinner. So we find in Pla^tus a certain
Parasite making a heavy do, and sadly railing at the Inventors of Hour-glasses
and Dials, as being unnecessary things, there being no Clock more regular than
the Belly.

Diogenes being asked at what times a Man ought to eat, answered, The Rich when
he is hungry, the Poor when he has any thing to eat. Physi^ians more properly
say, that the Canonical Hours are, To rise at five, to dine at nine,
To sup at five, to sleep at nine.


The famous King Petorsi^i^'s Magic was different -- here the Officers for the
Gut came in, and got ready the Tables and Cupboards, laid the Cloth, whose
sight and pleasant smell were very comfortable; and brought Plates, Napkins,
Salts, Tankards, Flaggons, Tall-boys, Ewers, Tumblers, Cups, Goblets, Basins,
and Cisterns.

Friar Ihon at the head of the Stewards, Sewe^s, Yeomen of the Pantry, and of
the Mouth, Tasters, Carvers, Cup-bearers, and Cupboard-keepers, brought four
stately Pasties, so huge that they put me in mind of the four Bastions at
Turin; ^ods fish, how manfully did they storm them! What havoc did they make
with the long train of Dishes that came after them, how bravely did they stand
to their Pan puddings, and paid off their Dust? How merrily did they soak
their Noses!

The Fruit was not yet brought in, when a fresh gale at West and by North began
to fill the Main-course, Misen-sail, Fore-sail, Tops, and Top-gallants; for
which Blessing they all sung diverse Hymns of Thanks and Praise.

When the Fruit was on the Table, Pantagruel asked. Now tell me, Gentlemen, a^e
your Doubts fully resolved or no? I gape and yawn no more, answered Rhizotome;
I sleep no longer like a Dog, said Ponocrates; I have cleared my Eyesight, said
Gymnast; I have broke my Fast, said Eusthenes; so that for this whole Day shall
be secure from the danger of my Spittle Aspes. Amphisbenes. Anerudutes.
Abedissimons. Alhatrafs. Ammobates. Apimaos. Alhatabans. A^actes. Asterions.
Alcharates. Arges. Spiders. Starry Lizards. Attelabes. A^calabotes.
Haemorrhoids. Basilisk^. Fitches. Sucking Water-snakes Black Wag leg-flies.
Spanish flies. Catoblepes. Horned Snakes. Caterpillars. Crocodiles. Toads.
Night-mares. Mad Dogs. Colotes. Cychriodes. Cafezates. Ca^hares. Snakes.
Cuhersks, two Tongued Adders. Amphibious Serpents. Cenchres. Cock^trices.
Dip^ades. Domeses. D^^inades. Dragons. Elopes. Enbyd^^des. Falvises. Galeotes.
Harmenes. Handons. Icles. Jarraries. Illcines. Pharao's M^ce. Kedusudures.
Sea-hares. Chalcidic Ne^^s. Footed Serpents. Manticores. Mulures.
Mouse-serpents. Shrew mice. Milia^es. Megalaunes. Spitting Asps. Porphyri.
Parcades. Phalangs. Pemphredons. Pine-tree-worms. Rutelae Worms. Rhagia.
Rhaganes. Salamanders. Sloe-worms. Stellions. Scorpones. Scorpions. Horn worm^.
Scalavotins. Solofruidars. Deaf-Asps. Horse Leeches. Salt haters. Rot Serpents.
Stink fish. Stuphes. Sabrins. Blood-sucking-flies. Hornfretters. Scolopendres.
Tarantolas. Blind-worms. Tetragnathias. Teristals. Vipers, etc.


CHAP. LXV. How Pantagruel past the Time with his Servants.
IN what Hierarchy of such Venomous Creatures do you place Panurge's future
Spouse, asked Friar Jhon? Art thou speaking ill of Women, cried Panurge, thou
mangy Sco^ndrel, thou sorry, nod^^ ^peak'd, shaveling M^^^? By the Cenomanic
Paunch and Gixie, said Epistemon, Euripides has written, and makes Andromache
say it, that by Industry, and the help of the Gods, Men had found Remedies
against all poisonous Creatures; but none was yet found against a bad Wife.

This flaunting Euripides, cried Panurge, was gabbling against Women every
foot, and therefore was devoured by Dogs, as a Judgment from Above; as
Aristophanes observes -- Let Us go on, let him speak that is next. I can leak now
like any Stone-horse, said then Epistemon. I am, said Xenomanes, full as an Egg
and round as a Hoop; my Ship's Hold can hold no more, and will n^w make (...)
to bear a steady Sail. Said Carpa^^n, A Truce with Thirst, a Truce with Hunger;
They Are strong, but Wine and Meat are stronger. I Am no more in the Dump, cried
Panurge, my Heart's a Pound lighter. I Am in the right ^^e now, as brisk as a
Body-Louse, and as merry as a Beggar. For my part, I know what I do when I
drink; and it is a true thing (though it is in your Euripide^) that is said by
that jolly Toper Silenus of blessed Memory, that The Man's emphatically Mad,
Who drinks the Best, yet can be sa^.


We must not fail to return our humble and hearty Thanks to the Being, who,
with this good Bread, this cool delicious Wine, these good Meats and ra^e
Dainties, removes from our Bodies and Minds these Pains and Perturbati^ns, and
at the same Time, fills us with Pleasure and with Food.

But methinks, Sir, you did not give an Answer to Friar Jhon's Question; which,
as I take it, was, how to raise good Weather? Since you ask no more than this
easy Question, answered Pantagruel, I Will strive to give you satisfaction, and
some other time we'll talk of the rest of the Problems, if you will.

Well then, Friar Jhon asked how good Weather might be raised: have we not
raised it? Look up, and see our full Topsails; Ha^k! how the Wind whistles
through the Shrouds, what a stiff Gale it blows; observe the Rattling of the
Tacklings, and see the Sheats, that fasten the Main sail b^hind; the force of
the Wind puts them upon the stretch. While we passed our time merrily, the d^ll
Weather also passed away, and while we raised the Glasses to our Mouths, we
also raised the Wind by a secret sympathy in Nature.

Thus Atlas and Hercules Clubb'd to raise and under^ the ^^lling Sky, if you will
believe the wise Mythologists; but they raised it some half an inch too high;
Atlas to entertain his Guest Hercules more pleasantly, and Hercu^es to make
himself amends for the thirst which sometime before had tormented him in the
Deserts of Africa. -- Your good Father, said Friar Jhon, interrupting him,
takes care to free many People from such an inconveniency; for I have been told
by many venerable Doctors, that his chief Butler Turelupin saves above eighteen
hundred Pipes of Wine yearly, to make Servants and all comers and goers drink
before they are a dry. -- As the Camels and Dromedaries of a Caravan, continued
Pantagruel, use to drink for the thirst that is past, for the present, and for
that to come, so did Hercules; and being thus excessively raised, this gave a
new motion to the Sky, which is that of Titubation and Tr^pidation, about which
our crack-brain'd Astrologers make such a pother. -- This, said Panurge, makes
the saying good.

While jolly Companions ca^r^use it together,
A fig for the Storm; it gives way to good Weather.
Nay, continued Pantagruel, some will tell you, that we have not only shortened
the time of the Calm, but also much disburthen'd the Ship, not like Aesop's
Basket, by easing it of the Provision, but by breaking our Fasts, and that a
Man is more Terrestrial and heavy when fasting, than when he has eaten and
drank, even as they pretend that he weighs more dead than living. However it is,
you will grant they are in the right, who take their Mornings draught, and
Breakfast before a long Journey, then say that the Horses will perform the
better, and that a Spur in the Head, is worth two in the Flank; or in the same
Horse Dialect, That a Cup in the Pats
Is a Mile in the Gate.
Don't you know that formerly the Amycleans worshipped the Noble Father Bacchus
above all other Gods, and gave him the Name of Psila, which in the Dorick
Dialect signifies Wings; for as the Birds raise themselves by a towering flight
with their Wings above the Clouds; so with the help of Soaring Bacchus, the
powerful juice of the Grape, our Spirits are exalted to a pitch above
themselves, our Bodies are more sprightly, and their Earthy parts become soft
and plyant.

CHAP. LXVI. How by Pantagruel's Order the Muses were saluted near the Isle of
Ganabim.
THis fair wind and as fine talk brought us in sight of a high Land, which
Pantagruel discovering afar off, showed it Xenomanes, and asked him, do you see
yonder to the Leeward a high Rock with two tops much like Mount Parnassus in
Phocis? I do plainly, answered Xenomanes, it is the Isle of Ganabim; have you a
mind to go ashore there? No, returned Pantagruel. You do well indeed, said
Xenomanes, for there is nothing worth seeing in the place. The People are all
Thieves; yet there is the finest Fountain in the World, and a very large Forest
toward the right top of the Mountain. Your Fleet may take in Wood and Water
there.

He that spoke last spoke well, quoth Panurge, let us not by any means be so
m^d as to go among a parcel of Thieves and Sharpers. You may take my word
(...), this place is just such another, as, to my knowledge, formerly were the
Islands of Sark and Herm between the smaller and the greater Britain; such as
were the P^neropolis of Philip in Thrace; Islands of Thieves, Banditti,
Picaroons, Robbers, Russians, and Murderers, worse than Raw head and
Bloody-bones, and full as honest as the Senior Fellows of the College of
Iniquity, the very outcasts of the County-Goal's Common-side. As you love your
self, do not go among 'em; if you go, you will come off but bluely, if you come
off at all. If you will not believe me, at least believe what the good and wise
Xenomanes tells you: For may I never stir if they are not worse than the very
Canibals, they would certainly eat us alive. Do not go among 'em, I pray you,
'twere safer to take a Journey to Hell. Hark, by Cod's Body, I hear 'em ringing
the Allarm-Bellmost dreadfully, as the Gascons about Bourdeaux used formerly to
do against the Commissaries and Officers for the Tax on Salt, or my ears
tingle. Let Us shear off.

Believe me, Sir, said Friar Jhon, let us rather land, we'll rid the World of
that Vermin, and inn there for nothing. Old Nick go with thee for me, quoth
Panurge. This rash hair-brained Devil of a Friar fears nothing, but ventures
and runs on like a mad Devil as he is, and cares not a Rush what becomes of
others; as if every one was a Monk like his Fryarship; a pox on grinning
Honor, say I. Go to, returned the Friar, thou mangy Noddy-peak! thou forlorn
druggle-headed Sneaksby! and may a million of black Devils Anatomise thy Cockle
Brain. The Hen-hearted Rascal is so cowardly, that he berays himself for fear
every day. If thou art so afraid, Dunghill, don't go, stay here and be hanged,
or go and hide thy Logger-head under Madam Proserpine's Petticoat.

Panurge hearing this, his Breech began to make Buttons, so he slunk in in an
instant, and went to hide his Head down in the Bread-room among the musty
Bi^ctuis, and the Orts, and scraps of broken Bread.

Pantagruel in the mean time said to the rest, I feel a pressing retraction in
my Soul, which like a Voice admonishes me not to land there. Whenever I have
felt such a motion within me, I have found my self happy in avoiding what it
directed me to shun, or in undertaking what it prompted me to do, and I never
had occasion to repent following its Dictates.

As much, said Epistemon, is related of the Demon of Socrates, so celebrated
among the Academics. Well then, Sir, said Friar Jhon, while the Ship's Crew
water, have you a mind to have good sport? Panurge is got down somewhere in the
Hold, where he is crept into some corner and lurks like a Mo^^^e in a Cranny;
let 'em give the word for the Gunner to fire yon Gun over the Round-house on
the Poop; this will serve to salute the Muses of this Antiparnassus; besides,
the Powder does but decay in it. You are in the right, said Pantagruel; here,
give the word for the Gunner.

The Gunner immediately came, and was ordered by Pantagruel to fire that Gun,
and then charge it with fresh Powder, which was soon done; the Gunners of the
other Ships, Frigates, Gallions, and Galleys of the Fleet hearing us ^i^e, gave
every one a Gun to the Island; which made such a horrid noise, that you would have
sworn Heaven had been tumbling about our Ears.

CHAP. LXVII. How Panurge beray'd himself for fear, and of the huge Cat
Rodilardus, which he took for a puny Devil.
PAnurge like a wild addle-pated giddy Goat, sal^ies out of the Bread Room in
his Shirt, with nothing else about him but one of his Stockins, half on half
off, about his Heel, like a rough-footed Pigeon, his Hair and Beard all be
powdered with Crumbs of Bread, in which he had been over Head and Ears, and a
huge and mighty Pusse partly wrapped up in his other Stockin. In this Equipage,
his Chops moving like a Monkey's who is a Louse-hunting, his Eyes staring like a
dead Pig's, his Teeth chattering, and his Bum quivering, the poor Dog fled to
Friar Jhon, who was then sitting by the Chain-Wales of the Starboard-side of
the Ship, and prayed him heartily to take pity on him, and keep him in the
safeguard of his trusty Bilbo, swearing by his share of Papimany, that he had
seen all Hell broke loose.

Woe's me, my Jackee (cried he) my dear Johny, my old Crony, my Brother, my
Ghostly Father, all the Devils keep Holy Day, all the Devils keep their Feast
to day, Man; Pork and Pease choke me, if ever thou saw such preparations in
thy life for an Infernal Feast. Do thou see the smoke of Hell's Kitchins?
(This he said showing him the smoke of the Gunpowder above the Ships) thou
never saw so many damned Souls since thou wast born; and so fair, so
bewitching they seem, that one would swear they are Stygian Ambrosia. I thought
at first, (God forgive me) they had been English Souls, and I don't know but
that this morning, the Isle of Horses near Scotland was sacked with all the
English who had surprised it, by the Lords of Terms and Essay.

Friar Jhon, at the approach of Panurge, was entertained with a kind of smell
that was not like that of Gunpowder, nor altogether so sweet as Musk; which
made him turn Panurge about, and then he saw that his Shirt was dismally
bepah'd, and beray'd with fresh Sir-reverence. The retentive faculty of the
Nerve which restrains the Muscle called Sphincter ('it is the Arse-hole an't
please you) was relaxated by the violence of the fear which he had been in
during his fantastic Visions. Add to this the thundering noise of the shooting,
which seems more dreadful between Decks than above. Nor ought you to wonder at
such a mishap, for one of the Symptoms and Accidents of fear is, that it often
opens the wicket of the Cupboard wherein second-head-meat is kept for a time.
Let Us illustrate this noble Theme with some Examples.

Messer Pantolfe de la Cassina of Siena, riding Post from Rome, came to
Chamberry, and alighting at honest Vinet's* took one of the Pitch-forks in the
Stable, then turning to the Innkeeper, said to him, Da Roma in qua io non son
andato del Corpo. Di gratia piglia in mano questa forcha, and fa mi paura. I
have not had a Stool since I left Rome, I pray thee take this Pitch fork and
fright me. Vinet took it, and made several offers, as if he would in good
earnest have hit the Signor; but all in vain, so the Sienese said to him, Si tu
non fai altramente, tu non fai nulla: Pero sforzati di ad operarli piu
guagliardamente; If thou do not go another way to work, thou had as good do
nothing; therefore try to bestir thy self more briskly. With this, Vinet lent
him such a swinging stoater with the Pitch-fork sowce between the Neck and the
Collar of his Jerkin, that down fell Signore on the ground Arsyversy with his
spindle shanks wide straggling over his Pole. Then mine Host sputtering, with a
full-mouthed laugh, said to his Guest, by Belzebub's Bum-gut, much good may do
you, Signore Italiano take notice this is Datum Camberiaci, given at Chamberry.
'Twas well the Sienese had untruss'd his Points and let down his Drawers; for
this Physic worked with him as soon as he took it, and as copious was the
evacuation, as that of nine Buff^loes and fourteen missificating Arch-lubbers.
Which Operation being over, the mannerly Sienese courteously gave mine Host a
whole bushel of thanks, saying to him, Io ti ringratio, bell messere; cosi
faciendo tu m^ ai esparagnata la speza d'un Servitiale. I thank thee good
Landlord, by this thou have 'een saved me the expense of a Clyster.

I Will give you another Example of Edward the Fifth King of England. Master
Francis Villon being banished France, fled to him, and got so far into his
Favor as to be Privy to all his Household Affairs. One day the King being on
his Close stool showed Villon the Arms of France, and said to him, do thou
see what respect I have for thy French Kings? I have none of their Arms any
where but in this Backside near my Close-stool. O^'s Life, said the Buffoon,
how Wise, Prudent and careful of your Health, your Highness is! How carefully
your Learned Doctor Thomas Linacer looks after you! He saw that, now you grow
old, you are inclined to be somewhat Costive, and every day were fain to have
an Apothecary, I mean a Suppository or Clyster thrust into Royal Nockandro, so
he has, much to the purpose, induced you to place here the Arms of France; for
the very sight of them puts you into such a dreadful Fright, that you
immediately let fly, as much as would come from Eighteen squattering Bonasi of
Peonia: and if they were painted in other Parts of your house, by Jingo, you
would presently conskite your self wherever you saw them: Nay, had you but here
a Picture of the great Oriflamb of France, Ods-bodikins, your Tripes and Bowels
would be in no small Danger of dropping out at the Orifice of your Posteriors.
-- But henh, henh, atque iterum henh.

A silly Cockney am I not?
As ever did from Paris come;
And with a Rope and sliding knot
My Neck shall know what weighs my Bum.
A Cockney of short reach, I say, shallow of Judgment, and judging shallowly to
wonder, that you should cause your Points to be untrussed in your Chamber
before you came into this Closet; by'r Lady at first I thought your Close-stool
had stood behind the Hangings, or your Bed, otherwise it seemed very odd to me
you should untruss so far from the place of Evacuation. But now I find I was a
Gull, a Wittal, a Woodcock, a mere Ninny, a Jolt-^^^d* a Noddy, a Changeling, a
Calflo^ (...) ^oddipole. You do wisely, by the Mass, you do wisely; for had not
you been ready to clap your hind Face on the Mustard-Pot as soon as you came
within sight of these Arms, mark ye me, Cop's Body, the bottom of your Breeches
had supplied the Office of a Close-stool.

Friar Ihon stopping the handle of his Face with his Left hand, did, with the
Forefinger of the Right, point out Panurge's shirt to Pantagruel; who, seeing
him in this Pickle, scared, appalled, shivering, raving, staring, beray'd, and
torn with the Claws of the famous Cat Rodilardus, could not choose but Laugh,
and said to him, Pry'thee what would thou do with this Cat? With this Cat,
quoth Panurge, the Devil scratch me, if I did not think it had been a young
Soft-chin'd Devil, which, with this same Stockin instead of Mittain, I had
snatched up in the great Hutch of Hell, as Thievishly as any Sizar of Montague
College could have done. The Devil take Tybert, I feel it has all bepink'd my
poor hide, and drawn on it to the Life I don't know how many Lobster's
Whiskers: with this he threw his Boar-Cat down.

Go, go, said Pantagruel, be bathed and cleaned, calm your Fears, put on a
clean Shirt, and then your Clothes? What! do you think I am afraid, cried
Panurge? Not I, I protest; by the Testic^es of Hercules, I am more hearty and
stout, though I say it that should not, than if I had ^^all^wed as many Flies as
are put into plumb Cakes, and other Paste at Paris, from Midsummer to
Christmas. -- But what is this? hah! oh, ho, how the Devil came I by this? Do
you call this what the Cat left in the Malt, Filth, Dirt, Dung, Dejection,
soecal Matter, Excrement, Stercoration, Sir-reverence, Ordure,
Second-hand-meat, Fewmets, Stronts, Scybal or Syparathe? It Is Hybernian
Saffron, I protest, Hah, hah, hah, it is Irish Saffron by Shaint Pawtrick, And
so much for this time. Selah, Let Us drink.

FINIS.

