To the Right Worshipful Sir St. JOHN BRODERICK Knight. AND THE Rest of the Worthy
Relatives OF Sir ALAN BRODERICK Knight. DECEASED.
HOW unfit a Person I am to make my first appearance in public, in a Discourse
of so Excellent a Man as your Brother was, You your self may best judge, who so
well have known both Him and Me. You knew Him equal to what the best Mind could
think, and (I had almost said) beyond what the best Tongue could speak of Him.
And you know me, so little and insignificant a thing, that, if the World were
to take the measures of good Reports from the Person that makes them, the
Person represented would be an huge sufferer. Non eget auxiliis, nec
defensoribus istis. He needed not, (because he despised and was above the
tickle of being known and famed in the World) but he deserved the Pencil that
gave so lively a touch upon the Incomparable Mr. Cowley, a Person that both
knows sense, and also how best to express it in his own Mother tongue. As to
what has been endeavored by Me, that it ventures abroad beyond the compass of
our own Parish Church, it must be charged, partly upon my own forwardness to
show my respects in saying something, though so much beneath him; and partly
your Complement in telling me it was worth the while; but chiefly the instance
of some persons that had heard, and either did themselves, or supposed others
might lie under the prejudice of some slanders, which the malevolent humor of
this Age may have affixt upon his Name. I mean chiefly as to his living or
dying in the Romish Faith. Indeed, had it pleased the All-wise God to have
restored him to Himself and the World from this last sickness, it would have
been very needless for any one to have added one tittle to the Memoires of
himself, which he would have blessed us with in his own handwriting. For, having
taken notice what entertainment those Remarks upon the Lord Rochester's death
did generally meet with, and that all his Religious breathings were accounted
by some the raves and delirancies of a sick brain; by others, a subtle fetch at
last, to take off the stench of his name, and entitle all his former lewdnesses
at least to the Charity of good minds, so as they should forget them in the joy
they conceived at his pretended change: and by most, a pang of horror upon his
Conscience under the terrors of death: either of which, if believed, might
effectually hinder the advantages that such examples otherwise do naturally
yield; Your excellent Brother (I say) having observed this; did resolve (and
that at a time when neither Himself nor any of us had any suspicions but that
he was returning to a good state of health again to have given the World a
public account in his own unmatchable way of thinking and expression, the
sentiments he had of Religion both as to the Faith and Practice of it. This, he
not only made me hope and expect upon my first suggesting the expediency of it;
but afterward hinted it to a much more Dr. Heze Burton.
valuable Person upon a visit he gave him; wherein (by the way) the Dr.
professed, he never found the joy and pleasure of two hours throughout the whole
course of his life, in comparison to what had transported him from that kind of
discourse he had then been entertained with by Sir A. Broderick.

However, though it has pleased God in his unaccountable wisdom to prevent so
useful a testimony from himself, and it is so weakly undertaken by a very
unsuitable Pen, yet I hope the truth of what is said will make some
compensation for want of the niceness and elegancy of the composure. And as to
the truth and credibility of what is here avowed, I hope the solemn
protestation which I have adventured to make in the body of the Sermon, will
even yet justify it, though we live in an Age wherein the great mystery of
Jesuitism has appeared in that effroncy, as to harden the minds of Criminals
to palliate their Treasons under such solemn Oaths at the last periods of Death
it self, that it may for the future almost desecrate all due veneration to that
great Sanctuary of Truth, and render it even useless amongst men.

Be it as it will, I knew the subject incapable of flattery, and therefore gave
my self the larger scope of commendation, because I knew my self still within
the limits of what he deserved. For certainly he was such an one whose bulky
virtue bore no proportion to his little stature, but it had quickly invaded and
overswell'd all the parts of it, as Statius speaks of little Tydeus. ^at. 1. l.
^eb.


-- Totos infusa per artus

Major in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus.

One thing more, I think my self bound to account for; and that is, that
whereas I say in my Sermon, that for some years before the close of his days,
he engaged in the best thoughts and in the best practices of life; I would
thereby deliver him from the diminishing imputation of a deathbed repentance.
It was not the dread and terror of that which Nature so easily shrinks at, that
governed him in this change of life, but the just sense and reasonings in his
own mind, improved and cultivated by the Grace of God, that had determined him
in a well-tempered resolution of future devotion toward God and usefulness
toward Men.

He oftentimes told me, that he had not naturally that dread and horror for
Death, that seemed in the tempers and constitutions of some Men: even then,
when (as he expressed himself) God knows, he had all the reasons imaginable, to
have trembled every joint at the fears of a surprise, he had no more perplexing
apprehensions of Death, than of that fly, which in the instant of his speaking,
was moving upon his hand. In his last sickness, as there was nothing unusual
that for a long time gave himself or his friends any concernment for the issue
of it so when any threatening symptoms did grow upon him, he seemed to be under
no fright at them; so that neither before, nor in his sickness was it fear, but
choice that made him what he was.

I confess, there was a very remarkable Fever two or three years before his
death, that had given us nearer apprehensions of losing him, than this last had
done till the very close of it; and this did indeed fasten in him the
resolutions he had antecedently taken, of being more useful and exemplary in
his Generation, if God should spare him; which we all visibly experienced in
that remainder of time wherein we afterward enjoyed him. He made it evident
that his sickbed goodness was not as the Morning dew which past away upon the
warmth and vigor of his health again, but remained and exerted it self still
in more fruit, to the last minute, wherein he was capable of acting like
himself. I cannot omit one very considerable passage he told me of, and which
he had made a very thoughtful observation of himself; and that was, that he had
taken notice, how for a long time after he had begun to bethink himself, he
gave himself a task of consulting the Holy Scriptures every day, especially
some portion in the Psalms, which he always had a peculiar veneration and
esteem for, as believing there was something therein that might well suit every
circumstance and condition of life, which a man, dependant upon Providence,
could suppose himself in in this World; and for which reasons he did with so
much eagerness consult and embrace that useful and learned Paraphrase which a
Reverend Dignitary in our Church has lately put forth; Dr. Patrick D.P.
besides those most Religious and valuable Meditations of the late Earl of
Clarendons, which he had by him in Manuscript. And yet, he told me, he
observed, that in the daily road of absolving this task wherein he had obliged
himself, he found so little more than ordinary as to the inward concern or
emotions of his mind, that he could not but think that all this performance was
but what we charge the Romanists for resting in, the mere opus operatum, in
Religion, wherein he could not be satisfied; and therefore made it his
importunate request in his private retirements to God, that he might in
consulting his Oracles, find some other relish and savor upon his spirit some
other transports of mind, which, he thought, without the blemish of any
unreasonable Enthusiasm, he might expect as the signature and stamp of Divinity
in what he read. This, he often prayed for, and this, as he himself believed he
found some good effects of, so might his observing friends easily perceive, if
they took notice but of his outward deportments in any action where the Public
Prayers, or the Holy Scriptures had their share.

But I shall give you no further trouble in enlarging upon any other heads
wherein I might find sufficient matter, that would be pleasing to my self, and
useful to others. And, as I dare not reflect upon the conducts of Providence,
who has thought fit to snatch such an one from us that had devoted himself so
much to his service and our advantage, so I earnestly pray for you his
Relatives and mine own particular, that we may so remember his example as to
follow it, where he followed Christ's, that when we depart we may be with
Christ, as we hope and believe he is.

Your faithful and obedient Servant, Nathanael Resbury.
WANDSWORTH, December. 24. 1680.
A FUNERAL-SERMON.
Isaiah 57. v. 1. The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.
WHether (as some Interpreters have conjectured) it was a peevish and
unwarrantable exception that Solomon made, against the vain and worthless state
of humane life, or whether it was a sober and instructive remark he designed,
from the observation he had taken of the common and undistinguished fate both
of the fool, and wise man; yet is it so certain and undeniable a truth, that
(in part) it might proclaim a vanity upon all the highest perfections of Humane
Nature (considered only in this present state of life) what he tells us,
Eccl. 2.16. There is no remembrance of the wise, more than of the fool for
ever, seeing that which now is, in the days to come shall be forgotten: and how
dies the wise man? as the fool. He had observed that after all the
embellishments of Nature, or Art, when any one person by the most industrious
improvement of his Native advantages had been labored into a wonder of his
Age, as to all the real accomplishments of wisdom and knowledge; yet the
ungentle hand of Death can by one stroke wipe out the well-drawn Scheme like
the Sponge upon the Slate, and make the Carcass of that wise and elevated piece
of Mankind, as useless and insignificant, as the Wretch that had drivel'd out
his life in perfect Ideotisme and unapprehensiveness: when the Man by a long,
and happy enquiry into all the desirable secrecies of Knowledge has made so
choice and useful a collection of thought, that he becomes as well the delight,
as the Oracle of Mankind; he has then no security, but that sickness, and his
fate may in a few moments befool and baffle all these improved and heightened
intellectuals: His breath goes forth (as the Psalmist expresses it) he
returns to his earth, Psalm. 146.4.
and in that very day all his thoughts perish.

We may make the same observation, if we take this wise man and this fool under
the notion wherein Solomon, and other parts of the Holy Scriptures have often
represented them, viz. the good and virtuous, or the vicious and profligate
man; the excellency of the one, and the worthlesness of the other, are
undistinguished (at least) as to the certainty of death; there is no discharge
in that war: Eccl. 8.8.
As is the good so is the sinner, and he that swears as he that fears an
oath.

An instance whereof even in this twofold notion of Wisdom we have at this
present before us whiles we are doing our last office to this Great, this Good
man, whose cultivation in all the acquirements and ornaments of Nature may give
us Solomon's resentment, alas! how dies the wise man? as the fool: and the
exemplary lustres of whose Religion and virtue (the only real and valuable
Wisdom indeed) may justly awaken in us the complaint our Prophet makes in the
words of my Text, The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.

I shall not here enquire into the occasion or introduction of these words, nor
undertake to determine, from the various guesses of Expositors, whether the
Prophet more directly intended any one signal and illustrious person, e. g.
Hezekiah, Josiah, the Prophet himself, or indeed the frequent decease of Good
and Excellent men in general, the loss of whom, as it was of present mischief
and disadvantage to those that survived them, so did it seem an omen and
presage of a calamitous Age, from the miseries of which, it had pleased the
Divine Providence, to draw off those that had been peculiarly endeared to him.

It may suffice for our purpose that the Prophet makes his complaint in these
two Observables.

1. The Nations loss and deprivement of some excellent Person or Persons, whose
excellency, and consequently the greatness of their loss, is intimated in a
double character which may comprehend their Devotion and Piety toward God, and
their usefulness and desirableness toward men: The Righteous perishes and
Merciful men are taken away.

2. He resents the stupidity and senslesness of the Age and Nation, that regard
not such unlucky and presaging events; they neither apprehend the present
inconveniences and mischiefs of such a loss, nor think at all how ill and
portentous an aspect the Death of such Men may have to future calamities.
Though the Righteous perishes, yet no man lays it to heart, though merciful
men are taken away, yet none will consider the impendent evils they might
reasonably upon that occasion expect; they do not think that the Righteous is
taken away from the evil to come.

I might from both these Observables, engage in a very useful subject of
discourse, by showing in general,

1. That the Death of Good men, where it is precipitated, and has not in it
the unavoidable reasons of Nature and old Age, may be justly accounted a severe
and deplorable infliction of Providence; it is a chastisement and act of Divine
judgment upon the Place or Nation that is thus deprived of them. This might be
argued from manifold advantages of such Men's abode and continuance amongst us:
Partly what might result from the influence of their good examples; the minds
of Men being indeed more easily shaped and modeled into a conformity of
goodness by Example than by Precept: and Religion deriving its visible
encouragement and countenance from the exemplary lives of such Men, it takes
off that vicious modesty and shieness that some have of being singular, and
makes them more confident and cheerful in doing well, when they see others do
so too.

But further, besides the influence of Good example I might urge the advantage
of Good men's Prayers while they are in this World. Their Prayers, like the Ark
in Obed-Edom's house, 2 ^^m. 6.11.
do frequently secure a blessing within their circuit and sphere of action. It
is an expression it pleases God himself to use by his Prophet Ezekiel, that
when the Nation of the Jews had made themselves so deeply obnoxious to God,
that he found himself immediately provoked to ruin them; I sought for a man
(says he) among them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap
before me for the Land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none. Ezekiel.
22.30. And thus we find Moses actually prevalent by his intercession, so as to
divert the stroke when it had almost fallen upon the provoking Israelites to
their utmost destruction, Exodus 32. a 9. ad 15.

Lastly, the advantage of Good men's continuance amongst us might be argued
from their active and effectual usefulness in the whole course and tenor of
their lives, the zeal and gravity of their instructions may help to correct and
institute the manners of some, the sobriety and justice of their actions to
rebuke and convince others: in a word, their mercifulness and charity (for it
is the property of such, to go about doing good) may disperse it self to the
feeding of the hungry, the clothing the naked, protecting the oppressed, and
relieving the universal want and indigency of the neighborhood. But for these
things; I must satisfy my self only with a transient hint and glance at them.
Nor should I indeed so much as mention them, but that they directly subserve to
the purposes of this solemnity.

2. It might be further remarked, how portentous and presaging a thing it is,
and points toward a Deluge and inundation of miseries upon that place, where
Good men are frequently, or immaturely called off. It is a sign (according to
what is intimated in the Text) that Providence through the foresight it has of
the approaching storm secures a shelter beforehand for the fondlings of his
care and indulgence; that he is not willing (according to what Abraham once
pleaded in Sodom's behalf) to destroy the righteous with the wicked, Genesis 18.23.
and so is beforehand removing the obstacles and restraints of his vengeance
that without the interposure of any moving and compassionable object, he might
take his full blow. It is like Noah's housing in the Ark before the old World
could be drowned: Genesis 7.1.
or the Christians quitting Jerusalem and retirement to Pella before the Roman
Arms could perfect their victory upon that Place and Nation. This might lead
into a large Field of collection both from the Holy Scriptures and other
Histories that would illustrate this argument, how the destruction and
overthrow of whole Communities has trod upon the heels of the unripe and
unlucky death of the best men in it; but the limits of our present hour must
prescribe against it.

3. Lastly, As consequent to the foregoing observations I might reflect, how
stupid and unreasonable a disregard it is to the chastisement and discipline of
Providence, where while he thus deals, in removing the best and culled part of
his Creation amongst us, we do with no resentment or concern bewail and deplore
the misfortunes or ill boadings of so great a loss.

And now, how far we are concerned in what has been hitherto only glanced at;
give me leave to lay some claim to a due and just thoughtfulness and
concernment of mind amongst those of you who have lived within the reach of
this Gentleman's diffusive goodness and usefulness. It becomes the Christian,
whatever the sullen Stoic might pretend to in some of the peculiar maxims of
his ridiculous, impracticable, (I may add) inhumane Philosophy; It becomes (I
say) the Christian sometimes to recount the weight and moment of these
afflictive incidencies of life that grieve and disease him.

Let me pay that just debt to the Memory of him who is snatched from us, and
insinuate the due reverence and awe you ought to entertain for the frowns and
displeasure of him who governs the World, by insisting a little upon the nature
and quality of our loss, and giving you, as much as I am capable, the image and
representation (though in a very rough and unskilful draught) of the Person
whom we are now deprived of. And here I am so very well assured beforehand
against all danger of flattery (the subject it self having attained some
degrees, which my mean and crippled thought and expression cannot reach) that
whoever intimately knew him will be recollecting something still, which I ought
not to have denied him the Glory of.

1. In the first place therefore I might be very well allowed to begin with
that usual head of Panegyric where the subject could well bear it, viz. the
Quality of his Birth and Extract, and so give you his Lineage in a long Series
of Worthy and Honorable Ancestry, who from time immemorial had lived in the
Registry of Honor in the Northern parts, till his own Father, by the occasion
of a Noble trust, viz. the Lieutenancy of the Tower of London, came to add
warmth to our Southern clime, and blessed this place not only with his own and
his Religious Lady's presence and Virtues (whose Names and Memories are still
fragrant in those odours of goodness wherein they had been so plentifully
scented in life) but with a numerous and valuable Progeny, amongst whom was
this Wonder both of Greatness and Goodness; Alas! that I must say he was! --
Hinc illae lachrymae. But I am afraid I sin against the humble intention and
design of our Honorable Friend, so much as in mentioning his Extract; this
being a theme of boasting which he so much despised, that he could not
dissemble it even in his last Will and Testament, wherein he has made express
provision that his Hearse should by no means be garnished with the usual
Ornaments of a Family, and no Escutcheon should either there or elsewhere
appear. Perhaps having that opinion of vulgar admiration and gazing, with the
Moralist, that it so little adds to the value of him whom in such trifles they
admire, that it is a symptom of madness in the wonderer: Arr. in Epict. L. 1.
c. 21.
(...); Who are those you would be admired by? are they not such whom you were
wont to call madmen? and will you be ambitious of the opinion of a madman?

2. It would add sense to the affliction of our loss, could I tell you what
treasures of Knowledge were shipwrack'd when this Vessel split. But for me to
endeavor a commendation here, would be almost as ridiculous, as for the Pigmee
to pretend to an history of the Giants, reckoning he had told you of Prodigies
of stature, when he had raised the Giant some few inches measure beyond
himself. I must profess my self in an Orb so many Regions below what this Great
man was fixed in, that it might have been as reasonable for himself when alive,
to have pretended to add luster to the Angels in describing their perfections,
as for me to greaten his Name by telling what a Master in all the parts of
Science he was. Yet give me leave to say something, who have for some years
been gleaning after His mighty Harvest.

Certainly this Age, though more fertile in the Sons of Wisdom than former Ages
perhaps have been, yet cannot exhibit many beyond this Gentleman in whom there
was so happy a conjuncture of quickness and sharpness of Wit, with maturity and
strength of Understanding; comprehensiveness and tenaciousness of Memory, with
choice and discretion of Judgment, that is not usual, I may say, hardly
repeated in any one instance again. His Memory was under that command and
empire of Judgment, that it never lost a Jewel committed to its keeping, and
the Judgment so well skilled and faithful that it would never cumber that great
Repository with a trifle or counterfeit. He had so clear and distinct a sense
of things, that, though he had traveled all the Regions of Learning, yet had
never bewildered himself, and though he had amast a treasure of very
heterogeneous materials, yet were they all so orderly and methodically
disposed, that he could fetch from every proper Cell what might be most
delightsome or most useful in all the varieties of Conversation he maintained;
and as he had been a mighty devourer of Books, so his very disgorgings (if I
may use the word) had generally more relish than the first cookery: because his
judgment had picked out and thrown away all the needless and superfluous
mixtures before he would deign a repetition: that to Me, his censure either of
Books or Men (which yet had always its candid leaning and bias) seemed a very
just cynosure and steerage in my choice or neglect of them. He, if any, has
made void that old observation of Aliquis in omnibus, nullus in singulis. In
Philosophy, there was no old or new hypothesis, but he had so well digested (so
far at least as became the Majesty of so great a Mind to condescend to the
little sports of conjecture) that he could with all easiness either explain or
redargue it. In Anatomy, he could almost talk as wondrously as he was made. In
Poetry he had so choice a collection in memory, and so lucky an art in using it
for the cheer of conversation, that both the ancient and modern Poets lived in
him, and when he had any just occasion to bring them into Company, he gave them
a dress so decent and suitable, that their wit through all the changes of Ages
and Humor did still, when introduced by him, appear modish and fashionable. In
History, he was so universally accomplished as to all its parts, especially
Topographical and Chronological; that if any imputation can be upon his memory,
it must be upon his modesty and reservedness in this particular, that he has
not made some essays in History (to which he might equally have pretended with
any one Author extant) wherein he might have given Laws as to method, and his
censures as to credibility in the sallacious or disputable reports of
Antiquity. Neither let me pass over in an ungrateful silence the advantages my
self have reaped from him, as to that knowledge that lies directly within the
sphere of mine own function; for in Divinity he was so thoroughly versed, that
he could give a strict account of (though he had no delight in) the Wars and
controversies of it, and had determined himself in the Truth, not because he
knew not the Errors, but because he knew and could argue that they were so.
But, as the Polemick part in Divinity had made him so uneasy that he almost
contemned the Schoolmen, whose method of dogmatizing he though had been, if not
the original, yet at least the Nursery of these jars and contentions in the
Church; and could not but bewail the short and imperfect insight that Humane
Nature it self was allowed in this World, by which the best minds could not
think the same things, nor hardly bear with each other in their differences;
so, thanks be to God, I dare say, that for some considerable time before the
close of his days he was a zealous and exemplary proficient in the practick
part, and made it his business not only to think and talk these great things,
but to live them too.

And I am glad I am now entered this best Scene of his life, that I can in the
terms of my Text tell you that the Righteous and the Merciful man is taken from
us; I pray God forbid the Omen, that he is taken from the Evil to come!

And indeed, as to all that I have hitherto said, Himself (under the sense he
had of greater things) was so slenderly opinionated in such lower
accomplishments, (For he was (if in any thing) affected, in designed and
studied unaffectedness) that had not the best and Noble part of him taken
flight beyond the disturbances of what happens in this Mortal state, it would
find it self uneasy, that such contemned and neglected topics of praise
should be mentioned or insisted on, toward the establishing of his value
amongst Men.

And because my Text points to a twofold Qualification in a Person, that may
render the death of such an one, a common misfortune and calamity: I shall
direct my Discourse with respect to both of them, as they were eminently
visible in him. The first Qualification is righteousness, the other is mercy:
Under the former; I shall consider his Religion and Devotion toward God. Under
the latter, his Charity and usefulness toward Men.

1. As to his Religion; his Profession was that of the Reformed, as the
Doctrine and Discipline of it is established in the Church of England by Law:
which he took care to leave upon Record in his last Will and Testament. And
indeed it is no nice or impertinent fineness in this calumniating Age to leave
some undeniable Memorial of what Faith we dye in, because there is a factious
party on the one hand, who are too apt to brand all actions not done in direct
and zealous favor to them, with the odious and reproachful name of Popery; and
there is a Jesuitical trick on the other hand, to enroll the flower of Wit, or
Learning, or Wealth and Interest within the Diptychs of the Romish Church, that
when such are dead and cannot speak for themselves, or when strangers to them,
inspect the number and weight of such Names, they may be enticed or frighted
into a closure with that party which has so plausible an appearance, and whose
interest seems so strong and invincible.

But as to our Friend whose worth would almost make the ambition of that Church
venial, to pretend to a share in him; I have heard him upon occasion declare so
great an abhorrence and detestation of the Popish Religion, that he has
professed he could bear the imputation of being Mahumetan or Atheist rather than
a Romanist; that is, he would not be accounted so much a fool as to espouse
principles so foppish so easily baffled by the very infancy of Reason, so
destructive of common sense, etc. But, if the World had no other Religion to
pretend to, but such an one, he would utterly renounce all. He could not but
believe that he had hands and eyes, he could both feel and see, and therefore
would not take a Wafer for his Redeemer: nor could he imagine the God he ought
to worship had such a relish to blood, that he delighted to have his Worship
introduced or secured by Rebellion or Murder, by open Wars, or secret
Massacres, the Torments of Inquisition, and all kind of Barbarism. The Turk he
thought something more plausible as less cruel, and the Atheist more excusable
as not so abandoned a fool.

But, thanks be to God, he had no reason to fly to either the one or the
other, for want of the reasonableness or gentleness and good nature of
Religion, for he found and loved and practiced it in ours. And indeed so steady
and devoted a Member was he to this Church. that in the public figure he once
made in the World, he did most sensible services to its interest, which some
nearliest concerned can never forget; and that so distant from all selfishness,
that he could not without some indignation reject a mighty
thanksigiving-offering, which the gratitude of some had prompted them to make
to him: Nor would he afterward interpose his interest in behalf of Relation or
Friend; lest it might seem an intimation or remembrance of the services he had
done; unless in one instance not long since, wherein the zeal and fervor of
his love made him make one unseasonable request, and the importunity of his
friendship made him resent the disappointment with something a less candor
than he was wont to interpret things; His love having so far biased his
judgment at that time, that he could not consider what the wisdom of those with
whom he interceded did discern, as to the worthlessness and insignificancy of
him for whom he had solicited. So much may serve as to what Profession he made.

As to His Practice: This for some years last past (to which my self have been
an eyewitness, and a joyful observer) has been so signally Religious, that as
in none of the excellent endowments, I have already mentioned, He was of the
ordinary rank, so, herein (how late soever he set out) yet when he once began
the course, he made such large and nimble steps Heavenward, that he
out-strip'd the ordinary Passenger that had begun long before in self-denial
and the zeal of his Devotions, in Circumspection and Watchfulness over his
actions and thoughts, in largeness of mind both for and toward God, in all the
exercises of a deep and serious repentance, and in all the noble reasonings of
faith beyond what is observable in the common stages of Christianity.

I will readily acknowledge (and why indeed should I scruple to own what
himself with such repeated contrition and brokenness of spirit would to all
sober ears so freely and heartily condemn himself for?) that a long Scene of
his life had been acted off in the Sports and Follies of sin: if I may use his
own words, it was a Pagan and Abandoned way he had sometime pursued, Skepticism
it self not excepted, wherein the poinancy of his Wit, and the strength of his
reasoning (even in that very argument, the using of which proclaims a Man, in
the Language of the Holy Scriptures, a very fool) may have been the occasion of
a great deal of mischief toward some that are already gone to their accounts
without the happy retreat that himself made; and others who may yet survive
him, and ought to improve the goodly example he has given them, of rescuing
themselves from those ruinous illusions, wherein their misopinionated wit, and
deceitful charms of their own Lusts have hampered and entangled them.

But I mention these things, and I hope all good minds will entertain them with
that kind of Joy, which the Angels themselves are said to express at the
conversion of a sinner, Luke 15.7, 10. A Joy (if I may so speak) that had been
wanting in Heaven, had it not been for the recovery of some profligate
Wanderers on Earth; a pleasure which the Indulgent Father could not have
conceived, had not the prodigal Son returned to himself and him.

We live, I confess, in an Age wherein Credulity is the least of our Crimes; we
are not easily induced to believe any thing, but what perhaps some destructive
wheadles from the common enemy may whisper and insinuate; so that it is not an
easy matter to possess Men with any assured persuasion of the truth of such an
instance, when we come to tell them of the mighty change and amendment of such
as have been remarkable in Vice. Even good Men themselves think it their
prudence to question such an event, as hardly comporting with so perverse and
naughty an Age as this is; and Ill men apprehend it their interest to ridicule
and laugh such a story out of the belief of others, lest a new Monument should
be erected to their shame; and so on both sides it is entertained either as the
dawbs and flattery of the Narrator, or the disguises and personatings of the
Penitent, designing only a good fame, and to leave a perfumed Name behind him.
It has been the fate of a late Noble Person, E. of Roch.
who having quitted the stage of this World with an action far different from
the entry he made upon it, being indeed a Prodigy of Conversion from the
extremes of ill, to the extremes of good; the incredulity of most Men has
given such modesty to the Reverend Person that could relate the whole with
great truth and assurance, that he has been almost ashamed to endeavor that
satisfaction to the World. I pray God grant we may none of Us live to see the
day, wherein the foolish Legends of some Rebel and Dunghil-Saints may not be
obtruded with easier success, or the contempt and disbelief of them by a fierce
and insolent urgency upon us, prove more costly and hazardous, than that, by
which we now with so much security deride most important and significant
matters of fact!

However, as to the truth and certainty of this joyous instance whose Funerals
we now solemnize; I shall for once swear to it, in the words which the Pen of
an Apostle has already hallowed for me; Gal. 1.20.
Behold, before God I lie not. I do speak to you the words of truth and
soberness, when I tell you that for some Years before this Gentleman was taken
from us, the bent and tendency of his life and actions was devout and
religious. Such was his love to all public Solemnities of Worship, that he
seldom failed (and that not unless prevented by sickness or most indispensible
occasions) his attendance every day at the Prayers of the Church, which himself
also by a stated allowance, procured that they should be every day performed.
His carriage and demeanor in those Services had so much the figure of a warm
and transported devotion in it, that I could not forbear sometimes casting a
glance at him, that by viewing him I might my self excite and enkindle in my
own bosom a new flame from the fire that seemed to blaze so upon his Altars.
His private intercourse and communion with Heaven, I question not but was very
frequent and very rapturous; because, for some considerable time lateward, I
hardly ever could be alone with him, but he would be discoursing some Cases of
Conscience about retired Closet-prayer, or the nature, necessity, or
qualifications of a true and adequate repentance. I remember in his last
sickness, long before either himself or his Friends had any apprehensions of
the nearness of his end, when my self in company with another Mr. R. Kidder.
Reverend Person were giving him the visit, he did with tears in his eyes, in
strange affectionateness bewail to us some perplexities of mind he then
labored under; and that was, that he thought himself under a mighty incumbency
to pray; and yet, such was the ineptitude of his mind at that time through the
indisposition of his Body, that he could not think with that strictness and
collection of himself that becomes that Holy and Awful Majesty to whom he was
to pray; that what between the Conscience he had of a necessity of praying, and
the jealousy upon himself lest he should not at that time perform it with all
becoming Reverence and seriousness, his mind was much harrast and anxious what
to do; For, Look you (says he) my Conscience is now as tender as wet Paper,
torn upon every apprehension of the least guilt before GOD.

As to the Nature and Qualifications of an effectual Repentance in general, he
made it the main of his business and study of late days to consult the best and
most distinct Authors and Treatises upon that Subject; and though he had as
conductive an apprehension of things in his own large Mind as he could expect
to meet with in Books, yet was he so humble and condescending, so little
opinionated of himself, that he would turn over any Volume that he believed did
not trifle upon the Argument, and sometimes consult some difficulties even with
my self, whom, whiles he had reason to know he could inform and instruct, yet
would he as humbly and obligingly enquire of as if he expected satisfaction in
something that had perplexed him. To which purpose, I having sometime since run
through the Explication of the Lord's Prayer in several Discourses, which he,
through a long sickness, had not been present at, excepting one or two that
concluded the whole; he was so little in the thoughts of himself as to make it
his request to me, that I would go over those Discourses again in public, it
having been a matter of his own strict thought and enquiry a great while, what
the extent, significancy, and distinct variety of those Petitions in that
excellent form should be.

And as he much revolved the Nature and Qualification of Repentance in general,
so he would make the Application with severity enough upon himself; more than
once complaining to me, that he had a great jealousy upon himself lest he had
not yet conceived an horror answerable to his past exorbitances of life, and
had not made those smart and pungent reflections upon himself, that might
become one that had so long and in such exalted degrees (as he said) violated
the Laws of his Maker, and made himself so obnoxious to the vengeance of his
Judge. Yet even as to this he told me; that if the cutting off one of his Hands
by the help of the other, were but a proper or likely way, through the anguish
of such a Wound, to give him a just horror for his sins, he would do that as
willingly as he ever did any one action that had given him the greatest
pleasure of life. This he spoke with that peculiar vehemence, that if there had
been any stander by beside my self, he must readily have judged him to have
been in earnest. However he has further told me, that he had thus far an
assurance with himself that he had attained one of the main and most likely
requisites in a solid and unfeigned repentance, that by the grace of God he had
such a sense and conviction of the folly and unreasonableness of sin, that no
argument, no temptation should prevail upon him to do the like again. Which
indeed amounts to the whole condition required and expected from the Penitent
in the Holy Scriptures, and gives a just claim and interest to that promise
which assures us, Pro. 28.13.
that whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins shall have mercy. And in truth, I
have reason to believe that his resolution to abridge himself in what formerly
he had (perhaps) too liberally allowed himself in his too long and too entire
abstinences, made that change upon the crasis and habit of his Body that
hastened his end and our grief.

He had for many years practiced in the Politics of this Nation, and having so
nearly attacht himself to one of the greatest E. Clarend. L. Chapter
Ministers of State that this Kingdom ever knew (whose mistaken Wisdom and
Integrity perhaps has been since better understood by the want of him) made
himself no small Figure in the administration: wherein (I must needs say) I
never perceived his Conscience reflecting upon him the reproach of any
injustice and unrighteousness of Counsel or Action; but as he always assoyl'd
himself in that, so I never heard of any Enemy that objected it against him.
Yet did he for many years before his death make a voluntary retreat from all
the business, or preferments, that even needed and courted him, and after his
recovery from a long and dangerous sickness, which has given him above two
years respit of life since, he told me he burnt all his Papers, all his
observations and memorials that had any relation with politics or business of
State, that he might lie under no temptation of diverting his mind from that
retirement within it self to which he had now reduced and devoted it; being of
that Philosopher's mind, who tells us how foreign and alienated a thing all
true good is from a busling encumbered state of life: (...): which, how unhappy
a loss soever, such a flame that devoured such Papers, might occasion to the
World, yet was it an argument indeed, how vehemently this Great Mind breathed
and enlarged it self toward Heaven the only Center of its rest and
satisfaction; which very thought sometimes would comfort him, and strengthen
his hopes of acceptance with God, (as he has expressed himself to me) viz. that,
that grace and clemency of God that had thus reduced, and in any measure
recovered him to himself, would overlook his former Errors of life, and steer
and conduct him successfully the remainder of his days, till he should enter
him into his own joys: And of this no doubt he would have given us encouraging
assurances before he had wholly quitted us, but that the first paroxysm in his
sickness that gave us any apprehension of his death, deprived him of his
intellectuals and afterward of his speech, that we could reap none of the
expected advantages of either; but only some lucid intervals we might guess, by
the devout motion and deportment of himself, wherein we might suppose him
importunately engaged in Prayers that were unutterable.

And thus much may serve as to that first qualification in the Text, that
adorned this Gentleman, and has made our deprivement of him so deplorable,
that is, his Righteousness, or Religion toward GOD.

2. I shall make but a brief mention of his Mercifulness or Charity toward Men;
not that it was so small and inconsiderable, that it will bear but a slender
and transient Encomium. For it was large and diffusive indeed, but for the most
part so silent and unboasted, that it generally ran deepest where it made no
noise; and I am sure would have been most pleasing to him (could he have been
sensible of this solemnity) had it not been mentioned at all. But to pass over
the liberal expenses he has been at, in making both beautiful and useful the
Place of our Worship with the appendages to it; I cannot forbear recognizing
one substantial instance of his Charity, because it had a double reach, not
only for the advantage of the Body, but the Soul too: For he has settled an
Annual encouragement for ever, for the reading of Public Prayers every Morning
in the Week, and Twelve Pence to be every Morning distributed amongst the Poor
that are present there.

What shall I add more? May I not use the Prophet's complaint in part, that the
righteous and the merciful man is taken from us? But must I use it all? that no
man lays it to heart, no man considers that he is taken away from the evil
to come? God forbid. The poor surely will lay it to heart, when they sensibly
find one of their main Springs dried up that was wont by very secret and
unobserved conveyances to supply and refresh them. The Good Man surely will
consider the stroke, as what seems to have sensible displeasure in it; and as
he is deprived of an Example and Companion in Goodness: and I would to God we
might All improve it, that by our repentance under such a chastisement, and
faithfully writing after so great a Copy and Pattern he has set, we may both
turn off the approaching evil which he seems taken away from, and attain the
same Joys and Rewards of Goodness which we have good hopes he is now instated
in. Which God of his infinite mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with Himself and his Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Glory and Praise for
ever. Amen!

THE END.

