THE THIRD BOOK OF THE WORKS OF Mr. Francis Rabelais, Doctor in Physic.
Containing the Heroic Deeds of Pantagruel the Son of Gargantua. Now faithfully
Translated into English, by the unimitable Pen of Sir Thomas Urwhart, Knight. and
Bar. The Translator of the Two First BOOKS. Never before Printed.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, 1693.

Francis Rabelais to the Soul of the deceased Queen of Navarre.
ABstracted Soul, ravished with ecstasies,
Gone back, and now familiar in the Skies.
Thy former Host, thy Body, leaving quite,
Which to obey thee always took delight;
Obsequious, ready. Now from motion free,
Senseless, and as it were, in Apathy.
Would thou not issue forth, for a short space,
From that Divine, Eternal, Heavenly place,
To see the third part, in this earthy Cell,
Of the brave Acts of good Pantagruel.
The Third Book of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the good Pantagruel.
The AUTHOR's Prologue.
GOOD People, most Illustrious Drinkers, and you thrice precious gouty
Gentlemen. Did you ever see Diogenes the Cynick Philosopher, if you have seen
him, you then had your Eyes in your Head, or I am very much out of my
Understanding and Logical Sense. It is a gallant thing to see the clearness of
(Wine, Gold) the Sun. I Will be judged by the blind born so renowned in the
Sacred Scriptures; who having at his choice to ask whatever he would from him
who is Almighty, and whose Word in an Instant is effectually performed, asked
nothing else but that he might see. Item you are not young, which is a
competent Quality for you to Philosophat more than Physically in Wine (not in
vain) and henceforwards to be of the Bacchick Council; to the end that opining
there, you may give your Opinion faithfully of the Substance, Color, excellent
Odor, Eminency, Propriety, Faculty, Virtue, and effectual Dignity of the said
blessed and desired Liquor.

If you have not seen him (as I am easily induced to believe that you have not)
at least you have heard some talk of him. For through the Air, and the whole
extent of this Hemisphere of the Heavens has his Report and Fame, even until
this present time, remained very memorable and renowned. Then all of you are
derived from the Phrygian Blood (if I be not deceived) if you have not so many
Crowns as Midas had, yet have you something (I know not what) of him, which the
Persians of old esteemed more of in all their O^acusts, and which was more
desired by the Emperor Antonine; and gave occasion thereafter to the Basilisco
at Rohan to be Surnamed Goodly ears. If you have not heard of him, I will
presently tell you a Story to make your Wine relish: Drink then, so, to the
purpose; hearken now whilst I give you notice (to the end that you may not like
Infidels be by your simplicity abused) that in his time he was a rare
Philosopher, and the chearfullest of a thousand: If he had some Imperfection,
so have you, so have we; for there is nothing (but God) that is perfect: Yet so
it was, that by Alexander the Great (although he had Aristotle for his
Instructor and Domestic) was he held in such Estimation, that he wished if he
had not been Alexander to have been Diogenes the Sinopian.

When Philip King of Macedon enterprised the Siege and Ruin of Corinth, the
Corinthians having received certain Intelligence by their Spies, that he with a
numerous Army in Battle Rank was coming against them, were all of them (not
without cause) most terribly afraid; and therefore were not neglective of their
Duty, in doing their best Endeavors to put themselves in a fit posture to
resist his Hostile Approach, and defend their own City.

Some from the Fields brought into the Fortified Places their Movables,
Bestial, Corn, Wine, Fruit, Victuals, and other necessary Provision.

Others did fortify and rampire their Walls, set up little Fortresses,
Bastions, squared Ravelins, dug Trenches, cleansed Countermines, fenced
themselves with Gabions, contrived Platforms, emptied Casemates, barricado'd
the false Brayes, erected the Cavalliers, repaired the Contrescarfes,
plastered the Courtines, lengthned Ravelins, stopped Parapets, mortaised
Barbacans, assured the Port-culleys, fastened the Herses, Sarasinesks and
Cataracks, placed their Centries, and doubled their Patrouille.

Every one did watch and ward, and not one was exempted from carrying the
Basket.

Some polished Corselets, varnished Backs and Breasts, cleaned the Head-pieces,
Mail-Coats, Brigandins, Salads, Helmets, Murrions, Jacks, Gushets, Gorgets,
Hoguines, Brassars, and Cuissars, Corseletts, Haubergeons, Shields, Bucklers,
Targuets, Greves, Gantlets and Spurs.

Others made ready Bows, Slings, Crossbows, Pellets, Catapults, Migrames or
Fireballs, Firebrands, Balists, Scorpions, and other such Warlike Engines,
expugnatorie, and destructive to the Hellepolists.

They sharpened and prepared Spears, Staves, Pikes, Brown Bills, Halberts, Long
Hooks, Lances, Zagages, Quarterstaves, Eelspears, Partisans, Troutstaves,
Clubs, Battle-axes, Maces, Darts, Dartlets, Glaves, Javelins, Javelots, and
Trunchions.

They set Edges upon Cimeters, Cutlasses, Badelans, Back-swords, Tucks,
Rapiers, Bayonets, Arrow-heads, Dags, Daggers, Mandousians, Poigniards,
Whinyards, Knives, Skenes, Sables, Chipping Knives, and Raillons.

Every Man exercised his Weapon, every Man scowred off the Rust from his
natural Hanger: Nor was there a Woman amongst them (though never so reserved or
old) who made not her Harnish to be well furbished; as you know the Corinthian
Women of old were reputed very courageous Combatants.

Diogenes seeing them all so warm at work, and himself not employed by the
Magistrates in any business whatsoever, he did very seriously (for many days
together, without speaking one Word) consider, and contemplate the Countenance
of his Fellow-Citizens.

Then on a sudden, as if he had been roused up and inspired by a Martial
Spirit, he girded his Cloak, scarf-ways, about his Left Arm, tucked up his
Sleeves to the Elbow, trussed himself like a Clown gathering Apples, and giving
to one of his old Acquaintance his Wallet, Books, and Opistrographs, away went
he out of Town toward a little Hill or Promontory of Corinth called Cranie;
and there on the Strand, a pretty level place, did he roll his Jolly Tub, which
served him for an House to shelter him from the Injuries of the Weather: The^e,
I say, in a great Vehemence of Spirit, did he turn it, veer it, wheel it, whirl
it, frisk it, jumble it, shuffle it, huddle it, tumble it, hurry it, joult it,
justle it, overthrow it, evert it, invert it, subvert it, overturn it, beat it,
thwack it, bump it, batter it, knock it, thrust it, push it, jert it, shock it,
shake it, toss it, throw it, overthrow it up-side down, topsiturvy, arsiturvy,
tread it, trample it, stamp it, tap it, ting it, ring it, tingle it, towl it,
sound it, resound it, stop it, shut it, unbung it, close it, unstopple it. And
then again in a mighty bustle he bandy'd it, slubber'd it, hacked it, whitled
it, way'd it, darted it, hurled it, staggered it, reeled it, swing'd it,
brangled it, tottered it, lifted it, heaved it, transformed it, transfigur'd
it, transposed it, transplaced it, reared it, raised it, hoised it, washed it,
dighted it, cleansed it, rinced it, nailed it, settled it, fastened it, shackled
it, fettered it, levelled it, blocked it, tugged it, tew'd it, carried it,
bedash'd it, beray'd it, parched it, mounted it, broached it, nicked it,
notch'd it, bespattered it, decked it, adorned it, trimmed it, garnished it,
gaged it, furnished it, boar'd it, pierced it, trap'd it, rumbled it, slid it
down the Hill, and precipitated it from the very height of the Cranie; then
from the foot to the top (like another Sisyphus with his Stone) bore it up
again, and every way so banged it and belabour'd it, that it was ten thousand
to one he had not struck the bottom of it out.

Which when one of his Friends had seen, and asked him why he did so toil his
Body, perplex his Spirit, and torment his Tub? The Philosopher's Answer was,
That not being employed in any other Charge by the Republic, he thought it
expedient to thunder and storm it so tempestuously upon his Tub, that amongst a
People so fervently busy, and earnest at work, he alone might not seem a
loytering Slug and lasie Fellow. To the same purpose may I say of my self,

Tho I be rid from Fear,
I am not void of Care.
For perceiving no Account to be made of me toward the Discharge of a Trust of
any great Concernment, and considering that through all the parts of this most
noble Kingdom of France, both on this and on the other side of the Mountains,
every one is most diligently exercised and busied; some in the fortifying of
their own Native Country, for its Defense; others, in the repulsing of their
Enemies by an Offensive War; and all this with a Policy so excellent, and such
admirable Order, so manifestly profitable for the future, whereby France shall
have its Frontiers most magnifically enlarged, and the Frenches assured of a
long and wellgrounded Peace, that very little withholds me from the Opinion of
good Heraclitus, which affirms War to be the Father of all good things; and
therefore do I believe that War is in Latin called Bellum, not by Antiphrasis,
as some Patchers of old rusty Latin would have us to think; because in War
there is little Beauty to be seen, but absolutely and simply; for that in War
appears all that is good and graceful, and that by the Wars is purged out all
manner of Wickedness and Deformity. For Proof whereof the wise and pacifick
Solomon could no better represent the unspeakable Perfection of the Divine
Wisdom, than by comparing it to the due disposure and ranking of an Army in
Battle Array, well provided and ordered.

Therefore by reason of my Weakness and Inability, being reputed by my
Compatriots unfit for the Offensive part of Warfare; and on the other side,
being no way employed in matter of the Defensive, although it had been but to
carry Burdens, fill Ditches, or break Clods, either whereof had been to me
indifferent, I held it not a little disgraceful to be only an Idle Spectator of
so many valorous, eloquent and warlike Persons, who in the view and sight of
all Europe act this notable Interlude or Tragicomedy, and not make some Effort
toward the Performance of this, nothing at all remains for me to be done. In
my Opinion, little Honor is due to such as are mere Lookers on, liberal of
their Eyes, and of their Purse parsimonious; who conceal their Crowns, and hide
their Silver; scratching their Head with one Finger like grumbling Puppies,
gaping at the Flies like Tithe Calves; clapping down their Ears like Arcadian
Asses at the Melody of Musicians, who with their very Countenances in the depth
of silence express their Consent to the Prosopopeie.

Having made this Choice and Election, it seemed to me that my Exercise therein
would be neither unprofitable nor troublesome to any, whilst I should thus set
agoing my Diogenical Tub, which is all that is left me safe from the Shipwreck
of my former Misfortunes.

At this dingle dangle wagging of my Tub, what would you have me to do? By the
Virgin that tucks up her Sleeve, I know not as yet: Stay a little till I suck
up a Draught of this Bottle, it is my true and only Helicon; it is my Caballine
Fountain; it is my sole Entousiasm. Drinking thus I meditate, discourse,
resolve and conclude. After that the Epilogue is made, I laugh, I write, I
compose, and drink again. Cynius drinking wrote, and wriing drank. Aschylus (if
Plutarch in his Symposiaes merit any Faith) drank composing, and drinking
composed. Homer never wrote fasting, and Cato never wrote till after he had
drunk. These Passages I have brought before you, to the end you may not say
that I live without the Example of Men well praised, and better* prised. It is
good and fresh enough, even (as if you would say) it is entering upon the Second
Degree. God the good God Sabbath (that is to say, the God of Armies) be praised
for it eternally. If you after the same manner would take one great Draught, or
two little ones, whilst you have your Gown about you. I truly find no kind of
Inconveniency in it, provided you send up to God for all some small scantling
of Thanks.

Since then my Luck or Destiny is such as you have heard, for it is not for
every body to go to Corinth, I am fully resolved to be so little idle and
unprofitable, that I will set my self to serve the one and the other sort of
People, amongst the Diggers, Pioniers and Rampire-builders, I will do as did
Neptune and Apollo at Troy under Laomedon, or as did Renault of Mountauban in
his latter days: I will serve the Masons, I Will set on the Pot to boil for the
Bricklayers; and whilst the minced Meat is making ready at the sound of my
small Pipe, I Will measure the Muzzle of the musing Dotards. Thus did Amphion
with the Melody of his Harp, found, build and finish the great and renowned
City of Thebes.

For the use of the Warriors I am about to broach off new my Barrel to give
them a taste, (which by two former Volumes of mine, if by the deceitfulness and
falsehood of Printers they had not been jumbled, marred and spoiled, you would
have very well relished) and draw unto them of the growth of our own trippery
Pastimes, a gallant third part of a Gallon, and consequently a jolly cheerful
Quart of Pantagruelick Sentences, which you may lawfully call (if you please)
Diogenical; and shall have me (seeing I cannot be their Fellow-Soldier) for
their faithful Butler, refreshing and cheering, according to my little power,
their return from the Alarms of the Enemy; as also for an indefatigable
Extoller of their Martial Exploits and Glorious Achievements. I shall not fail
therein par lapathium acutum de dieu, if Mars fail not in Lent, which the
cunning Lecher (I warrant you) will be loath to do.

I remember nevertheless to have read, that Ptolomee the Son of Lagus one day,
amongst the many Spoils and Booties, which by his Victories he had acquired,
presenting to the Egyptians in the open view of the People, a Bactrian Camel
all black, and a party-colored Slave, in such sort, as that the one half of
his Body was black, and the other white, not in partition of breadth by the
Diaphragma, as was that Woman consecrated to the Indian Venus, whom the Tyanean
Philosopher did see between the River Hydaspes, and mount Caucasus, but in a
perpendicular Dimension of Altitude; which were things never before that seen
in Egypt. He expected by the show of these Novelties to win the love of the
People. But what happened thereupon? At the production of the Camel they were all
affrighted, and offended at the sight of the party-colored Man: Some scoffed
at him as a detestible Monster brought forth by the Error of Nature. In a
word, of the Hope which he had to please these Egyptians, and by such means to
increase the Affection which they naturally bore him, he was altogether
frustrate and disappointed; understanding fully by their Deportments, that they
took more pleasure and delight in things that were proper, handsome and perfect,
than in misshapen, monstrous and ridiculous Creatures; since which time he had
both the Slave and the Camel in such dislike, that very shortly thereafter,
either through Negligence, or for want of ordinary Sustenance, they did
exchange their Life with Death.

This Example, My Cake will be Dough, and for my Venus I shall have but some
deformed Puppy, puts me in a suspense between hope and fear, misdoubting
that for the Contentment which I aim at, I will but reap what shall be most
distastful to me; instead of serving them, I shall but vex them, and offend
them whom I purpose to exhilerate; resembling in this dubious Adventure
Euclion's Cook, so renowned by Plautus in his Pot; and by Ausonius in his
Griphon, and by diverse others; which Cook, for having by his scraping,
discovered a Treasure, had his Hide well curry'd. Put the case I get no Anger
by it, though formerly such things fell out, and the like may occur again: Yet,
by Hercules, it will not. So I perceive in them all one, and the same
specifical Form, and the like individual Proprieties, which our Ancestor^
called Pantagruelism; by virtue whereof they will bear with any thing that
flows from a good, free, and loyal Heart. I have seen them ordinarily take
good will in part of payment, and remain satisfied therewith, when one was not
able to do better. Having dispatched this point, I return to my Barrel.

Up my Lads, to this Wine, spare it not; drink Boys, and trowl it off at full
Bowls; if you do not think it good, let it alone. I am not like those officious
and importunate Sots, who by Force, Outrage and Violence constrain an easy
goodnatur'd Fellow to whiffle, quaff, carouse, and what is worse. All honest
Tiplers, all honest gouty Men, all such as are adry, coming to this little
Barrel of mine, need not drink thereof, if it please them not; but if they have
a mind to it, and that the Wine prove agreeable to the Tastes of their
worshipful Worships, let them drink frankly, freely and boldly, without paying
any thing, and welcome. This is my Decree, my Statute and Ordinance; and let
none fear there shall be any want of Wine as at the Marriage of Cana in
Galilee; for how much soever you shall draw forth at the Faucet, so much shall
I tun in at the Bung. Thus shall the Barrel remain inexhaustible; it has a
lively Spring and perpetual Current. Such was the Beverage contained within the
Cup of Tantalus, which was figuratively represented amongst the Bracman Sages.
Such was in Iberia the Mountain of Salt so highly written of by Cato. Such was
the Branch of Gold consecrated to the subterranean Goddess, which Virgil treats
of so sublimely. It is a true Cornu-copia of Merriment and Railery. If at any
time it seem to you to be emptied to the very Lees, yet shall it not for all
that be drawn wholly dry; good Hope remains there at the bottom, as in
Pandora's Bott^e; and not despair, as in the Punction of the Danaids. Remark
well what I have said, and what manner of People they be whom I do invite; for
to the end that none be deceived, I (in imitation of Lucilius, who did protest
that he wrote only to his own Tarentias and Consentius, have not pierced this
Vessel for any else, but you honest Men, who are Drinkers of the First Edition,
and gouty Blades of the highest degree. The great Dorophages, Bribemongers,
have (on their hands) occupation enough, and enough on the Hooks, for their
Venison. There may they follow their Prey; here is no Garbage for them. You
Pettifoggers, Garbellers, and Masters of Chicanery, speak not to me I beseech
you, in the name of, and for the Reverence you bear to the Four Hips that
engendered you, and to the Quickening Peg which at that time conjoined them. As
for Hypocrites, much less; although they were all of them unsound in Body,
pockify'd, scurfie, furnished with unquenchable Thirst, and insatiable Eating;
because indeed they are not of good but of evil, and of that evil, from which
we daily pray to God to deliver us. And albeit we see them sometimes
counterfeit Devotion, yet never did Old Age make pretty Moppet. Hence Mastiffs,
Dogs in a Doublet, get you behind, aloof Villains, out of my Sunshine; Curs, to
the Devil. Do you jog hither, wagging your Tails, so pant at my Wine, and
bepiss my Barrel? Look here is the Cudgel, which Diogines, in his last Will,
ordained to be set by him after his Death, for beating away, crushing the
Reins, and breaking the Backs of these Bustuary Hobgoblins, and Cerberian
Hellhounds. Pack you hence therefore you Hypocrites to your Sheep-dogs, get you
gone you Dissemblers to the Devil. Hay! What, are you there yet? I renounce my
part of Papimanie. If I snatch you, Grr, Grrr, Grrrrrr. Avaunt, Avaunt, will you
not be gone? May you never shit till you be soundly lashed with Stirrup
Leather, never piss but by the Strapado, nor be otherways warmed, than by the
Bastinado.

CHAP. I. How Pantagruel transported a Colony of Utopians into Dypsodie.
PAntagruel having wholly s^bdued the Land of Dypsodie, transported thereunto a
Colony of Utopians, to the number of 9876543210 Men, besides the Women and
little Children, Artificers of all Trades, and Professors of all Sciences; to
people, cultivate and improve that Country, which otherways was ill inhabited,
and in the greatest part thereof but a mere Desert and Wilderness; and did
transport them so much for the excessive multitude of Men and Women which were
in Utopia, multiplied (for number) like Grasshoppers upon the face of the Land.
You understand well enough, nor is it needful further to explain it to you,
that the Utopian Men had so rank and fruitful Genetories, and that the Utopian
Women carried Matrixes so ample, so glutonous, so tenaciously retentive, and so
Architectonically cellulated, that at the end of every Ninth Month Seven
Children at the least (what Male what Female) were brought forth by every
Married Woman, in imitation of the People of Israel in Egypt, if Anthony de
Lira be to be trusted. Nor yet was this Transplantation made so much for the
Fertility of the Soil, the Wholsomness of the Air, or Commodity of the Country
of Dypsodie, as to retain that Rebellious People within the bounds of their
Duty and Obedience, by this new Transport of his ancient and most faithful
Subjects, who from all time out of mind, never knew, acknowledged, owned or
served any other Sovereign Lord but him; and who likewise from the very instant
of their Birth, as soon as they were entered into this World, had, with the Milk
of their Mothers and Nurses, sucked in the Sweetness, Humanity and Mildness of
his Government, to which they were all of them so nourished and habituated,
that there was nothing surer, than that they would sooner abandon their Lives,
than swerve from this singular and primitive Obedience naturally due to their
Prince, whithersoever they should be dispersed or removed.

And not only should they, and their Children successively descending from
their Blood, be such, but also would keep and maintain in this same Fealty, and
obsequious Observance, all the Nations lately annexed to his Empire; which so
truly came to pass, that therein he was not disappointed of his intent. For if
the Utopians were before their Transplantation thither dutiful and faithful
Subjects, the Dypsodes, after some few days conversing with them, were every
whit as (if not more) loyal than they; and that by virtue of I know not what
natural Fervency incident to all Humane Creatures at the beginning of any
labor wherein they took delight; solemnly attesting the Heavens, and supreme
Intelligences of their being only sorry, that no sooner unto their knowledge
had arrived the great Renown of the good Pantagruel.

Remark therefore here (honest Drinkers) that the manner of preserving and
retaining Countries newly Conquered in Obedience, is not (as has been the
Erroneous Opinion of some Tyrannical Spirits to their own Detriment and
Dishonor) to pillage, plunder, force, spoil, trouble, oppress, vex, disquiet,
ruin and destroy the People, ruling, governing and keeping them in awe with
Rods of Iron; and (in a word) eating and devouring them, after the fashion that
Homer calls an unjust and wicked King, (...), that is to say, a Devourer of his
People.

I will not bring you to this purpose the Testimony of Ancient Writers; it
shall suffice to put you in mind of what your Fathers have seen thereof, and
your selves too, if you be not very Babes. Newborn, they must be given suck to,
rocked in a Cradle, and dandled. Trees newly planted must be supported,
underpropped, strengthened and defended against all Tempests, Mischiefs,
Injuries and Calamities. And one lately saved from a long and dangerous
Sickness, and new upon his Recovery, must be forborne, spared and cherished, in
such sort, that they may harbor in their own Breasts this Opinion, that there
is not in the World a King or a Prince, who does not desire fewer Enemies, and
more Friends.

Thus Osiris the great King of the Egyptians, conquered almost the whole Earth,
not so much by Force of Arms, as by easing the People of their Troubles,
teaching them how to live well, and honestly giving them good Laws, and using
them with all possible Affability, Courtesy, Gentleness and Liberality:
Therefore was he by all Men deservedly Entitled, The Great King Evergetes
(that is to say Benefactor) which Style he obtained by virtue of the Command of
Jupiter to Pamyla.

And in effect, Hesiod, in his Hierarchy placed the good Demons (call them
Angels if you will, or Geniuses) as Intercessors and Mediators betwixt the Gods
and Men, they being of a degree inferior to the Gods, but superior to Men;
and for that through their Hands the Riches and Benefits we get from Heaven are
dealt to us; and that they are continually doing us good, and still protecting
us from evil. He says, that they exercise the Offices of Kings; because to do
always good, and never ill, is an Act most singularly Royal.

Just such another was the Emperor of the Universe, Alexander the Macedonian.
After this manner was Hercules Sovereign Possessor of the whole Continent,
relieving Men from monstrous Oppressions, Exactions and Tyrannies; governing
them with Discretion, maintaining them in Equity and Justice, instructing them
with seasonable Policies and wholesome Laws, convenient for, and suitable to the
Soil, Climate and Disposition of the Country, supplying where was wanting,
abating what was superfluous, and pardoning all that was past, with a
sempiternal forgetfulness of all preceding Offenses, as was the Amnestie of the
Athenians, when by the Prowess, Valor and Industry of Thrasybulus, the Tyrants
were exterminated; afterward at Rome by Cicero exposed, and renewed under the
Emperor Aurelian. These are the Philtres, Allurements, Iynges, Inveiglements,
Baits, and Enticements of Love, by the means whereof that may be peaceably
revived, which was painfully acquired. Nor can a Conqueror Reign more happily,
whether he be a Monarch, Emperor, King, Prince or Philosopher, than by making
his Justice to second his Valor. His Valor shows it self in Victory and
Conquest; his Justice will appear in the good Will and Affection of the People,
when he makes Laws, publishes Ordinances, establishes Religion, and does
what is right to every one, as the noble Poet Virgil writes of Octavian
Augustus.

-- Victorque volentes
Per populos dat jura.
Therefore is it that Homer in his Iliads calls a good Prince and great King
(...), that is, The Ornament of the People.

Such was the Consideration of Numa Pompilius the Second King of the Romans, a
just Politician and wise Philosopher, when he ordained that to God Terminus, on
the day of his Festival called Terminales, nothing should be Sacrificed that
had died; teaching us thereby, that the Bounds, Limits and Frontiers of
Kingdoms should be guarded, and preserved in Peace, Amity and Meekness, without
polluting our Hands with Blood and Robbery: Who does otherways, shall not only
lose what he has gained, but also be loaded with this Scandal and Reproach,
That he is an unjust and wicked Purchaser, and his Acquests perish with him,
Iuxta illud malae parta, male dilabuntur. And although during his whole
Lifetime, he should have peaceable possession thereof; yet if what has been
so acquired moulder away in the Hands of his Heirs the same Opproby, Scandal
and Imputation will be charged upon the Defunct, and his Memory remain accursed
for his unjust and unwarrantable Conquest, Iuxta illud, de male quaesitis vix
gaudet tertius haeres.

Remark, likewise, Gentlemen, you Gouty Feoffees in this main Point worthy of
your Observation, how by these means Pantagruel of one Angel made two, which
was a Contingency opposite to the Council of Charlemaine, who made two Devils
of one, when he transplanted* the Saxons into Flanders, and the Flemins into
Saxony. For not being able to keep in such Subjection the Saxons, whose
Dominion he had joined to the Empire, but that ever and anon they would break
forth into open Rebellion, if he should casually be drawn into Spain, or other
remote Kingdoms: He caused them to be brought unto his own Country of Flanders,
the Inhabitants whereof did naturally obey him; and transported the Haynaults
and Flemens, his ancient loving Subjects, into Saxony, not mistrusting their
Loyalty, now that they were transplanted into a strange Land. But it happened
that the Saxons persisted in their Rebellion and primitive Obstinacy; and the
Flemins dwelling in Saxony did imbibe the stubborn Manners and Conditions of
the Saxons.

CHAP. II. How Panurge was made Lord of Salmygoudin in Dypsodie, and did waste
his Revenue before it came in.
WHilst Pantagruel was giving Order for the Government of all Dypsodie, he
assigned to Panurge the Lairdship of Salmygoudin, which was yearly worth
6789106789 Ryals of certain Rent, besides the uncertain Revenue of the Locusts
and Periwinkles, amounting one year with another to the value of 435768, or
2435769 French Crowns of Berry. Sometimes it did amount to 1230554321 Seraphs
when it was a good Year, and that Locusts and Periwinkles were in request; but
that was not every Year.

Now his Worship, the new Lord, husbanded this his Estate so providently well
and prudently, that in less than fourteen days he wasted and dilapidated all
the certain and uncertain Revenue of his Lairdship for three whole Years: Yet
did not he properly dilapidate it, as you might say, in founding of
Monasteries, building of Churches, erecting of Colleges, and setting up of
Hospitals, or casting his Bacon-Flitches to the Dogs; but spent it in a
thousand little Banquets and jolly Collations, keeping open House for all
Comers and Goers; yea, to all good Fellows, young Girls, and pretty Wenches;
felling Timber, burning the great Logs for the Sale of the Ashes, borrowing
Money beforehand, buying dear, selling cheap, and eating his Corn (as it were)
whilst it was but Grass.

Pantagruel being advertised of this his Lavishness, was in good sooth no way
offended at the matter, angry nor sorry; for I once told you, and again tell it
you, that he was the best, little, great Goodman that ever girded a Sword to
his Side; he took all things in good part, and interpreted every Action to the
best Sense: He never vexed nor disquieted himself with the least pretense of
Dislike to any thing; because he knew that he must have most grossly abandoned
the Divine Mansion of Reason, if he had permitted his Mind to be never so
little grieved, afflicted or altered at any occasion whatsoever. For all the
Goods that the Heaven covers, and that the Earth contains in all their
Dimensions of Height, Depth, Breadth and Length, are not of so much worth, as
that we should for them disturb or disorder our Affections, trouble or perplex
our Senses or Spirits.

He drew only Panurge aside, and then making to him a sweet Remonstrance and
mild Admonition, very gently represented before him in strong Arguments, That
if he should continue in such an unthrifty course of living, and not become a
better Mesnagier, it would prove altogether impossible for him, or at least
hughly difficult at any time to make him rich. Rich! answered Panurge, Have you
fixed your Thoughts there? Have you undertaken the Task to enrich me in this
World? Set your Mind to live merrily in the Name of God and good Folks, let no
other Cark nor Care be harbored within the Sacro sanctified Domicile of your
Celestial Brain. May the Calmness and Tranquillity thereof be never incommodated
with, or over-shadowed by any frowning Clouds of sullen Imaginations and
displeasing Annoyance. For if you live joyful, meery, jocund and glad, I cannot
be but rich enough. Every body cries up thrift, thrift, and good Husbandry; but
many speak of Robin Hood that never shot in his Bow; and talk of that Virtue of
Mesnagery, who know not what belong to it. It is by me that they must be
advised. From me therefore take this Advertisement and Information, that what
is imputed to me for a Vice, has been done in imitation of the University and
Parliament of Paris, places in which is to be found the true Spring and Source
of the lively Idea of Pantheology, and all manner of Justice. Let him be
counted an Heretic that doubts thereof, and does not firmly believe it: Yet
they in one day eat up their Bishop, or the Revenue of the Bishopric (is it
not all one) for a whole year; yea, sometimes for two. This is done on the day
he makes his Entry, and is installed: Nor is there any place for an Excuse; for
he cannot avoid it, unless he would be houted at and stoned for his Parsimony.

It has been also esteemed an act flowing from the Habit of the Four Cardinal
Virtues. Of Prudence in borrowing Money beforehand; for none knows what may
fall out; who is able to tell if the World shall last yet three years? But
although it should continue longer, is there any Man so foolish, as to have the
Confidence to promise himself three years?

What fool so confident to say,
That he shall live one other day?
Of Commutative Justice, in buying dear (I say upon trust) and selling good
cheap, (that is, for ready Money) what says Cato in his Book of Husbandry to
this purpose? The Father of a Family (says he) must be a perpetual Seller; by
which means it is impossible but that at last he shall become rich, if he have
of vendible Ware enough still ready for sale.

Of Distributive Justice it does partake, in giving Entertainment to good
(remark good) and gentle Fellows, whom Fortune had Shipwrack'd (like Ulysse:)
upon the Rock of a hungry Stomach without provision of Sustenance: And likewise
to the good (remark the good) and young Wenches: For according to the Sentence
of Hippocrates, Youth is impatient of Hunger, chiefly if it be vigorous,
lively, frolic, brisk, stirring and bouncing; which wanton Lasses willingly
and heartily devote themselves to the pleasure of Honest Men; and are in so far
both Platonic and Ciceronian, that they do a^knowledge their being born into
this World, not to be for themselves alone, but that in their proper Persons
their Acquaintance may claim one share, and their Friends another.

The Virtue of Fortitude appears therein by the cutting down and overthrowing
of the great Trees, like a second Mil^ making Havoc of the dark Forests, which
did serve only to furnish Dens, Caves, and Shelter to Wolves, wild Boars and
Foxes; and afford Receptacles, withdrawing Corners and Refuges to Robbers,
Thieves and Murderers; lurking holes and sculking places for Cutthroat
Assassinators; secret obscure Shops for Coiners of false money, and safe
Retreats for Heretics, laying them even and level with the plain Champian
Fields and pleasant Heathy Ground, at the sound of the Hau-bois and Bagpipes
playing, reeks with the high and stately Timber, and preparing Seats and
Benches for the Eve of the dreadful day of Judgment.

I gave thereby proof of my Temperance in eating my Corn whilst it was but
Grass, like an Hermit feeding upon Sallets and Roots, that so affranchising my
self from the Yoke of sensual Appetites to the utter disclaiming of their
Sovereignty, I might the better reserve somewhat in store, for the relief of
the lame, blind, cripple, maimed, needy, poor and wanting Wretches.

In taking this course I save the Expense of the Weed-grubbers, who gain Money;
of the Reapers in Harvest-time, who drink lustily, and without Water; of
Gleaners, who will expect their Cakes and Bannocks of Threshers, who leave no
Garlic, Scallions, Leeks nor Onyons in our Gardens, (by the Authority of
Thestilis in Virgil) and of the Millers, who are generally Thieves; and of the
Bakers, who are little better; is the small Saving or Frugality; besides the
mischief and damage of the Field-mice, the decay of Barns, and the destruction
usually made by Weesils and other Vermin.

Of Corn in the Blade. You may make good green Sauce of a light Concoction, and
easy Digestion, which recreates the Brain, and exhilerates the Animal Spirits,
rejoices the Sight, opens the Appetite, delights the taste, comfort the
Heart, tickleth the Tongue, cheareth the Countenance, striking a fresh and
lively Color, strengthening the Muscles, tempers the Blood, disburthens the
Midrif, refreshes the Liver, disobstructs the Spleen, eases the Kidneys,
suppleth the Reins, quickens the Joints of the Back, cleanses the
Urine-Conduits, dilates the Spermatick Vessels, shortens the Cremasters,
purges the Bladder, puffs up the Genitories, corrects the prepuce, hardens
the Nut, and rectifies that Member. It will make you have a current Belly to
trot, fart, dung, piss, sneeze, cough, spit, belch, spew, yawn, snuff, blow,
breath, snort, sweat, and set taunt your Robin, with a thousand other rare
advantages. I understand you very well (says Pantagruel) you would thereby
infer, that those of a mean Spirit and shallow Capacity, have not the skill to
spend much in a short time: You are not the first in whose Conceit that Heresy
has entered: Nero maintained it, and above all Mortals admired most his Uncle
Caius Caligula, for having in few days, by a most wonderfully pregnant
Invention, totally spent all the Goods and Patrimony which Tiberius had left
him.

But instead of observing the Sumptuous Supper-curbing Laws of the Romans, to
wit, the Orchia, the Fannia, the Didia, the Licinia, the Cornelia, the
Lepidiana, the Antia, and of the Corinthians; by the which they were inhibited,
under pain of great punishment, not to spend more in one year than their annual
Revenue did amount to. You have offered up the Oblation of Protervia, which was
with the Romans such a Sacrifice as the Paschal Lamb was amongst the Jews,
wherein all that was eatable was to be eaten, and the remainder to be thrown
into the Fire, without reserving any thing for the next day. I may very justly
say of you, as Cato did of Albidius, who after that he had by a most
extravagant Expense wasted all the Means and Possessions he had to one only
House, he fairly set it on Fire, that he might the better say, Consummatum est.
Even just as since his time St. Thomas Aquinas did when he had eaten up the
whole Lamprey, although there was no necessity in it.

CHAP. III. How Panurge praises the Debtors and Borrowers.
BUT, quoth Pantagruel, when will you be out of Debt? At the next ensuing Term
of the Greek Calends, answered Panurge, when all the World shall be content,
and that it be your Fate to become your own Heir. The Lord forbid that I should
be out of Debt, as if, indeed, I could not be trusted. Who leaves not some
Leaven over night, will hardly have paste the next morning.

Be still indebted to some body or other, that there may be some body always to
pray for you; that the Giver of all good things may grant unto you a blessed,
long, and prosperous Life, fearing if Fortune should deal crosly with you, that
it might be his chance to come short of being paid by you; he will always speak
good of you in every Company, ever and anon purchase new Creditors unto you; to
the end that through their means you may make a shift by borrowing from Peter
to pay Paul, and with other folks Earth fill up his Ditch. When of old in the
Region of the Gauls, by the Institution of the Druids, the Servants, Slaves and
Bondmen were burnt quick at the Funerals and Obsequies of their Lords and
Masters; had not they fear enough, think you, that their Lords and Masters
should die? for per force, they were to die with them for Company. Did not they
uncessantly send up their Supplications to their great God Mercury, as likewise
unto Dis the Father of Wealth, to lengthen out their days, and preserve them
long in health? Were not they very careful to entertain them well, punctually
to look unto them, and to attend them faithfully and circumspectly? For by
those means were they to live together at least until the hour of Death.
Believe me, your Creditors with a more fervent Devotion will beseech Almighty
God to prolong your Life, they being of nothing more afraid than that you
should die; for that they are more concerned for the Sleeve than the Arm, and
love Silver better than their own Lives; as it evidently appears by the
Usurers of Landerousse, who not long since hanged themselves, because the price
of the Corn and Wines was fallen, by the return of a gracious Season. To this
Pantagruel answering nothing, Panurge went on in his Discourse, saying, Truly,
and in good sooth (Sir,) when I ponder my Destiny aright, and think well upon
it, you put me shrewdly to my Plunges, and have me at a Bay in twitting me with
the Reproach of my Debts and Creditors: And yet did I, in this only respect and
consideration of being a Debtor, esteem my self worshipful, reverend and
formidable. For against the Opinion of most Philosophers, that of nothing
arises nothing; yet without having bottomed on so much as that which is called
the First Matter, did I out of nothing become such Ma^^er and Creator, that I
have created, what? a gay number of fair and jolly Creditors. Nay, Creditors (I
will maintain it, even to the very Fire it self exclusively) are fair and
goodly Creatures. Who lends nothing is an ugly and wicked Creature, and an
accursed Imp of the Infernal Old Nick. And there is made, what? Debts: A thing
most precious and dainty, of great Use and Antiquity. Debts (I say) surmounting
the number of Syllables which may result from the Combinations of all the
Consonants, with each of the Vowels heretofore projected, reckoned and
calculated by the Noble Xenocrates. To judge of the perfection of Debtors by
the Numerosity of their Creditors, is the readiest way for entering into the
Mysteries of Practical Arithmetic.

You can hardly imagine how glad I am, when every Morning I perceive my self
environed and surrounded with Brigades of Creditors; humble, fawning, and full
of their Reverences: And whilst I remark, that as I look more favorably upon,
and give a chearfuller Countenance to one than to another, the Fellow thereupon
builds a Conceit that he shall be the first Dispatched, and the foremost in
the Date of Payment; and he valueth my Smiles at the rate of ready Money. It
seems unto me, that I then act and personate the God of the Passion of
Saumure, accompanied with his Angels and Cherubims.

These are my Flatterers, my Soothers, my Claw backs, my Smoothers, my
Parasites, my Saluters, my Givers of good Morrows, and perpetual Orators; which
makes me verily think, that the supreamest Height of Heroic Virtue, described
by Hesiode, consists in being a Debtor, wherein I held the first degree in my
Commencement. Which Dignity though all Humane Creatures seem to aim at, and
aspire thereto, few nevertheless, because of the difficulties in the way, and
encumbrances of hard Passages are able to reach it, as is easily perceivable by
the ardent desire and vehement longing harbored in the Breast of every one, to
be still creating more Debts, and the new Creditors.

Yet does it not lie in the power of every one to be a Debtor. To acquire
Creditors is not at the Disposure of each Man's Arbitriment. You nevertheless
would deprive me of this sublime Felicity. You ask me when I will be out of
Debt. Well, to go yet further on, and possibly worse in your Conceit, may Sanct
Bablin, the good Sanct, snatch me, if I have not all my Lifetime held Debt to
be as an Union or Conjunction of the Heavens with the Earth, and the whole
Cement whereby the Race of Mankind is kept together; yea, of such Virtue and
Efficacy, that, I say, the whole Progeny of Adam would very suddenly perish
without it. Therefore, perhaps, I do not think amiss, when I repute it to be
the great Soul of the Universe, which (according to the Opinion of the
Academicks) vivifyeth all manner of things. In Confirmation whereof, that you
may the better believe it to be so, represent unto your self, without any
prejudicacy of Spirit, in a clear and serene Fancy, the Idea and Form of some
other World than this; take if you please, and lay hold on the thirtieth of
those which the Philosopher Methrodorus did enumerate, wherein it is to be
supposed there is no Debtor or Creditor, that is to say, a World without Debts.

There amongst the Planets will be no regular Course, all will be in Disorder,
Jupiter reckoning himself to be nothing indebted unto Saturn, will go near to
detrude him out of his Sphere, and with the Homerick Chain will be like to hang
up the Intelligences, Gods, Heavens, Demons, Heroes, Devils, Earth and Sea
together with the other Elements. Saturn no doubt combining with Mars will
reduce that so disturbed World into a Chaos of Confusion.

Mercury then would be no more subjected to the other Planets; he would scorn
to be any longer their Camillus, as he was of old termed in the Hetrurian
Tongue; for it is to be imagined that he is no way a Debtor to them.

Venus will be no more Venerable, because she shall have lent nothing. The Moon
will remain bloody and obscure: For to what end should the Sun impart unto her
any of his Light? He owed her nothing. Nor yet will the Sun shine upon the
Earth, nor the Stars send down any good Influence, because the Terrestrial
Globe has desisted from sending up their wonted Nourishment by Vapors and
Exhalations, wherewith Heraclitus said the Stoics proved Cicero maintained
they were cherished and alimented. There would likeways be in such a World no
manner of Symbolization, Alteration, nor Transmutation amongst the Elements;
for the one will not esteem it self obliged to the other, as having borrowed
nothing at all from it. Earth then will not become Water, Water will not be
changed into Air, of Air will be made no Fire, and Fire will afford no Heat
unto the Earth; the Earth will produce nothing but Monsters, Titans, Giants; no
Rain will descend upon it, nor Light shine thereon; no Wind will blow there,
nor will there be in it any Summer or Harvest. Lucifer will break loose, and
issuing forth of the depth of Hell, accompanied with his Furies, Fiends and
Horned Devils, will go about to unnestle and drive out of Heaven all the Gods,
as well of the greater as of the lesser Nations. Such a World without lending,
will be no better than a Dog-kennel, a place of Contention and Wrangling, more
unruly and irregular than that of the Rector of Paris; a Devil of an
Hurly-burly, and more disordered Confusion, than that of the Plagues of Do^ay.
Men will not then salute one another; it will be but lost labor to expect Aid
or Succor from any, or to cry, Fire, Water, Murder, for none will put to
their helping Hand. Why? He lent no Money, there is nothing due to him. No body
is concerned in his Burning, in his Shipwreck, in his Ruin, or in his Death;
and that because he hitherto had lent nothing, and would never thereafter have
lent any thing. In short, Faith, Hope and Charity would be quite banished from
such a World; for Men are born to relieve and assist one another; and in their
stead should succeed and be introduced Defiance, Disdain and Rancour, with the
most execrable Troop of all Evils, all Imprecations and all Miseries. Whereupon
you will think, and that not amiss, that Pandora had there spilt her unlucky
Bottle. Men unto Men will be Wolves, Hobthrushers and Goblins, (as were Lycaon,
Bellorophon, Nebuchodonosor) Plunderers, Highway Robbers, Cutthroats,
Rapporees, Murderers, Payloners, Assass^nators, lewd, wicked, malevolent,
pernicious Haters, set against every body, like to Ismael, Metabus, or Timon
the Athenian, who for that cause was named Misanthropos; in such sort, that it
would prove much more easy in Nature to have Fish entertained in the Air, and
Bullocks fed in the bottom of the Ocean, than to support or tolerate a rascally
Rabble of People that will not Lend. These Fellows (I vow) do I hate with a
perfect Hatred; and if conform to the pattern of this grievous, peevish and
perverse World which lends nothing, you figure and liken the little World,
which is Man, you will find in him a terrible justling Coil and Clutter: The
Head will not lend the sight of his Eyes to guide the Feet and Hands; the Legs
will refuse to bear up the Body; the Hands will leave off working any more for
the rest of the Members; the Heart will be weary of its continual Motion for
the beating of the Pulse, and will no longer lend his Assistance; the Lungs
will withdraw the use of their Bellows; the Liver will desist from convoying
any more Blood through the Veins for the good of the whole; the Bladder will
not be indebted to the Kidneys, so that the Urine thereby will be totally
stopped. The Brains, in the interim, considering this unnatural course, will
fall into a raving Dotage, and withold all feeling from the Sinews, and
Motion from the Muscles: Briefly, in such a World without Order and Array,
owing nothing, lending nothing, and borrowing nothing, you would see a more
dangerous Conspiration than that which Esope exposed in his Apologue. Such a
World will perish undoubtedly; and not only perish, but perish very quickly.
Were it Asculapius himself, his Body would immediately rot, and the chasing
Soul full of Indignation take its Flight to all the Devils of Hell after my
Money.

CHAP. IV. Panurge continues his Discourse in the praise of Borrowers and
Lenders.
ON the contrary, be pleased to represent unto your Fancy another World,
wherein every one lends, and every one owes, all are Debtors, and all
Creditors. O how great will that Harmony be, which shall thereby result from
the regular Motions of the Heavens! Me thinks I hear it every whit as well as
ever Plato did. What Sympathy will there be amongst the Elements? O how
delectable then unto Nature will be our own Works and Productions? Whilst Ceres
appears laden with Corn, Bacchus with Wines, Flora with Flowers, Pomona with
Fruits, and Juno fair in a clear Air, wholesome and pleasant: I lose my self in
this high Contemplation.

Then will among the Race of Mankind Peace, Love, Benevolence, Fidelity,
Tranquillity, Rest, Banquets, Feastings, Joy, Gladness, Gold, Silver, single
Money, Chains, Rings, with other Ware, and Chaffer of that nature be found to
trot from hand to hand; no Suits at Law, no Wars, no Strife, Debate, nor
wrangling; none will be there an Usurer, none will be there a Pinch-penny; a
Scrape-good Wretch, or churlish hard-hearted Refuser. Good God! Will not this
be the Golden Age in the Reign of Saturn? The true Idea of the Olympic
Regions, wherein all Virtues cease; Charity alone rules, governs,
domineereth and triumphs? All will be fair and goodly People there, all just
and virtuous.

O happy World! O People of that World most happy! Yea, thrice and four times
blessed is that People! I think in very deed that I am amongst them, and swear
to you, by my good Forsooth, that if this glorious aforesaid World had a Pope,
abounding with Cardinals, that so he might have the Association of a Sacred
College, in the space of very few years you should be sure to see the Sancts
much thicker in the Roll, more numerous, wonder-working and mirifick, more
Services, more Vows, more Staves and Wax-Candles than are all those in the Nine
Bishoprics of Britany, St. Yves only excepted. Consider (Sir) I pray you, how
the noble Patelin, having a mind to Deity, and extol even to the Third Heavens
the Father of William Iosseaume, said no more but this, And he did lend his
Goods to those who were desirous of them.

O the fine Saying! Now let our Microcosm be fancied conform to this Model in
all its Members; lending, borrowing and owing, (that is to say) according to
its own Nature: For Nature has not to any other end created Man, but to owe,
borrow and lend; no greater is the Harmony amongst the Heavenly Spheres, than
that which shall be found in its wellordered Policy. The Intention of the
Founder of this Microcosm is, to have a Soul therein to be entertained, which
^^ lodged there, as a Guest with its Host, it may live there for a while. Life
consists in Blood, Blood is the Seat of the Soul; therefore the chiefest Work
of the Microcosm, is, to be making Blood continually.

At this Forge are exercised all the Members of the Body; none is exempted from
Labor, each operates apart, and does its proper Office. And such is their
Hierarchy, that perpetually the one borrows from the other, the one lends the
other, and the one is the others Debtor. The stuff and matter convenient which
Nature gives to be turned into Blood is Bread and Wine. All kind of nourishing
Victuals is understood to be comprehended in these two, and from hence in the
Gothish Tongue is called Companage. To find out this Meat and Drink, to prepare
and boil it, the Hands are put to Work, the Feet do walk and bear up the whole
Bulk of the Corporal Mass; the Eyes guide and conduct all; the Appetite in the
Orifice of the Stomach, by means of little sowrish black Humor (called
Melancholy) which is transmitted thereto from the Milt, gives warning to shut
in the Food. The Tongue does make the first Essay, and tastes it; the Teeth do
chaw it, and the Stomach does receive, digest and chylifie it; the Mesaraick
Veins suck out of it what is good and fit, leaving behind the Excrements, which
are, through special Conduits for that purpose, voided by an expulsive Faculty;
thereafter it is carried to the Liver, where it being changed again, it by the
virtue of that new Transmutation becomes Blood. What Joy, conjecture you, will
then be found amongst those Officers, when they see this Rivolet of Gold, which
is their sole Restorative? No greater is the Joy of Alchimists, when after long
Travel, Toil and Expense, they see in their Furnaces the Transmutation: Then is
it that every Member does prepare it self, and strive anew to purify and to
refine this Treasure. The Kidneys through the emulgent Veins draw that Aquosity
from thence which you call Urine, and there send it away through the Ureters to
be slipped downwards; where, in a lower Recepticle, and proper for it, (to wit,
the Bladder) it is kept, and stays there until an opportunity to void it out
in his due time. The Spleen draws from the Blood its Terrestrial part, viz.
The Grounds, Lees or thick Substance settled in the bottom thereof, which you
term Melancholy: The Bottle of the Gall substracts from thence all the
superfluous Choler; whence it is brought to another Shop or Workhouse to be
yet better purified and fined, that is, the Heart, which by its agitation of
Diastolick and Systolick Motions so neatly subtilizeth and inflames it, that in
the right side Ventricle it is brought to perfection, and through the Veins is
sent to all the Members; each parcel of the Body draws it then unto its self,
and after its own fashion is cherished and alimented by it: Feet, Hands,
Thighs, Arms, Eyes, Ears, Back, Breast, yea, all; and then it is, that who
before were Lender^, now become Debtors. The Heart does in its left side
Ventricle so thinnifie the Blood, that it thereby obtains the Name of
Spiritual; which being sent through the Arteries to all the Members of the
Body, serves to warm and winnow the other Blood which runs through the
Veins: The Lights never cease with its Lappets and Bellows to cool and refresh
it; in acknowledgment of which good the Heart through the Arterial Vein imparts
unto it the choicest of its Blood: At last it is made so fine and subtle within
the Rete Mirabilis, that thereafter those Animal Spirits are framed and
composed of it; by means whereof the Imagination, Discourse, Judgment,
Resolution, Deliberation, Ratrocination and Memory have their Rise, Actings and
Operations.

Cops body, I sink, I drown, I perish, I wander astray, and quite fly out of my
self, when I enter into the Consideration of the profound Abyss of this World,
thus lending, thus owing. Believe me, it is a Divine thing to lend, to owe an
Heroic Virtue. Yet is not this all; this little World thus lending, owing and
borrowing, is so good and charitable, that no sooner is the above-specified
Alimentation finished, but that it forthwith projecteth, and has already
forecast, how it shall lend to those who are not as yet born, and by that Loan
endeavor, what it may, to eternize it self, and multiply in Images like the
Pattern, that is, Children. To this end every Member has of the choicest and
most precious of its Nourishment, pare and cut off a Portion, then instantly
dispatcheth it downwards to that place, where Nature has prepared for it very
fit Vessels and Receptacles, through which descending to the Genitories by long
Ambages, Circuits and Flexuosities, it receives a competent Form, and Rooms
apt enough both in the Man and Woman for the future Conservation and
perpetuating of Humane kind. All this is done by Loans and Debts of the one
unto the other; and hence have we this word, the Debt of Marriage. Nature does
reckon Pain to the Refuser, with a most grievous Vexation to his Members, and
an outrageous Fury amidst his Senses. But on the other part, to the Lender a
set Reward, accompanied with Pleasure, Joy, Solace, Mirth and merry Glee.

CHAP. V. How Pantagruel altogether abhors the Debtors and Borrowers.
I Understand you very well, (quoth Pantagruel) and take you to be very good at
Topics, and thoroughly affectioned to your own Cause: But preach it up, and
patrocinate it; prattle on it, and defend it as much as you will, even from
hence to the next Whitsuntide, if you please so to do, yet in the end will you
be astonished to find how you shall have gained no ground at all upon me, nor
persuaded me by your fair Speeches and smooth Talk to enter never so little
into the Thraldom of Debt. You shall owe to none (says the Holy Apostle) any
thing save Love, Friendship and a mutual Benevolence.

You serve me here, I confess, with fine Graphides and Diatyposes, Descriptions
and Figures, which truly please me very well: But let me tell you, if you will
represent unto your Fancy an impudent blustering Bully and an importunate
Borrower, entering afresh and newly into a Town already advertised of his
Manners, you shall find that at his Ingress the Citizens will be more hideously
affrighted and amazed, and in a greater terror and fear, dread and trembling,
than if the Pest it self should step into it in the very same Garb and
Accoutrement wherein the Tyanaean Philosopher found it within the City of
Ephesus. And I am fully confirmed in the Opinion, that the Persians erred not,
when they said, That the Second Vice was to Lie, the first being that of owing
Money. For in very truth, Debts and Lying are ordinarily joined together. I
will nevertheless not from hence infer, that none must owe any thing, or lend
any thing. For who so rich can be, that sometimes may not owe; or who can be so
poor, that sometimes may not lend?

Let the occasion notwithstanding in that case (as Plato very wisely says,
and ordains in his Laws) be such, that none be permitted to draw any Water
out of his Neighbor's Well, until first, they by continual digging and delving
into their own proper Ground, shall have hit upon a kind of Potters Earth,
which is called Ceramite, and there had found no source or drop of Water; for
that sort of Earth, by reason of its Substance, which is fat, strong, firm and
close; so retains its Humidity, that it does not easily evaporate it by any
outward excursion or evaporation.

In good sooth, it is a great shame to choose rather to be still borrowing in
all places from every one, than to work and win. Then only in my Judgment
should one lend, when the diligent, toiling and industrious Person is no longer
able by his labor to make any Purchase unto himself, or otherwise, when by
mischance he has suddenly fallen into an unexpected loss of his Goods.

Howsoever let us leave this Discourse, and from henceforwards do not hang upon
Creditors, nor tie your self to them; I make account for the time past to rid
you freely of them, and from their Bondage to deliver you. The least I should
in this point, (quoth Panurge) is to thank you, though it be the most I can do:
And if Gratitude and Thanksgiving be to be estimated and prized by the
Affection of the Benefactor, that is to be done infinitely and sempiternally;
for the love which you bear me of your own accord and free Grace, without any
merit of mine, goes far beyond the reach of any price or value; it transcends
all weight, all number, all measure, it is endless and everlasting; therefore
should I offer to commensurate and adjust it, either to the size and proportion
of your own noble and gracious Deeds, or yet to the Contentment and Delight of
the obliged Receivers, I would come off but very faintly and flaggingly. You
have verily done me a great deal of good, and multiplied your Favors on me
more frequently than was fitting to one of my condition. You have been more
bountiful toward me than I have deserved, and your Courtesies have by far
surpassed the extent of my merits, I must needs confess it. But it is not, as
you suppose, in the proposed matter: For there it is not where I itch, it is
not there where it fretteth, hurts or vexes me; for henceforth being quit and
out of Debt, what Countenance will I be able to keep? You may imagine that it
will become me very ill, for the first month, because I have never hitherto
been brought up or accustomed to it, I am very much afraid of it. Furthermore,
there shall not one hereafter, Native of the Country of Salmigondy, but he
shall level the Shot toward my Nose; all the back-cracking Fellows of the
World, in discharging of their Postern Petarades, use commonly to say, Voila
pour les quitters; that is, For the quit. My Life will be of very short
continuance, I do foresee it, I recommend to you the making of my Epitaph; for
I perceive I will die confected in the very stinch of Farts. If at any time to
come, by way of restorative to such good Women as shall happen to be troubled
with the grievous pain of the Wind-Cholick, the ordinary Medicaments prove
nothing effectual, the Mummy of all my befarted Body will straight be as a
present Remedy appointed by the Physicians; whereof they taking any small
Modicum, it will incontinently for their Ease afford them a Rattle of Bum-shot,
like a Sal of Muskets.

Therefore would I beseech you to leave me some few Centuries of Debts; as King
Louis the Eleventh, exempting from Suits in Law the Reverend Milles d' Illiers,
Bishop of Chartre, was by the said Bishop most earnestly solicited to leave
him some few for the Exercise of his mind. I had rather give them all my
Revenue of the Periwinkles, together with the other Incomes of the Locusts,
albeit I should not thereby have any parcel abated from off the principal Sums
which I owe. Let us wave this matter (quoth Pantagruel) I have told it you over
again.

CHAP. VI. Why new Married Men were privileged from going to the Wars.
BUT, in the Interim, asked Panurge, by what Law was it constituted, ordained
and established, that such as should plant a new Vineyard, those that should
build a new House, and the new married Men should be exempted and discharged
from the Duty of Warfare for the first year? By the Law (answered Pantagruel)
of Moses. Why (replied Panurge) the lately married? As for the Vine-Planters,
I am now too old to reflect on them; my Condition, at this present, induces me
to remain satisfied with the care of Vintage, finishing and turning the Grapes
into Wine: Nor are these pre^ty new Builders o^ Dead Stones written or pricked
down in my Book of Life; it is all with Live Stones that I set up, and erect
the Fabrics of my Architecture, to wit, Men. It was (according to my Opinion,
quoth Pantagruel) to the end, First, That the fresh married Folks should for
the first year reap a full and complete Fruition of their Pleasures in their
mutual exercise of the act of Love, in such sort, that in waiting more at
leisure on the production of Posterity, and propagating of their Progeny, they
might the better increase their Race, and make Provision of new Heirs. That if
in the years thereafter the Men should, upon their undergoing of some Military
Adventure, happen to be killed, their Names and Coats of Arms might continue
with their Children in the same Families: And next that, the Wives thereby,
coming to know whether they were barren or fruitful (for one years Trial, in
regard of the maturity of Age, wherein; of old, they married, was held
sufficient for the Discovery) they might pitch the more suitably, in case of
their first Husbands Decease, upon a Second Match. The fertile Women to be
wedded to those who desire to multiply their Issue; and the steril ones to such
other Mates, as misregarding the storing of their own Lineage, choose them only
for their Virtues, Learning, Genteel Behavior, Domestic Consolation,
management of the House, and Matrimonial Conveniences and Comforts, and such
like. The Preacher of Varennes (says Panarge) detest and abhor the Second
Marriages, as altogether foolish and dishonest.

Foolish and dishonest, (quoth Pantagruel) a plague take such Preachers! Yea
but (quoth Panurge) the like Mischief also befall the Friar, Charmer, who in a
full Auditory, making a Sermon at Perille, and therein abominating the
Reiteration of Marriage, and the entering again in the Bonds of a Nuptial Tie,
did swear and heartily give himself to the swiftest Devil in Hell, if he had
not rather choose, and would much more willingly undertake the unmaidning or
depucelating of a hundred Virgins, than the simple Drudgery of one Widow. Truly
I find your Reason in that point right good, and strongly grounded.

But what would you think, if the Cause why this Exemption or Immunity was
granted, had no other Foundation, but that, during the whole space of the said
first year, they so lustily bobbed it with their Female Consorts, (as both
Reason and Equity require they should do) that they had drained and evacuated
their Spermatick Vessels; and were become thereby altogether feeble, weak,
emasculated, drooping and flaggingly pithless; yea, in such sort, that they in
the day of Battle, like Ducks which plunge over Head and Ears, would sooner
hide themselves behind the Baggage than in the Company of valiant Fighters and
daring Military Combatants, appear where stern Bellona deals her Blows, and
moves a bustling Noise of Thwacks and Thumps. Nor is it to be thought that
under the Standard of Mars they will so much as once strike a fair Stroke,
because their most considerable Knocks have been already jerked and whirrited
within the Curtines of his Sweetheart Venus.

In confirmation whereof, amongst other Relics and Monuments of Antiquity, we
now as yet often see, that in all great Houses, after the expiring of some few
days, these young married Blades are readily sent away to visit their Uncles,
that in the Absence of their Wives, reposing themselves a little, they may
recover their decayed Strength by the Recruit of a fresh Supply, the more
vigorous to return again, and face about to renew the dueling Shock and
Conflict of an amorous Dalliance: Albeit (for the greater part) they have
neither Uncle nor Aunt to go to.

Just so did the King Crackart, after the Battle of the Cornets, not cashier
us, (speaking properly) I mean me and the Quailecaller, but for our Refreshment
remanded us to our Houses; and he is as yet seeking after his own. My
Grandfathers Godmother was wont to say to me when I was a Boy,

Patonisters and Oraisons
Sont pour ceux-la qui les retiennent.
Un fiffre en frenaisons
Est plus fort que deux qui en viennent.
Not Orisons nor Patrenotres
Shall ever disorder my Brain.
One Cadet, to the Field as he flutters,
Is worth two when they end the Campagn.
That which prompteth me to that Opinion, is, that the Vine-Planters did seldom
eat of the Grapes, or drink of the Wine of their Labor, till the first year
was wholly elapsed: During all which time also the Builders did hardly inhabit
their new structured Dwelling places, for fear of dying suffocated through want
of Respiration; as Galen has most learnedly remarked, in the Second Book of
the Difficulty of Breathing. Under favor, Sir, I have not asked this Question
without Cause causing, and Reason truly very ratiocinant. Be not offended I
pray you.

CHAP. VII. How Panurge had a Flea in his Ear, and forbore to wear any longer
his magnificent Codpiece.
PAnurge the day thereafter, caused pierce his right Ear, after the Pewish
Fashion, and thereto clasped a little Gold Ring, of a Fearny-like kind of
Workmanship, in the Beazil or Collet whereof was set and inchased a Flea; and
to the end you may be rid of all Doubts, you are to know that the Flea was
black. O what a brave thing it is, in every case and circumstance of a matter,
to be thoroughly well informed! The Sum of the Expense hereof, being cast up,
brought in, and laid down upon his Council Board Carpet, was found to amount to
no more quarterly than the Charge of the Nuptials of a Hircanian Tigress; even
as you would say 600000 Maravedis. At these vast Costs and excessive
Disbursements, as soon as he perceived himself to be out of Debt, he fretted
much; and afterward, as Tyrants and Lawyers use to do, he nourished and fed
her with the Sweat and Blood of his Subjects and Clients.

He then took four French Else of a course brown Russet Cloth, and therein
apparelling himself, as with a long, plain-seemed and single-stitched Gown,
left off the wearing of his Breeches, and tied a pair of Spectacles to his Cap.
In this Equipage did he present himself before Pantagruel; to whom this
*Disguise appeared the more strange, that he did not, as before, see that
goodly, fair and stately Codpiece, which was the sole Anchor of Hope, wherein
he was wonted to rely, and last Refuge he had 'midst all the Waves and
boisterous Billows, which a stormy Cloud in a cross Fortune would raise up
against him. Honest Pantagruel, not understanding the Mystery, asked him by way
of interrogatory; what he did intend to personate in that newfangled
Prosopopeia? I have (answered Panurge) a Flea in mine Ear, and have a mind to
marry. In a good time (quoth Pantagruel) you have told me joyful Tidings; yet
would not I hold a red hot Iron in my hand for all the Gladness of them. But it
is not the fashion of Lovers to be accoutred in such dangling Vestments, so as
to have their Shirts ^lagging down over their Knees, without Breeches, and with
a long Robe of a dark brown mingled Hue, which is a Color never used, in
Talarian Garments amongst any Persons of Honor, Quality or Virtue. If some
Heretical Persons and Schismatical Sectaries have at any time formerly been so
arrayed and clothed, (though many have imputed such a kind of Dress to
Cosenage, Cheat, Imposture, and an Affectation of Tyranny upon credulous Minds
of the rude Multitude) I will nevertheless not blame them for it, nor in that
point judge rashly or sinistrously of them; every one overflowingly abounds
in his own Sense and Fancy: Yea, in things of a Foreign Consideration,
altogether extrinsical and indifferent, which in and of themselves are neither
commendable nor bad, because they proceed not from the Interior of the Thoughts
and Heart, which is the Shop of all Good and Evil. Of Goodness, if it be
upright, and that its Affections be regulated by the pure and clean Spirit of
Righteousness; and on the other side, of Wickedness, if its Inclinations,
straying beyond the bounds of Equity be corrupted and depraved by the Malice
and Suggestions of the Devil. It is only the Novelty and new-fangledness
thereof which I dislike, together with the Contempt of common Custom, and the
Fashion which is in use.

The Color (answered Panurge) is convenient, for it is conform to that of my
Council Board Carpet, therefore will I henceforth hold me with it, and more
narrowly and circumspectly than ever hitherto I have done, look to my Affairs
and Business. Seeing I am once out of Debt, you never yet saw Man more
unpleasing then I will be, if God help me not. Lo here be my Spectacles. To see
me afar off, you would readily say, that it were Eryar Burgess. I believe
certainly, that in the next ensuing Year, I shall once more preach the
Croisade, Bounce Buckram. Do you see this Russet? doubt not but there lurketh
under it some hid Property and occult Virtue, known to very few in the World. I
did not take it on before this Morning; and nevertheless, am already in a rage
of Lust, mad after a Wife, and vehemently hot upon untying the Codpiece-point,
I itch, I tingle, I wriggle, and long exceedingly to be married; that without
the danger of Cudgel-blows, I may labor my* Female Copes-mate with the hard
push of a Bull-horned Devil. O the provident and thrifty Husband that I then
will be! After my Death, with all Honor and Respect due to my Frugality, will
they burn the Sacred Bulk of my Body, of purpose to preserve the Ashes thereof,
in memory of the choicest Pattern that ever was, of a perfectly wary, and
complete Householder. Cops-body, this is not the Carpet whereon my Treasurer
shall be allowed to play false in his Accounts with me, by setting down an X
for an V, or an L for an S; for in that case, should I make a hail of
Fisti-cuffs to fly into his face. Look upon me (Sir) both before and behind, it
is made after the manner of a Toge, which was the ancient fashion of the Romans
in time of Peace. I took the Mode, Shape, and Form thereof in Trajan's Column
at Rome, as also in the Triumphant Arch of Septimus Severus. I am tired of the
Wars, weary of wearing Buff-coats, Cassocks, and Hoquetons. My Shoulders are
pitifully worn, and bruised with the carrying of Harness; let Armor cease, and
the Long Robe bear sway: at least it must be so for the whole space of the
succeeding Years. If I be married as yesterday, by the Mosaic Law, you
evidenced, in what concerns the Breeches: my great Aunt Laurence did long ago
tell me, that the Breeches were only ordained for the use of the Codpiece, and
to no other end; which I, upon a no less forcible consequence, give Credit to,
every whit as well, as to the Saying of the fine Fellow Galen, who in his Ninth
Book Of the Use, and Employment of our Members, alleges, That the Head was
made for the Eyes: for Nature might have placed our Heads in our Knees or
Elbows, but having beforehand determined that the Eyes should serve to
discover things from afar, she for the better enabling them to execute their
designed Office, fixed them in the Head (as on the top of a long Pole) in the
most eminent part of all the Body: no otherwise then we see the Phares, or high
Towers erected in the Mouths of Havens, that Navigators may the further off
perceive with ease the Lights of the nightly Fires and Lanterns. And because I
would gladly, for some short while (a Year at least) take a little rest and
breathing-time from the toylsome Labor of the Military Profession; that is to
say, be married, I have desisted from wearing any more a Codpiece, and
consequently have laid aside my Breeches: for the Codpiece is the principal and
most especial Piece of Armor that a Warrior does carry; and therefore do I
maintain even to the Fire (exclusively, understand you me) that no Turks can
properly be said to be armed Men, in regard that Codpieces are by their Law
forbidden to be worn.

CHAP. VIII. Why the Codpiece is held to be the chief piece of Armor amongst
Warriors.
WIll you maintain (quoth Pantagruel) that the Codpiece is the chief piece of a
Military Harness? It is a new kind of Doctrine very paradoxical: for we say at
Spurs begins the arming of a Man. Sir, I maintain it, (answered Panurge) and
not wrongfully do I maintain it. Behold how Nature having a servent desire
after its Production of Plants, Trees, Shrubs, Herbs, Sponges, and plant
Animals, to eternize, and continue them unto all Succession of Ages (in their
several Kinds, or Sorts at least, although the Individuals perish) unruinable,
and in an everlasting Being, has most curiously armed and fenced their Buds,
Sprouts, Shutes, and Seeds, wherein the abovementioned perpetuity consists,
by strengthening, covering, guarding, and fortifying them with an admirable
industry, with Husks, Cases, Scurfs, and Swads, Hulls, Cods, Stones, Films,
Cartels, Shells* Ears, Rinds, Barks, Skins, Ridges, and Prickles, which serve
them instead o^ strong, fair, and natural Codpieces: as is manifestly apparent
in Pease, Beans, Fasels, Pomegranates, Peaches, Cottons, Gourds, Pumpions,
Melons, Corn, Lemons, Almonds, Walnuts, Filberts, and Chestnuts; as likewise in
all Plants, Slips, or Sets whatsoever, wherein it is plainly and evidently
seen, that the Sperm and Semenae is more closely veiled, overshadowed,
corroborated, and thoroughly harnessed than any other part, portion, or parcel
of the whole.

Nature nevertheless did not after that manner provide for the sempiternizing
of Human Race: but on the contrary created Man naked, tender, and frail,
without either offensive or defensive Arms; and that in the Estate of
Innocence, in the first Age of all, which was the Golden Season; not as a
Plant, but living Creature, born for Peace, not War, and brought forth into the
World with an unquestionable Right and Title to the plenary fruition and
enjoyment of all Fruits and Vegetables; as also to a certain calm and gentle
Rule and Dominion over all Kinds of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Reptils, and
Insects. Yet afterward it happening in the time of the Iron Age, under the Reign
of Jupiter, when to the multiplication of mischievous Actions, wickedness and
malice began to take root and footing within the then perverted Hearts of Men,
that the Earth began to bring forth Nettles, Thistles, Thorns, Briars, and such
other stubborn and rebellious Vegetables to the Nature of Man; nor scarce was
there any Animal, which by a fatal disposition did not then revolt from him,
and tacitly conspire, and covenant with one another to serve him no longer,
(nor in case of their ability to resist) to do him any manner of Obedience, but
rather (to the uttermost of their power) to annoy him with all the hurt and
harm they could. The Man then, that he might maintain his primimitive Right and
Prerogative, and continue his Sway and Dominion over all, both Vegetable and
Sensitive Creatures; and knowing of a truth, that he could not be well
accommodated as he ought, without the servitude and subjection of several
Animals, bethought himself, that of necessity he must needs put on Arms, and
make provision of Harness against Wars, and Violence. By the holy Saint
Babingoose, (cried out Pantagruel) you are become, since the last Rain, a great
Lifre lofre, Philosopher, I should say. Take Notice, Sir, (quoth Panurge) when
Dame Nature had prompted him to his own Arming, what part of the Body it was,
where, by her Inspiration, he clapped on the first Harness: It was forsooth by
the double pluck of my little Dog the Ballock, and good Senor Don Priapos
Stabo-stando, which done, he was content, and sought no more. This is certified
by the Testimony of the great Hebrew Captain Philosopher Moses, who affirms,
That he fenced that Member with a brave and gallant Codpiece, most exquisitely
framed, and by right curious Devices of a notably pregnant Invention, made up
and composed of Fig-tree-leaves, which by reason of their solid stiffness,
incisory notches, curled frisling, sleeked smoothness, large ampleness,
together with their color, smell, virtue, and faculty, were exceeding proper,
and fit for the covering and arming of the Sachels of Generation, the hideously
big Lorram Cullions being from thence only excepted; which swaggring down to
the lowermost bottom of the Breeches, cannot abide (for being quite out of all
order and method) the stately fashion of the high and lofty Codpiece; as is
manifest, by the Noble Valentin Viardiere, whom I found at Nancie, on the First
Day of May (the more flauntingly to gallantrize it afterward) rubbing his
Ballocks, spread out upon a Table after the manner of a Spanish Cloak.
Wherefore it is, that none should henceforth say, who would not speak
improperly, when any Country-Bumpkin hyeth to the Wars, Have a care, (my
Roysters, of the Wine-pot, that is the Scull, but have a care (my Royster) of
the Milk-pot; that is, the Testicles. By the whole Rabble of the horned Fiends
of Hell, the Head being cut off, that single Person only thereby dies: but if
the Ballocks be marred, the whole Race of Humane Kind would forthwith perish,
and be lost for ever.

This was the motive which incited the goodly Writer Galen, Lib. 1. De
Spermate, to aver with boldness, That it ^vere better (that is to say, a less
evil) to have no Heart at all, than to be quite destitute of Genitories: for
there is laid up, conserved, and put in store, as in a Secessive Repository,
and Sacred Warehouse, the Semenae, and Original Source of the whole Offspring
of Mankind. Therefore would I be apt to believe, for less than a hundred
Franks, that those are the very same Stones, by means whereof Deucalion and
Pyrrha restored the Humane Race, in peopling with Men and Women the World,
which a little before that, had been drowned in the overflowing Waves of a
Poetical Deluge. This stirred up the valiant Justinian, L. 1. 4. De Cagotis
tollendis, to collocate his Summum Bonum, in Braguibus, and Braguetis. For
this, and other Causes, the Lord Humphry de Merville, following of his King to
a certain Warlike Expedition, whilst he was in trying upon his own Person a new
Suit of Armor, for of his old rusty Harness he could make no more use, by
reason that some few Years since, the Skin of his Belly was a great way removed
from his Kidneys, his Lady thereupon in the profound musing of a contemplative
Spirit, very maturely considering that he had but small care of the Staff of
Love, and Packet of Marriage, seeing he did no otherways arm that part of the
Body, then with Links of Mail, advised him to shield, fence, and gabionate it
with a big tilting Helmet, which she had lying in her Closet, to her otherways
utterly unprofitable. On this Lady was penned these subsequent Verses; which
are extant in the Third Book of the Shitbrana of paultry Wenches.

When Yoland saw her Spouse, equipt for Fight,
And, save the Codpiece, all in Armor dight,
My Dear, she cried, Why, pray, of all the rest
Is that exposed, you know I love the best?
Was she to blame for an ill-manag'd fear?
Or rather pious, conscionable Care:
Wise Lady, She! in hurly-burly Fight,
Can any tell where random Blows may hit?
Leave off then (Sir) from being astonished, and wonder no more at this new
manner of decking and trimming up of my self as you now see me.

CHAP. IX. How Panurge asks Counsel of Pantagruel whether he should marry,
Yea, or No.
TO this Pantagruel replying nothing, Panurge prosecuted the Discourse he had
already broached, and therewithal fetching, as far from the bottom of his
Heart, a very deep sigh, said, My Lord and Master, you have heard the Design I
am upon, which is to marry, if by some disastrous mischance, all the Holes in
the World be not shut up, stopped, closed, and bush'd. I humbly beseech you for
the Affection which of a long time you have born me, to give me your best
Advice therein. Then (answered Pantagruel) seeing you have so decreed, taken
deliberation thereon, and that the matter is fully determined, what need is
there of any further Ta^k thereof, but forthwith to put it into execution what
you have resolved. Yea, but (quoth Panurge) I would be loath to act any thing
therein without your Counsel had thereto. It is my Judgment also (quoth
Pantagruel) and I advise you to it. Nevertheless (quoth Panurge) if I
understood aright that it were much better for me to remain a Batchellor as I
am, than to run headlong upon new hair-brained Undertakings of Conjugal
Adventure, I would rather choose not to marry, quoth Pantagruel. Then do not
marry. Yea, but (quoth Panurge) would you have me so solitarily drive out the
whole Course of my Life, without the Comfort of a Matrimonial Consort? You know
it is written, Vae soli, and a single Person is never seen to reap the Joy and
Solace that is found with married Folks. Then marry, in the Name of God, quoth
Pantagruel. But if (quoth Panurge) my Wife should make me a Cuckold; as it is
not unknown unto you, how this has been a very plentiful Year in the
production of that kind of Cattle; I would fly out, and grow impatient, beyond
all measure and mean. I love Cuckolds with my Heart, for they seem unto me to
be of a right honest Conversation, and I, truly, do very willingly frequent
their Company: but should I die for it, I would not be one of their number,
that is a Point for me of a two-sore prickling Point. Then do not marry (quoth
Pantagruel) for without all controversy, this Sentence of Seneca is infallibly
true, What thou to others shall have done, others will do the like to thee. Do
you (quoth Panurge) aver that without all exceptions? Yes, truly, (quoth
Pantagruel) without all exception. Ho, ho (says Panurge) by the Wrath of a
little Devil, his meaning is, either in this World, or in the other, which is
to come. Yet seeing I can no more want a Wife, then a blind Man his Staff, the
Funnel must be in agitation, without which manner of Occupation I cannot live.
Were it not a great deal better for me to apply and associate my self to some
one honest, lovely, and virtuous Woman, then (as I do) by a new change of
Females every Day, run a hazard of being Bastinadoed, or (which is worse) of
the Great Pox, if not of both together: For never (be it spoken, by their
Husbands leave and favor) had I enjoyment yet of an honest Woman. Marry then
in God's Name, quoth Pantagruel. But if (quoth Panurge) it were the Will of
God, and that my Destiny did unluckily lead me to marry an honest Woman who
should beat me, I would be stored with more than two third parts of the
Patience of Job, if I were not stark mad by it, and quite distracted with such
rugged Dealings: for it has been told me, that those exceeding honest Women
have ordinarily very wicked Head-pieces; therefore is it that their Family
lacks not for good Vinegar. Yet in that case should it go worse with me, if I
did not then in such sort bang her Back and Breast, so thumpingly bethwack her
Gillets, to wit, her Arms, Legs, Head, Lights, Liver, and Milt, with her other
Intrails, and mangle, jag, and flash her Coats, so after the Cross billet
fashion, that the greatest Devil of Hell should wait at the Gate for the
reception of her damned Soul. I could make a shift for this Year to wave such
molestation and disquiet, and be content to lay aside that trouble, and not to
be engaged in it.

Do not marry then, answered Pantagruel. Yea, but (quoth Panurge) considering
the Condition wherein I now am, out of Debt and Unmarried; mark what I say,
free from all Debt, in an ill hour (for were I deeply on the Score, my
Creditors would be but too careful of my Paternity) but being quit, and not
married, no Body will be so regardful of me, or carry toward me a Love like
that which is said to be in a Conjugal Affection. And if by some mishap I
should fall sick, I would be looked to very waywardly. The wise Man says, Where
there is no Woman (I mean the Mother of a Family, and Wife in the Union of a
lawful Wedlock) the Crazy and Diseased are in danger of being ill used, and of
having much brabling and strife about them: as by clear Experience has been
made apparent in the Persons of Popes, Legates, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Priests and Monks: but there, assure your self, you shall not find me.
Marry then in the Name of God, answered Pantagruel. But if (quoth Panurge)
being ill at ease, and possibly through that Distemper, made unable to discharge
the Matrimonial Duty that is incumbent to an active Husband, my Wife, impatient
of that drooping Sickness, and faint Fits, of a pining Languishment, should
abandon and prostitute herself to the Embraces of another Man, and not only
then not help and assist me in my extremity and need, but withal flout at, and
make sport of that my grievous Distress and Calamity; or peradventure, (which
is worse) imbezzle my Goods, and steal from me, as I have seen it oftentimes
besal unto the lot of many other Men, it were enough to undo me utterly, to
fill brimfull the Cup of my Misfortune, and make me play the Mad-pate Reeks of
Bedlam. Do not marry then (quoth Pantagruel). Yea, but (says Panurge) I shall
never by any other means come to have lawful Sons and Daughters, in whom I may
harbor some hope of perpetuating my Name and Arms, and to whom also I may
leave and bequeath my Inheritances and purchased Goods, (of which latter sort
you need not doubt, but that in some one or other of these Mornings, I will
make a fair and goodly show) that so I may cheer up and make merry, when
otherways I should be plunged into a pievish sullen Mood of pensive sullenness,
as I do perceive daily by the gentle and loving Carriage of your kind and
gracious Father toward you; as all honest Folks use to do at their own Homes,
and private Dwelling-houses. For being free from Debt, and yet not married, if
casually I should fret and be angry, although the cause of my Grief and
Displeasure were never so just, I am afraid instead of Consolation, that I
should meet with nothing else but Scoffs* Frumps, Gibes, and Mocks at my
disastrous Fortune. Marry then in the Name of God, quoth Pantagruel.

CHAP. X. How Pantagruel represents unto Panurge the difficulty of giving
Advice in the matter of Marriage; and to that purpose mentions somewhat of
the Homerick and Virgilian Lotteries.
YOur Counsel (quoth Panurge) under your Correction and Favor, seems unto me
not unlike to the Song of Gammer Yeabynay; it is full of Sarcasms, Mockqueries,
bitter Taunts, nipping Bobs, derisive Quips, biting Je^ks, and contradictory
Iterations, the one part destroying the other. I know not (quoth Pantagruel)
which of all my Answers to lay hold on; for your Proposals are so full of ifs
and buts, that I can ground nothing on them, nor pitch upon any solid and
positive Determination satisfactory to what is demanded by them. Are not you
assured within your self of what you have a mind to? the chief and main point
of the whole matter lies there; all the rest is merely casual, and totally
depends upon the fatal Disposition of the Heavens.

We see some so happy in the fortune of this Nuptial Encounter, that their
Family shines (as it were) with the radiant Effulgency of an Idea, Model or
Representation of the Joys of Paradise; and perceive others again to be so
unluckily matched in the Conjugal Yoke, that those very basest of Devils, which
tempt the Hermits that inhabit the Deserts of Thebaida and Montserrat, are not
more miserable than they. It is therefore expedient, seeing you are resolved
for once to take a trial of the state of Marriage, that, with shut Eyes, bowing
your Head, and kissing the Ground, you put the business to a Venture, and give
it a fair hazard in recommending the success of the residue to the disposure of
Almighty God. It lies not in my power to give you any other manner of
Assurance, or otherways to certify you of what shall ensue on this your
Undertaking. Nevertheless (if it please you) this you may do, Bring hither
Virgil's Poems, that after having opened the Book, and without Fingers severed
the Leaves thereof three several times, we may, according to the number agreed
upon betwixt our selves, explore the future Hap of your intended Marriage: For
frequently, by a Homerick Lottery, have many hit upon their Destinies; as is
testified in the Person of Socrates, who, whilst he was in Prison, hearing the
Recitation of this Verse of Homer said of Achilles, in the Ninth of the Iliads,

(...). We, the third day, to fertile Pthia came. Thereby foresaw that on the
third subsequent day he was to die: Of the truth whereof he assured Aschines,
as Plato, in Critone; Cicero, in primo de Divinatione; Diogines Laertius, and
others, have to the full recorded in their Works. The like is also witnessed by
Opilius Macrinus, to whom, being desirous to know if he should be the Roman
Emperor, befell, by chance of Lot, this Sentence in the eighth of the Iliads,

(...).
Dotard, new Warriors urge thee to be gone.
Thy Life decays, and old Age weighs thee down.
In Fact, he being then somewhat Ancient, had hardly enjoyed the Sovereignty of
the Empire for the space of Fourteen Months, when by Heliogabulus (then both
young and strong) he was disposess'd thereof, thrust out of all, and killed.
Brutus also does bear witness of another Experiment of this nature, who
willing, through this exploratory way by Lot, to learn what the Event and Issue
should be of the Pharsalian Battle, wherein he perished, he casually encountered
on this Verse, said of Patroclus in the Sixteenth of the Iliads,

(...). Fate, and Latona's Son have shot me dead. And accordingly Apollo was
the Fieldword in the dreadful Day of that Fight. Diverse notable things of old
have likeways been foretold and known by casting of Virgilian Lots; yea, in
matters of no less importance than the obtaining of the Roman Empire, as it
happened to Alexander Severus, who trying his Fortune at the said kind of
Lottery, did hit upon this Verse written in the Sixth of the Aeneids,

Tu regere imperio populos Roman momento. Know, Roman, that thy business is to
Reign. He within very few years thereafter was effectually and in good earnest
created and installed Roman Emperor. A semblable Story thereto is related of
Adrian, who being hughly perplexed within himself, out of a longing Humor to
know in what Account he was with the Emperor Trajan, and how large the measure
of that Affection was which he did bear unto him, had recourse after the manner
above specified, to the Maronian Lottery, which by hap hazard tendered him
these Lines out of the Sixth of the Aeneids,

Quis procul ille autem ramis insignis olivae Sacra ferens? nosco crines
incanaque menta Regis Romani. But who is he, conspicuous from afar,
With Olive Boughs, that does his Offerings bear?
By the white Hair and Beard I know him plain,
The Roman King.
Shortly thereafter was he adopted by Trajan, and succeeded to him in the
Empire. Moreover to the Lot of the praiseworthy Emperor Claudius befell this
Line of Virgil, written in the Sixth of his Aeneids,

Tertia dum Latio regnantem viderit aestas, Whilst the third Summer saw him
Reign, a King In Latium. And in effect he did not Reign above two years. To the
said Claudian also, enquiring concerning his Brother Quintilius, whom he
proposed as a Colleague with himself in the Empire, happened the Responce
following in the sixth of the Aeneids,

Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata. -- Whom Fate let us see,
And would no longer suffer him to be.
And it so fell out; for he was killed on the Seventeenth day after he had
attained unto the management of the Emperial Charge. The very same Lot also,
with the like misluck, did betide the Emperor Gordian the younger. To Claudius
Albinus, being very sollicitous to understand somewhat of his future
Adventures, did occur this Saying, which is written in the sixth of the Aeneids,

Hic rem Romanam magno turbante tumultu Sistet Eques, etc. The Romans boiling
with tumultuous rage,
This Warrior shall the dangerous Storm assuage:
With Victories he the Carthaginian mawls,
And with strong hand shall crush the Rebel Gauls.
Likeways when the Emperor D. Claudius, Aurelian's Predecessor, did with great
eagerness research after the Fate to come of his Posterity, his hap was to
alight on this Verse in the first of the Aeneids,

Hic ego nec metas rerum, nec tempore pono. No bounds are to be set, no limits
here. Which was fulfilled by the goodly Genealogical Row of his Race. When Mr.
Peter Amy did in like manner explore and make trial, if he should escape the
Ambush of the Hobgoblins, who lay in wait all-to-bemawl him, he fell upon this
Verse in the third of the Aeneids,,

Hugh fuge credules terras, fuge Littus avarum! Oh flee the bloody Land, the
wicked Shore! Which Counsel he obeying, safe and sound forthwith avoided all
these Ambuscades.

Were it not to shun Prolixity, I could enumerate a thousand such like
Adventures, which conform to the Dictate and Verdict of the Verse, have by that
manner of Lot-casting encounter befallen to the curious Researchers of them. Do
not you nevertheless imagine, lest you should be deluded, that I would upon
this kind of Fortune flinging Proof infer an uncontrolable, and not to be
gainsaid Infallibility of Truth.

CHAP. XI. How Pantagruel shows the Trial of ones Fortune by the throwing of
Dice to be unlawful.
IT would be sooner done (quoth Panurge) and more expeditely, if we should try
the matter at the chance of three fair Dice. (Quoth Pantagruel) that fort of
Lottery is deceitful, abusive, illicitous, and exceedingly scandalous; never
trust in it; the accursed Book of the Recreation of Dice was a great while ago
excogitated in Achaia near Bourre, by that ancient Enemy to Mankind, the
Infernal Calumniator, who before the Statue or Massive Image of the Bourraick
Hercules, did of old, and does in several places of the World as yet, make many
simple Souls to err and fall into his Snares. You know how my Father Gargantua
has forbidden it over all his Kingdoms and Dominions; how he has caused burn
the Moulds and Draughts thereof, and altogether suppressed, abolished, driven
forth and cast it out of the Land, as a most dangerous Plague and Infection to
any well-polished State or Commonwealth. What I have told you of Dice, I say
the same of the Play at Cockall. It is a Lottery of the like Guile and
Deceitfulness; and therefore do not for convincing of me, allege in opposition
to this my Opinion, or bring in the Example of the fortunate Cast of Teberius,
within the Fountain of Appona, at the Oracle of Gerion. These are the baited
Hooks by which the Devil attracts and draws unto him the foolish Souls of
silly People into eternal Perdition.

Nevertheless to satisfy your Humor in some measure, I am content you throw
three Dice upon this Table, that according to the number of the Blots which
shall happen to be cast up, we may hit upon a Verse of that Page, which in the
setting open of the Book you shall have pitched upon.

Have you any Dice in your Pocket? A whole Bag full, answered Panurge, that is
Provision against the Devil, as is expounded by Merlin Coccajus, Lib. 2. De
Patria Diabolorum, the Devil would be sure to take me napping, and very much at
unawares, if he should find me without Dice. With this the three Dice being
taken out, produced and thrown, they fell so pat upon the lower Points, that
the Cast was Five, Six and Five. These are (quoth Panurge) Sixteen in all. Let
us take the Sixteenth Line of the Page, the number pleases me very well; I
hope we shall have a prosperous and happy Chance. May I be thrown amidst all
the Devils of Hell, even as a great Bowl cast athwart at a Set of Nine Pins, or
Cannon-ball shot among a Batalion of Foot, in case so many times I do not boult
my future Wife the first Night of our Marriage. Of that, forsooth, I make no
doubt at all: (quoth Pantagruel) You needed not to have rapped forth such a
horrid Imprecation, the sooner to procure Credit for the Performance of so
small a business, seeing possibly the first Bout will be amiss, and that you
know is usually at Tennis called Fifteen. At the next justling Turn you may
readily amend that Fault, and so complete your Reckoning of Sixteen. Is it so
(quoth Panurge) that you understand the matter? and must my Words be thus
interpreted? Nay, believe me, never yet was any Solecism committed by that
valiant Champion, who often has for me in Belly-dale stood Centry at the
Hypogastrian Crany. Did you ever hitherto find me in the Confraternity of the
Faulty? Never, I trow; never, nor ever shall, for ever and a day. I do the Feat
like a goodly Friar, or Father Confessor without Default: And therein am I
willing to be judged by the Players. He had no sooner spoke these Words, than
the Works of Virgil were brought in: But before the Book was laid open, Panurge
said to Pantagruel, My Heart, like the Furch of a Heart in* Rut, does beat
within my Breast. Be pleased to feel and grope my Pulse a little on this Artery
of my Left Arm; at its frequent Rise and Fall you would say that they swinge
and belabour me after the manner of a Probationer posed, and put to a
peremptory Trial in the Examination of his Sufficiency for the Discharge of the
Learned Duty of a Graduate in some Eminent Degree in the College of the
Sorbonists.

But would not you hold it expedient, before we proceeded any further, that we
should invocate Hercules and the Tenitian Goddesses, who in the Chamber of Lots
are said to Rule, sit in Judgment, and bear a Presidential Sway? Neither him
nor them, (answered Pantagruel) only open up the Leaves of the Book with your
Fingers, and set your Nails a work.

CHAP. XII. How Pantagruel does explore by the Virgilian Lottery what Fortune
Panurge shall have in his Marriage.
THen at the opening of the Book in the Sixteenth Row of the Lines of the
disclosed Page, did Panurge encounter upon this following Verse:

Nec Deus hunc mensa Dea nec Dignata cubili est. The God him from his Table
banished,
Nor would the Goddess have him in her Bed.
This Response (quoth Pantagruel) makes not very much for your benefit or
advantage: for it plainly signifies and denotes, that your Wife shall be a
Strumpet, and your self by consequence a Cuckold; the Goddess, whom you shall
not find propitious nor favorable unto you, is Minerva, a most redoubtable and
dreadful Virgin, a powerful and fulminating Goddess, an Enemy to Cuckolds, and
effeminate Youngsters, to Cuckold-makers and Adulterers: the God is Jupiter, a
terrible and Thunder-striking God from Heaven; and withal, it is to be
remarked, that conform to the Doctrine of the ancient Hetrurians, the Manubes
(for so did they call the darting Hurls, or slinging Casts of the Vulcanian
Thunderbolts) did only appertain to her, and to Jupiter her Father Capital.
This was verified in the Conflagration of the Ships of Ajax Oileus, nor does
this fulminating Power belong to any other of the Olympic Gods; Men therefore
stand not in such fear of them. Moreover, I will tell you, and you may take it
as extracted out of the profoundest Mysteries of Mythology, that when the
Giants had enterprized the waging of a War against the Power of the Celestial
Orbs, the Gods at first did laugh at those Attempts, and scorned such
despicable Enemies, who were in their conceit, not strong enough to cope in
Feats of Warfare with their Pages: but when they saw by the Gigantine labor
the high Hill Pelion set on lofty Ossa, and that the Mount Olympus was made
shake to be erected on the top of both.

Then was it that Jupiter held a Parliament, or General Convention, wherein it
was unanimously resolved upon, and condescended to by all the Gods, that they
should worthily and valiantly stand to their Defense. And because they had
often seen Battles lost by the cumbersome lets and disturbing encumbrances of
Women, confusedly hudled in amongst Armies, it was at that time Decreed and
Enacted, That they should expel and drive out of Heaven into Egypt, and the
Confines of Nile, that whole Crew of Goddesses disguized in the shapes of
Weezils, Polcats, Bats, Shrew-Mice, Ferrets, Fulmarts, and other such like odd
Transformations, only Minerva was reserved to participate with Jupiter in the
^orrifick fulminating Power; as being the Goddess both of War and Learning, of
Arts and Arms, of Counsel and Dispatch; a Goddess armed from her Birth, a
Goddess dreaded in Heaven, in the Air, by Sea and Land. By the Belly of Saint
Buff (quoth Panurge) should I be Vulcan, whom the Poet blazons! Nay, I am
neither a Cripple, Coyner of false Money, nor Smith as he was.

My Wife possibly will be as comely and handsome as ever was his Venus, but not
a Whore like her, nor I a Cuckold like him.

The crook-leg'd slovenly Slave, made himself to be declared a Cuckold by a
definitive Sentence, and Judgment, in the open view of all the Gods: for this
cause ought you to interpret the aforementioned Verse quite contrary to what
you have said. This Lot imports, that my Wife will be honest, virtuous,
chaste, loyal, and faithful; not armed, surly, waiward* cross, giddy, humorous,
heady, hai^brain'd, or extracted out of the Brains, as was the Goddess Pallas:
nor shall this fai^ jolly Jupiter be my Corrival, he shall never dip his Bread
in my Broth, though we should sit together at one Table.

Consider his Exploits and gallant Actions, he was the manifest Ruffian,
Wencher, Whoremonger, and most infamous Cuckold-maker that ever breathed: he
did always lecher it like a Boar, and no wonder, for he was fostered by a Sow
in the Isle of Candia, (if Agathocles the Babylonian be not a Liar) and more
rammishly lascivious then a Buck, whence it is that he is said by others, to
have been suckled and fed with the Milk of the Amalthaean Goat. By the virtue
of Acheron, he jusled, bulled, and last auriated in one day the third part of
the World, Beasts and People, Floods and Mountains, that was Europa.

For this grand subagitatory Achievement, the Animonians caused, draw,
delineate, and paint him in the figure and shape of a Ram, ramming, and horned
Ram. But I know well enough how to shield and preserve my self from that horned
Champion: he will not, trust me, have to deal in my Person, with a sottish,
dunsical Amphytrion; nor with a silly witless Argus, for all his hundred
Spectacles; nor yet with the cowardly Meacock Acrisius; the simple Goosecap
Lyrus of Thebes; the doting Blockhead Agenor; the phlegmatic Pea-Goose Aesop;
rough^ooted Lycaon; the luskish misshapen Corytus of Tuscany; nor with the large
backed and strong reined Atlas: let him alter, change, transform, and
metamorphose himself into a hundred various shapes and figures; into a Swan, a
Bull, a Satyr, a Shower of Gold, or into a Cuckoo, as he did when he unmaiden'd
his Sister Juno; into an Eagle, Ram, or Dove, as when he was enamoured of the
Virgin Phthia, who then dwelt in the Aegea^ Territory; into Fire, a Serpent;
yea, even into a Flea, into Epicurian and Democratical Atoms, or more
Magistronostralistically, into those sly Intentions of the Mind, which in the
Schools are called Second No^ions, I Will catch him in the nick, and take ^im
napping.

And would you know what I would do unto him, even that which to his Father
Coelum, Saturn did, ( Seneca foretold it of me, and Lactantius has confirmed
it) what the Goddess Rhea did to Athis; I would make him two Stone lighter, rid
him of his Cyprian Cimbals, and cut so close and neatly by the Breech, that
there should not remain thereof so much as one --, so cleanly would I shave
him: and disable him for ever from being Pope; for Testiculos non habet. Hold
there, said Pantagruel, Hoc, soft and fair (my Lad^) enough of that, cast up,
turn over the Leaves, and try your Fortune for the second time. Then did he
fall upon this ensuing Verse.

Membra quatit, gelidusque coit formidine sanguis. His Joints and Members
quake, he becomes pale,
And sudden Fear does his cold Blood congeal.
This imports (quoth Pantagruel) that she will soundly bang your Back and
Belly. Clean and quite contrary (answered Panurge) it is of me that he
prognosticates, in saying that I will beat her like a Tiger, if she vex me. Sir
Martin Wagstaff will perform that Office, and in default of a Cudgel, the Devil
gulp him, if I should not eat her up quick, as Candaul the Lydian King did his
Wife, whom he ravened and devoured.

You are very stout, says Pantagruel, and courageous, Hercules himself durst
hardly adventure to scuffle with you in this your raging Fury: nor is it
strange; for the Ian is worth two and two in fight against Hercules are too too
strong. Am I a Ian? quoth Panurge. No, no, (answered Pantagruel) my Mind was
only running upon the lurch and tricktrack. Thereafter did he hit, at the third
opening of the Book, upon this Verse.

Faemineo Praedae, and spoliorum ardebat am^re. After the Spoil and Pillage (as
in Fire)
He burnt with a strong Feminine Desire.
This portendeth (quoth Pantagruel) that she will steal your Goods, and rob
you. Hence this, according to these three drawn Lots, will be your future
Destiny, (I clearly see it) you will be a Cuckold, you will be beaten, and you
will be robbed. Nay, it is quite otherways, (quoth Panurge) for it is certain
that this Verse presageth, that she will love me with a perfect liking: nor did
the Satyr* writing Poet lie in proof hereof, when he affirmed, That a Woman
burning with extreme Affection, takes sometimes pleasure to steal from her
Sweetheart. And what I pray you? a Glove, a Point, or some such trifling Toy of
no importance, to make him keep a gentle kind of stirring in the research and
quest thereof: in like manner these small scolding Debates, and petty brabling
Contentions, which frequently we see spring up, and for a certain space boil
very hot betwixt a couple of high-spirited Lovers, are nothing else but
recreative Diversions for their refreshment, spurs to, and incentives of a more
fervent Amity than ever. As for example: We do sometimes see Cutlers with
Hammers mawl their finest Whetstones, therewith to sharpen their Iron Tools the
better.

And therefore do I think, that these three Lots make much for my advantage;
which if not, I from their Sentence totally appeal. There is no appellation
(quoth Pantagruel) from the Decrees of Fate or Destiny, of Lot or Chance: as is
recorded by our ancient Lawyers, witness Baldus, Lib. ult. Cap. de Leg. The
reason hereof is, Fortune does not acknowledge a Superior, to whom an Appeal
may be made from her, or any of her Substitutes. And in this case the Pupil
cannot be restored to his Right in full, as openly by the said Author is
alleged in L. ait praetor, Paragrult. H. de minor.

CHAP. XIII. How Pantagruel advises Panurge to try the future good or bad luck
of his Marriage by Dreams.
NOW seeing we cannot agree together in the manner of expounding or
interpreting the Sense of the Virgilian Lots, let us bend our course another
way, and try a new sort of Divination. Of what kind? (asked Panurge.) Of a good
Ancient and and Authentic Fashion, (answered Pantagruel) it is by Dreams: For
in Dreaming such Circumstances and Conditions being thereto adhibited, as are
clearly enough described by Hippocrates, in Lib. (...), by Plato, Plotin,
Iamblicus, Sinesius, Aristotle, Xenophon, Galene, Plutarch, Artemidorus,
Valdianus, Herophilus, G. Calaper, Theocritus, Pliny, Athenaeus, and others,
the Soul does often times foresee what is to come.

How true this is, you may conceive by a very vulgar and familiar Example; as
when you see that at such a time as Suckling Babes, well nourished, fed and
fostred with good Milk, sleep soundly and profoundly, the Nurses in the interim
get leave to sport themselves, and are licentiated to recreate their Fancies at
what Range to them shall seem most fitting and expedient; their Presence,
Sedulity and Attendance on the Cradle being, during all that space, held
unnecessary.

Even just so, when our Body is at rest, that the Concoction is every where
accomplished, and that, till it awake, it lacks for nothing, our Soul
delights to disport it self, and is well-pleased in that Frolic to take a
review of its Native Country, which is the Heavens, where it receives a most
notable Participation of its first beginning with an Imbuement from its Divine
Source, and in Contemplation of that Infinite and Intellectual Sphere, whereof
the Center is every where, and the Circumference in no place of the universal
World, to wit, God, according to the Doctrine of Hermes Trismegistus, to whom
no new thing happens, whom nothing that is past escapes, and unto whom all
things are alike present, remarketh not only what is preterit, and gone in the
inferior Course and Agitation of sublunary matters, but withal takes notice
what is to come; then bringing a Relation of those future Events unto the Body
by the outward Senses and exterior Organs, it is divulged abroad unto the
hea^ing of others. Whereupon the Owner of that Soul deserves to be termed a
Vatiemator, or Prophet.

Nevertheless the truth is, that the Soul is seldom able to report those things
in such Sincerity as it has seen them, by reason of the Imperfection and
Frailty of the Corporeal Senses, which obstruct the effectuating of that
Office; even as the Moon does not communicate unto* this Earth of ours that
Light which she receives from the Sun with so much Splendour, Heat, Vigor,
Purity and Liveliness as it was given her. Hence it is requisite for the better
reading, explaining and unfolding of these Somniatory Vaticiations and
Predictions of that nature, that a dexterous, learned, skilful, wise,
industrious, expert, rational and peremptory Expounder or Interpreter be
pitched upon, such a one as by the Greeks is called Onirocrit, or Oniropolist.

For this cause Heraclitus was wont to say, that nothing is by Dreams revealed
to us, that nothing is by Dreams concealed from us, and that only we thereby
have a mystical Signification and secret Evidence of things to come, either for
own prosperous or unlucky Fortune, or for the favorable or disastrous Success
of another. The Sacred Scriptures testify no less, and profane Histories
assure us of it, in both which are exposed to our view a thousand several kinds
of strange Adventures, which have befallen pat according to the nature of the
Dream, and that as well to the Party Dreamer as to others. The Atlantic
People, and those that inhabit the Land of Thasos, (one of the Cyclades) are of
this grand Commodity deprived; for in their Countries none yet ever dreamed. Of
this sort Cleon of Daulia, Thrasymedes; and in our days the Learned Frenchman
Villanovanus, neither of all which knew what Dreaming was.

Fail not therefore to morrow, when the jolly and fair Aurora with her rosy
Fingers draws aside the Curtains of the Night, to drive away the sable Shades
of Darkness, to bend your Spirits wholly to the task of sleeping sound, and
thereto apply your self. In the mean while you must denude your Mind of every
Humane Passion or Affection, such as are Love and Hatred, Fear and Hope; for as
of old the great Vaticinator, most famous and renowned Prophet Proteus was not
able in his Disguise or Transformation into Fire, Water, a Tiger, a Dragon, and
other such like uncouth Shapes and Visors to presage any thing that was to
come, till he was restored to his own first natural and kindly Form. Just so
does Man; for at his reception of the Art of Divination, and Faculty of
prognosticating future things, that part in him which is the most Divine, (to
wit, the (...), or Men's) must be calm, peaceable, untroubled, quiet, still,
hushed, and not imbusied or distracted with Foreign, Soul-disturbing
Pre^arbations. I am content, (quoth Panurge.) But I pray you, Sir, must I this
Evening, e're I go to Bed, eat much or little? I do not ask this without Cause:
For if I sup not well, large, round and amply, my sleeping is not worth a
sorked Turnep; all the Night long I then but dose and rave, and in my
stumbering Fits talk idle Nonsense* my Thoughts being in a dull brown Study,
and as deep in their Dumps as is my Belly hollow.

Not to sup (answered Pantagruel) were best for you, considering the state of
your Complexion, and healthy Constitution of your Body. A certain very ancient
Prophet named Amphiaraus, wished such as had a mind by Dreams to be imbued with
any Oracles, for Four and Twenty Hours to taste no Victuals, and to abstain
from Wine three days together; yet shall not you be put to such a sharp, hard,
rigorous and extreme sparing Diet.

I am truly right apt to believe, that a Man whose Stomach is repleat with
various Cheer, and in a manner surfeited with drinking, is hardly able to
conceive aright of Spiritual things; yet am not I of the Opinion of those, who
after long and pertinacious Fastings, think by such means to enter more
profoundly into the Speculation of Celestial Mysteries. You may very well
remember how my Father Gargantua, (whom here for Honor sake I name) has often
told us, that the Writings of abstinent, abstemious, and longfasting Hermits,
were every whit as saltless, dry, jejune and insipid, as were there Bodies when
they did compose them. It is a most difficult thing for the Spirits to be in a
good plight, serene and lively, when there is nothing in the Body but a kind of
Voidness and Inanity: Seeing the Philosophers with the Physicians jointly
affirm, that the Spirits which are styled Animal, spring from, and have their
constant practice in, and through the Arterial Blood, refined and purified to
the Life within the admirable Not, which wonderfully framed lies under the
Ventricles and Tunnels of the Brain. He gave us also the Example of the
Philosopher, who, when he thought most seriously to have withdrawn himself unto
a solitary Privacy, far from the rusling clutterments of the tumultuous and
confused World, the better to improve his Theory, to contrive, comment and
ratiocinate, was, notwithstanding his uttermost endeavors to free himself from
all untoward noises, surrounded and environed about so with the barking of
Currs, bawling of Mastiffs, bleating of Sheep, prating of Parrets, tatling of
Jackdaws grunting of Swine, girning of Boars, yelping of Foxes, mewing of Cats,
cheeping of Mice, squeaking of Weasils, croaking of Frogs, crowing of Cocks,
kekling of Hens, calling of Partridges, chanting of Swans, chattering of Jays,
peeping of Chickens, singing of Larks, creaking of Geese, chirping of Swallows,
clucking of Moorfowls, cucking of Cuckows, bumling of Bees, rammage of Hawks,
chi^ming of Linots, croaking of Ravens, screeching of Owls, whicking of Pigs,
gushing of Hogs, curring of Pigeons, grumbling of Cushet-doves, howling of
Panthers, curkling of Quails, chirping of Sparrows, crackling of Crows, nuzzing
of Camels, wheening of Whelps, buzzing of Dromedaries, mumbling of Rabets,
cricking of Ferrets, humming of Wasps, mioling of Tigers, bruzzing of Bears,
sussing of Kitnings, clamring of Scarfes, whimpring of Fullmarts, boing of
Buffalos, warbling of Nightingales, quavering of Meavises, drintling of
Turkies, coniating of Storks, frantling of Peacocks, clattering of Mag-pyes,
murmuring of Stock-doves, crouting of Cormorants, cigling of Locusts, charming
of Beagles, guarring of Puppies, snarling of Messens, rantling of Rats,
guerieting of Apes, snuttering of Monkies, pioling of Pelicanes, quecking of
Ducks, yelling of Wolves, roaring of Lions, neighing of Horses, crying of
Elephants, hissing of Serpents; and wailing of Turtles, that he was much more
troubled, than if he had been in the middle of the Crowd at the Fair of
Fontenoy or Niort.

Just so is it with those who are tormented with the grievous pangs of Hunger;
the Stomach begins to gnaw, (and bark as it were) the Eyes to look dim, and the
Veins, by greedily sucking some refection to themselves from the proper
substance of all the Members of a Fleshy Consistence; violently pull down and
draw back that vagrant, roaming Spirit, careless and neglecting of his Nurse
and natural Host, which is the Body. As when a Hawk upon the Fist, willing to
take her Flight by a soaring aloft into the open spacious Air, is on a sudden
drawn back by a Leash tied to her Feet.

To this purpose also did he allege unto us the Authority of Homer, the Father
of all Philosophy, who said, that the Grecians did not put an end to their
mournful mood for the Death of Patroclus, the most intimate Friend of Achilles,
till Hunger in a rage declared her self, and their Bellies protested to furnish
no more Tears unto their Grief. For from Bodies emptied and mecerated by long
Fasting, there could not be such supply of Moisture and brackish Drops, as
might be proper on that occasion.

Mediocrity at all times is commendable; nor in this case are you to abandon
it. You may take a little Supper* but thereat must you not eat of a Hare* nor
of any other Flesh: You are likewise to abstain from Beans, from the Preak, (by
some called the Polyp) as also from Coleworts, Cabbidge, and all other such
like windy Victuals, which may endanger the troubling of your Brains, and the
dimning or casting a kind of Mist over your Animal Spirits: For as a
Looking-glass cannot exhibit the Semblance or Representation of the Object set
before it, and exposed, to have its Image to the life expressed, if that the
polished sleekedness thereof be darkened by gross Breathings, dampish Vapors,
and foggy, thick, infectious Exhalations; even so the Fancy cannot well receive
the impression of the likeness of those things, which Divination does afford by
Dreams, if any way the Body be annoyed or troubled with the fumish Steam of
Meat, which it had taken in a while before; because betwixt these two there
still has been a mutual Sympathy and Fellow-feeling, of an indissolubly knit
Affection. You shall eat good Eusebian and Bergamot-Pears, one Apple of the
short-shank Pepin-kind, a parcel of the little Plums of Tours, and some few
Cherries of the growth of my Orchard: Nor shall you need to fear, that
thereupon will ensue doubtful Dreams, fallacious, uncertain, and not to be
trusted to, as by some Peripatetick Philosophers has been related; for that,
say they, Men do more copiously in the Season of Harvest feed on Fruitages,
then at any other time. The same is mystically taught us by the ancient
Prophets and Poets, who allege, That all vain and deceitful Dreams lie hid and
in covert, under the Leaves which are spread on the ground: by reason that the
Leaves fall from the Trees, in the Autumnal Quarter: for the natural fervor,
which abounding in ripe, fresh, recent Fruits, comes by the quickness of its
ebullition, to be with ease evaporated into the Animal parts of the dreaming
Person (the Experiment is obvious in most) is a pretty while before it be
expired, dissolved, and evanished. As for your Drink, you are to have it of the
fair, pure Water of my Fountain.

The Condition (quoth Panurge) is very hard: nevertheless, cost what price it
will, or whatsoever come of it, I heartily condescend thereto; protesting, that
I shall to morrow break my Fast betimes, after my somniatory Exercitations;
furthermore, I recommend my self to Homer's two Gates, to Morpheus, to Iselon,
to Phautasus, and unto Phabetor. If they in this my great need succor me, and
grant me that assistance which is fitting, I will, in honor of them all, erect
a jolly, gentiel Altar, composed of the softest Down. If I were now in Laconia,
in the Temple of Juno, betwixt Oetile and Thalamis, she suddenly would
disintangle my Perplexity, resolve me of my Doubts, and cheer me up with fair
and jovial Dreams in a deep Sleep. Then did he say thus unto Pantagruel: Sir,
were it not expedient for my purpose, to put a Branch or two of curious Laurel
betwixt the Quilt and Bolster of my Bed, under the Pillow on which my Head must
lean? There is no need at all of that (quoth Pantagruel) for besides that it is
a thing very superstitious, the Cheat thereof has been at large discovered
unto us, in the Writings of Serapion, Ascalonites, Antiphon, Philochorus,
Artemon, and Fulgentius* Placiades. I could say as much to you of the Left
Shoulder of a Crocodile, as also of a Camelion* without prejudice be it spoken
to the Credit which is due to the Opinion of old Democritus; and likewise of
the Stone of the Bactrians, called Eumerites, and of the Hamonian Horn: for so
by the Aethiopians is termed a certain precious Stone, colored like Gold, and
in the fashion, shape, form, and proportion of a Ram's Horn, as the Horn of
Jupiter Hammon is reported to have been: they over* and above assuredly
affirming, that the Dreams of those who carry it about them are no less
veritable and infallible, than the Truth of the Divine Oracles. Nor is this
much unlike to what Homer and Virgil wrote of these two Gates of Sleep: to
which you have been pleased to recommend the management of what you have in
hand. The one is of Ivory, which sets in confused, doubtful, and uncertain
Dreams; for through Ivory, how small and slender it soever be, we can see
nothing, the density, opacity, and close compactedness of its material parts,
hindering the penetration of the visual Rays, and the reception of the
Speciesses of such things as are visible: the other is of Horn, at which an
entry i^ made to sure and certain Dreams, even as through Horn, by reason of
the diaphanous splendor, and bright transparency thereof, the Species of all
Objects of the sight distinctly pass, and so without confusion appear, that
they are clearly seen. Your meaning is, and you would thereby infer (quoth
Friar John) that the Dreams of all horned Cuckolds (of which number Panurge, by
the help of God, and his future Wife, is without controversy to be one) are
always true and infallible.

CHAP. XIV. Panurge's Dream, with the Interpretation thereof.
AT Seven a Clock of the next following Morning, Panurge did not fail to
present himself before Pantagruel, in whose Chamber were at that time
Epistemon, Friar John of the Funnels, Ponocrates, Eudemon, Carpalin, and
others, to whom, at the entry of Panurge, Pantagruel said, Lo, here comes our
Dreamer. That word (quoth Epistemon) in ancient times cost very much, and was
dearly sold to the Children of Jacob. Then, said Panurge, I have been plunged
into my dumps so deeply, as if I had been lodged with Gaffer Noddy cap: dreamed
indeed I have, and that right lustily; but I could take a long with me no more
thereof, that I did goodly understand, save only, that I in my Vision had a
pretty, fair, young, gallant, handsome Woman, who no less lovingly and kindly
treated and entertained me, hugged, cherished, cocker'd, dandled, and made much
of me, as if I had been another neat dillidarling Minion, like Adonis: never
was Man more glad then I was then, my joy at that time was incomperable; she
flattred me, tickled me, stroaked me, groped me, frizled me, curled me, kissed
me, embraced me, laid her Hands about my Neck, and now and then made jestingly,
pretty little Horns above my Forehead: I told her in the like disport, as I did
play the Fool with her, that she should rather place and fix them in a little
below mine Eyes, that I might see the better what I should stick at, with them:
for being so situated, Momus then would find no fault therewith, as he did once
with the position of the Horns of Bulls. The wanton, toying Girl,
notwithstanding any remonstrance of mine to the contrary, did always drive and
thrust them further in: yet thereby (which to me seemed wonderful) she did not
do me any hurt at all. A little after, though I know not how, I thought I was
transformed into a Tabor, and she into a Chough.

My sleeping there being interrupted, I awaked in a start, angry, displeased,
perplexed, chasing, and very wroth. There have you a large Platter-full of
Dreams, make thereupon good Cheer, and, if you please, spare not to interpret
them according to the Understanding which you may have in them. Come Carpalin,
let us to Breakfast. To my sense and meaning, (quoth Pantagruel) if I have
skill or knowledge in the Art of Divination by Dreams, your Wife will not
really, and to the outward appearance of the World, plant, or set Horns, and
stick them fast in your Forehead, after a visible manner, as Satyrs use to wear
and carry them; but she will be so far from preserving herself Loyal in the
discharge and observance of a Conjugal Duty, that on the contrary she will
violate her plighted Faith, break her Marriage-Oath, infringe all Matrimonial
Ties, prostitute her Body to the Dalliance of other Men, and so make you a
Cuckold. This point is clearly and manifestly explained and expounded by
Artemidorus, just as I have related it. Nor will there be any metamorphosis, or
transmutation made of you into a Drum, or Tabor, but you will surely be as
soundly beaten as e're was Tabor at a merry Wedding: nor yet will she be
changed into a Chough, but will steal from you, chiefly in the Night, as is the
nature of that thievish Bird. Hereby may you perceive your Dreams to be in
every jot conform and agreeable to the Virgilian Lots: A Cuckold you will be,
beaten and robbed. Then cried out Father John with a loud Voice: He tells the
truth; upon my Conscience, thou will be a Cu^kold, an honest one, I warrant
thee; O the brave Horns that will be born by thee* Ha, ha, ha. Our good Master
De Cornilius, God save thee, and shield thee; Will thou be pleased to preach
but two words of a Sermon to us, and I will go through the Parish Church to
gather up Alms for the poor.

You are (quoth Panurge) very far mistaken in your Interpretation; for the
matter is quite contrary to your sense thereof; my Dream presageth, that I
shall by Marriage be stored with plenty of all manner of Goods, the hornifying
of me showing, that I will possess a Cornucopia, that Amalthaean Horn, which is
called, The Horn of Abundance, whereof the fruition did still portend the
Wealth of the Enjoyer. You possibly will say, that they are rather like to be
Satyrs Horns; for you of these did make some mention. Amen, Amen, Fiat siat, ad
differentiam papae. Thus shall I have my Touch-her-home still ready; my Staff
of Love sempiternally in a good case, will, Satyr-like, be never toyled out; a
thing which all Men wish for, and send up their Prayers to that purpose, but
such a thing as nevertheless is granted but to a few; hence does it follow by a
consequence as clear as the Sunbeams, that I will never be in the danger of
being made a Cuckold, for the defect hereof is, Causa sine qua non; yea, the
sole cause (as many think) of making Husbands Cuckolds. What makes poor
scoundrel Rogues to beg (I pray you)? Is it not because they have not enough at
home, wherewith to fill their Bellies, and their Poaks. What is it makes the
Wolves to leave the Woods? Is it not the want of Flesh Meat. What makes Women
Whores? you understand me well enough. And herein may I very well submit my
Opinion to the Judgment of learned Lawyers, Presidents, Counselors, Advocates,
Procurers, Attorneys, and other Glossers and Commentators on the venerable
Rubric, De Frigidis, and maleficiatis. You are in truth, Sir, as it seems to
me (excuse my boldness if I have transgressed) in a most palpable and absurd
Error, to attribute my Horns to Cuckoldry: Diana wears them on her Head after
the manner of a Cressant, is she a Cucquean for that? How the Devil can she be
cuckolded, who never yet was married? Speak somewhat more correctly, I beseech
you, least she being offended, furnish you with a pair of Horns, shapen by the
Pattern of those which she made for Actaeon. The goodly Bacchus also carries
Horns; Pan, Jupiter Hammon, with a great many others, are they all Cuckolds? If
Jove be a Cuckold, Juno is a Whore: this follows by the Figure Metalepsis. As
to call a Child in the presence of his Father and Mother, a Bastard, or Whore's
Son, is tacitly and under-board, no less than if he had said openly, the Father
is a Cuckold, and his Wife a Punk. Let our Discourse come nearer to the
purpose: The Horns that my Wife did make me are Horns of Abundance, planted and
grafted in my Head for the increase and shooting up of all good things: this
will I affirm for truth, upon my Word, and pawn my Faith and Credit both upon
it; as for the rest, I will be no less joyful, frolic, glad, cheerful, merry,
jolly, and gamesome then a well-bended Tabor in the Hands of a good Drummer, at
a Nuptial Feast, still making a noise, still rolling, still buzzing and
cracking. Believe me, Sir, in that consists none of my least good Fortunes*
And my Wife will be jocund, fea^s, comp^, neat, quaint, dainty, trim, tricked
up, brisk, smirk and smug, even as a pretty little Cornish Chough: who will not
believe this, let Hell or the Gallows be the Burden of his Christmas Carol.

I remark (quoth Pantagruel) the last point or particle which you did speak of,
and having seriously conferred it with the first, find that at the beginning
you were delighted with the sweetness of your Dream; but in the end and final
closure of it, you startingly awaked, and on a sudden were forthwith vexed in
Choler, and annoyed. Yea, (quoth Panurge) the reason of that was, because I had
fasted too long. Flatter not your self (quoth Pantagruel) all will go to ruin:
know for a certain truth, that every Sleep that ends with a starting, and
leaves the Person irksome, grieved, and fretting, does either signify a
present evil, or otherways presageth, and portendeth a future imminent mishap.
To signify an Evil, that is to say, to show some Sickness hardly curable, a
kind of pestilentious, or malignant Bile, Botch, or Sore, lying and lurking,
hid, occult, and latent within the very Center of the Body, which many times
does by the means of Sleep (whose nature is to reinforce, and strengthen the
Faculty and Virtue of Concoction) begin according to the Theorems of Physic to
declare itself, and moves toward the outward Superficies. At this sad stirring
is the Sleeper's rest and ease disturbed and broken, whereof the first feeling
and stinging smart admonishes, that he must patiently endure great pain and
trouble, and thereunto provide some remedy: as when we say proverbially to
incense Hornets, to move a stinking Puddle, and to awake a sleeping Lion,
instead of these more usual expressions, and of a more familiar and plain
meaning, to provoke angry Persons, to make a thing the worse by meddling with
it, and to irritate a testy choleric Man when he is at quiet. On the other
part, to presage or foretell an Evil, especially in what concerns the
Exploits of the Soul, in matter of Somnial Divinations, is as much to say, as
that it gives us to understand, that some dismal Fortune or Mischance is
destinated and prepared for us, which shortly will not fail to come to pass. A
clear and evident Example hereof is to be found in the Dream, and dreadful
awaking of Hecuba, as likewise in that of Euridice, the Wife of Orpheus,
(neither of which was sooner finished, says Cunius) but that incontinently
thereafter they awaked in a start, and were affrighted horribly; thereupon
these Accidents ensued, Hecuba had her Husband Priamus, together with her
Children, slain before her eyes, and saw then the Destruction of her Country;
and Euridice died speedily thereafter, in a most miserable manner. Aeneas
dreaming that he spoke to Hector a little after his Decease, did on a sudden in
a great start awake, and was afraid: now hereupon did follow this event; Troy
that same Night was spoiled, sacked, and burnt. At another time the same
Aeneas, dreaming that he saw his familiar Geniuses and Penates, in a ghastly
fright and astonishment awaked, of which terror and amazement the issue was,
that the very next day subsequent, by a most horrible Tempest on the Sea, he
was like to have perished, and been castaway. Moreover, Turnus being prompted,
instigated, and stirred up, by the fantastic Vision of an infernal Fury, to
enter into a bloody War against Aeneas, awaked in a start much troubled and
disquieted in Spirit, in sequel whereof, after many notable and famous Routs,
Defeats and Discomfitures in open Field, he came at last to be killed in a
single Combat, by the said Aeneas. A thousand other instances I could afford,
if it were needful, of this matter. Whilst I relate these Stories of Aeneas,
remark the saying of Fabius Pictor, who faithfully averred, That nothing had at
any time befallen unto, was done, or enterprized by him, whereof he preallably
had not Notice, and beforehand fore seen it to the full, by sure Predictions,
altogether founded on the Oracles of Somnial Divination. To this there is no
want of pregnant Reasons, no more then of Examples: for if Repose and Rest in
Sleeping be a special Gift and Favor of the Gods, as is maintained by the
Philosophers, and by the Poet attested in these Lines:

Then Sleep, that heavenly Gift, came to refresh,
Of humane Laborers, the wearied Flesh.
Such a Gift or Benefit can never finish or terminate in wrath and indignation,
without portending some unlucky Fate, and most disastrous Fortune to ensue;
otherways it were a Molestation, and not an Ease; a Scourge and not a Gift, at
least, proceeding from the Gods above, but from the infernal Devils our
Enemies, according to the common vulgar Saying.

Suppose the Lord, Father, or Master of a Family, sitting at a very sumptuous
Dinner, furnished with all manner of good Cheer, and having at his entry to the
Table his Appetite sharp set upon his Victuals, whereof there was great plenty,
should be seen rise in a start, and on a sudden fling out of his Chair,
abandoning his Meat, frighted, appalled, and in a horrid terror, who should
not know the cause hereof would wonder, and be astonished exceedingly: But
what? he heard his Male Servants cry, Fire, fire, fire, fire; his Serving Maids
and Woman yell, Stop Thief, stop Thief; and all his Children shout as loud as
ever they could, Murder, O Murder, Murder. Then was it not high time for him
to leave his Banqueting, for application of a Remedy in have, and to give
speedy Order for succouring of his distressed Household. Truly, I remember, that
the Cabalists and Massorats, Interpreters of the Sacred Scriptures, in treating
how with verity one might judge of Evangelical Apparitions (because oftentimes
the Angel of Satan is disguized and transfigured into an Angel of Light) said;
That the difference of these two mainly did consist in this: the favorable and
comforting Angel uses in his appearing unto Man at first to terrify and
hugely affright him; but in the end he brings Consolation, leaves the Person
who has seen him, joyful, well*pleased, fully content, and satisfied: on the
other side, the Angel of Perdition, that wicked, devilish, and malignant
Spirit, at his appearance unto any Person, in the beginning cheareth up the
Heart of his Beholder, but at last forsakes him, and leaves him troubled,
angry, and perplexed.

CHAP. XV. Panurge's Excuse and Exposition of the Monastic Mystery concerning
Powdered Beef.
THE Lord save those who see, and do not hear, (quoth Panurge) I see you well
enough, but know not what it is that you have said: the Hunger-starved Belly
wants Ears: For lack of Victuals, before God, I roar, bray, yell and fume as
in a furious Madness. I have performed too hard a Task to day, an extrordinary
Work indeed: He shall be craftier, and do far greater Wonders than ever did Mr.
Mush, who shall be able any more this year to bring me on the Stage of
Preparation for a dreaming Verdict. Fie; not to sup at all, that is the Devil.
Pox take that Fashion. Come Friar John, let us go break our Fast; for if I hit
on such a round Refection in the morning as will serve thoroughly to fill the
Mill-hopper and Hogshide of my Stomach, and furnish it with Meat and Drink
sufficient, then at a pinch, as in the case of some extreme necessity which
presses, I could make a shift that day to forbear Dining. But not to Sup: A
Plague rot that base Custom, which is an Error offensive to Nature. That Lady
made the Day for Exercise, to travel, work, wait on and labor in each his
Negotiation and Employment; and that we may with the more Fervency and Ardour
prosecute our business, she sets before us a clear burning Candle, to wit, the
Suns Resplendency: And at Night, when she begins to take the Light from us, she
thereby tacitly implies no less, than if she would have spoken thus unto us: My
Lads and Lasses, all of you are good and honest Folks, you have wrought well to
day, toiled and turmoiled enough, the Night approaches, therefore cast off
these moiling Cares of yours, desist from all your swinking painful Labors,
and set your Minds how to refresh your Bodies in the renewing of their Vigor
with good Bread, choice Wine, and store of wholesome Meats; then may you take
some Sport and Recreation, and after that lie down and rest your selves, that
you may strongly, nimbly, lustily, and with the more Alacrity to morrow attend
on your Affairs as formerly.

Falconers in like manner, when they have fed their Hawks, will not suffer them
to fly on a full Gorge, but let them on a Perch abide a little, that they may
rouse, bait, tour and soar the better. That good Pope, who was the first
Instituter of Fasting, understood this well enough; for he ordained that our
Fast should reach but to the hour of Noon; all the remainder of that day was at
our disposure, freely to eat and feed at any time thereof. In ancient times
there were but few that dined* as you would say, some Churchmen, Monks and
Canons; for they have little other Occupation; each day is a Festival unto
them; who diligently heed the Claustral Proverb, De missa ad mensam. They do
not use to linger and defer their sitting down and placing of themselves at
Table, only so long as they have a mind in waiting for the coming of the Abbot;
so they fell to without Ceremony, Terms or Conditions; and every body supped,
unless it weresome vain, conceited, dreaming Dotard. Hence was a Supper called
Caena, which shows that it is common to all sorts of People. Thou know it
well, Friar John. Come let us go, my dear Friend, in the name of all the Devils
of the Infernal Regions, let us go: The Gnawings of my Stomach, in this rage of
Hunger, are so taring, that they make it bark like a Mastiff. Let us throw some
Bread and Beef into his Throat to pacify him, as once the Sibyl did to
Cerberus. Thou likest best Monastical Browess, the prime, the flower of the
Pot. I am for the solid, principal Verb that comes after: The good brown Loaf,
always accompanied with a round slice of the Nine-lecturepoudred Labourer. I
know thy meaning, (answered Friar John) this Metaphor is extracted out of the
Claustral Kettle; the Labourer is the Ox, that has wrought and done the
Labor; after the fashion of Nine Lectures, that is to say, most exquisitely
well and thoroughly boiled. These holy Religious Fathers, by a certain
Cabalistick Institution of the Ancients, not written, but carefully by
Tradition conveyed from hand to hand, rising betimes to go to Morning Prayers,
were wont to flourish that their matutinal Devotion with some certain notable
Preambles before their entry into the Church, viz. They dunged in the
Dungeries, pissed in the Pisseries, spit in the Spitteries, melodiously coughed
in the Cougheries, and doted in their Doteries, that to the Divine Service they
might not bring any thing that was unclean or foul.

These things thus done, they very zealously made their repair to the Holy
Chapel, (for so was, in their canting Language, termed the Covent Kitchen)
where they with no small earnestness, had Care that the Beef Pot should be put
on the Crook for the Breakfast of the Religious Brothers of our Lord and
Savior; and the Fire they would kindle under the Pot themselves. Now the
Matines consisting of Nine Lessons, was so incumbent on them, that they must
have risen the rather for the more expedite dispatching of them all. The sooner
that they rose, the sharper was their Appetite, and the Barkings of their
Stomachs, and the Gnawings increase in the like proportion, and consequently
made these Godly Men thrice more a hungered and a-thirst, than when their
Matines were hemmed over only with three Lessons.

The more betimes they rose by the said Cabal, the sooner was the Beef Pot put
on; the longer that the Beef was on the Fire, the better it was boiled; the
more it boiled, it was the tenderer; the tenderer that it was, the less it
troubled the Teeth, delighted more the Palats, less charged the Stomach, and
nourished our good Religious Men the more substantially; which is the only end
and prime inintention of the first Founders, as appears by this, That they eat
not to live, but live to eat, and in this World have nothing but their Life.
Let us go, Panurge.

Now have I understood thee, (quoth Panurge) my Plushcod Friar, my Caballine
and Claustral Ballock. I freely quit the Costs, Interest and Charges, seeing
you have so egregiously commented upon the most especial Chapter of the
Culinary and Monastic Cabal. Come along, my Garpalin, and you Friar John, my
Leather-dresser: Good morrow to you all, my good Lords: I have dreamed too much
to have so little. Let us go. Panurge had no sooner done speaking, than
Epistemon with a loud Voice said these Words: It is a very ordinary and common
thing amongst Men to conceive, foresee, know and presage the misfortune, bad
luck or disaster of another; but to have the understanding, providence,
knowledge and prediction of a Man's own mishap is very scarce and rare to be
found any where. This is exceeding judiciously and prudently deciphered by Esop
in his Apologues, who there affirms, That every Man in the World carries
about his Neck a Wallet, in the Fore-bag whereof were contained the Faults and
Mischances of others, always exposed to his view and knowledge; and in the
other Scrip thereof, which hangs behind, are kept the Bearers proper
Transgressions, and inauspicious Adventures, at no time seen by him, nor
thought upon, unless he be a person that has a favorable Aspect from the
Heavens.

CHAP. XVI. How Pantagruel advises Panurge to consult with the Sibyl of
Panzoust.
A Little while thereafter Pantagruel sent for Panurge, and said unto him, The
Affection which I bear you being now inveterate, and settled in my Mind by a
long continuance of time, prompteth me to the serious consideration of your
Welfare and Profit; in order whereto remark what I have thought thereon: It
has been told me that at Panzoust near Crouly, dwells a very famous Sibyl,
who is endowed with the skill of foretelling all things to come. Take Epestemon
in your Company, repair toward her, and hear what she will say unto you. She
is possibly (quoth Epistemon) she is some Canidia, Sagane or Pythonisse, either
whereof with us is vulgarly called a Witch. I being the more easily induced to
give Credit to the truth of this Character of her, that the place of her Abode
is vilely stained with the abominable repute of abounding more with Sorcerers
and Witches than ever did the Plains of Thessaly. I should not, to my thinking,
go thither willingly, for that it seems to me a thing unwarrantable, and
altogether forbidden in the Law of Moses. We are not Jews, (quoth Pantagruel)
nor is it a matter judiciously confessed by her, nor authentically proved by
others that she is a Witch. Let us for the present suspend our Judgment, and
defer till after your return from thence, the sifting and garbeling of those
Niceties. Do we know but that she may be an Eleventh Sibyl, or a Second
Cassandra? But although she were neither, and she did not merit the Name or
Title of any of these Renowned Prophetesses, what Hazard, in the Name of God,
do you run, by offering to talk and confer with her of the instant Perplexity
and Perturbation of your Thoughts? Seeing especially (and which is most of all)
she is in the Estimation of those that are acquainted with her, held to know
more, and to be of a deeper reach of Understanding, than is either customary to
the Country wherein she lives, or to the Sex whereof she is. What hindrance,
hurt or harm does the laudable desire of Knowledge bring to any Man, were it
from a Sot, a Pot, a Fool, a Stool, a Winter Mittam, a Truckle for a Pully, the
Lid of a Goldsmiths Crucible, an Oil-Bottle, or old Slipper? You may remember
to have read, or heard at least, that Alexander the Great, immediately after
his having obtained a glorious Victory over the King Darius in Arbeles, refused
in the Presence of the splendid and illustrious Courtiers that were about him,
to give Audience to a poor certain despicable*like Fellow, who through the
Soilicitations and Mediation of some of his Royal Attendants* was admitted
humbly to beg that Grace and Favor of him: But sore did he repent, although in
vain, a thousand and ten thousand times thereafter, the surly State which he
then took upon him to the Denial of so just a Suit, the Grant whereof would
have been worth unto him the value of a Brace of potent Cities. He was indeed
Victorious in Persia, but withal so far distant from Macedonia, his Hereditary
Kingdom, that the Joy of the one did not expel the extreme Grief, which through
occasion of the other he had inwardly conceived; for not being able with all
his Power to find or invent a convenient Mean and Expedient, how to get or come
by the certainty of any News from thence; both by reason of the huge remoteness
of the places from one to another, as also because of the impeditive
Interposition of many great Rivers, the interjacent Obstacle of diverse wild
Deserts, and obstructive Interjection of sundry almost inaccessible Mountains.
Whilst he was in this sad quandary and sollicitous pensiveness, which, you may
suppose, could not be of a small Vexation to him; considering that it was a
matter of no great difficulty to run over his whole Native Soil, possess his
Country, seize on his Kingdom, install a new King in the Throne, and plant
thereon Foreign Colonies, long before he could come to have any Advertisement
of it. For obviating the Jeopardy of so dreadful Inconveniency, and putting a
fit Remedy thereto, a certain Sydonian Merchant of a low Stature, but high
Fancy, very poor in show, and to the outward appearance of little or no
Account, having presented himself before him, went about to affirm and declare,
that he had excogitated and hit upon a ready mean and way, by the which those
of his Territories at home should come to the certain notice of his Indian
Victories, and himself be perfectly informed of the state and condition of
Egypt and Macedonia within less then five days. Whereupon the said Alexander,
plunged into a sullen Animadvertency of mind, through his rash Opinion of the
Improbability of performing a so strange and impossible-like Undertaking,
dismissed the Merchant without giving ear to what he had to say, and villify'd
him. What could it have cost him to hearken unto what the honest Man had
invented and contrived for his good? What Detriment, Annoyance, Damage or Loss
could he have undergone to listen to the Discovery of that Secret, which the
good Fellow would have most willingly revealed unto him? Nature, I am
persuaded, did not without a cause frame our Eyes open, putting thereto no Gate
at all, nor shutting them up with any manner of Enclosures, as she has done
unto the Tongue, the Eyes, and other such out-jetting parts of the Body: The
Cause, as I imagine, is, to the end that every Day and every Night, and that
continually, we may be ready to hear, and by a perpetual hearing apt to learn:
For of all the Senses, it is the fittest for the reception of the knowledge of
Arts, Sciences and Disciplines; and it may be, that Man was an Angel, (that is
to say, a Messenger sent from God) as Raphael was to Toby. Too suddenly did he
contemn, despise and misregard him; but too long thereafter, by an untimely and
too late Repentance did he do Penance for it. You say very well, (answered
Epistemon) yet shall you never for all that induce me to believe, that it can
tend any way to the Advantage or Commodity of a Man, to take Advice and Counsel
of a Woman, namely, of such a Woman, and the Woman of such a Country. Truly I
have found* (quoth Panurge) a great deal of good in the Counsel of Women,
chiefly in that of the Old Wives amongst them; who for every time I consult
with them, I readily get a Stool or two extraordinary, to the great Solace of
my Bum-gut passage. They are as Slothounds in the Infallibility of their Scent,
and in their Sayings no less Sententious than the Rubricks of the Law.
Therefore in my Conceit it is not an improper kind of Speech to call them Sage
or Wise Women. In confirmation of which Opinion of mine, the customary style of
my Language allows them the Denomination of Presage Women. The Epithet of
Sage is due unto them, because they are surpassing dextrous in the knowledge of
most things. And I give them the Title of Presage, for that they Divinely
foresee, and certainly foretell future Contingencies, and Events of things to
come. Sometimes I call them not Maunettes, but Monettes, from their wholesome
Monitions. Whether it be so, ask Pythagoras, Socrates, Empedocles, and our
Master Ortuinus. I furthermore praise and commend above the Skies the ancient
memorable Institution of the pristine Germans, who ordained the Responces and
Documents of Old Women to be highly extolled, most cordially reverenced, and
prised at a rate, in nothing inferior to the weight, test and standerd of the
Sanctuary: And as they were respectfully prudent in receiving of these sound
Advices, so by honoring and following them did they prove no less fortunate in
the happy Success of all their Endeavors. Witness the Old Wife Antinia, and
the good Mother Villed, in the days of Vespasian. You need not any way doubt,
but that Feminine Old Age is always fructifying in Qualities Sublime, I would
have said Sibylline. Let us go, by the help; let us go, by the Virtue. God* let
us go. Farewell, Friar John, I recommend the care of my Codpiece to you. Well,
(quoth Epistemon) I will follow you, with this protestation nevertheless, that
if I happen to get a sure information, or otherways find, that she does use any
kind of Charm or Enchantment in her Responses, it may not be imputed to me for
a blame to leave you at the Gate of her House, without accompanying you any
further in.

CHAP. XVII. How Panurge spoke to the Sybil of Panzoust.
THeir Voyage was three days Journeying, on the third whereof was shown unto
them the House of the Vaticinatress standing on the knap or top of a Hill,
under a large and spacious Walnut-Tree. Without great difficulty they entered
into that straw-thatch'd Cottage, scurvily built, naughtily movabled, and all
besmoaked. It matters not, (quoth Epistemon) Heraclitus, the grand Scotist, and
tenebrous darksome Philosopher, was nothing astonished at his Introit into such
a course and paultry Habitation; for he did usually show forth unto his
Sectators and Disciples, That the Gods made as cheerfully their Residence in
these mean homely Mansions, as in sumptuous, magnifick Palaces, replenished
with all manner of delight, pomp, and pleasure. I withal do really believe,
that the Dewlling Place of the so famous and renowned Hecate, was just such
another petty Cell as this is, when she made a Feast therein to the valiant
Theseu^. And that of no other better Structure was the Coat or Cabin of Hyreus*
or Oaenopion, wherein Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury were not ashamed, all three
together, to harbor and sojourn a whole Night, and there to take a full and
hearty Repast; for the payment of the Shot they thankfully ed Orion.

They finding the ancient Woman, at a corner of her own Chimney, Epistemon
said, She is indeed a true Sybil, and the lively Pourtraict of one represented
by the (...) of Homer. The old Hag was in a pitiful bad plight and condition,
in matter of the outward state and complexion of her Body, the ragged and
tottred Equipage of her Person, in the point of Accoutrement, and beggarly poor
Provision of Fare for her Diet and Entertainment; for she was ill apparelled,
worse nourished, Toothless, Blear-eyed, Crookshoulder'd; snotty, her Nose still
dropping, and herself still drooping, faint, and pithless. Whilst in this
woefully wretched case she was making ready for her Dinner, Porridge of wrinkled
green Colworts, with a bit skin of yellow Bacon, mixed with a twice before
crooked sort of watrish, unsavory Broth, extracted out of bare and hollow
Bones. Epistemon said, By the Cross of a Groat, we are to blame, nor shall we
get from her any Responce at all: for we have not brought along with us the
Branch of Gold. I have (quoth Panurge) provided pretty well for that, for here
I have it within my Bag, in the substance of a Gold Ring, accompanied with some
fair Pieces of small Money. No sooner were these words spoken, when Panurge
coming up toward her, after the Ceremonial performance of a profound and
humble Salutation, presented her with six Neats-Tongues dried in the Smoke, a
great Butter-pot full of fresh Cheese, a Boracho furnished with good Beverage*
and a Rams Cod stored with Single Pence, newly coined: At last he, with a low
Curtsie, put on her Medical Finger, a pretty handsome Golden Ring, whereinto
was right artificially inchased a precious Toadstone of Beausse. This done, in
few words, and very succinctly did he set open, and expose unto her the motive
Reason of his coming, most civilly and courteously entreating her, that she
might be pleased to vouchsafe to give him an ample and plenary Intelligence,
concerning the future good luck of his intended Marriage.

The old Trot for a while remained silent, pensive, and girning like a Dog,
then, after she had set her withered Breech upon the bottom of a Bushel, she
took into her Hands three old Spindles, which when she had turned and whirled
betwixt her Fingers very diversely, and after several fashions, she pryed more
narrowly into, by the trial of their points; the sharpest whereof she retained
in her hand, and threw the other two under a Stone Trough; after this she took
a pair of Yarn Windles, which she nine times unintermittedly veered, and
frisked about, then at the ninth revolution or turn, without touching them any
more, maturely perpending the manner of their motion, she very demurely waited
on their repose and cessation from any further stirring. In sequel whereof, she
pulled off one of her wooden Pattens, put her Apron over her Head, as a Priest
use to do his Amice, when he is going to sing Mass, and with a kind of antic,
gaudy, party-colored String, knit* it under her Neck. Being thus covered and
muffled, she whiffed off a lusty good Draught out of the Borachoe, took three
several Pence forth of the Ram Cod Fob, put them into so many Walnutshells,
which she set down upon the bottom of a Feather-pot; and then after she had
given them three Whisks of a Broom Besom a-thwart the Chimney, casting into the
Fire half a Bevin of long Heather, together with a Branch of dry Laurel, she
observed with a very hush, and coy silence, in what form they did burn, and
saw, that although they were in a flame, they made no kind of noise, or
crackling din, hereupon she gave a most hideous and horribly dreadful shout,
muttering betwixt her Teeth some few barbarous words, of a strange termination.

This so terrified Panurge, that he forthwith said to Epistemon, The Devil
mince me into a Gally-mafry, if I do not tremble for fear. I do not think but
that I am now enchanted; for she utters not her Voice in the terms of any
Christian Language. O look, I pray you, how she seems unto me, to be by three
full spans higher than she was, when she began to hood her self with her Apron.

What means this restless wagging of her slouchy Chaps? What can be the
signification of the uneven shrugging of her hulchy Shoulders? to what end does
she quaver with her Lips, like a Monkey in the dismembring of a Lobster? My
Ears through horror glow; ah! how they tingle. I think I hear the skreaking of
Proserpina; the Devils are breaking loose to be all here. O the foul, ugly, and
deformed Beasts! Let us run away! by the Hook of God, I am like to die for
fear! I do not love the Devils; they vex me, and are unpleasant Fellows. Now
let us fly, and betake us to our heels. Farewell Gammer; Thanks and Grammercy
for your Goods. I will not marry, no, believe me, I will not; I fairly quit my
Interest therein, and totally abandon and renounce it, from this time forward,
even as much as at present. With this, as he endeavored to make an escape out
of the room, the old Crone did anticipate his flight, and make him stop; the
way how she prevented him was this: whilst in her hand she held the Spindle,
she f^ung out to a Back-yard close by her Lodge, where after she had peeled off
the Barks of an old Sycamore, three several times, she very summarily, upon
eight Leaves which dropped from thence, wrote with the Spindle-point some curt,
and briefly couched Verses, which she threw into the Air, then said unto them,
Search after them if you will; find them if you can; the fatal Destinies of
your Marriage written in them.

No sooner had she done thus speaking, when she did withdraw herself unto her
lurking Hole, where on the upper Seat of the Porch, she tucked up her Gown, her
Coats and Smock, as high as her Armpits, and gave them a full inspection of the
Nockandroe: which being perceived by Panurge, he said to Epistemon, Gods
Bodekins, I see the Sybil's Hole. She suddenly then bolted the Gate behind her,
and was never since seen any more. They jointly ran in have after the fallen
and dispersed Leaves, and gathered them at last, though not without great
labor and toil, for the Wind had scattered them amongst the Thorn-bushes of
the Valley. When they had ranged them each after other in their due places,
they found out their Sentence, as it is metrified in this Ocstatick:

Thy Fame upheld, Even so, so:
And she with Child Of thee: No.
Thy Good End Suck she shall,
And flay thee, Friend, But not all.
CHAP. XVIII. How Pantagruel, and Panurge did diversely Expound the Verses of
the Sybil of Panzoust.
THE Leaves being thus collected, and orderly disposed, Epistemon and Panurge
returned to Pantagruel's Court, partly well pleased, and other part
discontented: glad for their being come back, and vexed for the trouble they
had sustained by the way, which they found to be craggy, rugged, stony, rough,
and ill adjusted. They made an ample and full Relation of their Voyage, unto
Pantagruel; as likewise of the Estate and Condition of the Sybil. Then having
presented to him the Leaves of the Sycamore, they show him the short and
twattle Verses that were written in them. Pantagruel having read and considered
the whole sum and substance of the matter, fetched from his Heart a deep and
heavy Sigh, then said to Panurge: You are now, forsooth, in a good taking, and
have brought your Hogs to a fine Market: the Prophecy of the Sybil does
explain and lay out before us, the same very Predictions which have been
denotated, foretold, and presaged to us by the Decree of the Virgilian Lots,
and the Verdict of your own proper Dreams: to wit, that you shall be very much
disgraced, shamed, and discredited by your Wife: for that she will make you a
Cuckold in prostituting herself to others, being big with Child by another than
you; will steal from you a great deal of your Goods, and will beat you,
scratch, and bruise you, even from plucking the skin in apart from off you;
will leave the Print of her Blows in some Member of your Body. You understand
as much (answered Panurge) in the veritable Interpretation, and Expounding of
recent Prophesies, as a Sow in the matter of Spicery. Be not offended (Sir, I
beseech you) that I speak thus boldly; for I find myself a little in Choler,
and that not without cause, seeing it is the contrary that is true; take heed,
and give attentive Ear unto my words: The old Wife said, that as the Bean is
not seen till first it be unhuskt, and that its swad or hull be shaled, and
pilled from off it: so is it that my virtue and transcendent worth will never
come by the Mouth of Fame, to be blazed abroad proportionable to the height,
extent, and measure of the excellency thereof, until preallably I get a Wife,
and make the full half of a married Couple. How many times have I heard you
say, that the Function of a Magistrate, or Office of Dignity, discovers the
Merits, Parts, and Endowments of the Person so advanced and promoted, and what
is in him: that is to say, we are then best able to judge aright of the
Deservings of a Man, when he is called to the management of Affairs: for when
before he lived in a private Condition, we could have no more certain knowledge
of him, then of a Bean within his Husk. And thus stands the first Article
explained: otherways could you imagine, that the good Fame, Repute, and
Estimation of an Honest Man, should depend upon the* Tail of a Whore?

Now to the meaning of the Second Article: My Wife will be with Child, (here
lies the prime Felicity of Marriage) but not of me. Copsody, that I do believe
indeed: It will be of a pretty little Infant: O how heartily I shall love it! I
do already dote upon it; for it will be my dainty Fedle-darling, my gentiel
Dilli-minion. From thenceforth no Vexation, Care, or Grief, shall take such
deep impression in my Heart, how hugely great or vehement soever it otherways
appear; but that it shall evanish forthwith, at the* sight of that my future
Babe; and at the hearing of the Chat and Prating of its Childish Gibbridge: And
blessed be the Old Wife. By my truly, I have a mind to settle some good Revenue
or Pension upon her, out of the readiest Increase of the Lands of my
Salmigondinois; not an inconstant, and uncertain Rent-seek, like that of
witless, giddy-headed* Batchellors, but sure and fixed, of the nature of the
well-payed Incomes of Regenting Doctors.

If this Interpretation does not please you, think you my Wife will bear me in
her Flanks: Conceive with me, and be of me delivered, as Women use in Childbed
to bring forth their Young Ones: so as that it may be said, Panurge is a second
Bacchus, he has been twice born; he is re-born, as was Hypolitus, as was
Proteus, one time of Thetis; and secondly, of the Mother of the Philosopher
Apollonius: as were the two Palices, near the Flood Samethoe, in Sicily: his
Wife was big of Child with him. In him is renewed and begun again the
Palintocy, and of the Megariens, and the Palingenesie of Democritus. Fie upon
such Errors, to hear stuff of that nature rends mine Ears.

The words of the third Article are: She will suck me at my best End. Why not?
that pleases me right well. You know the thing, I need not tell you, that it
is my intercrural Pudding with one end. I swear and promise, that in what I
can, I will preserve it sappy, full of juice, and as well victualled for her
use as may be; she shall not suck me, I believe, in vain, nor be destitute of
her allowance; there shall her justum both in Peck and Lippy be furnished to
the full eternally. You expound this passage allegorically, and interpret it to
Theft and Larceny. I love the Exposition, and the Allegory pleases me; but not
according to the Sense whereto you stretch it. It may be that the sincerity of
the Affection which you bear me, moves you to harbor in your Breast those
refractory thoughts concerning me, with a suspicion of my Adversity to come. We
have this saying from the Learned, That a marvelously fearful thing is Love,
and that true Love is never without fear. But (Sir) according to my Judgment,
you do understand both of and by your self, that here Stealth signifies
nothing else, no more then in a thousand other places of Greek and Latin, Old
and Modern Writings, but the sweet fruits of amorous Dalliance, which Venus
likes best, when reaped in secret, and culled by fervent Lovers filchingly.

Why so? I prithee tell: Because when the Feat* of the loose Coat Skirmish
happens to be done underhand and privily, between two well-disposed, athwart
the Steps of a Pair of Stairs, lurkingly, and in covert, behind a Suit of
Hangings, or close hid and trussed upon an unbound Faggot, it is more pleasing
to the Cyprian Goddess, (and to me also, I speak this without prejudice to any
better, or more sound Opinion) then to perform that Culbusting Art, after the
Cynick manner, in the view of the clear Sunshine, or in a rich Tent, under a
precious stately Canopy, within a glorious and sublime Pavilion, or yet on a
soft Couch betwixt rich Curtains of Cloth of Gold, without affrightment, at
long intermediate Respits, enjoying of Pleasures and Delights a Bellyfull, all
at great ease, with a huge fly-flap Fan of Crimson Satin, and a Bunch of
Feathers of some East-Indian Ostrich, serving to give Chase unto the Flies all
round about: whilst, in the Interim, the Female picks her Teeth with a stiff
Straw, picked even then from out of the bottom of the Bed she lies on.

If you be not content with this my Exposition, are you of the mind that my
Wife will suck and sup me up as People use to gulp and swallow Oysters out of
the Shell? Or as the Cilician Women, according to the Testimony of Dioscorides,
were wont to do the Grain of Alkermes? Assuredly that is an Error. Who seizes
on it, does neither gulch up, nor swill down; but takes away what has been
packed up, catches, snatcheth, and plies the Play of Hey pass, Repass.

The Fourth Article does imply, That my Wife will flay me, but not at all. O
the fine Word! You interpret this to beating Strokes and Blows. Speak wisely:
Will you eat a Pudding? Sir, I beseech you to raise up your Spirits above the
lowsized pitch of earthly Thoughts unto that hight of sublime Contemplation,
which reaches to the Apprehension of the Mysteries and Wonders of Dame Nature.
And here be pleased to condemn your self, by a renouncing of those Errors which
you have committed very grossly, and somewhat perversely, in expounding the
Prophetic Sayings of the Holy Sybil. Yet put the case (albeit I yield not to
it) that by the Instigation of the Devil, my Wife should go about to wrong me,
make me a Cuckold downwards to the very Breech, disgrace me otherways, steal my
Goods from me; yea, and lay violently her Hands upon me; she nevertheless
should fail of her Attempts, and not attain to the proposed end of her
unreasonable Undertakings.

The Reason which induces me hereto, is grounded totally on this last Point,
which is extracted from the profoundest Privacies of a Monastic Pantheology,
as good Friar Arther Wagtaile told me once upon a Monday morning; as we were
(if I have not forgot) eating a Bushel of Trotter-pies; and I remember well it
rained hard: God give him the good Morrow.

The Women at the beginning of the World, or a little after, conspired to flay
the Men quick, because they found the Spirit of Mankind inclined to domineer
it, and bear rule over them upon the face of the whole Earth; and in pursuit of
this their Resolution, promised, confirmed, sworn and covenanted amongst them
all, by the pure Faith they owe to the nocturnal Sanct Rogero. But O the vain
Enterprises of Women! O the great Fragility of that Sex Feminine! They did
begin to flay the Man, or pill him, (as says Catullus) at that Member which of
all the Body they loved best; to wit, the nervous and cavernous Cane; and that
above five thousand years ago; yet have they not of that small part alone
flayed any more till this hour but the Head: In mere despite whereof the Jews
snip off that parcel of the Skin in Circumcision, choosing far rather to be
called Clip-yards, Raskals, than to be flayed by Women, as are other Nations.
My Wife, according to this Female Covenant, will flay it to me, if it be not so
already. I heartily grant my Consent thereto, but will not give her leave to
flay it all: Nay, truly will I not, my noble King. Yea, but (quoth Epistemon)
you say nothing of her most dreadful Cries and Exclamations, when she and we
both saw the Lawrel-bough burn without yielding any noise or crackling. You
know it is a very dismal Ornen, an inauspicious sign, unlucky judice, and token
formidable, bad, disastrous, and most unhappy, as is certified by Propertius,
Tibullus, the quick Philosopher Porphyrius, Eustachius on the Iliads of Homer,
and by many others.

Verily, verily, (quoth Panurge) brave are the Allegations which you bring me,
and Testimonies of two-footed Calves. These Men were Fools, as they were Poets;
and Dotards, as they were Philosophers; full of Folly, as they were of
Philosophy.

CHAP. XIX. How Pantagruel praises the Counsel of Dumb Men.
PAntagruel, when this Discourse was ended, held for a pretty while his Peace,
seeming to be exceeding sad and pensive, then said to Panurge, the malignant
Spirit misleads, beguileth and seduceth you. I have read that in times past the
surest and most veritable Oracles were not those which either were delivered in
Writing, or uttered by word of Mouth in speaking: For many times, in their
Interpretation, right witty, learned and ingenious Men have been deceived through
Amphibolories, Equivoks, and Obscurity of Words, no less than by the brevity of
their Sentences. For which cause Apollo, the God of Vaticination, was Surnamed
(...). Those which were represented then by Signs and outward Gestures were
accounted the truest and the most infallible. Such was the Opinion of
Heraclitus: And Iupitur did himself in this manner give forth in Amon
frequently Predictions: Nor was he single in this Practice; for Apollo did the
like amongst the Assyrians. His prophesying thus unto those People, moved them
to paint him with a large long Beard, and Clothes beseeming an old settled
Person, of a most posed, stayed and grave Behavior; not naked, young and
beardless, as he was pourtrayed most usually amongst the Graecians. Let us make
trial of this kind of Fatidicency; and go you take Advice of some dumb Person
without any speaking. I am content, (quoth Panurge.) But, says Pantagruel, it
were requisite that the Dumb you consult with be such as have been deaf from
the hour of their Nativity, and consequently dumb; for none can be so lively,
natural, and kindly dumb, as he who never heard.

How is it, (quoth Panurge) that you conceive this matter? If you apprehend it
so, that never any spoke, who had not before heard the Speech of others, I will
from that Antecedent bring you to infer very logically a most absurd and
paradoxical Conclusion. But let it pass; I will not insist on it. You do not
then believe what Herodotus wrote of two Children, who at the special Command
and Appointment of Psammeticus King of Egypt, having been kept in a petty
Country Cottage, where they were nourished and entertained in a perpetual
silence, did at last, after a certain long space of time, pronounce this word
Be, which in the Phrygian Language signifies Bread, Nothing less (quoth
Pantagruel) do I believe, than that it is a mere abusing of our Understandings
to give Credit to the words of those, who say that there is any such thing as a
Natural Language. All Speeches have had their primary Origin from the Arbitrary
Institutions, Accords and Agreements of Nations in their respective
Condescendments to what should be noted and betokened by them. An Articulate
Voice (according to the Dialecticians) has naturally no signification at all;
for that the sense and meaning thereof did totally depend upon the good will
and pleasure of the first Deviser and Imposer of it. I do not tell you this
without a Cause; for Bartholus, Lib. 5. de Verb. Oblig. very seriously
reports, that even in his time there was in Cugubia one named Sir Nello de
Gabrielis, who although he by a sad mischance became altogether deaf,
understood nevertheless every one that talked in the Italian Dialect howsoever
he expressed himself; and that only by looking on his external Gestures, and
casting an attentive Eye upon the diverse motions of his Lips and Chaps. I have
read, I remember also, in a very literate and eloquent Author, that Turidates
King of Armenia, in the days of Nero, made a Voyage to Rome, where he was
received with great Honor and Solemnity, and with all manner of Pomp and
Magnificence: Yea, to the end there might be a sempiternal Amity and
Correspondence preserved betwixt him and the Roman Senate; there was no
remarkable thing in the whole City which was not shown unto him.

At his Departure the Emperor bestowed upon him many ample Donatives of an
inestimable Value: And besides, the more entirely to testify his Affection
toward him, heartily entrusted him to be pleased to make choice of any
whatsoever thing in Rome was most agreeable to his Fancy; with a Promise
juramentally confirmed, That he should not be refused of his Demand. Thereupon,
after a suitable Return of Thanks for a so gracious Offer, he required a
certain Iackpudding, whom he had seen to act his part most egregiously upon the
Stage, and whose meaning (albeit he knew not what it was he had spoken) he
understood perfectly enough by the Signs and Gesticulations which he had made.
And for this Suit of his, in that he asked nothing else, he gave this Reason,
That in the several wide and spacious Dominions, which were reduced under the
Sway and Authority of his Sovereign Government, there were sundry Countries and
Nations much differing from one another in Language, with whom, whether he was
to speak unto them, or give any Answer to their Requests, he was always
necessitated to make use of diverse sorts of Truchmen and Interpreters: Now with
this Man alone, sufficient for supplying all their places, will that great
Inconveniency hereafter be totally removed; seeing he is such a fine
Gesticulator, and in the Practice of Chirology an Artist so complete, expert
and dextrous, that with his very Fingers he does speak. Howsoever you are to
pitch upon such a dumb Bone as is deaf by nature, and from his Birth; to the
end that his Gestures and Signs may be the more vively and truly Prophetic,
and not counterfeit by the intermixture of some adulterate Luster and
Affectation. Yet whether this dumb Person shall be of the Male or Female Sex is
in your Option, lies at your Discretion, and altogether depends on your own
Election.

I would more willingly (quoth Panurge) consult with and be advised by a Dumb
Woman, were it not that I am afraid of two things. The first is, That the
greater part of Women, whatever it be that they see, do always represent unto
their Fancies, think and imagine, that it has some relation to the sugared
entering of the goodly Ithypallos, and graffing in the Cleft of the overturned
Tree, the quick-set Imp of the Pin of Copulation. Whatever Signs, Shows or
Gestures we shall make, or whatever our Behavior, Carriage or Demeanor shall
happen to be in their view and Presence, they will interpret the whole in
reference to the act of Androgynation, and the culbatizing Exercise, by which
means we shall be abusively disappointed of our Designs, in regard that she
will take all our Signs for nothing else but Tokens and Representations of our
Desire to entice her unto the Lists of a Cyprian Combat, or Catsenconny
Skirmish.

Do you remember what happened at Rome two hundred and threescore Years after the
Foundation thereof? A young Roman Gentleman encountering by chance at the Foot
of Mount Celion with a beautiful Latin Lady named Verona, who from her very
Cradle upwards had always been both deaf and dumb, very civilly asked her, (not
without a Chironomatick Italianising of his Demand, with various Jectigation of
his Fingers, and other Gesticulations, as yet customary amongst the Speakers of
that Country) what Senators in her Descent from the top of the Hill she had met
with going up thither. For you are to conceive, that he knowing no more of her
Deafness than Dumbness, was ignorant of both. She in the mean time, who neither
heard nor understood so much as one word of what he had said, straight
imagined, by all that she could apprehend in the lovely Gesture of his manual
Signs, that what he then required of her was, what her self had a great mind
to, even that which a Young Man does naturally desire of a Woman. Then was it,
that by Signs (which in all occurrences of Venerial Love are incomparably more
attractive, valid and efficacious than Words) she beckned to him to come along
with her to her House; which when he had done, she drew him aside to a privy
Room, and then made a most lively alluring Sign unto him, to show that the Game
did please her. Whereupon, without any more Advertisement, or so much as the
uttering of one Word on either side, they fell to, and bringuardised it lustily.

The other Cause of my being averse from consulting with dumb Women, is, that
to our Signs they would make no answer at all, but suddenly fall backwards in a
divarication posture, to intimate thereby unto us the reality of their consent
to the supposed motion of our tacit Demands. Or if they should chance to make
any contre-signs responsory to our Propositions, they would prove so foolish,
impertinent, and ridiculous, that by them our selves should easily judge their
thoughts to have no excursion beyond the duffling Academy. You know very well
how at Croquiniole, when the religious Nun, sister Fatbum, was made big with
Child by the young Stifly-Stantor, her Pregnancy came to be known, and she
cited by the Abbess, and in a full Convention of the Convent, accused of
Incest. Her excuse was, That she did not consent thereto, but that it was done
by the violence and impetuous force of the Friar Stifly-stand-to't. Hereto the
Abbess very austerely replying, Thou naughty wicked Girl, why did thou not
cry, a Rape, a Rape, then should all of us have run to thy Succor. Her answer
was, That the Rape was committed in the Dorter, where she durst not cry,
because it was a place of sempiternal Silence. But (quoth the Abbess) thou
roguish Wench, why did not thou then make some sign to those that were in the
next Chamber beside thee? To this she answered, That with her Buttocks she made
a sign unto them, as vigorously as she could, yet never one of them did so much
as offer to come to her help and assistance. But (quoth the Abbess) thou scurvy
baggage, why did not thou tell it me immediately after the perpetration of
the Fact, that so we might orderly, regularly, and canonically have accused
him? I would have done so, had the case been mine, for the clearer
manifestation of mine Innocence. I truly, Madam, would have done the like with
all my heart and soul, (quoth Sister Fatbum) but that fearing I should remain
in Sin, and in the hazard of Eternal Damnation, if prevented by a sudden Death,
I did confess my self to the Father Friar before he went out of the Room, who
for my Penance, enjoined me not to tell it, or reveal the matter unto any. It
were a most enormous and horrid Offense, detestable before God and the Angels,
to reveal a Confession: such an abominable Wickedness would have possibly
brought down Fire from Heaven, wherewith to have burnt the whole Nunnery, and
sent us all headlong to the bottomless Pit, to bear company with Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram. You will not (quoth Pantagruel) with all your Jesting make me
laugh; I know that all Monks, Friars, and Nuns had rather violate and infringe
the highest of the Commandments of God, then break the least of their
Provincial Statutes.

Take you therefore Goatsnose, a Man very fit for your present purpose; for he
is, and has been, both dumb and deaf from the very remotest Infancy of his
Childhood.

CHAP. XX. How Goatsnose by signs makes answer to Panurge.
GOatsnose being sent for, came the day thereafter to Pantagruel's Court; at
his arrival to which Panurge gave him a fat Calf, the half of a Hog, two
Punchions of Wine, one Load of Corn, and thirty Franks of small Money: then
having brought him before Pantatgruel, in presence of the Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber, he made this sign unto him. He yawned along time, and in yawning
made without his mouth with the thumb of his right hand the figure of the Greek
Letter Tau by frequent reiterations. Afterward he lifted up his eyes to
Heavenwards, then turned them in his Head like a Shee-goat in the painful fit
of an absolute Birth, in doing whereof he did cough and sigh exceeding heavily:
This done, after that he had made demonstration of the want of his Codpiece, he
from under his shirt took his Placket-racket in a full gripe, making it
therewithal clack very melodiously betwixt his Thighs: then no sooner had he
with his Body stooped a little forwards, and bowed his left Knee, but that
immediately thereupon holding both his Arms on his Breast, in a loose faintlike
Posture, the one over the other, he paused awhile. Goatsnose looked wistly upon
him, and having heedfully enough viewed him all over, he lifted up into the Air
his left Hand, the whole fingers whereof he retained fist-ways closed together,
except the Thumb and the Forefinger, whose Nails he softly joined and coupled
to one another. I understand (quoth Pantagruel) what he means by that sign:
it denotes marriage, and withal the number thirty, according to the Profession
of Pythagorians, you will be married. Thanks to you (quoth Panurge) in turning
himself toward Goatsnose, my little Sewer, pretty Masters-mate, dainty Baily,
curious Sergeant-Marshal, and jolly Catchpole-leader. Then did he lift higher
up than before his said left Hand, stretching out all the five Fingers thereof,
and severing them as wide from one another as he possibly could get done. Here
(says Pantagruel) does he more amply and fully insinuate unto us, by the Token
which he shows forth of the Quinary number, that you shall be married. Yea,
that you shall not only be affianced, betrothed, wedded, and married, but that
you shall furthermore cohabit, and live jollily and merrily with your Wife; for
Pythagoras called five the Nuptial Number, which together with marriage,
signifies the Consummation of Matrimony, because it is composed of a ternary
the first of the odd, and binary, the first of the even Numbers, as of a Male
and Female knit and united together. In very deed it was the fashion of old in
the City of Rome at Marriage Festivals to light five wax Tapers, nor was it
permitted to kindle any more at the magnifick Nuptials of the most Potent and
Wealthy; nor yet any fewer at the penurious Weddings of the Poorest and most
Abject of the World. Moreover in times past, the Heathen, or Paynius implored
the Assistance of five Deities, or of one helpful (at least) in five several
good Offices to those that were to be married: of this sort were the Nuptial
Jove, Juno, President of the Feast, the fair Venus, Pitho the Goddess of
Eloquence and Persuasion, and Diana, whose aid and succor was required to the
labor of Childbearing. Then shouted Panurge, O the gentile Goatsnose, I will
give him a Farm near Gnais, and a Windmill hard by Mirebalais. Hereupon the
dumb Fellow sneezeth with an impetuous vehemence, and huge concussion of the
Spirits of the whole Body, withdrawing himself in so doing with a jerting turn
toward the left hand. By the Body of a Fox new slain (quoth Pantagruel) what
is that? this makes nothing for your advantage; for he betokens thereby that
your marriage will be inauspicious and unfortunate. This snezing (according to
the Doctrine of Terpsion, is the Socratick Demon) if done toward the right
side, it imports and portendeth, that boldly, and with all assurance, one may
go whither he will, and do what he lists, according to what deliberation he
shall be pleased to have thereupon taken: his entires in the beginning,
progress in his proceedings, and success in the events and issues will be all
lucky, good, and happy. The quite contrary thereto is thereby implied and
presaged, if it be done toward the left. You (quoth Panurge) do take always
the matter at the worst, and continually, like another Davus, casts in new
disturbances and obstructions; nor ever yet did I know this old paultry
Terpsion worthy of citation, but in points only of Cosenage and Imposture.
Nevertheless (quoth Pantagruel). Cicero has written I know not what to the
same purpose in his Second Book of Divination.

Panurge then turning himself toward Goatsnose made this sign unto him. He
inverted his Eyelids upwards, wri^ched his Jaws from the right to the left
side, and drew forth his Tongue half out of his Mouth; this done, he posited
his left Hand wholly open (the mid-finger wholly excepted, which was
perpendicularly placed upon the Palm thereof) and set it just in the room where
his Codpiece had been. Then did he keep his right Hand altogether shut up in a
fist, save only the Thumb, which he straight turned backwards directly under
the right Arm-pit, and settled it afterward on that most eminent part of the
Buttocks which the Arabs call the Alkatim. Suddenly thereafter he made this
interchange, he held his right Hand after the manner of the left, and posited
it on the place wherein his Codpiece sometime was, and retaining his left Hand
in the form and fashion of the right, he placed it upon his Alkatim: this
altering of Hands did he reiterate nine several times; at the last whereof, he
reseated his Eyelids into their own first natural position. Then doing the like
also with his Jaws and Tongue, he did cast a squinting look upon Goatsnose,
diddering and shivering his Chaps, as Apes use to do nowadays, and Rabbets,
whilst almost starved with hunger, they are eating Oats in the Sheaf.

Then was it that Goatsnose lifting up into the Air his right Hand wholly open
and displayed, put the Thumb thereof, even close unto its first articulation,
between the two third Joints of the middle and ring fingers, pressing about the
said Thumb thereof very hard with them both, and whilst the remainent Joints
were contracted and shrunk in toward the Wrist, he stretched forth with as
much straitness as he could, the fore and little fingers. That hand thus framed
and disposed of, he laid and posited upon Panurge's Navel, moving withal
continually the aforesaid Thumb, and bearing up, supporting, or under-propping
that Hand upon the above specified, and fore and little fingers, as upon two
Legs. Thereafter did he make in this posture his Hand by little and little,
and by degrees and pauses, successively to mount from athwart the Belly to the
Stomach, from whence he made it to ascend to the Breast, even upwards to
Panurges's Neck, still gaining ground, till having reached his Chin he had put
within the concave of his Mouth his aforementioned Thumb: then fiercely
brandishing the whole Hand, which he made to rub and grate against his Nose, he
heaved it further up, and made the fashion, as if with the Thumb thereof he
would have put out his Eyes. With this Panurge grew a little angry, and went
about to withdraw, and rid himself from this ruggedly untoward dumb Devil. But
Goatsnose in the mean time prosecuting the intended purpose of his
Prognosticatory Response, touched very rudely with the abovementioned shaking
Thumb, now his Eyes, then his Forehead, and after that, the borders and corners
of his Cap. At last Panurge cried out saying* Before God, Master-Fool, if you
do not let me alone, or that you will presume to vex me any more, you shall
receive from the best hand I have a Mask, wherewith to cover your rascally
scoundred Face, yo^ paultry shitten Varlet. Then said Friar Ihon, he is deaf,
and does not understand what thou say unto him. Bul^iballook, make sign to
him of a hail of Fisticuffs upon the Muzzle.

What the Devil (quoth Panurge) means this busy restless Fellow? what is it
that this Polypragmonetick Ardelione to all the Fiends of Hell does aim at? he
has almost thrust out mine Eyes, as if he had been to potch them in a Skillet
with Butter and Eggs, by God, da Iurandi, I will feast you with flirts and raps
on the Snout, interlarded with a double row of bobs and finger filipings? Then
did he leave him in giving him by way of Salve a Volley of Farts for his
Farewell. Goatsnose perceiving Panurge thus to slip away from him, got before
him, and by mere strength enforcing him to stand, made this sign unto him. He
let fall his right Arm toward his Knee on the same side as low as he could, and
raising all the fingers of that Hand into a close fist, past his dexterer Thumb
betwixt the foremost and mid-fingers thereto belonging. Then scrubbing and
swindging a little with his left Hand along, and upon the uppermost in the
very bought of the Elbow of the said dexter Arm, the whole Cubit thereof by
leisure fair, and softly, at these thumpatory warnings, did raise and elevate
it self even to the Elbow, and above it, on a sudden did he then let it fall
down as low as before: and after that, at certain intervals and such spaces of
time, raising and abasing it, he made a show thereof to Panurge. This so
incensed Panurge, that he forthwith lifted his Hand to have stricken him the
dumb Royster, and given him a sound whirret on the Ear, but that the respect
and reverence which he carried to the Presence of Pantagruel restrained his
Choler, and kept his Fury within bounds and limits. Then said Pantagruel, If
the bare signs now vex and trouble you, how much more grievously will you be
perplexed and disquieted with the real things, which by them are represented
and signified. All Truths agree, and are consonant with one another; this dumb
Fellow Prophesies and Foretells that you will be married, cuckolded, beaten
and robbed. As for the marriage (quoth Panurge) I yield thereto, and
acknowledge the verity of that point of his Prediction; as for the rest I
utterly abjure and deny it: and believe Sir, I beseech you, if it may please
you so to do, that in the matter of Wives and Horses, never any Man was
predestined to a better Fortune than I.

CHAP. XXI. How Panurge consulteth with an old French Poet, named Raminagrobis.
I Never thought (said Pantagruel) to have encountered with any Man so
headstrong in his Apprehensions, or in his Opinions so wilful, as I have found
you to be, and see you are. Nevertheless, the better to clear and extricate
your Doubts, let us try all courses, and leave no stone unturned, nor wind
unsailed by. Take good heed to what I am to say unto you, the Swans, which are
Fouls consecrated to Apollo, never chant but in the hour of their approaching
Death, especially in the Meander Flood, which is a River that runs along
some of the Territories of Phrygia. This I say, because Elianus and Alexander
Wyndius write, that they had seen several Swans in other places die, but never
heard any of them sing, or chant before their death. However, it passes for
current that the imminent death of a Swan is presaged by his foregoing Song,
and that no Swan dies until preallably he have Sung.

After the same manner Poets, who are under the protection of Apollo, when they
are drawing near their latter end, do ordinarily become Prophets, and by the
inspiration of that God sing sweetly, in vaticinating things which are to come.
It has been likeways told me frequently, That old decrepit Men upon the Brinks
of Charon's Banks, do usher their Decease with a disclosure, all at ease (to
those that are desirous of such Informations) of the determinate and assured
truth of future Accidents and Contingencies. I remember also that Aristophanes,
in a certain Comedy of his, calls folks Sybils, (...), for as when being upon
a Pee^ by the Shore, we see afar off Mariners, Sea faring men, and other
Travelers along the curled Waves of Azure Thetis within their Ships, we then
consider them in silence only, and seldom proceed any further than to wish them
a happy and prosperous Arrival: but when they do approach near to the Haven,
and come to wet their Keels within their Harbor, then both with words and
gestures we salute them, and heartily congratulate their Access safe to the
Port wherein we are our selves. Just so the Angels, Heroes, and good Demons
(according to the Doctrine of Platonicks) when they see Mortals drawing near
unto the Harbor of the Grave, as the most sure and calmest Port of any, full
of Repose, Ease, Rest, Tranquillity; free from the Troubles and Sollicitudes of
this tumultuous and tempestuous World; then is it that they with alacrity Hale
and Salute them, Cherish and Comfort them, and speaking to them lovingly, begin
even then to bless them with Illuminations, and to communicate unto them the
abstrusest Mysteries of Divination. I will not offer here to confound your
Memory by quoting antic Examples of Isaac, of Jacob, of Patroclus toward
Hector, of Hector toward Achilles, of Polymnester toward Agamemnon, of
Hecuba, of the Phodian renowned by Possidonius, of Calanus the Indian toward
Alexander the Great, of Orodes toward Mezentius, and of many others; it shall
suffice for the present, that I commemorate unto you the learned and valiant
Knight and Cavalier William of Ballay* late Lord of Langcy, who died on the
Hill of Tarara, the Tenth of January, in the Climacterick year of his Age, and
of our Supputation 1543. according to the Roman Account. The last three or four
hours of his Life he did employ in the serious utterance of a very pithy
Discourse, whilst with a clear Judgment, and Spirit void of all Trouble, he did
foretell several important Things, whereof a great deal is come to pass, and
the rest we wait for. Howbeit, his Prophesies did at that time seem unto us
somewhat strange, absurd, and unlikely; because there did not then appear any
sign of efficacy enough to engage our Faith to the belief of what he did
prognosticate*

We have hear near to the Town of Villomer, a Man that is both Old and a Poet,
to wit, Raminogrobis, who to his Second Wife espoused my Lady Broadsow, on whom
he begot the fair Basoche* it has been told me, he is a dying, and so near
unto his latter end, that he is almost upon the very last moment, point, and
article thereof; repair thither as fast as you can, and be ready to give an
attentive Ear to what he shall chant unto you: it may be, that you shall obtain
from him what you desire, and that Apollo will be pleased, by his means, to
clear your scruples. I am content (quoth Panurge) let us go thither Epistemon,
and that both instantly and in all have, least otherways his Death prevent our
coming. Will thou come along with us, Friar Ihon? Yes, that I will, (quoth
Friar Ihon) right heartily to do thee a Courtesy, my Billy-ballocks; for I
love thee with the best of my Milt and Liver. Thereupon, incontinently, without
any further lingering to the way, they all three went, and quickly thereafter
(for they made good speed) arriving at the Poetical Habitation, they found the
jolly Old Man, albeit in the Agony of his Departure from this World, looking
cheerfully, with an open Countenance, splendid Aspect, and Behavior full of
alacrity. After that Panurge had very civilly saluted him, he in a free Gift
did present him with a Gold*Ring, which he even then put upon the Medical
Finger of his Left Hand, in the Collet or Bezle whereof was inchased an
Oriental Sapphire, very fair and large. Then, in imitation of Socrates, did he
make an Oblation unto him of a fair White Cock; which was no sooner set upon
the Tester of his Bed, then that with a high raised Head and Crest, lustily
shaking his Feather-Coat, he crowed Stentoriphonically loud. This done, Panurge
very courteously required of him, that he would vouchsafe to favor him with
the Grant and Report of his Sense and Judgment, touching the future Destiny of
his intended Marriage. For answer hereto, when the honest Old Man had forthwith
commanded Pen, Paper, and Ink to be brought unto him, and that he was at the
same Call conveniently served with all the three, he wrote these following
Verses*

Take, or not take her,
Off, or on:
Handy-dandy is your Lot.
When her Name you write, you blot.
It Is undone, when all is done,
Ended e're it was begun:
Hardly Gallop, if you Trot,
Set not forward when you Run,
Nor be single, though alone,
Take, or not take her.
Before you Eat, begin to Fast;
For what shall be was never past.
Say, unsay, gainsay, save your Breath*
Then wish at once her Life and Death.
Take, or not take her.
These Lines he gave out of his own Hands unto them, saying unto them, Go my
Lads in Peace, the great God of the highest Heavens be your Guardian and
Preserver; and do not offer any more to trouble or disquiet me with this or any
other Business whatsoever. I have this same very day (which is the last both of
May* and of me) with a great deal of labor, toil, and difficulty, ^^ased out
of my House a rabble of filthy, unclean, and plagui^y pestilentious Rake ^elts,
black Beasts, dusk, dun, white, ash-colored, speckled, and a foul Vermin of
other hues, whose obtrusive importunity would not permit me to die at my own
case: for by fraudulent and deceitful pricklings, ravenous, Harpy-like
graspings, waspish stingings, and suchlike unwelcome Approaches, forged in the
Shop of I know not what kind of Insatiabilities; they went about to withdraw,
and call me out of those sweet Thoughts, wherein I was already beginning to
repose myself, and acquiesce in the Contemplation and Vision; yea, almost in
the very touch and taste of the Happiness and Felicity which the good God has
prepared for his faithful Saints, and Elect in the other Life, and State of
Immortality. Turn out of their Courses, and eschew them, step forth of their
ways, and do not resemble them, mean while, let me be no more troubled by you,
but leave me now in silence, I beseech you.

CHAP. XXII. How Panurge Patrocinates and Defends the Order of the Begging
Friars.
PAnurge, at his issuing forth of Raminagobris's Chamber, said, as if he had
been horribly affrighted, by the Virtue of God, I believe that he is an
Heretic, the Devil take me, if I do not; he does so villanously rail at the
Mendicant Friars* and Iacobins: who are the two Hemispheres of the Christian
World; by whose Gyronomonick Circumbilvaginations, as by two Celivagous
Filopendulums* all the Autonomatick Metagrobolism of the Romish Church, when
tottering and emblustricated with the Gibble*gabble Gibbrish of this odious
Error and Heresy, is homocentrically poysed. But what harm in the Devil's
Name, have these poor Devils the Capucins and Minims done unto him? Are not
these beggarly Devils sufficiently wretched already? Who can imagine that these
poor Snakes, the very Extracts of Ichthyophagy, are not thoroughly enough
besmoaked and besmeared with Misery, Distress, and Calamity? Do thou think,
Friar Ihon, by thy Faith, that he is in the State of Salvation? He goes,
before God, as surely damned to Thirty thousand baskets full of Devils, as a
Pruning-Bill to the lopping of a Vine-Branch.

To revile with opprobrious Speeches the good and courageous Props and Pillars
of the Church, is that to be called a Poetical Fury? I cannot rest satisfied
with him, he sins grossly, and blasphemeth against the true Religion. I am
very much offended at his scandalizing Words, and contumelious Obloquy. I do
not care a straw (quoth Friar Ihon) for what he has said; for although every
body should twit and jerk them, it were but a just retaliation, seeing all
Persons are served by them with the like Sauce: therefore do I pretend no
Interest therein. Let us see nevertheless what he has written. Panurge very
attentively read the Paper which the Old Man had penned, then said to his two
Fellow-Travellers, The poor Drinker doteth: howsoever, I excuse him; for that I
believe he is now drawing near to the end, and final closure of his Life: Let
us go make his Epitaph.

By the Answer which he has given us, I am not, I protest, one jot wiser then
I was, hearken here Epistemon, my little Bully, do not thou hold him to be
very Resolute in his Responsory Verdicts? he is a witty, quick, and subtle
Sophister. I will lay an even Wager, that he is a miscreant Apostate. By the
Belly of a stalled Ox, how careful he is not to be mistaken in his words.

He answered but by Disjunctives, therefore can it not be true which he says;
for the verity of such like Propositions is inherent only in one of its two
Members* O the ^^zening Pratler that he is* I wonder if Sa^^iago of Bressure be
one of these ^ogging Shirks* Such was of old (quoth Epistemon) the Custom of
the grand Vaticinator and Prophet Teres^as, who used always (by way of a
Preface) to say openly and plainly, at the beginning of his Divinations and
Predictions, that what he was to tell would either come to pass, or not: And
such is truly the style of all prudently presaging Prognosticators. He was
nevertheless (quoth Panurge) so unfortunately misadventrous in the Lot of his
own Destiny* that I^^^ thrust out both his eyes.

Yes, (answered Epistemon) and that merely out of a spite and spleen, for
having pronounced his award more veritably then she, upon the Question which
was merrily proposed by Jupiter. But (quoth Panurge) what Arch-Devil is it that
has possessed this Master Raminagrobis, that so unreasonably, and without any
occasion, he should have so snappishly, and bitterly inveighed against these
poor honest Father, Iacobins, Minors, and Minims? It vexes me grievously, I
assure you; nor am I able to conceal my indignation. He has transgressed most
enormously; his Soul goes infallibly to thirty thousand Panniers full of
Devils.

I understand you not (quoth Epistemon) and it disliketh me very much, that you
should* so absurdly and perversely interpret that of the Friar Mendicants, which
by the harmless Poet was spoken of black Beasts, dun, and other sorts of other
colored Animals. He is not in my Opinion guilty of such a sophistical and
fantastic Allegory, as by that Phrase of his to have meaned the Begging
Brothers; he in down right Terms speaks absolutely and properly of Fleas,
Punies, Handworms, Flies, Gnats, and other suchlike scur^y Vermin, whereof
some are black, some du^^, some ash-colored, some tawny, and some brown and
dusky, all noisome, molesting, tyrannous, cumbersome, and unpleasing Creatures,
not only to sick and diseased Folks, but to those also who are of a sound,
vigorous, and healthful Temperament and Constitution. It is not unlike, that he
may have the Asearids, and the Lumbricks, and Worms within the Intrails of his
Body. Possibly does he suffer (as is frequent and usual amongst the Egyptians,
together with all those who inhabit the Erythraean Confines, and dwell along
the Shores and Coasts of the Red Sea) some sour prickings, and sma^^ stingings
in his Arms and Legs of those little speckled Dragons, which the Arabians call
Meden. You are to blame for offering to expound his Words otherways, and wrong
the ingenuous Poet, and outragiously abuse and miscall the said Fraters* by an
imputation of baseness under servedly laid to their charge. We still should in
suchlike Discourses of fatiloquent Southsayers, interpret all things to the
best. Will you teach me (quoth Panurge) how to discern Flies among Milk, or
show your Father the way* how to beget Children: He is, by the Virtue of God,
an arrant Heretic, a resolute formal Heretic; I say, a rooted combustible
Heretic, one as fit to burn as the little wooden Clock at Rochel. His Soul
goes to Thirty thousand Carts-full of Devils. Would you know whither?
Cocks-body, my Friend, straight under Proserpina's Closestool, to the very
middle of the self-same infernal Pan, within which she, by an ex^rementitious
evacuation voideth the fecal stuff of her stinching Clysters, and that just
upon the left side of the great Cauldron of three fathom height, hard by the
Claws and Talons of Lucifer, in the very darkest of the passage which leads
toward the Black Chamber of Demigorgon. Oh the Villain!

CHAP. XXIII. How Panurge makes the motion of a Return to Raminagrobis.
LET us return, quoth Panurge, not ceasing, to the uttermost of our Abilities,
to ply him with wholesome Admonitions, for the furtherance of his Salvation.
Let us go back for God's sake, let us go in the Name of God: it will be a very
meritorious Work, and of great Charity, in us to deal so in the matter, and
provide so well for him, that albeit he come to lose both Body and Life, he may
at least escape the risk and danger of the eternal Damnation of his Soul. We
will by our holy persuasions bring him to a sense and feeling of his Escapes,
induce him to acknowledge his Faults, move him to a cordial Repentance of his
Errors, and stir up in him such a sincere. Contrition of Heart for his
Offenses, as will prompt him with all earnestness to cry Mercy, and to beg
Pardon at the Hands of the good Fathers, as well of the absent, as of ^uch as
are present: Whereupon we will take Instrument formally and authentically
extended, to the end he be not, after his Decease, declared an Heretic, and
condemned, as were the Hobgoblins of the Provost's Wife of Orleans, to the
undergoing of such Punishments, Pains and Tortures, as are due to, and
inflicted on those that inhabit the horrid Cells of the infernal Regions: and
withal incline, instigate, and persuade him to bequeath, and leave in Legacy
(by way of an amends and satisfaction for the outrage and injury done) to those
good Religious Fathers, throughout all the Convents, Cloisters, and Monastries
of this Province, many Bribes, a great deal of Mass-singing, store of Obits,
and that sempiternally, on the Anniversary Day of his Decease, every one of
them all be furnished with a quintuple Allowance: and that the great Borrachoe,
replenished with the best Liquor, trudge apace along the Tables, as well of the
young Duckling, Monkito's, Lay-Brothers, and lowermost degree of the
Abbey-Lubbards, as of the Learned Priests, and Reverend Clerks. The very
meanest of the Novices, and Mitiants unto the Order being equally admitted to
the benefit of those Funerary and Obsequial Festivals, with the aged Rectors,
and professed Fathers; this is the surest ordinary means, whereby from God he
may obtain forgiveness.

Ho, ho, I am quite mistaken, I digress from the purpose, and fly out of my
Discourse, as if my Spirits were a wool-gathering. The Devil take me, if I go
thither. Virtue, God, the Chamber is already full of Devils. O what a swinging,
thwacking Noise is now amongst them! O the terrible Coyl that they keep!
Hearken, do you not hear the rustling thumping bustle of their Strokes and
Blows, as they scuffle with one another, like true Devils indeed, who shall
gulp up the Raminogrobis Soul, and be the first Bringer of it, whilst it is
hot, to Monsieur Lucifer. Beware, and get you hence: for my part, I will not go
thither; the Devil roast me if I go. Who knows but that these hungry mad Devils
may in the have of their rage and fury of their impatience, take a quid for a
quo, and instead of Raminagrobis snatch up poor Panurge frank and free? Though
formerly, when I was deep in Debt, they always failed. Get you hence: I will
not go thither. Before God, the very bare apprehension thereof is like to kill
me. To be in the place where there are greedy, famished, and hunger-starved
Devils; amongst factious Devils: amidst trading and trafficking Devils: O the
Lord preserve me! Get you hence, I dare pawn my Credit on it, that no Iacobin,
Cordelier, Carme Capucin, Theatin, or Minim, will bestow any personal Presence
at his Interment. The wiser they, because he has ordained nothing for them in
his latter Will and Testament.

The Devil take me, if I go thi^her; if he be damned, to his own loss and
hindrance be it. What the Deuce moved him to be so snappish and depravedly bent
against the good Fathers of the true Religion? Why did he cast them off, reject
them, and drive them quite out of his Chamber, even in that very nick of time
when he stood in greatest need of the aid, suffrage, and assistance of their
devout Prayers, and holy Admonitions? Why did not he by Testament leave them,
at least, some jolly Lumps and Cantles of substantial Meat, a parcel of
Cheek-puffing Victuals, and a little Belly-Timber, and Provision for the Guts
of these poor Folks, who have nothing but their Life in this World.

Let him go thither, who will; the Devil take me, if I go; for if I should, the
Devil would not fail to snatch me up. Cancro: Ho, the Pox! Get you hence, Friar
Ihon; Art thou content that Thirty thousand Waineload of Devils should get away
with thee at this same very instant? If thou be, at my Request, do these Three
things: First, Give me thy Purse; for besides, that thy Money is marked with
Crosses, and the Cross is an Enemy to Charms, the same may befall to thee,
which not long ago happened to Ihon Dodin, Collector of the Excise of Coudray,
at the Ford of Vede, when the Soldiers broak the Planks. This moneyed Fellow
meeting at the very Brink of the Bank of the Ford, with Friar Adam Crankcod, a
Franciscan Observantin of Mirebeau, promised him a new Frock, provided, that in
the transporting of him over the Water, he would bear him upon his Neck and
Shoulders, after the manner of carrying dead Goats: for he was a lusty,
strong-limb'd, sturdy Rogue.

The Condition being agreed upon, Friar Crankcod trusseth himself up to his
very Ballocks, and lays upon his Back like a fair little Saint Christopher,
the load of the said Supplicant Dodin, and so carried him gayly and with a good
Will; as Aeneas bore his Father Anchises through the Conflagration of Troy,
singing in the mean while a pretty Avemaris Stella. When they were in the very
deepest place of all the Foord, a little above the Master-wheel of the
Water-Mill, he asked if he had any* Coin about him. Yes, (quoth Dodin) a whole
Bag full; and that he needed not to mistrust his Ability in the performance of
the Promise, which he had made unto him, concerning a new Frock. How* (quoth
Friar Cranckcod) thou know well enough, that by the express Rules, Canons
and Injunctions of our Order, we are forbidden to carry on us any kind of
Money: Thou art truly unhappy, for having made me in this point to commit a
heinous Trespass. Why did thou notleave thy Purse with the Miller* Without
fail thou shall presently receive thy Reward for it; and if ever hereafter I
may but lay hold upon thee within the Limits of our Chancel at Mirebeau, tho^
shall have the: Miserere even to the Vitulos* With this suddenly discharging
himself of his Burden, he throws me down your Dodin headlong.

Take Example by this Dodin, my dear Friend Friar John, to the end that the
Devils may the better carry thee away at thine own ease. Give me thy Purse.
Carry no manner of Cross upon thee. Therein lies an evident and manifestly
apparent Danger: For if you have any Silver coined with a Cross upon it, they
will cast thee down headlong upon some Rocks; as the Eagles use to do with the
Tortoises for the breaking of their Shells, as the bald Pate of the Poet
Eschilus can sufficiently bear witness. Such a Fall would hurt thee very sore
by Sweet Bully, and I would be sorry for it; or otherways they will let thee
fall, and tumble down into the high swollen Waves of some capacious Sea, I know
not where; but I warrant thee far enough hence, (as Icarus fell) which from thy
Name would afterward get the Denomination of the Funnelian Sea.

Secondly, Out of Debt: For the Devils carry a great liking to those that are
out of Debt. I have sore felt the experience thereof in mine own particular;
for now the lecherous Varlets are always wooing me, courting me, and making
much of me, which they never did when I was all to pieces. The Soul of one in
Debt is insipid, dry, and heretical altogether.

Thirdly, With the Cowl and Domino de Grobis, return to Raminagrobis* and in
case, being thus qualified, Thirty Thousand Boats full of Devils forthwith come
not to carry thee quite away, I shall be content to be at the charge of paying
for the Pint and Faggot. Now if for the more Security thou would some
Associate to bear thee Company, let not me be the Comrade thou searchest for,
think not to get a Fellow-Traveller of me; nay, do not, I advise thee for the
b^st. Get you hence; I will not go thither; the Devil take me if I go.
Notwithstanding all the Fright that you are in, (quoth Fr^ar Ihon) I would not
care so much, ^^ might possibly be expected I should, if I once had but my
Sword in my hand* Thou have verily hit the Nail on the Head, (quoth Panurge)
and speak li^^ a Learned Doctor, subtle, and well skilled in the Art of
Devilry.

At the time when I was a Student in the University of Tolouse, that same
Raverend Father in the Devil, Pio^rr^s, ^^ctor of the Diabological Faculty, w^^
wont to tell us, that the Devils did naturally fear the bright gl^ncing of
Swords* as much as the Splendor and Light of the Sun. In Confirmation of the
Verity whereof he related this Story, That Hercules at his Descent into Hell to
all the Devils of those Regions, did not by half so much terrify them with his
Club and Lion's Skin, as afterward Aeneas did with his clear shining Armor
upon him, and his Sword in his hand well furbished and unrusted, by the Aid,
Council and Assistance of the Sybilla Cumana. That was perhaps the reason why
the Senior Ihon Iacomo di Trivulcio, whilst he was a dying at Chartres, called
for his Cutlass, and died with a Drawn Sword in his hand, laying about him
along and athwart around the Bed, and every where within his reach, like a
stout, doughty, valorous and Knight-like Cavaleer: By which resolute manner of
Fence he scared away and put to flight all the Devils that were then lying in
wait for his Soul at the passage of his Death. When the Malsorets and Cabalists
are asked, Why it is that none of all the Devils do at any time enter into the
Terestrial Paradise? Their Answer has been, is, and will be still, That there
is a Cherubin standing at the Gate thereof with a Flame-like glistering Sword
in his hand. Although to speak in the true Diabological Sense or Phrase of
Toledo, I must needs confess and acknowledge, that veritably the Devils cannot
be killed, or die by the stroke of a Sword. I do nevertheless avow and
maintain, according to the Doctrine of the said Diabology, that they may suffer
a Solution of Continuity; (as if with thy Shable thou should cut athwart the
Flamme of a burning Fire, or the gross opacous Exhalations of a thick and
obscure Smoke) and cry out, like very Devils, at their Sense and Feeling of
this Dissolution, which in real Deed I must averr and affirm is devilishly
painful, smarting and dolorous.

When thou see the impetuous Shock of two Armies, and vehement Violence of
the Push in their horrid Encounter with one another; do thou think,
Balockass^, that so horrible a noise as is heard there proceeds from the
Voice and Shouts of Men? The dashing and joulting of Harnish? The clattering
and clashing of Armies? The hacking and slashing of Battle-Axes? The justling
and crashing of Pikes? The bustling and breaking of Lances? The Clamor and
Skrieks of the Wounded? The sound and din of Drums? The Clangour and Shrilness
of Trumpets? The neighing and rushing in of Horses? with the fearful Claps and
thundering of all sorts of Guns, from the Double Canon to the Pocket Pistol
inclusively? I cannot, Goodly, deny, but that in these various things which I
have rehearsed, there may be somewhat occasionative of the huge Yell and
Tintamarre of the two engaged Bodies.

But the most fearful and tumultuous Coil and Stir, the terriblest and most
boisterous Garboil and Hurry, the chiefest rustling Black Santus of all, and
most principal Hurly Burly, springs from the grievously plangorous howling
and lowing of Devils, who Pell-mell, in a handover-head Confusion, waiting for
the poor Souls of the maimed and hurt Soldiery, receive unawares some Strokes
with Swords, and so by those means suffering a Solution of, and Division in the
Continuity of their Aerial and Invisible Substances: As if some Lackey,
snatching at the Lardslices, stuck in a piece of Roast-meat on the Spit, should
get from Mr. Greazyfist a good rap on the Knuckles with a Cudgel, they cry out
and shout like Devils. Even as Mars did, when he was hurt by Diomedes at the
Siege of Troy, who (as Homer testifies of him) did then raise his Voice more
horrifically loud, and sonoriferously high, than ten thousand Men together
would have been able to do. What makes all this for our present purpose? I
have been speaking here of well-furbished Armor and bright shining Swords. But
so is it not (Friar Ihon) with thy Weapon; for by a long discontinuance of
Work, ceslation from Labor, desisting from making it officiate, and putting it
into that practice wherein it had been formerly accustomed; and in a word, for
want of occupation, it is, upon my Faith, become more rusty than the Keyhole
of an old Poudering-Tub. Therefore it is expedient that you do one of these
two, either furbish your Weapon bravely, and as it ought to be, or otherwise
have a care that in the rusty case it is in, you do not presume to return to
the House of Raminagrobis. For my part, I vow I will not go thither, the Devil
take me if I go.

CHAP. XXIV. How Panurge consulteth with Epistemon.
HAving left the Town of Villomere, as they were upon their return toward
Pantagruel, Panurge in addressing his Discourse to Epistemon, spoke thus: My
most ancient Friend and Gossip, thou see the perplexity of my Thoughts, and
know many Remedies for the removal thereof; art thou not able to help and
succor me? Epistemon thereupon taking the Speech in hand, represented unto
Panurge, how the open Voice and common Fame of the whole Country did run upon
no other Discourse, but the derision and mockery of his new Disguise; wherefore
his Counsel unto him was that he would in the first place be pleased to make
use of a little Hellebore, for the purging of his Brain of that peccant humor,
which through that extravagant and fantastic Mummery of his had furnished the
People with a too just occasion of flouting and gibbing, jeering and scoffing
him; and that next he would resume his ordinary Fashion of Accoutrement, and go
apparelled as he was wont to do. I am (quoth Panurge) my dear Gossip Epistemon,
of a mind and resolution to Marry, but am afraid of being a Cuckold, and to be
unfortunate in my Wedlock: For this cause have I made a Vow to young St.
Francis, (who at Plessiletours is much reverenced of all Women, earnestly cried
unto by them, and with great Devotion; for he was the first Founder of the
Confraternity of good Men, whom they naturally covet, affect and long for) to
wear Spectacles in my Cap, and to carry no Codpiece in my Breeches, until the
present Inquietude and Perturbation of my Spirits be fully settled.

Truly (quoth Epistemon) that is a pretty jolly Vow, of Thirteen to a Dozen: It
is a shame to you, and I wonder much at it, that you do not return unto your
self, and recall your Senses from this their wild swarving and straying abroad
to that rest and stilness which becomes a virtuous Man. This whimsical Conceit
of yours brings me to the remembrance of a solemn Promise made by the
Shaghaired Argives, who having in their Controversy against the Lacedaemonians
for the Terretory of Tyree lost the Battle, which they hoped should have
decided it for their Advantage, vowed to carry never any hair on their Heads,
till preallably they had recovered the loss of both their Honor and Lands: As
likewise to the memory of the Vow of a pleasant Spaniard called Michel Doris,
who vowed to carry in his Hat a piece of the Shin of his Leg, till he should be
revenged of him who had struck it off. Yet do not I know which of these two
deserves most to wear a Green and Yellow Hood with a Hares Ears tied to it,
either the aforesaid vainglorious Champion, or that Euguerrant, who having
forgot the art and manner of writing Histories, set down by the Samosatian
Philosopher* makes a most tediously long Narrative and Relation thereof: For
at the first reading of such a profuse Discourse, one would think it had been
broached for the introducing of a Story of great importance and moment
concerning the waging of some formidable War, or the notable change and
mutation of potent States and Kingdoms; but in conclusion, the World laugheth
at the capricious Champion, at the Englishman who had affronted him, as also
at their Scribler Euguerrant, more driveling at the Mouth than a Mustard-pot.
The Jest and Scorn thereof is not unlike to that of the Mountain of Horace,
which by the Poet was made to cry out and lament most enormously as a Woman in
the Pangs and Labor of Childbirth, at which deplorable and exorbitant Cries
and Lamentations the whole Neighborhood being assembled in expectation to see
some mavelous monstrous Production, could at last perceive no other but the
paultry ridiculous Mouse.

Your mousing (quoth Panurge) will not make me leave my musing why Folks should
be so frumpishly disposed, seeing I am certainly persuaded that some flout, who
merit to be flouted at; yet as my Vow imports so will I do. It is now a long
time since, by Jupiter Philos, we did swear Faith and Amity to one another:
Give me your Advice, and tell me your Opinion freely, Should I marry or no?
Truly (quoth Epistemon) the case is hazardous, and the danger so eminently
apparent, that I find my self too weak and insufficient to give you a punctual
and peremptory resolution therein; and if ever it was true, the Judgment is
difficult in matters of the Medicinal Art, what was said by Hippocrates of
Lango, it is certainly so in this case. True it is, that in my Brain there are
some rolling Fancies, by means whereof somewhat may be pitched upon of seeming
efficacy to the disintangling your mind of those dubious Apprehensions
wherewith it is perplexed; but they do not thoroughly satisfy me. Some of the
Platonic Sect affirm, that whosoever is able to see his proper Genius, may
know his own Destiny. I understand not their Doctrine; nor do I think that you
adhere to them; there is a palpable Abuse. I have seen the experience of it in
a very curious Gentleman of the Country of Estrangowre. This is one of the
Points* There is yet another not much better. If there were any Authority now
in the Oracles of Jupiter Ammon; of Apollo in Lebadia, Delphos, Delos, Cyrra,
Patara, Tegires, Preneste, Lycia, Colophon, or in the Castalian Fountain; near
Antiochia in Syria; between the Branchidians; of Bacchus, in Dodona; of Mercure
in Phares; near Parras; of Apis, in Egypt; of Serapis in Canorie; of Faunus in
Menalia, and Albunes near Tivoly; of Tiresias in Orchomenie; of Mosus in
Silicia; of Orpheus in Lisbos; and of Trophonius in Lucadia. I would in that
case advise you, and possibly not, to go thither for their Judgment concerning
the Design and Enterprise you have in hand. But you know that they are all of
them become as dumb as so many Fishes, since the Advent of that Savior King,
whose coming to this World has made all Oracles and Prophesies to cease; as
the approach of the Suns radiant Beams expels Goblins, Bugbears,
Hobthrushes, Broams, Schriech-Owl-Mates, Nightwalking Spirits, and Tenebrions.
These now are gone; but although they were as yet in continuance, and in the
same Power, Rule and Request that formerly they were, yet would not I counsel
you to be too credulous in putting any Trust in their Responses: Too many Folks
have been deceived thereby. It stands furthermore upon Record, how Agrippina
did charge the fair Lollia with the Crime of having interrogated the Oracle of
Apollo Clarius, to understand if she should be at any time married to the
Emperor Claudius; for which Cause she was first banished, and thereafter put to
a shameful and ignominious Death.

But (says Panurge) let us do better; the Ogygian Islands are not far distant
from the Haven of Sammalo: Let us, after that we shall have spoken to our King,
make a Voyage thither. In one of these four Isles, to wit, that which has its
primest Aspect toward the Sun setting, it is reported, (and I have read in
good Antic and Authentic Authors) that there reside many Soothsayers,
Fortune Tellers, Vaticinators, Prophets, and Diviners of things to come; that
Saturn inhabiteth that place, bound with fair Chains of Gold, and within the
Concavity of a Golden Rock, being nourished with Divine Ambrosie and Nectar,
which are daily in great store and abundance transmitted to him from the
Heavens, by I do not well know what kind of Fowls (it may be that they are the
same Ravens, which in the Deserts are said to have fed St. Paul, the first
Hermit) he very clearly foretells unto every one, who is desirous to be
certified of the condition of his Lot, what his Destiny will be, and what
future Chance the Fates* have ordained for him: for the Parques, or Weerd
Sisters do not twist, spin, or draw out a Thread; nor yet does Jupiter perpend,
project, or deliberate any thing, which the good old Celestial Father knows
not to the full, even whilst he is a sleep: This will be a very summary
Abbreviation of our Labor, if we but hearken unto him a little upon the
serious debate and canvassing of this my perplexity. That is (answered
Epistemon) a Gullery too evident, a plain Abuse* and Fib too fabulous. I will
not go, not I, I will not go.

CHAP. XXV. How Panurge consulteth with Her Trippa.
NEvertheless, (quoth Epistemon, continuing his Discourse) I will tell you what
you may do, if you will believe me, before we return to our King: Hard by here,
in the Brown-wheat Island, dwells* Her Trippa; you know how by the Arts* of
Astrology, Geomancy, Chiromancy, Metopomancy, and others of a like stuff and
nature, he foretells all things to come: Let us talk a little, and confer
with him about your Business. Of that (answered Panurge) I know nothing: but of
this much concerning him I am assured, that one day, and that not long since,
whilst he was prating to the Great King, of Celestial, Sublime, and
Transcendent Things, the Lackqueys and Footboys of the Court, upon the upper
Steps of Stairs between two Doors, jumbled, one after another, as often as they
lifted, his Wife; who is passable fair, and a pretty snug Hu^sie. Thus he who
seemed very clearly to see all Heavenly and Terrestrial Things without
Spectacles, who discoursed boldly of Adventures past, with great confidence
opened up present Cases and Accidents, and stoutly professed the presaging of
all future Events and Contingencies, and was not able with all the Skill and
Cunning that he had, to perceive the Bumbasting of his Wife, whom he reputed to
be very chaste; and has not till this hour, got Notice of any thing to the
contrary. Yet let us go to him, seeing you will have it so: for surely we can
never learn too much. They on the very next ensuing Day, came to Her Trippa's.
Lodging. Panurge, by way of Donative, presented him with a long Gown lined all
thorough with Wolves-skins, with a short Sword mounted with a gilded Hilt, and
covered with a Velvet Scabbard, and with fifty good single Angels: then in a
familiar and friendly way did he ask of him his Opinion touching the Affair. At
the very first Her Trippa looking on him very wistly in the face, said unto
him: Thou have the Metoposcopy, and Physiognomy of a Cuckold; I say, of a
notorious and infamous Cuckold. With this casting an eye upon Panurge's right
Hand in all the parts thereof, he said, This rugged Draught which I see here,
just under the Mount of Jove, was never yet but in the Hand of a Cuckold.
Afterward, he with a White Lead Pen, swiftly, and hastily drew a certain
Number of diverse kinds of Points, which by Rules of Geomancy he coupled and
joined together, then said, Truth it self is not truer, then that it is
certain, thou will be a Cuckold, a little after thy Marriage. That being done,
he asked of Panurge the Horoscope of his Nativity; which was no sooner by
Panurge tendered unto him, then that, erecting a Figure, he very promptly and
speedily formed and fashioned a complete Fabric of the Houses of Heaven, in
all their parts, whereof when he had considered the Situation and the Aspects
in their Triplicities, he fetched a deep sigh, and said: I have clearly enough
already discovered unto you the Fate of your Cuckoldry, which is unavoidable,
you cannot escape it; and here have I got of new a further assurance thereof,
so that I may now hardily pronounce, and affirm without any scruple or
hesitation at all, that thou will be a Cuckold; that furthermore, thou will be
beaten by thine own Wife, and that she will purloyn, filch, and steal of thy
Goods from thee; for I find the Seventh House, in all its Aspects, of a
malignant Influence, and every one of the Planets threatening thee with
Disgrace, according as they stand seated toward one another, in relation to
the Horned Signs of Aries, Taurus, and Capricorn: In the Fourth House I find
Jupiter in a Decadence, as also in a Tetragonal Aspect to Saturn, associated
with Mercury: thou will be soundly peppered, my good honest Fellow, I warrant
thee. I will be: (answered Panurge) a Plague rot thee, thou old Fool, and
doting Sot, how graceless and unpleasant thou art.

When all Cuckolds shall be at a General Rendezvous, thou should be their
Standard Bearer. But whence comes* this Ciron-worm betwixt these two Fingers?
This Panurge said, putting the Forefinger of his Left Hand, betwixt the Fore
and Midfinger of the Right, which he thrust out toward Her Trippa, holding
them open after the manner of two Horns, and shutting into a Fist his Thumb,
with the other Fingers. Then in turning to Epistemon, he said, Lo here the true
Ollus of Martial, who addicted and devoted himself wholly to the observing the
Miseries, Crosses, and Calamities of others, whilst his own Wife, in the
Interim, did keep an open Bawdyhouse.

This Varlet is poorer then ever was Irus, and yet he is a proud, vaunting,
arrogant, self-conceited, overweening, and more insupportable then Seventeen
Devils; in one word, (...), which term of old was applied to the like beggarly
strutting Coxcombs.

Come, let us leave this Madpash Bedlam, this hair-brained Fop, and give him
leave to rave and dose his Belly-full, with his private and intimately
acquainted Devils; who, if they were not the very worst of all the infernal
Fiends, would never have daigned to serve such a knavish, barking Cur as this
is. He has not learnt the first Precept of Philosophy, which is, Know thy
Self: for whilst he braggeth and boasts, that he can discern the least Mote
in the Eye of another, he is not able to see the huge Block that puts out the
sight of both his Eyes. This is such another Polypragmon, as is by Plutarch
described: He is of the nature of the Lamian Witches, who in foreign Places,
in the Houses of Strangers, in Public, and amongst the common People, had a
sharper and more piercing Inspection into their Affairs then any Lync; but at
home in their own proper Dwelling-Mansions, were blinder then Mold-Warps, and
saw nothing at all: for their Custom was at their return from abroad, when they
were by themselves in private to take their Eyes out of their Head, from whence
they were as easily removable as a Pair of Spectacles from their Nose, and to
lay them up into a wooden Slipper, which for that purpose did hang behind the
Door of their Lodging.

Panurge had no sooner done speaking, when Her Trippa took into his Hand a
Tamarisk Branch. In this (quoth Epistemon) he does very well, right, and like
an Artist, for Nicander calls it the Divinatory Tree. Have you a mind (quoth
Her Trippa) to have the truth of the matter yet more fully and amply disclosed
unto you by Pyromancy, by Aeromancy, (whereof Aristophanes in his Clouds makes
great estimation) by Hydromancy, by Leconomancy, of old in prime request
amongst the Assyrians, and thoroughly tried by Hermolaus Barbarus: Come hither,
and I will show thee in this Platter-full of fair Fountainwater, thy future
Wife, lechering, and sercroupierising it with two swaggering Ruffians, one
after another. Yea, but have a special care (quoth Panurge) when thou come to
put thy Nose within mine Arse, that thou forget not to pull off thy Spectacles.
Her Trippa going on in his Discourse, said by Catoptromancy, likewise held in
such account by the Emperor Didius Iulianus, that by means thereof he ever and
anon foresaw all that which at any time did happen or befall unto him: Thou
shall not need to put on thy Spectacles, for in a Mirror thou will see her as
clearly and manifestly Nebrundiated, and Billibodri^g-it, as if I should show
it in the Fountain of the Temple of Minerva near Parras. By Coscinomancy, most
religiously observed of old, amidst the Ceremonies of the ancient Romans. Let
us have a Sieve and Shiers, and thou shall see Devils. By Alphitomancy, cried
up by Theocritus in his Pharmeketria. By Alentomancy, mixing the Flower of
Wheat with Oatmeal, By Astragalomancy, whereof I have the Plots and Models all
at hand ready for the purpose. By Tyromancy, whereof we make some Proof in a
great Brehemont Cheese, which I here keep by me: By Giromancy, if thou should
turn round Circles, thou might assure thy self from me, that they would fall
always on the wrong side: By Sternomancy, which makes nothing for thy
Advantage, for thou have an ill proportioned Stomach: By Libanomancy, for the
which we shall need but a little Frankincense: By Gastromancy, which kind of
ventral Fatiloquency was for a long time together used in Ferrara by Lady
Giacoma Rodogina, the Eugastrimythian Prophetess: By Cephalomancy, often
practiced amongst the High Germans in their boiling of an Asses Head upon
burning Coals: By Ceromancy, where by the means of Wax dissolved into Water,
thou shall see the Figure, Pourtrait and lively Representation of thy future
Wife, and of her Fredin Fredaliatory Belly thumping Blades: By Capnomancy; O
the gallantest and most excellent of all Secrets! By Axionomancy, we want only
a Hatchet and a Jeat-stone to be laid together upon a quick Fire of hot Embers.
O how bravely Homer was versed in the practice hereof toward Penelope's
Suitors! By Onymancy; for that we have Oil and Wax: By Tephromancy, thou will
see the Ashes thus aloft dispersed, exhibiting thy Wife in a fine Posture: By
Botonomancy, for the nonce I have some few Leaves in reserve: By Sicomancy; O
Divine Art in Fig Tree Leaves! By Icthiomancy, in ancient times so celebrated,
and put in use by Tiresias and Polydamas, with the like certainty of event as
was tried of old at the Dina-ditch within that Grove consecrated to Apollo,
which is in the Territory of the Lycians: By Choiramancy. Let us have a great
many Hogs, and thou shall have the Bladder of one of them: By Cheromomancy, as
the Bean is found in the Cake at the Epiphany Vigil: By Anthropomancy,
practiced by the Roman Emperor Heliagobulus; it is somewhat irksom, but thou will endure it well enough, seeing thou art destinated to be a Cuckold: By a
Sybilline Stichomancy: By Onomatomancy: How do they call thee! Chaw, turd;
(quoth Panurge) or yet by Alectryomancy. If I should here with a Compass draw a
round, and in looking upon thee, and considering thy Lot, divide the
Circumference thereof into four and twenty equal parts, then form a several
Letter of the Alphabet upon every one of them; and lastly, posit a Barley Corn
or two upon each of these so disposed Letters, I durst promise upon my Faith
and Honesty, that if a young Virgin Cock be permitted to range along and
athwart them, he should only eat the Grains which are set and placed upon these
Letters, A. C. u. c. k. o. l. d. T. h. o. u. s. h. a l. t. b. e. And that as
fatidically, as under the Emperor Valence, most perplexedly desirous to know
the Name of him, who should be his Successor to the Empire, the Cock
Vaticinating and Alectryomantick, ate up the Pickles that were posited on the
Letters T. h. e. o. d. Or for the more certainty, will you have a trial of your
Fortune by the Art of Aruspiciny? by Augury? or by Extispicine? By
Turdispicine, quoth Panurge; or yet by the Mystery of Negromancy? I will, if
you please, suddenly set up again, and revive some one lately deceased, as
Apollonius of Tyan did to Achilles, and the Pythoniss in the Presence of Saul;
which Body so raised up and requickned, will tell us the Sum of all you shall
require of him; no more nor less than at the Invocation of Erictho, a certain
defunct Person foretold to Pompy the whole progress and issue of the fatal
Battle fought in the Pharsalian Fields? Or if you be afraid of the Dead, as
commonly all Cuckolds are, I will make use of the Faculty of Sciomancy. Go, get
thee gone (quoth Panurge) thou Frantic Ass, to the Devil, and be buggered,
filthy Bordachio that thou art, by some Albanian, for a Steeple-crown'd Hat.
Why the Devil did not thou counsel me as well to hold an Emerald, or the
Stone of a Hyena under my Tongue? Or to furnish and provide my self with
Tongues of Whoops, and Hearts of Green Frogs? Or to eat of the Liver and Milt
of some Dragon? To the end that by those means I might at the chanting and
chirping of Swans and other Fowls, understand the Substance of my future Lot
and Destiny, as did of old the Arabians in the Country of Mesopotamia? Fifteen
brace of Devils seize upon the Body and Soul of this horned, Renegado,
miscreant Cuckold, the Inchanter, Witch, and Sorcerer of Antichrist to all the
Devils of Hell.

Let us return toward our King: I am sure he will not be well pleased with us,
if he once come to get notice that we have been in the Kennel of this muffled
Devil. I repent my being come hither. I would willingly dispense with a Hundred
Nobles, and Fourteen Yeomans, on condition that he who not long since did blow
in the bottom of my Breeches, should instantly with his squirting Spittle
inluminate his Mustaches. O Lord God now! how the Villain has besmoaked me
with Vexation and Anger, with Charms and Witchcraft, and with a terrible Coyl
and Stir of Infernal and Tartarian Devils! The Devil take him: say Amen; and
let us go drink. I shall not have any Appetite for my Victuals (how good Cheer
soever I make) these two days to come, hardly these four.

CHAP. XXVI. How Panurge consulteth with Friar Ihon of the Funnels.
PAnurge was indeed very much troubled in mind, and disquieted at the words of
Her Trippa, and therefore as she passed by the little Village of Hugmes, after
he had made his Address to Friar Ihon, in pecking at, rubbing and scratching
his own left Ear, he said unto him, Keep me a little jovial and merry, my dear
and sweet Bully, for I find my Brains altogether metagrabolized and confounded,
and my Spirits in a most dunsical puzzle at the bitter talk of this Devilish,
Hellish, Damned Fool: Hearken, my dainty Cod.

Mellow C. Lead-coloured C. Knurled C. Suborned C. Desired C. Stuffed C.
Speckled C. Finely metall'd C. Arabian-like C. Trussed up Greyhound-like C.
Mounted C. Sleeked C. Diapred C. Spotted C. Master C. Seeded C. Lusty C. Jupped
C. Milked C. Calfeted C. Raised C. Odd C. Steeled C. Stale C. Orange-tawny C.
Imbroidered C. Glazed C. Interlarded C. Burger-like C. Impoudred C. Ebenized C.
Brasiliated C. Organized C. Passable. Trunkified C. Furious C. Packed C. Hooded
C. Varnished C. Renowned C. Matted C. Genetive C. Gigantal C. Oval C. Claustral
C. Viril C. Stayed C. Massive C. Manual C. Absolute C. Well-set C. Gemel C.
Turkish C. Burning C. Thwacking C. Urgent C. Handsome C. Prompt C. Fortunate C.
Boxewood C. Latten C. Unbridled C. Hooked C. Researched C. Encompassed C.
Strouting out C. Jolly C. Lively C. Gerundive C. Franked C. Polished C. Poudred
Beef C. Positive C. Spared C. Bold C. Lascivious C. Gluttonous C. Resolute C.
Cabbage-like C. Courteous C. Fertile C. Whizzing C. Neat C. Common C. Brisk C.
Quick C. Barelike C. Partitional C. Patronymick C. Cockney C. Auromercuriated
C. Robust C. Appetizing C. Succourable C. Redoutable C. Affable C. Memorable C.
Palpable C. Barbable C. Tragical C. Transpontine C. Digestive C. Active C.
Vital C. Magistral C. Monachal C. Subtle C. Hammering C. Clashing C. Tingling
C. Usual C. Exquisite C. Trim C. Succulent C. Factious C. Clammy C. Fat C.
High-prised C. Requisite C. Laycod C. Hand-filling C. Insuperable C. Agreeable
C. Formidable C. Profitable C. Notable C. Musculous C. Subsidiary C. Satyrick
C. Repercussive C. Convulsive C. Restorative C. Masculinating C. Incarnative C.
Sigillative C. Sallying C. Plump C. Thundering C. Lechering C. Fulminating C.
Sparkling C. Ramming C. Lusty C. Household C. Pretty C. Astrolabian C.
Algebraical C. Venust C. Aromatizing C. Trixy C. Paillard C. Gaillard C.
Broaching C. Adle C. Syndicated C. Boulting C. Snorting C. Pilfring C. Shaking
C. Bobbing C. Chiveted C. Fumbling C. Topsiturvying C. Raging C. Piled up C.
Filled up C. Manly C. Idle C. Membrous C. Strong C. Twin C. Belabouring C.
Gentil C. Stirring C. Confident C. Nimble C. Roundheaded C. Figging C. Helpful
C. Spruce C. Plucking C. Ramage C. Fine C. Fierce C. Brawny C. Count C.
Repaired C. Soft C. Wild C. Renewed C. Quaint C. Starting C. Fleshy C.
Auxiliary C. New vamped C. Improved C. Malling C. Sounding C. Batled C. Burly
C. Seditious C. Wardian C. Protective C. Twinkling C. Able C. Algoristical C.
Odoriferous C. Pranked C. Jocund C. Routing C. Purloyning C. Frolic C. Wagging
C. Ruffling C. Jumbling C. Rumbling C. Thumping C. Bumping C. C^ingeling C.
Berumpling C. Jogging C. Nobbing C. Touzing C. Tumbling C. Fambling C.
Overturning C. Shooting C. Culeting C. Jagged C. Pinked C. Arsiversing C.
Polished C. Slasht C. Hamed C. Leisurely C. Cut C. Smooth C. Depending C.
Independent C. Lingering C. Rapping C. Reverend C. Nodding C. Disseminating C.
Affecting C. Affected C. Grapled C. Stuffed C. Well-fed C. Flourished C. Fallow
C. Sudden C. Grasp-full C. Swillpow C. ^rushing C. Creaking C. Dilting C. Ready
C. Vigorous C. Scoulking C. Superlative C. Clashing C. Wagging C. Scriplike C.
Encremaster'd C. Bouncing C. Levelling C. Fly-flap C. Perinae tegminal C.
Squat-couching C. Short-hung C. The hypogastrian C. Witness bearing C.
Testigerous C. Instrumental C.
My Harcabuzing Cod, and Buttockstirring Ballock, Friar Ihon, my Friend: I do
carry a singular respect unto thee, and honor thee with all my Heart, thy
Counsel I hold for a choice and delicate Morsel, therefore have I reserved it
for the last Bit. Give me thy Advice freely, I beseech thee; Should I marry, or
no? Friar Ihon very merrily, and with a sprightly cheerfulness made this Answer
to him: Marry, in the Devil's Name, Why not? What the Devil else should thou
do, but marry? Take thee a Wife, and furbish her Harnish to some tune: Swinge
her Skin-coat, as if thou were beating on Stock Fish; and let the repercussion
of thy Clapper from her resounding Metal, make a Noise, as if a double Peal of
Chiming. Bells were hung at the Cremasters of thy Ballocks. As I say Marry, so
do I understand, that thou should fall to work as speedily as may be: yea, my
meaning is, that thou ought to be so quick and forward therein, as on this
same very day, before Sunset, to cause, proclaim thy Banes of Matrimony, and
make provision of Bedsteads. By the Blood of a Hog's-pudding, till when would
thou delay the acting of a Husband's part? Do thou not know, and is it not
daily told unto thee, that the end of the World approaches? We are nearer it
by three Poles, and half a Fathom, then we were two days ago. The Antichrist is
already born, at least it is so reported by many: the truth is, that hitherto
the effects of his wrath have not reached further then to the scratching of his
Nurse and Governesses: his Nails are not sharp enough as yet, nor have his
Claws attained to their full growth; he is little.

Crescat; Nos qui vivimus, multiplicemur. It is written so, and it is holy
stuff, I warrant you: The truth whereof is like to last as long as a Sack of
Corn may be had for a Penny, and a Punction of pure Wine for Threepence. Would
thou be content to be found with thy Genitories full in the Day of Judgment?
Dum veneris judicari. Thou have (quoth Panurge) a right, clear, and neat
Spirit, Friar Ihon, my Metropolitan Cod; thou speakst in very deed pertinently,
and to purpose: That belike was the reason which moved Leander of Abydos in
Asia, whilst he was swimming through the Hellespontick Sea, to make a Visit to
his Sweetheart Hero of Sestus in Europe, to pray unto Neptune, and all the
other Marine Gods, thus:

Now, whilst I go, have pity on me,
And at my back returning drown me.
He was loath, it seems, to die with his Cods over-gorged: He was to be
commended, therefore do I promise, that from henceforth no Malefactor shall by
Justice be executed within my Jurisdiction of Salmigondinois, who shall not,
for a day or two at least before, he be permitted to ^ulbut, and foraminate,
Onocrotalwise, that there remain not in all his Vessels, to write a great Greek
(...); such a precious thing should not be foolishly cast away; he will perhaps
therewith beget a Male, and so depart the more contentedly out of this Life,
that he shall have left behind him one for one.

CHAP. XXVII. How Friar Ihon merrily, and sportingly counsels Panurge.
BY Saint Rigomet (quoth Friar Ihon) I do advise thee to nothing, my dear
Friend Panurge) which I would not do my self, were I in thy place: only have a
special care, and take good heed thou soulder well together the Joints of the
double backed, and two bellied Beast, and fortify thy Nerves so strongly, that
there be no discontinuance in the Knocks of the Venerian thwacking, else thou
art lost, poor Soul: for if there pass long intervals betwixt the Priapising
Feats, and that thou make an intermission of too large a time, that will befall
thee, which be^ides the Nurses, if they desist from giving suck to Children,
they lose their Milk; and if continually thou do not hold thy Aspersory Tool in
exercise, and keep thy Mental going, thy Lacticinian Nectar will be gone, and
it will serve thee only as a Pipe to piss out at, and thy Cods for a Wallet of
lesser value then a Beggars Scrip. This is a certain truth I tell thee, Friend,
and doubt not of it; for my self have seen the sad experiment thereof in many,
who cannot now do what they would, because before they did not what they might
have done.: Ex desuetudine amittuntur Privilegia: Non-usage oftentimes destroys
ones Right, say the learned Doctors of the Law: therefore, my Billy, entertain
as well as possibly thou can, that Hypogastrian, lower sort of Troglodytick
People, that their chief pleasure may be placed in the case of sempiternal
laboring. Give order that henceforth they live not like adle Gentlemen, idly
upon their Rents and Revenues, but that they may work for their Livelyhoood, by
breaking ground within the Paphian Trenches. Nay truly (answered Panurge) Friar
Ihon, my left Ballock, I will believe thee, for thou dealest plain with me, and
fallest downright square upon the business, without going about the Bush with
frivolous circumstances, and unnecessary reservations. Thou with the splendor
of a piercing Wit, have dissipated all the louring Clouds of anxious
Apprehensions and Suspicions, which did intimidate and terrify me: therefore
the Heavens be pleased to grant to thee, at all She-conflicts, a stiff-standing
Fortune. Well then, as thou have said, so will I do, I will, in good Faith,
Marry; in that point there shall be no failing, I promise thee, and shall have
always by me pretty Girls clothed with the Name of my Wives Waiting-Maids, that
lying under thy Wings, thou may be Night-Protector of their Sisterhood.

Let this serve for the first part of the Sermon. Hearken (quoth Friar Ihon) to
the Oracle of the Bells of Varenes; What say they? I hear and understand them
(quoth Panurge) their Sound is by my Thirst, more uprightly fatidical, then
that of Jove's Great Kettles in Dodona. Hearken; Take thee a Wife, take thee a
Wife, and marry, marry, marry: for if thou marry, thou shall find good therein,
herein, here in a Wife thou shall find good; so marry, marry. I will assure
thee, that I shall be married, all the Elements invite and prompt me to it: let
this Word be to thee a Brazen Wall, by diffidence not to be broken thorough. As
for the Second part of this our Doctrine: Thou seem in some measure to
mistrust the readiness of my Paternity, in the practicing of my Placket-Racket
within the Aphrodisian Tennis-Court at all times fitting, as if the stiff God
of Gardens were not favorable to me. I pray thee, favor me so much as to
believe, that I still have him at a beck, attending always my Commandments,
docile, obedient, vigorous, and active in all things, and everywhere, and
never stubborn or refractory to my will or pleasure.

I need no more, but to let go the Reins, and slacken the Leash, which is the
Bellypoint, and when the Game is shown unto him, say, Hey, Jack, to thy Booty,
he will not fail even then to flesh himself upon his Prey, and tuzle it to some
purpose. Hereby you may perceive, although my future Wife were as unsatiable
and gluttonous in her Voluptuousness, and the Delights of Venery, as ever was
the Empress Messalina, or yet the Marchioness in England; and I desire thee to
give credit to it, that I lack not for what is requisite to overloy the Stomach
of her Lust, but have wherewith aboundingly to please her.

I am not ignorant that Solomon said, who indeed of that matter speaks
Clerklike, and learnedly: as also how Aristotle after him declared for a truth,
That for the greater part, the Lechery of a Woman is ravenous and
unsatisfiable: nevertheless, let such as are my Friends, who read those
passages, receive from me for a most real verity, that I for such a Gill, have
a fit Jack; and that, if Women's things cannot be satiated, I have an Instrument
indefatigable; an Implement as copious in the giving, as can in craving be
their Vade Mecums. Do not here produce ancient Examples of the Paragons of
Paillardise, and offer to match with my Testiculatory Ability, the Priapaean
Prowess of the fabulous Fornicators, Hercules, Proculus, Caesar, and Mahomet,
who in his Alchoran does vaunt, that in his Cods he had the vigor of
Threescore Bully Ruffians; but let no zealous Christian trust the Rogue, the
filthy ribald Rascal is a Liar. Shall thou need to urge Authorities, or bring
forth the Instance of the Indian Prince, of whom Theophrastus Plinius, and
Athenaeus testify, that with the help of a certain Herb, he was able, and had
given frequent Experiments thereof, to toss his sinewy Piece of Generation, in
the Act of carnal Concupiscence, above Threescore and ten times in the space of
Four and twenty hours. Of that I believe nothing, the number is supposititious,
and too prodigally foisted in: Give no Faith unto it, I beseech thee, but
prithee trust me in this, and thy credulity therein shall not be wronged; for
it is true, and Probatum est, that my Pionier of Nature, the sacred
Ithyphallian Champion, is of all stiff-intruding Blades the primest: Come
hither my Ballockette, and hearken, Did thou ever see the Monk of Castres
Cowl? when in any House it was laid down, whether openly in the view of all, or
covertly out of the sight of any, such was the ineffable Virtue thereof for
excitating and stirring up the People of both Sexes unto Lechery, that the
whole Inhabitants and Indwellers, not only of that, but likeways of all the
circumjacent places thereto, within three Leagues around it, did suddenly enter
into Rut, both Beasts and Folks, Men and Women, even to the Dogs and Hogs, Rats
and Cats.

I swear to thee, that many times heretofore I have perceived, and found in my
Codpiece a certain kind of Energy, or efficacious Virtue, much more irregular,
and of a greater Anomaly, then what I have related: I will not speak to thee
either of House or Cottage, nor of Church or Market, but only tell thee, that
once at the Representation of the Passion, which was acted at Saint Mexents; I
had no sooner entered within the Pit of the Theater, but that forthwith, by the
virtue and occult property of it, on a sudden all that were there, both Players
and Spectators, did fall into such an exorbitant Temptation of Lust, that there
was not Angel, Man, Devil, nor Deviless, upon the place, who would not then
have Bricollitched it with all their Heart and Soul.

The Prompter forsook his Copy, he who played Michael's part, came down to
rights, the Devils issued out of Hell, and carried along with them most of the
pretty little Girls that were there; yea, Lucifer got out of his Fetters; in a
word: seeing the huge Disorder, I disparked my self forth of that enclosed
place, in imitation of Cato the Censor, who perceiving by reason of his
presence, the Floralian Festivals out of order, withdrew himself.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Friar Ihon comfort Panurge in the douhtful matter of
Cuckoldry.
I Understand thee well enough, said Friar Ihon; but time makes all things
plain. The most durable Marbre or Porphyr is subject to Old Age and Decay.
Though for the present thou possibly be not weary of the Exercise, yet is it
like, I will hear thee confess a few years hence, that thy Cods hang dangling
downwards for want of a better Truss. I see thee waxing a little hoar-headed
already; thy Beard by the Distinctions of gray, white, tawny and black, has to
my thinking the resemblance of a Map of the Terrestrial Globe, or Geographical
Cart. Look attentively upon, and take Inspection of what I shall show unto
thee. Behold there Asia, here are Tygris and Euphrates. Lo there Africa; here
is the Mountain of the Moon, yonder thou may perceive the Fenny Marsh of
Nilus. On this side lies Europe: Do thou not see the Abbey of Tileme? This
little Tuft, which is altogether white, is the Hyperborean Hills. By the thirst
of my Throple, Friend, when Snow is on the Mountains, I say the Head and the
Chin, there is not then any considerable Heat to be expected in the Valleys and
Low Countries of the Codpiece. By the Kibes of thy Heels (quoth Panurge) thou
do not understand the Topics. When Snow is on the tops of the Hills,
Lightning, Thunder. Tempest, Whirlwinds, Storms, Hurricanes, and all the Devils
of Hell rage in the Valleys. Would thou see the experience thereof, go to the
Territory of the Swissers, and earnestly perpend with thy self there the
Situation of the Lake of Wendelberliok, about four Leagues distant from Berne,
on the Syon-side of the Land. Thou twittest me with my Gray Heirs, yet
considerest not how I am of the Nature of Leeks, which with a white Head carry
a green, fresh, straight, and vigorous Tail.

The truth is nevertheless, (why should I deny it) that I now and then discern
in my self some indicative Signs of Old Age. Tell this, I prithee, to no body,
but let it be kept very close and secret betwixt us two; for I find the Wine
much sweeter now, more savoury to my taste, and unto my Palate of a better
relish than formerly I was wont to do; and withal, besides mine accustomed
manner, I have a more dreadful Apprehension than I ever heretofore have had of
lighting on bad Wine. Note and observe that this does argue and portend I know
not what of the West and Occident of my time, and signifies that the South and
Meridian of mine Age is past. But what then? my Gentle Companion, that does but
betoken that I will hereafter drink so much the more. That is not, the Devil
hale it, the thing that I fear; nor is there where my Shoo pinches. The thing
that I doubt most, and have greatest reason to dread and suspect, is, that
through some long absence of our King Pantagruel (to whom I must needs bear
Company, should he go to all the Devils of Berathrum) my future Wife shall make
me a Cuckold. This is, in truth, the long and the short on it: For I am by all
those whom I have spoke to menaced and threatened with a Horned Fortune; and all
of them affirm, it is the Lot to which from Heaven I am predestined. Every
one (answered Friar Ihon) that would be a Cuckold, is not one: If it be thy
Fate to be hereafter of the number of that Horned Cattle, then may I conclude
with an Ergo, thy Wife will be beautiful, and Ergo, thou will be kindly used by
her: Likewise with this Ergo thou shall be blissed with the fruition of many
Friends and Well-willers: And finally with this other Ergo thou shall be saved,
and have a place in Paradise. These are Monachal Topics and Maxims of the
Cloister: Thou may take more liberty to sin: Thou shall be more at ease than
ever: There will be nevertheless left for thee, nothing diminished, but thy
Goods shall increase notably: And if so be it was preordinated for thee,
would thou be so impious as not to acquiesce in thy Destiny? Speak thou jaded
Cod,

Faded C. Moldy C. Musty C. Paultery C. Senseless C. Foundred C. Distempred C.
Berayed C. Inveigled C. Dangling C. Stupid C. Seedless C. Soaked C. Lowting C.
Discouraged C. Surfeited C. Peevish C. Translated C. Forlorn C. Unsavory C.
Worm-eaten C. Overtoiled C. Miserable C. Steeped C. Kneaded with cold Water C.
Appealant C. Swagging C. Withered C. Broken reined C. Defective C. Crestfallen
C. Felled C. Fleeted C. Cloyed C. Squeezed C. Resty C. Pounded C. Loose C.
Coldish C. Peckled C. Churned C. Filiped C. Singlefied C. Begrimed C. Wrinkled
C. Fainted C. Extenuated C. Grim C. Wasted C. Inflamed C. Unhinged C. Scurfie
C. Stradling C. Putrified C. Maimed C. Overlechered C. Druggely C. Mitified C.
Goat-ridden C. Weakened C. Asse-ridden C. Puff-pasted C. St. Anthonified C.
Untriped C. Blasted C. Cut off C. Beveraged C. Scarified C. Dashed C. Slasht C.
Infeebled C. Whore hunting C. Deteriorated C. Chil C. Scrupulous C. Crazed C.
Tasteless C. Hacked C. Flaggy C. Scrubby C. Drained C. Haled C. Lolling C.
Drenched C. Burst C. Stirred up C. Mitred C. Pedlingly furnished C. Rusty C.
Exhausted C. Perplexed C. Unhelved C. Fizled C. Leaprous C. Bruised C.
Spadonick C. Boughty C. Mealy C. Wrangling C. Gangreened C. Crustrisen C.
Ragged C. Quelled C. Bragodochio C. Beggarly C. Trepanned C. Bedusked C.
Emasculated C. Corked C. Transparent C. Vile C. Antidated C. Chopped C. Pinked
C. Cup-glassified C. Fruitless C. Riven C. Pursie C. Fusty C. Jadish C.
Fistulous C. Languishing C. Maleficiated C. Hectic C. Worn out C. Ill-favored
C. Duncified C. Macerated C. Paralytick C. Degraded C. Benumbed C. Bat-like C.
Fart-shotten C. Sunburned C. Pacified C. Blunted C. Rankling tasted C. Rooted
out C. Costive C. Hailed on C. Cuffed C. Buffeted C. Whirreted C. Robbed C.
Neglected C. Lame C. Confused C. Unsavory C. Overthrown C. Boulted C. Trod
under C. Desolate C. Declining C. Stinching C. Sorrowful C. Murdered C.
Matachin-like C. Besotted C. Customerless C. Minced C. Exulcerated C. Patched
C. Stupefied C. Annihilated C. Spent C. Foiled C. Aguish C. Disfigured C.
Disabled C. Forcedless C. Censured C. Cut C. Rifled C. Undone C. Corrected C.
Slit C. Skittish C. Spungy C. Botched C. Dejected C. Jagged C. Pining C.
Deformed C. Mischieved C. Cobled C. Imbased C. Ransacked C. Despised C. Mangy
C. Abased C. Supine C. Mended C. Dismayed C. Harsh C. Beaten C. Barred C.
Abandoned C. Confounded C. Lowtish C. Born down C. Sparred C. Abashed C.
Unseasonable C. Oppressed C. Grated C. Falling away C. Smalcut C. Disordered C.
La^tised C. Ruined C. Exasperated C. Rejected C. Belammed C. Fabricitant C.
Perused C. Emasculated C. Roughly handled C. Examined C. Crakt C. Waiward C.
Hagled C. Gleaning C. Ill-favored C. Pulled C. Drooping C. Faint C. Parched C.
Paultry C. Cankred C. Void C. Vexed C. Bestunk C. Crooked C. Brabling C. Rotten
C. Anxious C. Clouted C. Tired C. Proud C. Fractured C. Melancholy C. Coxcombly
C. Bafe C. Bleaked C. Detested C. Diaphanous C. Unworthy C. Checked C. Mangled
C. Turned over C. Harried C. Flawed C. Froward C. Ugly C. Drawn C. Riven C.
Distasteful C. Hanging C. Broken C. Limber C. Effeminate C. Kindled C.
Evacuated C. Grieved C. Carking C. Disorderly C. Empty C. Disquieted C.
Besysted C. Confounded C. Hooked C. Diverous C. Wearied C. Sad C. Cross C.
Vainglorious C. Poor C. Brown C. Shrunkin C. Abhorred C. Troubled C. Scornful
C. Dishonest C. Reproved C. Cocketed C. Filthy C. Shred C. Chawned C.
Short-winded C. Branchless C. Chapped C. Failing C. Deficient C. Lean C.
Consumed C. Used C. Puzzled C. Allayed C. Spoiled C. Clagged C. Palsey-strucken
C. Amazed C. Bedunsed C. Extirpated C. Banged C. Stripped C. Hoary C. Winnowed
C. Decayed C. Disastrous C. Unhandfom C. Stummed C. Barren C. Wretched C.
Feeble C. Cast down C. Stopped C. Kept under C. Stubborn C. Ground C. Retchless
C. Weather-beaten C. Flayed C. Bauld C. Tossed C. Flapping C. Cleft C. Meagre
C. Dumpified C. Suppressed C. Hagged C. Jawped C. Havocked C. Astonished C.
Dulled C. Slow C. Plucked up C. Constipated C. Blown C. Blockify'd C. Pommeled
C. All-to-be mawl'd C. Fallen away C. Unlucky C. Steril C. Beshitten C.
Appeased C. Caitive C. Woeful C. Unseemly C. Heavy C. Weak C. Prostrated C.
Uncomely C. Naughty C. Laid flat C. Suffocated C. Held down C. Barked C.
Hairless C. Flamping C. Hooded C. Wormy C. Besysted C. Faulty C. Bemealed C.
Mortified C. Scurvy C. Bescabbed C. Torn C. Subdued C. Sneaking C. Bare C.
Swart C. Smutched C. Raised up C. Chopped C. Flirted C. Blained C. Blotted C.
Sunk in C. Ghastly C. Unpointed C. Beblistered C. Wizened C. Begger-plated C.
Douf C. Clarty C. Lumpish C. Abject C. Side C. Choked up C. Backward C. Prolix
C. Spotted C. Crumpled C. Frumpled C. State C. Corrupted C. Beflowred C. Amated
C. Blackish C. Underlaid C. Loathing C. Ill-filled C. Bobbed C. Mated C. Tawny
C. Whealed C. Besmeared C. Hollow C. Pantless C. Guizened C. Demiss C.
Refractory C. Rensie C. Frowning C. Limping C. Raveled C. Rammish C. Gaunt C.
Beskimmered C. Scraggy C. Lank C. Swashring C. Moyling C. Swinking C. Harried
C. Tugged C. Towed C. Misused C. Adamitical C.
Balockatso to the Devil, my dear Friend Panurge, seeing it is so decreed by
the Gods, would thou invert the course of the Planets, and make them
retrograde? Would thou disorder all the Celestial Spheres? blame the
Intelligences, blunt the Spindles, joint the Wherves, slander the Spinning
Quills, reproach the Bobbins, revile the Clew-bottoms, and finally ravel and
untwist all the Threads of both the warp and the waft of the weer'd Sister
Parques? What a Pox to thy Bones do thou mean, stony Cod? thou would if
thou could, a great deal worse than the Giants of old intended to have done.
Come hither, Billicullion; Whether would thou be Jealous without cause, or be
a Cuckold and know nothing of it? Neither the one nor the other (quoth Panurge)
would I choose to be: But if I get an inkling of the matter, I will provide
well enough, or there shall not be one stick of Wood within Five hundred
Leagues about me, whereof to make a Cudgel. In good Faith (Friar Ihon) I speak
now seriously unto thee, I think it will be my best not to marry: Hearken to
what the Bells do tell me, now that we are nearer to them: Do not Marry, Marry
not, not, not, not, not; Marry, Marry not, not, not, not, not: If thou Marry,
thou will miscarry, carry, carry; thou wilt repent it, resent it, sent it: if
thou Marry, thou a Cuckold, a Cou-cou-Cuckoe, Cou-cou-Cuckold thou shall be. By
the worthy Wrath of God I begin to be angry; this Campa^lian Oracle fretteth me
to the Guts, a March-Hare was never in such a Chaff as I am. O how I am vexed!
you Monks and Friars of the Cowl-pated, and Hood-poll'd Fraternity, have you no
Remedy nor Salve against this Malady of Graffing Horns in Heads? Has Nature so
abandoned Humane-kind, and of her help left us so destitute, that married Men
cannot know how to sail through the Seas of this mortal Life, and be safe from
the Whirlpools, Quicksands, Rocks, and Banks, that lie along the Coast of
Cornwall.

I will (said Friar Ihon) show thee a way, and teach thee an expedient, by
means whereof thy Wife shall never make thee a Cuckold without thy knowledge,
and thine own consent. Do me the favor, I pray thee, (quoth Panurge) my pretty
soft downy Cod; now tell it, Billy, tell it, I beseech thee. Take (quoth Friar
Ihon) Hans Carvel's Ring upon thy Finger, who was the King of Melinda's chief
Jeweller; besides that, this Hans Carvel had the Reputation of being very
skilful and expert in the Lapidary's Profession, he was a studious, learned,
and ingenious Man, a Scientifick Person, full of Knowledge, a great
Philosopher, of a sound Judgment, of a prime Wit, good Sense, clear Spirited,
an honest Creature, Courteous, Charitable, Giver of Alms, and of a Jovial
Humor, a Boon Companion, and a Merry Blade, if ever there was any in the
World: He was somewhat Gorbellied, had a little Shake in his Head, and in
effect unwieldy of his Body; in his Old Age he took to Wife the Bailiff of
Concordat's Daughter, a young, fair, jolly, gallant, spruce, frisk, brisk,
neat, feat, smirk, smug, count, quaint, gay, fine, trixy, trim, decent, proper,
graceful, handsome, beautiful, comely; and kind, a little too much to her
Neighbors and Acquaintance.

Hereupon it fell out, after the expiring of a scantling of Weeks, that Master
Carvel became as jealous as a Tygar, and entered into a very profound suspicion,
that his new-married Gixy did keep a Buttockstirring with others: to prevent
which inconveniency, he did tell her many tragical Stories of the total Ruin
of several Kingdoms by Adultery; did read unto her the Legend of chaste Wives;
then made some Lectures to her in the praise of the choice Virtue of Pucidity,
and did present her with a Book in Commendation of Conjugal Fidelity: wherein
the wickedness of all licentious Women was odiously detested; and withal, he
gave her a Chain enriched with pure Oriental Saphires. Notwithstanding all
this, he found her always more and more inclined to the reception of her
Neighbor Copes-mates, that day by day his Jealousy increased; in sequel
whereof, one Night as he was lying by her, whilst in his Sleep the rambling
Fancies of the leacherous Deportments of his Wife, did take up the Celluls of
his Brain, he dreamt that he encountered with the Devil, to whom he had
discovered to the full the buzzing of his Head, and suspicion that his Wife did
tread her Shoe awry; the Devil, he thought, in this perplexity, did for his
comfort, give him a Ring, and therewithal did kindly put it on his
Middle-finger, saying, Hans Carvel, I give thee this Ring, whilst thou carriest
it upon that Finger, thy Wife shall never carnally be known by any other then
thy self, without thy special knowledge and consent. Grammercy (quoth Hans
Carvel) my Lord Devil, I renounce Mahomet, if ever it shall come off my Finger.
The Devil vanished, as is his Custom, and then Hans Carvel full of Joy awaking,
found that his Middlefinger was as far as it could reach within the
What-do-you-call-it of his Wife. I did forget to tell thee, how his Wife, as
soon as she had felt the Finger there, said in recoyling her Buttocks, Off,
yes, nay, tut, pish, tush, aye, Lord, that is not the thing which should be put
up in that place. With this Hans Carvel thought that some pilferring Fellow was
about to take the Ring from him.

Is not this an Infallible and Sovereign Antidote? therefore, if thou will
believe me, in imitation of this Example, never fail to have continually the
Ring of thy Wife's Commodity upon thy Finger. When that was said, their
Discourse and their Way ended.

CHAP. XXIX. How Pantagruel Convocated together a Theologian, Physician,
Lawyer, and Philosopher, for extricating Panurge out of the perplexity wherein
he was.
NO sooner were they come into the Royal Palace, but they, to the full, made
Report unto Pantagruel of the Success of their Expedition; they show him the
Response of Paminagrobis. When Pantagruel had read it over and over again,
the*oftner he perused it, being the better pleased therewith; he said, in
addressing his Speech to Panurge, I have not as yet seen any Answer framed to
your Demand, which affords me more Contentment: for in this his succinct Copy
of Verses, he summarily, and briefly, yet fully enough expresses, how he would
have us to understand, that every one in the Project and Enterprise of
Marriage, ought to be his own Carver, sole Arbitrator of his proper Thoughts,
and from himself alone take Counsel in the main and peremptory closure of what
his Determination should be, in either his assent to, or dissent from it. Such
always has been my Opinion to you, and when at first you spoke thereof to me,
I truly told you this same very thing; but tacitly you scorned my Advice, and
would not harbor it within your mind. I know for certain, and therefore may I
with the greater confidence utter my conception of it, that Phil^^ty, or Self
love, is that which blinds your Judgment, and deceives you.

Let us do otherways, and that is this: Whatever we are, or have, consists in
Three Things: the Soul, the Body, and the Goods: now for the preservation of
these Three, there are Three sorts of Learned Men ordained, each respectively
to have care of that one which is recommended to his charge. Theologues are
appointed for the Soul, Physicians for the Welfare of the Body, and Lawyers for
the Safety of our Goods: hence it is, that it is my Resolution to have on
Sunday next with me at Dinner, a Divine, a Physician, and a Lawyer, that with
those Three assembled thus together, we may in every Point and Particle, confer
at large of your Perplexity. By Saint Picot (answered Panurge) we never shall
do any good that way: I see it already, and you see your self how the World is
vilely abused, as when with a Fox-tayl one claps another's Breech, to cajole
him. We give our Souls to keep to the Theologues, who for the greater part are
Heretics: Our Bodies we commit to the Physicians, who never themselves take
any Physic: and then we entrust our Goods to Lawyers, who never go to Law
against one another. You speak like a Courtier (quoth Pantagruel) but the first
Point of your Assertion is to be denied: for we daily see how good Theologues
make it their chief Business, their whole and sole Employment, by their Deeds,
their Words, and Writings, to extirpate Errors and Heresies out of the Hearts
of Men; and in their stead profoundly plant the true and lively Faith. The
Second Point you spoke of I commend: for whereas the Professors of the Art of
Medicine, give so good order to the Prophylactick, or Conservative part of
their Faculty, in what concerns their proper Healths, that they stand in no
need of making use of the other Branch, which is the Curative, or Therapentick,
by Medicaments. As for the Thi^^, I grant it to be true: for Learned Advocates
and Counselors at Law, are so much taken up with the Affairs of others in
their Consultations, Pleadings, and suchlike Patrocinations of those who are
their*Clients, that they have no leisure to attend any Controversies of their
own. Therefore, on the next ensuing Sunday, let the Divine be our godly Father
Hippothadee, the Physician our* honest Master Rondibilis, and the Legist our
good Friend Bridlegoose: nor will it be (to my thinking) amiss, that we enter
into the Pythagorick Field, and choose for an Assistant to the Three aforenamed
Doctors, our ancient faithful Acquaintance, the Philosopher Trouillogan;
especially seeing a perfect Philosopher, such as is Trouiilogan, is able
positively to resolve all whatsoever Doubts you can propose. Carpalin, have you
a care to have them here all Four on Sunday next at Dinner, without fail.

I believe (quoth Epistemon) that throughout the whole Country, in all the
Corners thereof, you could not have pitched upon such other Four: which I speak
not so much in regard of the most excellent Qualifications and Accomplishments
wherewith all of them are endowed for the respective Discharge and Management
of each his own Vocation and Calling, (wherein without all doubt or
controversy, they are the Paragons of the Land, and surpass all others) as for
that Rondibilis is marrried now, who before was not: Hippothadee was not
before, nor is yet: Bridlegoose was married once, but is not now: and
Trouillogan is married now, who wedded was to another Wife before. Sir, if it
may stand with your good liking, I will ease Carpalin of some parcel of his
Labor, and invite Bridlegoose my self, with whom I of a long time have had a
very intimate familiarity, and unto whom I am to speak on the behalf of a
pretty hopeful Youth, who now studieth at Toulouse, under the most learned,
virtuous Doctor Boissonnet. Do what you deem most expedient (quoth Pantagruel)
and tell me, if my Recommendation can in any thing be steadable for the
promoval of the good of that Youth, or otherways serve for bettering of the
Dignity and Office of the worthy Boissonet, whom I do so love and respect, for
one of the ablest and most sufficient in his way, that any where are extant.
Sir, I will use therein my best Endeavors, and heartily bestir my self about
it.

CHAP. XXX. How the Theologue, Hippothadee, gives Counsel to Panurge in the
matter and business of his Nuptial Enterprise.
THE Dinner on the subsequent Sunday was no sooner made ready, than that the
aforementioned invited Guests gave thereto their Appearance, all of them;
Bridlegoose only excepted, who was the Deputy Governor of the Fonspeton. At the
ushering in of the Second Service, Panurge making a low Reverence, spoke thus:
Gentlemen, the Question I am to propound unto you shall be uttered in very few
Words; Should I marry or no? If my Doubt herein be not resolved by you, I shall
hold it altogether insolvable, as are the Insolubilia de Aliaco; for all of you
are elected, chosen, and culled out from amongst others, every one in his own
Condition and Quality, like so many picked Peace on a Carpet.

The Father Hippothada, in obedience to the bidding of Pantagruel, and with
much Courtesy to the Company, answered exceeding modestly, after this manner:
My Friend, you are pleased to ask Counsel of us; but first you must consult
with your self. Do you find any trouble or disquiet in your Body by the
importunate stings and pricklings of the Flesh? That I do (quoth Panurge) in a
hugely strong and almost irresistible measure: Be not offended, I beseech you,
good Father, at the freedom of my Expression. No truly, Friend, not I, (quoth
Hippothadee) there is no reason why I should be displeased therewith: But in
this Carnal Strife and Debate of yours, have you obtained from God the Gift and
special Grace of Continency? In good Faith, not, (quoth Panurge) My Counsel to
you in that case (my Friend) is, that you marry, (quoth Hippothadee) for you
should rather choose to marry once, than to burn still in Fires of
Concupiscence. Then Panurge, with a jovial Heart and a loud Voice, cried out,
That is spoke gallantly, without circumbilivaginating about and about, and
never hit it in its centred Point. Grammercy, my good Father. In truth I am
resolved now to marry, and without fail I shall do it quickly. I invite you to
my Wedding; by the Body of a Hen, we shall make good Cheer, and be as merry as
Crickets: You shall wear the Bridegroom's Colors; and if we eat a Goose, my
Wife shall not roast for me. I will entreat you to lead up the first Dance of
the Brides Maids, if it may please you to do me so much Favor and Honor.
There rests yet a small Difficulty, a little Scruple, yea, even less than
nothing, whereof I humbly crave your Resolution; Shall I be a Cuckold, Father,
yea or no? By no means, (answered Hippothadee) will you be Cuckolded, if it
please God. O the Lord help us now, (quoth Panurge) whither are we driven to,
good Folks? To the Conditionals, which according to the Rules and Precepts of
the Dialectick Faculty, admit of all contradictions and impossibilities. If my
Transalpine Mule had Wings, my Transalpine Mule would fly. If it please God I
shall not be a Cockold, but I shall be a Cuckold if it please him. Good God, if
this were a condition which I knew how to prevent, my Hopes should be as high
as ever, nor would I despair: But you here send me to God's Privy Council, to
the Closet of his little Pleasures. You my French Countrymen, which is the way
you take to go thither?

My honest Father, I believe it will be your best not to come to my Wedding:
The clutter and dingle dangle noise of Marriage Guests will but disturb you,
and break the serious Fancies of your Brain. You love Repose, with Solitude and
Silence; I really believe you will not come. And then you Dance but
indifferently, and would be out of Countenance at the first Entry. I will send
you some good things to your Chamber, together with the Bride's Favor, and
there you may drink our Health, if it may stand with your good liking. My
Friend (quoth Hippothadee) take my Words in the Sense wherein I meaned them,
and do not misinterpret me. When I tell you, if it please God, do I to you any
wrong therein? Is it an ill Expression? Is it a Blaspheming Clause or Reserve
any way scandalous unto the World? Do not we thereby honor the Lord God
Almighty, Creator, Pretector and Conserver of all things? Is not that a mean,
whereby we do acknowledge him to be the sole Giver of all whatsoever is good?
Do not we in that manifest our Faith, that we believe all things to depend upon
his infinite and incomprehensible Bounty? and that without him nothing can be
produced, nor after its Production be of any value, force, or power, without
the concurring aid and favor of his assisting Grace? Is it not a canonical and
authentic Exception, worthy to be premised to all our Undertakings? Is it not
expedient that what we propose unto our selves, be still referred to what shall
be disposed of by the Sacred Will of God, unto which all things must acquiesce
in the Heavens as well as on the Earth? Is not that verily a sanctifying of his
Holy Name? My Friend, you shall not be a Cuckold, if it please God, nor shall
we need to despair of the knowledge of his good Will and Pleasure herein, as if
it were such an abstruse and mysteriously hidden Secret, that for the clear
understanding thereof it were necessary to consult with those of his Celestial
Privy Council, or expressly make a Voyage unto the Empyrean Chamber, where Order
is given for the effectuating of his most holy Pleasures.

The great God has done us this good, that he has declared and revealed them
to us openly and plainly, and described them in the Holy Bible. There will you
find that you shall never be a Cuckold, that is to say, your Wife shall never
be a Strumpet, if you make choice of one of a commendable Extraction, descended
of honest Parents, and instructed in all Piety and Virtue: Such a one as has
not at any time hanted or frequented the Company or Conversation of those that
are of corrupt and depraved Manners; one loving and fearing God, who takes a
singular delight in drawing near to him by Faith, and the cordial observing of
his Sacred Commandments: And finally, one who standing in awe of the Divine
Majesty, of the most High, will be loath to offend him, and lose the favorable
kindness of his Grace through any defect of Faith, or transgression against the
Ordinances of his Holy Law, wherein Adultery is most rigorously forbidden, and
a close Adherence to her Husband alone most strictly and severely enjoined;
yea, in such sort, that she is to cherish, serve and love him above any thing,
next to God, that meriteth to be beloved. In the interim, for the better
schooling of her in these Instructions, and that the wholesome Doctrine of a
Matrimonial Duty may take the deeper Root in her Mind, you must needs carry
your self so on your part, and your behavior is to be such, that you are to go
before her in a good Example, by entertaining her unfeignedly with a Conjugal
Amity, by continually approving your self in all your Words and Actions a
faithful and discreet Husband; and by living not only at home, and privately
with your own Household and Family, but in the face also of all Men, and open
view of the World, devotely, virtuously and chastely, as you would have her on
her side to deport and demean her self toward you, as becomes a Godly, Loyal
and Respectful Wife, who makes Conscience to keep inviolable the Tie of a
Matrimonial Oath.

For as that Looking-glass is not the best, which is most decked with Gold and
Precious Stones, but that which represents to the Eye the liveliest shapes of
Objects set before it: Even so that Wife should not be most esteemed who
richest is, and of the noblest Race, but she who fearing God, conforms her self
nearest unto the Humor of her Husband.

Consider how the Moon does not borrow her Light from Jupiter, Mars, Mercury,
or any other of the Planets; nor yet from any of those Splendid Stars which are
set in the spangled Firmament; but from her Husband only, the bright Sun, which
she receives from him more or less, according to the manner of his Aspect, and
variously bestowed Eradiations. Just so should you be a Pattern to your Wife in
Virtue, goodly Zeal and true Devotion, that by your Radiance in darting on her
the Aspect of an Exemplary Goodness, she, in your imitation, may outshine the
Luminaries of all other Women. To this effect you daily must implore God's
Grace to the Protection of you both. You would have me then (quoth Panurge,
twisting the Whiskers of his Beard on either side with the Thumb and
Forefinger of his Left Hand) to espouse and take to Wife the prudent frugal
Woman described by Solomon: Without all doubt she is clead, and truly to my
best remembrance I never saw her; the Lord forgive me. Nevertheless I thank
you, Father; eat this slice of Marchpane, it will help your Disgestion; then
shall you be presented with a Cup of Claret Hypocras, which is right healthful
and stomached. Let us proceed.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Physician Rondibilis counsels Panurge.
PAnurge continuing his Discourse, said, The first word which was spoken by him
who guelded the Lubbardly quaffing Monks of Saussiniac, after that he had
unstoned Friar Corcil, was this, To the rest. In like manner, I say, to the
rest. Therefore I beseech you, my good Master Rondibilis, should I marry or
not? By the raking pace of my Mule, quoth Rondibilis, I know not what Answer to
make to this Problem of yours.

You say that you feel in you the pricking Stings of Sensuality, by which you
are stirred up to Venery. I find in our Faculty of Medicine, and we have
founded our Opinion therein upon the deliberate Resolution and final Decision
of the ancient Platonicks, that Carnal Concupiscence is cooled and quelled five
several ways.

First, By the means of Wine. I shall easily believe that, (quoth Friar Ihon)
for when I am well whitled with the Juice of the Grape, I care for nothing else
so I may sleep. When I say (quoth Rondibilis) that Wine abateth Lust, my
meaning is, Wine immoderately taken; for by Intemperancy proceeding from the
excessive* drinking of Strong Liquor, there is brought upon the Body of such a
Swilldown Bouser a chilness in the Blood, a slackening in the Sinews, a
Dissipation of the Generative Seed, a numbness and hebetation of the Senses,
with a perversive wriness and Convulsion of the Muscles; all which are great
L^ts and Impediments to the Act of Generation. Hence it is that Bacchus, the
God of Bibbers, Tiplers and Drunkards is most commonly painted Beardless, and
clad in a Woman's Habit, as a Person altogether Effeminate, or like a libbed
Eunuch. Wine nevertheless taken moderately works quite contrary Effects, as
is implied by the old Proverb, which says, That Venus takes cold when not
accompanied with Ceres and Bacchus. This Opinion is of great Antiquity, as
appears by the Testimony of Diodorus the Sicilian, and confirmed by
Pausanias, and universally held amongst the Lampsacians, that Don Priapos was
the Son of Bace^us and Venus.

Secondly, The Fervency of Lust is abated by certain Drugs, Plants, Herbs and
Roots, which make the Taker cold, maleficiated, unfit for, and unable to
perform the Act of Generation; as has been often experimented in the
Water-Lilly, Heraclea, Agnus Castus, Willow-twigs, Hemp-stalks, Woodbind, Honey
^uckle, Tamarisk, Chastree, Mandrake, Bennet, Kecbuglosse, the Skin of a
Hippopatam, and many other such, which by convenient Doses proportioned to the
peccant Humor and Constitution of the Patient, being duly and seasonably
received within the Body, what by their Elementary Virtues on the one side, and
peculiar Properties on the other, do either benumb, mortify and beclumpse with
Cold the prolifick Semence; or scatter and disperse the Spirits, which ought to
have gone along with, and conducted the Sperm to the places destinated and
appointed for its reception. Or lastly, Shut up, stop and obstruct the ways,
passages and conduits through which the Seed should have been expelled,
evacuated and ejected. We have nevertheless of those Ingredients, which being
of a contrary Operation, heat the Blood, bend the Nerves, unite the Spirits,
quicken the Senses, strengthen the Muscles, and thereby rouse up, provoke,
excite and enable a Man to the vigorous Accomplishment of the Feat of Amorous
Dalliance. I have no need of those, (quoth Panurge) God be thanked, and you my
good Master. Howsoever I pray you take no exception or offense at these my
words; for what I have said was not out of any ill Will I did bear to you, the
Lord he knows.

Thirdly, The Ardour of Lechery is very much subdued and mated by frequent
Labor and continual Toiling: For by painful Exercises and laborious working,
so great a Dissolution is brought upon the whole Body, that the Blood which
runs along the Channels of the Veins thereof, for the Nourishment and
Alimentation of each of its Members, has neither time, leisure nor power to
afford the Seminal Resudation, or superfluity of the third Concoction, which
Nature most carefully reserves for the conservation of the Individual, whose
Preservation she more heedfully regards than the propagating of the Species,
and the multiplication of Humane Kind. Whence it is, that Diana is said to be
chaste, because she is never idle* but always busied about her Hunting, For the
same reason was a Camp, or Leaguer of old called Castrum, as if they would have
said Castum: because the Soldiers, Wrestlers, Runners, Throwers of the Bar, and
other suchlike Athletick Champions, as are usually seen in a Military
Circumvallation, do uncessantly travel and turmoil, and are in a perpetual stir
and agitation. To this purpose Hippocrates also writes in his Book, De* Aere
Aqua and locis: That in his time there were People in Scythia as impotent as
Eunuchs, in the discharge of a Venerian Exploit; because that without any
cessation, pause, or respit, they were never from off Horseback, or otherways
assiduously employed in some troublesome and molesting Drudgery.

On the other part, in opposition and repugnancy hereto, the Philosophers say,
That Idleness is the Mother of Luxury. When it was asked Ovid, Why Egistus
became an Adulterer? he made no other Answer but this: Because he was idle. Who
were able to rid the World of Loytring and Laziness, might easily frustrate and
disappoint Cupid of all his Designs, Aims, Engines, and Devices, and so disable
and appall him, that his Bow, Quiver, and Darts should from thenceforth be a
mere needless Load and Burden to him: for that it could not then lie in his
power to strike, or wound any of either Sex, with all the Arms he had. He is
not, I believe, so expert an Archer, as that he can hit the Cranes flying in
the Air, or yet the young Stags skipping through the Thickets, as the Parthians
knew well how to do; that is to say, People moyling, sinking, and hurrying up
and down, restless, and without repose. He must have those hushed, still, quiet,
lying at a stay, lither, and full of ease, whom he is able, though his Mother
help him, to touch, much less to pierce with all his Arrows, in confirmation
hereof, Theophrastus being asked on a time, What kind of Beast or Thing he
judged a toyish, wanton Love to be? he made Answer, That it was a Passion of
idle and sluggish Spirits. From which pretty Description of ticking Love-tricks
that of Diogenes's hatching was not very discrepant, when he defined Leachery,
Occupation of Folks destitute of all other Occupation.

For this cause the Syconian Engraver, Canachus, being desirous to give us to
understand, that Sloth, Drouziness, Negligence, and Laziness were the prime
Guardians and Governesses of Ribaldry, made the Statue of Venus (not standing,
as other Stone-Cutters had used to do, but) sitting.

Fourthly, The tickling pricks of Incontinency are blunted by an eager Study;
for from thence proceeds an incredible resolution of the Spirits, that
oftentimes there do not remain so many behind as may suffice to push and thrust
forwards the Generative Resudation to the places thereto appropriated, and
therewithal in^^ate the Cavernous Nerve; whose office is to ejaculate the
Moisture for the Propagation of Humane Progeny. Least you should think it is
not so, be pleased but to contemplate a little the Form, Fashion, and Carriage
of a Man exceeding earnestly set upon some Learned Meditation, and deeply
plunged therein, and you shall see how all the Arteries of his Brains are
stretched forth, and bent like the String of a Cross-bow, the more promptly,
dexterously, and copiously to suppeditate, furnish, and supply him with store
of Spirits, sufficient to replenish, and fill up the Ventricles, Seats,
Tunnels, Mansions, Receptacles, and Celluls of the common Sense; of the
Imagination, Apprehension, and Fancy; of the Ratiocination, Arguing, and
Resolution; as likewise of the Memory, Recordation, and Remembrance; and with
great alacrity, nimbleness, and agility to run, pass, and course from the one
to the other, through those Pipes, Windings, and Conduits, which to skilful
Anatomists are perceivable, at the end of the Wonderful Net, where all the
Arteries close in a terminating Point: which Arteries taking their rise and
origin from the left Capsul of the Heart, bring through several Circuits,
Ambages, and Anfractuosities, the Vital, to subtilize and refine them to the
Aetherial Purity of Animal Spirits. Nay, in such a studiously musing Person,
you may espy so extravagant Raptures of one, as it were, out of himself, that
all his Natural Faculties for that time will seem to be suspended from each
their proper charge and office, and his exterior Senses to be at a stand. In a
word, you cannot otherways choose then think, that he is by an extraordinary
Ecstasy quite transported out of what he was, or should be; and that Socrates
did not speak improperly, when he said, That Philosophy was nothing else but a
Meditation upon Death. This possibly is the reason, why Democritus deprived
himself of the Sense of Seeing, prizing at a much lower rate the loss of his
Sight, than the diminution of his Contemplations; which he frequently had found
disturbed by the vagrant, flying-out strayings of his unsettled and roving Eyes.
Therefore is it, that Pallas, the Goddess of Wisdom, Tutress, and Guardianess
of such as are diligently studious, and painfully industrious, is, and has
been still accounted a Virgin. The Muses upon the same consideration are
esteemed perpetual Maids: and the Graces for the like reason, have been held to
continue in a sempiternal Pudicity.

I remember to have read, that Cupid on a time being asked of his Mother Venus,
why he did not assault and set upon the Muses, his Answer was, That he found
them so fair, so sweet, so fine, so neat, so wise, so learned, so modest, so
discreet, so courteous, so virtuous, and so continually busied and employed:
One in the Speculation of the Stars; another in the Supputation of Numbers; the
Third in the Dimension of Geometrical Quantities; the Fourth in the Composition
of Heroic Poems; the Fifth in the jovial Interludes of a Comic Strain; the
Sixth in the stately Gravity of a Tragic Vein; the Seventh in the Melodious
Disposition of Musical Airs; the Eighth in the compleatest manner of Writing
Histories, and Books on all sorts of Subjects; and the Ninth in the Mysteries,
Secrets, and Curiosities of all Sciences, Faculties, Disciplines, and Arts
whatsoever, whether Liberal or Mechanic; that approaching near unto them, he
unbended his Bow, shut his Quiver, and extinguished his Torch, through mere
shame and fear, that by mischance he might do them some hurt or prejudice:
which done, he thereafter put off the Fillet wherewith his Eyes were bound, to
look them in the Face, and to hear their Melody and Poetic Odes. There took he
the greatest pleasure in the World; that many times he was transported with
their Beauty and pretty Behavior, and charmed asleep by the Harmony: so far
was he from assaulting them, or interrupting their Studies. Under this Article
may be comprised, what Hippocrates wrote in the aforecited Treatise concerning
the Scythians, as also that in a Book of his entitled, Of Breeding and
Production; where he has affirmed, all such Men to be unfit for Generation, as
have their Parotid Arteries cut; whose Situation is beside the Ears: for the
reason given already, when I was speaking of the resolution of the Spirits, and
of that Spiritual Blood, whereof the Arteries are the sole and proper
Receptacles; and that likewise he does maintain a large portion of the
Parastatick Liquor, to issue and descend from the Brains and Backbone.

Fifthly, By the too frequent reiteration of the Act of Venery. There did I
wai^ for you (quoth Panurge) and shall willingly apply it to my self, whilst
any one tha^ pleases may, for me, make use of any of the four preceding. That
is the very same thing (quoth Friar Ihon) which Father Scyllino, Prior of Saint
Victor, at Marseilles, calls by the Name of Maceration, and taming of the
Flesh. I am of the same Opinion; and so was the Hermit of Saint Radegonde, a
little above Chinon: for (quoth he) the Hermites of Thebaida can no more aptly
or expediently macerate and bring down the Pride of their Bodies, daunt and
mortify their leacherous Sensuality, or depress and overcome the stubbornness
and rebellion of the Flesh, then by dusling and fanferluching it Five and
twenty, or Thirty times a day. I see Panurge, quoth Rondibilis, neatly
featured, and proportioned in all the Members of his Body, of a good
temperament in his Humors, well complexioned in his Spirits, of a competent
Age, in an opportune Time, and of a reasonably forward Mind to be married:
truly, if he encounter with a Wife of the like Nature, Temperament, and
Constitution, he may beget upon her Children worthy of some Transpontine
Monarchy; and the sooner he marry, it will be the better for him, and the more
conducible for his Profit, if he would see and have his Children in his own
time well provided for. Sir, my worthy Master (quoth Panurge) I will do it, do
not you doubt thereof; and that quickly enough, I warrant you. Nevertheless,
whilst you were busied in the uttering of your Learned Discourse, this Flea
which I have in mine Ear, has tickled me more then ever. I retain you in the
Number of my Festival Guests, and promise you, that we shall not want for
Mirth, and Good Cheer enough; yea, over and above the ordinary Rate. And, if it
may please you, desire your Wife to come along with you, together with her
She-Friends and Neighbors: That is to be understood, and there shall be fair
Play.

CHAP. XXXII. How Rondibilis declares Cuckoldry to be naturally one of the
Appendances of Marriage.
THere remains as yet, quoth Panurge going on in his Discourse, one small
scruple to be cleared: you have seen heretofore, I doubt not, in the Roman
Standards, S. P. Q. R. Si, Peu, Que, Rien: Shall not I be a Cuckold? By the
Haven of Safety, cried out Rondibilis, what is this you ask of me? If you shall
be a Cuckold: My Noble Friend, I am married, and you are like to be so very
speedily: therefore be pleased from my Experiment in the matter, to write in
your Brain, with a Steel-pen, this subsequent Ditton, There is no married Man
who does not run the hazard of being made a Cuckold. Cuckoldry naturally
attends Marriage; the Shadow does not more naturally follow the Body, then
Cuckoldry ensues after Marriage, to place fair Horns upon the Husband's Heads.

And when you shall happen to hear any Man pronounce these three Words: He is
Married: if you then say he is, has been, shall be, or may be a Cuckold, you
will not be accounted an unskilful Artist in framing of true Consequences.
Tripes and Bowels of all the Devils, cries Panurge, what do you tell me? My
dear Friend, (answered Rondibilis) as Hippocrates, on a time, was in the very
nick of setting forwards from Lango to Polystilo, to Visit the Philosopher
Democritus, he wrote a familiar Letter to his Friend Dionoys, wherein he
desired him, That he would during the interval of his absence, carry his Wife
to the House of her Father and Mother, who were an honorable Couple, and of
good Repute; because I would not have her at my Home, (said he) to make abode
in Solitude: yet notwithstanding this her Residence beside her Parents, do not
fail (quoth he) with a most heedful care and circumspection to pry into her
ways, and to espy what places she shall go to with her Mother, and who those be
that shall repair unto her: Not (quoth he) that I do mistrust her Virtue, or
that I seem to have any diffidence of her Pudicity, and chaste Behavior; for
of that I have frequently had good and real proofs: but I must freely tell you,
She is a Woman: there lies the suspicion.

My worthy Friend, the Nature of Women is set forth before our Eyes, and
represented to us by the Moon, in diverse other things, as well as in this, that
they squat, sculck, constrain their own Inclinations, and with all the Cunning
they can, dissemble and play the Hypocrite in the sight and presence of their
Husbands; who come no sooner to be out of the way, but that forthwith they take
their advantage, pass the time merrily, desist from all labor, frolic it, gad
abroad; lay aside their counterfeit Garb, and openly declare and manifest the
interior of their Dispositions; even as the Moon, when she is in Conjunction
with the Sun, is neither seen in the Heavens, nor on the Earth, but in her
Opposition, when remotest from him, shines in her greatest fullness, and wholly
appears in her brightest splendor whilst it is Night: Thus Women are but
Women.

When I say Womankind, I speak of a Sex so frail, so variable, so changeable,
so fickle, inconstant, and imperfect, that in my Opinion, Nature (under favor
nevertheless of the prime Honor and Reverence which is due unto her) did in a
manner mistake the Road which she had traced formerly, and stray exceedingly
from that Excellence of Providential Judgment, by the which she had created and
formed all other things, when she built, framed, and made up the Woman. And
having thought upon it a Hundred and five times, I know not what else to
determine therein, save only that in the devising, hammering, forging, and
composing of the Woman, she has had a much tenderer regard, and by a great
deal more respectful heed to the delightful Consortship, and sociable
Delectation of the Man, than to the Perfection and Accomplishment of the
individual Womanishness, or Muliebrity. The Divine Philosopher Plato, was
doubtful in what Rank of living Creatures to place and collocate them, whither
amongst the Rational Animals, by elevating them to an upper Seat in the
Specifical Classis of Humanity; or with the Irrational, by degrading them to a
lower Bench on the opposite side, of a Brutal kind, and mere Bestiality: for
Nature has posited in a privy, secret, and intestine place of their Bodies, a
sort of Member (by some not impertinently termed an Animal) which is not to be
found in Men. Therein sometimes are engendered certain Humors so saltish,
brackish, clammy, sharp, nipping, tearing, prickling, and most eagerly
tickling, that by their stinging Acrimony, rending Nitrosity, figging Itch,
wrigling Mordicancy, and smarting Salsitude, (for the said Member is altogether
sinewy, and of a most quick and lively feeling) their whole Body is shaken and
ebrangled, their Senses totally ravished and transported, the operations of
their Judgment and Understanding utterly confounded, and all disordinate
Passions and Perturbations of the Mind thoroughly and absolutely allowed,
admitted, and approved of; yea, in such sort, that if Nature had not been so
favorable unto them, as to have sprinkled their Forehead with a little
Tincture of Bashfulness and Modesty, you should see them in a so frantic mood
run mad after Lechery, and hye apace up and down with have and Lust, in quest
of, and to fix some Chamber-Standard in their Paphian Ground, that never did
the Pretides, Mimallonides, nor Lyaean Thyads deport themselves in the time of
their Bacchanalian Festivals, more shamelesly, or with a so affronted and
brazen-faced Impudency; because this terrible Animal is knit unto, and has an
Union with all the chief and most principal parts of the Body, as to Anatomists
is evident. Let it not here be thought strange that I should call it an Animal,
seeing therein I do no otherwise than follow and adhere to the Doctrine of the
Academick and Peripatetick Philosophers. For if a proper Motion be a certain
mark and infallible token of the Life and Animation of the Mover, (as Aristotle
writes) and that any such thing as moves of its self ought to be held
Animated, and of a Living Nature; then assuredly Plato with very good reason
did give it the Denomination of an Animal; for that he perceived and observed
in it the proper and self-stirring motions of Suffocation, Precipitation,
Corrugation, and of Indignation, so extremely violent, that oftentimes by them
is taken and removed from the Women all other sense and moving whatsoever, as
if she were in a swounding Lipothymy, benumming Sincop, Epileptick, Apoplectick
Palsy, and true resemblance of a palefaced Death.

Furthermore, in the said Member there is a manifest discerning Faculty of
Scents and Odours very perceptible to Women, who feel it fly from what is rank
and unsavory, and follow fragrant and Aromatic Smells. It is not unknown to
me how Cl. Gallen striveth with might and main, to prove that these are not
proper and particular Notions proceeding intrinsically from the thing it self,
but accidentally, and by chance. Nor has it escaped my notice, how others of
that Sect have labored hardly, yea, to the utmost of their Abilities, to
demonstrate that it is not a sensitive discerning or perception in it of the
difference of Wafts and Smells, but merely a various manner of Virtue and
Efficacy, passing forth and flowing from the diversity of odoriferous
Substances applied near unto it. Nevertheless, if you will studiously examine,
and seriously ponder and weigh in Critolaus's Balance the strength of their
Reasons and Arguments, you shall find that they, not only in this, but in
several other matters also of the like nature, have spoken at random, and
rather out of an ambitious Envy to check and reprehend their Betters, than for
any design to make enquiry into the solid Truth.

I will not launch my little Skif any further into the wide Ocean of this
Dispute, only will I tell you that the Praise and Commendation is not mean and
slender which is due to those honest and good Women, who living chastely and
without blame, have had the power and virtue to curb, range and subdue that
unbridled, heady and wild Animal to an obedient, submissive and obsequious
yielding unto Reason. Therefore here will I make an end of my Discourse
thereon, when I shall have told you, that the said Animal being once satiated
(if it be possible that it can be contented or satisfied) by that Aliment,
which Nature has provided for it out of the Epididymal Storehouse of Man, all
its former and irregular and disordered Motions are at an end, laid and
assuaged; all its vehement and unruly Longings lulled, pacified and quieted;
and all the furious and raging Lusts, Appetites and Desires thereof appeased,
suppressed, calmed and extinguished. For this cause let it seem nothing strange
unto you, if we be in a perpetual Danger of being Cuckolds; that is to say,
such of us as have not wherewithal fully to satisfy the Appetite and
Expectation of that vo^acious Animal. Ods Fish! (quoth Panurge) have you no
preventive Cure in all your Medicinal Art for hindering ones Head to be
Horny-graffed at home, whilst his Feet are plodding abroad? Yes that I have* my
gallant Friend, (answered Rondibilis) and that which is a Sovereign Remedy,
whereof I frequently make use my self; and that* you may the better relish, it
is set down and written in the Book of a most famous Author, whose Renown is of
a standing of two thousand Years. Hearken and take good heed. You are (quoth
Panurge) by Cocks-Hobby, a right honest Man, and I love you with all my heart;
eat a little of this Quince-Pye, it is very proper and convenient for the
shutting up of the Orifice of the Ventricle of the Stomach, because of a kind
of astringent Stypticity, which is in that sort of Fruit, and is helpful to the
first Concoction. But what? I think I speak Latin before Clerks. Stay, fill, I
give you somewhat to drink out of this Nestorian Goblet. Will you have another
Draught of white Hippocras? Be not afraid of the Squinzy, No: There is neither
Squinant, Ginger nor Grains in it; only a little choice Cinnamon, and some of
the best refined Sugar, with the delicious Whitewine of the Growth of that
Vine, which was set in the Slips of the great Sorbaple, above the Wallnut-tree.

CHAP. XXXIII. Rondibilis the Physician's Cure of Cuckoldry.
AT that time (quoth Randibilis) when Iupitur took a view of the state of his
Olympic House and Family, and that he had made the Calender of all the Gods
and Goddesses, appointing unto the Festival of every one of them its proper day
and season, establishing certain fixed places and stations for the pronouncing
of Oracles, and relief of traveling Pilgrims, and ordaining Victims,
Immolations and Sacrifices suitable and correspondent to the Dignity and Nature
of the worshipped and adored Deity. Did not he do (asked Panurge) therein, as
Tintouille the Bishop of Auxerre is said once to have done? This Noble Prelate
loved entirely the pure Liquor of the Grape, as every honest and judicious Man
does; therefore was it that he had an especial care and regard to the Bud of
the Vinetree, as to the great Grandfather of Bacchus, But so it is, that for
sundry Years together he saw a most pitiful Havoc, Desolation and Destruction
made amongst the Sprouts, Shootings, Buds, Blossoms and Sciens of the Vines by
hoary Frosts, Dank-fogs, hot Mists, unseasonable Colds, chill Blasts, thick
Hail, and other calamitous Chances of foul Weather happening, as he thought, by
the dismal inauspiciousness of the Holy Days of St. George, St. Mary, St. Paul,
St. Eutrope, Holy Rood, the Aseension, and other Festivals, in that time when
the Sun passes under the Sign of Taurus; and thereupon harbored in his Mind
this Opinion, that the aforementioned Saints were Saint Hail-flingers, Saint
Frostsenders, Saint Fogmongers, and Saint Spoilers of the Vine-buds; for which
cause be went about to have transmitted their Feasts from the Spring to the
Winter, to be Celebrated between Christmas and Epiphany, (so the Mother of the
three Kings called it)* allowing them with all Honor and Reverence the liberty
then to freeze, hail and rain as much as they would; for that he knew that at
such a time Frost was rather profitable than hurtful to the Vine-buds, and in
their steads to have placed the Festivals of St. Christopher, St. John the
Baptist, St. Magdalene, St. Ann, St. Domingo, and St. Lawrence; yea, and to
have gone so far as to collocate and transpose the middle of August in, and to
the beginning of May; because during the whole Space of their Solemnity, there
was so little danger of hoary Frosts and cold Mists, that no Artificers are
then held in greater Request, than the Afforder of refrigerating Inventions,
Makers of Junkets, fit Disposers of cooling Shades, Composers of green Arbours,
and Refreshers of Wine.

Jupiter (said Rondibilis) forgot the poor Devil Cuckoldry, who was then in the
Court at Paris, very eagerly soliciting a pedling Suit at Law for one of his
Vassals and Tenants; within some few days thereafter, (I have forgot how many)
when he got full notice of the Trick, which in his Absence was done unto him,
he instantly desisted from prosecuting Legal Processes, in the behalf of
others, full of Solicitude to pursue after his own business, lest he should be
fore-closed: And thereupon he appeared personally at the Tribunal of the great
Jupiter, displayed before him the importance of his preceding Merits; together
with the acceptable Services, which in Obedience to his Commandments he had
formerly performed; and therefore, in all humility, begged of him, that he
would be pleased not to leave him alone amongst all the Sacred Potentates,
destitute and void of Honor, Reverence, Sacrifices and festival Ceremonies. To
this Petition Jupiter's Answer was excusatory, That all the Places and Offices
of his House were bestowed. Nevertheless so importuned was he by the continual
Supplications of Monsieur Cuckoldry, that he, in fine, placed him in the Rank,
List, Roll, Rubric and Catalogue; and appointed Honors, Sacrifices and
Festival Rites to be observed on Earth in great Devotion, and tendered to him
with Solemnity.

The Feast, because there was no void, empty nor vacant place in all the
Calender, was to be celebrated jointly with, and on the same day that had been
consecrated to the Goddess Jealousy: His Power and Dominion should be over
Married Folks, especially such as had handsome Wives: His Sacrifices were to be
Suspicion, Diffidence, Mistrust, a lowering powting Sullenness, Watchings,
Wardings, Researchings, Plyings, Explorations, together with the Way-layings,
Ambushes, narrow Observations, and malicious Doggings of the Husband's Scouts
and Espials of the most privy Actions of their Wives. Herewithal every married
Man was expressly and rigorously commanded to reverence, honor and worship him;
to celebrate and solemnize his Festival with twice more respect than that of
another Saint or Deity, and to immolate unto him with all Sincerity and
Alacrity of Heart the abovementioned Sacrifices and Oblations, under pain of
severe Censures, Threatenings, and Comminations of these subsequent Fines,
Mulcts, Amerciaments, Penalties and Punishments to be inflicted on the
Delinquents; that Monsieur Cuckoldry should never be favorable nor propitious
to them; that he should never help, aid, supply, succor nor grant them any
subventitious Furtherance, a^xiliary Suffrage, or adminiculary Assistance; that
he should never hold in any Reckoning Account or Estimation; that he should
never daign to enter within their Houses, neither at the Doors, Windows, nor
any other place thereof; that he should never haunt nor frequent their
Companies or Conversations; how frequently soever they should invocate him, and
call upon his Name; and that not only he should leave and abandon them to rot
alone with their Wives in a sempiternal Solitariness, without the benefit of
the diversion of any Copesmate or Corrival at all; but should withal shun and
eschew them, fly from them, and eternally forsake and reject, them as impious
Heretics and Sacrilegious Persons, according to the accustomed manner of other
Gods, toward such as are too slack in offering up the Duties and Reverences
which ought to be performed respectively to their Divinities: As is evidently
apparent in Bacchus toward negligent Vine-dressers; in Ceres against idle
Plow-men and Tillers of the Ground; in Pomona to unworthy Fruiterers and
Custard-mongers; in Neptune toward dissolute Mariners and Seafaring Men; in
Vulcan toward loytering Smiths and Forge-men; and so throughout the rest.

Now, on the contrary, this infallible Promise was added, that unto all those
who should make a Holy Day of the aboverecited Festival, and cease from all
manner of worldly Work and Negotiation, lay aside all their own most important
occasions, and to be so wretchless, heedless, and careless of what might
concern the management of their proper Affairs, as to mind nothing else but a
suspicious espying and prying into the secret Deportments of their Wives, and
how to koop, shut up, hold at under, and deal cruelly and austeerly with them,
by all the Harshness and Hardships that an implacable, and every way inexorable
Jealousy can devise and suggest, conform to the Sacred Ordinances of the
aforementioned Sacrifices and Oblations, he should be continually favorable
to them, should love them, sociably converse with them, should be Day and Night
in their Houses, and never leave them destitute of his Presence. Now I have
said, and you have heard my Cure.

Ha, ha, ha, (quoth Capalin laughing)* this is a remedy yet more apt and proper
than Hans Carvel's Ring: The Devil take me if I do not believe it. The Humor,
Inclination and Nature of Women is like the Thunder, whose Force in its Bolt,
or otherways, burns, bruiseth and breaks only hard, massive and resisting
Objects, without staying or stopping at soft, empty and yielding matters: For
it pasheth into pieces the Steel Sword, without doing any hurt to the Velvet
Scabbard which insheatheth it: It rusheth also, and consumes the Bones,
without wounding or endammaging the Flesh, wherewith they are veiled and
covered: Just so it is, that Women for the greater part never bend the
Contention, Subtilty, and contradictory Disposition of their Spirits, unless it
be to do what is prohibited and forbidden.

Verily, (quoth Hippothadee) some of of our Doctors averr for a truth, that the
first Woman of the World, whom the Hebrews call Eve, had hardly been induced or
allured into the Temptation of eating of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, if it
had not been forbidden her so to do. And that you may give the more Credit to
the Validity of this Opinion, consider how the cautelous and wily Tempter did
commemorate unto her, for an antecedent to his Enthymeme, the Prohibition which
was made to taste it, as being desirous to infer from thence, It it forbidden
thee; therefore thou should eat of it, else thou can not be a Woman.

CHAP. XXXIV. How Women ordinarily have the greatest longing after things
prohibited.
WHEN I was (quoth Carpalin) a Whoremaster at Orleans, the whole Art of
Rhetoric in all its Tropes and Figures, was not able to afford unto me a
Color or Flourish of greater force and value; nor could I by any other form or
manner of Elocution pitch upon a more persuasive Argument for bringing young
beautiful married Ladies into the Snares of Adultery, through alluring and
enticing them to taste with me of Amorous Delights, then with a lively
Sprightfulness to tell them in downright terms, and to remonstrate to them,
(with a great show of Detestation of a Crime so horrid) how their Husbands were
jealous. This was none of my Invention: It is written, and we have Laws,
Examples, Reasons and daily Experiences confirmative of the same. If this
Belief once enter into their Noddles, their Husbands will infallibly be
Cuckolds; yea, by God, will they, (without swearing) although they should do
like Semiramis, Pasiphae, Egesta, the Women of the Isle Mandez in Egypt, and
other such like Queanish flurting Harlots, mentioned in the Writings of
Herodotus, Strabo, and such like Puppies.

Truly (quoth Panocrates) I have heard it related, and it has been told me for
a Verity, that Pope Ihon 22. passing on a day through the Abbey of Toucherome,
was in all Humility required and besought by the Abbess, and other discreet
Mothers of the said Convent, to grant them an Indulgence, by means whereof they
might confess themselves to one another, alleging, That Religious Women were
subject ^^ some petty secret Slips and Imperfections, which would be a foul and
burning shame for them to discover and to reveal to Men, how Sacerdotal soever
their Function were: but that they would freelier, more familiarly, and with
greater cheerfulness, open to each other their Offenses, Faults, and Escapes,
under the Seal of Confession. There is not any thing (answered the Pope)
fitting for you to impetrate of me, which I would not most willingly condescend
unto: but I find one inconvenience; you know, Confession should be kept secret:
and Women are not able to do so. Exceeding well (quoth they) most Holy Father,
and much more closely then the best of Men.

The said Pope on the very same day, gave them in keeping a pretty Box, wherein
he purposely caused a little Linnet to be put, willing them very gently and
courteously to lock it up in some sure and hidden place; and promising them, by
the Faith of a Pope, that he should yield to their Request, if they would keep
secret what was enclosed within that deposited Box: enjoining them withal, not
to presume one way nor other, directly or indirectly, to go about the opening
thereof, under pain of the highest Ecclesiastical Censure, Eternal
Excommunication. The Prohibition was no sooner made, but that they did all of
them boil with a most ardent desire to know, and see what kind of thing it was
that was within it: they thought long already, that the Pope was not gone, to
the end they might jointly, with the more leisure and ease apply themselves to
the Box-opening Curiosity.

The Holy Father, after he had given them his Benediction, retired and withdrew
himself to the Pontifical Lodgings of his own Palace; but he was hardly gone
three Steps from without the Gates of their Cloister, when the good Ladies
throngingly, and as in a hudled Crowd, pressing hard on the Backs of one
another, ran thrusting and shoving who should be first at the setting open of
the forbidden Box, and descrying of the Quod latitat within.

On the very next day thereafter, the Pope made them another Visit, of a full
design, purpose, and intention (as they imagined) to dispatch the Grant of
their sought and wished-for Indulgence: but before he would enter into any Chat
or Communing with them, he commanded the Casket to be brought unto him: it was
done so accordingly; but by your leave, the Bird was no more there* Then was
it, that the Pope did represent to their Maternities, how hard a matter and
difficult it was for them to keep Secrets revealed to them in Confession,
unmanifested to the Ears of others; seeing for the space of Four and twenty
hours they were not able to lay up in secret a Box, which he had highly
recommended to their Discretion, Charge and Custody.

Welcome, in good Faith, my dear Master, welcome: It did me good to hear you
talk, the Lord be praised for all. I do not remember to have seen you before
now, since the last time that you acted at Monpelliers, with our ancient
Friends, Anthony Saporra, Guy Bourguyer, Balthazar Noyer, Tolly, Ihon Quentin,
Francis Robinet, I^on Perdrier, and Francis Rabelais, the Moral Comedy of him
who had espoused and married a Dumb Wife. I was there, quoth Epistemon, the
good honest Man, her Husband, was very earnestly urgent to have the Fillet of
her Tongue untied, and would needs have her speak by any means: at his desire,
some pains were taken on her, and partly by the industry of the Physician,
other part by the expertness of the Surgeon, the Encyliglotte, which she had
under her Tongue, being cut, she spoke and spoke again; yea, within few hours
she spoke so loud, so much, so fiercely, and so long, that her poor Husband
returned to the same Physician for a Recipe to make her hold her Peace: There
are (quoth the Physician) many proper Remedies in our Art, to make dumb Women
speak, but there are none, that ever I could learn therein, to make them
silent. The only Cure which I have found out, is their Husband's Deafness. The
Wretch became within few Weeks thereafter, by Virtue of some Drugs, Charms or
Enchantments, which the Physician had prescribed unto him, so deaf, that he
could not have heard the Thundering of Nineteen hundred Canons at a Salve. His
Wife perceiving, that indeed he was as deaf as a Door-nail, and that her
Scolding was but in vain, since that he heard her not, she grew stark mad.

Some time after, the Doctor asked for his Fee of the Husband; who answered,
That truly he was deaf, and so was not able to understand what the tenure of
his Demand might be. Whereupon the Leech bedusted him with a little, I know not
what, sort of Powder; which rendered him a Fool immediately: so great was the
stultificating Virtue of that strange kind of pulverized Dose. Then did this
Fool of a Husband, and his mad Wife join together, falling on the Doctor and
the Surgeon, did so scratch, bethwack, and bang them, that they were left half
dead upon the place, so furious were the Blows which they received: I never in
my Lifetime laughed so much, as at the acting of that Buffoonry.

Let us come to where we left off, quoth Panurge) your Words being translated
from the Clapper-dudgions to plain English, do signify, that it is not very
inexpedient that I marry, and that I should not care for being a Cuckold. You
have there hit the Nail on the Head. I believe, Master Doctor, that on the Day
of my Marriage you will be so much taken up with your Patients, or otherways so
seriously employed, that we shall not enjoy your Company: Sir, I will heartily
excuse your absence.

Stercus and urina medici sunt prandia prima.
Ex aliis paleas ex istis collige grana.
You are mistaken (quoth Rondibilis) in the Second Verse of our Distich; for it
ought to run thus:

Nobis sunt signa vobis sunt prandia digna. If my Wife at any time prove to be
unwell, and ill at ease, I will look upon the Water which she shall have made
in an Urinal-glass, (quoth Rondibilis) grope her Pulse, and see the disposition
of her Hypogaster, together with her Umbilicary Parts. According to the
Prescript Rule of Hippocrates, 2. Aph. 35. before I proceed any further in the
Cure of her Distemper. No, no, (quoth Panurge) that will be but to little
purpose; such a Feat is for the Practice of us that are Lawyers, who have the
Rubric, De Ventre inspi^iendo: Do not therefore trouble your self about it,
(*Master Doctor) I will provide for her a Plaster of warm Guts. Do not neglect
your more urgent occasions other-where, for coming to my Wedding, I will send
you some supply of Victuals to your own House, without putting you to the
trouble of coming abroad, and you shall always be my special Friend. With this
approaching somewhat nearer to him, he clapped into his Hand, without the
speaking of so much as one word, four Rose Nobles. Rondibilis did shut his Fist
upon them right kindly; yet as if it had displeased him to make acceptance of
suc^ Golden Presents; he in a start, as if he had been wroth, said, He, he, he,
he, he, there was no need of any thing, I thank you nevertheless; From wicked
Folks, I never get enough; and I from honest People refuse nothing. I shall be
always, Sir, at your Command. Provided that I pay you well, quoth Panurge. That
(quoth Rondibilis) is understood.

CHAP. XXXV. How the Philosopher Trouillogan ^andleth the difficulty of
Marriage.
AS this Discourse was ended, Pantagruel said to the Philosopher Trouillogan,
Our loyal, honest, true and trusty Friend, the Lamp from hand to hand is come
to you; it falls to your turn to give an Answer, Should Panurge, pray you,
marry, yea or no? He should do both, quoth Trouillogan. What say you, asked
Panurge? That which you have heard, answered Trouillogan. What have I heard?
replied Panurge. That which I have said, replied Trouillogan. Ha, ha, ha, are
we come to that pass, quoth Panurge? Let it go nevertheless, I do not value it
at a rush, seeing we can make no better of the Game. But howsoever tell me,
Should I marry or no? Neither the one nor the other, answered Trouillogan. The
Devil take me, quoth Panurge, if these odd Answers do not make me dote, and may
be snatch me presently away, if I do understand you. Stay awhile until I fasten
these Spectacles of mine on this left Ear, that I may hear you better. With
this Pantagruel perceived at the Door of the great Hall, (which was that day
their Dining Room) Gargantua's little Dog, whose Name was Kyne; for so was
Toby's Dog called, as is Recorded. Then did he say to these who were there
present, Our King is not far off, let us all rise. That word was scarcely
sooner ^ttered, than that Gargantua with his Ro^al Presence graced that
banqueting and stately Hall. Each of their Guests a^ose to do their King that
Reverence and Duty which became them. After that Gargantua had most affably
saluted all the Gentlemen there present, he said, Good Friends, I beg this
Favor of you, and therein you will very much oblige me, that you leave not the
places where you sat, nor quit the Discourse you were upon.

Let a Chair be brought hither unto this end of the Table, and reach me a Cup
full of the strongest and best Wine you have, that I may drink to all the
Company. You are in Faith, all welcome, Gentlemen. Now let me know what Talk you
were about. To this Pantagruel answered, That at the beginning of the Second
Service Panurge had proposed a Problematick Theme, to wit, Whether he should
marry, or not marry? That Father Hippothadee, and Doctor Rondibilis had already
dispatched their Resolutions thereupon; and that just as his Majesty was coming
in, the faithful Trouillogan, in the delivery of his Opinion, has thus far
proceeded, that when Panurge asked, whether he ought to marry, yea or no. At
first he made this Answer, Both together. When this same Question was again
propounded, his second Answer was, Not the one nor* the other. Panurge
exclaimeth, that those Answers are full of Repugnancies and Contradictions,
protesting that he understands them not, nor what it is that can be meaned by
them. If I be not mistaken, quoth Gargantua, I understand it very well: The
Answer is not unlike to that which was once made by a Philosopher in ancient
times, who being interrogated, if he had a Woman, whom they named him, to his
Wife; I have her, quoth he, but she has not me; possessing her, by her I am
not possessed. Such another Answer, quoth Pantagruel, was once made by a certain
bouncing Wench of Sparta, who being asked, if at any time she had had to do
with a Man? No, (quoth she) but sometimes Men have to do with me. Well then
(quoth Rondibilis) let it be a Neuter in Physic; as when we say a body is
Neuter, when it is neither sick nor healthful; and a Mean in Philosophy; that
by an Abnegation of both Extremes, and this by the Participation of the one and
of the other: Even as when lukewarm Water is said to be both hot and cold; or
rather, as when Time makes the Partition, and equally divides betwixt the two,
a while in the one, another while, as long, in the other opposite extremity.
The holy Apostle, (quoth Hippothadee) seems, as I conceive, to have more
clearly explained this Point, when he said, Those that are married, let them be
as if they were not married; and those that have Wives, let them be as if they
had no Wives at all. I thus interterpret (quoth Pantagruel) the having and not
having of a Wife. To have a Wife, is to have the use of her in such a way as
Nature has ordained, which is for the Aid, Society and Solace of Man, and
propagating of his Race: To have no Wife is not to be uxorious, play the
Coward, and be lazy about her, and not for her sake to distain the Luster of
that Affection which Man owes to God; or yet for her to leave those Offices and
Duties which he owes unto his Country, unto his Friends and Kindred; or for her
to abandon and forsake his precious Studies, and other businesses of Account,
to wait still on her Will, her Beck, and her Buttocks. If we be pleased in this
Sense to take having and not having of a Wife, we shall indeed find no
Repugnancy nor Contradiction in the Terms at all.

CHAP. XXXVI. A Continuation of the Answer of the Ephectick and Pyrronian
Philosopher Trouillogan.
YOU speak wisely, quoth Panurge, if the Moon were green Cheese; such a Tale
once pissed my Goose: I do not think but that I am let down into that dark Pit,
in the lowermost bottom whereof the truth was hid, according to the saying of
Heraclitus. I see no whit at all, I hear nothing, understand as little, my
Senses are altogether dulled and blunted; truly I do very shrewdly suspect that
I am enchanted. I will now alter the former style of my Discourse, and talk to
him in another Strain. Our trusty Friend, stir not, nor imburse any; but let us
vary the Chance, and speak without Disjunctives: I see already that these loose
and ill-joined Members of an Eununciation do vex, trouble and perplex you.

Now go on, in the Name of God, Should I marry?

Trouillogan. There is some likelihood therein.


Panurge. But if I do not marry?


Trouil. I see in that no Inconvenience.


Pan. You do not?


Trouil. None, truly, if my Eyes deceive me not.


Pan. Yea, but I find more than Five Hundred.


Trouil. Reckon them.


Pan. This is an Impropriety of Speech, I confess; for I do no more thereby,
but take a certain for an uncertain Number, and posit the determinate Term for
what is indeterminate. When I say therefore Five Hundred, my meaning is, many.


Trouil. I hear you.


Pan. Is it possible for me to live without a Wife, in the Name of all the
Subterranean Devils?


Trouil. Away with these filthy Beasts.


Pan. Let it be then in the Name of God; for my Salmigondinish People use to
say, To lie alone without a Wife, is certainly a brutish Life. And such a Life
also was it assevered to be by Dido in her Lamentations.


Trouil. At your Command.


Pan. By the Pody Cody, I have fished fair; where are we now? But will you tell
me? Shall I marry?


Trouil. Perhaps.


Pan. Shall I thrive or speed well withal?


Trouil. According to the Encounter.


Pan. But if in my Adventure I encounter aright, as I hope I will, shall I be
fortunate?


Trouil. Enough.


Pan. Let us turn the clean contrary way, and brush our former Words against
the Wool; what if I encounter ill?


Trouil. Then blame not me.


Pan. But, of Courtesy, be pleased to give me some Advice: I heartily beseech
you, what must I do?


Trouil. Even what thou will.


Pan. Wishy, washy; Trolly, trolly.


Trouil. Do not Invocate the Name of any thing, I pray you.


Pan. In the Name of God, let it be so: my Actions shall be regulated by the
Rule and Square of your Counsel: What is it that you advise and counsel me to
do?


Trouil. Nothing.


Pan. Shall I ma^^^?


Trouil. I have no hand in it.


Pan. Then shall I not marry?


Trouil. I cannot help it.


Pan. If I never marry, I shall never be a Cuckold,


Trouil. I thought so.


Pan. But put the case that I be married.


Trouil. Where shall we put it?


Pan. Admit it be so then, and take my meaning in that sense.


Trouil. I am otherways employed.


Pan. By the Death of a Hog, and Mother of a Toad, O Lord, if I durst hazard
upon a little Fling at the swearing Game, though privily and under Thumb, it
would lighten the Burden of my Heart, and ease my Lights and Reins
exceedingly; a little Patience nevertheless is requisite. Well then, if I
marry, I shall be a Cuckold.


Trouil. One would say so.


Pan. Yet if my Wife prove a virtuous, wise, discreet and chaste Woman, I shall
never be Cuckolded.


Trouil. I think you speak congruously.


Pan. Hearken.


Trouil. As much as you will.


Pan. Will she be discreet and chaste? This is the only Point I would be
resolved in?


Trouil. I question it.


Pan. You never saw her?


Trouil. Not that I know of.


Pan. Why do you then doubt of that which you know not?


Trouil. For a Cause.


Pan. And if you should know her.


Trouil. Yet more.


Pan. Page, my pretty little Darling, take here my Cap, I give it thee: Have a
care you do not break the Spectacles that are in it; go down to the lower
Court: Swear there half an hour for me, and I shall in compensation of that
Favor swear hereafter for thee as much as thou will. But who shall Cuckold me?


Trouil. Some body.


Pan. By the Belly of the wooden Horse at Troy, Master Somebody, I shall bang,
belam thee, and claw thee well for thy labor.


Trouil. You say so.


Pan. Nay, nay, that Nick in the dark Celler, who has no White in his Eye,
carry me quite away with him, if in that case, whenever I go abroad from the
Palace of my Domestic Residence, I do not with as much Circumspection, as they
use to ring Mares in our Country to keep them from being sallied by Stoned
Horses, clap a Bergamasco Lock upon my Wife.


Trouillogan. Talk better.


Panurge. It is Bien chien chie chante, well cacked, and cackled; shitten, and
sung in matter of Talk: Let us resolve on somewhat.


Trouillogan. I do not gainsay it.


Panurge. Have a little patience, seeing I cannot on this side draw any Blood
of you. I will try, if with the Launcet of my Judgment, I be able to bleed you
in another Vein. Are you married, or are you not?


Trouillogan. Neither the one nor the other, and both together.


Panurge. O the good God help us; by the Death of a Buffle-ox, I sweat: with
the toil and travel that I am put to, and find my Digestion broke off,
disturbed, and interrupted for all my Phrenes, Metaphrenes, and Diaphragmes,
Back, Belly, Mid^i^, Muscles, Veins, and Sinews are held in a suspense, and for
a while discharged from their proper Offices, to stretch forth their several
Powers and Abilities, for Incornifistibulating, and laying up into the Hamper
of my Understanding, your various Sayings and Answers.


Trouillogan. I shall be no hinderer thereof.


Panurge. Tush, for shame: our faithful Friend, speak, Are you married?


Trouillogan. I think so.


Panurge. You were also married before you had this Wife.


Trouillogan. It is possible.


Panurge. Had you good Luck in your First Marriage?


Trouillogan. It is not impossible.


Panurge. How thrive you with this Second Wise of yours?


Trouillogan. Even as it pleases my Fatal Destiny.


Panurge. But what in good earnest? tell me: Do you prosper well with her?


Trouillogan. It is likely.


Panurge. Come on, in the Name of God: I vow, by the Burden of Saint*
Christopher, that I had rather undertake the fetching of a Fart forth of the
Belly of a dead Ass, then to draw out of you a positive and determinate
Resolution: yet shall I be sure at this time to have a snatch at you, and get
my Claws over you. Our trusty Friend, let us shame the Devil of Hell, and
confess the verity: Were you ever a Cuckold? I say, you who are here* and not
that other you who plays below in the Tennis-Court?


Trouillogan. No, if it was not predestined.


Panurge. By the Flesh, Blood, and Body, I swear, reswear, forswear, abjure,
and renounce, he evades and avoids, shifts, and escapes me, and quite slips and
winds himself out of my Gripes and Clutches.

At these words Gargantua arose, and said, Praised be the good God in all
things, but especially for bringing the World into that height of Refinedness,
beyond what it was when I first came to be acquainted therewith, that now the
Learned and most Prudent Philosophers are not ashamed to be seen entering in
at the Porches and Frontispieces of the Schools of the Pyrronian, Aporetick,
Sceptick, and Ephectick Sects: Blessed be the Holy Name of God, veritably, it
is like henceforth to be found an Enterprise of much more easy undertaking, to
catch Lvons by the Neck, Horses by the Main, Oxen by the Horns, Bulls by the
Muzzle, Wolves by the Tail, Goats by the Beard, and flying Birds by the Feet,
then to entrap such Philosophers in their words. Farewell, my worthy, dear, and
honest Friends.

When he had done thus speaking, he withdrew himself from the Company;
Pautagruel, and others with him would have followed and accompanied him, but he
would not permit them so to do. No sooner was Gargantua departed out of the
Banquetting-Hall, then that Pantagruel said to the invited Guests: Plato's
Timee, at the Beginning always of a solemn Festival Convention, was wont to
count those that were called thereto; we on the contrary, shall at the Closure
and End of this Treatment, reckon up our Number, One, Two, Three; Where is the
Fourth? I miss my Friend Bridlegoose: Was not he sent for? Epistemon answered,
That he had been at his House to bid and invite him; but could not meet with
him: for that a Messenger from the Parliament of Mirlingois, in Mirlingues, was
come from him, with a Writ of Summons, to cite and warn him personally to
appear before the Reverend Senators of the High Court there, to vindicate and
justify himself at the Bar, of the Crime of Prevarication laid to his charge,
and to be peremptorily instanced against him in a certain Decree, Judgment, or
Sentence lately awarded, given and pronounced by him: and that therefore he had
taken Horse, and departed in great have from his own House; to the end, that
without peril or danger of falling into a default, or contumacy, he might be
the better able to keep the prefixed and appointed time.

I will (quoth Pantagruel) understand how that matter goes; it is now above
Forty Years, that he has been constantly the Judge of Fonsbeton: during which
space of time, he has given Four thousand Definitive Sentences: of Two
thousand three hundred and nine whereof, although Appeal was made by the
Parties whom he had judicially condemned from his inferior Judicatory, to the
Supreme Court of the Parliament of Mirlingois, in Mirlingues, they were all of
them nevertheless confirmed, ratified and approved of by an Order, Decree, and
final Sentence of the said Sovereign Court, to the casting of the Appellants,
and utter overthrow of the Suits wherein they had been soiled at Law, for ever
and a day: that now in his Old Age he should be personally summoned, who in all
the foregoing time of his Life, has demeaned himself so unblamably in the
Discharge of the Office and Vocation he had been called unto; it cannot
assuredly be, that such a change has happened without some notorious
Misfortune and Disaster: I am resolved to help and assist him in Equity and
Justice to the uttermost extent of my power and ability. I know the Malice,
Despite, and Wickedness of the World to be so much more nowadays exaspered,
increased, and aggravated by what it was not long since, that the best Cause
that is, how just and equitable soever it be, stands in great need to be
succored, aided and supported. Therefore presently, from this very instant
forth* do I purpose, till I see the event and closure thereof, most heedfully
to attend and wait upon it, for fear of some underhand tricky Surprizal,
Cavilling, Pettifoggery, or allacious Quirks in Law, to his detriment, hurt, or
disadvantage.

Then Dinner being done, and the Tables drawn and removed, when Pantagruel had
very cordially and affectionately thanked his invited Guests, for the Favor
which he had enjoyed of their Company, he presented them with several rich and
costly Gifts, such as Jewels, Rings set with precious Stones, Gold and Silver
Vessels; with a great deal of other sort of Plate besides; and lastly, taking
of them all his Leave, retired himself into an inner Chamber.


CHAP. XXXVII. How Pantagruel persuaded Panurge to take Counsel of a Fool.
WHen Pantagruel had withdrawn himself, he by a little sloping Window in one of
the Galleries, perceived Panurge in a Lobbey not far from thence, walking
alone, with the Gesture, Carriage, and Garb of a fond Dotard, raving, wagging,
and shaking his Hands, dandling, lolling, and nodding with his Head, like a Cow
bellowing for her Calf; and having then called him nearer, spoke unto him thus:
You are at this present (as I think) not unlike to a Mouse entangled in a
snare, who the more that she goes about to rid and unwind herself out of the
Gin wherein she is caught, by endeavoring to clear and deliver her feet from
the Pitch whereto they stick, the ^oulier she is bewrayed with it, and the more
strongly pestered therein; even so is it with you: for the more that you
labor, strive, and enforce your self to disincumber, and extricate your
Thoughts out of the implicating Involutions and Fetterings of the grievous and
lamentable Gins and Springs of Anguish and Perplexity; the greater difficulty
there is in the relieving of you, and you remain faster bound then ever: nor do
I know for the removal of this Inconveniency, any Remedy but one.

Take heed; I have often heard it said in a Vulgar Proverb, The Wise may be
instructed by a Fool. Seeing the Answers and Responses of sage and judicious
Men, have in no manner of way satisfied you, take Advice of some Fool; and
possibly by so doing, you may come to get that Council which will be agreeable
to your own Heart's desire and contentment. You know how by the Advice and
Council and Prediction of Fools, many Kings, Princes, States, and Commonwealths
have been preserved, several Battles gained, and diverse doubts of a most
perplexed Intricacy resolved: I am not so diffident of your Memory, as to hold
it needful to refresh it with a Quotation of Examples; nor do I so far
undervalue your Judgment, but that I think it will acquiesce in the Reason of
this my subsequent Discourse.

As he who narrowly takes heed to what concerns the dextrous Management of his
private Affairs, domestic Businesses, and those Adoes which are confined
within the streight-lac'd compass of one Family: who is attentive, vigilant,
and active in the oeconomick Rule of his own House; whose frugal Spirit never
strays from home; who loses no occasion, whereby he may purchase to himself
more Riches, and build up new Heaps of Treasure on his former Wealth; and who
knows warily how to prevent the Inconveniences of Poverty, is called a worldly
Wise Man, though perhaps in the Second Judgment of the Intelligences which are
above, he be esteemed a Fool. So on the contrary, is he most like (even in the
thoughts of all Celestial Spirits) to be not only sage, but to presage Events
to come by Divine Inspiration, who laying quite aside those Cares which are
conducible to his Body, or his Fortunes, and as it were departing from himself,
rids all his Senses of Terrene Affections, and clears his Fancies of those
plodding Studies, which harbor in the Minds of Thriving Men: all which
Neglects of Sublunary Things are vulgarly imputed Folly.

After this manner, the Son of Picus, King of the Latins, that great Southsayer
Faunus, was called Fatuus, by the witless Rabble of the common People. The like
we daily see practiced amongst the Comic Players, whose Drammatick Rolls, in
distribution of the Personages, appoint the acting of the Fool to him who is
the wisest of the Troop. In approbation also of this fashion, the
Mathematicians allow the very same Horoscope to Princes* and to Sots. Whereof a
right pregnant instance by them is given in the Nativities of Aeneas and
Choroebus; the latter of which two is by Euphorion said to have been a Fool:
and yet had with the former the same Aspects, and heavenly Genethlick
Influences.

I shall not, I suppose, swerve much from the purpose in hand, if I relate unto
you, what Ihon Andrew said upon the Return of a Papal Writ, which was directed
to the Mayor of Rochel; and Burgesses after him by Panorm, upon the same
Pontifical Canon; Barbatia, on the Pandects, and recently by Jason, in his
Councels, concerning Seyny Ihon the noted Fool of Paris, and Caillets,
fore-great Grandfather. The Case is this:

At Paris, in the Roast-meat Cookery of the Petit Chastelet, before the
Cook-Shop of one of the Roast-meat Sellers of that Lane, a certain hungry
Porter was eating his Bread, after he had by Parcels kept it a while above the
Reek and Steam of a fat Goose on the Spit, turning at a great Fire, and found
it so besmoaked with the Vapor, to be savoury; which the Cook observing, took
no notice, till after having ravined his Penny Loaf, whereof no Morsel had been
unsmoakified, he was about discamping and going away; but by your leave, as the
Fellow thought to have departed thence shot-free, the Master-Cook laid hold
upon him by the Gorget, demanded payment for the Smoke of his Roastmeat. The
Porter answered, that he had sustained no loss at all; that by what he had done
there was no Diminution made of the Flesh, that he had taken nothing of his,
and that therefore he was not indebted to him in any thing: As for the Smoke in
question, that, although he had not been there; it would howsoever have been
evaporated: besides that, before that time it had never been seen nor heard,
that Roast-meat Smoke was sold upon the Streets of Paris. The Cook hereto
replied, That he was not obliged nor any way bound to feed and nourish for
naught a Porter whom he had never seen before with the Smoke of his Roastmeat;
and thereupon swore, that if he would not forthwith content and satisfy him
with present Payment for the Repast which he had thereby got, that he would
take his crooked Staves from off his Back; which instead of having Loads
thereafter laid upon them, should serve for Fuel to his Kitchen Fires. Whilst
he was going about so to do, and to have pulled them to him by one of the
bottom Rungs, which he had caught in his Hand, the sturdy Porter got out of his
Gripes, drew forth the knotty Cudgel, and stood to his own Defense. The
Altercation waxed hot in Words, which moved the gaping Hoydons of the sottish
Parisians to run from all parts thereabouts to see what the issue would be of
that babbling Strife and Contention. In the interim of this Dispute, to very
good purpose Seiny Ihon the Fool and Citizen of Paris, happened to be there, whom
the Cook perceiving, said to the Porter, Will thou refer and submit unto the
noble Seiny Thon, the Decision of the Difference and Controversy which is
betwixt us? Yes, by the Blood of a Goose, answered the Porter, I am content.
Seiny Ihon the Fool, finding that the Cook and Porter had compromised the
Determination of their Variance and Debate to the Discretion of his Award and
Arbitriment; after that the Reasons on either side whereupon was grounded the
mutual fierceness of their brawling Jar had been to the full displayed and laid
open before him, commanded the Porter to draw out of the Fab of his Belt a
piece of Money, if he had it. Whereupon the Porter immediately without delay,
in Reverence to the Authority of such a Judicious Umpire, put the tenth part of
a Silver Phillip into his hand. This little Phillip Seiny Ihon took, then set
it on his Left Shoulder, to try by feeling if it was of a sufficient weight;
after that, laying it on the palm of his hand he made it ring and tingle, to
understand by the Ear if it was of a good Alloy in the Metal whereof it was
composed: Thereafter he put it to the Ball or Apple of his Left Eye, to explore
by the sight if it was well stamped* and marked; all which being done, in a
profound Silence of the whole doltish People, who were there Spectators of this
Pageantry, to the great Hope of the Cooks, and Despair of the Porters
Prevalency in the Suit that was in agitation, he finally caused the Porter to
make it sound several times upon the Stall of the Cooks Shop. Then with a
Presidential Majesty holding his Babble (Scepter-like) in his Hand, muffling his
Head with a Hood of Martern Skins, each side whereof had the resemblance of an
Apes Face, sprucified up with Ears of pasted Paper, and having about his Neck a
bucked Ruff, raised, furrowed, and ridged, with Ponting Sticks of the shape and
fashion of small Organ Pipes; he first with all the force of his Lungs Coughed
two or three times, and then with an audible Voice pronounced this following
Sentence, The Court declares, that the Porter, who ate his Bread at the Smoke
of the roast, has civilly paid the Cook with the sound of his Money: And the
said Court Ordains, that every one return to his own home, and attend his
proper business, without Cost and Charges, and for a Cause. This Verdict, Award
and Arbitriment of the Parisian Fool, did appear so equitable, yea, so
admirable to the aforesaid Doctors, that they very much doubted, if the matter
had been brought before the Sessions for Justice of the said place, or that the
Judges of the Rota at Rome had been Umpires therein; or yet that the
Areopagites themselves had been the Deciders thereof, if by any one part, or
all of them together, it had been so judicially sententiated and awarded.
Therefore advise if you will be counseled by a Fool.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Triboulet is set forth and blazed by Pantagruel and Panurge.
BY my Soul, quoth Panurge, that Overture pleases me exceedingly well; I will
therefore lay hold thereon, and embrace it. At the very motioning thereof my
very Right Entral seems to be widened and enlarged, which was but just now
hard bound, contracted and costive: but as we have hitherto made choice of the
purest and most refined Cream of Wisdom and Sapience for our Counsel, so would
I now have to preside and bear the prime Sway in our Consultation, as were a
Fool in the supreme degree. Triboulet (quoth Pantagruel) is completely foolish,
as I conceive. Yes truly (answered Panurge) he is properly and totally a Fool, a

Pantagruel. Panurge. Fatal f. Jovial f. Natural f. Mercurial f. Celectial f.
Lunatic f. Erratick f. Ducal f. Excentrick f. Common f. Aetherial and Junonian
f. Lordly f. Palatin f. Arctick f. Principal f. Heroic f. Pretorian f. Gemial
f. Ellected f. Inconstant f. Courtly f. Earthly f. Primipilary f. Solacious and
sporting f. Triumphant f. Vulgar f. Jocund and wanton f. Domestic f. Exemplary
s. Pimpled f. Rare outlandish f. Freckled f. Satrapal f. Bell-tinging f. Civil
f. Laughing and lecherous f. Popular f. Familiar f. Nimming and filching f.
Notable f. Favourized f. Unpressed f. Latinized f. First broached f. Ordinary
f. Augustal f. Transcendent f. Cesarine f. Rising f. Imperial f. Papal f. Royal
f. Consistorian f. Patriarchal f. Conclavist f. Original f. Bullist f. Loyal f.
Synodal f. Episcopal f. Doting and raving f. Doctoral f. Singular and
surpassing f. Monachal f. Fiscal f. Special and excelling f. Extravagant f.
Writhed f. Metaphysical f. Canonical f. Scatical f. Such another f.
Predicamental and Catagorick f. Graduated f. Commensal f. Predicable and
enunciatory f. Primolicentiated f. Trainbairing f. Decumane and Superlative f.
Supererrogating f. Collateral f. Dutiful and officious f. Haunch and side f.
Nestling, ninny and youngling f. Optical and perspective f. Flitting, giddy and
unsteddy f. Algoristick f. Algebraical f. Brancher, novice and Cockney f.
Cabalistical and Massoretical f. Hagard, cross and froward f. Talmudical f.
Algamalized f. Gentle, mild and tractable f. Compendious f. Abbreviated f.
Mail-coated f. Hyperbolical f. Pilfring and purloining f. Anatomastical f.
Allegorical f. Tail-grown f. Tropological f. Gray-peckled f. Pleonasmical f.
Micher pincrust f. Capital f. Heteroclit f. Hair brained f. Summist f. Cordial
f. Abbridging f. Intimate f. Morrish f. Hepatick f. Leaden-sealed f. Cushotten
and swilling f. Mandatory f. Compassionate f. Splenetick f. Titulary f. Windy
f. Crooching, showking, ducking f. Ligitimate f. Azymathal f. Grim, stern,
harsh, and wayward f. Almicautarized f. Proportioned f. Well-hung and timbred
f. Chinnified f. Swollen and puffed up f. Ill-clawed, pounced and pawed f.
Overcockrifed lid and lified f. Well-stoned f. Crabbed and unpleasing f.
Corallery f. Eastern f. Winded and tainted f. Sublime f. Crimson f.
Kitchin-haunting f. Ingrained f. Lofty and stately f. City f. Spitrack f.
Basely acoutred f. Architrave f. Mast-headed f. Pedestal f. Modal f. Tetragonal
f. Second notial f. Renowned f. Cheerful and buxom f. Reumatick f. Flaunting
and braggadochio f. Solemn f. Annual f. Egregious f. Festival f. Humorous and
capricious f. Recreative f. Boorish and counterfeit f. Rude, gross and absurd
f. Pleasant f. Large measured f. Privileged f. Babble f. Rustical f. Downright
f. Proper and peculiar f. Broad-listed f. Downsical-bearing f. Ever ready f.
Diapatonal f. Stale and overworn f. Resolute f. Hieroglyphical f. Saucy and
swaggering f. Authentic f. Worty f. Full bulked f. Precious f. Gallant and
vainglorious f. Fanatic f. Fantastical f. Gorgeous and gaudy f. Symphatiok f.
Panick f. Continual and intermitting f. Limbicked and distilled f. Rebasing and
roundling f. Comportable f. Wretched and heartless f. Prototypal and
precedenting f. Fooded f. Prating f. Thick and threefold f. Catechetick f.
Cacodoxical f. Damasked f. Meridional f. Fearny f. Nocturnal f. Unleavened f.
Occidental f. Barytonant f. Trifling f. Pink and spot-poudered f. Astrological
and Figure-flinging f. Musket-proof f. Cenethliack and Horoscopal f. Pedantick
f. Strouting f. Knavish f. Wood f. Idiot f. Greedy f. Blockish f. Senseless f.
Beetle-headed f. Godderlich f. Crotesk f. Obstinate f. Impertinent f.
Contradictory f. Quarrelsom f. Pedagogical f. Unmannerly f. Daft f. Captious
and Sophistical f. Drunken f. Peevish f. Soritick f. Prodigal f. Catholoproton
f. Rash f. Hoti and Diots f. Plodding f. Aplos and Catati f.

Pantagruel. If there was any reason why at Rome the Quirinal Holiday, of old,
was called the Feast of Fools; I know not why me may not for the like cause
institute in France the Tribouletick Festivals, to be Celebrated and Selemnized
over all the Land.


Panurge. If all Fools carried Cruppers.


Pantagruel. If he were the God Fatuus* of whom we have already made mention,
the Husband of the Goddess Fatua, his Father would be Good Day, and his
Grandmother Good Even.


Panurge. If all Fools paced, albeit he be somewhat wry-legged, he would
overlay at least a Fathom at every Rake. Let us go toward him without any
further lingering or delay, we shall have no doubt some fine Resolution of him.
I am ready to go, and long for the issue of our Progress impatiently. I must
needs (quoth Pantagruel) according to my former Resolution of him, be present
at Bridlegoose's Trial: Nevertheless, whilst I shall be upon my Journey toward
Mirelingues, which is on the other side of the River of Loire, I will dispatch
Carpalin to bring along with him from Blois the Fool Triboulet. Then was
Carpalin instantly fent away* and Pantagruel at the same time attended by his
Domestics, Panurge, Epistemon, Ponocrates, Friar Ihon, Gymnast, Rysotome, and
others, marched forward on the the High Road to Marlingues.


CHAP. XXXIX. How Pantagruel was present at the Trial of Judge Bridlegoose, who
decided Causes and Controversies in Law, by the Chance and Fortune of the Dice.
ON the Day following, precisely at the Hour appointed, Pantagruel came to
Merlingues: At his Arrival the Presidents, Senators, and Counselors prayed him
to do them the Honor to enter in with them, to hear the Decision of all the
Causes, Arguments, and Reasons, which Bridlegoose in his own Defense would
produce, why he had pronounced a certain Sentence against the Subsidy-Assessor,
Toucheronde; which did not seem very equitable to that Centumviral Court.
Pantagruel very willingly condescended to their desire, and accordingly entering
in, found Bridlegoose sitting within the middle of the Enclosure of the said
Court of Justice; who immediately upon the coming of Pantrgruel, accompanied
with the Senatorian Members of that worshipful Judicatory, arose, went to the
Bar, had his Indictment read, and for all his Reasons, Defenses, and Excuses,
answered nothing else, but that he was become Old, and that his Sight of late
was very much failed, and become dimner then it was wont to be; instancing
therewithal many Miseries and Calamities, which Old Age brings along with it,
and are concomitant to wrinkled Elders; which not, par Archi d' lxxvi. C.
tanta: by reason of which Infirmity he was not able so distinctly and clearly
to discern the Points and Blots of the Dice, as formerly he had been accustomed
to do: whence it might very well have happened, said he, as old dim-^ighted
Isaac took Jacob for Esau, that I after the same manner, at the Decision of
Causes and Controversies in Law, should have been mistaken in taking a Quatre
for a Cinque, or Tree for a Deuce: This, I beseech your Worship (quoth he) to
take into your serious Consideration, and to have the more favorable Opinion
of my Uprightness, (notwithstanding the Prevarication whereof I am accused, in
the matter of Toucherondy's Sentence) that at the time of that Decrees
pronouncing, I only had made use of my small Dice; and your Worships (said he)
knew very well, how by the most Authentic Rules of the Law, it is provided,
That the Imperfections of Nature should never be imputed unto any for Crimes
and Transgressions; as appears, F. de re Mil. L. qui cum uno F. de Reg. Iur.
L. fere F. de aedit. edict. per totum, F. de term. Mo. L. Divus Adrianus,
resolved by LU. TO. ML. Si Vero. F. Sol. Mat. And who would offer to do
otherways, should not thereby accuse the Man, but Nature, and the All-seeing
Providence of God, as is evident in L. Maximum Vitium C. de Liber praeter.

What kind of Dice (quoth Trinquamelle, grand President of the said Court) do
you mean, my Friend Bridle-goose? The Dice (quoth Bridlegoose) of Sentences at
Law, Decrees, and peremptory Judgments, Alea Iudiciorum, whereof is written,
Per Doct. 26. qu. 2. Ca. Sors L. nec emptio F. de contrahen. empt. L. quod
debetur. F. de pecu, and ibi Bart. And which your Worships do as well as I,
use, in this glorious Sovereign Court of yours: so do all other righteous
Judges in their Decision of Processes, and Final Determination of Legal
Differences, observing that which has been said thereof, by D. Henri.
Ferraudet. and not. Gl. MC. si de sort. il and L. sed cum ambo F. de rud. ubi
Doc. Where mark, that Chance and Fortune, are good, honest, profitable and
necessary for ending of, and putting a final closure to Dissensions and Debates
in Suits at Law. The same has more clearly been declared by Bal. Barto. and
Alex. C. communia de L. Si duo. But how is it that you do these things? (asked
Tirquemel.) I very briefly (quoth Bridlegoose) shall answer you, according to
the Doctrine and Instructions of L. ampliorem par in refutatoriis C. de Appell.
Which is conform to what is said in Il. 1. L. 2. F. quod met. cau. gaudent.
brevitate moderni. My Practice is therein the same with that of your other
Worships, and as the Custom of the Judicatory requires, unto which our Law
commands us to have regard, and by the Rule thereof still to direct and
regulate our Actions and Procedures. Ut not. extra de consuet. C. ex literis,
and ibi Iano: for having well and exactly seen, surveyed, overlooked, reviewed,
recognized, read, and read over again, turned and tossed over, seriously
perused and examined the Bills of Complaint, Accusations, Impeachments,
Indictments, Warnings, Citations, Summonings, Comparitions, Appearances,
Mandates, Commissions, Delegations, Instructions, Informations, Inquests,
Preparatories, Productions, Evidences, Proofs, Allegations, Depositions, cross
Speeches, Contradictions, Supplications, Requests, Petitions, Enquiries,
Instruments of the Deposition of Witnesses, Rejoinders, Replies, Confirmations
of former Assertions, Duplies, Triplies, Answers to Rejoinders, Writings,
Deeds, Reproaches, disabling of Exceptions taken, Grievances, Salvation-Bills,
Re-examination of Witnesses, Confronting of them together, Declarations,
Denunciations, Libels, Certificates, Royal Missives, Letterss of Appeal,
Letters of Attorney, Instruments of Compulsion, Delinatories, Anticipatories,
Evocations, Messages, Dimissions, Issues, Exceptions, dilatory Pleas, Demurs,
Compositions, Injunctions, Reliefs, Reports, Returns, Confessions,
Acknowledgments, Exploits, Executions, and other suchlike Confects and
Spiceries, both at the one and the other side, as a good Judge ought to do,
conform to what has been noted thereupon. Sper de ordinario. Paragr. 3. and
Tit. de Offi. O. in Paragr. fin. and de prescriptis Praesent. a Parag. 1. I
posit on the end of a Table, in my Closet, all the Poaks and Bags of the
Defendant, and then allow unto him the first hazard of the Dice; according to
the usual manner of your other Worships. And it is mentioned, L. Favorabiliores
F. de Reg. Iur. and in d. cum sunt eo. Tit. Lib. 6. which says, Quum sunt
partium Iura obscura, r^o potius favendum est quam actori. That being done, I
thereafter lay down upon the other end of the same Table, the Bags and Sachels
of the Plaintiff, (as your other Worships are accustomed to do) Visum Visu,
just over against one another: for, Opposi^a juxta se potest clarius
elucescunt: ut not. in L. Parag. Videamus F. de his qui sunt sui vel alieni
juris, and in L. Munerum. Mixta F. de mun. and hon. Then do I likeways, and
semblably throw the Dice for him, and forthwith livre him his chance. But
(quoth Trigamelle) my Friend, how come you to know, understand, and resolve the
obscurity of these various and seeming contrary Passages in Law, which are laid
claim to by the Suitors, and pleading Parties? Even just (quoth Bridlegoose)
after the fashion of your other Worships: to wit, when there are many Bags on
the one side, and on the other, I then use my little small Dice (after the
customary manner of your other Worships) in obedience to the Law. Semper in
stipulationibus F. de Reg. Iur. The Law verified, verifieth that, Eo tit.
semper in obscuris quod minimum est sequimur: Canonized in C. in obscuris cod.
Tit. Lib. 6. I have other large great Dice, fair, and goodly ones, which I
employ in the fashion that your other Worships use to do, when the matter is
more plain, clear, and liquid: that is to say, when there are fewer Bags. But
when you have done all these fine things (quoth Triquamel) how do you, my
Friend, award your Decrees, and pronounce Judgment? Even as your other Worships
(answered Bridlegoose) for I give out Sentence in his favor, unto whom has
befallen the best Chance by Dice; Judiciary, Tribunian, Pretorial, what comes
first: So our Laws command. F. qui pot. in Pig. L. Potior. L. Creditor. C. de
Cons. L. 1. and de Reg. Iur on U. Qui prior est jure.

CHAP. XL. How Bridlegoose gives Reasons, why he looked upon those Law-Actions
which he decided by the Chance of the Dice.
YEa, but (quoth Trinquamol) my Friend, seeing it is by the Lot, Chance, and
Throw of the Dice that you award your* Judgments and Sentences, why do not you
livre up these fair Throws and Chances the very same Day and Hour, without any
further procrastination or delay, that the controverting Party-pleaders appear
before you? To what use can those Writings serve you, those Papers, and other
Procedures contained in the Bags and Poaks of the Law-Suitors? To the very same
use (quoth Bridle-goose) that they serve your other Worships. They are behooful
unto me, and serve my turn in three things very exquisite, requisite, and
authentical. First, For Formality sake, the omission whereof, that it makes
all whatever is done, to be of no force nor value, is excellently well proved,
by Spec. tit. de inst. edi. and tit. de rescript. praesent. Besides, that it is
not unknown to you, who have had many more Experiments thereof then I, how
oftentimes in Judicial Proceedings, the Formalities utterly destroy the
Materialities and Substances of the Causes and Matters agitated; for Forma
mutata, mutatur substantia F. ad exh. L. Iulianus F. ad. leg. Pals. si is qui
Quadraginta. Et extra de deci. C. ad audientiam. Et de Cel. Miss. C. in quadam.

Secondly, They are useful and steadable to me, (even as unto your other
Worships) in lieu of some other honest and healthful Exercise. The late Master
Othoman Vadat, a prime Physician, as you would say, Cod. de Commit. and Archi.
Lib. 12. has frequently told me, That the lack and default of Bodily Exercise,
is the chief, if not the sole and only cause of the little Health, and short
Lives of all Officers of Justice, such as your Worships and I am. Which
Observation was singularly well, before him, noted and remarked by Bartholus in
Lib. 1. C. de Sent. quae pro eo quod: therefore is it, that the Practice of
suchlike Exercitations is appointed to be laid hold on by your other Worships,
and consequently not to be denied unto me, who am of the same Profession: Quia
accessurum naturam sequitur principalis, de Reg. Iur. L. 7. and L. cum
principalis, and L. nihil dolo F. eo tit. F. de fide juss. L. fide Iuss. and
extra de Officio de L. Cap. 1. Let certain honest, and recreative Sports and
Plays of Corporeal Exercises be allowed and approved of; and so far, Ut omnes
obed. in prius Coll. 7. and F. de praescript. ver L. gratuitatem and L. 1. Cod.
de Spe. L. 11. Such also is the Opinion of D. Thom. in Secunda, Secundae Q.
168. Quoted in very good purpose, by D. at de Rosa; who, Fuit magnus Practicus,
and a solemn Doctor, as Barbaria attesteth in Principiis Consil. Wherefore the
Reason is evidently and clearly deduced, and set down before us, in Gloss. in
praemio F. par ne autem tertii. Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis. In very
deed, one, in the Year a Thousand four hundred fourscore and sixth, having a
Business concerning the Portion and Inheritance of a younger Brother, depending
in the Court and Chamber of the Four High Treasurers of France, whereinto
as soon as ever I got leave to enter by a Pecuniary Permission of the Usher
thereof, as your other Worships know very well, that Petunia obediant omnia;
and there says, Baldus, in L. Singularia. F. si cert. pet. and lol. in L.
receptitia. Cod. de constit. pecuni. and card. in cler. 1. de Baptism. I found
them all recreating and diverting themselves at the Play called Musse, either
before or after Dinner; to me, truly, it is a thing altogether indifferent,
whether of the two it was, provided that Hic not. that the Game of the Musse is
honest, healthful, ancient, and lawful: A Muscho inventore, de quo Cod. de
perhaere L. si post motam: and Muscarii. Such as play and sport it at the
Musse, are excusable in and by Law, Lib. 1. C. de excus. artific. lib. 10. And
at the very same time was Master Tielman Picquet, one of the Players of that
Game of Musse: there is nothing that I do better remember; for he laughed
heartily, when his Fellow Members of the aforesaid Judicial Chamber, spoiled
their Caps in swinging of his Shoulders; he, nevertheless, did even then say
unto them, that the banging and flapping of him to the wast, and havoc of
their Caps, should not at their return from the Palace to their own Houses,
excuse them from their Wives: Part 1. extra de praesum. and ibi glos. Now
resolutory loquendo, I should say, according to the style and phrase of your
other Worships, that there is no Exercise, Sport, Game, Play, nor Recreation in
all this Palatine, Palacial, or Parliamentary World, more ariomatizing and
fragrant, then to empty and void Bags and Purses: turn over Papers and
Writings: quote Margins and Backs of Scrolls and Rolls; fill Panniers, and take
inspection of Causes: Ex Bart. and Joan. de prad. in L. falsa de condit. and
Demost. F.

Thirdly, I consider as your own Worships use to do, that Time ripeneth and
brings all things to maturity, that by Time every thing comes to be made
manifest and patent, and that Time is the Father of Truth and Virtue. Gloss. in
I. cod. de Servit. authent. de restit. and ea quae pa. and spe tit. de requis.
cons. Therefore is it, that after the manner and fashion of your other
Worships, I defer, protract, delay, prolong, intermit, surcease, pause, linger,
suspend, prorogate, drive out, wy^e-draw, and shift off the Time of giving a
Definitive Sentence, to the end that the Suit or Process, being well vanned and
winnowed, tossed and canvassed to and fro; narrowly, precisely, and nearly
garbelled, sifted, searched and examined: and on all Hands exactly argued,
disputed and debated, may, by success of Time come at last to its full ripeness
and maturity: by means whereof, when the fatal hazard of the Dice ensues
thereupon, the Parties cast or condemned by the said Aleatory Chance, will with
much greater patience, and more mildly and gently endure, and bear up the
disastrous Load of their Misfortune, then if they had been sentenced at their
first arrival unto the Court: as, Not. gl. F. de excus. tut. L. tria onera.
Portatur leviter quod portas quisque libenter. On the other part, to pass a
Decree or Sentence, when the action is raw, crude, green, unripe, and
unprepared as at the beginning, a danger would ensue of a no less
inconveniency, then that which the Physicians have been wont to say, befalls
to him in whom an Imposthume is pierced before it be ripe; or unto any other
whose Body is purged of a strong predominating Humor, before its digestion: for
as it is written, In Authent. haec consist. in nos. de constit. princip. So is
the same repeated, In gloss. in C. caeterum extr. quod medicamenta morbis
exhibent. hoc jura negotiis. Nature furthermore admonishes and teaches us, to
gather and reap, eat and feed on Fruits when they are ripe, and not before.
Instit* de re di paragr. is ad quem and F. de action. empt. L. Iulianus. To
marry likeways our Daughters when they are ripe, and no sooner. F. de donation.
inter vir. and uxor. L. cum his status paragr. si quia sponsa and 21 q. C. sic
ut dicit. gl.

Iam matura thoro plenis adolever at annis Virginitas. And in a word, she
instructs us to do nothing of any considerable Importance, but in a full
maturity and ripeness. 23 q. 2 paragr. ult. and 23. de C. ultimo.

CHAP. XLI. How Bridlegoose relates the History of the Reconcilers of Parties
at variance in matters of Law.
I Remember to the same purpose (quoth Bridlegoose, in continuing his
Discourse) that in the time when at Poictiers I was a Student of Law under
Crocadium Iuris, there was at Smerva one Peter Dandin, a very honest Man,
careful Labourer of the Ground, fine Singer in a Church-Desk, of good Repute
and Credit, and older than the most aged of all your Worships; who was wont to
say, that he had seen the great and goodly Good Man the Council of Lateran,
with his wide and broad brimmed Red Hat: As also, that he had beheld and looked
upon the fair and beautiful Pragmatical Sanction, his Wife, with her huge
Rosary or Patenotrian Chapelet of Jeat-beads, hanging at a large Sky-colored
Ribbond. This honest Man compounded, attoned and agreed more Differencies,
Controversies and Variances at Law than had been determined, voided and
finished during his time in the whole Palace of Poictiers, in the Auditory of
Montmorillon, and in the Townhouse of the old Partenay. This amicable
Disposition of his rendered him Venerable, and of great Estimation, Sway, Power
and Authority throughout all the neighboring places of Chauvinie, Nouaille,
Vivonne, Mezeaux, Estables, and other bordering and circumjacent Towns,
Villages, and Hamlets: All their Debates were pacified by him; he put an end to
their brabling Suits at Law, and wrangling Differences. By his Advice and
Counsels were Accords and Reconcilements no less firmly made, than if the
Verdict of a Sovereign Judge had been interposed therein, although, in very
deed, he was no Judge at all, but a right honest Man, as you may well conceive.
Arg. in L. si Anius F. de Iure jur. and de verbis obligatorii sit continuus.

There was not a Hog killed within three Parishes of him, whereof he had not
some part of the Haslet and Puddings. He was almost every day invited either to
a Marriage, Banquet, Christning Feast, an uprising or Women Churching Treatment,
a Birth-day's Anniversary Solemnity, a merry Frollick Gossiping, or otherways
to some delicious Entertainment in a Tavern, to make some Accord and Agreement
between Persons at odds, and in debate with one another. Remark what I say; for
he never yet settled and compounded a Difference betwixt any two at variance,
but he straight made the Parties agreed and pacified, to drink together; as a
sure and infallible Token and Symbol of a perfect and completely well cemented
Reconciliation, sign of a sound and sincere Amity and proper Mark of a new Joy
and Gladness to follow thereupon. Ut Not. per F. de Peri and com. rei. ven. L.
1. He had a Son whose Name was Tenot Dandin, a lusty young sturdy frisking
Royster, so help me God, who likewise (in imitation of his Peacemaking Father,
would have undertaken and meddled with the taking up of Variances, and deciding
of Controversies betwixt disagreeing and contentious Parties, Pleaders as you
know.

Saepe solet similis filius esse patri.
Et sequitur leviter filia matris iter.
Ut ait gloss. vi, quaest. I. C. siquis g. de consdisc. v. C. 2. fin. and est.
int. per dict. cod. de impu. and aliis substit. L. vir. and L. Legitimae. F. de
stat. hom. gloss. in L. quod si nolit. de adi L. quisquis C. ad leg. Iure
Majest. excipio filius a moniali susceptos ex Monacho per gloss. in C.
impudicas 27 quaestione. And such was his Confidence to have no worse Success
than his Father, he assumed unto himself the Title of Law-strife-setler. He was
likeways in these pacificatory Negotiations so active and vigilant; for
Vigilantibus Iura subveniunt ex L. pupillus F. quae in fraud. ^red and ibi L.
non enim and instit. m. proaem. That when he had smelt, heard, and fully
understood; ut F. si quando paufec. L. Agaso q. in verbo offecit, id est nasum
ad culum posuit. That there was any where in the Country a debatable matter at
Law, he would incontinently thrust in his Advice, and so forwardly intrude his
Opinion in the business, that he made no Bones of making offer, and taking upon
him to decide it, how difficult soever it might happen to be, to the full
Contentment and Satisfaction of both Parties: It is written, Qui non laborat
non mand^cat. And the said Gl. F. de damn. infect. L. si quamvis: And Currere
plus que lae pas vetulam compellit egestas. Gloss. F. de lib. agnosco. L. si
quis pro quo facit. L. si plures C. de Codd incert. But so huge great was his
Misfortune in this his Undertaking, that he never composed any difference, how
little soever you may imagine it might have been, but that instead of
reconciling the Parties at odds, he did incense, irritate and exasperate them
to a higher point of Dissension and Enmity than ever they were at before. Your
Worships know I doubt not that,

Sermo datur cunctis animi sapien^ia paucis. Gl. F. de alien. in mun. cause. fa.
lib. 2. This administered unto the Tavern-keepers, Winedrawers and Vintners of
Smerva an occasion to say, that under him they had not in the space of a whole
year so much Reconciliation-Wine (for so were they pleased to call the good
Wine of Leguge) as under his Father they had done in one half hours time. It
happened a little while thereafter, that he made a most heavy regret thereof to
his Father, attributing the Causes of his bad Success in pacificatory
Enterprises to the Perversity, Stubbornness, froward, cross and backward
Inclinations of the People of his time, roundly, boldly and irreverently
upbraiding, that if but a score of Years before the World had been so wayward,
obstinate, pervicacious, implacable, and out of all Square, Frame and Order as
it was then, his Father had never attained to, and acquired the Honor and
Title of Strife-appeaser, so irrefragably, inviolably and irrevocably as he
has done; in doing whereof Tenot did heihously transgress against the Law
which prohibiteth Children to reproach the Actions of their Parents. Per gl.
and Barth. L. 3. par agr. si quis F. de cond. ob cause. and authent. de Nupt.
par sed quod sancitum Col. 3. meant. To this the honest old Father answered
thus: My Son Dandin, when Don oportet takes place, this is the course which we
must trace, Gl. C. de Appel. L. eos etiam: For the Road that you went upon was
not the way to the Fullers Mill, nor in any part thereof was the Form to be
sound wherein the Hare did sit. Thou have not the skill and dexterity of
settling and composing Differences. Why? Because thou take them at the
beginning, in the very Infancy and Bud as it were, when they are green, raw,
and indigestible; yet I know handsomely and featly how to compose and settle
them all. Why? Because I take them at their Decadence, in their Weaning, and
when they are pretty well digested. So says Gl. dulcior est fructus post multa
pericula ductus. L. non moritturus C. de contrahend. and commit. stip. Did
thou ever hear the vulgar Proverb, Happy is the Physician whose coming is
desired at the declension of a Disease? For the Sickness being come to a
Crisis, is then upon the decreasing hand, and drawing toward an end, although
the Physician should not repair thither for the Cure thereof; whereby though
Nature wholly do the Work, he bears away the Palm and Praise thereof. My
Pleaders after the same manner, before I did interpose my Judgment in the
reconciling of them, were waxing faint in their Contestations, their
Altercation Heat was much abated, and in declining from their former Strife,
they of themselves inclined to a firm Accommodation of their Differences;
because there wanted Fuel to that Fire of burning, Rancour and despightful
Wrangling, whereof the lower sort of Lawyers were the Kindlers: That is to say,
their Purses were emptied of Coin, they had no^ a Win in their Fab, nor Penny
in their Bag, wherewith to solicit and present their Actions.

Deficiente pecu deficit omne, nia. There wanted then nothing but some Brother
to supply the place of a Parunymph, Braul broker, Proxenete or Mediator, who
acting his part dexterously, should be the first Broacher of the Motion of an
Agreement, for saving both the one and the other Party from that hurtful and
pernicious Shame, whereof he could not have avoided the Imputation, when it
should have been said, that he was the first who yielded and spoke of a
Reconcilement; and that therefore his Cause not being good, and being sensible
where his Shoe did pinch him, was willing to break the Ice, and make the
greater haste to prepare the way for a Condescendment to an amicable and
friendly Treaty. Then was it that I came in pudding time, ( Dandin my Son) nor
is the fat of Bacon more relishing to boiled Pease, than was my Verdict then
agreeable to them: This was my Luck, my Profit and good Fortune. I tell thee,
my Jolly Son Dandin, that by this Rule and Method I could settle a firm Peace,
or at least clap up a Cessation of Arms and Truce for many years to come
betwixt the Great King and the Venetian State; the Emperor and the Cantons of
Swisserland; the English and the Scots; and betwixt the Pope and the
Ferrarians. Shall I go yet further: Yea, as I would have God to help me,
betwixt the Turk and the Sophy, the Tartars and the Muscoviters* Remark well
what I am to say unto thee, I would take them at that very instant nick of
time, when both those of the one and the other side should be weary and tired
of making War, when they had voided and emptied their own Cas^^es and Coffers
of all Treasure and Coin, drained and exhausted the Purses and Bags of their
Subjects, sold and morgaged their Domains and proper Inheritances, and totally
wasted, spent and consumed the Munition, Furniture, Provision and Victuals that
were necessary for the continuance of a Military Expedition. There I am sure,
by God, or by his Mother, that would they, would they, in spite of all their
Teeths, they should be forced to take a little Respit and Breathing time, to
moderate the Fury and cruel Rage of their ambitious Aims. This is the Doctrine
in Gl. 37. d. c. si quando.

Odero, si potero, si non invitus amalio. CHAP. XLII. How Suits at Law are bred
at first, and how they come afterward to their perfect growth.
FOR this Cause (quoth Bridlegoose) going on in his Discourse, I temporise and
apply my self to the Times, as your other Worships use to do, waiting patiently
for the Maturity of the Process, full Growth and Perfection thereof in all its
Members; to wit, the Writings and the Bags. Arg. in L. fin. Major. C. commodus,
and de cons. de 1. c. solemnitates, and ibi gl. A Suit in Law at its
Production, Birth and first beginning, seems to me as unto your other
Worships, shapeless, without Form or Fashion, incomplete, ugly and imperfect,
even as a Bare, at his first coming into the World, has neither Hands, Skin,
Hair nor Head, but is merely an inform, rude and ill-favored piece and lump of
Flesh; and would remain still so, if his Dam out of the abundance of her
Affection to her hopeful Cub, did not with much liking put his Members into
that Figure and shape which Nature had provided for those of an Arctick and
Ursinal kind. Ut Not. Doct. F. ad L. aliquia 2. in si. Just so when I see, as
your other Worships do, Processes and Suits in Law at their first bringing
forth, to be numberless, without shape, deformed and disfigured; for that then
they consist only of one or two Writings, or Copies of Instruments, through
which Defect they appear unto me as to your other Worships, foul, loathsome,
filthy and misshapen Beasts. But when there are Heaps of these Legiformal
Papers packed, piled, laid up together, impoaked, insacheled, and put up in
Bags, then is it that with a good reason we may term that Suit; to which, as
pieces, parcels, parts, portions and members thereof, they do pertain and
belong, well-formed and fashioned, big limmed, strong set, and in all and each
of its Dimensions most completely membred: Because forma dat. esse. rei L. si
is qui F. ad leg. falcid. in C. cum delicta extra de rescript. Barbaria consil.
Lib. 2. And before him, Balsus in C. ult. extra decons. and L. Iulianus exhib.
and F. ad L. quaesitum F. de leg. 3. The manner is such as is set down in gl.
p. quaest. 1 C. Paulus.

Debile principiam melior fortuna sequetur. Like your other Worships, also the
Sergeants, Catchpoles, Pursevants, Messengers, Summoners, Apparitors, Ushers,
Door-keepers, Pettifoggers, Attorneys, Proctors, Commissioners, Justices of the
Peace, Judge Delegates, Arbitrators, Overseers, Sequestrators, Advocates,
Inquisitors, Jurors, Searchers, Examiners, Notaries, Tabellions, Scribes,
Scriveners, Clerks, Pregnatories, Secondaries, and Expedanean Judges, de quibus
tit. est L. 3. C. by sucking very much, and that exceeding forcibly, and
licking at the Purses of the pleading Parties, they, to the Suits already begot
and engendered, form, fashion and frame Head, Feet, Claws, Talons, Beaks, Bills,
Teeth, Hands, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, Muscles, Humors, and so forth, through
all the Simulary and Dissimilary Parts of the whole; which Parts, Particles,
Pendicles and Appurtenances, are the Law. poaks and Bags, Gl. de Cons. d. 3. C.
accepisti qualis vestis erit, talia cornua gerit. Hic notandum est. That in
this respect the Pleaders, Litigants and Law-Suiters are happier than the
Officers, Ministers and Administrators of Justice: For beatus est dare quam
accipere. F. Com. L. 3. extra de celcb. Miss. cum Matthae and 24. Quaest. 1.
Cap. Od. Gl.

Affectum dantis pensat censura tonantis. Thus becomes the Action or Process,
by their care and industry, to be of a complete and goodly bulk, well shaped,
^^^med, formed, and fashioned according to the Canonical Gloss.

Accipe, sum, cape, sunt verba placentia Papae. Which Speech has been more
clearly explained by Alb. de Res. in verbo Roma.

Roma manus rodit, quas rodere non valet, odit.
Dantes custodit, non dantes spernit, and odit.
The Reason whereof is thought to be this:

Ad praesens ova, cras pullis sunt meliora. Ut est Gl. in L. quum H. F. de
Transact. Nor is this all, for the inconvenience of the contrary is set down in
H. C. de Allu. L. F.

Quum labor in damno est, crescit mortalis eg est as. In confirmation whereof
we find, that the true Etymology and Exposition of the word Process is
Purchase, viz. of good store of Money to the Lawyers, and of many Poaks, id
est, Prou-Sacks, to the Pleaders, upon which Subject we have most Celestial
Quips, Gybes, and Girds.

Litigando jura crescunt, litigando jus acquiritur. Item Gl. in Cap. illud
extrem. de praesumpt. andC. de prob. L. instram. L. non Epistolis L. non ^udis.
Et si non prosunt singula, multa juvant. Yea, but (asked Trinquamelle) how do
you proceed, (my Friend) in Criminal Causes, the culpable and guilty Party
being taken and seized upon, Flagrante Crimine? Even as your other Worships use
to do (answered Bridlegoose): First, I permit the Plaintiff to depart from the
Court, enjoining him not to presume to return thither, till he preallably,
should have taken a good sound and profound Sleep, which is to serve for the
prime Entry and Introduction to the Legal carrying on of the Business. In the
next place, a formal Report is to be made to me of his having slept. Thirdly, I
issue forth a Warrant to convent him before me. Fourthly, He is to produce a
sufficient and authentic Attestation, of his having thoroughly and entirely
sleeped, conform to the Gloss. 22. Quest. 7. Si quis cum.

Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. Being thus far advanced in the Formality of
the Process, I find that this Consopiating Act engenders another Act, whence
arises the articulating of a Member; that again produces a Third Act,
fashionative of another Member; which Third bringing forth a Fourth,
Procreative of another Act: New Members in a no fewer Number are shapen and
framed, one still breeding, and begetting another (as Link after Link, the Coat
of Mail at length is made) till thus, Piece after Piece, by little and little,
like Information upon Information, the Process be completely well formed, and
perfect in all his Members. Finally, having proceeded this length, I have
recourse to my Dice nor is it to be thought, that this interruption, respit, or
interpellation, is by me occasioned without very good reason inducing me
thereunto, and a notable Experience of a most convincing and irrefragable force.

I remember, on a time, that in the Camp at Stockholm, there was a certain
Gaseon named Gratianauld, Native of the Town of Saint Sever, who having lost
all his Money at Play, and consecutively being very angry thereat, as you know,
Pecunia est alius sanguis ut ait Anto. de Burtio, MC. accedens 2. extra ut lit.
non contest and Bald. in L. si tuis C. de op. Lib. per not. and L. advocati. C.
de advo. diu. Iud. pecunia est vita hominis and optimus fide jusser in
necessitatibus: Did, at his coming forth of the Gaming-House, in the presence
of the whole Company that was there, with a very loud Voice, speak in his own
Language these following words: Pap. cap. de bious nillots que maux depipes
rous tresire: aresque de pergudes sont les mires bingt, and quovatre bagnelles,
ta pla done rien pies cruz and Patacts, Scy de Gum de bons aulx, qui boille
trequar ambe Iou a Belsambiz. Finding that none would make him any Answer, he
passed from thence to that part of the Leaguer, where the huff, snuff,
honder-sponder, swash-buckling High Germans were, to whom he renewed these very
Terms, provoking them to fight with him; but all the Return he had from them to
his stout Challenge, was only, Der Gasconner that schich, usz. mitt. cim. iedem
zesclage aberer is it genegrer au stac^e^ darum liebem fram ve hend serg au
inverm hausraut. Finding also, that none of that Band of Teutonick Soldiers
offered himself to the Combat; he passed to that Quarter of the Leaguer where
the French Free-booting Adventures were encamped, and reiterating unto them,
what he had before repeated to the Dutch Warriors, challenged them likewise to
fight with him, and therewithal made some pretty little Gasconado frisking
Gambols, to oblige them the more cheerfully and gallantly to cope with him in
the Lists of a Duellizing Engagement; but no Answer at all was made unto him.
Whereupon the Gascon despairing of meeting with any Antagonists, departed from
thence, and laying himself down, not far from the Pavilions of the grand
Christian Cavalier, Crissie fell fast asleep. When he had thoroughly sleeped an
hour or two, another adventurous and all hazarding Blade of the Forlorn Hope of
the lavishingly wasting Gamesters, having also lost all his Moneys, sallied
forth with a Sword in his Hand, of a firm Resolution to fight with the
aforesaid Gascon, seeing he had lost as well as he.

Ploratur lachrymis amissa pecunia veris. Says the Gl. de poenitent. distinct.
2. C. sunt plures. To this effect having made enquiry and search for him
throughout the whole Camp, and in sequel thereof found him asleep, he said unto
him, Up, ho, good Fellow, in Name of all the Devils of Hell rise up, rise up,
get up; I have lost my Money as well as thou have done, let us therefore go
fight lustily together, grapple and scuffle it to some purpose: Thou may see
that; and look, my Tuck is no longer then thy Rapier. The Gascon altogether
astonished at his unexpected provocation, without altering his former Dialect,
spoke thus: Cap de Saint Arnault, qu'au segs tu qui me rebeillez? Que mande
taberne te gire: Ho Saint Siobe Cab. de Gascoigne tapla do my Iou, quand a
quest ta quam me bringu estae. The ventrous Royster inviteth him again to the
Duel; but the Gascon, without condescending to his desire, said only this:
Hepauvres Iet' esquinerie ares que son plat reposat: vene impaur que te pansat
comme Iou peusse truquete. Thus in forgetting his loss, he forgot the eagerness
which he had to fight. In conclusion, after that the other had likeways steeped
a little, they instead of fighting, and possibly killing one another, went
jointly to a Sutler's Tent, where they drank together very amicably, each upon
the pawn of his Sword. Thus by a little Sleep was pacified the ardent fury of
two warlike Champions. There, Gossip, comes the Golden Word of Ihon Andn. in
Cap. ult. de Sent. and rejudio. L. Sexto.

Sedendo, and dormiendo fit anima prudens. CHAP. XLIII. How Pantagruel excuses
Bridlegoose, in the matter of Sentencing Actions at Law, by the Chance of the
Dice.
WIth this Bridlegoose held his peace. Whereupon Trinquamelle bid them withdraw
from the Court; which accordingly was done: and then directed his Discourse to
Pantagruel, after this manner. It is fitting (most illustrious Prince) not only
by reason of the deep Obligations, wherein this present Parliament, together
with the whole Marquisate of Merlingues, stand bound to your Royal Highness,
for the innumerable Benefits, which as effects of mere Grace, they have
received from your Incomperable Bounty; but for that excellent Wit also, prime
Judgment, and admirable Learning wherewith Almighty God, the Giver of all Good
Things, has most richly qualified and endowed you, we tender and present unto
you the Decision of this new, strange, and Paradoxical Case of Bridlegoose; who
in your presence, to your both hearing and seeing, has plainly confessed his
final judging and determinating of Suits of Law, by the mere Chance and Fortune
of the Dice: therefore do we beseech you, that you may be pleased to give
Sentence therein, as unto you shall seem most just and equitable. To this
Pantagruel answered: Gentlemen, It is not unknown to you, how my Condition is
somewhat remote from the Profession of deciding Law-Controversies; yet seeing
you are pleased to do me the Honor to put that Task upon me, instead of
undergoing the Office of a Judge, I will become your humble Supplicant: I
observe, Gentlemen, in this Bridlegoose, several things, which induce me to
represent before you, that it is my Opinion he should be pardoned. In the First
place, his Old Age. Secondly, His Simplicity: To both which Qualities our
Statute and Common Laws, Civil and Municipal together, allow many excuses for
any slips or escapes, which through the invincible Imperfection of either, have
been inconsiderately stumbled upon by a Person so qualified. Thirdly,
Gentlemen, I must needs display before you another Case, which in Equity and
Justice makes much for the advantage of Bridlegoose: to wit, that this one,
sole, and single fault of his, ought to be quite forgotten, abolished, and
swallowed up, by that immense and vast Ocean of Just Dooms and Sentences, which
heretofore he has given and pronounced: his Demeanours for these Forty Years
and upwards, that he has been a Judge, having been so evenly balanced in the
Scales of Uprightness, that Envy itself, till now, could not have been so
impudent as to accuse and twit him with any Act worthy of a Check or
Reprehension: As if a Drop of the Sea were thrown into the Loire, none could
perceive, or say that by this single Drop, the whole River should be salt and
brackish.

Truly, it seems unto me, that in the whole Series of Bridlegoose's Juridical
Decrees, there has been, I know not what, of extraordinary favoring of the
unspeakable Benignity of God, that all those his preceding Sentences, Awards,
and Judgments, have been confirmed and approved of by your selves, in this
your own Venerable and Sovereign Court: for it is usual (as you know well) with
him whose ways are inscrutable, to manifest his own ineffable Glory, in
blunting the perspicacy of the Eyes of the Wise, in weakening the Strength of
potent Oppressors, in depressing the Pride of rich Extortioners, and in
erecting, comforting, protecting, supporting, upholding, and shoaring up the
poor, feeble, humble, silly, and foolish Ones of the Earth. But waving all
these matters, I shall only beseech you, not by the Obligations which you
pretend to owe to my Family, for which I thank you; but for that constant and
unfeigned Love and Affection which you have always found in me, both on this
and on the other side of Loire, for the Maintenance and Establishment of your
Places, Offices, and Dignities, that for this one time, you would pardon and
forgive him, upon these two Conditions: First, That he satisfy, or put a
sufficient Surety for the Satisfaction of the Party wronged by the Injustice of
the Sentence in question: for the fulfillment of this Article, I will provide
sufficiently. And Secondly, That for his subsidiary Aid in the weighty Charge
of Administrating Justice, you would be pleased to appoint, and assign unto him
some pretty, little, virtuous Counselor, younger, learneder, and wiser then
he, by the Square and Rule of whose Advice he may regulate, guide, temper and
moderate in times coming all his Judiciary Procedures, or otherways, if you
intend totally to depose him from his Office, and to deprive him altogether of
the State and Dignity of a Judge, I shall cordially entreat you to make a
Present and free Gift of him to me, who shall find in my Kingdoms Charges and
Employments enough wherewith to imbusie him, for the bettering of his own
Fortunes, and furtherance of my Service. In the mean time, I implore the
Creator, Savior and Sanctifyer of all good things, in their Grace, Mercy and
Kindness to preserve you all now and evermore, World without end.

These Words thus spoken, Pantagruel vayling his Cap, and making a Leg with
such a Majestic Garb as became a Person of his paramount Degree and Eminency,
farewell'd Trinquamelle the President, and Master Speaker of that Merlingues^an
Parliament, took his leave of the whole Court, and went out of the Chamber; at
the Door whereof finding Panurge, Epistemon, Friar Ihon, and others, he
forthwith attended by them, walked to the utter Gate, where all them
immediately took Horse to return toward Gargantua. Pantagruel by the way
related to them from point to point, the manner of Bridlegoose's sententiating
Differences at Law. Friar Ihon said, that he had seen Peter Dandin, and was
acquainted with him at that time when he sojourned in the Monastery of Fontaine
le Conte, under the Noble Abbot Ardillon. Gymnast likeways affirmed, that he
was in the Tent of the Grand Christian Cavallier de Cressie, when the Gascon,
after his Sleep, made answer to the Adventurer. Panurge was somewhat
incredulous in the matter of believing, that it was morally possible.
Bridlegoose should have been for such a long space of time so continually
fortunate in that Aleatory way of deciding Law Debates. Epistemon said to
Pantagruel, Such another Story, not much unlike to that, in all the
Circumstances thereof, is vulgarly reported of the Provost of Montlebery. In
good sooth, such a Perpetuity of good Luck is to be wondered at. To have hit
right twice or thrice in a Judgment so given by Hap-hazard, might have fallen
out well enough, especially in Controversies that were ambiguous, intricate,
abstruse, perplexed and obscure.

CHAP. XLIV. How Pantagruel relates a strange History of the Perplexity of
Humane Judgment.
SEeing you talk (quoth Pantagruel) of dark, difficult, hard and knotty
Debates, I will tell you of one controverted before Cneius Dolobella, Proconsul
in Asia. The Case was this.

A Wife in Smyrna had of her first Husband a Child named Abece; he dying, she
after the expiring of a Year and Day, married again, and to her Second Husband
bore a Boy called Edege: A pretty long time thereafter it happened (as you know
the Affection of Step-fathers and Step-dams is very rare, toward the Children
of the first Fathers and Mothers deceased) that this Husband, with the help of
his Son Edege, secretly, wittingly, willingly and treacherously murdered
Abece. The Woman came no sooner to get Information of the Fact, that it might
not go unpunished, she caused kill them both, to revenge the Death of her first
Son. She was Apprehended and carried before Cneius Dolobella, in whose
Presence, she, without dissembling any thing, confessed all that was laid to
her Charge; yet alleged that she had both Right and Reason on her side for the
killing of them. Thus was the state of the Question. He found the business so
dubious and intricate, that he knew not what to determine therein, nor which of
the Parties to incline to. On the one hand, it was an execrable Crime to cut
off at once both her Second Husband and her Son. On the other hand, the Cause
of the Murder seemed to be so natural, as to be grounded upon the Law of
Nations, and the rational Instinct of all the People of the World; seeing they
two together had feloniously and murtherously destroyed her first Son. Not that
they had been in any manner of way wronged, outraged or injured by him, but out
of an ava^icious Intent to possess his Inheritance. In this doubtful Quandary
and Uncertainty what to pitch upon, he sent to the Areopagites then sitting at
Athens, to learn and obtain their Advice and Judgment. That Judicious Senate
very sagely perpending the Reasons of his Perplexity, sent him word, to summon
her personally to compear before him, a precise Hundred Years thereafter, to
answer to some Interrogatories touching certain Points, which were not
contained in the Verbal Defense: Which Resolution of theirs did import, that it
was in their Opinion a so difficult and inextricable a matter, that they knew
not what to say or judge therein. Who had decided that Plea by the Chance and
Fortune of the Dice, could not have erred nor awarded amiss on which side
soever he had past his casting and condemnatory Sentence: If against the Woman,
she deserved Punishment for usurping Sovereign Authority, by taking that
Vengeance at her own hand, the inflicting whereof was only competent to the
Supreme Power, to administer Justice in Criminal Cases: If for her, the just
Resentment of a so atrocious Injury done unto her, in murdering her innocent
Son, did fully excuse and vindicate her of any Trespass or Offense about that
particular committed by her. But this continuation of Bridlegoose for so many
years, still hitting the Nail o^ the Head, never missing the Mark, and always
judging aright, by the mere throwing of the Dice, and the Chance thereof, is
that which most astonisheth and amazeth me.

To answer (quoth Epistemon) categorically to that which you wonder at, I must
ingen^ously confess and avow that I cannot; yet conjecturally to guess at the
reason of it, I would refer the Cause of that marvelously long continued happy
Success in the Judiciary Results of his Definitive Sentences to the favorable
Aspect of the Heavens, and Benignity of the Intelligences; who, out of their
love to Goodness, after having contemplated the pure Simplicity and sincere
Unfeignedness of Judge Bridlegoose in the acknowledgment of his Inabilities,
did regulate that for him by Chance, which by the profoundest Act of his
maturest Deliberation he was not able to reach unto. That likeways which
possibly made him to diffide in his own Skill and Capacity, notwithstanding his
being an expert and understanding Lawyer, for any thing that I know to the
contrary, was the Knowledge and Experience which he had of the Antenomies,
Contrarieties, Antilogies, Contradictions, Traversings and Thwartings of Laws,
Customs, Edicts, Statutes, Orders and Ordinances, in which dangerous
Opposition, Equity and Justice being structured and founded on either of the
opposite Terms, and a Gap being thereby opened for the ushering in of Injustice
and Iniquity, through the various Interpretations of Self ended Lawyers, being
assuredly persuaded that the Infernal Calumniator, who frequently transformeth
himself into the likeness of a Messenger or Angel of Light, makes use of these
cross Glosses and Expositions in the Mouths and Pens of his Ministers and
Servants, the perverse Advocates, bribing Judges, Law-monging Attorneys,
prevaricating Counselors, and other such like Law-wrestling Members of a Court
of Justice, to turn by those means Black to White, Green to Gray, and what is
Straight to a Crooked ply; for the more expedient doing whereof these
Diabolical Ministers make both the Pleading Parties believe that their Cause is
just and righteous; for it is well known that there is no Cause how bad soever,
which does not find an Advocate to patrocinate and defend it, else would there
be no Process in the World, no Suits at Law, nor Pleadings at the Bar. He did
in these Extremities, as I conceive, most humbly recommend the Direction of his
Judicial Proceedings to the upright Judge of Judges, God Almighty; did submit
himself to the Conduct and Guideship of the blessed Spirit, in the Hazard and
Perplexity of the Definitive Sentence; and by this Aleatory Lot, did as it were
implore and explore the Divine Decree of his Good Will and Pleasure, in stead
of that which we call the Final Judgment of a Court. To this effect, to the
better attaining to his purpose, which was to judge righteously, he did in my
Opinion throw and turn the Dice, to the end, that by the Providence aforesaid,
the best Chance might fall to him whose Action was uprightest, and backed with
greatest Reason; in doing whereof he did not stray from the Sense of
Talmudists, who say that there is so little harm in that manner of searching
the Truth, that in the Anxiety and Perplexedness of Humane Wits, God oftentimes
manifests the Secret Pleasure of his Divine Will.

Furthermore, I will neither think nor say, nor can I believe, that the
unstreightness is so irregular, or the Corruption so evident, of those of the
Parliament of Mirlingois in Mirlingues, before whom Bridlegoose was Arraigned
for Prevarication, that they will maintain it to be a wors^ Practice to have
the Decision of a Suit at Law referred to the Chance and Hazard of a Throw of
the Dice, hab nab, or luck as it will, than to have it remitted to, and past by
the Determination of those whose Hands are full of Blood, and Hearts of wry
Affections. Besides that, their principal Direction in all Law-matters comes to
their Hands from one Tribonian, a wicked, miscreant, barbarous, faithless and
perfidious Knave, so pernicious, injust, avaricious and perverse in his ways,
that it was his ordinary custom to sell Laws, Edicts, Declarations,
Constitutions and Ordinances, as at an Outroop or Putsale, to him who offered
most for them. Thus did he shape Measures for the Pleaders, and cut their
Morsels to them by and out of these little Parcels, Fragments, Bits, Scantlings
and Shreds of the Law now in use, altogether concealing, suppressing,
disannulling and abolishing the remainder, which did make for the total Law;
fearing that if the whole Law were made manifest and laid open to the knowledge
of such as are interessed in it, and the Learned Books of the Ancient Doctors
of the Law, upon the Exposition of the Twelve Tables and Praetorian Edicts, his
villainous Pranks, Naughtiness and vile Impiety should come to the public
notice of the World. Therefore were it better in my Conceit, that is to say,
less inconvenient, that Parties at Variance in any Juridicial Case, should in
the dark march upon Caltropes, then to submit the Determination of what is
their Right to such unhallowed Sentences and horrible Decrees: As Cato in his
time wished and advised, that every Judiciary Court should be paved with
Caltropes.

CHAP. XLV. How Panurge takes Advice of Triboulet.
ON the sixth Day thereafter Pantagruel was returned home, at the very same
hour that Triboulet was by Water come from Blois. Panurge at his Arrival gave
him a Hogs Bladder, puffed up with Wind, and resounding, because of the hard
Pease that were within it: Moreover he did present him with a guilt Wooden
Sword, a hollow Budget made of a Tortoise shell, an Osier Watled Wicker-Bottle
full of Briton Wine, and Five and Twenty Apples of the Orchard of Blanduco.

If he be such a Fool (quoth Carpalin) as to be won with Apples, there is no
more Wit in his Pate than in the Head of an ordinary Cabbage. Triboulet girded
the Sword and Scrip to his side, took the Bladder in his Hand, ate some few of
the Apples, and drunk up all the Wine* Panurge very wistly and heedfully
looking upon him, said, I never yet saw a Fool, (and I have seen ten thousand
Franks worth of that kind of Cattle) who did not love to drink heartily, and by
good long Draughts. When Triboulet had done with his Drinking, Panurge laid out
before him, and exposed the Sum of the business, wherein he was to require his
Advice in eloquent and choicely-sorted Terms, adorned with Flourishes of
Rhetoric. But before he had altogether done, Triboulet with his Fist gave him
a bouncing Whirret between the Shoulders, rendered back into his Hand again the
empty Bottle, filipped and fli^ted him on the Nose with the Hogs Bladder; and
lastly, for a final resolution, shaking and wagging his Head strongly and
disorderly, he answered nothing else but this, By God, God; mad Fool, beware
the Monk: Buzansay, Hornepipe. These Words thus finished, he slipped himself
out of the Company, went aside, and rattling the Bladder, took a huge Delight in
the Melody of the rickling, crackling noise of the Pease; after which time it
lay not in the power of them all to draw out of his Chaps the Articulate Sound
of one Syllable; insomuch that when Panurge went about to interrogate him
further, Triboulet drew his Wooden Sword, and would have stuck him therewith. I
have fished fair now, (quoth Panurge) and brought my Pigs to a fine Market.
Have I not got a brave Determination of all my Doubts, and a Responce in all
things agreeable to the Oracle that gave it? He is a great Fool that is not to
be denied; yet is he a greater Fool who brought him hither to me. That Bolt,
quoth Carpalin, levels point blank at me; but of the three I am the greatest
Fool, who did impart the Secret of my Thoughts to such an Idiot Ass and Native
Ninny.

Without putting our selves to any stir or trouble in the least, (quoth
Pantagruel) let us maturely and seriously consider and perpend the Gestures and
Speech which he has made and uttered: In them veritably (quoth he) have I
remarked and observed some excellent and notable Mysteries; yea, of such
important and worth and weight, that I shall never henceforth be astonished,
nor think strange, why the Turks with a great deal of Worship and Reverence,
Honor and Respect Natural Fools, equally with their Primest Doctors, Mufties,
Divines and Prophets. Did not you take heed (quoth he) a little before he
opened his Mouth to speak, what a shogging, shaking and wagging his Head did
keep? By the approved Doctrine of the ancient Philosophers, the customary
Ceremonies of the most expert Magicians, and the received Opinions of the
learnedest Lawyers, such a brangling Agitation and Moving should by us all be
judged to proceed from, and be quickened and suscitated by the coming and
Inspiration of the Prophetizing and Fatielical Spirit, which entering briskly,
and on a sudden, into a shallow Receptacle of a debil Substance (for as you
know, and as the Proverb shows it, a little Head contains not much Brains)
was the cause of that Commotion. This is conform to what is avouched by the
most skilful Physicians, when they affirm, that Shakings and Tremblings fall
upon the Members of a Humane Body, partly because of the Heaviness and violent
Impetuosity of the Burden and Load that is carried, and other part, by reason
of the Weakness and Imbecility that is in the virtue of the bearing Organ: A
manifest Example whereof appears in those, who fasting, are not able to carry
to their Head a great Gobletfull of Wine without a trembling and a shaking in
the Hand that holds it. This of old was accounted a Prefiguration and mystical
pointing out of the Pythian Divineress, who used always before the uttering of
a Responce from the Oracle, to shake a Branch of her Domestic Laurel.
Lampridius also testifies, that the Emperor Heliogabulus, to acquire unto
himself the Reputation of a Sooth-sayer, did, on several Holy Days of prime
Solemnity, in the Presence of the Fanatic Rabble, make the Head of his Idol,
by some slight within the Body thereof, publicly to shake. Plautus, in his
Asserie, declares likeways, that Saurius, whithersoever he walked like one
quite distracted of his Wits, keeps such a furious lolling and mad-like
shaking of his Head, that he commonly affrighted those who casually met with
him in his Way. The said Author in another place showing a Reason why Charmides
shook and brangled his Head, assevered that he was transported, and in an
Ecstasy. Catullus after the same manner makes mention in his Berecynthia and
Atys, of the place wherein the Menades, Bacchical Women, She-Priests of the
Lyaean God, and demented Prophetesses, carrying Ivy Boughs in their hands, did
shake their Heads. As in the like case amongst the Gauls, the guelded Priests
of Cybele were wont to do in the celebrating of some Festivals, which according
to the sense of the ancient Theologues, have from thence had their
Denomination; for (...) signifies to turn round, whirl about, shake the Head,
and play the part of one that is wry-necked.

Semblably Titus Livius writes, that in the Solemnization time of the
Bacchanalian Fobedayes at Rome, both Men and Women seemed to Prophetize and
Vaticinate, because of an affected kind of wagging of the Head, shrugging of
the Shoulders, and Jectigation of the whole Body, which they used then most
punctually. For the common Voice of the Philosophers, together with the Opinion
of the People, asserteth for an irrefragable Truth, that Vaticination is seldom
by the Heavens bestowed on any, without the Concomitancy of a little Frenzy,
and a Head shaking, not only when the said presaging Virtue is infused, but
when the Person also therewith inspired declares and manifests it unto
others. The Learned Lawyer Iulien, being asked on a time, if that Slave might
be truly esteemed to be healthful and in a good plight, who had not only
conversed with some furious, maniack and enraged People, but in their Company
had also prophesied, yet without a Noddle-shaking Concussion, answered, That
seeing there was no Headwagging at the time of his Predictions, he might be
held for sound and compotent enough. Is it not daily seen how Schoolmasters,
Teachers, Tutors and Instructors of Children, shake the Heads of their
Disciples, (as one would do a Pot in holding it by the Lugs) that by this
Erection, Vellication, stretching and pulling their Ears, (which according to
the Doctrine of the sage Egyptians, is a Member consecrated to the Memory) they
may stir them up to recollect their scattered Thoughts, bring home those
Fancies of theirs, which perhaps have been extravagantly roaming abroad upon
strange and uncouth Objects, and totally range their Judgments, which possibly
by disordinate Affections have been made wild, to the Rule and Pattean of a
wise, discreet, virtuous and Philosophical Discipline: All which Virgil
acknowledges to be true, in the branglement of Apollo Cynthius.

CHAP. XLVI. How Pantagruel and Panurge diversely interpret the Words of
Triboulet.
HE says you are a Fool; and what kind of Fool? A mad Fool, who in your old Age
would enslave your self to the Bondage of Matrimony, and shut your Pleasures up
within a Wedlock, whose Key some Ruffian carries in his Codpiece. He says
furthermore, beware of the Monk. Upon mine Honor, it gives me in my mind, that
you will be cuckolded by a Monk. Nay, I will engage mine Honor, which is the
most precious Pawn I could have in my Possession, although I were sole and
peaceable Dominator over all Europe, Asia, and Africa, that if you marry, you
will surely be one of the Horned Brotherhood of Vulcan. Hereby may you perceive
how much I do attribute to the wise Foolery of our Morosoph Triboulet. The
other Oracles and Responses did in the general prognosticate you a Cuckold,
without descending so near to the point of a particular Determination, as to
pitch upon what Vocation, amongst the several sorts of Men, he should profess
who is to be the Copesmate of your Wife, and Hornifyer of your proper self.
Thus noble Triboulet tells it us plainly, from whose Words we may gather with
all ease imaginary, that your Cuckoldry is to be infamous, and so much the more
scandalous, that your Conjugal Bed will be incestuously contaminated with the
Filthiness of a Monkery Lecher. Moreover he says, that you will be the
Hornepipe of Buzansay. That is to say, well horned, hornified and cornuted: And
as Triboulet's Uncle asked from Lewis the Twelfth, for a younger Brother of his
own who lived at Blois, the Hornepipes of Buzansay, for the Organ Pipes,
through the mistake of one Word for another: Even so, whilst you think to marry
a wise, humble, calm, discreet and honest Wife, you shall unhappily stumble
upon one witless, proud, loud, obstreperous, bawling, clamourous, and more
unpleasant than any Buzansay-hornepipe. Consider withal, how he flirted you on
the Nose with the Bladder, and gave you a sound thumping Blow with his Fist
upon the ridge of the Back. This denotates and presageth, that you shall be
banged, beaten and filipped by her; and that also she will steal of your Goods
from you, as you stole the Hogs Bladder from the little Boys of Vaubreton. Plat
contrary (quoth Panurge) not that I would impudently exempt my self from being
a Vassal in the Territory of Folly; I hold of that Jurisdiction, and am subject
thereto, I confess it; and why should I not? for the whole World is foolish. In
the old Lorrain Language ( fou for oou) All and Fool were the same thing.
Besides it is avouched by Solomon, that infinite is the number of Fools: From
an Infinity nothing can be deducted or abated; nor yet by the Testimony of
Aristotle, can any thing thereto be added or subjoyned. Therefore were I a mad
Fool, if being a Fool I should not hold my self a Fool. After the same manner
of speaking, we may averr the number of the mad and enraged Folks to be
infinite. Avicenne makes no Bones to assert, that the several kinds of Madness
are infinite.

Though this much of Triboulet's words tend little to my Advantage, how be it
the Prejudice which I sustain thereby be common with me to all other Men, yet
the rest of his Talk and Gesture makes altogether for me. He said to my Wife,
Be weary of the Monky; that is as much, as if he should be chery, and take as
much delight in a Monky as ever did the Lesbia of Catullus in her Sparrow; who
will for his Recreation pass his time no less joyfully at the exercise of
snatching Flies, then heretofore did the merciless Flycatcher Domitian. Withal
he meant by another part of his Discourse, that she should be of a Jovial
Country-like Humor, as gay and pleasing as a harmonious Hornepipe of Saulian
or Buzansy. The veridical Triboulet did therein hint at what I liked well, as
perfectly knowing the Inclinations and Propensions of my Mind, my natural
Disposition, and the Biass of my Interior Passions and Affections: For you may
be assured, that my Humor is much better satisfied and contented with the
pretty frolic rural discheveled Shepheardesses, whose Bums through their
course Canvas Smocks smell of the Claver-grass of the Field, than with those
great Ladies in Magnifick Courts, with their Flandan, Top-knots and Sultana's,
their Polvil, Postillo's and Cosmeticks. The homely sound likeways of a
Rustical Hornepipe, is more agreeable to my Ears, than the curious Warbling and
musical Quavering of Lutes, Teorbes, Viols, Rebecks and Violins. He gave me a
lusty rapping thwack on my Back. What then? Let it pass in the Name and for the
Love of God, as an Abatement of, and Deduction from so much of my future Pains
in Purgatory. He did it not out of any evil intent: He thought belike to have
hit some of the Pages: He is an honest Fool, and an innocent Changeling. It is
a Sin to harbor in the Heart any bad Conceit of him. As for my self, I
heartily pardon him. He flirted me on the Nose: In that there is no harm; for
it imports nothing else, but that betwixt my Wife and me there will occur
some toyish wanton Tricks, which usually happen to all new married Folks.

CHAP. XLVII. How Pantagruel and Panurge resolved to make a Visit to the Oracle
of the Holy Bottle.
THere is as yet another Point (quoth Panurge) which you have not at all
considered on, although it be the chief and principal Head of the matter. He
put the Bottle in my hand, and restored it me again. How interpret you that
Passage? What is the meaning of that? He possibly (quoth Pantagruel) signifies
thereby, that your Wife will be such a Drunkard, as shall daily take in her
Liquor kindly, and ply the Pots and Bottles apace. Quite otherways (quoth
Panurge) for the Bottle was empty. I swear to you, by the prickling brambly
Thorn of St. Fiacre in Brie, that our unique Morosoph, whom I formerly termed
the Lunatic Triboulet, refers me, for attaining to the final Resolution of
my Scruple, to the Response-giving Bottle: Therefore do I renew afresh the
first Vow which I made, and here in your Presence protest and make Oath by Styx
and Acheron, to carry still Spectacles in my Cap, and never to wear a Codpiece
in my Breeches, until upon the Enterprise in hand of my Nuptial Undertaking, I
shall have obtained an Answer from the Holy Bottle. I am acquainted with a
prudent, understanding, and discreet Gentleman, and besides a very good Friend
of mine, who knows the Land, Country, and Place where its Temple and Oracle
is built and posited: He will guide and conduct us thither sure and safely. Let
us go thither, I beseech you: Deny me not, and say not, Nay; reject not the
Suit I make unto you, I entreat you. I will be to you an Achates, a Damis, and
heartily accompany you all along in the whole Voyage, both in your going forth
and coming back. I have of a long time known you to be a great Lover of
Peregrination, desirous still to learn new things, and still to see what you
had never seen before.

Very willingly (quoth Pantagruel) I condescend to your Request. But before we
enter in upon our Progress toward the Accomplishment of so far a Journey,
replenished and fraught with eminent Perils, full of innumerable Hazards, and
every way stored with evident and manifest Dangers. What Dangers (quoth
Panurge) interrupting him? Dangers fly back, run from, and shun me whither
soever I go seven Leagues around: As in the Presence of the Sovereign a
subordinate Magistracy is eclipsed; or as Clouds and Darkness quite evanish at
the bright coming of a Radiant Sun; or as all Sores and Sicknesses did suddenly
depart, at the approach of the Body of St. Martin Aquande: Nevertheless (quoth
Pantagruel) before we adventure to set forwards on the Road of our projected
and intended Voyage, some few Points are to be discussed, expedited and
dispatched. First, Let us send back Triboulet to Blois, (which was instantly
done, after that Pantagruel had given him a Frize Coat.) Secondly, Our Design
must be backed with the Advice and Counsel of the King my Father. And Lastly,
It is most needful and expedient for us, that we search for, and find out some
Sybille to serve us for a Guide, Truchman and Interpreter. To this Panurge made
answer, That his Friend Xenomanes would abundantly suffice for the plenary
Discharge and Performance of the Sybil's Office; and that furthermore, in
passing through the Lanternatory Revelling Country, they should take along with
them a Learned and profitable Lantern, which would be no less useful to them
in their Voyage, than was that of the Sybil to Aeneas in his Descent to the
Elysian Fields. Carpalin in the interim, as he was upon the conducting away of
Triboulet, in his passing by, hearkened a little to the Discourse they were
upon, then spoke out, saying, Ho, Panurge, Master Freeman, take my Lord Debitis
at Calais along with you, for he is Goud-fallot, a good Fellow: He will not
forget those who have been Debitors: These are Lanternes: Thus shall you not
lack for both Fallot and Lantern. I may safely with the little Skill I have
(quoth Pantagruel) prognosticate, that by the way we shall engender no
Melancholy; I clearly perceive it already: The only thing that vexes me is,
that I cannot speak the Lanternatorie Language. I shall (answered Panurge)
speak for you all; I understand it every whit as well as I do mine own Maternal
Tongue, I have been no less used to it than to the Vulgar French.

Brizmara dalgotbrick nubstzenos
Isqufez prusque alboriz crinqs zabac
Mizbe dilbarlkz morp nipp stanch bac
Srombtz, Paurg, walmap quost grufzbac.
Now guess, Friend Epistemon, what this is. They are (quoth Epistemon) Names of
errand Devils, paissant Devils, and rampant Devils. These words of thine, dear
friend of mine, are true (quoth Panurge) yet are they Terms used in the
Language of the Court of the Lanternish People. By the way as we go upon our
Journey I will make to thee a pretty little Dictionary, which notwithstanding
shall not last you much longer than a Pair of new Shoes; thou shall have
learned it sooner than thou can perceive the Dawning of the next subsequent
Morning. What I have said in the foregoing Tetrastick is thus translated out of
the Lanternish Tongue into our Vulgar Dialect.

All Miseries attended me, whilst I
A Lover was, and had no good thereby:
Of better Luck the married People tell,
Panurge is one of those, and knows it well.
There is little more then (quoth Pantagruel) to be done, but that we
understand what the Will of the King my Father will be therein, and purchase
his Consent.

CHAP. XLVIII. How Gargantua shows, that the Children ought not to marry
without the special Knowledge and Advice of their Fathers and Mothers.
NO sooner had Pantagruel entered in at the Door of the Great Hall of the
Castle, than that he encountered full but with the good honest Gargantua coming
forth from the Council Board, unto whom he made a succinct and summary
Narrative of what had passed and occurred worthy of his Observation in his
Travels abroad, since their last Interview: Then, acquainting him with the
Design he had in hand, besought him that it might stand with his good Will and
Pleasure to grant him leave to prosecute and go thoroughstitch with the
Enterprise which he had undertaken. The good Man Gargantua having in one hand
two great Bundles of Petitions, indorsed and answered; and in the other some
remembrancing Notes and Bills, to put him in mind of such other Requests of
Supplicants, which albeit presented, had nevertheless been neither read nor
heard, he gave both to Ulrich Gallet, his ancient and faithful Master of
Requests; then drew aside Pantagruel, and with a Countenance more serene and
jovial than customary, spoke to him thus: I praise God, and have great reason
so to do, my most dear Son, that he has been pleased to entertain ^n you a
constant Inclination to virtuous Actions. I am well content that the Voyage
which you have motioned to me be by you accomplished, but withal, I could wish
you would have a mind and desire to marry, for that I see you are of competent
years. Panurge in the mean while was in a readiness of preparing and providing
for Remedies, Salves and Cures against all such Lets, Obstacles and Impediments
as he could in the height of his Fancy conceive might by Gargantua be cast in
the way of their Itinerary Design. Is it your Pleasure (most dear Father) that
you speak? (answered Pantagruel) For my part I have not yet thought upon it. In
all this Affair I wholly submit and rest in your good liking and Paternal
Authority: For I shall rather pray unto God that he would throw me down stark
dead at your Feet, in your Pleasure, then that against your pleasure I should
be found married alive. I never yet heard that by any Law, whether Sacred or
Profane, yea, amongst the rudest and most barbarous Nations in the World, it
was allowed and approved of, that Children may be suffered and tolerated to
marry at their own good Will and Pleasure, without the Knowledge, Advice or
Consent asked and had thereto of their Fathers, Mothers, and nearest Kindred.
All Legislators every where upon the Face of the whole Earth, have taken away
and removed this Licentious Liberty from Children, and totally reserved it to
the Discretion of the Parents.

My dearly beloved Son (quoth Gargantua) I believe you, and from my Heart thank
God for having endowed you with the Grace of having both a perfect notice of,
and entire liking to laudable and praise worthy things; and that through the
Windows of your exterior Senses he has vouchsased to transmit unto the
interior Faculties of your Mind, nothing but what is good and virtuous. For in
my time there has been found on the Continent a certain Country, wherein are I
know not what kind of Pastophorian Mole-catching Priests, who albeit averse
from engaging their proper Persons into a Matrimonial Duty, like the Pontifical
Flamens of Cibele in Phrygia, as if they were Capons and not Cocks; full of
Lasciviousness, Salacity and Wantonness, who yet have nevertheless, in the
matter of Conjugal Affairs, taken upon them to prescribe Laws and Ordinances to
married Folks. I cannot goodly determine what I should most abhor, detest,
loath and abominate, whether the Tyrannical Presumption of those dreaded
Sacerdotal Molecatch^rs, who not being willing to contain and coop up
themselves within the Grates and Treillices of their own mysterious Temples, do
deal in, meddle with, obtrude upon, and thrust their Sickles into Harvests of
Secular Businesses quite contrary, and diametrically opposite to the Quality,
State and Condition of their Callings, Professions and Vocations; or the
superstitious Stupidity and senceless Scrupulousness of married Folks, who have
yielded Obedience, and submitted their Bodies, Fortunes and Estates to the
Discretion and Authority of such odious, perverse, barbarous, and unreasonable
Laws. Nor do they see that which is clearer than the Light and Splendor of the
Morning Star, how all these Nuptial and Connubial Sanctions, Statutes and
Ordinances have been decreed, made and instituted, for the sole Benefit, Profit
and Advantage of the Flaminal Mists, and mysterious Flamens, and nothing at all
for the good Utility or Emolument of the silly hood-winked married People;
which administreth unto others a sufficient Cause for rendering these Churchmen
suspicious of Iniquity, and of an unjust and fraudulent manner of dealing, no
more to be connived at nor countenanced, after that it be well weighed in the
Scales of Reason, than if with a reciprocal Temerity the Laics by way of
Compensation would impose Laws to be followed and observed by those Mysts and
Flamens; how they should behave themselves in the making and Performance of
their Rites and Ceremonies, and after what manner they ought to proceed in the
offering up, and immolating of their various Oblations, Victims and Sacrifices;
seeing that besides the Edecimation and Tith-haling of their Goods, they cut
off and take Parings, Shreddings and Clippings of the Gain proceeding from the
Labor of their Hands, and Sweat of their Brows, therewith to entertain
themselves the better. Upon which Consideration in my Opinion, their
Injunctions and Commands would not prove so pernicious and impertinent as those
of the Ecclesiastic Power, unto which they had tendered their blind Obedience.

For as you have very well said, there is no place in the World where legally a
License is granted to the Children to marry without the Advice and Consent of
their Parents and Kindred. Nevertheless by those wicked Laws and Mole-catching
Customs, whereat there is a little hinted in what I have already spoken to you,
there is no scurvy, mezely, lepro^s or pocky Ruffian, Pander, Knave, Rogue,
Skelm, Robber or Thief, pilloried, whipped and burn-marked in his own Country
for his Crimes and Felonies, who may not violently snatch away and ravish what
Maid soever he had a mind to pitch upon, how noble, how fair, how rich, honest
and chaste soever she be, and that out of the House of her own Father, in his
own Presence, from the Bosom of her Mother, and in the sight and despite of
her Friends and Kindred looking on a so woeful Spectacle, provided that the
Rascal Villain be so cunning as to associate unto himself some Mystical Flamen,
who according to the Covenant made betwixt them two, shall be in hope some day
to participate of the Prey.

Could the Goths, the Scyths, or Messagets do a worse or more cruel Act to any
of the Inhabitants of a Hostile City, when after the loss of many of their most
considerable Commanders, the expense of a great deal of Money, and a long
Siege, they shall have stormed and taken it by a vioolent and impetuous
Assault? May not these Fathers and Mothers (think you) be sorrowful and
heavy-hearted, when they see an unknown Fellow, a Vagabond Stranger, a
barbarous Lowt, a rude Curr, rotten, fleshless, putrified, scraggy, boily,
botchy, poor, a forlorn Caitif and miserable Snake, by an open Rapt, snatched
away before their own Eyes their so fair, delicate, neat, well-behavioured,
richly provided for, and healthful Daughters, on whose Breeding and Education
they had spared no Cost nor Charges, by bringing them up in an honest
Discipline to all the honorable and virtuous Employments becoming one of their
Sex, descended of a noble Parentage, hoping by those commendable and
industrious means in an opportune and convenient time to bestow them on the
worthy Sons of their well-deserving Neighbors and ancient Friends, who had
nourished, entertained, taught, instructed and schooled their Children with the
same Care and Solicitude, to make them Matches fit to attain to the Felicity
of a so happy Marriage; that from them might issue an Offspring and Progeny no
less Heirs to the laudable Endowments and exquisite Qualifications of their
Parents whom they every way resemble, than to their Personal and Real Estates,
Movables and Inheritances? How doleful, trist and plangorous would such a
Sight and Pageantry prove unto them? You shall not need to think that the
Collachrymation of the Romans, and their Confederates, at the Decease of
Germanicus Drusus, was comparable to this Lamentation of theirs? Neither would
I have you to believe, that the Discomfort and Anxiety of the Lacedaemonians,
when the Greek Helen, by the Perfidiousness of the Adulterous Trojan Paris was
privily stolen away out of their Country, was greater or more pitiful than
this ruthful and deplorable Collugency of theirs? You may very well imagine
that Ceres, at the Ravishment of her Daughter Proserpina, was not more
attristed, sad, nor mournful than they. Trust me, and your own Reason, that the
loss of Osyris was not so regreatable to Isis; nor did Venus so deplore the
Death of Adonis; nor yet did Hercules so bewail the straying of Hylas; nor was
the Rapt of Polyxena more throbbingly resented and condoled by Pryamus and
Hecuba, than this aforesaid Accident would be sympathetically bemoaned,
grievous, ruthful and anxious to the woefully desolate and disconsolate Parents.

Notwithstanding all this, the greater part of so vilely abused Parents, are so
timorous and afraid of Devils and Hobgoblins, and so deeply plunged in
Superstition, that they dare not gainsay nor contradict, much less oppose and
resist those unnatural and impious Actions, when the Mole-catcher has been
present at the perpetrating of the Fact, and a Party Contracter and Covenanter
in that detestable Bargain. What do they do then? They wretchedly stay at their
own miserable Homes, destitute of their well-beloved Daughters; the Fathers
cursing the days and the hours wherein they were married; and the Mothers
howling and crying that it was not their fortune to have brought forth Abortive
Issues, when they happened to be delivered of such unfortunate Girls; and in this
pitiful plight spend at best the remainder of their Time with Tears and Weeping
for those their Children of, and from whom they expected (and with good reason
should have obtained and reaped) in these latter days of theirs, Joy and
Comfort. Other Parents there have been, so impatient of that Affront and
Indignity put upon them and their Families, that, transported with the
Extremity of Passion, in a mad and frantic mood, through the Vehemence of a
grievous Fury and raging Sorrow, have drowned, hanged, killed, and otherways
put violent hands on themselves. Others again of that Parental Relation, have
upon the reception of the like Injury, been of a more magnanimous and heroic
Spirit, who (in imitation, and at the Example of the Children of Jacob,
revenging upon the Sichemits the Rapt of their Sister Dina) having found the
Rascally Ruffian in the Association of his mystical Mole-catcher closely and in
hugger-mugger, conferring, parlying, and coming with their Daughters, for the
suborning, corrupting, depraving, perverting and enticing these innocent,
unexperienced Maids unto filthy Lewdnesses, have, without any further
Advisement on the matter, cut them instantly into pieces, and thereupon
forthwith thrown out upon the Fields their so dismembered Bodies, to serve for
Food unto the Wolves and Ravens. Upon the chivalrous, bold and courageous
Achievement of a so valiant, stout and man-like Act, the other Mole catching
Symmists have been so highly incensed, and have so chaffed, fretted and fumed
thereat, that Bills of Complaint and Accusations having been in a most odious
and detestible manner put in before the competent Judges, the Arm of Secular
Authority has with much Importunity and Impetuosity been by them implored and
required, they proudly contending, that the Servants of God would become
contemptible, if exemplary Punishment were not speedily taken upon the Persons
of the Perpetrators of such an enormous, horrid, sacrilegious, crying, heinous,
and execrable Crime.

Yet neither by Natural Equity, by the Law of Nations, nor by any Imperial Law
whatsoever, has there been found so much as one Rubric, Paragraph, Point or
Tittle, by the which any kind of Chastisement or Correction has been adjudged
due to be inflicted upon any for their Delinquency in that kind. Reason
opposes, and Nature is repugnant: For there is no virtuous Man in the World,
who, both naturally and with good reason, will not be more hugely troubled in
Mind, hearing of the News of the Rapt, Disgrace, Ignominy and Dishonor of his
Daughter, than of her Death. Now any Man finding in hot Blood, one who with a
forethought Felony has murdered his Daughter, may, without tying himself to
the Formalities and Circumstances of a Legal Proceeding, kill him on a sudden,
and out of hand, without incurring any hazard of being attainted and
apprehended by the Officers of Justice for so doing. What wonder is it then? or
how little strange should it appear to any rational Man, if a Lechering Rogue,
together with his Mole catching Abetter, be entrapped in the flagrant Act of
suborning his Daughter, and stealing her out of his House, (though her self
consent thereto) that the Father in such a case of Stain and Infamy by them
brought upon his Family, should put them both to a shameful Death, and cast
their Carcasses upon Dunghils to be devoured and eaten up by Dogs and Swine, or
otherwise fling them a little further off to the direption, tearing and rending
asunder of their Joints and Members by the Wild Beasts of the Field.

Dearly beloved Son, have an especial Care, that after my Decease none of these
Laws be received in any of your Kingdoms; for whilst I breath, by the Grace and
Assistance of God I shall give good Order.

Seeing therefore you have totally referred unto my Discretion the Disposure of
you in Marriage, I am fully of an Opinion, that I shall provide sufficiently
well for you in that Point. Make ready and prepare your self for Panurge's
Voyage: Take along with you Epistemon, Friar Ihon, and such others as you will
choose: Do with my Treasures what unto your self shall seem most expedient:
None of your Actions, I promise you, can in any manner of way displease me.
Take out of my Arcenal Thalasse, whatsoever Equipage, Furniture or Provision
you please, together with such Pilots, Mariners and Truchmen, as you have a
mind to; and with the first fair and favorable Wind set sail and make out to
Sea in the Name of God our Savior. In the mean while, during your Absence, I
shall not be neglective of providing a Wife for you, nor of those Preparations,
which are requisite to be made for the more sumptuous solemnizing of your
Nuptials with a most splendid Feast, if ever there was any in the World, since
the days of Assuerus.

CHAP. XLIX. How Pantagruel did put himself in a readiness to go to Sea; and of
the Herb named Pantagruelion.
WIthin very few days after that Pantagruel had taken his Leave of the good
Gargantua, who devoutly prayed for his Sons happy Voyage, he arrived at the
Seaport, near to Sammalo, accompanied with Panurge, Epistemon, Friar Ihon of
the Funnels, Abbot of Theleme, and others of the Royal House, especially with
Xenomanes the great Traveller, and Thwarter of dangerous ways, who was come at
the bidding and appointment of Panurge, of whose Castlewick of Salmigondin he
did hold some petty Inheritance by the Tenure of a Mesnefee. Pantagruel being
come thither, prepared and made ready for launching a Fleet of Ships, to the
number of those which Ajax of Salamine had of old equipped, in Convoy of the
Grecian Soldiery against the Trojan State. He likewise picked out for his use
so many Mariners, Pilots, Sailors, Interpreters, Artificers, Officers and
Soldiers, as he thought fitting; and therewithal made Provision of so much
Victuals of all sorts, Artillery, Munition of diverse kinds, Clothes, Moneys,
and other such Luggage, Stuff, Baggage, Chaffer and Furniture, as he deemed
needful for carrying on the Design of a so tedious, long and perilous Voyage.
Amongst other things, it was observed, how he caused some of his Vessels to be
fraught and loaded with a great quantity of an Herb of his called
Pantagruelion, not only of the green and raw sort of it, but of the confected
also, and of that which was notably well befitted for present use after the
fashion of Conserves. The Herb Pantagruelion has a little Root somewhat hard
and ruff, roundish, terminating in an obtuse and very blunt Point, and having
some of its Veins, Strings or Filaments colored with some spots of white,
never fixes it self into the ground above the profoundness almost of a Cubit,
or Foot and a half; from the Root thereof proceeds the only Stalk, orbicular,
canelike, green without, whitish within, and hollow like the Stem of Smyrgium,
Olus Atrum, Beans and Gentian, full of long Threads, straight, easy to be
broken, jogged, snipped, nicked and notched a little after the manner of
Pillars and Columns, slightly farrowed, chamfered, guttred and channel'd, and
full of Fibers, or Hairs like Strings, in which consists the chief Value and
Dignity of the Herb, especially in that part thereof which is termed Mesa, as
he would say the Mean; and in that other which has got the Denomination of
Milasea. Its Height is commonly of five or six Foot; yet sometimes it is of
such a tall Growth, as does surpass the length of a Lance, but that is only
when it meets with a sweet, easy, warm, wet and well-soaked Soil, (as is the
ground of the Territory of Olone, and that of Rasea, near to Preneste in
Sabinia) and that it want not for Rain enough about the Season of the Fishers
Holydays, and the Estival Solstice. There are many Trees whose Height is by it
very far exceeded, and you might call it Dendromalache by the Authority of
Theophrastus. The Plant every year perishes; the Tree, neither in the Trunk,
Root, Bark or Boughs, being durable.

From the Stalk of this Pantagruelian Plant there issue forth several large and
great Branches, whose Leaves have thrice as much length as breadth, always
green, roughish and rugged like the Alcanet, or Spanish Buglose, hardish, slit
round about like unto a Sickle, or as the Saxifragum, Betony, and finally
ending as it were in the Points of a Macedonian Spear, or of such a Lancet as
Surgeons commonlymake use of in their Phlebotomizing Tiltings. The Figure and
shape of the Leaves thereof is not much different from that of those of the
Ash-tree, or of Egrimony; the Herb it self so being like the Eupatorian Plant,
that many skilful Herbalists have called it the Domestic Eupator, and the
Eupator the wild Pantagruelion. These Leaves are in equal and parallel
Distances spread around the Stalk, by the number in every Rank either of Five
or Seven, Nature having so highly favored and cherished this Plant, that she
has richly adorned it with these two odd, divine and mysterious Numbers. The
Smell thereof is somewhat strong, and not very pleasing to nice, tender and
delicate Noses: The Seed enclosed therein mounteth up to the very top of its
Stalk, and a little above it.

This is a numerous Herb; for there is no less abundance of it than of any
other whatsoever. Some of these Plants are Spherical, some Romboid, and some of
an oblong shape, and all of those either black, bright-coloured or tawny, rude
to the touch, and mantled with a quicklyblasted-away Coat, yet such a one as is
of a delicious Taste and Savor to all shrill and sweetly singing Birds, such
as Linnets, Goldfinches, Larks, Canary Birds, Yellowhammers, and others of that
Airy chirping Quire; but it would quite extinguish the Natural Heat and
Procreative Virtue of the Semence of any Man, who would eat much, and often of
it. And although, that, of old, amongst the Greeks there was certain kinds of
Fritters and Pancakes, Buns and Tarts made thereof, which commonly for a
lickorish Daintines; were presented the Table after Supper, to delight the
Palate, and make the Wine relish the better. Yet is it of a difficult
Concoction, and offensive to the Stomach; for it engenders bad and unwholsom
Blood, and with its exorbitant Heat wounds them with grievous, hurtful, smart
and noysom Vapors. And as in diverse Plants and Trees there are two Sexes, Male
and Female, which is perceptible in Laurels, Palms, Cypresses, Oaks, Holmes,
the Daffadil, Mandrake, Fearn, the Agarick, Mushrum, Birthwort, Turpentine,
Pennyroyal, Peony, Rose of the Mount, and many other such like. Even so, in
this Herb there is a Male which bears no Flower at all, yet it is very
copious of, and abundant in Seed. There is likeways in it a Female, which has
great store and plenty of whitish Flowers, serviceable to little or no purpose;
nor does it carry in it Seed of any worth at all, at least comparable to that
of the Male. It has also a larger Leaf, and much softer than that of the Male;
nor does it altogether grow to so great a height. This Pantagruelion is to be
sown at the first coming of the Swallows, and is to be plucked out of the
Ground when the Grasshoppers begin to be a little hoarse.

CHAP. L. How the famous Pantagruelion ought to be prepared and wrought.
THE Herb Pantagruelion in September; under the Autumnal Equinox, is dressed
and prepared several ways, according to the various Fancies of the People, and
Diversity of the Climates wherein it grows. The first Instruction which
Pantagruel gave concerning it, was, to divest and dispoil the Stalk and Stem
thereof of all its Flowers and Seeds, to macerate and mortify it in Pond,
Pool, or Lake-water, which is to be made run a little for five days together,
if the Season be dry, and the Water hot; or for full nine or twelve days, if
the weather be cloudish, and the Water cold: Then must it be parched before the
Sun, till it be drained of its Moisture: After this it is in the Shadow, where
the Sun shines not, to be peeled, and its Rind pulled off: Then are the Fibers
and Strings thereof to be parted, (wherein, as we have already said, consists
its prime Virtue, Price, and Efficacy) and severed from the woody part thereof,
which is improfitable, and serves hardly to any other use, than to make a
clear and glistering Blaze, to kindle the Fire, and for the Play, Pastime and
Disport of little Children, to blow up Hogs Bladders, and make them rattle.
Many times some use is made thereof by tippling, sweet-lipped Bibbers, who out
of it frame Quills and Pipes, through which they with their Liquor-attractive
Breath suck up the new dainty Wine from the Bung of the Barrel. Some modern
Pantagruelists, to shun and avoid that manual Labor, which such a separating
and partitional Work would of necessity require, employ certain Catarractick
Instruments, oomposed and formed after the same manner that the froward,
pettish and angry Juno did hold the Fingers of both her hands interwovenly
clenched together, when she would have hindered the Childbirth Delivery of
Al^mena, at the Nativity of Hercules; and athwart those Cataracts they break
and bruise to very Trash the woody parcels, thereby to preserve the better the
Fibers, which are the precious and excellent parts. In, and with this sole
Operation do these acquiesce and are contented, who, contrary to the received
Opinion of the whole Earth, and in in a manner paradoxical to all Philosophers,
gain their Livelihoods backwards, and by recoiling. But those that love to hold
it at a higher rate, and prize it according to its Value, for their own greater
Profit, do the very same which is told us of the recreation of the three fatal
Sister Parques, or of the nocturnal Exercise of the noble Circe; or yet of the
Excuse which Penelope made to her fond wooing Youngsters and effeminate
Courtiers, during the long Absence of her Husband Ulysses.

By these means is this Herb put into a way to display its inestimable Virtues,
whereof I will discover a part: (for to relate all is a thing impossible to do)
I have already interpreted and exposed before you the Denomination thereof. I
find that Plants have their Names given and bestowed upon them after several
ways: Some got the Name of him who first found them out, knew them, sowed them,
improved them by Culture, qualified them to a tractability, and appropriated
them to the uses and subse^viences they were fit for: As the Mercuriale from
Mercury, Panacee from Panace the Daughter of Esculapius, in Armois from
Artemis, who is Diana; Eupatorie from the King Eupator; Telephion from
Telephus; Euphorbium from Euphorbus, King Iuba's Physician; Clymenos from
Clymenus; Alchibiadium from Alcibiades; Gentiane from Gentius King of
Sclavonia, and so forth, through a great many other Herbs or Plants. Truly, in
ancient Times, this Prerogative of imposing the Inventors Name upon an Herb
found out by him, was held in a so great account and estimation, that as a
Controversy arose betwixt Neptune and Pallas, from which of them two that Land
should receive its Denomination, which had been equally found out by them both
together, though thereafter it was called and had the Apellation of Athens,
from Athene, which is Minerva: Just so would Lynceus King of Scythia have
treacherously slain the young Triptolemus, whom Ceres had sent to show unto
Mankind the Invention of Corn, which until then had been utterly unknown, to
the end, that after the murder of the Messenger (whose Death he made account
to have kept secret) he might, by imposing with the less suspicion of false
dealing, his own Name upon the said found out Seed, acquire unto himself an
immortal Honor and Glory, for having been the Inventor of a Grain so
profitable and necessary to, and for the use of Humane Life. For the wickedness
of which Treasonable Attempt he was by Ceres transformed into that wild Beast,
which by some is called a Lynx, and by others an Oince. Such also was the
Ambition of others upon the like occasion, as appears by that, very sharp
Wars, and of a long continuance, have been made of old betwixt some Residentary
Kings in Capadocia, upon this only Debate, of whose Name a certain Herb should
have the Appellation; by reason of which difference, so troublesome and
expensive to them all, it was by them called Polemonion, and by us for the same
Cause termed Makebate.

Other Herbs and Plants there are, which retain the Names of the Countries from
whence they were transported: As the Median Apples from Media, where they first
grew; Punick Apples from Punicia, (that is to say, Carthage;) Ligusticum (which
we call Louage) from Liguria the Coast of Genoua; Rubarb from a Flood in
Barbary (as Ammianus attesteth) called Ru; Sautonica from a Region of that
Name; Fenugreek from Greece; Gastanes from a Country so called; Persicarie from
Persia; Sabine from a Territory of that Appellation; Staechas from the Staechad
Islands; Spica Celtica from the Land of the Celtick Gauls; and so throughout a
great many other, which were tedious to enumerate. Some others again have
obtained their Denominations by way of Antiphrasis, or Contrariety; as,
Absinth, because it is contrary to (...); for it is bitter to the taste in
drinking; Holosteon, as if it were all Bones, whilst on the contrary, there is
no frailer, tenderer nor britler Herb in the whole Production of Nature than it.

There are some other sorts of Herbs, which have got their Names from their
Virtues and Operatious; as Aristolochie, because it helps Women in
Childbirth; Lichen, for that it cures the Disease of that name; Mallow,
because it mollifieth; Callithricum, because it makes the Hair of a bright
Color; Alyssum, Ephemerum, Bechium, Nasturtium, Aneban, and so forth through
many more.

Other some there are which have obtained their Names from the admirable
Qualities that are found to be in them; as Heliotropium (which is the Marigold)
because it follows the Sun; so that at the Sun rising it displayeth and
spreads it self out, at his ascending it mounteth, at his declining it waineth;
and when he is set it is close shut; Adianton, because although it grow near
unto watery places, and albeit you should let it lie in Water a long time, it
will nevertheless retain no Moisture nor Humidity; Hierachia, Eringium, and so
throughout a great many more. There are also a great many Herbs, and Plants,
which have retained the very same Names of the Men and Women who have been
metamorphosed and transformed in them; as from Daphne the Laurel is called also
Daphne; Myrrh from Myrrha the Daughter of Cinarus; Pythis from Pythis; Cinara
(which is the Artichock) from one of that name; Narcissus, with Saffran,
Similax, and diverse others.

Many Herbs likewise have got their Names of those things which they seem to
have some Resemblance; as Hippuris, because it has the likeness of a Horse's
Tail; Alopecuris, because it represents in similitude the Tail of a Fox;
Psyllion, from a Flea which it resembles; Delphinium, for that it is like a
Dolphin Fish; Buglosse is so called, because it is an Herb like an Oxes Tongue;
Iris, so called, because in its Flowers it has some resemblance of the
Rainbow; Myosata, because it is like the Ear of a Mouse; Coronopus, for that
it is of the likeness of a Crows Foot: A great many other such there are, which
here to recite were needless. Furthermore, as there are Herbs and Plants which
have had their Names from those of Men, so by a reciprocal Denomination have
the Surnames of many Families taken their Origin from them; as the Fabii, a
fabis, Beans; the Pisons, a pisis, Pease; the Lentuli from Lentils; the
Cicerons, a Ciceribus, vel Ciceris, a sort of Pulse called Cichepeason, and so
forth. In some Plants and Herbs the resemblance or likeness has been taken
from a higher Mark or Object, as when we say Venus Navil, Venus Hair, Venus
Tub, Jupiter's Beard, Jupiter's Eye, Mars's Blood, the Hermodactyl or Mercury's
Fingers, which are all of them Names of Herbs, as there are a great many more
of the like Appellation. Others again have received their Denomination from
their Forms; such as the Trefoil, because it is three-leaved; Pentaphylon, for
having five Leaves; Serpolet, because it creeps along the ground; Helixine,
Petast, Myrobalon, which the Arabians call Been, as if you would say an
Ackorne; for it has a kind of resemblance thereto, and withal is very oily.

CHAP. LI. Why is it called Pantagruelion, and of the admirable Virtues thereof.
BY such like means of attaining to a Denomination (the fabulous ways being
only from thence excepted; for the Lord forbid that we should make use of any
Fables in this a so venerable History) is this Herb called Pantagruelion; for
Pantagruel was the Inventor thereof: I do not say of the Plant it self, but of
a certain use which it serves for, exceeding odious and hateful to Thieves and
Robbers, unto whom it is more contrarious and hurtful than the Strangle-weed,
Choakfitch is to the Flax, the Cats-tail to the Brakes, the Sheavgrass to the
Mowers of Hay, the Fitches to the Chickny Pease, the Darnel to Barley, the
Hatchet Fitch to the Lentil Pulse, the Antramium to the Beans, Tares to Wheat,
Ivy to Walls, the Water Lilly to lecherous Monks, the Birchen Rod to the
Scholars of the College of Navarre in Paris, Colewort to the Vine-tree,
Garlic to the Lodestone, Onyons to the sight, Fearn-seed to Women with Child,
Willow Grain to vicious Nuns, the Yew-tree shade to those that sleep under it,
Wolfsbane to Wolves and Libbards, the Smell of Fig Tree to mad Bulls, Hemlock
to Goslings, Purslane to the Teeth, or Oil to Trees: For we have seen many of
those Rogues by virtue and right application of this Herb finish their Lives,
short and long, after the manner of Phillis Queen of Thracia, of Benosus
Emperor of Rome, of Amata King Latinus's Wife, of Iphus, Autolicus, Lycambe,
Arachne, Phaedra, Leda, Achius King of Lydia, and many thousands more; who were
chiefly angry and vexed at this Disaster therein, that without being otherways
sick, evil disposed in their Bodies, by a touch only of the Pantagruelian, they
came on a sudden to have the passage obstructed, and their Pipes (through
which were wont to bolt so many jolly Sayings, and to enter so many luscious
Morsels) stopped, more cleaverly, than ever could have done the Squinancy.

Others have been heard mo^st woefully to lament, at the very instant when
Atropos was about to cut the thread of their Life, that Pantagruel held them by
the Gorge. But (well-a-day) it was not Pantagruel; he never was an Executioner:
It was the Pantagruelian, manufactured and fashioned into an Halter, and
serving in the place and Office of a Cravat. In that verily they solaecized,
and spoke improperly, unless you would excuse them by a Trope, which allows
us to posit the Inventor in the place of the thing invented; as when Ceres is
taken for Bread, and Bacchus put instead of Wine. I swear to you here, by the
good and frolic Words which are to issue out of that Wine-bottle which is a
cooling below in the Copper Vessel full of Fountain Water, that the noble
Pantagruel never snatched any Man by the Throat, unless it was such a one as
was altogether careless and neglective of those obviating Remedies, which were
preventive of the Thirst to come.

It is also termed Pantagruelion by a Similitude: For Pautagruel, at the very
first minute of his Birth, was no less tall than this Herb is long, whereof I
speak unto you, his measure having been then taken the more easy, that he was
born in the Season of the great Drowth, when they were busiest in the gathering
of the said Herb, to wit, at that time when Icarus's Dog, with his fiery
bawling and barking at the Sun, makes the whole World Troglodytick, and
enforces People every where to hide themselves in Dens and subterranean Caves.
It is likeways* called Pantagruelion, because of the notable and singular
Qualities, Virtues and Properties thereof: For as Pantagruel has been the
Idea, Pattern, Prototype and Exemplary of all Jovial Perfection and
Accomplishment (in the truth whereof I believe there is none of you, Gentlemen*
Drinkers, that puts any Question) so in this Pantagruelion have I found so
much Efficacy and Energy, so much Compleatness and Excellency, so much
Exquisiteness and Rarity, and so many admirable Effects and Operations of a
transcendent Nature, that if the Worth and Virtue thereof had been known, when
those Trees, by the relation of the Prophet, made Election of a wooden King, to
rule and govern over them, it without all doubt would have carried away from
all the rest the Plurality of Votes and Suffrages.

Shall I yet say more? If Oxilus the Son of Orius had begotten this Plant upon
his Sister Hamadryas, he had taken more delight in the Value and Perfection of
it alone, then in all his Eight Children, so highly renowned by our ablest
Mythologians, that they have sedulously recommended their Names to the
never*failing Tuition of an eternal Remembrance. The eldest Child was a
Daughter, whose Name was Vine; the next born was a Boy, and his Name was
F^g-tree; the third was called Walnut-tree; the fourth Oak; the fifth
Sorbaple-tree; the sixth Ash; the seventh Poplar; and the last had the Name of
Elm, who was the greatest Surgeon in his time. I shall forbear to tell you, how
the Juice or Sap thereof, being poured and distilled within the Ears, kills
every kind of Vermin, that by any manner of Putrefaction comes to be bred and
engendered there; and destroys also any whatsoever other Animal that shall
have entered in thereat. If likewise you put a little of the said Juice within a
Pale or Bucket full of Water, you shall see the Water instantly turn and grow
thick therewith, as if it were Milk-Curds, whereof the Virtue is so great, that
the Water thus curded is a present Remedy for Horses subject to the Cholick,
and such as strike at their own Flanks. The Root thereof well boiled,
mollifieth the Joints, softneth the hardness of shrunk in Sinews, is every way
comfortable to the Nerves, and good against all Cramps and Convulsions, as
likeways all cold and knotty Gouts. If you would speedily heal a Burning,
whether occasioned by Water or Fire, apply thereto a little raw Pantagruelion,
that is to say, take it so as it comes out of the Ground, without bestowing
any other Preparation or Composition upon it; but have a special Care to change
it for some fresher, in lieu thereof, as soon as you shall find it waxing dry
upon the Sore.

Without this Herb Kitchins would be detested, the Tables of Dining-Rooms
abhorred, although there were great Plenty and Variety of most dainty and
sumptuous Dishes of Meat set down upon them; and the choicest Beds also, how
richly soever adorned with Gold, Silver, Amber, Ivory, Porphyr, and the mixture
of most precious Metals, would without it yield no Delight or Pleasure to the
Reposers in them: Without it Millers could neither carry Wheat, nor any other
kind of Corn, to the Mill; nor would they be able to bring back from thence
Flour, or any other sort of Meal whatsoever. Without it, how could the Papers
and Writs of Lawyers Clients be brought to the Bar? Seldom is the Mortar, Lime
or Plaster brought to the Workhouse without it. Without it how should the
Water be got out of a Draw-Well? In what case would Tabellions, Notaries,
Copists, Makers of Counterpanes, Writers, Clerks, Secretaries, Scriveners, and
such like Persons be without it? Were it not for it, what would become of the
Toll-rates and Rent-rolls? Would not the noble Art of Printing perish without
it? Whereof could the Chassis or Paper-Windows be made? How should the Bells be
rung? The Altars of Isis are adorned therewith; the Pastophorian Priests are
therewith clad and accoutred; and whole Humane Nature covered and wrapped
therein, at its first position and production in, and into this World: All the
Luni^ick Trees of Seres, the Bumbast and Cotton Bushes in the Territories near
the Persian Sea and Gulf of Bengala; the Arabian Swans, together with the
Plan^s of Maltha, do not all of them cloth, attire, and apparel so many
Persons as this one Herb alone. Soldiers are nowadays much better sheltered
under it, than they were in former times, when they lay in Tents covered with
Skins. It overshadow; the Theaters and Amphitheaters from the heat of a
scorching Sun: It begirdeth and encompasseth Forests, Chases, Parks, Copses and
Groves, for the pleasure of Hunters: It descends into the Salt and Fresh of
both Sea and River-Waters, for the profit of Fishers: By it are Boots of all
sizes, Buskins, Gamashes, Brodkins, Gambados, Shoes, Pumps, Slippers, and
every cobled Ware wrought and made steddable for the use of Man: By it the Butt
and Rover-bows are strong, the Crossbows bended, and the Slings made fixed:
And, as if it were an Herb every whit as holy as the Verveine, and reverenced
by Ghosts, Spirits, Hobgoblins, Fiends and Phantoms, the Bodies of deceased Men
are never buried without it.

I will proceed yet further, by the means of this fine Herb, the invisible
Substances are visibly stopped, arrested, taken, detained, and Prisoner-like
committed to their receptive Goals. Heavy and ponderous Weights are by it
heaved, lifted up, turned, veered, drawn, carried, and every way moved quickly,
nimbly and easily, to the great Profit and Emolument of Humane Kind. When I
perpend with my self these and such like mavelous Effects of this wonderful
Herb, it seems strange unto me, how the Invention of so useful a Practice did
escape, through so many bypast Ages, the Knowledge of the Ancient
Philosophers, considering the inestimable Utility which from thence proceeded;
and the immense Labor, which without it, they did undergo in their pristine
Elucubrations. By virtue thereof, through the retention of some Aerial Gusts,
are the huge Rambarges, mighty Gallioons, the large Floyts, the Chiliander, the
Myriander Ships launched from their Stations, and set a going at the Pleasure
and Arbitriment of their Rulers, Conders and Stee^smen. By the help thereof
those remote Nations, whom Nature seemed so unwilling to have discovered to us,
and so desirous to have kept them still in abscondito, and hidden from us, that
the ways through which their Countries were to be reached unto, were not only
totally unknown, but judged also to be altogether impermeable and inaccessible,
are now arrived to us, and we to them.

Those Voyages outreached Flights of Birds, and far surpassed the Scope of
Feathered Fowls, how swift soever they had been on the Wing, and
notwithstanding that advantage which they have of us in swimming through the
Air. Taproban has seen the Heaths of Lapland, and both the Iava's the Riphaean
Mountains, wide distant Phebol shall see Theleme, and the Islanders drink of
the Flood Euphrates: By it the chill-mouthed Boreas has surveyed the parched
Mansions of the torrid Auster, and Eurus visited the Regions which Zephirus
has under his Command; yea, in such sort have Interviews been made, by the
assistance of this Sacred Herb, that maugre Longitudes and Latitudes, and all
the Variations of the Zones. The Periaecian People, and Antoecian, Amphiscian,
Heteroscian, and Periscian had often tendered and received mutual Visits to, and
from other, upon all the Climates. These strange Exploits bred such
Astonishment to the Celestial Intelligences, to all the Marine and Terrestrial
Gods, that they were on a sudden all afraid: From which Amazement, when they
saw how, by means of this blessed Pantagruelion, the Arctick People looked upon
the Antarctick, scowred the Atlantic Ocean, passed the Tropicks, pushed
through the Torrid Zone, measured all the Zodiac, sported under the
Equinoctial, having both Poles level with their Horizon; they judged it high
time to call a Council, for their own Safety and Preservation.

The Olympic Gods being all and each of them affrighted at the sight of such
Achievements, said, Pantagruel has shapen Work enough for us, and put us more
to a plunge, and nearer our Wits end, by this sole Herb of his, then did of old
the Aloids, by overturning Mountains. He very speedily is to be married, and
shall have many Children by his Wife: It lies not in our Power to oppose this
Destiny; for it has passed through the Hands and Spindles of the Fatal
Sisters, Necessities inexorable Daughters. Who knows but by his Sons may be
found out an Herb of such another Virtue and prodigious Energy, as that by the
Aid thereof, in using it aright according to their Fathers Skill, they may
contrive a way for Humane Kind to pierce into the high Aerian Clouds, get up
unto the Springhead of the Hail, take an Inspection of the snowy Sources, and
shut and open as they please the Sluices from whence proceed the Floodgates of
the Rain; then prosecuting their Aetherial Voyage, they may step in unto the
Lightning Workhouse and Shop, where all the Thunderbolts are forged, where
seizing on the Magazin of Heaven, and Storehouse of our Warlike Fire Munition,
they may discharge a bouncing Peal or two of thundering Ordinance, for Joy of
their Arrival to these new supernal places; and charging those Tonitrual Guns
afresh, turn the whole force of that Artillery against our selves, wherein we
most confided: Then is it like they will set forward to invade the Territories
of the Moon, whence passing through both Mercury and Venus, the Sun will serve
them for a Torch, to show the way from Mars to Jupiter and Saturn: We shall not
then be able to resist the Impetuosity of their Intrusion, nor put a stoppage
to their entering in at all whatever Regions, Domicils or Mansions of the
Spangled Firmament they shall have any mind to see, to stay in, to travel
through for their Recreation: All the Celestial Signs together, with the
Constellations of the Fixed Stars, will jointly be at their Devotion then: Some
will take up their Lodging at the Ram, some at the Bull, and others at the
Twins; some at the Crab, some at the Lion Inn, and others at the Sign of the
Virgin; some at the Balance, others at the Scorpion, and others will be
quartered at the Archer; some will be harbored at the Goat, some at the
Water-pourer's Sign, some at the Fishes; some will lie at the Crown, some at
the Harp, some at the Golden Eagle and the Dolphin; some at the Flying Horse,
some at the Ship, some at the great, some at the little Bear; and so throughout
the glistning Hostories of the whole twinkling Afteristick Welkin: There will
be Sojourners come from the Earth, who longing after the taste of the sweet
Cream, of their own scumming off, from the best Milk of all the Dairy of the
Galaxy, will set themselves at Table down with us, drink of our Nectar and
Ambrosia, and take to their own Beds at Night for Wives and Concubines our
fairest Goddesses, the only means whereby they can be Deify'd. A Junto hereupon
being convocated, the better to consult upon the manner of obviating a so
dreadful Danger, Jove, sitting in his Presidential Throne, asked the Votes of
all the other Gods, which, after a profound Deliberation amongst themselves on
all Contingencies, they freely gave at last, and then resolved unanimously to
withstand the Shock of all whatsoever sublunary Assaults.

CHAP. LII. How a certain kind of Pantagruelion is of that nature, that the
Fire is not able to consume it.
I Have already related to you great and admirable things; but if you might be
induced to adventure upon the hazard of believing some other Divinity of this
Sacred Pantagruelion, I very willingly would tell it you. Believe it if you
will, or otherways believe it not, I care not which of them you do, they are
both alike to me, it shall be sufficient for my purpose to have told you the
Truth, and the Truth I will tell you: But to enter in thereat, because it is of
a knaggy, difficult and rugged access, this is the Question which I ask of you,
If I had put within this Bottle two Pints, the one of Wine and the other of
Water, thoroughly and exactly mingled together, how would you unmix them? After
what manner would you go about to sever them, and separate the one Liquor from
the other, in such sort, that you render me the Water apart, free from the
Wine, and the Wine also pure, without the Intermixture of one drop of Water;
and both of them in the same measure, quantity and taste that I had embottled
them? Or to state the Question otherways, If your Carr-men and Mariners,
entrusted for the Provision of your Houses, with the bringing of a certain
considerable number of Tuns, Punchions, Pipes, Barrels and Hogsheads of Gr^ves
Wine, or of the Wine of Orleans, Beanne and Mirevaux, should drink out the
half, and afterward with Water fill up the other empty halves of the Vessels
as full as before; as the Limosins use to do in their Carriages by Wains and
Carts of the Wines of Argenton and Sangaultier. After that, how would you part
the Water from the Wine, and purify them both in such a case. I understand you
well enough; your meaning is, that I must do it with an Ivy Funnel: That is
written, it is true, and the Verity thereof explored by a thousand Experiments;
you have learned to do this Feat before I see it: But those that have never
known it, nor at any time have seen the like, would hardly believe that it were
possible. Let us nevertheless proceed.

But put the case we were now living in the Age of Silla, Marius, Caesar, and
other such Roman Emperors; or that we were in the time of our ancient Druids,
whose custom was to burn and calcine the dead Bodies of their Parents and
Lords, and that you had a mind to drink the Ashes or Cinders of your Wives or
Fathers in the infused Liquor of some good Whitewine, as Artemisia drunk the
Dust and Ashes of her Husband Mansolus; or otherways, that you did determine to
have them reserved in some fine Urn or Reliquary Pot, how would you save the
Ashes apart, and separate them from those other Cinders and Ashes into which
the Fuel of the Funeral and bustuary Fire has been converted? Answer if you
can; by my Figgins, I believe it will trouble you so to do.

Well, I will dispatch, and tell you, that if you take of this Celestial
Pantagruelion so much as is needful to cover the Body of the Defunct, and after
that you shall have inwrapped and bound therein as hard and closely as you can
the Corpse of the said deceased Persons, and sowed up the Folding-sheet with
thread of the same stuff, throw it into the Fire, how great or ardent soever it
be it matters not a Straw, the Fire through this Pantagruelion will burn the
Body, and reduce to Ashes the Bones thereof, and the Pantagruelion shall be not
only not consumed nor burnt, but also shall neither lose one Atom of the Ashes
enclosed within it, nor receive one Atom of the huge bustuary heap of Ashes
resulting from the blazing Conflagration of things combustible laid round about
it, but shall at last, when taken out of the Fire, be fairer, whiter, and much
cleaner than when you did put it in at first: Therefore it is called Asbeston,
which is as much to say as incombustible. Great plenty is to be found thereof
in Carpasia, as likeways in the Climate Diasienes, at very easy rates. O how
rare and admirable a thing it is, that the Fire which devoureth, consumes and
destroys all such things else, should cleanse, purge and whiten this sole
Pantagruelion Carpasian Asbeston! If you mistrust the Verity of this Relation
and demand for further Confirmation of my Assertion a Visible Sign, as the
Jews, and such incredulous Infidels use to do; take a fresh Egg, and
orbicularly (or rather ovally) infold it within this Divine Pantagruelion; when
it is so wrapped up, put it in the hot Embers of a Fire, how great or ardent
soever it be, and having left it there as long as you will, you shall at last,
at your taking it out of the Fire, find the Egg roasted hard, and as it were
burnt, without any Alteration, Change, Mutation, or so much as a Calefaction of
the Sacred Pantagruelion: For less than a Million of Pounds Sterling, modified,
taken down and amoderated to the twelfth part of one Four Pence Halfpenny
Farthing, you are able to put it to a trial, and make Proof thereof.

Do not think to overmatch me here, by paragoning with it, in the way of a more
eminent Comparison, the Salamander. That is a Fib; for albeit a little ordinary
Fire, such as is used in Dining-Rooms and Chambers, gladden, cheer up,
exhilerate and quicken it, yet may I warrantably enough assure, that in the
flaming Fire of a Furnace, it will, like any other animated Creature, be
quickly suffocated, choked, consumed and destroyed. We have seen the
Experiment thereof, and Galen many ages ago has clearly demonstrated and
confirmed it, Lib. 3. De tempora mentis. And Dioscorides maintains the same
Doctrine, Lib. 2. Do not here instance in competition with this Sacred Herb the
Feather Alum, or the wooden Tower of Pyrce, which Lucius Sylla was never able
to get burnt; for that Archelaus, Governor of the Town for Mithridates King of
Pontus, had plaistered it all over on the outside with the said Alum. Nor
would I have you to compare therewith the Herb, which Alexander Cornelius
called Fonem, and said that it had some resemblance with that Oak which bears
the Misselto; and that it could neither be consumed, nor receive any manner of
prejudice by Fire, nor by Water, no more than the Misselto, of which was built
(said he) the so renowned Ship Argos. Search where you please for those that
will believe it, I in that Point desire to be excused. Neither would I wish you
to parallel therewith (although I cannot deny but that it is of a very
mavelous Nature) that sort of Tree which grows along the Mountains of
Brianson and Ambrun, which produces out of his Root the good Agarick; from its
Body it yields unto us a so excellent Rosin, that Galen has been bold to
equal it to the Turpentine: Upon the delicate Leaves thereof it retains for
our use that sweet Heavenly Honey, which is called the Manna: And although it
be of a gummy, oily, fat and greasy Substance, it is notwithstanding
unconsumable by any Fire. It is in Greek and Latin called Larix. The Alpinesi
name it Melze. The Antenotides and Venetians term it Larege; which gave
occasion to that Castle in Piedmont to receive the Denomination of Larignum, by
putting Julius Caesar to a stand at his return from amongst the Gauls.

Julius Caesar commanded all the Yeomens, Boors, Hinds, and other Inhabitants
in, near unto, and about the Alps and Piedmont, to bring all manner of Victuals
and Provision for an Army to those places, which on the Military Road he had
appointed to receive them for the use of his marching Soldiery; to which
Ordinance all of them were obedient, save only those as were within the
Garrison of Larignum; who, trusting in the natural Strength of the place, would
not pay their Contribution. The Emperor purposing to chastise them for their
refusal, caused his whole Army to march straight toward that Castle, before
the Gate whereof was erected a Tower, built of huge big Sparrs and Rafters of
the Larch Tree, fast bound together with Pins and Pegs of the same Wood, and
interchangeably laid on one another, after the fashion of a Pile or Stack of
Timber, set up in the Fabric thereof to such an apt and convenient height,
that from the Parapet above the Portcullis they thought with Stones and Leavers
to beat off and drive away such as should approach thereto.

When Caesar had understood that the chief Defense of those within the Castle
did consist in Stones and Clubs, and that it was not an easy matter to sling,
hurl, dart, throw, or cast them so far as to hinder the Approaches, he
forthwith commanded his Men to throw great store of Bavins, Faggots and
Fascines round about the Castle; and when they had made the Heap of a competent
height to put them all in a fair Fire, which was thereupon incontinently done;
the Fire put amidst the Faggots was so great and so high, that it covered the
whole Castle, that they might well imagine the Tower would thereby be
altogether burnt to Dust, and demolished. Nevertheless, contrary to all their
Hopes and Expectations, when the Flame ceased, and that the Faggots were quite
burnt and consumed, the Tower appeared as whole, sound and entire as ever.
Caesar, after a serious Consideration had thereof, commanded a Compass to be
taken, without the distance of a Stone Cast from the Castle round about it
there, with Ditches and Entrenchments to form a Blockade; which when the
Loringians understood, they rendered themselves upon Terms: And then, by a
Relation from them it was that Caesar learned the admirable Nature and Virtue
of this Wood; which, of it self, produces neither Fire, Flame nor Coal; and
would therefore in regard of that rare Quality of Incombustibility, have been
admitted into this Rank and Degree of a true Pantagruelional Plant; and that so
much the rather, for that Pantagruel directed that all the Gates, Doors,
Angiports, Windows, Gutters, frettized and embowed Seelings, Cans, and other
whatsoever wooden Furniture in the Abbey of Theleme should be all materiated of
this kind of Timber. He like ways caused to cover therewith the Sterns, Stems,
Cook-rooms or Laps, Hatches, Decks, Coursies, Bends and Walls of his Carricks,
Ships, Gallioons, Galays, Brigantins, Foysts, Frigates, Crears, Barks, Floyts,
Pinks, Pinnaces, Huys, Catches, Capers, and other Vessels of his Thalassian
Arcenal; were it not that the Wood or Timber of the Larch-tree, being put
within a large and ample Furnace full of huge vehemently flaming Fire,
proceeding from the Fuel of other sorts and kinds of Wood, comes at last to be
corrupted, consumed, dissipated and destroyed, as are Stones in a Lime-kill:
But this Pantagruelion Asbestin is rather by the Fire renewed and cleansed,
than by the Flames thereof consumed or changed. Therefore,

Arabians, Indians, Sabaeans,
Sing not in Hymns and Io Paeans;
Your Incense, Myrrh, or Ebony:
Come, here, a nobler Plant to see;
And carry home, at any rate,
Some Seed, that you may propagate.
If in your Soil it takes, to Heaven
A thousand thousand Thanks be given;
And say with France, it goodly goes
Where the Pantagruelion grows.
The End of the Third Book.
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST PART.
THE Author's Prologue. Page. 1. Of the Genealogy and Antiquity of Gargantua.
Chap. 1. p. 1 The Antidoted Conundrums found in an ancient Monument. chapter 2. p.
5 How Gorgantua was carried eleven Months in his Mothers Belly. chapter 3. p 9 How
Gargamelle, being big with Gargantua, did eat a huge deal of Tripe. chapter 4. p.
12 How they chirped over their Cups. chapter 5. p. 14 How Gargantua was born in a
strange manner. chapter 6. p. 19 After what manner Gargantua had his Name given
him; and how he tipled, bibbed and curried the Can. chapter 7. p. 23 How they
apparelled Gargantua. chapter 8. p. 26 The Colors and Liveries of Gargantua. chapter 9
p. 31 Of that which is signified by the Colors White and Blew. chapter 10. p. 35
Of the youthful Age of Gargantua chapter 11. p. 41 Of Gargantua's wooden Horses.
chapter 12. p. 45 How Gargantua's wonderful Understanding became known to his
Father Grangousier, by the Invention of a Torchcul or Wipebreech. chapter 13. p. 49
How Gargantua was taught Latin by a Sophister. chapter 14. p. 55 How Gargantua was
put under other Schoolmasters. chapter 15. p. 58 How Gargantua was sent to Paris,
and of the huge great Mare that he rode on: How she destroyed the Ox-flies of
the Beauce. chapter 16 p. 61 How Gargantua paid his Beverage to the Parisians, and
how he took away the great Bells of our Ladies Church. chapter 17. p. 64 How
Janotus de Bragmardo was sent to Gargantua to recover the great Bells. chapter 18.
p. 67 The Harangue of Mr. Jonatus de Bragmardo, for the recovery of the Bells.
chapter 19. p. 69 How the Sophister carried away his Cloth, and how he had a Suit
in Law against the other Masters. chapter 20. p. 72 The Study of Gargantua,
according to the Discipline of his Schoolmasters the Sophisters. chapter 21. p. 76
The Games of Gargantua: chapter 22. p. 80 How Gargantua was instructed by
Ponnocrates, and in such sort disciplinated, that he lost not one-hour of the
day. chapter 23. p. 86 How Gargantua spent his time in rainy Weather. chapter 24. p. 97
How there was great Strife and Debate raised betwixt the Cake-bakers of Learn,
and those of Gargantua's Country; whereupon were waged great Wars. chapter 25. p.
100 How the Inhabitants of Learn, by the Commandment of Picrochole their King,
assaulted the Shepherds of Gargantua unexpectedly and on a sudden. chapter 26. p.
105 How a Monk of Sevile saved the Closs of the Abbey from being ravaged by the
Enemy. chapter 27. p. 108 How Picrochole stormed and took by assault the Rock
Clermond; and of Grangousiers Unwillingness and Aversion from the Undertaking
of War. chapter 28. p. 116 The Tenor of a Letter which Grangousier wrote to his Son
Gargantua. chapter 29. p. 120 How Ulrich Gallet was sent unto Picrochole. chapter 30.
p. 122 The Speech made by Gallet to Picrochole. chapter 31. p. 123 How Grangousier
to buy Peace, caused the Cakes to be restored. chapter 32. p. 127 How some
Ministers of Picrochole, by hairbrain'd Counsel put him in extreme danger. chapter
33. p. 132 How Gargantua left the City of Paris to succor his Country, and how
Gymnast encountered with the Enemy. chapter 34. p. 138 How Gymnast very nimbly
killed Captain Tripet, and others of Picrochole's Men. chapter 35. p. 141. How
Gargantua demolished the Castle at the Ford of Vede, and how they passed the
Ford. chapter 36. p. 145 How Gargantua in combing his Head made the great Cannon
Ball fall out of his Hair. chapter 37. p. 149 How Gargantua did eat up ^ix Pilgrims
in a Sallet. chapter 38. p. 152 How the Monk was feasted by Gargantua, and of the
jovial Discourse they had at Supper. chapter 39. p. 156 Why Monks are the Outcasts
of the World; and wherefore some have bigger Noses than others. chapter 40. p. 161
How the Monk made Gargantua sleep, and of his Hours and Breviaries. chapter 41. p.
165 How the Monk encouraged his Fellow Champions, and how he hanged upon a
Tree. chapter 43. p. 168 How the Scouts and Fore-party of Picrochole were met with
by Gargantua, and how the Monk slew Captain Drawforth, and then was taken
Prisoner by his Enemies. chapter 43. p. 171 How the Monk rid himself of his
Keepers, and how Pricochole's Forlorn Hope was defeated. chapter 44. p. 176 How the
Monk carried along with him the Pilgrims, and of the good Words that
Grangousier gave them. chapter 45. p. 179 How Grangousier did very kindly entertain
Touchefaucet his Prisoner. chapter 46. p. 184 How Grangousier sent for his Legions,
and how Touchfaucet slew Rashcalf, and was afterward executed by the Command
of Picrochole. chapter 47. p. 188 How Gargantua set upon Picrochole, within the
Rock Clermond, and utterly defeated the Army of the said Picrochole. chapter 48. p.
192 How Picrochole in his Flight fell into great Misfortunes, and what
Gargantua did after the Battle. chapter 49. p. 197 Gargantua's Speech to the
Vanquished. chapter 50 p. 199 How the victorious Gargantuists were recompensed
after the Battle. chapter 51. p. 204 How Gargantua caused to be built for the Monk
the Abbey of Theleme. chapter 52. p. 207 How the Abbey of Thelemites was Built and
Endowed. chapter 53. p. 210 The Inscription set upon the great Gate of Theleme. chapter
54. p. 213 What manner of Dwelling the Thelemites had. chapter 55. p. 217 How the
Men and Women of the Religious Order^ of Theleme were apparelled. chapter 56. p.
219 How the Thelemites governed, and of their manner of Living. chapter 57. p. 224
A Prophetical Riddle in the Style of Merlyn. chapter 58. p. 227
The Table of the Second Part.
THE Author's Prologue. Page 4 The Original and Antiquity of the great
Pantagruel. chapter 9. p. 1 Of the Nativity of the most dread and redoubted
Pantagruel. chapter 2. p. 17 Of the Grief wherewith Gargantua was moved at the
Decease of his Wife Badebec. chapter 3. p. 22 Of the Infancy of Pantagruel. chapter 4.
p. 26 Of the Acts of the Noble Pantagruel in his youthful Age. chapter 5. p. 33 How
Pantagruel met with a Limousin, who affected to speak in L^arned Phrase. chapter 6
p. 36 How Pantagruel came to Paris, and of the choice Books of the Library of
St. Victor. chapter 7. p. 40 How Pantagruel being at Paris, received Letters from
his Father Gargantua, and the Copy of them. chapter 8. p. 48 How Pantagruel found
Panurge, whom he loved all his Life time. chapter 9* p. 57 How Pontagruel decided a
Cause which was wonderfully intricate and obscure; whereby he was reputed to
have a most admirable Judgment. chapter 10. p. 64 How the Lords of Kissebreech and
Suckfist did plead before Pantagruel without Advocates. chapter 11. p. 71 How the
Lord of Suckfist pleaded before Pantagruel. chapter 12. p. 77 How Pantagruel gave
Judgment upon the Difference of the two Lords. chapter 13. p. 84 How Panurge
related the manner how he escaped out of the hands of the Turks. chapter 15. p. 88
How Panurge showed a very new way to build the Walls of Paris. chapter 15. p. 97 Of
the Qualities and Conditions of Panurge. chapter 16. p. 104 How Panurge gained the
Pardons, and married the old Women; and of the Suit in Law which he had at
Paris. chapter 17. p. 112 How a great Scholar of England would have argued against
Pantagruel, and was overcome by Panurge. chapter 18. p. 118 How Panurge put to a
Nonplus the Englishman that argued by Sign^. chapter 19. p. 126 How Thaumast
relates the Virtues and Knowledge of Panurge. chapter 20. p. 133 How Panurge was
in Love with a Lady of Paris. chapter 21. p. 135 How Panurge served the Parisian
Lady a trick that pleased her not very well. chapter 22. p. 141 How Pantagruel
departed from Paris, hearing News that the Dipsodes had invaded the Land of the
Amaurots: and the Cause wherefore the Leagu^s are so short in France. chapter 23.
p. 146 A Letter which a Messenger brought to Pantagruel from a Lady of Paris;
together with the Exposition af a Posy, written in a Gold Ring. chapter 24. p. 148
How Panurge, Carpalin, Eusthenes and Epistemon (the Gentlemen Attendants of
Pantagruel) vanquished and discomfited Six hundred and threescore Horsemen very
cunningly. chapter 25. p. 154 How Pantagruel and his Company were weary in eating
still salt Meats: and how Carpalin went a hunting to have some Venison. chapter 26.
p. 158 How Pantagruel set up one Trophy in memorial of their Valor, and
Panurge another in remembrance of the Hares. How Pantagruel likewise with his
Farts begat little Men, and with his Fisgs little Women. And how Panurge broke
a great Staff over two Glasses. ch 27. p. 163 How Pantagruel got the Victory
very strangely over the Dipsodes and the Giants. c 28. p. 167 How Pantagruel
discomfited the three hundred Giants armed with Freestone, and Loupgarou their
Captain. chapter 29. p. 174 How Epistemon, who had his Head cut off, was finely
handled by Panurge; and of the News which he brought from the Devils, and
damned People* in Hell. chapter 30. p. 182 How Pantagruel entered into the City of
the Amaurots, and how Panurge married K. Anarchus to an old Lant^rn-carrying
Hag, and made him a ^rier of Green-sauce chapter 31. p. 193 How Pantagruel with his
Tongue covered a whole Army, and what the Author saw in his Mouth. chapter 33. p.
197 How Pantagruel became sick, and the manner how he was recovered. chapter 33. p.
202 The Conclusion of this present Book, and the Excuse of the Author. chapter 34.
p. 205
The Table of the Third Part.
THE Author's Prologue. Page 1 How Pantagruel transported a Colony of Utopians
into Dypsodie. chapter 1. p. 18 How Panurge was made Lord of Salmygoudin in
Dypsodie, and did waste his Revenew before it came in. chapter 2. p. 26 How Panurge
praises the Debtors and Borrowers. chapter 3. p. 34 Panurge continues his
Discourse in the praise of Borrowers and Lenders. chapter 4. p. 44 How Pantagruel
altogether abhors the Debtors and Borrowers. chapter 5. p. 51 Why new married
Men were privileged from going to the Wars. chapter 6. p. 56 How Panurge had a
Flea in his Ear, and forbore to wear any longer his magnificent Codpiece. chapter
7. p. 61 Why the Codpiece is held to be the chief piece of Armor amongst
Warriors. chapter 8. p. 67 How Panurge asks Counsel of Pantagruel whether he
should marry, yea or no chapter 9. p. 74 How Pantagruel represents unto Panurge
the difficulty of giving Advice in the matter of Marriage; and to that purpose
mentions somewhat of the Homerick and Virgilian Lotteries. chapter 10. p. 80 How
Pantagruel shows the Trials of ones Fortune by the throwing of Dice to be
unlawful. chapter 11. p. 88 How Pantagruel does explore by the Virgilian Lottery
what Fortune Panurge shall have in his Marriage. chapter 12. p. 92 How Pantagruel
advises Panurge to try the future good or bad luck of his Marriage by Dreams.
chapter 13. p. 100 Panurge's Dream, with the Interpretation thereof. chapter 14. p. 112
Panurge's Excuse and Exposition of the Monastic mystery concerning Powdered
Beef. chapter 15. p. 124 How Pantagruel advises Panurge to consult with the Sibyl
of Panzoust. chapter 16. p. 130 How Panurge spoke to the Sybil of Panzoust. chapter 17.
p. 137 How Pantagruel and Panurge did diversely expound the Verses of the Sybil
of Panzoust. chapter 18. p. 144 How Pantagruel praises the Counsel of dumb Men.
chapter 19. p. 153 How Goatsnose by Signs makes answer to Panurge. chapter 20. p. 162
How Panurge consulteth with an old French Poet, named Raminagrobis. chapter 21. p.
171 How Panurge patrocinates and defends the Order of the begging Friars. chapter
22. p. 178 How Panurge makes the motion of a return to Raminagrobis. chapter 23.
p. 183 How Panurge consulteth with Epistemon. c. 24. p. 194 How Panurge
consulted with Her Trippa. c. 25. p. 201* How Panurge consulted with Friar Ihon
of the Funnels. chapter 26. p. 212 How Friar Ihon merrily and sportingly
counsels Panurge. chapter 27. p. 220 How Friar Ihon comfort Panurge in the
doubtful matter of Cuckoldry. chapter 28. p. 227 How Pantagruel convocated together
a Theologian, Physician, Lawyer and Philosopher for extricating of Panurge out
of the Perplexity wherein he was. chapter 28. p. 242 How the Theologue,
Hippothadee, gives Counsel to Panurge in the matter and business of his
Nuptial Enterprise. chapter 30. p. 247 How the Physician Rondibilis counsels
Panurge. chapter 31. p. 225 How Rondibilis declares Cuckoldry to be naturally one
of the Appendances of Marriage. chapter 32. p. 267 Rondibilis the Physicians Cure
of Cuckoldry. chapter 33. p. 276 How Women ordinarily have the greatest longing
after things prohibited. chapter 34. p. 283 How the Philosopher Trouillogan
handles the difficulty of Marriage. chapter 35. p. 291* A Continuation of the
Answer of the Ephectick and Pyrronian Philosopher Trouillogan. chapter 36. p. 196
How Pantagruel persuaded Panurge to take Counsel of a Fool. chapter 37. p. 307 How
Triboulet is se^ forth and blazed by Pantagruel and Panurge. chapter 38. p. 315 How
Pantagruel was present at the Trial of Judge Bridlegoose, who decided Causes
and Controversies in Law by the Chance and Fortune of the Dice. chapter 39. p. 322
How Bridlegoose gives Reasons, why he looked upon those Law-Actions which he
decided by the Chance of the Dice. chapter 40. p. 328 How Bridlegoose relates the
History of the Reconcilers of Parties at variance in matters of Law. chapter 42. p.
334 How Suits at Law are bred at first, and how they come afterward to their
perfect growth. chapter 42. p. 343 How Pantagruel excuses Bridlegoose in the
matter of Sentencing Actions at Law by the Chance of the Dice. chapter 43. p. 352
How Pantagruel relates a strange History of the Perplexity of Humane Judgment.
chapter 44. p. 358 How Pa^urge takes Advice of Triboulet. c. 45. p. 365 How
Pantagruel and Panurge dive sly interpret the Words of Triboulet. chapter 46. p.
373 How Pantagruel nnd Panurge resolved to make a Visit to the Oracle of the
Holy Bottle. chapter 47. p. 376 How Gargantua shows, that the Children ought not
to marry without the special Knowledge and Advice of their Fathers and Mothers.
chapter 48. p. 381 How Pantagruel did put himself in a readiness to go to Sea; and
of the Herb named Pantagruelion. chapter 49. p 394 How the famous Pantagruelion
ought to be prepared and wrought. chapter 50. p. 403 Why it is called
Pantagruelion, and of the admirable Virtues thereof. chapter 51. p 408 How a
certain kind of Pantagruelion is of that nature, that Fire is not able to
consume it. c. 52. p. 421
FINIS.

