A REPLY TO THE SECOND RETURN.
I Received yours, in Print by the Penny-Post and expected the date from Ruff.
Abbey, and not from New Market, but I understand your Lordship has given your
Agents in this Town the Lie, and not retired to your Country House, upon the
Dukes coming; but have rather Posted down to New Market, with the new Hosanna,
of O Duke live for ever; which was some years since O King live for even. I
find your Lordship is no good Judge of Styles, for I can asure you the Letter
was not the Earl of S -- 's, and therefore you do ill to take this occasion of
railing at him, unless you are resolved to save charges, and do that in your
own Person, which others are so unsuccessfully hired to. It is a notorious
false Testimony to say that Earl was raised from a mean Fortune, when it is well
known his father in 1630 long before the troubles had a revenue between 8 and
9000 l. per annum: And I have heard him often say, he would yield himself to be
the worst man alive, if he in the Kings service got his maintenance, or did
lay up above half his Paternal Revenue; and I think so able a man may be
allowed at least to be maintained in so great employments, Neither do I
understand that malicious hint of merited severity, it was never applied to any
man that had one of the chief hands in restoring a Prince to his Kingdom; as I
know he had, and without whose courage and dexterity, some men, the most highly
rewarded; had done otherwise then they did; therefore I have heard him say
often that the Act of Oblivion was an Act of the Kings Honor and Justice, but
not of his Mercy; it being a Treaty, and Agreement, much more sacred then any
Act of Parliament can be, and I must tell your Lorship, and your Friends the
Papists; that if you consider what Promises, Declarations, and Engagements the
Dissenting Protestants had both of his Majesty, his Lords, and his Bishops, at
the time of his coming over; and how they have been since used, and with what
submission and Loyalty they have carried themselves; you will not find a
Parallel Instance.

But your Lordships business is, to keep your Hounds in full cry, against the
pretended Association, for since you cannot find one really in being; a
red-herring from your own Kitching, must he hunted and trailed through the
Kingdom, to make a noise.

The malice is more then the wit in the matter. You have broken down your Gates
in the Chase, and made so many -- Gaps in your own hedges, that your Cattle are
broke out and come to the Pound; and what sort of Beast you trade in will be
discovered. It Is an Impudence beyond the Jesuits, to say that nothing was more
exactly proved, nothing more unquestionable and free from disputes, then that
the Association was seized in the Earls Closet; Gwyn himself neither does nor
dare positively swear it, and it is Judged in that great case of Monsieur
Fouquet, that a man is not answerable for Papers seized, when he is refu'd to
deliver them upon Inventory. Fonquets enemies were not more bloody and
inveterate than the Earls, nor the concern of State against him higher: And yet
the Law of Nature and Reason, can never Subject a man to so unreasonable a
danger. Besides was it ever heard that any man was questioned for a loose paper
without any hand to it, found in his Study, that cannot be proved to this day,
nor ever will, that he ever saw, read, or conferred with any about it, Neither
is it to be proved notwithstanding all this Popish Clamor and Abhorrours that
ever any one man did ever sign, or Act upon it; or any thing like it. But your
Lordship is very plain in the matter, and would have the Parliament men in the
house of Commons who promoted the Association; have their heads advanced to the
house top. I do not doubt but your Lordship and your friends the Papists (whose
Religion you have lately taken up, and mean to use while it is convenient) are
of that mind; but it is for some other Votes they then made of declaring Enemies
to the King and Kingdom, for otherwise your Lordship and some of your friends,
are as much guilty, as any of the house of Commons, of the Association. It
being to be proved that the Association, and the banishing the Duke for ever,
was your Lorships proposition in the Lords house in the last Westminster
Parliament. The first utterly disliked by the Earl of Shaftsbury as no
expedient they could trust in, since your Lordship and others of your make,
could not be kept from being in the head of it. But those eminent and worthy
persons of the Earl of Shaftsbury's Jury must be railed at, at any rate: Yet
where your Lordship found that two of the Jury should say, This is the same
with that which we saw produced and promoted in the house of Commons, I cannot
tell, I am sure there is no such expressions in the Proceedings at the
Old Bailey, Published by Authority: But between the Veracity of a condemned
Jesuit in Newgate, and that of a Statesman, marked (...) by a Vote of the
House of Commons for an Enemy to the King and Kingdom, I see here is no great
ods. Your Lordship has great reason to be angry; for I confess they spoild the
best design was ever laid, by a damned Popish Party. The Government according
to Law, with the help of Irish witnesses, and well chosen Juries, should have
delivered you from all the honest worthy and considerable Protestants of
England, for it is plainly confessed by your Lordship how far you meant to go:
it is a thousand pities that the City Charter were not gone, and that your
Lorship, and your fellows might not have the naming of Sheriffs for London and
Middlesex, as well as the rest of the Kingdom, and then it is plain what Justice
we should have for our Lives and Fortunes: The Masters of the Companies would
then be hanged with the Journey-men. And Sheriff Pilkimon's conscientious Surry
Jury would be found at every Assizes; eight Hundred Pound damages given to such
a fellow, that proved not a Penny damage received or possible to be received by
it. But since your Lorship and your friends have had so good a design spoiled,
I cannot blame you to be angry; but I would very fain guess what you would next
be at, or whether your patience will hold out till the City Charter be taken
away, which I assure my self will be long before it be done; I fear you will
resort to back the Pattern in the mount: and follow the President of your
bloody Predecessors, the Gueses in France, cut our throats and condemn us
after; since we will not quietly be condemned first and hanged after; I am sure
this is the next step can reasonably be expected from men of your Conscience,
and from the Principles and Interest you are carrying on: Neither let any one
blame me for minding you of it, for I know it has been long in your mind and
often in your debates, and therefore I thought it more necessary to warn others
of what you are most likely to do. And since you talk so much of the Duke of
Yorks Loyalty and Love to his Prince, I pray God preserve the King and keep him
out of your bloody hands. --

I beg to know to what purpose your Lordship recites that my Lord S -- y was
Lord Chancellor, do you quarrel at any of his decrees or actions then, or
wherein did he not execute that Office as a great and good man should, and what
does your Lordship mean by the certain strict Test for the discovery of Popery,
opposed by that Lord in Parliament, the Test that was passed against Popery
(which every Officer is obleig'd to take) is notoriously known was principally
promoted by him: If your Lorship mean the other bill of the Test which he
opposed, it is the same with what the Duke of York has passed lately in
Scotland, and is a great step to the Destruction of the Protestant Religion.
The truth is, there are so many of these downright Popish touches in your
Paper, that I sometimes doubt whether it be your Lordships or no, Since you are
but a Papist of two years standing, and yet they say young Proselites are the
fiercest; But this Paper must come from a Papist, or Voted Enemy to the King
and Kingdom, since you tell us, that you would have the days of Dissolving the
two last Parliaments kept Festival, Anniversarily, in Commemoration of your
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers, wherewith you were
encompassed, whilst they were in Session. None but such fellows and their
Faction being then in danger: But I find your Lordship extreme angry at the
word Faction; since you will please to have it, that your worthy Abhorrors and
Addressors are not a Faction, but the total of the Kings Subjects, who
conscienciously respect their own duty and the general welfare. Pray my Lord
let us examine this excellent position of your Lordships setting aside your
heat and railing. Does your Lordship think that the choice of Sheriffs, the
great care in returning select men for grand Juries; The arts that were used to
draw many of them into these Abhorrences, are not well known to all the Nation
We never doubt but you have choice of Gentlemen to make Sheriffs fit for your
turn, and they have Rogues to make under Sheriffs in every County; Neither is
it doubted that seventeen or eightteen men may be found in most Countys, for
your turn; although in some (and those great Countries) you could not find
above thirteen, and in several other Countries you have failed absolutely, and
yet all this will not speak your Party the hundredth part of the Nation. Has
your Lordship found out another way to make a distinction between the sense of
the Nation, and that of a dangerous Party; than that of the House of Commons?
will you tell me that a Parliament chosen against all the opposition, industry,
power, and money of the Court; is not the sense of the greatest part of the
Nation? Will your Lordship affirm, that this is a Faction and your Lordship,
the Papists the Duke of York, and his Creatures, are the only Loyal Subjects to
the King and Government. And what sort of People these make up, may be guessed
by what you profess your selves for: A Government infinitely worse than that in
Turkey; wherein the Law shall be of no other use, but as a mask to the Princes
worst actions and Tyranny. Our Religion, Estates, Lives, and Liberties,
Subjected to the most Arbitrary will of the Prince, who being a man is as
capable and liable to be extremely ill as any other, besides what Law you allow
to this King (who is an excellent Prince) as your King, must be allowed to the
next, though he be the worst in nature: And yet you will find out away that by
naming, Judges, Sheriffs and Juries, all things shall certainly go as the Court
and great men order; it is already so complete in Scotland, where the Proverb is
show me the man and I will tell you the cause. This is away that no sober, or
honest men were ever for in any Country. The zeal of your Lordships to preserve
your greatness, of your Duke to get a Crown, and of the Papists to introduce
their Religion, has outgone by many steps, all that ever went before you.

I acknowledge it the Kings Prerogative, to call Parliaments, but Edw. the 3d.
tells us he was sworn by his Coronation Oath to provide remedy in Parliament
upon great Emergencis. And our Laws have been very careful to fix the frequency
of them: And it is that only Court that can keep all the rest useful to the
King and People: they are brave spirits indeed, and blessed with a Popish Torish
humility, or rather stupid folly, if not wicked villainous designs, that are
unconcerned when a Parliament should be called, and leave it to the Prince,
whether he please to have any or no. The Law has given us a right (nay it is
our chiefest Birthright, and without which we have nothing left us, but are
mere slaves) to Parliaments within such a distance of time: The Prince has the
Prerogative of appointing the day; and dissolving when the business is done,
but the Prince is obliged that we have Parliaments within our time, and
continued so as may be of effect to provide remedys for the Emergent evils. His
prerogative of appointing the day ought not to deprive us of our right of
having them in such a time, Neither ought his Power to dissolve them render
them useless to us.

I am heartily sorry your Lordship is so ill instructed in the Protestant
Religion, that you ask what it is, but you profess that your self, and your
fellow Addressors, Abhorrors are zealous for the Religion by Law established in
the Church of England, so then you do not know the Protestant Religion; but
Religion by Law established you are well acquainted with. what security will
your Lordship give, that when your Army is completed, and your Militia.
Abhorrers and Addressors mustered, that you will not tell us, that the Religion
established by Law in the Church of England, is the Old Popish Religions settled
by Magna Charta, which is not repealable by any future Act. For this good old
cause, your Lordship and friends at Court, has nursed up the King of France to
this height, he is now in Christendom, and all Europe is abundantly in your
debt for it: Qantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.

I own my self a friend to the Dissenting Protestants! until your Lordship can
find out an infallible decider of points of Faith. -- I can give men leave to
differ from me in opinion, whilst they live soberly and honestly by me. --
There are none I know so inconsistent with Government as the Papist; who owns a
foreign Jurisdiction, and disolves all natural Religion to introduce his own.
-- And though your Lordship is pleased, to add the word Rebel to the name
Protestant; yet it will agree much better with the Papists, whose Religion is
Rebellion; and it is impossible to find one true subject of them in the World,
(to any but the Pope) if they believe their own Religion.

I find your Lordship is very kind to Court Converts, and would pass over the
blackness of all their former transactions; and you have great reason, since
you are so lately one your self: but be not deluded, the Papists think not as
you think; they never forgive past offenses. -- Argile cannot be forgiven the
being his Fathers son. -- Nor the Duke of Lauderdale will not be forgiven the
having brought the Covenant into England -- Twedale will find hereafter that
'twill be remembered he sat in Olivers Parliaments. And I should tell your
Lordship, that you will suffer hereafter by a halter of the Duke of Yorks
providing; but that my skill in Astrology has told me, a Garter of your own
useing shall prevent it. The jealous Churchmen that Govern the Popish Interest
never forgives, especially men capable of thinking and judging other things,
then they would have them.

Your Lordship is extremely out, when you tell us the Associations in Queen
Elizabeth's time, were entered into with her consent and privity; when the Queen
her self, in her speech to the Parliament, in the twenty eight year of her
Reign: Did protest before God, that she never heard or thought of such matter,
being wholly ignorant of it till a great number of hands, with many obligations
were shown her at Hampton Court, signed and subscribed with the hands and
seals of the greatest in this Land. -- But you are pleased to call the several
Parliaments, that about that time. so extremely opposed the Succession of Mary,
Queen of Scots, a Puritan Gang, and have found out a Clergy, Nobility, and
Gentry in the Clouds, that were of another opinion, no question there were some
and great store of Papists in those days, but I am sure the Parliament were
violently against her succession, as appears in the Rolls: Nay, and against her
life too; for it was then daily experienced, that the Queen was not safe,
whilst the head of so desperate and bloody a Religion as the Papists was in
being --

Pray, My Lord let me ask you freely is not this the very Case now? 'twas the
Opinion of our Parliaments, and the truth appears every day more and more. Can
your Lordship make a difference between the Case of Queen Elizabeth, and her
Popish Successor, Mary Queen of Scots; (which your self have so wisely
instanced in and brought upon the Stage) and the present Case of our King, and
the Duke of York, Has the Papists appeared less bloody in their Designs since
that time? Have they less Passion for introducing their Religion? did the Queen
of Scots discover more ambition for the Crown of England than our Duke has?
she was a Prisoner in the Queens hands and in custody, and had not the tenth
part of the opportunity the Duke has, whose friends and creatures, possess all
the Governments and Commandments of Sea and Land, fill the Courts and Councils,
so easy and unwary (pardon me if I so say) has our King been. But the D -- of
Y -- s Loyalty is not to be disputed? Though I remember the time when he got
the Fleet from his Brother the Prince, and swore it to himself: And I appeal to
the King, whether he knows not of several attempts were made, to set up the D.
of York before his coming over and the Transactions in the Dukes name, of the
D. of B -- m, and Colonel Banfield for the restoring the Duke to the Crown,
and not the Elder Brother, are suffciently to be proved. We are all witnesses
of the Kings marriage by the Dukes Father in Law, to a Lady of great birth, but
such as the Spanish Ambassador then undertook to prove could have no Children:
and immediately upon this marriage, the Duke (as if sure of this matter) sets
up with Guards, the Princes Lodgings at Court, and seat in Parliament, And all
the Establishment of his house exactly suitable to the Prince of Wales: His
unparalled love to his Prince, appears in all this, and in nothing more then
the civil treatment the King at this hour receives from him and his party, the
throngs that tend the one, whilst the King walks the streets with two or three
Pages of his backstayrs: Our King is the first instance that was so willing to
settle indubitably the Title of his Presumptive Heir; and to strengthen his
Power gives it up all to his Successor: But he goes far that never turns,
especially in such perilous and unsafe ways, Our King is not only an excellent
well bred Gentleman, but a man of great abilities and courage, three things his
brother wants: Whenever the King will think of his own interest he will not
want hundreds of thousands to dye at his feet: multitudes would adore him that
hate and fear the Religion and temper of his Brother. Pray God bless the King,
and give him yet more and more the Spirit of discerning his Interest and
friends, and the courage to deliver himself from the hands of such unworthy
base Traitors, as we have reason to fear he is now encompassed with. Shall ever
be the hearty Prayers of,

Yours, etc.

LONDON Printed for E. S. 1682.


