A RETURN to the LETTER OF A NOBLE PEER, Concerning the ADDRESSES.
My Lord,
THE Favor you conferred upon me, to permit me to write to your Honor, with a
condescending Invitation, occasioned that of March the 4th. directed to your
hand; in which, my Thoughts of the numerous Addresses seemed to me so plainly
set down, that no Mistake could ensue: yet it has otherwise happened, and your
Answer, although not altogether differing from my Expectation, is not wholly
such, nor so ingenious, as I expected. I could have wished, that as you printed
the Answer, you had with it published my Letter, which gave the Occasion, that
if any Knowledge of the Persons between whom this Intercourse is used, should
give the World occasion to repeat our Names, and descant upon our Judgments, I
might not appear, after so much resolute Constancy, now dotish and fluctuating.

But for your whole Discourse, Noble Peer, I must be plain in telling you, that
not I, but the Likeness of it to that Speech you made in the House, which being
published, the Hangman committed to the Flames, has published you the Author:
And you do so mince this Association, and turn and wind it so tenderly, that it
seems your own Projection, and a Brat so taking in your Affections, that every
Abhorrence of it is a Daggers point at your Heart. You are much in Labor to
have it believed never to have a Being, thinking that way to secure it from the
zealous Abhorrors, and yet at every other turn, your Fondness of it makes you
break out into Commendations of it is pretty Features and Usefulness. Indeed,
your Shiftings show you have something of a debauched Modesty left, and that
you are ashamed of what you so much love; my Willingness to excuse what will
bear it, says this of you: but the Generality cry out upon your Impudence, in
saying, An Association pretended to have been seized in the E. of S's Closet,
when nothing was ever more exactly proved, nothing more unquestionable and free
from dispute, nothing more defended by that Lord's Clientage, and even owned in
the Court by two of his Compurgators, (for they acted such more than Jurymen)
who looking upon it, said, This is the same with that which we saw produced,
and promoted in the House of Commons. And by the way, you may take notice what
Justice was like to be done the King, when his Cause was in the hand of Persons
guilty of the same Conspiracy; for, should they have found the Bill, they had
directed the Attorney General to draw up one against themselves; as truly it is
to be lamented, that they and all others should escape free from Punishment,
who in the House saw and promoted this damnable Plot of Association, and did
not so discover it, as to have the Projectors and Forwarders rewarded with
their merited Rope. The Authors of such Parliamentary Proceedings ought to have
their Heads advanced to the Housetop, to admonish their Successors of Modesty
and Allegiance.

But to return; Your Title, at the first sight, made me merry with the
Remembrance of your Lordship's and that Religious Party's, you so diligently
served, accustomed Activity, that out run their Sagacity, laying open dangerous
Plots and Designs before they were detected. As your Lordship has been
frequently termed a Catt, from your noted Skill in falling safely, so you
further merit it from the Apology of the Catt changed into a beautiful Woman,
receiving a Change only in Form not in Conditions. You are by the exceeding
Greatness of Royal Favor, raised to very great Riches and Honor, not only out
of a mean Fortune, but (pray pardon my Plainness and necessary Freedom) an ill
State (as you are too conscious) that merited Severity: yet all Indulgences,
all immerited Additions of Luster and Fortune, cannot alter you, but you must
be Catting, still playing your old Tricks, laying open before detecting. Your
Wit has, like Galba's, very unseemly Lodgings, and is no other than what may
be conjectured to proceed out of so ill contrived a Frame, mischievous and
unlucky: it serves to no eminent Counsel, but to impose upon the silly and
credulous Multitude, who adore you as some Idolaters are said to choose and
worship their God, for it is excellent Deformity. No Man who makes a just and
serious Inspection into these Addresses, sees any thing but what becomes
generous and loyal Subjects, whom the Sense of their own Duty, and the odious
Practices of Men of your Principles, stir up to these Expressions of Fidelity
on their own part, and a most reasonable Abhorrence and Detestation of the
others.

And now, because it is an Answer to my Letter, you lay upon me the Task of
enquiring what this Monster which you have ripped up and laid open, is.

You begin to tell me, that the Fermentation which the Nation is put into, must
be cherished by the ways that first occasioned it, and that the Romish Designs
against the Protestant Religion and Liberties of England, would miscarry, if
the Heats and Animosities between Protestants were not artificially fomented.
Here the Tale you tell of the Romish Designs is so exceedingly stale, that it
stinks abominably, and is rejected by most of the apprehensive Dissenters and
Factious Party, who see it in vain to talk any more at that rate, the
Generality of the Nation being cured of those Fits which the affrightful Noise
of Popery put it into. For, as soon as honest and quiet Men hear any begin to
blutter those fusty Discourses, they leave them as men tainted and rusty, Tools
(as you call them) to your Trade of Protestant Joynery. And the Truth is, you
all so torment and saw what you take in hand to polish, that it is great pity
the Masters of the Company are not hanged for Company, with the Journey-man.
It Is time indeed some end were put to the Lunacy the Kingdom has been
afflicted with, and I hope we may conclude it wrought, or near effecting,
seeing the greatest part of what you style distracted are recovered, and you
are found not Lords of the Ascendent Predominant over Affections, but Witches
and Juglers that have held men under some short Surprizal, but are delivered by
Divine Providence, President at the Council Table. Even they who commend you do
not believe you, and the rest will never trust you: Neither have you shot your
Bolt any thing near the Mark, in saying, the Operation of the Declaration
against the two last Parliaments being wholly spent, this against the
Association is slipped in, and managed to perpetuate Rancours; for your self (I
fear to your Grief) find the contrary, both that the Efficacy of the
Declaration is not spent, but has produced this brisk and genuine Offspring,
the natural Issue of so incomparable a Conjunction as the Peoples Affections,
answering their Prince's Condescension and Love; and that it is so far from
fostering Animosities, that it is the most certain Bond of Union that could
ever have been framed; a League indeed offensive and defensive, not as your
squinting Loyalty and unmannerly Comparison would make it seem, between the
Prince and a Faction, but between the King and all his Subjects, who
conscientiously respect their own duty, and the general Welfare. We never think
or call that a Faction, which, compelled by the Fear of God, honors the
King; but you, who of all Men living, have the greatest Provocations to admire
and love regal Clemency and Bounty, do most wretchedly, after all the strictest
Engagements to Loyalty, turn back like a Dog to his Vomit, and are pleased no
otherwise, but during your Respect to that vile Excrescence of Government,
which has been spued out and abhorred, as your beloved Association is now,
chiefly for it is Tendency toward the same.

After you have made a Citation of a Loyal Gentleman's words, you will needs
insinuate from them, a parity of His most Excellent Majesty's, and that basest
of Usurper's Oliver's Cause, and do in effect deride all that out of Devotion
worship the true God, because some, out of Fear or Illusion, have worshipped the
Devil. Usurpers, conscious to themselves what Hatred their ambitious and
tyrannical Invasions merit, study Popularity, and are forced to fawn upon the
worst of men, whom they interest to impose upon others, and always rule by Arts
contrary to the Prescriptions of Legal and just Monarchy; They either affright
or corrupt men to obsequious acknowledgments; These, with Majestical, but
Gracious Countenance, receive the due Tributes of voluntary Obedience, and
encourage Fidelity, to the shame and terror of such as associate and consult
by their Kings to disturb the Public Peace. Because some unduely flattered
Oliver, (once your Master) therefore you will allow none to give our Lawful
King those proper Eulogies and Thanks which his wise and excellent Government
challenges from all, whom God has blessed with Judgment to see and rejoice in
their happiness by and under him.

But this, with your Lordship, is a base and destructive Design: a strong
Affirmation, which you would have received, although you have forgotten to tell
us the Reason. And so in truth you have the Sense which should direct us to
what you mean, in saying, It would have been some Argument of the Addressors
Candor, and sincerity of their Intentions, in what they did before, if they
had forborne their late Applications, till they had found that they were not
mistaken in the grounds upon which they think to vindicate themselves for what
they then did. Something your Lordship did here conceive, but being ill
Midwiv'd, is spoiled in the production. As to what you said a little before,
you are as unfortunate in your expressions and reasoning. For these Addressors
are not sick of your Lordships Megrims and distempers of Brain, that giddily
rave and anticipate the Fruits of Royal Counsels before maturity. They, as all
brave Spirits, are blessed with Humility, and meddle not with the King's
Prerogative, neither take upon them to instruct him when a Parliament will be
most seasonably called, but leave it to his Wisdom, from which, by God's
blessing upon it, they hope to reap the satisfactory Effects of these and their
former Addresses, while your Lordship and your Factious Adherents shall sit in
melancholic postures, and enviously assist your tormenting Angels in your own
vexation.

How you call Mr. Groy^'s Oath a bare suggestion, I understand not; neither
what credit you gain by saying this Association was, for what appears, only
feigned and imaginary. Those few words upon this account before spoken, may (I
think) suffice; for all your scrupulous artifice will neither cover nor color
that Villainy. You may as well call in question, Whether that Noble and Loyal
Peer was accused and indicted, as whether that Paper was seized in his Closet,
or any where promoted by Associators; you may as well question, Whether that
Lord ever was Lord Chancellor, and afterward made good his own words in his
Speech to L. Treasurer, and found His Majesty a Prince under whom the
unfortunate fall gently; Whether afterward in the House of Peers he made any
Speeches in opposition to a certain strict Test for the discovery of Popery,
promoted in that House; Whether he was since at Oxford, and afterward committed
to the Tower?

Your Lordship thinks it congruous, that the Addressors testify their
detestation of the many Sham-Plots, whereby Loyal and innocent Protestants have
been endeavored to be destroyed; and what is more evident, than that they do
this, abhorring both the real and Sham-Plots, which bold and bloody-minded
Factions, under the name (forsooth) of Protestants, were engaged in to the
destruction of the King, Religion, and Government? This you are fierce and
zealous to have done, yet being done, you dislike and complain of it; and
what is the reason, but because while you cry out of Popish Plots, and Popish
Sham-Plots only, these Addressors, the true Friends of the Protestant
Religion, and Peace of these Kingdoms, see you involved in the same Plots which
you cry out against, -- and engage to defend the King and established Religion
against all Conspirators whatsoever, whether Popishly, Scismatically, or
Heretically affected?

But when all of you make such a dinn about Protestants, and name the
Protestant Religion, why do you not set forth what this Protestant Religion is,
that we may know it before we engage to defend it? The Religion established in
the Church of England we are sure you would destroy, not preserve; for this the
Addressors promise and desire to preserve, which promises only give you these
Galls and Disturbances. Neither will you own the Presbyterian to be the only
Protestant, nor with the Presbyterian the Independent, for then the other
younger Brethren, Anabaptist, Brownist, Quaker, Fifth Monarchy man, and all the
rest of this large Family, will take it very ill to be rejected as Spurious,
and unprovided of Protestant Portions. If you take all into your politic Ark,
whether feathered or naked, cloven-footed, clawed, or hoofed, this Conjunction
will make England in the next Generation, surpass any part of Africa for
monstrous Issue, when those of Baxter's, Vincent's and Jacomb's holy Protestant
Herds, shall mingle with Protestant Muggletons, Protestant Quakers, Protestant
Ranters; and your Honor's, which is Protestant Atheists. Considering then, the
impossibility of such pretended Union in different Opinions, knit together in
one Band of Religion, and yet, that if any one or more Part or Opinion be
rejected, the Project is that way inconsistent with what it throws out, and
would seem, because there is a Rupture made with the Muggletonian or Ranter; or
whomsoever this Holy League receives not, who yet has as good a title to that
Vocabulum of Protestant, as Jack Presbyter, Jack of Leyden, George of Munster,
or Hugh Peter's, when he came from New England. So that in time I find the
League hits not upon the score of Religion, but all these are Protestants, as
protesting against Monarchy, and the whole present frame of Government, and
that can no otherwise come under one name of Protestant, than by joining with
it the word Rebel; and then Protestant Rebel speaks all the Parties together,
Presbyterian, Muggletonian, Anabaptist, etc. being as the Colors of Yellow,
Tawny, Green, etc. by which the several Regiments are to be distinguished. And
these, you think meet, the City of London should lead the way to address for
their Protection, until they may conveniently be (as is aforesaid) united and
formed into a Body that can defend and set up for it self. But your Lordship is
still unfortunate, advising impertinently; for the City, seeing the Design,
has, in the Lord Mayor and Lieutenancy, taken a truly safe, commendable, and
contrary way to your prescription, and so have bid your Honor good Night,
wishing you to sleep for more wit.

And when Parliaments shall, in stead of Endeavors to perfect the important
matters of the Kingdom, sit down and spin out more time in doing nothing, than
other Parliaments have taken to dispatch Multitudes of Affairs, or rather, in
doing nothing but chalking out unwarrantable Rules for the Subject to grow
licentious, and act as in an authorized Disobedience, What Reason is there,
that good and peaceable Men should not make to their Prince grateful Addresses,
for his Care of them, in dissolving such Parliaments, and scattering the
impending Mischiefs which threatened Ruin to our Universe? As an Anniversary
day of Thansgiving for our Deliverance from the ineffable Calamities we
sustained by that traiterous Convention, called a Parliament assembled under K.
Charles the First, whom they devilishly persecuted, unking'd and murdered, is
appointed upon the day of his Sacred Majesty now reigning his Birth, and happy
Return; it seems to me as reasonable, that those days, whereon his Majesty
secured the Liberty of the Subject, by dissolving the last Parliaments, be kept
Festival, in Commemoration of our Deliverance from those great and apparent
Dangers, wherewith we were compassed, while they were in Session.

Neither are all Associations, (as either your Nine-eyed Perusal reads, or your
distorted and grieved Fancy interprets them) abhorred in any of these
Addresses, which detest only those two Diabolical ones, the first, of the Sole
^n League and Covenant, and this seized in the E. of S.'s Closet, but are
themselves pious and Loyal Associations, excellently adapted (to use your
Words) for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person and Dignity, and the
Protestant Religion, now by Law established. But for your so justly abhorred
Association, which you would insinuate, was to have had the Royal Stamp, pray
tell me where and when those audacious Ruffians (who would not allow their King
in the Management of his settled Revenues, the Privilege which the meanest
Owner of a Chattel Lease has, in the disposal of it) did agree and consent
more than in the taking the Covenant to ask the King's Leave and Liking? Or
rather, tell me whether you would not first have taken it, and have afterward,
upon the Point of a Spear, tendered it to him for his Approbation and Stamp, at
Holmby House, the Isle of Wight, or Hurst Castle?

How strangely (you say) it looks, that the Mayor of Gl. who is recorded to
have done Service against Chapter Stewart, at Worcester, should now be hugged for
advancing these Addresses! From a Person of good Credit I am assured, that this
Gentleman, now Mayor of Gl. was in those times, with all the Family, expelled
that City, because Persons of known Loyalty. But if it be as you say, it is not
so strange to see deceived men undeceived; which happening, none are wont to be
more zealous Maintainers of the Cause, which they once opposed. But it may be,
you reflect on him, and the eminent Magistrate in the City of London, by reason
of the Opinion received by many, That Rebellion is never truly repented of: But
it is a Mistake; for although it be rare, yet we have seen diverse Eminent
Persons, great in the Rebellious times, far greater in the King's; as Col. J.
B. and D. L. H. one of the five Members, yet since a Privy Counselor, and
Ambassador, entrusted with the weightiest Affairs of the Realm; and above all,
the E. of S. whose Riches, Honors, and Trusts, were almost unaccountable: yet,
to say these were not Men of Principles acting, uniformly, but swayed by
Interest, and ready to engage with the same heat in every thing that lies in
Subserviency to their Gain: What is this, but to upbraid those pious, great,
and wise Ministers of State with Insincerity, which must be an Inlet to all
Villainy and Corruption; which for you to think, or me to say, were a Crime
never to be expiated. Therefore, if nothing in Men's Actions and Manners does
appear, but what speaks them obedient, all good Men will rejoice at their
Conversion, notwithstanding the affrightful Blackness of their former
Transactions.

As for your Brethren and Fathers of your Protestant Corporation and Interest,
discourse them as you please at your own Leisure. But while your Zeal to the
former Times transport you, no wonder you mistake Men and Business, and dream
all things transacted after the Vsurper's Mode, as if the Country-Gentlemen,
Grand-Jurors, and chief Burgers of Corporations in these days are like your
Upstarts, who were indeed mere Tools, and must be managed like Puppets, ere
they could squeek a pitiful Address to those Bables of Authority. And then,
you, mentioning the different Opinions of the Papists in our days, from those
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in the Cause of Succession, make we wonder at your
either Error or imposing Confidence, if you either believe or would persuade
others to believe the whirling Zealots have not a Papistical Rule and Method
for all they do and say; and change Sense and Language as they are taught from
Rome. You now all along say expressly the same which they then; but the Doctrine
introduced under the Title of the whole Clergy, Nobility, Gentry, and Courtiers
Arguments, concerning the Succession of Mary Queen of Scots, is wholly false:
for, whereas some of the Puritan Gang (which then began to be somewhat in
esteem with Religious Time-servers) did preach up, and throw forth such
Discourses as you mention, yet was it far from the Sense of the Clergy or
sincere Statesman, who would not alter from the Pattern of Loyalty set before
them, and sealed with the Blood and Sufferings of those who drew it, in the
Case of Queen Mary's and the Lady Jane Grey's Title to the Crown. Though they saw
the Danger, yet they had learned to believe in, and rely upon the Divine
Providence, which takes Care for the Safety of the Church and blesses it
chiefly, when the Governors thereof renounce the Refuge of indirect Politics.

And then, what a Story you tell of Associations in Queen Elizabeth's Time?
Which had they been entered into, without her Consent, and of such a Draught as
this abhorred one, which you so much dandle, no Ignoramus Jury should have
rescued the Abettors and Concealers from the Gallows. And yet you presently
destroy your own rare Tale in the following Paragraph, by prattling where the
King should reign, even in the Hearts of his People, which you would suppose he
does only of those who subscribe these Addresses, An inconsiderable parcel of
Men (you say) if compared with the Bulk of Nation. Pray my Lord, tell me,
whether the Subscribers in Queen Elizabeth's time were a tenth part of the
Number? Yet were they a joyful Guard to her, who having their hands, was
assured of the rest of inferior Ranks, who were under the Subscribers Command.
And whereas you pretend these Addresses do proclaim the Weakness of the
Government, you are out in that Note upon the Text; for, they most certainly
magnify it, rendering it glorious abroad and at home, in the Eyes of all, who
wish the Prosperity of it, being also a disheartening to it is Enemies, whether
Foreign or Domestic. Nothing can be imagined more to increase the Honors of
Esteem toward him in our Neighbors Affections, than to see the Readiness of
the King of Great Brittain's Subjects throughout the whole Kingdom to assert
the Royal Prerogatives, and give such hearty Engagements to defend his
Majesty's Sacred Person, Crown and Dignities, the Religion by Law established,
and the Right of Succession: which last, is no less Reputation abroad and at
home, than the former, because all Disputes and Heart-burnings concerning his
Successor, disturbing his Peoples Affections make him uneasy, and frequently
proves of as ill Consequence to any Prince, as if his own Title were in
Controversy; but that, settled and undubitable, strengthens his Power, and
blunts the sharpest Edge of Malice against that Prince that has such a
Revenger of any his Reproaches or Injuries. And when the Heads and principal
Members of all Counties, Cities, Towns, and other Corporations, do with so
filial a Respect purge themselves of all sinister Designs or Intentions-towards
the Crown, either in the present Fruition or future Inheritance, and out of the
Ardency of honest Affections, abhor all such vitiated and rotten Members as
you and others, who are, and have been versed in indirect and disloyal
Practices, not only Foreign Malignity, but yours is hereby shattered in
pieces, and you, who pretend you tremble at others, are in an Agony with the
Thoughts of this and the cooperating Stings of Conscience.

What your Lordship mentions concerning the Portugal King, is Foreign to the
Matter discoursed, and more ridiculously introduced, than I should a Petition
that your Honor as a Reward for your Oratory and Manners should be sent to the
House of Correction.

To conclude, seeing your Lordship so great a Counselor and fortunate
Statesman, as never to be believed or loved, never to attain to what you seek,
because your Mind's more Changling than your unsightly Body gives us to
suppose, and always knowing, that you never speak Truth but as the Devil did
Scripture, to corrupt the Holy to Apostasy; our own Searchings having caused us
strongly to confide in the D. of York's Loyalty, and unparalelled Love of his
Prince, his untainted Candor and Sincerity toward all who faithfully respect
their Duty and Allegiance, your forming such terrible Dangers to the King and
Kingdom by his Authority and Succession does sufficiently secure us from Fear:
For, were there any real Danger imminent, you would never discover it, it being
impossible but you should have an Hand in it. And this Giant Popery, as it is
magnified by your Optics to us, is but a Dwarf: How much properer he may
appear to some, when shown from off your Munkey Shoulders, I cannot tell, and
leave you to the Trial; whom I desire to pardon for any thing harshly
expressed, because I hope it may prove beneficial to your Honor, and if so, it
is the same to

From Newmarket March 16th. Your Lordships very Friend and Servant. etc.


Printed for Ralph Stamp. 1682.


