Dr. RESBURY's SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, August 21. 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, August 21. 1692.

By NATHANAEL RESBURY, D. D. Rector of S. Paul Shadwell, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1692.

Job xxxiij. 22, 23, 24. His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to
the destroyers. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a
thousand, to show unto Man his uprightness: Then is he gracious unto him, and
says, Deliver him from going down unto the pit; I have found a ransom.
THese words have something in them, that seems dark and mysterious, as a great
many passages, in this Book of Job particularly, have. It is one entire and
lofty Poem, and not only so, but one of the ancientest pieces of Writing that
was ever delivered to the World; and so, must needs have things in it very
difficult; being either Proverbial expressions, peculiar to the Age or
Countries amongst whom they were then in use, or else References to the
Histories of those Times; which being now wholly out of reach, render the
passages that concern them, so much the more abstruse and unintelligible.
However, if we consider the drift of this Chapter, where my Text is, it may
make for clearing up these words, and the design of that Subject of discourse I
intend from them.

Elihu, one of Job's Visitants, is remembering him of the various methods God is
pleased to take, in teaching and disciplining Mankind; with all his gracious
Ends and Designs in these ways of instruction, viz. to bring Men to the
knowledge both of God himself, and of their own state. He shows further, all
those mixtures of goodness, the softnings and mitigations, the allays or
refreshments, that God is pleased to minister, even under the sharpest
afflictions, which he thinks fit sometimes to bring upon Men.

The ways of instruction represented in this Chapter, are,

1. By Visions or Night-dreams. When the Mind was retired from the business and
noise of the day, and was more receptive of divine impressions. A way, which it
pleased God to take something more frequently, as a Ministry of knowledge, when
Men had no other supply of Revelation; no written Oracles of God for a rule and
standard of their belief and actions. Ver. 14, 15, 16. God speaks once, yea
twice, yet man perceives it not. In a Dream, in a Vision of the night -- then
he opens the Ears of men and seals their instruction.

But then, as God was wont to instruct Mankind, by Visions or Dreams, so he had
another way, and that more usual, that which (as it might be circumstanc'd)
might prove much more instructive, more effectual for his correction and
amendment every way.

And this was, by afflictions and calamities of life: Especially Diseases and
Sicknesses, which were not intended merely to afflict Mankind, or make their
lives uneasy or uncomfortable; but to give them a sight of themselves, to
remember them of their guilt to teach them their duty, how they may learn to
carry themselves before God, with all submission to his Will, dependence upon
his Providence, and repentance for the irregularities of Life, by which they
have provoked God. Ver. 19. and so on. He is chasten'd also with pains upon his
bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain, so that his life
abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat.

-- His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers. --
And this way of instruction, as Job himself was at present under; so Elihu, in
describing it, seems to accommodate his Expressions to the circumstances of
Job's Sickness; to the allays and mitigations he might observe in them, and to
the hopes he might have of a good issue and deliverance out of them. The
circumstances of his disease, he describes by the pains in his bones, the
weakness of his stomach, the consumption of his flesh, and that degree of
wasting, that he seems (as we express it) as if he were just drawing on. His
soul draws near unto the grave. The allays and mitigations he might observe
were these; That he had those about him, that might instruct him in the Will of
God; that might bring him to a sense of himself; that might interpose with God
in his behalf, and prevail for the removal of this present affliction. If there
be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man
his uprightness: Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from
going down unto the pit; I have found a ransom.

Lastly, The encouraging hopes he might have of a rescue from death (though his
disease looked very dangerously) ver. 25, 26. His flesh shall be fresher than a
Child's, he shall return to the days of his youth, he shall pray unto God, and
he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy.

In the words thus explained, by what went before, and what follow after, there
may arise these three Things observable.

1. The great incidency of humane Nature to sickness and bodily diseases; His
soul draws near to the grave, etc.

2. That sickness and bodily diseases, to which humane Nature is so incident,
have a great deal of instruction in them; and it pleases God frequently to
inflict them for this very end; that Men might be taught the knowledge of
themselves, and their duty toward Him. This I gather from the tendency of the
Argument that Elihu is upon; viz. showing the various methods by which it
pleases God to teach Men the knowledge of his Will; sometimes by Visions and
Dreams in the night; at other times, by sickness and other calamities.

3. Lastly, It is further observable how great a blessing of Providence it is,
and what an allay to the affliction, to enjoy one of the Messengers of God
about a Sickbed. Some excellent Person that may read Lectures upon Divine
Providence, that may govern us in our behavior toward God when under his
correction and chastisement, and that may pray in our behalves for the removal
of that Calamity, in his own good time. If there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness, etc.

Of these in their Order.

I. I observe to you the great incidency of humane Nature to sickness and
bodily diseases. The best of Men are not exempt from them. We have two great
instances in Job and David; who both fell not only under the power of common
distempers, and weaknesses of body, but diseases, as soul and noisome, as sore
and painful, as strange and exemplary, as have ever yet befallen the worst of
Men. And as the best of Men are not exempt, so neither are the youngest, nor
those of the strongest constitution. We may be gay and flourishing in all the
Vigours of youth and health to day, and to morrow groaning under the pains and
languishings of a sickbed; not able to move an arm, or wink into a moment's
rest; not able to bear the least food or support of Nature, much less to
exercise the nobler faculties of Mind in any just thought or act of good
reasoning.

This incidency to sickness and bodily diseases is founded, partly in the frame
of our Natures, partly the common Accidents of Life, but especially (and
without which, that Divine Hand that made us, would have secured us against all
the Accidents of our nice and tender Composure) the great inlet to all
Calamity, Sin, and our fatal Apostasy from God.

1. The very frame of our Natures. We are so fine a piece of Workmanship,
wrought off with such Applications of Wisdom as well as Power, and made up of
such numberless dependencies, all so tender, and so easily interrupted; that,
were we to consider the structure of our bodies, the small fibers, the
necessary communication of parts, the strange ways of conveyance for the
nourishment of the whole, it might rather be a wonder every moment that we feel
our selves in health and order, than any surprise to labor under an indisposed
Nature, which may be so easily over turned by any peccant humor, by the least
obstruction in any of its parts, by the redundancy, as well as defect, or decay
of what, in a just and equal temperament, might be our support and defense.
However, such is indeed our Contexture and Frame, that the very necessary use
and exercise of the several parts for the maintenance of the whole, and of one
another, does wear and decay them, takes off their natural service, brings in a
gradual death upon some of our parts, which becomes past all possibility of
repair or revival, and (as the Learned Lord Verulam somewhere observes) puts
us, in old Age, under the torments of Mezentius, that is, ties the living to
the dead; parts that are decayed, and have ceased their Functions, to those
that are alive and animated, and still at work, for the mere continuance of
life and action. So that Old Age is one natural and unavoidable disease, which
the strongest, the best composed, the best used Constitution cannot but fall
under. And thus the Wise man describes all the parts and organs of the Body, as
having by degrees spent themselves off, into a perfect unserviceableness in Old
age, till the whole structure it self comes to fall and be demolished, Eccles.
12.2, 3, 6. When the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars begin to be
darkened. When the keepers of the house tremble, the strong men bow
themselves, and the grinders cease, and they that look out of the windows be
darkened -- When the silver cord is loosed, and the golden bowl is broken, or
the pitcher broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern, etc.
That is, when all the faculties and powers of the Soul, the leading and the
rational, the lower and the sensitive, shall begin to be obstructed in their
several operations; and when the members of the Body shall betray their
sensible decays: the nerves loose and enfeebl'd, the spirits low and unactive,
the legs and hands trembling, the teeth dropping out, the optic juices of the
eye drying up, the brain, with all its defenses, shattered, the circulation of
the blood slow and languid: This is an unavoidable disease in nature, and
closes in the dissolution of the whole. But then,

2. The common accidents of life point to us the incidency of humane nature to
bodily diseases. The constant returns of Spring and Autumn, pestilential airs,
unhealthy seasons, immoderate exercise, or slothful and undisturbed ease,
unwholesome diet surfeits, either by excess, or something not of agreeable
digestion; maims or bruises, by falls or quarrels; natural propensities derived
from the loins of diseased parents when the stamina vitae, the first threads of
life (if I may so express it) are wove amiss; and numberless other accidents,
which time would fail to reckon up, do necessarily expose the whole race of
Mankind to distemper and infirmity, that might every moment take off the luster
and desirableness of life.

3. Lastly, I add also, a Consideration of Sin, and our fatal Apostasy from
God, which was indeed the great and only inlet to all humane Calamity. For
without this, that Divine Hand that made us, would, have secured us against all
the accidents of our nice and tender composure. It was Sin that brought
sickness and disorder upon the Soul and Body of our first Parents, which Adam
could not but derive upon his Posterity, when he must needs beget one in his
own Likeness, and after his own Image. By one man (says the Apostle) sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5.12. Now Sickness is the
harbinger of Death, and had its same, both way, and time of entry into the
World with Death it self. It was Sin that made the healthy and well tempered
Climate of Paradise too hot for our first Parents. Sin that made the Earth so
pregnant with noxious Vapors, and other fatal issues of her Womb, Sin that
brought that Universal Curse upon the Creation, that every thing proved so
unkindly that had been made either for service or sustenance. Sin that
occasioned that entire sickliness in the whole Constitution of nature, that
tainted our very Birth and Original, who otherwise must have come into the
World with that equal poise of temper, that nothing would have moved disorderly
within, nothing have assoulted impetuously without, so as to have blasted or
impaired this noble composure of ours, till it had pleased God, in all the
gentle disposals of his Providence, to have called us out of this sphere of
action, to the immediate enjoyment of himself.

Some useful reflections upon this observable.

1. By all that has been said, what reasons have we of thankfulness, for every
moments enjoyment or continuance of health; it is that which is so much the
brightness and joy of present life, that, without it, no other advantages of
Nature or Art can make the enjoyment of life so much as tolerable, much less
desirable; and yet it is what may be broke in upon so easily, that nothing but
one-continu'd wonder of Divine Providence preserves it entire to any one of us.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who heals all thy diseases -- who redeemeth thy
life from destruction, etc. says the Psalmist.

2. As we should be thankful for Health, so also submissive in Sickness. It
is, we see, the common lot of humane Nature, the Seeds of which we take in with
our first Being. Diseases and Maladies are the Rods in God's hand to discipline
the good, and punish the bad. Nay, I may further add, They are frequently the
natural products of some men's sins, that do necessarily follow such or such
vicious ways of life; upon all which accounts we are owing to the good pleasure
of the Divine Will, where we enjoy so great a blessing any one day, and have
reason to submit when it is otherwise. So much for that first Observable.

II. Come we, secondly, to observe, That sickness, and bodily diseases, have a
great deal of instruction in them, and it pleases God frequently to inflict
them for this very end; that Men might thereby be brought to the knowledge of
themselves, and their duty toward Him. This I gather from the drift of the
argument that Elihu is upon, wherein he is showing the various ways God had to
teach and instruct Mankind; partly by Visions and Dreams in the night, strong
and divine Impressions upon the Mind, which were never dispensed or indulged,
but to those who by wisdom and seriousness, frequent Contemplation of God, and
strictness in serving him, had been predispos'd to such Condescentions of
Grace; And partly by sickness and bodily diseases, which he used as the more
common means of reducing the disobedient, when they had given up themselves to
all forgetfulness of God, contempt of Religion, and neglect of their immortal
Souls. Now that the amendment and bettering of Men by these present
chastisements, is the main end and design that God has in all, and that in his
Visitations of this kind, there is very visible instruction, such as the
meanest understandings may easily arrive at, may appear either from a
Consideration of God, or the Calamity it self.

1. From a Consideration of God, who has all along made it plain in the
Revelations of his Word, that he has that Love and Good Will to Mankind, that
he never afflicts them for Affliction's sake, as delighting in their Groans, or
thinking his Sovereignty best exercised by continued methods of punishment. He
assures us, that in all our afflictions he is afflicted, Isa. 63.9. Besides,
that he has given actual demonstration of this by his Providence. What other
reason can be given that we at any time enjoy a moments health? God has the
disposal of our Tempers and Constitutions, of the Air we breath in, the Food we
eat, of the Seasons of the Year, the Influences of the Stars, the Vapors of
the Earth, and whatever might minister either to Sickness or Health; that in
the least exerting of his Power, our Beauty and Gloss, Strength and Vigor
might consume away like a Moth fretting a garment. So that our possessing a
moments health, is a demonstration of the kindness and tenderness of
Providence, that he does not bring in these Calamities upon Men, merely for the
delight he has in grieving them, but when it proves unavoidably necessary
either to chastise or correct their follies. The foolishness of Man perverteth
his own ways; however, his heart at that time, and in that calamity, may fret
against God.

2. Consider we the Calamity it self, and what natural instruction arises
thence: For instance.

1. By Diseases and Sickness, we are taught the absolute Vanity and uncertainty
of this World, with all the Comforts of it; the beauty of all vanishes before
us upon a Sickbed. What pleasure can the man, in the height of an acute
distemper take, in his Honors, his large Fortunes, his beautiful Wife, his
witty Children, and all his other Conveniences of life! Much less, what relish
can we suppose he has, in those Lusts of his, which once seemed to administer
such high satisfaction! Alas! all this is gone; the disorder within has taken
off the gusto of all this; and he can as little taste the pleasures of life, as
he can his ordinary food, which now is grown nauseous and intolerable.

2. By Sickness we gain an easier insight into our own guilt, and all the
unreasonable provocations we have given the Almighty, throughout the whole
Course of our Lives: Sometimes the Sin is read in the very distemper it self:
Some feel their excess and intemperance, in the flames of their Fever: Some
their uncleanness in their Aches or Ulcers; others their sloth and idleness in
the ill habits of body they have thereby contracted. However, under any
calamity of this kind, we have reason to remember Sin in general, and our Sins
in particular, because we may be assured, that the one is the direct fruit and
product of the other. This is the Season therefore, for reflecting upon loss of
Time, and a vain expense of all the precious moments of Life: the profuse
embezzelling our Talents, our Parts, or other Trusts deposited with us for
Purposes, to which we have not used or improved them.

This is the season of apprehending the displeasure of God, which, if in these
less instances, it becomes so irksome and grievous, it may make us think how
intolerable it would prove, should the whole Viols of it be poured out upon us
in the other World. This, in a word, is a just season of representing Death,
and Judgment, and Eternity to our Thoughts; by all which we may grow wiser and
better in all the future management of that life that God may yet allot to us.
Here is matter of sufficient instruction, and that which Diseases and Sickness
most naturally, and most reasonably lead us out to discern and ponder on.

To close this second Observable, as usefully as may be, let me give one hint
or two.

1. That if any of us have known what a fit of Sickness is, we would remember,
and run over all those thoughts and impressions of Mind we felt at that time.
It is hardly to be avoided at such a time, but that the follies of some will
stare them in the face, will extort Confessions from them, will put them upon
vehement resolutions, and hearty promises of amendment, if God would please to
spare them but this once. This is an entertainment the Minister familiarly
meets with, in his attendances on Sick-beds. How sensible are such of their
former miscarriages! How resolved to change so foolish and provoking a Course
of life, they have hitherto led, if merciful Providence would vouchsafe their
recovery! Would to God such were as capable of practicing the wise instructions
of Sickness, as they were receptive and apprehensive of them at that time! That
they would keep up the warmth of those Thoughts upon the return of Health, that
had been enkindled by Sickness, and the prospect of Death! Consider this one
thing; that if, upon recovery from Sickness, you forget those instructions
which that Season gave you, and violate those solemn engagements you then put
your selves under, you may both lay your selves open to some new instance of
God's displeasure, and a more fatal seizure that may end in Death: And also,
you may have steeled your Minds with an acquired hardness and impenitency of
Temper, that perhaps none of those kindly impressions may ever return more, and
the next passage from a Sickbed, may be into a miserable Eternity.

2. If you ever do fall under this discipline of the Almighty, remember to
improve this advantage, where it may lie within your reach, of a Messenger, an
Interpreter, one among a thousand, which may be so useful, and serve to so
good purposes at that time. Which leads to the last Observable in the Text.

III. Lastly, I observe to you, how great a blessing of Providence it is, and
what an allay to so great a Calamity, if we have the advantage of a Messenger,
an Interpreter, etc. that may be helpful to us, in any of the difficulties of
that Season.

Some, by this passage in my Text, would understand the Ministry of an Angel;
expressed by these Titles, Messenger, Interpreter, One among a thousand. And
indeed, in the Times when there was nothing of a standing, revealed Rule and
Law of Faith and Practice, it is not improbable but the Ministry of Angels was
more frequently and more visibly indulged toward good Men. And questionless, it
was a pure mark of Divine Favor, where the Sick person at any time met with
such Condescentions of Grace, that such an One of all those thousands that
attend the Throne of God, should stand at his Bedside, to ennoble his Mind
with wiser and clearer Notions of God, more comfortable prospects of another
World, or a pleasing assurance of a longer date and term of years here. But
this we need not either stretch, or confine this passage to.

Elihu seems to hint to Job, the present mixtures and allays of Divine
Goodness, in that while God had brought Job into so deplorable a condition, by
sickness and pains of the worst kind; yet he had condescended to furnish him
with religious, useful, and excellent Friends, that might interpret to him the
Will and Meaning of God in this present Dispensation, and might pray for the
removal of so sad an affliction from him. So that in Analogy to this, we have
reason to account it an admirable Privilege that we may have the attendance of
God's Messengers at our Sickbeds to assist us with their Exhortations, their
Reproofs, their Directions, their Comforts, their Prayers, and all the useful
Applications of their Office and Ministry, as they may be any way serviceable
to relieve us at present, or further us in the great Concernments of Eternity.
The Privilege may appear chiefly upon these accounts.

1. The great indisposedness that probably our own Minds may be in (at such a
time as that) to do any thing to good purpose our selves; the disorder of the
whole Man, when bodily pains, want of rest, an hurry of the spirits, sickness
and nauseousness of stomach, affection of the brain and the like, must in all
likelihood greatly interrupt all composed Thought or Reasoning, and may easily
take the Mind off from its greatest Concernments by a vehement desire of
present ease and refreshment: then to have a faithful Messenger of God by us,
that may put us in mind of higher things; that may help us in our Meditations;
may supply us with Materials of Thought and Reflection; that may lead us into a
sense of our selves, and put us upon looking back upon past follies, and so
help us forward in those acts of Repentance which are required of us in the
Gospel; thereby either preparing us for Heaven, or making us more fit to live
in this World, if restored and recovered. Surely this is of great advantage,
which a good Mind would be apt to esteem as some way Compensating for all the
uneasiness and other troublesome Appendages of a Sickbed.

2. The great Mistakes we may be apt to fall under at such a time, makes it of
great advantage to us, to be under the direction and steerage of such an one.
Our own Organs of Thinking may then be so much out of order, that we may not
have the same Idea's of Things which in our Health and Vigor of Reasoning we
have once had. But besides that, there is a most busy Adversary that neglects
no such opportunities of attacking the weak and disabled Powers of Mind at that
time. He will then be casting all the Blinds, and representing all the false
Scenes imaginable. Sometimes he will flatter the Man into a better opinion of
himself than he ought to have, by which he would prevent his necessary
Repentance. Here the faithful Messenger, and due Interpreter of things, is
infinitely useful: To let a Man see himself and his lamentable Condition
through Sin; the need he has of the great Expiation; the necessity of
Repentance, and earnest importunity with God for Pardon and Forgiveness.
Sometimes again, he will increase and aggravate the Sinner's guilt beyond all
just measures, as if his Sins, both for the number, and the nature of them,
were beyond the compass of Divine Grace. Here again, the Messenger, the
Interpreter, the One among a thousand, comes in seasonably, explains the Nature
of the New Covenant, recites and insists upon the Promises, which are as large
and boundless as our Sins have been; and have no feebler a Confirmation, than
the Blood of Jesus, and the Oath of God. He informs him of the Nature of true
Repentance; and by the just Notes of it, shows him, that what he now acts is
true and real; Nay, he can lay open those very Wiles of the Devil, by which he
would at that time, be perplexing his Faith and Hopes in God. In a word,
sometimes the Devil will be aggrandizing the affliction it self, as if it were
out of the ordinary way of Providence, and an evident token of God's Wrath; or
that it is not what he has deserved, but what he may justly murmr and repine
at. Here this excellent Interpreter can, by a skillful reading upon Providence,
let the Man see, that no temptation has befallen him, but what is common to
Man; that no Man knows love or hatred by these things; that affliction is so
far from being the mark of God's wrath, or of a reprobate state, that it is
rather a token of his tender and fatherly compassion, who therefore chastises,
because he loves them, and would do them good in the latter end; that it is
far less than his iniquities deserve, and that therefore there is all the
reason in the World for his entire submission and resignation. In these and
other cases where the Clinick is so prone to mistakes concerning either himself
or God; how useful may such an excellent Person be to interpret to him the
Word and Providence of God, to keep him right in all just Idea's and
Apprehensions of things!

3. Lastly, He is of further advantage to implore God in the behalf of such,
either for the removal of his hand, or for a good issue and conclusion in the
end; It is no ordinary Privilege that, when our own Minds perhaps are sharing
in the disorders of our Bodies, we should then have the Prayers of some good
Men, who, in a fellow-feeling of our infirmities, can heartily and in earnest
recommend us to God. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous Man avails
much, Jam. 5.16. Hence his direction to the faithful, that if any be sick
among them, they should call for the Elders of the Church, and they shall pray
over them -- and the prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up, ver. 14, 15. We don't indeed, with those of the Church of Rome,
pretend to keep up the Ceremony of anointing with Oil, which is also directed
in this place; because the Power it self, that is, the gift of Healing, of
which this Unction was the Symbol, is so long ceased, and therefore it is
highly proper that the Symbol it self should cease too. But Prayer is a
standing Duty, and has its abiding Effects; if not in the actual recovery of
the Man (which yet not improbably has been frequently obtained by Prayer)
however may not prove ineffectual, as to his Eternal Salvation; both which seem
to be comprehended in this last passage of my Text: Then he is gracious unto
him, and says, Deliver him from going down into the pit; I have found a
ransom. This might lead me into a large field of discourse, but I will shut up
the whole, with an useful Inference or two.

1. We may hence learn to live under a daily wise expectation of such a
Calamity as this. Our sins and follies of Life may easily provoke God. Our
frail and obnoxious Nature daily exposes us; and Old Age, which is one
continued and unavoidable Sickness, will ere long creep upon the strongest of
us, which therefore may put the wisest of us into a just expectation of such an
hour. But then,

2. If it should be our lot to be thus dealt with, let us not despise this
indulgence of Providence, the Helps and Ministries of him whom God has
appointed his Messenger, his Interpreter; that he may minister to us in all
those useful assistances, of which we may then stand in so much need, and for
which the Church has accordingly provided such tender and comprehensive Offices.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, and
Glory, and Praise, now and for ever. Amen.
THE END.

