THE REUNITING OF Christianity. OR The Manner how to rejoin all Christians
under one sole Confession of Faith.

Written in French by a Learned Protestant Divine, And now Englished by P. A.
Gent.

LONDON. Printed by John Winter, for William Gilbert, at the Half Moon in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE
IF it be a great cause of grief to all true Christians, to see the sacred
Religion, which the Son of God brought down from Heaven to the Earth, miserably
torn in pieces by so many several Sects, which heretofore have, and who still
divide it at this present: If all these different Confessions of Faith, which
dismember the spouse of Jesus Christ, do extraordinarily afflict all pious
Souls; surely these pious Souls should conceive no less grief at this, that
hitherto there has never been any that has undertaken to apply a healing remedy
to these wounds, that has attempted, with success, the cure of so great an
evil. It seems no more to be thought of, but as an evil to be deplored, and
absolutely incurable. Every one thinks himself straightly bound to stick to his
old principles and preconceived opinions: every one flatters himself in his own
thoughts, and believes, that he possesses the Truth. and is in the right way;
after which he looks no more upon others but with some kind of aversion; or, at
least, with pity, They, in the judgment of him and his party, are as so many
unfortunate creatures, ready to tumble down an unavoidable precipice: they are
considered as people that are only sit to be the subject of the prayers which
are offered up for miserable wretches, or of the complaints w ch are formed
against their unhappiness. Neither are those looked upon who would undertake to
remedy this, but as idle Projectors and fantastical persons, like Mountebanks,
who promise the Cure of those Diseases that are given over by the most skilful
Physicians.

I know very well, that many have studied to find out a means of according some
of these Sects, to reunite certain persons together, who have been engaged in
them, and who, on this account, have reciprocally entertained most implacable
feuds against each other. There have been diverse Writings published for
endeavoring an accommodation between the Roman Catholics and Protestants:
they have attempted to reconcile those of the Confession of Ausburg, vulgarly
styled Lutherans, with those other called Calvinists; but there have commonly
been other interests than those of the Glory of God, intermixed in these
enterprises. It has rather been by a principle of Policy than by any motive of
Conscience, and desire of the salvation of Souls, that these designs have been
set on foot: whence it has happened, that God has turned his Blessing from
them, and made the success not to answer the greatness of the design. Some
likewise, not aiming at any thing herein more than how they might make ane
asier passage, and more plausible revolt, from one Communion to another, have
only studied to weaken the foundation of their former opinions, and strengthen
that of their new ones, which they have an intention to embrace. There is also
this in it, that men do not ordinarily attempt, but to remedy some effects,
without ascending up to the principal cause, and only source of all this evil;
just like those ignorant Physicians, who unskilfully labor to cure some of the
Symptoms of Diseases, without applying any thing to the grand original Cause,
on the curing whereof depends all its consequences.

There was a Preface of a Book, printed some years since, in the Low Countries,
which touched this matter, and seemed to aim at a general reconciliation of all
Christians, by means of a charitable allowance and and a mutual toleration. But
besides that, it was but by the by, that the Author treated upon this important
Subject: It seems that, not having ascended up to the spring head of all these
Divisions, he has not contrived any proper way, for the Reconciliation which he
proposes, nor has rightly distinguished between what is fundamental in
Christian Religion and what is not, to let us see, last of all, in what things
we should have this charity one toward another. And we reject also the means
which is most important toward the attaining to so good an end, whilst we
refuse to disingage our selves from whatsoever may render it unfruitful, as I
shall show you in its proper place.

It was in the search of this, that I have, for some years since, applied my
self to so diligent and serious meditation. I utterly cast off, at the instant,
all former opinions of my own, and prejudices against others, which might be
any obstacle to me in so laudable a design: I disingaged my self for a time of
all things whatsoever of any Communion of Christians, which was singular, and
which separated it self from others: And I believed, that in examining
carefully the things wherein they all agreed, I might discern with a more
disinterested eye, that which would be for the common good. I then considered
with the greatest exactness that I was able, the Nature, Greatness, and
lamentable Effects, of this miserable Division of Christians. I observed at the
same time, how inestimable would all those goods and all those advantages be,
which would arise from their reuniting into one and the same Confession of
Faith, and reconciliation of their minds into the same Communion. After that, I
diligently considered with an entire applying my mind, what could be the causes
of so deplorable a misfortune: I have ascended the best I could to the very
fountain head of this evil, where, I suppose, I have made some discoveries,
which, without question, will be relished by those who shall look upon them
without interest. In short I am verily persuaded, that after all my endeavors,
nay continual prayers have been heard by the Goodness and Bounty of the God of
Peace: I hope, that through the Blessing of Heaven, I have met with the true
and only remedy of this evil, that is to say, the sole means of reconciling
together all those who make profession of Christianity, and who are persuaded,
that the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is comprised in the Scriptures of the
New Testament, is delivered to us from God, and that it contains what we should
know, believe and do for our salvation. So that as soon as we shall religiously
reunite, in those matters which it prescribes to us, we shall be in a ready way
of attaining to the mark which it proposes to us. At least, I may, with truth,
say, that since that very time, I have found, for my own part, a great calmness
of Spirit. I have not any more, since that, looked upon Christian Doctrine, to
be difficult, knotty, charged and encumbred with an infinite number of subtle
questions, critical and unprofitable notions. These are the very things, that
have made it to pass unknown, having utterly disfigured its natural Beauty:
This is it, that has given it a face altogether new and strange; and, I dare
say, that if Saint Paul and the rest of the Apostles should descend down, this
very day, upon the earth, they would not know this Doctrine, so disguised as it
is. And this same also is it, that has caused these miserable Divisions among
Christians, at this present.

I must confess, that I, for a great while, had a design, not to publish my
thoughts upon this Subject. I would have concealed this advantage, which I had
met with, and made it of particular use to my self. It was not for any envy
that I bare to the public good, for which I could be glad to employ all my
power and life: But I have always distrusted my own abilities, and knowing, as
I do, their utmost, I have ever been suspicious of their productions. Besides
this, I did never approve of that liberty which is given of exposing openly all
our thoughts to public view, or to say more properly, all those whimsies which
we have conceived in our Studies. It is to do a great prejudice to men of
Learning, to steal from them the time which is so dear to them. It is staying
them to pick out good from bad Writings, that is, to search for some grains of
Gold amongst heaps of Sand. It is to busy the Press about fruitless Works,
which ought not to be employed but in the most excellent: It is, lastly, to
entertain the ignorance of the vulgar, who are not able to make distinction of
Books, and who, many times, being drawn by a specious Title, are afterward
observed to be deeplier engaged in ignorance and error.

Moreover I know that the opinions of the public are very tenderly to be
considered, for every one will ordinarily pass verdict upon other men's Works,
according to the sway of their own passions. Whence it often comes to pass,
that perverse Judgments are made on the most innocent designs. I fancied, that
some would say of me, that I was but in jest, to make sport, that others would
imagine, that I acted herein by some of those motives which I had already
observed, and condemned; and that many also of those who did not absolutely
disapprove of my thought, might say, that it is a thing rather to be desired
than hoped for, that the execution is impossible, and that therefore all the
attempts would be without success. Neither am I ignorant how curious this age
is. That now a days much seasoning is required to the choicest meats; and that
if the most excellent subjects be not accompanied with a studious and elegant
style, they discourage the Readers, and are thrown aside, as merchandise not
worth looking on. And it will be a hard matter for me, at above sixty years of
age, to contrive a style that shall carry with it that air and neatness, which
shall please the refined Wits of our times. But after all, I thought that I
ought not to quit a design so profitable and so important to the public good,
for some objections of small consequence; that the matter ought more to be
looked upon than the Form. I considered that Diamonds should not be thrown away
because they are rough; and that the golden Oar has always its value, although
it has not yet attained to the luster which the Crusible gives it, when its
pure body shall be separated from the dross and earth which soil it. The least
articulate and weakest voices are kindly heard, when employed to advise us of
our good, and to conduct us out of some unsafe course. And perchance it may so
fall out, that some or other of the learned men of this age, excited by my weak
endeavors may worthily accomplish* what I have but rudely essayed: and thus it
often happens, that the unskilful play of some indifferent Musician stirrs up
those who have a more delicate touch to correct the defects of the former by
the excellency of their hands. All these considerations, after sundry debates,
did induce me to upbraid my self in terms not much unlike the poor Leppers of
Samaria, 2 Kings, chapter 7. These wretches having met with great riches and a
quantity of provisions in the Camp, which the Syrians had left behind them,
blamed themselves for keeping close to themselves a good which might relieve
the necessities of all the inhabitants of their City. I have therefore, at
last, taken my Pen in hand to communicate to the Public, the fruit of a
Meditation, to which I have applied my self for a long time.

I have endeavored in this little work to follow a familiar method
accommodated to the humors of all sorts of people; wherein my principal aim is
to make all Christians, even the most weak and ignorant, comprehend the nature
of that Religion which they profess, by bringing it back to its first
principles and fundam^^tal Doctrines: But to attain to this end, it must be
represented in its naked dress, by clearing it from whatsover may render it
obscure, ridiculous and barbarous. I do strive to make my self understood by
all the world and to proportion any thoughts and expressions to the capacity of
every one. To which effect I have divided this small Treatise into three
principal parts: in the first I shall let you see the Nature, the Extent, and
sad Consequences of this lamentable Division, which is among Christians; The
greatness of the Evil should make us know how urgent and pressing is the
necessity of its remedy. The second will discover the Cause of the Evil, by
laying them open even to their very source head. And lastly, the third will set
forth the sovereign and infallible remedy which may be employed for the curing
and heating this grievous wound.

If I perceive that this work is seriously entertained, and that it shall
produce any good fruit, I will bless God for it with all my heart, since it is
only his Glory that I propose for the sole object of my design. And I will
further beseech him to bestow on me so much health and strength, that I may be
able to make this Treatise be followed by two others, which will be of no less
importance: one of which shall be concerning the Counsels which Christian
Princes and States may take to make this enterprise succeed aright, by
preserving their true and lawful interests* and those of private persons. The
other shall be to dispose all those who are out of the Pale of Christianity,
utterly to cast away from them all those prejudices which blindly retain them
in their ancient Religions, and hinder them from seeing the advantages of that
which the Eternal Son of God has given us: so that they shall see how nature it
self, and reason, does powerfully invite them to submit to the Gospel, by a
perfect obedience; and that it is the only means to enjoy a real tranquillity of
mind, and a solid quiet in Conscience. This will sufficiently serve to excite
Christians (after their reunion shall be procured) to contribute on their parts
toward the Salvation of all the inhabitants of the world, with whom they shall
entertain any commerce.

And as there is nothing so repugnant to the design which I have in hand as the
prejudices wherewith it may be look upon: for they are these prejudices which
have so much fomented and strengthened this Division, and which would also be
capable to destroy the fruit that might be hoped for from this project* So I
have, on this occasion, endeav^ured as much as in me lay, not to give the least
hint that should seem to favor any prejudice whatsoever. I have avoided, as a
dangerous rock, giving the least suspicion that I am interested for any party;
and content my self, without taxing any one in particular, to blame in general
whatsoever has caused these Divisions, and whatsoever entertains them at
present. It Is for this reason, that I have not been spurred on to this design
by any motive of Vanity, as to acquire the glory of having undertaken an
enterprise which never any man proposed before; and likewise to take away all
distrusts which my Profession or my Condition might give: For I know well
enough, that if the Protestants did believe that this project had been
contrived by a Roman Catholic, and especially by a Clergy man of that
Religion, they would think partially on it, and that it was already engaged by
interest to favor those of their Communion: and on the contrary, if the Roman
Catholics were persuaded, that it was the work of a Protestant, or of a Greek,
they would immediately reject it. And, without doubt, the aversion that they
have to those whom they pretend are out of the Church, would make them refuse
the most saving remedies, because it would be presented them by a suspected
hand: it is just as a sick person takes not, but with great fear, any Medicine
which is ordered him by a Physician whom he mistrusts. The same might be said
of all other Communions, which are found amongst Christians, they look upon one
another with so much Jealousy and Suspicion, that only the very thought that
so laudable a design had been laid by a person who was not of their Communion,
would be sufficient to make them reject it without any further examination.

But to draw to a conclusion, I doubt not but that some coming to consider the
nature of the remedy which I propose, for the cure of this evil, shall esteem
it but as a thing easy to conceive: that they will say, this Idea was no more
than what any man might have thought on: that it is a project which, at the
first, is very specious, and which finds no great difficulties at a slight
consideration of it, but which will meet with such as are unconquerable, if any
one undertakes to set it on foot. But besides the great advantage it is to have
a means of fancying such an Idea as is accompanied by that of peace and
concord, the only names of which are capable of exciting an abundance of joy in
the hearts of all men; I hope so to unmask this design, and discover such a
face, that all shall understand the foundation, the possibility and great
advantage thereof. For I pretend not to put an end to this great work, without
answering to the principal objections, which may be made against it. And I do
promise (as I have said before) another Treatise, wherein, in case this shall
be favorably received, I will propose a means how to make this project
succeed: I shall let you see how the power and authority of those must be
employed, who are in a capacity of working successfully in it. And I beseech
God to send down his blessing hereupon, and guide all to his Glory, to the good
of his Church, and to the comfort of all those good Souls, who shall sigh after
so holy a Reunion.

ET nunc miror maxim, and usque antehac miratus sum, eo plerosque Christianos
esse ingenio, ut inter se concordiam colere non possint: quod mihi in monstri
loco, esse videtur. Cum enim eam religionem sectentur, qua nihil unquam fuit,
nec unquam erit, aut sanctius, aut simplicius, aut ad humanitatem accommodatum
magis, illi tamen inter se ita vivunt, ut tigres, ursos, pantheras, leonesque,
ac rabiosos canes in unam caveam conclusos dicas. Hincque adeo faclum, ut
jamdiu mihi sit persuasissimum, qui ita sunt, eos nihil minus esse quam
Christianos, etiamsi tales se haberi postulent. Neque enim internecinis odiis,
turpissimis opprobriis, ac atrocissimis calumniis, ferro denique ac flammis, ut
fit, alii adversus alios grassarentur, and amorem Dei, ac proximi charitatem
violarent: queis sublatis nihil aliud fuerit Christianismus quam nomen inane,
and vana aliqua species, quae contemplantis otium oblectet. Id apud me cum
nuper, ut saepe alias, non sine gravissima indignatione dolorem, optato allatus
is it hic libellus sine omni scriptoris nomine; in quo tantam utilitatem reperi,
ut, si quod tam diuturno ac pene immedicabili malo adhiberi remedium possit, id
illius open eventurum esse arbitrer. Eum certe ita probavi, ut repentino mentis
instinctu percussus, meum de illo judicium his versibus incluserim, non sine
votis, ut te, Lector, Christianum esse bona side ostendas. Et siet, spero. ubi
scriptoris mentem and consilium pernoveris.

Marc. IX. (...)

Descend summis,
Pax alma, polis,
Celeresque per aethera purum
Extend pennas,
Frondenti nitidum caput
Impediens oliva.
Jam satis, O nimium satis,
Te juga Olympi,
Et Long a exilia,
Et dirae scelerum facies, ac tristia bella Aversam tenuere.
Aude itaquo oblitas nunc, Diva, revisere terras,
Christiadumque genus genus irritabile, placa.
Concordes illis mittens per pectora sensus.
Laeta redi, Virgo, tecum una Astraea redibit,
M^lliaque inter se traducent otia gentes
Dissidiis odiisque procul. Te turba Acherontis,
Te bellona tremet venientem, and magnus easdem
Sub te, sacra canens, Orbis venerabitur aras.
Fia age, jam cernes divelsa abreptaque membra,
Et corpus lacerum in seeds rediisse priores:
Donique jam Christo redivivum reddere Christum,
Et secura potes: Nam lato limite, fertur
Hic liber, aversosque animos tibi, Sancta, reducit,
Per populos jam juradabis; Te quisque canemus,
Et tua tam densis stabunt altaria donis,
Vt te rellicts ^encant oblivia Coeli,
Et dubites posthac ^um secula laeta videbis,
Sideribus Terrae praestent, an sidera Terris.
THE CONTENTS.
The First Part. Of the Division which is among Christians, and of its
Consequences.
CHAP. I. OF the nature and greatness of this Division. Page 1 CHAP. II. The
first Effect of this Division. Disquiet of mind, and trouble of conscience. p.
15 CHAP. III. The Second Effect of this Division. That it destroys the study of
Holiness, and especially the practice of charity. 26 CHAP. IV. The Third Effect
of this Division. That it makes men irreligious, and causes Atheism. 35 CHAP.
V. The Fourth Effect of this Division. That it keeps back all those who are
without, and breeds in them a dislike of Christian Religion. 44 CHAP. VI. The
Fifth Effect of this Division. Trouble in Church and State.
The Second Part. Of the Causes of this Division which is among Christians.
CHAP. I. THat the frame and temper of men's Minds does much contribute to this
evil. p. 69 CHAP. II. That there has never yet been made a true distinction in
Christian Religion, of what is really essential and fundamental and what is
not. 80 CHAP. III. That men have departed from the true fundamentals of
Christian Religion, to take up others which have nothing of solidity in them,
and which put these divisions among Christians. 88 CHAP. IV. That the dislike
which has been had at the simplicity of Christian Religion, has been an
occasion, that me^ have given it a different ^^^^ct from that which it had in
its ^^^inning. 97 CHAP. V. That many do make use of Religion, to serve their
particular interests, and the advantages of a temporal life. 106
The Third Part. Of the proper means to reunite all Christians into one sole
communion.
CHAP. I. Of the ill means that has been made use of hitherto, for putting a
remedy to the evil of this Division. 117 CHAP. II. The first mean. To lay aside
all prejudices, and to throw off all particular interests, that so nothing may
be proposed by us, but the Glory of God and the Salvation of Souls. 128 CHAP.
III. The second means. That we should not have for our direction, more than one
known and generally approved Rule for all Christians to walk by. 142 CHAP. III.
The third means. Rightly to distinguish between the Doctrines, which the Holy
Scriptures propound to be believed by all true Christians, and what regards
only the outward Government of the Church and its ceremonies. 150 CHAP. V. The
fourth means. To distinguish between that which the Scriptures proposes to us
to believe, as Doctrine of Salvation; that which it delivers to us, as
Histories of things which have happened; and that which it reports to us as
predictions of things to come. 163 CHAP. VI. Fifth Advice. Touching the
Mysteries of Christian Religion, which we must believe, as being revealed in
the Holy Scriptures, and concerning the distinction which must be made of them.
170 CHAP. VII. What ways must be followed to facilitate the execution of this
design. 186 CHAP. VIII. Answers to the Objections, and Difficulties which may
be formed against this design. 199 CONCLUSION. Profits and advantages which
might be hoped for from this Project. 218
THE RE-VNITING OF CHRISTIANITY.
The First Part. Of the Division which is among Christians, and of its
Consequencies.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature and Greatness of this Division.
WHen St. Paul said, That it was necessary there should be Heresies amongst us,
to the end that such as are approved might be made manifest. His words must not
be taken, as if he would by an extravagant Paradox Authorize the diversity of
Opinions in Christianity. For his design was never to favor the Authors of
Sects and Heads of Patties, by imposing silence to those who would remedy
Divisions, and put a stop to their sad consequencies. But he declares plainly,
what we must expect from the ill disposition of the spirits of Men, from the
high esteem which they have of their own sufficiency, and from their
inclination to render themselves considerable, by some singular Opinions in
matters of Religion. He designs by the same means to make us see how the
providence of God, which draws good out of evil, and light out of the thickest
darkness, takes occasion from thence, to distinguish such as appeartain to him:
making appear by this contradiction of sinners, the constancy of the Servants
of God, and their generous resistance to all sorts of temptations and trials.
It is in this sense also, that Jesus Christ declares to us the necessity of
scandals and tribulations arising in the Church; and that he is come to kindle
the Firebrand of War in the World, and to put Divisions in States and
Families, for otherwise the Gospel, which is the Ministry of Grace, and a Word
of Reconciliation and Peace, does not of it self propose any thing, but union,
amity and concord. Nature, although sprung from the same Original with Grace,
has inclinations quite distinct: It is not pleased, but in diversity, and
seems not to subsist but by the contrariety of qualities, which occur in its
works; whereas Grace is not preserved, but by the entire correspondence of
those who ^^ve a share therein, and by the conformity of their Opinions. We
cannot divide our selves in its Principles without destroying it to us. For
such a separation is to give it such grievous wounds, as will force it to
retire from those who are not more careful to improve it by such ways as are
most suitable to its nature.

Now, is it not a most deplorable thing, that an occasion should be taken of
making use of a Doctrine of Peace, for the miserable tearing in pieces a Body,
whose Members ought to be perfectly united? Is it not a shameful thing that
this unhappy Pro and Con should be introduced to make the same havoc in the
Church which it ordinarily makes in the World? Philosophy never saw so many
Sects: Paganism so many different Devotions. Mahometisme so many contradictory
Opinions concerning their Alcoran, as we have Sects, Heresies and Schisms in
Christianity, about the understanding of its fundamental Law, which is the
Gospel. As soon as the sprouts of this Holy Seed began to appear upon the face
of the Earth, we saw at the same time an infinite number of unprofitable and
choking Tares spring up, sufficient to destroy that in its birth, which would
bring with it Salvation and Life. Almost in the sight of the Holy Apostles,
(those Sacred Confidents of our Sovereign Master) there arose such as vaunting
themselves to have embraced his Doctrine, would have represented him after
their fancies, and set him forth as their own whimsies and caprichioes
suggested to them. And presently afterward would make their particular
Sentiments pass for general and infallible Rules, and have pretended that all
others were obliged to submit themselves thereto. Thus the Blood of Jesus
Christ, which still reeking, should warm the hearts of Christians, with a Holy
Charity, as well as with an Ardent Zeal, could not choke the Seeds of these
miserable Divisions. Insomuch that in the Third Age, St. Epiphanius numbers up
Four-score several Heresies, (or rather different Opinions) which had crept in
amongst the Christians, and yet not mentioning the diverse Branches into which
these Heresies were sub divided. There is scarcely any one Article of Faith, or
any speculation of Christianity, whereon strange Opinions have not been
advanced, which in time have made Sects, and different Religions. And we know
that every particular Combination has appropriated to it self the Name of a
Church, and boasted to be the Spouse of the Son of God, to the utter exclusion
of all others. They have also gone further, for besides the Heavenly Doctrine
contained in the Gospel, where they have taken occasion of raising disputes;
They have forged such as have been merely humane, concerning which there has
also been miserable Divisions. And as though these Men had climbed up to Heaven
to consult the very Mouth of God himself, they have Preached up their Doctrines
as Oracles, and Fundamental Truths. After which they have had no great trouble
to engage their Followers to suffer the most cruel Torments, and even Death it
self in defense of their Opinion, and after that have confidently enrolled them
in their own Legend, as Martyrs of Jesus Christ, though they suffered only to
advance the glory and reputation of some Arch-Heretique. So God to chastize the
rashness and confound the vanity of their thoughts, has permitted, that
Division should ruin their work, as heretofore it defeated the insolent
designs of those who would erect the Tower of Babel.

After that we have once forsaken the Royal Road, which God has prescribed us,
we run into all by paths, and separate our selves one from another, each of us
fancying to be in the most commodious and safest way. Can you likewise believe
that a separation is sometimes made about Subjects, not only light and trivial,
but in some sort ridiculous, and which do redound to the shame of those who
made them serviceable to the ends of their Schism and Division? What
contentions have there not been among Christians, namely, on what Day the
Celebration of Easter should be observed; If, in the Communion, Bread leavened
or unleavened should be made use of; If the Body of Jesus Christ was
corruptible after its conception, or not; If we may say that one of the Trinity
was Crucified: If the Church can condemn, and excommunicate one that is dead.
If the Hallelujah might be Sung in Lent, and other Questions of the like
nature? Behold here what are ordinarily the subjects, which cause these most
real calamities. Behold that which separates those; who with one consent should
advance the glory of their common Master.

But to come to our times, and more nearly to touch upon the evil which
troubles us at present, and which has given me occasion of laying open my
sense, to contribute to a Remedy: Is it not a lamentable thing, and of sad
Example, to see Christians so miserably divided, as they are at this Day? For,
to let pass the diverse Sects of Christians, which are in the East, and who have
more cause to grieve for their lamentable Divisions, than for their miserable
state, under the rigorous Yoke of the Mahometans; such are the Greeks of
Armenia and Circassia, the Nestorians, Jacobites, Maronites, Cophtes,
Christians of St. Thomas, etc. People who are looked upon as Heretics or
Schismatics, and who believe that out of their particular communion, there is
no Salvation to be expected; Let us insist only upon this deplorable condition
of the Christians of Europe in these Countries wherein we live. There is no
heart so hard that does not sigh to behold so strange a disunion; There is no
truly Christian Soul, that does not grieve to see the effects of the implacable
sudes and hatreds, which are amongst those who are looked upon as Brethren;
Since they are thereby exposed to the continual insolences of the sworn
Enemies of Christianity.

Since this great breach which is made in the Western Church, by the separation
of the Protestants, from the Communion of the Church of Rome, what Bloody Wars!
How many Murders and Massacres! What changes and subversions is in States! has
there not been seen, insomuch that they have not stuck to have recourse to the
common Enemy to draw in succor against those with whom they should have
entertained a true Brotherly affection? And that which is most deplorable is,
that this division has been followed by an infinite company of others, and as
a fruitful Mother has produced an incredible number of Monsters, which
resemble it. These two great Branches growing out one from the other, have also
sprouting out of them, a vast company of lesser Branches, which although not
equal in strength, bring forth fruits altogether as dangerous as their Mother.
Among Protestants, how many several Sects in Germany, in England, in France, in
the Low Countries, etc.? There needs but some diversity in the habits of
Preachers, some difference in the Ceremonies, or in the Ornaments of Churches,
or of the Government thereof, to form a Sect. A simple dissenting in the
Liberty which every one gives himself of expounding according to his Fancy, the
mysteries which are above his reach, is sufficient to cause a separation. The
manner of explaining the subject of Predestination, and o^ Reconciling God's
Grace with the Motions of the Will of Man, makes us look upon those who are of
a different Opinion, as such People as are in the highway of Damnation, and
with whom we must not enterta^^ any Communion.

Nor may they who have lived in Communion with the Church of Rome insult at
this Division of the Protestants, and pretend that union and concord have
continued amongst them without any division; For although they all submit
themselves in appearance to the Authority of one only Head, and that they look
upon him as the Center, wherein all the Lines of their Society do meet and are
reunited, nevertheless we are not ignorant, how great the number of their
dissentions are, and how little the union is amongst their Doctors. (...) that
if the fear of a Superior Authority seems to retain them in one and the same
Society, their hatreds are but the more fermented within. They do not less
condemn one another of Heresy, and of being out of the way of Salvation. And
the Ex^mples of our Age have shown us, that when oppertunities have been
presented, of making their aversions appear, how far they have carried it,
being always desirous that their particular Opinions might prevail over all
others. Therefore it is not any particular interest that I here endeavor to
advance; But, it is the general interest of all Christian Societies; It is the
good and the union of all those who march under the Standard of the Cross. I
design to reunite together all the Christians of the East and West, Greeks and
Romans, Catholics and Protestants, and all the diverse Branches whereinto these
latter are subdivided.

CHAP. II. The first Effect of this Division. Disquiet of Mind and Trouble of
Conscience.
WEre there no other Evil in this Division, than the very Division it self, and
that deformity which it causes in Christian Societies; Were there no other harm
done by it, than the disfiguring the Face of Christianity, and the blemishing
its beauty that renders it so considerable, it would be so great a cause of
grief, as to oblige us to endeavor, with all our power, to remedy so great a
mischief. But besides all this, this unhappy Division is very fruitful, and
produces infinite evils, as much or more pernicious than it self. It Is like the
Viper, which by a strange self dilaceration, makes a great Number of little
Serpents come out of her, which instantly make their Teeth and Venom appear.
There are some who set upon particular Persons, and others who cause great
disorders in Societies, both secular and Ecclesiastical, as I undertake to make
evident, to every one.

The first effect of this Division, is disquiet and torment of mind, wherein
they ordinarily do plunge themselves, who are engaged in this Laberinth of
diverse Opinions, about matters of Religion; And these Opinions do in time form
the different Sects and Societies which divide all Christians. A Traveller
Journeys with pleasure, so long as his way seems good and plain, and that he is
assured it is the right, that it lies direct, and finds it is not divided into
other different Paths; But so soon as he perceives himself in a cross Road,
where he meets with several tracks, without knowing which of them he should
make choice of; It Is impossible, but that being in this suspense, he must have
a great unquietness and grief of spirit. If all Christians perfectly agreed in
Opinion, that Agreement would be a grand means whereby we might advance with
pleasure toward our happiness; But meeting with this great diversity of
sentiments and professions, wherein every one boasts of possessing the truth,
as by birthright to the exclusion of all others; we must needs be involved in
great perplexity. For to think that we can easily solve doubts, by a careful
and serious applying of our minds to meditation, and by the force of reasoning
and discourse, is a Fallacy, for besides that every one has cause of
distrusting himself amidst this great diversity of Opinions; Seeing that the
clearest Wits, the most profound Doctors, Men of the choicest Endowments, and
such as have the greatest Piety, sweetness and Moderation of Temper, are
oftentimes observed to be separated and divided, the one from the other; I am
assured that many often times in these applications, how zealous soever, nay even
after the most fervent Prayers, be overswayed by the probability of the
Arguments, which every Opinion has produced in its own favor. And I durst say
that when one has so soon determined in this scrutiny, there may be some reason
to suspect so quick a resolution: I am apt to fear that this may often respect
other interests, than those of the glory of God, and our Salvation, which could
so quickly make us bend to them. It many times happens that our Education, our
Customs, our particular advantages, and such other considerations, do easily
turn the Scales. And that indeed which abuses us herein, is, that these are
slipped in so dexterously, and mixed in such a manner in these disputations, that
we cannot discover them, but by strong and frequent reflections.

But let us put the case, that a Man who has an extraordinary light, by the
knowledge of Tongues, and reading of Good Books, may wade through these
difficulties, and sow his doubts among these perplexities. What shall we say
of so many common Persons, who have not had, nor ever been in a Condition to
have, all these so profitable helps, I mean, so necessary for the penetrating
into these profound mysteries, and carrying them through that Labyrinth? Is it
because that Christian Religion is not proposed, but only to the learned? Is it
not as well addressed to the Ignorant, to Women, to Children, and to the poor
unlearned Pesants? Must we not rather say, that it is toward such that it
turns the most Favorable Aspect? That whilst the Doctors are disputing with
great earnestness together, about the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, the
most simple do forcibly take it by the ardour of their Zeal. Therefore what can
we point out more contrary to the Peace and Consolation of these good and
simple Souls, than this great diversity of Opinions, of Sects, and of Religions?

But, if it should be objected, that for want of reading and necessary study to
search, into the most sublime mysteries of Religion, these ordinary People
would be content with what is most plain and most clear in Christian Doctrine,
which will suffice to inspire them with the Love of Virtue, and the fear of
God; and that will be capable to give them peace of Conscience, and all inward
Consolation, that is necessary for them. I shall readily answer that this is
all I demand, and to which I endeavor to reduce all Christians in general. The
Christians Religion is equally proposed to all, and in the distribution of its
Graces, it makes no distinction between the Learned and the Ignorant: The
High-towering Wit, and that which creeps among the Vulgar: As the Remedies and
Medicines which Nature offers us, work in the same manner upon Persons of all
conditions and degrees. So that to be a Man, suffices to qualify us for laying
claim to the advantages which Grace presents to Us in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and to lay hold of the Aids which it gives us, to make Us partakers of
it.

But should it be likewise objected for the clearing this difficult Point, that
those who have not the means and advantage of penetrating into these secrets,
by a deep meditation, may consult the Learned to resolve them, in the choice
which they should make of a good and sure Opinion; Who does not see, in the
first place, that it is not the way to draw them out of the trouble, wherein
they are, seeing they do not address themselves, but to Men who are not
infallible, and who may be prepossessed with prejudices, and have their
particular Interests, so that they shall be always in doubt, whither or no the
advice which was given them, proceeded not from some other Principle than the
Glory of God, the Charity, and desire of promoting the Salvation of Souls.
Moreover, should this address be made to some of those Doctors who follow
different Opinions, upon color they are obliged to examine all things, and
retain what is best: Every one will alledg in his own favor, all the most
plausible Reasons and Considerations which he can, and many times those that
are least valid, are most specious. After this can a Man of mean parts, find
out in himself light enough, and discerning to carry him through those
difficulties, which make a separation amongst Men of far greater parts, and
more refined Judgments than his Own.

But last of all, what shall we say of the poor Labourer or simple Tradesman,
who has ever been bred in a Country, where some one of these Sects prevails?
We know that such a Sect forces those of the Country, perfectly to acquiesce in
it. That it requires every one to submit, without any contradiction to all that
it shall prescribe: That there are some Sects, who suffer not their Followers
to enter into any discussion of what they lay down to follow, and compel them
to a blind obedience. As for Example, what can a poor Soul do, who has been
born in the midst of Italy or Spain, where Reigns a most severe Inquisition, or
in the farthest parts of Denmark, or Swedeland, where are none but Protestants,
when he shall learn that there are other People elsewhere in great numbers, who
are called Christians, boasting themselves to have Truth in its greatest
Purity, and doom all to Eternal Torments who are not of their Opinion? Is it
not certain that a poor Wretch in this condition, not being able to have any
commerce nor conference with those of whom he has been told this, will have so
much more trouble in his Mind, by how much his passion is greater that stirs up
in him a desire of his own happiness? Which makes us see the necessity of
bringing together all Christians under one common Principle: And this Principle
must contain Maxims, easy, intelligible and indisputable. In a word, this
Principle must be such, that it may produce Peace and Inward comfort, and guide
all the Faithful, by the Practice of Holiness, to the enjoyment of an Immortal
Crown.

CHAP. III. The Second Effect of this Division. That it destroys the study of
Holiness, and especially the practice of Charity.
THe Principal design of the Gospel, and I dare say the only one, is to bring
Men by the knowledge of its Mysteries, to the study of Virtue, and to conduct
them by the practice of this Virtue, to the enjoyment of Happiness and Glory.
So that we may say, that the sacred Chain of our Salvation has three Links, to
wit, the knowledge of truths, the practice of virtues, and the possession of
Happiness. And if this Salvation be compared to a Building; The Revelations of
the Gospel, may be said to be the Foundation and Basis of it, Celestial Glory
is the covering, and Virtue that which joins these two extremes together,
making us pass from the knowledge, to the possession of the Object known; where
all our Felicity resides. So that whatever gives any impediment to this
knowledge, the same obstructs the progress of Virtue, and staggers the hope of
Felicity. The first receives no blow, whereof the two others feel not the
Impression. And this is seen in these Lamentable Divisions, which not only cast
us into disquiet, as has been said, but also in disturbing Men's knowledge, they
hinder Holiness, and pervert the practice of Christian Virtues. The principal
part whereof, consists in the Piety and Zeal, which we bring to the service of
God. And the principal exercise of Piety consists in the Sacred Commerce, which
the Faithful entertain with their God, by Prayer. So that whatsoever troubles
our Prayer, the same brings a notable prejudice to a life of Holiness. If then,
as St. Peter teaches us [1 Pet. 3.7.] the idle domestic contentions, which
arise from the want of Unity between Husband and Wife, are capable to interrupt
our Prayers, and blast the fruit of this saving exercise? What shall we say
then of the Contentions which divide the Christian Church, into so many
different Societies? How can we expect that our Christian vows should unite
together to ascend more readily to our common Father, whilst our Opinions, and
consequently our Inclinations remain so contrary?

One of the principal means required for our right observing of Holiness, is
the repose and tranquillity of the Soul: Sweetness also and moderation are
necessary, which make us look upon things without any prejudice, and the
engagement of particular Interests. If then (as we have plainly showed) this
Division throws us into such disquietness and trouble, every one may judge how
prejudicial it is to the notions of true Piety. Is it not certain, that if we
would employ in the study of Piety, and good Works, the time which we allow our
selves, for the examining of all those Questions, which divide us; We should
quickly make great progress in the way which leads to Eternal Life? The Emperor
Antoninus exhorted those who were desirous to advance in the practice of Moral
Virtues, to desist from the reading of Books, chiefly such as treated of
Philosophy, as being only a hinderance to their design. If, said he, any should
persuade thee to read, do thou immediately answer, I have no time, to busy my
head about these things; I have a greater and more important affair in hand,
which requires a Man's whole attendance. My business is to tame my passions,
and to make my self every day a more virtuous Man, and to discharge my
principal duties. May we not in like manner say, to these curious Wits, who
give up themselves entirely to such thorny questions? This is not that whereunto
ye were called, Leave off all these contentions; You lose the most precious
thing in the World, which is your time. Rather study to become a true
Christian, that is, to be humble, fearing God, loving your Neighbor,
preserving your Body in purity, avoiding evil, and continually endeavoring to
edify those with whom you converse.

If Holiness be no other thing than a precious Crown, composed of all Christian
and Moral Virtues, I believe there is none but will grant me that the fairest
flower of that Crown is Charity toward our Neighbor, which St. Paul calls the
bond of perfection, Col. 3. Now this Virtue consists in loving our Neighbor,
as our self; Considering that he bears the Characters of the Image of God; That
we enter both one and the other into the Communion of the same Society, and
that we are called to be made partakers together of one and the same
Inheritance. This admirable Virtue is so excellent, that some, with good
reason, call it tho Soul of Religion, the Fountain of all other Virtues, or to
speak more properly, Virtue it self, which takes diverse Names, according to the
diversity of the Subjects whereon it is exercised. It is called Piety, when it
looks up toward Heaven, to pay Homage to its Sovereign, we call it Charity,
when enclining toward the Earth, it studies to do good to its Fellow Servants;
In a word, it receives the Names of other Virtues, as of Temperance, of
Modesty, of Humility, etc. when it is reflected back upon its self, by the
Motions of that Legitimate Love, which it bears it self. Therefore if this
Monster of Division, be capable to destroy Charity, which establishes the
Essence of Holiness; It is manifest, that nothing can be conceived more
prejudicial to Virtue, than the dis union and alienation of Men's minds. And as
Charity proposes nothing but Peace, Union, and Concord, For its aim is straightly
to tie the knots of a holy amity: There can nothing be so diametrically
opposite to it, as Division, which cutting all these knots, and breaking these
sacred Bonds, does divide all that which should be most united.

To confirm this truth; Let us make a parallel of the effects of this Charity,
which St. Paul thus reckons up, 1 Cor. 13. with those which division produces.
Charity is of a patient spirit, division is turbulent and unquiet: Charity is
kind and bountiful, Division only spreads hatred and malice; Charity is not
envious, but envy raigns particularly in division, where each party respects
the obligation of their proper Interests; Charity is not insolent, nor puffed
up with Glory, whereas Division is fierce, proud, and insupportable; It
inspires those who possess it with a desire to abase and oppress others, if it
be possible, that they may raise up themselves, and Rule without Competitor;
Charity seeks not its own ends, is not dispiteful, and thinks no evil. These
ill qualities are the true Characters of Division, in which it has no other
end, than the advancement of its own party, to the detriment of all others.
Charity rejoices not in injustice, but altogether in the truth: Division
oppresses the truth, and is never pleased, but with unrighteousness, and
violence. Charity endures, believes, hopes and bears all things. Division
causes suspicions and jealousies to arise, gives ill interpretations to
actions, and even to the most innocent words, and drives us into passion and
impatience, into murmuring and extravagances. And to draw the last Line to this
parallel, God grant that as Charity never fails, but is maintained in the very
ruin of all that which is most Glorious, and most firm in Society: so on the
other side, by the rule of contraries, that we may quickly see this unhappy
Division utterly decay and cease, by a perfect uniting of all Christians.

CHAP. IV. The Third Effect of this Division. That it makes Men Irreligious,
and causes Atheism.
IN all Divisions, which tear in pieces Kingdoms and Monarchies, each side at
the first does boast by their Manifestoes and Declarations, that they took not
up Arms, but for the Public Good, and for maintaining the Crown and Authority
of the Prince; And although those Parties be so contrary, and averse, that
their Swords are drawn, and in a readiness to decide their quarrel, yet both of
them have the confidence to allege in their Vindication, the Justice of their
cause, and interest of their Sovereign; whilst in the end, all tend to the
utter subversion of the State, and total change of the Government. And it will
many times happen, in these contests, that the most mutinous and most
sedicious, do make themselves Masters of Sovereign Authority. So is it
ordinarily seen, that in the division of Opinions in Religion, every one
protests, that no other Argument or Interest persuades him to follow the
Religion that he embraces, but the real love of truth, and desire of his
Salvation: All those who would be the promoters and spreaders of some new
Opinion, show an extraordinary Devotion and Zeal at the beginning; But by
little and little all that degenerates, and all the overtures which Division
makes, serve but as so many doors, by which at last, Impiety Irreligion, and
Atheism do slip in. It Is amidst these differences that we commonly see some
new Religion thrust in it self among us, which differs but very little from the
disclaiming of all Religion. Just so was it by means of the diverse Sects, which
heretofore sprang up in the Church, that the Doctrine of Mahomet has taken such
footing in the World; Every one knows how wide the Division of the Eastern and
Western Churches was at that time. And I do not believe but that the great
diversity of Judgments, and Religions, which we see at present in Christianity,
has been the cause of this coldness and want of Devotion amongst us, in what
we call Christian Society. Insomuch that Piety and Religion seem only to be
left in full Authority amongst Women, and the Vulgar.

This Evil arises from hence, that the greatest part of Men either cannot, or
will not give themselves the trouble of searching into these different
Opinions, to determine which they might close with; so they choose rather to
believe nothing absolutely, than to be always in suspense about what they ought
to believe. As the great diversity of Medicines, which are prescribed to a
Patient, do very often make him refuse all, thinking it better to resign up all
to venture at once, rather than stand so long about making his choice of the
Remedies which are proposed to him. Some go toward it, but with such a kind of
negligence and natural sloth, that makes them apprehend a great deal of
trouble in it: And these esteem it better to suspend all manner of action, than
undertake any thing, that requires so much care and intensness of thought
concerning it. These are like lazy Soldiers, who suffer themselves to be
killed, rather than they will courageously take up their Arms, and stand to their
own defense: Or those who, out of a desperate Fury thrust a Dagger into their
own Breasts, for fear, least their Enemy is pressing upon them to do it.

There are others who dare not venture upon this trial, through the distrust
which they have of themselves, and of their own power; They do not feel
themselves strong enough to sustain such a weight, nor able to break through
all those difficulties which they meet with. This obliges some, blindly to
follow the first that is presented them, and suffer themselves to be led by
those, who pretend to have skill herein; Supposing they are in a good
condition, if they put themselves under the conduct of their Leaders: And
others stand Newters, not daring to adhear to any Party, out of a Distrust
which they have, of all such as offer themselves to them; And this it is, that
causes Irreligion and Atheism. Yet are there some, whose Fault is not neglect
of examining these different Questions, but the true Reason of it is, because
they are not indeed capable of it. Such are all Pesants and Mechanics, and
others, who know nothing more, than what belongs to their employments, and who,
being taken out of that, are as if they were in an unknown Country, where they
are ignorant both of the ways and Language: It puts them to a stand, as though
they had neither sense nor Motion; They make all their Devotion, and all the
Service which they should pay to God, to consist in the well observing these
outward actions of Religion, in which they have been trained up. Witness the
poor Christians of Muscovia, all whose Religion is no more than just a showing
to those who desire to be informed of their belief, the Image of some Saint,
which they carry about with them: And others also, who think that if they know
but how to make the sign of the Cross aright, may pass for very good
Christians. Therefore, if, instead of puzelling our selves about so many
questions, and controversies, we would study to bring back the Christian
Doctrine, to its true Principles, which are but few in number, and easy for all
sorts of Persons to comprehend, it would be the ready way to make true
Christians, who would know what is really essential in their Doctrine, and so
would quickly be brought to a true piety, and to the fear of God, which is the
only design of Christian Religion.

Here it may also be added, that this great diversity of Opinions, begets a
strange prejudice in certain Spirits: For there are many who would make us
believe, that truth is so evident and perceivable, by all where it is revealed,
that it shines as the Sun, which dims the light of all the other Stars.
Wherefore they conclude, that if Christian Religion contains those saving
truths that came from God, were brought down from Heaven to Earth, and attended
with Glory and Miracles, it would immediately obscure with its splendor all
seeming truths, which strive to have a counterfeit Luster to resemble it. When
therefore they see that every one of these different Opinions upholds it self
by such probable Reasons, that many are staggered at the consideration of them:
They cannot be persuaded that this Gold is to be found in the Earth, because it
does not immediately discover them its glistering light. And as they cannot
conceive that it is fit for them to remain one moment in suspense of separating
truth from falsehood and error, they forsake both one and the other, to secure
themselves from the danger of being forced to a new change, those Persons would
certainly refuse to take a Sum of Money, if offered them, out of a distrust,
that they should not know the Coins, and that they should not discern false
Money from good; whence we may judge, how great the prejudice is, which this
Division brings to Men's Salvation. An unhappy design, that under the pretense
of an exact search for the truth, destroys the principal effect of Christian
Religion, which is the Salvation and comfort of Souls!

CHAP. V. The Fourth Effect of Division. That it keeps back all those who are
without, and breeds in them a dislike of Christian Religion.
THe preaching of the Gospel, being as it were a public Proclamation, to
invite Men to list themselves under the Ensigns of Jesus Christ: It is
undeniable, that whatsoever obstructs this Holy Summons is contrary to the
intent and purpose of the Gospel, and troubles the establishment of the Eternal
Reign of the Son of God; And this same is one of the principal effects of the
Division of Christians. Those who are without the bounds of Christianity, as
Turks, Jews, and Pagans, may justly reproach us, with the want of a true
understanding amongst our selves. Resolve how to settle (will they say) your
different Opinions, before you go about to persuade us to follow you. First
unite your selves together, and then we will consider whether or no we shall
unite with you. And since unity and verity are inseparable; How, in this great
difference of your Opinions, shall we be assured that you will propound the
truth to us? And certainly there can be no greater scandal to our Religion, in
the sight of those without, than this deplorable Division. The Sieur dela
Boulaye [Chap. 18.] In his Voyages to the Levant, says, That the Turks
perceiving this vicious excess of strife, and multitude of Divisions amongst
Christians, have confirmed themselves, by this means in their own way, and
think God to be the Author of them. It Is by reason of this, that St. Paul says,
[Rom. 2.] That the Name of God is despised, because of us, among the Gentiles.
And yet the bad lives, and extravagances of particular Persons, do not bring so
much Prejudice to Christian Religion, as the Dividents of Opinions in its
Doctrine. Of the first it may be said, that these are but the faults of certain
Persons, whose profession is not answerable to their Religion; That that may be
innocent, though they are criminal, who pretend to follow it. But when the evil
is in the Opinions; It may be thought that the defect is in the Doctrine it
self. So that they have some Reasons to offer their Objections against it, and
to suspect the Truth of the whole. Therefore if it be the purity of the
Doctrine, rather than the deportment of particular persons, that must draw us
to one communion; without all question, that which results from this Doctrine,
will make a greater impression upon Men's spirits, than that which only regards
the manners of some few Men.

It Is generally observed that things are not maintained, but by the aid of
that which first contributed to their production. The same influences of the
Heavens, which made those Seeds sprout up, that the Earth has been entrusted
with, serve likewise to raise the Plants to their perfections. Therefore some
ambitious and unsteady brains have taken occasion by the Division of
Christians, to give birth to a Sect, which has utterly departed from the
Fundamental Principles of Christianity; For it was by the means of this
Disunion, that a new Religion has been formed, and a false Prophet substituted
in the room of the: Eternal Son of God, who alone inspired all the true
Prophets. It is not to be wondered, such Divisions continuing in the Church, if
these poor misled Souls remain confirmed in their Opinions. And since that
which first alienated them from us, still remains; the aversion which they have
to our mysteries, remains likewise. So long as the Roman Armies were well
united, that their Commanders held a perfect understanding amongst themselves,
and their Soldiers were kept in a true obedience and submission to their
Orders: Other Nations endeavored to procure their amity with great eagerness;
They esteemed it a great Glory to enter into alliance with this People, and
many have made no difficulty, to receive their Yoke, to whose Dominion, they
thought all others ought to submit: But so soon as misunderstandings happened
between their Generals and Soldiers, and revolts in the Subjects. Other States
despised their Alliance, and took up Arms against them, plainly seeing that
they were not invincible, since they were subject to Division. Just so, our
disunion makes us an object of the contempt and aversion of all other people.
After this, can we think it strange that so many Exhortations, Sermons, and
Writings, which have passed continually amongst Christians, should make so few
Proselites? In the Apostles time, one Sermon alone converted many Thousands of
Infidels to the Faith. At the end of St. Peter's Sermon Three Thousand Souls,
by Baptism ranged themselves under the Standard of the Cross. [Act. 2] It was
also at this time that all Christians dwelt together with one common accord,
and had all but one heart, and one Soul. At this present we drive back by our
Divisions, those whom we invite by our Exhortations. But if it should be
objected, that the Church makes now great progress in the Indies; I dare say,
with pardon for my Opinion, that these poor people have not yet attained to the
knowledge of our divisions, and that if they should understand them, their Zeal
would quickly wax cold, and all these conquests would be of no long continuance.

When the Protestants first separated from the Communion of the Church of Rome,
so long as they kept an Uniformity in their Opinions, they made mavelous
progress, the Union which was amongst them drew a great part of Europe to their
profession: But so soon as they divided themselves into several branches, they
have put a stop to their conquests, and had no further thought, than to
maintain themselves both those whom they have forsaken, and such as have
forsaken them.

And it is not only from the ill example of this division, that strangers to
the Faith are driven from it: They are led thereunto by the very intrigues and
stratagems of the Christians, who are so separated and divided among
themselves. Their Division creates such animosity one against the other, that
they do their utmost endeavor, to hinder those who have an earnest desire to
embrace Christianity, from entering into any other Christian communion but their
own. There are others who go further, for they hold it as a true Maxim. That
it is better for a Jew or Mohammedan, to persist in his old Error, than to
thrust himself into some of the Christian Societies, which they disapprove. So
that as it is impossible for Iron equally drawn between two Loadstones, to move
either toward the one, or the other. So these different solicitations which
Christians make to draw Infidels to them, leaves them in a neutral state, not
knowing which side they should take, nor to which they should determine their
Judgments.

CHAP. VI. The Fifth Effect of this Division. Trouble in Church and State.
THe Evil of this Division is not limited only to particular persons; but all
Societies, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, have too great a feeling of it:
For we daily see strange Tempests happen in both, which had no other cause for
the forming of them, than this sad disunion. And has not the Church much reason
to complain, that those who are called her Children should tear out her Bowels?
That she can expect nothing but death even from those to whom she has given
life? Since they to whom she continually administers the sacred Milk of her
pure Doctrine, and of her wholesome Instructions, do give her so many grievous
wounds, as they form Sects in her; In multiplying they dismember Her, and each
striving to draw her to their side, at last nothing is seen to remain, but her
mangled and broken pieces. And what is more; these deplorable Relics of the
Church, have likewise been so miserably handled, that she is no longer to be
known; insomuch that they might rather be taken for the parts of some misshapen
Monster, than for the Members of the Divine Spouse of Jesus Christ; washed in
the Blood of her dear Lord, and clothed with the Sacred Robe of his
Righteousness.

But that I may not be thought to aggravate these things, and raise them with
an Hyperbole: Let us but consider the present face of the Church; Is it not
true that we shall have much ado to meet any one of these Societies, (which
call themselves a Church, and attribute the truth solely to themselves,) where
these ill Characters are not to be seen? First, a certain high conceited
Opinion of the Principles they have embraced, which creates in them a blind
persuasion without examining it, and whereof not any solid reason can be given.
Birth, Education, Worldly Interests, and other engagements of this nature,
together with a kind of negligence, and a fear of being accounted inconstant,
and unsettled, if they should turn to another party; These things, I say, have
ordinarily a greater influence for the establishment of them in their Religion,
than Reason and Conscience have: All which is followed by a certain obstinacy,
not to call it self-conceitedness, in maintaining their belief, at any rate
whatsoever. There are those who many times do hazard, on this occasion, all
that they hold dearest in the World, even to their very lives; which passes in
every One of these Societies, for an exquisit Zeal, and an examplary devotion.
Nor is there any one of these Sects, which has not a Catalogue of its
Confessors, and that cannot produce its Roll of Martyrs. But how many are there
of these Martyrs, who if they had been demanded to give a reason of the
Doctrine, for which they made so much constancy appear, would have been
gravelled, and have little to answer to the least argument that might have been
proposed to them? Many times false Opinions are maintained with as much heat,
as the True. Also Illusions and Impostures do make as strong Impression upon
our Spirits, as real Obj^cts. Now this obstinacy draws after it an extreme
aversion to all other Religions, and even to all other Christian Societies: It
either accuses them of blindness, or of stupidity, or of malice. It Is nothing
else, say they, but fleshly interest, that seems a Foundation of their
Doctrine; They reproach them, that their Opinions are altogether destructive to
true Piety; that they hurry Men into Superstition and to Idolatry, or else to
Libertinisme or Atheism. And some there are, who are pointed out by others, as
if they were frightful Monsters. In a word, any protestation, or any
declaration, which they make, that it is the Doctrine they loath, and not the
Persons who take it up; That it is the Error they detest, but that they have
charity and compassion, for such as are misled, is enough with them: Which yet
shall never make me believe, But that the precedent qualities are accompanied
with a great Animosity of Spirit, against those who are not of the same
Opinion. For how can we sincerely love those, whom we look upon as Enemies to
God, and Disciples of Satan, whose Lot and Portion is Hell, where they shall be
made a Prey to the Devils? Are there not likewise very dreadful Examples, in
what manner they have reciprocally treated one another, in those places where
they are mingled together. The weak employ such arms as are most convenient
against their Adversaries, which are injuries and reproaches; the powerful
straight pass to action; there is no craft nor subtilty, no violence nor
cruelty, which these People s^t not a work, utterly to exterminate such as
follow a different profession from theirs. The Roman Catholic persecutes the
Protestant, in those places where he is strongest. The Protestant, he requites
him where he has the Power and Authority in his own hands. And amongst
Protestants, those who are of different Opinions, are not treated more
favorably. Heretofore the Christians complained much, that the Pagans would
force them to sacrifice to their Gods, and quit their Religion. [ Tertul.
Apolog. 28.] They grounded not their complaint on any other Reason than this,
that Religion, as they affirmed, ought to be an act of a pure and free Mind.
But now a days Christians do the same thing toward Christians. We have seen
times, where tortures and the cruelest punishments, have been used by
Christians, for afflicting other Christians, and for no other cause but their
not being of the same judgments and persuasions. And now after this, who can
take it ill that I have no more represented the Church, as the Ship which the
Son of God conveyeth safe amidst the storms, wherewith she is continually
battered; But to the lamentable wracks of a Vessel, dashed in pieces, not by the
rage and fury of contrary Elements, but by the negligence of those within her,
and misunderstanding of her Conductors.

This Evil is also very communicative; It Is like a Gangrene, which never stays
in one place, but corrupts all the neighboring parts; States, and all Bodies
Politic are very sensible of the effects of this Division. We might say of
this evil, as of the Leprosy described by Moses, that it not only infects Men,
but the very Towns and Places where they dwell. I dare affirm, that of Thirty
Wars, which have happened in Europe, within these Hundred and fifty years, five
and twenty have had the differences of Religion for the occasions of them, or
at least, that they have either been accompanied or followed by some Interests
of Religion. If any would throw the Apple of Discord into a Nation, to trouble
it, and raise civil Wars at home, to the end, that Foreiners might have an
opportunity of attacking it; They need but use means to cause some differences
to be moved about the Government of the Church; Find some fault with the
Ornaments of the Altars; Cloth in a different manner those who are to
administer Divine Service; or introduce some diversity in the Liturgy, and in
the Public Prayers. This will be sufficient to disturb the Peace of a Nation,
and absolutely turn it upside down. Examples of this are so fresh, and so
dreadful amongst us, that I need not produce them to confirm what I lay before
you. If we would favor the Rebellion of any Country, or back the pretensions
of some Usurper; It Is but publishing that the reason why we take up arms in
their favor, is to give Liberty to weak and tender Consciences, and to be
instrumental, in giving poor distressed Christians a freedom of praying to God
Almighty, and to perform all the Exercises of Devotion without constraint.
There is nothing impossible to be effected under this specious pretense: There
is no manner of excess and violence, which on these occasions they do not dress
up in the Cloak of Piety and Zeal. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.

Moreover, there are no sewds to be compared to those which spring from
dissenting in Religion: And till these cease, and an union be made, we must
never expect to see that the States of Christendom, should agree together, to
resist the common Enemies of their Profession. and put a stop to their
progress; Who prevail by means of our Divisions, and advance their Conquests by
help of our misunderstandings. If one only place situate in an Island, which
was all Enemies to it, were capable to withstand, for so long a Time, the whole
Ottoman Power: What would it do, if the Armies of all Christians were joined
together to Repress the insolency of an enemy, detesting so much the Name of a
Christian? I am persuaded that he is not victorious, but because we do not
defend our selves. He gains no ground, but merely for want of our Opposition;
and gives us no wounds, but by those gashes which woe give our selves. If we
would stir by Agreement, for the glory of our common Master, all those
advantages which we promise our selves, from the Victories we gain over our
Fellow-brethren, are not comparable to those which would accrue to us by our
Conquests of strangers. And let not those Christian Princes, whose Territories
lie far distant from Constantinople, flatter themselves in their own thoughts,
with the advantage of their situation; For those Frontiers, which serve at
present for a Bulwark to Christendom, being once mastered by the Turks, they
will easily force a passage into the heart of the most remote Countries. If they
but once have a liberty of entering upon our Borders and Confines, they will
soon strike up an Alarm within the very Bowels of Europe; And it is too well
known, how some of these parts have lately been weakened. I wish with all my
heart, that the Drums and Trumpets of these Infidels, may be a means to gather
Us once more together, and be as a signal to put us in mind of uniting our
selves quickly, and laboring altogether for our own preservation.

In the last place, this consideration might be added to the precedent ones, to
make us see the Evil, that this Division causes in States. Let us suppose that
in a Kingdom, or any other Christian State, those who Govern it, should
perceive that they have been mistaken in the Opinion; which they have held; and
that seeing they have not the truth on their side, they are in danger of losing
their Souls. I dare affirm, that the Nature of this Division is such, that it
would be almost impossible to procure their own Salvation, and the Salvation of
those who are under their Authority. The Interests of State are so mixed, and
woven with those of Religion; The intrigues and alliances, which are made with
those of the same communion, are so strong, that in going about to separate
them, it would endanger a loss of all. As for Example, who does not conceive,
that if a King, who is a Roman Catholic should come to believe that the
Foundations of his Religion are not sound, that (as the Protestants alledg)
they contain certain Principles that are prejudicial to the Salvation of Souls;
this Prince would not meet with impregnable difficulties to set his Conscience
at rest? Is it not certain that so soon as he should discover his Thoughts, his
Subjects would rise up in Rebellion against Him? The whole Body of his State
would oppose his Designs, and his Allies would forsake him, to side with that
Party, that should be against Him? The same might be said of Protestant
Princes. The Politicians, who oppose themselves to any change or innovation in
Religion, of what nature so ever it be, who look upon it as a Flame that must
be quenched in the instant, would render all the endeavors of a Prince
unprofitable, that should have any such thoughts. Therefore by this it is
evident, that it is the Ground and Interest of all Christian States, to
endeavor the healing of these Divisions; as well for their own subsistence and
preservation, as for the safety and quiet of the Consciences of those who
Govern them.

THE REUNITING OF CHRISTIANITY
PART II. Of the Causes of this Division which is among Christians.
CHAP. I. That the Frame and Temper of Men's Minds does much contribute to this
Evil.
WHatsoever things pass through the Hands of Men, they always savor of that
quality which is predominant in them; As Waters take their Tincture, from the
Channels through which they run; if the Channels be impure, the Waters quickly
lose that Purity, which from the Fountain Head they derived. So Christian
Doctrine, the same which was given us by the Son of God, and proposed to us by
his Apostles, is most pure and most Holy: But it has been much abused by the
ill qualities of such as have handled it, since those blessed Times; It has
passed through soul hands, which have made it lose much of its Original Beauty.
The Universal passion, and that which chiefly raigns amongst Men, is Vanity and
Pride; and that likewise is it, which has given the first soil to Christian
Doctrine. There have been some, who have thought it too plain and too course,
for Wits higher than the common Level. Every one of those who have fancied
themselves to have any degree of Light above others, have had a mind to cloth
it after their own mind. Many have believed that they had a right to interpose
their Judgments in the most profound Mysteries; Yea, some have been so rash and
bold, as to add of their own Heads, what they esteemed necessary to its
perfection: and this it is that has given a beginning to the great diversity of
Opinions, which are at this Day in Religion.

Hence has it come to pass, that some learned Doctors having made the first
advance of their particular Opinions in Religion, others coming afterward
(thinking no less of themselves than the former) have taken a liberty of
examining their Tenants, and have further thought they were obliged to
overthrow them, and establish others, by which means they hoped to make
themselves famous, in being the Authors of a new Opinion, and Founders of a
Sect. The first carried by the same Motive, which at the beginning had induced
them to propose new Doctrines, were not willing to recant them; For it is not
so much the persuasion of the Truth, of what they have broached, that obliges
Men to persist in it, as the fear and shame of disowning that which they have
once asserted, and that new-comers should be able to discover their faults, and
teach them any thing. So that every one standing up for their own Notions, and
being unwilling to let themselves be run down, and vanquished; This impertinent
self-conceitedness, has laid the Foundation of these great Divisions.

This Evil might in some measure have been suffered, if such had been contented
to declare their Opinions, as the mere productions of humane Wit, and if
particular Persons keeping them within their own breasts, had left others the
liberty of examining them, either to receive, or reject them, according to the
judgment that they should make of them. But as when some thinking they want
credit to establish what they are desirous to put in practice, have commonly
recourse to a superior Authority, whereby they procure that to pass in their
favor, which otherwise would not have been considered of: So every party
contending in matters of Religion, and not believing themselves sufficiently
strengthened by their own Reasons, and Authority, does presently declare it to
be the Interest of God, and his cause that they defend, and every one of th^se
particularly, protests that whosoever rejects what he delivers, rejects the
Heavenly Doctrine, throws down the Pillars of Christian Religion, walks out of
the true Church, and exposes himself to Eternal Damnation. So that drawing thus
straightly the Bonds which should engage Men's Consciences, in their Parties
they have occasioned particular animosities, widened the Division, and rendered
the Evil more incurable. For whither will not the Wit of Man carry him, when he
shall be possessed with an Opinion, that whatsoever he does, tends to the Glory
of God, and the Salvation of his own Soul?

There are two different sorts of Spirits, to whom the Doctrine of the Gospel is
proposed, the first are bold and active; the second timorous and always very
distrustful of themselves: The former easily undertaking to establish new
Opinions, and to give beginning to Division; the latter contributes not a little
to the fomenting and increasing of it, through their timorousness and facility,
not daring to depart from what their Predecessors have prescribed them. And as
in Seditions the froward and busy Spirits are they which raise the tumults, and
stir up others; and the Rabble being prepared by some artificial and plausible
Declaration, finish the disorder, by the liberty which they give themselves, and
is allowed them by the grand Mutineers: So it is in Religion; for the ordinary
People being naturally ignorant, cannot hit upon the right way, but by chance;
It must be their great good fortune, or to say better, a Divine conduct which
must guide them to it, and not any choice or search of their own. And yet it is
the most inferior sort of People, that are the fiercest and most eager in
maintaining the Religion which they blindly follow, and whereof they for the
most part have but little knowledge and understanding. Tertullian complains, in
his Apology, that the Pagans condemned the Doctrine of the Christians, which
they were ignorant of: and how many Christians are there now a days, who
condemn the Opinions of other Christians, without knowing them? It Is therefore
from this popular and blind passion, that the Grand Leaders and Politic Heads
of Factions serve themselves to strengthen their Sides, advance their designs,
and take away all means of Reconciliation between party and party.

Now these Heads of Sects, and all those, who following their principles,
pretend to have a share in their Glory, do play another Game, to attain more
easily to their Ends; which is this: they strive many times to engage the
Politicians in their Cause, making them believe that their Doctrine is the most
proper to hold the common people in subjection, and in obedience to their
Superiors; that it prevents all kinds of Insurrections, Seditions, and
Rebellions. In effect, I believe there is scarce any Sect of Christians, which
does not boast to have this advantage above others; they tax all those who
oppose their Tenets with building upon such Foundations, as are only fit to
bring disturbance upon States, and to alienate the affections of Subjects from
their Princes; at least they affirm that others have Principles which do not
press home enough this Article, of the obedience which is due to Magistrates.
It Is well known what the Roman Catholics say of the Doctrine of the
Protestants on this Subject; It Is also well enough known on the other side, how
the Protestants reproach them, by Reason of the power which they seem to give
to a Foreign Nation to Conquer such as deny Obedience to the Pope's Authority.
Whence it comes to pass, that according to the Face which the Politicians set
on these things, they favor those, whom they suppose do contribute most by
their Doctrine; to the peace and quiet of States, which is their Sovereign
good. Likewise when a Religion is once established in any State, it is the
prudence and care of those who govern, that makes them hinder a change, by
reason of the great disorders which may arise from it. Therefore those Doctors
who have no other aim, than that of maintaining the Opinions which they have
established or embraced, do most of all their endeavor to bring into disgrace,
with the Magistrates of their Country, all of different Tenets from theirs.
They make them believe that all those who are not of the same mind with them,
go about to undermine the Foundations of Religion, that they might substitute
another in its room; Thus by their subtilty they Arm the Secular Power,
against those who would promote Doctrines perchance were innocent, or better
Founded than theirs.

CHAP. II. That there has never yet been made a true distinction in Christian
Religion, of what is really Essential and Fundamental, and what is not.
ALthough the minds of those who have embraced Christianity, may be diversely
disposed; yet they all agree in this one Point; that there are certain
Doctrines in Religion which are Essential, and Fundamental, and others likewise
of less importance. They all acknowledge that there are some, from which they
cannot depart, without doing a manifest prejudice to Religion, and to the
Salvation of Souls; and that there are also others, to which they may adhere
without wounding their consciences. But there could never yet any Boundaries be
agreed upon, which should be established for the right settling all People in
their proper and natural Limits: Every one would make his own Opinion pass for
Fundamental, and absolutely necessary to Salvation. Whereas had we but well
distinguished betwixt these two sorts of Doctrines, had we but laid good
Foundations to keep these Tenets hereafter from being confused, this Evil of
which we complain, might easily be remedied, and all Parties might be
Reunited, as I undertake to make appear to You, in the Third Part of this
Treatise.

In the mean time, who does not evidently see, that for want of knowing rightly
how to distinguish between these two sorts of Doctrines; the greatest part of
the Divisions which are amongst Christians, is observed to arise? How many
questions are there, as unprofitable as curious, which have made a separation
in Men's Judgments? How many persons, without ever having exammed or understood
them, have sided some with one, and some with the other, only that they might
not be suspected to be without Religion, without Devotion, and without
Knowledge? How many Disputes likewise are there, which have no other Foundation,
than certain different terms and expressions, whilst all agree in the
substances, and make all their quarrels but about words? It Is certain, that
would they examine the Foundation of their Contentions, without passion, and
without prejudice, they would be ashamed for having lost so much time, and
expressed so much heat about a thing which merited it not. Every one knows how
many disputes the subject of Grace has caused amongst the Roman Catholics.
It Is well known with what ardour the Defenders of an Irrespective Science,
which they attribute to God, have maintained their Doctrine against those who
establish an Absolute Decree. This is that which has formed two Parties amongst
their Doctors; This Difference has continued, and is renewed in our time
betwixt the Jansenists and the Jesuits, although under other terms. There is no
person ignorant, unto what a degree of Division they have come about this
business, and the strange consequences which are apprehended from it. In the
mean time, how a new Doctor who has caused the Memoires of Grace to be
printed, maintains that all the difference, is but only in words. He undertakes
to put an end to it, by showing that they all agree in the Foundations, and are
all in the same mind with St. Augustine, Fulgentius, St. Thomas Aquinas, all the
School men, and the Council of Trent. If it be so, who will not suspect, that
the like thing may not possibly have happened, in many other points, wherein
(to our misfortune) different Opinions have made a separation and division?

I place in the rank of Questions, which are not essential and fundamental in
Religion, such as are made about the business of the Government of the Church,
and the Ceremonies instituted for ruling the exterior part of its Worship. For
how much stir has been made concerning those things, which have no other
ground, than the general Rule proposed by St. Paul, namely, That all things be
done with Order and Decency in the Church! It Is sufficient thersore, that in
these Matters, we have always before our eyes, that which may advance the Glory
of God, and edify his Church. For indeed we may dress in a different manner,
the proper means for obtaining so good an end. The use and application of this
general Rule, might be left to the Liberty of each particular Church, to do
what they should judge most expedient, according to the Circumstances of the
Place, times, dispositions of Men's Spirits, and such like. They should only
take heed of introducing in these things some practice, which might be directly
opposite to any of the essential and fundamental Doctrines. Some require that
the Teachers of the Church should be equal, and others would have a Superiority
and Inferiority amongst them. Some are for an outward Pomp in the Church, and
others would have a great plainness. Some believe that the Ornaments of the
Places of Devotion, breed a respect to the exercise, and others think that the
meanness of the place, takes off the thoughts of the faithful from material
carnal things, to lift them upward to those which are Celestial and Divine.
Some love Music, and the sound of melodious Instruments in Divine Service: and
others say, that it disturbs the mind, and carries away the devotion, which
should be fixed in those Holy places. Some are of Opinion that the Riches of the
Ministry, their Train, and outward Pomp, gains them the veneration of the
People, who are apt otherwise to despise them: Others judge that the poverty and
simplicity of the Ministers of the Church, does better accord with the Genius
of the Gospel, and produce more saving effects in the minds of Men, than all
Worldly splendor. It is in these kinds of Questions and Differences, that I
shall let you see we should bear one with another; for I hold, that there may
happen occasions, where one of these practices may be most expedient, and most
edifying, and others, or that which is opposite to it, may likewise prove of
very great benefit; always provided, that order and decency be preserved; Thus
must there be a mutual Toleration amongst Christians, and a charitable and
brotherly support one toward another.

CHAP. III. That Men have departed from the true Fundamentals of Christian
Religion, to take up others which have nothing of Solidity in them, and which
put these Divisions amongst Them.
It Is a general Opinion amongst all Christians, that it is from God alone that
we must receive the Articles of our Faith, and the Rule of our Actions. They
agree also in this, that it is in his Word, contained in the Old and New
Testament, that those two things are comprised, and that it is from thence, as
from two Fountains, that they must be drawn down to us. The Councils
themselves, namely those which are called General, and to which some Christians
do attribute as much authority and infallibility, as to the Holy Scriptures,
confirm this truth. For they have never undertaken to decide any point of
Religion, but by the Holy Scriptures, They have concluded that they ought to
ascend up thither for establishing of any Doctrine, which must have power and
authority amongst Christians. And yet have we departed insensibly from this
principle. We have quitted this saving Tenet, by attributing to Man, that which
is not due, but to God alone. We have made such Doctrines as are merely humane,
to pass crowded amongst those which are handed down to us from God. Just as
they put off false Money by making it glister as much as may be, and then
mixing it amongst such as is current Coin, that it may not be suspected. This
is it that has given scope to contentions, and afterward been the grand cause
of Division. Some have been of Opinion that whatsoever specious pretenses, and
whatsoever plausible names have been given to the decisions of the most famous
Assemblies, are all this while but Humane Sentiments, which ought to be
examined before they are received. They say that they are but particular Men,
who have proposed their Opinions in these Assemblies; That many times in these
occasions, it is the credit, readiness of wit, eloquence, or some force of
argument more specious than solid, which makes these Opinions pass for Articles
of Faith. That those particular Persons who compose these Assemblies may be
mistaken, notwithstanding all their Lights and Knowledge; That by consequence,
a Company of them, how numerous soever they be, are subject to defects, and to
the errors of the Members whereof they are composed. Lastly, That the very
diversity which is sometimes sound in the decisions made by them, justifies
enough their Opinion, and makes us see that all these decisions are subject to
trial. Others who are of a different sense, maintain that without the decisions
of the Councils, we should have but an imperfect Rule of our Belief. That the
Holy Scripture does not comprehend all that which is taught us in the Church.
That there are also many things in the Holy Scriptures, that have need of
explaining and interpretation. That on these occasions, there is none to whom
we can have better recourse, than to the Church, to whom God has promised the
ordinary conduct of his Spirit. That the Church cannot make her Voice be better
understood, and declare to us her sense, in a fashion more authentic, than
when she is represented, and as it were united in these Solemn Assemblies. They
are persuaded, that when such an Assembly is lawfully gathered, it does of
Right enjoy an Infallibility, equal to that of the Holy Scripture, that it is
God himself, who speaks as much in one, as the other.

In the mean time both one and the other, agree in this point, that the
Scripture is infallible, that it is the foundation of the truth, and the
sovereign Rule of all Holiness. The latter also pretend, that although they
plead in favor of the authority and infallibility of the Church, they find
argument enough in the Scriptures, for maintaining their doctrine, and
confounding of Error. But let us, for the present, lay by this controversy of
the Authority of the Church, and return back to that principle, which all agree
upon. It may be we may draw Rules and Directions enough from thence, so that we
shall not be obliged to enter upon this other Dispute; which shall be more
particularly examined in the third Part of this Treatise. Let us therefore only
hear what Tertullian says upon this Subject. Apolog. Chap. 47. Where giving a
Reason of the Divisions which he saw in his time about Christian Religion; He
says that, Those who have separated themselves from the Communion of the
Church, have in the doing it, violated their faith to Jesus Christ; For he it
is that has taught us the rule of truth, which he caused to be delivered to us
by those holy Men, who had the happiness to hear his Word, and receive his
divine Instructions; That all which is not conformable to that Rule, has been
invented by new Doctors, who came not till after those Blessed Disciples of the
Son of God. In this manner has this worthy Man ascended up to the very
Fountain Head of this Evil, and discovered the Original of those miserable
Divisions. And St. Augustine in that remarkable passage against Maximin the
Arrian, Let us lay aside (said he) all prejudices which we may conceive, I from
the Council of Nice, and thou from that of Arimini; Let us both one and the
other be guided by the Authority of the Holy Scripture, which is no partial
witness, but is as well common to one, as to the other.

Therefore, as when a Man has once given way to some dangerous Principle, what
care soever he takes to avoid the ill consequences thereof, he is sure to fall
insensibly upon them. Likewise whatsoever corrective may be brought for the
taking away from the Antimony its malignant qualities, there shall nevertheless
break forth some ill effects of it: So this Doctrine being once settled, that
Men must be consulted and followed, concerning the Articles of Faith, we do
give them by little and little an Authority, which appertains only to him, who
is truth it self. The consequence of which is, that we become in a condition of
acquiescing blindly on whatsoever the Caprichio's of Men can invent in matters
of Religion. Every one believes himself to have as much right herein, as his
Companion; Every one endeavors to make his particular Opinions pass for
essential truths; Every one condemns as Heretics, and as People out of the
way of Salvation, all those who do not submit themselves absolutely to their
Rule: In brief, every one maintains, that there is no true Church, but that
which receives the Opinions, which he has promoted, to whom alone belongs the
Right of Governing all that which concerns Religion. And although many make a
difficulty of attributing insallibility to the Church; nevertheless they hold
that they ought to submit to these decisions, at least, if they themselves
cannot pass for Deciders. All which has much contributed to the forming of
Division, and to the fomenting it, after it is kindled.

CHAP. IV. That the dislike which has been had at the simplicity of Christian
Religion, has been an occasion, that Men have given it a different aspect from
that which it had in its beginning.
I Do not believe that there is any Christian, who will not agree with me, that
Christianity was never more pure, more Holy, and more proper to induce its
Professors to Virtue, than in its Birth. That was a time wherein the saving
Principles of the Gospel, were only received from the mouth of the Son of God,
and from those holy Men whom he had inspired. This was the true Golden Age of
the Church, abounding in Saints, in Confessors, and in Martyrs. And I believe
that this truth will also be granted me, that then at that time when Christian
Religion was so pure, and exempt from Error, its Doctrine was also most simple
and most naked; It was free from all those subtle questions, which some caused
to be statted up in the succeding Ages. It was not subjected to the burdensome
observation of so many Ceremonies, which are as strange habits and ornaments,
wherewith it has been since clothed. There are to be found amongst us two
sorts of Persons, which have much contributed to this Evil. The first are those
subtle Spirits, who besides their own natural wit, are still more refined in
the Schools of the Philosophers: The second are such as are pleased at some
show and appearance, who have not yet been able to quit the inclinations,
which the World has inspired them with for these outward things, and who cannot
forbear the having some esteem for the pomp of the Jewish and Pagan Ceremonies.
The first sort have thought that Christian Religion would be much more
considered, if it should contain many Mysteries, which were obscure and
difficult to comprehend; Judging, that as plainness causes contempt, obscurity
would gain it respect and veneration. They have formed difficulties upon all
the points of Religion, to exercise their wits on, and to show their skill and
learning, which they bring with them from the Schools. They have caused doubts
to arise from the things which are most easy. In a word, they have changed the
Christian School, into a School of Branglings and Disputes. Which heretofore
caused a certain Person to say, that the Philosophers had been the Patriarchs
of the Heretics.

The other Spirits, who are for having some show in Religion, fancy that if the
Christian Church, were but reduced into the simplicity which it had in its
first rise, it would have but a few Followers. They see that Men naturally do
love that which pleases the Senses, and which conveys devotion into the heart,
by the Eyes and Ears. It is from this notion, that all these several different
Ceremonies are crept in amongst us, which we see practiced among Christians.
They have retained Jewdaisme, nay more, they have brought in such Paganism, as
they have deemed most proper, to imprint, by outward objects, some inward
Motives to Devotion and Zeal. They have imagined that they could with profit
make use of those things, which the others abused. They have supposed, that
that was the way to sanctify the profane Vessels of the Egiptians, and bring
back that to its true use, which nourished the Pagan Superstition.

In the mean time, how specious soever the Reasons and Pretenses are which one
and the other alledg in their own favor. These are they who have given the
first stroke to the Peace and Union of the Church. For if at first, they had
religiously kept themselves to the small number of Rules, which the Gospel
prescribes us; they had never soparated into so many Sects, as have been
formed, concerning such questions as the curiosity of Men has caused to be
raised. Jesus Christ tells us, that his Yoke is easy to bear. He invites all
even to the very little Children to believe in Him; which he would not have
done, if the Faith had certainly brought with it all those abstruce Rules and
Mysteries which are proposed to us now. The Holy Scriprures do present but very
few Doctrines, in comparison of the Exhortations to Virtue, which are there
made us. And the Gospel is not given us, but that we should believe that Jesus
is the Messiah, and that in believing it, we may have life through his Name:
John 20. To be lawfully Baptized, It is sufficient to believe from the Heart,
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: Acts 8. Saint Paul reduces all his
preaching to this only Point. That Jesus Christ is the Messiah, foretold by the
Prophets, that he was to be crucified, and rise again from the dead, Acts 17.
The same reports that the extent of his knowledge is to know Jesus Christ, and
Him Crucified. The Epistle to the Hebrews, requires not more of him that would
approach near to God, but the knowledge of two things; that there is one God,
and that he is the Rewarder of those who seek after Him. And St. James makes
pure Religion, and blameless before God, to consist in visiting the Widow and
Fatherless in their afflictions, and in keeping themselves from being defiled
by this World. As if they would have said, that the Principal design of
Religion is, to bend all ones study to Sanctity, to Purity, and to Charity. The
Creed of the Apostles, contains whatsoever is Essential in the Rules of
Christian Religion. And what that teaches us is sufficient for the Consolation
of our Souls, and to induce us to a holy Life. Let us but examine all the
Apologies of the first Christians, written on purpose to discover their
Opinions in Religion: They justify all that which I assert. They comprehend
but a very few Articles of Faith, as concerning the existence of God, the
Incarnation of our Lord, his Birth, Life, Death and Resurrection. Hence it is
that they have defended themselves from the accusations which were brought
against them, that they have resisted the strongest temptations, and sustained
with courage the most violent Persecutions. If they had continued in that
course, and had not consulted the Schools of Plato and Aristotle, concerning
the Rules of Religion, there had been no change made; then had there been no
separation in Christianity. If the wit of Man had not been ambitious to mix his
own, with the Divine Oracles, the Church would have still been in its
innocence, and in its purity: Such are all these new Opinions, which being
destitute of the evidence of truth, have separated Men's Spirits, and caused
this unhappy Division.

And as to this matter of Ceremonies, and of the outward show of the Church; If
they had considered them as simple Ornaments, which are nothing of the Essence
of Religion; If they had not multiplied them to so vast a number. If herein,
they had kept up themselves to the simplicity of their practice in the
Primitive Church. They had had no occasion for any contests concerning these
things, and every one might have easily found wherewithal to be satisfied. But
since they have without measure, increased the number of Ceremonies; So that
they have not left Christians the Liberty of making the least step in Religion,
without upholding it by some Ceremony; They have put things to a trial; Every
one has pretended to have a right to speak his sense thereof, which has made
many to separate, and given occasion of Division.

CHAP. V. That many do make use of Religion, to serve their particular
Interests, and the advantages of a temporrl Life.
THe greatest Evil which Reigns in Society, is, that a right distinction has
never been made between the solid and true goods, and those which have no
foundation, but in the imagination of Man. We often prefer a Worldly interest
before all the advantages of the Soul, and the hopes of that which is to come.
Sometimes also after a most wicked and detestable manner, there are those who
make Religion, and an appearance of Devotion, serve for the obtaining or
preserving some temporal and passing good. Insomuch, that as it is from this
particular interest, which contentions do ordinarily arise, it must not be
thought strange, if being mixed in Religion, it causes separation and division
there. Religion is but the specious pretext which these People make use of, for
advancing their affairs, and establishing their fortunes in the World. It Is no
more to them than an accessory to attain to their principal, which is their
aggrandizing and making themselves powerful. And since it is not the glory of
God which they propose to themselves in Religion, we must not wonder, if God
permits Discord to ruin a design, the motives whereof are so vile and so
shameful. When a Religion is once established in an Estate, the most do not
examine whither or no it be well founded in its Rules; and whether it
contribute to the salvation of all. Every one consults whether the profession
which is made thereof, may be accomodated to the posture of his own affairs,
and to the subsistence of his Family. The most principal Persons of the State
think they ought to maintain it against all others, at what Price soever. They
think, that if they should leave to private Men a Liberty of examining it,
there would happen a great deal of trouble by the contradiction of those who
might oppose it. So that it is not at all any Pious Motive, which incites them
to maintain that Religion which bears the sway, but an Interest merely
Politic and Worldly. It is not the advancement of God's glory, and defense of
the truth, which they propose to themselves: It Is their own advancement, which
they endeavor to manage by the Rules of Humane Prudence; and this Prudence
ordinarily suggests to them, not to exercise any but an outward Devotion for
the attaining of their Ends. Whence it comes to pass that God (cursing this
conduct) permits, in despite of all their prudence, some bold Spirits to arise
up amongst them, who freely discover their Opinions; daringly publish the
defects of that Religion, which bears so much sway, make themselves heads of
Factions, and sow Divisions not only in the Religion, but likewise in the
State. I leave it to those who have but the least insight into the History of
our Times, to make proof of this truth, by examples known to every one.

The Interests of private Persons do not work with less power on their spirits,
than the Interests of a State busy the Politicians who govern it: And their
passions likewise do not contribute less to the disorders and divisions in
matters of Religion. How many are there, who coming to establish themselves in
a Country, where diverse Religions are tolerated, do presently question which of
these Religions they ought to follow; whereupon they consult this kind of
Prudence, which obliges them to find out that profession which is the
probablest to turn best to account. If there be any Great Man in the State, and
they expect some support or protection from Him; They take special care not to
throw themselves into any communion which their Protector shall not approve of.
They particularly incline to engage themselves in the Religion of the Prince,
whom they are more afraid of offending, than their own Consciences. Others
there are likewise, who although they see one of these Communions less
considerable in the State than the other is, by reason of its weakness and
small number of Followers, will not yet forbear to list themselves there,
merely for some carnal Interests; It Is very often ambition, and the desire of
Rule, which carries them thither, they hope to acquire more reputation, in
having some eminent employment in a simple Barge, than if they were thrust
amongst ordinary Seamen in a great Fleet. They make a large preamble to those
of their Party, telling them a fine story how they are disinteressed and
disengaged of all things that may receive a temptation, and might make them
hope for any advantage in the world: They declare that they have preferred a
Religion abandoned and persecuted, before one wherein they might have had
sufficient profits, and advancements; And if they obtain not speedily what they
aimed at, they let them know that they are powerfully solicited to forsake
them, and that their falling off will cause a considerable Rent amongst them.
These People draw false conclusions from their false Principles, as if ambition
and self-interest did not many times work by occult ways, and under false
pretenses; and as though Men traveled not sometimes to a vain glory by back
ways, and to advance their affairs in the World, under the mask of Zeal and
Devotion; and these are chiefly such as make the greatest noise in their
Society: These are they who are the most Zealous in appearance; They who
declaim most highly against such as do not approve of their Party. Lastly,
these are they who contribute most of all to Division, to strengthen, in favor
of it, a Body whereof they would make themselves Masters. So that in the choice
of a Religion, Men do ordinarily take that which is clear contrary to the
Precept of Jesus Christ. They do not above all things seek the Kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof: But they seek every other thing before that
which is most important. We should not only prefer God's interest and Glory
before our temporal advantages, but we ought not to desire those very
advantages, but for the Glory of God and our own Salvation; and leave the whole
disposal thereof to the providence of him, who takes particular care of the
least Creatures. These People on the contrary are very inquisitive to know in
what way of Worship they may live most commodiously with all their Family;
afterward they inform themselves, and seek about on all sides by what means
soever to widen their Consciences, that so they may favor, without trouble or
remorse, the Passion which rules them.

After that, Judge if these Men (so disposed) are not in a condition, blindly
to follow those, to whom they have joined themselves: If they who move not, but
by such ill Principles, are not capable of being made subject to what-soever
shall be desired of them, to advance their own Society, and Ruin others. Hence
it is that all those dangerous prejudices does arise, which are in Religion,
like a thick Cloud, that obscures the Understanding. This it is, that hinders
us from discovering the Truth, and from working by the Motives of a sincere
Charity. After once a particular Interest has taken place in our Spirits, it
excludes all others from thence. It cannot suffer any concurrent; And, if we be
sometimes obliged to take in any other Interests, it is but upon condition,
that they shall be subject to that which was first seated in our heart and
affections.

THE REUNITING OF CHRISTIANITY
PART III. Of the proper means to Reunite all Christians into one sole
Communion.
CHAP. I. Of the ill Means which has been made use of hitherto, for putting a
Remedy to the Evil of this Division.
AFter having considered the Nature of this Evil, whereof we have undertaken
the Cure: After having made known the extent, the depth, and the consequences;
found out the causes, and traced them up to their very source; Order directs us
to come to the remedies which are requisite to the curing thereof. But before
we propose them, it will not be at all from the purpose, to say something of
those which hitherto have been unprofitably employed therein. And I do not
wonder that we could never yet see any success of whatsoever has been done, for
stopping the course of so great disorder. Men have always built upon this wrong
Foundation; That this Evil was of it self incurable, and that therefore they
could only study how they might stop the course of its most pernicious
symptoms. They have believed it was but like going about to save a sick Persons
Life, that was given over by the Physicians. They never thought of a means of
reducing all the Societies of Christians into One. They have imagined that the
difference of their Opinions was too great, and concerning matters too
important, ever to bring it about, that all the ends should be made to meet
together. They have fancied that the Alienation of Men's minds was too
inveterate, the prejudices too many, the interests too disserent and too deeply
rooted, reasonably to hope that either one or other, would make the first
advance toward such an agreement. Insomuch that every one has supposed it was
enough for him to strenthen himself in his Opinions, and to establish them by
good Reasons, and to weaken those which are opposite to them, that they may
draw to their sides such as should reject them.

It is on this Foundation, that all those have hitherto worked, to whom God has
bestowed any great Talents, and who have had any Name in Divinity. All these
disputes, conferences, and volumes of Controversies are not employed, but to
this end, viz. to maintain the Doctrine, which they have embraced, and to
induce others to the receiving of it. But in this, all these great
inconveniences have never been considered; That those very same who write, and
who dispute with so much heat and subtilty, are many times us much biased as
others, and their passions are as violent as those in vulgar Persons; That
oft-times they alledg on both sides very specious Reasons, and such as cause
new difficulties to arise, of which they cannot easily clear themselves; That
all private Persons have not the time, and conveniences requisite, to be able
to read over these kind of Writings, and hear these Disputes; That of those
likewise who are in a condition to apply themselves hereto: There are but few
who bring not some strong conceits in favor of those Opinions, which they
have followed before. Insomuch that on these occasions, we see but few, who
give not all the applause to the Doctors of their Communion, and esteem not the
others as consuted, and bafled Teachers. So as I dare boldly say, that all
these Writings, and all these Disputes being far off from producing any good
effects, shall but cause the minds of Men to be more wedded to their Opinions,
and remove them further off from any sincere Reconciliation. Let us say then
with Saint Augustine, Epist. 122. That this Evil has more need of tears and
lamenting, than of large Writings and great Volumes. Many times the Discourses
which have been used for obliging the vanquished party to follow another
profession, have served but still more to animate the Parties, and fortisie
them in their separation.

Therefore many seeing the small success of this Remedy, which has been
endeavored, have judged that they ought to change their Method, and work the
Cure after another way. For effecting of which, they have distinguished between
such Societies of Christians, whom they have believed to have gross and
dangerous Opinions; and others whom they supposed not to lie in so great
Error. As to the first, they have given them over as sick Persons, in so
deplorable a condition, that their Disease is stronger than all Remedies. But
they have made some steps toward the assistance of the latter; they have
offered them a hand of Reconciliation, and made them hope to meet together, in
certain terms and expressions, whereon they should agree. This is it, that all
those have endeavored, who have hitherto applied themselves to the Reuniting
of the Roman Catholics and Protestants. This is the way which they have
followed, who would have agreed the Lutherans with the Calvinists, and these
again with the Arminians, and others who are gone out of their Communion. And
yet after a world of trouble, and writings composed on this Subject, these
designs have proved abortive, and these essays unprofitable. For not to say
any thing of the distinction which they make between pernicious Doctrines, and
those which are not so, (which is only contrived by their own sentiments,
whereby they are already pre-engaged.) Is it not true, (as I have observed in
the Preface,) that they are particular interests that have slipped in, and
diverted the blessing of God, from a design, where another End was pursued than
his Glory? As also that they have rather endeavored herein to lull a sleep,
and give some kind of present ease to this Evil, than to cure it perfectly by
any effectual Remedy. There has been made a certain mixture of Doctrines, and a
composition of things which can never be incorporated together, whereas they
ought to have labored to purify Christian Religion, and separate it from that
mixture of all strange things, and bring it back to its first simplicity.
Indeed they have failed herein, for want of looking up to the Fountain Head of
this Evil, to discover what first made this separation among Christians, of
what communion soever they are. We ought therefore, since it is so, to find out
a means how to propound to all Christians in general, something wherewith to
satisfy them in the overtures, which shall be made them, and cause them all to
understand the Interest which they have to reunite themselves in one and the
same Principle.

In short, Some there are who have fancied, that Councils and General
Assemblies might put a good period to this Evil, by their Authority and great
Learning, but many times Interests and prejudicate Opinions reign as well in
these Assemblies, as amongst the particular Persons which compose them. For we
ordinarily see that these kind of companies make Men's spirits more obstinate in
their first sentiments, and cause a less disposition to an Agreement. We see
besides that these same Assemblies are very seldom formed, but under the
Authority of one of the Sects of Christians, and that whatsoever is proposed
therein, is to fortify them the more against others, and to fix them more and
more in their first Opinions. This is that which has caused many absolutely to
reject all Assemblies of this kind, and has been the ground of that common
saying, that, Every General Council begets a War. Therefore for the right
management of this Design, all Christians generally should agree together upon
all things which regard their common good; they should all work upon the same
Principle, and if they convene any Assembly for the attaining to so good an
end; no Christian Society should be suffered to prevail by its Authority, and
power over the rest: But all should have the Liberty of proposing their
Opinions, to be afterward determined by that which shall be for the common
good.

CHAP. II. The first means. To lay aside all prejudices against others, and to
throw off all particular Interests, that so nothing may be proposed by us, but
the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Souls.
WE have already shown, that there is nothing ruins more the Peace of the
Church, than the Interest of particular persons. That the greatest obstruction
to this Reunion, is our prejudice against other Societies, which in time
strengthens our preconceived Opinions. Therefore what we should do out of hand
for the successful carrying on of this design, is, to cast off all particular
Interests, and all these prejudices. I mean not to own any but the true and
lawful Interests, that all should meet in one point, which is that of the glory
of God, our own Salvation, and the good of those with whom we desire to be
rejoined. And it is farther requisite, to lay aside all those prepossessions of
Spirit, which may render us less inclinable to those propositions of peace,
that may be offered us. And I am persuaded that were we free from such
preengagements and prejudices, we should favorably hearken to all overtures of
reconciliation which should be made us.

As for the lawful Interests which I speak of, and are fit to be proposed in
this affair, they are such as have no regard to any imaginary good, but are
real, solid, and essential to Man. Also this same good is never separated from
the Interests of the Glory of God, and the establishment of truth. I exclude
therefore out of the rank of right motives, which should guide us in the search
of the true Christianity: First of all, whatsoever has relation to the
advantages and commodities of the present life. I put into this number them who
thurst after honors, riches, pleasures, and whatsoever is the object of any
carnal desire. Hither I also refer whatsoever contributes to the satisfaction
of our inordinate passions, where they revolt from the obedience which they owe
to reason. I am certain that this Principle will be approved by every one.
There is no Man who will not confess that things so different can never be
matched together. All will agree in the general Thesis, that as there is no
Union betwixt Light and Darkness: So we cannot join the strict holiness of the
Celestial Doctrine, with the impure liberty of our Passions. But there often
slip in certain particular Interests, the which being more secret, and such as
do pass more dexterously under the lavour of some specious pretense, are not
yet less prejudicial to the peace of the Church. Such is an inconsiderate and
turbulent Zeal in Men, which because it seems exempt from those other gross
interests, of which we have been speaking, they appear as though they had only
piety for their rule and measure in all their Motions. It Is for the most part
observed, that this Zeal is nothing, but a mere obstinacy and
self-conceitedness, which can never depart from that which it has once
received. This Interest which ordinarily arises, either from ignorance, from an
inveterate custom, or from some other such motive, engages us so much the more
in division, by how much it is covered with the appearance of Devotion. And I
am persuaded that many of those who read this part, if they consider it with
themselves, will confess that I touch upon a String, which though small, yet is
not at all the less intelligible. To th^se apparent Interests, I join those of
some particular Persons, who being willing to pass for sworn Enemies of
inconstancy, and levity, persevere in the profession which they have followed
from their Infancy. They call it rashness and Inadvertency, to depart so
readily from those Tenets in Religion, which they first embraced; and they
hold, that before they can do it, they must be fully convinced of the falseness
thereof, and the evident peril which they incur by retaining them. Wherefore so
long as they find any appearance, or probability, they cannot believe it stands
with their prudence to abandon them. I have known some of these, who have been
so strongly prepossessed with this Opinion, that they could not forbear showing
a less esteem of such as had embraced their sentiments, than of those who had
still persisted in the contrary party. To these specious Interests, I must yet
add one more; and that is a disposition of Spirit, which we find many to have,
who being entered into a Communion, believe it would be a shameful thing, should
it be said of them, that they have examined their Religion too late. They
imagine, that should they confess they have continued in an error to these
Years, and that they had never in all this time perceived the weakness of their
former profession, People would take all the rest to be want of discretion,
irreligion, and impiety. To flatter themselves herein, they endeavor to make
some kind of superficial consideration, which they have made of the Rules of
their Sect, pass for an exact and profound search into the reasons of their
belief. After which, they maintain it with confidence, as not at all doubting,
but that they are in the right way. There are some others, who are directly
opposite to those, of whom I have now been speaking; These are such as are
inconstant, and bid defiance to whatsoever they have formerly believed; who
imagine that all new Opinions, which are proposed to them, are far better than
those wherein they have been brought up. They are like those of whom an Ancient
says, that out of fear, they make all their prudence consist in following every
other council, but their own. So these timorous Spirits in Religion, embrace
the first Opinions which are propounded to them, and prefer always new
Doctrines, before those which were received before. We should therefore check
all those bad inclinations, which nature, education, age, ignorance, and
example may give us: For whilst we listen to any one of these voices, we shall
be but in an ill condition to entertain the propositions of an Agreement. All
these propositions will at the first instant appear suspicious to us, and at
last we shall reject them absolutely.

After this, to do well, we must cast away from us all these unhappy prejudices
against others, and high conceits of our own Opinions, which cause almost all
the diforders that ordinarily happen in the Church. These are so many clouds
which darken the understanding, and hinder Men from seeing distinctly the
Objects, upon which they should make their judgment. They are a painted
Glasses, which represent to us all that we look on, the clear contrary way, as
dyed with their own color. How would you have a Man, whose spirit is filled
with an infinite number of Ideas, upon which he is already fixed, be able,
after this, to make room for those which are opposite to them, although they
are really more effectual to his salvation? They must be all excluded to
compare them together without prejudice, they must be seen naked, and that
held, which shall be judged most reasonable. There has been not long since
proposed, in Philosophy, an excellent way of right disputing, and keeping a
direct course for searching out the truth. They say, that for effecting of
this, all preconceived Opinions, and prepossessions of spirit must be
absolutely cast away. That then they must not take up any, but the most plain
notions, and such Propositions as cannot be quarreled at by any who have the
least use of reason. Why then cannot we imitate this manner of procedure in
Religion? Can we not for a while set aside all these Opinions, which we
defended heretofore with so much eagerness and heat, to examine them afterward
more freely, and without any passion, holding closely to our common Principle,
which is the Holy Scripture? Can we notwithout any prejudice look upon the
Foundations of Religion, which all they who are called Christians do generally
acknowledge, and the Principles which they all agree upon? Would it not be an
infallible means to know with a disinterested mind, how we should advance in a
right way, and how we might build upon a solid Foundation, and such as should
be approved by every one?

My desire therefore is, that these prejudices and strong fancies of our own
Opinions may be quitted, which bind us in a Religion, rather by false
appearances, than by Judgment and Reason. Hence is it that some boast of their
antiquity, the succession of their Pastors, the Government of their Communion,
their temporal advantages, the riches, splendor, and magnificence of their
Temples, and Ornaments. Hence is it that others glory in their plainness, and
the smallness of their number, the contempt which is made of them in society,
and other things of this nature, which the World cannot relish. Lastly, there
are others extolling the knowledge and talents of their Doctors: the sanctity,
austerity, and mortifications of their Votaries, the Zeal of their Martyrs, and
other exterior things, and accidentals to Religion. For it may so happen, that
all these may meet in Societies, which are not approved of by those, who boast
of them, as so many titles in their favor. There are likewise some, who,
although they seem not to regard any thing, but Religion, by putting away
whatsoever is not essential to it, yet cannot forbear falling into prejudices
and errors of dangerous consequence. Such are those who believe that their
Doctrine is to be prefered before others, by reason of the number of the
learned Men which defend it, the Arguments with which they appear to be
supported, and the great motions of Virtue which they seem to inspire. They
consider not that all these things may be also observed in the Societies, whose
Doctrine they do not approve: That at least the Followers of the rest might
make a like Judgment of their Doctrine; seeing the friends of each of them are
prepossessed with reasons in favor of their own. We ought therefore for a
while to cast off all these particular Sentiments, which form the diverse
Societies of Christians; in such manner, that it should not be the Authority of
any one amongst them, that should bear sway over the rest; but the sole
infallible Rule of truth, which is the Word of God: For, seeing that is
universally received by all Christians, there ought to be no difficulty, in
submitting to whatsoever it clearly teaches us. This being so, how can we doubt
of the blessing of GOD, upon such an Enterprise, since we have no other thing
for our Interest, than his Glory; for our Rule, than his Word; and for our End,
than our Salvation.

CHAP. III. The Second means. That we should not have for our Direction, more
than one known and generally approved Rule, for all Christians to walk by.
When we say, that for the attaining to a perfect Reunion, we must be free
from all obstinate prejudices; I mean not thereby, the establishing of an
indifference, and leaving Men's minds in a suspense, without knowing what to
resolve on. It Is only to render many unsure foundations, suspected, and to
search out for one which may be firm and solid, and which the whole World
should agree to be so. Now there is but one of this nature, and that is the
Sacred Word of God, which he has given us by the Ministry of his Servants. He
has given it us expressly to be the Rule, both of our Faith, and all our
Actions, in what concerns his Service. And it is too evident, that all do not
agree on other matters. All do not hold that the Church is infallible. All do
not acknowledge, that there is an unwritten Word, which is of as much Authority,
as that which is in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles. All do not
pretend that we must be guided by that, which the Holy Ghost shall dictate, by
his secret motions in the Hearts of the Faithful. But all Christians, without
exception, hold, that God speaking to us in his Holy Word, must be hearkened
to, and that we must obey him without any restriction. If, besides this, there
shall be found any Confession of Faith, which has been drawn from the Holy
Scriptures, and drawn in such a manner, as that it retains a Doctrine so pure,
that all Christians may securely receive it: It may very well be joined with
this Word, delivered to us from God. And such, in my Opinion, is the Apostles
Creed: there never having been hitherto, as I have ever heard, any Christian
who denied to entertain it, as being an Extract, and Compendium of the Gospel.
And, if that had been well practiced, which the Council of Chalceden enjoined,
of not adding any other Doctrine to this Symbol, we had never seen
Christianity divided into so many Sects, as at present it is.

I shall not here undertake to prove the Divinity of this Holy Writing; as
having ^ow only to do with Christians, who all acknowledge it. This is a thing
that I may possibly handle in the third Treatise, which I have promised to
publish, in the Preface to this Piece. For my design therein is, to let all
People of the World see the advantages of the Christian Religion above others:
I shall also there endeavor to give to every one, a means of looking into it
without these obstinate prejudices, which would certainly make us reject any
Doctrine, now tending soever to our Salvation. At the present, me thinks, for
the working with success toward a good Reunion, we should rise to a Principle
wherein we all agree; It would be a very good step toward a Peace, when we
should find a Subject wherein we could all Unite. For, according to that
Universal Maxim, Things which agree in a Third, agree also together. If
therefore we all receive the Word of God, as our Sovereign Rule; might we not
probably hope that we may be Reunited in other things, which are but
dependances on that; especially if after we have cast away from us all our
passions, and prejudicate Opinions, we bring only with us a true Zeal, and an
ardent Charity? Moreover, being persuaded that the Doctrine contained in these
Holy Scriptures is Divine, that it is true, that it is infallible, and that it
is perfectly Holy, we shall without doubt conclude, that it is our Sovereign
Rule: That it prescribes to us what we should all believe, and receive for our
Salvation. And as this word expressly forbids us to add, diminish, or alter any
thing in the Doctrine, which it lays open to us, we should look upon all other
Doctrines received in any other Society of Christians, us very suspicious: We
should not receive them, tili after a careful examination of them, and upon
sure conditions, how specious soever the pretenses were, under which they would
make them pass to us. Although they should give them to us merely as
Explications, Illustrations, and consequences drawn from this word: we should
however look upon them, but as Essays of Man's wit, whose infirmity appears in
all his actions. All his meditations, his application, his reasoning his
Humility, his Prayers, and his Fastings, cannot hinder, but that there will
remain still great weaknesses of Flesh, which will render him liable to contempt
and error. There is none but God only who is able to declare to Us the things
which are of God; because there is none but God who knows God; as an excellent
Author of our times has very well expressed. What Men say of Him, is but
babbling. Whatsoever they bring thither of their own, is but weak and doubtful.
De divinis, etiam vera dicere, periculosum est. We must go to the very Truth it
self, and ascend up to the Fountain Head. We must suspect all the Waters which
have not passed through this Channel, although they appear never so excellent.

Oh that we had but made known with a little diligence amongst Christians, the
value of this important Principle, as we have sown the seeds of Division, that
we had avoided unprofitable questions and disputes; And had made Christian
Religion easy and intelligible, as carefully as Particular Doctors have taken
upon them the liberty of expounding this Scripture. Every one giving it the
sense which his Genius, or rather his capricious Fancy, or Interest suggested
to him: Every one having drawn the consequences from it, which must favor his
inclinations: Nay. and without sticking there, every one has endeavored to
give to these consequences, an authority equal to that of the Original, from
whence he pretends to have drawn them. In this very manner have we seen
Disputes and Contentions arise, also Heresies, Schisms, Divisions, and
different Communions. Every Society has made his particular confession, which
they pretend ought to be of as great authority, as the very Creed of the
Apostles themselves. And thus, as this Practice has strengthened it self in the
Church, after the same rate also has Division been strengthened and augmented.
It is therefore absolutely necessary for the establishing a good Peace in the
Church, to reject all Inventions of Men, and (...) to lend an Ear, but to God
only, speaking in his Word. It is thus, that the great Persons have practiced,
who lived in the most pure Age of the Church. They have ever confined their
minds to the Holy Scriptures, as to the only Foundation of our Faith, and of
our Salvation.

CHAP. IV. The Third means. Rightly to distinguish between the Doctrines, which
the Holy Scriptures propound to be believed by true Christians; and what
regards only the outward Government of the Church, and its Ceremonies.
THis Sacred Word, which we have said, is the only Foundation of the Churches
subsistence, and of the Union of its Members, offers Us three sorts of things
to be learnt by Us. It declares to Us; First, what we are to believe, for the
Peace of our Consciences, and for obtaining Salvation, and Eternal life. It
teaches us next, what relates to the Government of the Church, in the Exercise
of its Discipline, and in the outward Practice of its Ceremonies. And Lastly,
it gives Us saving Precepts, which serve for the Direction of our Lives, and
Manners; Not only to be the outward Guide of our Actions, and of our Words: But
also of our Affections, Inclinations, and most secret Motions of our Souls.
This distinction being well established, and all its Members truly considered:
We shall find that in the right management hereof, there will be no occasion of
quarrelling, unless it be about the Rules proposed to our Faith. For as to what
concerns the Precepts of Virtue, they are so clearly laid open in the Holy
Scriptures, that in them there can be no ground for Controversy. All
Christians know that God will be most highly loved and adored. All agree that
we must honor Father and Mother, according to the Commandment of God. All
accord in this Point, that the Law of God forbids Murder, Adultery, Lying, etc.
All acknowledge that these Laws are not merely established to Rule the outward
Form of Men in Society: But that they oblige us to conform the most secret
thoughts and inclinations of our hearts, to the Purity and Sanctity which they
command. After this we need not any other Rule, than that Abridgment of the
Law, which the Son of God has reduced to these two admirable Precepts; To love
God with all our affections; and our Neighbor as our selves. The Observation
which might be made from hence, would Rule, as every one may perceive, all our
actions; Insomuch that no Person could defire any thing more for the living
holily, and justly. I know very well that there have been certain Doctors
formerly amongst Christians, who by their interpretations, have gone aside from
the strict observation of these Laws; But they have not only wanted the
approbation of others, as well of their own Communion, as strangers: But also
they themselves have always made profession of acquiescing, as others, in these
sacred and inviolable Rules. They did not pretend to weaken them by their
interpretations: they only soothed Men's consciences with a favorable sense,
which they give to the circumstances of particular actions. Behold here one of
the principal Articles of Faith; Nay, I dare say, the most important, and
wherein consists the very Essence of Religion, which can give no cause of
Division.

As to the Rules which the Holy Scriptures afford us for the Government of the
Church, relating to its Discipline, and to its Ceremonies: It Is a strange thing
that they should have so often given occasion of Disputes, and been the cause
of separation and division. If the Holy Penmen had punctually prescribed, and
ordered every thing that ought to be done in this matter; we should be obliged
indispensibly to observe them. And we should have reason to separate our selves
from those, who did depart from them. But seeing that this sacred Word is
contented to give us, for this purpose, certain general Precepts: For St. Paul
plainly tells us, that These things must be done with Order and Decency.
Liberty is given without doubt to Christians, to dispose of these, according as
they shall think convenient, having regard to the circumstances of Places, of
Times, and of Persons, in keeping always within the Bounds of Decency, and
Order. For, besides that, the Scripture has thus declared it self hereupon: The
nature of the thing seems palpably to lead us to the same. There is no Body,
who does not put a great difference between that which is essential to a thing,
and that which is merely accidental. All acknowledge, it is on the preservation
of the first, that the subsistence of its subject does absolutely depend; that
it can be very well maintained without the second, and that also more
conveniently. Likewise that we should act quite otherwise for the first, than
we should for the other. So to preserve health, or to recover it, though we
strictly observe the Diet which is obsolutely requisite, we can freely and
without prejudice, change the Relishes and Tinctures, which we give to the Fod,
and to the Medicines.

This being once well settled, every one sees how unreasonable a thing it would
be, to separate about the occasion of any difference, which might happen in
outward matters, and accidentals to Religion, should there be any Schism in
the Church concerning the Order which is to be amongst its Governors? Must
this Holy Union be broken, because some would have the Church be governed by
Bishops, and others would have an equality amongst its Pastors? Must we,
because of some diversity in the Habits of those who officiate in the Church,
break the knot which should tie all Christians together? Is it just that for
the Ornaments of the Temples, the postures wherein private Persons should be,
during the acts of Devotion, and other such Ceremonies, the peace of the Church
should be ruined, and the Unity of its Members? Has not the Primitive Church
made it well appear, that there was no such matter of scruple, when it freely
changed the practice, according as the times and occasions required it? Did not
Tertullian, one of its principal Doctors, teach us, that the Rule of Faith
continuing firm and constant; other things which regard the Discipline, do
sometimes suffer alterations and changes? Were the Temples always set out in
this magnificence, which they are in at present among Christians? Were Fastings
always after the same manner observed? Were the Garments of Ministers of the
Church always in the some mode? Have they at all times, and in all places
received the holy Eucharist after the same fashion, as to their outward
Gestures? Has there not always been great diversity in the practice of these
things, and can we not still be able to suffer it, without being forced to
separate, and dismember the Church, as we do at this present time?

I confess that in certain Ceremonies, some things may fall out to be
practise^, which would directly oppose to the Fundamental Points of Religion.
But it would be easy to give a Remedy to this Evil, following the Order which I
shall propose. We should in this case, look back to the very Precept it self,
upon which we should all agree together. For if we all accord in what concerns
the Doctrine, we shall find no great difficulty to accord, or at least to
maintain a charitable judgment in the use of the Ceremony. If we were once but
well Reunited together, in the Opinions which we should have of the Doctrine, I
am assured, that we should bear with one another, in things which are not of
that importance. If we joined in the main essential matters, the necessaries
would not easily separate us.

Behold then, how this happy means of Peace must be ordered. It is by
establishing immediately, with great care, the bounds which are to be given to
these two things; That is, First, that a right distinction be made between what
serves for the outward conduct of the Actions of true Believers, and the
essence, and internal concern of a good Christian: Next, that we labor and
seek out by all the ways imaginable, how we may be Reunited in what respects
the essence of Christianity. But for that which respects the outward
Government, and the Ceremonies of the Church, some liberty should be given to
the particular Societies of Christians. Herin regard must be had to the
difference of Places and Climates, where they dwell, which often create more
disgust to one sort of Government, than to another. Also there should be
considered the diversity of their Politic Government, which may imprint some
stamps of its Character upon that of the Church. Lastly, We should likewise
have in consideration, what these Societies may have practiced hitherto, with
success in this respect, and leave them the entire disposal thereof, after
having represented to them what shall be judged more prositable, and more
commodious for them. This diversity must not alter the peace of the Church; It
is not just, that agreeing together in the essential Points, we should break
the bonds of our amity, for things which are not essential. How many Brothers
are there, who although they be of different employments, yet for all this
leave not off their living together as Brothers, and making up one and the same
Family. I would therefore have an accommodation made herein, according to the
Customs, and Practices of the Places, in which they live. That in all parts,
where they should inhabit and sojourn, they might be subject to the Community
of Christians, which should be there established, without condemning or blaming
other Customs. That we should rather believe charitably, that every one has
followed herein, the Order which has been supposed to be most convenient, and
most requisite to Salvation; seeing that still the Principal which is
comprehended in few Articles, continues firm. Thus St. Paul was accustomed to
do, 1 Cor. 10.33. Endeavoring to please, and accommodate all matters, without
seeking after particular conveniences, but only the Salvation of many. And
when he saw any who would be contentious in these things; He only answered them
thus, 1 Cor. 11.16. We have no such Custom: Showing that it argues a
contentious spirit, and an enemy to the Peace of the Church, to be unwilling to
follow Order and Custom in things of this nature. We should always six here,
that we ought not, barely upon account of humane Institutions, to separate one
from another, seeing we break with those, who embrace the same Doctrine which
we do, clearly taught us in the Word of God, under pretense that they have not
the same practice with us in the outward part of Religion.

CHAP. V. The Fourth means. To distinguish between that which the Scripture
proposes to us to believe, as Doctrine of Salvation; and that which it delivers
to us, as Histories of things which have happened; and that which it reports to
us, as predictions of things to come.
FOllowing the distinction made, in the foregoing Chapter, of all the things
which are proposed to us in the Holy Scripture: We must first examine what it
declares to us, as truths, which the true Believer ought to receive by Faith.
These are not all of a like nature; and must also be carefully distinguished,
to take away likewise all cause of contention among Christians. I believe,
therefore, they may all be brought under these three Heads. As first, the
Mysteries of Religion, which ought to be believed, for setting the Conscience
at rest, and procuring its Salvation. Secondly, the Historical Narrations which
the Scripture makes us, of many things that have happened, as well in the
Disposition of the Order of the Universe, as in the Government of the Church,
under the Old and New Covenant. Thirdly, the predictions there made, as of
things which must happen, and whereof we see not yet the accomplishment. This
being concluded, we should generally recerve as unquestionable truths,
whatsoever God has revealed to us in his Word. Wherein there are many things
which should not, neither can they give any matter of contention, much less of
Division. As for Example, the Historical Relations of the Holy Scriptures are
such, that all Christians generally receive ^^^m, as certain and indubitable,
and if there be any diversity of Opimons upon any difficulties of Chronology:
That should not cause a separation in the Church; The Opinions may be left to
the Liberty of particular Persons, to follow therein, what they shall judge
most probable. I say the same of interpretations, which may be given to some
obscure passages, which should not cause any Division, be the diversity never
so great, which is there met with. There is but one sole occasion for allowing
it, and that is, when a particular interpretation overthrowes some one of the
Fundamental Doctrines, or that they would make it to pass, as issued out from
the very mouth of God himself. For all these interpretations are but so many
attempts of Man's wit, which may fail* Insomuch that we should leave to every
one the liberty of examining them, to receive them afterward, or to reject
them without prejudice to Salvation, and without breaking the Union, which is
had with those of contrary Opinions.

As to what concerns suture predictions, neither ought these to be the subject
of any Division. It may suffice, we are all in general persuaded, that
whatsoever has been foretold, in the Holy Scriptures, shall have its
accomplishment, notwithstanding all the obstacles which intersere. It Is
sufficient to believe, that the first Cause absolutely disposing of second
causes, will bring about its designs, in despite of all resistance of the
Creatures. This hinders not from advancing our thoughts higher, searching into
the sense of the prophecy, and making our conjectures of the times of its
execution. We should in this give Liberty to certain particular persons,
especially when these kinds of Meditations may contribute to the Consolation of
true Believers, and to excite them more to sanctity. It is in this, I make that
happiness consist, which the Book of the Apocalypse attributes to those who
read it carefully, and understand it. But he who would apply himself to this
study, must not do it, but with great precautions. Here it is, that much
strictness must be observed, and principally not the least stirring be made but
from a principle of deep humility. He must on all occasions distrust himself,
but more in this, than any other. For although these Oracles be not conceived
in ambiguous terms, as those of the Pagans were; yet are they proposed in
obscure and dark expressions; They are such hidden mysteries, and so profound,
that they can scarcely be fa^omed. When predictions are accomplished, they
change their nature, and become Histories easy to be understood: But before the
Event, they must be looked upon with that profound respect, as causes naturally
a silence. But yet if any think they have espied some light, they may utter
their thought with modesty; And should rather propose it as a conjecture, than
as a certain Doctrine. For truly there is nothing so dangerous, nor so
prejudicial to the peace of the Church, as the desire of making pass our sense
upon things foretold, for constant truths. There needs but a forced Opinion of
these Prophesies, to stir up a whole Nation to tumult, to disturb the peace of
States, and ruin the Unity which should be amongst Christians. The Examples of
this, are as well known as they are Dreadful to Consider. There might some kind
of Parallel be made between this Reflection, and those dangerous obstinate
Opinions, whereof we have already made mention, and which must be entirely cast
away, to attain to a perfect intelligence in Christianity.

CHAP. VI. Fifth Advice. Touching the Mysteries of Christian Religion, which we
must believe, as being Revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and concerning the
distinction which must be made of them.
AFter having considered methodically, of what the Word of God teaches us,
touching the Rites, Ceremonies, and outward Order of the Church, as also the
Histories and Prophesies which it contains; After having shown that in all
these things there should be no matter of Contention among Christians: I have
nothing less to examine, but what concerns the Rules, comprehending the Holy
Mysteries of Christianity, which Believers should own, and receive for their
Salvation. And because it is a most important matter, it must be clearly
opened, and explained, to remove whatsoever might give any occasion of
Contention, and procure herein, as well as in the rest, a Reconciliation of all
Christian Societies.

I cannot now absolutely disapprove the Distinction, which all Doctors make in
this matter, and of which I have already spoken. If I acknowledge there be in
Religion some important Precepts, essential, fundamental, and necessary to
Salvation; I acknowledge therein also others less important, which might be let
alone, as where some Error may slip in; Yet this may be done without
prejudicing our Salvation, ^^e Peace of Consciences, and tranquillity of the
Church. But what I cannot approve of in this, is the Application which these
Doctors make of this distinction, to their Cause. They commonly fall,
concerning this matter, into the same faults which have been observed; Namely
their prejudicate Opinions, and particular Interests, which for the most part
bear sway in the Judgment, which they make of what is Fundamental, and what is
not. So that they would oblige all, who enter into their Communion, to
acquiesce in Humane Doctrines, as if they were so many Fundamental Points. They
oblige Men also to Reject the Doctrines which agree not with theirs, as if they
tended to overthrow the Foundations of Religion, although they may not be so
prejudicial, as they would make them believe. For who has Authority of fixing
that which is Fundamental, and distinguishing it from that which is not? If it
were left to the disposition of Men, every Society would do therein according
to their prejudicate Opinions, which they have been possessed with, formerly
admitted. Whence is it therefore that we should take the Foundation of this
distinction, but from the Moush of God Himself, speaking to Us in his Holy Word?

True it is, we find not any passage in the Holy Scriptures, that declares in
formal terms, which are the Fundamental Doctrines, to distinguish them from
others. But the nature of the thing tells us, we may establish this
distinction, by the very Word of God. For if all Christians receive, as
unquestionable truths, all that which has been revealed to Us in the Word of
God: If they all acknowledge that it would be an unpardonable crime, but to call
in doubt any of these Sacred Oracles: (seeing it would be to suspect Him of
falsehood, who is truth it self.) They must by consequence own, that whatsoever
is clearly proposed to Us in the Word of God, and is also received by a general
consent, is a Fundamental Point of Christianity. They must acquiesce in this
Doctrine, as being immediately issued out from God, or else utterly renounce
Christianity. Whereas if there be Doctrines which have not been so clearly
revealed to Us, they give occasion to the Doctors, to interpose their Judgment,
and give place to different Senses. We have likewise the liberty of examining
these diverse Opinions. We may compare them together, to retain that which we
shall judge most conformable to the Analogy of Faith. We may search out that
which shall agree best with the Fundamental Points, which gives most
consolation to the Soul, and affords the greatest Motives to Piety. But we must
not put these last truths in the same rank with the first, nor must we oblige
Christians to acquiesce there, in the same degree of Faith. As to the first, we
should receive them as so many Oracles delivered from the Mouth of God, without
any mixture of humane infirmity; whereas the second, which have passed through
the Discourses of Men, may have been altered by the weakness of their Judgment.
They may be tainted with the defects and imperfections of humane wit. And these
are those truths or rather those Doctrines, which I do not allow to be
Fundamental. Otherwise we should give to Man, and to Reason, an Authority,
which appertains to none, but to God alone, and his Word. And to the end we may
clear this matter by Examples which may make it both known and understood by
every one; It is certain that these are Fundamental Doctrines in Christianity;
Viz. That there is One God: That he has sent his only Son into the World, That
whosoever believes in Him may have Eternal Life. That Jesus Christ dyed for our
Sins, and arose again for our Justification. That He shall come in his Glory,
to judge both the quick and the dead, and such other truths, as all Christians
admit of, as being most distinctly and plainly taught us in the Holy
Scriptures. But as for those Doctrines, which determine the Order of the
Eternal Decrees of God; that tell us punctually what is the Object of
Predestination; that Expound how the two Natures are united, in the Person of
Jesus Christ; that comprehend and fadome the Mystery of the Trinity; that
pretend to discover the means, by which the Holy Ghost operates in the hearts
of the Faithful, and other things of the like Nature. I maintain that although
the Learned Men should say never so many excellent things concerning these
matters, and what they say might be approved, (as being judged reasonable.)
They must not nevertheless be made to pass, as of equal authority with the
truths which are clearly revealed to us in God's Word. They ought indeed to be
received but in such manner, as that we should be all ready to quit, and
renounce them, in case any one should make us see some error therein; Otherwise
it is but to make way for Division: Since every Doctor will make his particular
Opinions to pass for so many Fundamental Truths: And will reject all others, as
Errors which utterly overthrow Salvation. The adverse Parties will not be less
Zealous in maintaining their contrary Opinions, which will be followed by a
lamentable separation and division. Here it is that we should value the Precept
of Saint Paul: 1 These. 5. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is Good.
Here it is also, that the saying of the same Apostle might take place; 1 Cor.
3. That there is but one sole Foundation of Christian Religion, which is Jesus
Christ: That Man might build upon it Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay,
or Stubble: But that every Man's work shall be made manifest; For it shall be
tried by Fire: which will consume the evil works, although the workers may be
preserved. Let us in the next place, hear what the excellent Author of that
Treatise of the Imitation of Christ, says. What will it avail thee, though thou
can dispute concerning the depth of the Mystery of the Trinity, if, in the
mean time, thou shall be destitute of the Grace of Humility, which may make
Thee acceptable to the Trinity? The profound Discourses of Divines, make not a
Man more Holy, and more Just. I had rather feel the true effects of repentance,
than know how to give a diffinition of it.

This distinction being settled, the ready way will be open to us, by which we
may attain to a perfect Reunion of all Christians, in one Confession of Faith.
In the first place, I suppose that we must have a strong Faith, having
suppressed all particular Interests, which have no regard, but to temporal
things; That we must for some time have cast away all those prejudicate
Opinions, which are so many bars and hindrances of agreement; After this, I
require that we should adhere without varying, to the certain and infallible
Rule, which is the Voice of God, speaking to us in his Word: That according to
this Word, we bear one with the other in the diverse practice of its
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and in the different use of its Ceremonies. That we
should not look upon these outward things, but as accidentals to Religion, and
which ought not to be established, but according to the general Rule of Order
and Decency. I next require, that we all rest in the Truth of the Sacred
Histories, leaving a Liberty to learned Men, of declaring their Opinions upon
the difficulties, which are therein met with, to follow without constraint,
that Party which shall be judged most reasonable; That we read not the
Prophesies and Predictions contained in the Holy Scriptures, but with Humility,
without determining any thing, as by authority, upon their sense, and the times
of their accomplishment; That we carefully distinguish between the Doctrines,
so clearly established in the Word of God, that all Christians are obliged to
receive them: And those which have need, for their enlightening, of the Labor,
and Meditation of Men, to clear them; That we admit not of any other, than the
first for Fundamentals, and unvariable: And that as to the others, we may
dispense with our receiving them, without prejudice to our Salvation, which
ought not to depend, but on the first; Or, if we do receive them, it should be
but as humane Opinions, which we judge most probable, which nevertheless we are
ready to forsake, so soon as we shall know them not to be well grounded.
Lastly, I undertake that all this may be done, without disturbing the Peace and
Unity, which we should entertain with those, who have different Opinions upon
these Questions, on condition that they receive them not, but after the same
manner which we receive ours; That is to say, as Humane Doctrines which may
have their use, but which should not engage Us, as those which are issued from
God, without any mixture of Humane Infirmity. After that, I believe there is no
body, who does not judge that, being so well established, all Christians
generally shall live in a Perfect Unity, which is the Mark whereto we should
all aim.

And to justify that, what I here lay down, is not without Foundation; that we
may attain to Salvation in Christianity, without engageing in the Labyrinth of
all these knotty Questions of the Schools. Suppose it should so happen, that
some Christian might be driven by a Tempest into the Country, about the
Straights of Magellan, or any other Parts, where the Inhabitants never heard
speak of our Mysteries. Farther, I would not have this Christian know any but
the first, and most plain Rudiments of Christian Religion, contained in his
CREED. I suppose him only to be persuaded of these truths: That there is One
God, who has created the Heaven and the Earth; That he requires of us Perfect
Holiness; That we have violated his Ordinances, which has rendered us unworthy
of his mercies; That nevertheless he has invited us still to Repentance, and to
Salvation; That He has sent for this Purpose, Him, whom He Himself calls His
Son; That this Son dyed for our Sins; That He is risen again for our
Justification; That He ascended into Heaven, and there makes Intercession for
Us; And that if so be we are but ^ully persuaded of these truths; and will
carefully study Piety toward God, and Charity toward our Neighbors, we shall
obtain Eternal Happiness. I suppose, that this Man teaches these things to this
savage Nation, and that these People, who hitherto had been ignorant of all
these truths, are taken with their beauty, and afterward fully convinced of
them, and will thereto conform their Lives: I ask if these People might not
truly be called Christians, and whether or no they were not in the ready way to
Salvation. For my part, I cannot make any difficulty to believe it, and passing
further on, I shall say, that I should esteem them happier, if they continued
in these Principles, than if we should come to overcharge them with all these
critical Questions, with which we are ordinarily entertained. John Moquet, in
the Third Book of his Travels, relates a History, which confirms this truth. A
poor Christian Woman being a Slave in one of the Principal Families of Morocco,
taught the Christian Religion to the Master of the House's Daughter; The Slave,
without doubt, was not able to give Her any, but the most General Principles,
according to the capacity of a Person of that Sex, and of that condition;
Nevertheless this Noble Maid, new born to the Faith, was so thoroughly convinced
of these Christian truths, that she quickly suffered Martyrdom for the defense
of them, and that too with an Heroique Virtue. Therefore as I acknowledge but
one sole way, which God offers to all Men, for their attaining Salvation: So I
conclude, that all those who shall hold fast to these Principles, so plain, and
so few in Number, and live agreeably to them, will undoubtedly obtain Salvation
and Life.

CHAP. VII. What Ways must be followed, to facilitate the Execution of this
Design.
AS it is not enough for the Curing a Disease, to be informed of the Remedy,
which is proper for it, but we must also know its use, to apply it to purpose,
and with success: So it is not sufficient that we know what will be a saving
means to Reunite all Christians in one Confession of Faith: But we must examine
how this means must be applied to produce its effect; seeing great difficulties
and obstacles may be found in the practice, which thwart the Execution thereof.
There might be alleged the remoteness of many, who are called by the Name of
Christians, whom it would be almost impossible to bring together, for
concurring to so happy a Work. There might be produced the great Diversity of
Opinions, which are amongst them; The Interests of Princes and States; The
engagements of whole Nations; The aversions and animosities, which are
strengthened by time. There might be also added the temporal advantages, which
those who have any Ecclesiastical charges will be hardly persuaded to part
with, and as many other things, which may arise in the spirit of every one. All
these considerations might make this Proposition pass for an A^ery and
Imaginary project: At the best it might be said to be a fair Idea, but very
difficult to put in execution, which, like Plato's Republique, is in the rank
of things, which are more to be desired than hoped for.

To which I may, in the first place, say, that if there should be no other end
proposed herein, than this, of Laboring for the Glory of God, and the Peace of
his Church, it might be hoped that he would second with his Grace, so laudable
a Design. It is to attend his Work, it is to establish his Reign in the World,
it is to build up his House. What? will he refuse the succors of his Grace, to
those who shall have no other aim, but his proper Interests? Therefore when we
shall meet with difficulties, which we cannot remedy upon the sudden, we
should not for that be discouraged, but expect from the Goodness of God, the
success of so pious an enterprise. It must not be thought strange, if at
present, God has left Christians as destitute of the Graces, which he showered
down in the first times of Christianity. His Spirit is not to be found among
Tempests, and amidst Whirlwinds: How? should it be among Christians, divided
into so many Sects, and animated with the Spirit of Division, which raigns by
passion and violenc^ So soon as Charity is awakened, we shall then labor for
the common Peace: That Spirit which was communicated to the first Disciples,
who were met together with one accord, in one place, will inspire us in such
manner, that this great design will go forwards beyond all our hopes.

In the mean time, seeing that God does not forbid us the endeavoring to make
his Glory shine, with this small stock of Prudence, which we have received from
his Grace. I suppose we might happily proceed after this order in our design.
It would be necessary, with all speed to cause to be dispersed, Writings of
this Tenor, in diverse Languages, and send them into all Places, where there
shall be any Christians; of what profession soever they be. This would serve to
undeceive an infinite number of prepossessed Spirits, and make them hope for
the success of an enterprise, which hitherto has been supposed impossible to
finish. This would waken in diverse places, many private Persons, who would have
an inclination to peace, and on whom God had powered his Grace, proper for
contributing to so good an end. I am assured that they would be ravished to
have so favorable an occasion of working for the common good of Christendom.
They would certainly be astonished at the consideration, that they should have
been so long time without making a discovery of this business, and without
taking it by its true Measures. They would bless God for having opened so fair
a Port, to enter into so great a Calm, after so many Tempests. They would
sutably qualify themselves, for the attaining to so desirable an end. They
would labor with all their industry, to bring thither those of their
Communion; and altogether would strive to suspend for a while their Judgments
in particular Articles, until by common consent all that should be regulated,
which was requisite to so happy a design.

Besides the writings which should be employed to this end; Familiar
conversations, and particular Discourses would much contribute thereunto. It is
thus that we might do; and that we ought mutually to lend our assistance, for
the clearing of these matters. We ought always to have in Prospect, the Glory
of God, and the Peace of his Church; and this should be our principal business.
There is not any thing, which oftener puts a stop to the execution of our
greatest designs, than the want of frequent unmasking, and laying them open.
For the well-ordering of them, this must be often attempted, and all the
difficulties by little and little removed, which shall occur therein. We are
all generally more curious, to entertain our selves in converse about any other
thing, rather than that which is most necessary. The subjects most ordinarily
fallen upon, in those companies which are esteemed to be the most regular, are
full of vanity, if not sinful. News of what passes in the World; Affairs of
State; Explication of some difficult passage of the ancient Authors; Some
questions of the Mathematics, or of Physics, and things of this nature, are
the ordinary entertainment of these famous companies, which we so much admire.
If any one should propose such a subject as this, which I treat of, either it
is coldly received, or passed over lightly, to go to some other, which may give
more pleasant relish to the company, and better accomodated to the humors of
the Age. And yet what more worthy subject is there of our conversations, than
that which regards the general good of all Christians? Let us bless the happy
moment, wherein we have been brought to the discovery of this generous design,
and contribute our endeavor toward its good success; if we can let our selves
be vanquished by this Exhortation!

Moreover it would be convenient, that all those who have found themselves
persuaded of the truth and advantage of this Proposition, should employ their
greatest care in advancing the execution of it. If in traffic, Men expose
themselves to so many perils, to transport their commodities from one Country
to another, in hopes of some small profit; Shall we sit still without
communicating the most precious Treasure, and greatest advantage which can
arrive to Society? It is not here to be seared, that the number of those who
shall be sharers in this good, will diminish the Portion of any particular
Person: On the contrary, the increase of this number, will augment the
Satisfaction and Joy of those, who make a part thereof: As those that follow
Arms, rejoice to see their side grow stronger, and at the same time conceive
thereat both Hopes and Joy. For, if we act in this Affair, but for the glory of
God, the good of his Church, and our own Salvation, as we have even now
asserted, the more true Believers we se^ Reunited together, to promote this
end, the more Joy shall we have and the more satisfaction.

But if private Persons are obliged to contribute to so glorious an enterprise:
I believe that those who have any employment in the Church, in whatsoever
Society it be, ought to be assistant therein, by a particular engagement. Their
profession calls them to it, their charge obliges them to it, and the Lights
which they pretend to have above the Vulgar, ought only to guide them this way.
They are as well responsible for the Souls of others, as for their own. They
should not propose any other Interests, than those which are joined to the
Interests of their Master; and his glory only ought to adorn theirs. If they
use it otherwise, they are bad Servants, and Stewards of the Talents, which
have been committed to them. But if they once strive with Zeal, to promote this
great Work, besides their own comfort, the success of it will make them
readier, and more assured. People have commonly their Eyes on them, to follow
their steps, and imitate their Examples; So that they draw after them, whole
Troops, Societies, Communities, and Sects, as it suffices Him to gain the
Officers of an Army, who would make Himself Master of all the Soldiers.

But especially, I make account, that those who are able to give the greatest
stroke on this occasion, are Princes, and all those who have the Government of
States, and management of Public Affairs. They can maintain with their
Authority all these Reasons, which shall be employed in this noble enterprise:
And their power will be very efficacious, for making the Exhortations of others
valued. It is not, that I mean this Affair should be plainly carried on by the
force and authority of Men. The understanding must herein be cleared, to gain
over the Heart and the Affections, which is better done by reasoning, than
threatenings, and by the force of Arguments, than by that of Arms. But since
there may be some particular Persons, so wedded to their old Opinions, that for
their Worldly Interests, they would reject the good, which would be procured
for them; It would be fit to hinder these People, by a Superior Authority,
from crossing so happy a Design. If for Example, some Clergymen, of any
Community whatsoever, could not resolve to quit their temporal advantages,
which are of more weight with them, than the Public Interest: The authority
of Princes, and Magistrates, would serve very well to reduce them to that which
was Reason and Justice. There would also herein be this advantage expected,
from those who have the power in their Hands; namely, that by the
Correspondence and Alliance, which they have together, they might make this
good, Universal to all Christians. They might likewise Join their Forces, for
repressing the boldness of Infidels and all Enemies to the Name of Christians,
who would oppose themselves to so holy a Resolution. Lastly, they might
maintain against all others, those who would enter into this Holy Communion;
But forasmuch as this is one of the most powerful means, to attain to this end,
and which deserves more important considerations; I reserve it to a particular
Treatise, if this first Work still be favorably entertained.

CHAP. VIII. Answers to the Objections, and Difficulties which may be formed
against this Design.
THere can be no advantage proposed, which meets not with its Difficulties; We
cannot fetch Gold out of a Mine, but with much trouble; The Earth is not made
fertile, but when it is dug and plowed with great care: and the success of
the most admirable enter prizes is not obtained, but by surmounting with
industry, all the obstacles which are met with, in the execution of them. And
yet this trouble we have in attaining th^se most excellent goods, is that which
contributes much to their glory. It is a poor common Virtue which finds no
resistance in its operations; The praise of Heroic Virtue consists in the
conquering of great difficulties. So that this project would be less admirable
than it is, if it could be effected without pain, and if the execution thereof
were easy. But what objections may be made to this, and difficulties met with
herein; will be altogether such, as that we shall be easily able to Answer the
One, and Remedy the other.

Some will presently say, That to attempt this, is, in a manner to go about to
hinder an effect, which must necessarily happen. That it is, as if one should
undertake to stop the course of the Stars, and hinder the Revolution of the
Seasons. That Jesus Christ and his Apostles have foretold there should be
Heresies, Dissentions, and Schisms in the Christian Church. That this is
permitted by the Providence of God, to make evident the Zeal and Constancy of
his Faithful Servants: Insomuch that it would be to strive against the Eternal
Decrees, and Rules appointed in the Counsel of God, to endeavor to prevent the
division or dissension among Christians. But for satisfying this Objection,
besides what has been said upon this Point, at the beginning of this Treatise.
There is but one thing to consider, which is, that this Prediction is not only
grounded upon a Decree of God, for the ordering of things which should happen
in his Church; but upon an effect of the evil disposition of the Spirits of
Men, which is cause of the Disunion. And that hinders Us not from laboring to
remedy this cause, and put a stop to these deplorable effects. So that what
Jesus Christ has foretold us of the Fire which he was come to kindle in the
Earth, by the Preaching of his Gospel, hinders not his Servants from ^^^^^ng,
with great affection, to extinguish it, and to stay the great burning which
this Flame might cause; Moreover, if it were so, that (...) out, because it has
been foretold: Yet it does not import thus much, that it should abide
continually. Is it not enough, that it has taken place for so many Ages? Is it
not time to stop its Course, and see an end of it? So will the Prophecy have
had its accomplishment in our Fathers days, and we shall, in ours, enjoy the
calm, after all these Tempests. Let us add hereunto, that this very word, which
foretells us these Divisions, makes us also hope for an estate of Peace, and
Quiet in the Church. It makes times of refreshment, and ease, to succeed all
these great disturbances; and assures us that there shall be such a firm Peace
in the Earth, that we shall see those Creatures, which are the greatest Enemies
one to the other, that is to say, those Spirits wherein is the most
contrariety, dwell, and unite together. Who knows, but that we may live to
enjoy those happy times? Who knows, but that in our days, we may see this
general Peace among all Christians? And I durst promise, that by the assistance
and bounty of God, This shall come to pass, if our Sins do not put a hinderance
to it, and our particular Interests more sway us, than the general good of
Christendom.

It must be said in the second place that this Design of bringing all
Christians to acknowledge, but so small a Number of Heads in Christian Religion,
approved by every one, is directly opposite to the Apostles Doctrine, and to
the Practice of the Primitive Christians. Those, who dispute so strongly
against the Errors which arose in their times; Those who condemned with so
much indignation, all who did not conform to the Holy Doctrine, which they
received from the Lord; Is there any likelihood that they would have hearkened
to these Propositions of beating with one another, and a charitable
condescending in these Points of Religion? Would St. Paul have listened to such
an accommodation, who writ with so much sharpness against the Galatians, who
had suffered themselves to be seduced by certain false Teachers: Would St.
John, who refused to have any converse with Heretics, have approved of this
Overture? To which I answer, that what persuaded these Holy Men, to act on this
manner, was, that they regarded not so much the diversity of Opinions, which
they disapproved, as the evil disposit^on of those, who went about to establish
those ill Opinions. They well saw that what these Persons were about to
contrive, was not out of a spirit of simplicity, and humility: They observed
nothing in all their conduct, but particular Interests of Worldly honor,
profit, authority, and rule, which all their endeavors carried them to. These
now are Motives, against which we can never make too much Zeal and Indignation
appear. But we see, they dealt clearly otherwise with such poor People, as had
been seduced by these crafty Wits, than they did with these Incendiaries, these
spirits of Lying. They treated those with mildness, but these they condemned
with severity: They bare with the first, and had charity for them, but they had
a Holy, and Just anger for the second: They allowed some Liberty to the former,
but granted nothing to the Latter. (...) also how St. Paul, that Zealous (...)
of God, is not afraid in (...) question of the Resurrection (...) our Bodies,
(so important in R^ligio^,) o^ s^^ing a great value on this holy and charitable
bearing with one another. To this might be added that these Holy Men have been
immediately inspired by the spirit of God, to acknowledge, and make known to
others these Heavenly truths. And this being so, they might condemn with
boldness, and with knowledge of the Cause, those who rejected the truth, which
appeared to them in the open Day; Whereas at present, we not having these
Lights, and this Supernatural and Miraculous Assistance, are obliged to keep
our selves strictly to the express terms of the Doctrine contained in the Holy
Scriptures.

Morcover, it might be Objected, that this Design is of dangerous consequence:
That it is to give to every one a liberty of having what Opinion he pleases;
and also in matters of importance, such as have hitherto divided Men's spirits;
That it is to give an occasion of falling insensibly into an indifferency for
Religion, and to favor, in some sort, the contempt of all. Now, as this is a
pressing Objection, and able to drive from this design all good Souls, if it
were well founded; I am confident that whosoever shall have well examined the
Foundations which I have laid down, will find that there is nothing further
from my purpose, than this consequence, which they would draw from it. This
would be to make darkness arise from light, and as the Scripture says, to draw
filthiness from that which is pure, to imagine such effects should proceed from
a cause so holy and innocent. Can that which only tends to the Re-uniting of
Christians in the same Opinions, hurry them into impiety, and irreligion? Will
that which brings Us back to the most plain, and most naked Doctrine of the
Gospel, cause an indifferency for Religion to spring from it? What then would
this be, living without Religion, to be fully persuaded, that there is a God,
who has created Heaven and Earth, who has made Man kind, who punishes the
wicked, and cherishes the Good? Is it to be without Religion, to believe
firmly that we have no other means of getting out of that misery, wherein our
Sins have cast Us, but by embracing the promises which God has made Us, in his
Son Jesus Christ? Is it to be indifferent in matters of Religion, to hold for
certain, that there is no way to obtain Life and Eternal Happiness, but by that
of Holiness, and good Works? Is it to be impious, wholly to consecrate our
selves to the service of God, according to the Rules which he has prescribed
Us in his Word, under the color, that there are but sew Rules embraced; Yet
however embraced, with an entire persuasion of their truth? I maintain, on the
contrary, that all these defects of Piety, and all these inclinations to
irreligion, do not proceed from any other cause, than this, that Religion has
been overcharged with too many curious and strange Questions. I hold that it is
this great number of Ceremonies, scrupulous Observations of the externals of
Religion, and such other trisles, which have divided the minds of Men, and
alienated the most tender affections. For those who are not penetrating enough
to search into, and resolve all the difficulties which are met with in these
kind of matters, suffer themselves to fall into an indifferency. They never
looked upon Religion, but as a Subject whereon the most subtle, and active Wits
set themselves awork. Whereas, if we did but once reduce Christian Religion, to
the natural simplicity of its Rules, it would then discover all its graces and
beauty, and would be loved by us all, because it would have nothing in it, but
what was lovely to our Eye.

Lastly, There might be produced other difficulties, which might occur in the
prosecution of this grand design. Some will say, that if it were a feasible
thing, it would have long ago come into the heads of some others, who would
have tried it; And if they did discover it, without making some attempt in it,
it was because they knew the execution of it to be impossible. That there are
too many different Geniouses to overcome, too many different Interests to
reconcile, too many Jealousies and distrusts to surmount: That after we shall
have begun to remedy the precedent evils, there will arise from this design
other new subjects of contention and dispute, and by consequence of Division.
But perchance no body to this present has ever considered this affair, as I do:
It may be, if they have made the same discovery, they have wanted application
of spirit to form the design of it, and clear the difficulties. For my part, I
do not think the difficulties unconquerable: And I say once more, that would we
engage in it with Zeal, and Religious motives, the affair would succeed
happily, to the great good of all Christendom. These spirits would let
themselves be vanquished by the motions of Piety, and Charity. All these
particular Interests would give place to that, of the Glory of our Sovereign.
All these Jealousies, and Distrusts would be smothered by an ardent Zeal, for
the Service of God. And why shall I loose the hopes of succeeding in this
generous Design? Did we not see, that at the Disputation at Poissy, in the Year
1561. The Roman Catholics and Protestants had almost agreed together about the
terms, wherein the Article of the Communion should be expressed? Yet that is
esteemed the greatest difference amongst them. And had it not been for certain
Doctors, who indeed, for their particular Interests, broke off this
accommodation, it would then have been seen, that these two Grand Parties would
have been reconciled together. Do we not know that at the Conference held at
Marporg in Germany, in the Year 1529. between Luther and Zuinglius, they sell
into agreement about certain expressions, almost in all the Points of Religion,
and it was concluded, that as to those whereon they could not likewise agree,
they should bear charitably one with another, and that that should not hinder
the Reunion which was to be made. I know that afterward it was crossed, by the
ill disposition of bad spirits. But, when all these particular Interests, and
prejudicate Opinions, shall be removed, which have at other times crossed all
these fair designs, what shall hinder us from meeting in that Point, and true
Center, now at last, wherein all Christians may be Reunited? Who shall hinder
us in those things, wherein it may be, we cannot easily be enlightened, from
using a charitable, and brotherly bearing with one another? And that so we may
work together, as well United Brethren, for the Glory of the Common Father of
this great Christian Family, whose Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, cannot be
divided? The greatest rub is in the first steps, which must be made toward
this Reunion, but this is no unconquerable difficulty.

We read in the Relations of Voyages, made to the Eastern Countries, that in
Turkey, Persia, etc. All the Christians which are there met with, of whatsoever
Sect they be, live together in a perfect Unity, and give mutually all possible
marks of a sincere friendship.

Olearius observes, that in Persia they make no difficulty of joining together
in their Devotions. And Peter de la Valle, a Roman Gentleman, relates, ( Tom.
2. Ep. 3.) that when an English Ambassador arrived at Hispahan, a Consultation
was held, whether or no the Roman Catholics, the Spaniards, and Italians,
which were there, should go to Visit Him, and that by Joint consent they were
of Opinion, that it was the common Interest, to make it appear to that
Mohammedan Prince, notwithstanding some difference that there was amongst them
in certain Points of Religion, yet that they lived together in a perfect
correspondence. And he adds a very considerable Instance, VIZ. That in
Constantinople, all the Christians, both Catholics and Heretics (as his
phrase is) dwell together in so excellent and perfect an Unity, that once when
he lived there, I know not upon what occasion, the Jesuits having fallen into
some great trouble; The Ambassadors of England and Holland, who otherwise are
their mortal Enemies, (as he says) were the first, who spoke in their favor,
and made their business be dispatched, with all the good success which they
could desire. What hinders Us here in Europe, in the midst of Christianity,
that we cannot do that, by a motive of Charity, which they in the Levant do by
the Principle of the Interest of Trade, and civil Affairs, and that, we drawing
again one toward another, should not agree at last in the Fundamental Points,
which may Unite Us altogether: And although this Design should not be so
readily brought to perfection; Meditation would be very advantageous, and very
conducing to it. Particular Persons, who shall have tasted of it, would draw
much satisfaction from it; They would be disabused, as to many of their
preconceived Opinions; They would find themselves discharged of a heavy Yoke;
They would unmask Christian Religion, and discover its beauteousest Face, as
being most pure, and most plain. They would love it, and dwell together in its
profession, with singular comfort. I shall also add this same, that if the
Proposition should not succeed so happily, for all Christians in general, it
might take effect in many particular States of Europe. I mean amongst those
Christians, where there are diversities of Opinions and Professions. Could we
not, at least in these places labor herein, for some good accommodation? And
would not the Fruit which grows thence, be capable of inviting others to take a
share in it?

The Conclusion. The Profits and Advantages, which might be hoped for from this
Design.
HE must be very dim-sighted, who cannot plainly see the signal advantages,
which may be expected from so-excellent a Design. It would be an admirable
means for advancing the Glory of God, to establish his Doctrine, in the purity
and simplicity which is natural to it. Men have been desirous to supply by
their prudence, the defects which they thought they had observed, in the
conduct of providence. They thought that God had not in His Word explained
Himself, neither clear enough, nor amply enough, to be understood, without
assistance. Thence proceeded all these expositions, Paraphrases, Commentaries,
Questions and Disputes, which have oppressed, and almost choked the most
excellent, and most holy Doctrine, that ever appeared in the World. If
therefore we can but once rid her of this Burden, she will appear in all her
luster again, and establish in its ancient purity the service of Him, who is
manifested by Her. Under the old Covenant, God rejected the Worship, which the
most supersticious amongst the Jews offered him* and that because they had
modeled it according to their fancies, and had rather endeavored the
observance of these outward things, than the solidity and essence of true
Piety. God refuses his Graces to those, who have no mind to receive them,
merely simple and pure as they are: To mix them with ours, is absolutely to
spoil them. And now seeing we are so unhappy at this present, as not to enjoy
the communication of the Graces of Heaven, nor that blessed commerce which the
first Christians had with God, who doubts but that this must needs come from
hence, that we have quitted their simple and innocent carriage in Divine
Service? We have undertaken to serve Him after our manner, and we have
endeavored to know Him, only by such Ideas, which our Caprichious fancies have
fashioned of Him; This has properly been the cloud, which has intercepted our
sight of Him; This, certainly, has been the Sin, which being the most capital
of all, has made Him conceal Himself from us, and the provocation which has
obliged his Justice to chastize, by the deprivement of his Graces, those who
have neglected the simplicity of his Doctrine. We must therefore re-enter into
that first estate of simplicity, humility, and charity, to recover that which
we have lost, that is to say, God and his Graces: And this is what we should
hope for, from the execution of this Design.

The second advantage which we may expect, is, that we should find it much
easier to extirpate Vice, and to procure the Reformation of Manners in Society.
We are driven to a necessity of certain Disputes, and strange Controversies,
whilst we should be rooting out the passions, which choke the Fruit of the
Doctrine of the Gospel. We make sallies out upon the Enemy, whilst Sedition
molests us within. Let us cast away these unprofitable Questions: We have
enough to do, to make Answer to the Reproaches of our own Consciences. We shall
never think of reforming our manners, whilst we spend the chiefest of our time,
in maintaining these impertinent Discourses. We shall not be able to defend our
selves from ill examples, if we employ our Arms in vindicating of indifferent
Opinions, which cannot so long be debated Pro, and Con, without prejudice to
Salvation: Especially since this diversity of Opinions destroys, as it has
been proved, both Charity, which is the foundation of Christian virtues, and
humility, which is the soul of them. The fire of this Division must first be
extinguished, before we can proceed, with success, toward the Correction of
Manners and Reformation of Life. Therefore it is this, that all good Christian
Souls do sigh after.

We might have great reason to hope that the State would have also a
considerable advantage by this design. People would become more tractable, and
submit with more willingness to the Orders of their Governors, when they
should see themselves united with them in the same Profession. It has been
lways observed, that men's Affections have never been straightly linked
together, where their Minds have been divivided by different Opinions: Moreover
all those subtilties, which we cause to arise about Religion, do ordinarily
make peoples spirits inquisitive, proud, standing upon punctilio's, obstinate,
and by consequence, more difficult to be brought to Reason and their Obedience.
Every parcular man pretends to have a right of taking cognizance of those
Controversal Matters, to inrerpose his judgment therein, and then with great
vehemence to defend them. After this, in Affairs of State they will take the
same liberty, which they gave themselves in those of Religion. They believe,
that if it be permitted them to control the Opinions of their Governors in
the Church, where the Service of God is; it should likewise be free for them to
examine the Conduct of those who are set over them in State. Thus the Reunion
which I propose, will be a powerful means to hold every one in his Duty.

All Princes of Christendom would draw considerable advantages from this
design, besides the Obedience of their Subjects, of which I have now been
speaking. They might strictly unite themselves together; For these Jealousies,
these Distrusts and these Divisions, which ordinaiily arise from diversiry of
Professions, coming absolutely to cease, all these different Interests, which
separate them, would unite in one, and the Fruit would be common to them all.
This Interest would carry them on jointly to oppose themselves to the Enemies
of the Name of Christian, and take over them all advantage, which reason and
justice could allow. Is it not a strange thing that since the Roman Catholics,
the Protestants and the Greeks have so rent and torn each other; we see that
the Mahometans have made so great a progress amongst them, by reason of their
Divisions? If, when the Turks came to fix themselves in Hungary, and then
afterward attacqued the State of the Venetians, all Christendom with one
accord had opposed themselves to their designs; Had they reaped those
advantages; which now they have obtained over those two States? Is it not a
very astonishing, not to say a shameful, thing, that some neighboring
Countries to those dreadful-Enemies of all Christians, do think themselves
obliged to treat with them, and that also upon disadvantagious Terms, merely
out of the Distrusts and Jealousies which they have of other Christians? They
shamefully make Peace with the Turks, to turn their Arms against the
Christians; esteeming it to be running to that which is the most pressing
necessity: Thus the common Enemy advances, and gets much ground every day, by
reason of our Divisions. To stop this evil, I see no other more effectual
remedy, than to hasten this Agreement of Opinions, which (without doubt) will
be followed by that of affections.

The common People will find herein this satisfaction, that they shall no more
be troubled in Religion, with so great a number of Questions, and diversity of
Opinions, proposed to them as necessary to Salvation. Hereby will be banished
from hence all those Scruples of Conscience, those Troubles, those Alarms and
those Distrusts, so directly opposite to the Genius of Christian Religion, and
to the Peace which the Eternal Soh of God has procured for us. Thus the simple
Artificers, the Laborers, and those who are most unlearned and ignorant would
be guided in the way of Salvation, and be led to the enjoyment of eternal
Blessedness. The Doctors, by this means, would not have any advantage over the
people, in the Knowledge and practice of things necessary to Salvation. It
might be said, that hitherto there have been, as it were, two different
Religions, in one and the same Religion: The first is of the learned and
Scholars, the other that of the common People, Women and Children: Yet Jesus
Christ never had a double Auditory, he never instructed the Pharisees and the
Doctors of the Law otherwise than the common People: And when he chose
Successors to supply his room, they were poor Fishermen, who had more concern
in the instructing and saving of such as were like them in condition, than
boasting their subtilty in the Disputes of the Schools, and confounding such as
thought to have the advantage over others in arguing.

I am also persuaded, that those particularly, who are employed in
Ecclesiastical Charges, and called to teach others, will here find great
advantage. They will no more tread upon those Thorns, which heretofore they met
with, in all those critical and unprofitable Questions: They will have no more
those Distrusts and Alarms, which they gave themselves, doubting if they were
not in a wrong way, and if they misled not others: They will not fear the
encountering a Doctrine which is truer than that they profess. Let them say what
they will, this thought oftentimes makes their hearts ache, who, amongst them,
have tender Consciences. Therefore seeing themselves delivered from all those
unquietnesses, they would acquit themselves of their Charge with much more Joy.
They would labor with pleasure for the Advancement of the Glory of God. They
would bend all their thoughts to stir up every one to a good life, and they
themselves would be Examples to others, of Virtue, Piety and Charity. It Is
often seen, that amidst the Contentions which the Doctors raise about some
Niceties of Doctrinal Points, there is little or no Zeal for the Glory of God.
They grow so passionate for the getting of some advantage in a Dispute, until,
at last, they let themselves be mastered and vanquished by their own Passions.
Many times strang^ Controversies make us forget that business that we should
have with our selves; and some study more how to speak well, and dispute well,
than how to live well.

Lastly, who does not see, that if we bring this design about, it will prove an
excellent means to draw to the Gospel many people, who look not upon it now
but with aversion and contempt. This Simplicity, this Beauty, and this Facility
which is observed in Christian Religion, together with the perfect Unity of the
Professors thereof, will be a powerful Loadstone to attract to it, all these,
who hitherto have rejected it: When they shall see that this holy Religion is
not made to consist merely in Ceremonies, that is to say, in outward grimaces,
which most commonly terrify and keep off those that are well inclined toward
it, rather than invite them to follow it: When they shall never more hear talk
of all those critical and troublesome Questions, which are risen up in
Christianity: When they shall observe no more particular interests predominant
in the Spirit of Christians: When they shall be convinced, that there is
nothing but the Love of God, Charity toward our Neighbor, and the desire of
living well, which inspires them: Lastly, when they shall see in the Faces of
these Christians the marks of true Peace and Comfort, which the Christian
possesses within: They must have deprived themselves of all sense of Virtue,
they must have extinguished utterly all sparks of Reason, and turn sworn
enemies of their own good, if they desire not to enter into a Society which
has all these advantages.

I doubt not also but those blessed Spirits who continually stand before the
Throne of God, will be concerned in the Advantages of this holy Union; for if
they so much interest themselves in the conversion of a poor sinner, that they
rejoice and sing aloud in the Quire of Glory, will they not make a solemn
Festival in Heaven for the reuniting of all Christians upon earth? I am also
persuaded, that God, seeing we all bend our Course toward him, with the same
heart and the same affections, will certainly come to meet and receive us; He
will embrace us in his mercies, and speak to us in the motions of his loving
kindness, especially if we say to him with the Author of that Treatise of the
Imitation of Christ, Lib. 1. C. 3. I am weary with hearing and reading so many
things. It is in thee alone, O my God, that all is included which I desire or
wish for. Let all Doctors hold their peace, let all Creatures keep silence in
thy presence, and be thou pleased alone to speak to me.

I wish with all my heart, that all these considerations may make such an
impression upon the spirits of all those who shall read this Writing, that
every one may afterward contribute, according to his power, to the advancement
of this great work; and that God would favor, in such manner, our attempts
with his Grace, that we might suddenly see a happy success therein to his
Glory, and the good of all Christians. And because my voice is too weak to
awaken them, and draw them out of the estate where I behold them now; I wish
they would hear that of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, whose Voice and
Style all Christians know. He calls to them thus, in Ephesians. 4. Be ye kind one
to another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace. There is but one body and one spirit, even as you are called to one hope
of your vocation: There is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in you all. This great
servant of God likewise beseeches them all, with words capable to work upon the
hardest hearts, speaking to the Philippians, Chap. 2. If, says he, there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels of mercy, if any compassion; make my Joy complete, that ye be of
the same opinion, having the same charity, being of the same courage and
acquiescing in the same thing. Neither let any thing be done amongst you with
strife, or vain glory: But rather esteeming one the other, in humility of
spirit, more excellent than himself, not every one regarding his own particular
interest, but that also which appertains to others. Let there be therefore, one
mind in you, like that which was also in Jesus Christ. To whom, with the
Father, be Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
These Books are Printed and Sold by William Gilbert, at the Half Moon in Saint
Paul's Churchyard.
Folio.
THe Annals of the Old and New Testament by James Usher, Doctor in Divinity,
Archbishop of Armagh. Danielis Sennerti opera omnia, 3. Tom. Venet. Poeta
Graeci Veteres Carminis Heroici Scriptores, qui extant, omnes. 2 Tom. Biblia
Graeca. Francosurti. Book of Martyrs by J. Fox 3 Vol. Alexander de Ales. 4 Vol.
Quarto.
Jani Alexandri Ferrarii Caenobitae Augustiniani Euclides Catholicus, sive
demonstratio Romanae fidei ex primis, certis and evidentibus Principiis,
Mathematica methodo and connexis continua seriv propositionibus deducta. Regal
Protomartyr, or the Memorial of the Martyrdom of King Charles the first, in a
Sermon preached upon that occasion, by John Allington Rector of Vppingham.
Learn to lie warm, or an Apology for that Proverb, It is good sheltring under
old Hedge: containing Reasons wherefore a young Man should marry an old Woman.
Miltons History of England, from the first traditional beginning to the Norman
Conquest. The Way to get Wealth, by Gervase Markham.
Octavo.
Discourse of Evangelical Love, Church Peace and Unity. English Rogue, or the
Witty Extravagant, in four parts. Hools Greek Testament. The last and now only
complete Collection of the newest and choicest Songs and Poems that are now
extant at Court, Theaters and elsewhere, with above forty new Songs never
before in Print, which are now added to this second part of Wistminster
Drollery.
Duodecimo.
Hungarian Rebellion, an Historical Relation of the late wicked Practices of
the three Counts, Nadasti, Serini and Frangepani; tending to subvert the
Government of his present Imperial Majesty of Hungary, and introduce the
Mohammedan, with their Arraignment, Condemnation and manner, of Execution. By P.
A Gent.
FINIS.

