A TREATISE Of the necessity of Humane Learning FOR A GOSPEL-PREACHER: Showing
the use of I. Languages. II. Rhetoric. III. Logic. IV. Natural Philosophy. V.
Moral Philosophy. VI. History. VII. Chronology. VIII. Arithmetic. IX. Geometry.
X. Astronomy. XI. Geography.
AND The benefits of Learning in all Ages. Also this Question is Determined,
Whether Grace be Essential to a Minister of the Gospel?

By EDWARD REYNER late Minister of the Gospel in Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed by John Field, and are to be sold by Joseph Cranford, at the
Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1663.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe grand Enemy of humane Happiness, having baffled Man in his first
Encounter, and cheated him of his knowledge and his innocence together, has
studied ever since to improve his Follies, and thereby to complete his Misery.
In pursuance of which he saw it his concernment, to employ his policy in
evacuating those means, whereby the Sons of Adam might attempt some reparation
of their loss, and raise their Intellectuals, so much depressed by the fall
which he occasioned. Well understanding, that the interest of his Kingdom does
not a little depend upon the ignorance of men, as most proper to dispose them
for his conduct, and that which brings in great throngs of Subjects to him from
the Pagan World: which might well add eagerness to his industry: in seeking the
advancement of it, in that other part which calls it self Christian. And here,
because Light had broken forth, his business was, where he could not compass a
total extinction of it, either to restrain its luster, or disappoint its
influence. The former he has performed among the Papists, with whom it is so
muffled, as not to be seen by vulgar eyes. The Romish Church being made a Stove
of Devotion, where Religion is hatched in the dark, and men may grow hot with
the sentiments of a fiery zeal, without discerning any blaze, or spark of
knowledge. But when the subtle Impostor meets with others, that cannot spare
their sight, that care not for having their Candle shut up in a dark Lanthorn,
and that born by another too; advised by their differing tempers, he forms new
Methods; and since they will not be patient without Light, he bestirs himself,
either to embase its Purity, or hinder its Efficacy, or counterfeit its
Appearance.

Its Purity is embased, while it is mixed with shadow, with gross Conceits,
wild Fancies, perplex Opinions; while obscured by dark, abstruse, or imperfect
Representations; while deflowred by corrupt Glosses, and tinctured by some ill
disposed Medium, through which it has past, either in the form of a Version,
or an Exposition.

It is infeebled in its Operation, and its Efficacy obstructed, when it is
eclipsed through the interposition of some black suggestions, or clouded with
doubts and scruples; when its rays are dissipated and dispersed, being split
with Distinctions, and bandied away in Disputes; when it is employed only to
form the visible species of Sanctity, to exhibit the glitterings and
splendors, the quaint colors and imagery of a bare Profession; while it serves
but to gild men's Discourses, and cast such a brightness upon some of their
Actions most exposed to observation, as may dazzle the eyes of others, that the
impieties they more closely prosecute, may securely escape both their notice
and suspicion too. Nor do there want other sinister purposes to which it may be
applied; as, the rarifying of men's self-conceit, till it swell and puff them
up; the inkindling of heart-burnings and animosities amongst them; whilst all
the heat that accompanies the illumination of their minds is derived upon
their passions, and ferments their peevish humors, till they proceed to such
Calentures of contention, as are ever attended with a cold fit of Charity, if
not of Piety too. And so their Light serves only to put out the fire of love,
and making the fervency of their spirits exhale in their contests, leaves them
to freez in the service of God, and the concerns of their souls: by which means
Satan is highly gratified, and his designs of defeating the most necessary
knowledge not a little promoted. He is well content it should shine for men to
talk, but not to live by: he would either draw them to make an unprofitable use
of it, or else withdraw them from making any at all: which he most usually, and
not unsuccessfully, attempts, by entertaining their minds with so many
divertisements, and distracting them with such a variety of objects, as not to
give them leave by me ditation to recollect, by a frequent and serious
reflection to unite those beams which have disfused themselves there; so as to
beget a holy fervor within, and produce in the heart such a vital flame, as
might impart vigor to the whole man, and warm it into a pious activity. It is
none of the least pernicious of the Tempters Arts, to set men's Affections at
odds with their Judgments, and make their Practice dissent from their
Principles: which he often performs by presenting to them, in the most alluring
forms, the various delights of sense, the sweetest and most gustful pleasures,
which may infuse soft and easy prejudices into their minds against the
strictness of their opinions, and release the severities of their deportment,
till their indulgence extend not only to the more modest sallies of a lustful
inclination, but to the bolder excursions of a dissolute sensuality. Hence many
live at such a distance from their knowledge, that their Notions and their
Actions seem to be calculated for very different Meridians: it being commonly
midnight with the latter, when bright day with the former.

Thus I have recounted the principal Artifices, whereby the Prince of Darkness
seeks to undermine and render ineffectual that Light, which men have received
from Divine Revelation. A third Policy still remains, which is, the
counterfeiting of its appearance; while men are induced to ow their
Illumination either to the flashes of Fancy, the lightnings of a heated brain,
the appearing of Lucifer their morning star, or the rising of some new
Luminary, to which that transformed Angel performs the office of an
Intelligence.

The old Sophister has of late earnestly applied himself to the profession of
Optics, and chiefly taught men that experiment, in which, by shutting out the
Light that shines in the place where they are, admitting none but at a little
hole, they might have a more pleasant and delightful view of things; whilst
objects from without should crowd in, and offer themselves to their observation
in the most lovely forms: For he knew, that when men's curiosity had once guided
them to the trial hereof, those things which they saw right before would now
become invers'd, and be quite otherwise represented: and he, by a convenient
disposing and presenting of Objects, might paint upon their minds what idea's
he pleased; which would be more lively and express, the nearer their minds
resembled unwritten paper, by being cleared of what good Principles were
imprinted on them before. He has circumvented many by inviting them out of the
Sunshine of Divine Ordinances to refresh themselves in the shade, and take the
pleasures of a retired Walk; where he has led them on by degrees till the
night has overtaken them, and by concealing their way rendered the offer of his
Lanthorn acceptable, who had ever an Ignis fatuus, or some wisp of error ready,
to direct their goings: as not ignorant, that when men are benighted, Lights of
this nature will be more admired and followed then all the Stars of Heaven; and
there are no better guides to his black Mansion the pit of destruction.

He has a great advantage for imposing upon such as he has got into the dark;
for here rotten wood will shine, and any cheap delusion serve to amuse the
sight: though sometimes he may go to the cost of a more solemn cheat, of some
garish apparition or splendid disguise of error: yea, he can match Mystery with
falsehood, and teach the most shallow conceits to be profound. He has a
newfangled dress to recommend the vainest and most Antic Tenets; and can
cloth an ill-contrived opinion with a venerable obscurity: By this means
accommodating himself to minds of various conditions; some of which are taken
with the surperficial glistering, others with the intricate dimness of what is
propounded. But lest the credit of his impostures, which have been so
successful, might fall, to support it, and secure them from being detected, he
has tried to disparage all External Light (and Internal too, of which himself
is not the Author) and disoblige men's regard, both to Divine Declarations
published in holy Writ, and to the Law of Nature, and those notices of good and
evil, which are most intimate and familiar to the minds of men; and, lastly,
to the sober judgments of Reason, and the genuine deductions either of
Scriptural or Natural Principles. For it was easy to conclude, that if he
could fetch men off from attending to these, he himself should have leave to
indite their Creed, and have their faith pliant to his proposals: that he might
be the Conductor of their Devotion, and the Infernal sire lend the Coal with
which their Incense should burn.

But if he cannot deprive the Scripture of that Authority which it carries with
men, he will endeavor to hinder them of a great part of the Contents and
Advantages of it, by decrying all use of Reason and Learning in sacred matters.
For, if he can prevail with men to renounce the former, then farewell so much of
the Divine Will, as is not set down in Scripture in express terms, but only,
though clearly, employed, and flowing from what is written by a fair and
necessary consequence; which is the part of Reason to discern and deduce. Nor
is its help less requisite to the discovery of the genuine sense, and
importance of what is expressly recorded, and needs to be interpreted; which
must be found out by observing the Tenor and Series, the Scope and Design of
the Discourse, with the dependence of the several parts, and the proportion any
particular place bears to others, by comparing obscurer Texts with clearer,
shorter with fuller; those that have no limitations or restrictions with the
like which have; and carefully distinguishing the various acceptions of words,
especially the figurative from the proper. All which are the operations of
Reason: which is further instrumental to put a difference between Ceremonial
and Moral Precepts; between those that are of particular concernment as
restrained to some certain Nation, Person, or Time, and those which are of a
general Aspect, binding all indifferently, and perpetually. For, in as much as
these are sometimes in Scripture immediately connected or mingled together in
the same tenor of speech, and enjoined alike, without the least note of
discrimination; there must be some other principle distinct from it to find out
their difference, and that is Reason; which (besides that it may infer it from
the Scripture it self, discerning which Commands are universal and perpetual,
by collation of other places; which singular and temporary, by consideration of
circumstances) is peculiarly fitted for acknowledging Moral Precepts, because
they are founded in Reason, have an essential consonancy to, and connection with
a rational Nature, and are contained in that Law which God has written upon
the hearts of all men, and published by the voice of Reason; which indeed is
not more useful to distinguish commands, then necessary to render us capable of
them. For therefore the bruits are exempted from the demands of obedience, and
have no Law imposed on them, because they being creatures destitute of Reason,
it is impossible for them to discern the differences of good and evil, or to
understand an injunction, and consequently to frame their actions by it: To
which men are disposed by those rational faculties with which God has invested
them, and so come within the compass of an obligation, which could not else be
fastened upon them. Wherefore Conscience, whose part it is to apprehend this
obligation, excite men to their duty, and challenge them for their neglect,
must needs be an intelligent and rational Principle; which evidently appears in
that it operates by discourse and ratiocination (whence its actings are styled
(...) reasonings, Romans 2.15.) seeing it draws particular conclusions from
universal rules; collecting from the Law of God generally proposed what ought
to be done in special cases and circumstances: and from the agreement or
disagreement of such and such actions to the Divine Will (which it finds by
comparing one with the other) it judges them either good or bad, and thence
infers men's duty for the future, and either their guilt, or their integrity as
to what is past, while it directs, accuses, or acquits; all which it performs
by a Syllogistical Process. He therefore must resolve to make no use of God's
Commands, who will not use his Reason: and he that would banish it, must send
away his Conscience with it; yea, and his Religion too. For it is a reasonable
service, Romans 12.1. a service in which Reason, or what is endued with it, is
presented to God. Irrational Creatures were offered in Sacrifice under the Law;
but under the Gospel only rational. We must present our selves to God; and not
our Bodies only, but our Minds, our reasonable faculties: John 4.23, 24.
Matthew. 22.37. Mark 12.33.
for God will be worshipped in spirit: we must se^ him with our understandings,
and l^ ^im with all our minds, as well as with all our hearts. Our Love must be
intelligent, as well as affectionate; and not only active, but contemplative,
discovering it self in frequent thoughts and meditations of him, and in
diligent enquiries into his Nature and Will. True Religion is so far from
discarding or depressing that which is of greatest excellency in the
constitution of man, his Reason, that it does exceedingly raise and advance it;
it cures its blemishes and imperfections, and consigns it to spiritual and
divine employments. God does not destroy or void any thing in the new Creation
which he made in the old, but only mends and rectifies it, sanctifies and
prepares it for those purposes to which it was designed by him, but since grown
indisposed. The Candle of the Lord, of which the Wiseman speaks Prove. 20.27.
is not here extinguished, but snuff'd that it may burn the brighter; and
increased with illustrious accessions from above. In short, He that is a
Christian must be a Man; and he that is a Man must be rational. For it is
Reason that makes the Man, and gives him so great advantage and pre-eminence
above all other visible Beings. Take this away, and he becomes like the Beasts
that perish which we sinde eminently verified in No^^^ ^adnezzar; of whom, when
he came from grasing, it is said Dan. 4.34. That his Understanding, or (as it is
Verse 36.) his Reason (for both these are the same thing) returned to him: upon
which he broke forth into the Praises of the most High, and made that excellent
Confession in Verse 34, 35, 37. Those therefore, who disclaim Reason, cast off
the badge and cognizance of Humanity, and in effect give up their Names to an
inferior Order of Beings, with a foul ingratitude reproaching the Bounty of
Heaven, as if God had conferred nothing valuable in that eminent favor and mark
of excellency, by which he has distinguished them from brutish natures, and
rendered them capable of apprehending spiritual objects, Heaven and future
Happiness; yea, and of perceiving and enjoying himself, of which the irrational
Creatures are utterly incapable, and that because they are devoid of Reason,
which gives the capacity: though there be further qualifications requisite to
an actual fitness for the fruition of God; yet these are such as cannot
possibly be where the other is not. Let such then, and such only, speak
against it, as affect to be inapprehensive, and are in love with stupidity.
Surely no considerative person can account it the praise of those in 2 Pet.
2.12. that they were (...), as brute Beasts, or (which the words properly
import) as Animals without Reason. Was it the Perfection of the Galatians that
they were (...), unintelligent? Gal. 3.1.
Or did Agur commend himself when he said, He had not the understanding of a
man? If it be of no moment, and not worth the having, why does the Psalmist
warn us not to be as the Horse, or the Mule, Psalm 32.9, with 8.
that have no Understanding, etc. and therefore are unteachable, not capable of
any counsel, or being moved with Arguments and Persuasions? For, if Men wanted
an intellectual faculty, in vain would be that instructing and teaching offered
in the foregoing Verse. Why does God bid the Israelites, after their absurd and
irrational Idolatry, Isaiah. 46.8.
remember, and show themselves Men? that is, make it appear they were
reasonable Creatures by acting rationally. Why does he call them to reason with
him Isai. 1.18. and often appeal to the judgment of Reason for the
justification of his proceedings? as Isai. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Jer. 2.9, 10, 11.
Ezekiel. 18.25, to 29. Micah 6.2, to 5. And why does he so frequently in Scripture
require us to understand, bring to mind, search, examine, meditate, consider,
judge, all which are rational operations, if Reason it self were useless to
holy and divine intentions? Which that it is not, may abundantly appear from
the use our blessed Savior made of it, especially in his Conferences with
Pharisees and Sadduces; and his Apostles in their Discourses. The Gospel was
exceedingly propagated by Paul's reasoning and disputing, Acts 17.2, 3, 4. and
18.4. and 19.8, 9, 10. For Reason may do excellent service in managing those
Arguments advantageously which are for the Truth (though they were suggested by
the Spirit) and in refuting such as are brought against it. It is necessary to
acquaint us with the vices of Ratiocination, and detect false reasonings; to
discern the force of an Objection, and level an Answer aright; and, in short,
to decide a Controversy, to prove, convince, and persuade; none of which can
be performed without reason shown. All these things considered, methinks none
should in the least question the requisiteness of Reason, without which we can
neither think nor speak consistently. Yet I find an Objection, Object.
urging the impertinency of it in divine matters, from its uncapableness of
them; because it is said of the natural man (one who has no higher Principle
then Reason) that he receives not the things of God, 1 Cor. 1.14.
neither can he know them, seeing they are spiritually discerned? To which I
return, Solut.
That divine matters, or the things of God, are of two sorts:

I. Some of them were published in and by the Creation; God having there
contrived clear intimations of his own nature and mind into the constitutions
and relations of things, from whence, by a necessary resultancy, many verities
and duties slow. For those intimations are either speculative, as, That there
is a God; That he is wise, powerful, good, etc. or practical, as, That God is
to be worshipped; That we are to do as we would be done by; That Parents are to
be honored, etc. Now both these Reason may find out by reflection and
discourse, by considering the quality of the Objects, and their intrinsic and
essential respects; and consequently natural Men, though Heathens, may
apprehend them. The Speculative they may, because God has showed these to them
by the things which he has made, Romans 1.19, 20. And the Practical, because
they have the work of the Law written in their hearts, and, while they want the
Scripture, do by Nature the things contained in the Law, Romans 2.14, 15. By
Nature, that is, by the information of Reason (the only knowing Principle in
the Nature of Man) which, though imperfectly, dictates to them the same things
that the Moral Law, set down in holy Writ, requires. And though it discover not
all Natural Precepts, yet when it has received them from the Word of God, and
wistly looks upon them, it cannot but acknowledge and embrace them with some
natural resentments, as akin to those Principles of prime note, that are
nearest alied to, and have the strictest conjunction with it self; which are so
highly reasonable, and of so clear and conspicuous a Goodness, that it can
readily approve, and easily evince the dueness and equitableness of what it
sees descended from them. Hence that of our Savior to the people Luke 13.57.
Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right? Of your selves; i.
e. by that natural ability which God has given you for this very purpose, to
distinguish between Right and Wrong, and discern what is in it self fit to be
done, and what not?

II. There are other divine matters declared only by after-revelation, which
cannot possibly be collected, and certainly concluded from the essence,
capacity, or habitude of the things to which they relate, because they do not
result from them by any moral necessity, but are the entire effects of a free
and positive Determination; the knowledge of which had been utterly
unattainable, even by the greatest sagacity, if the same gracious Will that
conceived had not disclosed it. Now of this sort are the Mysteries of the
Gospel, called the depths and hidden wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.7, 10. and the
things of the Spirit of God, verse 14. And of these it is that the Apostle
asserts the natural Man wholly inapprehensive without the Spirit. He receives
them not. (...).
He neither conceives, comprehends, nor closes with them

1. He could form no conception of them, except the Spirit had revealed them in
the Word: seeing they were the secrets of the divine Breast, the stupendous
products of his good pleasure, and such as could not fall within the compass of
man's imagination, much less of his certain knowledge, if they had not been
presented to him from above. For he could not deduce them from the Principles
of which he is naturally possessed, since they have no necessary dependence on
them; being of a quite different condition, because the matter of the other is
necessary; of these, arbitrary. In those Maxims that are of natural cognizance,
the terms do of themselves cohere by an internal congruity: but in such as are
only known by supernatural revelation, they have no firm coherence, but what
they receive from an external constitution. In the former the terms are linked
together by the Complexion and Properties of the things denoted by them, which
therefore are perfectly inseparable: in the latter they are coupled only by
the interposition of the divine Will, without which, as they were in themselves
separable, so they had continued actually disjoined. Except therefore that Act,
or Decree of Heaven, to which they owe their conjunction, were promulged, the
Propositions which they make up, could they possibly have been thought of, yet
could upon no ground have been assented to. For instance; These Articles of the
Christian Faith, That Eternal life is to be had by the death of Christ, and
that we must believe for the remission of sins, are not evidenced by any
necessary relation, or intrinsecal and natural tie between their subject and
predicate (between Eternal life, and Christ's death; between Believing and
Remission) and could not have been rightly credited, had we not been expressly
acquainted with that determination of infinite goodness that has joined them
together. Whereas in those axioms, that God is to be loved, and that he is to
be honored, there is so intimate and essential a connection between the parts
(between God, and the right to love and honor) that he, who seriously attends
thereto, may from thence, without any supernatural Revelation, be constrained
to acknowledge them undeniably true, and worthy of all acceptance: since it is
impossible that love and honor, if due to any excellency, should not be so to
the greatest and most transcendent.

2. The natural Man is not able thoroughly to penetrate into, and comprehend
divine Mysteries without the illumination of the Spirit, distributed betwixt
the Object and the Faculty, whilst it sheds light upon the things revealed,
representing them to the mind with the greatest evidence and advantage; and
also assists and furthers Reason in the perception of them, clearing and
strengthening it, and removing those prejudices under which it labored.

3. The Natural Man, without the influence of the Spirit disposing him thereto,
cannot fully close with, and affectionately entertain the things of God. He can
have no experimental feeling, no kindly and permanent impressions, no
enlivening sentiments of them.

Now take any, or all of the forementioned Senses, and what do they make
against the use of Reason in religious affairs? Will any one say, that because
it can have no apprehension of supernatural Mysteries before they be revealed,
therefore it cannot apprehend them when they are revealed? He may as well
conclude, that because he cannot now look upon any of the Gold at present hap'd
up in the Indian Mines; therefore, if it were taken out, brought over and laid
before him, he should not be able to discern it. Or who would argue, that since
his eyes are dim, or have a web grown upon them; therefore if ever he see well,
it must be without eyes? And yet thus they do, who, because their Reason is
weak, and wants much of its Primitive vigor and sharpness, cast it away as
useless to any spiritual employment: which is to act at the same rate of
discretion with him, who should make blindness the cure of dimness, and put out
his eyes to mend his sight. The Spirit performs to our minds the office of a
Perspective, rendering those things conspicuous which were before invisible, and
giving a distincter view of what was less clearly seen. Now a Perspective
supposes a visive faculty, to which it ministers relief. No man would be so
absurd as to think that he who has got spectacles has no need of eyes:
and yet he might, as well as conceit him who has the Spirit to have no use of
Reason. For this makes us capable of the operation and impressions of the
Spirit, of apprehending what he suggests, and so of being affected with it,
both because affection ever supposes an apprehension of the thing that excites
it; and the most refined and spiritual affections are the workings of our
rational part. Reason is the sense of our souls; by this, when the Spirit has
put it into a right temper, we may see, and savor the things of God, and can
see no more without it, then we can view or relish material objects without
either sight or taste.

But I have outrun my intentions in the pursuit of a Question, which nothing
but a notorious ignorance or a great perverseness could ever have started. The
rather induced hereto, because many of those, who were no Friends to Learning,
were opposers of Reason also; who now possibly may be rather silent then
satisfied. And though, since the Scene of affairs was altered, their conceits
walk not so much abroad as formerly, yet they may still keep within doors: upon
which account an attempt of this nature, in vindication of Reason, may not be
impertinent; only it is so to be vindicated, as that nothing above its due be
ascribed to it; none of its extravagancies justified: it is by no means to be
allowed when it grows immodest and imperious, and so big with Usurpation as to
control the dictates of Heaven, to proproclaim its own infallibity, and to
banish faith out of Religion: which it does, when men will not admit of Divine
Authority in any matters of which they are not able in all points to give a
clear and natural account: for they must either suspect Gods credit, or prefer
their own judgments before his, or at least attribute as great perfection to
their own understandings, as Omniscience it self can challenge; as if nothing
were too wonderful for them: whereas indeed the slightest and most obvious of
these inferior things are of sufficiency enough to pose and baffle them. To
exact all Truth by the scant measure of our own comprehension, and set our seal
to none which is not modelled to, and just of the same size with our
capacities; to prescribe to an Infinite Understanding, and not suffer his
Conceptions in any case to be above our reach, nor allow him any Reasons to
guide his Determinations by, but what we are acquainted with, is extremely
arrogant and supercilious. For, though it be most certain, that God offers
nothing to be credited by us, which is contrary to the sound dictates of Reason
(whereof he is the Author) or which would destroy the clear and indubitable
evidence of those discerning faculties, which God has bestowed upon us; seeing
one Truth can be no more contrary to another, Scriptural to Rational,
Supernatural to Natural, then God, who is the source of both, can be adverse to
himself, or be guilty of self-contradiction: Yet it is as certain that he can
present some Truths of so vast a bigness, as that to take the full dimensions
thereof, would be difficult above what the shortness of the most raised mind,
in this present state, can hope to attain to. No understanding, but that which
is so large as that nothing can escape it, can warrantably argue from an
ignorance either of the nature, cause, mode or end of any thing, to the
nonexistence of the thing it self. And to conclude that not to be at all,
concerning which we understand not either how or why it should be so, is no
less absurd in Theology, then in Physics and Politics. For this consequence in
Naturals would annihilate the greatest part of the world, and destroy all that
which poseth humane sagacity, our very selves not excepted. In Civils it would
annul all public Decrees, Appointments, Transactions, when people have no
prospect into the breasts of their Governors, to see the springs that turn the
wheels of State, by being made partakers of the reasons thereof. As to Divine
matters, it takes away all mysteries, and will not permit the Kings of Kings
his Secrets, nor that privilege of earthly Princes, to have a heart
unsearchable, Prove. 25.3. when indeed it becomes both Prudence and Majesty
sometimes to be reserved:
and excellent purposes may be served by concealment, the nurse of humility,
veneration, observance and an inquisitive diligence. God may keep secret the
reasons of some things which he requires to be done (as of diverse in the
Levitical Law) and also the modes of others (of which several in the Gospely
that he would have to be believed; to the end he may teach us rightly to value
his Sovereignty and Infallibility, his Authority and Testimony; and to account
the one of it self alone a sufficient obligation to Obedience, and the other to
Faith. Besides, that the understanding might have somewhat to exercise its
submission, as well as the will. And sure it can never submit to a better
judgment, nor more securely credit, then where God relates: for though it
cannot circumscribe the thing in its whole latitude, nor discern how it should
be what it is represented; yet supposing the (...) (that it is so) to be
certainly revealed, and attested by God, the clearness of the assertion will
acquit our faith of blindness, and the infallibility of the Assertor, together
with our own imperfection, and liableness to mistake, vindicate it from
unreasonableness. For not the evidence, or demonstration of what is testified,
but the unquestionable credit of the testifier is the only ground and reason
of Faith. I say, reason; because believing is a rational act, an assent to some
truth, as proved by certain authority. Believing without good reason is not
Faith, but credulity. Not, that it is necessary we should know the reason of the
thing, but only of our belief of that thing; of which no greater can be found
then his attestation who is all-knowing, and infallible; in whom infinite
Wisdom, Truth and Goodness meet and engage for our security: the first placing
him as much beyond the possibility of a mistake, as the other two free us from
the danger of a delusion, while we sincerely embrace his witness. In doing
which we need not fear being any time driven upon the belief of contradictions,
or impossibilities. For it is as eternally repugnant to his Nature to affirm an
impossibility,
as to perpetrate any iniquity. Yet there want not those who either make or
feign absurdities and contradictions in divine Doctrine: some make them by
taking Scripture-expressions in an incongruous and inconsistent sense: as
those, who, by introducing a corporal presence, make the Doctrine of the
Sacrament self-repugnant, and diametrically opposite to the most solid evidence
both of Sense and Reason. Others feign absurdities by the errors of their
argumentations. For either they judge of some sacred Verities by wrong
Principles, with which they have no connection or affinity: or else charge them
with strange and horrid Consequences, of which they are wholly innocent. Either
they mistake the circumstances and state of the case, and so proceed upon a
false Hypothesis: or else their deductions are unnatural, wild and
impertinent: and so it is not the article, but their arguing that is
unreasonable; which makes nothing against the singular advantage of Reason in
its sober and circumspect use, assisted by a superior direction, for finding
out and maintaining Truth, and hindering the triumphs of Error: To which
Learning also does not a little contribute, as being the improvement and
accomplishment of Reason; as that which advances and embellisheth our better
faculties, which relieves the imperfections of our understandings, and helps to
vindicate them from that darkness and confusion that has been the sad
concomitant of man's degenerd^^^ by which means they become more quick and
piercing, and we less liable to be imposed on. Upon which accounts the Devil
has a great spite at it; and has sufficiently expressed it of late, by working
with so great a number of men to decry and vilify it, and cast dirt upon those
that were furnished with it: which was the ready way to procure entertainment
for all delusions, as the consequence two apparently proved. For then men
committed their actions to the guidance of a wild instinct, and counted it a
great attainment to be beside themselves. A frenzy then became desirable for
its lucid intervals; the eyes of many were darkened, and their heads ak'd with
light;
they grew blind with Revelations, and unable to see for Visions. Then was the
season that, by an overheat in the pursuit of some extravagant opinion,
disposed men to religious Agues, and put their piety into shaking sits. Then to
swell with Inspiration, to converse with strange amusements, to be full of
Ecstasy, and possessed with rapture, were esteemed the chief indications of a
sanctified temper. And if in others Religion were not acquainted with such
impetuous concitations, but were more sweet and calm, more sedate and composed;
or if conscious to ^^dgement and discretion, to consideration and ^^visement,
it was censured as unworthy of its name, and stamped something of a more base
allay. Men had brought a new Style into their profession, and not a few were
(unawares) dating their Faith after the Roman account; while in guiding their
course, they made use of such a Compass as often varied in obedience to odd and
unusual attractives, and were ready to sail to any Latitude and with any Wind
(whether it came from Vaticano, or Averno was not material) so it blew but with
pretense of a Commission from the Spirit.

Common Breasts had now got their Urim, and their Thummim too, and attained so
far, that they left nothing for Heaven to complete. Those that knew least were
so improved in confidence, as not to open their mouths under an Oracle. The
infallible Chair suggests not a greater peremptoriness then breathed in their
dictates: which to contradict, or disbelieve, was infidelity, and something not
to be expiated with less then an Anathema. Now he that could till the ground
thought his Heifer the fittest to plow up God's Riddles, and accounted it
something that belonged to his Occupation to sow the seed of the Word. An
ordinary Reaper would be thrusting his Sickle into God's Harvest; and he that
could tent Sheep was well qualified for the oversight of God's slock. Nor is
the Military Man to be forgotten, who challenged the Sword of the Spirit, as
the proper appendent of his Profession, and sit to be managed by him who
wore the Belt. The Forge was now ambitious to form Instruments for the Service
of the Gospel; and the Potter's Wheel to turn forth chosen Vessels. The Shears
would undertake to divide the Word aright, and a Pick-Lock serve best to open
the Scriptures, whilst the Key of Knowledge was wilfully thrown away. Now all
good Literature was under a Cloud: Arts and Sciences were neglected. and
despised Names: the Tongues (except illiterate) were nigh to silencing; yea,
those Languages which divine inspiration hallowed were condemned for profane:
and Oriental Learning, which had lately shined so bright in the West, now
seemed to be setting here. Men's being able to word it so abundantly in their
own Tongue was thought sufficient to render all other superfluous, and made a
Copia verborum commence their highest Degree of Learning; while their unsettled
humors carried them to affect a fluency of discourse, as the greatest
accomplishment that might entitle them to esteem and reputation: of which those
held the principal place with many, who could at the lowest ebb of sense
command a springtide of words, and fetch a whole slood of speech in the most
insupportable drought of matter. Whose particular excellency it was to be very
liberal of their stock of Language, and spend frankly upon poor Arguments;
which the more weak and jejune they were, the sitter Objects of their bounty.

Thus strangely were men affected by the malign influence of new Light; which
had now wel-nigh attained its Meridian, when this ensuing Treatise had its
first Conception: occasioned by a sad reflection upon the great contempt and
decay of Learning, and the many mischiefs spawned thereby. The Author (whose
memory with me must ever be dear and precious) committed it to my care to see
the Press delivered of it. Which accordingly I here present, together with a
short Account of the advantages of the Arabic Tongue; which I made bold to
insert, because it is not inferior to diverse others in usefulness, though it
has not had the happiness to be so well known, either by reason of the great
scarcity or huge price of those Books that speak of it; and some but by the by
neither, and in scattered hints. As for the Book it self, though the design of
it principally respected those who slighted or were dissatisfied with Humane
Knowledge, yet it was not so narrow, as not to be comprehensive of others too,
who profess respect to it. Amongst whom those may more especially claim an
interest in the assistance which it offers, who either are better versed in the
general Elogiums of Learning, then in the particular offices of the several
parts thereof; or else more ready at the understanding of it as proposed in
Systemes, then at the discerning of those improvements that may be made of it
in reference to Divinty, and what tribute the several Arts and Sciences pay to
this Queen of Disciplines. Some happily may be hence directed to use the
knowledge which they have; others enabled to discover what they want; and a
third sort quickened to the pursuit of what they neglect.

Liberal and useful Erudition ows most of the disparagement at any time cast
upon it, either to the sloth or unskilfulness of those that have given up
their names to it, because too much unfurnished to produce any thing worthy of
their education, or those just expectations which that has raised in others.
Their stock being so slender, and so pitifully managed, comes to nothing, and
serves only to make them, with greater confidence and ostentation, betray
their own weakness, and invite derision. Nor are those to be excused, who,
though better provided of Academical improvements, yet not maintaining their
familiarity with their Studies, grow so negligent and loath to bestow any pains
upon those performances which their charge exacts from them, that the crudeness
of them renders them disgusted of others, and their conceptions become as
jejune and void of any sprightful relish, as if their minds had never received
any Artificial seasoning, nor were tinctured with any principles besides those
which are ordinarily found among the vulgar throng of men. What proceeds from
them is of such a condition, that it might better become some rude and
unpolished heads. And no marvel, if by this means many such be tempted to lift
up themselves, and vy abilities with their Teachers: Who though they should
highly extol and passionately defend Learning, yet if they but sorily acquit
themselves when it comes to the proof, their very praises turn to a detraction,
and make a blot where they intended a flourish. For it raises men's suspicion,
and provokes their disdain, to see but mean and despicable productions issue
from those things which carry a great port of commendation. Let Students
therefore henceforward, as they would approve the sincerity of their affection
to good Literature, reckon themselves concerned to use such an industry in the
prosecution of it, as may correspond with its dignity and usefulness, and
enable them to give such real demonstrations of its singular advantages, as may
answer the largest reports that are made thereof. By this means they may rescue
it from that scorn and contempt, to which the weakness of some, the laziness of
others, and the unprofitableness of both have made it obnoxious.

As for those who are fallen out with Learning, let them be entreated to demand
of themselves an answer to these two Questions.

First, Whether their distaste had not its rise from Ignorance of it? For sure
it cannot be undervalued in the general without a good competency of that.
Whether have they walked the round of Knowledge, viewed its several
plantations, and tasted of the fruits that grow therefrom? If not; then they
are concerned to inquire again, whether they be not in the List of those that
fall under the Apostles censure, 2 Pet. 2.12. who speak evil of the things that
they understand not? And let them seriously ponder what a Charge is drawn up
against them in that Chapter, and in the Epistle of Jude, where verse. 12. they
are elegantly styled, ^ Pet. 2.17.
Clouds without water, carried about of winds. Clouds, as opposing and
obscuring that light which is without them: And clouds without water, either as
being big with hot exhalations, and delivered only of some transient slashes;
or else as conceiving thunder, and bringing forth nothing but a huge noise. For
so we find, verse. 16. that their mouth discharges great swelling words; such
as are only filled with emptiness, at best but stuffed with wind: whilst, by
lofty and mystical terms, strange and uncouth phrases, in a great poverty of
signification, they affect a more then ordinary grandeur of expression. And
that which compleats this part of the description is, that they are carried
about of winds: of the various, yea contrary, blasts of a pretended
inspiration; which, that it might be distinguished from the sweet and gentle
breathings of the good Spirit of God, as being something more blustering and
impetuous then these are, it is in 2 Pet. 2.17. called a tempest; and they,
Clouds carried with a tempest: because inspired with the vehemence of a storm,
rather then the softness of a whisper; and feeling not calm and equable
motions, but violent and tumultuous agitations; being not so much led as
hurried by the Spirit, and indeed transported out of their own sight, and
beyond all possession and ken of themselves, into a state of stupidity, which
yet their imaginations are apt to advance into a signal testimony of a raised
piety. Now if such as these condemn all acquired knowledge, they have more need
to rectify their judgment, then others to matter it.

The second Interrogatory is, Whether the displeasure they conceive against
Learning, and the invectives they spend upon it, be not the results of pride
and envy? Whether through the consciousness of their own imperfections they be
not afflicted with the excellent accomplishments they behold in others; and
impatient of being out-stript, endeavor to bring down those to their own level
by detraction, to whose pitch they despaired of rising by imitation? For it is
a weakness incident to mean abilities, to propose themselves as the standard
from which all others should receive their just proportions: and to be offended
at that depth, which is greater then their own shallows. So those that go but a
slow pace themselves, whether through feebleness or listlessness, use to be
vexed at the quickness of others, who cannot easily learn to be so dull, nor
frame to proceed at that sluggish rate.

I am strongly inclined to think, that many men's dissatisfaction grows hence,
not that Science is not good, but that it is not theirs: Not that they discover
not a brisk, and amiable luster in those Pearls with which the Ring of Arts is
all beset; but that they have not the wearing of it. It Is the excentricalness
of their capacities, because they are out of the circle, that makes all the
Disciplines in the Encyclopaedia seem irregular. And this may the rather be
thought, because if such men have got but a small pittance of Erudition, they
will think never the worse of themselves for it, nor refuse its help, but use
and show it when ever they would set off themselves most, yea when they declaim
against it; hereby teaching their Tongues to accuse themselves of injustice.

If we respect parallel instances, we may find, that those, whose ambition is
too great for their merits, and their hopes too small for their ambition, being
destitute of means to advance them to any considerable eminency, sometimes cry
out of all preferment, dignities and honorable distinctions of men, earnestly
contending that there ought to be an equality amongst them in condition, as
well as there is in blood and excellency of nature: hereby deluding their
aspiring thoughts with a pleasing satisfaction of bringing others to be like
them, while they cannot attain to be like others. Again, we see some (in whom a
greedy mind meets with a slender estate, and that not capable of accession or
improvement) dissemble their covetousness in a scorn and contempt of riches;
and use all the Rhetoric they have to prove that supersluous which they have
not. But when any opportunity shall present either honor to the former, or
wealth to the latter, they will receive them with as affectionate embraces, as
before they slighted them with feigned pretenses. Nor is the case otherwise
here. Those who are not invested with the ornaments and accomplishments of the
mind, acquired by learned Instructions, and liberal Studies, seek to disgrace
what they cannot enjoy, and by their reproaches to sully the seize of
some, and check the endeavors of others, that so they may bring all to the like
nakedness with themselves. Yet certainly could they once be made masters
thereof, they would be so far from rejecting them, as to give them a cordial
welcome, and recant their former calumnies in ample commendations. It Is not
unusual for great perfections to suffer diminution by their distance, and
appear the less because far removed from the beholders reach. And it is well
known, that where Envy is judge, Excellency it self is a crime. This ever
bestows the worst looks upon the best Objects, and designs the blackest Brands
to what is brightest and most illustrious. But what Envy reads evil, Propriety
corrects and signs good. If those men were but entitled to the eminent
endowments, which they are now disaffected to while they shine in others, they
would soon be absolved from all their faults, and clear up into an unstained
innocence. Yea, the attempts of Envy are so inseparably compounded with Folly,
that it cannot but disappoint its own intentions, and while it goes about to
blot the reputation of Learning, it is constrained to subscribe to its worth,
being it self as plain a confession of the excellency of that which it seeks to
deprave, as it is a clear discovery of the narrowness of those spirits in which
it resides. To whom I shall only say, that what is worthy in it self is never
the worse because they want it. And to those, whose scruples against so useful
a good as ingenuous Literature, whether rising in their own breasts, or
received from others, grow from want of acquaintance with it, I shall address
but this one request, That they will be pleased either to apply their endeavors
to the acquiring of it, and so suffer their judgments to be led by their
experience; or else seriously to weigh the various advantages of it, as they
are represented in the following Discourse, and then calmly infer the most
rational conclusion. For that plainly evinceth, that it is not so easy a
matter as many imagine to be well accomplished for the Ministerial Profession.
No small variety, no inconsiderable proportion of knowledge will serve the
turn. He must listen to the Tongues, be skilled in the Arts, advise with the
several Sciences, and be more then superficially conversant in all, who would
fully penetrate into the meaning of sacred Writ, and be true to those
intentions which consign him to that excellent function. The Languages
especially declare their own requisitness, while they tell us all that we can
know of the secrets of Heaven, and the concernments of Religion. These are the
Vessels in which divine Truths set sail from Heaven with the breathings of the
Spirit, and since arrived at us from those foreign Parts, for which they were
first bound; and are not to be unladed of their rich fraught, but by such as
are well accustomed to them. It renders the study of words necessary, that they
are the representatives of things, the conveyances of Conceptions, the
instruments of Communication, by which we may be let into the breast of
another, and partake of his secret thoughts. Which is most true of those Words
in which the Scriptures were originally dictated (Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek)
because they present the only authentic Manifesto, and the sincerest Express
of the pleasure of God (no other so securely admitting us to a participation of
divine Counsels: seeing those terms must needs give the most certain aspect of
the Authors mind, in which he himself has chosen to exhibit it:) and
therefore are most industriously to be consulted by all those who desire a
through insight into it themselves, and undertake the Explication of it to
others; lest they either misconstrue it, or else apprehend not the full
importance of it; which those that ever adhere to a Translation, without giving
themselves the trouble of a further search, are liable to. For there are many
times so great elegancies and such significant force in the Text, as must be in
vain expected from the most exquisite attempts of any Translation. Which
(though it should receive no disadvantage from the Renderers, a privilege
which few enjoy) yet it might through an infelicity of expression, chargeable
only upon the Language in which it is framed, be unable to deliver that
pregnancy of conception which is conspicuous in the Original: the nearest way
to give an intimation of it, being to go about by a larger circuit of words
then is permitted to the brevity of a Version. For Tongues have their differing
genius: and one can breathe as much in an accent or two, as will serve another
to run with to a full stop: and crowds such efficacy into a single clause, as,
when poured forth into another kind of Speech, may replenish the large receipt
of an entire Period; and yet happily remain inexhausted. Thus it fares with
those Languages, in which the Will of God was primitively delivered; which in
diverse places are so compendiously copious, as to disclose that in a few words,
which will give an Interpreter a sufficient task to represent in many: and
sometimes display so rich a Sense, as other Languages are scarce able to tell
the value of, or sum up, without the omission of several items in their
account. The searching out of which might deliver that pleasure and
satisfaction to the mind, which would be a sufficient price and compensation
of the pains bestowed thereon. The milk of the Word is then most sincere, when
drawn immediately from those full breasts, the Hebrew and Greek Texts: whereas
it becomes more dilute by being siled through a Translation, where, part of the
cream sticking in the passage, it loses somewhat of its delicious and genuine
relish. This water of life, when carried away from its fountain by derivation
into other Tongues, does not always retain its high gust and generous Spirit;
but sometimes is more flat, and savors of the veins through which it passed;
exchanging an unimitable sweetness for some austere quality. And here, not to
make particular mention of any of those neatnesses and beauties, those
illuminations and graces of Speech, which are the proper embellishments of that
fashion of Language wherewith the Will of God was clothed when it came first
abroad into the World, which must of necessity be put off together with it; I
shall only take notice of some abatements sacred Writ has sustained by
Versions in its substantial import, whether as to its comprehensiveness, its
energy, or its direct and true intention. And that because Interpreters, who
were not (as the sacred Penmen) secured from all mistakes by an infallible
guidance, did either extend their pains to too great a Sphere to manifest an
equal exactness in every point; or not sufficiently attend to the scope and (a)
Through disregard of the Time when those words were spoken Acts 2.13. viz. at
the Feast of Pentecost, (...). is ill rendered new win^; for there could be none
of that then, the Spring not being past. See He^^^ and Beza in loc. and Vander
Landen's Exerc. 10. vini pleni. (...) there is rather sweet wine, the ^^est and
most sprightly.
circumstances of some places; or pitch upon a less convenient pointing or
reading, whence the LXX are thought often to vary from the Hebrew Verity; or
they were not aware of the rise (...) pedigree of some words (as those many
Arabic ones which occur in the Old Testament, especially in Job, who was an
Arabian;) or of the adopted significations of others, as of those many Greek
words in the New, which present either a Hebraism or a Syrism: or of the
particular references of a third sort to a certain custom, Historical passage,
or Geographical consideration. To which, in the last place, may be added their
not distinguishing rightly between appellatives and proper Names; so the LXX
mistake those appellatives, (...) planicies, Jer. 32.44. (...) agri, 2 Kings
23.4. and (...) fortitudo, validus, Psalm. 74.5. expressing them by (...). And
the Vulgar Latin Interpreter, with others, in Acts 27.13. put Asson for (...)
prope. But that mistake is more general, whereby (...) 2 Samuel 6.3, 4. is
rendered in Gibeah, (...). LXX.
whereas it signifies there in the hill, viz. at Kirjath-jearim (called also
Kirjath-Baal, or Baalah, 2 Chronicles. 13.6.) where Abinadab dwelt, 1 Samuel 7.1, 2.
which was a different place from Gibeah, as appears from Josh. 15.57, 60.
Sometimes on the contrary proper Names are taken for common. Thus, to say
nothing of Gad, rendered a troop; Meni, ^mber, Isai. 65.11. Achad, One, chap^^^.
17. and Amon, a multitude, Jerem. 46.25. all being proper names of Idols:
Phaleg. 1.2. c. 22.
Bochartus conceives that (...) 1 Chro. 4.41. should not be translated
habitations, but Meunims, or Maonites, as it is 2 Chr. 26.7. and Judge. 10.12.
and in this very place by the Greek Interpreters (...). Ib. 1.3. c. 13.
And further, that (...) Ezekiel. 38.2. which we (as it is generally taken)
express by chief, but the LXX by (...) is the proper name of the River Araxes,
and the Region about it: and so the words will run, Prince of Rhos, Mesech, and
Tubal; that is, of Armenia Araxene, Moschica, and Tibarenia, Countries near
adjoining: from the two former of which it is probable the Russians and
Muscovians received their original.

Thus we see that he may diverse ways be defeated in searching out the true and
full importance of divine Writ, who never consults the Hebrew and Greek Text,
where he might often spy that, which has either escaped the Version, or is
less appositely represented by it. An instance of which we have Deuteronomy. 16.2.
rendered, Thou shall sacrifice the Passover of the flock and the herd. Whereas
the Passover was not to be of the herd, but either a Lamb or a Kid, as is
plain Exodus 12.3, 5. Here therefore is a difficulty, yet such as is made by the
Translation; for the Hebrew is clearly free from it: (...). LXX.
(...) the clear and proper sense of which is, Thou shall sacrifice the
Passover ( i. e. the Paschal Lamb) Sheep and Oxen: which were additional
Sacrifices, besides the daily Burnt-offering, required at that solemnity; Number.
28.16. to 24. 2 Chronicles. 30.15. and chap. 35.1, 6, 7, 14, 16, 17. verses. Again,
He that adheres to the usual rendering of Genesis 17.14. will sinde himself
involved in the trouble of showing how an Infant can be said to break God's
Govenant, in being uncircumcised, and upon this account be liable to be cut
off; to which task he is not obliged, who attends to the words of the Text, and
in stead of The male, the flesh of whose foreskin is not circumcised, (...)
Fut. K^l. a (...)
etc. reads The male who shall not circumcise the flesh of his foreskin, etc.
as meant of one, who not having been circumcised in his infancy, when grown up
neglects it through wilfulness or contempt, which guilt Children were not
capable of; and this alone rendered the want of Circumcision so dangerous: Josh.
3.5, 6, 7.
for it was omitted in the Wilderness forty years without such peril. A third
instance Isai. 53.9. will afford us, where the Hebrew sounds more clearly, and
with greater consonancy to Evangelical story, St Rivet and (...) More in socum.
(...) from (...) excelsum. aedi^^^ ed tum, t^mulus.
thus, And they (i. e. the people, verse 8.) ordered his grave with the wicked,
but with the rich man [was] his monument. The People would have had him buried
with those Malefactors with whom he suffered; but God, otherwise disposed, and
to show the difference between them, by Joseph of Arimathea, called a rich man,
Mat. 27.57. provided such a splendid Monument for him, as became both an
innocent and an excellent person: so that some beginning of his Glory brake
forth in the honorableness of his entombment. Another incongruity, though
indeed in none of the weightier matters, is to be seen Matthew. 23.23. where we
should read Mint, Dill, and Cummin: for (...) is Dill or Anet, not Anise, which
is a different Herb, and in Greek (...).

But, to dismiss misrepresentations of the Text; sometimes a Translation may
very innocently occasion a mistake in him that cannot see beyond it, by the
ambiguous As of M^sters, Mat. 23.10 which there, answers to (...), not to
(...), as many of late have mistaken it.
sense or As of those words in prison, 1 Pet. 3.19.
reference of some word or phrase in it, of which the Original is not
conscious. Hence diverse of the Ancients have strangely interpreted and applied
several Scriptures, by pitching upon impertinent acceptions of words in the
Greek Version, because they wanted the light of the Hebrew to guide them to the
most proper. Thus One proves the Fable of the Phoenix (and from it the
Resurrection) from Psalm. 92.12. (...). Tertul. de Resur. carni^, oper. edit.
Laurent. page 34.
Another cites Numb. 23.19. in these words, Lactant. de vera Sapient. 1.4. c.
18.
Non quasi homo Dominus suspenditur, etc. which he brings as a Prophecy of
Christ's hanging on the Cross; mistaking (...), used by the LXX, not in its
primitive notion of hanging, but Metaphorically, for to be various and
inconstant in his word, and so it answers to (...); this being the true import
of the place, God is not as man, that he should lie. A third understands Psalm.
128.2. August. in loc.
thus, Labores fructum tuorum manducabis; Thou shall eat the labors of thy
fruits (which he subtly distinguishes from the fruits of labors) in stead of
the labor of thy hands, the Greek being indifferent to both significations by
the ambiguity of (...). Others (as Amama observes, A^i^arb p. 551.
who has many instances of this nature) reading (...), Psalm. 39.5. and
deceived by the doubtful sense of (...), as formed from (...) a hand-breadth,
or (...) wrestler, have taken this to be the meaning of the Text, P^giles
posuistidies meos.
Thou have made my days full of wrestling: to which sense the Hebrew (...) is
altogether a stranger. How requisite then is it to have acquaintance with the
Original? But if any think it may be well spared where Commentators are
familiar, I would gladly understand by what (...) they would judge of
Expositions, and tell which is best where they meet with those that are very
different. It Is like such would approve of their interpretation of Psalm. 17.14.
who expound (...) by saturati sunt porcina. Cajetan, though a very learned man
in his way, yet being (...) Linguist run into a gross mistake (as Mr.
Cartwright relates) by reading Erasmus's Mellifie Hebr. l. 4 c. 10.
Note on 2 Cor. 4.16. that de die in diem is not in the Greek (...), sed nove
(...) whence Cajetan in his Comment puts nove in stead of de die in diem, and
makes the Apostle to have written renovatur nove; upon which he delivers
himself with wonderful subtilty. So may it often befall those, who only take
up the sense of the Original at the second hand: which indeed they had need
have an insight into, were it only to understand that Translation thoroughly to
which they stick, where it retains such forms of speech as are proper to those
Languages wherein the Scripture was penned. So does ours in Hosea 4.8. They eat
up the sin of my people: where sin is put for a sacrifice for sin, because the
same word in Hebrew (...) (and so (...) Levit. 5.6.) signifies both. In those
words Luke 11.17. A house divided against a house falls; the Noun is
repeated, after the Hebrew usage, See Gen 19.24. Isaiah 16.7.
to supply the place of a reciprocal Pronoun, which that Tongue wants; and so
the sense is, A house divided against it self falls; as may appear from
Matthew. 12.25. and Mark 3.35. The like we find Romans 7.23. But I see another Law
in my members -- bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my
members; that is, to it self. Further, the knowledge of that idiotism of the
holy Tongue, the putting of a third Person Active indefinitely for a Passive or
an Impersonal, will give light to diverse expressions: As Micah 2.4. In that day
shall [one] take up a parable against you; that is, a parable shall be taken
up. So Revel. 16.15. -- lest he walk naked, and they see his shame; for, and
his shame be seen. So Luke 12.20. This night they require thy Soul, (as it is
in the margin) that is, thy Soul shall be required. Lastly, to pass over other
proprieties of the sacred Dialect, to live is put for life Phil. 1.21. after
the manner of the Greek, as (...), an Infinitive for a Noun; and so the sense
is, to me life, or my life is Christ, i. e. Christ is my life.

By this time it may sufficiently appear, that unlearned persons are unfit to
undertake the Explication of God's Word, which the Apostle confirms, whilst he
charge them with wresting the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet.
3.16. If any lay the same Action against learned men, let them consider, that
when such distort any instance of sacred Writ, it is no effect of their
Learning, but either of their Ignorance, because they do not know enough; or of
their perverseness, and the depravedness of their minds, which disposes them
either to dissemble the Truth they have been convinced of, or to entertain such
erroneous Conceits as may best comply with their corrupt inclinations. And
though they may put false Glosses upon Scripture, and set Learning upon the
Rack to force out some Testimony to their Forgeries; yet, what ever shallow
heads may imagine, it will appear to him that thoroughly examines what ever they
can squeez out of it, that it has not spoken any thing which imports a real
Defense and Confirmation of them: and therefore is no more liable to be taxed
upon this account, then the Scripture is worthy of blame, for being constrained
to attend on unskilful Men, who lean upon it while they sacrifice to their
unsound Opinions. It is the lot of the most excellent things to be exposed to
abuse, which is not the natural result of their own qualities, but of men's
vices, and therefore ministers no just ground either of their rejection or
disparagement. They argue but at a pitiful rate, who, because some men do hurt
with their Learning by misapplying it, and others do no good with it while they
neglect to use it, therefore conclude it a thing of no worth and goodness, but
in it self offensive and disallowable. Such may do well to consider what Answer
they will return to the same Argument, when levelled against the knowledge of
the Word of God; when it shall be objected, That it is of pernicious
consequence, at least unprofitable, for private men to have familiar
acquaintance with holy Writ; for many have from hence taken the occasion of
gross Conceptions, and by it defended Positions both strange and impious; and
others have been careless of employing their knowledge to the purposes of a
holy life. Its probable they would answer, that there are many private
Christians well versed in Gods Book, who are not chargeable with either of
these imputations, but make good use of their knowledge; and that others do not
is their own fault. The like say I of Learning, which is not the worse (any
more then the former knowledge) because some that have it are so bad. It has
done excellent service in many, and would not have failed to have done so in
more, had it been rightly managed. Arts themselves are not to be loaded with
the Artists guilt. Who will condemn all Trades for dishonest, because there are
none but have some dishonest men of them? And why should ingenuous literature
be more prejudiced by the irregularities of some that profess it? God himself
has given a signal Testimony to its excellency and usefulness, by choosing
Persons of the greatest Sufficiency and Learning to pen his Word, viz. Moses,
Solomon, Daniel, (...) D^ctus, peritus. (...) in Psalm. 15.2.
Ezra, (styled (...) a ready or learned Scribe, Ezra 7.6.) Luke, who was a
Physician, Col. 4.14. with Philem. v. 24. and consequently a Scholar. And
lastly, Paul, who was Disciple to Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law, and probably
before had received some instruction at the Academy of Tarsus (his birthplace)
to which Strabo gives the pre-eminence of all others, Geogr. 1.14.
Athens and Alexandria not excepted: which may be the rather conceived, because
of his acquaintance with Heathen Authors, diverse of which he cites. Now if God
pitched upon such accomplished persons to pen his Word, shall we think that any
illiterate men may serve to preach and explane it? If any interpose and tell us
that the plough afforded an Elisha, the herd an Amos, the drag a Peter and
John; they must needs grant, if they consult the Scripture, and do not
industriously shut their eyes, that God immediately, and in an extraordinary
manner, gave them such raised abilities as might bear proportion to the weighty
employment he called them to: Especially when we find the two last named, whom
before ordinary parts and acquaintance with their Mother Tongue would suffice
for the designs of a Net, and to deal in those petty fallacies that entangle
mute and unwary fishes, on a sudden created unparalled Linguists, and made
the Masters of many Languages; having matter to support their words, high
impartance to recommend their matter, mysteriousness to enhance the estimate of
that importance, and clearness of understanding to unfold that mysteriousness.
But since the primitive Times we have no example of any in an instant furnished
with ministerial endowments, or whose intellectuals all on a sudden, and
without any culture, have shot up to a considerable height. Indeed there have
not wanted some of late, who (their ambition leading them to affect the dignity
of Instructers, and withal prompting an impatience of ascending thereto by
degrees) found out a way, by pretending a divine Mandate, at the first step to
go out Doctores Illuminati: though their Letters were never made Patents, nor
had the Seal of Heaven upon them; and their undertakings witnessed only a
great weakness matched with an extraordinary confidence. They doubted not to
rank themselves amongst the Stars of the first honor, but their irregular
motion proved them very much deprest, and in stead of the vigorous splendour of
Truth, you could perceive nothing but a long tail projected from a disheveled
blaze. How great things so ever they boasted of, yet that their performances
were a shame to their pretenses is sufficiently known. Seeing then the
qualifications requisite to the understanding and dispensation of the Gospel
are not now bestowed on a sudden, they must either be attained by little and
little, or not at all; by the ordinary assistance of the Spirit in the way of
an industrious diligence and artificial improvements; by advising with the
Tongues about the Words, with Grammar and Rhetoric about the Sense, with Logic
about the argument of Scripture, with History about Customs, and with the
several Sciences about those things which are of Philosophical Consideration.
Concerning which I shall say nothing, having already slipped into too great a
prolixity; but shall conclude with this vote, That, since Learning is now grown
into credit again, those that own it would not suffer any stain and
disreputation to be cast upon it by the neighborhood of a vicious practice, nor
maintain a separation between Knowledge and Piety; but present them to the
World embracing each other in the fastest closure, and discover the light of
their minds in the luster of their lives. It is to do a great disservice to
God, and a real pleasure to the envious one, to set two excellent Daughters of
the same Father at variance; in putting on Learning to deride Grace, or Grace
to despise Learning. It is no offense for humane Knowledge to clear the way,
where divine Obedience is to walk: That may be allowed to hold the Candle while
this does its work. It is a most amiable sight, to behold the greet of science
and innocence; the Arts and Virtues mingling their splendors in a happy
conjunction: to see a mind no less fraught with excellent qualities then rare
notions, and as eminent for a gracious disposition as a piercing conceit: to
observe a well ordered demeanor attend upon a well furnished understanding, and
the fruits of righteousness ripen by the bright beams of ingenuous Literature.
Which sight, that it may be as ordinary as it is excellent, is the earnest wish
of

An Honorer of true Goodness and good Learning. J. Reyner.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS and SECTIONS In the following TREATISE.
CHAP. I. THat the Knowledge of the Languages is of great Use to a Minister of
the Gospel. Page 1. Sect. 1. Of the Languages in general. ibid. Sect. 2. Of the
Hebrew and Greek in common. Page 3 Sect. 3. Of the Hebrew. Page 14 Sect. 4. Of
the Greek Tongue. Page 22 Sect. 5. Of the Latin. Page 24 Sect. 6. Of the
Chaldee, and Syriac; how they differ. Page 25 Sect. 7. The Usefulness of the
Chaldee. Page 29 Sect. 8. Of the Syriac. Page 31 Sect. 9. (...). Page 35 An
Appendix concerning the Usefulness of the Arabic, added by another hand. Page 36
CHAP. II. Of the Usefulness of Rhetoric. Page 50 Sect. 1. Of Rhetoric in
general. ibid. Sect. 2. Of Tropes. Page 60 Sect. 3. Of Figures. Page 72
CHAP. III. Of the Usefulness of Logic. Page 81 CHAP. IV. Of the Usefulness of
Natural Philosophy. Page 90 Sect. 1. Usefulness of Natural Philosophy declared,
and proved. ibid. Sect. 2. Objections refuted. Page 100
CHAP. V. Of the Usefulness of Moral Philosophy, or Ethics. Page 108 CHAP. VI.
Of the Usefulness of History. Page 110 Sect. 1. Of History in general, as
useful to understand Scripture. ibid. Sect. 2. Of Jewish History. Page 113
Sect. 3. The History of other Eastern Nations. Page 115 4. Of Egyptian History.
Page 120 5. Of Grecian History. Page 123 6. Of Roman History. Page 126 7. Of
Christian, or Church History under the Gospel. Page 127 8. Of History, as
useful to know God's Works. Page 129 9. Of History, as useful to know the
Examples of Men. Page 131
CHAP. VII. Of the Usefulness of Chronology. Page 132 CHAP. VIII. Of the
Usefulness of Arithmetic. Page 141 CHAP. IX. Of the Usefulness of Geometry.
Page 147 CHAP. X. Of the Usefulness of Astronomy. Page 151 CHAP. XI. Of the
Usefulness of Geography. Page 158 CHAP. XII. Of the Arguments, which prove the
Usefulness of Learning. Page 163 Sect. 1. Seven Arguments propounded. Page 163
Sect. 2. Of God's affording means of Learning, as Schools, etc. Page 164 Sect.
3. Of Religion flourishing when Learning abounded. Page 179 Sect. 4. Learning
qualifies for all Public Employments. Page 185 Sect. 5. Satan makes use of
Learning to oppose the Truth. Page 186 Sect. 6. Satan seeks by obstructing
Learning to undermine Religion. Page 190 Sect. 7. Testimonies concerning
Learning. Page 194 Sect. 8. Of the Learning of the Ancient Fathers. Page 201
Sect. 9. Of the Learning of the first Reformers. Page 216 Sect. 10. The
After-Promoters of Reformation were Learned. Page 227
CHAP. XIII. Objections against Learning answered. Page 234 Sect. 1. That the
People may be the better for the Learning of their Ministers. ibid. Sect. 2.
That the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles were learned. Page 236 Sect. 3.
That Joel 2.28. and 1 John 2.27. make not at all against the need of Learning.
Page 244 Sect. 4. An Objection, drawn from the ill effects of Learning,
answered; and it shown to be good in it self. Page 252 Sect. 5. An Objection
against Rhetoric from 1 Cor. 1.17. answered. Page 256 Sect. 6. Of Paul 's
desire to know nothing but Christ. Page 258

A Determination of this Question, Whether Grace be Essential to a Minister of
the Gospel? by the same Author. Page 259 Objection 1. From Tit. 1.8. answered.
Page 289 Objection 2. From Psalm. 50.16, 17. answered. Page 294 Objection 3.
From Dan. 12.3. answered. Page 304

THE USEFULNESS OF THE LANGUAGES.
CHAP. I. That the Knowledge of the Languages is of great Use to a Minister of
the Gospel.
SECT. I. Of the Languages in general.
THe Tongues or Languages are the Boxes or Cabinets, wherein all Sciences or
sorts of knowledge, the Jewels of all Truths both Divine and Humane,
Theological, Moral and Natural, are laid up.

Skill in the Languages is a Key that unlocks and opens all these, and lets a
man into the knowledge of them all. It is (as one says) that to a Minister,
which the Sea is to an Haven-town, to bring in all sorts of Provision from
foreign parts to replenish and enrich the same.

Every Tongue has a peculiar Idiome, or form of Speech, or innate Emphasis,
Elegancy, and Perspicuity, which cannot be so fitly and fully expressed in a
Translation, without some Circumlocution, Diminution, or Alteration.

Hence it is, that every Book is best in its own Tongue, wherein it was
originally written by the Author thereof; that is, the soundest, and the
clearest.

The Knowledge of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, is requisite, because the
Superscription of our Saviors Title on the Cross was in these three Languages,
Luke 23.38. for three Reasons: 1. That Christ's Death, and the Cause of it,
which concerned all Nations, might be divulged to all the Nations, to the East
by the Hebrew, to the South by the Greek, to the West by the Latin,
in regard of the present Confluence of People to the Feast at Jerusalem from
all Nations, Joh. 12.20. 2. To show, That the Knowledge of these three
Principal Languages conduces much to the clear and full understanding of the
Mystery of Christ crucified. 3. And that the Holy Ghost would have the Dignity
and Study of them ever preserved, or kept on foot in the Church.


SECT. II. Of the Hebrew and Greek in common.
THe Knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek is needful for a Minister especially,
for six Reasons;

Reas. 1. Because the Hebrew and Greek are the Original Tongues, in which the
Old and New Testaments were written. A competent knowledge of these Tongues
gives a man great light to the right and clear understanding of the Original
Text; and much satisfaction and delight to his mind: without some insight into
the same, a man cannot understand the proper Signification and Emphasis of
Words, Phrases, and Proverbs; nor the Idiomes or peculiar forms of speaking,
which the Originals (especially the Hebrew) have in them; but he must see only
with other men's eyes; and take both the Translation and Interpretation of the
Scripture upon trust from others.

Reas. 2. Great Skill in the Original Languages is necessary to the true
Translation of the Bible into other Tongues; and to the serene, sound, and
proper explanation thereof. For the Mind of God (as Divines observe) is
primarily in the Original, and but secondarily in the Translation; which no
farther contains the Word of God in it, then it agrees with the Original, out
of which it is translated.

This Difference must be put between the Hebrew and Greek Text of the Old and
New Testament, and the Latin and all other Versions, that in the Original
Text, and Res and Verba, both the Matter and the Words proceed immediately from
the Holy Ghost, who suggested to the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, and
quae scriberent, and quomodo scriberent; both what and how they should write.
In Versions (that are faithful) the Doctrine is from the Holy Ghost, the Words
are from Men: who although they use the help of the Holy Ghost, yet not in that
manner nor measure with the Prophets and Apostles. See Is. Casaub. Exercit. 13.
ad Annals Baronii, page 273. Polan. Syntag. Theolog. lib. 1. cap. 40. Beza,
Tractat. Theolog. vol. 1. ad defens. Castle. page 432.

Reas. 3. There is more need yet of Skill in the Originals to reform and refine
former Translations; to amend the faults and mistakes, and supply the defects
that still remain in them.

Divines observe, that much Divinity depends on small Particles, upon such a
Mood, Tense, Case, or Number; sometimes upon one letter, upon pricks and
points. Many errors have been bred and fed by false Translations, and mistakes
of Words and Letters, and by corrupt Glosses thereupon.

The holy Scriptures are vindicated, and many Truths are restored and confirmed
by a rectified Translation, and sound interpretation of them according to the
Original.

Critical learning, and Scholia's, are of excellent use hereunto. Many learned
Authors in these later times have performed the same exquisitely beyond the
exactness of the ancient Fathers; as Erasmus, Beza, Piscator, Drusius,
Salmasius, Casaubon, Grotius, Scaliger, Fuller, Ludovick de Dieu, Heinsius.

No Translation expresses all places exactly, but sometimes gives either not
the right, or not the full sense.

I. Not the right and proper sense. For those, who have used the greatest
diligence and accurateness in translating the Bible, have not been exempted
from being liable to mistake, (nimis augusta res est non errare) and probably,
if they had afterward set themselves to a more distinct search about some
particular places, or seen those observations which others have made on them,
they might have found reason to alter their former apprehensions, and translate
some places otherwise then they did. Amam. Paraenos.
For it is no new thing for Learned men, upon a review, to have espied faults
in, and amended their own Versions, as Luther, Junius, Beza, etc.

Yea there are instances given out of several places in our last English
Translation, wherein there appears some discrepancy from the mind of the Text.

Besides that those slips, and mistakes, which are to be charged on the Press
(which differ according to the diversity of Impressions) pervert the sense, and
show the use of the Original to direct to the true reading. Some Errata in our
English Bibles may be a means of deceiving those that look no further; as well
as the faults, which have crept into the Copies of the Latin and Greek
Version, have deceived others who relied thereon. Many instances might be given
hereof. In the Vulgar Latin, evertit domum was put for everrit, Luke 15. Asia
for Achaia, Romans 16. vidua for Judaea, Act. 16, etc. See the like in the Greek
Version; where through the carelessness, or unskilfulness of some hand, (...)
was turned into (...), Psalm. 132.15. (...) into (...), Psalm. 89.46. (...) into
(...), Psalm. 31.16. (...) into (...), Isa. 45.1. Which mistakes, and many more,
were derived into the Latin Translation, and have not wanted followers; Amam.
Antib. Bibl. and Paraen. de excit. ^^ng. stud.
amongst whom was Austin, who was often out as to the sense of Scripture,
because he wanted skill to correct the Translation he used, by the Hebrew. This
made him raise many doubts, and spend much time in solving them; and when all
is done, look but in the Original, and you will see no ground for them, but all
is plain and clear. Nor was he insensible of what frustrations happened to him
through his ignorance: When he was pretty ancient, he learned the Greek Tongue;
he bewailed his want of Hebrew, and commended the study of both.

II. The exactest Translation may sometimes not give the full sense of the
Original, either

1. Because a word or sentence in the Original may be more comprehensive, and
admit of more senses, and those good and convenient, (For as words have
different acceptions, so they may also have an ambiguous reference) then the
word or phrase does, which answers thereto in the Translation. In which case
the Translation cannot draw out all that is contained in the Text, and perhaps
sometimes not hint the greatest part of it.

2. Because the Translation expresses but one of the readings in the Hebrew,
in those places where there are two, viz. the Keri and Chetib, one in the
Margin, the other in the Text or line: which are requisite to be known, that
when there is any difference in the sense, we may judge which is to be
preferred.

Tremellius and Junius in their first Version rendered 2 King. 8.10. (after the
Marginal reading (...)) thus, Abi, dic ei, etc. Go, say to him, Thou may
certainly recover. But Junius in his latter work chooses rather the Textual
(...), and turns it, Dic, Non omnino revalesces; Go, say, Thou shall certainly
not recover.

So in Ezra 4.2. their first Version has Et eidem sacrificamus, And we
sacrifice to him; the latter, Non enim (alteri) sacrificamus; That according to
the Margin, this to the line. Of the Keri and Chetib, the Marginal and Textual
readings, see more in Ainsworth's Advertisement, next after his Annotations on
the Pentateuch.

Reas. 4. Without the help of the Tongues we cannot understand those words of
the Hebrew and Greek Text, which are retained in the Translation, as Jehovah,
Messiah, Shiloh, Hosanna, Alleluja, Nehushtan, 2 Kin. 18.4. Ephod, Urim,
Thummim, Higgaion, Selah, Belial, Beelzebub, Abaddon, Apollyon, Rabbi, Raka,
Mammon, Amen, Anathema Maranatha, etc. to which I may add Christ and Jesus. To
say nothing of the Titles of Psalms, and those proper Names which are
Prophetical, and describe future events.

Nor can we, without the help of those Languages, know the meaning of such
phrases retained in the Translation, as suit not with the genius of that
Tongue, into which it is made, but are proper and peculiar to those, in which
the Text was first penned. Thus, if not informed from the Hebrew Idiome, we
should not know that the children of the Bride-chamber, Mat. 9.15. signifies
the Bridegroom's friends; and the fire of God, Job 1.16. a great fire; and the
voice of God, Psalm. 29.3. thunder: with many other forms of speech of an Hebrew
extraction.

Reas. 5. Insight into the Original is needful, sometimes for determining which
sense of any ambiguous word or Phrase in the Translation is agreeable to the
Text; For words or expressions in a Version, may be capable of those senses,
which the Original will by no means admit of; and so those who are not able to
con^^^^ it, may run into great mistakes: As it fared with many of the Fathers,
who used the Greek Version of the LXX. and wanted skill in the Hebrew. For
instance hereof, see Amama's Antibarb. Biblicus. Though we be furnished with
the Versions and Commentaries of learned men on the Scriptures, (as Beza,
Piscator, Mercer, Drusius, etc.) yet we cannot read, or at least fully
understand them without skill in Hebrew and Greek, (of which we shall find some
scattered up and down there) much less can we defend them against Opposers; nor
be capable of judging which is the fittest of those Expositions we meet with,
when we are perplexed with variety. That sure is the best, which agrees best
with the Original; and so, without insight into it, we shall be uncertain which
to follow.

Reas. 6. The knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek Text is necessary for the
deciding of Controversies, and defending of truth, and refuting of errors, and
it contributes much to reconcile many differences that are among Interpreters.
Men generally appeal to it, as being the only authentic rule of Faith, (given
by divine inspiration, and dictated by God himself, which cannot be said of any
Translation, since no Interpreter had the same privilege with the sacred
Penmen, to be infallibly inspired) when they will not stand to the
determination of any Version. And it is reasonable, that the Original Text
should have the definitive sentence in all doubtful Cases; for it is the only
Judge or Rule of Controversies, from which we have no appeal: It is the
touchstone of all Translations, by which they are to be tried, and from which
they derive all their Authority. The Papists prove diverse of their opinions
from those places in the Vulgar Latin, which agree not with the Original. How
then shall they be disproved but from the Original? Ignoratio Hebraismorum
multa absurda and impia dogmata invexit in Ecclesiam, In Genesis 48.16.
says Pareus, Ignorance of the Hebrew Idiome has brought many absurd and
impious opinions into the Church: and therefore the knowledge thereof is the
way to cast them out.

For the Invocation of Saints the Papists bring Genesis 48.16. Invocetur super eos
nomen meum, nomina quoque patrum meorum, the sense of the Hebrew is, Let them
be called by my name. For the worshipping of Christ's Sepulcher, they allege
Isaiah 11.10. Et erit Sepulchrum ejus gloriosum, but according to the Hebrew,
His rest shall be glory. For merit, Heb. 13.16. Talibus hostiis promeretur
Deus, in the Greek it is (...), With such sacrifice God is well pleased. More
instances might be given in the Old and New Testament.

The knowledge of the Tongues (as some observe) has always been an individual
companion of the Orthodox faith in the Church; Bowls Falt. Evang. page 72.73.
Amam. paraen.
the neglect and contempt of the Scriptures always accompanied the neglect and
contempt of them. Luther saw that there was no other compendious way to reduce
old Barbarism, then if the studies of the Tongues should perish. When the
knowledge of them revived, (which was about the year 1470) forthwith the
clearness of the Gospel shined forth. Good skill in the Tongues makes men good
Textmen, or Expositors; and Bonus Textuarius, bonus Theologus. Hence those,
that have searched most into the Text by the light of the Tongues, if
Protestants, they are the most pithy Divines; if Papists, they are sounder then
the rest, as Arias Montanus, Masius, Vatablus. They that have wanted the
knowledge of the Tongues have erred greatly in Expounding the Scriptures, as
the Commentaries of some of the Ancients abundantly testify.

It is Musculus his counsel, Loc. Com. de facr. Script. p. 184.
Sunt admonendi, imo vehementer urgendi Adolescentes sacrae Scripturae
candidati, ut sacrarum Linguarum Ebraeae and Graecae cognitionem studiis suis
non quasi parergon adjiciant, sed instar fundamenti in ipsum fundum mentium
suarum submittant. Young men that study the holy Scripture should be vehemently
pressed to lay the knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew as a foundation in the
bottom of their mind; and not to add it to their Studies as a by-work.

See what Muscu^^ says in that place, of the need of Professors of the Greek
and Hebrew Tongues in the Churches of Christ, and in the Schools of the
faithful.

So much of the General use of Hebrew and Greek considered jointly. Now I will
show the Particular use of them severally, and of the Latin, to which I will
add the Chaldee and Syriac.

SECT. III. Of the Hebrew.
THe knowledge of the Hebrew is useful in four respects;

I. To understand the Greek of the New Testament, because

1. There are many Hebrew words, both Proper Names, and Appellatives, in the
New Testament. See Pasor's Lexicon in fine.

2. The New Testament is full of Hebraisms. Of which see Gataker against
Pfochenius: and Beza on Act. 10.46. The Apostles used Hebraisms (says he) not
only because they were Hebrews, but because when they discoursed of those
things, which were written in Hebrew, it was needful to retain many, lest they
should seem to bring in some new Doctrine. And I do not wonder they kept so
many Hebraisms, when many of them are such as cannot be so happily expressed in
any other Idiom: that, except they had retained those forms of Speech, they
should have devised sometimes new words, and new kinds of Speech, which no man
had understood. See also Beza's Theol. Tract. vol. 1. ad defensionem
Castellionis de Hebraismis page 431, etc.

The New Testament was written in a style, that has the Tincture, and relish
of the Hebrew: by reason of which it differs much from the pure and genuine
strain of the Greek. Hence learned men call the Language of the New Testament
rather (...) then (...), that is, Jewish Greek, such as was peculiar to
Graecising Jews; The words generally Greek, but the Phrase often Hebrew. Many
Instances may be given hereof: Ex. gr.

-- (...), for (...), Luc. 16.8. a steward of unrighteousness for an
unrighteous steward.

-- Moses was (...), Act. 7.20. fair to God, for exceeding fair: for the
Hebrews express a Superlative often by the Name of God. Niniveh is said to be a
City, (...) great to God, that is, exceeding great, Jonah 3.3.

-- The inward man is renewed (...) ((...) Hebr.) daily. So Mar. 6.40. they
sat down (...) in ranks, in ranks. For the Hebrews double a word to express a
distribution. See Mar. 6.7, 39.

-- 2 Corinthians. 2.14. Thanks be to God, (...), qui facit ut semper triumphemus,
so Beza: who makes us to triumph always. Here (...) is used by Paul in the form
of the Conjugation of Hiphil, to express the Emphasis of the Participle of
Hiphil.

So the Greek Interpreters of the Old Testament, being Jews, put (...) (which
properly is only to reign) in Esaias 7.6. and elsewhere for to make a King, or to
cause to reign, that it might answer (...) in Hiphil, which signifies regnare
fecit, regem praefecit.

Thus (...) is used in the New Testament for to justify, or absolve, which
answers to (...) of the Hebrews, in which sense Master Gataker de stylo novi
Test. contends, Contra Psochen. p. 80. etc.
that it no where occurs in ancient Greek Authors.

Nor is this unusual for the Penmen of the New Testament (following herein the
Greek Interpreters of the Old) to put new significations upon words (which
before they were unacquainted with) to make them suit better, or be of the same
latitude with some Hebrew words, that signify the same thing with them, but
have other acceptions besides.

So (...) is put for a thing, Luke 1.37. because (...) which answers to it in
Hebrew, signifies both a word, and a thing.

(...), (...)
properly a Law, stands for Doctrine, Romans 3.27. because (...) denotes both.

(...) gratis in Gal. 2.21. signifies in vain, because (...) has both these
senses.

(...), commonly power, is put for wealth in Rev. 18.3. because (...) is
indifferent to both.

(...), Hell is put for the Grave, 1 Cor. 15.55. because (...) stands for both.

(...) signifies victory, and denotes eternity, 1 Cor. 15.54. because (...) is
capable of both senses: and (...) in aeternum, or for ever, is rendered by the
Seventy (...), Amos 8.7. Lam. 5.20. Jerem. 3.5.

And that (...) in 1 Cor. 15.54. should be rendered for ever, Amama, and
Heinsius (on that place) determine.

(...), which is to confess, is used for to thank, or praise, Matthew. 11.25.
hecause (...) expresses both. So Beza.

(...), with the Hellenists, imports both speaking, and answering; because
(...) has the notion of both: and it is often used in the New Testament of one
that speaks, when he is asked nothing. See Beza in Matthew. 11.25. and 28.5. Rev.
7.13. or who begins a Speech, when no Question went before.

I will conclude this particular with this Observation, that because with the
Hebrews there is no distinction of Cases, but the Nominative (which uses to be
the source and root of the rest) stands for all; therefore it is diverse times
in the New Testament put for other Cases; as (...) for (...) Ephesians. 3.18. so 2
Cor. 8.23. (...), for (...). See also Rev. 1.5. Joh. 1.14. Luke 22.20.

II. This knowledge of the Hebrew is useful to understand some Prophetical
visions, which are of that nature, that their Explication is made by a
Paronomasia, or Verbal allusion in the Hebrew; as Jerem. 1.11, 12. I said, I
see a rod of an Almond-tree (...) Then said the Lord, Thou have well seen, for
I am (...) hastening my word to perform it. So Amos 8.2. -- Amos, what see
thou, I said, A basket of summer-fruit (...) Then said the Lord to me, (...)
The end is come upon my people.

III. To understand the different writings of the same proper Name sometime in
Scripture: as in the Old Testament Jehoiachin, 2 King. 24.6. is called Jeconiah
in 1 Chronicles. 3.16. And Eliam 2 Samuel 11.3. is called Ammiel 1 Chronicles. 3.5. where
the difference lies only in transposing the words, Silas and Silvanus may be
the same name, and so Epaphras and Epaphroditus. For it is not unusual for names
ending in (...) to be the Contracts of longer ones Se^ Grot. in Luke 1. and in
Col. 1.7. and in 1 These. 1.1. Simon the Canaanite (Matthew. 10.4.) Is the same
with Simon Zelotes, Luke 6.15. only one surname is expressed in two Languages,
Hebrew and Greek.
of which the Name is compounded; and putting the Name of God ( Jehovah, Jah,
or El) first in one place, and last in another.

Jehoahaz 2 Chronicles. 21.17. is by a Metathesis written Ahaziah 2 Chr. 22.2.

In such like differences, one that is not skilled in the Language may be
troubled to reconcile some places of Scriptures; and will be lieable to mistake
in misapplying of Names. So he may also be, when Names that differ in the
Original, are written alike in the Translation.

Thus Rahab, when put for the Harlot, is in Hebrew (...) with Cheth, when it
stands for Egypt, (...) with He, Amam. Antib. B^blic. in loc.
as in Psalm. 87.4. where Austin, and others mistake; misunderstanding Rahab of
the Harlot, and so interpreting it of the Canaanites, because she was a
Canaanite.

IV. Hebrew is useful also to understand the Jewish writers, in whom such
Records may be met with, as are of excellent use to the Explication of many
Passages in the New Testament; as Doctor Lightfoot affirms in his Preface to
his Harmony, and Chronicle of the New Testament. There he shows the necessity
of their Writings for the genuine explication of Matthew. 5.22. In the Book it
self he has cleared out of Jewish Authors that puzling place, Matthew. 27.9.
where the quoting of Jeremy for Zechary has made some deny the purity of the
Text. He says, Matthew here follows the general division of the Bible into
three parts, the Law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa; and therefore
alleging a Text out of the volume of the Prophets, he does it under the name
of Jeremy, because he stood first in that volume as they were ranked of old.
Such a manner of Speech is that of Christ, Luke 24.44. All things must be
fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms, concerning me, where he follows that general division, only he
calls the whole third part, or Hagiographa, by this Title the Psalms, because
they stood first in that part. And in Matthew. 16.14. -- others say, Jeremias, or
one of the Prophets; there is the same reason why Jeremy alone is named by
name, because his name stood first in the volume of the Prophets, and so came
first in their way when they were speaking of the Prophets.

Skill in the Hebrew conduces much to the knowledge of the Talmud (which is a
great body of Doctrine, What the Talmud is, see Ainsworth of the Hebrew Records.
compiled by diverse learned Rabbis) that gives great light to the
illustration of the New Testament, See Grotius on Matthew. 3.6. Lightfoot Horae
Hebraicae in Mat^^.
as some that are learned therein show. Talmudical learning gives light to the
right understanding of Baptism; and Rabbinical learning is useful for clearing
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as appears in Doctor Cudworths learned Piece
concerning the true Notion of the Lord's Supper.

Ainsworth in his Tract of the Hebrew-Records says, That the Apostles
alleging sometimes the Testimonies of the Rabbines do teach, that their
writings are not wholly to be despised. Paul names Jannes and Jambres, the
chief Sorcerers of Egypt, 2 Timothy 3.8. out of the private Records of the Jews,
as may yet be read in their Talmud. He rehearses the Persecution of the Godly
under Antiochus, Hebr. 11.35. etc. recorded in the Book of the Macchabees.
Others speak of the contention between Michael and the Devil, about the body of
Moses, Jude v. 9. of the prophecy of Enoch, Verse 14, 15. of the marriage
between Salmon and Rachab, Matthew. 1.5. Yet some think these things might be
received by Tradition, or divine Inspiration, or were extant in some known
Books, and Records then in use, but lost long since, Josh. 10.13. 1 King.
11.41. and 14.19, 29. See a Catalogue of them in Beza in Jude p. 74.

SECT. IV. Of the Greek Tongue.
THe Greek Tongue is of use in two Respects; Usserius de versione 70
Interpretum, cap. 3.
first, in Reference to the Greek version of the old Testament, by the
Septuagint; for by understanding it, and how it was used by the Jews,
throughout Egypt, Syria, and Asia long before Christ's time, and publicly read
in their Synagogues, scarce one in an hundred then understanding the Hebrew, a
fair account may be given why so many places cited by Christ, and his Apostles
out of the Old Testament, are set down according to that Version; and that too
where it differs from the Hebrew, as in Luke 3.36. where Cainan is inserted out
of the Septuagint, but is not in the Hebrew: so Acts 7.14. (taken out of Genesis
46.27.) seventy five souls are taken out of the Septuagint, the Hebrew has but
seventy: so Acts 13.41. taken out of Habak. 1.5. The Apostle following the
Greek Translation, says -- behold ye despisers, for -- behold ye among the
Heathen, as the Hebrew has it. So Acts 15.17. taken out of Amos 9.12. Hebr.
12.6. out of Prove. 3.12. 1 Pet. 2.6. (the last words) out of Isaiah 28.16. Many
more Instances of this nature are collected by Tailor, and Bootius in their
Examen Praefationis Morini, Sect. 4.5.6. and Ludovicus Capellus in his Critica
Sacra, l. 3. c. 3.

The cause why Sacred Writers so often followed the Seventy was, because, if they
had wholly slighted their Translation, it might have been a great prejudice to
the Faith, both of those Jews and Gentiles, who had no other in ordinary use,
the Greek being a Language common, and intelligible to both.

Though this may be also observed, that many places are quoted by the Apostles
out of the Old Testament, according to the Hebrew, and not according to the
Seventy, whom they leave sometimes, even when the sense in the Version is the
same, and the difference but in words: to the end, that their indulgence to the
Grecising Jews and Gentiles, in using the Greek Version received by them, might
not be so interpreted, as if they accounted it Authentical, and not to be
receded from. The places are Mat. 2.15. taken out of Hos. 11.1. and Matthew.
8.17. out of Esaias 53.4. John 19.37. out of Zach. 12.10. Romans 9.17. out of Exodus
9.16. with many more to be seen in Capel. Critic. sacr. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Usserius de 70. interpretibus, cap. 3. Tailor and Bootius in Examen Praefat.
Morini, sect. 7.

Also the Greek Tongue is necessary to understand many Latin words derived
from it, and many terms of much use in Divinity; and the several Arts, and to
understand the Greek Fathers, who have Commented on the Scriptures, and
strenuously defended Religion by Theological Treatises.

SECT. V. Of the Latin.
THe Latin Tongue is necessary in four respects:

1. For getting Knowledge in the Original Tongues by reading Grammars and
Lexicons.

2. For understanding the Greek Testament, because it has many Latin words
inserted, though clothed in Greek letters, as (...), See Pasor's Lex. in sine.
and many others. Beza in Matthew. 5.26. reckons up twenty seven of them: these
words cannot well be understood, without some knowledge of the Latin.

3. For making use of Commentaries on the Bible, Systemes, Tracts,
Controversies in Divinity, Cases of Conscience, Histories, and briefly of
Authors of all kinds, and of all subjects, who have written in that Tongue.

4. For understanding many English words, which are of great use in Divinity,
and are borrowed of the Latin.

SECT. VI. Of the Chaldee and Syriac, how they differ.
THe Chaldee and Syriac are useful to help us to understand the Scriptures in
the Originals: which in one sense are the Names of the same Language, in
another they differ.

I. That Tongue, which is now generally understood by Chaldee, and is termed
the Tongue of the Chaldeans, Dan. 1.4. is usually in Scripture styled Syriac,
the Aramite, or Syrian Language, Dan. 2.4. 2 Kings 18.26. Ezra 4.7. and that
either,

1. Because the Chaldeans and the Syrians had one and the same Language:

2. Or because Chaldea was of old esteemed a part of Syria; as appears both

1. See Pliny.
From Scripture, where Mesopotamia (which is styled the Land of the Chaldees in
Ezekiel. 1.3. as Tremellius and Polanus conceive, but more plainly in Acts 7.2,
4.) is commonly (in the Original of the Old Testament) called Aram Naharajim,
that is, Syria interamnis. See Genes. 24.10. 1 Chronicles. 19.6. and Padan-Aram,
Genes. 28.2, 5, 6.) and once Aram (that is, Syria) without any addition, Judge.
3.10, with 8. Hence Laban, who lived in that Country, is called an Aramite, or
Syrian, Genesis 25.20.

2. From other Authors, see Strabo lib. 16. and Pliny lib. 6. c. 12. who make
Mesopotamia, Babylonia (or Chaldea) and Assyria to be anciently included in
Syria; and that Assyria is often called Syria, and the Inhabitants Syri, you
may see proved by many Instances in Seldom de DIs Syris, Proleg. cap. 1. and so
were the Babylonians too, Ibidem.
as is plain from those words of Strabo; Qui de Syrorum imperio scribunt, cum
Medos a Persis eversos dicunt, Syros autem a Medis, nullos alios Syros
intelligunt, quam qui Babylonem and Ninum regni caput effecerunt. Here he calls
that Monarchy, which was overthrown by the Medes (which the Scripture informs
us to be the Babylonian or Chaldean) the Syrian Monarchy.

And may not that Tongue then well be called the Syrian, which was used by the
Babylonians (with their Neighbors) Ezra 4.7, 9, 10. by the Chaldeans, Dan. 2.4.
and by the Assyrians, Isai. 36.11? See Wolphius in Ezra 4.7. Willet in Dan. c.
1. Qu. 25. Fuller's Miscellan. l. 3. c. 20.


Thus you see in what sense the Chaldee and Syriac are Names of the same Tongue.

II. But that which has commonly past under the Name of Syriac, since the
Captivity in Babylon, is degenerate from the old Syriac or Chaldee, and but a
corruption of it. For the Jews returning from Babylon, having there forgot
their own Language, the ancient Hebrew (which, Bibl. Polyglot. Ptoleg.
being dispersed, they could not retain so well there, as they did in Egypt,
when they lived together in Goshen) they used the Tongue of the Chaldees, which
they had learned there (as necessary for Commerce, and to render them capable
of the Commands of those whom they served) but mixed some relics of Hebrew
with it: and altered it somewhat, See Freerwoods Enquiries, cap 9
by framing it according to the fashion of their own Countrey-Language: and
afterward it grew more impure, by the Addition of Arabic, Greek, Latin, and
other exotic words.

The old Babylonian Syriac, thus corrupted, is that which now carries away the
Name of Syriac: and it divides it self principally into two Dialects:

1. Introduct. ad lect. Ling. Orient. Praefatio.
The Jerusalem, which was used by Christ.

2. The Antiochian Dialect (in which there are ancient Translations of both
Testaments) which varieth a little from the other; yet is not therefore to be
thought a different tongue. For if the same story should be writ in Kentish,
Devonshire, and Yorkshire Language, there would probably be greater difference,
then is to be found between those two Dialects.

The Syrian-Characters were brought in by the Antiochian Christians, in the
Infancy of the Church, that they might have nothing common with the Nazarites
and Ebionites.

Now I have set down the Difference between Chaldee and Syriac, it remains that
I show the Use of each.

SECT. VII. The Usefulness of the Chaldee.
THe knowledge of the Chaldee is requisite,

I. For the understanding of those places of Scripture, which were written in
that Language, though Chaldee be called Syriac in the Old Testament, of which
before, as the Syriac is styled Hebrew in the New) as Ezra, from chap. 4.7. to
chap. 6.19. and chap. 7. from ver. 11. to ver. 27. and Daniel 2. from ver. 4.
to the 8. chapter. Jer. 10.11. Vide Piscat. Scholias in loc.

II. For the understanding of Chaldee words scattered up and down in other
places in the Original, and some Hebrew words, whose root is in the Chaldee: as
also of many Chaldaisms in the Hebrew Text, when Hebrew words borrow a Chaldee
signification: thus (...) in Chaldee is to consult, and so it is used, Neh. 5.7.

Many Hebrew Nouns and Verbs are formed, and words altered after the Chaldee
manner. See many instances hereof in De Dieu's Oriental Grammar, and in
Bythner's Introduction to the Chaldee Tongue, and his Appendix de Aramaeismis,
both at the end of his Hebrew Grammar.

III. For understanding of the Chaldee Paraphrases, which rendered the Hebrew
Text for the help of the Jews, who were better acquainted with the Chaldee
since the Captivity, then with the Hebrew.

These Paraphrases, See Prolegom. Bibl Polyglott. p. 86.
especially those most ancient ones of Onkelos on the Law, and of Jonathan,
Judges, Samuel, Kings, and all the Prophets, except Daniel, are represented as
very useful, in two respects.

1. In that they illustrate difficult and obscure places, and explane
Old Testament Rites, Customs, Histories, and the genuine signification of
words. For knowing of which the Authors thereof had a far greater advantage
then others since, because they lived nearer those times, when the Hebrew was
commonly spoken, and those Rites in use.

2. In that they confirm diverse Articles of the Christian Faith, and afford
the strongest arguments against the Jews. There are clear testimonies in them
of the Person of the Messiah, his coming and Offices, which (as Amama in
Consilio de stud. Hebr. says) makes them afraid of Christians, who are any
whit versed in these Paraphrases; because they are with them of almost equal
authority with the Text. There you may see those Prophesies, Genesis 49.10. Psalm.
45. Esa. 9.6. and 52.13. to the end of the 53. chapter plainly applied to the
Messiah.

IV. There are diverse expressions in the New Testament, which frequently occurr
in the Chaldee Paraphrases; as See Drusius and Grotius in Joh. 1.1. and Heins.
Aristarch. c. 3.
The Word, which seems often there to denote a person, is by John ( c. 1. v.
1.) applied to Christ.

The second death, and the world to come (see Deuteronomy. 33.6. Isa. 65.6. Jer.
51.39, 57. in those Paraphrases) and the false, or deceitful Mammon, (that is,
riches) for so should (...), or (...), be rendered in Luke 16.9. since its
opposed to the true Mammon, the true riches, ver. 11. and so it will be the
same with (...) opes fallaces, which we meet with in the Chaldee, Hos. 5.11.
Prove. 15.27. Nor is this sense repugnant to the word (...), or (...), both
which carry the Notion of falsehood and deceit, as they are diverse times used by
the Hellenists, which you may see proved by Heinsius, and de Dieu on Luke 16.9.

SECT. VIII. Of the Syriac.
THe knowledge of the Syriac is of good use in two respects.

1. To understand the New Testament, because it was the Native Language of
Christ and his Apostles, which in the New Testament is called Hebrew, (being
the Language of the Hebrews, and in part descended of the ancient Hebrew) as
appears from (...), the pavement, John 19.13. and (...), the place of a skull,
ver. 17. both these were Syriac words, yet called by John, See Fuller's
Miscellan. l. 3. c. 20. and Dr. Hammond's Annot. in Ioh. 19.13.
Hebrew. Which manifestly shows, (says Beza in locum) that the Syriac Tongue
was then Vernacula Judaeis, Native to the Jews.

There are many more Syriac words in the New Testament, See Pasor's Lex. in
fine.
as (...).

Besides, there are diverse Phrases there, (called Syriasms or Syriacisms) yea
the Style it self savours of that Idiome: which must needs be so, if we
consider, that many speeches of Christ, and his Apostles there recorded, were
delivered in Syriac; and that the sacred Penmen themselves conceived that in
Syriac, which they expressed in Greek, but so, as that by framing it to set
forth the emphasis, and propriety of their own Language, they make it much
different from other Greek.

Hence it is, that (...) stands for (...), See Canin. de locis obscur. N.T. p.
86.
Matthew. 6.12. and Debtors for sinners. (...) for (...), Mat. 25.25. Luke 15.21.
(...) for (...), Heb. 1.2. and 11.3. (...) for (...), Rev. 6.8. See Drus.
Praeter, in loc. and Fuller's Miscel. lib. 1. c. 7.
because the same Syriac word denotes both; as (...) signifies both sins and
debts.

(...) both Heaven and God: (...) both an age and the world: (...) both death
and the pestilence. Hence also, because (...) in Hebrew, to be clear, in Syriac
signifies to overcome; therefore the Apostle after the LXX. renders (...) Psalm.
51.4. (thou might be clear) by (...), thou might overcome, Romans 3.4.

There seems also to be a Syriasm in (...), Luke 14.18. Fuller's Miscel. lib.
1. cap. 1.
which expresses that usual Syriac Adverb (...) ilico, continuo (and so that
place should be rendered, -- And they all presently began to make excuse) for
(...) signifies una and also prima. Therefore (...) is several times in the New
Testament put for (...). Rev. 9.12. Mar. 16.2. with 9. (...), the first day of
the week; the whole Phrase is Syriac, for (...) signifies both a Sabbath and a
week, as Luke 18.12.

It is also observable, that (...) See de Dieu on Mar. 4.22. and Drus. Praeter.
in Gal. 2.16.
and (...), nisi, are sometimes put for (...), sed, because the Syriac (...)
denotes both. See Mat. 12.4. and 24.36. Gal. 2.16. upon See De Dieu, on Mar.
4.22. and Drus. Praeter. in Gal. 2.15.
the same account (...) See Heins. Exer. in 2 Cor. 2.5.
is put for (...) Mar. 9.8. Joh. 17.12. Matthew. 20.23. which our Translators,
and others, not considering, have feigned a defect, and created a difficulty in
that place, which should be rendered thus -- is not mine to give, (...), except
to whom it is prepared of my father. See Grotius on that place, and De Dieu on
Mar. 10.40.

Lastly, See De Dien on Joh. 7.4. and Heins. Aristar. cap. 22.
(...) stands for (...) openly, Joh. 7.4. and 11.54. Col. 1.15. according to
the use of the Syriac (...).

II. The knowledge of the Syriac is useful for the understanding of that very
ancient Translation, made out of the Hebrew of the Old, and Greek of the New
Testament, into Syriac: which for the most part keeps close to the Original
(whose Idiotisms, by reason of its Assinity thereto, it can excellently
express) and represents it the most exactly of all others, as Dr. Walton, in
his Prolegom. to the Oriental Bible, page 92. And in the judgment of
Tremellius, (as he delivers it in his Epistle before the Syriac Testament, set
forth, and Translated by him) there is scarce greater difference between the
Greek and the Syriac, then there is between several Copies of the New Testament.

This Version helps much to vindicate those places of the Original; which
diverse cry out against, as if they were corrupted, and would thence infer the
Scripture unfit to be a Rule of Faith. See Instances hereof in Glassius's
Philol. Sacr. lib. 1. and Hottinger's The saurus Philologicus, page 147. etc.

SECT. IX. Of Grammar.
IF there be use of the Tongues, then there is need of Grammar, for acquiring
the knowledge thereof; which are not now attainable by an immediate miraculous
Gift, for that was proper and peculiar to the Apostles, and others, at the
first publishing of the Gospel, Act. 2.4, 5, 6. Scriptura non potest intelligi
Theologice, Melancthor
nisi prius intelligatur Grammatice. For Grammar delivers the first Principles
of a Language, shows the Formations, and Significations, Connexions, and
Dependencies of words, and how they are put together to frame a discourse, of
which no sense can be made without it.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the VSEFVLNESS OF THE ARABIC, ADDED By another hand.
SKill in the Arabic Language is by the unanimous consent of Learned men, of
greatest note for Oriental Learning, represented as a considerable attendant of
Divinity; being able to do much service in unfolding the sense of Sacred writ;
because a perfect knowledge of the Hebrew is not to be attained without it:
which we may the rather be induced to believe, if we consider, that we have but
a part of that Language in the Bible; the only Monument and Record of it, that
has escaped the injuries of Time. For it can not be thought, that this
Mother Tongue should be so barren of words, as not to contain, in its whole
extent, a far greater number, then are at present in the Old Testament. Whence
it comes to pass, the rest being lost, that we are to seek for the genealogies
of many words we meet with there; of whose descent whilst we are ignorant, we
cannot certainly rate and value them: nor know what eminency and riches of
sense are entailed upon them. In which case, that Language must needs be
acknowledged to do a singular good office, which is ready to minister relief,
and in a great measure to supply the defect. And this the Arabic performs,
enabled thereto, partly, because it is of great affinity with the Hebrew; as
descended of it, and differing from it rather in accidents, then in the essence
and substance of the Language, as Ravis proves in his Discourse and Grammar of
the Eastern Languages, and may be discerned from Schindler's Lexicon
Pentaglotton. Partly, because it is an exceeding copious Tongue, abounding with
words, and preserved entire and complete. Hence, to speak more particularly,

I. The Arabic may help us to the roots, (and so clear the meaning) of many
Hebrew words, which are not to be found in the present remains of the Hebrew
Tongue.

Hottinger for proof hereof has given a little Lexicon of Instances in his
Smegma Orientale, l. x. c. 7. where he shows that from the Arabic we may
understand that (...) contortum comes from (...) funem torquere: (...) statua
from (...) posuit, erectum constituit; both which roots, anciently (without
doubt) Hebrew, are still retained in the Arabic. (...) palatium, templum is
derived from (...) in Arabic magnus, procerus fuit. (...), from (...) in
Arabic. palatum; (...) being compensated by Dagesch in (...) as in (...) and
(...) Magnas, from (...) multi famulitii furit. (...) legatus, from (...), or
(...) ivit, profectus est. (...) gluma, from (...) fuste percutere. And from
(...) carnosos clunes habuit, (...) cauda ovis, vel arietis, magna, and
adiposa: which word, used Exodus 29.22. and Lev. 7.3. is appropriated to the
Eastern sheep, in which that part is so very large and fat, In Lex. Ara^^ p.
146.
that it ever weighs at least ten or twelve pound (as Golius attests) and
sometimes above forty; whence we may discover some reason why that part was
appointed to be burnt in sacrifice, as in the formentioned places we find it
was. To these may be added (...) descending from (...) donavit. (...) Elohim,
See Pocock. Not. Miscell, page 34, 35.
from (...) coluit, servivit (...) coeli, from (...) excelsum esse. (...)
crudus from (...) semicocta, cruda fuit caro. And, to name no more, (...) found
only Habak. 1.9. from (...) copiosum, multum esse, whence (...) multitudo,
copia, which derivation of De Dieu's is better suited both to the forms of the
word, and the sense of the place, then the uncertain conjectures of others. For
which of them is so clear, and well grounded, as this, A multitude of their
faces [shall be] toward the East?

II. The Arabic, since it received not only words from the Hebrew, but
significations too, may give us a more certain aim at the sense of many Hebrew
words (used also in the Arabic) which have been uncertainly, and sometimes
unhappily explicated. Being such as occur more rarely, and perhaps but once:
or, if frequently, yet in such acceptions as are not agreeable to some peculiar
places of Scripture, though well fitting the rest. Hence it is, that these
following words are explained from the Arabic: (...) Job 16.15. sutis. (...)
chap. 30.17. vena, arteria, See Hotting. Thesaur. Philol. page 507. and his
Smegma Orientale. li. 1. cap. 7.
(...) chap. 33.20. fastidivit. And so may (...) chap. 40.12. (with us 17.) be
from thence rendered femur, as it there signifies, where the Verb (...) is taken
as well for femur laesit, as for pavit. (...) chap. 37.11. may be more
conveniently expressed by projicit, disjicit. (...) chap. 32.6. by tardavi.
(...) chap. 21.32. properly by terra inculta. All which significations the
Arabic furnishes us with: as also that of the Verb (...) abscondere,
recondere; whence (...) in Jer. 2.22. which, according to Bochartus, In Phaleg,
lib. 3. cap. 5.
should be rendered recondita; Thine iniquity is laid up before me. See the like
Phrase, Deu. 32.34. Hos. 13.12.

(...) or (...), commonly a, ab, in the Arabic frequently denotes ad, versus,
and so it must needs do in Genesis, chapter 13.11. where Lot going from Beth-el to
the plain of Jordan (which lay East of Beth-el) is said to journey (...)
Eastward. And in like manner (...) 2 Samuel 6.2. should be rendered to (not, from)
Baale, as may appear from 1 Chronicles. 13.6. See Fullers Miscell. l. 1. c. 4. and
Amama's Antibarb. Bibl. ad Genesis 13.11.

The most learned of the Jewish writers are observed to have recourse to this
Language for the meaning of diverse words in the Hebrew Text: as, of (...)
everri, and (...) everriculum in Isa. 14.23. of (...) Hos. 13.5. terra
siticulosa: (...) being in Arab. See Pocock. not. Miscell. page 36, 37. Ad
Hebraeae linguae perlectam cognitionem mult^^^ plus confert (Arabica) quam
creditum est hactenus. Quod Hebr^^orum in Scriptutam commentaria docent, qui,
quoties haret calculus, ad hanc linguam confugiunt tanquam ad sacram anchoram.
Q^amvis long plura observassent ex Ara^^smo ad sacri Textus ill utrationem, si
^^us linguae fuislent peritiores. Bochar^. Phaleg lib. 1. cap 15.
locus aridus and siticulosus, from (...) sitivit. Of (...) Number. 11.5. melones
from (...) Arab. melo. Of (...) Ezekiel. 27.24. vestes pretiosae, which Hottinger
deduceth from (...) Arab. contorquere, quasi contortis filis contextae.

The same learned Author has also proved, That the Greek Interpreters had a
respect to the Arabic usage of words in many places of their Version, as in
Mich. 7.3. where (...) usually turned aerumna (or, pravitas) animae suae, is
expressed by (...), acceptum animae suae, from (...) Arab. cupido, res cupita.
So in Ezekiel. 21.14. in translating (...) by (...), in stuporem conjicies eos,
they seem to look at that sense of (...) whereby it sounds torpuit, stupuit:
though it also denote post velamentum latuit, whence (...) Hebr. conclave. To
these instances scattered by that industrious writer, well versed in the
Eastern Languages, in his Smegma Orientale, Lib. 1. cap. 7. p. 144. 150.
a whole heap might be added out of his Thesaurus Philol. p. 368. But there is
the less need thereof, because this matter will be further evinced in the fifth
particular. I shall rather observe, that our Translators have given such a
sense of several Hebrew words, as the Arabic ministers, and warrants, and does
in it self carry the greatest convenience to those places, in which they are
found. So they have rendered (...) Deuteronomy. 33.3. they sat down, which is the
usual notion of the Arabic Theme (...) accubuit, See De Dien in locum.
and well expresses the posture of learners. (...), Ezra 5.8. they make to
signify great, [(...) great stones] which import must be acknowledged to the
Arabic (...) magnus, crassus fuit. And so must that signification of (...) he
commanded, Est. 1.10. and that of (...) a friend, expressed very fitly in Prove.
16.28. and 17.9. and derived from (...) which with the Arabians is copulare,
conjungere: as De Dieu observes in Psalm. 55.14.

In fine, that diverse of the Hebrew Themes had anciently, as, more
Conjugations, so more significations, then now they have, appears from their
Derivatives, some of which are used in such acceptions, as have no affinity
with any one, which their Theme still retains, but flow from some other which
is lost; to the restoring of which the Arabic is most likely to contribute.
Thus it helps (...) to that sense, pauper, miser fuit; the print of which
remains in (...), Eccles. 4.13. indigus: (...) to studium rei alicui impendit,
of which some footstep is to be seen in (...) occupatio, negotium. And lastly,
(...) to remunerare, donare; a memorial of which is preserved in (...) portio,
found Genesis 48.22. By which means the particular significations of these
Derivatives are cleared and confirmed.

III. The Arabic Tongue must explain to us those Arabic words which occur in
the Scripture. Such are (...) Amos 5.26. Saturnus: (...) Gad, and (...) Meni,
Isai. 65.11. of which see Mr. Seldom de Diis Syris, Syntag. 1. c. 1. and Mr.
Pocock in Not is ad Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 89, 92. who in page 203. makes
(...) also in Prove. 30.31. to be borrowed from the Arabians, with whom it is as
much as populus; and so the sense there will be, (...), a King with whom is his
People, reckoned as one of the things which are comely in going.

IV. By the help of this Language those many Arabisms which are in Scripture
may be discerned, and diverse words cleared, which are reputed anomalous, from
the transposition of letters, the quiescence of the (...), their redundance,
defect, or promiscuous use; which yet are regular and usual in the Arabic; and
were, it may be, of old in use in the Hebrew too; which, no doubt, as well as
other Tongues, permitted different ways of writing and speaking the same words
in various places and ages. In Not. Miscel. cap. 4.
Whence Mr. Pocock has offered an excellent Conjecture, that many of the
various Lections in the Hebrew (textual and marginal) grew hence, That where
the words in the Text seemed to be of a courser Dialect, or of a form then less
in use, the Scribes, who were to see to the correct writing of the Copies, set
down in the margin, over against those words, a more pure and usual form, or
such as was more established by Grammar Rules, whereby they would have them
pronounced. Which yet is not to be accounted the indication of any Error, or
Corruption, or the bringing in of any thing new. For if a Prophet, who was an
Ephraimitc, had written (...) Sibboleth, and a Scribe of Jerusalem would have
it be read Shibboleth with Shin, he had not corrupted the Text. The matter
would come all to one, and the sense remain inviolate. Therefore, though some
words comply not with the Precepts given by Grammarians, which are conformed
only to the examples of the Bible, and not to the whole extent of the Hebrew
Tongue, of which since we have no more monuments, we may well be ignorant of
much of the ancient Hebraism: yet such words are not presently to be rejected
as faults and mistakes. Of this sort are (...) 2 Kings 11.2. and (...) v. 4,
and 9. (...) chap. 13.6. and (...) v. 17. (...) chap. 14.6. Of all which the
excellent Author, last mentioned, has given a Reason from the Analogy of the
Arabic; and further shown, since (...) there, in the middle of Quiescents, is
turned into (...), how we come to find (...) Hos. 10.14. (...) Zechary 14.10.
(...) Ezekiel. 28.24. (...) Psa. 27.17. from (...).

Other Arabisms are observed by Hottinger, as (...) 1 Kings 21.21. In
Grammatioa Haemonica, page 155.
(...) Jer. 15.10. (...) Isai. 28.12. (...) Numb. 1.47.

V. Hence a fair account may be given of the consonancy of diverse quotations in
the New Testament to the Hebrew of the Old, though they be cited out of the
Greek Version, which is commonly thought in those places to disagree from the
Hebrew Text, as we have received it: which Text may herewithall be vindicated
from any such Alterations, or various Lections, as some fancy to have happened
to it in those instances. Thus (...) Jer. 31.32. See Pocock, no: Miscel. cap.
1, 2, 3.
which we translate, I was an Husband to them, the Seventy (and after them the
Apostle in Heb. 8.9.) render (...). And to the same sense the Syriac
Interpreter: these following the Arabic use of (...) fastidire, nauseare,
though in that Tongue it also signify dominum esse, and maritari.

So (...) Isaiah 28.16. [in our Translation, Shall not make haste] is turned by
the LXX. (...), and so expressed by Peter, 1 Pet. 2.6. and by Paul, Romans 9.33.
and 10.11. (...), Shall not be ashamed, because (...) (as the Arabic informs
us) signifies as well to be ashamed, as to make haste; and likewise to fear:
which last sense both the Chaldee and Syriac express in that place.

Again, (...) in Hab. 1.5. of which later Interpreters have given this sense,
Behold ye among the heathen, and wonder marvellously; according to the LXX, and
the Apostle in Acts 13.41. have a different import: viz. (...) Behold, ye
despisers, and wonder, and perish. And that because they took not (...) for a
compound word, as others since have done, but for a simple one, descended from
(...) injurius fuit, superbe vel insolenter se gessit, which is retained in the
Arabic: in which Language (...) also signifies to be corrupted, and altered for
the worse, whence it is rendered by (...), perish.

Further, in Hab. 2.4. (...) commonly rendered is lifted up, by the LXX, and the
Apostle in Heb. 10.38. is expressed by (...), which imports a drawing back, or
being remiss, a sense well agreeing to the Verb (...), as may appear from the
Arabic.

He, that desires to see these Observations more largely prosecuted, may
consult the accurate Author of the Notae Miscellaneae before cited; and learn
moreover from him, how (...) Psalm. 19.5. may signify (...), as the Apostle
(after the LXX.) represents it Romans 10.18.

VI. Skill in this Language is requisite to the understanding of the Arabic
Versions of the Old and New Testament, which conduce to the clearing of the
genuine sense of Scripture; as Hottinger shows at large in his Analecta,
Dissert. 2, and 6. What use Beza and De Dieu make thereof, may be seen in their
Annotations.

VII. An Insight into the Arabic may contribute much to Historical purposes. As,

1. To explicate those Rites and Customs of the ancient Arabians, which
Scripture has frequent respect to; as may appear from many Instances,
mentioned in the sixth Chapter of this Treatise, concerning the usefulness of
History. And particularly from Ezekiel. 21.21. To which place Mr. In Notis Specim.
Hist. Arab. p. 327.
Pocock has given light, by acquainting us with the Arabian manner of
Divination, used by them when they were to take a journey, marry, or perform
some other business of great moment. They had three arrows in a little vessel,
upon one of which was written to this effect, My Lord has bidden me; upon
another, My Lord has forbidden; the third had no mark. He, that went to
consult, pulled out one of these; if it happened to be the first, then he went
forward cheerfully, as if he had been admonished by God; but if the second, he
desisted; if the last, which was without any writing, he put it in again, till
he should be directed by the coming forth of one of the other. And here it may
be noted, that (...) commonly rendered by tersit, Hierom explains by commiscuit,
which comes near the Arabic notion of the same word, commovit, agitavit; which
sense it seems to have here in the place mentioned, from their agitation and
confused mingling of their lots or arrows. He shaked together the arrows: not,
he made them bright.

2. To understand those Arabic writings, which illustrate the Ecclesiastical
History, both of Jews and Christians. Plurimi Orientis Christiani sermon hoc,
ipsis vernaculo, multa condiderunt, quae ad varias Ecclesiae vices casusque
dignoscendos, and sacram Historiam, splendidam universis facem accendant. Mr.
Greaves in Orat. de Ling. Arab. p. 17.
See Hotting. Analect. Dissert. 6. p. 257. 292. and his Histor. Orient. l. 2.
c. 2. and others, which declare the rise and success of Mahometism, its
Principles and Constitutions; acquaintance with which may have no small
influence upon the right explication of Daniel's Prophecy, and of the
Revelation: and give this further advantage (as the same Author Smegm. Orient.
l. 1. c. 3. p. 54.
takes notice) of discerning what Doctrines and Rites crept into the Church,
after the obtaining of that Religion in the world; as, the worshipping of
Angels, the Invocation of Saints, the superstitious Consecration of creatures,
the Mass, with many others diligently observed from the Mahometans.

So much may suffice to evince the Utility of this Tongue, which does not more
urge, then its facility invites to the study of it. For Erpenius Cited in
Proleg. Bibl. Polygl. See M. Greave's Orat. de Ling. Arab. p. 19.
(who well knew it, as being the great restorer of it in these Western parts)
commends it as much easier then Greek or Latin, yea, or Hebrew, being almost
unacquainted with its difficulties, anomalies, and mutations of points. So that
there are scarce so many irregular words in all this Language, as are in one
only book of the Old Testament.

I shall conclude the whole matter with the words of that excellent Professor
of the Arabic Tongue at Oxford, Not. Mis. p. 12.
whose great skill therein renders his testimony of no small weight, where he
speaks thus concerning its usefulness. Ego vero, si quid censeam, Theologo adeo
utilem existimo, ut si Textum Hebraicum aliquando penitius excutere necessarium
ducat, ea sine manifesto veritatis praejudicio, ne dicam dispendio, carere non
possit.

CHAP. II. Of the Usefulness of Rhetoric.
SECT. I. Of Rhetoric in general.
RHetoric is useful for a Minister of the Gospel,

I. To discover the Tropes, Figures and Elegancies, which are in the Original;
which those that are unlearned cannot discern nor unfold.

II. To deliver his mind in good words, in apt or congruous phrases and
expressions, yet without affectation or ostentation (which Paul calls wisdom of
words, that make the cross of Christ of none effect, 1 Cor. 1.17.) but to Gods
glory, the Churches profit, and edification.

There are three grounds thereof,

1. Eloquence is a Gift of God, bestowed upon many of his dear servants, as we
may observe,

1. In the Prophets, and others in the Old Testament.

Aaron was a good Orator, I know (says God of him to Moses) that speaking he
can speak] that is, well and eloquently. Ainsworth.
Exodus 4.14. and he shall be to thee for a Mouth] or, thy spokesman unto the
people. God gave Moses a spirit of Government, and Aaron a faculty of Speech.
Job in his book far exceeds all the Poems of the Greeks, and Latins, Ornatu,
See Rivet's Isagoge ad Scripturam, cap. 28.
gravitate, and majestate. So many excellencies of words and sentences can
scarce be found elsewhere. This is observed, that the Poetical parts of
Scripture are written in a lofty and elegant Style. Annot. in Job. 10.3.
Job stretched all the veins of his wit in an eloquent way, to express the
greatness of his grief.

Solomon sought out pleasant, acceptable, delightful words, Eccles. 12.10. that
might both please and profit, tickle the ear and take the heart.

Isaiah was endowed with the Tongue of the Learned, Isa. 50.4
not only for spiritual Instruction, and seasonable consolation, but for apt
and elegant elocution also. Some learned men, who have read Isaiah and Cicero,
and compared them together, gave Isaiah the preeminence by far for Eloquence:
a^ the Noble and Learned Philip Mornay, De verit. Religionis cap. 26.
testifies: that whosoever reads them both will say, What is Cicero to Isaiah?
-- Then speaking of the Oration of Aeschines, inveighing against Demosthenes
(which Tully so much admired) he appeals to those that read both, what
Eloquence, vehemence, or sublimity is there in that, in respect of the words of
Isaiah, threatening the Jews, cap. 1, 2, 3, etc. -- Hear, O heavens, and give
car, O earth, etc.

See Franciscus Picus Mirandula (a man well able to judge) in lib. 2. de stud.
Philos. cap. 2. and Theodorus Bibliander of the Elegancy of Isaiah, cap. 25. as
cited by Rivet in his Isagoge ad Scripturam, cap. 28. and Budaeus de Ass, lib.
5. fol. 292.

2. This may be observed in the Apostles, and others in the New Testament.

Paul was (...), Acts 14.12.
a Master of speech. The Lycaonians called him Mercury, whom they feigned to be
the Interpreter of the will of their Gods, because Paul here appeared to be the
chief speaker. There is as good Rhetoric found in Paul's Epistles, as in any
Heathen Orator whatsoever: and some account the Eloquence of Cicero and
Demosthenes but dull stuff to his Elegancies.

Beza in 2 Cor. 11.6. preferred Paul before Plato in grandiloquence, before
Demosthenes in (...), before Aristotle and Galen in exact Method of Teaching.

Paul affected plainness in condescending to vulgar capacities, yet he could
play the Orator excellently when he pleased; and did sometimes, (which some
have observed) as at Athens, Act. 17.22. and before King Agrippa, Act. 26.2.
and in persuading to unanimity, Phil. 2.1, 2. to unity, Ephesians. 4.1. to 7. to
charity, 1 Cor. 13. in setting forth his sufferings, 2 Cor. 11.23, etc.

Apollos was an Eloquent man, (...) vir dicendi peritus, Act. 18.24. and mighty
in the Scriptures.

The Corinthians were enriched (...), 1 Cor. 1.5. See Annot. in 1 Cor. 1.5.
in all speech (or utterance) that is, as some interpret it, not in affected
strains of Rhetoric, but in a gift of holy Eloquence (such as Apollos is
commended for) which is a piece of a Christians riches.

3. This is also observed, that after the Apostles Times the Church had always
eruditos and eloquentes Doctores, learned and eloquent Teachers, Problem. loc.
118. page 375.
(as says Aretius) ex Oratorum numero conversos. Cyprian was first a
Rhetorician.

Great Encomiums are given of the Greek and Latin Fathers for their Eloquence.
Clark's Lives.
Hierom styled Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, for his Eloquence, Romani eloquii
Tubam, the Trumpet of Roman elocution. -- He says that Lactantius was quasi
sluvius Tullianae Eloquentiae, He flowed with Eloquence, as Tully himself. It
is said of Gregory Nazianzen, that the true beauty of his soul did shine forth
in his Eloquence, Rhetoric being both his companion, and servant. Chrysostom
was a golden-mouthed Preacher, Mellitissimus Christi Concionator. He was so
admired for his Eloquence, as that the people said, Satius esse solemn non
lucere, quam Chrysostomum non docere, We had better want the sun, then the
preaching of Chrysostom. Ambrose had an Eloquent Tongue.

4. This is observable in Modern Divines. Some of which have excelled herein, as
Melanchthon, Calvin, and Viret, whose singular Eloquence, and skill to work
upon the affections, Zanchy greatly admired.

2. Ground. Eloquence may be of good use for Persuasion (by soft and oily
insinuations) and for working upon the affections, and to set a Luster and an
Edge on the Truths and Messages of God. Lactantius said, Magis creditur
ornatae veritati, Truth the more decently it is trimmed, the more readily it is
embraced. Good Matter, clothed with good Language, is ordinarily more
acceptable and taking. Experience shows that Eloquence is an excellent
instrument and assistant to the Truth, when rightly used; but when abused, it
is potent and prevalent for the adverse party. Eloquent Apollos was as
effectual a Propugner of the Gospel, as ever Tertullus the Orator was an
Oppugner of the same.

Observe Gods blessing upon Eloquence or Elocution rightly used. Augustine
confesses that he was converted by the Eloquence of Ambrose, Veniebant in
animum meum cum verbis quae diligebam etiam res quas negligebam, Lib. 5 cap. 14.
says he in his Confessiions. Ambrose his eloquent Tongue touched Augustine's
heart with the knowledge and love of the Truth.

Peter Viretus (as the Writers of his Life relate) was so exceeding Eloquent,
that he drew many to be his Hearers, who were no friends to Religion: and they
were so chained to his lips, that they never thought the time long, wherein he
preached, but always wished his Sermons longer.

Mr. Acts and Mon.
Fox reports of Mr. Rogers, and Mr. Bradford, Martyrs, that it was hard to say,
whether there was more force of Eloquence and utterance in their Preaching, or
Holiness of life and conversation in them.

But when men abuse Rhetoric, or use it for ostentation, or vainglory, not to
woo souls to Christ, but to win credit to themselves, then God often blasts it;
and it loses its luster, savor, vigor, and efficacy.

3. Ground of the Use of Rhetoric for a Minister is this, The holy Scriptures
are full of Rhetoric, of Tropes, and Figures. Many passages in Scripture must
be Tropically or figuratively understood: else Circumcision must be really Gods
Covenant, Genesis 17.13. and the Lamb must be the Lords Passover, Exodus 12.11.
Bread and wine must be flesh and blood, Matthew. 26.26, 28. kine and ears (of
corn) must be years, Genesis 41.26. Christ must be a door, Joh. 10.7. and a vine,
Joh. 15.1. and the Prophets hair must be Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 5.5. and the Image
must be the Calf, Exodus 32.19.

The interpreting of improper or Tropical Expressions in a proper sense has
(as Glassius well observes) occasioned uncouth and absurd Opinions: Praesat.
Rhetor. Sacr.
as that of the Anthropomorphites, who attributed a real body and members to
God: and many Jewish fables. Yea that deep-rooted persuasion the Disciples had
of Christ's Temporal Reign grew from their understanding those Prophecies of the
kingdom of the Messiah according to the proper and genuine import of the words,
in which the majesty and greatness of it is set forth by Metaphors taken from
the condition of earthly Kingdoms.

Hence it is that many Speeches of Christ were mistaken, because Metaphorical
and improper: as when he bid his Disciples take heed of the Leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadduces, they understood him without a Metaphor, Matthew. 16.6;
but he corrects their mistake ver. 11, 12, then they saw Leaven was to be taken
in a borrowed sense for Doctrine: so when he spoke to the Jews about destroying
the Temple, Joh. 2.19.20, meaning his body, ver. 21. and giving his flesh to
eat, Joh. 6.51, 52. to Nicodemus of being born again, Joh. 3.3, 4. to the woman
of Samaria about living water, Joh. 4.11, 12, 14, 15. and ver. 32, 33, 34. and
to his Disciples concerning the Meat he had to eat: as also touching Lazarus
his sleeping, Joh. 11.11.

All these mistook the intent of Christ, because they understood him without a
Trope, not attending to the secondary signification of his words.

Hereunto I may add the Testimony of Master Perkins upon Hebr. 11.12. page 93,
94. Rhetoric (says he) is a good, warrantable and lawful Art; because the Holy
Ghost uses Rhetoric much in Scripture. Many of Paul's Epistles, of Christ's own
Sermons, and of the Prophets, especially Isaiah, have as much and as elegant
Rhetoric in them, as any Writers in the World: and, beside all other virtue,
and divine Power in them, they do even for Figures, and Ornaments of Art, match
any Orators, that have written in the Latin, or Greek. -- Every approved Rule
of Rhetoric may be illustrated out of the Scriptures -- and that the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament are the Fountain of Christian Eloquence, etc. --
that they are filled with the most excellent Learning in all kinds: and you may
find in them as excellent Pattesns, and Presidents of Eloquence, as are to be
found in any Author in the World. -- They that deny liberty to a Minister to
use Eloquence in preaching the word, which the Holy Ghost used in penning of
the Scripture,
they pull out of the hand of the Minister one of his weapons; and out of the
wings of the Scripture one of her feathers.

But humane Eloquence must be prepared, as the Midianitish-women taken in war
by the Israelites were to be purified, before they might marry them. See Deuteronomy.
21.11, 12, 13. it must be brought home to Divinity, and be pared and shaved
with spiritual Wisdom, and then it may lawfully and profitably be used: -- for
it is a Damosel to Divinity, but not her Mistress.

Budaeus says, De Ass lib. 5. fol. 292.
Ego quidem certe in ea sum opinione, ut existimem Tropos Oratorios multo
sublimiores, efficacioresque in sacra lectione inveniri, quam in priscorum
Graecorum Latinorumve monumenta; posseque Oratoriam Phrasim fieri ea lectione
multo locupletiorem. He thought that Oratory may be much improved, and enriched
by reading of the Scripture, since it has loftier Tropes, then any other
writings.

Here it may not be amiss to show that the holy Scriptures afford instances of
the most Tropes and Figures in Rhetoric.

SECT. II. Of Tropes.
FIrst the Kinds, of them which are four: 1. A Metonymie, 2. Irony, 3.
Metaphor, 4. Synecdoche.

Secondly, the Affections of them, which are four also:

1. Catachresis, 2. Hyperbole, 3. Metalepsis, 4. Allegoria.

First, Of the kinds of Tropes.

A Trope is an Elocution, whereby a word is changed from the proper or native
Signification to another, for ornament sake. Tropes are condimenta orationis.

I. Of a Metonymie, which is fourfold, scil: 1. of the Cause. 2. Effect. 3.
Subject. 4. Adjunct.


Of the Cause and that either 1. of the efficient. 2. of the matter.


1. Instances of a Metonymie of the efficient, when the Author, or Inventor, is
put for the thing effected:

As Ancestors for their posterity, as Japhet and Shem, Genesis 9.27. Jacob and
Israel, Psalm. 135.4.

-- Moses, and the Prophets are put for their books and writings, Luke 16.29,
31.

-- The Spirit is put for a Revelation, or Doctrine, 1 John 4.1. 1 Cor. 14.32.

-- The Holy Ghost is put for the variety of Gifts in men for the edification
of the Church, Joh. 7.39.

2. Of a Metonymy of the matter, when the name of the Matter is put for that
which is made of it: -- as Dust for a Man, Genesis 3.19. and 18.27.

-- And Seed for a Son, Genesis 4.25. 2 Samuel 7.12.

2. Of a Metonymy of the Effect, when the Efficient is signified by the Effect.
Thus God is said to be our Reward, Genesis 15.1. our Life, Deuteronomy. 30.20. Light,
Psalm. 27.1. Strength, Psalm. 18.1. because he is the Author, or Cause of these.

-- The Devil is said to be dumb, Luc. 11.14. and a spirit of infirmity, Luc.
13.11. because he made dumb and infirm.

-- Thus Faith is our Victory, 1 John 5.4. i. e. the Means and instrument of it.

-- Wine is said to be a Mocker, and strong drink is raging, Prove. 20.1.
because it makes men so.

-- Thus Bread is put for Corn, the matter of it, Isa. 28.28.

3. Of a Metonymy of the Subject, when the Name proper to it is brought to
signify the Adjunct of it. -- Thus the Place is put for the Inhabitants, as
Jerusalem, Judea, and the Region about Jordan, Matthew. 3.5.

-- Heaven for God, who dwells in heaven, Psalm. 73.9. Matthew. 21.25. Dan. 4.26.

-- House is put for children, or oss-spring, Exodus 1.21. 2 Samuel 7.11.

-- For family, Act. 10.2. Luc. 19.9.

-- Sea is put for those that coast or dwell by it, or trade upon it, Isa. 60.5.

-- Thus Princes, and Governors are put for their jurisdictions, Matthew. 2.6.
which place, thus understood, is best reconciled with Micah 5.2. for so the
Princes, and the Thousands of Judah come both to one.

-- The Cup is put for the Wine, 1 Cor. 11.25. Continens pro contento.

-- Power over the head is put for a Veil, the sign of it, 1 Cor. 11.10.

4. Of a Metonymy of the Adjunct, when subjects are signified by the Names of
their Adjuncts. Thus

-- Adjuncts are put for their Objects: so God is said to be our fear, dread,
praise, considence, hope.

-- Christ is called the desire of all Nations, Hagg. 2.7.

-- The Sign is put for the thing signified; as the anointing for the
priesthood, Numb. 18.8.

-- Bread and wine for Christ's body and blood.

-- To sit is put for to teach, Matthew. 23.2. and to rule, Psalm. 110.1. 2 These.
2.4. that being the posture of Teachers, Matthew. 26.55. and of Judges, Judge.
5.10.

-- To lift up the hand is put for to swear, Genesis 14.22. Revel. 10.5, 6. to
pray, Psalm. 28.2. and 63.5.


-- Thus the Scepter is put for the Kingdom, Genesis 49.10.

-- The Sword for Magistracy, Romans 13.4.

-- The Keys for the power of the Church, Matthew. 16, 18, 19.

-- The Abstract is put for the Concrete, as wickedness for the wicked, Job
5.16.

And righteousness for righteous, 2 Pet. 3.13. The Names of Virtues, and Vices,
are put for the persons, to which they are adjoined.

Paul was was called (...) Act. 24.5. a pest, for a pestilent fellow.

-- Thus pride is put for the proud man, or city: as Babylon, Jer. 50.31.
Behold I am against thee, O pride.

-- Days denote Old men, Job 32.7.

-- Thus Time is put for Things happening or existing in it, 1 Chronicles. 29.30. --
the Times that went over David signified the various occurents, that fell out
in his Time, See 2 Timothy 3.1, etc.

-- And a day is put for some remarkable good, as Hos. 1.11. the day of
Jezreel: or evil, as Job 18.20. the day of the wicked. Ezekiel. 21.29. and 22.14.

-- Thus joy is put for Heaven, the place of it, Mat. 25.21, 23.

The second Trope is an Irony, which is a Speech by Contraries; when it is
sharp, or biting, it is called a Sarcasm.

This is used,

1. By God himself to Adam, Genes. 3.22. Behold, the Man is become as one of
us, etc. -- to Israel, Judge. 10.14. -- go, and cry to the gods whom ye have
served; which was an Ironical upbraiding of them for their Idolatry. See the
like in Jer. 22.23. Amos 4.4.

2. By Christ to the Pharisees, Mark 7.9. -- full well ye reject the
Commandments of God; he means, they did very ill in so doing: -- and to his
Disciples, Matthew. 26.45. Bexa.
Sleep on, and take your rest.

3. By good Men, as Elijah to the Worshippers of Baal, 1 Kings 18.27. and Job
to his self-conceited Friends, Job 12.2. and 26.2, 3. Solomon to the young man,
Eccles. 11.9. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.8.

The third Trope is a Metaphor, when the like is signified by the like. It is a
Similitude contracted to one word.

-- So Eyes, Hands, Feet, Grief, Laughter, Repentance, and other Parts,
Affections, Actions, and Adjuncts of the Creature, especially of Men, are
attributed to God by a kind of Similitude.

-- So God is called a Rock, Buckler, Horn, high Tower, Psalm. 18.2. a Sun, and
a Shield, Psalm. 84.11. a fountain of water, Jer. 2.13. a consuming fire, Heb.
12.29. a husbandman, Joh. 15.1.

-- So Christ is called a Shepherd, a Door, a Lion, a Lamb, a Vine -- a bright
Morning Star, Rev. 22.16. a foundation-stone, Isa. 28.16.

-- So the Spirit, and the graces and operations of it are set forth by water,
John 4.10 14. and 7.38, 39.

-- and by sire, Matthew. 3.11.

-- Yea, all the Mysteries of the Gospel, and what ever is spiritual, is
Metaphorically expressed in the holy Scripture; as Repentance, by washing,
Isai. 1.16. by circumcising the foreskin of the heart, Jer. 4.4. Faith by
eating Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood, John 6.47, with 54. Pardon of
sin, by blotting it out, Isai. 43.25. and by God's casting it behind his back,
Isa. 38.17.

See many Instances together in Mat. 16.18, 19. 2 Cor. 10.4. Ephesians. 6.14, to 17.
Revel. 3.18.

-- So the Church is called God's house, 1 Timothy 3.15. God's Husbandry, 1 Cor.
3.9. the righteous are called Wheat, Mat. 3.12. Jewels, Mal. 3.17. Sheep, Joh.
10.

-- The wicked are called Dogs, Swine.

-- Seducers are called Wolves.

-- The Devil a Serpent, a Lion.

-- The Scripture sometimes gives the parts and properties of Men to other
things, and so represents them as persons; as hands to the Spider, Prove. 30.28.
mourning and weeping to the Ground, Job 31.38. Joel 1.10.

-- Thus blood is said to cry, Genes. 4.10. the pastures to shout and sing,
Psalm. 65.13.

-- the trees to clap their hands, Isai. 55.12.

-- the waters to see and be afraid, Ps. 77.16

Add Psalm. 19.1, to 6. Isai. 59.14.

The fourth Trope is a Synecdoche, which is fourfold: Of the 1. Genus. 2.
Species. 3. Whole. 4. Part.


1. A Synecdoche of the Genus, when the Genus is put for the Species, or a
General for a Particular. So the living, Genesis 3.20. and all flesh, Luke 3.6.
Romans 3.20. and every creature is put for all men, Mark 16.15. Col. 1.23.

-- Thus a common Name is used (...) for a proper; as the seed of the woman,
and the Son of man, for Christ. A Prophet for Moses, Hos. 12.13. -- the river
for Euphrates, Genesis 31.21. Josh. 24.2, 3.

2. A Synecdoche of the Species, when the Species is put for the Genus, or a
Particular for the General.

-- So the Greeks are put sometimes for all the Gentiles, in opposition to the
Jews, Romans 1.16. and 2.9.

-- Bread for all kind of food, Genesis 3.19.

-- Peace is put for all good things, Temporal, Ps. 122.6, 7. and Spiritual,
John 14.27. Romans 1.7.

-- The washing one another feet, for the whole exercise of love and humility,
John 13.14.

-- Removing of mountains, for performing any thing difficult, and seemingly
impossible, Mat. 17.20.

3. A Synecdoche of the whole, when that is put for a part. Thus the World is
put for the Roman Empire, Luke 2, 1. or for the Land of Canaan, as some
understand Romans 4.13. -- for the Gentiles, in opposition to the Jews, Romans
11.11, 12. 1 John 2.2.

-- All in Scripture is often taken for some of all sorts, distributively; not
collectively, for all of every sort. 1 Timothy 2.4. Thus God will have all men to
be saved.

-- So Genesis 7.14. Mat. 4.23. Luke 11.42.

-- Thus the plural Number is used for the singular, as sons for one son, Genesis
46.23. daughters for one daughter, verse. 7. that was Dinah, verse. 15.

-- Thieves for one of them, Mat. 27.44. with Luke 23.39, 43.

-- The Prophets (Acts 13.43.) for one of them, scil. Habakkuk, chap. 1.5.

4. A Synecdoche of the Part, when a part is put for the whole; as soul (Genesis
46.26, 27. Romans 13.1.) for the whole man. So is the body, Romans 12.1. and the
blood, Mat. 27.4. and the heads, Prove. 11.26. The roof is put for the house,
Mat. 8.8.

-- Gates for a City, Genesis 22.17.

-- The singular Number is put for the plural, as Man for Men, Job 14.1. and
beast for beasts, Eccles. 3.21.

-- Thus a certain number is put for an uncertain, that is the usual Phrase of
Scripture; as Job 5.19. in six troubles, yea, in seven, i.e. in many. Amos 1.3.
Prove. 24.16. 1 Samuel 2.5. Jer. 15.9. Eccles. 11.2. Revel. 4.5. Zech. 3.9.

So much of the kinds of Tropes.

Secondly, The Affections of Tropes follow, which are four.

I. A Catachresis, which is a harsher or more strained manner of speech, that
seems to come in vi, non precario.

-- Thus wings are put for beams, Mal. 4.2.

-- So the Priests are said to profane the Sabbath, Mat. 12.5.

-- The Israelites savor to stink in the eyes of Pharaoh, Exodus 5.21.

-- Thus the people are said to see the thundering as the noise of the trumpet,
Exodus 20.18. and John to see the voice that spoke with him, Rev. 1.12.

II. An Hyperbole, which is the boldness of a Trope coming into one extreme,
either by Amplification or Extenuation.

1. By way of Amplification, when our speech increases the thing, or is above
it, which is called Auxesis.

-- Thus Abraham's seed are said to be like the dust of the earth, Genesis 13.16.
and the stars of Heaven for number, c. 15.5.

-- Jacob is said to hate Leah, that is, to love her less then he did Rachel,
Genesis 29.30, 31. Luke 4.16. with Mat. 10.37.

-- Saul and Jonathan are said to be swifter then Eagles, and stronger then
Lions, 2 Samuel 1.23.

-- Thus it is said, that in Solomon's days silver was as stones, 1 King.
10.21, 27.

-- That the world it self could not contain the books, if all was written,
which Jesus did, Joh. 21.25.

-- That David made his bed to swim, Psalm. 6.6. -- That Job washed his steps in
butter, and the rock poured him out rivers of oil, chap. 29.6. See the like in
Deuteronomy. 32.13. Genesis 49.11. Judge. 5.5.

-- That our light affliction, etc. works for us (...), an exceeding excessive
eternal weight of glory. But, as one says, Nec Christus, nec coelum patitur
Hyperbolen. Here it is hard to Hyperbolize.

2. By way of Extenuation, when our speech lessens the thing, or is beneath it,
which is called Meiosis or Tapinosis. So David calls himself a dead dog, a
slay, 1 Samuel 24.14. -- a weak despicable person. So did Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel
9.8.

-- God takes no pleasure in wickedness, Psalm. 5.4. i. e. he abhors and
abominates it. -- Lazarus sleeps, he means, is dead, John 11.11.

-- God chooses things that are not, 1 Cor. 1.28. i.e. that are of small
esteem, or of no account.

III. Affection of a Trope is Metalepsis, that is, the multiplication of a
Trope in one word, Psalm. 85.1. Thou have been favorable unto thy land -- the
land is put for Judea, by a Synecdoche of the Genus, and for its inhabitants by
a Metonymie of the Subject.

-- So Genesis 3.15. the seed of the woman is by a Metonymie of the Matter, put
for her offspring, and by a Synecdoche of the Genus for Christ.

IV. Affection of a Trope is an Allegory, that is the continuation of a Trope,
when more Tropes of the same kind are put in a sentence, as in Ezekiel. 16.3, etc.
Eccles. 12.2, to 7. Here is a contexture of Tropes, Prove. 5.15, 16, 17. 1 Cor.
3.6, to 16. Ephesians. 6.11. Romans 11.16.

-- The whole book of the Canticles is Allegorical.

-- Hither Proverbs are referred, and Parables (by some) and Allusions to other
passages in Scripture, as in 2 Cor. 3.13, etc. Gal. 4.22, etc. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.

But these places (as also Ephesians. 5.31, 32.) are accounted Allegories in another
acception, ( scil. as the word is opposed to the literal sense of Scripture,
(whether proper or tropical) i. e. the representation of the mystical sense of
some things related in the Scripture, which had a true literal meaning besides.

So much of Tropes.

SECT. III. Of Figures.
SEcondly, Figures follow, which are appendant either to Words, or, Sentences.

I. Instances of Figures appendant to Words, which are eleven.

First figure, Epizeuxis, which is a continued repetition of the same word in a
sentence, to express

1. An Emphasis, as I, even I am he, etc. Isa. 43.25. -- The living, the
living, Isa. 38.19.

2. Or Affection, as my father, my father, 2 King. 13.14. -- O my son Absalom,
my son, my son, 2 Samuel 18.33. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.

3. Or Certainty, Rev. 18.2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. -- Genesis 2.17.
dying you shall die, that is, surely die.

4 Or Greatness in any kind, as multitudes, multitudes in the valley of
decision, Joel. 3.14. that is, very great multitudes. -- Psalm. 68.12. kings of
armies did flee, did flee, that is, fast, or apace.

5. Or an Inculcation of the same thing, as Isa. 28.10. precept must be upon
precept, line upon line.

The second figure, Anadiplosis, when the same word that is used in the end of
a foregoing sentence, is repeated in the beginning of the following, as Psalm.
121.1, 2. from whence comes my help, my help comes from the Lord, Romans 8.16,
17. Luke 7.31, 32.

The third figure, Climax, or Gradation, that is, a continuation of an
Anadiplosis in diverse degrees. When the succeeding words ascend higher, or
exceed, or transcend each other, it is as it were a going up by steps: as Romans
5.3, 4, 5. Tribulation works patience, and patience experience, etc. So chap.
10.14, 15. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed, etc. --
So chap. 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called, etc. So Joh. 1.1,
4, 5.

The fourth figure, Anaphora, when the same word is iterated in the beginning
of sentences, as Deuteronomy. 28.3, to 7. -- blessed shall thou be, etc. ver. 16, to
20. -- Cursed shall thou be, etc. Mat. 5.3, to 12. and 23.13, to 17. Woe to you,
Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites. Psalm. 148.1, 2, 3, 4.

The fifth figure, Epistrophe, when a like sound is repeated in the close of
sentences, or they end alike, 2 Cor. 11.22, 23. -- so am I. Psalm. 136.
throughout, his mercy endures for ever. Amos 4.8, 9, 10, 11.

The sixth figure, Symploce, or Complexion, when the like sound is repeated
both in the beginning and end of diverse sentences, as Psalm. 136.1, to 8. 1 Cor.
11.4, 5, 6. and ver. 14, 15.

The seventh figure, Epanalepsis, when the same word is used in the beginning
and ending of a sentence, as Eccles. 1.2. vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice.

The eighth figure, Epanodos, when words of one sentence are repeated with the
order inverted in the next, as Mar. 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man, not man
for the Sabbath. Isa. 5.20. John 8.47.

The ninth figure, Paronomasia, when a word by a change of some letter or
syllable, is changed in signification also. This is a pleasant sound of words.
-- Isa. 5.7. he looked for (...) judgment, but behold (...) accumulation,
scil. of sin; and for (...) righteousness, but behold (...) a cry.

-- Jer. 48.43. (...) Fear and the pit, and the snare shall be upon them.

-- Romans 12.3. (...). -- Romans 1.29. (...) -- (...) and Verse 31. (...) -- So
Romans 2.1. (...). So 2 Timothy 4.2. (...).

The tenth figure, Polyptoton, when words of the same Original are consonant
among themselves in diverse Cases. This Figure is a variation of Cases, as Romans
4.18. who Against hope believed in hope.

-- Romans 11.36. of him, through him, and to him are all things 2 Cor. 10.12.
and 12.14. Hither may some Hebraisms be referred, as A song of songs, Vanity of
vanities.

The eleventh figure, Antanaclasis, or a repetition of the same word in a
different Signification. So Matthew. 8.22. Let the dead bury the dead. So Joh.
1.10. the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.

-- Joh. 2.23. many believed ((...)) in his Name, but Jesus did not commit
himself ((...)) to them ver. 24.

-- Romans 9.6. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel.

-- See Mat. 26.29. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Timothy 6.5, 6.

II. Instances of Figures appendant to a Sentence which are eleven.

First, Exclamation, is to signify the greatness of the thing, or to express
our affections, or to excite and move affections in others; by an adverb of
exclaming, expressed, or understood -- and that by way

1. Of Complaint, or Lamentation, as Job 6.2. Oh! that my grief was thoroughly
weighed -- Lament. 1.12. -- Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, etc.

2. Of request, or wishing, Jer. 9.1. Oh! that my head were waters, etc.

-- Genesis 17.18. Oh! that Ishmael might live before thee -- Deuteronomy. 5.29. and
32.29. Psalm. 55.6. Oh! that I had wings like a dove.

3. Of admiration Psalm. 31.19. Oh! how great is thy goodness, etc.

Romans 11.33. Oh! the depth of the riches, etc.

4. Of reprehension, Gal. 3.1. Oh foolish Galatians! who has betwitched you,
etc. Matthew. 17.17. O faithless and perverse generation, etc. and 8.26. O ye of
little faith, why are ye fearful -- Deuteronomy. 32.6.

5. Of indignation and commnation, Matthew. 23.13, 14, 15, Woe to you Scribes,
Pharisees, Hypocrites.

6. Of commiseration, Jer. 4.19. Mys bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very
heart.

7. Of obtestation, as 1 These. 2.10. ye^ are witnesses, and God also, etc. Romans
1.9. God is my witness. -- 1 Timothy 5.21.

The second figure, Epiphonema, which is usually added to what was declared, or
proved before; for confirmation, or brief comprehension, or admiration, or
consequence, or application thereof.

Piscator conceives that in 2 Timothy 2.11. to be an Epiphonema. It is a faithful
saying, -- and that in 1 Timothy 1.15. -- that in Eccles. 12.15, 16. seems to be a
remarkable Epiphonema.

The third figure, Epanorthosis, or Correction, when something is recalled that
was spoken before, as John 16.32. ye shallleave me alone, and yet I am not
alone, etc. -- 1 Cor. 7.10. I command, yet not I, but the Lord: and chap.
15.10. -- I labored more abundantly, etc. yet not I, but the Grace of God in me
-- Gal. 2.20. Thus, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. So Gal. 1.6, 7.
and 3.4. and 4.9.

The fourth figure, Aposiopesis, or Reticentia, when part of a Sentence begun
is kept in, or concealed, which yet may be understood, as Luke 19.42. If thou
had known even thou in this thy day, etc. So Genesis 3.22. Such imperfect
speeches are caused sometime by perturbation of mind, as Psalm. 90.13. --
return, O Lord, how long? scil. will thou afflict? or defer to help us, Psalm.
6.3.

This is frequent in Oaths, where the Imprecation is often omitted, or for the
most part concealed, Psalm. 89.36. If I lie unto David, what then? then I will
cease to be God. -- or something of that Nature is to be understood.

-- So Hebr. 3.11.

See 1 Samuel 14.44.

The fifth figure, Apostrophe, when a Speech is turned to another person, as
that of Paul to the Gentiles, Romans 11.13, 17, see Piscator; and to the Jews,
Romans 2.17.

-- And of Moses to things inanimate, as Heaven and Earth, Deuteronomy. 30.19. and
32.1. So Isaiah begins his Prophecy against obstinate Israel, Isai. 1.2. Hosea
13.14. -- O death, I will be thy plagues, Judge. 5.21. -- 1 Kings 13.2.

The sixth figure, Prosopopaeia, which is the siction of a person introduced,
as speaking in our Speech -- so in Romans 10.6, 7, 8. Does the righteousness,
which is of faith, etc. See Piscator in locum.

Jotham in his parable Judge. 9.8, etc. brings in the Trees speaking like men,
ver. 15. so Isai. 14.8, 9, 10.

The seventh figure, Aporia (Addubitatio) that is a deliberation with ones
self, Psa. 139.7, to 12. Luke 7.31. Luke 16.3, 4. Hos. 11.8, 9.

The eighth figure, (...), Anacaenosis (Communication) that is deliberation
with others. Romans 8.31. Gal. 4.21. Jam. 4.1.

The ninth figure, Occupatio, which is, to prevent a Question, or Objection,
that we conceive might be made by another, and answer it.

The Objection, or Question is sometimes expressed, sometimes implied. So Romans
11.1. I say, has God cast off his people? This some might take occasion to
object from the last Verse of the former Chapter -- To which he answers, God
forbid, etc. See also Verse 7, 19, 20.

-- So Romans 14.22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God. Here is an
Objection understood, which some might have made. I have Faith, i. e. I believe
all Meats lawful to a Christian, and so may eat any.

This Figure often occurs in the Epistle to the Romans. See chap. 2.13, 14, 25.
chap. 3.1, 3, 31. and chap. 4.2. and chap. 6.1, 2, 15.

The tenth figure, Epitrope, or Permission, when the doing of a fact is
pardoned, at least seemingly, -- which is often Ironical. Judge. 10.18. 1 Cor.
15.32. Rev. 22.11.

The eleventh figure, Synchoresis (or Concessio) when some saying or Argument
is pardoned, 2 Cor. 4.8. and cap. 12.16, 17.

There are other Figures also, which Rhetoricians call Figurae secundariae,
which I will pass over, and mention only two, scil. Antithesis, when Opposites
answer one another in a Speech, as 2 Cor. 6.8, 9, 10. -- as unknown, yet well
known -- as dying, and behold we live, etc. chap. 4.17. Romans 8.13. Phil. 3.7.

Oxymoron, which is an elegant Conjunction of contraries, Acts 5.41 -- They had
the honor to suffer reproach -- 1 Timothy 5.6. she is dead while she lives.

He that desires to see more Instances of the several Tropes and Figures, may
consult Glassius in that elaborate piece, which he calls Rhetorica sacra.

CHAP. III. Of the Usefulness of Logic.
THe use of Logic to a Minister of the Gospel is fivefold.

I. For the rational understanding, or clear and distinct notion of things, in
their several habitudes, respects and order, and for the right defining and
describing of things; and to discourse understandingly, properly, clearly,
distinctly and methodically, not obscurely, extravagantly or confusedly.

II. For understanding the sense and scope of the Scriptures, the Dependence,
Contexture, Method, and Argumentation of them: to discern evidently the
Arguments and Conclusions in the Disputations of Christ, and of the Prophets
and Apostles.

III. For the right Dividing of the word of Truth, (...) 2 Timothy 2 15. (which
cannot be without the help of Logic, and Rhetoric, which are properly
subservient to that end, etc. says Mr. Burges in his Treatise of Assurance,
page 620) and for proper Analyzing of the Books of Scripture into Heads and
Chapters (according to the subject thereof;) and of Chapters into parts; of
Texts into simple Terms first, then into Axioms, or Propositions.

For want of Logic some tear the word in pieces (as it were with their teeth
and nails) rather then divide it aright.

IV. See Dr. Chapel's Method of Preaching.
For the plain, perspicuous, and methodical handling of Points of Divinity, or
Doctrines, and of every Particular in them, in its right manner, due order, and
proper place: which is a great help to the Understanding and Memory of the
Hearrers, and of the Speaker also.

V. For Disputations, and the handling of Controversies. Logic is of great use,

1. To understand rightly both the state of the question, and the force of the
Arguments.

2 To proceed Syllogistically.

3. To detect Paralogisms, Captions, Argumentations, Fallacies, and Sophistries
of the Adversaries of the Truth of God; as the Jews, false Prophets, and false
Apostles: of the Broachers or Maintainers of Errors and Heresies: of Seducers
and Deceivers. It is the work of a Minister (...) to argue against, Titus 1.9.
and refute Gainsayers, and to defend Truth against all Opposers and
Underminers, Phil. 1.17. Danaeus, in his Logical piece de Elenchis
Haereticorum, reduces their Sophisms and Fallacies to their several Heads, and
shows the manner of detecting, and answering them.

4. To infer, or draw conclusions rationally, clearly and strenuously,
according to the Rules of good and firm Consequence.

5. To confute the corrupters of the sense of the Scriptures.

Davenant says, that Philosophy, In Col. 2.8.
which teaches the Rules and Art of right Disputing, (that is, Logic) apprime
necessaria est, and ab omnibus adhi^enda in dijudicandis and tractandis omnibus
Controversiis quae spectant ad Religionem, is principally necessary in
handling, and adjudging all Controversies, which pertain to Religion.

Pareus speaks of the Lutherans as no great friends to Logic: In Col. 2.8.
and therefore at Ratisbone, when they would by no means be brought to dispute
Syllogistically, though they had the best Cause, yet were sadly foiled by the
Jesuits.

Augustine, in one of his Epistles, ingenuously professes, ad dissolvenda
Haereticorum sophismata, artem hanc (scil. Dialecticam) magnum sibi adjumentum
attulisse.

I may give three Reasons of this usefulness of Logic for a Minister.

1. Reas. Logic is of Universal use and Influence for all Arts and Sciences,
and for all Artists, why not for Divinity? (which is the principal) and
consequently for Divines.

Augustine, De ordine, lib. 2. cap. 13. says -- Dialectica est Disciplinae
disciplinarum. Haec docet docere, haec docet discere: quae scit scire, and
alios scientes facere, etc. Logic is the Discipline of Disciplines, -- This
teaches to teach, and to learn, etc.

2 Reas. Reason is the Eye of the Soul, and Logic the Art or Way of using
Reason aright: Or it is a Faculty of Reasoning by Art, acquired by industry.
They that would debar men of the use of Logic, (as one says) would have them
blind, Mr. Gataker.
or blinded,
that they may carry them as the Faulkner does the Hauk, hoodwinked whither
themselves please.

3. Reas. The holy Scriptures are full of Logic, of Logical Arguments both
Artificial and Inartificial: of Axioms, Simple and Compounded; and of
Syllogisms of all sorts.

Christ himself made use of Logic in drawing consequences, or in arguing from
an Antecedent to the Consequent, or from Premises to a Conclusion, in the same
manner that we do: as to infer and prove from the story of the Creation, and of
God's Institution of Marriage, the unlawfulness of groundless Divorce, Matthew.
19.4, 6. -- from Hosea 6.6. to vindicate the lawfulness of his Disciples
plucking and eating the ears of corn on the Sabbath Day, Matthew. 12.7.

Thus Christ proves the Doctrine of the Resurrection by way of Syllogism, or
Logical Inference, from the saying of God to Moses, Exodus 3.6. with Matthew.
22.31, 32, Luc. 20.37.38. God is the God of the living, God is the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Ergo, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, must live: and to
that end, rise again.
Christ calls this by the Name of Scripture, which was but a Logical Inference
drawn from it, Matthew. 22.29, 31, etc. with Exodus 3.6.

Thus Christ proves the Jews not to be of God, Joh. 8.47. He that is of God
hears God's words, Ye hear not God's words, Ergo, ye are not of God. This was
a Categorical Syllogism.
Christ used Hypothetical Syllogisms also: as John 5.46, 47.

If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed me: But ye believe not his
writings. Ergo, how shall ye believe my words?
Thus Christ disputed against the Phariseces -- Assertion of the Messiah's
being the Son of David, See Piscat. in locum.
Matthew. 22.43, 45.

If Christ be David 's Son, then David should not call him Lord. But David
calls him Lord -- How is he then his Son?

Christ used a Dilemma to nonplus those that asked by what Authority he acted,
Matthew. 21.23, 25. The Baptism of John whence was it? from Heaven, or of Men?
and they had Dilemmatical Reasonings with themselves what to answer to this
Dilemmatical question, ver. 25, 26, 27. If we say, It was from Heaven, he will
say, Why did ye not then believe him? If we say, Of men, we fear the people,
Thus perceiving they were in danger to be caught with Christ's Dilemma, if they
answered to either part of it, they returned Ignoramus for their answer -- we
cannot tell. Thus Christ did clavum clavo pellere, drive out one wedge with
another.

See more of Christ's Dilemmas in Luc. 6.9. Joh. 18.23.

Christ begun to be a Questionist, and a Disputant, when he was young, twelve
years old, sitting in the midst of the Doctors or learned men in the Temple,
(...), Luke 2.46.
(...), both hearing them, Dr. Arrowsmith Orat. 2. Antiweigel. page 12.
and posing them. Ecce Jesum Quaestionistam! All that heard him were astonished
at his Understanding, and Answers. Did not Christ herein put honor upon
Learning, and upon learned men, and upon Disputations?

The Prophets and Apostles do every where bring Arguments, or use Logical
Reasonings, to press unto Virtues and Duties, to dissuade from Vices; to
convince, reprove, encourage, comfort, etc. drawn from Causes, Effects,
Consequents, Examples, etc. from Promises or Threatenings, Rewards or
Punishments, etc.

Both Christ and his Apostles draw Arguments by good Logic from the Old
Testament, to prove Articles of Faith in the New. Hence these Phrases occur so
often, -- it is written -- it is written, -- and what says the Scripture? --
or such and and such a Prophet?

How frequently and strenuously does Paul prove Theological Points (and confirm
matters of Faith) by Logical Arguments? As,

Justification by Faith, not by Works, Romans 3.20, 28. and 4.1, 2, 3, etc.

The Necessity of Sanctification, Romans 6.2, etc.

The Filthiness of Fornication, 1 Cor. 6.13. to the end.

The Resurrection of the Body, 1 Cor. 15.13.

Paul was very Argumentative and Syllogistical in his Epistles: He played the
Logician notably in the Epistle to the Romans; as Chap. 3. v. 28. (...) --
Therefore we conclude ( scil. from the premises laid down before) that a man
is justified by Faith, etc. Paul's Syllogisms show his Logic.

His Sorites, Romans 5.3, 4. and 8.29, 30.

His Induction, Romans 8.35, etc.

Enthymems are very frequent with him.

His Hypothetical Syllogisms are many; as Gal. 3.18. If the Inheritance be of
the Law, it is no more of Promise -- But God gave it to Abraham by promise --
Ergo. The Conclusion is left out, as it is often in Disputation.

As Christ, so his Apostles were Disputants. Paul disputed against the Grecians
at Jerusalem, Acts 9.28, 29. with the Jews, Epicureans and Stoics at Athens,
Acts 17.17, 18. The Stoics were most famous for Logical Skill, they were
accounted in those Times Dialectici maximi. Paul was able to dispute Logically
and Philosophically with those Philosophers: -- argumenta vibrare, idque
Athenis.

He disputed daily in the School of one Tyrannus, Acts 19.9.

Did not Stephen make use of Logic when he disputed against the Libertines and
Sophisters of diverse Nations, Acts 6.9, 10?

Logica est Radius divinae mentis, Alsted. Encyclop. lib. 4. Didact. cap. 10.
est Regina mentis humanae, lima ingenii, norma judicii, officina veritatis,
and panacea memoriae: atque ita necessaria est Theologis, Medicis,
Jurisperitis, and ipsis Philosophis; sive velint docere, sive refutare, sive
explicare, sive probare; unde non abs re vocatur Instrumentum Instrumentorum,
and manus Philosophiae.

CHAP. IV. The Usefulness of Natural Philosophy.
SECT. I. Usefulness of Natural Philosophy declared, and proved.
PHilosophy is either 1. Natural, called Physics. 2. Or Moral, called Ethics.


First, Natural Philosophy is of great use to a Minister of the Gospel. After
the times of the Apostles the Church (as Aretius says) had always learned
Doctors (or Teachers) ex Philosophorum Scholis translatos: Probl. loc. 151.
such were Justin Martyr, surnamed the Philosopher (in Platonicis disciplinis
ad mira^ulum eruditus) Cyprian and Lactantius. Origin, Chrysostom, Hierom were
Philosophers. Austin excelled herein; and writ diverse Philosophical Pieces.

This is useful in two Respects:

I. To know the Natures, Properties, Effects, and Operations of all sublunary
Creatures:

1. Of the four Elements, as Fire, Air, Water, and Earth.

2. Of Meteors in the Air.

3. Of Minerals in the Earth.

4. Of all living Creatures: As,

1. Vegetatives; of all Trees, Plants, Herbs, Fruits, and Flowers, that grow
out of the Earth. -- the Kinds, Qualities, and Virtues of them.

2. Sensitives, or Animals; as of 1. All Birds in the Air. 2. Beasts of the
Field. 3. All creepings things on the Earth. 4. And the Fishes in the Sea.


3. Rational Creatures; as of Spirits and Men.

Of Man's Body, the Fabric, and all the Members of it. Man's Soul, the
Essence, and all the Faculties of it, and their Operations.


II. To make a fit application of the Creatures ( scil. of the Natures,
Qualities and Effects of them) to spiritual uses, as the Holy Ghost directs us
in the Scriptures; which have much Philosophy in them; as Genesis, and other
Books: and are full of Allusions to the Natures of all kinds of Creatures: Of
Beasts, as Lions, Wolves, Goats, Sheep, Lambs. Of Fowls, as Doves, Eagles,
Ravens. Of creeping things, as Serpents, Worms, Ants. Of Gnats, Flies, Locusts,
Caterpillars.
Which we cannot make use of for our selves, nor teach or unfold to others,
unless we have the knowledge hereof in some measure, which the study of Natural
Philosophy may much help us to.

This is needful for a Minister for seven Reasons.

Reas. 1. The knowledge of the Nature of the Creatures is but the knowledge of
God in the creatures: from his works of Creation and providence we may and
should learn the power, wisdom, goodness and glory of God, (which Natural
Philosophy may, through God's blessing, much further us in) yea, the Deity of
God, Romans 1.20.

More's Antidote against Atheism.
The subordination of end and means (which clearly demonstrate an intelligent
Agent) in the works

1. Of Creation, especially in the fabric of the bodies of Animals, and in the
forming of souls:

2. Of Providence, is (as some learned men conceive) the clearest demonstration
of the existence of a God.

From hence, it is probable, Aristotle gathered and owned one first Cause, and
Plato one God, and Cicero divine providence.

By understanding the utmost activity of Natural Agents we may be assisted in
the knowledge, and settled in belief of the divine authority of the Scriptures,
and of the Deity of Christ; both which are with much conviction proved by that
Argument, which Mr. Baxter has excellently managed in his Rest, part 2. page
215, etc. drawn from Miracles: the many and real miracles, with which the
doctrine of the Scriptures, and the testimony of Christ and his Apostles
concerning his Deity, were confirmed; since all miracles are the product of
divine power, and the righteous God will not seal and confirm a falsehood. For
seeing the Jews, and others, the enemies of Christian Religion, do impiously
object, that those miracles, which Christ wrought, were not above Nature, but
performed through the exquisite knowledge of it by Natural means; what way is
there to silence such objections, but an accurate search and inquiry into the
Causes, Natures and Virtues of things, and the understanding how far their
power and activity will extend?

Reas. 2. The knowledge of the Natures of the Creatures was part of God's Image
stamped on Adam at his creation, (and upon us all in him, as being in his
loins) as appears by Adam's giving of Names to the Creatures according to their
Natures presently, as Hebricians well know. See Calvin in Genesis 2.19. And
Piscator in ver. 19, 20, 23. says, Ante lapsum eximia fuit in homine cognitio
rerum naturalium: quippe Adam animalibus sibi a Deo adductis, itemque adductae
sibi mulieri, nomina ipsorum naturae convenientia imposuerit. Huc pertinet
illud Pythagorae, qui dixisse fertur, Sapientem oportere fuisse hominem, qui
primus nomina rebus imposuerit.

This knowledge Adam lost by his fall, for himself, and for us; and it must be
recovered now by observation, study and industry. To which Philosophy conduces
very much.

Reas. 3. Because a Minister should teach the people to read, understand, and
make use of the books, not only of the Scriptures, Psalm. 19.
but of the Creatures also; which presupposes himself to be well read in both.

Reas. 4. Philosophy is a very pleasant study, and affords much benefit,
satisfaction, and delight to the mind of man, (which ignorance herein deprives
men of) and why not to a Minister of the Gospel?

Reas. 5. Good skill in Philosophy may make a Minister more fit and able to
understand, discuss and determine some points of Divinity, (though not without
the assistance of God's Spirit) especially those that have a physical Term in
them: as about the body of Christ. He that would demonstrate that not to be
every where; or that Christ is not corporally present in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, must fetch his Arguments from the Nature and property of a Body,
which are delivered in Physics. So about the freedom of the Will, which cannot
be handled well, without the knowledge of Natural Philosophy: which may also
give some furtherance unto his coming to Christ, as it did to the wise men,
Mat. 2.1, 2.
who came from the East to Jerusalem, being guided by the star, to seek and to
adore Jesus Christ the newborn Savior. These (...) were professed
Philosophers, great searchers of the depths of Nature. Why did they only follow
the star which led them to Christ, when doubtless this light was visible unto
many beside them? Because they knew it had more then Nature in it. Hence Bishop
Hall infers, Contempl. l. 1. The Sages and the Star.
That no man is so apt to see the star of Christ, as a diligent Disciple of
Philosophy: that humane Learning well improved makes us capable of divine: but
Philosophy without the star is but the wisp of error: and that God is the
author of all knowledge, and would never have bestowed any Gift that should
lead us away from himself.

Reas. 6. God sends us to the Creatures for Instruction in moral and spiritual
duties; now we are not capable of it, if we be not acquainted with their
Natures. Thus he places an Ant in the chair to teach the sluggard wisdom.
Prove. 6.6.
He sets the Ox and the Ass, (Esa. 1.3.) the Stork, Turtle, Swallow and the
Crane, (Jer. 8.7.) to read a Lecture to his people against disregard of God,
and non-observance of his dealings with them. Christ sends his Disciples to
school to the Birds of the air, and to the Lilies of the field, to be taught
Reliance upon the Providence of God, Mat. 6.26, etc.

Many other Lessons may be learned from the Creatures, if we know their Natures
and properties. See instances hereof in the several sorts of Creatures in
Alsted's Theologia Naturalis.


Therefore if God has made other beings as Glasses (as One says) to
represent, as his own excellency, so our duty; we may safely conclude he would
have us look in them. Where God teaches we must learn; and have an eye there,
where the finger of God points to us, scil. in his works: which because all
men cannot study and search into, it is necessary some should, namely Ministers,
that declare them to others, as David did. The Creatures will not read Ethics
to him that has no insight into Physics. Skill in Naturals may help to make
good Morals.

Reas. 7. From Examples, which show God to be the Author of Philosophy, and it
to be of great use and excellency. That David was well acquainted with the
works of Nature, as well as with that of Grace, may be gathered from diverse
passages in the Psalms: especially from Psalm. 104. (if that be his, as it
seems to be, because it begins and ends as the former Psalm does, which is
his.) How often do we find him contemplating the works of God, and admiring
him in them?

Solomon was a great Philosopher, 1 King. 4.33.
and full of humane, as well as of divine Learning. Therefore it is said, he
spoke, or discoursed, of all kinds of Plants that grow out of the earth, from
the Cedar to the Hyssop that springs out of the wall. -- He spoke also of
Beasts, Fouls, of creeping things, and of Fishes.

Philosophy was part of that wisdom, which God gave unto him, and made him
wiser then all men. Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of
the East Country, Mat. 2.1. 1 King. 4.30.
who were reputed the wisest in the world, Dan. 2.2. Such were the Chaldeans,
and Arabian Philosophers and Astronomers, -- and his wisdom excelled all the
wisdom of Egypt. The Egyptians were famous for wisdom and knowledge in all
Sciences, Annot.
Isa. 19.11, 12. Many famous Philosophers went to Egypt for increase of
learning and wisdom. The wisest among the Grecians professed they had their
grounds of Philosophy from the Egyptians. But some Authors conceive the
Grecians Philosophy to have been but the Jews Cabala with a new Name, and that
other Nations derived their Philosophical knowledge from the Hebrews,
especially the Phenicians, Phoenicia is sometimes put for Canaan.
(who were their Neighbors, and with whom Abraham sojourned) from whom Learning
was by Cadmus carried to the Grecians, and received from them by the Latins,
and so spread into these Western parts of the world. Yea, it is probable that
by means of Solomon's wisdom, and knowledge, Philosophy was improved, and
Physiology flourished, even in Egypt, Arabia, Chaldea. For it is said, 1 King.
4.34.
that there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all Kings of
the earth, which had heard of it; especially from Egypt, because of his
alliance with that King, having married his daughter; and from Arabia, because
the Queen of Sheba came thence, who brought her hard Questions to him, and
carried away his Resolutions. Thus must his knowledge needs be spread in those
Countries, where being cherished it raised their fame, and invited those
Grecians (who after proved the most eminent Philosophers) to undertake long
journeys in pursuit of Learning.

Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts. 7.22. that is, in
Philosophy, and in all the ingenuous and liberal Arts of the Egyptians.

Job (who is styled the greatest of the sons of the East, Job 1.3.) and his
friends were eminent for profound knowledge. Their discourse evinced their
acquaintance with Philosophical, as well as Theological knowledge.

God gave Daniel, Dan. 1.17.
and his three Associates, knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; that
is, as Calvin says, in the liberal Arts, (not in Magical Arts) and in natural
knowledge. Nebuchadnezzar commanded they should be taught the learning (and the
Tongue) ver. 4. of the Chaldeans; that is, as some expound it, the knowledge of
Natural, Moral, and Rational things. They were trained up, through God's
providence, by their Chaldean Instructers, in commendable learning, scil. of
Arts and Sciences, wherein they attained unto a greater perfection then any in
so short a time, as the space of three years; and they were preserved from the
corrupt and unlawful Arts the Chaldeans used; as Magic, Enchanting, Judiciary
Astrology, and such like. As they would not defile themselves with the King's
meat, so they would not be corrupted with the vain Arts of the Chaldeans, or
the superstitious precepts of their Teachers. Daniel was the Master or
superintendent of the wise men in Babylon, Dan. 2.48, with 4.9.

SECT. II. Objections refuted.
Obj. 1. Does not Paul condemn Philosophy, when he cautioneth the Colossians
against it, Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, that
is, rob you of your souls, or your souls of Christ, or his Truth and Grace?

Ans. The Apostle means not all Philosophy, but that which is vain and
deceitful, an imposture or seducement, therefore said to be vain deceit, by way
of Explication, or as a restraint, as Calvin, Zanchy, Davenant, and many
others, interpret the words.

Philosophy may be taken in a triple sense.

The first sense. For the knowledge of the Natures and properties of the
Creatures, and the Rules concerning the same; as also of Moral Virtues. This is
the most true, proper, and genuine signification thereof.

This Philosophy is lawful and useful, for two Reasons.

Reas. 1. It is the birth of right Reason, (or, as one calls it, the child of
rectified reason) it is the knowledge of Truth invented by the light of natural
Reason, which is put into man's mind by God himself. Res Dei Ratio, says
Tertullian. True Philosophy is the Truth of God, or a branch plucked from the
eternal verity (as some phrase it.) It is (...), that which is to be known of
God, much of whom may be seen in the Creature. Romans 1.19. Psalm. 19.1. Acts
14.17.


The book of Job is full of Arguments from things Natural, to dictate and
manifest the infinite wisdom and power of God.

Does not the Word of God send us sometimes to the teachings of Nature, and of
natural things?

Reas. 2. The knowledge of the Creatures (or of natural things) and of Moral
Virtues, may help in the knowledge of things spiritual and heavenly, as a
spectacle wherewith they may be better discerned, and serve as a step to ascend
to the clearer discovery thereof.

True Philosophy helps grace (says one) better to apprehend, Bains in Col. 2.8.
and more fitly to teach others the things it knows; and it furthers and
strengthens faith in a believer, (though he believe not for Reason) when he
sees the consent of Reason. Credimus supra rationem, sed non temere, aut
irrationabiliter. Nam ipsa ratio concipit and illud cui fidem adhibemus sluere,
and recte deduci ex principiis sacrae Scripturae, Davenant in Col. 2.8.

This Philosophy (or Philosophy in this sense) is good, Acts 17.28, 29.
and allowed by Paul, else he should condemn himself; for he used it in
disputing Philosophically with the Philosophers at Athens, and confuting them
out of their own writings.

The second sense. Philosophy may be taken for the Errors of the Philosophers,
or of Heathens, who excelled in the knowledge of Philosophy, affirming things
false and contrary to the Word of God; as the eternity of the world; Vid.
Zanch. in Col. 2.8.
the mortality of souls; of Purgatory fire after this life, out of Plato; of
Stoical Fate; Magic, and Soothsaying; of Heathenish deities, and the worship
of them; and of diverse devilish things; the doctrine of Demons; 1 Timothy 4.1.
of the worship of Angels.

It Is probable the false Apostles, under a pretense of secret wisdom, sought
to obtrude some new doctrines (as this and others, drawn, it is like, Davenant
on^^ 2.18.
out of the fountains of the Platonists) upon the Colossians.

The Philosophers, as the Stoies, Epicureans, Aristotelians, Platonists, and
others, do not always deliver the dictates of right Reason, but sometimes the
dreams or fancies of their own opinion.

We judge that true Philosophy, delivered by all the Philosophers, or others,
which is agreeable to right reason, to truth, and good Manners. Hoc totum
selectum appellamus Philosophiam, says Davenant.

Now the errors of Philosophers do not appertain to Philosophy, tanquam parts,
sed pestes ejus,
as the parts, but pests thereof; as the errors of Divines do to Divinity: and
to introduce the errors of Philosophers into Divinity is dangerous, and
damnable.

The third sense. Philosophy may be taken for the Misapplication of the Rules
of Philosophy, that are true in themselves (in the course and order of Nature)
and agreeable to reason, to impugn the mysteries of the Gospel, and our faith
therein, or to overthrow the Principles of Religion; which are far above
Nature, and above Reason: As, the Creation of the world; the Resurrection of
the body; the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence; the
Incarnation of Christ; (that a Virgin should conceive;) the Hypostatical Union
of his two Natures; the Justification of a sinner by the righteousness of
another, etc.

All which are to be drawn from higher Principles then the light of Nature,
(because the like to all these is not in all Nature) scil. from the revealed
will of God in his word; and are to be effected not by the virtue of Natural
Causes, but by the omnipotency of God.

This is the abuse and perverting of Philosophy, which is pernicious, and has
helped to breed heresy in many Articles of Faith and Religion. Then Philosophy
is vain deceit indeed, and corrupts the soul with its delusions, and draws the
heart away from Christ, and the simplicity of the Gospel, Beza. Zanch. Davenant.
when it is carried beyond its proper bounds and limits, to determine of such
things as are above the capacity of Nature and Reason, and pertain to faith,
and depend only upon the revealed will of God, and concern the worship of God,
and the salvation of man, then it does misere in nugas evanescere.

The errors of Philosophers, and the abuse of Philosophy, are condemned, and
dissuaded from by Paul in this Text.

Now the abuse of a thing takes not away the lawful use of it.

Protestants blame the Papists for making Philosophy a Mistress, rather then an
Handmaid, to Divinity; and for following Aristotle rather then Paul,
Cartwright in Rhem. Test.
in their opinions of God's providence; of Justification by works; of Free Will
and Purgatory, and of many other things, wherein their Philosophical Agar has
malapertly gainsayed her Theological Mistress Divinity: and though we embrace
the help of those weapons against the presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, which common reason puts into our hands, yet we bring them not but
sharpened and headed out of the holy Scriptures, Fulk.
which declare the perfect humanity of Christ, and all the essential properties
of a true and natural body, Mar. 16.16. Luke 24.39. Acts 3.21.

Object. 2. Did not the ancient fathers sometimes inveigh bitterly against
Philosophers and Philosophy, De Anima cap. 1. Adversus Hermogenem, cap. 1.
as Tertullian, who calls them Animalia Gloriae -- Haereticorum Patriarchas,
Adulteros veritatis, etc. -- and Lactantius Instit. lib. 3. cap. 2. Hierom
says, Philosophi sunt Primogeniti Aegypti, Ad Ctesiph. contra Pelag. cap. 1.
and Irenaeus adversus Haereses, lib. 2. cap. 19.

Answ. The abuse of Philosophy by the Heretics of old ( Sophisters rather then
Philosophers) as is conceived, gave those Fathers the occasion thereof. For in
other places, where they speak of it, as it is in it self, they much commend,
and set it forth. Ye^ Tertullian, though he was a keen opposer of those
Philosophers, yet gave this good Testimony of the use and need of Humane
Learning: De Idololatria, cap. 1.
Quomodo quis institueretur ad prudentiam humanam, vel ad quemcunque sensum vel
actum (sine literis) cum Instrumentum sit ad omnem vitam literatura? quomodo
repudiamus secularia studia, sine quibus divina esse non possunt? videamus
igitur necessitatem literatoriae eruditionis, etc.

Si Philosophiam damnaret and rejiceret Apostolus, rejiceret utique lumen
Rationis, Davenant in Col. 28. page 225.
and Deum ejus Authorem summa afficeret injuria.

Vere dicamus nullam esse partem Philosophiae, aut humanae literaturae, Idem p.
228, 229.
quae ab Interpret sacrarum literarum non advocetur quandoque, quasi ad
Symbolum suum conferendum.

Note.
Metaphysics I have omitted (though there might be use of them) because what is
contained in them may be referred to Physics, Logic, and Divinity.

CHAP. V. Of the Usefulness of Moral Philosophy, or Ethics.
MOral Philophy is useful for a Minister, to have the knowledge of Ethics,
Oeconomics, Politics.

Reas. 1. Because the holy Scriptures have much of all these in them (they
being a Rule of Manners to all sorts of men, and in all Capacities and
Relations) especially the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes; out of which Bishop Hall
has made an Extract of Solomon's Ethics, Oeconomics and Politics.

Reas. 2. A Minister may be much helped in the knowledge of virtues and vices
and of the concernments of both; and in aspirations after Goodness, especially
summum bonum, and Tranquillity of Mind, and in many other such things, even by
the Moral Philosophy of the Heathen (who went onwards as their light leads
them) wherein very useful and excellent things are to be found.

This is of much use.

1. Romans 2.14, 15.
To declare that the Moral Law of God is written naturally in the Heart, seeing
diverse of the Heathen, who were amiably and laudably moral, were never by Grace
elevated above Nature.

2 1 Cor. 11.14. Dr. Hall.
To show what Dictates or Doctrines even Nature teaches men: Grace scorneth
not to learn some things even of Nature.

3 To shame Christians, who enjoy Means of Grace, the light of the Gospel, yet
come very short even of Heathen men in Moral virtues; as in Justice,
Temperance, Meekness, Continency, Patience, Amity, and fall sometimes into such
foul Sins as are not named among the Gentiles, scil. without detestation; as
the incestuous person in the Church of Corinth did, 1 Cor. 5.1.

CHAP. VI. Of the Usefulness of History.
SECT. I. Of History in general, as useful to understand Scripture.
THe knowledge of History both sacred and civil affords both profit and
pleasure, and is of great use to a Minister of the Gospel in three respects,
scil.

For knowing and improving 1. The word of God, 2. The works of God, 3. The
examples of Men.


First of all, for understanding and improving the holy Scriptures.

Reas. 1. Because the greatest part of Scripture is written in a way of History.

Reas. 2. Much spiritual and profitable Doctrine is laid up in Histories, to
wit, Of Persons, Families, Nations, Polities, in the Old Testament: and of
Churches, in the New.


Yea some Scripture- histories contain Gospel- mysteries wrapped up in them. As
the Mystery of God's Election and Rejection in the History of Isaac and Ismael,
Romans 9.6, 7, 8. of Jacob and Esau, ver. 11, 12, 13. -- the Mystery of God's
wrath, severity, obduration and rejection, in that of Pharaoh, ver. 17. Exodus
9.16.

-- Of the two Covenants, in the History of the two places Sinai and Jerusalem,
and of the two Mothers, Sarah and Hagar, Gal. 4.22. to the end.

Reas. 3. Because many passages of Scripture, both in the Old and New
Testament, cannot be well understood, explicated, illustrated or made use of to
the benefit of our selves, or others, but out of Histories, or without the
knowledge of Histories. As those Prophetical Scriptures, which speak of the
four Monarchies, of the Pope and Turk; of the various state of the Church of
God in several Ages.

There is in Scripture a mixture of Civil with Sacred stories, as

Of the Jews affairs, and transactions with the Nations round about them, and
with other Nations, that were remote from them; and what was done to the Jews
(God's people) in the times of the Old Testament, to Christ and his Church, or
to any of his members, under the New; by Kings, Emperors, Rulers, or their
Officers, at their Command, as by Herod, Matthew. 2.3, etc. Acts 12.1, 2, 3. and
by others, as Claudius, Acts 18.2. Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17.

Or, what befell them in the times of these Kings, or Emperors, as of Caesar
Augustus, Luc. 2.1, 2. of Claudius Caesar, Acts 11.28.

Many passages in the Prophets may be best explaned out of the Histories of the
Times, and Places, to which they properly belong. Mr. Rutherford.
A learned man says that Josephus, Herodotus, Quintus Curtius, Xenophon, and
other Heathen Writers, conduce not a little to the Textual knowledge of
Chronicles, Nehemiah, Esther, Daniel: as those that write of the Babylonish,
Assyrian, and Persian Kingdoms, and Empires, and the Roman History may add
light to the Prophets and Evangelists, Acts, and Epistles of Paul in the New
Testament.

The Scriptures have much of the Antiquities, Manners, Customs, both of the
Jews, and of other Countries also, in them, and there be many Allusions in them
thereunto; and the Scriptures receive illustration from them.

SECT. II. Of Jewish History.
FIrst of the Jews. Whence if not from the Jewish Records, or Writers, should
we learn -- what the Scribes and Pharisees were? what the Elders, the Rulers of
the Synagogue? what the (...), Luke 22.52? what (...), Mark 19.43? what their
Synagogues, their Phylacteries, and the enlarging of the borders of their
Garments? -- what was the rise of the Feast of Dedication, John 10.22. seeing
the Temple was thrice consecrated by solemn Dedication, and of which that in
John must be understood? See Beza in Joh. 10.22. What a Sabbath Days journey?
what the Samaritanes were, and where they worshipped, John 4.20? This conduces
to understand the parable of the good Samaritan. Luke 10.33. and of Mat. 10.5.
What those particular Customs of the Jews are, which are hinted, and referred
to in holy Writ? The knowledge hereof helps us more fully to understand
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, and Matthew. 23. chap. -- and 21. chap. 8, 9, 12.
Luke 7.44, 45, 46. and 11.44.

Rev. 16.15. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments] This has
respect (as some conceive) to the twenty four Guards of Priests and Levites
watching in the Temple every night, Dr. Lightfoot's Temple-Service, cap. 7.
sect. 1.
where one walked the Round; who, if he found any of them asleep, might set
fire on his garment.

Revel. 3.4. -- They shall walk with me in white, De Dieu in loc.
for they are worthy] This place seems to glance at that Custom of the Jews,
that when enquiry was made of the Genealogy and imperfections of the Priests,
whosoever was rejected, as to his Genealogy, had a black Garment put on him,
and went out of the Court: but who so was found entire, and right, was invested
with white, and ministered with the rest of the Priests.

Luke 13.33. -- It cannot be that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem] which
speech of Christ looks to that custom, that none were to judge Prophets, but
the Sanhedrim, or great Council of seventy one, who used to sit only in a part
of the Temple at Jerusalem. Matthew. 17.24. -- They that received Tribute-money:]
(...).
-- that is half a Shekel, demanded of every Jew yearly for the use of the
Temple: Of which see Grotius in loc. and Schickards Jus Regium Hebr. page 84.

It may be cleared from Jewish Writings, how our Savior could keep his last
Passover a day before the Jews kept theirs (for the day after he had eaten it,
and wherein he was crucified, was but the preparation to theirs, John 18.28.
and 19.14.) and yet keep it at the due time: which Dr. Cudworth has
excellently made out in his Discourse of the Notion of the Lords Supper, chap.
3.

Lastly, Those words Hebr. 11.35. Others were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, etc. have respect to Eleazar, and the Mother with her seven Sons,
whose Faith and Constancy is recorded in the second of the Maccabees, chap. 6.
verse 19, 30. and chap. 7.

SECT. III. The History of other Eastern Nations.
THe Scriptures have also in them the Customs of other Nations: Both I. Of
those that were nearest the Jews. II. And of those that were more remote.


First, Of those which were nearest the Jews, round about them: For they mention

1. Their Deities, of which many in the Old Testament, as Moloch, Baal-peor,
Dagon, Ashtaroth, etc. of which see Mr. Seldom de Diis Syris. To those commonly
observed some add Amon, an Egyptian and Libyan Deity, mentioned Jer. 46.25. in
the Hebrew; (...) Amon of No, i. e. a place where Amon was worshipped, thence
called No-amon, Nah. 3.8. See De Dieu in loc. and Bochart. Geogr. sacra, page
6. Others add (...) Achad, which we render [one] Isai. 66.17. but seems to
denote the Sun, the god of the Assyrians. See Grotius in loc. and Scaliger in
notis in fragmenta selecta.

2. Their Rites and Ceremonies; as of worshipping an Idol See Doughty's
Analecta sacra in locum.
by kissing the hand, Job 31.27. Their Women's being prostituted in the Temple
of Venus Seldom de Diis Sir. Syntag. 2. cap. 7.
(in honor to her) among the Babylonians: to which Levit. 19.29. seems to have
respect. Their observing lucky and unlucky days for such and such businesses,
Levit. 19.26. and their several sorts of Divination (as by the staff and liver)
without which those two places are not to be understood, Ezekiel 21.21. Hosea
4.12. Their custom of eating of the Sacrifices, which they offered to their
Idols, upon mountains: See Dr. Cu^worth's Notion of the Lord's Supper, cap. 1.
whence it is that Idolatry is expressed in Scripture by eating on the
mountains, Ezekiel. 18.11. and by setting a Bed there, Isai. 57.7. (see also
Ezekiel 23.41. and Amos 2.8. because they were wont not to sit at Feasts, but
to lie on Beds, or Couches: which the Jews also used. So we read of John's
leaning (or rather (...).
lying) in Jesus bosom; that is, with his head before Jesus breast, which was
the usual posture, John 13.23, 25. To which See Heins. in Luke 15.22.
Lazarus's being in Abraham's bosom may refer, Luke 16.22. as intimating his
having the next place to Abraham at that heavenly Feast, where many from the
East and West shall sit down with him.

From that See much of it in Mr. Gregory's Notes, cap. 7, 8. and H^t^inger's
Histor. Orient. page 190, etc.
Eastern usage (thence translated into the West) of making Telosms or Images of
some plague, or noxious creature, which infested them (and that under a certain
Position of the Heavens) that by virtue hereof they might drive it away: from
that usage, I say, we may judge of the meaning of those Images of Emerods and
Mice (the plagues vent amongst them) which the Lords of the Philistims sent
back with the Ark, that so those plagues might be removed, 1 Samuel 6.4, 5.

A fair Reason may be given of diverse prohibitions in the Ceremonial Law
(otherwise somewhat strange) from the Rites and Superstitions of other Nations
the Jews Neighbors) to which they are opposed. For God knew the Israelites
prone to Idolatry; so that the more Rites they had common with the Gentiles,
the more easily would they have passed over to their Worship and Manners.

Thus Exodus 23.19. and 34.26. after the Command of bringing in the first of the
first fruits into the House of God, it is added, Thou shall not seethe a Kid in
his Mothers milk: because it was the custom of the Idolatrous Heathen (as Dr.
Cudworth Notion of the Lord's Supper, page 26.
proves) when they had gathered in all their Fruits, to boil a Kid in the Dams
milk, and then in a Magical way to besprinkle all their Trees, Fields, Gardens,
and Orchards, thinking hereby to make them fructify. The Israelites may be
forbidden to sow their Field or Vineyard with diverse seeds, Levit. 19.19.
Deuteronomy. 22.9. because this mixture was used by others for Magical Purposes. See
Grotius in loc. and Hotting. Hist. Orient. lib. 1. cap. 8. And the Zabian (or
Eastern) Priests are said to have worn linsey-woolsey garments, which might
occasion the forbidding of such, Levit. 19.19. As the shaving of their heads
and beards; and the cutting of the hair round, leaving only some behind, in
use among the Arabians (thence called, those that have their corners polled
Grotius and Junius in loc. and Dion. Vossius in Maimon. de Idolol. cap. 12.
Jer. 9.26. margin, and 25.23.) did that other, verse 27. Ye shall not round
the corners of your heads -- or beard.

The next verse also has respect to Heathen Customs: The latter part of it
[nor print any marks upon you] is opposed to that of the Sabeans and Assyrians,
who used to print marks on their flesh, and those See Grotius in Levit. 19.28.
either the names of their gods, or some number standing for their name, or
some Hieroglyphical note or character appropriated to them: To which Revel.
13.16, 17. refers, where we read of men, that have the mark or the name of the
Beast, or the number of the name on their hand or forehead. See Grotius on that
place. These Idolaters were thus marked probably in token of their serving such
an Idol, their Baal, their lord: since it was a custom in the Eastern parts for
Servants to have their Masters names imprinted on their foreheads: and so we
read of the servants of God sealed there, Ezekiel. 9.4. Rev. 7.3. The Zabians used
to sacrifice to Devils under the form of Goats; whence that Levit. 17.7. They
shall no more offer their Sacrifices unto Devils, (...) to Goats, or Satyrs.
They offered only leavened Bread, and anointed their Sacrifices with Honey.
Hence Leaven and Honey seem to have been forbidden in Offerings, Levit. 2.11.

To be short, what better Expositors are there of these following places, then
such as write of the Gentiles Manners and Superstitions? viz. Deuteron. 18.10,
11. 2 Kings 23.4, to 15. Isai. 65.3, 4, 11. and 66.17. Ezekiel. chap. 8. and chap.
23. verse. 39, 40, 41. Jer. 7.18.

SECT. IV. Of Egyptian History.
SO much in general of the Customs of the Nations nearest the Jews. To which
some things may be subjoined, which relate particularly to the Rites and
Antiquities of the Egyptians. And,

I. Who can understand the meaning of Moses's excuse for not sacrificing in
Egypt ( Exodus 18.26. We shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians) that
has not heard of their Apis or Mnevis, of their adoring an Ox, and counting
Sheep and Goats sacred Creatures; which, for the Hebrews to have killed in
sacrifice, would have been abominable to them? Which further clears two things:

1. Hence we may discern a Reason, why God, of all Beasts, chose these ( Oxen,
Sheep and Goats) to be sacrificed to him; namely, because they were deified by
the Egyptians: by which means he might keep the Israelites from their Idolatry,
and make himself acknowledged the only true God. Thus, among Birds, God might
pitch on a Dove for sacrifice, because it was worshipped by the Syrians and
Assyrians, who would not eat of, or suffer that creature to be hurt.

2. We may further discover hence, where the Israelites learned to worship a
Calf, or Ox (as it is called Psalm. 106.20.) in the Wilderness; to wit, in Egypt,
Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. Whence also Jeroboam (newly returned from thence) brought that
Worship in again amongst them.

Cunaeus De Republ. Hebr. l. 3. c. 4.
also thinks, that their burning incense to the brazen Serpent, 2 Kings 18.4.
sprung from the vanity of the Egyptians, who had Serpents in so sacred account.

II. Egyptians Story will acquaint us fully how Shepherds came to be an
abomination to the Egyptians: for which consult Cunaeus de Repub. Hebraeor.
lib. 1. cap. 5. or Bochart. Geograph. sacr. page 375.

III. Their Antiquities will clear Isai. 18.1, 2. Woe to the Land of the Cymbal,
or jingle, (for that is the meaning of the Hebrew, according to Geogr sacr.
page 240.
Bochartus and Annotat. on Isa. 18.1, 2.
Mr. Gataker) -- that sends Ambassadors by the Sea in vessels of Bulrushes
upon the Waters. That this Land is Egypt, appears,

1. In that abundance of such Instruments was used in the worship of Isis, the
great goddess of the Egyptians.

2. It was ordinary there, to pass to and fro in Boats or Vessels made of a
sort of Rush, which was plentiful in Egypt: and so were Reeds also; their
plenty making them Amam. Antibarb. Bibl. in Psalm. 68.30.
to be used Hieroglyphically to signify Nilus, or Egypt. Whence it is, that
the Egyptians are understood by the Company of the Reed, in Psalm. 68.30. or
Pharaoh by the Beast of the Reed, as the margin has it.

IV. From the Egyptians we may learn the meaning of the Sea Junius in Ezekiel.
8.14. and Seldom de Diis Sir. Synt. 2 cap. 11.
women's weeping for Tammuz, Ezekiel. 8.14. and of the Star of Remphan in Acts
7.43. which verse is quoted out of Amos 5.26. and that according to the Version
of the LXX, who rendered Chiun there by (...), or as some Copies have it See
Beza in Act. 7.43.
(...), or (...). because this Name was better known to the Egyptians (in whose
Land, and for whose King they made their Version) in whose Language it
signified the same that Chiun does in Hebrew, or Arabic rather, viz. Saturn.
See De Dieu in Acts 7.43. and Doctor Hammond on the same place.

SECT. V. Of Grecian History.
Secondly, THe Scripture has something in it of the customs of other Nations,
more remote from the Jews, the Grecians and Romans.

I. Of the Grecians. For we read of diverse of their Deities, as Jupiter,
Mercury ( Acts 14.12.) Castor and Pollux ( Acts 28.11.) and Diana, which were
also worshipped by the Romans. We read too of the Athenian Altar, Acts 17.23.
and the Ephesian Image, the (...), chap. 19.35.

The Grecian Games are frequently alluded to in Paul's Epistles, who, planting
Churches in Greece, attempers his discourse to their usages. One of their four
famous Games was the Isthmian, celebrated at Corinth, the customs of which he
has manifest respect to in 1 Cor. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. where you may see in the
Greek several of their exercises (as running and pugilate) and the terms
appropriate to them, as (...).

All which words require explication from those Grecian Solemnities, without
knowing of which we cannot reach that great Elegancy, nor the full sense of
those Verses. In that last word (...) the Apostle alludes to the probation of
those who had performed athletical exercises, for it was examined whether they
had striven lawfully, before they were pronounced Conquerors, and so crowned:
which you may see in 2 Timothy 2.5. He that strove as he ought, was (...),
approved, and so got the prize. Hence Jam. 1.12. its said of him that endures
tentation, (...), etc. He that strove or run amiss was (...) rejected, and
missed of the reward. So that Paul's meaning in 1 Cor. 9.27. is, lest when I
have performed the office of a (...), or Herald (which was to proclaim the
prize, and the laws of the Exercises, and to admonish and animate the
contenders) when I have showed others the right way of striving and getting the
Crown, I my self miscarry, and be judged incapable of it.

There is also an allusion to the Grecian Games in Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, 16.
where we meet with more agonistical terms, as (...) (which is as much as to be
crowned) and (...) or (...), which is used to denote his apprehending, or
catching of the prize, or reward from the top of the Goal, who was judged the
Conqueror.

So in 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. and in Heb. 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12. the Phrase is
agonistical.

He that desires an Explication of the Customs of their Games, and so of those
Scriptures which refer to them may consult P. Faber, or Lydius in his
Agonistica sacra; or Doctor Hammond in his Annotations on the abovementioned
Places, who excellently sets forth the Emphasis of them.

In Acts 19.31. we read of the (...) See Doctor Hammond on that place, and Beza.
the Exhibiters and Governors of the Games in Asia, which were at that time
celebrated at Ephesus to the honor of Diana. Therefore Ephesus is styled her
(...), or Sacrist, verse 35. which Title was affected by every City, where
their games were celebrated in honor of some of their Deities. See Master
Gregorie's Notes, chap. 9.10.

The (...) verse 35. is also said to have been See Master Gregory's notes
before cited.
an Officer in those Games.

In 1 Cor. 4.9. and 15.32. the Apostle has respect to that bloody spectacle,
when men, who were (...), devoted to death, were to sight on the Theater with
Beasts, that would rend them to pieces.

I will conclude this Head with the words of Scultetus; In Orat. pro conjun.
Philolog. cum Theolog.
Graeciam igitur veterem noverit, Paulinas Epistolas qui nosse satagit.

SECT. VI. Of Roman History.
2. THe Scripture has something in it of the Roman Customs, and Antiquities.
See Acts 22.25, 28. and 25.10, 11, 16. and 26.32. Luke 2.1, 2.

Let me hear without any help from the Roman History, what Caesar was, Joh.
19.12. and what is meant by Legion, Centurion, Publican, by the whole world,
(...) The Roman Empire.
, and what by (...), Luke 2.1.

He that has not read, or heard that Tarsus, amongst other places, was
privileged with the freedoms of the City of Rome, cannot make it out how Paul
could say, and say truly, that he was a Roman freeborn, Acts 22.27, 28. when
indeed he was a Jew born at Tarsus, verse 3.

The crucifixion of Christ was a Roman punishment, and so not to be perfectly
understood but from that History. To which there was something added of the
Jewish usage, in giving him (...) Mark 15.23. For the Jews used to give a cup
of wine with frankincense, or See Amam. Antibath. Bibl. in Prove. 31.6.
myrrh to condemned persons before their execution, grounding this Custom on
Prove. 36.1. Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, etc.

SECT. VII. Of Christian, or Church History under the Gospel.
THus much may suffice to evidence the History both of the Jews, and Gentiles,
to be useful for explicating many passages in Scripture. The same may be
affirmed of the Christian History, or the History of the Church in the times of
the Gospel, from which we must receive information, about that usage of being
baptized for the dead, mentioned 1 Cor. 15.29. and about the (...), or Feasts
of charity, Jude 12. the understanding of which is of use to clear the meaning
of 1 Cor. 11.21, 22. And concerning the Nicolaitans, who they were, and what
their Doctrine, Rev. 2.6, 15.

It is Ecclesiastical History that must give light to those places of Scripture
which foretell of Antichrist, or which concern the Church all along, since the
first publishing of the Gospel.

From hence also must we be instructed in those Cases, wherein it is requisite
to know the custom of the Churches, 1 Cor. 11.16.

Ecclesiastical History is one of the nearest attendants to Divinity, and
therefore has always experienced the same fate with it: Simul floruerunt,
simul jacuerunt, both flourished, and both were out of respect together: as
Isaac Casaubon shows in his Prolegomena to his Exercitations on Baronius's
Annals.

Who so desires to see the use of this sort of History largely pursued, may
read Grynaeus's Preface to the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius,
etc. rendered into Latin.

SECT. VIII. Of History as useful to know Gods works.
SEcondly, History is useful to a Minister for knowing the works of God, which
are great and manifold, and declared by it.

History is the Theater and representation of God's providence, (or divine
dispensations) as it exercises and manifests it self in managing the affairs
of the world; but especially in reference to his children, and to his cause; in
the preservation of his Church and Truth, notwithstanding the cruelty of
Tyrants, and subtilty of Heretics, designing the extirpation of the one, and
corruption of the other.

Herein are legible God's wonderful mercies and deliverances of his servants,
and his judgments upon the wicked, in special upon the opposers of his Truth,
and the persecuters of his servants, and the constancy of those many Martyrs,
who sealed the Truth with their blood. All which may contribute much to the
confirming of our belief of it, and the convincing of others.

Without History, how much of the manifestation and appearances of God in the
world, how many eminent and signal instances of his wisdom, power and goodness,
would be lost.

The declaring of God's doings among the people is that the Scripture calls
for, Psalm. 9.11. and to whom does this belong, if not to God's Ministers? and
what greater help to this, next the word of God, then History? sure, he that is
furnished with it will be a Scribe better instructed, and more able to bring
forth of his Treasury things both new and old.

Men are ordinarily more awakened and affected with the Historical Relations,
and lively Descriptions (because they come nearest to sensible representations)
of such passages, or providential dispensations to any, wherein the mercy or
displeasure of God is conspicuous, then if they only hear promises or
threatenings. It would strike the mind with far more horror, to hear of the
dreadful calamity brought upon the Jews by the Romans, after they had crucified
Christ, and to have the particulars of their misery recounted, then only to
read Christ's words where he denounces destruction against them, Luke 19.43.

SECT. IX. Of History as useful to know the Examples of men.
THirdly, For knowing and improving the examples of men, their virtues and
vices. By Historical relations we have the benefit of others good examples, and
the comfort of their experiences; which may be improved (as well as the various
passages of God's providence, both mercies and judgments) by the Ministers of
the Gospel, to the exciting or supporting of others, as occasion is offered.
And since men are so apt to be led by examples, he that is a good Historian
has a great advantage for the drawing and working upon others; to make an apt
application of stories and examples, (providential and personal) which is often
much moving and taking with the auditors.

This use of History approaches very near Christ's way of teaching by
Parables; in many of which, there is as it were an application of an Historical
passage to divine and spiritual purposes.

Histories are Pictures or Glasses, Mr. Part in Romans 11.2.
(says one) wherein we may discern both what is good and bad, and what we may
expect as a reward either of our virtues or vices; -- and it is very profitable
to be acquainted with the Histories of the Bible, and to make use of them. Our
Savior and Paul approve this by their practice, Mat. 12.3, 5. Have ye not read,
says Christ. 1 Cor. 10.1, etc. I would not that ye should be ignorant, says
Paul] scil. of the Old Testament-stories. So also practiced James, Peter, Jude,
John, as appears in their Epistles. -- There was never any man of note for
wisdom, who was a stranger in story.

Lege Historiam ne flas Historia, says one. Read History that you may not be
made an History.

CHAP. VII. Of the Usefulness of Chronology.
CHronology is of great use for a Minister of the Gospel, to know eight things.

I. The several Ages of the world exactly, and the Times of Generations, and of
Nations,

-- of Governments, Kingdoms and Commonwealths; the rise, growth, changes and
periods of them.

-- And of Governors, of Kings and Rulers, and the times of their reigns,
(especially of the Kings of Judah and Israel, both absolutely and
comparatively, which have some knots, difficulties, and seeming repugnancies in
them) and what fell out therein: as Christ's birth in the days of Herod the
King, Mat. 2.1. and so John Baptist's birth, Luke 1.5, 13.

It may be needful to know the times of the reigns of Heathen Kings and
Emperors, because some passages of Sacred story refer to them; as Christ's
birth; the coming up of Joseph and Mary to Judea, to be taxed in the days of
Caesar Augustus, Luke 2.1. to 8. the great dearth which Agabus prophesied, that
came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar the Emperor, Acts 11.28.

It Is said in Dan. 2.44. Will. t.
In the days of these Kings (that is of Syria and Egypt, as some conceive, or
rather of the Roman Empire, as others) shall the kingdom of the Messiah be set
up.

II. To know the particular times and seasons,

1. Wherein Persons of Note lived, -- and who were contemporary, or what
distance of time was between them.

2. Wherein such and such remarkable things were done by God or man, reported
in the Old or New Testament.

To know the order and distinction of times, and of deeds done in them.

III. To know the several ages of the Church of God.

1. Under the Law, and the various states thereof, and what Prophets lived in
each of them.

2. Under the New Testament, the several ages and states of the Churches of
Christ, their beginnings, continuance, decay and dissolution; and what
Apostles, or Ministers of Christ, lived in them.

To know the parts of Christ's life, (private and public) and the years of his
Ministry, and what he did or suffered in every one of them.

To know the times of the Passovers while Christ lived upon earth, for the
years of Christ's Ministry are reckoned according to the same.

IV. To know the particular times, wherein the several books of the Holy
Scripture were written by the Penmen thereof; which conduces much to a right
understanding of several passages therein, and to reconcile seeming
repugnancies in the Scriptures.

Distingue tempora and concordabunt Scripturae.

The distinction of the times, wherein Paul writ his several Epistles, is of
much use to show, why the Apostles wrote so variously about the same things, as
Circumcision, and other Ceremonies. For to the Romans, chap. 14.1. he exhorts
that they should receive them that are weak in the faith, etc. i. e. about
Ceremonies and indifferent things.

But to the Galatians and Colossians he utterly condemns the use of
Circumcision, Gal. 5.2, etc. Col. 2. the reason is, the difference of times, as
Chrysostom has noted. Ceremonies were always in themselves mortal; at
Christ's death they became mortuae, dcad, but after that they became
mortiferae, deadly to them that used them.

V. To know the times of fulfilling Prophesies, and Promises of things that are
now 1. Past. 2. To come.


First Past, as those that were made concerning

1. Particular persons, as Josiah; the Prphecy of him foretold by the man of
God, Piscator.
330. years before he was born, 1 King. 13.2. and concerning Cyrus by name,
about 220. years before he was born, Isa. 44.28. which are so punctually
performed, as if these Prophecies concerning them had been a Narrative of
things past, rather then a prediction of things to come.

2. Concerning people; as

1. Genesis 15.13.
To the Israelites about their bondage, which was 400 years, beginning the
account from Ismael's mocking and persecuting of Isaac, Gal. 4.29.
which fell out 30. years after the promise, Genesis 12.3. which promise was 430.
Gal. 3.17.
years before the law, -- and about their coming forth of Egypt out of bondage,
Answorth.
which was 430. years after that promise, Exodus 12.41. God kept time to a day.

2. To the Jews concerning their Captivity in Babylon, and Reduction thence
after 70. years, Jer. 29.10.

Concerning the coming of the Messiah in fullness of time, Gal. 4.4.
exactly answering and fulsilling the prophecies thereof, as to Christ's birth
and death, Genesis 49.10. Dan. 9.24.

God is punctual for time in all his performances of his Prophecies, and
promises, even to a day or hour; and for things, to a title.

Whatever God promised to Israel at any time with his mouth, he performed with
his hand to the utmost, 1 King. 8.56. Jer. 33.14.

A clear demonstration of his veracity and fidelity, and of the verity of his
word.

The same may be said of the times of God's fulfilling of Prophecies and
Treatnings of Evils past, both to God's people, and to the wicked, their
enemies, whether Persons or Nations.


Secondly, To know the times of God's fulfilling of Prophecies, and Promises,
and Threatenings of things yet to come, which are expressed in the Prophets,
especially in Daniel, in the Apostles Epistles, but especially in the
Revelations: Concerning,

1. The Calling of the Jews, and of the Ten Tribes, in the latter days.

2. The Prophesying and slaying of the Witnesses, and their reviving, Rev.
11.3, 7, 11.

3. The downfall of Antichrist and Babylon.

4. The ruin of the Turks.

Of Gog and Magog.

VI. To know the Epochas, the terms of Account, or the beginning of times in
Computation, from which times, and things are resto^ed in Scripture; or the
intervals, in which the measures of times are termined, as

From the Creation to the slood, See Perkins in his Introduction to his Digest.
Alsted. Chron. cap. 1.
1656 years.

From the Flood to the Promise made to Abraham, 367 years.

From the Promise to the going out of Egypt 430 years, Exodus 12.40.

From the children of Israel's coming out of Egypt, when they began to be a
free people, and a Nation of themselves, to the Temple, 1 King. 6.1. 480 years.

From the building of the Temple to the destruction of it, 427 years, in which
is included the time of the Captivity.

From the beginning of Daniel's weeks to the death of Christ, (as Mr. Perkins
thinks) 490 years, where they end.

VII. The knowledge of Chronology is necessary to the disposing of the Bible
into an Harmony: or to the transposing of the order of Books and Chapters of
the holy Scriptures, for the reducing of all into a continued History, See Mr.
Samuel Torshel's design.
which some have endeavored, and Dr. Lightfoot has performed in his Harmony,
for the New Testament.

VIII. The study of Chronology is needful to know, and evince the verity, and
certainty of the holy Scriptures; and to confirm the Conscience against Satan's
Attempts to overthrow men's Faith by casting in suspicions of the truth of
Scripture, because it does not agree in the Account of Time with other
Histories of the world, written by the most prudent men of all Ages. And with
this Tentation Funccius in his Epistle Dedicatory before his Chronology
(reckoning up the advantages of the diligent observation of History and times)
affirms himself to have been assaulted; which was the cause that moved him to
undertake his Chronology, though otherwise unwilling to it.

Vossius speaks of his meeting with some, not versed in the Doctrine of Times,
De scient. Mathem. cap. 39.
though else learned men; who could not be so soon induced to question the
truth of Scripture by any thing, as the Discrepancy of Times in it, whom he, by
answering their Objections, convinced of the use of Chronology.

From the Premises it appears, that Chronology is of great use to the
understanding of the Scriptures, which are exact in the Computation of times;
and to the clear and distinct referring of Occurrences or passages in
Scriptures to their proper Times. The knowledge of the Times when, as well as
of the Places where, persons lived, and things were done, tends much to the
elucidating of them, and is very delightful. As God made every thing beautiful
in his time, Eccles. 3.11. so there is beauty, satisfaction and pleasure in the
knowing the times and seasons, wherein things were done, or came to pass.

The ignorance of times leads men into mistakes about passages of Scripture.
Thus some have thought that the shipwreck at Melita, Act. 27. was one of the
three mentioned by Paul, 2 Cor. 11.25. whereas the second Epistle to the
Corinthians was writ long before that shipwreck. So Capellus (out of Baronius)
in Histor. Apostol. page 63.

Chronology is the key for the right understanding of the Prophets: to know the
times, to which they refer, and the things acted in those times, See Grotii
Annotat. in prophetas.
is the way happily to apply dicta factis.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Usefulness of Arithmetic.
Arithmetic is useful for a Minister in two respects:

First, Rightly to understand, and exctaly to compute Scripture-numbers and
accounts, as in Genealogies, Histories, Chronologies, Prophecies, and in other
things.

Secondly, To search into, and find out Scripture-mysteries, which are hid in
numbers. Arithmetic is a key to open to us the right understanding of numerical
speculations.

There are two Mystical numbers to be taken notice of especially;

The one is contained in the Name of the Beast, Rev. 13.17, 18, which points
out Antichrist to us.

The other is contained in the Measure of the wall of the New Jerusalem, which
(as some Divines conceive) points out the Church of Christ, Rev. 21.17. [ Here
is wisdom, says John, Rev. 13.17, 18. i. e. a thing that requires wisdom. Let
him that has understanding count the Number of the Beast, or the Name of the
Beast, or the Number of the Name; that is, Brightman.
the name of the Beast, which is expressed by number (or a numeral name) or
wherein number is contained, to wit, in the letters of which the name consists.
For the Greeks, as also the Hebrews, had not sigures, as we have, but counted
by letters: men's names in Greek contained numbers in the letters. Piscator in
ver. 17. says, that by these three names, scil. the Beast, the name of the
Beast, and the number of the name, one and the same thing is signified, that is
Antichrist.

This is called the number of a man, because such a name of a man (says
Brightman) out of whose numeral letters this number is made, 666, which he
thinks to be (...), Latinus: that is the name, which the holy Ghost bids us
number in place; the letters whereof do, according to the computation of the
Grecians, make this number 666. Piscator in Rev. 13. shows how, in a Table.

Or, this is the number of a man, that is, which may be counted, and found out
by man; which may be computed, or calculated by study and search: one calls
this number an Arithmetical Riddle.

Dr. Potter, upon the number 666, goes another way to work, very ingeni^ously
to unfold this Mystery by Arithmetical Calculation, (...) thus. The number,
666, is applicable to Antichrist, Dr. Potter.
not in it self, but according to what is essential and remarkable in it, to
wit, its Rootae, and Figure.


I. Its Root^, which is 25. This describes the Root or Basis of Antichrist's
Hierarchy, College of Cardinals (who were but 25) instituted Anno Chr. 305,
who only with the Pope, the Head of this Corporation (which is the very Body
and Essence of Antichrist) usurp all power and Authority in the Church.

This seems so,

1. In that it is said, Let him that has understanding (in Arithmetic) count
the number of the Beast, to wit, by the extraction of the Root; which is the
only way men usually count by, when but one number is expressed, as here. And
this is said to be the number of a man, that is, such as is used among men.

2. Because Christ's number, or the number of the wall of the new Jerusalem,
describes his Church, not in it self, but by its rootae, which is 12; as it
hints the founding of it by the 12 Apostles, and other things concerning it, as
may appear from Revel. 21. The Spirit making 12 conspicuous in all the
Particulars of the Description of it.

So the number of 25 is Remarkable in Rome, and much affected by the Papists,
in many respects. For Rome had 25 Gates (as Jerusalem 12,
Rev. 21.12.) 25 Churches, 25 Titles, or Parishes. In two of their Churches 25
Altars, on each Altat 25 marks, or dints.

Their Jubilee is every 25 year: their chief Holy Days, are upon the 25 day of
the month: and Bartholomew-feast is celebrated at Rome on the 25 of August,
though in all other places one day sooner. There is no one day of the month,
which has had originally so many holy days laid upon it as the 25.

The Articles of their Faith are 25, decreed in the Council of Trent: which was
begun by 25 Prelates, continued 25 Sessions, and ended with the subscriptions
of 25 Popish Archbishops.

The Mass of Christ's 5 wounds, 5 times multiplied and repeated (which makes
25) will (say they) cure all diseases, and deliver souls from pains. So that
they of Rome acknowledge some great mystery and virtue in this number.

The Emperor of Rome, the King of Spain, and Arch Duke of Austria, bear 5
Cinques, or 25 round spots in their Arms: which Device is recorded to have been
sent from Heaven, in a more Celestial manner, then the Ancile of ancient Rome,
as a sanctified Banner to lead Armies fortunately. The Pope and Cardinals cause
these 25 spots to be imprinted in the Frontispiece of diverse Books printed at
Rome, for their better success and greater confirmation.

II. Its Figure. The Figure of 666, which is a square something more then as
long again as it is broad (18 being to be multiplied by 37, the product of which
is 666) shows the figure of Antichrist's city, to wit, Rome, which is just
such. As the Figure of 144, which is a perfect square, shows the Figure of
Jerusalem. Thus far Dr. Potter.

Mr. Cotton, in his Exposition on Rev. 13.18. following Junius in his Notes on
that Text, would have 6 to be multiplied by 10 (to make up 666.) So 10 times 6
is 60, and 10 times 60 is 600. Six is made the basis, because there are six
Books of Decretals (of which the sixth is most complete, being compiled by Pope
Boniface, and called Sextus, in which the Pope's Canons are summed up) which
are a certain platform of Direction for all matters of Practice and Manners in
the Discipline of the Romish Church. So six is a perfect number of all things
to be done therein, for Doctrine, Worship, and Government: all their
Administrations are founded and measured out from their Canon-Laws, which are
all wrapped up in six Volumes, and the sixth is the most complete of them all;
therefore the Pope makes six the foundation. This (says Mr. Cotton) is but the
number of a man, that is, a mere humane invention. This 6 is multiplied by 10,
because all the Government of the Roman State (says he) is by Tenths, by
Tithes. All the People must give the tenth to the Priest, and the Priest to the
Bishop.

To these numbers may be added the Virgin number with the Lamb, which is
144000, Revel. 14.1. (mentioned before in Revel. 7.4. as the Number of them
that were sealed) made up by multiplying the 12000 of the twelve Tribes, which
are the Spiritual Progeny of the twelve Apostles. See Mede in Revel. 14.1. See
Mr. Cotton in Revel. 13.18. he says, This number of the Lamb's followers has
its rise from 12; 12 multiplied by 12 will arise from so many scores to so many
hundreds: and 12 times 12000 is 144000; and the number of the Beast, scil. 666,
is expressly opposite thereunto. See more about it in Mr. Cotton.

CHAP. IX. Of the Usefulness of Geometry.
GEometry is of use to a Minister of the Gospel upon a threefold account:

First, For the explication of many places in the Old Testament, especially
those which treat I. Of Weights and Measures. II. Of Edifices and Buildings,
and of their Proportions and Dimensions. As, Of the Fabric of Noah's Ark. Of
Moses's Tabernacle. Of Solomon's Temple. Of Ezekiel's Temple, chap. 40. and
City, chap. 48. Of the New Jerusalem, Revel. 21. Of the Division of the Land of
Canaan among the Tribes, Psalm. 78.55. Josh. 13.4. And of several other
particulars in Scripture, which are Geometrically described, or to which
Dimensions are attributed.



I shall instance in two or three places, wherein the Spirit speaks
Geometrically, and cannot be understood without knowledge in the Mathematics:

1. Dr. Potter, 666.
About plain and superficial Measure in Ezekiel. 43.16. and most evidently in
Ezekiel. 48.20. where he uses a circumlocution, that he might by a Geometrical
phrase, and a number multiplied by it self, viz. 25000 by 25000, intimate the
Square and plain measure of a piece of Ground.

2. About solid Measure, Rev. 21.16. where he says, The City was measured
12000 furlongs; the length, breadth, and height of it are equal. So that it is
set down as a solid Cubical Figure, containing three Dimensions, and so only
to be measured by solid Measure: and then the compass of Ezekiel's City
(namely, 1800 great Cubits) will be the compass of this new Jerusalem; for
Brightman, Villalpandus, and others, make them both to be the same City.

Secondly, Geometry is an Help to the understanding of the Works of God, who
has ordered all things in number, measure, Wisdom 11 17
and weight. Pondere, mensura, numero, Deus omnia fecit.

Geometry is conversant about Order, and Measure, or Commensuration; which two
do so excel, as Plato says, (...). God does always play the Geometrician; that
is, he does all, and every thing exactly, in order, as by Line and Measure: Or,
as Plutarch interprets it, God does, Octavo S^mp^s. 2. Problem.
ratione, proportione, similitudine, omnes mundi parts exornare and dimetiri.

Etenim cum Deus (says Pet. In his Epistle before his general Table of
Geometry.
Ramus) immensitatis aeternae spacia definire statueret, Geometria inprimis
usus est, quae longitudinem, latitudinem, profundorum spatia terminaret,
omniumque symmetriam, rationem, proportionem, similitudinem discerneret, quae
aerem levitate sublime tolleret, aquam, terramque pondere deprimeret; quae
denique coelestes globos ita tornaret, ut ad conversion is motum nihil
rotundius effingi, nihil aptius expoliri posset. Itaque Mundi Architectus ille
summus in fabricando machinandoque Universitatis Opisicio Geometriam inprimis
adhibuit, neque Plato quidquam magnificentius locutus est, cum dixit, Deum
(...).

Thus Geometry conduces much to the acknowledging and celebrating of the
Wisdom and Power of God in his Works.

Thirdly, Arithmetic and Geometry are of good use to the forenamed Arts or
Sciences:

As, in Ethics, to understand what Virtue is, which is said to consist in
Proportion: and what are the bounds or limits of Justice: that a Geometrical
Proportion should be kept in Distributive Justice, and Arithmetical Proportion
in Commutative Justice.

-- Also in Physics, Astronomy, and Geography.

Arithmetic and Geometry sunt duae illae alae Mathematicae, quibus Astronomi
and Geographi alta and profunda pervolant. Alsted. Furyclop. Didact. cap. 7,
and 8. page 126. in 4.
Of the Antiquity, Certainty, Jucundity, Utility of the Study of Geometry, see
Alsted.

It is observed, the Patriarchs were Mathematicians.

There may be use of Mathematics in handling Points of Divinity. Bradwardine
(the profound Doctor) made use of the Mathematics (wherein he excelled) of the
Principles, Demonstrations, and Corollaries or Conclusions thereof, Sir Henry
S^vile's Prelace before Bradwardine's (...).
in handling Theological Points.

-- silo Mathematico Theologica contexit. CHAP. X. Of the Usefulness of
Astronomy.
AStronomy is useful for a Minister of the Gospel upon a double account:

First, To know the Nature, Light, Motions, Magnitudes, Influences, and
Operations of the Celestial Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and of their
Constellations. -- And how they serve (according to God's appointment) for
signs and seasons, for days and years, Genesis 1.14. -- To know the Ordinances of
Heaven, Job 38.33.
the various Motions, and the mavelous and unspeakable Order of the Heavenly
Bodies, which they keep as constantly, as if they walked by a Rule, Jer. 31.35.
-- As also to understand Eclipses. It is only an Astronomer that can
demonstrate that famous Eclipse of the Sun at Christ's passion to be
miraculous, Luke 23.45.
since it happened about the full Moon, for then was the Passover celebrated:
but Solar Eclipses in the Course of Nature must be at the new Moon.

Secondly, To understand the Jewish Years, Months, Days, and their several
Accounts hereof, and the dependences thereupon, as the Jewish Feasts: -- and
the Prophecies, Histories, Chronologies, that are in the Scripture: -- and the
clearing and reconciling of diverse Places, or Passages in Scripture; as the
difference between the Jews and the Romans in fixing the beginning of their
Hours, the Jews reckoning them from Sunrise, the Romans from midnight, the
clearing whereof will make those Places agree, which speak of the time of
Christ suffering, and the circumstances of it.

In the night Christ was in the High Priests Hall, denied by Peter at the
Cock-crowing, at the break of the day he was delivered to Pilate, (...), Mark
15.1. then accused before him till the sixth hour, Joh. 19.14. to wit, of the
Romans, which was the first hour of the Jews. After that he was condemned and
delivered to the Soldiers, and all things prepared for his crucifixion, which
by Mark is said to be at the third hour, to wit, of the Jews, cha. 15, 25. but
the ninth hour of the Romans, and the darkness from the sixth to the ninth hour
is to be understood of the Jewish hours, that is from noon to three of the
clock. See De Dieu on Mark 15.25.

And as John uses the Roman hours, cha. 19.14. so the Roman day, cha. 20.19.
The same day at evening being the first day of the week, Jesus, etc. that could
not be the evening before Sunset: for when the two Disciples went with Christ
to Emmaus, it was toward evening, and the day far spent. Now they supt there,
and returned to Jerusalem, which was sixty furlongs distant from Emmaus, and (
Luke 24.13, etc.) told the Disciples what had happened to them, then Christ
appeared in the midst of them, which must be at the evening after Sunset, and
that not taken after the custom of the Hebrews (for then he should not have
appeared on the first day of the week, but on the second, because they begin
their natural day at evening) but of the Romans, who reckon their natural day
from midnight.

Hence also may that difficulty be cleared of the Evangelists, calling that
day, De Dien in Matthew. 26.17.
which was the preparation to the Passover the first day of unleavened bread,
Mat. 26.17. Mark 14.12. for the evening after they are the Paschal Lamb with
unleavened bread was, after the Jewish account, the beginning of the fifteenth
day of the Month Nisan, which was the first day of unleavened bread, Numb.
28.16, 17. but, according to the Roman account, that evening was the end of the
fourteenth day, which was the day of Preparation.

The Jews divide their night into four watches, each three hours long. Their
day had in it twelve hours Common, and three Temple hours, or hours of
Sacrifice and Prayer, (which on their Feasts-days were signified by sound of
Trumpet, Numb. 10.10. Grotius on Matthew. 27.45.) which were most famous and
notable distinctions of the time of the day. We read of them, Acts 2.15. and
3.1. and 10.3, 9. Matthew. 20.3, 5. so that after this account whatsoever was
done after the third, and before the sixth hour, might be said to have been
done the third hour, and so some reconcile Mark 15.25. with Joh. 19.14. Christ
was crucified the latter end of the third hour, a little before the sixth, for
these was no Temple-hour between the third and the sixth.

I may give four Reasons of the use of Astronomy to a Minister of the Gospel.

Reas. 1. Because the heavens declare the glory of God. etc. Psalm. 19.1, 2. his
Majesty, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, which shine brightly in them, and demonstrate
his Deity, and the knowledge of them, is a means to come to the knowledge of
God, and to the acknowledgement of a Deity. See how the site and course of the
Sun evinceth the wisdom of God, made out in Doctor Browns Vulgar Errors, lib.
6. cap. 5.

Reas. 2. Scriptures have much of Astronomy in them: as Genesis 1.15, to 19. Job
38.31, 32, 33. In two respects especially.

1. Of their natural motions and revolution in themselves; of the Sun and Moon
especially, Psalm. 104.19. Psalm. 19.5, 6, 7, and of the effects, and
concomitants thereof, as the vicissitude, or continual succession of night and
day, of Summer and Winter, Genesis 8.22. and of the influences of the Sun, and of
the Moon, and of the Stars, Deuteronomy. 33.14.

2. Of spiritual allusions to the Heavens, the Stars, their Light, Motion, and
many other things, of which the Holy Scriptures are very full.

I might multiply Instances hereof. Psalm. 84.11. Cant. 6.10. Dan. 12.3. Phil.
2.15. Jude 13. (...). Without the knowledge of Astronomy we cannot explain
these things to others, nor make use of them for our selves, or draw forth the
sense of many Scriptures, or the meaning of the Holy Ghost in them fully, and
clearly; nor teach those spiritual things by them, which are hinted to us in
them.

Ignorance in Astronomy buries many sweet and excellent points in Divinity,
that may be learned from the Heavens, the Stars, etc.

Reas. 3. From Examples. Moses, and Daniel imbuti fuerunt Astrologia, says
Calvin on Dan. 1.4. they were both endued with skill in Astrology, because
Moses was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, and Daniel in all the
learning of the Chaldeans, both which were skilful in true and genuine
Astrology. Some think they of the East Country (as the Chaldeans) were the
first that found out the courses of the Stars, and the rules of Astronomy; and
give this reason, quod null a regio in mundo esset tam plana ad patefaciendum
quaqua versus Horizontem, therefore they were more propense to learn that
Science, to which also the Egyptians were disposed, having the advantage of
open fields, and serene nights, fit for such contemplation. Coelius Rhodig.
lib. 16. cap. 4. But sure this Science had a more early Original, it was known
to those before the Flood; being requisite for the ordering of their Months
and Years, and the computation of Time, which receives its measures from the
motion of heavenly Bodies.

Hence we have the years of the Patriarchs before the Flood summed up; and we
read of the seventeenth day of the second Month, when Noah entered into the
Ark, and of the seventh, tenth, and first Month, Genesis 7. and 8 chap.

Besides, that the length of their Lives in that first Age of the World made
them more capable of observing and determining the various Motions, and Periods
of the heavenly Bodies.

Reas. 4. Astronomy is a sublime part of natural Philosophy, lost by our fall
in Adam, recoverable by observation, reading and study; and as light is sweet,
and a pleasant thing is it for the eyes to behold the Sun, Eccles. 11.7. so the
knowledge of Light, of the Sun, Moon, and Stars is very pleasant and delightful
to the Mind, and makes us more useful and profitable unto others.

CHAP. XI. Of the Usefulness of Geography.
GEography is useful for a Minister in diverse respects,

1. In the General to understand the whole Course or Tenor of
Scripture-stories, both in the Old and New Testament, from the beginning of the
Bible to the end: the History of the Creation, of our Redemption, and of Gods
Providence in the Series thereof, all along from the first to the last, related
in Gods Books.

To know the Distinctions, Bounds or Borders of Places, Towns, Cities,
Countries: the Situations of them, in respect of one another, and of the
Heavens: the Longitude and Latitude of them, and their distance one from
another: and the Natures, Properties, Commodities, or Discommodities of them.

2. In Particular, to understand

The Plantation of the world by Noah's sons after the flood.

The Journeys of Israel from Egypt, through the wilderness to Canaan.

The Stories of the Patriarchs, Judges, and Kings of Judah and Israel.

The Journals of the Prophets in the Old Testament. See Bunting's Itincra^^um
^otius Sacrae Scripturae.


Of Jesus Christ, John. 4.3, 4.

And of his Apostles in the New Testament, and of their removals from place to
place.

The Division of the land of Canaan among the Tribes: the situation and
proportion, or quantity of their several allotments, absolutely and relatively,
or in reference one to another.

The situation of Neighboring Countries and Nations to the land of Canaan;
how near, or far off, and on what side.

The Transactions of God's people the Jews, (possessing Canaan) with other
Nations (either near or remote) by Trade, by League or War, by Amity or
Hostility.

The Deportations or Captivities of the ten Tribes, and of the two Tribes,
which were several and diverse.

The Propagation of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles, from place to place,
from one Town, City, Country and Nation, to another.

The Accomplishment of some Prophecies, promises, threatenings, judgments;
especially such as have reference to places, as well as to persons, as the
downfall of Babylon, of Antichrist, of Gog and Magog, the calling of the Jews.

The Histories of the four Monarchies, and of other Kingdoms, which are
mentioned in the Scriptures, and of their Cities.

In the understanding of all which we may be much assisted by the knowledge of
Geography, because the knowledge of the places where the persons were, and the
things were done, gives light to the understanding of the History thereof.

We cannot have a full notion and comprehension of some affairs, events or
occurrences, without knowledge of the places where they were agitated, or fell
out.

Neither can we understand many Prophetical Descriptions of places without the
knowledge of their site and customs.

The want of skill in Geography has caused many wild conjectures about the
situation of Paradise; and made those guilty of a great mistake, as to many
places of Scripture, that take the land of Cush (so often mentioned there) for
the African Ethiopia; and the land of Havilah for that in East India, as Sir
Walter Rawleigh in his History of the World has demonstrated, l. 1. c. 3. and
c. 8. sect. 10.

3. Geography is further useful for the clearing of some Texts in Scripture,
wherein there is difficulty upon one of these two accounts.

1. Either when Places, that differ in their situation, have the same name: as
the two Edens, one in Mesopotamia, Genesis 2.8. the other in Coelo-Syria, of which
Amos. 1.15. -- The two Sabas, one in Arabia Felix, of which Psalm. 72.10. the
other in Arabia Deserta; whence the Sabeans were that robbed Job, chap. 1.15.

So the two Hamaths, one in Syria Zobah, of which 2 Chronicles. 8.3. the other in
Phenicia in the Tribe of Nepthali, of which Numb. 34.8. Ezekiel. 47.16.

So Kedesh and Ramah were the names of diverse places far distant. See Sir
Walter Rawleigh of all these in his History of the world.


So two places are called Cesarea, the one near the rise of Jordan, of which
Mat. 16.13. the other on the shore of the Mediterranean sea, mentioned Acts
18.22. and 25.1, 4.

So two places are named Antioch, one in Syria, of which Acts 11.26, 27. the
other in Pisidia, of which Acts 13.14.

Without knowing the different situation of these places, of the same name, we
cannot distinguish between them; nor judge which of them is meant in such or
such a place of Scripture.

2. Or when the same place has several names in Scripture, which create a
seeming repugnancy between some places, or expressons therein, only to be
reconciled by skill in Geography.

Thus, when Christ sent the Devils into the Swine, Matthew says, he was in the
Country of the Gergesens, Mat. 8.28. but Mark, of the Gadarens, Mar. 5.1. which
is the same Country indifferently named from these two Cities in it, Gergesa
and Gadara.

So the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22. is called a Syro-Phenician, Mar. 7.26.
for the Jews called those, who lived about Tire and Sidon and the seacoast, in
a strict sense, Canaanites, (see Numb. 13.29. Judge. 1.30, 31, 32.) but by
others they were styled Phenicians, Grotius in Matthew. 15.22.
and sometimes Syro-Phenicians, to distinguish them from the Liby-Phenices in
Africa.

The place, whither Christ went with his Disciples before he was apprehended by
Judas, is said to be Gethsemane, Mat. 26.36. but Luke says it was the mount of
Olives, chap. 22.39. and John, differently from both, makes it a Garden beyond
the brook Cedron.

In reconciling which there will be no difficulty to him, who has seen a true
description of Jerusalem, and the adjacent places. For Mount Olivet lies beyond
the brook Cedron, and part of it is called Gethsemane, See Dr. Lightf. Centur.
Chorog. cap. 40.
(the place of Oyl-presses) and at the foot of this Mountain especially it was,
that they had their gardens: for they used not to have them in the City.

CHAP. XII. Of the Arguments which prove the Usefulness of Learning.
SECT. I. Seven Arguments propounded.
HAving declared the particular use of Arts and Tongues for the Ministers of
the Gospel, I will further demonstrate the need and use of Learning for them by
seven Arguments.

I. God's affording of Means for obtaining Learning in all Ages.

II. Religion flourished when Learning abounded.

III. Learning qualifies for all public employments.

IV. Satan makes use of Learning.

V. Satan seeks to obstruct Learning.

VI. Testimonies given to Learning by the Learned.

VII. God has used Learned men as the greatest Instruments of his service and
glory.

SECT. II. Of God's affording means of Learning, as Schools, etc.
GOd has in his good Providence appointed, Argum. 1.
and in all ages afforded his people ordinary helps and means for obtaining the
knowledge of Arts and Tongues, as Schools, Universities, Colleges, the
Seminaries or Nurseries of Learning.

There were many Schools of the Prophets under the Old Testament.

Calvin on Amos 7.14. says, Scimus tunc fuisse Prophetarum Collegia, and hoc
satis notum est ex sacris Historiis. Collegia illa in hunc finem instituta
fuerunt, ut Seminarium aliquod semper maneret in Ecclesia Dei, ne destitueretur
bonis and probis Doctoribus.

There was a College or School of the Prophets upon the Hill of God, where
they trained up young Scholars and Students, 1 Samuel 10.5, 10. Some think it was
in Gibeah of Benjamin.

-- Another College at Naioth in Ramah, whither David sled, and Saul followed
him, whereof Samuel was Overseer, and President, 1 Samuel 19.19, 20. the Teacher
and Instructor of those that were called the children of the Prophets in that
School. For though Prophecy be the special Gift and Work of the Spirit, yet it
was fit, that they which afterward should be employed in the service of God (as
it is like that these were most of Levi) should be prepared, by Godly
Instruction and Education, for the further works of the Spirit in them. See
Doctor Willet on 1 Samuel 19.18.

By these two Instances ( scil. of the Colleges at Gibeah and Naioth) it seems
that Colleges of Students were privileged Places, seeing the
Israelite-Students in the former were not hurt, though in the Garrison of the
Philistines: and David was secure in the later, though Saul was his enemy.

There was another College of the Prophets, in the time of Elisha, at Beth-el,
2 King. 2.3. and another at Jericho, 2 King. 2.5.

Another at Gilgal, 2 King. 4.38, with 43, where there were an hundred Sons of
the Prophets.

Elisha's College was so full of Scholars, that there was not room enough for
them, and they desired it might be enlarged, 2 King. 6.1, 2, 3.

Among the Israelites forty eight Cities were appointed for the Levites, which
were as the common Schools and Universities for the whole Kingdom. See Willet
in Dan. 1.4.

Some think, that Debir was an Academy or University of Palestina, that when
the Jewish Polity came to be fixed, and they were in a succession of
Government, then they erected public Schools of Learning, appointed Cities,
which to that end they privileged, as this of Debir for one Josh. 15.15. (see
Masius in loc.) which was therefore called Kirjath-Sepher, which signisies a
City of Books, or of Learning, though others conceive it to be a place where a
famous Library was kept, in which many notable Monuments,
and ancient Records of many things done ever since the Flood were reserved.

In these Schools, or Colleges of the Prophets, there were two sorts: First,
Some were called Prophets simply, as the Masters and Instructors of others,
styled Fathers, 1 Samuel 10.12. 2 King. 2.12. Secondly, Others were called the
Sons, or Children, that is, the Pupils, or Scholars of the Prophets, young
Students taught and trained up by them in the way of Learning, and Prophesying.

Gods blessing upon those Schools of the Prophets amongst the Jews was so
great, that upon many in them God bestowed the extraordinary Gift of
foretelling things to come, 2 Kings 2.3, 5. and diverse Miracles were wrought
for them: two at Gilgal, one in healing the deadly pottage, 2 King. 4.38.
another in feeding an hundred of them with twenty Loaves, verse 42, 43, 44. a
third at Jordan, in causing the Axe-head to swim, 2 King. 6.5, 6.

What an honor was it to these Schools of the Prophets, that Elijah went to
visit them, immediately before he was taken up to Heaven, 2 King, 2. as at
Beth-el, verse 2, 3. at Jericho, verse 4, 5.

In Babylon there were three famous Universities of the Jews, Nehardea, Sorah,
^xtorf. Com. Masorct. cap. 6. Alting. Acad. Hebr. p. 30, 31.
and Pumbeditha: erected by those that stayed there after the Captivity, and
returned not with their Brethren (as some conceive) or by their Posterity, for
the preservation of Religion, and the knowledge of the Law, which (as some
think) would have been lost, if they had not brought up their children in
Learning; because by living and conversing with the Chaldeans their Tongue was
corrupted; so that the Word of God delivered in it, without this remedy, would
not have been so intelligible and useful to them.

The same course was also requisite to be taken by those which returned into
their own Land; because their Language was then a Medley of Chaldee and Hebrew.
After which time the old and pure Hebrew remained only among learned men, and
was taught in Schools, as among us the learned Tongues are accustomed to be.
See Breerewoods Enquiries, cha. 9.

Afterward Learning, and Languages flourished in Judea, as may appear in that
seventy two learned men were sent to Ptolemy Philadelphus, to translate the
Hebrew Bible into Greek, (As Gellius in Noct. A^tic. lib. 6. cap. 17.)
that he might with it enrich his vast Library, consisting of almost 700000
Books, which was kept at Alexandria, a place renowned for the Schools of all
Liberal Arts. Strabo lib. 14.
Here Euclid set up a Mathematic School; after which, till the Times of the
Saracens, there was scarce any excellent Mathematician, that was not either
born, or educated at Alexandria.

Here also was an Academy of the Jews (see Hottinger, Eccles. Hist. part. 1.
cap. 2.) Vossius de Scient. Mathem. cap. 15. Antiqu. Jud. lib. 12. cap 1. and
lib. 14. cap. 14.
who were a great part of the Citizens, as Josephus relates. Of this place was
Apollos, Acts 18.24.

The Jews dwelt in other places of Egypt, in Cyrene, and all other Nations,
Joseph. ibidem.
being dispersed in the Countries of their Conquerors in the several Empires,
and distinguished into the Babylonian and Greek dispersion: the first made
under the Chaldean, the second under the Macedonian Empire, of which we read
John 7.35. -- Will he go (...), to the Jews dispersed among the Greeks in Asia,
or Egypt? They, being dispersed among other Nations, always endeavored to keep
their Schools, which they called Synagogues, wherein they interpreted the Law,
wherein they conferred and disputed about the Scriptures, Acts 6.9.


Now, out of all Nations, whither they were scattered, some of all sorts went
to Jerusalem, and dwelt there, at or before our Savior's time. For, Acts 2.5.
it is said, There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every
Nation under Heaven, Parthians, Medes, etc. the Dwellers in Asia, in Egypt, and
about Cyrene, and Strangers of Rome.

The Cause hereof was either,

1. That Jerusalem being the Metropolis of Religion and Knowledge, the Jews
sent their Sons to be instructed there, as Cornelius a Lapide conceives.

2. Or, as Dr. Lightfoot (on Acts 2.5.) thinks, because the whole Nation had
then a general expectation of the Messiah about that time, as he clears both
from Scripture (out of Luke 2.38. and 3.15. and 19.11.) and their own Writings.
This might make such multitudes flock to Jerusalem about this time, and take up
their residence, where they thought the royal Seat of the Messiah would be,
that so they might partake of the pomp and prosperity of his Kingdom. And that
the Jews of these several Nations had their distinct Synagogues there, is
intimated Acts 6.9. where we read, Diverse arose of the Synagogue of the
Libertines (that is, such, both Natural Jews and Proselytes, See Grotius and
Lightfoot on the place.
as had obtained the Roman Freedom) of the Cyrenians, of the Alexandrians, and
of them of Cilicia, and of Asia.

Hence the Jews tell of 480 See Lightfoot Centur. Chorographic. page 71. Juntus
de Academ. cap. 2.
Synagogues, and Houses of Learning in Jerusalem: for there used to be a House
of Learning joined with a Synagogue.

The Schools of the Jews, about our Savior's time, had very famous men; the
chief were Hillel, and Schammai (the former is said to have bred 80 eminent
Scholars) and Simeon Hillel's Son, whom diverse Learned Men See Hotting. Hist.
Eccles. Nov. Test. part. 1. cap. 9. A^^ing. Acad. Hebr. p 39. Lightfoot in Acts
5.34.
make the same with him that took Christ into his arms, Luke 2.25. To whom add
Gamaliel, Simeon's Son, and Paul's Master.

After the Destruction of Jerusalem, See Buxtorf. Tiber^as.
Schools for Learning were still held up by the Jews: and the Jews had their
Schools at Jafne, Zephoria, Cesarea, and Tiberias: and these declining, the
three forementioned in Babylon flourished very much, when Learned Jews went
thither from Palestine.

The Jewish Writers say, there were also a great number of Colleges in Bither
(a place in the Land of Canaan) destroyed by the Emperor Hadrian. -- Buxtorf.
Talmud. Lex. page 372.

Thus far of the Jewish Schools.

Dr. Willet upon 1 Samuel 19.19, 20. concludes out of Peter Martyr, That the
noble Foundation of Universities, and Schools of Learning, is grounded upon the
Example of the Prophets.

The same Author, upon Daniel 1.4. observes, that the Institution of Schools,
to train up youth in good Letters, was very ancient: as among the Egyptians,
where Moses was taught their Learning: and in Babylon, where Daniel and the
three children were taught the Learning and the Tongue of the Chaldeans. Among
the Grecians Athens was famous for the Study of Arts there was Plato's Academy,
hence Livy calls Greece Sal Gentium) and in Egypt Alexandria: yea, the rude
Indians had their Gymnosophists, and the Romans had their Colleges of Augures;
I may add their Philosophers and Rhetoricians.

The Persians and Arabians had their Magi. Grotius in Mat. 2.1.
The Gauls had their Druides.

All Sects whatsoever had their Schools to advance their Way. Stephen met with
some of them at Jerusalem, Acts 6.9. and Paul at Athens, Acts 17.18.

It is observed, that the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Babylonians, Persians,
Grecians, Romans, erected Schools, and by great Liberality, and other ways,
promoted Learning, and encouraged Scholars.

Now let us view the Schools of the Christians, See Alsted. Chron. cap. 30.
ultim. edit.
which, upon the Planting of the Gospel, were set up at Antioch and Alexandria;
the latter of which afforded many famous Men, as Clemens, Origin, Ammonius,
Athanasius, Didymus, etc.

That the Primitive Church had her Schools (wherein Youths did learn the
Principles of Religion, and the Liberal Arts, and heard the holy Scriptures
explaned) and that Care was taken for settling Schools every where, where
Churches were built, and for setting over them such Men as were invested with
eminent Piety and Learning, See Magdeb. Cent. 2. cap. 7. and Cent. 3. c. 7.
Ecclesiastical Histories do declare.

That there were many learned men in diverse places in the first Ages of
Christianity is an Argument, that there were Schools, in which they were
educated.

In the time of Constantine the great, when Religion had its free course, the
Christian Schools flourished, which were after shut up by Julian.

It is observable, that the University of Cambridge (to which Chronologers give
pre-eminence for Antiquity to most Universities in the World of a Christian
Foundation) was restored by Sigebert, As Isaacson, Alsted, Helvicus.
a great Promoter of Christianity, presently upon the Conversion of the
East Angles (much furthered by him) about the year of Christ 631. For there was
a British Academy there long before: of which some make Lucius, the first
Christian King of the Britains, the Founder. But it being ruined by the Saxons,
and the Britains shut up in Wales, Dubritius (a great Champion of the Truth
against the Pelagians, as was also David, his Scholar, who held a Synod against
their Errors) instituted an Academy (in the latter end of the fifth Century) on
the River Wye, and after at Caer-lion on Usk in Monmouthshire, where many
eminent Men were educated. Of which see Mr. Fuller's Church History of Britain.

This Necessity and Use of Schools, Universities, and Learning, is as great now
under the Gospel (if not greater in some respects) as ever it was under the Old
Testament. And God has plentifully furnished all Countries that have
entertained the Gospel of Christ, especially all the reformed Churches in
Europe, with famous Schools and Academies: and he has wonderfully blessed them
(as these in England, See Dr. Arrowsm^h, 1. Orat. Antiweigel. p. 3.
Scotland, Ireland, and those in the Low Countries, in Germany, the Palatinate,
Bohemia) so that these Universities have trained up, and sent forth learned,
able, eminent Scholars, and godly Men, choice, useful Instruments of God's
Glory and Service, both in Church and Commonwealth.

The use and need of Schools and Universities (which is evident in the holy
Scriptures, and by the light of Reason, and practice, and experience of all
Nations) as they are the means of Learning, Qui vult finem vult media. Fints
est nobilior mediis.
infers and evinceth the need of Learning (as it is the end thereof) especially
for the Ministers of the Gospel.

As there is necessity of Schools, and Universities, so of study and industry
in them, for the attainment of Learning. For we cannot expect God should
communicate these Gifts to us by Miracle, or immediate infusion of the Spirit
(as he did to his Apostles) but they must be acquired through the use of
ordinary Means forementioned; which to contemn, or neglect, and depend upon
immediate and miraculous Infusions and Revelations, is to tempt the good Spirit
of God, and to provoke him to give us up to strong delusions, and to give heed
to seducing Spirits, and to doctrines of Devils. Inspiration (of such common
gifts) must be supplied by Education. The way Paul directed Timothy unto (even
in reference to Ministerial abilities) was, Give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy
4.13, etc. meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all, ver. 15. As Timothy had not health by Miracle, but
in the use of Means, 1 Timothy 5.23. so neither had he Gifts for the Ministry by
Miracle, but by Study.

In the Platform of Church Discipline, agreed upon in the Synod at Cambridge in
New England, cap. 6. number. 6. it is said, This we gladly acknowledge, that
Schools are both lawful, profitable, and necessary, for the training up of such
in good Literature, or Learning, as may afterward be called forth unto the
office of Pastor or Teacher in the Church.

Scholae non immerito vocantur Emporia and Mercaturae bonarum literarum:
Scminaria Ecclesiae: armamentaria Reipublicae: vivaria Oeconomiae: officinae
Pietatis: magistrae Humanitatis: fontes Honestatis: scaturigines Utilitatis:
nervi Morum and Disciplinae: horti Gratiarum: and uno verbo Cornu-copia
omnimodae felicitatis -- O felices Ecclesias, quibus haec pietatis domicilia
sunt adjuncta! Alsted. in Orat. de causis corrupt. Schol.

Of the causes, and uses of Public Divinity Schools, see Zanch. tom. 7. orat.
1. -- who says in his fourth Tom. lib. 1. These. 2. in quartum praeceptum page
812. -- It should be the great care of a pious Prince (or Supreme Magistrate)
that, beside the public and Ecclesiastical Ministry, Schools should be
constituted, wherein beside Humane Learning, and the Liberal Arts, the holy
Doctrine of Religion should be faithfully delivered to youth, to conserve
heavenly Doctrine in the Church, etc. and that maintenance should be provided
for both. Afterward we see (says Zanchy) that the Gentiles, and all Nations,
Page 813.
that were not altogether Barbarous, took care hereof; whereby their Religion
might be conserved, and propagated, for they saw, Sine Scholis non posse
consistere vel Religionem, vel etiam Politiam; that without Schools neither
Religion, nor Policy could consist: -- that Nature it self should teach a
Christian Prince, that it is his office to take care of Schools, and Colleges.

He adds, Jeroboamus ille impius, Rex Apostatarum ab Ecclesia, etc. That wicked
Jeroboam King of Apostates from the Church, and Kingdom of Juda, as he
corrupted Religion, so he also overthrew the Schools in the Towns of the twelve
Tribes; because he knew that the purity of Doctrine and Religion was conserved
there by the faithful Prophets. But afterward Elias and Elisha (his Disciple)
knowing that Religion could not be kept pure without Schools, restored them:
and when the wicked Kings had transferred the Revenues, which were due to
maintain the Schools, partly to their own private use, and partly to
slatterers, many good men contributed of their own substance to the maintenance
of Students, who, being content with a little, defended true Doctrine stoutly
against the Priests of Baal.

Object. Does not Beza in his marginal Note on Acts 6.9. call Universities
Flabella Satanae, Satan's slaps to keep away slyes? Does not Luther call them
Cathedras pestilentiae, and Antichristi luminaria? the seats of pestilence, and
lights of Antichrist? Does not another call them the Synagogues of perdition,
the pits of the Abyss, by the smoke whereof the sun of the Gospel is obscured.

Answ. What some worthy men have spoken of Jewish and Popish Universities, See
Dr. Arrowsmiths Orat. 1. Antiweigel. page 3.
that others have, out of little Candor, and great fury, transferred to
Universities reformed, as what Beza spoke of the Jewish Academies (his words
are, Academiae jamolim falsis Doctoribus addictae) and what Luther, and others
spoke of the Pontifician or Popish Academies.

But the corruptions of some will not prejudice the Usefulness of Universities
in general, or of others Reformed, and free from the same infection.

SECT. III. Of Religion flourishing, when Learning abounded.
THe second Argument, Argum. 2.
to prove the usefulness of Learning.

Learning has not been in the same state in all Ages since Christ, but ebbing
and flowing like the water, waxing and waning like the Moon. But this is
observable, that in those Ages wherein Learning abounded most, Religion has
flourished, and the Truth of God has had most Champipions, Defenders and
Witnesses of it, and for it.

The fourth Century was, as it is called, Chronol. ad Annum. 365.
a Learned Age. Hoc tempore fulserunt in Ecclesia Dei clarissima lumina, says
Bucholcer. Many famous Lights shone in the Church of God in this time, who were
the Hammers of Heretics.

The fifth Century was the like. These two Centuries for choice of Learned men,
were compared to the golden Age, and are styled the two Learned Ages.

In the sixth and seventh Century there was (as Authors observe) a great decay
in knowledge, and scarcity of able men to defend Truth, and furnish the Church
withal. There were few in Italy then, as Baronius observes -- (haud in promptu
esset, Annal. Tom. 8. A^n. 593. number. 62.
qui utriusque linguae peritus esset) who were skilled both in Greek and Latin.

Yea Gregory the Great, who lived in the seventh Century who was, In his
Critic. Sacr. lib. 4. cap. 29.
(as Rivet says) -- Primus Papa and ultimus Episcopus Romanus, the last Bishop
of Rome, and the first Pope; or the last of the good Bishops of Rome, and the
first of the bad ones: This Gregory professes that he was ignorant of the
Greek Tongue, Gregor. Tom 2. 1 p^st. lib. 9.
lib. 6. Epist. 29. Nam nos nec Graecum novimus.

That ignorant Age was a declining age, wherein men came short of their
Predecessors in some Truths, as even Gregory himself did; therefore it affords
few, and those not full Testimonies of the truth.

The Ages of the Church (says a learned man) resemble the stars of the sky.
Dr. Featly, Of the Names of visible Protest. in all Ages.
In some Ages we may see many and glorious lights, likestars of the first and
second Magnitude: in other Ages there are few Authors of any Note, or bright
luster (whose writings have come to Posterity) and in some Ages none but
obscure and unknown Authors.

The same Author says, that after we have passed the eighth Age of the Church,
we fall into Cimmerian darkness.

Of the ninth Age Bellarmine cannot speak with patience -- Saeculo hoc nullum
extitit indoctius, Lib. 4. De Romano pontifice cap. 12, ad linem.
aut infeliciu^^ in quo qui Mathematicis aut Philosophiae operam dabat, vulgo
Magus putabatur. There was no Age more unlearned, or unhappy, then this; in
which whosoever studied the Mathematics, or Philosophy, was commonly accounted
a Magician. This is called an unhappy Age, empty of men famous for wit, or
learning, in which the light of knowledge was not to be found, no not in Popes,
Bishops, or Princes: but this Age was full of palpable Egyptian darkness: and
it may be said of this Age, that it yielded no eminent men, Catholics, or
Heretics.

As this ninth Age, so the tenth, and some other after, were barren of Learned
Writers: Dr. ^eatly.
and therefore no marvel (says my Author) if the Harvest we gather in these
Ages of the Professors of the Truth, and defenders thereof by writing, be very
thin.

In the tenth Century Learning was decayed by the fall of the Roman Empire,
great corruption grew in this Century or thousandth year, Bi^ck. P^^^est. (...).
wherein (as some think) Satan was let loose. For at this time, Rev. 20.3.
they of Rome forbad to marry; and indulged uncleanness themselves: -- they
also devised a carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament.

This ignorant Age was a Monkish Age, much cumbred with Monkery, or with the
dotages of Monks and Legendary Fables; wherein the Monks devised subtle tricks
to delude the people, as the Oracles of the Holy Rood, etc. and that illiterate
herd of Monks and Friars bore the greatest sway, and the blind led the blind
into the pit.

In the fourteenth Century (as some compute it) Learning began to revive, Idem.
there being a general Resurrection of all good Learning (a little before the
receiving of the Gospel) at which the Monks were mad. For as in the first
Plantation of the Gospel in Europe, Mellific^i Theolog. page 716.
as Mr. Trap observes, God shipped the Arts before into Greece, that they might
be as Harbingers unto it, as Tertullian speaks; so in these latter Ages the
Lord, intending a Reformation of Religion, set up the Turk to overrun Greece;
and by the cruelty of the Turks, used against the Grecians (such as they
abhorred) and by God's Providence overruling it, diverse learned men among the
Greeks, left (as exiles) those parts, and fled into these Western parts; and by
their means the knowledge of Letters, and study of Tongues, especially the
Greek and Latin, began to spread abroad through diverse parts of the West.
These were God's first Instruments (says Mr. Trap) to restore humane Learning,
that was almost lost out of the world -- as Chrysoloras, Trapezuntius, Gaza,
Argyrophylus, Chalcondylas, Cydonius, and other. In like sort also afterward
John Capnio brought the use of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues into Germany.

In the beginning of this Age Hebrew was first taught in Oxford. Isaacson's
Chronol. ad Ann. Christ. 1314.


In this Age knowledge increased very much by the means of Printing,
which Art is said to be first invented at Strasburg in Germany by John
Guttenburg. Hereby the Languages were divulged, and good Learning was generally
communicated, and Books were more easily dispersed then formerly the Manuscrips
could be. Shortly after, there were printed at Paris, Venice, Antwerp, and
diverse other places, the Works of sundry Learned men, stirred up by God to
fetch the Arts back out of banishment. Page 716, and 717.
Mr. Trap names diverse of them. After that Humane Learning began thus to
reflourish, and lift up the head, Divinity also, that had been shamefully
obscured and slurried with needless and endless Doubts and Disputes, was
vindicated and illustrated by the knowledge of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.

In this fourteenth Age (as also in the fifteenth and sixteenth Ages) God
raised up diverse Worthies, who, by their Confessions, Writings, and Martyrdom
gave a great and glorious Testimony to the Gospel of Christ, and the Truths
thereof, as Wickliff, Huss, Hierom of Prague; after them Luther, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, and many others.

Then grew up that golden Age of gracious and excellent Divines, famous and
matchless for depth of Learning, and height of Holiness.

If the Times of greatest Ignorance, Neglect, and Contempt of humane Learning,
were the Times, wherein Errors most prevailed, Superstition, and Idolatry was
advanced, and Truth suppressed; and Popery did not fall, till Learning did
rise: and if Religion flourished, and was best defended, when Learning most
abounded, then Learning is useful, and needful for the Ministers of the Gospel.

SECT. IV. Learning qualifies for all public Employments.
HUmane Learning qualifies, Argum. 3.
and is needful for all Persons in public Places, and Employments, as Kings,
Counselors, Judges, Magistrates, Lawyers, Physicians (for who would not take
advice of Learned Lawyers about their Estates, and of Learned Physicians for
their Bodies) and indeed for every ingenuous Employment.

Henry the First, King of England, was bred up in Learning, and such a Prizer
of it, as he used to say,
That An unlearned King was but a crowned Ass.

Then Learning is most needful for a Minister, to fit and furnish him thoroughly
for the work of the Ministry, considering that no calling requires more
abilities, or acquired parts, then the Ministry, which work

I. Is most Important, Weighty, and Worthy: for it is the Minister's office to
be conversant in the Matters of God, and of Souls, of Heaven, and of Eternity,
which are of the greatest Interest, and highest Concernment, and of the
largest, and longest Consequence.

II. Is most comprehensive, and manifold: As

1. To give the Sense, clear the Difficulties, reconcile the Differences, and
seeming Repugnancies of the Scriptures.

2. To handle positively all Points of Religion, and to discuss and determine
Controversies, and Doubts about them.

3. To resolve and satisfy Cases of Conscience, and Scruples.

4. Ephesians. 4.24. Gal. 5.1.
To detect false Teachers, and discover the many Evils, Artifices, Cheats,
Fallacies, and Sophistries of Seducers, and Impostors, and of Satan in them,
whereby many poor simple Souls are deluded.

Therefore says Paul, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.6. Do not
they call for the best accomplishments?

SECT. V. Satan makes use of Learning to oppose the Truth.
LEarning is necessary to the Ministers of the Gospel, Argum. 4.
for defense of the Truth, because Satan makes much use of Learning to oppose
the Truth, and fight against Religion, to maintain his Cause, uphold and
promote his Kingdom: and Satan makes choice and use of Learned men to be his
Agents and Champions, Advocates for Error, and Adversaries to the Truth of God.
To this end

1. Satan stirred up Heathens, who were endued with Learning, to write books
against the Christian Religion, as Porphyry (who was one of Julians
bosom-birds) Celsus, Symmachus, and others.

2. Then Satan raised up Heretics within the Church, men of corrupt minds,
destitute of the Truth (but of Parts, and Learning) to devise, defend, and
spread Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies, and resist the Truth of God with all
their might, as Arrius, Nestorius, Macedonius, Donatus, Pelagius, and many
others.

3. How many learned Men has Satan employed, and engaged since, in later
times, to be defenders of Popery, or Romish-Idolatry (as Jesuits, and many
others) of Arminianism, Socinianism, Antinomianism, Anabaptism, Familism,
Libertinism; and of several old Heresies, newly raked up and revived?

It has been the Jesuits brag, that Imperium literarum est penes Jesuitas, the
Empire of Learning is within their Dominion, and that we have not a Scholar-
Protestant.

4. How has Satan excited the Papists (those friends of Antichrist, and
builders of Babylon) to be at great pains, cost, and charges to advance
Learning with them, that they may the better overthrow the Truth of God with
us. Hence it is that they have errected so many Universities in Spain, France,
Italy.

How are the Colleges of the Jesuits, throughout the Pope's Dominions,
promoted so as to allure even foreiners thereunto.

Then, do not the Protestant Reformed Churches stand in great need of Men,
eminently Learned, to be able Defenders of the Faith, and strenuous maintainers
of the Truths of Christ, against all Heathenish, Heretical, and Schismatical
Adversaries thereof; whether secret underminers, or open opposers? to convince,
and confute Learned, Subtle, Witty Adversaries, as Heretics, Jesuits, and
diverse others?

May not Learning (being well used) be as great a help, or advantage to the
Truth and Cause of God, as Learning abused is an hinderance to it? an Engine,
or Bulwark for Errors? Learning (as one says) is part of the defensive Arms of
true Religion. Did not the Israelites need Smiths to make them Weapons, to
defend themselves against the Philistines, as the Philistines did to offend
Israel? It is very observable, how God accomplished some of his servants, in
all ages, with excellent Gifts, Graces, and Learning to refute, silence, and
nonplus the most acute, and learned Adversaries of God's Truth, and Grace,
which those times produced, as Moses to withstand the learned Egyptians;
Athanasius to confute Arrius; and Austin, that learned Father, to oppose
Pelagius; Jewel, Whitaker, Rainolds, Cartwright, Fulk, Perkins, men of great
Learning, to refute the Jesuits; Moulin, Ames, Twiss, to confute Arminius.

Yea, the Devil can and does sometime make use of Learning himself to serve his
turn; as he did in his speaking out of the possessed man, See Mr. Rich.
Rothwel's life in Mr Clark's Book of Lives.
John Fox in Nottinghamshire, to Mr. Richard Rothwel: he quoted many Scriptures
out of the Old and New Testament, both in Hebrew and Greek; he cavilled, and
played the Critic, and backed his Allegations with Sayings out of the Fathers
and Poets, in their own languages, which he readily quoted. So that the Company
trembled to hear such things from the Man (who understood not Learning, nor
moved either tongue or lip) or rather from the Devil in the Man. But Mr.
Rothwel, being not only a gracious Man, but a great Scholar, was enabled by
God to detect the Devil's Sophistry. -- Was not his Humane Learning then of use
to him?

SECT. VI. Satan seeks by obstructing Learning to undermine Religion.
THe Necessity and Utility of Learning does further appear by another Design of
Satan, Argum. 5.
which is, to undermine Religion by the obstructing of Learning, and
discouraging thereof. This he has practiced by his Instruments, three
especially, scil. Julian, Antichrist, and Opinionists.

1. Julian the Apostate, who endeavored to suppress all Christian Religion by
repressing the Schools of Learning: forbidding to Christians the use of humane
Authors, of Philosophy, and the Liberal Arts; telling them in scorn, that their
own sublime Learning might suffice. He prohibited the Children of Christians to
be educated in Learning. He decreed, none should study in any School, who would
not adore Idols, to deprive Men of Learning and Abilities to preach and defend
the Christian Faith, and confute the Heathens: for by this means, says he,
Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 8.
propriis pennis configimur; ex nostris enim libris arma capiunt, etc. We are
beaten with our own Weapons. This is like the Philistines Design upon Israel,
that there should be no Smith in all the Land of Israel to make them Swords or
Spears. 1 Samuel 13.19.


2. Antichrist ( Satan's eldest Son) this was one of his Projects, to banish
Arts and Tongues, and to overspread all with Barbarism, which abandoneth
Religion, and excludes Learning, and succeeds it as Darkness does the Light.
There was a time when Graece nosse suspectum erat, Hebraice fere Haereticum: to
understand Greek was a matter of suspicion, but to know Hebrew was almost
Heresy.

Pope Paul the second pronounced them Heretics, See Platina in vita Paul^ 2.
who should commemorate the Name of Academy, vel serio, vel joco, either in
jest, or in earnest: he exhorted the Romans not to bring up their Children in
the Studies of Learning, telling them, it was sufficient if they could write
and read: he so hated Humane Learning, etc.

How vigorously have the Papists driven on this Design to hinder Learning (as
much as they could) among the Protestants, of purpose to disable them, and
disarm them of Weapons to defend the Truth of Christ, and to oppugn their
Romish Doctrines and Tenets: but they have by all means promoted Learning in
all kinds among themselves, to defend themselves, and offend us; to oppose,
yea, to overcome the Truth, if they could; but that is great, and will prevail.

That it is a Jesuitical Design to decry Learning and Universities, and thereby
to extirpate the Protestants Religion, appears by Adam Contzen, a subtle
Jesuit, in his Politics, lib. 2. cap. 18. sect. 6. who prescribes this, among
diverse others Means for the introducing of Popery, to banish (Protestant)
Ministers out of the Commonwealth, and that at once, if it can conveniently be;
if not, insensibly, and by degrees. For the Truth, when it wants Patrons, will
fall, without striking a stroke. Antiministerial Designs are Antichristain
Designs, into which many are seduced, and which are carried on by Jesuitical
craft; that there should be no learned men to detect Popish Impostures, and
refute their Errors.

3. This Design Satan carries on by Enthusiasts also, and tumultuous
Opinionists, misled and acted by a spirit of Error, Delusion, and Faction,
giddiness, and perverseness; as those Anabaptists, Familists, and Libertines in
Germany, who abased and abandoned humane Learning, and burnt all Books save the
Bible.

Should not all the Reformed Churches indulge and encourage the Universities,
and Nurseries of good Learning, as much as they can, for the Advancement of
Learning, and indeed of Religion thereby? Ought not all, that would approve
themselves the Builders of Sion, be active, to the utmost of their power, to
countermine these dangerous Designs of Satan and his Instruments? Dr. Arrowsm.
Orat. 1. Antiweigel.
It is a glory to the Transylvanians, that they lately founded Alba Julia; and
to the Hollanders, that they erected an illustrious School and College,
Collegium Auriacum, at Breda; and to the Germans, that they restored or renewed
the Academy at Heidelberg. Is it not an Honor to the English to uphold and
maintain the two famous Universities of Cambridge and Oxford in their just
Privileges, due Revenues, Honor, and flourishing State? to give all the
Encouragement they can to Learning, and not to detract or diminish the least of
any of these from them? Did not the Parliament acknowledge, that, for the
Propagation of the Gospel in New England, Universities, Schools and Nurseries
of Literature must be settled there, for instructing and civilizing them? See
the Act for promoting the Gospel in New England.

Even Leo the first,
Emperor, professed that he would rather have Philosophers then Soldiers in his
Pay.

SECT. VII. Testimonies concerning Learning.
LEarning has been highly esteemed, Argum. 6.
and much commended by the ancient Fathers, and all the Christian Reformed
Churches, and by the most learned, orthodox, godly, judicious Modern Divines,
and by others also, for the necessity, commodity, and excellency thereof.

Luther speaks thus, Luther. Epist. Tom. 1.
-- Vehementer and toto coelo errare censeo, qui Philosophiam, and Naturae
cognitionem, inutilem putant Theologiae. I make account they err exceedingly,
who think Philosophy, and the knowledge of Nature, useless to Divinity. -- And
in another place he says, Epist. Tom. 2.
Ego persuasus sum sine literarum peritia prorsus stare non posse sinceram
Theologiam; sicut hactenus ruentibus and jacentibus literis miserrime and
cecidit and jacuit. Quin video, etc. I am persuaded, that pure (or sincere)
Divinity can in no wise stand without the Skill of Learning: as hitherto
Learning salling and lying, it (scil. Divinity) has most miserably both fallen
and lain. Yea (says he) I see there was never a remarkable revelation of the
Word of God made, but first, as by Baptists, Forerunners of it, he prepared a
way by Tongues and Learning, rising and flourishing.

In his Book of the Institution of Children Luther thus commends the Tongues,
Tom. 7. page 442. a.
-- Vaginarum vice sunt Linguae, in quibus Gladius ille Spiritus, etc. -- Arcae
sunt, etc. The Tongues are as it were the Scabbards, in which the Sword of the
Spirit, the Word of God, is sheathed. They are the Chests, or Cases, which keep
this precious thing, this noble Jewel. The Storehouses, out of which a Preacher
may fetch Gospel-provision. The Cups, wherein we carry about this wholesome
Potion: and the Baskets, in which the loaves with the fishes, and the very
fragments are kept, that they be not lost. He adds, Page 444.^.
-- Quanquam and nobis obscurum non est, Spiritu Dei omnia prorsus fieri; tamen
nisi suppetias mihi tulissent Linguae, per hoc quod literarum sacrarum certo
and infallibili me constabilissem intellectu, sane priore in salebra misero
mihi cum inimicis Evangelii etiamnum haerendum foret. In which, and the
following words he declares, That if he had not been helped out by the Tongues,
he had still stuck where he was, with the Enemies of the Gospel, in the mire of
Popery: and in page Page 445. a.
445. he seriously bewails it, that he had not read more Poets and Historians.
-- Quanta nunc ducor poenitentia, ob non plures and Poetas and Historiographos
a me lectos.

Melancthon, Melancthon.
in his Epistle before this book of Luther's, delivers himself thus, -- Linguas
profecto praecidi oportet iis, qui pro concionibus passim a literarum studiis
imperitam juventutem dehortantur. Nam admissa Barbary, etc. They deserve
(says he) to have their Tongues cut out, who dehort youth from the study of
learning. For we see that when Barbarism has been admitted, Religion has been
weakened. And I greatly fear lest things come to the same pass, except we with
all our might defend learning, that most excellent gift of God.

Quantum Ratio dat Homini (says Casaubon) tantum Literatura dat Rationi,
Casaubon.
Religio Literaturae, and Religioni Gratia. What Reason does give to a Man,
that does Learning give to Reason, Religion to Learning, and Grace to Religion.

Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs gives this testimony to Learning. Burtough's
Heart-Divisions upon Hosea 10.2. p. 88, 89.
There is (says he) a great delusion in many men's hearts, that makes them
think it to be half Popery to give any respect to learning. Although the abuse
of learning has done much evil, (against that much has been, and may be said)
yet I dare avow this, that never, since the beginning of the world, could a man
be found to speak against learning, but an ignorant man. Neither is it like,
nay I may aver, it is impossible, that any but such will be found to the end of
the world. Learning has so much of God in it, that it never had, nor will have
any enemy, but ignorance.

Dr. Rainolds says, Rainolds in his Funeral Sermon for Mr. Langley in Acts
7.22.
Humane Learning is a noble gift of God, and a great honor and ornament to the
most excellent men. All Secular Learning is the knowledge of God's works,
aeternae veritatis particula, a small emanation from eternal verity.
Philosophical and Mathematical Learning is the knowledge of his works of
Creation: Historical and Political lea^ning, the knowledge of his works of
Providence: Moral, Oeconomical, and Civil learning is the knowledge of those
remainders of his image and law, which are left in the mind of men for their
direction and conviction: Grammatical, Rhetorical and Logical learning is the
knowledge of the use of that Reason, which God gives us for imparting our
minds, and evidencing our conceptions one unto another.

-- In regard of the Church and Truths of Religion, learning is useful as an
Handmaid, in a way of attendance thereupon, and subserviency thereunto.

Dr. Gauden.
Gauden says, The excellent Gifts of all sorts of good learning are as the
string to the bow, and as feathers to the arrows of Truth; herewith Satan has
found himself much galled, hampered and chained.

-- Learning is a Glass, wherein the fair faces and beauty of Religion and
Reason are best represented. -- It is an intellectual beauty, and a mean of
knowing something daily more excellent in the Creature, or Creation, then it
did before.

Pitsaeus says, Pitsaeus in Procemio Relat. retum Anglic. page 23.
Homines quo magis ignari, and a bonis literis and disciplinis alieni, etc. The
more men are ignorant and estranged from all Arts and Sciences, the nearer they
come to the life of beasts and savages. For unless the powers of the mind (by
which we are distinguished from brutes) be by liberal Sciences ordered and
modified, all their virtue will degenerate, not only into a likeness to, but
into a degree of rudeness beyond beasts. -- That of the Poet is true, --
Didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.


Sigismund the Emperor (as some relate) was much affected, that neither he,
Bucholcer. Chronol. Anno 1437.
nor any of his Courtiers, or Counselors, were able (at the Council of
Constance) to answer a foreign Ambassador in the Latin Tongue: therefore he
began to learn Latin when he was old. -- And when some of his Nobles, that had
no learning, (and therefore hated it) disdained that he preferred some men of
mean degree before them, merely for their learning; he answered that he had
good reason to honor Scholars, as those that were singularly graced and gifted
by God. Knights and Lords, said he, I can make in a day as many as I list, but
Scholars God only can make, from whom comes every good and perfect Gift.

It Is true, many in these days decry Learning, and lay it as low as they can,
as unnecessary, if not dangerous; and they disesteem and dishonor the learned.
But are they not (diverse of them at least) fanatic persons, who speak evil of
the things they know not, both Tongues and Sciences? or do not some of them
sometimes use it, (or rather abuse it, as I have heard) even when they speak
against it? and discommend others wares, to get the better price for their own
silly stuff? Usually they, that speak against learning, decry Reason (which
they may as well do, seeing learning is but the improvement of reason) when
they are not able to speak one word of sense against it, without its help: Just
as those that defame Logic must be beholding to it, to frame their Arguments
for them? But such men, by disclaiming reason, tie themselves to oppose
learning without any reason, and so disoblige others regard to what they say.
They are like those Tradesmen, who keep their shops dark on purpose, that they
may better put off their bad wares. These are Fauxes (as one calls them) with
dark lanthorns to blow up all.


It is accounted the character of wicked men to hate learning, and design the
ruin of it: and some observe, that they never read in any Histories of any,
but evil men, that were opposers of it.

Enemies to learning are no friends to the learned, (for they ordinarily
bespatter and vilify them) nor to Religion, (as has been declared) no nor to
Reason, or to natural gifts and abilities, which are much improved, heightened,
and perfected thereby. For what are Arts but reason refined, rightned and
ripened; or well regulated and well ordered, as far as the subjects and
capacity of them does extend.

SECT. VIII. Of the Learning of the Ancient Fathers.
GOd has used such as the greatest instruments of his glory, of good in his
Church, and of service in their Generation, who have been endued with, yea
excelled in humane learning; as I. The Ancient Fathers. II. The Modern Divines.


I. The Ancient Fathers were strenuous defenders of the Truth, justifiers of
Christian Religion against the Jews, and against the Heathen, (discovering to
the world the vanity of their gods, the absurdity and impiety of Paganism) and
against proud Heretics; and the vindicators of it from unjust aspersions, and
injurious calumnies.

They were all learned men, or bred and brought up in learning. I will set down
some hints hereof, which I find in several Authors concerning some of them, in
reference to the Centuries (or ages) after Christ, in which they lived, as the
Writers of their lives have placed them.

Justine Martyr, In the second Century.
of a Philosopher (for he was at first a Platonist, and learned) became both a
Christian, and a Martyr. He labored and suffered much for the Religion of
Christ. He writ a book against all Heresies, and famous Volumes against Marcion
the Heretic; he writ also Apologies for the Christians. He was renowned in all
ancient Histories, for his great knowledge both in Religion and Philosophy.

Irenaeus was educated from his childhood in Philosophy, and Arts. He was
admired of all for his excellent learning and skill in humane and in divine
things. Tertullian calls him Omnium doctrinarum curiosum exploratorem, an
exquisite searcher out of all learning. He was an exact resuter of Heresy. He
confuted the Valentinians, and Gnostics, who were the inventers (as one says)
of the most Chemical Divinity that ever came into the fancy of man. He was
laborious and prosperous in his Ministry, and converted almost the whole city
(of Lions in France) from Paganism.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Jerome says of him, Meo judicio fuit omnium
eruditissimus: quid in illius libris indoctum? etc. That in his opinion he was
the most learned. Daniel Heinsius says, In the Dedication of Clemens his Works
to Gustavus Adolphus.
He was second to few in Antiquity, to none in Learning: and that he labored to
be an healer of the superstition of the Greeks, which at that time invaded the
world. Cui primo omnium errori vir sanctissimus gravissimo volumine medetur.
His writings contain a treasure of divine and humane learning, and are full of
eloquence. He excelled in History, and in confutation of heresy.

Tertullian was skilled in all kind of learning, Lactantius.
and of chiefest esteem amongst the Latin Authors. Jerome says, that his books
against the Gentiles contain cunctam saeculi doctrinam, all the learning of his
age, or all sorts of learning. Pamelius in vita Tertulliam.
He was diligently conversant in the Mathematics, and in Histories. Scult.
Medull.
He opposed in those times with great zeal the Heretics, as Marcion, the
Valentinians, Praxeas, Hermogenes, as also the Jews. He wrote a learned Apology
in behalf of the Christians, who were then falsely accused and persecuted; and
he demonstrated to the very Heathen the verity of Christian Religion, and the
innocence of Christians.

Origin was (as is reported of him) from In the third Century.
his infancy thoroughly grounded in all Learning; and he was accounted a Mirror
of Piety and Learning, of all sorts Humane and Divine. He had a great acuteness
in confuting the Philosophers, and those Arabians, who would have Souls to die
with their Bodies, and Berillus the Heretic, who denied the Eternity of Christ:
whom at length he reduced to the Truth; as he did Ambrose from the error of the
Marcionites. He was a great honorer of Martyrdom, a comforter of Martyrs. His
whole life was a continual study, he would read at his Meals.

Cyprian was first a Rhetorician, after a Learned godly Bishop, and at length a
glorious Martyr of Christ. He confuted Novatus the Heretic, whom he styles in
his Epistles an importunate Innovator, a murderer of Penitence.

Lactantius excelled all the Writers of the Church in Elegance, In the fourth
Century.
and luster of Language. Jerome says of him, that he was as it were a flood of
Tullian Eloquence. He wrote many Treatises, which may be read with profit, and
pleasure.

Athanasius was educated in all sorts of learning. He was a vigorous Opposer of
the Arrians, therefore he was called, The Hammer of the Arrian Heretics, by
whom he was extremely hated, because they perceived the acuteness of his wit,
Learning, and industry, in confuting of Heresies in the Nicene Council;
therefore he was exposed to great trouble. Theodoret calls him, The Bulwark of
Truth; Naziazen styles him, The great Trumpet and pillar of the Church. He was
great for his Learning, labors, sufferings, and constancy, and courage, even
when not only Bishops, but Emperors, Kingdoms, Armies, and Nations, were set
against him, yet the Emperor Constantine gave this character of him, Virum
plane divinum existimo. I hold him to be indeed a divine man.

Hilary was a man of excellent parts. In his Epistle presixed to his works.
Erasmus says, that he was Ob vitae sanctimoniam, insignem eruditionem, and
Eloquentiam admirabilem, aevi sui Lumen, the light of his Age for sanctity of
life, eminent Learning, and admirable Eloquence -- quanto stomacho saevit in
Arrianos, etc. He was a great Antagonist to the Arrians, whom he called,
Devils, Antichrists, blasphemers, pests; he writ several books against them.
Jerome calls him The Trumpet of the Latin Tongue, (perhaps because he was the
first that confuted the Arrians in Latin) and the Confessor of our time.

Cyril of Jerusalem, a man of great Learning, Prudence, and Piety,
Ecclesiastical Writers testify of him, that he was Fortissimus Christi
Athleta, and Orthodoxae fidei assertor constantissimus. A most valiant champion
of Christ, and most constant defender of the Orthodox faith. He suffered many
persecutions through the rage of the Arrians.

Basil called Magnus, Greg. Nazianz. in vita Bahlii.
he was great every way, as in wit and Learning ( in omni doctrinae genere
summus, says Suidas) skilful in all the liberal Sciences, and in all the
Mathematics. Summus in cunctis apparuit, he was so excellent in every one, as
if he had studied that only one. Great in eloquence, ( Erasmus calls him the
Christian Demosthenes) great in contending for, and in defending the truth, in
confuting and convincing Heretics.

Gregory Nazianzene was Learned in Grammar, Vita Greg. Nazianz. a Greg.
Presbytero conscripta.
Rhetoric, Philosophy both Natural and Moral, Poetry, Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, in all the Liberal Arts: in the study of which he spent many years.
He was a man of great Authority and use in the Greek Churches: that who so
opposed his testimony was suspected of Heresy. He is called A living Library
of Philosophy and Divinity.

Epiphanius had great knowledge in the Hebrew, being educated by one Tryphon, a
Jew. He was a learned, pious Divine, Cornarius Medicus.
says Cornarius, who translated him out of Greek into Latin, which work he
undertook propter Authoris praes^ntiam, and operis raritatem, for the
excellency of the Author and rarity of the work. He was a man (says one) of a
very good, honest, John Daille.
and plain nature. He was semper Haereticorum acerrimus oppugnator, always a
sharp opposer of Heresies. He wrote a Learned book against 80 Heresies, which
contains variety of story in it. He purged all Cyprus from Heresies, and having
obtained an Edict from Theodosius the Emperor, he cast all the Heretics out of
the Island.

Ambrose was Learned in the Liberal Arts, and excellent in Eloquence. He was
very courageous for the truth. He denied the Emperor Theodosius entrance into
the Church, until he had publicly confesed his fault, scil. that miserable
slaughter caused by him at Thessalonica. Daille says he was one of the most
firm Pillars of the Church in his time. He was called (says another) orbis
Terrarum oculus: the eye of the world, an eye as bright as any other in the
world's orb in his time.

Gregory Nyssen, a famous man (as Suidas) omnique doctrina exuberans, abounding
with all Learning, and as excellent in Rhetoric as any of the Ancients. He was
the light and ornament of the Nyssen Church: a strenuous opposer of Eunomius
his Heresy; he was a diligent, reverent, studious reader of the holy
Scriptures, having a special eye to the proper and genuine sense of them.

Theodoret made such proficiency in Learning and piety by his own ingenuity,
and industry, through God's blessing, that he was made Bishop of Cyrus (a Town
in Syria) while he was yet a young man. One calls him, Orthodoxae pietatis
amantissimus propugnator, haereticaeque pravitatis fortissimus oppugnator. A
most loving propagator of Orthodox piety, and a courageous opposer of Heretical
pravity. He wrote much against the Heretics. He of himself condemned Nestorius,
and put stop to his Heresy. He reduced many in his Diocese to the truth, with
great labor, and hazard of life, who were infested with the pest of Marcion.
He wrote a volume against all Heresies; and an Ecclesiastical History, which is
very useful to the Church. Bellarmine calls him virum plane doctissimum, a very
Learned man, Another says, he had multifarium in omni disciplinarum genere
scientiam, manifold knowledge in all kind of Learnings.

Jerome was instructed at Rome (then the only Nursery of Learning) where he
profited much in all sorts of Learning, and afterward traveled over the
greatest part of Europe, to increase his knowledge, by viewing several
Libraries, and conferring with the most Learned men. He was a great Linguist,
hence called (...), excellent in Hebrew, well skilled in the Chaldee and Syriac.
His style is elegant. He was vir in saecularibus valde eruditus, Trithemius.
well versed in secular Learnings. Erasmus calls him facundissimum Ecclesiae
doctorem, the most Eloquent Doctor of the Church. He was the boldest and most
judicious censurer of the Ancients, John Daily.
and he happily improved a critical faculty upon them.

He wrote against the Pelagians: and was an extirpator of Heretics, and
defender of the truth, he read over all his Library, and learned Scriptures to
a word, and translated the Bible out of the Original into Latin.

Chrysostom studied hard the liberal Sciences and Philosophy, and afterward
Divinity and Piety; Erasmus.
he was famous for Eloquence and zeal. He was called os aureum, mellitissimus
Christi concionator, praecoque indefatigabilis, a most honey sweet, unwearied
Preacher of Christ, for his eloquent wisdom, and wise eloquence, throughout his
works Sanctity and Scholarship are joined in one. He was (...), the most
copious writer of any of the Greek Fathers now extant. A judicious man says of
him, A man cannot easily take Chrysostom amiss any where, especially in his
Moral Discourses. He was a zealous propagator of the Gospel to dark places, and
opposer of Idolatry and Heresy, and Heretics, as of the Marcionites, and the
Arrians. He was bold in reproving sin, and not fearing sufferings, as appears
by his speeches to Eudoxia the Empress. Nil inli peccacatum tunco.
Theodoret styles him eximium orbis terrarum luminare, The eminent light of the
whole world. He was so beloved and reverenced of all men, that, when he was
like to be silenced, the people cried out, Satius est ut sol non luceat, quam
ut non doceat Chrysostomus, We had better want the shining of the Sun, then the
preaching of Chrysostom.

Augustine was educated in Learning, In the fifth Century. Lossidius alias
Possidonius.
to the weakening of his Parents estate. He learned Grammar in his own city, and
Rhetoric at Carthage, He was saecularibus literis eruditus apprime, etc. very
learned in all the liberal Sciences: he writ of the Arts, as Grammar, Rhetoric,
Logic, Music, Philosophy, etc. He defended the truth against the Arrians,
Manichees, Pelagians, Circumcellians, Donatists, Priscillianists, and
whatsoever error else prevailed in his time. He had several sharp conflicts
with them, and confuted them by many Learned writings, as also by word of mouth
in Disputations, as he did Fortunatus, and Placentius, both stiff Arrians: and
thereby he convinced, and converted one Felix a Manichee, (that he recanted his
error, and joined to the Church) as he did also one Firmus, a rich Merchant and
a Manichee, by a digression in his Sermon (when he was out, and forgot the
subject he thought to prosecute, and fell upon a confutation of the Manichees)
this Firmus came afterward to him with tears, renouncing his error, and
promising reformation. Augustine was called Malleus Haereticorum, The Hammer of
the Heretics. Erasmus calls him acerrimum fidei Christianae propugnatorem, the
most sharp and valorous defender of the Christian Faith. Another calls him The
fairest flower of Antiquity. He was an instrument in God's hands of gaining
many Pagans to the knowledge of the truth. Dr. Sibbs says of him, that he
challenged the doctrine of Gods Predestination out of the hands of the enemies
of Grace, and flatterers of Nature, as being a man fitted with grace, learning,
and wit for such a conflict. No Scriptures are more faithfully handled by him,
then those that were wrested by his opposites, and such as made for the
strengthening of his own cause; in other writings he took more liberty. His
Scholars, Prosper and others, interessed themselves in the same quarrel:
Prosper, retaining Augustine's Doctrine, learnedly confuted the Pelagian
Heresy. Daniel Tossanus says, that the Palmary or Masterpiece of Augustine
was, that he, above all the other Fathers, and almost alone, being provoked by
the Pelagians, diligently discussed the Doctrine of Predestination, and of
Original Sin.

He only of all the Ancients wrote Books of Retractations: for, as he
professes in his seventh Epistle, he wrote by profiting, and profited by
writing. He always kept Scholars in his house quoad victum and amictum, -- with
food and raiment. His usual Prayer was, that when Christ came he might find
him aut precantem, aut praedicantem, either praying, or preaching.

Cyril of Alexandria was famous for Piety and Learning, he was President in the
Council at Ephesus, in which he condemned Nestorius and Pelagius, with their
Errors, very learnedly and judiciously: he spoke many elegant Sentences: he was
so renowned, that the Grecian Bishops (as it is reported) gat some of his
Homilies by heart, and rehearsed them to their people.

Fulgentius was Augustine's Scholar, In the sixth Century.
and followed him foot by foot, especially in ad Monimum, and ad Petrum, the
two best of his Works; he had great knowledge in the Greek and Latin Tongues:
he contended earnestly against the Arrians (whose Opinion then had overspred
all Africa) and other Heretics; and he suffered much for defending the Orthodox
Faith. He was extremely persecuted by the Arrians, yet would not seek revenge
(no not when he had opportunity) but would say, Plura pro Christo sunt
toleranda, We must suffer more for Christ then so: and as he answered Felix the
Arrian that dealt so ill with him, Christiani est non ulcisci sese, Deus enim
ulturus injuriam suis illatam.

Isidore was called by Casaubon, In the seventh Century.
pius and eruditus Scriptor, a godly learned Writer; he was admired for his
Learning and Eloquence: he could fitly accommodate his speech both to the
learned, and to the ignorant: it is said, He led an Angelical and Evangelical
Life in the flesh.

Venerable Bede was very learned in Philosophy, Astronomy, Poetry, in Greek,
Arithmetic, Rhetoric; but especially very conversant in, and studious of the
holy Scriptures: he was said to be the Honor of England, and the Mirror of his
Time for Learning: so famous for it, and for Piety, that he was sent for to
Rome to help to settle the Churches peace.

Damascen was educated in Learning, In the eighth Century.
got the knowledge of all the Liberal Sciences, then he studied the Scripture,
and Divinity: he was a diligent Preacher and Propagator of the Faith and Truth
of Christ, and a great Opposer of Heretics: he was called a great Star in the
Churches Firmament in that time when there was great darkness; but he by his
life and doctrine illuminated many.

Bernard had pregnant and admirable parts for wit, memory, and understanding, a
great Proficient in Learning, and had an excellent faculty in preaching. His
Sentences were stuffed (as one says) omni amoenitate and pietate, with all
amoenity and piety: he was in great repute for his sanctity of life and
doctrine.

Thus I have given a brief Account of the ancient Fathers, that they were
learned, whom God made eminently useful in, and to his Church. Let me add two
things by way of Caution:

1. Though they were learned and pious, yet they had their infirmities and
blemishes; and were subject to errors and failings even in their Writings, as
has been observed by many. See Daille's Treatise.

They were not acted with an infallible spirit (as the Penmen of sacred Writ
were) therefore they must be read with consideration and discretion; their
Writings must be tried by the Touchstone of God's Word. To be altogether exempt
from Errors is the Privilege of the holy Scriptures.

Diverse Divines have given Rules for the right understanding of the Fathers.
See Scultet. Medull. Patr. Dan. Synops. de Legendis Patribus, John Daille in
his Treatise concerning the right use of the Fathers.

2. Lest any should think these ancient Fathers had no need of their humane
Learning, or might have been as well without it; it is true they stood in need
of more Learning in some kind then they had attained, the want whereof was the
Cause of their Errors and Mistakes Ex. gr. Augustine, by reason of his good
insight into the Hebrew and Greek Tongue, fell short, and failed much of solid
Interpretation in his Expository Books. Luther instanceth in his Comment upon
the Psalms: he mentioned Hilary too. Ambrose also, by reason of his Ignorance
in the Tongues, erred often in his Expositions. See Luther in libello de Instit.
pueris, where he shows, that Patrum Errores in sacra Scriptura provenerunt ex
Linguarum ignorantia, page 442, 443, 444. The Errors of (some) of the Fathers
grew from their Ignorance of the Tongues. Had it not been better for them to
have had more knowledge thereof?

So much of the Learning of the Fathers.

SECT. IX. Of the Learning of the first Reformers.
Secondly, Now I shall show briefly the Learning of the Modern Divines, which
may be cast into two Ranks:

I. Those former, who were the happy Reformers of Religion, or honored by God
as Master Builders to lay the Foundation, and begin the Work of Reformation.

II. These later, who vigorously carried on the Work of Reformation.

I. The Learning of those former Divines, whom God raised up in pity to his
poor Church, when the Apostasy of Popery had so far overspread, and prevailed.
They were many of them learned, men of great skill in Arts and Tongues; and
others competently learned: and all, men of invincible courage, and
indefatigable pains, excited and qualified by God to be the Restorers of the
true Christian Religion from its bondage in Ignorance and Superstition; and
strong and stout Opposers of the Pope and Popery in the Points of Doctrine,
Worship, and Practice. These lived in (or about) the fourteenth and fifteenth
Centuries.

Berengarius lived in the dismal darkness, and depth of Popery: Century 14.
Ussertus de Christ. Eccles. succes. cap. 7. page 196, 197.
he profited in the School above his Equals; and was well-skill'd in the
Liberal Arts, an excellent Logician; of great account for his Learning and
Piety. He was expert in the Scriptures; and also in the Writings of the ancient
Fathers. He was a Champion for the Truth in the Point of Transubstantiation;
opposing the Corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. He had almost drawn
all Italy, France, and England to his Opinion. He was of a bold, undaunted
spirit and courage. His Life and Conversation was so unblameable, that therein
(as one says) he starved the Malice of all his Adversaries. Fuller.


Petrus Waldus, though he was not one of the Modern Divines, yet something is
observable in his Story, which is useful to our purpose. Alsted. Chronol.
He was a rich Citizen of Lions in France,
converted by seeing one fall down dead in the streets; upon which he betook
himself to teach and admonish his House and Friends to repent, and to study the
Scriptures himself: and he profited so well therein, that he translated diverse
parts thereof out of Latin into French. Friar Rainer, an Adversary to the
Truth, and to the Waldenses, says, That Waldus, being tolerably learned,
taught those that resorted to him the Text of the New Testament in their
Mother's Tongue; and that the Waldenses (who were his Followers and Auditors)
had above forty Schools, In Dioeceli Pataviensi.
and diverse Churches, all within one Diocese: yea, they were (as others
witness) of that ability, that they had diverse Conferences and Disputations
with the Romanists, and had the better. Vide Usserium cap. 6, 8.


As for the Doctrines and Tenets of the Waldenses, Vide Usserium in cap. 6, ad
cap. 10. and Protest. Evidences.
they preached against the Doctrines and Practices of Rome; as the Pope's
Power, Transubstantiation, the Adoration of Images, and of the Cross, against
Prayers for the dead, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, extreme Unction,
Auricular Confession, with many more.

John Wickliff was brought up in Merton College in Oxford, he was famous both
for life and learning, he excelled in the knowledge of the Arts and
School Divinity; he was admired of all for his singular abilities, and
sweetness of demeanor: he was Divinity-Reader in Oxford: he was a diligent
faithful Preacher of the Gospel under King Edward the third, who always
favored, and protected him against the rage of his Adversaries. He denied the
Pope to be the Head of the Church, Mr. Fuller. Mr. Clark.
and pronounced him to be Antichrist: he confuted and condemned his Doctrines
about Bulls and Indulgences, Masses, Transubstantiation, etc. He was a great
Enemy to the swarms of begging Friars. He wrote above two hundred fair Volumes,
most of which were burned by Subinck Archbishop of Prague in Bohemia: he wrote
many Books of Philosophy, and some of Metaphysics. Dr. Featly.
The University of Oxford crowned his person and doctrine with a fragrant
Garland of Praises, whose doctrine was not only favored by diverse Nobles, but
also by the third part of the Clergy of England. In all his sufferings he
showed an undaunted spirit.

John Huss was educated in Learning at Prague in Bohemia, he was a great
Scholar, and a famous Preacher in that University: he was converted by reading
of John Wickliff's Books, Mr. Fuller.
which Queen Ann's Courtiers, who brought her (being Sister to Wenceslaus King
of Bohemia) over into England to Richard the second King of England, did here
light on, and carried them into their own Country; which Huss had the
happiness to read, approve, and disperse: which proved a means of the
Conversion of Bohemia; for Wickliff's Books first discovered the Romish
Superstitions unto them: he stoutly opposed the Pope's proceedings, and gave a
blow to the man of sin under the fifth rib, which in Scripture is always
observed to be mortal. The Gentry and Nobility of Bohemia did highly favor him.

Jerome of Prague had his first breeding there, but he much enriched himself in
Learning by his travels abroad to the most principal parts, and Staple-places
of learning. At Paris he commenced Mr. of Arts; and in the University of Colen,
and Heidleberg, had the same degree confirmed unto him. He was a man of
admirable learning, Eloquence, Memory, Courage, and Zeal. He was converted, as
John Huss, by reading one of Wickliff's books, by which he perceived the
abominable superstitions then used in the Church; and began by degrees, first
in his judgment to dislike them, after in his practice to disuse them, and
lastly in his preaching to confute them. He earnestly contended for the Truth,
against the enemies of it, and openly opposed the doctrine of Purgatory, and
Prayers for the dead; and thundered against the ill lives of the Monks and
Friars. He proclaimed and defended the innocence of John Huss, and condemned
his false accusers. After his great and grievous sufferings, being brought
before the Council, he so learnedly vindicated himself, and refell'd his
enemies, that they were astonished at, and silenced by his Oration, which he
concluded thus, That all such Articles as Wickliff and Huss had written against
the enormities, pomp and disorder of the Prelates, he would firmly hold and
defend even to death.

Martin Luther born 1483. Century 15.
at 14. years of age went to Magdeburg, from thence his Parents removed him to
Isenak, a famous School, there he perfected his Grammar-learning. He went
thence to the University of Erford, Anno 1501. where he profited much in the
knowledge of Logic, and other Learning, and read over Cicero, Livy, Virgil, and
other Latin Authors. When he was twenty years old, he was made Mr. of Arts,
and read as Professor Aristotle's Physics, Ethics, and other parts of
Philosophy.

After his Conversion he began to read Augustine's works; Mr. Fuller.
he also read over the Schoolmen, especially Occam, whom he esteemed, for
acuteness of wit, before Aquinas and Scotus, and he studiously perused Gerson.
In these Studies he spent five years in the College at Erford.

When Luther was twenty six years old, John Staupicius (who endeavored to
promote the University of Wittenberg, then lately begun) removed Luther
thither, where at first he explained Aristotle's Logic and Physics, yet
intermitted not his study.

When he was 30. years old he was made Doctor in Divinity after the manner of
the Schools, at the charge of Duke Frederic Elector of Saxony. The Prince
hearing him preach admired his excellent parts.

Then he betook himself to the study of the Greek and Hebrew. Afterward Luther
published his Propositions against Indulgences, and opposed the Pope's
Supremacy, Purgatory, and other Tenets of Popery.

Luther also confuted Nicholas Stork, Mr. Fuller.
Thomas Muncer, and other fanatical Ringleaders, broaching new Doctrines, who
pretended Revelations Angelical, and conferences with God, and denied the
Baptism of Infants.

The Pope's Advocates promised Erasmus a Bishopric of rich revenue, if he
would write against Luther; but he answered that Luther was a man too great for
him to write against, and that he learned more from one short page of Luther's
Writings, then from all Thomas Aquinas his Books.

Bucer called Luther the first Apostle of the reformed Doctrine; not simply,
for Wickliff, Huss, and those forenamed, preached the same before; but Luther
was the first, who in Bucer's age and memory, publicly and successfully, set
on foot a general Reformation of the Church in these Western parts. John Huss
bare a torch before Luther, and showed him his way. See more of Luther in his
life.

Huldericus Zuinglius was sent to School at Basil at 10. Born 1487.
years of age, where he exceeded his School-fellows in learning. At Bern he
learned Rhetoric, Poetry, Oratory and Logic. At Vienna in Austria he studied
Philosophy, and perfected his former parts. At Basil he taught others what
himself had learned. He commenced Master of Arts, and studied School Divinity
and Greek, wherein he excelled. He was chosen Pastor at Zuric, (anno Christi
1521.) where, beside his Ministerial labors, he studied Hebrew, and was able to
expound those two major Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah. He prevailed with the
Senate at Zuric to erect a School for Latin, Greek and Hebrew.

He was admired in Switzerland, and famous at Zuric, as Luther in Germany, and
at Wittenberg. He was solid in all manner of learning, and a diligent searcher
of the Scriptures, being expert in the Original Tongues. He was so great an
opposer of the Pope's Pardons, Indulgences, and proceedings, that the Cardinals
themselves (as is reported) sought by great gifts to allure him to their side.
At Zuric he disputed with Franciscus Lambertus, a Friar, about the Intercession
of the Saints, and the sacrifice of the Mass, and convinced him of his error,
so that he confessed and forsook his error, and gave glory to God.

Then crept in the opinion of the Anabaptists, which he opposed with all his
might.

His works are large witnesses of his gifts and graces, parts and pains.

Oecolumpadius, he was educated in Religion and Learning, first at a School in
Germany, called Heelbronna, then at Heidelberg. Here he attained to that
perfection in learning, that at the age of 14 years he was made Bachelor of
Arts, with great approbation, and continued there till he was Master of Arts.
Afterward he fell close to the study of Divinity, and read the Schoolmen, (
Aquinas, Gerson, and others) with indefatigable pains, and much profit. He
studied Greek at Stutgard, and Hebrew at Heidelberg. Anno 1515. he was called
to be Preacher and Pastor at Basil, and commenced Dr. in that University; about
the same time that Erasmus came to Basil to print his Annotations on the New
Testament; for the perfecting whereof he used the assistance of Oecolampadius,
a man (says he) In his Preface to his Annotat. on the New Testament.
eminent not only for piety, but for skill in three Languages; and confessed he
was much helped by him.

The Writers of his Life give this character of him, that he was a worthy
instrument of advancing the truth of Christ; which he defended against Eckius
and Faber, and others. He was very successful in appeasing Sects and
contentions, that arose in the Church. His fame both for piety and learning
spread so abroad, that Philip Prince Elector Palatine committed his youngest
son unto his tuition. He was a diligent, faithful Preacher of the Gospel, and
promoter of Reformation in the Church; into which he brought the right
administration of the Sacraments, and the censure of Excommunication. He
declared his judgment against the Mass, and other Popish doctrines; against
sprinkling with holy water, and many superstitious actions; to which his
doctrine (sinking into his auditors hearts) put a period. He was famous in the
City of Basil.

SECT. X. The after-Promoters of Reformation were Learned.
I Have briefly declared the Learning of the former Modern Divines, who first
set Reformation of Religion on foot; to wit, their Education in Learning, their
study and increase of it; and the means thereof, scil. Schools and
Universities; their need and use of it, as to the work God gave them to do; and
the success thereof in their generation. Now follows,

2. The Learning of the latter Divines, Century 16, 17.
who carried on the work of Reformation vigorously in Doctrine and worship,
that was happily begun by the former: and were Eminent for Learning, as well as
for Piety; and were very instrumental in promoting the truth of God, and in
defending it against the Adversaries of it: and in extirpating Errors,
Heresies, and Superstitions, and many of them were Pillars in the Church of
God, famous in the work of the Ministry, for their labors in Preaching, and
also in Printing, and for the success of both in the conversion of sinners, and
edification of Saints, and the confirmation of staggerers, and reduction of the
erroneous; in the planting and watering of Churches. Who have set forth so many
Learned Systemes, Commentaries, and Tractates, and Disputations of Divinity, as
former Ages cannot parallel.

Their number being very great, and their Lives being largely described by many
Writers, I shall refer you to them, for information concerning their Learning
and Godliness, and usefulness, what blessings they were in their Generation,
and only name some of them that were of chief Note.

Outlandish Divines.
Paulus Fagius. Cent. ^6, 17.
Martin Bucer. Philip Melancthon. Peter Martyr. Wolfgangus Musculus. John
Calvin. William Farel. Peter Viretus. Stephen Zegidine. Peter Ramus. Benedictus
Aretius. Henry Bullinger. Emmanuel Tremellius Zachary Ursin. Martin Chemnitius.
Ralph Gualter. Hierom Zanchy. Anthony Sadeel. Lambert Danaeus. Theodore^ Beza.
Daniel Tossanus. Francis Junius. Luke Trelcatius. Amandus Polanus. David
Pareus. John James Grynaeus. Abraham Scultetus. John Piscator.
English Divines.
John Frith. Thomas Bilney. William Tindal. John Rogers. Laurence Sanders.
Rowland Tailor. John Bradford. John Juel. William Whitaker. Alexander Nowel.
William Perkins. John Rainolds. Thomas Holland. Robert Abbat. Andrew Willet.
Robert Bolton. William Wheatly. Dr. Sibbs. Dr. Tailor. Dr. Preston.
Scottish Divines.
John Knox. Robert Bollock.
Cum multis aliis.

Vide Melch. Adamum de vit is Theologorum, tum Germanorum tum exterorum.

The later Divines may be refered to three heads, according to the several
Forms of Church Discipline, which they held forth in judgment and in practice
Episcopal, Presbyterial, Congregational. What man has been famous, and
eminently instrumental in the work of the Ministry for labors and success
(under any of these Forms) who have not been Learned, or endued with a good
measure of acquired parts, as of knowledge in the Tongues and Arts.

1. For Episcopacy. How many very Learned, Laborious, Godly Bishops has
England bred, as Hooper, Latimer, Ridley, Cranmer, who were most zealous,
courageous, faithful Martyrs for Christ, and for the Truth.

And many since, who have been famous for their Learning and Labors, both in
Preaching and Printing; and for their piety and charity; who by their worthy
works yet speak, though they be dead, as Bishops, Jewel, Abbot, Babington,
Cowper, Davenant, Downame, Hall, Usher, who was a Magazine of Learning, and
Mirror of Sanctity, Humility and Charity.

Beside many other pious, Learned, and useful men, who were for Episcopacy,
though they were not Bishops.

2. For Presbytery. The old Non-conformists, who opposed Episcopacy and
Ceremonies, were many of them Learned men. Dr. Ames in his preface to Mr.
Bayn's Diocesan's Trial, says, that Mr. Deering, More, Greenham, Perkins,
Rogers, Cartwright, Fenner, Parker, Philips, Hieron, Bradshaw, Brightman, Dr.
Rainolds, Dr. Fulk, and Whitaker, with many others, were apprehended as men
agreeing in one spirit, having had indeed the spirit of glory resting on them,
as their Works do show, together with those Letters Testimonial, which they
left written in the hearts of many thousand Christians.

To these may be added Gerson, Bucer, Century 16, ^^.
John Dod, Arthur Hildersham, Robert Nicols, John Ball, Richard Rothwel, Paul
Bayns; who were all as really Learned, as truly Godly; famous for their great
Abilities and Labors. Read their Lives, and you shall see the same made out
fully, and clearly.

Besides many precious Divines of great Note for Holiness and Learning, both
formerly, and lately, (yea even at this day) in all the Reformed Churches, not
only in England and Scotland, but in other Countries, who were (and are) for
Presbytery. The Assembly of Divines, that sat at Westminster by Authority of
Parliament, was a Demonstration of the excellent Learning of the Ministers of
the Presbyterian Judgment.

3. For Independency, or the Congregational way. Many Ministers of this both in
Old England and in New, have been choicely Learned, and excellently
accomplished with Gifts, as well as Graces; as Reverend, holy and Learned Dr.
Ames, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, Mr. Sidrach Simpson,
Mr. Carter, Mr. Strong, with many others, some deceased, others yet living.

Many Pastors and Teachers, in the Churches of Christ in New England, were
eminently Learned, as well as exemplarily Godly, and very famous and successful
in Ministerial Labors; as Mr. Thomas Hooker, Mr. Peter Bulkeley, Mr. Davenport,
Mr. Thomas Shepherd, Mr. Allen. Mr. George Philips, Mr. Norton.

And Mr. John Cotton. B. D. whose Name is as an ointment poured forth, a most
deservedly famous man of God, of whom Mr. Norton (his Successor, as Teacher of
the Church in Boston in New England) relates, In his Narrative of Mr. Corton's
Lafe and Death.
that he was a General Scholar, studious to know all things, the want whereof
might in one of his Profession be denominated Ignorance. The greater part of
the Encyclopaedia he excelled in. Those Arts, which the University requires
such a proficiency in from her Graduates, he both digested and refined by his
more accurate knowledge of them. He was a good Hebrician; in Greek a Critic;
and could with great facility both speak and write Latin in a pure elegant
Ciceronian style. He was a good Historian; no stranger to the Fathers,
Schoolmen, Councils; abundantly exercised in Commentators of all sorts. His
Library was great, his reading and Learning was answerable, himself a living
and better Library. But though he was a constant Student, yet he had not all
his Learning out of his books.

Yea some of the Separation have been Learned men, I mean, the leaders of them;
as Mr. Ainsworth, Mr. Robinson, Francis Johnson, Mr. Smith, and others.

Now if God has used such as greatest Instruments of his Glory, and of good in
his Church, even from one Generation to another, who have been Learned men, as
I have made it appear by instances, to wit, in the ancient Fathers, and Modern
Divines; yea even under the several Forms of Church-constitution and Government:

Then, Learning is useful and needful for a Minister of the Gospel in these
days, and will be in succeeding Ages.

CHAP. XIII. Objections against Learning answered.
SECT. I. That the people may be better for the Learning of their Ministers.
MAny Objections are made against the use of Learning, for the Ministers of the
Gospel.

Object. What are the people better for the Learning of their Ministers?

Answ. The people, which are unlearned, may enjoy the benefit of all the
Studies, and Learning of their Ministers (in the extract, result, refinement,
or quintessence thereof, as a Learned man says) in, and by their labors in
preaching, and writing; by which they convey the same unto them, which the
people could not by their own private industry have attained.

So that the Ministers of the Gospel may be said to study (even Learning, as
well as Piety) for the People; as Mothers, and Nurses eat, and digest food for
their children, to whom they give suck: and the people suck Learning, and
Knowledge out of the Breasts of the learned labors of their Ministers (both
Sermons, and Books) in Translating, and Expounding the Holy Scriptures: in
handling points of Divinity, in deciding Controversies, in resolving Cases of
Conscience, in composing Tracts, etc.

In all which Learning is prepared, and fitted for the Peoples reception, and
digestion: and by all which they are made partakers of the Sap, and Virtue of
their Ministers Parts, and Studies, Gifts, and Graces.

Hereby the people may be kept from Errors, and Heresies; from corrupting, or
rejecting wholesome Doctrine; from perverting, and wresting the holy Scriptures,
which (as S. Peter says) they that are unlearned (to wit in themselves, 2 Pet.
3.16.
and in their Teachers) do unto their own destruction. That saying is very
true, scil. that judicious Believers can never be unthankful despisers of those
Gifts of good Learning in their Ministers, by whom they have been instructed
foundly and plainly in the truth.

SECT. II. That the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, were learned.
THe Prophets in the Old Testament, Obj. 2.
Christ and his Apostles in the New, had not Humane Learning, -- Ergo there is
no need of it for the Ministers of the Gospel? They carried on their Ministry
without the knowledge of Arts and Tongues, may not Ministers do so now?

Answer in five Propositions.

The first Proposition. Mr. Rutherford.
The Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles were learned, and had all the
learning and Tongues that we now have, and these (Gifts) are the same in them
and in us, in the names, substance, and proper use of them, but otherwise
acquired then ours are. The manner of obtaining them is double, scil. 1. By
Infusion. Or, 2. By Education.


I. By Infusion or inspiration from the Spirit of God, immediately and
extraordinarily, without the help of Schools or study.

Thus the Prophets and Apostles were Act. 2.4.
plentifully furnished with all gifts of knowledge and abilities.

1. Of Learning (to wit the Arts and Languages) needful to carry on the work of
Prophecy in the Old Testament, and of preaching the Gospel, of planting and
watering Churches in the New.

2. With the knowledge of God and his will, of Christ and the mysteries of the
Gospel, and the things pertaining to the kingdom of heaven. This came to the
Prophets and Apostles from God by revelation.

Jesus Christ was filled with all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge both
humane and divine, Col. 2.3. by the spirit which he received above measure,
Joh. 13.34. wherewith he was anointed above and for his fellows. The spirit of
wisdom and counsel, etc. that made him quick of understanding, Isa. 11.2, 3.
Hence it is, that, when he was a child, he disputed among the Doctors and
learned men in the Temple, Luke 2.46. among whom he was found, Verse. 48.
when his parents had sought him sorrowing. He grew in wisdom and knowledge, so
as, Verse. 40, 52
according tothe proportion of his age, the gifts of the Spirit were augmented
in him. He being greater then Solomon, could not come short of Solomon's wisdom
in any thing, Matthew. 12.42.

II. The manner of obtaining learning is by Education, in Schools and
Universities, by study and industry, by the reading of books, and teachings of
men, etc.

This is the ordinary means God has appointed to serve his providence in, for
attainment of learning and knowledge, both humane, scil. of Arts and Tongues,
and divine, to wit, of God and Christ, of Law and Gospel, etc.

The same knowledge of the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, and of the
mysteries of salvation, and of speaking with Tongues (in the substance and
nature of the gift) which came to Paul by immediate Revelation from God, Gal.
1.11, 12. Ephesians. 3.2, 3. and to others of the holy men of God, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Timothy acquired by Paul's teaching, 2 Timothy 3.10, 14. and chap. 2. ver. 2. and
by his parents education of him in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures from a
child, 2 Timothy 3.15. and by study and industry, 1 Timothy 4.15, 16.

Thus the Prophets and Apostles had learning and knowledge both divine and
humane, infused and inspired into them by the Spirit, immediately,
supernaturally, extraordinarily, and miraculously in respect of the manner, and
(of the measure) of their obtaining them, which is now ceased, and cannot be
expected without tempting of God.

We must seek to acquire all these from God, by pains and diligence, in the use
of the means God has appointed for that purpose. Paul exhorts Timothy
thereunto, to study and meditate, and to give himself wholly to these things,
that his profiting may appear in all things, or to all men, and to stir up the
gift that is in him, for fitting himself more to the work of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15.

Obj. The Council perceiving that Peter and John were (...), unlearned men were
amazed, Acts 4.13. Ergo, the Apostles had no humane learning?

Ans. They counted the Apostles unlearned, because they, being fishermen, were
not trained up in learning, nor educated in Schools, as the Pharisees were;
therefore they wondered that men unlearned were so well-skill'd in the doctrine
of Moses and the Prophets; and could speak so boldly of the mysteries of the
Gospel.

They wondered at Christ's learning, seeing he was a Carpenter's son, (as then
reputed) and never learned at School, Matthew. 13.55, 56. John 7.15. How knows
this man letters having never learned?

The second Proposition. Though many of the Prophets were called, or taken from
secular employments, as Elisha from the plow, King. 19.19, 20. Zechariah from
husbandry, chap. 13.5. Amos from the herd, Amos 1.1. and 7.14. and diverse of
the Apostles from their nets, ships, and fishing, as Peter, Andrew, James and
John, Mar. 1.16, to 21. and Matthew from the Custom-house where he sat, chap.
9.9.

Yet others of them were educated in humane learning, Acts 7.22.
as Moses was in all the learning of the Egyptians, by the care of Pharaoh's
daughter; Dan. 1.4.
and Daniel in the learning and Tongue of the Chaldeans, by Nebuchadnezzar's
command.

Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Acts 22.3. Festus told him of his
much learning.

The third Proposition. Christ and his Apostles made good use of Tongues, Arts
and Sciences, for opening the Scriptures, and for explaning, applying, and
pressing the Doctrines contained therein, and what they delivered to their
hearers.

Of Tongues, in citing and translating Scriptures out of Hebrew in the Old
Testament into Greek in the New, and expounding them; and in speaking to men of
several Nations in their own Language, Acts 2.4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 14.18.

Of Arts, as Rhetoric, Logic, Philosophy, as has been declared before. --
Their use of learning shows they had learning.

The fourth Proposition. The Prophets and Apostles made use of books, of the
holy Scriptures chiefly, and also of humane Authors to read them.

Mr. Weemse says, (...), Divine (...) page 66.
that the Prophets and the Apostles (to wit, some of them) learned their humane
Arts and Sciences from men, as Moses did from the Egyptians, Daniel from the
Chaldeans, Paul from Gamaliel; but, as they were Prophets and Apostles, they
had their divine knowledge immediately from God, yet they were to retain and
keep it by reading: S^m.
as the fire that came from Heaven upon the Altar was miraculous; yet when it
was once kindled they kept it in with wood, as we do our fires. Yea, they daily
increased in knowledge by reading of books, especially the holy Scriptures.
Daniel, though a great Prophet, did exercise himself much in reading the books
of the Prophets, chap. 9.2. I Daniel understood by books the number of the
years.

Paul, a great Apostle, yet made use of Books: 2 Timothy 4.13.
he writ to Timothy to bring him the Books he left at Troas, See Piscator in 2 Timothy 4.13. in his Obse. v.
(...). Calvin observes (upon that place) now that Paul, being aged, was to
prepare himself for death, yet he desists not from reading Books. Here is
commended (says he) to all the godly diligent reading of Books, by which they
may profit. Hence the Fury of those Fanatic persons is refel'd, who, contemning
Books, and condemning all reading, boast of their own Enthusiasms only. Paul
commends reading to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13.

It Is certain Paul read humane, yea Heathen Authors, as the Greek Poets; for he
alleges Sayings out of them: As of

Menander, to convince the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil words corrupt good
maners] whereby he refutes the Verse of another Poet, to wit, Anacreon, as some
think, -- Let us eat, and drink, for to morrow we shall die, verse. 32.

Of Epimenides to reprehend the Cretians, Titus 1.12.

Of Aratus to shame the Athenians, Acts 17.28. when he disputed against the
Philosophers there.

Scultetus collects out of 2 Timothy 1.6. that Paul was read in Plato's Writings,
for he uses some of his words, as (...), which is verbum Platonicum. Peter
quotes a common Proverb, or rather two, (...), etc. (...), etc. 2 Pet. 2.22.
The Dog is turned to his vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the mire.

The fifth Proposition. Some of them made use, not only of Books, for further
information of their Minds, but of their Notes, or Writings, for the help of
their Memories; as Paul did of the Parchments, 2 Timothy 4.13.
which he left at Troas, and sent for. The Cloak] whereby he was covered from
showers, and kept warm. (...).
But some think the word signifies Scriniolum, or Theca Libraria, a Desk, or
Coffer, wherein Paul laid his Books, or Writings. Calvin inclines to this
sense, -- The Cloak I left with Carpus bring with thee when thou come, and
the Books, but especially the Parchments. What these Parchments were is
difficult to determine. Some conceive them to be a Scheme, or draught and model
of Divine Truths methodically digested, which Paul had prepared and
accommodated to his own use, or transferred to the use of others, as Apollo, or
Timothy, or Titus, 1 Cor. 4.6. Hence one infers, If Paul had been always
supplied with miraculous assistance, what needed he to have committed any thing
to writing for his own use? or to have been so solicitous for his Parchments?

SECT. III. That Joel 2.28. and 1 John 2.27. make not at all against the need
of Learning.
Obj. 3. Has not God promised to pour out his Spirit upon all flesh in the
latter days, Joel 2.28, 29? and that the Anointing we have received teaches us
all things, 1 John 2.27? What need is there then of Learning, of Books, or
Studies for the Ministers of Christ? Is not the Teaching of the Spirit
sufficient without all these?

Answ. Hereto I return a triple Answer.

First, Joel 2.28.
That Prophecy in Joel 2.28. of the effusion of the Spirit in extraordinary
Gifts of Tongues, and of Prophesying, etc. was fulfilled at that time, when the
Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles (on the day of Pentecost) in the form of
cloven Tongues, like as of fire, etc. Acts 2.1, to 7. (for they that spoke in
this place were Peter, and the eleven, Acts 2.14.) Peter asserts it for their
vindication, that the Apostles were not drunk, Verse. 5, 16, 17.
verse. 15, 16, 17. This was a wonderful and miraculous pouring out of the
Spirit shortly after Christ's Ascension, Mr. Hollingworth.
and for the honor of it, Ephesians. 4.8. that God might have a Church among the
Gentiles before the fall of the Jewish Church. As the miraculous Confusion of
Tongues was the casting off of the Heathen, Genesis 11.7. so the Gift of Tongues
in this variety was a means of their Conversion.

Though such extraordinary Gifts were conferred on some others (besides the
Apostles) afterward, as Prophesying on Agabus, Acts 11.28. and the Daughters
of Philip the Evangelist, Acts 21.8, 9, 10. and other Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.28. yet
they were confined to the Primitive Times only of the New Testament (when the
Gospel was first published) as proper and peculiar thereunto. But such
extraordinary Gifts are now ceased, as I showed before.

Viz. 1. For kind. 2. For manner, by immediate infusion, or without means. 3.
For measure, the Apostles being filled herewith.


And we must now look for the pouring forth of the Spirit,

I. Only in ordinary Effects: As,

1. In regenerating, renewing, or sanctifying Graces.

2. In quickening, strengthening, comforting Operations, though in a greater
measure.

3. In common Gifts.

4. In the performance of holy Duties, and in the efficacy of the Ordinances,
through the working of the Spirit, for the conversion of more Souls, and
greater edification of them.

II. To obtain these Gifts, and Graces, Comforts, etc. of the Spirit, and the
growth and increase thereof, in, and by the use of the Means, which God has
appointed for that purpose.

Secondly, 1 John 2.27.
That Promise in 1 John 2.27. must be thus understood -- The anointing ye have
received (that is, the Spirit of Christ) ^^^eth you all things, so that ye need
not be taught either better things, Mr Cotton in locum.
or in a better manner then he teaches. Yet the Spirit ordinarily teaches by
Means, that is, Hildersham in Psalm. 5^.7.
chiefly (...) the Ministry of the Word, and not by immediate Inspirations, or
Enthusiasms, or by any other outward Means so much. Faith, that grand saving
Grace, and greatest work of the Spirit, comes by hearing the word preached,
Romans 10.17. Therefore Christ at his Ascension gave gifts unto men, and
appointed some to be Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, (extraordinary Officers)
some Pastors and Teachers (i. e. standing Officers of the Church) for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, etc. and these to
continue (for the Ministry is necessary) in the Church, till we all come into
the Unity of the Faith, etc. that is, till we be made perfect in Christ; till
we all come in Heaven -- Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12. Christ, who has promised his
Spirit, Jer. 2.15.
promises Ministers also, and gifts to them, and requires they should not be
despised ( Luke 10.16.) nor their Office. 1 These. 5.20. despise not
prophesying. Hence Paul calls the Ministry of the Gospel the ministration of
the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. whereby the Spirit is conveyed into us ( Gal. 3.2.) and
works in us. The Spirit first breathed the word of God into the Prophets, and
Apostles, to write the same, 2 Pet. 1.21. and now he breaths in the holy
Scriptures, and in, and by the Ministry of them upon our souls.

This is observable, that where our being taught of God is spoken of (which
some conceive to be immediately) something is mentioned, either going before,
or following after in the context, relating to the Ministry of the Word, to
show that that is the Means, whereby God ordinarily teaches his people. Ex. gr.

Joh. 6.45. It Is written in the Prophets, John ^.15. Mr. Hild^r^h.
They shall be taught of God -- he adds immediately, Every man therefore that
has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me: q.d. The Father teaches
no man (ordinarily) but in, and by the hearing of he Word preached.

Isaiah 30.21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the
way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, or to the left.

When God promises to teach and guide his people aright by his Spirit, they
being in danger to be seduced, or drawn out of the right way, in the 20 verse
he shows (or premiseth) how, or by what means the Spirit will do this -- thine
eyes shall see thy Teachers, etc. -- Then follows, Thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee, etc. q. d. I will accompany the Ministry of my Word with the
efficacy of my Spirit in the dispensation of thy Teachers, to instruct, and
guide thee in the right way.

1 John 2.27. -- The anointing ye have received, teaches you all things: in
verse 24. he declares how -- Let that ( scil. doctrine) abide in you, which ye
heard from the beginning, verse 7. which was preached at first by Christ, and
after by his Apostles, Luke 1.2. The Spirit of Christ teaches us all things by
the Doctrine, or Word dwelling, or abiding in us, Act. 2.42. Joh. 15.7.

1 These. 4.9. Touching Brotherly love ye need not, that I write unto you, for
ye are taught of God to love one another. Compare the first verse herewith --
We beseech and exhort you, as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and
to please God, so ye would abound more and more, to which add the tenth verse.
-- God teaches by his Ministers.

Thus the Spirit of Christ teaches ordinarily by the word, and the Ministry
of it (for the Word and the Spirit God has joined together, Isai. 59.21. Let
no man put them asunder) that is, in the Church of God chiefly: though he does
teach also by Christians exercise of their Gifts and Graces, for mutual
edification in private Communion by Exhortation, and Admonition, etc. which is
enjoined in the Gospel, Col. 3.16. 1 These. 5.14. Hebr. 3.13. and 10.24. Jude
20. Acts 18.26. 1 Cor. 14.35.

Thirdly, Though the Spirit be the principal Teacher of us, yet he uses his
Gifts (which he bestows on us) as instruments, whereby he teaches us, and
enableth us to teach others. The Spirit of God is the Author of every good Gift
in us, Jam. 1.17.

1. Of all saving Graces, which are the fruits of the Spirit in us, Gal. 5.22,
23. As he is the Spirit of Regeneration, and Sanctification, 2 These. 2.13.

2. Of all spiritual Gifts, qualifying for Church-offices, and Christian
Communion, 1 Cor. 12.4, to 12. Romans 12.6, to 9. Ephesians. 4.8.

3. Of all common Gifts, which qualify and enable men for Callings, and
Employments.

Bezaleel was filled with the Spirit of God, that is, the Gifts of the Spirit,
in wisdom, understanding, and knowledge; and in all manner of workmanship, to
devise cunning works (all those things, that did belong to the Tabernacle) to
work (curiously) in gold, silver, and brass, Exodus 31.2, 3, 4.

The skill of Husbandry is the Gift of God, Isai. 28.26. God teaches the
Husbandman (by his Spirit) how to plow, sow, reap, and thresh; as he does the
Soldier how to handle his weapon, Psalm. 18.34. and 144.1.

The skill of a Smith in blowing the coals, and in forming Tools, Instruments,
Weapons, etc. the fruits of the Forge, in the work of his Trade, is the Gift of
God also, Isai. 54.16.

Much more are Arts, and Tongues, or Liberal Sciences, the Gift of Gods Spirit,
as being more excellent in themselves, and indeed having more of God in them:
and more needful and eminently useful for the highest Callings, and
Employments, especially for the Ministers of the Gospel, as has been
demonstrated. The Apostles, being filled with the Holy Ghost, speak with other
Tongues (even all kind of Languages) as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts
2.4. (...), to speak Apophthegms, wise and weighty, grave and gracious
Sentences. The Spirit now teaches us Arts, and Tongues, as well as the way of
preaching, not by revelation, or immediately, as formerly, but by Means, as
Schools, Universities, and humane Teaching.

Hence I infer, that the Teaching of Gods Spirit, as the principal cause, does
not exclude the Gifts of the Spirit (and in particular of Arts, and Tongues)
from being Instruments, which the Spirit uses to teach us, and to make us more
fit to teach others; considering the Spirit of God is the Author of them all,
and he, bestowing them on us, may employ them, or work by them as subservient
to himself, as he pleases. As the inward teaching of the Spirit does not
exclude the outward teaching by the Ministry of the word (for these are
Subordinates, not Opposites, Consistents, yea, inclusive the one of the other,
not Repugnants) Christ, that promised to teach his people by his Spirit,
promised also to give them Pastors, and Teachers, thoroughly furnished with all
abilities, requisite for the work of the Ministry, Ephesians 4.11, 12.
the perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ.

Hence it is that (as some have observed) the perfection of humane Arts, both
Liberal and Mechanic, is to be found in the Church; because God ordinarily
pours his Spirit, and all the Gifts of it, both special and common upon it,
most plentifully.

SECT. IV An Objection, drawn from the ill effects of Learning, answered, and
it shown to be good in it self.
Obj. 4. What is humane Learning, but the wisdom of this world? which carnal
men, yea Heathens affect, and seek most after, which God will bring to nothing,
1 Cor. 1.18, etc. which stands in opposition to Christ, and his Gospel (and
crosses the wisdom of God) and by which both Jews and Gentiles slighted Christ,
refused him, and accounted the preaching of Christ foolishness, verse 23, 24.
and mocked at it, Acts 2.11, 13. and the Ministers of it, Act. 17.18? Is not
Learning the wisdom of the flesh, which is enmity against God, Romans 8.7? and
upon these accounts a great obstruction to man's salvation? Further, does not
humane Learning puff men up, and make men proud? and qualify men (as subtilty
did the Serpent, Genesis 3.1.) to be fit instruments for Satan to work by, in
oppugning Truth and Holiness, and the Kingdom of Christ? to devise and defend
Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Wickedness, and also malicious, mischievous
Designs?

Answ. First, these are not the genuine, or proper effects of Learning in it
self, but as it is in men, by reason of their corruptions, and of Satan's
tentations. So that all these are Vitia personae, non rei, the faults of the
Persons that are learned, not of the Thing, or of Learning it self. -- Or these
are the effects of Learning abused to the perverting of the simplicity of the
Gospel; to the putting false Glosses upon the Scripture; or to the maintaining
of Evil in opinion, or practice; and to the service of Satan against Christ. --
Or these are the effects of Learning, prided and gloried in; or overvalued, set
above its proper place, and price, and preferred before Gods Spirit, and the
saving Graces of it, or reputed sufficient to teach Christ, to convert, and
save souls.

Now the carnal abuse of Learning (no more then of any thing else) takes not
away the lawful use thereof. Not only Meats, Drinks, Clothes, etc. but Grace
it self, and Reason may be abused.

Secondly, It is demonstrable by Reason, Experience, and Scripture also, that
humane Learning is good in it self, it being the knowledge of God in the
Creatures; and the good Gift of God, who is the Author and Donor of it (as he
is of all good) therefore it is not enmity, but complacency, or pleasing to
God: and it is good in the natural tendency, and efficacy of it. Indeed it is
but a subordinate good, yet subservient to an higher end, both in its Nature,
and in Gods appointment and donation of it. God has so wisely contrived, and
ordered all his Gifts (both superior, and inferior) as that they should not
clash together, nor one give impediment to another: but all conspire and move
(as wheels in a Clock) to promote the chiefest good, that is, Gods Glory, and
man's Salvation. Neither Arts, nor Tongues, nor any other Gift of God, can be
any hinderance thereunto, except our corruptions make them so to be.

Learning in it self, or rightly used, is a threefold Good.

1. A Natural Good, the profit and pleasure of the knowledge whereof is
discovered and discerned by the light of Nature; and upon that account so much
prized, desired, and labored for by all sorts of men, yea, even by the very
Heathen. Yea, by the use of Learning the Heathen have attained to so much
knowledge of God from the Creatures (scil. of his eternal power and Godhead,
Romans 1.20.) as made them unexcusable, though not sufficient to save them.

2. It is a Moral Good, for regulating, reforming, and restraining even carnal
men, the very Heathen.

3. It is a Civil Good, to qualify men for all Callings, and employments, (as
has been showed) and for Societies.

But Learning sanctified and spiritualized, proves a great help and blessing
every way, both to them that have it, and to others also: but of this before.

III. It Is not Humane Learning (or Arts, or Tongues) in it self, but that
wisdom of this world, by which men slight, neglect, and reject Christ, and the
Gospel, that Paul condemns, and God will bring this to nothing, and make it to
be foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.12, 20. and that wisdom of the flesh, or fleshly
wisdom, which is the corruption and pravity of our Nature, or proceeds from it,
and makes us walk contrary to God; this Paul condemns, and it is enmity against
God, Romans 8.7.

SECT. V. An Objection against Rhetoric from 1 Cor. 1.17. answered.
Obj. 5. DId not Paul disclaim wisdom of words, as making the Cross of Christ
ineffectual, 1 Cor. 1.17. and 2 Cor. 1.4? what is Rhetoric, or Eloquence else?

Answ. First, by the wisdom of man's words Paul means not Rhetoric, or
Eloquence, considered simply or purely in it self, but the affectation of
Eloquence, highslown Phrases, vain soaring expressions, pomp of words, painted
speech; as if the efficacy of preaching stood therein, or they could add virtue
to the Gospel to call, or save souls.

Secondly, There is a lawful use of Rhetoric in Sermons, as has been declared,
so it be

1. Free from affectation, and ostentation.

2. Humbly, soberly, and fitly made Use of, as we see in the Prophets and
Apostles.

3. So it may probably have an insinuating influence, or influential
insinuation upon the hearers.

4. So it tend and serve clearly, plainly, and livelily to set forth Christ,
and his Cross, and the Truths of the Gospel in a taking way; and no way to
darken, dim, or obscure the same, as painted glass does the light.

Aretius, Problem. loc. 118. page 375.
speaking of Learning and Eloquence, says, Contra illa non aliter disputat
Apostolus, etc. The Apostle disputes no otherwise against these, then as they
obscure the Cross of Christ: -- and it must be granted (says he) that
eloquence and wisdom are good things in themselves, and the gifts of God: and
if they be rightly used, they adorn piety, and may profit wonderfully.

SECT. VI. Of Paul 's desiring to know nothing but Christ.
Obj. 6. PAul desired to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor.
2.2. Ergo, not Arts, and Tongues?

Answ. 1. He knew humane Learning already, being educated at Gamaliel's feet;
and he was a Pharisee, and they excelled in knowledge, and were great teachers
thereof in Christ's time.

2. Yet he valued it not in comparison of Christ, and the knowledge of him,
Phil. 3.7, 8. he counted it but dung.

3. He desired to profess, or teach no other skill, but the knowledge of
Christ. This was his main, yea his sole design; which does not hinder, but that
he might make use of Learning, so far as it would be subservient to the
advancing of it. And indeed so we find him doing in the fifteenth Chapter of
this Epistle, verse 33. where he cites a Heathen Poet, as was before observed.
The earnest intention of some one end does not oblige to a neglect of any
means, that may conduce thereto.

A DETERMINATION OF THIS QUESTION, Whether Grace is Essential to a Minister of
the Gospel?
By the same Author.
Question. WHether Grace be Essential to a Minister of the Gospel? or Wwhether
the want of Grace does annul his Admission? or be a sufficient cause of
Ejection?

Answ. Though Grace be a most desirable Qualification of a Gospel-Minister, and
a most excellent help, and furtherance, eminently useful to the work of the
Ministry, both for performance of the Duty, and for success of Labors; and I
wish, Oh that God would! that all the Ministers of the Gospel were Preachers
from Grace, as well as from Gifts; from conscience and experience, as well as
from science; from their hearts, as well as from their heads: yet it appears
not to me, that Grace is Causa sine qua non, or of so absolute necessity to the
Ministry, as without which a man cannot be (or should not be allowed, or
continued to be) a Minister of the Gospel.

To make good this Assertion, I will give three Grounds.

I. Ministerial Gifts, and saving Graces, are things distinct in themselves,
and separable in the subject.

II. The Ministry of the Gospel is ordained by Christ, principally for the
good of others.

III. The Testimonies of eminent Divines in the Case.

First Ground. Grace is not Essential to a Minister of the Gospel, because
Ministerial Gifts, and saving Graces, are things distinct in themselves, and
separable each from other in the subject.

Here I will first clear three things, scil. 1. What these Ministerial Gifts
are. 2. That they qualify men for the work of the Ministry. 3. That God is
the Author and Doner of these Gifts to that end.


And afterward I will show the Distinction, and Separability of Gifts, and
saving Graces.

First, What these Ministerial Gifts are, which dispose men for that work, and
are adequate to the end of the Ministry now: these are the ordinary

1. Gifts of common Illumination, Of Common Illumination, and the effects
thereof, see Pemble's works, page 60. and Dickson on the Hebr. 6.4, 5, 9. page
93.
and knowledge of Religion, and the Matters thereof, which is attainable either
by inward sense and experience, or by intellectual Speculation: and though both
these do more exactly accomplish a man for the Ministry, yet the latter only
may in some cases suffice: especially considering that experience can assure us
of nothing, that I am to press upon others, which Scripture also does not
suggest and confirm.

2. The Gift of Preaching, Prophecy, or Interpretation of the Scripture, of
opening, or unfolding, and applying the same.

3. The Gifts of utterance, and of prayer.

4. The Gifts of Arts, and Tongues, which are useful as handmaids to Divinity,
and to the Ministry.

5. The Gift of Argumentation, or reasoning, to confirm or defend the Truth, to
confute errors, and convince Gainsayers, etc.

The second is, that these Ministerial abilities do qualify men for the work
of the Ministry, as they make them suitable and competent thereunto; and fit
them to perform their office (and the several acts thereof) by Gifts: as to
pray by a Gift of prayer, to preach by a Gift of preaching, and to dispute by a
Gift or faculty of Disputation; and not to preach other men's Sermons, or say
other men's prayers only.

Hence, a man, endowed with good parts, natural and acquired, by diligent
reading, study, discourse, and prayer to God for Illumination, Direction,
Assistance, etc.

1. May attain to a large, clear, distinct knowledge of Religion, and the
several Principles and Points of it.

2. May be able to teach the same plainly, soundly, and profitably to others,
to instruct, convince, reprove, confirm and comfort others.

3. May be through God's blessing instrumental for the good of others; for
edifying the body of Christ; for building up in knowledge, faith, holiness, and
obedience; for carrying on the work of the Lord, promoting Reformation, and
furthering the salvation of others; and for information of some (who have Grace
really) of some things they knew not before; and for resolution of some doubts
and scruples.

4. May be useful in the Church of God to defend and maintain the Christian
Religion, and all the Points of it (especially Controversal) against the
Adversaries of the Truth and Grace of God, as Papists, Arminians, Socinians,
and others that are Heterodox; which some men of great Learning, parts and
studies (but it is questionable by their lives and ways, whether they had true
saving Grace) have done more soundly and strenuously, even to the convincing of
Gainsayers, and to the silencing or stopping the mouths of Adversaries; then
many who have true Grace, but want such Gifts, are able to do -- Probatum est.

For there are many real Christians, who have good experience of the practical
part of Religion, yet want abilities for the Controversal part, or defense of
the Truth against the oppugners of it.

Hence also I infer, that datur Medium, or there is a Mean between a Ministers
Preaching from Experience of the New Birth, or work of Grace, etc. in his own
soul, which is indeed the most comfortable and effectual; and a Ministers
taking a Sermon out of a book (which he never made) and getting it by heart,
and saying, or preaching it.

The mean between them is a Ministers making of a Sermon by a Gift God has
given him, and by study; and preaching it afterward, though he has not the
Experience of it in himself.

As there is a Mean between praying by the Spirit (or the Spirit of Prayer) and
reading of a prayer out of a book, or using a bare form of prayer; and that
Mean is praying by a Gift, or a Gift of prayer.

As there is a difference between a Scholars pronouncing an Oration, which he
has only gotten by heart, and his uttering one he made himself, according to
the Rules, and Art of Oratory.

The third thing is, That God is the Author and Donor of all Ministerial Gifts
to that end, that they may qualify Men for the Work of the Ministry, whether
they be extraordinary Gifts, as in former times; or ordinary, as in our days;
which God bestows on some men, not on others, as appears by some Scriptures,
which I shall endeavor to explane: As,

Ephesians. 4.8. Ephesians. 4.8.
When Christ ascended on high, he gave Gifts unto Men; that is, Church-Gifts,
or Ministerial Abilities, suitable and needful for the Work of the Ministry,
both in the Primitive Times, and to the End of the World: and upon the variety
and diversity of these Gifts Christ founded the several Offices and Officers in
his Church; He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, Verse 11.
some Evangelists] these were extraordinary Officers, to be and continue in the
Church but for a time; -- God has set forth us (says Paul 1 Cor. 4.9.) (...),
the last Apostles: which implies there should be no Apostles after them, none
should succeed them in Apostleship, but only in the Ministry of the Gospel:
-- and some Pastors, and Teachers, which are to continue as standing Officers
in the Church, Verse 13.
-- till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc. -- unto a perfect man --
that is, till we all come in Heaven.

Quoties a Deo vocati sunt homines, dona necessario conjuncta sunt officiis,
says Calvin on Ephesians. 4.11.

Herein -- commemorat discrimina donorum in Ecclesiae Doctoribus, says
Piscator Diversitatem donorum Ministerii Ecclesiastici, says Rollock.

Dr. Hammond in Ephesians. 4.7. calls these Gifts capacities and qualifications for
the serving of Christ in the Church; which are given by Christ severally, and
in diverse degrees, not in the same manner and measure to all.

To this end Christ ascended, Annot. in Ephesians. 4.10.
that he might fill all things, that is, replenish the Church with his Gifts.

The next Scripture is 1 Cor. 12.4, 1 Cor. 12.4, to 12.
to 12. Now there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit, etc. The
diversity of Gifts the Apostle speaks of in this place seems to be, not saving
Graces bestowed on God's Elect for the Salvation of their own Souls, but
Ministerial Gifts conferred by God on Men for the discharge of Church-Offices,
or Administrations; for the propagation and confirmation of the Gospel unto
others, for the edification of the Church. These Gifts were of two sorts:

1. Some were extraordinary, suited to those Times, Verse 9.
as Faith, not that we call saving Faith (which is proper to God's Elect) but
the Faith of Miracles, -- and the Gifts of Healing, Verse 10.
-- the working of Miracles, -- Prophecy, that is, the foretelling of things to
come from extraordinary Revelation, -- discerning of spirits, -- Gifts of
Tongues. Verse 6.
These Paul calls (...), diversities of Operations, or distinctions of Actions,
as Beza renders it, the doing of which exceeds all natural power; yet it is the
same God that works all in all.

2. Some were ordinary, Verse 8.
to continue in the Church, as the word of wisdom to the Pastor, to enable him
to apply the Word to the people; and the word of knowledge to the Teacher, to
handle Doctrinal Truths. Verse 5.
There are diversities of Administrations, or Ministeries, which Beza expounds,
-- Sic signate vocat Apostolus functiones Ecclesiasticas toti coetui Ecclesiae
formando and nutriendo destinatas.

The Gifts are diverse, as the Offices and Functions in the Church are diverse;
yet they all flow from one and the same Fountain, that is, Verse 7, 11.
the Spirit of God (who divides, and dispenses all these, to every man
severally (for kind and measure) more or less as he will; the Will of the
Spirit of God being the Rule of this Distribution:) and they are all referred
to the same end (...), for the profit of all, scil. the edification of the
Church.

Having declared and cleared these three things, I must proceed to show, and
prove, That Ministerial Gifts and saving Graces are distinct in themselves, and
separable in the Subject; which I shall endeavor to do by three Arguments.

Argum. I. God gives Ministerial Gifts to many men (as those five forenamed,
scil. of common Illumination, of Preaching, of Prayer, Utterance, of Arts and
Tongues, of Argumentation) to whom he gives not saving Grace. Even common
Experience is a plain Evidence, and full Proof hereof. Ergo, Grace is not
essential to make a Minister of the Gospel.

As, on the contrary, God gives Grace to many, to whom he gives not Ministerial
Gifts. -- Ergo, These are not necessary to make a Christian.

But God gives both Ministerial Gifts and saving Graces to some of his
servants, who are thereby most accomplished, and thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
that is, to all the Services of their Ministerial Function; and made most able
Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6.
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. This is appropriated, or peculiar but to
some Ministers of the Gospel, not extended or common to them all.

In former Times God gave Gifts extraordinary for kind to many, to whom he
gave no saving, sanctifying Grace; to bad, as well as good. A man might have
them, yet miscarry, and perish; might want them, yet be saved.

Paul's words in 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. hold forth the distinction or separability
of extraordinary Gifts, and saving Graces, each from other.

A man may have the Gift of Prophecy (to prophecy truly, and not be truly
godly) and of Tongues, etc. A man may understand all mysteries, and all
knowledge, and have all faith, that is, all the degrees of a Miracle-working
faith, and yet want love, that is saving Grace, and so perish.

Baalam prophesied particularly of Christ to come; and spoke of many things
concerning Israel, foretelling their excellency, Numb. 23.9. their
multiplication, ver. 10. Piscator.
and happy death. -- and he is called a Prophet, 2 Pet. 2.16. because sometimes
he had Revelations from the true God, Number. 23, and 24. and uttered Divine
Oracles as from the mouth of God. And he desired to die the death of the
righteous, yet he would not live their life: he was a wicked man, a Soothsayer,
and a Sorcerer; he loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. and he was
rebuked by the dumb Ass for his iniquity and madness.

Caiphas prophesied Joh. 11.51, 52. of Christ, that he should die, etc. though
he spoke it out of his own malicious sense; thinking it better, that Christ
should rather perish, then their Nation.

Many will plead their extraordinary Gifts, Mat. 7.22, 23.
and Works, as Prophecy, Ejection of Devils, etc. as done in Christ's Name; yet
Christ will not own them.

Now if God give Gifts both ordinary and extraordinary to some, to whom he
gives not saving Grace, then Ministerial Gifts are distinct in themselves, and
separable in the subject.

Argument II. (which may give both light and strength to the former) is the
examples of some such, who have been allowed Ministers and Preachers of God's
word, who had Gifts, but no Grace. I will give four instances thereof.

First Judas. He had not Grace. Christ knew it, (though it was not discovered
to others then what he was) yet he chose him to bean Apostle, and gave him a
joint Commission, Judas had the Faith of Miracles, and by it wrought Miracles,
says Calvin in 2 Cor. 12.9.
equal with the rest of the Apostles to go and preach the Gospel; and power to
work Miracles, and cast out Devils. See Mat. 10.1, to 9. yea, through the whole
Chapter, compare it with Mat. 11.1. Mar. 3.14, 15, to the 20. and 6.7. Luke
9.1, 2. They all (that is, the whole twelve Apostles) were sent out; they all
did Miracles; they all cast out Devils; they all returned to Christ, and gave
him an account of their success, Luke 9.6, 10. compared with Mar. 6.30. God
wrought by Judas as well as by the rest. Peter says, that Judas had part of
the Apostolical Ministry, Acts 1.17. as truly as any of the rest. A true
Apostle, though he proved truly a Reprobate, and Apostate, ver. 25.

No difference was discerned between Judas, and the rest of the Apostles, in
parts, or powers, or pains, or in the success of the Ministry: the Scripture
makes no distinction between him and them therein; but Judas, for any thing the
Apostles could perceive, was equal to them in all these.

Therefore when Christ said, that one of them should betray him, they enquired
among themselves who it should be. Peter beckoned to John to ask Christ who it
was of whom he spoke, Luke 22.21, to 24. John 13.21, to 27.

Christ revealed his mind (touching his Passion) to Judas as well as to the
rest, Mat. 20.17, to 20. and eat the Passover (at least) with him, Mat. 26.20.
Luke 22.14, 15. some think, that Judas eat the Lord's Supper also.

Also Christ required perseverance of Judas, when he said to the twelve, Will
ye also go away? John 6.67. to wit, in his Ministry and Discipleship, or in
following of Christ, and in walking with Christ, from whom many of his
Disciples went back, and fell off, ver. 66. yet Judas (as one says) truly
practiced secret thievery, and injustice, even while he exercised his public
Ministry, John 12.6. and Christ knew he was a Devil; and so he would prove
himself at length, to be a man possessed and acted by the evil Spirit, John
6.70, 71. Have I not chosen you twelve (says Christ) and one of you is a
Devil, and a son of perdition, John 17.12. and he was a Traitor, and he did
more against Christ then all the Jews did.

The second Example. Those Paul speaks of in Phil. 1.15. Who did preach Christ
of envy, and strife, -- of contention, ver. 16. not of good will, nor
sincerely, supposing to add affliction to Paul 's bonds, (he being then in
prison at Rome for the Gospel) what then says Paul, ver. 18. so Christ be
preached, that is, in true doctrine, though by some that did it not of good
will, or love, or in truth, (that is, in sincerity and integrity of mind) but
in pretense only, or out of envy to outstrip Paul, or cruelty to make his chain
more heavy, or to procure his death, etc. yet therein I do rejoice, yea, and
will rejoice; because by the preaching of these, who were insincere, (says
Piscator on this place) as well as of those that were sincere, and gloria
Christi innotescit, and salus electorum promovetur, The glory of Christ was
made known, and the salvation of the elect promoted thereby.

These had Gifts, else they could not have preached Christ: but had such any
Grace in their hearts? No, their end in it argued a high degree of malice,
wickedness, and immanity in them. Now, would Paul have rejoiced, that Christ
was preached, though by such persons, if he had thought that their preaching
could do no good? or that it was not lawful for such to preach?

The third Example. See Beza's Annotat. on Mat. 23.2, 3.
The Scribes and Pharisees they sit in Moses Chair (says Christ) all
therefore, whatsoever they bid you do, observe, and do. Christ allowed the
people to hear them, therefore he allowed them to teach.

They sat in Moses Chair as Teachers, and Expounders of the Law by Office; they
did succeed Moses in the ordinary Office of teaching the Word of God: therefore
Christ would have them to be heard, though their persons were wicked, lest
their Ministry (which was the Ordinance of God) should be contemned, and
theirs also, whom he should after send. Though their Actions were not imitable,
because they said, and did not, yet while they sat in Moses Chair, that is, as
long as they preached the Doctrine of Moses, they were to be heard, and
therefore they were allowed to teach: they were true Priests Mal. 27. by
Office, though they were not good and gracious men.

The Scribes and Pharisees had Gifts, but no Grace, Matthew. 5.20. and chap.
23.13, etc. Christ denounced many Woes against them for their hypocrisy and
iniquity; their Ministry was but Legal, not Evangelical, yet Christ enjoined
his Disciples (who were Gospel-believers) to attend to, and observe their
Ministry.

Is it not lawful now for those Ministers to preach, and for the People to hear
them, who, as to their Lives, are not worse then the Pharisees; and who, as for
their Doctrine, are better, scil. who preach Christ and the Gospel truly, which
the Scribes and Pharisees did not at all?

The fourth Example. Demas, whom Paul calls and acknowledges to be his
fellow-Laborer, Philem. 24. to wit, in the Work of the Ministry, Col. 4.14.
or Co-adjutor (as well as Marcus, Aristarchus, Lucas) who was well esteemed of
by the Apostles, yet afterward fell away, 2 Timothy 4.10. and continued in his
Apostasy, as Calvin on Philem. 24. thinks: and Davenant on Col. 4.14. who
shows the cause of it out of Dorotheus in Synopsi. Rolloc upon that place
conceives it probable, that Demas at that time was a Minister of the Gospel,
but afterward deserted that Calling to seek wealth, or betake himself to his
worldly affairs.

Dr. Hammond on 2 Timothy 4.10. says, -- Demas, that did assist Paul in preaching
the Gospel, has now left him, etc. and is gone to Thessalonica, whether to his
Home there, or to trade, and get Wealth in that place.

To the same purpose Espencaeus in 2 Timothy 4.10. Otium hic Apostata, quietem,
securitatem, vitam periculorum expertem maluit; and domi in tuto esse, and
deliciis frui, quam cum Magistro periclitari. -- and abiit Thessalonicam] ubi
vivere possit, relicta Roma, ubi Paulo commori timeret, aut pro ejus societate
incarcerari, and ad martyrium abduci; ita fugit periculum, ut existimavit:
atque hic erat unus ex ejus Adjutoribus, and iis qui valde laudabantur.

Byfield on Col. 4.14. and Elton on that place conceive, that Demas forsook
Paul, and fell away after he had been his Companion and Fellow-laborer. -- See
Hyper. on 2 Timothy 4.10.

Indeed Beza on 2 Timothy 4.10. is of Opinion, that Demas repenting afterward
returned to Paul; seeing there was mention made of him in the Epistle to
Philemon, verse. 24. as one of his (...), which ( Beza thinks) was pro^able to
be written after his Epistle to Timothy.

But Ludovicus Capellus in his Historia Evangelica says, that the second
Epistle to Timothy (which speaks of Demas's Apostasy) was written anno Christi
64. Neronis 11. and that this Epistle was the last of all Paul's Epistles,
written by him in his latter bonds, a little before his Martyrdom, which he
seems to intimate in 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.

He affirms also, that his Epistle to Philemon was written anno Christi 56.
Neronis 3.

Mr. Perkins in his Digest places the second Epistle to Timothy as the last of
Paul's Epistles, which he writ before his Martyrdom, or Beheading; after that
Epistle pistle, he writ to Philemon.

Mr. Roberts, in his Key of the Bible, the second part, in his Chronological
Table before the Epistle to the Romans, gives Reasons why the Epistle to
Philemon was written before the second Epistle to Timothy, before Demas his
Desertion, or Demas had returned again unto Paul. In page 763. he says, that
Paul wrote his second Epistle to Timothy last of all those Epistles he wrote, a
little before his Martydom, as all circumstances evince, and the Epistle it
self intimates, 2 Timothy 4.6. See also page 898. of the Time. So Hyperius in
Philem. 24. Demas adhuc erat constans, quum haec (scil. epistola scriberctur)
sed quando illa secunda ad Timotheum conderetur, Paulum and Religionem
universam deseruit cum in ea legatur, 2 Timothy 4.10.

By this it is probable, that Demas never recovered his fall, nor returned to
Paul after it.

Argum. III. Ministerial Gifts, and saving Graces, are distinct and separable,
and go not always together: otherwise no man could be a gracious man, but he
that has Ministerial gifts; and no man could have Ministerial gifts, but he
that has Grace: both which are apparently false in common experience.

Hence great Parts, and eminent Abilities in matters of Religion, are no sure
signs of Grace, they may make a man (...), not (...), able to teach others, not
holy himself.

Though these Gifts alone, be they never so excellent and useful in themselves,
and to others, yet without Grace. they cannot save those that have them, nor
enable them to act out of pure love to Christ, and souls, or out of sincere
desire to Gods Glory: but they are like the Carpenters, that built an Ark to
save Noah, and his Family, and perished themselves in the water: or like the
Tyrians, that did help to build the Temple, but did not worship God in it, nor
partake of the privileges of it.

Ground 2. Grace is not essential to a Minister of the Gospel, because the
Ministry of the Gospel is ordained by Christ, not for the Ministers own good
so much (though that also be included) as for the good of others, principally.
Therefore God may bless it, and make it instrumental for the benefit of others,
(...) for a public good (and work that end by it) though the Instrument, 1 Cor.
12 7. and 14, 12.
or Person God uses, be not sanctified here, nor shall be saved hereafter. A
Minister may preach to others, and himself be a castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27. he may
by his Gifts profit others, and yet not procure salvation to his own soul.

God employed Cyrus (though he had not known God) to restore his people out of
captivity, and reedifie the Temple, Isaiah 45.1, to 5. That saying of Austin is
alleged by some Divines to this purpose: The seed, that is sown by a foul
hand, may bring forth fruits, as well as that, which is sown by a clean and
sound hand.

If a man's Ministry may (by Christ's appointment) do good to others, though he
be not sanctified, and saved himself, then Grace is not essential to a Minister
of the Gospel.

Ground 3. The testimonies of some, who were Eminent, Godly, Learned,
Judicious, Sound, Orthodox Divines (in their Generation) in the Case. In the
close of this Ground I shall declare, how far I consent with them, and wherein
I dissent from them.

Master Perkins in his Art of Prophesying, chap. 10. says, Grace (or holiness
of heart) makes not a Minister, yet it is very necessary. -- In his Exposition
upon Christ's Sermon in the Mount, Mat. 7.6. he says, We may lawfully use the
Ministry of those men, whose lives and conversations be evil and offensive, if
their Doctrine be sound and good, etc. The virtue and efficacy of the Word and
Sacraments, administered by men, is not from the Minister, but from God. A
Letter is not the worse, because brought by an unhonest and unlawful Carrier.

Master Paul Bain in his Comment on Ephesians. 4.11. says, There are three sorts of
Ministers, 1. some are ignorant and scandalous: 2. some of knowledge, and free
from crime, but unsanctified: 3. some are truly sanctified. The first Christ
permits, or inflicteth as judgments, Mat. 28.19. for to him is all Power
and Judgment committed in heaven and earth. The second sort Christ gives, and
that for the good of the Church: for if men be qualified for Life and Doctrine,
and have a calling, (are inwardly excited, and outwardly called, that is
approved of the Church, desired, or after accepted by the people) they are to
be held as Ministers, given for the good of the Church, though their Persons
are not approved, and Christ shall say, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
Mat. 7.23.
The third sort are those, that are qualified, called, and sanctified inwardly.
Now these are given of Christ, as men according to his own heart, that is,
delegated by him.

He says on Ephesians. 3.7. that The Ministerial Gift, which the God of Grace
gives, makes a Minister. This does form him ad intus, as skill in this, or
that Manuary Science, does make an Artificer.

Master Hildersam in Psalm. 51.7. says, A man may be a Preacher of Gods
sending, though he be an Hypocrite, and have no truth of Grace in his heart, as
those in Phil. 1.18. and as Judas was; he was sent of God to preach, Mat. 10.4,
7. yea, and God wrought with him too, Luke 9.6. and yet he was but an Hypocrite
in heart, he never had truth of Grace in him, when he was at the best.

In page 802. -- he says, Paul was so zealous for much preaching, and rejoiced
so much in the glory he knew redounded to God by it, that speaking of some in
Rome, who preached the truth, and sound doctrine, without all truth and
soundness of heart, Phil. 1.18, he says notwithstanding, Every way, whether in
pretense, or in truth Christ is preached, I therein do, and will rejoice:
surely they were very bad men, of whom he says, verse. 15, 16. that they
preached Christ of envy, to increase his grief, and trouble, when he was in
bonds for the Gospel. How could Paul rejoice in such men's preaching will you
say? Certainly he knew, though they were so bad in themselves, yet their
doctrine, which was both for matter and manner sound, might, through Gods
blessing upon his own Ordinance, become effectual to the conversion and comfort
of Gods Elect: for be you sure of this, that if Paul had been of that mind,
that he, that is a wicked man himself, cannot by his Ministry be the
instrument of the conversion of another, he would never have said of such men
as these, I do rejoice that Christ is preached by them, yea, and I will rejoice
in it.

Doctor Airay upon Phil. 1.18. page 174. says, That a Minister and Preacher of
the word is gladly and joyfully to be heard, that preaches Christ, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel soundly, and truly, with what mind soever he preaches
the same. To which purpose also is that of Christ, Mat. 23.3. where he wills
to hearken to the Scribes and Pharisees, sitting in Moses seat; whereby he
means, that the Doctrine which the Scribes and Pharisees delivered faithfully
out of Moses, was gladly to be received, howsoever in their actions, and lives
they were justly to be noted. The Reason is, because the word is the Lords,
which they bring, with what mind soever they bring it, or how vicious and bad
soever they be, that bring it

Master Pemble in the Nature and Properties of Grace, and Faith, page 125.
says, The common Grace of the Spirit (whereby men are enlightened in the
knowledge of heavenly things) is the cause of an Historical Faith, or general
assent to the truth of the Scriptures; which Grace God bestows upon the
unregenerate, and unsanctified, more for others then their own good: some light
shines upon them, whereby they may know and assent unto divine Truths, for a
common good of the Church; yet others may be instructed by their teaching: for
Christ in the building of his Church does also use the help and ministry of
such men, according as Solomon did in the building of the material Temple; who
employed not the natural Israelites, but the Relics of the Canaanites, and
strangers, that lived in the Land, to be bearers of burdens, and hewers of
stone, and overscers of the work, 2 Chronicles. 2.17. and these men, though
unsanctified, and such as do not themselves heartily esteem, and affect that
which they know, yet in the general they believe it, and willingly teach it, to
the benefit of the Church.

Master Samuel Hieron in his Treatise called The Preachers Plea, says, That
Ministers bad life is no sufficient Argument against Preaching, or hearing
them. -- Put case it were so (which, thanks be to God, it is not) that all
Preachers did confute their own Sermons with their evil lives; and had Esaus
hands with Jacobs voice, and were like a sile, which smootheth other things, it
self remaining rough; yet this could make nothing against Preaching: for is
Physic naught, because many Physicians perhaps live contrary to their own Rules
of Physic? or is Law damnable, because some Professors thereof do live lawless?
giving Rules of equity to others, themselves keeping none but ill Rules? No man
will be so without sense to affirm it. Why then? shall the course of Preaching
be condemned for the supposed misdemeanors of them that Preach? God forbid, who
but a Fool, or a froward heart will tread the Holy Doctrine of God under his
feet, because he is a man not of a good carriage, that delivers the same.

Master William Fenner in his Sermons on Revel. 3.1. called Christ's Alarm to
drowsy Saints, says, I dare not say absolutely, that a carnal Minister shall
never have good success in his Ministry; as if a Minister should conclude he
was a good man, because God has blessed his labors. No, that is not a good
Argument: for

1. It is the Word that converts, not the Person of the speaker, I dare not tie
God to the goodness of any man's Person; God, as he is a Creator, is a wise God,
and can write well with a bad pen, and cut well with a blunt naughty knife.

2 Such may be sent of God, and gifted for the Ministry, and therefore, for all
that I know, they may be an organ of Conversion sometime.

3. Paul rejoiced, that Christ was preached by the false Apostles, though it
were but of envy, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17. Object. How could he rejoice in that,
that was a wicked manner of Preaching? Answ. Surely he could not rejoice in it,
but that he thought it might do some good.

4. If a carnal Minister cannot be the means of Conversion, some man cannot be
assured of his salvation.

5. They may say at the last day, Lord, Lord, etc.

6. Why else does Christ bid his people hear the Scribes, and Pharisees, but
that he implies they may be a means of good unto them.

7. Judas was sent out to preach, Matthew. 10.4. Christ said to him, as well as
to the rest. -- When ye go Preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,
verse 7.

8. Experience has found this to be true, some Godly Souls have confessed this
very thing, that such as now they see to be palpably carnal, etc. have been the
means of their conversion. God may make the crowing of a Cock to he a means of
awakening Peter 's conscience; the temptations of the Devil to be the means of
Luther 's quickening.

Mr. Anthony Burgess in his Treatise Of Faith and Assurance, page 503, 504.
says, A corrupt or ungodly Minister may be used by God for conversion, because
the Ministry is Gratia gratis data; not Gratia gratum faciens, it is appointed
for the public good of others, not for the Ministers good so much. -- And page
114. I make no question, but a man of abilities may do good by his gifts,
although he himself be naught, otherwise Paul would not have rejoiced, that
some preached Christ out of envy, nor would Christ have remitted his Disciples
to the Scribes and Pharisees Ministry as he did, when he bad them hear them as
long as they sat in Moses chair, deliver true doctrine from the Scriptures. In
page 503. he says, This was a question discussed of old between the Orthodox
and the Donatists, who held, that if any Minister fell into gross sins, neither
the Preaching of the word, nor the administration of the Sacraments could do
any good to others. See Danaeum de Haeresibus, cap. 69. The Anabaptists now
teach the same.

Mr. Thomas Manton in his Exposition on Jude verse 20 says -- Sometimes this
Gift (I conceive he means of Prayer) is given to carnal men because of their
Service in the Church. Gifts are for the body. They may have great abilities to
pray and preach, and may be carried on with full gales of outward assistance.

Hieronymus Zanchius, in Phil. 1. ver. 12. ad 27. page 45. where this question
is handled, whether the Ministry of such men as are not sanctified may be
effectual, and is to be allowed, -- in ver. 18. page 38. has these words,
Diversitas affectuum and finium, quibus adducebantur Ministri ad praedicandum
Christum (scilicet, quod alii modo simulato, ex invidia, and contentione, alii
animo vero and sincero) nihil impedivit profectum Evangelii, cum ab omnibus
idem Christus praedicaretur, ac proinde and ipse and Philippenses, aliaeque
Ecclesiae habuerint causam, cur debuerint debeantque de hac re magis gaudere,
quam de suis vinculis dolere. And further, De hoc dogmate, propter vitia
Ministrorum, illorum legitimum Ministerium non desinere esse sanctum, and
efficax in credentibus, eoque non esse deserendum, aut contemnendum, convenit
inter omnes Ecclesias, quae verbum Dei sequuntur, adeoque etiam inter nos and
Pontificios consonat Apostolus dicendo, "Gaudeo and gaudebo.

Sed, si vitia sint and manifesta and enormia, ferendi non sunt, praesertim si
admomoniti non corrigantur.

David Paraeus in Rev. 3.1. speaks thus, Efficacia Ministerii non fluit, vel
pendet a bonitate Ministri, Deum enim quandoque per mortuos Episcopos Ecclesiam
vivisicare and regere, exemplum praesens contra Donatistas testatur, and
Pontificios Sophistas, qui, etc.

Theodorus Beza, De veris and visibilibus Ecclesiae Catholicae notis, says,
Nos non sentimus Ministrorum vitiis aboleri posse Ministerii vel dignitatem,
vel etiam efficacitatem.

I freely concur with these faithful servants of Chris. in their Testimonies
premised, thus far: viz.

1. That Grace is not absolutely necessary to a Minister of the Gospel.

2 That a man may have good Ministerial Gifts, though not saving Grace.

3. That such a man may by his Gifts be instrumental for the good of others.
But, as for the wicked, profane, and scandalous Ministers, (as well as
Ignorant, and Insufficient) I judge them not fit (especially after admonition,
without emendation) to be tolerated in the Church, either to preach, or
administer the Sacraments, but worthy to be ejected, to the end that better men
may be brought into their places; how unfit and unworthy then are such to be
made Ministers? I wish with Calvin, De scandalis, page ^31.
Utinam tali hominum colluvie exonerari, purgarique Ecclesia posset, (speaking
of openly scandalous and vicious Ministers) that the Church was purged, or
disburdened of them!

Objections against the former Assertion.

Object. 1. It is required of a Gospel-Minister, that he be (...) holy, Tit.
1.8. Ergo, Grace is essential to a Minister of the Gospel?

Answ. There is a threefold holiness mentioned in Scripture, from each of which
persons are denominated holy, scil, by Profession. Separation. Inhesion.


1. The first kind or mode of holiness is visible profession of Holiness,
reformation of life, unblamableness of conversation; to be free from all open
and scandalous sins.

Such as have this work upon them may be called Saints by calling: because they
answer God's call in some degree, scil. by conviction of their judgment, and
outward profession, and reformation; though not totally and effectually by
through-conversion to God, and sanctification in Christ: for such may fall
away, and discover themselves but Hypocrites at last, because the root of the
matter is not found in them.

Men may hold forth such a show, semblance, or appearance of holiness in their
lives, under which there may be true Grace, (though there be not in some) and
for which they are counted holy by others, in the judgment of charity, they
not knowing their hearts, nor being able to discern any thing to the contrary
in their lives. Men have now no infallibility in their discerning; even Paul
was mistaken in Demas, and in diverse others; Philip in Simon the Sorcerer; the
Church at Jerusalem in Ananias and Sapphira.

Such an holiness (though more is most to be desired) may qualify persons to
be Members of visible Churches: and this holiness (at the least) ought to be in
all that are called, or allowed to be Ministers of the Gospel. 1 Timothy 3.1, to
8. A Bishop must be blameless, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality,
not given to wine, no striker, nor greedy of filthy lucre, not a brawler, nor
covetous, etc.

2. The second sort of holiness is by consecration to an holy use. In
Scripturephrase many persons and things are said to be holy, to wit, by
Dedication, and Designation, as being set apart from common use to holy
service, which were not inherently holy in themselves, some of them being
subjects not capable thereof: the word of God abounds with instances of this
kind.

A Minister of the Gospel may be said to be holy, in being set apart to the
work of the Ministry, (which is an holy work, or calling, 1 Timothy 3.1.) two
ways.

1. By his own inclination of heart, bent of spirit, a (...) or readiness of
mind thereunto, to serve God in the Ministry, above any other calling; being
furnished with gifts suitable thereunto, as he must be (...) apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2.

2. By an outward call to it, in way of Election, and Ordination, according to
the Gospel, whereby he is separated to the work.

3. The third and best sort of Holiness is Inhesion of Grace in the soul, or
the Renovation of the inward man into God's image.

This is the sanctification of the Spirit, (1 Pet. 1.2.) or in Christ, 1 Cor.
1.2. a true Regeneration, this must be found in all that would be, or shall be
saved.

This inherent holiness is required to be in a Minister of the Gospel, in
respect 1. Of himself. 2. Of his Office.


1. In respect of himself, it is his duty to be holy, and necessary both
necessitate Praecepti and Medii, both by God's commandment, and as a necessary
means of his own salvation: Heb. 12.14.
for without holiness no man can see God, or save his own soul, though he may
by his Gifts promote the good of others.

2. In respect of his office, or Ministry; to be inherently holy will conduce
very much to the Ability and Efficacy of his Ministry, to make him a more
able, fruitful Minister of the Gospel, and will qualify him better to be set
apart to that work. God does call for inward sanctity in Ministers above
others, because of their near approach to God, and that influence, which their
lives (if holy) will have upon others; but open sinfulness is a discredit to
the Gospel, and dishonor to his Calling, an obstruction to the success of his
labors: it carries a great aggravation, and foul stain with it, and may do much
hurt to others, by way of example. But I conceive, that, though inherent
Holiness be most necessary for a Minister of God, in respect of himself, in
order to his own salvation, yet that it is required of him in respect of his
Office, to qualify him to be a Bishop (or Gospel- Minister) upon the ground of
Expediency, Convenience, or Commodity, ad been esse, or as some other
particulars are in Paul's Catalogue of qualifications in Titus 1.7, 8. propter
melius, for the better, not of absolute necessity, as causa sine qua non, or ad
esse; as if a man could not be a Minister except he had the real work of Grace
or holiness in his heart. He is most fit and able every way for the work of the
Ministry, who has Grace as well as Gifts, and is inherently holy; but the
bare or simple want of holiness does not uncapacitate a man for the Ministry,
nor annul the same, if other things concur in him, as Gifts, and a Call, inward
and outward, and unblamableness of life. Christ knew Judas to be a close
Hypocrite, yet he chose him to be one of the twelve, and he was useful in the
Church for a time.

Dr. Tailor in his Comment upon Titus 1.8. A Bishop must be holy, says,
Necessary it is for a Minister to be clothed with the robes of holiness, both
inward and outward: yet this must not so be taken, as that holiness is so
Essential to a Minister, as that he cannot be a Minister that wants it, for
Judas may be Disciple and a Devil too; but that it is a dangerous estate to
himself, and hurtful to others, for him to be destitute of Holiness.

Object. 2. Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or take my Covenant in thy mouth, etc. seeing thou hate
instruction? etc. Psalm. 50, 16, 17.

Ergo, None should be Preachers of God's Word and Testament, but such as have
Grace.

Answ. To this I answer three things:

First, O^^ Psalm. 50.16.
That Unto the wicked God saith] Appellationem impii (says Musculus) Scriptura
dai non cuivis peccatori, sed plane malitiosis, qui ex destinata malitia, non
ex errore, peccent. The Scripture gives this name of wicked not to every
sinner, but to those that are malicious, who offend of forethought malice, not
of error. The wicked do offend far otherwise, then those that sin through
error. See Musculus's Distinction of wicked men into two sorts in that place.
The worst kind are they, who cover the malice and impiety of their hearts with
a counterfeiting, or color and pretense of Piety, and probity in life; who by
Hypocrisy seek the name of Piety among men (when in heart they are wicked) and
they cover these wickednesses, which they design as wicked men, with the paint
or counterfeit of external and dissembled Piety: therefore they are not aperte,
but occulte impii; not openly, but covertly impious.

Et hi sunt (says Musculus) qui hoc loco reprobantur. These are the wicked,
who are reproved by God in this place.

They had God's Covenant often in their mouths, that is, they did in words, or by
external confession, profess the Name of God, and Piety before men, and
pretended to a Covenant with God, and that they were his People, yet they
denied God in their hearts, lives, or works. They were haters of Reformation,
contemners of the Word of God, verse. 17. addicted to theft, lust, or adultery,
verse. 18. to evil or deceitful speaking, verse. 19. to slandering and
calumniating near Relations, verse. 20. They transformed God into an Idol after
their own fancy, verse. 21. By the description of their improbity it appears,
that these were obdurate, obstinate, wilful, restractorily wicked, though
covertly and concealedly, as much as they could.

To such as are so wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
Statutes? etc. Quamobrem usurpas tibi Statutorum meorum and foederis
administrationem ad te non pertinentem? says Musculus. Why do thou usurp to
thy self the Administration of my Statutes, and Covenant, which does not belong
to thee? Est ergo Deo prorsus abominabile, etc. The office of a wicked man is
abominable, sive illud siat praedicando, etc. whether it be done in preaching,
sive Ceremoniis externis ipsum colendo, or in worshipping him in outward
Ceremonies. A man may be a sinner, and not a wicked man. Mr. Caryl shows the
difference between them in five things in Job 10.7, 15. Job confessed himself
to be a sinner, verse. 6. but thou know, says he to God, that I am not
wicked. The best of Saints are sinners on Earth, and the worst of Saints are
not wicked. Sin is not inconsistent with Grace, but wickedness is; yea, a man
may have no Grace (or be void in heart of the true fear of God, and Piety) and
so be an unregenerate man, and yet not be a wicked man in Scripture-sense, or
be (...), which signifies an ungodly, restless, lewd, turbulent man. See his
character Isaiah 57.20. And why such as are not wicked (being fitted, and
called) may not be allowed to preach the Word, I do not see. Yea, a man may
commit gross sins, and yet, not concealing the malice of his mind with
hypocrisy, not be in so high a degree wicked and abominable in the sight of
God, as those that cloak their Impiety and Hypocrisy.

Those that are so wicked (and are known to be so) are unworthy to be Ministers
of God's Word.

The second thing is, Though the Services, which those that are Sinners
perform, (in the general) are displeasing to God, as their Prayers, Praises,
hearing the Word, giving Alms, Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. Isai. 66.3. Yet

1. God does require them to do the same.

2. Though they sin in doing them, yet it is a greater Sin not to do them.

3. God may reward them for the same.

4. They may be instrumental for the good of others thereby.

I. They may be such things in themselves (or for the matter of them) as God
requires, or which are their Duty to do; as Praying, Hearing, Praising God.

Duties of the Moral Law, which all men (even bad, as well as good) are bound
unto: As,

1. To pray to God. The neglect hereof is noted as a sin in the very Atheist,
that fool, who says in his heart, There is no God, Psalm. 14.1, 4. in the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 53.4. in the very Heathen, for which God pours
forth his wrath and judgment, Psalm. 79.6. Jer. 10.25. Even by the Light of
Nature all men are bound to pray unto God, as the Mariners in Jonah 1.6.
acknowledged in a tempest; and by the Law of Creation to seek to God for what
they want.

2. To praise, and give thanks to God for his Mercies. David excites all the
Creatures to praise God, as a natural Duty according to their several
capacities, Psalm. 148. and Psalm. 145.21. Let all flesh bless his holy Name. And
verse. 10. All thy Works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless
thee. God has given a general Command to all men upon Earth to sing unto the
Lord, that is, to praise the Lord, Psalm. 68.2. and 96.1.

So that Prayer and Praise are Natural Duties, imposed and incumbent upon all
men, as they are men; and part of the Natural Worship, which all are bound unto
by the Light of Nature, and Law of their Creation, to perform to God, as
obligatory to all Mankind, even to the wicked.

II. Though the wicked cannot perform these Duties of Prayer, Praises, Hearing
aright, or without sin (as to the manner of doing them) but they displease God
therein; yet it is a greater sin in any, even in the wicked (and shows more
slighting of God, and disregard to God) to neglect or omit the matter of a Duty
(or the Duty it self) as not to pray, not to praise God, not to hear the word,
then to fail, fall short, or miscarry in the manner of performance; as not to
perform these aright, scil. in faith and fervency, with affection and
sincerity. This is a greater sin, because to omit the Duty wholly, as to the
matter of it, is (as one says) to disobey totally: to sin in the manner of
doing it is to disobey God but in part only.

In performance there is some good, scil. the matter of the Duty, or the thing
done: it may be some acts or circumstances besides may be good ( materially,
though not formally) but in omission of Duties there is no good at all: now ubi
major privatio boni, ibi majus malum.

They do evil, that pray, praise God, or hear the Word amiss; but they do
worse, that do not these at all.

III. God may reward men for the materiality of their Duties, or for the things
they do (as being good in themselves) though he utterly dislike the formality
thereof, or their manner of doing them. God has, out of his infinite goodness,
sometimes showed respect to the good things that have been done, even by
ungodly men (though they were but the carcass, and wanted the soul and life of
good Works) so as to reward them temporally.

Thus God heard the Prayer of Ishmael, though a profane wretch, Genesis 21.9, 10,
17. and Ahab's Prayer, when he was humbled by fear, 1 Kings 21.29. See how it
prevailed with God to defer a temporary Judgment, and to grant some
Deliverance to Rehoboam, when he humbled himself (which some think was but
outwardly) 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7, 14. External Humiliation may prevail to remove an
outward Judgment, Exodus 9.27.

IV. The Services even of those that were unsanctified may be instrumental for
the good of others; as the Teachings of the Scribes and Pharisees were: they
were grand Hypocrites, etc. yet Christ allowed them to teach (and take his
Statutes and Covenant into their mouths) else he would not have bidden others
hear them, scil. for the benefit they might get by their Doctrine, more then by
their Examples; for they said, and did not.

The third thing is, God's Expostulation with Sinners about their Services, or
Performances, seems to imply, not a Prohibition of such things as Duty obliged
them to do, but rather a Reprehension of them; Either

1. For the manner, that they did them amiss, not so as he prescribed, or
otherwise then he required; or end, as seeking themselves therein, Hosea 10.2.

2. Or for their unsuitable carriage, or bad lives accompanying the same.

Hereupon God rejected their Services, and expressed his dislike of them, as
being not his, but theirs, because of the iniquities inherent in their Persons,
or practiced in their Actions, or adherent to their Duties in their performance
of them.

God reprehended the Jews (in his Expostulation with them) Isai. 1.10, to 16.
not simply for their Sacrifices and Oblations, -- solemn Feasts and Assemblies,
as treading in his Courts, making Prayers, etc. because God had commanded all
these to be done as their Duties, (yea, God complains of his People sometime
for the want of these, Isai. 43.22, 23, 24.) but because they did not do these
aright; they did them hypocritically, not sincerely, without due affection and
devotion of heart, and outward reformation of life: and their hands, wherewith
they brought and offered their Sacrifices, and which they spread forth in
Prayer, were full of blood, Isai. 1.15. (i. e.) Cruelty, Oppression, Murder,
etc. Therefore God refuses to own, or to accept these their Duties, or
Services, as being done

1. By such persons as they were.

2. In such a manner as they did them.

Yea, they were abhorred of him.

See the like Expostulation of God with his People Jerem. 6.20. To what purpose
comes there to me Incense from Sheba? etc. your Burnt-offerings are not
acceptable, nor your Sacrifices sweet to me. God tells them that their Services
were none of them pleasing to him, because they rejected his Laws, and wilfully
said, We will not hearken, scil. to the Prophets, verse. 17, 19. and their lives
and courses were displeasing to him.

Christ reproved the Scribes and Pharisees in Matthew. 23.23. not for tithing
Mint, Anise, and Cummin, (for these were commanded by the Law, Levit. 27.30.)
but for omitting the weightier matters of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy, and
Faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Christ
blames not those that do the smallest things commanded (as some expound this
place) but those that think, when they have done these, Annotat.
they have done all that is required, and so securely neglect the greatest
Duties.

Paul reproved the Jew in Romans 2.17, to 23. not for teaching others, but for
not teaching himself, ver. 21. or for doing the contrary himself to what he
taught others, as stealing, committing adultery, verse. 22. not for abhorring
Idols, but for doing as ill, or worse, that is, committing sacrilege.

May it not be conceived, that God in this Psalm. 50.16. reprehends the wicked,
not simply for declaring his Statutes and Words, but for the manner, because
they did it in hypocrisy; and for the concomitants thereof in them, seeing
they hated Instruction, and rejected his Words, v. 17.

And may not these words, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes? etc. be
understood rather as an Expostulation with them about it, then a Prohibition of
them to it? (...) Quid tibi? What is it to thee? As if God had said,

1. How unfit, unable, and unworthy art thou to declare my Statutes, etc.
seeing thou art so vile, and do so, and so?

2. Or how durst thou, or wast thou not afraid, or how had thou a face to
speak of my Statutes and Covenant?

3. Or what profit or benefit will it be to thee, seeing thou hate
instruction, and live contrary thereunto, and art so hypocritically and
desperately wicked in thy self, loathsome and abominable in the sight of God?
All thou do is in vain, but lost labor, as to thy self: thy declaring my
Statutes, etc. (in such a manner) will neither be grateful to me, nor useful to
thy self; thou shall have neither acceptance nor recompense from God for the
same after this life.

Isai. Annotat.
1.11. (...) Why, or wherefore, or to what end, or to what purpose unto me (or
in regard of me) is the multitude of your Sacrifices?

Object. 3. If an unconverted Minister may by his preaching be an Instrument of
converting Sinners, then he may be saved, and glorified thereby; or in saving
others he may save himself, because God has promised, that they that turn
others to Righteousness shall shine as Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

Answ. The Ministers of God's Word are not (yea, cannot) be saved by, or for
their Works (as the Good they do to others, either Temporal, or Spiritual) but
upon another account, that is, by their Faith in Christ, and through the Grace
of Christ, the only way to Salvation, both for Minister and People. Peter
professed his hope hereof by no other means, Acts 15.11.

Yet the good success of their Ministerial Labors (through God's blessing) in
the Conversion of many Souls, will be found to their Praise, Honor, Glory, and
Joy, at the Appearing of Jesus Christ; and will add Brightness or Splendour to
their Glory, and Pearls to their Crown, and Fullness to their Joy: They shall
shine as Stars for ever and ever (according to God's Promise) that is, share in
the highest degree of Heavenly Glory (as some expound it) who are not only the
Children of God themselves by Faith in Christ, but Spiritual Fathers to beget
others unto God, and gain many Souls to God's Kingdom. Hence it is, 1 These.
2.19, 20
that Paul says to the Thessalonians, -- Ye are our hope, joy, and crown of
rejoicing, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming, ye are our
glory and joy.

As for those Ministers, that are instrumental (or used by God) in the
Conversion or Salvation of Sinners, to further the same, yet are unconverted
themselves, though they cannot be saved hereafter, yet they shall be rewarded
some way here by Temporal Remuneration. None can shine as Stars in the Kingdom
of Heaven, which do not enter into it, which without Conversion none can.
Therefore the place objected must not be thought to respect any that are
unregenerate. For Glory ever supposes Grace. And those, that have Grace to
carry them to Heaven, shall, if they here turn many to Righteousness, have
greater degrees of Glory when they come there.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 10. lin. 5. for confute read consult. p. 12. l. 17. r. no other marc. p.
16. l 1. (...) r. (...). ib. l. ult. (...). 1. (...). p. 17. l. 4. (...) r.
(...). p. 33. l. 1. r. and Debtors. p: 38. l. 17. sunt r. fuit. p. 40. l. 28.
r. (...). p 41. in the margin l. 7. r. multo plus. ib. in marg. l. 30. r. cap.
15. p. 45. l. 4. (...). r. (...). p. 52. l. 6. as r. and. p. 59. l. 24. r.
monumentis. p. 67. l. 30. delc or. p. 69. l. 15. as r. and p. 75. l. 2. (...)
r. (...). p. 84. l. 8. r. Disciplina. p. 94. l. 2. r. Creatures. p. 97. l. 8.
r. that may declare. p. 99. l. 7. r. alliance. ib. l. 16. r. long journeys
thither. p. 103. l. 15. r. wisdom. p. 109 (r. 108.) l. 20. r. did lead. p. 119.
l. 6 r. that other prohibition. p. 132. l. 14. fay r. fias. p. 138. l. 2.
restored r. reckoned. ib. l. 4. r. terminated. p. 142. l. 21. r. this place. p.
143. l. 1. r. ingeniously. ib. l. 7, 10, 30. r. root. p. 162. l 23. r. whither.
p. 207. l. 6. praesenttam r. praestantiam. p. 216. l. 5. r. his want of good.
p. 227. l. 20. r. Theodore. p. 229. l 22. as r. in. p. 230. l. 4. r. has. ib.
l. 19. r. Abbot. p. 234. l. 1. for VI. r. XIII. p. 238. l. 3. r. The other
manner. p. 243. l. 2. r. (...). p. 246. l. 15. makes r. teaches. ib. l. 19.
to r. by. p. 252. l. 16. VIII. r. IV. p. 299. at top for Psalm. 15. r. 50.


