A SERMON Preached to the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of MANNERS, In the CITYS of
London and Westminster.

February, 19. 1699.

Published at their Request.

By THOMAS REYNOLDS.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Mount on Tower Hill, and John Lawrence in the
Poultrey. 1700.

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS ABNEY, AND Sir OWEN BUCKINGHAM Knights, and
Aldermen of the City of LONDON.
Most Honored,
I Esteem it a favorable Providence, that my first appearing thus publicly
should be in defense of so Noble a Cause, as that of Reforming the Manners of
Wicked Men, which has overcome the reluctance I had to the publishing of this
Discourse. And the Post you bear in the Government of this Renowned City,
besides the honor of being admitted to your Acquaintance, has emboldned me to
offer it to your Patronage.

The suppressing of Vice and Immorality, which have too long been the Reproach
of our Nation, is such a work, as requires the Assistance of all that have any
regard to Religion or Virtue: and it is not the least of our Public Blessings,
that so many of your Rank and Quality are ready to lend their helping hand to
it.

This is a Design that greatly becomes Persons in your Station, and is truly
worthy of Those that bear the highest Character. Your Zeal therefore in
promoting it will be your Glory while living, and a considerable comfort to you
in the hour of Death.

They who act in a lower Sphere direct their eyes to you for encouragement; and
they are such as You that must animate 'em, and make 'em cheerful in their
work, who otherwise will be apt to faint and be discouraged.

You are better known than to need the display of Your worthy Characters. And I
much rather choose to be silent than incur the least imputation of Flattery. Yet
I hope you will pardon me that I have declared You the Friends of Virtue, and the
Promoters of what is aimed at in the following Sermon, by Dedicating it to You.

I beseech you to accept it as a Testimony of my unfeigned Gratitude for the
Favors I have received from you: And espouse what I have end eavour'd to
recommend to Persons of all Statious, that You may be reckoned among our
valuable Blessings; and as you outshine others in the Honors of this World,
you may partake of a larger share in the Glories of the other: which is the
Humble and Hearty Prayer of,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, Thomas Reynolds.

PROVE. ix. 7, 8. He that reproves a Scorner, gets to himself Shame: And he
that rebukes a wicked Man, gets himself a Blot. Reprove not a Scorner, lest
he hate thee --


HOW improper soever these words at their First view may seem to the present
occasion of our Meeting, a little Patience and Attention it is hoped will beget
in you other conceptions about them.

I have not chosen them to become an Advocate for Vice, or to lay
Discouragements in their way, who are vigorously bent to suppress it. No, my
Brethren, it is so far from my purpose to abate your Zeal, that I would do my
uttermost to increase and inflame it. And I heartily pray, that wicked men may
be sooner weary of their sins, than you in reproving them in all those ways,
and by all those Methods that are becoming, proper, and lawful.

And although my Text may carry a face contrary to what I pretend; yet I promise
my self some considerable advantage in drawing an Argument from it, that I
presume will be allowed to have strength in it, both for the justifying your
Laudable Proceedings, and encouraging your Perseverance therein.

It is more than probable some may from hence raise an Objection against you;
and for this very reason it is necessary these words should be considered and
understood, both for your own satisfaction, and the confuting of those who
would be glad to lay hold on any thing, whereby to disparage and give a check
to that good Work you are engaged in.

If I show that these words are not directed against your assisting the Civil
Magistrate in punishing Profane and Vicious Men, but from what they are really
opposed unto, they render it your indispensible Duty; may I not hope hereby to
wrest out of the hands of your Enemies one of the principal Weapns they may use
against you, and so do some Service to your Cause?

He that reproves a Scorner, gets to himself Shame: and he that rebukes a
wicked Man, gets himself a Blot. Reprove not a Scorner, lest he hate thee --

And is this all that is to be gotten (may the Objector say) by reproving
Scorners and wicked men? Is this all the Recompense to be expected? What wise
man then would engage in so fruitless a Service, and bestow his Pains where he
is like to meet with so bad a Requital? Were it not better to sit still at home
and sleep in a whole Skin, than by casting Pearls before Swine, or endeavoring
to pull them out of the Mire, to provoke them to turn and rend us? What man
will parley with an Enemy, when instead of bringing him to terms of Compliance
he is sure beforehand to be torn and cut to pieces by him? Who would venture
to reprove wicked men, when they instead of being softened and reclaimed
thereby, will but be the more enraged, and wound our Innocence while we are
striking at their Vices? Common Prudence and Self-preservation would teach us
to forbear in such a Case. But the rather should we do it when Wisdom her self
favors us with her Advice, and expressly forbids us to Reprove a Scorner lest
he hate us, implying that he certainly will do so, and this is all we are like
to get from him whatever kind Intentions we bear toward him.

Now it is of dangerous consequence to draw upon our selves the hatred of
wicked men; Men who have no Fear of God before their eyes, who are professed
Enemies to all that is Good, who have banished their Reason and debauched their
Conscience, who matter not what they say or do, nor which way their Tongues or
their Hands are employed so they can but discharge their Malice upon us.

And this being so as Wisdom her self who cannot err assures us, Attempts for
reforming the Manners of Scorners and Wicked men would seem a vain and
hazardous undertaking: A Work that a Wise man would be shy of, and no man is
under any Obligation to engage in, nay under an express Charge to the contrary.

If therefore by meddling in a Matter which does not belong to them, they
receive to themselves no other Recompense of their Pains, than Shame and a
Blot, that is, all the Dirt and Calumny that wicked Men can rake together and
throw upon them; they must charge it to their own Imprudence, and thank
themselves, for if they had taken Wisdom's Advice, they would not have done it.

This Objection has not (as I know of) been designedly taken notice of by any
of my Brethren that have gone before me, yet deserves to be considered as that
which not only may be urged by professed Enemies to your worthy Designs, but by
those who pretend to be of the wiser, that is, the more wary and cautious sort
of Christians.

And indeed this is an Objection they may be very fond of, because it seems to
carry some Plausibleness with it, and chiefly because it is an Arrow taken out
of your own Quiver; for thus they will pretend to direct your own Weapons
against you, and stab your Cause with that very Sword you use in defense of it.
But this, like an Arrow besides the Mark, does no execution; or rather, like
one directed into the Sky, falls down again, and wounds his Head who shot it.

To make this clear and evident, I have proposed to my self this Method in
discoursing upon the words.

First, I shall endeavor to give you the true genuin Sense and Meaning of them.

Secondly, Answer a Query that will naturally result from hence: And this in the

Third and last place will yield me a very fair Opportunity to expose the
Weakness and Impertinency of the Objection; and to make it evident, that what
Advantage may be had from these words, in the case under consideration, lies on
your side, and against your Adversaries.

And, First for the Sense of the words, there are three things which deserve
our Enquiry: as,

Who is designed by the Scorner and Wicked Man?

What is the Reproof we are forbidden to minister nto such?

How are we to understand the Prohibition when it is said, Reprove not a
Scorner lest he hate thee?

I. Who is designed by the Scorner and Wicked Man? I reply, one and the same
Person is understood. For it is agreed on all hands that it is the manner of the
Wise Man to repeat the same thing in the same verse in other words throout all
this Book. A Scorner is one of the worst of Men: He is a confirmed and hardened
Sinner, one who refuses Instruction, and is so incapable of Reproof, that
nothing will move him to become better: And therefore Wisdom passes such by,
and leaves them to their wretched Folly as Persons to be despaired of; while
those who being merely inconsiderate and deluded, she invites to her House,
because such (it were to be hoped) might become willing to receive her
Instructions, ver. 1, 2. of this Chapter.

Again, the Scorner is one who if reproved will but requite you with Shame and
a Blot, that is, will not only make you lose your labor, and thereby give
occasion to others to deride the Vanity of your Attempt, but like an ungrateful
Wretch will deride and scoff at you himself, as tho it were not enough to
reject your good Offices, but he must abuse you into the bargain.

He is one, who will malign and hate you, and whilst you reprove him, will but
throw Dirt in your face, and afterward traduce you behind your back; till he
has made you as black by Slanders and Reports as his Crimes have rendered him
in Reality.

And are there not many such Scorners in our times? Monsters! shall I say of
Men? yea Monsters of Sinners too! most Impious Wretches! who being perfectly
hardened in Wickedness, will hearken to nothing that might tend to reform or
better them. They are too big to be spoken to, too proud to be instructed, too
ungrateful to take any thing kindly at your hands. To endeavor to reform them,
is but to give them an occasion to become worse, since Contumelies and Curses,
Scorn and Contempt, a Hiss and a Scoff is the Reward you must expect. These are
those whom we may well suppose pointed at by St. Jude, concerning whom he
speaks, that there shall come in the last days Mockers walking after their
ungodly Lusts, Sensual, not having the Spirit. ver. 18, 19.

II. What is the Reproof here forbidden?

Reproof is Verbal or Real.

Verbal is the more Gentle way of dealing with Sinners, by speaking to them,
and reasoning the Case soberly with them, conveying our Reproofs as wholesome
Physic in the Vehicle of soft words and friendly admonitions. An Instance of
this we have in the first Chapter of this Book of Proverbs, where Wisdom is
represented as uttering her words, saying, How long ye simple ones will ye love
Simplicity, etc. Turn you at my reproof: behold I will pour out my Spirit unto
you, I will make known my words unto you. v. 21, 22, 23.

Real Reproof is a rougher way of handling them, and is the last Remedy that is
left, which therefore is not to be used till other Methods are found fruitless
and ineffectual upon them. This is performed by corporal Punishments and penal
Mulcts: And to this those words may refer which you have in the 19th Chapter of
this Book; Judgments are prepared for Scorners, and Stripes for the back of
Fools, ver. 29. And there we are directed to smite a Scorner, and the Simple
will beware, v. 25. that is, to punish a Derider of Religion severely, which
tho it do Him no good, may reclaim Others, or at least make them more cautious
and wary.

Now to which sort of Reproofs the Words of my Text do refer, will be very
easily determined, by any one that duly considers what goes before and follows
after. For I must by the way observe, that although in the Chapters which succeed,
there is seldom any Coherence either of the Sense or Sentences, but they lie as
so many precious Pearls loose and unstrung; yet here, and in what has been
hitherto delivered of this Book, there is a very plain Connection, and the Sense
like the precious Ore in a rich Mine, runs along in one continued Vein, as an
ingenious Author makes the Comparison.

To any one therefore who considers the Respect the words of the Text have to
what precedes and follows, it may appear beyond all doubt that the Reproofs
which are here forbidden must be confined to those which are managed in a way
of Counsel and Advice, Admonition and Entreaty, and all those other Methods of
Argument and Persuasion, whereby Ordinarily the Ministers of the Word or
private Persons would endeavor to reclaim Wicked men from their sins: And that
here is nothing in the Text or Context that has the least shadow of a
reference to that sort of Reproof which consists in the punishing Offenders by
the Sword of the Civil Magistrate. For in the beginning of this Chap. Wisdom is
represented as a glorious Princess dwelling in her Stately Palace, and sending
forth her Agents to invite poor simple Souls to her House to hear the
Instructions of her Mouth, which will yield as much Pleasure and Satisfaction
to the minds of her Scholars, as the most noble Banquet or delicious Feast to
their bodily Appetite. And further, the Text stands in a manifest Opposition to
ver. 19th, where it is said, Give Instruction to a wise Man and he will be yet
wiser, teach a just Man and he will increase in Learning. So that upon the
whole Context it appears that the words refer only to the Verbal reproving of
Scorners.

III. And lastly, How are we to understand the Prohibition when it is said,
Reprove not a Scorner lest he hate thee? This may be taken, either Absolutely
or Comparatively.

Absolutely, And so we are to let him alone; and as to what respects this way
of dealing with him, to leave him wholly to himself.

1. It supposes some former Trials, either by our selves or others, and that
there is the fullest Proof of his Obstinacy and Incorrigibleness. Which being
so, we are not to spend any further Time and Pains to no purpose upon him, but
pass him by as a desperate Wretch, with whom other kind of Methods must be
taken.

2. It may be taken in a Comparative Sense, which is frequently to be observed
in the Hebrew, where the Negative Adverb is commonly put for the Particle of
Comparison, as Chap. 8.10. Receive my Instruction and not Silver, i. e. rather
than Silver. It immediately follows, and Knowledge rather than Choice Gold. So
Joel 2.5, 13. Rend your Hearts and not your Garments, i. e. rather rend your
Hearts than your Garments. And so may we not accommodate this Hebraism to the
words of the Text? Reprove not a Scorner lest he hate thee, but (as is
immediately subjoined) rebuke a Wise Man and he will love thee; that is,
Reprove not a Scorner, but rather bestow your Reproofs upon those who will
receive Good by them, and heartily thank you for them. We should much sooner
turn to a wise Man, one that will hear Reason, and think upon what we say, than
one where all our Counsels will be rejected. Not but that such Emergences and
Circumstances may happen wherein it may be our Duty to reprove the worst of
Scorners to testify our Abhorrence of the Sin, even when we cannot not better
the Man. But usually and for the most part we should apply our selves to those
who will hear us, where there is the greatest likely hood of doing Good, with
the least Damage at the same time to our selves. And so the words teach us to
make a wise and discreet Choice of the Persons we would admonish, and not
heedlesly to expose our selves to the Contempt and Obloquy of scornful men: But
when all Circumstances considered there is the greatest Reason to believe that
we shall neither do Good to the Person we reprove, nor to Others, nor bring any
Glory to God, but only draw down an Inconvenience upon our selves, in such a
Case we are to forbear our Reproofs.

And thus it most commonly happens with reference to the openly Profane and
Wicked. Such generally do but make a mock of Sin, and deride every thing that
carries the face of Seriousness with it. To tell such of their Sins, does but
exasperate them the more; to check them in their Career, is to make them fly
out with the greater Violence; and to offer to control them, is to inflame
their Wrath, and increase their Hatred against us.

Here then it is fitting we should desist and hold our Hands, because when we
can do no Good we ought not to administer an Occasion of further Evil; and
since we cannot suppress Men's Wickedness, we should not do any thing that might
provoke it: Herein acting consonantly to those words of our Blessed. Lord, who
thought fit to advise us not to give that which is Holy unto Dogs, nor to cast
our Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their Feet, and turn
again and rend us, Matthew. 7.6.

But yet, as I have already observed, this is not so absolute a Rule, but may
upon some extraordinary Emergency admit of an Exception: And it may so fall out
that we shall find our selves under an Obligation to speak up boldly for the
Glory of God, tho we despair at the same time of any Good to the Sinner. Yea
Bystanders by considering our Place, Profession and Character, may expect
something from us: And to avoid being accused of Connivance or Cowardice, we
may find our selves bound to take some notice of Scorners: tho to speak
properly, I think this is not so much a reproving of them, as a clearing of our
selves.

When this is to be done, and How, and what are those Circumstances that must
determine us, as I have not time, so neither do I judge it fit for me to assign.
This must be left to a Man's own Conscience and Prudence; and it being a very
nice and critical Point, he has the more Reason to look up to God for his
Assistance and Direction: But setting aside some rare and special Emergences,
the Instruction the words afford us is to be the Rule of our Conduct toward
Scor ners and Wicked Men. And this leads me to a Query which does Naturally
result from hence, which is the

Second thing proposed, in answering of which I shall not only remove the
Objection that has been started, but make it undeniably appear, that because
we are forbidden to reprove a Scorner in the plain Sense of our words, for that
very Reason we are indispensibly bound to reprove him in the Sense that our
Adversaries oppose.

The Query then is this, If we are expressly forbidden to reprove Scorners and
wicked Men in a way of Counsel, Advice, Admonition, and the like; pray what
must be done, or what other course must be taken with them? In answering of
this Inquiry, I shall undertake to evince these two things.

I. That they must not absolutely be let alone, that is, be left to pursue
their hellish Courses with that full Swinge and Liberty, as to be entirely
without all manner of Control. But,

II. That the supreme Governor of all things, in his great Wisdom and Mercy to
the World, has appointed other Methods of dealing with such irreprovable
Sinners.

I. That they must not absolutely be let alone so to pursue their hellish
Courses, as to be without all manner of Control. The Reasons of this are so
strong and obvious, and the Absurdities of the contrary supposition so gross
and palpable, that there are none who do not wilfully shut their Eyes, but must
readily assen to the truth of it. And as for Scorners themselves, if we could
as easily turn their Wills, as convince their Understandings of this, we should
not only presently put to silence all their Objections, but save them from
those Severities which otherwise they must shortly fall under, and it may be
before they are aware.

But to speak somewhat to this, there needs no more to prove it than to suppose
the contrary: Suppose that Scorners were to be wholly uncontrolled, to live as
they please, and do what they list. The Consequences of this will appear to be
such, as must render it absolutely necessary for the Honor of God, the Defense
of Religion, the maintaining common Order, and the Peace and Welfare of Humane
Societies, that some Course be taken at least to restrain and curb them.

For if no notice were to be taken of them; if men of profane and atheistical
Principles, of unbridled Lusts and Passions, haters of all that is Good, and
open deriders of God and Godliness, were to be let alone to follow the depraved
Bias of their wicked Hearts, to what a pass must the World be reduced in a
little time?

The Vices of Men would not only grow up to an Excess of Boldness and
Insolence, but the Infection would spread like a raging Pestilence, or like a
devouring Fire, which tho at first it break out but in one House, and might
have been easily quenched, yet being let alone proceeds farther till it has
turned the whole City into a ruinous Heap.

Sinners would hearten one another up and take Courage, others would be more
easily induced to fall in with them. Their Zeal for Licentiousness (O that we
were as zealous against it!) would make them indefatigable in using all
imaginable Methods to strengthen their Party, and increase the Number of their
Proselytes. And if now, after all the Endeavors the Reforming Societies have
used to discourage them, they swarm in such Numbers among us, how would they
then overspread the Face of the whole Earth, and like a general Deluge drown
all Mankind first in Sin, and then in Perdition?

If Men might be suffered not only to revile Religion, but openly to renounce
Calling upon God, to profane his Sabbaths, to Curse and Swear, to Blaspheme
his Holy Name, to commit all the Outrages against Heaven they are capable of,
and to be guilty of all manner of Immoralities: What would become of Religion,
the Worship of God, and all that Honor we owe to him, and should be so tender
of?

If Men might pursue their inordinate and beastly Lusts without Interruption,
who would be safe either in the Street or in their Houses? And as we might
suppose the Number of the Good at such a time to be very small; so how would
they be as so many Lots in the midst of Sodom, who had it not been for a
wonderful Interposition of God, could not have kept himself from the violence
of those filthy Wretches, tho in his own House. Genesis 19.11.

In a word, If wicked Men were to pass on wholly uncontrolled, there would be
in a little time no Temperance, no Sobriety, no Chastity, no Truth, no Faith,
no Justice, no common Honesty: But Beastliness and Sensuality, Leudness and
Debauchery, Injustice and all kind of Immorality would take place of Religion,
and banish all Virtue out of the World. The bands of all humane Society would
be broken; and as Men would daily grow worse and worse, so they would not only
bring ruin upon others, but sudden destruction upon themselves: not only as
such extravagant Wickedness would hasten down the Judgments of God, as it did
upon Sodom and Gomorrah; but as there would need no more utterly to destroy
them than their own inordinate Lusts and outrageous Passions.

And these being now the most certain, natural and necessary Consequences of
men's unrestrained Vices and Corruptions (as none will deny) it does then most
unquestionably follow, that they must not be thus let alone, but that some
course or other must be taken to repel and rebuke, to conquer or at least to
curb and put a stop to their prevailing wickedness, without which Religion and
the honor of God would soon fall to the ground, and all the bands of common
Order and Government be broken and torn to pieces. So that the World could not
long subsist if Vice were wholly without a check, but would of necessity soon
perish by its own wickedness. And therefore,

II. The supreme Governor of all hings, in his great Wisdom and Mercy to the
World, to prevent its speedy and hasty ruin, has appointed other ways and
methods of dealing with scornful and incorrigible Sinners, who will not be
reclaimed by mild and gentle Reproofs. He has appointed that which shall have
more force upon them, than the strongest Reasons in the world. They shall be
constrained to do that which they cannot be persuaded to; they shall be forced
and driven to it even against their wills. When fair Words and Entreaties,
sober Admonitions, and friendly Advice will not prevail upon them, but they
persist to sin openly in the face of the Sun, to the scandal of Religion, the
contempt of the Laws, and the dishonor of God; they are to find, that tho God
may have sealed up our Mouths, he has not wholly tied up our Hands: And we
must make them do that by outward force and compulsion, which they will not do
by entreaty and persuasion. The stripes and corrections of the Rod, and other
mulcts and punishments, must supply the defects of the Word: And the Magistrate
must compel them to that, which Ministers and other good People cannot by
softer Methods obtain from them.

Therefore for this end God has invested the Civil Magistrate with power to
restrain and punish such daring Offenders. He is said to be the Minister of
God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.4. And in
another place is said to be sent of God for a Punishment of evil doers, 1 Pet.
2.14. He has his Authority from hence (as tho he were sent down from thence to
take cognizance of insolent Rebels) and it is God who smites, tho by the hands
of men.

And as it is the indispensible Duty of the Magistrate to employ his power for
God, in punishing the bold Impieties of these men: As he is not to bear the
Sword in vain, but to use it in suppressing their Vices and reforming their
Manners, as well as for other ends and purposes; so it is no less the Duty of
every one in his private Station and Capacity to be assisting to the Magistrate
in subserviency hereunto; by discovering Offenders, and bringing them to
Justice, by taking notice of those who break the Laws, and proceeding against
them in order to legal Conviction, that so they may be justly punished; such as
Blasphemers, Sabbath Breakers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, and the like profane
and beastly Sinners; such as deride and scoff at Religion, who make a mock of
Sin, and glory in their shame, who hate the Reproofs of the Mouth, and despise
all manner of Instruction.

These are the Scorners in my Text, and for these the Laws are made; these are
the proper Objects of punishment; Stripes are prepared for the backs of such
Fools as these. The Sword is put into the hand of the Magistrate on purpose to
be exercised upon these men, because by no other means or methods is there any
hope of bringing them to terms. And therefore tho we are forbidden to reprove
such, yet we are not absolutely to let them alone, or to suffer them to go
uncontrolled in their wickedness; but to apply ourselves to those other Methods
of dealing with them, which God has appointed, that so hereby they may be
brought to some amendment: and if they cannot be reformed in their Principles,
they may in their Manners; and although there were no hope of bettering them,
there might be somewhat done to prevent their hurting of others: as rude and
savage Beasts, which (tho you cannot change their Nature) may be chained up
from doing further Mischief.

And our assisting the Magistrate to this end, is what we are all of us in our
several Stations and Capacities obliged to both as Men and as Christians. To
this we are indispensibly bound, as we tender the Honor and Glory of God, the
good of the Society of which we are parts, the Welfare of our Families, the
Authority of the Magistrate; as we would not partake of other Men's sins, nor be
guilty of their Blood; and as we would put a stop to the spreading of Iniquity,
and avert the heavy judgments of God, or procure those farther desirable
Blessings we may need. And this being so, then in the

Third and last place, how fair an opportunity does this give me, and what
Scope does it afford to expose the weakness and impertinency of the Objection,
which your Adversaries might pretend to raise from these words to discourage
your noble Undertakings? How evident does it now appear, that your Opposers are
so far from gaining an advantage against you from hence, that on the contrary
whoever should offer to urge these words, would not only be presently put to
shame and silence, but have the weapon whereby he thought to stab your Cause
sheathed in his own Bowels? I mean, his own Argument would be turned into one
of the strongest Arguments against him.

How little pretense have any to argue from these words against your assisting
the Civil Magistrate in punishing of lewd and notorious Sinners? It is true, we
are not to use verbal Reproofs to a Scorner, we are not ordinarily to spend our
Breath upon so vile and impious a wretch, we are not to admonish and counsel
him; but are to forbear using any further Arguments and Persuasions with him.
And what then? must the Magistrate therefore not have any concern with him? or
we not yield our assistance to the Magistrate? whence do they infer this? where
is the Nexus?

But how convincing and clear is the reasoning on the other side? Because we
are not to minister verbal Reproof to the Scorner, and yet his wickednesses are
such as upon no account to be tolerated; therefore and for that very reason we
are to join with the Civil Magistrate in doing our utmost to suppress their
Abominations: for which very end the Sword is delivered from God into his
hands, that so they who will not be brought into order by methods of Reason,
may be compelled and forced into it by mulcts and bodily punishments. The
reasoning here is close and pertinent, so clear and natural, and so strictly
cemented and united, that all the malice of wicked men, and the subtilty of all
the Devils in Hell will never be able to break the force of it.

But yet after all we have said, I am apprehensive our Adversaries may resume
the Objection, and proceed to reply: We will acknowledge it is probable, they
may say, that the Text may be wholly confined to the verbal reproving of
Scorners, and so far it must be granted that our Objection is not pertinent or
valid. But notwithstanding, the reason on which the Prohibition in the Text is
founded, is applicable to your case, and if it holds true and has force in the
one, why may it not in the other?

Now is it not plain that in the method you take of reproving Scorners and
wicked men by the power of the Civil Magistrate, you incur their hatred and
malice? In your way of dealing with Sinners don't you make good the words, in
getting to your selves Shame and a Blot? does not your own daily Experience
confirm and verify it? do not the many Sermons that have been preached and
printed acknowledge it? a good part of which is taken up in solacing you against
the Calumnies and Reproaches of Scorners. And if here, in the sense given of
the Text, you are not to reprove a Scorner lest he hate you, and not to rebuke
him lest you get to your selves Shame and a Blot, why should you not then for
the same reason be forbidden to reprove him by the Civil Magistrate?

I shall give as short an Answer to this as I can, tho many things might be
said unto it.

It is falsely suggested that we are forbidden to reprove a Scorner merely or
solely upon the account of shame and hatred. For I have shown you, that when by
verbal reproving a Scorner there is nothing else to be got but shame and
reproach, no good end or purpose can be served that might balance the present
evil we sustain by administering our Reproofs: that is, there is no good to be
done to the Person we reprove, nor to others, neither any Glory to be brought
to God; there is nothing redounds from our pains but a reproach to our selves,
and a further exasperating of the wicked wretch: In such a case, we are to
desist and forbear our reproofs. But if any of those great and noble Ends I
have mentioned might be obtained; if by exposing our selves to shame we might
bring glory to God, or do any good, these are such valuable ends, that we
should not only be willing to sacrifice our Reputation, but all we had for the
sake of them.

And this now is the case with reference to our assisting of the Civil
Magistrate, which makes it vastly different from that in my Text. For by
bringing Offenders to punishment, tho we incur the reproaches and malice of
wicked men, yet we do thereby answer such good ends and purposes as do
infinitely outweigh the particular loss or evil we may sustain in the faithful
discharge of our Duty. For to instance hereby,

1st. Sometime a great deal of good is done to the person we reprove, he is
reclaimed and reformed, or prevented from growing worse.

2dly. A great deal of good is done to others, they are warned and admonished
thereby.

3dly. A great deal of evil is prevented that might result from men's
uncontrouled Impieties. And,

Lastly, a great deal of glory is brought to God, as Religion is defended,
God's Honor is maintained, his Name is reverenced, the Authority of the
Magistrate is upheld, and Order and Government is kept up in the world: Each
one of which ends, if but one might be attained, is so valuable, and all put
together so unspeakably advantageous, and such a general good, that no man
ought, nay no good man (that duly considers it) can be unwilling to sacrifice
his Name and Reputation, nay to venture his Life for the attaining of them.

And if in our Endeavors hereunto we get to our selves shame and a reproach,
we might use the Scripture expression, and say, if this is to be vile, we will
yet be more vile, 2 Samuel 6.12. Let them call me Informer, Busy-body, and a
thousand worse names, I Will matter them not. Let them heap up all the Dirt they
can upon me, I will still pursue these great ends. Much more might be said
toward the silencing of this part of the Objection; but this I judge to be
sufficient.

Having thus considered and opened the Text, cleared the Sense, and removed the
Difficulties which might seem to attend it, and brought them to serve you
Purposes instead of making against them, I now proceed to the Applicatory part
of my Discourse. And,

I. By way of Instruction in the following Reflections: as here we may take
notice,

1. Of the precipitancy and imprudent rashness of some well meaning People, who
will plentifully bestow their Exhortations and good Counsels where they might
reasonably expect not only to be rudely treated themselves, but that Religion
also should suffer upon their account. They fall to the reproving of Sin
wherever they meet it, without any consideration had of the Person that commits
it; and so for want of observing the rule of my Text, have done disservice to
Religion, and gained no credit to themselves. It is good to be zealously
affected in a good thing (as some of you have heard in a worthy Discourse from
those words of the Apostle) but then our Zeal should be tempered with
Discretion. It is, I must confess, a most rare and commendable Virtue, yet through
an imprudent misplacing of it may issue in very bad effects. But the Instances
of those whose zeal does transport them beyond their knowledge in this
particular are so few; and of such whose zeal does not keep pace with it, so
many, that I think it not needful to enlarge.

2. We may observe the adorable goodness of God, in prescribing this rule for
our conduct toward Scorners and Wicked men. Such is his regard to our peace and
quiet, to our good Name and Reputation, that he would not have us employ our
pains where we may not reap the pleasant Fruits of our labor, nor expose our
reputation where there is not a prospect of bringing more Glory to him by our
reproofs, than shame to our selves. Which one consideration should methinks be
an irresistible motive to induce us cheerfully to comply with the Duty of
reproving, since we are only obliged to it, when the accruing Benefit and
Reward will unspeakably countervail all the Trouble, Hazard, and Difficulty
which may attend the performance of it.

3. The words do also lead us to observe the most deplorable condition of
Scorners and Wicked men; how unconceivably sad their case must be, in being
thus left of God, and all good men, in being deprived, nay in depriving
themselves of one of the greatest Blessings under Heaven. For what a Blessing
is it to have a faithful Friend, who will admonish us of our faults, that so
Iniquity may not prove our ruin?

To be deprived of this is to be deprived of one of the greatest mercies, and
of a most suitable and likely means of our Salvation: yet this you see is the
sad case of those who deride Religion. For not only Solomon, but a greater than
Solomon, our Savior Christ himself, has forbidden us to misplace reproofs
upon those who are desperate.

4. The whole Tenor and Strain of what has been delivered, does not only
evince the necessity of Civil Magistracy and Government, in order to lay a
restraint upon the Corruptions, and reforming the Manners of those men in whom
no Counsels or verbal Reproofs will produce the desired effect: But shows us
also, how great and public a mercy it is to enjoy such Magistrates as will
righteously execute the Laws upon these Offenders, and who, if there be any
that will convict them, will take care that they receive such punishments as
their crimes deserve. Such Magistrates are public blessings indeed, and as
they are sent of God, are the Instances of his good will to Mankind.

Vice runs every thing into disorder and confusion: whatever therefore
restrains and keeps this from breaking forth, ought to be acknowledged as a
great blessing, as it is a binding up men's hands, to prevent their destroying
themselves, and hurting others.

And this again makes it evident that Magistracy is from God, that it is not
from the evil Spirit, who as he at first lost his own happiness, by stepping
out of his proper place and rank, would by introducing the same disorder ruin
the World, and destroy Mankind by the same methods whereby he undid himself.
The powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. And the Magistrate, as I
have before observed, is sent of God; that is, tho not the Man, yet the Office
and the Power comes down from Heaven, and this in infinite mercy to a sinful
World, which has not so much as a Principle left for its common preservation,
but if abandoned to its own Inclinations would hurry into ruin.

5. And this farther informs us of the honor of the Civil Magistrate, and what
regards we are to bear to him, even no less than to God's Vicegerent, and the
Guardian of our Laws: which should strike us with aw, and direct us to carry it
toward him with the highest Respect and Reverence. Such are said to be the
Gods of the Earth, Gods in Power, as they should be also in other Godlike
Excellencies. How high a Post, how honorable a Station then are they set in!
But which certainly is then most honorable, when they are most serviceable,
and do most thoroughly pursue and answer the ends of their appointment. And this
again.

6. Instructs those in their duty who have any concern or influence in the
choice either of such persons as are to concur in enacting Laws for us, or of
such whose place it is to see them executed. It is most plain from all that
has been hitherto said, that we are not to be directed merely by a great
Estate, or by regard to a Party, or biased by Relation, Affection, Dependence,
private Interest, and such like mean selfish and mercenary Motives: But we are
to take our measures from the nature and ends of Government; and therefore
laying aside all particular and by respects, and having nothing but the glory
of God and the good of the Community in our eye, we should make choice of such
Magistrates as will diligently take care and see that the good Laws we have be
duly and impartially executed, men (as the Holy Scripture describes them)
fearing God and hating Covetousness, who are no Respecters of Persons; who will
not be warped by bribery, fear, or private regards; Men of real Integrity and
Probity, men of Fidelity, Justice, Courage and Boldness; who will not fear the
face of Man in the cause of God; who when Offenders are convicted, will be sure
to punish them. Where such are to be found is not my place to direct, but yours
to enquire.

And then again, having chosen such Magistrates, it is our duty to obey them,
and in our several stations and capacities to yield them all the assistance we
can, and not to render them, so far as in us lies, only great Ciphers in their
Office through the want of our help; but that Iniquity being found out, it may be
brought under the correction of Justice. As you can do nothing without the
Authority of the Magistrate, so neither will he be able to do much without your
help and assistance. You are to be as Eyes to him in bringing criminal matters
under his cognizance, and he to be as Hands to you in correcting and punishing
them.

Now as a motive to urge and enforce all this upon you, I would desire you only
to consider that the obtaining of such choice blessings, as good
Representatives, faithful Magistrates, and subservient Officers, lies much in
your own power. For you (my Brethren) enjoy this unspeakable Privilege above
many Nations, viz. the right (in many cases) of choosing these persons.

If at any time therefore it should hapden (which God forbid) that there should
be any effectual Laws wanting for the supressing of Vice and Profaneness; or,
supposing good Laws, there should not be a sufficient Magistracy of those (who
come under your choice) to put them in execution; or if on the contrary,
Iniquity should be established by a Law, or publicly connived at, much of all
this would be owing to your selves, for that by your care and diligence at
first you might (in a great degree however) have prevented it. The miseries
which must ensue from such a posture of affairs might be looked upon as a just
punishment of your negligence, and it would then be in vain to cry out or
complain of the slackness of the Laws and badness of the times; for why did you
not use the means that were once in your own power to guard against these
evils? Thus much by way of Instruction. To proceed:

II. What I have endeavored to prove in the foregoing Discourse, does afford
abundant matter for the justifying your noble and generous undertaking of
suppressing the Vices and reforming the Manners of Wicked men. This is your
duty, and the sense of duty should bear you up under the greatest censures and
reproaches. Besides whatever you may incur of this nature, yet by doing your
duty you will answer (as I have shown you) such great ends and purposes, as
will make amends for all your trouble and hazard in the performance of it. Let
men go on to condemn you, you may be sure God will justify you; and is it not
unspeakably better to be censured of men for doing your duty, than to be
condemned of God for the neglect of it?

But why should any condemn you? If a man's house were infected with the
Plague, will any body blame you for shutting up his Doors? If those very
Persons who exclaim so much against you should have their Houses on fire, would
they reproach and revile you for endeavoring to quench the Flames? And if a
worse Pestilence and Fire be broken out, if men grow rampant in Wickedness, and
run up and down spreading the contagion, as tho Hell were broke loose, must you
be blamed for endeavoring to put a stop to it?

Will Men thank you for lending a helping hand to save them from temporal evils
and dangers? and shall they reproach you for laboring to deliver them from
eternal ruin? It will put a man to great pain to have his Leg or Arm cut off,
yet he will not blame the Surgeon, when it is to save his life; and must you
be blamed for punishing a Sinner to save his Soul? O ungrateful creatures, that
will thus requite your kindness to them!

But let us consider a little; If you are to be blamed, it is either because,

The Matter you are engaged in is unlawful in it self.

Or it does not concern you.

Or the Methods you take in the prosecution of it are unjustifiable.

As for the Matter and Work it self, my whole Discourse has been a full and
clear Justification of it.

To say it does not concern you, is very absurd and foolish. What! does it not
concern you to vindicate the honor of God? to bring Glory to his Name, the
thing you were made for? Does it not concern you to avert the Wrath and
Judgments of God from the Land, and to preserve your selves, your Families, and
the Nation from ruin? What does concern you if this does not?

To say your Methods are unjustifiable, this is what I presume they can never
prove after they have made those allowances, which in a matter of such public
nature and extent all mankind must own to be reasonable and just.

As for your entering into Combinations and Societies: They cannot reproach you
for this, when they consider the Order and Regularity of them. This has been
already sufficiently justified by another hand; and (as that Reverend Person
expresses it) it is no other thing than what is constantly done without offense
in cases of Secular concernment. Besides, can Wicked men think it no offense to
combine and club together, to carry on the designs of Hell in debauching and
damning one another? And shall not we associate and combine together to prevent
their ruin, if it be possible?

As for the Rules and Orders that are observed among you; do not very competent
Judges highly approve them? and if any condemn them, are they not for the most
part such as betray a very apparent malice or ignorance?

The only thing that seems to carry an ill face with it, yet will be found
highly commendable, is the business of Informing.

It is true, as it was managed in the late times, it was one of the most odious
and disgraceful things in the world, when a parcel of sorry, idle and
profligate Fellows, the scum of the Earth, to get a piece of Money to supply
their necessities, or to spend upon their Lusts, would inform against those who
were forced into Corners, and there met together not to plot against the
Government, but only to worship God according to their Consciences. This was
such an employment, that none but a generation of Vipers would be engaged in.
And indeed there is nothing in my opinion can render a man more infamous and
odious than to be such a kind of Informer. But to inform against the Vices and
evil Manners of Wicked men; to inform against Cursing and Swearing, Blaspheming
and Sabbath-breaking, Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness, and
other such hellish and brutal Practices, what reproach can there be in this?
This is what the greatest and best of men have not disdained or refused, as you
have had diverse instances given you by others out of the Scriptures.

But I only ask, Is the Law or the Execution of it to be reproached? why then
should Informing in order to execution? To have a Law that shall never be
executed, is all one as to have no Law. And how shall the Law be executed if
there be none to inform, and to convict Offenders in order to the bringing them
to punishment? And where lies the dishonor of doing our duty in this
particular? This is so far from being a disgrace to any man, that I must say,
it is the most honorable part of your whole work, as it discovers a brave and
noble Spirit, that is not afraid to appear for God against the worst of men.
Those who are most forward in this work, are most to be commended; as those we
reckon the best Soldiers, who will stand in the Front of the Battle, and engage
in the hottest service.

But to conclude, as it is every one's duty to see the Laws executed, so it may
in diverse circumstances be every man's duty to inform. And he is to be accounted
little better than a Coward, who will not engage in this piece of Christian
Service when fairly called to it.

What I have said therefore under this Head may be sufficient to vindicate your
Proceedings. And if there be any who will still continue to rail and
calumniate, it is to be suspected they generally are very bad men and of no
reputation. And then you need value their reproaches no more than the fleerings
of Fools and Idiots, or the loud clamor and bawling of mad Men. But having
shown how much there is to justify you of the Societies for Reformation of
Manners, I pass in the

III. Place to a Use of Reproof to those who most justly deserve it. And.

1. As for those who are open Enemies to Reformation, and are the Persons you
are to deal with, I shall not speak to them; they are the Scorners in my Text,
and therefore to be supposed very seldom present at these places, and upon
these occasions: And if I should address my self to them, it would be to no
purpose, and I have too little time to spend my Breath in vain. Therefore
leaving them wholly to your Management, I pass them by to speak

2. To another sort of Persons, of whom there is more hope, and they are those
who pretend to Religion as well as you, and are men of some Principles and
Sobriety, who notwithstanding have been too ready to condemn and cast
Reflections upon you.

That Profane and Wicked men should oppose a Reformation of Manners, is not to
be wondered at; the Reasons are plain and obvious, none can be ignorant of them:
but that any who pretend to Religion or Sobriety, who are not openly vicious
themselves, that they should discourage your good undertakings, and concur to
raise Objections against them, this is what ought to be deeply lamented by us.
Their Reasons must lie more secret and remote, yet I presume it not difficult
to guess at them. For what can they spring from but a narrow, contracted and
selfish Principle, from the want of a generous and public Spirit, and that
noble Zeal and Courage wherewith you appear to be inspired for the cause of God?

This indeed they blame in you as imprudent rashness and forwardness, a meddling
with matters beyond your Sphere, and a needless disturbing of your Neighbor.
But to speak plainly, I fear (without breach of Charity) that this is a subtle
Artifice only to salve their own Reputation by wounding of yours. And therefore
they are so liberal in bestowing their Censures upon you, that they might
escape those which otherwise must fall heavy upon their own Heads: As it
usually happens that they who are first in the complaint are most in the fault.

3. Those also I think worthy to be condemned, who tho they will speak nothing
against you, will act nothing for you. The work of Reformation may sink or swim
for them, they mind and matter it not, and are not at all concerned about it.
Now these persons are to be reproved for the neglect of their duty upon a
double account.

1. For not assisting in their own Persons. In such a Cause as this, wherein
the common Interest of Religion, and the good of our Country is so much
concerned: Every one should appear and show himself as there is fit occasion.
In case of an open Invasion every one is ready to take Arms, and make head
against the common Enemy, to defend their Estates and Liberties. And shall the
more valuable concerns of Religion and our Souls, which are of infinitely
greater Consequence, be invaded; and shall any man, can any man be so miserably
stupid and sluggish, so very cowardly and timorous, as either to sit still and
do nothing, or keep out of sight and run away from the Conflict?

Yet this I fear is the case of many, especially of those who when an
opportunity offers for their being singularly useful in an Office, slip away
and decline it, whereby a worse man comes in, or at least hire another to
supply it; who indeed will stand in the place, but take little care to
discharge the duties of the office; they will carry the Staff, but earn their
Money as easily as they can. There is little to be expected from a great many
who only serve in an Office for gain. Such will not ordinarily put themselves
to much pains, or expose themselves to notable hazards and difficulties. And
may it not be feared that the same motive that induced to accept of the Office,
may as easily corrupt them in it, so that they shall have no strength to hold a
great Offender when a piece of Money is dropped into their hands? What I have
suggested under this Head is one principal reason why a Reformation of Manners
is not more vigorously prosecuted, and which I have heard very much complained
of; and therefore beseech you to consider it, and not let so good a Cause fall
to the ground for want of putting your shoulder to the burden. And,

2. Such are to be reproved not only for their unwillingness to assist in
Person, but also for their backwardness in contributing to the Charge. And this
indeed is an offense of a higher nature, because it is so reasonable, and at
the same time so very easy, that methinks they should not in modesty refuse
it. This puts them to no trouble, and besides might be managed with that
secrecy if they thought fit, that there would be no need to fear incurring the
displeasure of any man thereby. If they had a Cause of their own to be pleaded,
they would not starve it for want of feeing the Counsel. But if the Cause of
God is to be pleaded, tho they are rich and abound, they will not spare a
Farthing; and yet their Assistance in this particular is greatly needed, and is
a further Obstruction to the Course of Justice. There are few such generous
Lawyers to be found who will plead in order to the conviction of a wretched
Sinner, without their Fee; and indeed it is their livelihood, and therefore
they may justly expect to be rewarded for it. And this is another matter I
would recommend to consideration, and beseech those that will not assist to
this good work in Person, to contribute however toward the charge.

Indeed I must speak it to the praise of the People of London, that they have
upon all occasions appeared very ready to afford a bountiful assistance to the
preaching of the Gospel which is designed to make men good. I wish they would
be as free and generous in furthering of what is designed for the restraining
and punishing of the bad: I hope they will. But with reference to those who
will yield no Help or Assistance in either of these respects, neither in their
Persons nor with their Money; how great supineness does it argue in them! and
the slender regard they have to the glory of God, or the good of their Country!
And how just might it be for God severely to animadvert upon them. And since
they would do nothing for the stopping the Plague of wickedness among us, their
Families should be first in the Infection, their Sin punished in the rebellion
and degeneracy of their Children; and when Judgments shall come upon the Land,
they should feel the first and smartest strokes of them.

3. Those are to be censured and reproved, who being in places of Power and
Authority, are unfaithful in their Office, not only as they connive at Vice in
not punishing it, but encourage it by their own Example, and browbeat and
discountenance such as inform against Offenders that they might be brought to
Justice. How sad is the case, when they that should be a Terror to Evildoers
shall become the patrons of Vice; who instead of discouraging Profaneness and
Immorality shall lead men on to it, and rather than use the Sword for the
punishing of Sinners, shall reach forth a shield to defend them.

It is a Crime which we condemn and abhor, when one in a private station is
found unfaithful to his Trust, tho it is in a thing comparatively trivial; how
much more in the Post of a Magistrate, and in a matter wherein the good of the
Public is concerned, where his Fidelity is too engaged, not only in point of
Honor, but under the sacred Tie of an Oath, the breach of which does render
him both perfidious and perjured?

An evil Magistracy has been reckoned of such fatal consequence to the Public
in ancient Governments, that they took all imaginable care whom they chose into
such a Post; and if any proved unfaithful, they thought no Punishment severe
enough for them. We may read of those who have been flead, and the Seats of
Justice covered with their skins, as a Mark of perpetual Infamy, and for a
Terror to them who should succeed in their places.

And tho we have no such frightful usages among us, yet the belief of a God,
and that Magistracy is his Ordinance, that persons in places of Power do act
under him as his Deputies and Delegates, and that they must give a strict
account another day of their trust, as well as other men; when the guilt of all
those Abominations which it was their duty to have restrained and punished
shall be laid at their door: All these things, I say, put together, would
furnish them with such considerations as are enough, one would think, to awaken
the most senseless and stupid; and make a man either afraid to take upon him
the Office of a Magistrate, or to resolve to execute it with the greatest
Faithfulness and Diligence. I pass to the

IV. And last use of Exhortation, wherewith I shall conclude. And,

1. As to what more especially respects your selves, who are of the Societies
for Reformation; my Exhortation to you is, that watching strictly over your own
Lives (which should be very exact and exemplary) you would continue to
encourage and provoke one another to this good Work. Be not balk'd by any
difficulties, discouragements, or oppositions you meet with, but consider your
great Lord and Master, who bore such contradiction of Sinners, lest you grow
weary and faint in your minds. Preserve the sweet Harmony and Affection that
has hitherto obtained among you, and increase the good Opinion you have of
each other, so that the Devil and his Emissaries by all the stratagems they
shall use may not be able to divide and weaken you. Go on to convince the
World, that whatever particular Sentiments you may have about lesser doubtful
matters of Religion, yet in the most substantial, plain and necessary things
you heartily agree, and can as heartily concur to promote them; appearing
herein for the cause of Religion as the ancient Romans for their Commonwealth,
with whom it was a generous principle to sacrifice their private piques and
quarrels to the public good. And did we all employ our Zeal more this way, it
would be found one of the most effectual means to put an end to those Heats and
Animosities that have been so much lamented by sober Men of all Parties.

I shall offer but one thing more, and it is, that you would yield all the
assistance to each other you can, by your often meeting together to consult and
advise about the most proper methods to prosecute what you have undertaken. And
might it not be of some further use in promoting this great design of
Reformation, if (as I understand there are diverse Societies, some consisting of
Persons of inferior, and others of a higher Rank) those of the latter sort
would favor the other more frequently with their presence, which will very
much animate and encourage them? like Soldiers who are observed never to fight
so courageously, as when their general Officers appear at the head of them. But
this I propose with submission.

2. As to those you would reform: It is not needful that I exhort you to what
others have so largely insisted upon already, and which I believe you are
careful to observe. It may suffice that I only hint to you, that you would make
the Word of God your guide in this important affair: And therefore bearing no
Wrath, Malice, Revenge, etc. against any man in your hearts, but strictly
observing the Rules of Charity and Mercy, you would see that with meekness and
compassion, and yet with great impartiality and prudence, you endeavor to
reclaim wicked Men from their Sins. And,

1st. By Verbal Reproof, if by this there is any likelihood of prevailing upon
them; not proceeding to rougher methods when milder ones may do, nor hastily
passing those by as incorrigible Sinners who may not be so: but having found
upon sufficient trial, or being well assured upon other grounds, there is no
good to be done this way; then

2dly. Apply your selves to that which God in cases of extremity has
appointed. If they are really Scorners, deal with them as such: and to stir you
up to the vigorous prosecution of the Laws against these hardened and obstinate
Offenders, I shall offer a few things to your consideration: As,

1st. That tho the foregoing Discourse should not fully convince you of your
duty herein, yet your own enlightened Consciences cannot but prompt you to it,
and tell you that God expects it from you. Here you do not run before you are
sent, nor answer before you are called. May those words therefore be always
fresh in your Memory, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart, thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Levit.
19.17. Implying that not to rebuke him is to hate him, to be accessory to his
Damnation, and guilty of his Blood.

2dly. It is your honor and glory to be engaged in this Work: what Service is
more honorable than the being employed in beating down the Devil's Kingdom, in
lifting up the Name of God, in promoting the Peace, Welfare and Happiness of
your Country, and in doing the most beneficial kindness to your Neighbor?

Indeed hereby we incur the anger and reproach of those we have to deal with,
but this is little to be regarded by us. And if we are calumniated for doing of
good, we ought not to be discouraged thereby, but esteem it our honor that God
has thought us worthy to suffer for his sake.

This is to be like our blessed Lord, who was grievously reviled and mocked,
even by those very Sinners he came to reform and save. Yet he went on in his
merciful design, tho at last it cost him his Life, and the warm Blood of his
Heart. This is to be like the holy Apostles and Martyrs, who had trial of cruel
Mockings and Scourgings, yea moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments: Yet they
persisted in their endeavors to amend the World. And indeed who should be
ashamed to be engaged in such a Cause as this, or afraid to die for it, since
it is worth losing a mortal Life, if it be to save but one immortal Soul?

It may afford great comfort to us, to think that all our present shame will
redound to our future glory, that every reproach and calumny we suffer will but
add to the luster and brightness of our Crown. For these light afflictions,
says the Apostle, which are but for a moment, shall work out for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Who then should fly back from such a
work? fly back! nay who should not strive and be ambitious to appear in it? and
herein be as forward to suppress men's sins, as they are greedy in committing
'em?

3dly. Consider the advantageous opportunity God has put into your hands for
the furthering your designs: we have a good KING, the brightest Ornament we
have ever seen in the English Throne, who as he has studied, and ventured his
Life to procure our Peace and Quiet, so he has not been wanting in his care
that under his Government we may live in all Godliness and Honesty. How often
has he expressed his desires of a Reformation? and by his Speeches to both
Houses of Parliament, and issuing out his Proclamations, has done his part to
endeavor it? And shall the KING cry for Justice, and will not the People too?
Would the King have us reformed, and shall we hate to be reformed?

Again, you have many of the NOBILITY and JVDGES of the Land, who in their
Letter prefixed to a Book entitled, An Account of the Societies for Reformation
of Manners, and worthy to be recommended, have publicly applauded the Design,
and the Methods proposed for the accomplishing of it; adding their most humble
and hearty Prayer, That Pious men of all Ranks and Qualities, may be excited by
this good Book to contribute their best endeavors toward a national Reformation
of Manners.

Besides, our REPRESENTATIVES in Parliament have taken care there should not be
wanting good Laws to discourage Profaneness and Immorality, and have made it
their humble Address to the King that he would issue out his Proclamation
commanding all his Majesty's Judges, Justices of the Peace, and other
Magistrates, to put in speedy execution those good Laws that are now in force
against those Vices, which was accordingly done.

And lastly, you have many good Magistrates that hold up the Sword ready to
smite, and only want your bringing Offenders to Justice. You especially of this
City are honored with this Blessing. The CHIEF MAGISTRATE, like an Illustrious
Head, communicates Life and Vigor to the Body Politic. On these occasions he
countenances you (my Brethren of the Church of England) with his presence in
your Assemblies, and all of us with his Power; and may he with the rest of his
Brethren continue to do so. May he carry the Sword triumphantly through this
City, driving Sinners before him, who are timorous enough when Justice looks
them in the face. May he entail a lasting honor upon himself by thus honoring
of God; and finally, may he thus set a truly great Example to those that shall
succeed him.

And now being favored with so fair a juncture and opportunity, having all
this to countenance you, a good King, good Laws, good Magistrates, and good men
of all Ranks and Qualities to own you, how should this inspire you with Zeal,
and embolden you in your Work? And how much of guilt will lie at their door who
act in a private capacity, if a Reformation of Manners be not vigorously
carried on! Stir up your selves therefore, and be of good Courage, and the Lord
of Hosts will be with you.

4ly. And lastly, consider the success you have hitherto had, and let that
encourage you. You have met with many difficulties, but have surmounted them.
You have begun the work, and that was the greatest difficulty of all; don't
faint therefore, but go on. Some have been reformed by you, and bless God
heartily for it, and more have been restrained. I hear your Societies increase,
and are strengthened; may they do so still. This will put Sinners out of heart.
They begin to give ground; do you not only maintain yours, but pursue them.

And thus, if out of a conviction of your duty, and an aim at the glory of God,
joining a pity to Sinners with your punishing of 'em, and praying God to bless
those Punishments to them, you vigorously prosecute your charitable and noble
Undertaking, you will do abundance of good, you will at least drive Sin into
corners; and tho men should not cease to commit it, you will no longer behold
it; and if you cannot remove guilt from their Persons, you will from the
Nation. You will avert the heavy Judgments of God, and draw down a Blessing
upon your selves, your Families, the Land; and when you have done your work,
and your life is ended, Men will have reason to say as they are following you
to your grave, we accompany the Corpse of one, who while he lived was a Reformer
of this World, and is now gone to live in a better. But how short is this of
that Commendation which your departed Spirits shall have, when introduced into
the presence of your glorified Master, whose Interest you have industriously
promoted, and who thereupon will openly acknowledge and abundantly reward it by
saying, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter into the Joy of your Lord.
Amen.

FINIS.

