THE True English Interest: OR AN ACCOUNT OF THE Chief National Improvements;
IN Some Political Observations, Demonstrating an Infallible Advance of this
Nation to Infinite Wealth and Greatness, Trade and Populacy, with Employment,
and Preferment for all Persons.

By Carew Reynel Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for Giles Widows at the Green-Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1674.

THE PREFACE.
Great Britain is acknowledged by all the world to be Queen of the Isles, and
as capable to live within it self as any Nation: Having not only all things
necessary for the Life of man, but also abundance of materials, and store of
Manufactures and Commodities to a superfluity for Transportation. And is so
incomparably situated, that Trade offers it self to all its Ports and Harbors.
The Soil of the Country rich, abounding with much Grain, Horses, Beefs, and
Sheep that wear the Golden Fleece, and other Traffic: Also Mines of Tin, Lead
and Sea-Coal unexhaustible; and no Nation in the Universe, but partakes of its
woollen manufactures. Its Seas every where filled with shoals of Fish, that are
as good as ready silver, to fetch in all manner of Foreign Commodities. Now it
is a very hard case, if the Heavenly Bounty shall by nature thus furnish us
with so great assistances, that we should not add to it and give some advance,
by our own Art and Industry, bringing in whatever foreign Arts, Trades or
Husbandries may be profitable to us: for doubtless we may Aggrandize our Trade,
to an Inestimable Account, if we would our selves, and make our Territories, as
rich and populous as we please, under so glorious a King and Government as we
have; had we but that public spirit as we ought, and gave countenance to brave
actions and industrious men, and minded the business of Trade and Populacy, as
much as we do Pleasures and Luxury. Get first but Trade and People which will
produce riches, and then pleasure will come of course. Riches are the
Convenience of the Nation, people are the strength, pleasure, and glory of the
Nation: But Trade preserves both. And if we be but industrious no Nation can
exceed us either in a home or foreign trade: For at home we have so many
materials to employ people, and men hardy and ingenious enough to work and
raise all sorts of manufactures within our selves which we have now from
abroad, yet we make not our own Silks we wear, our own houshold-furniture, I
mean Tapistry, nor our own shirts to our backs, which three manufactures, if we
had them full stockt, would make us infinitely rich and populous to Eternity.
And for foreign trade and commerce, this Island lies so surrounded with our
neighbor nations, and those of the chief concern and so near them, that it
seems designed for all manner of riches, and the seat of Empire: Being a Land
also pleasant, and its Metropolis London so great and glorious, that it invites
all people that come over to stay here. So that the Country being thus
accomplished, powerful, and substantial already as to fertility and ingenuity
of the natives, a little help and inspection will make it the most glorious
place in the world; and his Majesty the most potent Prince in Christendom. I
have hinted here at the chief advancements we are capable of, and those I am
sure will do the work effectually if encouraged; for though we are a Nation
already pretty substantial, yet it is easy for us to be ten times richer, and
that in the third part of an Age, if we will set aside some portion of our time
and money, for public actions, and such contrivances, that may be for the
general good. We are come to this Improvement that we are, not so much by the
indulgent care of rich men, as by the wants of some ingenious persons, forcing
them to improve themselves for a livelihood: But what perfection should we
arrive to, if (in imitation of his Majesty and Royal Highness, who much
encourage Trade, Ingenuity, and Discoveries, even beyond any former Princes)
other great and rich persons would set about the work, and private persons
would get public spirits, to labor after things so beneficial, not only to
the nation in general, but to every man in particular? We take up our time
about little businesses, and it may be factious discourses, when the whole
profit of the nation, which is properly a nation of trade, lies unregarded: And
half the charges that were spent in the last Rebellion would have brought the
Gold of Guiny and Riches of the Indies to us. Free Naturalization, and some
kind of general Indulgence, the Bugbear of former Ages, is now by Statists
found to be the great security and cement of Society, as well as the
Aggrandizing of them, to vastness of Trade, Riches and Populousness. What has
made the Hollanders to bid defiance to the most potent Princes of Christendom
but this? which now is plain to all the world, and legible to the most
obstinate: And when other Princes are at loss for trade, men, money, and vent
for their commodities, they abound in all these: and though a small Country not
much above the bigness of Yorkshire, yet is the richest, most populous, and
most trading spot of the Universe: although they have no Timber of their own,
nor any grain or manufacturing materials, yet they have more plenty of Ships
and all other Commodities, and reasonabler than any part of Christendom: And
though they have already ten times as many people as their native Country will
maintain; yet the great freedom, and trade they have, makes people of all
nations flock thither as to a refuge and sanctuary: So that they carry all
before them like a mighty torrent, Amsterdam declaring freedom to all the world
to come and dwell there, with equal liberty and privileges as themselves; and
might have still so continued, had not their ingratitude engaged his Majesty to
make them a little more civil to him, whose Predecessors first set them up.

All of us both Country and City should be endeavoring, how they may do good
in their generation, and be beneficial to the public: For if we were once full
of people and full of trade, rents of Lands would quickly raise, the Kings
revenue would be greater, the Nobility and Gentry richer, the Commonalty more
substantial, and the poor be all employed to advantage. We want people, and yet
as the case stands we want means to maintain them; when if we please, we may
increase our people by multitudes, and grow infinitely rich by them too: For it
is a sad case there should be so many lusty poor about every where, and yet so
many manufactures want to be brought in, which would set at work millions of
people more than we have to spare. For it is manufactures must do the work,
which will not only increase people, but also Trade, and advance it. It saves
likewise money in our purses by lessening importation, and brings money in by
exportation. How many decayed Gentry also of good families that want bread, and
are dispatched beyond Seas; when so many Forests lie unimproved which would
maintain them all, and might be so managed as to bring to his Majesty a good
revenue also? I wish some great persons would make it their business to look
after such great things. In the mean time I have thrown in my mite, and
endeavored to show the chief Improvements, and have reduced them to a narrow
room, that whoever has a mind to bend his study this way, may with ease
comprehend the groundwork of the English prosperity, and such Politics as are
proper for our Nation, hoping it may work a good effect, on some able persons
which may be instrumental to the public good, when they see the manner of
bringing it about thus contracted under their eye and to their use, and behold
so many advantages that may be made and yet lie unregarded.

THE CONTENTS.
1. INdustry. page 1. 2. Money. p. 3. 3. Trade in General. p. 5. 4. Home and
Foreign Trade. p. 7. 5. Trade to particular Places. p. 9. 6. Importation and
Exportation. p. 10. 7. Committees of Trade. p. 16. 8. Manufactures. p. 17. 9.
Husbandry. p. 19. 10. Of the Chief National Improvements. p. 22. 11. Linen
Trade. p. 24. 12. Of the Silk Trade. p. 25. 13. Tapistry. p. 26. 14. Of the
Fishery. p. 27. 15. Orchards and Vineyards. p. 30. 16. Tobacco. p. 32. 17. Of
the Salt Trade, Latton, and Paper. p. 36. 18. Of Mines. p. 38. 19. Forests. p.
40. 20. Cutting of Rivers. p. 42. 21. Variety of Trades, Professions, and
Manufactures. p. 44. 22. Of Employments, and Preferments. p. 51. 23. Of
Colleges, of Manufactures, and Enrichment of particular Parishes. p. 56. 24.
Of Marriage, and Populacy. p. 59. 25. Kings Revenue, Taxes, Customs. p. 68. 26.
Of public maintenance, and provision of Charity. p. 72. 27. Learning. p. 76.
28. Laws, and easing of Debtors. p. 80. 29. Of Navigation and Sea Affairs. p.
85. 30. Of New Inventions and Discoveries. p. 86. 31. Of Plantations. p. 88.
THE True English INTEREST.
1. Industry.
THE happiness and welfare of all People arises, by having or acquiring,
through some Industry or other, such convenience of livelihood, as may not
only keep them from Want and Poverty, but render them pleasant and sociable to
one another, this holds both in private Persons and Families, and also in
bodies Politic: that they may be able to grow and flourish, at least bear up
against the Malignity of Enemies and adverse Fortune.

Now Money being the common receipt, and standard of all the world, as to
commerce and community one with another, that Nation that has most Money, or
Goods Money worth, must needs be most substantial and wealthy.

And Money is gotten either naturally by digging it out of the Mines, or else
by Trade and Manufactury, supplying those which have money with such things as
they want: and so fetching of it to us by Merchandise. The first way we want,
the having of it in the Mine, and therefore must have recourse to the second,
of Trade, Manusacture, and things Money worth.

Wherefore we ought to furnish our selves, within our selves, of as many needs
of life as may be, by Manufactures, and all Husbandries whatsoever, that our
Country will make or bear, and want as few as we can, so shall less Money serve
our turn, and yet we have store of Money by making and producing those things
that draw in Money continually.

2. Money.
THat Nation that values Money most, shall have most of it: wherefore it is
good that the value of Coin be always somewhat higher than in our neighbor
Nations: so can we not fail of having it from them. Also to keep Money in a
Nation it is good to allay it a little, and Coin much small Money, which
disperses amongst the Commonalty and body of the Nation: and most of the large
Coin ought to be made plain and ill shapen, so none will be carried away out of
curiosity, whereas now all our fine Crowns are transported abroad and hoarded
at home.

To bring in the old Gold again it were well, the broad pieces might go for 24
shillings, and the 22 shillings for 26 shillings, and only these pieces raised
which would be easily known by their wearing and age: this would bring them in
a pace from beyond Sea, where they say great payments are made of our old Gold,
and keep them from melting here: so if there were also a de-coy piece of
Silver, as a fine Crown to go for five shillings and three pence, it would keep
them in very much.

Also if we valued some Coin of another Nation very high, as suppose six pence
in a Crown above the rate it went for there, it would be a means to bring over
that Money hither; and to keep our selves from any loss, we might raise the
value of our own Cloth or other Commodity accordingly; so might any Town in
England which abounds in a particular Commodity, draw in much Money to them and
Sale of their Commodity by valuing some one piece of Coin extraordinary, to go
current so in their own Town.

Also Money is gained by letting any one Coin Bullion that will at the public
charge.

3. Trade in General.
BUT Money is chiefly gained by Trade, and making store of Manufactures, which
other Nations want: and improving of our Ground with variety of Husbandry
Commodities, and to furnish them with such of our productions, for we ought to
supply our selves within our selves, that we need few Foreign things, and make
as many Commodities at home as possible, that Foreigners want and so Export it
to them.

For England is properly a Nation of Trade, and extremely well situated for
Commerce, and the Inhabitants ingenious, and fit for it, if encouraged: also
furnished within it self with store of Materials, which are the grounds of Trade.

But being an Island and independent from our neighbors, the less War and more
Peace we have the better; for Conquest of unprofitable Countries help us not
but hinder us, are chargeable and waste our People: our business is to keep at
unity with our selves and enjoy a free Trade, keeping only some Forts and
Islands in profitable places, whereby we become Masters of Trade.

Also such Laws might be made and contrived for the encouragement of Trade and
Manufactures, that without cost or charge Industry would increase, many
particular Arts rise of themselves, and Riches be produced of course. The chief
things that promote Trade and make it flourish, are that it be free,
naturalization, populacy, comprehension, freedom from Arrests, certainty of
property and freedom from Arbitrary power, small Customs, all convenience and
advantages for trading People: Loans of Interest, public places of Charity for
all wanting and distressed People, and also Employments ready for all persons
that want it; the more strict also Laws are against grand Vices, the more
seriousness, Learning and Trade will flourish.

It would be for the advantage of Trade that what ever Apprentice had served
his time in one Corporation should be free of any.

4. Home and Foreign Trade.
TRade is to be advanced every way at home and abroad, but especially the home,
as being of more Consequence than the Foreign: for what ever we can raise at
home we should never have from abroad. Foreign Trade is a secondary help, home
Trade is our primary advantage. Those Nations are observed to be rich and
populous, who waste nor their People in Foreign parts, but enjoy a great home
Trade, not going abroad themselves, but suffering all Nations that will, to
come and fetch their Commodities, as Persia, the great Mogull, China, and
Japan, and the French our Neighbors.

Though we lying so naturally for Trade, ought to encourage Navigation,
especially for the transporting our own Commodities, yet great care ought to be
had that Seamen be not exported so much as they have been and are; for it has
been our business to breed them up and other Nations to steal them away.

For the People of this Nation are lessened by it extremely, not one in three
of them ever settling again at home, but are decoyed away to New England and
Virginia, and several other places. And also the Dutch get vast numbers of them
to their Islands in the East Indies, and keep them there whether they will or
no, first enticing them into their Ships with great wages.

To encourage home Trade we should enjoin our own People chiefly to use our own
Manufactures, and make them pay treble Custom that bring in any Foreign
Manufacture, that we do make or may make at home, to encourage home-trade. It
were excellent to erect storehouses for the public work, and to buy up all
Cloth and other Manufactures in dead times of Trade, that the poor might be
always kept in work.

5. Trade to particular Places.
WE should take all possible care to find all the particular Towns, and
Provinces, and by Inland places, as well as general Countries, that want our
Manufactures, that we might find store of vent for our Commodities. Sometimes
private Creeks will entertain Merchandise as well as great Rivers.

The Guiny Trade would be much advanced by being freer; the Norway Trade at
present, we having occasion for such vast quantitities of Timber, swallows up
abundance of our Money for want of more proper things for exportation. The
French Trade by Importing so much of their Wines, Silks, Linen, Papers, and
Salt does much exhaust our Money. The Barbary Trade would be good if Tangier
might have a free intercourse to them; the Turkey, Spanish, the Guiny, West-Indy
Trade are very good to us, but the West-Indy Trade will be the only advantage
to us, if we fix it rightly, which will vend not only all our own Commodities,
but bring us store of Silver and increase Navigation.

6. Importation and Exportation.
WHere a Nation Imports by its voluptuousness more than it Exports, it must
needs come to ruin; Coin there going out in Specie for the over balance is
still maintained by ready Money. For Exportation is gain, but all Commodities
Imported is loss, but ready Silver or such Commodities, that being carried out
again brings in Silver from other Nations.

No Customs, or very small, should be paid for Exportation of our own
Manufactures. It were better to advance the Kings Revenue any other way than by
gaining Custom on our own Commodities, which hinders Exportation, or to
encourage Foreign Commodities that we can make here to advance the Customs.

For as too much Importation is the ruin of Trade and Navigation, so
Exportation is the life of them both: For we can never Export too much, but the
more we do, the more still will be our benefit, which also procures greater
Importation to profit as well as advance of Customs and Navigation: For let us
but Export three times the Commodities we do, and we shall Import twice the
Commodities we do, and yet be gainers; and the Customs and Navigation doubly
advanced, and the Nation in general richer; whereas if the overbalance be by
Importation all these are so much weakened.

Wherefore it is a great mistake of some who think the forbidding several
Commodities to be Imported, which we can produce, or turn into Manufacture our
selves, that the Customs are thereby lessened, for though they may be lessned
in that thing they will be highly advanced in another, through more
Exportation, which of course will bring in more Importation.

Wherefore we should contrive to make as many various things as possible for
Exportation, so should we grow rich of course, and Trade increase on our hands,
which otherwise will daily decrease.

For it is not all Trading advantages a Nation. A People may be undone by some
kind of Merchandise, for many Merchants, so they advantage themselves, care not
what injury they may do to the Public; for as they were wont formerly and do
still serve those of Guiny, to carry them Beads, Looking-Glasses, and such like
things, and bring away their Gold: so they deal often with their own
Countrymen: for finding us fantastical and voluptuous, they tempt us with all
sorts of French Toys, Indy and Japan trifles, stained Callicoes, Silks and
such pleasant things, and fetch away our Money and solid wealth. But I say let
us make store of all new Manufactures to tempt them with, and to barter for
them, and not send Money, then come with what they will. But as things are now
we are losers by most of our Trading, especially our French and Canary: we
Import, as one Author says of French Commodities, as Silks, Laces, Linen, and
Paper, and the like, sixteen hundred thousand pounds a year more than we Export
of our own: and of Canary Wine one hundred and fifty thousand pounds worth more
than we Export also. And to the East Indies we carry nothing but ready Money,
and bring in again nothing worth any thing but Spices, and though the pretense
is, that those things so Imported, when Exported bring in more Money than they
carried out, yet we find the Money decays, and they bring in little Money with
them, only still more superfluity of Wines, Silks and unnecessary toys. But it
were well if we could manage the East-Indie Trade as the Dutch do, who carry no
Silver from Holland, but drive the Trade with the Silver they get from Japan in
exchange for other Commodities, they bring to them, which we may do in a better
and speedier way than they can, if permitted by the means of the West Indies,
the Isthmus of Panama being within one hundred and sixty Leagues off Jamaica,
and but six weeks Sail from Japan, and driving the West and East-Indie Trade
under one Voyage, carry what Silver we will from the West Indies thither if it
is required, and so come back hither with East-Indie Goods, and West-Indie
Silver. But of this more in another place.

It is an extreme benefit to the Nation to encourage all manner of Exportations
of our own Commodities to Foreign Countries, and countenance and embrace all
Nations that will setch away our home Commodities, though in their Ships; so
should we have a greater advantage, than if we only transported them in our
bottoms, for Foreigners would not come but they would be resolved to take off
our Commodities. Then the Commodities that they bring, they would be forced to
sell at any rate, for they would not go back again without their Errand, so our
Commodities would be highlier valued. Whereas our own Merchants beat the price
down both at home and abroad. At home when they know we must sell to them or
none else. Abroad in the manner recited by proffering the Goods so plentifully
in their own ports: also by letting Foreigners come we should vend doubly to
them, and our own: and the quick and large vend would raise the price.
Wherefore the Act of transporting only in our own bottoms is apparently
disadvantagious to us, both as to Merchandise and the convenience of Ships and
Shipping Goods: also for Foreign built Ships, we might have at an easier rate
to purchase them, and our Goods would be transported also cheaper, by having a
double means, either by our own Mariners or Foreigners.

7. Committees of Trade.
BUT that there be more of Public good in Merchandise, and the confusion of
Trade taken away, it were well the Mysteries of Exchange were more publicly
known; and also that there were a Committee of Trade, being mixed with the chief
able Merchants that understand Trade, and to continue always; Who still should
be on the discovery, and study for the Improvement of Trade, so should we have
Trade brought more to a general benefit, and we may come to understand it is
the best Interest we have, to which purpose also it were expedient they had a
Court Merchant, to end all businesses speedily amongst themselves without
charge or delay, which now they are tired with.

8. Manufactures.
THe more Trade, Husbandries and Manufactures there are in a Nation, the more
people there will be, more employment for them, and more riches; every thing
again will vend the more one for another, being stockt with several ways of a
lively hood, and not glutted and over-stockt with any one Manufacture, as we
are with Cloth in England; when as if we had Linen, Silk, and Tapistry also,
it would employ us, and enrich us immeasurably. The Linen, Silk, and Tapistry
would be more Merchandable than any thing; as vending not only here, but
infinitely to our West-Indie Collonies.

For it is the Manufacturers of a Commodity, that is in general sale, that
imploys people and produces the great profit; although the original Materials
are not in the Country, as Silks for example, the making of which employs
abundance of people, and with them bring in other things by Exportation. The
Dutch gain by making our Cloth, and they have their Wool from us.

Trade and populousness of a Nation are the strength of it; and the product of
it is riches. Money, Trade, and populousness are by all means possible to be
kept in a Nation; the more populous, the more Trade; the more Trade, the more
populous, and the more Trade and populacy, the more Money.

But then Trade must be regulated; for if a Nation pursue either but one or few
Trades, populacy may be lost, for want of variety of Trades to employ men, for
they will go to other Countries where there is more Trade, and thus Trade will
decay for want of People, and so in the end People and Trade will decay, as
here in England; both which we may easily remedy.

9. Husbandry.
AS it is an advantage to have variety of Manufactures, so also it is to have
variety of Husbandries, for the more several Husbandries the ground is taken up
with, the more every grain and Commodity will vent one for another, and so
advance the rate of Land, produce greater profit and increase, and maintain
more people; but of all Plantations at present, Vineyards, Orchards for Sider,
and Tobacco Plantations, would be the most advantageous, especially Tobacco; it
sets an infinite of People on work, increases the rent of Land, and returns
great profit to the planter, as can be proved beyond all exceptions, if time
and occasion required.

English Sider is better than any. As good Wine has been made here as in
France, and as good Tobacco as in Spain, and sold for as great a rate by
relation, and if it were planted in England, it would be profitable to us,
better for Navigation, and the Kings Customs.

All manner of other Husbandries ought to be brought into the Nation that is
beneficial, as Hops, Liquorish, Saffron, Madder, Clover-grass, San, Foin, Oade,
Saffe Flowers that dies Scarlet, which thrives well here, and any other that
are profitable.

The more a Country is enclosed, and the less waste Grounds, Commons, and
Forests there are, the more populous, wealthy, and full of Trade it will be.

And the smaller Estates the Land is divided into, the better for the Nation;
the more People are maintained, and the Land better Husbanded.

As for the transportation of Wool, which some fancy would be an advantage; but
truly that cannot be, for then we could not make Cloth so reasonable, and it
would be a hindrance to the Manufacturing men; they object it would be better
for the Graziers. Not so neither, for if they transported it in its kind, there
would be no Manufacture of Cloth at all, it would then fall to be cheaper than
now. But to remedy the complaint of the Grazier, 'twere better there were less
grazing ground, and more to tillage, and Gardening, or other Husbandry; so more
People would be employed; for grazing depopulates extremely, and employs few
hands. If Wool be cheap, so much the better for the Cloth Manufacture; and it
will encourage the Husbandman to sow Homp, Flax, or some other Husbandry, which
were better for the Nation than grazing; or contrive to bring in People and
Manufacture, which would quickly make Wool and every thing vend by store of
Consumption; for it is want of several Husbandries, People and Manufacture that
destroys us, and the employing of ground to so mean a profit as grazing;
wherefore all care ought to be, to prevent it by more active and profitable
Husbandry.

10. Of the chief National Improvements.
THese following Arts and Manufactures, added to what we have already, would
improve and advance England sufficiently, and make it rich and populous, that
is, by setting up, 1. The Linen Trade. 2. The Silk Trade. 3. The Tapistry. 4.
The Fishery. 5. The Sider Trade. 6. Planting of Tobacco. 7. Vineyards. 8.
Enclosing of Forests. 9. Discovery and Improvement of Mines. 10. Advancing the
Salt Trade. 11. The Lattin Manufacture. 12. The making of Paper.


Observe that these things bring a new stock of People; who being employed upon
new Trades, will not only maintain themselves, but give employment and Trade to
all the old Professions, as much as if a new Nation were Planted in the midst
of us.

11. Linen Trade.
THE benefit of these will be inestimable, by the profit that will ensue
thereby, and the vast employment it will give to People. The Linen Trade will
save an infinite deal of Money we send to France and Holland, and employ half a
million of People; keep in Tillage much Land, set many Husbandmen on work, by
the great quantity of Hemp and Flax, that will be sown for the carrying of it
on, whereas now we make not so much as the Sheets to our Beds, or Shirts to our
backs. The Linen Manufacture also is of greater vend than Woolen; as being used
on more occasions, and in both cold and hot Countries and never fails of
Chapmen, or is ever dull.

12. Of the Silk Trade.
THE Silk Trade will also save us vast sums of Money, now sent to France and
Italy, and we make it here better and cheaper. And then we should have it to
furnish our selves and our neighbors; and transport abundance to our Southern
Plantations, and bring with it Silver or such Commodities, we must necessarily
want or otherwise pay ready Silver for. This Commodity also vends in hot and
cold Countries, and our Plantations in the hot Countries grow so considerable
and populous of late, that they will vend abundance of Silk, and Linen if we
had it for them.

13. Tapistry.
THE Tapestry would set whole Towns on work and consume our own Wool, and
wosted abundantly, and save Money in our purses; for the Upholsterers Trade, as
it is now, consists much of Foreign ware, which is a damage to us, which we may
make as well, and have enough to Export; also it encourages Weavers,
Wosted-workers, Drawers, and Designers, and several other Trades that have a
livelihood by it; these Manufactures would employ a million of People.

14. Of the Fishery.
THE Herring Fishery would employ nigh half a million of People more, both by
Sea and Land in managing the Ships, and catching the Fish. It is supposed it
may employ many thousand Busses, besides many other little Vessels and Boats
attending them, then there would be abundance of employment at home in making
Nets, Cordage, Sails, curing and ordering the Fish, and employ abundance of
Ship Carpenters, and raise all the Port Towns and Countries adjacent; and the
Fish would bring in store of Silver, and is it self as good as Silver to fetch
in any other Commodity we want, from any other Nation: and the most certain
salable Commodity to all our neighbors that can be produced. We have better
advantage for the Fishery than any Nation, the Trade being on our own Coasts,
and our own Seas. But if we will we may manage the Trade with their People,
procuring them to serve us in our Ships.

Now effectually to bring in both the Fishery, and the three former
Manufactures, besides Public Acts of encouragement, Naturalization, and
freement from Taxes, there is no way like this, that there be an Impost of
forty thousand pound per annum, and on some Commodity that may be constant and
certain, as Coal or the like, which should go to the raising of the Fishery,
Linen, Silk, and Tapistry Manufacture; and be so ordered that forty pound per
annum and a piece, should be duly paid to a thousand of the elder masters of
Busses, and diverse of the other three Manufactory Trades, which would give
pensions to two hundred and fifty men of each Trade constantly, and as they die
and fall off, the next Senior Buss-master or Manufacturing man to take place,
and this continuing during their lives: and their forty pound a year to be paid
not in ready moneys, but in Cloth or other English Manufacture, which would
increase the Trade also. If this course were taken, it would not only set up
and keep up the Fishery, and those Manufactures, but all other Trades also, and
enrich the Land vastly. And the Custom that would arise to the King by it,
bringing in Foreign Goods, would be infinite, and observe, the Fishery, would
be constanter to us than any Trade we have now.

15. Orchards and Vineyards.
THE Sider Trade would be a brave improvement of rent: an Acre of Ground many
times yielding fifty Hogsheads and more, besides it would save the bringing in
abundance of French Wine, however it would bring into use our own Liquor; if we
yet must drink Foreign also, it is more excusable when we consume our own too.
If it be made well it is a luscious and high bodied liquor, and esteemed by
many far above French Wine, as our Herefordshire, and Devonshire Gentry can
testify, and it were a good thing that when they planted Orchards, they would
plant with the best fruit, as Pippin, Pearmain, Redstreak, Golden-Rennet, which
they may do as cheap as the worst, yet notwithstanding you shall see the common
People plant whole Orchards of a pitiful sort of Fruit, that will not turn to
half the account of the other.

Vineyards also would do abundance of good in saving Foreign Wines, and taking
up the ground, helping thereby other Commodities to vend better. And if all
Gentlemen would have but what Wine they could make on their own Ground, they
would not be so much beholding to France as they are, and have so little thanks
for it. The chief thing in Vineyards is in choosing a luscious sort of Grape,
as the sweet Muscadel. Our ground is as good as theirs, if our Grapes were as
good; and the earlyer the Grape is the better for us. And if when the Wine is
made we do but pull out all the hard and unripe Grapes, and the green stalks of
the Vine, we may make better Wine than they do, for it is that makes their Wine
so rough and unwholsom, and often sowers so soon. I have drank as good Wine
here in England, as ever came out of France, both for small Wine like
Champeign, and a high Wine like Burgundy. Colonel Blunt and many others have
had good Vineyards here of about two or three Acres of ground, and sold many
Hogsheads to the Vintners.

16. Tobacco.
BUT that which would bring infinite wealth to this Nation (if the Law would
permit it) is the planting of Tobacco, it would also employ abundance of
People, in tilling, planting, weeding, dressing, and curing of it: it improves
the rent of Land extremely; for the Land which would not be worth otherwise
above ten shillings an Acre, will by relation be worth three pounds per annum
in Tobacco, and besides the Tenant shall make thirty pounds, and forty pounds
an Acre, all charges paid: before the severity of the Laws against its
planting, it went well forward, and would still, if it were reversed; as those
Countries where it began to be planted, do much desire, and would, it is
believed, willingly allow his Majesty the common rent of the Ground, or more,
rather than be frustrated of it, if required. For by relation there were above
six thousand Plantations of it, in Gloucestershire, Devonshire, Sommersetshire,
and Oxfordshire: all the objections that are against it, cannot vye with the
advantages that it produces. Some say it is not so good as Foreign; however if
People will take it as they do, and it will go off, what matter is it. It might
be better if no Tobacco were taken at all, but who can help that which is grown
to so great a use and vogue in the world. But others say it is better than any
Foreign Tobacco, especially for English bodies: and being a strong Tobacco,
they can cure it, and bring it to taste in a manner as they will, like Virginia,
Spanish, or Barbados, and has been often sold in London, by relation, for
Spanish, and as dear as any others. Some say it would spoil Virginia, what
though it should, we are bound to look to our selves at home first. Besides it
were better, if that New England and Virginia both, if possible, were removed
farther toward the South, for then they would consume our own Commodities, and
might meet with store of Silver and riches, whereas now they have little
necessary Trade for us, possessing only such things as we have. But they
consume our People here by transportation, and take the Bread out of our
mouths, by supplying Barbados, Jamaica, and the Southern Plantations, with the
same Commodities as we do. However it were better for Virginia, they planted no
Tobacco, they living but poorly on it, and it takes up their thoughts from
better improvements: as the planting of Mulberry trees, Vines, and Olives, as
they begin in Carolina, by which means they would produce Silks, Wines, and
Oils, which would turn to a greater account; and besides our Commodities that
we cannot raise, and so would breed a better commerce; again our planting here
would not take away their Tobacco Trade, for we would not wholly ingross it to
our selves, but plant it with equal liberty as others do, and vend our shares
with them. It would help us, and not hinder them: if theirs be as they say so
much better. Others object it would spoil the Kings Customs, and Navigation;
but I think it would much advance them, for Foreign Tobacco is not at all
prohibited to come in, and our Tobacco would fetch in so many other Commodities
which will answer to the rest, besides the Custom of its Exportation; however
it were better to supply his Majesty some other way, than by prejudicing the
common good. And indeed it would be a great gain to this Nation, and his
Majesty. All the South of England being fit for it; and as for Custom,
Navigation, and Foreign Trade; this is a Rule throughout, that the more home
Trade, variety of Manufactures, and Husbandries we have within our selves, the
more Foreign Trade we shall have also; from which flows Custom and Navigation:
for home Trade is the foundation of Foreign, and if we are full of home
Commodities, every private man will be of a public spirit to gain
Transportation for them.

17. Of the Salt Trade, Latton, and Paper.
THE Salt Trade would be a vast profit, if it were undertaken in all places of
this Nation where it might. Whereas now we have most of our Salt from France.
Then the Latton Trade would employ abundance of People, and consume our own
Commodities of Tin, and Iron, prove an excellent thing for Exportation. Paper
also if it were made here would employ many hands, and many Trades, And it is a
thing so generally used all over the world, that it could not miss of Sale; but
this is not expected to be brought in, till we have the Linen Trade, on which
this depends, as being made thereon. No Nation uses more Paper than we, and yet
make none our selves, but only some small quantity of brown Paper, and
Past-board, and if we made but the white Paper we used, it would set on work
thousands.

18. Of Mines.
THere might be abundance of Mines of all sorts found out more than there are
if carefully sought for.

Many Tin Mines might be found in Dartmore, and many places of Devonshire as
well as Cornwall, also store of Marble Mines are there, and more might be
discovered; also some where in the West are Mines of Loadstone.

Many Clays also are very profitable, as ordinary pot Clay, Tobacco-pipe Clay,
crucible Clay, and such that will endure the fire, and serve the Founders; as
in the Isle of Wight, and at Cheam in Surry, where it is sold for fifty
shillings a Load, for the excellency of it, by that honest Gentleman Colonel
Bugges, who now has it in possession.

Clay that makes China, they say, is lately discovered within the Nation. More
advantage might be made of Silver Mines, if regarded; and better Mines found
out.

More Coal Mines, and Quarries of Freestone might be found out, if looked after.

There is a kind of Rock-Salt, they say, lately discovered in the North of
England.

Though Mines yield no more than wages for the labor, yet it is great
advantage to the Public, in setting people on work, and besides gaining very
profitable Materials.

19. Forests.
IF the Forests of England were enclosed, what a world of People would they
give Estates to. Gentlemen that want Bread now, may then sit warm and be
comforted; it would give Estates to all the wanting people of the whole Nation,
for this Age; and let the next find out something else in their Generation:
besides his Majesty's Revenue might be much advanced by it also, who might have
three pence an Acre, per annum on all Forest Lands enclosed; also the more
Lands we have enclosed and planted, the more strong wealthy and populous we
are; but the less enclosed and planted, the less strong and wealthy. If Forests
were enclosed, the same Taxes would be a fourth part lighter than now they are,
to every body. The Nation would be so much improved, which is as good as
joining another Country to us for help: also what store of new People would
this breed, for Trade, War, or Navigation. What abundance of Farmers it would
increase, and maintain many thousands of poor Laborers; and abundance of
Tradsemen also, to supply the others with necessaries. There would be several
public Offices, and Employments for Ministers and others, in every new Parish.
And there would be to this Nation, in general, abundance of gain; and more
maintenance for numbers of People, there being above seventy Forests and
Chases, and several of them which are bigger than the Barbados; besides
abundance of Wastes and Commons.

It is observed that those Countries in England, that are most enclosed and
populous, are most wealthy. That which makes China also so remarkable, is their
great Husbanding and enclosing of their Country, that they say, there is no
more Wastes, besides the Roads, in all that vast Dominion, which makes it so
infinite full of People, Trade, and Cities.

20. Cutting of Rivers.
THis Nation might be greatly advantaged by cutting of Rivers, and making them
Navigable from one Town to another, and so breed a good commerce, where was
none before, as from London to Bristol, which is very Feazable to be done. From
Farnam to Guilford; Southampton to Winchester, and from Maidstone higher into
the Country; and from Lincoln; and in the North and West to many places. In the
North of England, about Carlisle, it may be cut quite across, and have course
from Sea to Sea; as they have done lately in France, where they have cut a
River across the Nation, from Bordeaux in our British Seas to Narbone; and Aude
in the Mediteranean Sea: that they may now Trade quite through the Country
about two hundred Miles.

Mr. Lee of the North his Engine, and Mr. Balyes Engine, both lately invented,
will cut Rivers now at an easy rate, were they but employed enough; this would
also set on work the poor extremely.

21. Variety of Trades, Professions, and Manufactures.
THese Arts and Mysteries, above mentioned, would employ at the least three
Millions of People, more than are now ordinarily employed. How bravely then
should we help our needy People, and supply our selves, and store us with
Money, brought in by Exportation, and what an infinite Trade and Consumption of
home Goods would this produce.

Many more Arts and Mysteries besides may be brought in, as the making of
Gilded Leather; all sorts of Normandy toys; all manner of Dying; making
curious Earthen ware of all sorts, China and the like, and abundance of others.
Then Husbandry of all sorts, as Saffron, Liquorish, Saffe Flowers, very
profitable, and grows well; the Flower flies Scarlet. It produces thirty pounds
per annum of an Acre profit, all charges born.

We should study all manner of ways to get new employments for our People,
that are profitable. What pains do the Dutch take to bring in ^ll Trades into
their Dominions; though we could do it here with much ^ore gain and advantage,
for Ex^mple, in making Latton, they bring their Iron Plates from Sweden, their
^in from Cornwall, their Coals from ^ewcastle, their Water from the ^arthest
part of Holland, besides the ^arge of their duties here, and yet ^ake great
profit.

Thus let us increase our People and Manufactures by Industry, and there ^ill
flow in to us all manner of Re^il Trades, and common Professions ^ill increase
to advantage, as being ^sie occupations, and which depend (...) the first, as
having their Original from abundance of People that are not Retailers, which
make n^ productions, but only pass the Money already gotten, from one to
another; gaining only by each other loss: Whereas Manufactures and Artificers,
breed and maintain People upon a grounded stock, supplying (...) with
necessaries, we could not have otherwise; giving us also occasion to transport
Commodities, and in exchange bring in abundance of more Riches. Holland for the
bigness has twice the populousness and Trade tha^ we have, being the Richest
spot (...) Ground in the Universe; and ye^ have but few Retailors, but the^
chiefly consist of Merchants and Manufacturing men, which is a greate^
advantage to the Public.

Again the more Goods of our ow^ we consume, the more we profit o^^ selves, and
less our Neighbors thus the Act for Burying in Woole^ though by some despised,
yet if (...) had gone forward, would have been great advantage in maintaining
va^^ numbers of People, and consuming things of our own growth. There being
many thousand persons that die weekly in his Majesty's Dominions, which would
have taken off much Woolen. And if all Men and Women, were bound to wear Cloth
in the Winter half year, it would be a great advantage to the Nation; for the
more we consume of Foreign Commodities, the more we strengthen Foreigners, and
weaken our selves, without we over balance it by our own Exportation. For if
we have not Manufactures, and home productions, had we never so many Silver
Mines, they would be exhausted; as we have an Example in the Spaniard, who
consumes all the Silver he has from the Indies on Foreign things he has
occasion for.

This is certain, that whatsoever Commodities we can make, plant, or produce at
home, it is very disadvantageous for us to fetch from abroad, and hinders us
from riches and populousness, which otherwise would increase extremely:
wherefore let us set up all Manufactures and Handicrafts possible; so should
thousands also of Retail Trades be increased, as necessary to supply
Manufacturing People; also advantaging Navigation by increasing of Ships and
Mariners.

Where abundance of Manufacturing people are, they consume and sweep away all
Country Commodities, and the wares of ordinary Retail Trades, with all sorts of
Victuals, wearing Apparel, and other necessaries, and employ abundance of
Handicrafts men, in Wooden and Iron work for Tools, and Instruments that belong
to their Trades, and so maintain and increase abundance of Husbandmen,
Retailers, and Artificers of all sorts, and they again increasing, take up more
Manufactures, and so they thrive one by another, ad infinitum.

It would advance Trade much, that who was Free and had served his time in one
Corporation, should have liberty to set up in any.

And also that Apprentices should not serve above four or five years to many
slight Trades; as also allowance for ingenious persons to set up themselves,
without being Apprentice, if they have a mind to it. So should many lusty Lads,
and able men become Apprentices and sober Tradsemen, which are loath to live so
great a part of their Lives in slavery, after they come to be grown up; thus
would Industry be encouraged, and many ingenious people get to themselves a
better livelihood, than those that have been longer bred up to it.

Also it were good that poor Manufacturing men of all Trades should be free
from Taxes.

And that there were Prizes and Rewards for all manner of Ingenuity and
Industry. But that I may speak once for all to Manufactures, the surest way to
bring them in, and establish them here would be, to forbid all manner of
Foreign wrought up Manufactures whatsoever to be brought in; whether Cloth,
Silks, or Linen; also Lattin, Paper, Riband, Gloves, Lace, and the like, at
least wise to put high Imposts on them; so should all Tradesmen here encourage
them quickly to be made in England, to supply their Shops. There would not be a
poor Manufacturing man, but would be sought to; and the Merchants, and
Tradsemen too, would both contrive to Export our own Manufactories, so that
then we might bring in what Foreign Commodities besides we would, having
Commodities of our own, to over balance them. And the best of our Gentry,
would be best pleased to wear our own Commodities, and the vainer sort would be
pleased also, when there could come none from abroad to tempt them. And all
people seeing the benefit that would follow, would promote it; and our own
workmen being thus encouraged, would grow great Artists, and curious in Modes
and Inventions.

22. Of Employments, and Preferments.
WE ought to find out Employments for all manner of wanting People whatever,
that are able to perform any thing. As also all manner of decayed People should
find help and redress by some public works of Charity, and provision for them,
that there might be no Indigent people found amongst us.

Comfortable Preferments for many ought to be provided, rather than great
Preferments for few.

It is good for the Commonwealth, that the Rich hoard not up their Money, but
employ the poor people in general works, as building of Houses, Colleges,
Bridges, or the like, Improving of Grounds, cutting of Rivers, discovering of
Mines, and digging of Quarries, planting of Wood, and many other things might
be Invented also. For we should endeavor still to bring in some new Trades
that may produce employment.

For employ but a multitude of People any where in the Kingdom, in such a way
what ever it is, that they may get their own lively-hoods, and they shall all
not only increase the stock of the Nation, but they shall bring great profit by
the other Goods and Commodities which will of course be vended on them; how
much gain therefore are new Employments and Professions, that not only maintain
themselves and consume our own Commodities; but also save Money in our Purses;
bring in riches, and make us flourish in People: Certainly the gain of it is
incredible. An^ had we but store of People, by Professions, Employments,
Manufactures or any way, we need not seek vend for our Cloth or Corn abroad,
for it would be consumed at home at great rates.

And when once our own Nation were so populous, and all in employment, that the
product of our Country, could not supply them, but we were forced to procure
Commodities from abroad, not by our own ill Husbandries, but by the
numerousness of our People, then would our Trade arrive to a height, and we to
a flourishing Condition.

For there are several Mysteries and Employments, that even Women, nay Children
of eight or nine years old, would earn more Money than they spend. As they say
about Norwich, the gain of their small Children exceeds their expenses above
twelve thousand pounds per annum. Much advantages have been made in several
Towns, by setting uniformly to some Employment. As at Manchester Lace, Blanford
Band-strings, Sheffeild Knives, Lancashire Fustians, Ipswich the best Sails
that ever were made. Workensop Liquorish, Farnhan Hopps, Saffron-Walden
Saffron, Winchcomb Tobacco. At Norwich, Canterbury, and Colchester, as also in
Spittle-fields, and some Suburbs in London, the making of all sorts of Stuffs,
Silks, Sattins, and Velvets, which arrive to a great height. Silks especially
at Canterbury, and the Suburbs of London; and with little encouragement the
Trade would be absolutely completed. At Maidstone they drive an excellent
Trade, only by Thread; which within this thirty or forty years, they did not
vend above forty pounds a week, now it is so increased, that they vend a
thousand pounds a week. So also at Exeter they vend, by relation, many thousand
pounds worth of Serges every week. How profitable have the Dutch Collony been
to Colchester, by being entertained there about twenty years ago; who settled a
rich Trade of Stuffs there, which since is extremely advanced; which was
offered first to Malden, who have lost much wealth by refusal of so brave a
proffer. In Foreign parts, Embden in Hollan^ sets forth seven hundred Busses
yearly to the Fishing Trade; Cambray maintains thousands of People in making of
Cambrick; Iper with Holland; and at Courtray Diaper and Damask. What an
infinite of Tapistry-men are there at Arras, Brussels, and Delf. Geneva wholly
lives on their Silk Manufactury. And Genoa in Italy, maintains eighteen
thousand People only in making Silk from the Worm.

In Grand Cairo in Egypt, thousands of People live by hatching of Chickens in
Stoves.

23. Of Colleges, of Manufactures, and Enrichment of particular Parishes.
TO put in practice a thing beneficial to the Commonwealth, it should be made
as Universal as possible; and that it be universal, all particular Parishes
ought to be employed in it. So if it be but an employment of common Industry,
yet it will turn to a rich and profitable account. Now Manufactories are so
eminently advantageous, that those of all things would do the business of a
Nation, being fit also for a general reception.

To which purpose 'twere well if in every Parish they had a College of
Manufactures, or some Art or other that would surely maintain the ordinary
People in that Circuit.

And observe that those Parishes that have Forest, or waste Land belonging to
them, it were well if a portion of it were set apart in this manner, or the
like to the public good, (viz.) Fourscore Acres to the College of
Manufactory, allowing twenty Families in the College, each Family Lodgings for
them, and four Acres of Ground, which they should have for the Manufacturing
man's life. Also there might be Glebe Lands allowed for all the public Offices
of the Parish beside; as the Minister, Schoolmaster, and Clerk, as also an
allotment for the Poor of the Parish. By this means there might be some
provision of certainty. They may advance them what besides they please. In
great Cities and Towns also, it were good there were public Colleges of
Manufactures erected, that should be bound to take in yearly so many hundred of
poor People gratis.

The useful Manufactures, Trades, and Husbandries the People may be employed
about, are many, (viz.) Cloath-Serge, Stuffs, Silk, Sattins, Velvets, Tapistry,
Linen, fine and coorse; as Holland, Cambrick, Diaper, Damask, Sail-cloath,
Fustian, all manner of Cotton, Chamlet, Drugget, making Thread, also Paper
Latton, Gilded Leather, Gloves, Ribbands, Lace, and many more.

As also Husbandries of Hops, Orchards, Bees, Liquorish, Saffron, Tobacco, Oad,
Madder, the Saffe Flower, Rape Nurseries, Vineyards, Cherry Gardens, and all
manner of Gardening.

So should the Country be enriched, and the People maintained, and all other
Husbandry Commodities vend the better.

24. Of Marriage, and Populacy.
THE Country complains of small vend of Commodities, which proceeds especially
from want of People; for our People were consumed mightily in these late years,
some three hundred thousand were killed in the last Civil Wars; and about two
hundred thousand more have been wasted in re-peopling Ireland; and two hundred
thousand lost in the great Sickness, and as many more gone to Plantations. So
that these things must bring us low of People: Whereas did we Establish the
Fishery Manufactures, and enclosure, it would quickly recruit us. For we are
able to contain twice the number of People we are, merely by Enclosures: Though
if we had but a million more of People than now, we should quickly see how
Trade and the vend of things would alter for the better. And this would hinder
people from going out of the Nation, when they may have Land, Preferment, or
Employment here.

Another way for increasing populacy, is by encouraging all sorts of trading
people to come and Inhabit here, which is done by making all Nations free
Denizens, that will live here. And why should not we, as the Hollanders do at
Amsterdam, declare all the World to have freedom in our Nation, as their own;
it would make us thrive infinitely, and bring in all the Arts, Manufactures,
and Ingenuity of Europe. Some object, they would breed a mixed Nation. As for
that they would signify nothing, as to the number of our own; if it did, why
may not several Nations live under one Government, as they do in Holland,
trading people value not that; they love to live where they are most secure;
Besides, coming in by degrees they would not be considerable. And generally
they that come over are men that would Marry English Women, so are English
presently; and are good Preferm^nt to ordinary Women, being generally
tradsemen, and Manufacturing men, as we see in many French and Dutch already,
that are perfectly English. However in half an Age they would be as much
English as our selves. The old stock going off, and the Children being born in
England, supplying their places; and however at present live as quietly, and
are good Subjects, and as great lovers of us and the Kingdom as others: or else
they would never leave their own Nation, so formally to Inhabit here; for all
that do so leave their Country, show an extraordinary affection unto this
place, and so are by all means to be received and countenanced. What ever they
are before, when once they come here, to be under our Laws, Customs, and
Government, they are soon all one with us. By this means also we should draw
back our own English from Holland and all Europe esides, and many of our
Plantations also; this and the Fishery would bring in an infinite Trade to
England, and so drein Holland of her Men, Money, and Merchandise, that we
should leave them bare of every profitable thing: And no way can we be too hard
for them like this, for the Fishing Trade is that which clearly sets them up,
the one gets them great Numbers of People, the other abundance of Money or
exchange for all manner of Merchandises; by this they get so much wealth from
all Places. Now if matters were regulated aright, we should very much out do
them in their own way; this Island lies much better for Trade, and is a much
more pleasant and capacious Country for Inhabitants, for they themselves had
rather live and purchase Land here than there: Land being cheaper, more Seats
to be bought, and every thing more convenient for such Merchants that have
gotten Estates in their own Country. And if once they were settled and fixed
here, they would bring over millions of Money, and many trading people also if
they may be free Denizons, with a toleration, and privileges suitable. Another
way of being populous is countenancing Marriage and a settled Life, giving it
many Privileges more than either single or debauched persons, and that none
but Married persons be capable of any profitable Office or Preferment. This is
the very Original of the well being and continuance of Nations. Upon this
property, Families, and civil Government depends, also Trade, Riches, Populacy;
and without this a Nation crumbles to nothing. Besides, Married People are more
honest, oeconomical, and Industrious. By the Laws of Lycurgus, elderly
Batchelors were banished the company of all civil and honest people. Where a
Nation is given to be Licentious, they breed but few Children. Lewd Women make
away their Children, or order it so they never have many. And it is an ill
Custom in many Country Parishes, where they, as much as they can, hinder poor
people from Marrying: for at present they are the very stock and seminary of
the Kingdom, they marry apace, and get a laborious hardy Generation, which is
best for a Nation. They value not Portions, so they are able to serve, work, or
any way earn their living, which is a brave humor. For we ought to increase
the world for the public good; and to be contented in a mean, and not
sacrifice our thoughts to Ambition; and were it not for these poor honest
people, we should be almost desolate. Strictness of Matrimonial Laws, and
Penalties against lewdness, breeds constancy and pleasure in lawful ties, and
hinders the very thoughts of loose designs; making people follow their callings
quietly, and soberly, when the pain of the Penalty spoils the sweet of Luxury,
and every honest man would be glad, that by this means himself is also kept
from such Vices, otherwise he would be apt to commit. There is a great
complaint of many people flocking out beyond Sea to Plantations, why is it not
prevented, it cannot be done by force, for who can keep in such that are ready
to starve for want of Bread, wherefore it must be done by raising of
Employments, Professions, and Trade for young persons, and Children, which
would encourage People to get them. For by that means we may employ twice the
number of People that we have. What makes New England, Jamaica, and the
Plantations abroad, increase so fast; but because they have Employments and
Estates for all People, and no poor among them; which encourages People to come
from abroad, and their own People to Marry, and get Children: when they know as
soon as they are grown up, they can give every Child an Estate, by setting them
out so many Acres in a fresh Plantation, so they increase ad infinitum, till
they have stockt the Islands and Country full; as they have in Barbados; which
Island being not above twenty eight Miles long, and fourteen Miles broad, yet
by relation contains fifty thousand English besides twice as many Blacks. And
if we did set up Manufactures, and enclose the Forests, we should populate as
much; we having several Forests bigger than the Barbados. And great Estates
should not be desired to leave Children but so much as to help Industry. Why
should not Ingenious persons, by public establishment, be allowed forty or
fifty Acres to a Family, out of these Lands, which are now more charges than
benefit. How brave a provision this would be for ruined Families, and
improvement to the riches, populacy and grandeur of the Nation. Who can blame
people to go beyond Seas, when they cannot live here; it is mere need and force
that drives them out of the Kingdom. And it is a sign of great. Ingenuity that
they will go, and strive to live any where. England is not half Peopled, and
yet we find not employment for those we have. Therefore judge you how it would
increase people and employments, if the Forests were enclosed, and how many
people lie wanting now, that this would help and relieve.

25. Kings Revenue, Taxes, Customs.
IT is a great strength, and advance also to a Nation to allow the Prince a
considerable Revenue, for so will he be able to countenance his Subjects, and
defend them from all assaults. And the keeping a plentiful Court, some small
Forces, and Navy, gives good Preferment to the Subjects; but Taxes were better
raised any way than from the Land, for that drives the Money out of the
Country, which seldom or never returns. And is hard to be got to it upon any
occasion, but it would be great advantage to his Majesty, and gratify his
Subjects infinitely if he could get a considerable Revenue some where from
without, by which means his own people might be eased at home, which would bind
them to him Eternally, besides the great advantage it would be to the Nation,
by such a yearly Income of Silver continually; and questionless the King of
England might have five times the Revenue he has brought yearly to him from
the West Indies, when he pleases, besides the vast Trade which would ensue by
it, to all his Subjects. However there might be ways found out, that no Taxes
might ever be laid, on the substantial part of the Nation, Country, or City,
Land, or Houses, but only on the Vices of the people, as in all Taverns,
Alehouses, Foreign needless Commodities, and on debauched persons, and also
double Customs on all such Goods brought over, that we might make here, as
Silks, Linen, Tapistry, Lace, Gloves, Ribands, Paper, and many things more.

Also whereas persons designed to live singly, always are debauched
themselves, and great corrupters of others; besides by avoiding Marriage they
partake not of the common troubles and charges of the Public, as others do,
but shift themselves, and live scandalously, spending their Estates idly. It
were well that no single person were capable of Preferment, and that all
persons who Married not at twenty five years old, should pay the tenth part of
their Estates to his Majesty: for they might better spare it than any body. For
it Engratiates his Majesty extr^amly in the hearts of his People; and the
generality and sober part of the Nation to be eased from Taxes, and all
oppressions, which ought to be properly the Penalty of Vicious persons; which
if all things of this nature were discovered, would raise a greater Revenue
than ever yet has been known. And this done without grievance to the Nation
but benefit.

And nothing advances the King of England more than to be esteemed the
Champion, and vindicator of the Protestant Religion throughout Christendom, and
to balance those Princes that shall seek to disturb them. And let this Nation
be a Sanctuary for them from all parts; so should his Majesty be truly great
in himself, and in the eyes of all the World; and nothing could he desire to be
done, but would be effected; so also should we be silled with Trading and
Mercantile people throughout all Europe. For it is observed that where the
Protestants are countenanced, there all manner of Trade and improvement follow
more than in other places, as well as advancement in Reason and Philosophy:
Being a rational and industrious people, not having their Souls or man's
inslam'd to superstitious Principles, which makes them hold to all ingenious
prosecutions: but having their minds free, and ready to embrace any
improvement, learning or Trade. And if his Majesty desires to advance his
Empire, it is but granting more privilege to Trade, and security to men's
persons, and properties from Arbitrary power; and control: then his fellow
Princes; and he shall not fail to draw to him all the Hands, Hearts, and Purses
of the neighboring Nations.

26. Of public maintenance, and provision of Charity.
THere is a great deficient in the Nation, which is Employment, and aid for
young Gentry that have not been bred up in the University, or cannot get
Preferment thence, yet are Learned or Industrious, though of small Fortune; and
again a subsistence for decayed and meriting men of elder age. Also a
maintenance for decayed and sick Soldiery and Seamen; likewise a provision for
Ingenious Manufacturing men, so should Ingenuity be encouraged, and complaints
of poverty, and discontent be taken away from the midst of us. And for a way to
raise these, four Colleges, for each of the aforementioned degrees, might be
founded of five thousand pound per annum Revenue a piece, and two hundred
persons in each College, which would be but twenty thousand pounds a year in
all, a rent which some one vain person oftentimes confounds in debauchery. And
yet this would give a small subsistency of Lodging, and twenty pound five per
annum to eight hundred persons in the four Colleges; and as they die others to
be chosen in their rooms. To effect this, a Forest or two only enclosed, and
well Tenanted to the best advantage, would suffice, which were a noble
enterprise, for the generosity of doing good, is beyond all other actions, nay
there is one Foundation, which would by relation, largely answer all these
ends, if it were looked into, and that is St. Katherines Hospitals, in the
Tower, whose Revenue is said to be above twenty thousand pounds per annum. Also
there is another near the Bath, of above a thousand a year, and now turns to no
account for the public, considerable. And many more doubtless might be found
out in the Nation, if inspected, that are not Alienated, but only wrongly
executed, or lie dormant.

The advantage of a Nation is to have many Preferments, for industrious and
necessitous persons, though but of an indifferent maintenance, for too much
many times prejudices people; but a moderation comforts, and does much good,
and it is pity there is not some way found out, that all persons in any
calamities, may have some comfortable relief. And it were well if the
Parliament would take this so necessary a thing into consideration; what were
one Tax of three or four hundred thousand pounds, for so great a work as this,
if it could be done, no other way: to give Preferments to all sorts of
Gentlemen and Scholars. According to their better Education, and Employment for
the meaner sort, by planting them in Colleges of Art and Manufactories, that
there might not be any but may live well one way or other. Certainly to so
great and good a work, all people would joyfully contribute.

27. Learning.
KNowledge in a Nation, makes a wise and sober People, as well as wealthy and
ingenious, and apt for every good thing; therefore Ignorance ought to be
destroyed, all manner of ways and Learning encouraged.

To which purpose it were well that the Arts and Sciences, were taught in the
Mother Tongue, and all manner of Books of use and Learning, in any other
Language Translated into our own; and that there were a public maintenance for
Professors, and Scholars that should teach the Sciences in the Mother Tongue;
and Accademies erected for that purpose, so should youth quickly improve in
Knowledge, and men be fuller of wisdom then at twenty, than now they are at
forty years of age. Not that I would have the Languages neglected, but all may
learn those as before. But that the English Tongue may be promoted and made
excellent, general, and useful in all manner of Knowledge. And young Gentlemen
that have a mind to it, may attend the Sciences without so much trouble, and
cracking their brains so many years about Learning the Languages. This would
make the generality of the Nation more Wise, Learned, and useful one to
another, both to themselves, and Country, and our Language would be popular,
and esteemed in all places. For the desire of retaining Languages, is only for
the Learning contained in them, which if disclosed without them, their
extraordinary use cease.

It were an excellent advantage also to all persons, especially Scholars and
Students, that the Arts and Sciences, and all manner of the best Knowledge were
reduced into a narrower room, and exacter Method; and that there may be one
Book, that may be composed in each Art, and Science, that may be absolute and
complete in its kind, and those to be written and compiled, by men selected for
that purpose, that are very eminent in such Arts and Sciences, that they who
have a desire to Knowledge, should be able presently to resort to the choicest
Book, and improvement in any Art or Science. And come to knowledge and
perfection in study, with much less reading and trouble than now. Learning
might be so reduced, that all Knowledge at large might be well bought for three
hundred pounds (or less,) which now ten thousand will not purchase.

And for a contracted Receptory of all Knowledge, it were good there were an
Enciclopedia or Body of all the Arts and Sciences, in two or three Volumes, in
the Mother Tongue. Alstedius has done very ingeniously in this kind, in the
Latin, but yet is capable of much Improvement; and a Book of this nature would
be most rare and excellent, and if it were exactly performed, would give to
mankind as much knowledge as were necessary.

Also store of Libraries in great Cities, are very useful; they are as good
almost as so many Academies for where there is a great concourse of People,
there are many of extraordinary parts, who yet have not abilities to compass a
stock of Books, which if they had a freedom of access to, would of themselves
arrive to great knowledge and perfection. Much more might be said of this
Subject, but I refer that to my Discourse of Advancement of Learning.

28. Laws, and easing of Debtors.
CAre ought to be had, that the property, liberty, and advantage of the Subject
be the especial grounds of Laws; and such Laws extremely promoted, that make
for a general good and profit to the Public. As for establishing unity in a
Nation, encouraging Trade, giving employment to the People, and increasing
populacy, and settling Estates, the Registers Office to be Erected, might be
beneficial if well managed.

And if Usury were abated it would promote Trade, advance Lands, make men abler
to give security, increase common Charity, and generally make men more
Industrious.

Taking of Arrests on men's persons, would also be beneficial to the Nation. And
if all Debts under fifty pounds were ended in the Parish where the Debt was, by
the chief of the Parishoners, it were very well.

And all Debts under a hundred pound were concluded by three the next Justices
of Peace, it would prove of good consequence.

Also care ought to be had, that men should not be Imprisoned at all for small
Debts, nor long for any Debt, men's persons being not an equal pawn for so vile
a thing as Money. And for great Debts, if the Law and Goods would not satisfy,
the person should be free, for by Imprisoning he is undone, that should
maintain his Family; then all come to beggary. So the Nation is prejudiced by
the malice of ill Creditors. And if men are more in Debt than they are worth,
they should yet have some small matter, as a fourth part unto themselves and
Family, incapable to be seized on; otherwise the Commonwealth suffers more by
the absolute undoing of a man, than is countervail'd by so exact Justice;
besides, Religion, and the Laws of nature, bind us to more Charity, and the
Creditor that Imprisons, and undoeth a man, ought to maintain him and his
Family; if not, the Law ought to take care he may, without being beholding to
the Creditor; for it is better a Rich Creditor should lose something, than a
Poor Subject be lost or rot in a Prison.

Also it would be a great advantage to the Public, and Trade one with another,
and Foreign parts also, if Bills of Credit were made to be good in Law, and
answer Debts; which should without ready Money, maintain, and advance Trade
infinitely; for these Bills would pass current as well as Money, and save also
very much the telling, and luggage of carrying Money up and down, and hinder
the loss received by bad, or clipped Coin, and manage a vast Trade with the tenth
part of the Silver now used, which would make Money abound every where for the
Common uses, and the ordinary conveniences of life. Many excellent improvements
might be made by several new Laws.

Also how many old Laws are there that bar us of our advantage; and how can we
expect to thrive till such be repealed?

We complain of ill rents of Lands, and yet bar that which would advance them;
as planting Tobacco, and bringing down the Interest of Money. We complain of
want of vent for our Commodities, and forbid Foreigners ^o Export them but in
our own bottoms, who will sooner do it than our own, and to more advantage to
^s.

We complain of want of Trade and Manufacturing People, and forbid them setting
up Trades, that have not ^een Apprentice to it Seven years: upon which account,
of late many Cloathiers and Serge dealers would ^ave been put down, had not the
fa^our of the Judges eased them a little for the present. Again, none can ^e
free of Corporations, without they have served seven years in the Corporation.

And also there is a Law to forbid any man to build a House, that has not four
Acres of Ground belonging to it.

And many more old Laws there are, that hinder our welfare and improvement, and
how is it possible for us to thrive if the Laws forbid us?

29. Of Navigation, and Sea Affairs.
NAvigation, and Sea affairs might be much advanced, by having public Schools
of Geography, and Navigation; and such there may be Erected, whereby Youth may
be taught in a twelve-months time, to conduct a Ship at Sea, as if they had
been Masters and Pilates many years; so that when they come to Sea, they are
Masters of their Ships at first sight; and then their chief business will be to
advance the Art of Navigation, by continual experience; instead of spending
their times in common Notions, of which they are already sufficiently stored.
The finding out the Longitudes, and making Salt water fresh, are two great
secrets now in search after, and there is great hopes of them; which if
performed will be very public advantages; so would also Post Ships to Sail
with all Winds swiftly, which some imagine feazible.

30. Of new Inventions, and Discoveries.
THere have been of late many Inventions, Improvements, and Discoveries, very
praise worthy; the Discovery of Magellan Streights, more than ever by Captain
Norbury; and Hudsons Bay, with the Beaver Trade there, by Captain Guillam,
Captain Goosberry, and others, by his Majesty's encouragement: also settling of
the Guiny Company; and the settling of New York by the Duke; and Carolina by
the Proprietors; the discovery of the Isthmus of Panama by the Jamaica men; the
making of fine China, brought in by Prince Rupert; the making of fine Glass,
beyond Venice, brought in by the Duke of Buckingham; the polishing Glass in the
nealing without grinding; and the way of cementing Glasses, by Mr. Reeves; the
polishing Marble by a new Mill expeditiously, by Major Calthrop; several
Engines for making Rivers Navigable, by Mr. Lee of the North, and Mr. Baily;
the bringing in of Saffron, Liquorish, Xantfoigne, Clover, Lucerne, and of late
the Saffe Flower, that dies Scarlet, and of very great gain to the planter, as
twenty or thirty pounds per annum an Acre above all charges; the making of
Latton is found out also, if encouraged; an excellent Sider Engine, that both
grinds and presses Apples, and will make you, by it, ten Hogsheads a day, found
out by Mr. John Worlidge, of Petesfield. Also an excellent invention of late,
for whitening black and brown Hair, so as to make light coulored Periwigs.

Many such useful Inventions and Discoveries would daily be produced, if
Rewards, and Encouragements, or Pensions were appointed for the Inventors.

31. Of Plantations.
IT concerns the English to Plant and fix Colonies, only in the chiefest and
most considerable fastnesses for Trade and Design: and not to waste men in
large and unprofitable Territories, which has ruined the Spaniard.

Most of our Plantations in the West Indies, except Jamaica, and Barbados, are
but unprofitable. And Barbados is small, but Jamaica is the place that will
turn to a great advantage to the English on many accounts, as by lying so near
the Isthmus of Panama; and for several other advantages which I shall not now
mention. But the very situation of this Island is extraordinary remarkable,
and it was the greatest blessing imaginable, that we left the Enterprise of
Hispaniola, and set on this Island; for if we had studied an Age to six in a
place, where we might Center, the richest Treasure, and Trade of the Indies,
here it must be: for Jamaica is situated so well for Trade, or conquest of the
Main, if there be occasion, that no Island in the World lies like it for
advantage: it being the Key of the Indies, and naturally the seat of Riches and
Empire. So that if they had but a Trade once with the Indies adjoining, they
have no way to avoid being the richest Colony in the Indies: It being wholly
surrounded with the main Land, and Islands, lying in the very Belly of all
Commerce, in the Inland Sea of Porto-bell, which is in the heart of America,
and near the Mexican Gulf, between Peru and Mexico, facing to the South and
West; the richest Continent in the World; from which not distant any where much
above an hundred Leagues; and against it, on the North, lie the two great
Islands of Cuba and Hispaniola; and a little be-hither Eastwards, are the
Caribbee Islands; but this lies in the midst of all, as Queen of the Indian
Isles; and no Ship that comes from the West Indies, but must pass by one end of
this Isle, before they come to the Gulf of Florida: which place all Ships must
pass that come for Europe. And had we but a Trade with the Indies, so near
neighbors to us, we should vend more Commodities than we could send them, and
have in exchange store of Silver.

'Twere the Spaniards Interest also to let us have a free Trade and share with
them, of some few Port Towns on the Continent, to maintain a Trade and
neighbourliness between us; so should we not endanger them, but equally defend
the Indies with them; and they, by our means, have twice the riches yearly come
home to Spain, as they have now. But of this in another place.

Concerning our Plantations in America, the Southern Plantations are the most
advantageous to us; and it were well hereafter we planted no more behither
Jamaica, but settled and removed, if possible, rather our Northern Colonies
more forward. And these now insignificant Islands to us of Nevis, Mountserat,
Antego, and St. Christophers, if removed more Southwards, might prove very
advantageous to us. For our North Colonies, as those of New England, and the
rest afford only such Commodities as we have our selves, and so breed no good
Commerce; besides, they hinder Trade to our Southern Plantations, by supplying
Barbados, Jamaica, and the rest, with such things as we do: so that they take
the bread out of our mouths, and are ^^ther a disadvantage, than advantage to
us; whereas if they had been at first planted near the Bay of Mexico, they
would by this time have run down as far as the Silver Mines, by course of
ordinary populating, and besides breed so much Trade, that they would have
taken off all our Commodities we had to spare.

I could easily demonstrate, if it were required, a more particular account of
the West Indies of the Spaniards Interest and ours, and what great advantages
we might have there if we pleased. But I shall refer this to a more seasonable
occasion.

In conclusion; no opportunity should be slighted, but that we fix Colonies of
our own People abroad in the chiefest fastnesses, and most considerable places
of Trade and absolute advantage. Yet the whilst, encouraging populacy and
Manufactures at home, by priviledging the best Foreigners and Artificers, and
Tradsemen; countenancing them as our own, with all manner of promotion, to
bring in their Colonies hither: for it is observed that those sober Trading
People increase wealth extremely, and have none that want amongst them, but
contrariwise set on work all the Industrious round about them; and so we should
by this means of countenancing all the Ingenious and Industrious, have no poor
or idle persons amongst us, but be full of people, wealth, and riches, full of
all Trades, and Arts whatsoever. Land at thirty years purchase, and Employment
and Preferment for all persons.

FINIS
Reader,
THere is now newly Printed, that most excellent piece of Daily Devotions, or
the Christians Morning and Evening sacrifice: Digested into Prayers and
Meditations, for every day of the week, and other occasions; with Directions
for a Godly Life: By John Collet, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Founder of that
famous School near adjoining; the last Edition, with a brief account of the
Authors Life, by D. T. Fuller.

There is now ready for the Press, a Relation of Two Voyages to New England;
Performed in the years of our Lord 1638. and 1663. With a Chronological Tableof
the most remarkable passages, since the first planting of New England, by John
Josselyn, Gent.

Advertisement.
THose Famous Lozenges, for the Cure of Consumptions, Asthmaes, Phthisicks,
Colds new and old, Hoarsness, and Obstructions of the Stomach: Also a Sovereign
Antidote against the Plague, and all other contagious Diseases; they are a
great Cordial, and fortify all the Spirits, both Animal, Vital, and Natural.

And whereas formerly I made use of Mr. Richard Lownes, at the White Lion in
St. Paul's Churchyard, for the dispersing of them: These are to certify the
World, that I have taken them from him, to prevent any further abuse that may
arise, by those that have or shall hereafter Counterfeit my Lozenges, to the
fraud and abuse of so famous a Medicine: and whereas formerly I put my own Coat
of Arms on the top of the Paper; These are to certify that I now put the
Queens Arms upon the top of the Paper, and at the end with my own Coat of Arms,
in Red wax. The price is two shillings and six pence the Paper.

They are to be had at Mr. Giles Widows Bookseller, at the Green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard: whom I have deputed to be the whole disposer of them.

Edmund Buckworth, Physician to the Queens most Excellent Majesty.


