A SERMON PREACHED IN St. PAUL'S BEFORE THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lord Mayor.

BY THE Late Reverend Father in GOD, Dr EDWARD REYNOLDS, Late Lord Bishop of
Norwich.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for John Martyn, at the Bell in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with a Sermon many years since Preached in St. Paul's
before the Lord Mayor and his Brethren, by the late Right Reverend Father in
God Dr Edward Reynolds late Lord Bishop of Norwich.

This Copy I received from the hands of a Gentleman, who being an Auditor
himself of the Sermon, and of good acquaintance with the said Lord Bishop,
obtained it of him fairly written in his own hand with liberty to transcribe it.

Which being carefully done, and revised by the original, is here presented to
thy view.

This Gentleman bad me farther assure thee, that notwithstanding he knows his
copy to be exact, he would not have taken that boldness to have printed it, had
he not first obtained from the Author a willingness that it might be printed,
which himself would have done, but could not readily find his papers.

This encouragement made him willing to let the world be partaker of this
excellent and elaborate discourse, by which he being dead: yet speaks to thee
in the words of the Prophet, to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God.

Thine in all service, I. M.

A SERMON Preached in St. Paul's, before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor.
Micah Chap. 6. Ver. 6, 7, 8. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and
bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings,
with calves of a year old?

7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul?

8. He has showed thee O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee* but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.


IN the beginning of this Chapter we find mention of a controversy between God
the Plaintiff, and his People the Delinquent. The action, an action of
unkindness and ingratitude after two great deliverances; from the tyranny of
Pharaoh in Egypt, from the subtilty of Balaam in Moab. And this is an high
aggravation of injury when it is done by a friend, the Philosopher tells us,
Rhet. lib. 1. (...), you know was the deepest wound that Caesar felt; and Moses
is at the self same figure, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people, and
unwise? Is not he thy Father? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Job complains of it as of one of his
greatest afflictions, They whom I loved, are turned against me, Job 19. 19. yea
he that was greater than Job at Jobs greatest excellency of patience, cannot
but complain of this, that his wounds like Amnons were given him in the House
of a friend, Zach. 13. 6. The kiss of a Disciple did no less pierce him, than
the Nails of a Soldier. His Enemies that wounded him found mercy, when his
friends that betrayed him found none.

The people being cited to appear to this action, and being condemned by their
own witness, begin to betake themselves to counsel: Not how they may come and
stand before God, which is the gesture of men that can abide a trial; Isai. 50.
8. but how they may come and bow before him to deprecate the judgment which
they are forced to acknowledge.

And when they have advised upon a course of their own, and made tender of
performances of their own to make an expiation, they all come short, and are
rejected. God himself is pleased to be of their counsel, and he who in the
beginning of the suit was the Plaintiff to accuse them, in the issue becomes
their Advocate to instruct them; and when he had a judgment entered against them
upon their own confession, does himself notwithstanding direct the way how that
judgment may be reversed, and avoided.

He has showed thee O man, etc.

But what then are the counsels that he gave? Surely one would judge but such
as were very obvious, and which any man might have given to himself; To be
just, merciful, humble, religious. Who could not have said as much as this?

Certainly how mean instructions soever we may judge them, there is not a man
can learn them but of God. Let Israel alone here to counsel himself; we find
him at his Sacrifices, and Holocausts, with rams, and oils, with thousands, and
ten thousands, with a child, a firstborn, with as many costly and hyperbolical
evasions, and circuitions of his own carnal worship, will worship as Rhetoric
can express; Sacrifices more, sumptuous than justice could provide, Sacrifices
more bloody than mercy would allow; but all this while not a word of Justice,
or Mercy themselves.

But what? did not God show those as well as these? did not Moses as well
receive the pattern of the Sanctuary, as the Tables of the Law? did not the law
give an express indicavit for these too? Surely we may not deny it. But it is
still with respect to judgment, and mercy. Commanded they were, but not as
principal, either in point of obedience, for they must yield to the great
duties of the law; or in point of expiation, for they must lead to the great
Sacrifice of the gospel: Leave these things out, and then ask of God whether he
required those or no, and he will answer you with a Quis requisivit, Isai. 1.
12. Ask whether he will own them or no, and he will tell you, they are yours,
and not his, Amos 5. 21. Nay ask him whether they be good or no, and he will
tell you plainly, Dedi eis praecepta non bona, I gave them Statutes which were
not good, and judgments whereby they should not live.

Well then, my people, if you will needs be saved by offering of thousands, and
ten thousands, go not to the Mountains for them, but go to thy Conscience;
there thou shall find thousands of beastly, and ten thousand of inordinate
desires fit to be slaughtered, and sacrificed unto him.

If ye will be saved by Sacrifices, and oblations, and rams; No Sacrifice to
that which is reasonable, Romans 12. 1. No oblation to that of thy self, Romans 15.
16. No Rams to the rams of Nebaioth, the confluence of the Gentiles to the
Gospel, Isai. 60. 1.

If you will needs swim through rivers to Heaven, Rivers of oil are nothing
worth to rivers of judgment. Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness
as a mighty stream, Amos 5. 24.

If thou will needs go to God with meat offerings of oil, no oil to the
Samaritans oil of mercy and compassion, Luc. 10. 34.

If you dare not come to God without a firstborn, go not to thy self for one.
Thine is like thy self, sinful and unclean; but take him in thy arms who is the
firstborn of every creature. There is none but (...), one childbearing which
can save thee, 1 Timothy 2. 15.

You see which way the words look and what they intend, and that you may see it
yet more clearly, let us take them in sunder, and consider in them these two
general parts.

An anxious and solicitous inquiry of counsel. Hypocrites seek how to be at
peace with an offended God. A full and solid answer of the Prophet to that
enquiry.
In the peoples enquiry after God are observable two things.

The Question it self, and there are likewise Their festination, in quo
praeveniam, occurram, antevertam. So much the word imports, Job 4. 2. Deuter.
23. 4. Nehem. 13. 2. Psalm. 68. 28. Hab. 6. 2. Their prostration and humility.
Incu^vabo me coram Deo excelso.
Anticipation of the Prophets answer by proffers and addresses of their own in
many costly and difficult acts of external services instituted by God himself
Excogitated supererogations invented by themselves.



In the Prophet's answer are likewise considerable two general parts.

An Implicit reprehension and rejection of those. Positive and express
direction unto other duties.


First, A reprehension of Carnal confidence in external duties severed from the
great duties of the law. Arbitrary ways and projects of human devotion, beside
and without the rule of Gods word.


Secondly, A positive and express direction how to come and appear before God
in his worship with acceptance, in his judgment with confidence, in his
Kingdom with glory; to wit in the great duties of the Law and Gospel. And here
are considerable four particulars.

1. The substance of the duties required. 1. Judgment, and that to be done. 2.
Mercy and that to be beloved. 3. Walking with God, and for that to be humbled.
2. The principles whence they must rise. 1. The light of Gods law, Ille
indicavit, he has showed. 2. The authority of Gods will, Quid requisivit, what
he has required.
3. The manner how couched in these words, to walk humbly with thy God; which I
take not only for the specification of a distinct duty, but a qualification
also of both the other which are, To be done 1. In constancy, it must be
ambulation, a tenor, progress, proficiency; jumping or leaping will not serve
the turn. 2. In sincerity, with an eye to God, so as to agree with him and to
please him. 3. In humility, denying our selves both persons and duties. 4 In
faith, the foundation of all the rest, we must walk with him as our God.
And 4. the inducement unto those duties, which we find likewise couched in the
text. And they are in regard of our selves, human frailty, O man. Gods Divine
Majesty, he is a most high God, we cannot otherwise approach to him. Divine
mercy, he is a gracious God, ready to teach us how we may.


Duties they are good by conformity to the rule. Gods will, as expressions of
it. End, Man's felicity as means unto it.


I begin with the anxious and solicitous question of the guilty people:
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, etc.

I wonder to hear guilt talk of appearing before God. Look on it when it came
first into the world, and you will find it running away from God. Adam and his
wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God, amongst the trees of the
garden, Genesis 3. 8. And surely if the Sun and Moon be ashamed, Isa. 24. 23. if
the Heavens be not clear, Job 15. 15. if the Seraphims cover their face and
feet, Isai. 6. 2. if Moses may not draw too nigh, Exodus 3. 5. but did
exceedingly quake and tremble, Heb. 12. 21. if Elias cover his face, 1 Kings
19. 13. if Isaiah cry out, I am undone, Chap. 6. 5. if Job abhor himself in
dust and ashes, cap. 42. 6. if the 24. Elders cast down their Crowns, Revel. 4.
10. I wonder with what confidence Hypocrites dare think of meeting God. Is he
not a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. and how dare thorns and briars stand before
him, Isai. 27. 4? Does he not dwell in light which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6. 16? and what has darkness with light, for every one that does evil
hates the light, neither comes to it, Ioh. 3. 20.

Something surely there is in it that guilty men bethink themselves of meeting
God. By nature they do not so much as seek after him; God is not in all their
thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. They love not to retain him in their knowledge, Romans 1.
28. They are alienated, and estranged from his life, Ephesians. 4. 18. They would
fain be without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. They would have the holy one of
Israel cease from among them, Isai. 39. 11.

If you look to the two first Verses of this Chapter, you will find the reason
of all this. God has a controversy, plead he will; and as he called for Adam
when he hid himself, Adam where art thou? Genesis 3. 9. so here he calls forth
the people to this controversy, O my people, what have I done unto thee? v. 3
and they who contended with one another were to come near, and to stand
together, Isai. 50. 8. Act. 25. 16.

Now then Cum rex justus saderit in solio, When once God cites the Conscience
to his tribunal, Prepare to meet thy God O Israel, Amos 4. 12. When the Soul is
once awakened, and startled with this question, how will thou do to dwell with
devouring fire, and with everlasting burning? then the sinners in Sion are
afraid, fearfulness does surprise the hypocrite, Isai. 33. 14. When there is a
noise of the Bridegrooms coming, then the foolish Virgins think of their Lamps,
and ask after Oil as well as the wise. Wicked men themselves may be so
convinced of their sins, and of Gods greatness, of the guilt that is in them,
and of the terror that is in God that out of the force and principles of a
startled and awaked Conscience, they shall be affected with notable fear of the
wrath to come, and be constrained to bethink themselves of a treaty of peace,
and of preventing that wrath ere it overtake them. Even the Pharisees and
Sadducees, a Generation of Vipers, had some warning to flee from the wrath to
come, Mat. 3. 7. Ay Felix an unjust and sinful Judge, cannot but tremble at the
Sermon of this at the bar, Act. 24. 25. Thunder will make Pharaoh repent, Exodus
9. 27. and terror will make Judas repent, Mat. 27. 3.

The Prophet Eliah will drive Ahab into Sackcloth, and John Baptist the second
Eliah constrains Herod to do many things. The Scullion that cares not for the
foulness of the coat, will be afraid to handle it when he sees it on fire. The
most covetous man that is, will not dare to dive to the bottom of the Sea to
gather Pearls, or put his hand into a burning Furnace to hug his gold whilst it
is melting. The robber that threatens on the high way, bring him to the bar and
he will speak supplications. Next to mercy, there is no such Orator to persuade
guilty men, as terror. We having, says the Apostle, the terror of the Lord do
persuade men. He speaks of appearing before the judgment seat, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
When Saul hears of restitution, then he cried out, I have sinned, 1 Samuel 15.
24. When Esau perceived he had lost the blessing indeed, then he cried out with
a great and exceeding bitter cry, and with many tears would have persuaded
Isaac to repent, and change his resolution, Heb. 12. 17. Even the worst of
Sinners, wilful Apostates that have thrown away mercy, are yet amazed with
judgment, and with a fearful looking for it, and fiery indignation, Heb. 10. 27.

The Conscience thus awakened by Gods controversy, and summoned to his
Tribunal, will then from the pang and pinch of terror be mavelous inquisitive
after the ways of escape. As soon as ever John Baptist lays his Axe to the root
of the tree, the people, the Publicans and Soldiers are every one asking
questions, Luke 5. 9. 14. When the Plague of Locusts was upon Pharaoh, and his
House, then he sent to Moses and Aaron in haste to ask pardon, and entreat the
Lord, Exodus 10. 16. When God slew Israel, then they sought and enquired early,
even when their heart was not right, and when they were not steadfast in his
Covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. Fear is mavelous inquisitive. Watchman! what of the
night, what of the night, watchman! it doubles question upon question, Isa. 21.
11, 12. as sorrow does complaint upon complaint. And indeed this is an
excellent inquiry how we may do to stand before God; if men were not in this
case like Pilate, who asked a question but would not stay for an answer, Ioh.
18. 28. if they would not anticipate the Indicavit in the Text, but stay for
Gods own resolution. But as nothing is more contrary to faith than fear, Mat.
8. 26. so nothing has a more contrary operation. He that believes does not
make have, Isa. 28. 16. whereas he that fears cannot stand still, insomuch
that in men's fears they are said to fly seven ways at once, Deuteron. 28. 7.
There is no passion either more solicitous in asking counsel, or less constant
in following that which is given. Yea many times so desperate is the hypocrisy
of men's hearts, that fear or formality force them to ask the question; yet lust
overrules them to make their own answer. Iohanan, and the people came down to
ask counsel what they should do, whether go into Egypt, or stay in the land,
Ier. 42. 23? but receiving an answer contrary to their expectation, they tell
the Prophet plainly, that he speaks falsely, cap. 43. 2. And another time the
people came and sat before that Prophet, and enquired of God, but God tells
him, they kept idols in their hearts, and resolved they should be counselors
that should regulate their behavior, and God would not be enquired of, Ezec.
14. 17. 20. 30. chap.

The truth is, men would fain, if possible, reconcile Gods service and their
lust together; and therefore they take counsel of themselves, (...), making God
such a God to themselves, as Pasquilius speaks, as they had made themselves to
be unto him, they would fain be unto themselves Arbitri religionis and
praeceptorum, even d^^ores, as Hilarious Pictaviensis elegantly speaks, and
the Philosopher gives the reason of it in another case, (...), That every man
loves his own way best, as Parents do their own children; and therefore betakes
himself to many inventions of his own. So long as sin is loved, and lust
retained, men will not go downright to the will of God, but to carnal reason.
When God called to St. Paul by his grace, and revealed Christ unto him, then
only it was that he resolved not to confer with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16. If
Ahaz be commanded to believe, and for confirmation of his faith have a sign
offered him, he will not take Gods way to trust in him, but his own way, an arm
of flesh. I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord, Isai. 7. 12. Spiritual
things are above the reach of carnal thoughts, Principles, and not only above
them but against them. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God, Romans 8. 7. and
the natural man neither knows nor receives the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
It is the voice of flesh and blood, Nolumus hunc, We will not have him to rule
over us; and therefore as water can move no higher than the fountain of it, so
carnal principles can carry men no farther than carnal performances. And the
truth is, Carnal men have bu^gross and carnal notions of God and his Kingdom.
To be glorified, is to be like unto Christ, Ph. 3. As the eye by seeing the Sun
is made like unto the Sun, so he who rejects his image here has no true desire
of his glory there. Ioh. 3. 3. Having therefore none but carnal notions of God,
they have none but carnal notions of his service too.

And surely, to say truth, every man is so afraid of the wrath of God when he
begins to understand it, that though he consult with nothing but flesh and
blood, yet he will go far to escape it.

1. All outward duties he will perform with all punctual observation, be they
never so full of strictness, costliness, difficulty; never so numerous, never
so sumptuous, he will willingly undertake them all; so rivers are used to
express abundance, Job 20. 17. But here is his misery in that point, that then
when he does multiply them beyond number, yet he does dimidiate them by leaving
out the sole duties of faith and repentance, and reasonable service, which
through the Sacrifice should have lead his soul to the substance, and therefore
God objects it to them, They sacrifice flesh, Hos. 8. 13. whereas the sacrifice
of God is a broken Spirit, Psa. 51. 19. and therefore he calls multiplying of
sacrifices multiplying of transgressions, Amos 4. 4.

2. He will add unto this, outward rigorous operations, scrupulositates
negotiosas, as Tertullian expresses them. Many venturous austerities, and
supererogations of his own. One Temple will not serve his turn, but he will
build Temples, Hos. 8. 14. One Altar at Jerusalem shall not serve his turn, but
he will have Altars, Hos. 10. 11. One holy City will not serve his turn, he
will run to Bethel, and at Gilgal multiply transgressions, Amos 4. 4. Nay
ordinary Sacrifices shall not serve his turn, he will not go to the Herd, and
to the Stall only, for the first-fruit of his Cattle, but to his own bowels for
the firstborn of his body; Ahaz who would not be persuaded to take Gods way,
would take his own, 2 Samuel 28. 3. though God commanded it not, Isa. 4. 32.

A wicked man will part with any thing for salvation but his sin, and he will
sooner sacrifice his Child than sacrifice his lust, and if it be possible, with
the blood of his Son, will purchase to himself an annuity of sinning. If Herod's
child stand in the way of his timorous ambition, he had better have been his
hog than his son; as Augustus spoke.

And without question did the salvation of men hang upon this issue, the
sacrificing a firstborn, as it does indeed upon faith, repentance, and new
obedience, it would not be they, who cast it away now by the contempt of these,
would be so merciful to the temporal life of their child as to shipwreck upon
the eternal life of their own.

If men then might have the deciding of this controversy in their own power,
should we not, think you, hear multitudes now speaking like those in our
Prophet then, wherein shall I come and bow before the high God; shall I offer
up all my time in Sacrifices? all my substance in devotion? shall I change a
Palace for a Cloister? and put on Sackcloth instead of purple? shall I nail
mine eyes up to Heaven? and wear out my lungs with sighs? shall I bruise my
breast with buffets, and torture my back with scourges? shall I wither and
shrink up my body with discipline, and make it a House of correction to the
soul that is in it? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of sighs, or with
rivers of tears? shall I lick up the dust of the Temple, or kiss the stones of
the sanctuary hollow? Surely to do all these, and leave out graviora legis,
judgment, mercy, to abound in voluntary humility, and be puffed up with a fleshly
mind, to be taken wholly up with bodily service, and to leave godliness quite
out; to have a leavened countenance and a Pharisaical Conscience; law in the
phylacteries, and lust in the soul that is in it; is all but like him in
Plutarch, whose lungs were putrifyed, and he went to the Physician for a
whitloe on his finger. The best outward performances, though not founded in
will worship but in Gods own word, are all of them ^^t (...), Heb. 9. 10.
carnal ordinances, and (...), 1 Timothy 4. 8. bodily exercise. And such devotion
St. Basil compares to Bell the Idol, that was brass without, but clay within. It
is to do with religion as men do with the Ostrich, wear the fur or feathers,
but throw away the body.

We do then, says Clemens Alexandrinus, truly worship God, when we do imitate
him: And the sacrifice does not sanctify the man, but the conscience does
sanctify the sacrifices; as old Irenaeus speaks.

Take away this and you shall often find God vilifying his own institutions,
not as ordained by him, but as depraved by us. Thus he calls their Sacrifices a
shame, Ho. 4. 19. their Sermons Songs, Ezech. 26. 13. their Psalms, a confused
noise, Amos 5. 23. their prayers and incense, an abomination, Pro. 28. 9. Isai.
1. 13. their temple a den of thieves, Ier. 7. 11. their land a land of Sodom,
Isa. 1. 10. their people a people of Aethiopia, Amos 9. 7. their brazen
Serpent, Nehustan, a piece of brass, Neh. 18. 4. their circumcision, concision,
Phi. 3. 2. their receiving the Lords Supper, not receiving it, 1 Cor. 11. 20.
their sacrifices, transgressions, Am. 4. 4.

Well, but it may be they who bid so high for salvation, so many thousands, and
their very Children for advantage, had they known a better way, would not
failed to have tried that too. No; ignorance can they pretend none; for, Ille
indicavit, he has not been wanting to show them what it is which he requires
of them.

Such is the desperate corruption of the heart of men, even then when they are
frighted with the wrath to come, and very anxious and solicitous to fly from
it; they do yet wilfully shut their eyes to the right way, choke, suppress,
smother in themselves the light of saving truth; delude and cast a mist over
their own conscience, and willingly rather choose their own ways from wrath,
than God's. Haec summa delicti nolle agnoscere quem ignorare non possunt. So
long as men like not to part with their lusts* they cannot away with the light
that discovers them. False wares love not true, but false lights, nothing but
repentance will bring men to acknowledge the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 25. when men will
lay apart filthiness, then they will receive the ingraffed word, Iam. 1. 19.
when they will do his will, then they will know his doctrine, Ioh. 1* 17. when
they fear him, then they will see his secret, and have their eyes toward the
Lord, Psa. 25. 14, 15. when they are in his way, then they will take his
guidance, Psa. 32. 8. But until then they are willingly ignorant, 1 Pet. 3. 5.
and like not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 11. 2. do resolve to
contend against it, Romans 2. 8. In the things which they know in them they
corrupt themselves, and though God hate robbery for burnt-offerings, do yet
venture to hope, that when they have robbed God of substantial duties, he will
rest satisfied with their Sacrifices; and thus they deal with God just as
Bankrupts with their Creditors; think they can put him off with parcel payment,
and compound for so much in the hundred. So exceeding deceitful is the heart of
man, as then when it fears wrath, it does not so much as fly from it; hoodwinks
and hides it self, like Cowards when they see a blow coming do not ward it, but
only wink that they may not see it, and the sum of all their care is to perish
by stealth.

We have hitherto examined the peoples question and found, First, The
Consciences of wicked men, who naturally fly from God being shaken, and
awakened do bethink themselves of meeting him.

Secondly, Being thus shaken with the fear of wrath, mavelous inquisitive how
to escape it.

Thirdly, Not only making questions, but as it is said of the Mother of Sisera,
making answers unto themselves, and not betaking themselves as good men do to
the will of God, I will know what God the Lord will say; but to the dictates
and resolutions of carnal reason, and that making plentiful offers.

First, A most exact and scrupulous observation of carnal duties.

Secondly, Of many Arbitrary, and excogitated ways of will worship, and
supernumerary administrations.

Thirdly, All this not for want of means to discover a better way, but only as
subterfuges, and evasions, and thickets for a naked guilty soul which is out of
love with the spiritual and great duties of the law to shelter it self, and
take sanctuary in from the Majesty of Gods presence, and from that tempest of
wrath that did first awaken it.

And now as the Apostle stopped the mouth of cavilling disputers with (...),
Romans 9. 20. O man who art thou! and God draws Adam out of the thicket, with
(...), Adam, where art thou, Genesis 5. 8. so our Prophet here confutes all the
specious but most empty arguments of Hypocrites against Gods controversy with
(...), O man he has showed thee. If one man sin against another, the judge
shall judge him, but if a man sin against God, who shall entreat for him, 1 Samuel 2. 25. He is not a man as thou art, that thou should answer him, or come
together in judgment, Job 9. 32. Are calves, or rams, or children, fit to be
Umpires betwixt a sinner and his God? All thy former resolutions though
apparently full of zeal and devotion, and voluntary humility, neglecting thy
estate, thy body, thy bowels, adventuring all for mercy, were but the poor
dictates of flesh and blood; all of them but the nudum hominem, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 3. 3. as if a beggar should offer a bag full of farthings, or
his Child at his back to a Prince for his Crown. Not thy Sacrifices, nor thy
offerings, nor thy rams, nor thy rivers, or thy Children, or thy bowels will
serve the turn. But Ille indicavit, He has showed thee O man what is good to
thy self, and to God in his eyes and account. Not Sacrifice, and offerings, he
desires them not, he delights not in them. Psa. 51. 16. but to do judgment,
and love mercy.

And yet we may not think that God is careless of his outward worship, or of
any of that external order and decency which belongs unto it. If they bring the
lame, the sick, or any corrupt thing for a Sacrifice, they shall hear of it
with a curse, Mal. 1. 8. 14. All things are to be done decently, and in order.
Thus when Ezra read in the Book of the law, the people stood up, and when he
prayed they bowed down their heads, and lifted up their hands, Nehe. 8. 5, 6.
When our Savior prayed he lifted up his eyes to Heaven, Ioh. 17. 1. When the
solemn services were ended, the people bowed the head, and worshipped, 2 Chronicles.
29. 29. As men use a dead hedge to preserve a quick; even so the due observance
of that outward order in the people of God, which he has appointed, does serve
both to express, and to bear up that awful and reverend affectation which the
soul should have of him.

But there is the misery, and the mistake, that evil men being wholly carnal do
rest, and stop at that part of Gods service which stands in carnal ordinances,
not being either able or willing to perform spiritual services for want of
spiritual and holy affections, and then in this case the Holy Spirit is
express, (...), Heb. 10. 5, 6. Thou did not require them to be performed, and
when they were obtruded upon thee, thou did take no delight in them. And he
told his people he would not reprove them for their Sacrifices, they were
continually before him, but for their sins he would reprove them, Psa. 50. 8.

If Cain sacrifice to God, and hate his Brother; if Doeg be detained before the
Lord, and have a violent spirit against David; if the Pharisees make long
prayers, and then devour Widows Houses; If Israel hear the Prophet and admire
the Sermon, and run still after their covetousness; if the people inquire of
God, and set up idols in their hearts; if they cry The Temple, the Temple, and
in the mean time swear, and murder, and commit adultery; if Judas kiss, and
then betray him; if the Soldiers bow the knee, and then crucify him; if the
eye look to Heaven, and the Soul cleave to the Earth; if the knee bow to the
earth, and the heart lift it self against Heaven; if there be a tender body and
a stubborn spirit; if the tongue flatter God, and the Conscience despise him;
if a man cherish a Schism within himself, have the outside for God, and the
inside for lust: I will not say as Achilles in the Poet, (...), but I will say
as Christ in the Gospel, Go learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice.

Go learn, and take heed of whom you learn. If you have not an ille indicavit,
a direction from him, you will still be to seek of your duty. As we cannot see
the Sun but by its own light, so we cannot know God, or his worship, but by
divine revelation. Look how far he is pleased to stoop unto us, so far we are
also to mount unto him. Moses was to do all things according to the pattern in
the Mount, Act. 7. 44. Heb. 8. 5. And the Apostles Commission in the Gospel is
the same; teaching them to observe all things what soever I commanded you, Mat.
28. 20. It must first seem good to the Holy Ghost, and then to them, Act. 15.
29. They must declare nothing to the Church but what they have received. They
from us, and we from them, 1 Cor. 11. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 2. We must not serve, ex
arbitrio, but ex imperio, as Tertull. speaks, (...), says St. Basil, The
Scripture does not comply with us, but we must submit to that. The ruler is not
to be leaded to the stone, but the stone to be squared by the ruler; our
straining and wrying of Gods word to our own humors, is a sin which has
damnation attending it, 2 Pet. 3. 16. and we find God finding great fault with
such service obtruded upon him as has not entered into his heart, Ier. 7. 32.
For as at the omission of what he commands we despise his will, so in obtruding
what he commands not, we control his Wisdom; in the one we show our selves
careless to obey him; in the other we show ourselves presumptuous to counsel
him. We are the servants of it, and the servant, as the Philosopher says, has
no motion but from the guidance of the principal cause. Namque coquus domini
debet habere gulam, The cook must dress his meat to his Masters palate, not to
his own. That Spartan which added one string more to his instrument in the war
than was publicly allowed him, though he mended his music, yet he marred his
obedience, and he was punished for it. And therefore in all our conversation,
especially religious, and toward God, it is most wisdom, and safest to keep
toward our standard, and public rule.

I have now done with the implicit reprehension of defective and invented
service, and proceed now to the great things of the Law in the text required,
judgment, and mercy, that to be done, this to be loved.

The same water with is sour in the juice of a fig tree, is sweet in the fruit.
And as we have found that devotion in the outside and bark of religion is but
sour, and unpleasing: so if you taste it now in the power and fruit of it, you
will find it exceeding sweet; for the best sacrifice which any man can offer,
is a purelife, as the Father speaks.

Many duties in scripture are of a narrow, and contracted nature, some only
spiritual belonging to the soul, others only corporal belonging to the body, as
the Apostle distinguishes of some, filthiness of the flesh and spirit; but
these which are very often twins in scripture, have a great latitude, reaching
both of them to our bodies, souls, our estates, to all that concerns Gods
glorious name which he proclaimed to Moses made up of these two, Exodus 34. 6, 7.

It would be endless to handle them according to the latitude of their common
places. I shall be able only to put you in remembrance of some principal
particulars.

To do justly reaches, as I conceive, in this place unto a threefold justice,
according to the different conditions of men Justice in administration, in
negotiation, in conversation.

In administration, and that both sacred, and secular. In sacred
administration, the Ministers of the word are said to judge, Ezec. 20. 4. to be
rulers over the household to give them meat, Mat. 24. 45. to have power of
binding and loosing, Mat. 16. 19. to have it in their power to avenge
disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 5. to be Stewards, Ambassadors, Officers between God
and man, 1 Cor. 4. 1. and there is no office but justice belongs to it, and
that is in this case (...) rightly to divide the word, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and to
give to every man (...) his own Dimensum, and allowance. Threats to the
obstinate, promises to gainsayers, comfort to mourners, counsel to the
unsettled. There can be no greater injustice to the souls of men than to say
peace where there is no peace, or to make sad where the Lord has not made sad.
Secondly, (...) not to corrupt, or adulterate the word of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. to
put chaff with wheat, and dross with silver, and wine with water, and straw and
stubble with precious stones, and the language of Ashdod with the language of
Canaan, and leaven with sacrifice, Samaritan contemperations of purity and
Popery, of piety and profaness. Our Savior gives us both in a word, Feed my
sheep, they must be fed, not poisoned.

In administration of civil. Thus a Magistrate and Judge is, as the Philosopher
elegantly, Tanquam argentarius, to distinguish between that which is base, and
precious, and he is, (...), keeper of the tables of the Law. As the Priestslips
must preserve knowledge, so the Magistrate must preserve judgment, and the
people seek it at their mouth. So long as there are in commonwealths
contentions to be composed, enormities to be punished, innocence to be
protected, encroachments to be restrained, property to be distinguished, and
preserved, and in all these manifold emergent difficulties to be resolved, and
antinomies to be reconciled; there will be a necessity of learned, faithful
and religious Ministers, who may be the depositories of public justice, Deuteronomy.
16. 18.

And when such there are, it is their great work to do judgment; it is not
enough to have it in the brain, to know it, and in the lips to praise it. Non
loquimur magna, sed vivimus. Justice is never in its right place till it come
to the hand to do it. It is not enough for the honor, and security of a
Kingdom that justice be in the Laws, but it must be in the Judges too, they
must be a living and speaking Law. Righteousness in the Law is but like
Ezechiels vision of the dead bones in the valley, they never have the strength
of Law till the Magistrate puts Life into them by execution. Justice in the Law
is like Gold in the mine, which while it is there only, does no man good; but
when in the Magistrate is like gold coined, or plate on the Cupboard for use
and honor. A magistrate is the keeper of public justice, as the conduit is of
common water in a City. It is (...), and they must let it out for the use of
others, and so the phrase in scripture is Egrediatur Iudicium, Hab. 1. 4. It
must run down like waters, Amos 5. 24. and it is said of it, that he should
bring forth judgment unto truth, Isa. 40. Ambitious hopes, shrinking fears, low
passions, domestic ends, personal interests, foreign compliance and
correspondence may prove miserable weeds and obstructions in the stream of
justice.

And therefore the sins of Judges and Magistrates in their public
administrations are called by the Prophet Mighty sins, Amos 5. 12. Diseases in
the bones of the commonwealth; for so much the original word imports
sometimes. Moving of Foundations, Psalm. 82. 5. Removing of Bounds, Hos. 5. 10.
which was one of the solemn curses upon mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27. 17.

Therefore says the Lord, I will pour out my wrath upon them like water, as a
man that pulls down the sea-banks lets in a flood to destroy himself:
whereas on the other side upright and just Magistrates like Moses stand in the
gap, and are binders, healers, sanctuaries, hiding places unto the people from
the storm and tempest.

2. There is justice in negotiation, which we may in no case leave out; for if
you look but a verse beyond the text, you will find our Prophet complaining for
want of it, and crying out against scant measure, wicked balances, deceitful
and light weights, 10, 11. scant measures will fill up a full measure of guilt,
and light weights bring upon the soul a heavy weight of judgment. The Prophet
makes mention of wickedness in an Ophir, Zach. 5. 8. And therefore as Job was
careful that the Furrows of the field might not complain of him, Job 31. 38.
so be you careful that your Ephah, and your balance, which are unto you your
lands and your furrows, (as the Prophet calls it the harvest of the sea, Isaiah
23. 3.) do not cry out unto God against you: Let not any one (says the
Apostle) defraud, or overreach his brother in any matter, for God is the
avenger of those things, 1 these* 4. 6. Take heed of severing the portion of
gain from godliness, to esteem all good profit that comes in by sordid and
sinful acts; a snare, a temptation, a drowning follows upon it, 1 Timothy* 6. 9.
He that overloads his ship though it be with gold, heaps it up for the sea, and
not for himself. Learn so to converse with the world as not to be without God
in the world. Let not the Ephah and the sheckle wrangle with the New Moon, and
the Sabbath, as it is, Amos 8. 5. Let not the world get into your hearts to
choke the word. Your coffers are good enough for money, keep your consciences
for God. They who go down into mines to dig up gold and silver, carry candles
with them, and when the damp comes though it be gold they dare not stay with
it: your trades are your mines out of which you dig your treasure; sink not
your selves into them without David's Lanthorn, the word of God; and if your
consciences feel the damp of the Earth, covetous lust begin to work, then make
have upward with David's prayer, Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not
to covetousness, Psalm. 119. 26. Though you may not carry the shop into the
Temple, and make that a place of money changers; yet you must not thrust the
Temple out of the shop; there is no place but holiness will become it. In the
Prophet a merchant is called Chanan, Hos. 12. 7. but in the parable a Christian
is called a merchant, Mat. 13. 45. Remember in your professions to be
Christians and not Canaanites.

3. There is justice in conversation, which is a sincere, entire, square,
faithful conversing with men; when a man is constant to his word, fixed to his
honest resolutions, yesterday and to day the same, this makes a man like unto
God whose name is One, Zach. 14. 9. Like unto him whose name is Amen, Rev. 3.
14. And therefore we being members of him of whom we can learn nothing but what
should be true and just one to another, Ephesians. 4. 5. It is said of Asper a
servant of the Emperor Leo, That* finding him fail in performance of promise,
he laid hold of (...) purple robe, and told him it was too rich a cover for
falsehood. Certainly it is not fit that such a robe as the name of Christ should
be used to shroud and palliate deceit; and indeed such kind of unjust and false
men, who are like him possessed of an unclean spirit, Luke 8. 29. whom no bonds
can hold, who care not how many they deceive, if they can have but a cloak to
palliate it; who like the Serpent will insinuate, and then sting; like the
Cockatrice weep, and then bite; like the Panther allure with the sweet breath,
and then destroy with her sharp teeth; who make truth give place to turns, and
for advantage say and unsay, do and undo; like those in Greg. Nazianzen, John's
to day, and Iudases to morrow. Such men as these are not members but ulcers in
the common body, and they must be sure that that justice which they hate will
find them out at the last; for men of blood and deceit shall not live out half
their days, Psa. 55. 23.

But we no sooner hear of sincerity, but presently mercy like Rachel as the
more beautiful calls upon us for our love to her. I will not curiously inquire
into the reason, why justice is bid to be done, but mercy to be loved: for of
Christ it is said that he loved righteousness, Psalm. 45. 1. But surely for the
punishing part of justice, Jeremy tells us, that he did not desire the woeful
day though he did denounce it, Ier. 17. 16. yea God himself when he often
beats, does it not willingly, he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner;
but when he saves, when he shows mercy, in that he delights, Mic. 7. 18.

Happily to give unto a man that which he has a just property and claim unto,
men can be contented to do; it is violence and robbery to withold it: but when
we must give that which is our own to another, here grudging and unwillingness
may creep in upon us. Now in justice I give a man that which is his, but in
mercy I give that which is mine own; and therefore to prevent repining, I am
called upon not only to do it, but to do it cheerfully, heartily, willingly, to
love mercy, to draw out the soul in it, Isa. 58. 1. I shall not need to inquire
the nature or kind of it; if it were as well in our hearts and hands as it is
in our heads, we should need the less to be bid to love it. In one word there
is Misericordia donans, a bountiful mercy, and misericordia condonans, a
pardoning mercy.

Mercy to them; the mercy of relief to those who are in any distress; be as Job
was, eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, father to the poor, Job 29. 15. To
instruct the ignorant, reclaim the wandering, confirm the weak, comfort the
distressed, exhort thesluggish, support the feeble, cloth the naked, feed the
hungry, heal the sick, harbor the harbourless, wash the feet, and minister to
the necessities of the brethren.

Pardon; to show mercy to those that are overtaken in a fault, forgiving one
another, and forbearing one another. It is a grave observation which the
Historian makes, when he compares the different dealings of Fabius, and Manlius
in crimes which were much alike, Non minus firmatum Imperiu* etc. That
Government was as much honored by mercy showed to the one, as by the ruin of
the other.

I shall use but three inducements unto both these duties of mercy.

First, the excellency of it, nothing makesus so like unto God. That which St.
Luke calls mercy, Luke 6. 36. St. Matthew calls persection, Mat. 5. 48. When
God showed Moses his glory, it was by his goodness, Genesis 35. 18. His name full
of mercy, Exodus 34. 6. His works full of mercy, the Earth full, Psalm. 35. 5.
the Heaven full, Psalm. 36. 5. knowledge, wisdom, power, greatness; Evil men may
have some resemblance of, but none can imitate God in mercy but good men: for
the mercies of the wicked are cruel, Pro. 12. 10.

Secondly, The Necessity of it unto all. For the truth is, as Solon said to
Croesus, (...), Every man is calamity it self, corrupting the life, distressing
the conscience; sorrows wounding the heart, and fears weakening it; death
making pleasures short, and guilt making life bitter. What difference does a
Fever make between a Lord, and a beggar, or what manners does lightning and
thunder observe more toward a Cedar than a shrub? All have need of mercy,
therefore all must love it.

Thirdly, The benefit of it. No grace has more abundant promises made unto it
than this of mercy, a sowing, a reaping, a thrifty grace, Prove. 11. 22.
Solomon's excellent houswife stretched out both her hands to the needy, Prove. 3.
20. Every tear that your mercy wipes away, every sigh and groan that it
removes, every back that it clothes, every belly that it fills, every sinking
and oppressed man that it relieves, turn all into so many advocates,
sollicitors and real promises to procure greater mercies for you than you have
been able to extend to them.

And now that you may always be in a readiness to come before God in these
great duties of justice, and mercy; he is always in a readiness to come unto
you, and teach you what he requires of you. He has showed thee O Man. Man the
author of the enmity, but God the director unto peace and reconciliation. And
ever where God requires a duty, he does first reveal a light, and according to
the light which he reveals is the account which he requires; where much is
given much shall be required.

And surely in all Gods service either sacred or civil, we must have an
Indicavit for what we do: we can have no knowledge, wisdom, obedience to serve
Cod, but only out of the scripture, (...), as Athanasius speaks, out of the
holy Scriptures, not out of the abundance of our own hearts. If we pray it must
be according to his will, Ioh. 5. 14. if preach it must be according to his
counsel, Ier. 25. 22. if hear it must be what God the Lord will say, Psalm. 5. 8.

That which goes unto God must first come from him; as waters return to the
sea, (...), as one well spoke; we must pay our tribute in the Princes own coin,
we must not out our dead child into his bosom, and think he will own it.

And here if I had time it would be worth the pains to insist a little on the
plenitude of Holy Scripture which the Ancients so much adored, and so it
behooves all Gods Ministers both sacred and civil never to speak any thing by
the authority of God, except we have his Indicavit and requisivit to bear us
out. Having always an eye to that dreadful intermination, He that speaks any
thing in my name which I have not commanded him, even that Prophet shall dye,
Deuteronomy. 18. 20. It would infinitely conduce to the peace of the Church and State,
to the honor of Religion and justice, and to the avoiding of envy or scandal,
if every person in his order would regulate all his demeanours and
administrations with a Quid requisivit, what is it that God would have me to do.

And lastly since we cannot do our duty, without an Indicavit from him; they
shall all be taught of God; therefore his indicavit should be seconded by our
Meditation; his requisivit with our requesting; his precepts and promises with
our prayers; for he will be sought unto for what he promises, Ezech. 36. 37.
That he would make his way plain before our eyes, that so we may not only do
the things which he requires, but in doing them to walk with him.

For the very Philosopher could say, (...), It is not the matter but the manner
makes up the work.

1. Then, it must be ambulation, a constant tenor; a good man must be always
like himself. Do what you can to gold, it will keep its nature in the fire.
That is gold in justice and mercy indeed, which in all cases, when persons,
passions, prejudices, favor, interests offer to immix themselves, keeps its
nature entire still.

2. It must be Cum Deo with an eye to God, his word the rule; his fear the
principle; his glory the end: that wha^ we do may not be for the gratifying of
men, that we m^^ walk honorably before them; but for the pleasing of God, that
we may walk acceptably before him; for else God will complain of them as he did
of those in the Prophet, Did you do it to me even to me, says the Lord, Zach.
7. 5.

3. It must be done with seeking of God, but yet it must be with denying of our
selves; when we have done justice, and loved mercy, and pleased God, we may
rejoice in it, we may not boast of it, we must walk humbly still, like the
Moon, the nearer we come to the Sun of righteousness, the less glory we must
assume unto our selves. Our justice must stand in fear of Gods justice, lest
that consume it; and our mercy must cry to Gods mercy, that that may cover it.
If Moses the justest and meekest man in his generation will appear before God
he must have a hiding place to cover him, Exodus 34. 21.

When we have done the uttermost we can, we must go to God as Nehemiah did,
Remember me O God, spare me according to the multitude of thy mercies, Neh. 13.
22. Non gloriabor quia justus sum, sed gloriabor quia redemptus sum, as St.
Ambrose speaks. Our righteousness here stands not in the perfection of our
virtues, but in the remission of our sins. Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum,
si remota misericordia discutias eam. But this is our great comfort and
security, that as stubble being covered with Amianthum (as Athanasius speaks)
can endure the fire, so we have Christ and his righteousness with which men
cannot only stand before God, but walk with him too as with Our God.

4. In faith, and confidence. Take away the Sun, and all the Stars of Heaven
would never make day: So if a man have as many moral virtues as there be Stars
in the firmament, and were destitute of faith in Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, have not God for his God, there would be night and calamity in
his soul still. Without faith there is no walking with God; for two will not
walk together unless they (...) agreed, Amos 3. 3.

But O what madness is it for man to disagree with God; for Adam to arm himself
with fig leaves against his maker, (...) briars to rise in rebellion against
fire, or smoke to withstands a whirlwind? Remember thy nature, that will teach
thee thy duty. For he has showed thee O man! And what is man? Abraham will
tell us in two words, Dust and Ashes. Dust by his original, which came from
Earth; Ashes by desert, which carry him to the fire, Revel. 20. 10. The Law, a
Law of fire, Deuter. 33. 2. The prison a lake of fire, Revel. 20. 10. the Judge
a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 18. with whom he may not contend, Eccl. 6. 10. from
whom he cannot escape, Psalm. 129. 7. Consider then what thou art O man, submit
to a severe judgment, where there is a record kept, an appeal entered, a writ of
Error enforced against every miscarriage of thine. Therefore O man do justly,
and being of the same mould with thy Brother, set thy self in his stead, Job
16. 4. We are all of us like leaves of trees, as Homer elegantly. That wind
which blows away my neighbor to day, may blow away me to morrow. That mercy
that I deny to him, I may live to see denied to my self.

The rich man who withheld erums was denied drops, Luc. 16. 24. Consider then
what thou art O man, guilty of sins, subject to misery, thou art forced to beg
mercy, be persuaded to love it.

Again, consider thou art Adam, Earth, and that is the lowest of all the
elements: Dust thou art, said God to man, Dust thou shall eat, said God to the
Serpent. So man is, fitter to be a prey to Satan than a companion to his Maker.
Of this dust indeed God made a vessel, and put a treasure of knowledge, and
righteousness in it. But what reason has the cup to be proud of the wine, or
the bag of the money which men put into it? Thou have received, why should
thou boast, 1 Cor. 4. 7.

But we are become now broken vessels, that retain nothing but dregs, our drink
is become Merum Resract arium, sour and corrupt, Hag. 4. 18. The pot is become
a potsherd. Consider then O man, that thou art made of Earth, though made for
Heaven; in the one respect walk with God, but in the other respect humble thy
self to do it. Te ad sidera tollet. No advancement to such an humility.

Thou have his Majesty to awe thee, no approaching his presence but by
Humility, with that man will I dwell that is of an humble Spirit, Isaiah 57.
15. Zaccheus must come down if he will have. Christ abide in his House, Luke
19. 5.

Thou have his mercy to aid thee, he will show thee what is good; The meek he
will guide in judgment, Psalm 25. 9. and therefore he has chosen these two
Humble graces as pipes to convey mercy to the soul; by faith, which teaches us
to deny our selves, Phil. 3. 9. and repentance, which teaches us to abhor our
selves, Ezekiel 6. 9.

Thou have his example to instruct thee, Who is like to the Lord our God who
dwells on high and humbles himself, Psalm. 113. 5. Christ a King, one who
does justly and loves mercy, yet he humbles himself, Phil. 2. 8. see all
three virtues together, Zach. 9. 9. Behold the King comes to thee just, having
salvation, and yet lowly too.

Thou have his Glory to reward thee. H^ allows thee to look on his Law, not
only as holy (...) just* ^^^self, but as good unto thee, Romans 2. 12. Does not
my word do good to those that walk uprightly, Mic. 2. 7. He allows thee to
look in, and by the Requisivt his authority, but to Quid bonum thy own
felicity. The duties performed are obedience only to him, but they are benefits
to thee: not by way of debt, or condignity in thy work; but by way of promise
and covenant from his grace: Thy will chooses, thy prayer desires, thy hope
expects.

All the comfort thou can have (...) communion with (...) here, all the glory
thou must have by fruition of God hereafter must come by Justice, Mercy and
Hlumility.

And now having so great duties to do, so great a teacher to instruct, so great
authority to obey, so great a reward to (...)rage; let each man in his place do
justly, love mercy, and humble himself to walk with God here, that God may
exalt him to live with him hereafter.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, three persons,
and one immortal, invisible, only wise God, be all glory, majesty, and
thanksgiving for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

