A SERMON Preached before the PEERS, IN THE Abbey Church AT WESTMINSTER,
November 7. 1666.

Being a Day of Solemn Humiliation for the Continuing Pestilence.

BY Edward Lord Bishop of Norwich.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe for John Durham, and are to be sold by
Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1666.

A SERMON Preached before the PEERS, IN THE ABBEY CHURCH at Westminster, November.
7. 1666. Being a Day of Solemn Humiliation for the Continuing Pestilence*
PHILIP. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men. The Lord is at hand.
SOme Graces are primary, radical and fundamental, which having their proper
termination in God and Christ, are therefore, as to their formal and immediate
beauty, Invisible to any eye, but his who searches the Heart and tries the
Reins. So our Repentance is said to be toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. our Faith and Hope is said to be in God, 1 Pet. 1.
21. As the Root, though the principal Seat of Life in the Tree, is under ground
unseen, but the fruits flowing from that Life are visible; or, as the Orator
says of a goodly Structure, fastigia spectantur, latent fundament. So the most
primitive and vital Graces are in themselves known only to God, and to the
Heart which enjoyes them; but in and by their fruits they may, and must be
known unto men. By our Works we must show our Faith, Iam. 2. 18. Act. 19. 18.
Works, I mean, of transient Charity, which properly termimate upon others,
without us; In which respect our Savior, though he forbid us to do our Works
to be seen of men, in a way of Ostentation, Matthew. 6. 1. 6. 16. -- 18. yet he
commands us to let our Light shine before men, in a way of Edification, and
to God's Glory, Matthew. 5. 16. and in order to the Same End, the Apostle here
requires us to let our Moderation be known unto all men.

The words contain, a serious and weighty Doctrine, (...). The Lord is near;
and a Christian duty from thence inferred, Let your Moderation be known unto
All Men; or an Exhortation to the Exercise of a Special Grace, and a most
Solemn Argument, because, The Lord is at hand. In the Exhortation is
observable, 1. The virtue it self required, expressed by the Concrete for the
Abstract, not without an Emphasis, as I take it. Sometimes we find a Concrete
Superlative expressed by an Abstract, Ier. 50. 31. Behold I am against thee O
Pride, that is, O thou most proud: and here an Extensive Abstract expressed by
a Concrete, as if he should have said, Let your Tongue, your Hand, your whole
Conversation show forth to all men, upon all occasions, this excellent and most
amiable Grace. 2. The Peculiarity or Characteristical difference of this virtue
intimated in the word (...), not a bare Philosophical, but a Christian
moderation, such as becomes Believers. 3. The Conspicuousness thereof, (...),
let it be really upon all occasions manifested, for the Honor of Christ, and
Credit of Religion. 4. The Impartiality of it, It must be manifested to all
men; not only unto good men, but unto the froward, that the mouths of
Adversaries may be stopped, their Prejudices refuted, their Emnities broken,
and they won by the meek and humble Conversation of Believers to the obedience
of the Gospel.

In the Argument unto this Duty, it is considerable, how many ways the Lord is
near unto his Servants, for their encouragement in so difficult and excellent a
Duty; near, ad Auxilium, to Help them; near, ad Solatium, to Comfort them;
near, ad Iudicium, to Reward them; near, per Inhabitantem Gratiam, to direct
and enable them; near, per Exauditionis Clementiam, to Hear and Answer them;
near, per Providentiae oeconomiam, to Support and Protect them.

1. Believers are called unto an high and honorable Condition, the (...) and
dignity of being the Sons of God, John 1. 12. and in that Condition they may,
by the power of Corruption and Temptation, be in danger to be puffed up with
pride and arrogance above others, and to a supineness and security of Living,
to sever their Dignity from their Duty: In this Case (...), that is, as Suidas,
Hesychius, and Favorinus render it, (...), or (...), that which is decent or
becoming, is to be known; we must walk secundum decentiam status Christianis,
so as becomes the sanctity and dignity of our High Calling.

2. Again, being in common with other men exposed to the various vicissitudes
of Events; apt in Prosperity to be corrupted, in Adversity to be dejected, and
according to diversity of Conditions, to express a dissimilar and uneven
behavior; here again, (...), let your Moderation be known, (...), a serene,
pacate, and steadfast equability of mind, unshaken and fixed against all Events.

3. Again, being by the state of our Christianity, and by reason of the Emnity
which God has put between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent,
to expect, as Strangers in the midst of Adversaries, manifold afflictions and
injuries, as the Scripture has assured us, Act. 14. 22. 2* Tim. 3. 12. Here
also (...), let your Moderation be known, (...), Moderation of patience in
bearing Evils; (...), a Moderation of Candor and Equanimity; not putting
suspicious and morose, but favorable constructions upon Actions which have an
appearance of unkindness; and (...), a Moderation of meekness and placability,
an easiness to be entreated, a readiness to forgive; as the Philosopher says
of such men, that they are (...), apt to pass by, and to pardon Injuries.

4. Again, having with other men a share and right in public Justice, and out
of the debt of Self-love, being engaged thereby to preserve our own Interests,
we may be tempted to rigor and extremity in the means thereunto, and to lay
hold on the utmost advantages against our Brother: Here also the Exhortation is
seasonable, that our Moderation be known; that we be rather ready to part from
our own right, than to prosecute it (...), with the strictness of a rigorous
inflexibility; and so the Philosopher says, that (...) is (...), a supplying
of the defect, and (...), a rectifying and mitigating of the rigor of Legal
Justice.

5. Again, because we have the Human Nature burdened with the same common
Infirmities, and are of like passions with other men, we may be easily tempted
and transported many ways into inordinateness and excess; we may use our
knowledge and liberty undecently and exorbitantly, to the defiling of our
Selves; we may use them uncharitably, to the grief and scandal of our Brethren,
as the Apostle shows, Romans 14. 15, 21. 1 Cor. 8. 9, 12. 10. 23, 28, 29, 32. 1
Pet. 2. 16. we may use our power and authority sharply and severely, to the
grieving, rather than benefiting our poor Brethren; in all such Cases the
Apostle's Exhortation is seasonable, Let your Moderation be known; (...);
Moderation in Judgment, not to disquiet the Church, or offend our Brethren
with every unnecessary opinion of our own; not rigidly to insist on our
Liberty, to the grief and scandal of our Brethren. Moderation of Power, not to
be (...), severe Exactors of the extremity of Justice; but to adorn our
authority, and render it amiable with clemency and meekness. Moderation of
Passions, not to be transported with excessive delights, overwhelmed with
inordinate sorrows, or possessed with any other unruly or tempestuous
affection, to the suffocating of Reason, and dishonor of Religion; but to let
Grace and Wisdom hold the reins, and keep within just bounds of Temper and
Sobriety whatsoever offers to break forth into undecency and excess. We see the
wide extent and comprehensivenesse of this most amiable Grace. Give me leave to
speak a word or two to each of these Particulars, and then I shall proceed to
that which follows.

1. We must walk secundum decentiam and dignitatem status Christiani, so as
becomes the Gospel, that we may credit and honor our most holy Profession, as
those who have a Lord to rejoice in, a God to pray unto, a Blessed appearing of
a Glorious Savior to wait for, as a People whom God has formed for himself,
to show forth his praise, Isai. 43. 21. This is the frequent Exhortation of the
Apostle, that we walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith we are called, Ephesians. 4.
1. as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1. 27. So as we have learned and
received Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2. 6. worthy of God, who has called us to
his Kingdom and Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. as becomes Holiness, as a peculiar
People, that we may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things, Tit.
2. 3, 10, 14. and may show forth the praises of him, who has called us out of
Darkness into his marvelous Light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And truly there is nothing
deserves such Lamentation as this, to consider how few there are who live
consonantly to the Gospel; which will too evidently appear, if we consider the
Law of Christ, the vow of Baptism, and compare our Conversations with them.
Are not these the Laws of Christ? He that hates his Brother, is a Murderer;
He that looks on a Woman lustfully, is an Adulterer; that we Resist not
Evil; that we love our Enemies; that we lay not up for our selves Treasures in
Earth, but in Heaven; that we enter in at the strait Gate; that He who will
come after him, must deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow him; that
we learn of him to be meek and lowly, who when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, threatened not: In one word, that we should walk as he
walked, and observe all things whatsoever he has commanded us? and have we not
solemnly vowed all this in our Baptism? wherein we promised to keep a good
Conscience toward God, and did in the presence of God and Angels renounce the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, with all their pomps, vanities, and lusts? and
so not only subscribe to the truth, but undertake the practice of those
necessary Doctrines? And if we should now compare the Lives of Men amongst us,
their barefaced and open Profaneness, their daring Atheism and Blasphemy,
their Oaths and Curses, their Luxuries and Excesses, their Wantonness and
Impurities, their Variance and Wrath, their Contentions and Defiances, their
Bloodshed and Duels, their Implacableness and Revenge, their inordinate love of
the profits and pleasure of the World more than of God, their utter
unacquaintance with the Yoke of Christ, and the narrow way that leads unto
Life; if, I say, we should lay together Christ's Laws, and our Lives, our most
solemn Vow, and our most perfidious violations of it, might we not most
confidently conclude, aut haec non est Lex Christi, aut nos non sumus
Christiani? Either this is not Christianity, or we are not Christians? and so
Tertullian, Justin Martyr, and other Ancients are bold to affirm of such men,
That they are not Christians. Ioannes Picus Mirandula professed, That he had an
amazement upon him, when he seriously considered the Studies, or rather Follies
of Men: For, says he, a Madness it is for Men not to believe the Gospel; which
has been sealed by the blood of Martyrs, published by the preaching of
Apostles, confirmed by Miracles, attested by the World, confessed by Devils:
Sed long major insania, si de Evangelii veritate non dubitas, vivere tamen
quasi de ejus falsitate non dubitares. But a far greater Madness it is, if not
doubting of the truth of the Gospel, we so live as if we doubted not of the
falseness of it. And certainly, they who abuse the Doctrine of the Gospel unto
licencious Living, and expose the holy Name of God unto Contempt, by turning
his Grace into Lasciviousness, are Christiani nominis probra and Maculae, the
stain and dishonor, the blains and ulcers of the Christian* Name, no otherwise
belonging unto the body of Christ, than dung and excrements to the Natural body
If the Lacedemonian in Plutarch would often look on his Gray Hairs, that he
might be put in mind to do nothing unworthy the honor of them; how much more
should we continually mind the dignity of our Relation unto God, as his
Children, that we never admit any thing unbecoming the Excellency of so High a
Calling.

2ly. Being in danger by the different vicissitudes of divine providence, to be
tossed and discomposed with various and unequal Affections, contrary to that
stedfastness of Heart which ought always to be in Believers, who have an
all-sufficient God to rejoice in, and a Treasure of exceeding great and
precious Promises, (able by Faith and Hope to balance the Soul against all
Secular Fluctuations and Concussions) to take Comfort from, In this Case
therefore it is necessary that our Moderation be known, that we learn, with the
Apostle, in every state to be content, to be abased and suffer need without
pusillanimity or despondency, to abound and be full without arrogance or
vainglory. Faith makes a Rich man rejoice in that he is made low and humbled,
to glory no longer in Grass and Flowers* in withering and perishing Contents;
and it makes the Brother of Low degree to rejoice in that he is exalted to the
hope of Salvation, Jam. 1. 9, 10. When therefore, with David, we find one
while our Mountain strong, and presently we are moved, Psalm. 36. 6. when one
day, with Jonah, we rejoice in our Gourd, and another day are as angry because
it is withered; then we must labor for this (...), this pacateness and
serenity of Soul; like Gold, to keep our nature in the fire, like Celestial
Bodies, which in all their Motions are regular and steady. Even Heathen men, by
the dictates of Reason and Philosophy, have arrived at a very noble Constancy
and Composedness of Mind; of one, it is said, That in all Companies, Times, I
and Places, suos semper Mores retinuit, he never departed nor varied from
himself; of another, that he was never observed either to laugh or weep; of
another, that he was of so equal a Temper, that in his Youth, he had the
wisdom of an Old Man, and in his Age the valor of a Young man; and of that
excellent Emperor Marcus Antoninus it is observed by Dion, (...), that he was
ever like himself, never given to change. How much more should Christians, who
have an unchangeable God to take care of them, a Kingdom which cannot be shaken
provided for them, Promises which are all yea and Amen, and an Hope which is
sure and steadfast set before them, retain a mind like the Rock on which they
are built, fixed and inconcussible. Such was the blessed Apostle, as dying, and
yet alive; as chastened, and yet not killed; as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things: and such he would
have us all to be, steadfast and unmovable, 1 Cor. 15. 58. not soon shaken in
mind, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. but holding our Confidence, and the rejoicing of our Hope
firm unto the end, Heb. 3. 6.

3. Being, by the Condition of our Christianity, to expect manifold Afflictions
and Injuries in the World; Here also it is necessary, that our Moderation be
known; Moderation of Patience, in bearing them; of Candor, in interpreting
them; and of Lenity and meekness, in forgiving them.

1. Moderation of Patience in bearing them, having our Eye more fixed on the
hand of God ordering, than on the hand of Man infflicting them; being more
taken up with the Hope of Future Good, than with the Sense of Present Evil;
looking rather with Comfort on the need we have of them, 1 Pet. 1. 16. on the
fruit we have from them, Heb. 12. 10. on the Recompense of the Reward which
will follow them, Heb. 11. 25, 26. Romans 8. 17, 18. on the love of God, which
will support us under them, Heb. 12. 6. on our Communion in them with Christ,
for whose sake we suffer them, 1 Pet. 4. 13. on the End of the Lord, who is
ever pitiful and of tender mercy to us, in them, Iam 5. 11. than on any
present weight or pressure we sustain from them. Nullus dolor est de
incursione* Malorum praesentium quibus fiducia est futurorum Bonorum, says
Saint Cyprian: A Man is never miserable by any thing, which cannot take away
God or Salvation from him.

2. Moderation of Candor and Equanimity, putting the best Constructions on
them, as the Carpenter's Plain renders rugged things smooth, as favorable
Glasses report Faces better than they are. A meek Spirit does not easily take
up every Injury, not out of dullness, because it cannot understand them; but
out of love, which does not wittingly or hastily suspect Evil, 1 Cor. 13. 5.
which covers all Sins, Prove. 10. 12. which teaches us to show all meekness
to all men, Tit. 3. 2. we are prohibited Society with some men, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
but we are commanded to follow Peace with All, Heb. 12. 14.

3. Moderation of Meekness and Lenity, not resisting of Evil; nor out of a
vindictive Spirit, embracing all advantages to avenge our Selves, as if it were
an Argument of a low and dejected Soul not to repay Evil with Evil, and bid a
defiance and challenge upon every Wrong; directly contrary to the Word of God,
which makes it a man's wisdom and glory to pass over a transgression, Prove.
19. 11. and expressly requires us not to recompense Evil, but to wait on God,
Prove. 20. 22. Romans 12. 17. yea contrary to the noble practice of many
magnanimous Heathens, Epaminondas, Agesilaus, Pompey, Caesar, and others, who
by their clemency and bounty toward Enemies, provided for their own Safety, and
made the way easy unto further victories. But we have a more excellent Example
to follow, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, says the
Apostle, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye, Col 3. 13. that man can
have no assurance of Christ's forgiving him, who resolves to be avenged on his
Brother, Matthew. 18. 35. He who choseth rather to be a Murderer, to take away
another Man's life, or to throw away his own, than to suffer a Reproach, has,
give me leave to say it, eousque, renounced the Doctrine of Christ, who
commands us to do good unto those that hate us, and pray for those that
despitefully use us, Matthew 5. 44. as himself did, Luke 23. 34. who being
reviled reviled nor again, but was as a Sheep dumb before the Shearer, as the
Prophet speaks. By this noble Moderation we disappoint those that wrong us,
quia fructus Laedentis in dolor laesi est, we fence our selves against the
harm which an Injury would do us, as a Canon bullet is deaded by a soft Mudd
wall, and the force of a Sword by a pack of Wool. He that is slow to anger
appeaseth strife, Prove. 15. 18. We melt and overcome our Enemy, and heap coals
of fire on his head, Romans 12. 20. But above all we honor God, to whom alone
Vengeance belongs, we adorn the Gospel, and evidence our selves to be the
Disciples of Christ.

4. Being subject, by the dictates of overmuch Self-love, to assert with rigor
our own Right and Interest, in this Case also the Precept is necessary, Let
your Moderation be known; rather remit of your own Due, than by too earnest an
exacting of it, to grieve your Brother, or to discredit your Profession;
Abraham did so, though the nobler Person, yet in order unto Peace and Honor,
that their Dissentions might not expose Religion unto reproach amongst the
Canaanites, he gave unto Lot the praeoption of what part of the Land he would
live in, Genesis 13. 9. It was as free for the Apostle to have taken the Rewards
of his Ministry of the Corinthians as of other Churches, yet he purposely
refused to use that power, that he might not hinder the Gospel, nor give
occasion of glorying against him unto those that sought it, 1 Cor. 9. 12, 14,
15. 2 Cor. 1^. 8, 12 Our Savior, though he might have insisted on the dignity
of his Person, as the Son of God, from paying Tribute, yet to avoid offense
he did Cedere de Iure, and gave order about the payment of it, Matthew. 17. 24,
25, 26. No doubt is to be made, but that it is free for Christians to recover
their Just Rights by a legal trial, yet when the Corinthians sued one another
before Unbelievers, and thereby exposed the Gospel unto Contempt, the Apostle
reproves them that they did not rather take wrong, and suffer themselves to be
defrauded; the Evil being far less for them to suffer wrong, than for the
Gospel to suffer reproach, 1 Cor. 6. 5, 6, 7. Thus does this most amiable Grace
whereby we behave our Selves toward all Men with all Equity, Facility,
Equanimity, and Suavity of Conversation, attempering the severity of other
Virtues with the Law of Love, exceedingly conduce to the honor of God, and
credit of the Gospel, yea to our own safety and interest; for as a Tempest does
not break the Corn which yields unto it, but the Oaks which withstand it, nor
Thunder so easily hurt Shrubs as Cedars, So the wrath and prejudice of
Adversaries is exceedingly mitigated and abated by the Humility, Moderation and
Meekness of those that suffer them.

Lastly. Being subject to the same common Passions and Infirmities with other
Men, and thereupon liable to be transported into Excess in the use either of
our Knowledge, Power or Liberty; here also comes in the seasonable use of this
excellent Precept, Let your Moderation be known. Moderation of Judgment,
Moderation of Power, and Moderation of Passions.

1. Moderation of Judgment, that we suffer not our Knowledge to puff us up,
but temper it as the Apostle directs us with Charity, and use it unto
Edification, 1 Cor. 8. 1. I do not hereby understand Moderation in the measure
or degrees of our Knowledge, as if we should content our Selves with a
Mediocrity, and be, at our own choice, willingly Ignorant of any part of God's
revealed will, as we please our selves; for we are required to grow in
Knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18. and the Word of Christ must dwell in us richly, Col 3.
16. Nor do I understand a Moderation of Indifferency, as if it mattered not
what Judgment we were of, but had, as the Priscilianists claimed, a Liberty at
pleasure to depart from the Rule of Divine Truth in Outward Profession, to
serve a present Interest; for we are to buy the Truth, and not to sell it; We
can do nothing against the Truth, but for it; We are to hold fast the Faithful
Word, Tit. 1. 9. and having proved all things, to hold fast that which is good,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. But by a Moderation in Judgment, I understand these three
Things:

1. A Moderation of Sobriety, not to break in and gaze upon hidden and secret
things, as the men of Bethshemesh into the Ark, 1 Samuel 6. 19. nor to weary our
Selves about Questions, as the Apostle speaks, which are unprofitable and vain,
Tit. 3. 9. such as that of Peter, What shall this Man do? John 21. 21. and that
of the Apostles, Will thou now restore the Kingdom unto Israel? Acts 1. 6. But
to be wise unto Sobriety, Romans 12. 3. and to content our Selves with things
Revealed, and leave Secret things unto God, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. in quem sic Cred^mus,
says Saint Austin, ut aliqua non aperiri etiam pulsantibus nullo modo adversus
eum murmurare debeamus. And therefore that good Father Gave no other Answer to
a curious Question, than this modest one, Nescio quod Nescio, as Judging an
humble Ignorance much better than a proud Curiosity.

2. A Moderation of Humility and Modesty, not to be so opinionative or
tenacious of our own private, merely disputable and problematical Conceptions,
wholly unnecessary to Faith, Worship, or Obedience, as out of a love of them,
not only to undervalue and despise the as probable and sober Judgments of
other Men, but by an imprudent and unadvised publishing of them, to obtrude
them with over confidence on the belief of others, and happily thereby to cause a
great disturbance in the Church of God, directly contrary to the Counsel of the
Apostle, Have thou Faith, have it to thy self before God, Romans 14. 22. It is
not fit that the peace of the Church should be endangered by the bold attempts
of every daring Pen. Of this sort was that unhappy Controversy in the days of
Pope Victor, between the Roman and Asiatick Churches, touching the time of
Easter, who though former Bishops of Rome had, notwithstanding the different
observations in that Case, held intimate fellowship with the Asian Bishops, did
out of excess of Passion, (...), as Socrates expresses it, Excommunicate all
the Asian Churches, and made a doleful disturbance in the Church of Christ;
upon which occasion, the forenamed Historian has a grave Discourse, to show
how several Churches did differ from one another in Matters Ritual, and yet
retained firm Unity and Communion still.

3. Moderation of Charity, when in such things wherein a latitude and mutual
Tenderness may be allowed, we choose rather, according to the Doctrine of the
Apostle, not to offend our weak Brethren, than unseasonably to insist on our
own Knowledge and Liberty. And truly as it is an Honor which Learned men owe
unto one another, to allow a liberty of Dissent in Matters of mere opinion,
Salva compage Fidei, Salvo vinculo Charitatis, Salva pace Ecclesiae, (for those
three, Faith, Love, and Peace, are still to be preserved:) so it is a Charity
which Good men owe unto one another, upon the same Salvo's, to bear with the
Infirmities of each other, not to judge, or despise, or set at naught our
Brethren, as useless and inconsiderable Persons; but whom God is pleased to
receive into His Favor, not to cast them out of Ours. This Latitude and
Moderation of Judgment, some Learned men have taken the freedom to extend even
to the Case of Subscriptions by Law required; the learned For the Church of
England I am persuaded that the con^ia^t Doctrine of it is so pure and
orthodox, that whosoever believes it, and lives according to it, undoubtedly he
shall be saved; and that there is no error in it which may ne^e sitate or
warrant any man to disturb the Peace, or renounce the Communion of it This, in
my opinion, is all intended by Subscription; and thus much if you conceive me
not ready to subscribe, your Charity I assure you is much mistaken. In the
Preface, Sect. 40.
Author of the Book called An Answer to Charity maintained, and the late learned
We do not suffer any man to reject the 39 Articles of the Church of England at
his pleasure* yet neither do we look upon them as Essentials of saving Faith,
or Legacies of Christ and his Apostles: but in a mean, as pious Opinions,
fitted for the preservation of Unity. Neither do we oblige any man to believe
them, but only not to contradict them. In the Treatise called, Schism guarded
and beaten back upon the right Owners, etc. Sect. 1. cap. 11. page 190. See
also his Just Vindication of the Church of England, Cap. 6. p. 156.
Primate of Armagh Archbishop Bramhall I shall not take upon me to affix any
private sense of mine upon Public Laws, or ever judge it desirable, that the
Doctrine of the Church of England should have too slack a tie on the Judgment
of the Clergy; only sure I am in Points which are not Fidei but Questionum (as
Saint Austin distinguishes) in Matters of an inferior nature, wherein no Man
can rationally hold himself bound to trouble or discompose the Minds of the
People, or the Order and Peace of the Church, by an unnecessary publishing of
his own private Persuasion, so that his Opinion and the Churches Quiet may be
very well consistent together, Learned men have ever allowed this latitude unto
one another.

2. Moderation of Power, by gentle and winning ways, to reform the Manners,
allay the Distempers, and conquer the frowardness of inconstant and
discontented Minds; by placide and leasurely steps and degrees to get the
possession of them, and to model and compose them unto an Equal temper. This
was the Counsel of the Old men, Speak good unto them and they will be thy
Servants for ever, 1 Reg. 12. 7. as Moderation is by grave and prudent men
observed to be the preservative of Power; So Cato in Plutarch, and Julius
Caesar in that excellent Oration which he made unto the Senate in Dion: so
certainly it is a special means for the Right administration of it. Therefore
the Lord chose Moses the meekest man alive for the Government of his Peculiar
people, Number. 12. 3. and of Christ the Prince of Peace it is said, that he would
not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, Matthew. 12. 20. as he
says of himself, Learn of me for I am meek and lowly, Matthew. 11. 29. and the
Apostle beseeches the Corinthians by the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ, 2
Cor. 10. 1. so the same Apostle expresses his tenderness toward the Church,
by the affections sometimes of a Father, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Sometimes of a Mother,
Gal. 4. 19. Sometimes of a Nurse, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. He calls upon Timothy, In
meekness to instruct those that oppose themselves, because the Servant of the
Lord must be Gentle to all men, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. and upon Titus, to show all
Meekness to all men, Tit. 3. 2. Rulers are called Healers, Isai. 3. 7. and a
Physician, says Plutarch, will if it may be cure the Disease of his Patient
rather by Sleep and Diet, than by strong Purges. Grave Writers have observed,
that even in the avenging of conquered Enemies Moderation is advantageous to
the Conqueror. He, says Thucydides, who is kind to an Enemy provideth for his
own Safety; and surely it cannot but be useful for Healing Distempers, amongst
a long dilacerated and discomposed People, ut quod Belli calamitas introduxit,
hoc Pacis Lenitas sopiret, to use the words of Justinian the Emperor. A course
observed with rare clemency by our most Meek and Gracious Sovereign in the Act
of General Pardon and Indemnity toward his People.

I do often sadly recount with my self the woeful distractions which are in
this once flourishing Church, occasioned by the wantonness of some, and
subtilty of others, and can scarce arrive at any other Expedient than Abraham's
Jehovah Iireh, Genesis 22. 14. I do not need at all, neither shall I at all
presume to bespeak the Reverend Governors of the Church in this Case of
Moderation, in any other way than the Apostle does the Thessalonians in the
Case of Brotherly* Love. As touching Moderation ye need not that I write unto
you, for you your selves are taught of God to show all meekness to all men, and
to restore those that are overtaken in a fault with the spirit of Meekness, and
indeed you do it. One thing I assure my self would greatly conduce to the
Healing of our Divisions, and reducing of many unto the Communion of the Church
who have departed from it, If all the other Ministers of the Gospel in their
respective Places would every where preach the Word with that Soundness,
Evidence, and Authority, and so commend themselves to every man's Conscience in
the sight of God, reproving Sin not with Passion, Wrath, and Animosity, but
with the Spirit of Meekness, and by the Majesty and Authority of the Word;
(which alone can convince and awe the Conscience) would lead such holy,
peaceable, and inoffensive Lives, would treat all men with that prudence,
meekness, and winning Converse, that all who see and hear them may know that
God is in them of a truth, that they do indeed love the Peoples Souls, and so
faithfully discharge their Trust, as those that do in good earnest resolve to
save themselves and those that hear them. Thus are all the Interests of a
Christian Church by all the Officers therein, to be managed and preserved with
that wisdom which is from above, which Saint James tells us, is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good works,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy, whereby the fruit of Righteousness
is sown in peace of them that seek Peace.

3. Moderation of Passion, when we suffer not our Passions to anticipate right
Reason, or run beyond the dictates of Practical judgment, when they fly not
out beyond their due measure, nor transport us unto any undecency or excess,
when they do not like a troubled Sea cast up mire and dirt; but are like the
shaking of clean Water in a Crystal Glass, which only troubles it, but does
not defile it. For this purpose we must keep sanctified Reason always in the
Throne; The higher and more heavenly the Soul is, the more sedate and calm it
will be, Inferiora fulminant, Pacem Summa tenent. We must get the Heart
balanced with such Graces as may in special manner establish it against
perturbation of Passion, with clearness of Reason, serenity of Judgment,
strength of Wisdom, sobriety and gentleness of Spirit, humility and lowlyness
of Mind, (for ever the more Proud, the more Passionate) with Self-denial; for
all Impotency of Affections is rooted in an inordinate Self-love; This will
transport a man to furious Anger, to insatiable desires to excessive Delights,
to discruciating Fears, to impatient Hopes, to tormenting Sorrows, to gnawing
Emulations, to overwhelming Despairs. The Heart, says the Apostle, is
established by Grace, Heb. 13. 9.

We have thus largely considered the Duty here required, which the Apostle
would further have to be such a Moderation as becomes them as Christians. And
therefore the Precept is closed in on all sides of the Text with certain
peculiarities of Christians, Rejoicing in the Lord, Verse 4. And what can
befall a man to shake and discompose his Heart, who has a Lord always to
rejoice in? nearness of that Lord, the Lord is at hand; And what is there in
all the World, the beauty whereof can bewitch with Inordinate Love, the evil
whereof can tempt to Immoderate Fears the Heart which can by Faith see Christ
coming quickly with a far more exceeding and abundant weight of glory? An
access in Prayer and Supplication unto the Throne of Grace, v. 6. And what
Evils can disquiet the Heart of that Man with anxious, excessive, and
discruciating Cares, who has the bosom of a Father in Heaven to power out his
Requests into? Lastly, the peace of God which passes all understanding; and
what Perturbations are able to storm such a Soul as is garrisoned with Divine
peace? There is a mere philosophical Moderation, quae mimice affectat
veritatem, as Tertullian speaks. But Christian Moderation is that which is
founded in the Law of Christ; which requires us not to resist Evil, to love
our Enemies, to Bless them that Curse us, to do Good unto those that Hate us,
to recompense to no man Evil for Evil, to weep as though we wept not, and to
rejoice as though we rejoiced not. It is founded in the love of Christ, the
sense and comfort whereof ballanceth the Soul against the assault of any other
Perturbations. It is Regulated by the Example of Christ, of whom we learn to be
meek and lowly, to forbear and to forgive, who when he was reviled reviled not
again, who prayed for his Persecutors, and saved them by that Blood which their
own hands had shed. It is wrought by the spirit of Christ, the fruits whereof
are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, as the
Apostle speaks. It is ordered to the glory of Christ, and honor of
Christianity, when by our Moderation we adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior,
being blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, shining as
Lights in the World.

For this End it is that the Apostle requires this Moderation of theirs to be
known, not as the Philosophers and Heathen showed their Virtues for Vainglory,
Ostentation, and Interest, as Gloriae Animalia, and Negociatores Famae, as
Tertullian calls them: But that others seeing our good Works may glorify God
in the day of Visitation; for if they who profess Obedience to the Rule of
Christ in the Gospel live dissonantly from the Prescripts of that Rule, they do
not only harden wicked men in their Sins, but expose the name of God and his
Doctrine unto Reproach, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 2. 23, 24. 1 Timothy 6. 1.
as Nathan told David, that by his Sin he had caused the Enemies* of God to
blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12. 14. So perverse and illogical is Malice, as to charge
those Sins, which are aberrations from the Doctrine of Christianity, upon the
Doctrine it self, as genuine Products and Consequences thereof. The Moralist
has observed, that the ancient Grecians called a Man (...), that is, Light,
teaching him so to live as to be a Light unto others. Sure I am the Apostle
has told us, that though we were by nature Darkness, yet we are Light in the
Lord, and therefore should walk as Children of Light, and shine as Lights in
the World, Ephesians. 5. 8. Phil. 2. ^5.

Lastly. As it must be known, so universally known unto All Men; It must be
without Hypocrisy, not attempered to Interests and Designs, like the Devotion
of the Pharisees, who for a pretense made long Prayers; like the Civilities of
Absalom and Otho, of whom the Historian says, That he did Adorare vulgum,
jacere oscula, and omnia serviliter pro Dominatione. It must be without
partiality, not varied or diversified according to the differences of Persons
with whom we have to do. We Christians, says Tertullian, Nullum Bonum sub
exceptione Personarum administramus. It must be known to our Brethren, that
they may be edified; it must be known to our Enemies, that their Prejudices may
be removed, their Mouths stopped, their Hostilities abated, and their Hearts
mollified and persuaded to entertain more just and honorable thoughts of those
Precepts of the Gospel by which our Conversations are directed.

Many and weighty are the Arguments which might be used to persuade all sober,
pious and prudent Christians unto the practice of this most excellent Grace.
They may be drawn from Our great Exemplar and Pattern, whom though we find
once with a Curse against a barren Fig Tree, once with a Scourge against
Prophaners of his Fathers House, once with Woes against malicious and
incorrigible Scribes and Pharisees; yet generally All his Sermons were
Blessings, all his Miracles Mercies, all his Conversation meek, lowly, humble,
gentle, not suited so much to the greatness and dignity of his Divine Person,
as to the economy of his Office, wherein he made himself of no reputation, but
took upon him the form of a Servant.

From a principal Character of a Disciple of Christ, Humility and Self-denial,
which teaches us not only to moderate, but to abandon our own Judgments,
Wills, Passions, Interests, when ever they stand in Competition with the Glory
of Christ, and welfare of his Church, which makes the same mind be in us
which was in Christ Jesus, to look not every man on his own things, but every
man on the things of others.

From the Credit and Honor of Christianity, which is greatly beautified by the
meekness and moderation of those that profess it. Hereby we walk worthy of our
Calling, or as those who make it their work to show forth the worth and dignity
of the Christian Profession, when we walk in lowlyness, meekness,
long-suffering, unity, and love, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3. as the splendor of a Princes
Court is set forth by the Robes and fine Rayments of their Servants, Matthew. 11.
8. 2 Samuel 13. 18. So the Servants of Christ show forth the Honor and
Excellency of their Lord, by being clothed with Humility, 1 Pet 5. 5: and
decked with the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4.

From the Breaches, Divisions, and Discomposures which are at any time in the
Church or State; toward the Healing of which Distempers Moderation, Meekness,
and Humility, do exceedingly conduce; though sharp things are used to search
wounds, yet Balm and Lenitives are the Medicines that heal them; as Mortar, a
soft thing, is used to knit and bind other things together. It is observed by
Socrates and Nicephorus of Proclus Patriarch of Constantinople, that being a
Man of singular lenity and meekness, he did thereby preserve entire the Dignity
of the Church, and by his special prudence healed a very great Division in the
Church, bringing back unto the Communion thereof those who had departed from it.

From the various vicissitudes and inconstancies of Human Events, whereby many
times it comes to pass, that things which for the present are judged very
needful and profitable, prove inconvenient and dangerous for the future, as
Polybius has observed. Hereby we may in all Conditions be taught Moderation,
not to faint or be dejected in the day of Adversity, because God can raise us
again; nor to swell or wax Impotent with Prosperity* because God can as easily
depress us. It was a wise Speech of the Lacedemonian Ambassadors unto the
Athenians in Thucydides; That they who have had many alternations and
vicissitudes of Good and Evil, cannot but deem it Equal to be (...), diffident
and moderate in their Prosperity; as Coenus the Macedonian said unto Alexander,
That nothing did better become him, than (...), as Arrian tells us. And so on
the other hand, this Grace of Moderation does so poize and balance the heart
with Christian Constancy and Courage, that it is not easily tossed or
overturned by any Tempest; but, as they say of the Palm tree, bears up above
all the difficulties that would depresse it; as good Iehosaphat, when he was
distressed with a great multitude of Adversaries, said in his Prayer to God; We
have no might against this great Company that comes against us, neither know
we what to do; but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles* 20. 12.

Lastly* From the Nearness of Christ, which is the Apostles Argument in the
Text, The Lord is at hand. Prope ad Auxilium, Near to help us, The Lord is nigh
unto all that call upon him, Psalm. 145. 18. Deuteronomy. 4. 7. We have no sufficiency
of our selves to improve any Talent, to manage any Condition, to use our
Knowledge or Liberty, our Power or Prosperity to the Honor of God, or Service
of his Church, no power to rejoice in Adversity, to forgive Injury, to correct
the exorbitancy of any inordinate and irregular Passion. Only we have a Lord
Near unto us, his Eye upon us to see our Wants, his Ear open to hear our
Desires, his Grace present to assist our Duties, his Comforts at hand to
support our Hearts, his Power and Providence continually ready to protect our
Persons, to vindicate our Innocence, to allay the wrath, and rebuke the
attempts of any that would harm us. This is one Principal cause of all our
Impatiency and Perturbation, that we are so soon shaken and discomposed with
every Temptation, so soon posed with every Difficulty, that we do soon despond
under every Storm, Because we do not with an Eye of Faith look up unto God as
one that Cares for us, and is ever near at hand as a Sun and a Shield, a
Sanctuary and an Hiding Place to secure us against all our Fears.

Prope ad judicium, Near to judge us, to take a Full and Impartial Review of
all that is done by us, and accordingly to Recompense either Rest or Trouble,
as the Apostle speaks. This is a Fundamental doctrine which we all avow as an
Article of the Christian Faith. Act. 17. 13. Romans 14. 10. 2. Cor 5. 10. That
Christ shall Come as the Ordained Officer to whom all Judgment is Committed,
in flaming Fire, attended with all the Holy Angels; Matthew. 25. 31* 2 Thessalonians. 1.
7, 8. Iud. 10. 14, 15. to give a Righteous, an Impartial, and final Doom and
State unto the Everlasting Condition of all men. Before whose most dreadful
Tribunal we must all appear, Stripped of all our Wealth, Honors, Dignities,
Retinues, accompanied with nothing but our Consciences, and our Works, whether
good or Evil, to bear witness of us, and there receive a proportionable
Sentence to the things which we have done: Holy men a Sentence of Absolution
and Mercy, for the manifestation of Gods glorious Grace, when he shall come to
be Magnified in his Saints, and admired in all those that believe. Wicked men a
Sentence of Rejection and Everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, for the manifestation of his glorious Power and Justice, when all the
Devils in Hell and Powers of Darkness shall be brought all together, and be
trodden down under his Feet, when all the low and narrow Interests of Secular
wealth, pleasures, power and greatness which shortsighted men so passionately
dote upon, and so eagerly pursue, shall to their Everlasting disappointment be
swallowed up in the general Conflagration and so vanish for ever. When the poor
and pitiful Artifices, whereby angry Mortals do countermine and supplant one
another, and mutually project each others vexations, shall to the confusion of
the Contrivers be detected and derided. In a word, when nothing that ever we
have done, shall afford benefit or comfort to us, any further then as it was
with a single and upright aim directed to the Glory of God, and managed by
the Law of Love.

Certainly this is one principal Reason of all Immoderation amongst Men, of
Despondence in Adversity, of Insolence in Prosperity, of Excess in Delights, of
Perturbation in Passions, of vindictive Retaliations; one principal Reason why
they do not with a single Eye and an unbiassed Heart manage all their Actions
and Designs to the Glory of God, the Credit of the Gospel, the Interest of
Christianity, the Edification and Salvation of the Souls of Men, but often
suffer weak Passions, Prejudices, Interests to State, model and overrule their
Designs; the Reason I say of all is, Because the Terror of the Lord has not
persuaded them, because they are not sufficiently awed with the All-seeing Eye,
and near approach of the Lord of Glory, before whom all their ways are naked,
with whom all their Sins are laid up in store, and sealed amongst his
Treasures. Let us therefore seriously resolve to regulate all our Actions by
our Great Account. To say with Job, What shall I do when God rises up, and
when he visits what shall I answer him? Job 31. 14. He has entrusted me with
many Talents, with a Rich Treasure of Power and Interest, of Wisdom and
Honor, of Wealth and Learning, he has deposited with me the Custody of his
Eternal Gospel, the Grand Interests of the Church of Christ, and of the
Precious Souls which he redeemed with his own Blood. God forbid that I should
ever suffer any Immoderate Passions, or Prejudices, or Partialities, or low and
narrow Interests of mine own so far to transport me, as that I should betray
so great a Trust, and provoke the wrath of so Holy and Just a Judge. God enable
me with that Equanimity and Singleness of Heart, without Hypocrisy, and
without Partiality, with a direct Eye to the Glory of God, the Kingdom of
Christ, the Edification and Peace of his Church, the Flourishing of his Gospel,
and the Prosperity of the Souls of his People; so to discharge every Trust
reposed in me, as that I may be able to give up mine Accounts with Joy, and
when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, I may lift up my Head in the day of
Redemption, and receive a Crown of Glory which fades not away.

Thus let your Moderation be known unto All men, because the Lord is at hand in
his future approaching Judgments.. But has not the Lord been at hand, near
us, in the midst of us already by many strange intermingled Providence, by a
series of Glorious Mercies, and a vicissitude of dreadful Judgments; as if he
would both ways try, whether by the one we would be led unto Repentance, or by
the other learn Righteousness? Is it a small Mercy, that we have had the Gospel
of Salvation in the purity of the Reformed Religion for so long a time in this
Land, having brought* forth so little Fruit in answer to the Light and Grace
which has been therein revealed unto us? I have read an Observation in one of
the Homilies of our Church (if my memory do not greatly fail me) That we shall
not often find, that a Nation which has had the Gospel in purity, and not
brought forth the Fruits thereof, has enjoyed it much longer than 100 years. I
do not mention this as a sad Presage, for I dare not set bounds to the infinite
Mercy and Patience of God, his Judgments are unsearchable, and his Ways past
finding out; the secret things belong unto him, and things revealed to us and
our Children; It is not for us to know the Times or the Seasons, which the
Father has put in his own Power: only I desire, by this sad Observation, to
awaken both my self and you timely to consider the things that do belong unto
our Peace, before they be hidden from our Eyes; for this is a sober and certain
Truth, that the Sins of a Church, as the Fruits of a well-ordered Garden, do
ripen much faster than those of a Wilderness; and therefore the Prophet Amos
calls them by the name of Summer Fruit, Amos 8. 2. The Prophet Jeremiah
compares the Judgments threatened against them unto the Rod of an Almond-tree,
Jer. 1. 11. which shoots forth her Blossoms before other Trees. And therefore
when we have reason to fear that God will hasten Judgments, we have great
reason to resolve with holy David, to make have and not to delay to keep his
Commandments.

Again, was it not a great and eminent Mercy, when God commanded up into the
Scabbard the Sword of violent men, swelled into Pride and Arrogance, with their
many Successes, when he infatuated their Counsels, shattered and dissipated
their Undertakings, and swallowed them up in the confusion of their own
Consultations?

Was it not a glorious and wonderful Mercy, that after a long and bitter
Banishment the Lord brought back our dread Sovereign in the Chariots of
Aminadab, upon the wings of Loyalty and Love unto his Royal Throne, without the
effusion of one drop of Blood, and thereby made way for a stable and durable
Settlement both of Church and State? To say nothing of the other ordinary
Mercies, of flourishing of Trade, and plenty of Provisions, wherewith this
Nation has been for a long time blessed: And may it not be said of us as it
was of Hezekiah, that we have not rendered again according to the Benefits done
unto us? but have surfeited and played the Wantons with these great Mercies; so
that the Lord has been provoked to lift up his Hand in many sore and dismal
Judgments against us?

For after that Thousands and Ten Thousands had fallen by the Sword of an
unnatural War in the High Places of the Field, he has stirred up Potent
Adversaries abroad against us, though blessed be his Name we have not only
hitherto been delivered from their Fury, but by signal Successes have had good
reason to hope that the Lord has owned our Righteous Cause.

Yet for all this, his Anger is not turned away, but his Hand is stretched out
still; for he has in these two years last past emptied this City and Nation in
very many parts thereof, as we may I presume with good Reason compute, above an
Hundred Thousand of her Inhabitants, by the fury of a raging and contagious
Pestilence, the like whereunto possibly cannot be paralelled for some Hundred
of years. And yet after all this, his Anger has not been turned away, but his
Hand is streched out still. He has likewise contended by Fire, and by the late
direful Conflagration, has laid in Ashes the glorious Metropolis of this
Nation, has made desolate almost all her goodly Palaces, and laid waste almost
all the Sanctuaries of God therein. Thus the Lord has come with Fire, and with
his Chariots like a whirlewind, to render his Anger with fury, and his Rebuke
with flames of Fire; for by Fire and by Sword has he pleaded with us, and the
Slain of the Lord have been many.

We see how the Lord has been near us both in ways of Mercy and of Judgment,
as if he would say of us as of Ephraim, Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a
pleasant Child? for since I speak against him I do earnestly remember him
still, therefore my Bowels are troubled for him. I will surely have mercy upon
him, says the Lord. And again, How shall I give thee up Ephraim, How shall I
deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as
Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my Repentings are kindled together. I
will not execute the fiercenes of mine Anger, I will not return to destroy
Ephraim, for I am God and not Man, etc. Jer. 31. 20. Hos. 11. 8, 9.

I shall Limit the Inference from all this to the first Acception, which I gave
of the Original Word in the text, namely, to teach us from hence to walk as
becomes the dignity of our High Calling, according to that Exhortation of the
Apostle, Let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. For every
thing of the Gospel does call upon us for Holiness of Life, the Author of it a
Pattern of Holiness, He that says he abides in him, must walk even as he
walked, 1. Ioh. 2. 6. The End of it a design of Holiness, That we being
delivered out of the hand of our Enemies, might serve him without fear in
Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our life The Doctrine of
it a Mystery of Godliness, 1. Tim. 2. 16. There is not an Article of the Creed
which has not Holiness a Consequent of it. The Laws of it Prescripts of
Holiness, Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew. 5. 48. The
Cardinal Graces of it Faith, Love, and Hope, all Principles of Holiness, Faith
Purifieth the Heart and works by Love, Act. 15. 9. Gal. 5. 6. Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. Herein is Love if we keep his
Commandments, 1 John 5. 3. And every one that has this Hope in him purifieth
himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. No man can rationally hope to be like
unto Christ in Glory hereafter, who resolves to be unlike unto him in Grace and
Holiness here; for Glory is the Consummation and Reward of Grace. All the
precious Promises of the Gospel invite unto Holiness, Having these Promises,
dearly beloved, let us cleanse our Selves from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Lastly, the
dreadful Threatenings of the Gospel drive unto Holiness; since we know, that
without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. and that he will come
in flaming Fire to take vengeance on those that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. And therefore as ever we
expect to enjoy the Benefits of the Gospel, (without the which we are of all
Creatures the most miserable) we must show forth the Efficacy and Power of the
Grace of the Gospel in our Hearts and Lives, which teaches us to deny
Vngodlyness and Worldly Lusts, and to Live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in
this Present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. which that we may all do, The God of Peace,
who brought again from the Dead the Lord Jesus, the Great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in every
Good Work to do his Will, working in us that which is pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for Ever and Ever. Amen.

FINIS.

