A REVIEW of the REFLECTIONS ON THE Prince of Orange's Declaration.
1. THE Prince's unwillingness to charge the Government with any thing but what
was Evident and Undeniable, affords the Reflection with which this Paper
begins; That all the noise of a secret League with France has been only a
feigned danger, and a false fear, since it is not so much as mentioned in the
Prince's Declaration. It is certain, that the French Ambassador asserted it in
a public Audience, and in a Memorial given in to the States General at the
Hague; and all the World has clearly seen through the grimmace that the Court of
England made upon it to Mr. Skeleton; for it is not to be supposed, that the
Court of France would have published this Alliance, unless it had been made, or
that they would have made it, unless they had seen full powers for it in Mr.
Skelton's hands. But after all, as the Articles of it are secret, ^o the Court
of England having disowned it, the Princes exactness in not mentioning a
doubtful thing, deserved rather a Reflection in his favor.

2. The Reflector is offended at the Prince's using the Style of We and Us, for
it seems thou and thee are so dear to him, that he cannot hear any thing out of
that Cant. But though by the Connivance of our Court, France has robbed the
Prince of his Principality, yet the Rights and Dignity of a Sovereign Prince
remain still with him, which will justify his speaking in the plural number:
And the other terms of Authority that are in his Declaration, being the usual
Style of all that Command Armies, his using them imports no more, than that he
is resolved to use force for the Restoring of our Liberty; and if the Style is
a little high, it is their fault who would not hearken to softer and humbler
representations, and that had made it a Crime so much as to Petition.

3. There is nothing works more on weak people, than the fastening an ill name
even on the best actions, and therefore Invasion being a term that naturally
gives horror, the Reflector fastens that upon the Prince's Attempt to save the
Nation; but things appear now too broad to be disguised, and therefore the wise
and worthy part of the Nation esteems that to be a Deliverance, which is here
called an Invasion. It is true, the Prince promises to send back his Forces,
which imports, that he intends to stay behind; for he having engaged to see a
Free Parliament Called and Assembled, must stay after his Army is sent away,
since no Parliament can be chosen with freedom, while the Nation is overawed
by a Military Power; but when that is laid down of all hands, then the Prince
will be obliged to see the promise that he has made to the Nation for a Free
Parliament executed. So that all the malicious insinuations of his Aspiring to
be King, which return so often in the Reflections, are thrown out only to
create an unjust jealousy of His Highnesses Intentions.

4. The security which the Reflector promises to the Nation, and the Religion,
by the Concurrence of Protestants to save the Court, is now a little too late,
the same Cheat will hardly pass twice. This had once a great effect in bringing
the Nation off from the design of the Exclusion, and Men in the simplicity of
their heart believed it. But the Court has taken so much pains to convince them
of their error, and has succeeded so effectually in it, that it is too great
an imposing upon us, to fancy that we can be so soon deluded again in the same
manner. We know now, by sad experience, what all the Promises and Oaths that a
Papist can make to Protestants do signify; and we see how little is to be
built even on the honor of a Prince, when a Jesuit has the keeping of his
Conscience. Nor can it be any Reproach on our Religion, if the Nation comes
under the Protection of a Prince that has so near an interest in the Succession
to the Crown, to preserve it self and the Established Religion from the
Conspiracies of those who intend to destroy both, and had made a great way in
it, and would have probably brought their designs to a full ripeness this
Winter, if the Prince's coming had not checked them. The Reflector thinks the
Prince ought to have turned his Arms rather on France, and allows that he has a
just right to do it. But England had a greater Title to his Protection, and
ought to have been first taken care of by him, and when that is once done, the
proposition here made, with relation to France, may be more seasonable.

5. Great exceptions are taken, because the Prince founds the Invasions that
are made on the Protestant Religion, on this, that it is the Religion
Established by Law; since our Reflecter tells us, that it is the Truth and not
the Legality of a Religion that is its warrant; and that otherwise Paganism and
Judaism had been still the Established Religion. But the Reflector confounds
things of different Natures. If we consider Religion, as it gives us a Title to
the favor of God, and to Eternal happiness, we ought to have no regard but to
the truth of it. But when Religion is considered as the first of all Civil
Rights, then the Legal Establishment is the foundation of its Title: And if
Legislators had not changed Laws, Paganism had been still the Legal Religion,
notwithstanding its falsehood; and tho the Truth of the Christian Religion is
the only ground upon which we believe it, yet it must become Legal as well as
it is true, before we can claim the Protection of the Law and the Government
that has secured it to us; so that to fight against Popery, where that is the
Established Religion, (...) as certainly a Sin, as it is a debt that we owe our
Religion and Country, to fight for the Protestant Religion, when the Law is for
it, and illegal violence is employed to pull it down.

6 The Reflector's Common-place-stuff, with relation to the Dispencing Power,
has been so often exposed, that it scarce deserves a review. The Obligation of
all Laws depends on the force of the Penalties against Transgressors; so that
the Dispensing with Penal Laws, carries in it the Dispensing with all Laws
whatsoever; and by this Doctrine, the whole frame and security of our
Government is at the King's discretion: Nor will that distinction of malum in
se, and malum prohibitum save the matter, unless all the World were agreed upon
the point; what things are evil of themselves, and what not. In the sense of a
Papist, all the Laws against their Religion are so far from being Obligatory of
their own Nature, that they are impious attempts upon that Authority which they
think Infallible. Therefore all the distinction that is offered to save us from
the exorbitancy of this Dispensing Power, as if it could not reach to things
that are evil of themselves, is of no force, unless a measure were laid down,
in which both Protestants and Papists were agreed concerning things that are
good or evil of themselves. For instance, Murder is allowed by all to be evil
of it self; yet if the Extirpation of Heretics is a duty incumbent on a
Catholic King, as we are sure it is, then a Commision given to destroy us
would be a justifiable Action, and so the Laws against Murder and Manslaughter
might in that case be Dispensed with, since the killing of Heretics is by the
Doctrine of Papists only Malum prohibitum, and not Malum in se.

7. Our Author might have spared his Rhetoric how well soever he loads it
upon the head of Persecution and Liberty of Conscience, if it had been but for
this reason, that it discovered too plainly who it was that wrote these
Reflections, which perhaps he may have e're long some Reasons to wish it were
not so well known, as he has taken pains to do by his luxuriant Style. All that
can be said on this head, belongs very pertinently to the consideration of a
Parliament, but is very improperly urged in favor of the bloodiest of all
Persecutors, who could not begin their breaking in upon our Laws and our
Religion more dexterously than at this of Liberty of Conscience, though they
themselves had been the Authors of all the severities that had been acted among
us, and intended by this show of ease to bring us under all the Cruelties of an
Inquisition, which is one of the inseparable Perquisities of that bloody
Religion.

8. The greatest part of the Invasions made on our Government, that are set
forth in the Princes Declaration, are acknowledged to be such by our Reflector.
But he thinks they are now redressed. The High Commission is at an and,
Magdalen College is restored. If the King had of his own motion, and from a
sense of the justice of the thing done all this while he apprehended no danger,
and if he had brought the Authors of those Pernicious Councils to condign
Punishment, then it had been more reasonable to Value those Acts of Justice, by
which the former Violences had been in some measure repaired: but what is done
in the present Circumstances, shows only a meanness of Spirit, and a feebleness
in the Government: And some Men's Tempers are too well known, to suffer us once
to doubt of their returning back to all their former Violences, and of their
carrying them on to greater Excesses; if God for the sins of the Nation, should
blast this Glorious Undertaking. And if the Charters are now restored, we know
by the Proceedings of the late Regulators of Corporations, that it was far from
their thoughts but a little while ago, so that this is likewise an effect of
the present Fear they are under; and it shows that after all their Huffings
during their Prosperity, they sink under dangers as much as others, whose
Memory they are so careful to blemish, how much soever they are beholding to
them. It is here said, that most of the Charters were taken away in the late
King's time: But as it is well known under whose Influence the last years of
the late Reign were conducted, so the limiting the Elections to a special
number, contrary to Custom and Prescription, was the Invention of the present
Reign.

9. But if the Reflector will not justify every thing that the Government has
done, and thinks the present state of things could hardly bear so gross an
Abuse; yet he insists often upon this, that these Illegal things were fit for
the Consideration and the Redress of a Parliament, and that they do not
justific the Prince of Orange's Attempt. But the Prince's Design is only to see
a Free Parliament Chosen and Assembled according to Law. For our Author and his
Accomplices (for he reckons himself in the Ministry, Sect. 23. when he names the
things objected against the Ministry, as objected against us,) had taken such
care to keep off a parliament, and to overturn all Corporations, to Corrupt all
Elections, and to provide for false Returns by Popish Sheriffs and Mayors, that
we were out of all hopes, or rather out of a possibility of ever seeing a Free
Parliament again; so that any nearer Prospect that we now have of one, is
wholly owing to the Prince's Undertaking; and indeed what is given us at
present, is done with so ill a Grace, and the Popish and corrupt Ministry, is
still preserved and cherished with so particular a Considence, that they seem
to have a mind to make the Nation see that all is done so grossly, that those
who are cheated by it, will have no excuse for their Folly, since the Trick is
acted with too bare a (...) to pass on any.

10. The Reflector thinks that the Prince ought to have complained to the King
of these Abu^^^, though in other places of this Paper, he pretends that the
Prince was not a proper Judge in th^se Matters; he Aggravates the Prince's
(...) an Uncle and a Father-in-Law without warning given. Indeed, if this were
the Case, all that could be said upon it, was, that he had copied from the
Pattern that was set him in 1672. in that famous Attempt on the S^^^na Fleet:
What Complaints the Prince ^^^de, or what encouragement he had to make any, and
how they were entertained and Answered, are Domestic matters, of which the
World knows little, since all that has appeared in public was in Mr. Fagel's
Letter, and how well that was received, and how civilly it was answered, all
England saw. It is true, the Prince is very nearly related to the King, but
there are other Ties stronger than the Bonds of Flesh and Blood; He owes more
to the Protestant Religion and to the Nation, than can be defaced by any other
Relation whatsoever; and if the failing in one Relation excuses the other, then
enough might be said, to show at what pains the Court of England has been, to
free the Prince from all other Engagements, except those of Loving Enemies, and
doing good to those who Despitefully use us, for upon this account the Prince
lies under all possible Obligations.

11. The Reflector thinks, that those who left Ireland, were driven by a
needless fear; but though he has no reason to apprehend much from the Irish
Papists, yet those who saw the last Bloody Massacre, may be forgiven, if they
have no mind to see such another. He faintly blames that great Change that was
lately made in the whole Government of Ireland; but he presently excuses it,
since it was Natural for the King and his Friends to desire to be safe some
where; till they had fair Quarter in England, they must make sure of Ireland;
but he adds, that as soon as that was done, the thing must have returned into
its old Channel again. This ought to be writ only to Irish- men, for none of a
higher size of Understanding can bear it; if it can ever be showed that Papists
have yielded up any thing, which they had once wrung out of the hands of
Protestants, except when they were forced to it; we may believe this and all
the other gross things which are here imposed on us. The plain case was, the
Papists resolved to destroy us, and to put themselves in case to do it as soon
as was possible; so they went about it immediately in Ireland, only they have
delayed the giving the Signal for a new Massacre, till matters were ripe for it
in England.

12 The Reflector has reason to avoid the saying any thing to the Article of
Scotland, for even his Confidence could not support him in justifying the
King's claiming an Absolute Power, to which all are bound to obey without
reserve, and the Repealing of a great many Laws upon that pretension; this is
too gross for Human Nature, and the Principles of all Religions whatsoever. Our
Author avoids speaking to it, because he does not know the extent of the
Prerogative of that Crown. But no Prerogative can go to an Obedience without
Reserve, nor can Absolute Power consist with any Legal Government.

13. The Declaration had set forth, that the Evil Counselors had represented
the Expedient, offered by the Prince and Princess, as offered on design to
disturb the Quiet and Happiness of the Kingdom; upon which the Reflector
bestows this kind Remark on the Ministry: And did they not say true, as it
happens? Believe me, some Folks think many of them are not often guilty of such
foresight: The Writer is angry that his side is not uppermost, and though he
includes himself in the Ministry by saying Us, when he speaks of them, yet
here, though he was to censure the Party that is against him, he distinguishes
them, by saying many of the Counselors use not to have such foresight: But
perhaps they can object as much to his foresight, and with as much reason. But
if the King comes up to Mr. Fagel's Letter, why was it rejected with so much
scorn, and answered with so much Insolence? Now perhaps they would hearken to
it, when they have brought both themselves and the Nation to the brink of
Ruin, by their mad Councils: But they ought to be forgiven, since they have
been true to the Principles and Dictates of their Religion.

14. Our Reflector thinks a Free Parliament a Chimera, and indeed he and his
Friends have been at a great deal of pains to render it impossible. But perhaps
he may be quickly cured of his Error, and a Free One is the sooner like to be
chosen, when he and such as he, are set at a due distance from the public
Councils. If Members are sometimes chosen by drinking and other Practices, this
is bad enough, but still it is not so bad as the laying a force upon the
Electors, and a restraint upon the Election. Nor is it very much to the King's
Honor, to remember how the last Parliament was chosen; it was indeed a very
disgusting Essay in the beginning of a Reign, and gave a sad prospect of what
might be looked for; but if one Violence was born with, when the struggle of
another Party seemed to ex^use it; this does not prove that a course of such
Violences, when the Design is become both more visible, and less excusable,
ought to be endured. If the Members of that Parliament proved Worthy Patriots,
I do not see why they ought not to be remembered with Honor, though there is a
great deal to be said upon their first elevation to that Character, which they
maintained indeed nobly; so that if the first Conception of that Parliament was
Irregular, yet its End was Honorable, since never a Parliament was dissolved
upon a more Glorious Account.

15. The Reflector sets up all his Sail, when he enters upon the Article of the
pretended Prince of Wales: This was a Point by which he hoped to merit highly,
and upon that, to gain ground on that Party of the Court, on whom he had
reflected with so much scorn. Therefore here must the Prince be attackt with
all the Malicious force to which his Rhetoric could carry him; and all those
Men of Honor that went over to wait on him at the Hague, and to represent to
him the bleeding and desperate Condition of the Nation, must be stigmatized as
a lewd Crew of Renegadoes; though I must tell him, that the common acception of
Renegadoe, is one that changes his Religion, and by this he will find some near
him to whom that Character belongs more justly. He almost blames the King for
the low step he lately made to prove that Birth: It was a low one indeed, to
make so much ado, and to bring together such a Solemn Appearance, to hear so
slight a Proof produced: which could have no other effect, but to make the
Imposture so much the more visible, when the utmost attempts to support it,
appear to be now so feeble, that as to the main point of the Queen's bearing
the Child, there is not so much as a colony of a proof produced: And it is
certain, that if this had been a fair thing, the Court would have so managed
it, that it should not have been in the power of any Mortal to have called it
in question: And on the other hand, they have so managed it, that one must
needs see, in every step of it, broad marks of an Imposture. It will not be
half Proofs, nor Suborned Witnesses, that will satisfy the Nation in so great
a Point. But I will enter into no particulars relating to this Business, which
will be better laid open when a Free Parliament meets to examine it.

16. The Reflector charges upon the Prince all the miseries that may follow on
a War, as an unsuitable return to the kindness that the Nation has showed him.
But if the dissolution of the Government, brought on by the Court, has given a
just rise to his coming, then the ill effects that may fall out in the progress
of his design, are no more to be charged on him, than the miseries to which a
severe Cure of the ill effects of a wilful disorder expose a Patient, ought to
be imputed to a Physician, that betrays his Patient if he slatters him; and
that must apply violent Remedies to obstinate Distempers. I do not hear from
other hands, that the Lords and Bishops about the City have disowned their
inviting the Prince: and I do not believe it the better, because our Author
affirms it. But if it were true, there are others in England besides those
about the City: so the thing may be true, though a few about the City had not
been in it. A small Civility is bestowed on the Prince, when it is said, that
he would not have affirmed it, if he did not believe it; but this is soon taken
off, and it is said, that doubtless he was abused in this. If this is to be
supposed, the Prince is as weak a man, as his Enemies, for their own sakes,
ought to wish to be; if he could suffer himself to be engaged in a matter of
this nature, without being well assured of the grounds he went on.

17. What is said of the Prince's referring all matters to the determination of
a Free Parliament, is too flat to require an Answer: This was a plausible
thing, and therefore it ought to have been either quite past over, or somewhat
of force ought to have been set against it. This is not the referring of other
peoples Rights to a Parliament; but the leaving the healing of the Nation to
those who are its proper Physicians. And the taking a Cure out of the hands of
the Court, instead of that, is like the renouncing a sure Method and a good
Physi^ian, and the hearkening to the arrogant promises of a bold Mountebank.
The Prince has promised to send away his Army as soon as the state of the
Nation will permit, upon which the Reflector says, that here is but a
Foreigner's word against our own King's; and he refers it to our Allegiance to
judge, which of the two we ought to trust. But I cannot find out in what the
Prince's promise contradicts any that the King has made; for I do not hear that
the King had promised that these Troops shall not return; and unless that were
the Case, I cannot find out the Contradiction; and after all, if we must speak
out, there is some odds to be made between a Prince whose Religion, as well as
his Honor, has ever determined him to keep all his Promises, and another whose
Religion has taught him so often to make bold with all his.

18. The Prince's summoning the Nobility and Gentry, as it is the usual style
of all Generals, so it requires them only to appear and to act for their
Country and their Religion; and his promising to have a Parliament called in
Scotland and Ireland, imports no more but that he is come with a Resolution to
have the Government settled on its true Basis, and that he will see it done.

19. The Reflector is in great wrath, because the Prince has, in his Additional
Declaration, showed how little regard ought to be had to that imperfect Redress
of Grievances that has been offered of late. But it had been a concurring in
the Cheat, to suffer it to pass, without laying it open: When fair things are
offered from men to whom we ought to trust, it is as reasonable to receive
them, as it is to reject all deceitful things, when the Truth is apparent.
Therefore as the Prince had no reason to abandon the Cure of the Nation, after
the steps that he had made, because of the endeavors of the Court to lay it
asleep; so he has so purged himself from the Imputations of designing a
Conquest, that all out Reflector's malice cannot make them stick; and all that
Noble Company that came over with him, and that have since come in to him, are
a proof of this beyond exception: Let all Men of Sense judge, whether an Army
composed of so many Irish Papists, or another made up of so many Noblemen and
Gentlemen of great Families and Estates, are likeliest to set about the
Conquering the Nation.

20. He saucies that what the Prince gets by the Sword, he will keep by the
Sword: And upon this he tells us, that he said Once to the King, that the
bringing the Dutch Army to the Discipline in which it was, had cost 1300 Lives:
upon which he wishes those who value the Magna Charta, and Trials by Juries, to
make some Reflections. But since the Situation and Constitution of Holland,
makes an Army necessary to them, and since they have provided by particular
Laws, that Marshal Discipline should be Maintained by a Council of War, nothing
could have been contrived more for the Prince's Honor, than to tell us that he
has so ordered the Matter, that the Army is become one of the most Regular and
Inoffensive Bodies of Men that is in all Holland: which this Nation sees now,
with no small astonishment; to whom one Regiment of Irish, has given more fear
and disorder, than this great Army has done to the places through which it has
passed. The Reflector tells us also, as a very ridiculous thing, that the
Prince who has left the Dutch no Liberty at home, comes now to secure ours
here: And to make the Parallel complete between the Prince and a near Relation
of his, he pretends that he broke his Oath to the States of Holland, he having
promised never to be Statholder, though it should be offered him: And to conclude
all against him, he says, there is no more proportion between the Ancient
Liberties of Holland, and his present Government, than there is between London
and Brandford. Here is the force of all his Malice, but we who have seen the
State of Affairs in Holland, and the Freedom of the Government there, know
that England can wish for no greater Happiness, than that the Laws and
Government here, may be Maintained as exactly here, as they are there: And the
late Unanimous Concurrence of all the Provinces, and of all the Negatives in
every Province, and not only of all the Members in every one of these Bodies,
but indeed of the whole People all over the Provinces, Amsterdam it self
leading the way to all the rest, by which they gave their Fleet, their Army,
and their Treasure so frankly up to the Prince, was an evidence of his good
Government, beyond all that can be set forth in words: For real Arguments
conclude always truly. And for the Prince's Oath, it was an Obligation to the
States, and was intended even by those who framed it, only to hinder all
Caballing for obtaining any such offer to be made him. But when they were
brought to that extremity, to which we helped to drive them, so that there was
a change made in the greatest part of the whole Government, they Unanimously
found the necessity of Vesting the Prince with the full Authority of
Statholder; and therefore the Oath being made to them, it was in their Power to
give it up: So that here was no breach of Oath, but only a Relaxation of the
Obligation that was made to the States. The Reflections end with a piece of
Railery, which might pass, if it were either witty or decent; but if the things
that are objected seem irregular, I fancy that Mr. Pen's Writing for Popery,
and Mr. Stewart's for Tyranny, are things every whit as Incongruous as any of
these, with which the Reflector diverts himself.

Printed for William Churchil, 1688.


