THE Pastoral Office. Opened in a VISITATION-SERMON Preached at IPSWICH October
10. 1662.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, EDWARD Lord Bishop of NORWICH.

Greg. Nazianz. in Apologet. (...).

LONDON, Printed by T. Ratcliffe for George Thomason at the Rose and Crown in
St Paul's Churchyard, 1663.

To the Right Worshipful the Magistrates, and to the Reverend Ministers, and
other Members of the Corporation of Ipswich in Suffolk.
Dearly Beloved,
THough I could not with any decency decline the Publication of this Sermon,
which had been by you so earnestly desired, then, when the greatness of your
Love and respects to my Person, and function, did for many days express it
self in a most free and noble Reception: yet it pleased Divine providence, by a
sore visitation on my Family, to obstruct the performance of this Service, so
long, till I might justly have hoped to have been no more minded of it. But
being disappointed in that hope, I now, though late, send it forth, without
altering any one Line or period of what I then delivered. And although it be
but a very Slender Return for the great favors I received from you alone, yet
I must crave your leave to profess, That as a Ring, though placed only on a
finger is yet a token of Love to the whole person; so this little Sermon,
though dedicated only to you, is intended as a Testimony of that Honor and
Thanks which I owe to all Orders in this great Diocese, for those signal and
public favors, which, in mine attendance on the service thereof, I every
where received. All the Answer I can make to so great an Obligation, is daily
to pray, That the Church of Christ in this large Diocese, may be beautified
with the blessings of Truth and Peace, of Unity and Holiness; That the Clergy
thereof may with all fidelity deliver the Word of Gods grace, and that it may
by his effectual operation, have a free and successful passage into the hearts
and lives of the people committed to their Charge. And as this is the Continual
Prayer, so I hope, that through the Assistance of Divine Grace, it shall be the
unwearied Endeavor of him who desires to approve himself

An unfeigned Servant of your Faith, and Salvation, ED. NORVIC.

THE PASTORAL OFFICE. OPENED In a VISITATION-SERMON Preached at IPSWICH.
ZECH. 11. 7. And I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the
other I called Bands, and I fed the flock.
IN this Chapter we have a prophecy of horrible and final Judgments hanging
over the Nation of the Jews, for their Rejection of Christ, here foretold. The
Judgments are External, arising from Enemies abroad, verse 1, 2, 3. from
shepherds at home, v. 5. from Intestine Commotions, ver. 6. and Spiritual,
Rejection by Christ's breaking the staves wherewith he had fed them, ver. 9. --
14. and Tradition into the hands of Cruel shepherds, ver. 15. 17. Causes of
these Judgments, Oppression, ver. 5. Ingratitude against Christ their good
Shepherd. Concerning whom we have 1. His Call to his pastoral office, verse 4.
2. His obedience to that Call, verse 7. 3. The Hatred, and dis-estimation he
received from the pastors and people, ver. 8. 12. Lastly Gods Abhorring their
so unworthy dealing with his Son, verse. 13.

The Lord being willing to save his flock sets a shepherd over them who should
feed them. And a Good shepherd we are sure it is who could call God My God,
verse 4; and although we may take it for the Prophet himself, representing by a
Synecdoche all faithful pastors whom the Lord from time to time sent to
acquaint them with his Counsel, yet it is evident by the ensuing parts of the
Chapter, that Christ is here meant, the chief and great shepherd, of whom the
Prophet in these actions was but a Type. He threatens them, verse 6. punishes
them, verse 10. was sold by them, verse 12. compared with Mat: 27. 9. He
principally, and other faithful pastors under him, are they who here undertake
the Charge of this people to feed and Govern them. Which Care is further set
forth by a Metaphore of Two Shepherds staves, noting his double vigilance and
superinspection over them; by the names of which I understand Two-special Ends
of Christ's pastoral Service:

1. To Restore Beauty, and to erect that collapsed order of doctrine and
worship which had been corrupted; for verity of doctrine, purity of worship,
and decency of order, are the special Beauties of a Church, which render it
amiable: upon these accounts it is that Sion and the House of God therein are
so often called the Beauty of the Lord, and the Beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 27.
4. 48. 2. 50. 2. 96. 6. 9. Isay 60. 13. 64. 11. Christ in his Ministry did
cleanse the doctrine of the Church in his Sermon on the Mount, and the worship
of the Church in his purging of the Temple, and so filled his house with Glory,
Hag: 2. 7. and made Beautiful the feet of his Ministers, Romans 10. 15. The
Magnificence of the Temple, the Glorious Garments of the Priests, the pure
Vessels of the Sanctuary, the Sweet Incense and Perfume, the admirable State,
Order, and Government of Solomon's house, were all shadows and Types of these
spiritual and heavenly Beauties wherewith Christ adorneth his Church

2. To gather together into one his scattered and divided people, John 11. 52.
that from him the whole Body may be joined together and compacted, Ephesians: 4. 16.
in peace and love one unto another, according unto his prayer, John 17. 21, 22,
23. This, I take it, is meant by the Staff called Bands, making of the stick of
Joseph and Judah one, Ezeck. 37 19. In those Eastern Countries such as entered
into a Covenant of peace were wont to Twist a Band, Fuller Miscellan. l. 6. c.
17
and upon dissolving a Covenant to untwist it again; Whence a Society of men
joining together in one employment are called (...) Psalm: 119. 61. 1 Samuel: 10 5.
and their possessions were divided unto them per (...) by measuring lines,
Psalm: 16. 6. 78. 55. to note their dwelling together in unity. But now upon
Rejecting Christ, They who had been before in Amoenitate Dei, the Lords
peculiar people, and were knitt together in the Bands of a Brotherly Covenant,
were at last loathed by God, ver. 8. no longer consociated in the same policy
or possessions, but devoured by the Roman Army, and dissipated into diverse and
remote Nations.

In the words Two things are observable. The Office or Administration, feeding
the flock. And the great Ends of that Service, Purity and Unity, set forth by
the Symbol of two pastoral Staves, called here by the names of Beauty and Bands.

Touching this Administration of Feeding the Flock, we shall briefly open, 1.
The Necessity of this Pastoral office, both supreme in the Chief Shepherd, and
subordinate in his servants and inferior Ministers. 2. The particular Duties
wherein the discharge of our pastoral Office does stand, which the supreme
Shepherd is pleased to second with his powerful and most efficacious
Cooperation.

Necessity is Twofold. Absolute, as it is absolutely necessary for the first
Being to Be. Relative or Hypothetical, when one thing is necessary in order
unto, or upon supposition of another. Obedience unto God is a Necessary duty to
be done, Blessedness, a necessary End to be pursued; unto the performance of
this Duty, there is a necessity to know the Rule wherein it is prescribed: unto
the obtaining of this End there is a Necessity to know the Means whereby it may
be promoted; for understanding whereof we shall premise two or three
Propositions.

1. Though there remain some ingrafted notions of the Law of Nature touching
God and a service due to him in the heart of Man, yet that Law is much darkened
and defaced by that sinful Corruption which does as well indispose the mind
as any other faculties unto its due operations. Of this blindness and vanity we
have frequent mention, 1 Cor. 2 14. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. and therefore albeit rare
things are recorded of the moral Virtues of many Heathen men, and though
diverse of their Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Hierocles, Plutarch, Cicero,
Seneca, Epictetus* and others have written excellently on those Arguments, yet
unto a full knowledge of Moral Duties to be in a due manner performed unto God
and Men, there is necessary a further patefaction of the Divine will, then
those remaining Principles of the Law of Nature can dictate unto us. And this
was done by the Ministry of Moses, by whom to the Church, and unto whom by the
Ministry of Angels the most holy and perfect Law of God was fully discovered.

2. Though the Law delivered by Moses be pure and perfect, though it be Holy,
Just, and Good, and though the Commands thereof be Exceeding Broad, yet thereby
Salvation cannot be had, since by the Law is the knowledge of Sin, Rom: 3.
20. and therefore it can Curse only and not Bless or Save us, as the Apostle
argues, Gal. 3. 10, 11. All that the Law can do is to show us duty, to discover
the sin whereby we come short of duty, the punishment due unto that sin, and
our Impotency to prevent, remove, endure, or avoid that Curse. And Consequently
there must be a further patefaction of life and grace by another Prophet.

3 The doctrine of the Gospel as it stands formally distinguished from the
doctrine of the Law, is wholly Mysterious and supernatural, there are no
seminal notions in the mind of man from whence it may by rational disquisition
be deduced. And therefore it is usually in Scripture called a Mystery, the
Mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 4. Col. 4. 3. the Mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.
19. of the Faith, of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 9. 16. Hidden from ages and
generations. Romans 16. 25. which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2. 9. as a Mystery, Above
Natural Reason, as a Mystery of Godliness against Carnal Reason. Except
therefore it had been by some Pastor Revealed to the Church, we could never
have had the knowledge of it.

4 Unto the perfecting of Salvation by the Gospel Two things Concur. A Valid
Impetration of Grace by the Merit of Christ. And an Effectual Application
thereof by his Spirit, which he does by begetting Faith in us, called the faith
of the Operation of God, Col. 2. 12. This knowledge of Christ is Simply
necessary to Salvation, Isay 53. 11. Joh. 8 24 And it is not of our selves, but
the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. and God works it by Hearing, Romans 10. 17. So there
is a Necessity of a Divine Pastor, by whose teaching this knowledge so
necessary to Salvation may be effectually wrought in us.

5. The doctrine of Redemption lays an Obligation on the Redeemed to live
unto him that bought them. Christ therefore died and rose, that he might be the
Lord of dead and living; the Grace which brings Salvation, Teaches to Deny
ungodliness, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12. Sanctification is necessary to Salvation, as
being the Inchoation thereof. Nothing can be perfected till it be begun, Heb.
12. 14. Since therefore Holiness is Necessary, and it belongs to him to whom
this Service is due to prescribe the manner of it, and since we have naturally
in us Ignorance, Impotency, and Enmity, wholly disabling from the doing of it,
there is upon these Accounts an Absolute Necessity of such a Pastor who may
Reveal the Right way of Holiness unto us, and may efficaciously incline our
wills thereunto. Upon these Grounds we may see the Necessity of the Great
Pastor for Revealing the supernatural Mysteries of Life and Salvation by Free
grace, for working Faith whereby Life and Salvation may be applied unto us, for
Enabling us unto the duties of Holiness, and removing those Impediments of
Ignorance, Impotency, and Enmity, which indispose us thereunto.

And now because the Office of Inferior Pastors under this great Shepherd has
in these late unhappy and licentious days by the subtilty, or rather bungling
of Satan been greatly opposed, It will not be unseasonable to speak a little of
the Necessity of these also to feed the flock.

That which God has appointed as an Office in his Church, is to be
acknowledged Necessary. God has by his special Institution appointed Pastors
and Teachers in his Church, whose function the Scripture owneth as an Office,
called (...) and (...), 1 Timothy: 3. 1. Col. 4 17. therefore they are to be
acknowledged Necessary. The Lord is said to have set or constituted them in his
Church* 1 Cor. 12. 28. to have given them to her as part of her Dowry, Ephesians: 4.
11. they are sent forth by the Lord of the harvest, Matthew. 9* 38. They are
called Ministers of Christ, Col. 1. 7. They receive their Ministry from the
Lord, Col. 4. 17. He has made them Overseers Acts 20. 28. Therefore none can
without Sacrilege against Christ and his Church reject them.

2. Necessary Ordinances presuppose necessary Officers to administer them.
Christ has appointed necessary Ordinances to be to the End of the world
administered; therefore the Officers who are to administer them are Necessary
likewise. He did not appoint a work to be done, and leave it to the wide world
who should do it, but committed the Ministry of Reconciliation to Stewards and
Ambassadors by him selected for that Service, 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 19.

3. That which was Instituted for Necessary Ends, so long as those Ends
continue must be Necessary likewise; The Office of the Ministry was Instituted
for Necessary Ends, which do and will still continue; therefore the Ministry
by which they are to be promoted is still to continue. Those Ends are The
proclaiming Repentance and Remission of Sins, the bringing Glad tidings of Good
things, the turning men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, the saving of souls, the perfecting of Saints, the Edifying the body
of Christ, the nourishing of men in the words of faith, the speaking a word in
season to the weary, to show forth the Lords death till he come; These and such
like great and weighty works the Apostle calls (...), Ephesians. 4. 12. So long as
these works remain to be done, the ministry whereby they are to be done must
remain likewise.

But it may be Objected, others may promote these Ends as well as Ministers;
all Believers are commanded to Comfort, Support, Edify one another, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 11. 14. Jud. v. 20. therefore no need of such an Office for the doing of
them.

We answer, Although every private Christian in his place and station ought to
minister grace to the Hearers, to have his speeches seasoned with Salt, and
fitted to the use of edifying, yet these great Works are not done with the same
authority, efficacy, certainty, or order, by a private hand as by public
Officers.

1 Not with the same Authority. A Learned Lawyer may resolve a man's Case as
truly as a Judge; but when he has a Sentence declared by the Judge, this does
more assure and quiet him, because it is a Sentence not only of truth but of
authority. Ministers speak and exhort and rebuke with Authority, Tit. 2. 15.

2 Not with the same Efficacy; for the Lord has made them Able Ministers 2
Cor. 3. 6. furnished them with power for Edification, 2 Cor. 13. 10. anannexed
a special promise of Blessing unto their service, Matthew. 28. 20. the Gospel
ministered by them is not in word only but in power, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. not
declarative only, but operative, they being therein workers together with God,
1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 1.

3 Not with the same Certainty; for How can it be expected that the Cases and
Conditions of particular Consciences should be so well looked after by private
Men who have Callings of their own to divert them, as by those whose whole work
it is to oversee the Souls committed to their Charge, to whom they may in every
case of difficulty resort for Counsel? Or how can I expect ordinarily as full
Satisfaction from a private Brother, as from one whose duty it is to give
himself wholly to these things, whose Constant Business it is to give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, to meditate on them, to
take heed unto them, to continue in them, that his profiting may appear to all?
1 Timothy 4. 13. 16.

4 Not with the same Order; God is in all his works, much more in his Church a
God of Order, 1 Cor. 14. 33. If the Apostles themselves found it difficult to
attend the Word of God, and Tables, Acts 6. 2. It cannot but be much more
difficult for private Brethren to attend their own domestical callings, and the
public concernments of the Church of God. If a great Apostle said Who is
sufficient for these things, 2 Cor: 3. 16. shall we judge private persons fit
enough for them? If in the Body God has set several Members for several uses;
shall we think so weighty, difficult, and important a service as publishing the
glad tidings of Salvation, should be entrusted at large in every hand, and no
peculiar Officers set apart for the dispensing of it?

4. We may infer this Necessity from the Titles given by God unto these his
Officers; they are called Angels, Rev. 1 20. Ambassadors entrusted with the
ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 20 Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1
Cor. 4. 1, 2. Watchmen and Overseers of the flock, Ezekiel. 3. 17. Acts 20. 28
Shepherds, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Teachers distinguished from the people taught, Gal. 6.
6. Preachers sent to publish peace, Romans 10. 14. Builders, Planters,
Husbandmen, Scribes instructed for the kingdom of God. All which Metaphorical
expressions import Services of absolute Necessity in States and families. There
are mutual and reciprocal Duties enjoined by God upon them and the people, they
to watch over the flock, and these to love, honor, esteem and encourage them.
If they be not necessary Officers in the Church, why should there lie upon them
so severe a Charge, why should there be due unto them so great a respect?

5 They whom the Apostles took Order to be provided for the service of the
Church, are necessary Officers thereof; for had they been superfluous, they
would not have burdened the Church with them. But the Apostles took special
Order for the succession of Ministers in the Church, they Ordained Elders
themselves, Acts 14. 23. they directed Timothy and Titus to do so too, 2 Timothy
2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. they call upon them to attend their service, Col. 4. 17. 1
Pet. 5. 1, 3. they call upon others to obey and encourage them, Heb. 13. 17.
Gal. 6. 6. Now certainly they would not have taken all this Care, nor put the
Church to so much duty and charge, if the Office were not necessary to the Good
and Interest of the Church.

Add hereunto the uninterrupted prescription of all ages; for not to mention
the Heathen Nations, where we find persons separated for divine worship, in
Egypt, Genesis 47. 22. in Palestine, 1 Samuel 6. 2. in Lycaonia, Acts 14. 13. Such
were the Chaldeans in Babylon, the Magi amongst the Persians, the Brachmanni
amongst the Indians, the Druidae amongst the Gauls, the Pontifices, Augures,
Flamines, and others amongst the Romans; and to keep to the Church of God, we
read in the beginning, of Enoch a Prophet, Noah a Preacher, Abraham a Prophet,
Melchisedeck a Priest, of the order of Priests and Levites in Israel, before
whom the firstborn of the chief of the Families did bear that Honor; for we
read of Priests before the Levitical Order was instituted, Exodus 19. 22. After
that the Evangelical Ministry began in John, continued in the Twelve Disciples
and Seventy Elders, held on in a constant Succession, Christ and his Apostles
appointed it, and never repealed their own order. If Jephte his prescription of
300 years possession was a good plea, Judges 11. 26. much more the Churches of
1600.

And now, dear Brethren, since our office is of so great necessity to the
Church of God, it greatly concerns us to be duly therewith affected, with all
fear and trembling to discharge so important duties for the administration
whereof this function has been divinely instituted, By the Holiness and
Exemplariness of our Lives, by the Evidence, authority, and purity of our
Doctrine, to keep our selves above the Contempt of men, not to suffer any to
despise us, to magnify our office, and to bear up that double Honor which the
Lord has awarded unto those that Labor in the Word and Doctrine. That in all
things showing our selves patterns of good works, In our Doctrine showing
incorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity, sound speech which cannot be condemned, men
that are against us may be ashamed having no Evil thing to say of us. And this
leads to the Second thing proposed, the Consideration of the Duties wherein
the discharge of this Pastoral office does stand.

The word Feed is an usual Metaphore to express the tender Care and Gentle
Government which men are to exercise over those who are Committed to their
Custody. It is used frequently not only in Scripture, Psalm. 77. 20. 78, 71.
Ezekiel. 34. 23. Isa 40. 11. John 10. 11. 21. 15 17. 1 Pet: 5. 2: but in profane
authors, as Xenophon makes the Comparison in the beginning of his Cyropaedia,
and Homer calls Agamemnon (...), the Pastor of the people, (...), one that
takes care of the flock. There is likewise a Synecdoche of the part for the
whole, one particular of the Office being put for all the rest. Here then we
might enter into a large field, 1. In opening the Pastoral Office of Christ, as
he came to Seek and to save his Lost sheep; to Rule them by his royal
authority; to Lead them by his most holy example; to feed them (...), by his
Body, Blood, Spirit, and Word; to Heal and bind them; to fold and defend them,
to rescue and deliver them out of the mouth of the Wolf and Lion 2 In setting
forth the whole duty of the Vnder-shepherds which they owe to the flock of
Christ, as they have entrusted unto them the Ministry of Reconciliation, which
Ministry stands in 4 things, 1 In offering up the spiritual Sacrifices of
prayers and praises in the name and behalf of the Church unto God, and to
bless in his name. 2 In administration of the Seals or Sacraments. 3 In
Exercising the power of Binding and loosing, of retaining and remitting of
sins toward particular contumacious sinners in the one Case, or penitent
sinners in the other. 4 In Preaching the glad tidings of Salvation to the
Church: But because it is not possible to handle so many weighty particulars in
this little Scantling of time, I shall keep to the most narrow and formal sense
of the word Feed, as it relates to the spiritual food of the soul, the
pastures of life, the word of God, for (...), as Basil Seleuc. speaks, The
food of the soul is the feast of the word, whereunto possibly the Apostle may
allude, when he requires Timothy (...), 2 Timothy 2. 15. as the Ministry of the
Word and Spirit is compared by the Prophet to a royal and magnificent Feast,
Isa. 25. 6. Prove. 9. 1, 2. Rev. 3, 20.

This Great work of Preaching is appointed by God as a means and Instrument of
begetting Faith in the people, and turning them from the power of Satan unto
God. By Evidencing divine truth unto the Conscience, 2 Corinthians. 4. 2. that a
man's sin may find him out to make him penitent, and he may find Christ out
to make him blessed; By stopping the mouths of Gainsayers, By Reproving those
that sin out of Infirmity with meekness, Gal. 6. 1. out of Contumacy with
sharpness, Tit. 1. 13. all with Authority, Tit. 2. 15. By Exhorting with
strong Arguments, and with winning persuasions unto the obedience of the truth,
2 Cor. 5. 20. By comforting and pouring Balm into wounded Spirits, removing
fears, resolving doubts, speaking peace, showing a man his righteousness, and
delivering him from going down into the pit, I say 40. 1. Job 33. 23. By
differencing the Sheep from the Goats, the chaff from the wheat, the precious
from the vile, him that fears God from him that fears him not. The word of
Grace thus Managed is the Ordinary Instrument which God uses to sanctify us,
John 17. 17. to form Christ in us, to derive the spirit upon us, and to turn us
to the Lord. And the Minister of Christ who duly preaches it, is his Herald,
and Ambassador, (...), to proclaim war against the Rebellious, and to publish
Remission of sins unto those that repent and believe.

And s^^ ^uch has Christ honored his Stewards in the faithful discharge of
this their Ministry, that though they be but weak men, yet such effects are
ascribed unto them as are proper unto God alone. They are said to forgive
sins, John 20. 23. to convert and to save souls, Jam. 5. 20. 1 Timothy 4. 16. to
deliver men from going down into the pit. Job 23. 24. to revenge all
disobedience, Quodammodo ante diem Judicii Judicant. Hieron. Ep. ad Heliodorum
2 Cor. 10. 6. and to Judge wicked men, Ezekiel. 20. 4. None of which can be
effected, but by God alone; The Excellency of the power belongs u^^ to him, 2
Cor. 4. 7. Nulla est Remissio culpae nisi per Gratiani. Sed Gratiam dare est
potentiae Infinitae, says Alex. Hales; and therefore Peter Lumbard, and after
him Altissiodorensis, Bonaventure, Occham, Biel, and diverse other Schoolmen do
affirm, per hanc potestatem non posse Remitti culpas, sed solum declarari
Remissas; and that the Priest does it per modum Impetrantis, but not per modum
Impertientis. And yet because unto us is committed the Ministry of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. and together with that Office an Authority to
work together with God as his Instruments, who makes us Able Ministers of the
New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. so that by the cooperation of God our Gospel comes
not in word only but in power, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 8. Tit. 2. 15.
therefore we are said to do those things which are proper for God alone to do,
because God is pleased to do them by that word of Grace, the Ministry whereof
he has committed unto us. Humana opera, Dei munera, as Optatus speaks, the
Ministry is man's, the Gift Gods. The Priest, says St. Chrysostom, lends his
tongue and his hand, but neither Angels nor Archangels can do the thing, but
God alone. Humanum obsequiunt, munifientia supernae potestatis, says S.
Ambrose, De Spiritu Sancto, l. 3. c. 19. the Service is man's, but the
Munificence is Gods. We loose by our Pastroal Authority whom God raises by his
quickening Grace, says Gregory, Homil. 26. in Evang.

The Matter of this our Preaching is in General The whole Counsel of God, Acts
20. 27. All the words of life, Acts 5. 20. That which we have heard of the Lord
of Hosts, Is. 21. 10. All which God commands without diminishing a word, Jer.
26. 2. Thou shall speak My words unto them says the Lord, Ezekiel. 2. 7 We are
Angels, we must keep to our Message; we are Ambassadors, we must keep to our
Commission: we are Depositaries, we must discharge our trust; Quid est
depositum? says Vincentius Lirinensis, speaking of that Command to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 20. Id quod tibi Creditum est, non quod a te Inventum, quod accepisti;
non quod excogitasti; rem non ingenii sed doctrinae, non usurpationis privatae,
sed publicae Traditionis, in qua non Author debes esse sed Custos; and so
Origin, The Apostle, says he, has given example to the Doctors of the Church
to speak to the people, non propriis praesumpta sententiis, sed divinis munita
Testimoniis. Our own devices are all but chaff, Gods word is the wheat, Jer.
23. 28. Ours but Hay and Stubble, His Gold and silver and precious stones, 1
Cor. 3. 12.

More Particularly, the Matter of our Preaching is Christ crucified, and the
glad tidings of Remission and Salvation through him, Acts 8. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 2.
The Credenda all Recapitulated in the doctrine of Christ; the Agenda all
supplied by the Grace of Christ; the Petenda all granted in the Name of Christ;
the Communicanda all seals of the Love of Christ. He is Lux, and Cibus, Sermon.
15. in Cantic.
and Medicina, as Bernard speaks; If I be Ignorant, Christ is my Light; if I be
Hungry, Christ is my food; if I be sick, Christ is my Physic. Si scribas, non
sapit mihi, nisi legero ibi Jesum: Si disputes out conferas, non sapit mihi,
nisi sonuerit ibi Jesus. Our Ministry now is altogether Evangelical; for
though we Preach the Law, yet it is ever in a subserviency unto the Gospel,
that by the Convictions thereof we may betake our selves unto Christ for
shelter from the Curse which the Law threatens, and for Grace unto the duties
which the Law prescribes. Our Savior seems unto me to dictate the right
Method of preaching the Gospel in that threefold Conviction of Sin,
Righteousness, and Judgment, John 16. 8, 9, 10.

1. The Spirit accompanying the preaching of the Gospel does convince men of
their sin, and the wrath due unto them for the same, until they shall
believe in Christ, for the wrath of God abides on unbelievers, John 3. 36. 8.
24. Till Faith transferr the sin upon the Sacrifice, it remains upon the
sinner. Hereby the Soul is awakened, and the Heart shaken and made restlessly
Inquisitive after some way of escape from the wrath to come, Acts 2. ^7.

2. The Spirit by the Gospel convinces of Righteousness in Christ, who albeit
he was reckoned amongst Malefactors, John 19. 7. Isay 53. 12. yet there was in
him Righteousness abundantly enough to justify and save to the uttermost all
that come unto God by him, in as much as having finished the work of Redemption
on earth, he is gone to his Father, and is not sent back again, but is sat down
at his right hand, pleading the propitiation which here he wrought. In his
death believers suffered, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Romans 6. 6. In his Resurrection they
were justified, Romans 4. 25. and In his Ascension they have a virtual possession
of Heaven, Ephesians. 2. 6.

3. The Spirit by the Gospel convinces of Judgment, whereby I understand
Debitum Subjectionis unto Christ, as a Judge or Prince to whom all Judgment,
Authority and power is committed, John 5. 22. 27. Matthew. 28. 18 that we having
been delivered from the wrath to come, and having received so great a Gift as
the Righteousness of Christ, ought to be subject unto him, who died and rose
again that he might be Lord both of the dead and living, Rom: 14. 9. having
demolished the kingdom of Satan, and Judicially cast out, or dethroned the
Prince of this world, John 12 31. and destroyed him, Heb. 2. 15. so that being
translated from the power of darkness into the kingdom of Christ, Acts 26. 18.
Col. 1. 13. we ought to be reduced unto the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
and to observe and do whatsoever he commands, Mat. 28. 20 for the doctrine
of Grace and Salvation is a doctrine of Holiness, Tit. 2. 11. 14.

In this Method ought the Gospel of Salvation to be preached, that neither the
discovery of sin may drive men unto despair, but cause them to fly for
Sanctuary unto the Righteousness of Christ and free Grace of God in him; and
that the magnifying of Free Grace and the Gift of Christ's Righteousness, may
not induce a neglect of Holiness, Romans 6. 1, 2, 14 15, but that the Love of
Christ may constrain them not henceforth to live unto themselves, but unto him
that died for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

Now for the Manner how this part of the Ministry of Reconciliation is to be
be dispensed; we are to preach the word

1. Demonstratively, (...), so as to commend our selves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God, and they may confess that God is in us of a
truth.

2* Sincerely, not handling the word of God deceitfully, nor complying with the
Lusts of men to gratify them in their ways, as the Priests of Ahab did,
rather displeasing men with that doctrine which profits, then pleasing them
with that which betrays their Souls; as a Physician does not so much consider
what will please his Patients palate as what will cure his disease. The Apostle
professes in one place, That if he pleased men, he should not be the servant
of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. and yet in another place he says that he pleased All
men in All things, 1 Cor. 10. 33. But this was not mentiendi desiderio, but
compatientis affectu, not out of Collusion but Condescension, to gain, save,
edify, profit them.

3 Wisely, so as to fit the word to the state of those that hear us, to give
every one his (...), Mat. 24. 45. the Apostle preached (...), Cor. 3. 10 3. 10.
we must not preach comforts so as that profane persons may mistake them as
theirs, nor threatenings so as to make sad the hearts of those whom the Lord
has not made sad.

4 Boldly, not fearing the faces of men in the work of God, Jer. 1. 8. not
concealing any part of Gods Counsel, because happily it may be unwelcom to those
that hear it; but freely and confidently, (...), to deliver the whole Counsel
of God, as Micaiah to Ahab, as Amos to Jeroboam. Most wicked men are of
Vitellius his mind, they love to hear nothing nisi jucunda and laesura. But if
they have the boldness to commit sin, should not we have the Courage to
reprove it? There is a Majesty in the word which can humble an Ahab, a Felix, a
Belshazzer; which can strike an awe and rrverence into the heart of a Joash
toward Elisha, and of Herod toward John the Baptist, 2 Reg. 13. 14. Mark 6.
20 God has threatened to confound us, if we be dismayed in his work, Jer. 1.
17. He has promised to be with us, Matthew. 28. 20. to stand by us, 2 Timothy 4.
16. in the discharge of so great a trust; and will give testimony to the word
of his grace, Acts 14. 3. His word rightly administered, is as nails, goods,
arrows, a two edged sword, dividing asunder soul and spirit, joints and marrow,
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

5 Meekly, affectionately, with all Love and tenderness to the souls of our
Hearers, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 25
with the spirit of Meekness, Restoring those that are overtaken in a fault,
Gal. 6. 1. A Preacher, as a Chirurgian, should have an Eagles eye to discover
the state of the Soul, a Lions heart to search spiritual wounds, and a Ladies
hand to dress them with all tenderness and sympathy. The Servant of the Lord
must be Gentle toward all men.

6 Plainly, without unnecessary affectation or ostentation of the Enticing
words of man's wisdom, or of mere humane and exotic wit or learning. The
Apostle, though a great Scholar, would not ground the faith of his hearers upon
the wisdom of men, but upon the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. and warns them
to take heed of those who would spoil them through Philosophy and vain deceit,
Col. 2. 8.

And here a needful Question may be proposed, How far forth a Minister may
make use of Humane wit or learning in the service of the Church? Learning is a
noble Gift of God. It was the Honor of Moses that he was learned in all the
learning of the Egyptians, Acts 7. 22. And every good Gift of God may be
sanctified for the use of the Church as the Crown of the King of Rabbah was set
upon the Head of David, 2 Samuel 12. 30. and the spoils of the Heathen were
dedicated to the Lord, 2 Samuel 8. 11, 12. Clemens Alexand, calls it, (...), as
men lay a ground of some meaner color when they intend to overlay with Gold.
Singular use did the Ancient Fathers, Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Origin, Clem.
Alexand. Cyprian, Theophilus, Arnobius, Augustine, Eusebius, Minutius Felix,
Theodoret, and others make of this kind of the learning of the Heathen in
defense of Christian Religion, as David slew Goliath with his own sword; as the
Apostle disputed with the Philosophers of Athens from the Inscription of their
own Altar, Acts 17. 23. 24. Of which Inscription we read in Philostratus,
Pausanias, and others, very many passages; and expressions of Holy Scripture
cannot be so clearly understood without the knowledge of those usages mentioned
in Heathen Writers, whereunto they refer; of which we meet with diverse
instances in the Agonistica of Petrus Faber and multitudes of other Learned
Writers: To say nothing of the eminent service done in this kind to the Church
of Christ by Beza, Grotius, Heinsius, Scultetus, Gataker, and diverse others.
Thus a Moabitish woman became an Israelite, if her head were shaven and her
nails pared. Thus Theodosius reserved the Golden vessels of the Heathen Temples
unto the use of the Christian Church. Christianus Domini sui esse intelligit,
ubicunque invenerit veritatem. We find the Apostle himself making sometimes use
of the Heathen Poets, and as I may so speak, bringing those Greeks into the
Temple.

And for Wit, though it be naturally a proud and unruly thing, yet it may be so
sanctified by Grace, and fixed by humility, as to be of great use to the Church
of God. The Holy Scripture is full of curious Elegancies and Paranomasies of
this kind, and some have written just volumes de Rhetorica sacra, of these
Scripture Elegancies. What higher strain of wit could be used then that Acts 5.
41. they went away rejoicing (...), that they were Honored with dishonor for
the name of Christ? Which of the noblest Orators or Poets amongst the Heathen
can parallel that expression of the Apostle touching the Glory to come, (...).
2 Cor. 4. 17. It were end less to instance in these kind of particulars: And
how Wit may be sanctified to the use of the Church, we have delicate examples
in the Apologetick of Tertullian, in the Epistle of Cyprian to Donatus, in
Minutius Felix his Octavius, in the Orations of Gregory Nazienzen and Basil, in
the Sermons of Chrysostom, Bernard, Chrysologus, and multitudes of others
amongst the Ancients. To say nothing of the Worthies in our own Church and of
our own time, amongst whom I cannot but mention my most Religious, and most
Excellent Predecessor in this Diocese, whose writings are like the Land of
Canaan, flowing with milk and honey. Now in this particular I should advise
those who have vigorous and predominant wits, of whom we may say, as
Quintilian said of Seneca, It is pity they should not do as they ought, who can
do as they will, that they would not too much indulge nor loosen the reins
unto luxuriancy of fancy in so solemn and serious a work as preaching the
Gospel, but proportion their ballast to their sail; and temper their fancy with
Humility, piety, and prudence, so as they may render severe and solid truths
the more amiable, and reconcile the minds of their hearers the better unto
sound and saving doctrine, as Physicians convey their physic in some pleasant
vchiculum to gratify the palate, and prevent the fastidium of their tender
Patients. After this manner must we preach the Gospel, discharging faithfully
toward God and men the trust which is reposed in us; for it is required in
Stewards that a man be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2.

Now there being three ways of Pastoral Feeding, as Bernard has observed,
Ore, Mente, Opere, by Preaching, Praying, and Living, it is necessary to add
these two latter unto that which we have already handled. 1. To be the Lords
Remembrancers, and to give our selves continually to prayer, Acts 6. 4. If we
Consider the Great Importance of our Ministry in dispensing the unfearchable
Riches of Christ; the great difficulty of the work, for which without divine
assistance none can be sufficient: the Divine efficacy and Cooperation required
unto the success of it: the Infinite preciousnesse of the souls of men, and
great Concernments of the Church of God over which we have an inspection, we
cannot but grow unto holy Cyprians Resolution, who thus says of himself in his
Book De bono pudicitiae, Non solum proferimus verba quae de scripturarum sacris
fontibus veniunt, sed cum ipsis verbis preces ad Dominum and vota sociamus.

2. We must give testimony unto our doctrine by a Godly Example, as Paul
requires Timotby and Titus, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Tit. 2. 7. and Peter all Elders, 1
Pet. 5. 3. as John was both a shining and a Burning Lamp, John 5. 35. The Star
which led the wise men unto Christ, the Pillar of fire which led the Children
unto Canaan, did not only shine, but go before them, Matthew. 2. 9. Exodus 13.
21. the voice of Jacob will do little good if the hands be the hands of Esau.
In the Law no person who had any blemish was to offer the Oblations of the
Lord, Levit. 21 17. -- 20. the Lord thereby teaching us what Graces ought to be
in his Ministers. The Priest was to have in his robes Bells and Pomgranates;
the one a figure of sound doctrine, and the other of a fruitful life, Exodus
28. 33, 34. the Lord will be sanctified in all those that draw near unto him,
Isa. 52. 11. for the sins of the Priests make the people abhor the offering of
the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. their wicked lives do shame their doctrine; Passionem
Christi annunciant profitendo, male agendo exhonorant, as S. Austine speaks,
with their doctrine they build, and with their lives they destroy. The Minister
who will win his people, must not only doctorem virtutis se praebere, sed
ducem, as Lactantius, ut si praecipientem sequi nolint, sequantur antecedentem.
The salt which is it self unsavory, will hardly season other things. I conclude
this point with that wholesome passage of Hierom ad Nepotianum, Let not, says
he, thy works shame thy doctrine, lest they who hear thee in the Church tacitly
answer, Why do thou not thy self what thou teach others? He is too
delicate a teacher who persuades others to fast with a full belly. A Robber
may accuse Covetousness. Sacerdotis Christi os, men's, manusque concordent; a
Minister of Christ should have his tongue, and his heart, and his hand agree.

I shall conclude all with Two words of Exhortation; one to my Reverend
Brethren in the Clergy, and the other to the people.

To my Brethren: That they would with all their might set about this most
necessary work of feeding the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made them
Overseers, and thereby testify their love unto Christ, who by that Love does
adjure us to feed his sheep and lambs, John 21. 15. 16, 17. If we would not be
an Anathema Maranatha for not loving of Christ, we must do that which he by so
strong an argument as the Love of him does enjoin. Is it possible for a man to
love the father, and to starve the children? Is it possible to love the Lord,
and to neglect his doubled and redoubled command? Is it possible to love God,
and to hate our brethren? Or do we not hate our brethren when we betray their
souls to perdition? O let us lay to heart that most solemn and tremendous
charge of the Apostle, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom, preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke* exhort, with all
long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Let us consider the dreadful
Account which at that fiery Tribunal of this Great Judge will be required of
us, Heb. 13. 17. the woe which we incurr if we neglect it, 1 Cor. 9. 16. and
the horrid guilt of the blood of souls which thereby we contract, Ezeck. 3. 17,
18, 20 their blood will I require at thy hand Let us consider the unvaluable
preciousness of the souls committed to our charge, of more worth then all the
world beside, Mat. 16. 26. insomuch that Heathen men have said, (...). It is
the property of a Reasonable soul, says Antoninus the Heathen Emperor, (...)*
to prefer nothing before it self. O what a doleful thing will it be to have
the everlasting perdition of such precious souls to lie upon our betraying of
them! Consider the Inestimable price wherewith they were purchased, even the
Blood of God, Acts 20 28. and how fearful a thing it will be for the Blood of
Christ to cry out against us for destroying those souls which that blood did
purchase. Consider the continual Dangers these precious souls are exposed to,
the vigilance of a cunning, a powerful a malicious adversary, who goes about
seeking to devour them, 1 Pet. 5. 8 the baits, snares, examples, and
entanglements of an evil world, the swarms of Innumerable inward lusts which
war against the soul. O how vigilant should we be to fore warn and arm them
against the assault of so great dangers? Lastly, consider we the weight and
greatness of that Crown of Righteousness and glory which the Chief Shepherd
reserveth for all those who willingly and with a ready mind feed the flock of
God. They who turn many to Righteousness shall shine as Stars for ever and
ever, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Dan. 12. 3. What a Glorious Testimony will it be before the
throne of Christ at the last day, when so many souls shall stand forth and say,
This was the hand which snatched us out of the fire, This tongue was to us a
tree of life, his Reproofs and convictions awakened us, his Exhortations
persuaded us, his Consolations revived us, his wisdom counseled us, his example
guided us unto this Glory! Some are apt to charge Clergymen with ambitious
pursuance of dignities and preferments; Behold here a preferment worthy the
climbing after, a dignity worthy to be contended for, an holy, an Apostolical
Ambition, as St. Paul's expression imports, (...). Romans 15. 20. which is as
much as Ambitioso conatu praedicare Evangeliu^; preaching the Gospel where it
had not before been heard, was the Apostles greatest honor which ambitiously he
did aspi^e unto.

To the People. 1. We exhort them to pray for their Ministers, since they have
a Service upon them which without divine Grace none are sufficient for, that
God would by his special assistance enable them to discharge so great a trust.
God commands it, we beseech it, our weakness wants it, your souls require it;
the more you pray for your Minister, the more you will profit by him. You help
to edify your selves, you help him to study and pray and preach for you, while
you pray for him.

2 To take heed that the labor of your Ministers for your souls be not by your
carelesseness all in vain. Do not with our Sermons, which cost us so hard
labor, as David did with the water of the well of Bethleem, spill them on the
ground, and let them cry from thence, like the blood of Abel against you. So
long as he keeps to his Commission, and delivers the Counsel of God, you cannot
despise the work of your Minister, but you do therewithal despise the blood of
your Savior. If your souls be dear in their eyes, should they be vile in your
own? Will you by your wickedness turn the prayers of your Pastors into curses,
their Sermons into a favor of death, and their tears into the blood of your
own souls? Shall they beg mercy for you, and will you reject it? Shall they
tender Grace unto you, and will you resist it? Shall they open for you the door
of Life, and will you shut it against your selves? Shall Christ by them beseech
you, and will you by your Impenitency refuse him? Is it not a Reasonable
Request, though you will not love your Ministers, yet not to Hate nor destroy
your selves? Must he Teach, and you not Learn? Must he open his lips, and you
shut your ears? are Sermons preached to be praised only, and not obeyed? Must
he Reprove Sin in you, and will you Reprove God in him? Shall he take up the
weapons of God to withstand sin, and will you take up the weapons of lust to
withstand God! Is it good to kick against the pricks? Will Gods word be impune
despised? Can his Law be put to flight? where it does not persuade, can it not
curse? Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger then he? Shall the
Minister in the name of God, forewarn us of the wrath to come, and shall we
belie the Lord, and say It is not he? Shall we bless where God curses? and
promise peace, where God proclameth war? Shall we sell our selves to sin, and
make a Covenant with Hell and death, as if we could sin securely, and choose
whither we would perish or no? Will not the Lord make us know at the last whose
word shall stand, His or Ours? O that the Love of Christ might constrain us,
and his Goodness lead us unto Repentance, that when Christ does beseech us, we
would be persuaded not to deny him! Did Satan dye for us? Did the world or the
flesh ever redeem us? were they scourged, or mocked, or crucified to save us? O
that Christ should be persuaded to dye for us, and we should give him his blood
back again, and choose rather to dye our selves! Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

