AN EPISTLE To the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, Emitted by Mr. ROBERT RICH, Who
arrived at LONDON from the BARBADOS the Ninth day of September, 1679, and
departed this Life the Sixteenth of November following.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680, to be sold by Francis Smith at the Elephant
and Castle in Cornhil, a little below the Royal Exchange.

An Epistle for the most pure Amity and Unity in the Spirit Life and Love of
God, in all sincere-hearted Souls amongst the People called QUAKERS. And as to
them, so unto all; or any other Sort or Sect of People that own and follow the
Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith every one is enlightened, ROBERT RICH sends
Greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Allelujah.
IN the Year 1666, feeling the Babe of Grace (the Word in the Heart) to wax
strong in the Love of God shed a broad in my Heart, I sent to the Poor of your
People Thirty pounds; which after some of your Leaders had received, (to wit,
John Bolton, Gerard Roberts, and Amos Stoddard) and given under their hands
accordingly, 'twas denied to be received; and about a Year after returned to me
again, with many evil opprobrious Names; which makes me say, That I went to my
Own, but my Own would not receive me, but sold me into Egypt (by their many
false Reports;) And poor Joseph found no greater Enemies than his Brethren
were. Nevertheless the Lord my God did not forsake me, but found me out in the
Innocence wherewith he had clothed me, and appeared to me in all my straits,
and was my Strength, my joy, and Crown of Glory; and at length brought me forth
of Prison to stand before Princes, assisting and carrying me with much Courage,
and through great Opposition, to bear and finish my Testimony to Christ in the
Saints. And being cast out from my Brethren, the Lord my God took me up, and
became my Teacher under whose Teachings I felt more of the Love of God, and
increased more in knowledge of the Things of God, than when I sat under the
Teachings of Men; by whose Teachings I grew in Wisdom and in Stature, unto the
measure of a perfect Man in Christ Jesus; then I came to know, that out of
Egypt God called his Son, to whom he has given, not only the Heathen, but the
whole World for his Possession and Inheritance. In which Spirit of the Son, I
call to mind the sweet Union and Communion I had with the Quakers, when they
preached Christ the Light in every one that comes into the World, the way to
God the Father of Lights; which Light sprang up so strongly in my Heart, that
(with St. Paul) it struck me down to the Ground, where I felt the Root of the
Matter in my self, so that I needed no Man to teach me; but as the Unction,
that small grain of Mustard Seed grew to a great Tree, on whose Body did hang
all my Sins, my Weaknesses and Infirmities; which Seed of the Kingdom begot in
me a new Heart, and Placed within me a right Spirit, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, filled with the Love of God. Allelujah.

In the day when the People called Quakers were small in their own Eyes, I
dearly loved them; who did not only preach Christ the Truth and Light in every
one, but with much boldness and courage, and through great Persecutions,
defended the same, living in much Love and Amity one with another, (which to me
was a most lovely sight to see); till there came to be a difference between J.
N. and George Fox; then G. F. by reason of his Enmity and Self-exaltation,
envied and persecuted J. N. and begat a most bitter wrathful Spirit in all his
Friends against J. N. and all that stood by him in his sufferings. Thus G. F.
was the Father that begat all those Divisions, Rendings, and Tearings that were
then amongst the Quakers, (and since to this very day); which with great
violence lasted till J. N. took all the blame on himself, and made himself of
no reputation, who was circumcised in Heart and Soul; in which Circumcision he
lived and died, a true Israelite indeed.

But G. F. and his Party continued acting in another manner of Spirit; for I
have seen those pull, hale, and carry out of their Synagogue at the Bull and
Mouth, one Richard Freeman; and the chief in this work was John Bolton, with
diverse others. At this time I perfectly saw, that God had divided in Jacob, and
scattered in Israel; and that a separation was making betwixt the Precious and
the Vile amongst the Quakers.

And was it not the same bitter persecuting Spirit in G. F. that writ against
J. Perrot's Book, called Unity and Amity? for did not G. F. say, This Book was
writ with Cain's Spirit? crying against his Sottishness and Ignorance;
affirming, That a Cloud had compassed him, that he went in the way of the false
Prophets, that his Spirit would give up the Children of God to Persecution.
Further alleging, that J. P. is one of Ham's Stock, and that his gross Lies
proceeded from a devilish hellish Spirit, and that none that are in the least
Truth, will believe him; and that he is a Liar and Deceiver. And the great
Offense G. F. takes at this Book, is, that J. P. owns the Spirit of God's Grace
and Light to be in Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, and
others; also that he has Unity and Amity with all that walk therein; the which
G. F. denying, and calling it a Lie, etc. plainly shows, he is an Enemy to all
that will not bow down to him, and call him Master, or Father of their Spirits;
and that he is turned from the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and that he
is removed to another Gospel than what at first himself had preached; and also
writ against J. P. that he was like a Dog, snarling and biting such as are in
the Life of Truth, and so like a Dog thinks he will die This and much more has
G. F. writ against J. P. pursuing and hunting him (as Saul did David) like a
Partridg on the Mountains, from Country to Contry, from Region to Region, and
from City to City, whithersoever he went, these venomous, Arrows were shot
against him.

At this time I perfectly saw a Star fall from Heaven, called Wormwood, or the
Dragon's Tail, with which he drew to the Ground a third part of the Stars of
Heaven; then I saw a War in Heaven, (a Religious War) the Dragon against the
Lamb; Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon and his Angels. Which
bitter Spirit of the Dragon, did write or indite John Bolton's Book, printed
1670, entitled, Judas and his Treachery, etc. In which Book, he says, The
thirty pounds Robert Rich sent to the Poor amongst the Quakers, was the price
of Blood, and Judas his Treachery; That Robert Rich is a Vagabond on the Earth,
one that has not an Habitation in the Living God; That he is a Contender
against God's Blessed and Holy Way, the Way of Life, with whom Robert Bacon is
joined; That they were Idolaters, and judged them to be the Whorish Spirit, and
that the Mystery of Iniquity, in R. R. and R. B. was brought forth to open
view. And all along his Book is full of the like Expressions, not only against
R. R. and R. B. but the same Railing Accusations are also against Innocent J.
N. and J. P. and for no Evil said or done against any one of them, as in their
own Consciences they well know. To all which Railing Accusations, R. R. says,
The Lord rebuke thee.

About the same time another Book was writ against R. R. and R. B. by Ger.
Roberts, Geo. Whitehead, and E. H. entitled, Impudency and Ranterism rebuked;
in which they call the Spirit of R. R. which sent Thirty pounds to their Poor,
A drunken ranting Spirit, a fained Love; and the Gift they call Cain's
Sacrifice, Balack's Reward, and Balaam's Wages, Judas's Oblation, and a
Superstitious Idolatrous Gift. Also that R. R. is a wandering Star, a raging.
Wave of the Sea; that he is a Sow wallowing in the Mire, a Dog casting up his
Vomit; that he is that Fool, which says in his Heart, there is no God; and
bray a Fool in a Mortar, and he will never be the wiser; and that this folly
has bin with him ever since the days of J. N. All this, and much more, for
naught else than for R. R. his Gift to the Poor of their People. Which Language
let G. F. and his Friends well consider whether it proceeded from the Spirit of
the Lamb, that loves Enemies, or from the Dragon, that casts his Floods after
the Man-Child to devour Him, who is the only begotten of God in the Saints; He
must rule and reign, though G. F. and his Men of War never so much rave and
rage: I say, that the only begotten of God, by the overshadowing of the Holy
Ghost in the Saints, the Virgin Daughter of Sion, whose Name is Immanuel, must
surely rule and reign. Even so, Amen. Allelujah.

What had you against J. N. more than that God had taken away his Judgment from
him, and then led him into the Wilderness, to be tried and tempted by G. F. and
others, and to suffer by that Spirit that then ruled in the Children of
disobedience? who in all meekness and patience did bear and suffer the enmity
and cruelty of all his Persecutors, as a good Example.

And what had you against R. R. more than that he stood by J. N. in his
Sufferings, and for pulling off his Hat at the Command of the Lord, as a sign
of Love to them that understood that sign better, than if he had saluted after
your mode and fashion in giving the Hand? Also that he pulled off his Hat,
which was to testify that the Hat might be made an Idol, hoth in keeping it on,
and in pulling it off?

And what had you against J. P. more than for owning the Light of Christ in
Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, Seekers, and others, even in all that
believed in it, and followed it? And is not the Light of Christ in every one,
the Ensign, to gather together all of every Sect and Nation, those that follow
it, into Unity with the Lord, and Amity one with another? And why was G. F. so
bitter against J. P. for declaring, that no such beggarly Element as the Hat
off or on, is any part of God's Worship? And if G. F. must be obeyed in these
things, rather than the Light of Christ in our selves; whether then G. F. and
his prescribed and imposed Forms, be not the greatest Idol that ever was set up
by a Professing People? let the Witness of God in every one be Judge.

I have lately read a Manuscript, subscribed George Fox, writ to all that would
know what those People called Quakers are, and showing their Experiences which
they have seen, and gone through, to Priests and Professors: Which Paper
contains fifty Paragraphs.

In the first and second G. F. says, We thought it a hard thing for Cain to
kill Righteous Abel; but when we looked within our selves, we saw that envious
wrathful Man that slew every appearance of God within, and ready to slay the
Righteous without. Then G. F. goes on, speaks against Adam's Fall, and against
Joseph's Brethren, for selling of him into Egypt etc. and tells Priests and
Professors, That if they look within, they shall find this Nature in
themselves. And I tell G. F. that he need not go so far to seek this evil
Nature in Priests and Professors. Let him look but within himself, and consider
his own Actings against his Innocent Brethren, and he will find Cain's Nature
there, and Cain's Sin to lie at his own Door, and will know him that sold
Joseph into Egypt, etc. And this Spirit was the cause of G. F's own Fall, who
was once an Angel of Light, and had a place in Heaven, but is fallen from
thence like Lightning, and is now become an Angel of the Bottomless Pit, where
he rules and governs over all that have not their Names written in the Lambs
Book of Life, continuing their forms of Godliness, their long Preachings and
long Prayers from the Comprehension of Truth, but not with the Life and Power
thereof. Thus ye suffer that Woman Jezebel, which calls her-self a Prophetess,
(by good words and fair Speeches) to seduce and deceive the Innocent among you,
keeping them always learning, but can never come to the Knowledge of the Truth
as it is in Jesus, unless they cease from Man's Teachings, and come to the
Teachings of God in themselves, which alone truly teaches the way to Life and
Salvation. Allelujah.

I have also read a Testimony from the Brethren, met at London the third Month
1666, subscribed by eleven of your Ministry. Also from a Meeting at Bristol,
the 27th day of the 7th Month 1669, subscribed by 36 Persons. Also from a
Meeting at Ellis Hooks, the 12th of the 4th Month 1677, against John Wilkinson
and John Story, subscribed by 66, most of the Ministry. All which in general
contain, very bitter Censures, and high Condemnations against many of your own
People, who have divided from the Body of Friends, (so called by your selves)
wherein you testify, That those engaged in the Spirit of Separation, ought not
to have any Rule or Dominion in the Church of God, whereof the Holy Spirit that
was poured forth upon you, (as you say) has made you Overseers. But your
Fruits will make you more manifest than your Words. Also, That all that are
joined to that Spirit of Separation, who stand not in Unity with your Ministry,
their Judgments ought not to be regarded amongst Friends. And further, You
declare your selves the Witnesses and Ambassadors of the Unchangeable Truth,
and the Elders of the Church of God, who of right (having kept your Habitations
in the Truth) ought to judge of things which differ, and this your Judgment to
stand good and valid amongst Friends against all that oppose it. Also, that if
any pretending to be of your Membership, will not admit to be tried, in case of
Controversy, by the Elders and Members of this your Body, but oppose it, (as
the Judgment of Man) you then testify in the Name of the Lord against them,
that he or she, with all those that countenance these Refusers, are to be
rejected, as joined in one with Infidels and Heathens. These (together with G.
F's Paper in vindication of Prescriptions, dated the 4th Month 1678) imposing
upon the Consciences of Men; as also the particular Invectives against John
Wilkinson and John Story, both importing the same Spirit of Dominion and Rule
over the Conscience, (which is the proper Heritage of God) I have both seen,
well-weighed, and considered; and while I contemplate your present State, by
comparing it with the Principles with which you were first inspired, I cannot
but take up that Lamentation concerning you, which the Prophet of old did
concerning Israel, How is the Mighty fallen? How is the Gold become dim? the
fine Gold how is it changed? Even the Sea Monsters draw out the Breasts, and
give suck to their young Ones, but the Daughters of my People are become cruel,
like the Ostrich in the Wilderness. O let it be timely considered by you; how
degenerate you are grown from that Love, Meekness, and Simplicity to which you
at first pretended. Are not you the Men that have in your Doctrine exalted the
Measure of God in all Men, as the only Guide and Director, in that to abide,
and by it to be led, and not by any outward Prescriptions or Impositions
whatsoever? And are not you the Men that now not only impose and prescribe on
others, but also condemn and censure your Innocent Brethren as Heathens and
Infidels, because in Conscience they cannot subject themselves under the Yoke
of your Prescriptions? Are you so presumptuous, as to conclude all Knowledge and
discerning in the Things of God, and all Spiritual Judgment is given into your
Hands, that you usurp the Keys of the Kingdom, and will let none in, but those
who stand in conformity to your carnal and literal Impositions? Is G. F. and
the Body of his Friends, of greater Authority than Peter, (who was an Elder and
Pillar of the Church?) whom nevertheless Paul withstood, because he did not
walk uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel, but endeavored to compel
the Gentiles (who had their Law within themselves) to live after the manner and
form of the Jews, whose Law stood much in outward Observation from the Letter,
as does G. F's Comely Order. And are G. F. and his Friends, so bold and daring,
as to condemn the Generation of the Just, that went before you in other past
Ages, under their various Dispensation, (and all those Worthies in our-present
Time, who cannot own your Practices, or submit to your Preceps) by concluding
them none of the Body of Christ, because none of your Membership? Is the Body
of Christ now shrunk and narrow'd into G. F's Tribe of Members and Ministers?
are these the Lips only that preserve Knowledge? are you the only Men that fear
God and work Righteousness? and must we forsake the inward Testimony, to ask
the Law from your Mouths? Can any thing be more prodigious and destructive to
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus than this Doctrine? or present it self with
greater horror and amazement to the minds of all rational and sober Men, and
all that truly fear God, that the injunction of a necessary submission to G. F.
and his Tribe of Proselytes, under the penalty of being no otherwise esteemed
than Heathens and Infidels? Do not you in these things apparently cloth your
selves with the Livery and Character of him who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or worshipped, by creating a Dominion over your
Brethren, and the movings of God in them, and claiming a Power to judge of all
Differences, prescribing Rules and Orders, and putting Yokes upon the Necks of
your Disciplles, to the stifling of their Consciences, wounding their Peace,
and destroying that Liberty wherewith Christ has made them free? If this be
the Spirit which you at present stand in, (as your several forementioned Papers
do plainly import) I dare boldly challenge all that have gone before you, from
the Pope himself downward, to all Sects and Opinions extant in the World, to
produce, if they can, a greater Instance of swelling Sovereignty over the Minds
and Consciences of Men, than you have erected. And certainly had you a Secular
Power but framed and fitted to your Rule, Ecclesiastical Supremacy, the World
would soon feel, that the Finger of your Church Censures, would bear an equal
weight (at least) with the Loins of those Persecutors which have bin your
Predecessors. Now (all this considered) can you in soberness conceive that this
frame of Spirit (in that absolute Dominion which you claim to your selves over
all others) will render you the Healers of our Breaches, and the Restorers of
our Paths of Peace? Can you think that this Arbitrary and Haughty Government,
will invite the Nations and Languages of all Sects and Opinions, to lay hold on
your Skirts, with desire to be led by you, because the Lord is with you? Or do
they not rather with dread and horror behold you, while you so heavily impose
upon others in such Circumstances and Indifferencies, wherein the Kingdom of
God does not consist, and make those Rules and Prescriptions of equal value
with Divine Institutions? Witness the Hat, etc. the outward Garb imposed upon
your Proselytes; Your Set-times when to begin, and when to end your Religious
Exercises (notwithstanding your pretense of the immediate guidance of the
Spirit); Your manner of greeting one another, with many things of the like
Nature. To all which an exact conformity is required, upon the penalty of a
Censure from G. F. and his Eldership.

Now, dear Friends, can you (in the cool of the Day of God upon your Spirits)
believe that this violent and rigid sort of Practice, will render your Feet
beautiful upon the Mountains? or will attract the Hearts of any wise or
ingenuous People toward you? No surely, your experience may otherwise inform
you, that since this violence (of Esau against his Brother Jacob) has appeared
amongst, you the Curse of Babylon has overtaken you, ( Isa. 47.9, to the end)
even the loss of Children and Widowhood, which will certainly come upon you in
their perfection, as the Witness of God arises amongst those that you have so
heavily yoked and burdened with your own invented Prescriptions.

I have done with you, when I have told you, That the Dispensations in which
God administers Himself to the World at this day, do most naturally call for a
more sober, moderate, tender, and loving Spirit amongst Christians, than this
wherein you are exercised. You cannot but observe how the Lord of Hosts is
pleading with the World in the dreadful Manifestations of his Power, (by
Plague, Fire, Sword, etc.) how He turns the Earth up-side down, and makes it
reel to and fro like a Drunkard; and the Foundations of the World are out of
Course, divided and broken, both in their Civil Policies, and Religious
Practices. Fear, the Pit, and a Snare, have laid hold on the Inhabitants of the
Earth, there is no Establishment in their Paths, and the way of Peace they know
not: Yea, this is the day of Jacob's Troubles, and for the Divisions of Reuben
there are great searchings of Heart; God is now pleading in Judgment with the
People that have bin called by his Name, searching Jerusalem with Candles, (
Zeph. 1.12, etc.) and Judgment is already begun at the House of God; He is
about to judge the Spiritual Pride and Exaltation, the Cruelty and Oppression,
the Hypocrisy and Formality that has mingled it self with all the fair and
beautiful Professions of those that have bin called Christians. And what will
you say (my Friends) if in Israel's Skirts be found the Blood of the Souls of
the poor Innocent? ( Jer. 2.34, etc.) Now if this be the proper Work of the
Almighty at this day (as certainly all that are not either blinded with Carnal
Interest, or lulled into a formal Security, must needs acknowledge); Can you yet
be so vainly confident, as to persuade your selves that nothing of this Evil
shall come near your Borders, whilst the Arrows of God's Judgments fly so thick
in the World, and stick so deep in the Hearts and sides of all, both Civil and
Religious Interests? Are you, and your Imposing Tribe, the only Men that must
escape, when the whole World is to be set on Fire, yea, the very Heavens of
Professors are to be burnt up, and nothing to be left alive in us, but what can
lie down in those Flames? Is there nothing, think ye, in or amongst your People
that is for Judgment? Or, is this a time for you to build (and raise a Name to
your selves) when God is destroying? to contend for outward Rule and Dominion
over others, when God is pleading his own Royal Prerogative? to fit in judgment
over the Consciences of your Brethren, when the Judge stands at the Door? Or are
ye so regardless of the prints and footsteps of the Almighty in his present
Providence, that ye say in you Hearts, with that Evil Servant, The Lord delays
his coming? and fall to smiting your fellow Servants with the Tongue and Fist
of Wickedness, wounding and reproaching them with your bitter and severe
Censures, thinking (with the evil Husbandmen) therewith to kill and slay the
Heir, the Seed of God in Man, that must rule and reign? Surely (my Friends) the
tempestuous Storms of Wrath and Indignation that you see falling upon the
World, do earnestly call for a more mild and sober Spirit amongst you than
this: Let therefore your Moderation be known to all men; the Lord is at hand.
If you would be a Blessing to the World in your Generation, learn first to judge
and condemn your selves: Cast off your Judging, Censuring, and imposing Spirit,
and give the Witness of God in every one its just Right, its due Scope and
Latitude, and usurp not Authority over it: Take not upon you to be Lords over
God's Heritage; let the Bowels of your Love and Tenderness be drawn out and
extended toward the Measure of God in all Men of every Religion, in
forbearance and forgiveness to the whole World. Follow Peace in the Spirit of
Love with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see God. Give
Christ his Prerogative in Spirituals, He must and will have it; Give Caesar his
due in Temporals, who may of undoubted right challenge it. Thus if you can
commend your selves to God and the World, ye shall be the Joy of this
Generation; all good Men will be drawn out in an earnest imitation of your
Purity, while the violent and wicked shall stand mute, and be struck dumb at
your modest Patience and Meekness; you shall never want either inward Peace, or
outward Freedom, but ye shall enter into Peace, and rest in your Beds, each one
walking in his Uprightness. This (my dear Friends) is the Testimony, in which I
long to meet you, and which will justly provoke the hearty embraces of

Your true Friend in Love to serve you, R. R.

ADVERTISEMENT of some BOOKS lately published of Mr. ROBERT RICH's.
I. Hidden Things brought to light, etc.

II. His Epistles to the Seven Churches, viz. 1. to the Roman Catholic; 2. the
Episcopal Protestant; 3. the Presbyterian, 4. the Independent, 5. the
Anabaptist; 6. the Quaker; 7. the Church of the Firstborn. Containing his
Testimony to Gods Approbation of the Good, and Aversation to the Evil in all
Persuasions. Sold by Fr. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil near the
Royal Exchange.

III. Abstracts of several Letters, treating most of Spiritual Matters,
transmitted to Posterity, and recommended to the sober and serious Enquirer,
for promoting of Universal Love amongst all sorts of People, without respect of
Persons, Parties, or Sects. Together with a friendly Letter of Dr. Jer.
Taylor's to R. R. in Answer to one of his. Sold by Benjamin Billingsly at the
Printing-Press in Cornhil under the Royal Exchange.


