A CONTINUATION OF THE ANSWER TO THE Scots Presbyterian Eloquence, Dedicated to
the Parliament of Scotland. Being a Vindication of the Acts of that August
Assembly, from the Clamours and Aspersions of the Scots Prelatical Clergy, in
their Libels printed in England. With a Confutation of Dr. M -- 's Postscript,
in Answer to the former, proving, That it is not the Church of England's
Interest, to countenance the Scots outed Clergy. As also Reflections on Sir
Geo. Mackenzy's Defense of Charles the Second's Government in Scotland. And
Instances on Record of Sir George's Subornation against Sir Hugh and Sir George
Campbel, and the Lord of Blackwood, Presbyterian Gentlemen. Together with the
Acts of the Scots General Assembly and present Parliament; compared with the
Acts of Parliament in the two last Reigns against the Presbyterians. By WILL.
LAICK.

London, Printed in the Year 1693.

TO THE STATES of SCOTLAND in Parliament Assembled.
Most Noble Patriots;
I Presume, but with that profound Respect which is due to such an August
Assembly, humbly to implore your Protection to this rude and indigested, yet
real Effort of true Love to my Country, and to you Worthy Patriots in
particular, whom all honest-hearted Scotsmen look upon as the Healers of our
Breaches, and Restorers of our Paths to dwell in: And therefore it is not
possible for any Man who has a drop of true Scots Blood in his Veins, to hear
your Authority impugned, and your Wisdom called in Question, without resenting
it to the utmost of his Ability: And if, according to the common Opinion of
some of our Neighbors, S^otorum ingenia sint praefervida, an Affront of that
Nature is enough to make them boil over. Hence it is, that in a former
Endeavor I could not forbear to besprinkle, Scotico aceto, some degenerate
Monsters of our Country, who exposed to contempt, as much as in them lay,
whatever Scotsmen account dear in things Civil and Sacred.

Had it been only a particular Party, or some such packed Clubs as disgraced
the Name of Parliaments in former Reigns, and enacted such Laws as their
present Majesty's, with your Advice, have declared to be impious; had it, I say
been thus, the Matter might have been the more easily digested; but to have a
lawful and a freely elected Parliament of Scotland, charged in a Neighboring
Kingdom with a deliberate and malicious Lie, in an Act so unanimously resolved
on and duly canvas'd, as was that of your Assembly, concerning the Nation's
being first reformed by Presbyters; and that therefore Presbyterian Government
is most suitable to the Inclinations of our People; I say, to have a Lie of that
Nature charged upon you, is a Piece of Impudence that none but the Party
culpable could be guilty of. And yet, as if they had a mind to exhaust all the
Treasure of the bottomless Pit at once, and to bankrupt the Malice and Falsehood
of Hell for ever after, they go on to charge you further, with lodging the
Government of the Church, in the Hands of such blasphemous ignorant and immoral
Beasts, as Asrica never produced the like; and to aggravate your Guilt, would
make our Neighboring Nation believe, that at the ^ame time you have turned out
such a Generation of Ministers, as the Primitive Church would have been proud
of for their Sanctity, and ador^d for their Learning. Thus those common
Incendiaries, in their printed Libels, treat the Parliament of Scotland; which
for the Antiquity of its Standing, and fullness of its Power, gives place to
none in Europe. But it is not to be wondered at, most Noble Patriots, that that
Party should treat you thus, seeing they hate your being any otherwise than to
serve as their Drudges, and devour the best and most industrious Part of the
Subjects; by which both you, and that Ancient Kingdom which you represent, were
well-nigh entombed in Oblivion and Disgrace. It was that Party who changed a
well-limited and regular Monarchy, into an absolute and uncontrollable Tyranny;
that durst arrogate, a Power to cass and annul your firmest Laws, and treat you
with Contempt as perfect Slaves K. James's Proclamation.
. It was that Party who robbed Christ of his Prerogatives Royal, to be Jewels
in the Crowns of their Absolute Monarchs Act of Supremacy.
. It was that Party which robbed the People of their Consciences, to bring them
to an absolute dependence on the Prelatical Mitres Act for f^riot Confor^i^y.
: And not only deprived you of the Property of your Houses By frequent making
them Garrisons.
, but denied you a safe Retreat into your own Hearts Extorting your Thoughts by
Torture, and then hanging you for them.
. It was that Party who rendered K. James the Sixth so much a Prelatical Bigot,
as to the disturbance both of Church and State, and contrary to his Oath, to
obtrude Bishops upon the Nation, and persecute the sincerest Protestants, while
at the same time he indulged the Papists; and in fine, had such an aversion for
his Native Country, that instead of seeing it once in three Years, for
administering Justice according to his Promise, he never came to it but once
after his Succession to the Crown of England; and instead of favoring his
Church of Scotland, which he pretended once so much to admire, he persecuted
those who declined a Conformity with the Church of England. It was that Party
who influenced Charles the First, though a Native of Scotland, to put such an
intolerable Affront upon the Nation, as to demand their Crown to be sent to
England; and afterward to invade us with a formidable Army, designing an
absolute Conquest, and in an unnatural manner to subject that Nation to his
newly acquired Crown; which his Ancestors did so much disdain, that they
maintained 300 Years War upon that Head with no small Glory. And how the
Faction prevailed with Charles the Second, to requite our Nation for making
themselves a Field of Blood in Defense of his Title, is so fresh, that it needs
not be recapitulated; and it is yet much more recent, how well K. James the
Seventh rewarded us for owning his Right of Succession, when England had in a
manner spued him out by the Bill of Exclusion; he, I say, rewarded us, by
publishing such despotical Proclamations, as with an unparalled audacity,
declared us Slaves to the perpetual Infamy of that Generation of Scotsmen, who
were so tamely bereft of their Liberty, which our Noble Progenitors maintained
against Romans, Picts, Britains, Danes, Saxons, Normans and English, for twenty
preceding Ages. So that I say, considering how the Prelatical Faction
in^luenced those four Monarchs to treat our Nation, though they derived their
Being and Honor from it; and were otherwise in many respects, tantorum haud
quaquam indigni avorum. The Resolve of your August Assembly, that Prelacy was
an insupportable Grievance to that Kingdom, deserves to be engraven in Pillars
of Corinthian Brass; and that all Scotsmen (as no doubt many thousands will)
should not only when their Pens, but their Swords, in defense of it. It is that
Party, who in this Reign, impugn your Authority, by procuring Letters from
Court to command such things to the Assembly as by Law they are not obliged to
comply with; and if they should have done it, could neither have been
answerable to God nor your Honors for it, to pull down with their own Hands,
that Hedge which he in his Providence, by your Act, has set about the Church,
in lodging the Government upon themselves, which no doubt the Wisdom of your
August Assembly judged to be the best Expedient to secure the Peace of the
Church; and yet for noncompliance, how did they procure the Dissolution and
Reproach of that Assembly, to the manifest violation of your Authority; and
that by the Advice of some English Courtiers and Prelates, as if they had a mind
to homologate the Ancient Pretensions of that Crown and Church over yours, and
in the view of the World declare our Parliament and General Assembly not able
to give Advice in our own Affairs, but fit to be overruled by a packed Club of
another Nation: and shall they act thus impune to affront a Parliament, which
Malice it self cannot say, as their Party did formerly of the English
Parliament, That it is but a superfluous Tumor or Wen: for all who know our
History, are sensible of the share which the Scots Parliaments have, from the
first Constitution of our Government, been possessed of, not only in the
Legislative, but the Executive Power: and, if our Historians may be believed,
laid the Foundation, and have oftentimes since regulated and limited the Power
of our Monarchy; and to the eternal Confusion of all those who would insinuate
the danger thereof to Kingly Government, have, notwithstanding, preserved our
Monarchy in a longer and more uninterrupted Succession than any Nation of
Europe.

It is not unknown to your August Assembly what Convulsions the Prelatical
Party have thrown the Kingdom into, since the first Intrusion of their Prelacy;
and how near the Ruin both of our Religious and Civil Liberties were effected,
by their Concurrence with the Tyranny of the late Reigns, represented in your
Claim of Right; and therefore the World cannot but justify your Conduct in
depriving them of any share of the Government of the Church, which they only
seek, that they may undermine; and tho they should comply with the Terms
required in Law, yet their former Perjuries and contradictory Tests are but too
shrewd Causes to suspect their future Levity, which, together with the
Disaffectedness they have generally evidenced to the present Government,
demonstrates how dangerous it is to entrust them with the Conduct of Peoples
Consciences. And what may justly render them hateful to all honest Scots-men,
is the Obloquy and Reproach they have thrown here upon the whole Nation; and
their underhand dealing with the high-flown Church-of- England-Party, who have
a Heart-hatred at our Country and Religion; and have treated you with so much
Contempt, that tho you moved for an Union, and his Majesty was graciously
pleased to back it, they disdained to give him any Answer, as thinking you
unworthy of a Politic or Temporal Union; and yet they would be at forcing you
to an Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Union, which if they could effectuate, the
World must allow that they ought, in the next place, to beg us for Fools, who
could believe that they have a Kindness for our Souls, who have ^one for our
Bodies. Yet this is the Party that our Prelatical Countrymen do so much court
and make Application to, while they slight Scots-men who are authorized to
represent our Affairs: So much have they divested themselves of all natural
Respect to their Country, that if their Prelacy live, they care not tho the
Name and Fame of Scotland die: and that they may effectuate their Designs,
there is no doubt but they will be forming Parties in your August Assembly, and
make many fair Pretenses of desiring Liberty only to exercise what belongs to
their pretended indelible Character of Pastors, and promise to undertake
nothing to the Disturbance of the public Tranquillity: But their worming
themselves in by degrees in King James the VIth's time under fair Pretenses,
and then overturning all when they had opportunity, is a sufficient Caveat to
beware of them, as inwardly ravening Wolves, tho outwardly they appear in
Sheeps Clothing. Your August Assembly cannot so soon have forgot that the
Nation was almost totally ruined, your Counties invaded by savage Highlanders,
your Tenants murdered, and Families impoverished, your Houses plundered, your
Wives, Daughters, and Relations ravished, your selves and tender Infants
exposed to Wandering, Hunger, Nakedness and Cold, and all the Miseries and
Oppressions which you groaned under in the late Reigns, both as to Soul and
Body. I say your Honors cannot certainly have forgot these things, so far as
to be prevailed upon by any Insinuations whatever, again to deliver up your
bleeding Church and Country into the Hands of that Faction, lest the latter end
be worse than the first.

There Is no cause to fear a Rupture with England on that account. The good
Church-of- England-Laity, and not a few of their Clergy, have incurred danger
enough from their high-flown Tantivies, and have smarted sufficiently under
their Doctrine of Passive Obedience, to make them cautious and willing to
secure themselves from their Fury, so far will they be from concurring with
them against you.

The chief Arguments used here for re-admitting the Prelatical Clergy are, That
it will contribute to his Majesty's Interest, and please the Church of England,
and supply the vacant Congregations. As to the first, How it can promote his
Majesty's Interest to disoblige the greatest part of Scotland, and all the
Dissenters in England and Ireland, is beyond the reach of Mankind to determine.
2. How it can be supposed that a Party, who have hitherto witnessed so much
Rancour against his Majesty's Person, Family and Government, as the Scots
Episcopal Clergy have done, is only to be answered by those who can swear
contradictory Oaths, as our Curats did in their infamous Tests, etc. As to the
second, That it will please the Church of England; it may easily be answered,
that we do not ow^ them so much Kindness; and if we did, we must first know
what that Church of England is that we must oblige; for hitherto she has been
an individuum Vagum, that no body knows where to find, it being as difficult to
define her, as to make a Coat for the Moon. Her Doctrinal Articles are owned by
us, and all good Protestants; but that is not the Characteristick of the Church
of England: for in the late Reigns Passive Obedience and Nonresistance were her
Shibboleth; but now she has renounced those Doctrines, by acting diametrically
opposite to them. And for a Character of the Church of England in this Reign,
we cannot certainly have it better than from a Vote of the last House of
Commons, who resolved on an Address of Thanks to his Majesty for the Care he
had taken of the Church of England, in the Alteration which was then made in
the Lieutenancy of London; and that was, because by the ill Advice of a certain
Prelate and others, the Military Power of the City was lodged in those who had
surrendered her Charter, and dipped their Hands in the Blood of my Lord Russel,
Colonel Sidney, Alderman Cornish, etc. and contributed to the Arbitrary Methods
of the late Reigns: And because this is but one half of the Parliament, let us
look into the higher House, and there you will find, that according to the
opinion of none of the least Church-of- England-Men, when the Act passed for
depriving the Nonjurant Bishops, it was looked upon as a fatal Blow to the
Church of England. So that in plain terms, the Jacobite Party is what that
Faction means by the Church of England. And as a Commentary upon the Text,
let us but consider the main Engine which they have made use of to quash the
Discovery of all Plots against the Government, and we shall find that it was by
giving out those Discoveries as the Efforts of Republicans and Dislenters
against the Church of England; and if we look nearer home, and consider how it
comes to pass that such Men are advanced to the highest Places in the Scots
Government, who were the Contrivers, Enacters, and bloody Executioners of those
Laws which your August Assembly has declared to be impious, we shall find it
to be done by the Interest of that Party in the Church of England. If we
consider further, whence it is that those who betrayed our Army, murdered our
People, and plotted the Destruction of your Convention, escape unpunished, you
will fined it to be by the Procurement of the aforesaid Party. Now all these
things being considered, it will easily appear, whether it be your Interest to
oblige this Church or not. Or, if we take her according to the general
Acceptance of Bishops and Ceremonies, the Vote of your August Assembly
concerning Prelacy, your Act establishing Presbytery as most agreeable to the
Word of God, and the Opposition made to the Ceremonies by our Country in
Charles the First's time, will speedily determine the case. And it will yet
appear less reasonable to oblige that Church, so taken, if we consider, that
those of her own Communion, and the best of them too, look upon both Bishops
and Ceremonies to be indifferent, and not of Divine Institution, as may be seen
by the Writings of Mr. Hickeringil, Counselor Stephens, and Stillingfleet's
Irenicum. So that in effect, the best of the Church-of- England-Communion are
embarked in the same Bottom with your selves, and the common Enemies of both
call them Presbyterians as well as you, and treated them accordingly in the
late Reigns: So that from that worthy part of the Church of England, who are
Men of good Lives, and keep firm to the Doctrine of their Church, you need fear
no Opposition; for to do them Justice, they are as zealous for the Protestant
Religion as any, and never joined in persecuting their Brethren of a different
Opinion.

To what they pretend of supplying the vacant Churches, may speedily be
replied; The Assembly has declared their Willingness to employ such of them as
are Godly and Orthodox. And as for others, the good old way of our Church in
the Reformation (when Ministers were scarcer than now) of appointing Men to
preach by turns to those vacant Congregations till they can be otherwise
supplied, is the much safer and better Expedient, than to entrust such Men with
the Charge of other Peoples Souls, who have discovered so little care of their
own, and whom in your Wisdom you objected against as the great and
insupportable Grievance of the Nation. Nor have you any such Encouragement from
their former Success to employ them again: and if it shall seem good in your
Eyes to go on as you begun, and encourage a Reformation, such of our
Countrymen as are abroad, will be the sooner prevailed with to come home; and
others to prosecute their Studies, to adapt them for the Ministry, and fill up
the Vacancies; for it cannot be hid from your Illustrious Assembly, that the
intrusting the chief Enemies of the Presbyterians in the Government, is a great
Discouragement to all that wish well to our Church or Country^; and administers
but too just cause of Suspicion, that we must either be imbroil'd in a Civil
War, or return to our former Bondage, which nothing but your Care, with his
Majesty's Assistance and God's Blessing, is able to prevent.

Your Honors may perhaps be inclined to think, that there is too much Gall in
my Pen against our Prelatical Clergy; but such of your Number as have been
lately at London, cannot but know what an Odium they have endeavored to bring
upon the Country in general, and your August Assembly in particular;
insinuating, That you are neither the True nor full Representatives of the
Nation, and but a mere surreptitious Faction got together by the Opportunity of
tum^ltuous Times; and that you neither acted from a Principle of Honor nor
Conscience, but did only what you thought would be pleasing to the Prince of
Orange. And hence they have used their utmost Endeavors to have you Dissolved,
by the Interest of the high-slown Prelatical English Courtiers, to whom they
represent you in the blackest Colors, which their Malice or Wit can invent:
And not only so, but they make use of your Name, as the Turkish Slaves do those
of their Barbarous Masters from whom they have escaped, to move those of the
Church-of- England-Communion to open their Purses, pretending that you have
turned them out in a barbarous and illegal manner, or that they have had such
and such Indignities and Affronts put upon them. And thus they beg from one
Clergyman to another, and spend what they get at Taverns and Alehouses, or
sitting up whole Nights at Cards, particularly at Mills in Westminster, or
Hutchinsons in the Hay-Market: and when their Stock is spent, renew the begging
Trade, or else troop about the Country, and with their stolen Sermons, or
railing Invectives against the Government of Scotland, both in Church and
State, insinuate themselves into the Adorers of Bishops and Ceremonies; for the
latter of which, though they exclaimed against them at Home, they profess
themselves to be mighty Zealots Abroad: and thus they disseminate their Poison
in our Neighboring Nation, by their lying Tongues and blasphemous Pamphlets.
So that hence your August Assembly may have a sufficient view, whether it be
safe to reintroduce such Men into the Church, who have given up themselves to
all manner of Villainies, and are become Devotoes to those unscriptural
Ceremonies, which occasioned the fatal War in Charle^^ the First's Time; and
have moreover evidenced such Levity and Unsted fastness both in embracing and
rejecting them at Home, since the Revolution, that it is visible they are not
acted by Principle, but Interest; and that their Interest has been always
contrary to what your August Assembly has now espoused, both as to Policy and
Religion, is so evident, that whoever casts but an Eye upon the History ever
since they were obtruded upon the Nation, may soon be convinced of it: Or by a
shorter view, if they please but to read the Grievances which you desired to be
redressed by their present Majesty's, of which the Bishops and Clergy were for
the most part Contri^ers, Promoters and Actors. And we may the better be
satisfied what those Men who now solicit for a Share in the Government of the
Church, do chiefly aim at, both as to that and the State, if we do but consider
that their principal Converse is with the Jacobites in England, and that the
chiefest of their Friends are none of the best Williamites in Scotland.

It Is not unlike that your Honors may be accosted with this amongst other
Arguments, that admitting those Men to a share of Church Government, will
gratify the King to whom you are so much obliged, which of it self is an
impeachment of your Wisdom; for none can so well know the Interest of Scotland
as a free chosen Parliament, who are consequently fittest to give the King
Advice: And seeing the Interest of all good Kings, and their People, is one and
the same, that ought to be most grateful to the King which is so to the People,
and what that is you have already declared. It is obvious to those that know
our History, that ever since the Reformation, the Church of Scotland has
claimed a Right of Calling and Adjourning her own Assemblies, pro re nata; and
what dismal Consequences the Invasion of that Privilege has been attended
with, to those Kings and Grandees who have attempted it, is so well known, that
it cannot easily be forgot. And whether King James the Sixth's Curse has not
taken place upon those of his Successors who invaded the Church, the
Revolutions of the Crown have sufficiently witnessed: and if the Hand of God
has not been remarkably seen in punishing those Great Ones who were their
Tools, let the Ruin of their Families from time to time declare. Nor has the
Nation escaped punishment for the Treachery of their Representatives, God
having been justly provoked to give them and their Liberties to be swallowed up
by those very Men whom they would needs set upon his Throne, and into whose
Hands they betrayed the Liberties of the Church, of which your own Claim of
Right is a speaking Monument: and seeing there is no doubt but your August
Assembly had valuable Reasons for abolishing the Supremacy, it is an Affront to
your Authority to demand its Restitution: Its being possessed by the Church,
can bring no Damage to the Crown; for Presbyterians are known to have as good,
if not a better Opinion of his present Majesty, than any other of his Subjects;
and all Men of Sense must needs take it for a Proof of it, that they solicit
for such good Laws in his Reign, as may secure them from the danger of others.
And seeing our Churchmen are subject to the Laws, and never did refuse to
assemble at the Call of their Kings, and to give an Account of their Affairs,
it is but equal to leave them in the Possession of that Liberty of calling
Assemblies, concerning their own Matters, which the Church was possessed of
before ever there was a Christian Magistrate, if the 15th of the Acts be the
Word of God. And certainly he who promised that Kings should be
Nursing-Fathers, did never intend that they should be Step-Fathers, to rob the
Children of what is their due.

As for the Calumnies of your Church of- England-Enemies, it is easy to stop
their Mouth with Argumentum ad Hominem; their Carriage to K. James the Seventh,
proclaims their unshaken Loyalty. And for your own Episcopal Party, all the
World knows that they and their Kings together, did so tyrannize over your
Bodies and Souls, that you durst scarcely plead a Property in either. And if
the Church of England must be pleased, which is the Achillean Argument used by
the Party, we can justly answer the peevish Lady, as the young Crab did the old
One, I prae Matter and ego sequar. Let Us see how careful she will be to testify
her Gratitude to his Majesty, in taking off the Test, and taking in Dissenters
to the Church, which will but just make them even with us; and then, and time
enough then, because we are the oldest Nation, we may think which way to make
the next Advance: for as we have got the Precedence, it is but reasonable we
should keep it; for I know so much by my self, that Scotsmen love to go, but
neither to be driven nor dragged.

I cannot but acquaint your Honors, that since the writing of what is above,
the Jacobites here are mightily elevated, and big with hopes of seeing you all
in Confusion, and the Nation in a Flame, by the Designs which they give out to
be on foot amongst you, of lodging the Power of Calling and Dissolving
Church Assemblies in the Magistrate alone, and depriving the People of the
Right of choosing Ministers, by which means they are so bold as to say, That
they hope not only to see Prelacy gradually reintroduced, but their late
Monarch reinthroned: And that they may accomplish these Designs, will insinuate
themselves into both Parties; and are very confident, that the Result will
answer their Expectation for a speedy Reestablishment, of Prelacy at least;
these Measures, as they give out, being concerted with English Prelates, who
have formed a Party among you for their Designs. But as they have hitherto
reproached your Proceedings, there is no doubt but this is a Calumny from the
same Forge, by which they would Ridicule your Authority, and represent you to
the World as Men of no Principle nor Solidity, but such as will make your self
Transgressors, in building again what you have already destroyed. But may the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ direct your Counsels, so as to issue in
the Comfort of his Church, Peace of the Nation, and Confusion of those your
black-mouthed Enemies, who are engaged in an Interest, not only distinct from,
but altogether destructive of yours: Of which there is no room to doubt, if we
consider the following Address of the Representatives of their Church, which
they have endeavored to perform on all Occasions; and as they have never yet
revoked it, we need not doubt but that the Party are still of the same mind.

The Address of the Archbishops and Bishops of Scotland to the late K. James,
upon the News of the Prince of Orange's Undertaking, November the 10th, 1688.
Vid. Gazette, Numb. 2398.
May it please your most Sacred Majesty,
WE prostrate our selves to pay our most Devote Thanks and Adoration to the
Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth, for preserving Your Sacred Life and
Person, so frequently exposed to the greatest Hazards, and as often delivered,
and You miraculously prospered with Glory and Victory, in Defense of the Rights
and Honor of Your Majesty's August Brother, and of these Kingdoms; and that by
his Merciful Goodness the Ragings of the Sea, and Madness of Unreasonable M^^
have been stilled and calmed: And Your Majesty, as the Darling of Heaven,
peaceably seated on the Thrones of your Royal Ancestors, whose Long,
Illustrious and U^parallell'd Line, is the greatest Glory of this Your Ancient
Kingdom.

We pay our most humble Gratitude to Your Majesty for the repeated Assurances
of Your Royal Protection to our National Churoh and Religion, as the Laws have
established them; which are very suitable to the Graci^u^ Countenance,
Encouragement and Protection Your Majesty was pleased to afford to our Church
and Order, whilst we were happy in Your Presence amongst us.

We magnify the Divine Mercy in blessing Your Majesty with a Son, and us with a
Prince, whom we pray Heaven may bl^s^ and preserve to sway Your Royal Scepter
after You, and that he may inherit with Your Dominions the Illustrious and
Heroic Vert^es of his August and most Serene Parents.

We are amazed to hear of the danger of an Invasion from Holland, which excites
our Prayers for an universal Repentance to all Orders of Men, that God may yet
spare his People, preserve Your Royal Person, and prevent the Effusion of
Christian Blood, and to give such Succes^ to Your Majesty's Arms, that all who
invade Your Majesty's just and undoubted Rights, and disturb or interrupt the
Peace of Your Rea^^s, may be disappointed and clothed with Shame; so that on
Your Royal Head the Crown may still f^ourish.

As, by the Grace of God, ^e shall pres^^ve in our selves a firm and unshaken
Loyalty, so we shall be careful and zealous to promote in all Your Subjects an
intrepid and steadfast Allegiance to Your Majesty, as an Essential Part of their
Religion, and of the Glory of our Holy Profession, not doubting but that God in
his great Mercy, who has so often preserved and delivered Your Majesty, will
still preserve and deliver You, by giving You the Hearts of Your Subjects, and
the Necks of Your Enemies. So pray we, who, in all Humility, are,

May it please Your Most Sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most
Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and Servants. Signed by
The Lord Ar Bp of St. Andr^ws. The Lord Archbishop of Glasc^w. The Lord Bishop
of Edinburg. The Lord Bishop of Galloway. The Lord Bishop of Aberdeen. The Lord
Bishop of Dunkell. The Lord Bishop of Brechen. The Lord Bishop of Orkney. The
Lord Bishop of Murray. The Lord Bishop of Ross. The Lord Bishop of Dumblane.
The Lord Bishop of the Istes.

Edinburg, Nov. 3. 1688.
Pardon my Freedom, most Noble Patriots; God the Searcher of Hearts, knows what
Veneration I have for your August Assembly, as Representatives of the
ancientest Kingdom upon Earth: I own that your Wisdom and Authority sets you
above the reach of Dictates; nor is any thing here intended as such; for if the
Case would admit it, I am far from the Vanity of thinking my self able to do
it, but cannot forbear to contribute my poor Mite toward the Vindication of
what you have already done, and to put you in mind how much your Wisdom is
vilified, and your Authority impugn'd amongst Strangers, which I have the
opportunity of knowing better than many of the Members of your August Assembly.
And at the same time to inform your Honors, that the Authors are our
Prelatists, a Set of Men whom you voted to be the insupportable Grievance of
the Nation; and certainly not without very good Reason, seeing they had in a
great measure obscured the Glory which our Gallant Ancestors had acquired by
their noble Defense of the Liberties of their Country from Tyrants at home, and
E^emies abroad, and particularly Rome, both Pagan and Popish. May the God of
Heaven and Earth pour out his best Blessing^ upon you in general, and incline
your Hearts, with of that your Heroic Sovereign, to what may be best for the
Good of the Nation, and the Glory of his Name.

The Badness of the Copy, and the Distance of the Author from the Press, has
occasioned many Errata's, the most considerable of which the Reader is desired
to amend, as follows, because they man the Sense.
PAge 17. line antepenult. dele so. P. 23. l. 7. read asperius. P. 27. l. 32.
dele sense. P. 33. l. 33. read to make no s^ruple. Ibid. l. 34. r. and
therefore ought not to be believed. P. 34. l. ^. r. anot^er denies it. Ibid. l.
7. r. Friends. Ibid. l. 19. r. and you apply it to all (...) gross. Ibid. l.
21. r. warily. P. 35. l. 24. r. Lords of the Iusti^iary. P. 36. l. 3. dele is.
Ibid. l. 7. r. and yet owns. Ib. l. 23. r. and I am. P. 38. l. ^. dele your
self. Ibid. l. 17. r. inau^picious. P. 40. l. 27. r. would (...) allow. P. 41.
l. 9. r. disaffected, for dissatisfied. P. 51. l. 25. dele and.

The CONTENTS.
PAge 1, 2, 3. An Apology for the sharpness of the S^ile, and Instances, etc.
in my last. Page 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Arguments to prove that it is not the Church of
England 's Interest to endeavor the Subversion of Presbytery in Scotland; and
that the Scots Presbyterians don't think themselves obliged to a forcible
Extirpation of Prelacy in England by the Covenant. Page 9, 10, 11, 12. The
Danger which moderate Church-of-England- Men are in as to their Religious and
Civil Liberties from our Scots Prelatists, and their high-flown Tantivies, whom
they ought not to countenance in their Designs against the Church of Scotland.
Ibid. The Falsehood of the Doctor's Assertion, That the late Governments were
obliged to make such severe Laws against us in their own Defense. Page 13, 14.
The moderate Church-of-England- Men to blame in not making a public
Protestation against the Practices of their high-flown Party in the late
Reigns, and this. Ibid. Instances of the Disloyalty and ungovernable Passion of
D. M -- o. Page 15, 16, 17. Answers to his Calumnies and Defense of the
Severities of Charles ll's Reign against the Presbyterians, and Proofs from his
own Concession, that we may justly accuse that Government of Cruelty. Page 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. The Doctor's Objections from the Cameronians, and his
Arguments from our Practices in Charles the First and Second's time, answered
and retorted. From Page 25, to 30. Answers to Sir Geo. Mackenzy's Defense of
Charles the second's Government, with Retortions, and Proofs that either K.
William and his Parliament of Scotland, or Sir Geo. Mackenzy and our Scots
Prelatists must be Liars; and the Pr. of Orange's Undertaking unjust, if
Charles ll's Government in Scotland can be defended. From Page 30, to 38.
Further Answers to the Doctor's Postscript, and his Exceptions against my
Instances in the last. From Page 38, to 45. An Account of Sir Geo. Mackenzy's
Subornation and Injustice against Cesno^k, Blackewood, etc. From thence to the
end, A Comparison between the Presbyterian Acts of their General Assembly and
Parliament against the Episcopalians in this Reign, and theirs against the
Presbyterians in the late Reigns.
A FURTHER ANSWER TO THE Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, By way of Animadversion
on Dr. M. -- As Postscript in Answer to the first.
BEFORE I take the Doctor to task, I think it necessary to answer the
Objections made by Friends against my first Essay; which are, That the Style is
too Satirical, the Instances at the latter end too Fulsome; and that their Book
deserved no Answer, as ^arrying its Confutation in its Forehead. I reply, That
as to the sharpness of the Style, none who read, or consider what they wrote,
can think they ought to be otherwise treated: So that I shall for once make use
of the Tinker's Apology to a Farmer, who quarrelled him for striking his Dog
with the sharp End of his Staff, alleging that it had been sufficient to have
beat him with the Blunt. Yes, says the Tinker, when your Dog runs at me with
his blunt End, I shall use the blunt End of my Stick; but when he runs at me
with his sharp End, give me leave to be as sharp with him. Not that I would
justify the rendering of Railing for Railing, which I acknowledge to be contrary
to our Savior's Command, but I submit it to the Judgment of Divines, Whether
answering Lies with Truth, and making the real Infamy of him appear, who
endeavors, by forged Accusations, to take away my good Name, be a Breach of
that Divine Precept? So that while the Matters of Fact wherewith they are
charged, hold true, the Reflections upon them, and Epithets given them, can
never be justly quarrelled; and therefore I would entreat my Friends to be
sparing of their Censures: for while the Memory of K. Charles the Second, or K.
James the Seventh endures; and till Time, the consumer of all things, has eat
up their Parliament-Rolls, it will hold an undeniable Truth, That the
Prelatical Party of Scotland are Persecutors; and that in denying the same,
they have made themselves notorious Liars.

2. So long as it appears by the same Acts, that they imposed and took a
contradictory Test, so long will it hold that they are perjured themselves, and
chargeable with the Perjury of others.

3. So long as it remains in the Records of Council, that they ordered Men to
be killed, without any Trial or color of Law; or so much as with an Exception,
Whether they resisted or not resisted; so long will it hold that they are
bloody Murderers.

4. So long as the Records of the last General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland remain, it will appear, by their Evasions, Answers, and disingenuous
Refusals, to declare their abhorrence of Arminianism, Socinianism and Popery,
that they are Firebrarnds in the Church, and Incendiaries in the State.

5. So long as any of their villainous Libels, called The Scotch Presbyterian
Eloquence, exist, wherein they charge Holiness with Deformity, God with horrid
Decrees, and mock at Seriousness and Piety, so long will it be evident that
they they are Blasphemers.

6. So long as that s^urrilous Address of their Bishops against the Prince of
Orange; their opposing him in Parliament; their refusing to pray for him, or
swear to him now he is King, and the legal Procedure against them on the said
accounts are on Record, so long will it appear that they are Rebels.

7. So long as their bloody Acts of Parliament, and barbarous Execution of
those Acts against us, and our gentle Acts of Parliaments, and moderate
Execution of those Acts against them are upon Record, so long it will appear
that they are infamous Liars, in asserting, that we treat them more barbarously
than they treated us.

8. So long as the West of Scotland (which was the principal Scene of those
bloody Tragedies) has a Being, so long will it appear that they were barbarous.

So that I hope all Men of common Sense, perceive that there is no denying the
Consequence, without denying the Precedent; which they can never do so long as
any Records have a Being in Scotland; and therefore I refer it to the impartial
Reader, whether they do not deserve to be sharply treated.

To the fulsomness of the Instances I reply, That indeed such things are not
sit to be named amongst Christians as a Subject of Conversation: but seeing
they charge our Ministers with Impurity of Life and Doctrine, I hope it may be
allowed in such a case to expose their really vicious Practices, in opposition
to what they have forged against us; and seeing the thing is in a manner
juridical, and they the first Aggressors, it was but necessary for our own
Justification, to display them in their own Colors. However, if any thing
either in this Particular, or others, be offensive, let the Blame rest upon me
alone; for I solemnly declare, that I neither had the Commission nor Connivance
of my Party to write what I did, only some particular Persons and Laics like
my self, gave me most of the Passages now found fault with. But e're I leave
this Subject, let me add, that I humbly conceive my Foundation to be very
solid, whatever Blemish there may be in the Superstructure, seeing the present
Parliament of Scotland, when a Convention, passed such a Vote, That their
Bishops and Clergy were the great and insupportable Grievance of the Nation,
for which no better ground can be assigned than their Profanity, Persecution
and want of Piety. So that I have only made out by Particulars, what they
charged them with in general: and therefore seeing I only spoke the truth, to
vindicate those who were falsely accused, and not to gratify the profane Palate
of the Age, I hope I may have some grains of Allowance, it never being reckoned
a fault in any Evidence, to repeat the Blasphemies of the Atheist, or the
Treason of the Traitor: nor can Religion be a Sufferer by the exposing of those
Men, any more than it was by stigmatizing of the Scribes and Pharisees as
Hypocrites.

As to the last Objection, That it deserved no Answer because confuted by it
self; I reply, That in Scotland it is true, but here we are not known: and being
represented as the worst of Men and greatest of Barbarians to those of the
Church of England; that Atheistical Vomit was greedily licked up, and by many
believed; so that their Pamphlets spread, and were mightily hugged by such as
are enraged at our abolishing Prelacy, and by the Jacobites who thence took
occasion to re^lect upon his Majesty for settling such a monstrous Church in
Scotland, that they might render him odious to the Church of England. I cannot
mention it without Concern, that those who are able to defend our Church and
Country, are so unwi^^ing to write; and when they do, that they let the
Adversary triumph so long before they reply. If it must be so, I wish that they
would oblige some of their Friends here with Hand-Granadoes, to keep tho Enemy
in play till they come up with their Mortar-pieces.

Before I take the Postscript in hand, I find it needful to make it evident to
the World, that Presbytery cannot be over-turn'd in Scotland without the
Subversion of our Religious and Civil Liberties; and consequently that our
Scots Episcopalians are Enemies to the present Government, and French
Incendiaries, or at least such a Crew as would sacri^ice all that is dear to
us, as Men and Christians, to their own private Resentments.

1. It is very well known, and too lately transacted to be forgotten, that the
States of Scotland in their Claim of Right did demand the Abolition of Prelacy,
as contrary to the Inclination of the Generality of the People; on which
Condition, amongst others, their Majesty's accepted that Crown; and in
pursuance of their Promise have by Act of Parliament, abolished Prelacy since,
and established Presbytery in Scotland, as most agreeable to the World of God,
as well as the Peoples Inclinations. Then if their Majesty's should be
prevailed upon (which blessed be God there is no cause to fear) to act contrary
to their solemn Oaths, and the Claim of Right, they must needs see that the
People of Scotland would have ground enough to plead a Breach of the Original
Contract; nor could the Church of England for shame condemn them, seeing they
made use of the same Plea in their Convention and Parliament against King
James. And in the next place, let them but consider, that upon the same ground
this, or any other King may as well break with them, and invade the
Constitution of their Church, which by the Coronation Oath they have bound him
to maintain: And whether Charles the Second, after he was by them persuaded to
break his Oath to the Presbyterians in Scotland, made any greater Conscience of
maintaining the Civil and Religious Liberties of England, I^ appeal to
themselves. And therefore seeing by that excessive Power which they gave their
Kings in things sacred, merely to destroy the Presbyterians, they found at last
that they had put a Rod in their Hands to whip themselves; I think they should
be cautious how they play that Game over again. I do not write this, as having
any suspicion that their Majesty's are so weak as to be prevailed upon to alter
the Church Government in Scotland, but merely to let the World see, that they
who solicit them to it, are their greatest Enemies, and design to shake their
Throne; and that it is not the Church of England's Interest to countenance our
Scots Prelatis^^, nor to importune their Majesty's on that Head.

If what is already said be not enough, I would earnestly entreat all sober
Church-of- England-Men to consider what were the Consequences of their meddling
in our Affairs, and incensing King Charles the First against the Presbyterians,
in favor of our Runnagate Prelates, and their Hirelings. And seeing like
Causes may have the like Effects, they would do well to beware. It is not
unknown that Scotland is a distinct Nation, and ought to be governed by their
own Laws and Councils; and therefore it must needs be an Invasion of the Rights
of Scotland, for English Ministers of State, and Prelates to meddle, or give
Counsel in Scottish Affairs when not called to it. And I cannot but think that
all reasonable Men will easily grant, that the Parliament, and General Assembly
of the Church of Scotland, are better Judges of what is expedient for that
Nation, than a few English Ministers of State, or Prelates; and that both of
them have reason to reject what Directions or Injunctions come from such a
Mint. And I would put it to the Consciences of all judicious Church-of-
England-Men, how they would take it if the King were in Scotland, that any of
the Dissenting Ministers who are really injured, as those who preached at St.
Hellin and Hi^ley Chapels in Lancashire, or the whole of them, because denied
a Comprehension, should ^ly thither, and by their Interest with Scots
Presbyterian Ministers of State and Preachers, importune his Majesty to have
the Constitution of the Church of England overturned, and pro^ure Orders to
have such and such Ministers planted in Churches, tho they refuse to satisfy
the Law. I say, in such a case I appeal to their own Consciences how they would
take it, whether they would reckon themselves obliged to obey, or if they would
not complain that their Rights were invaded, and demand Satisfaction of such
Ministers of State, etc. as Incendiaries and Dis^^^bers of the Harmony between
King and Subjects? I believe verily they would, and that not without good
reason, tho I am sure the case is much stronger on our side still: for the
Dissenting Ministers of England are all of them Loyal to his Majesty, willing
to swear Allegiance, and pray for him; but so are not our Scots Prelatists. And
besides, his Majesty is really the Head and Fountain of all Power in the Church
of England, who have not only their Temporal Baronies and Honors from him, but
are nominated to their Bishoprics by him: but so it is not in Scotland, where
he has divested himself of the Supremacy, and neither bestows Lands nor
Honors upon Churchmen. Then the case being so, the Golden Rule, which
commands us to do as we would be done by, should oblige Englishmen not to
meddle with our Church, no more than they would have us to meddle with theirs;
and if the Parliament of Scotland do pass over what of that Nature is already
done, it is not to be supposed that the Red Rampant Lion is become so much a
Calf as not to roar sometime or other, and make the fattest and proudest of the
Beasts in the Field to tremble, as ers^ of old; but I hope and pray that God
will avert both the Cause and the Effect. The English Bishops did not gain so
much by the the last Bellum Episcopale against us, that they need to be fond of
another; and we doubt not to find as much Justice from the Parliament of
England now as we found then, and have no reason to doubt but King William
would be as ready as Charles the First, to deliver up his Ministers to the Law,
if it should be made appear against them that they have been meddling too much
in our Affairs.

I know that our Scots Prelatists possess the Church of England, that we think
our selves obliged to endeavor the Extirpation of their Hierarchy, and upon
that account prevail with them to endeavor our Subversion.

But I would earnestly beg all moderate Men to weigh the following Answers.

1. That the reason of entering into that solemn League and Covenant, was the
Fury which the English Prelates evidenced at that time against the Church of
Scotland, having excommunicated the same in all the Churches in England, forced
a Service Book upon us more exceptionable than their own; and in Conjunction
with Papists, enabled Charles the First to raise 30000 Men against us, when the
Parliament of England refused to concur with him, insomuch that that Expedition
was called the Bishops War. But blessed be God his present Majesty is far from
any such Attempt, and the English Bishops, the chief of them at least, are Men
of more Moderation: So that there is no such cause for us to endeavor the
Overthrow of their Hierarchy.

2. That the Scots Presbyterians do not at all think themselves obliged, by
that Covenant, to endeavor a forcible extirpation of the English Prelacy, but
in Concurrence with the Parliament of England: and therefore so long as they
have not their Call to the Work, the English Prelacy is in no Hazard; and the
best way to keep so, is for the Church of England to carry modestly, and
neither to meddle with us, nor give their own Parliament occasion to make such
a Vote against them, as the Parliament of Scotland made against our Bishops,
That they were the great and insupportable Grievance of the Nation: so that
they have their Safety in their own Hand. But if they should be so infatuated
to proceed as they began, in relation to the late General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland; or if they be such Fools, as to concur to the sti^ling of
all Plots against his Majesty as hitherto, because so many of their own
Communion are concerned in them, let them blame themselves for what will be the
unavoidable Consequences, soon or late: for the Church-of- England Laity are
too good Protestants and Englishmen, to be always led by the Clergy, or
continually hood-winked, and not discover the Plots carried on against the
State, under pretense of Zeal to the Church; of which methinks the Hotheaded
Clergy should take warning, seeing they may easily perceive how little Ground
their Passive Obedience had gained, when the honest Church-of- England Laics
found themselves in hazard by K. James, as to their Liberties and Religion.

Next I would earnestly beg, that they would consider how the Faction, under a
pretense of Zeal for the Church, and against Presbytery, screwed up the
Prerogative to such a height, that Englishmen had very near lost their Liberty
and Property. It was this mistaken Zeal that threw out the Bill of Exclusion,
surrendered the Charters of Corporations, enabled the King to pack Parliaments,
pick Juries, and cut off whomsoever he pleased, under pretense of Law. It was
this mistaken Zeal, that brought the late Reign, and all the direful Effects of
it, which we have already felt, or are still impending upon us. It was this
mistaken Zeal which delayed his present Majesty's Access to the Throne; gave
the Enemies opportunity to ruin Ireland, raise a Rebellion in Scotland, and
Plot, as they do still, in England; And shall we never be aware of it? Methinks
that if the Church of England compared Things past and present, She might
easily perceive that this intemperate Heat against Presbytery, does naturally
issue in Popery and Slavery; and that she has much more reason to unite, for
Defense of the Protestant Interest, and her own Doctrinal Articles, with the
Church of Scotland, than by espousing the Cause of a few pro^^igate or
traitorous Clergymen, because Episcopal, run her self into unavoidable Dangers.

Is it possible that a Harmony in Discipline should have more Power to unite
distinct Interests, than a Harmony in Doctrine and Agreement under one Civil
Head, has to cement those who drive the same Interest? It cannot be unknown to
the Church of England, if she believes either their Majesty's Proclamations, or
considers the procedure of his Parliament, and other Courts in Scotland, that
the Prelatical Party there drive at a Design to restore K. James. And with she
yet entertain such Vipers in her Bosom as their outed Clergy; and not only so,
but for their sakes entertain Suspicions of his Majesty, and solicit him
against the Church of Scotland? Can she say that we have ever made any Address
to him against the Church of England? and why should they be more zealous
against us than we against them? Does she not know that Archbishop Usher, and
some of the greatest of her Fathers, thought Episcopacy and Presbytery
reconcilable, and the other things in Controversy indifferent? How is it then
that she thinks her Differences with King James and the Church of Rome more
reconcilable, as she must needs do if she fall in with her own high-flown
Tantivees and our Scots Prelatists? But I hope, if no Religious Considerations
will prevail, that the danger of their running the same Risk with us may, they
seeing both they and we have the same Security, viz. the King's accepting of
the Crown on such and such Conditions, and consenting to Acts of Parliament
accordingly: if he should break to one, he may do the same to both; and though
they may think that he will not overthrow their Hierarchy, because the Bishops
depending on him, may be use^ul to him in the Parliament House; yet at the same
time he may, as Charles the Second did, invade their Civil Liberties, and then
their Religion, nor nothing else, can ever be secure. I must again beg the
Reader not to mistake me^ as designing to create any Suspicion of his Majesty
following such an unhallowed Pattern, but merely to set this as a Beacon before
the Church of England, that they may beware of being Shipwrack'd twice upon the
same Rock; which will be unavoidable, if they should prevail wi^h any of their
Kings to break the Original Contracts, or call in K. James, or set up any other
Pretender against his present Majesty, and prosper: which, blessed be God,
there is no probability that ever they will, for never was King better beloved
by Subjects; and let them try it when they please, they will ^ind he has in
Scotland Twenty to One firm in his Interest: And whatever Noise they make (to
blind their own Designs) of our hazard from a Republican Faction; if they will
assure the Nation of such Governors as are now at Helm, those whom they call
Republicans, will as cordially submit to them as any.

But I foresee an Objection as to Scots Affairs, That they only solicit his
Majesty to dissolve the present Parliament, and call another, which will
restore Episcopacy, and recognize his Title.

Answ. 1. His Majesty has had too many Proofs of the Loyalty of Presbyterians,
and the Treachery of Episcopalians, to venture such an Experiment; or if he
should, and they happen to recognize his Title, he can never think that they
submit from Affection, but merely from Interest, when they see they can do no
better: And in truth, whatever Pretenses of Loyalty they make, it is
demonstrable enough, that as the Countryman, when the London ^Drawers baul'd
out, Welcome, Sir, laid his Hand on his Pob, and said, I thank you my Friend;
so may his Majesty, when our Scots Prelatists pretend Loyalty, put his Hand to
his Side, and say, I thank you, my Sword* for no longer will they be his
Friend, than he is able to cudgel them. Whereas it is very well known, that the
Scots Presbyterians declared for him before Providence had determined their
Crown in his Favor, and have beat into the Prelatists whatever Loyalty they
pretend to have. Nor is it to be thought, a Prince so Good and Generous as his
present Majesty, will ever be so ungrateful to his Friends, or act so much
contrary to Reason, and his own Conscience, as to shake the present Title he
has to the Crown of Scotland, to buy the Consent of the Scots Prelatists, who
could not desend their Darling K. James, nor make any other Effort to
re-establish him, but by hectoring among the inaccessible Hills, stealing Cows
and Sheep, plundring the Country, murdering the People by Treachery and
Surprise; and at last seizing the insignificant Rock, called the Bass, where,
if they please, they may send for him to govern the Solon Geese, and
themselves, the greater of the two^ But,

2. They will find themselves mistaken, if his Majesty should gratify them so
far as to dissolve this, and call another Parliament; the Presbyterians have
not lost but gained Ground since the Revolution, and they have smarted too
severely under the Prelates, to suffer themselves either to be hectored or
kicked out of their present Settlement by any more packed Clubs; and knowing
that Instruments of Cruelty are in the Habitations of the Prelates, will rather
quit themselves like Men, for the Ark and People of their God, than be brought
again under the Philistin Slavery. This is only to undeceive our Prelatists,
who promise themselves such an easy Conquest: not that we can suspect a Prince
of our King's Prudence, Generosity and Conscience, capable of so much Weakness,
as to disoblige the Kingdom of Scotland, those who preserved him the Crown of
Ireland, and such as are his steady and useful Friends in England, as he must
needs do if he gratify the Scots Prelatists. They have not now an effeminate
and luxurious Prince to deal with, who, provided he might wallow in impure
Pleasures, was content to abandon all Care of his Subjects; but one who knows
his Friends from his Foes; has been accustomed to Government from his Cradle;
outbrav'd the Hector of France in his Youth; and therefore is not to be
frighted by our Scots Prelatists, and the English Tories, into such mean
Compliances, for fear of Prelatical Insurrections and Tantivy Grumblings; he
stis^ed greater Serpents than those in his Cradle, and carries a Sword to cut
off the Hydras Heads as fast as they multiply.

But now to come to the Postscript, or pretended Answer to my Last.

One would have thought that our Prelatists had bankrupt their Treasure of
Lies, Malice and Blasphemy, in their late Pamphlet, called, The Scots
Presbyterian Eloqu^nce: But the Apologist and Post-scribler demonstrate the
contrary, and evidence, That their Magazines are still full, and running over;
and I confess there is no cause to wonder at it, when we consider, that the
Bottomless Pit, whence they are furnished, is an unfathomable Source, and that
the Father of Lies is not yet so superannuated, but that he can beget more of
the Breed. But to come to our Author; he tells you, in his very first Page,
That he could not read two Lines of Dr. Rule's Book, without being provoked
unto the Undecencies of Passion; and therefore it is no marvel that the reading
of mine put him stark mad, seeing I treat the Faction with some more roughness
than the Doctor did.

Page 1. After a very super^icial Division of my Book, he gives a suitable
Answer; and that you may know he was blinded with Passion, he begins with
downright Nonsense, and a notorious Lie. I suppose there is scarcely any body
but knows that the Faction did brag of Charles the Second's peaceable
Restoration, as a Miracle and Demonstration that God owned his Title, (nay, Sir
Geo. Mackenzie, Vindic. p. 5. owns he was restored almost by universal
Consent;) and yet the Scribler alleges that he, and our subordinate Governors,
were forced to make Laws against the Presbyterians of Scotland in their own
Defense. Now it is certain that none have any Legislative Power in Scotland but
the King and Parliament; and by subordinate Governors, he must therefore, if
he understands himself, mean the latter; and if so, it is plain that the
Presbyterians at that time attacked neither, but had sufficiently smarted under
the Usurper for maintaining the Right of King and Parliament by the Sword, and
refusing to abjure Charles Stewart, and the Lords, who are a constituent part
of our Parliament; so that neither of them being attacked, nor threatened to be
attacked, in Authority nor Person, but on the contrary the Presbyterians being
sworn to maintain them, the pretense of a necessity to make Laws in their own
Defense is a false excuse. But if our Author would speak Truth, he should say,
that Charles the Second having a Mind to break his Oath, which he had taken
solemnly, to maintain Presbytery and the Privilege of Parliaments, and being
secured, as he thought, in foro divine, by the Dispensation first of his Popish
and then of his Episcopal Priests, he must find some pretense to salve his
Credit in foro humano, and so with his packed Parliament formed Iniquity into a
Law. Whether the said Laws were gentle, as our Author says, I leave it to the
Consideration of all thinking Men, who please to peruse them as exhibited in my
other Book. It seems indeed that the Prelates thought them too gentle, and not
extensive enough for them, when they pressed Conformity in so barbarous a
manner beyond the extent of the said Laws, in so much that they were forced to
extort Certificates from the People that they had been civilly used, because
they knew they had exceeded the Law, and were liable to be called to an account
for it. One of the first Laws they made, was an unlimited Oath of Allegiance,
which swallowed up the Privileges of the People, took away all the Suffrage of
Parliaments as to the Succession of the Crown, and established a Despotical
T^ranny, which this Author calls the King's Hereditary Right: so infallibly
true is it, that Tyranny and our Scots Prelacy are inseparably connected, and
such Brethren in Iniquity, that the one is always productive of the other; and
therefore as soon as he had deprived the People of their Native Rights, he made
bold to invade their Consciences, and contrary to his own Oath and the Peoples
Inclinations, brought in the abjured Prelates, as knowing very well that
Tyranny could not subsist without them; and so he supported them in their
Lording it over the Peoples Consciences: and they to requite their Creator,
preached up his Divine Right to Tyrannize over their Purses and Persons. And
thus did Tyranny and Prelacy, like two scabbed Jades, nab one another, till
they were both sent a packing by his present Majesty. Nor can I omit to take
notice of the natural Aversion which Prelacy has to a lawful Government, it
being visibly seen that not only our Scots Prelates who were his Majesty's
personal Enemies, but even the English Prelates, most of whom pretended to be
his Friends, were and are jealous that the Destiny of their Hierarchy is at
hand; for every one knows how soll^citous the Pillars of Prelacy were to club
at the Devil-Tavern to contrive means for the maintaining their Hierarchy, and
how to fetter his Majesty with Oaths not to touch it: and after they had got
this Assurance once, they were not satis^ied, but dunn'd his Majesty as if he
had been their Debtor, for a Repetition of his Promises, till he took notice of
it, and told them he was very willing to lay hold on every opportunity of
renewing his Assurance to maintain the Church of England, or words to that
Effect. So that it is evident beyond Exception, that Prelacy is afraid when
they see Popery touched; and that they are jealous that our Dread Sovereign,
whom God has raised to break the Horns of the Antichristian Carpenters, should
also prove the Bane of the Pope's Journey-men, the Prelates; and hence it is
that they behold his Majesty's glorious Success with Jealousy, which all the
rest of the Protestant World looks upon with Joy.

So that their Convocation when assembled, were very loath to give his Majesty
Thanks; and when they did, could hardly be brought to thank him for what he had
done for the Protestant Interest in general, but only for playing the Bugbear
to frighten away K. James, who began to bring in their elder Brethren the
Papists to be sharers of the Fat with themselves; and lest we should doubt what
this Church of England is, which they are so mightily tender of, they informed
us in an Address of Thanks to the King for the Care he had taken of the Church
of England in the Alteration which was then made in the Lieutenancy of London,
and that was for putting in some of the Bloody Juries, and those who had
betrayed the Charter of the City, and were the Tools to promote Tyranny. Now
this being matter of Fact and undeniable, the moderate Church-of- England-Men
see what they must expect if that Faction get the Ascendant once more: it is not
their Agreement in Government and Ceremonies that will give them a true Title
to be Sons of the Church; Gibellins they are, and as Gibellins they must die.
The Murder of my Lord Russel, Alderman Cornish, and many others, are sad Proofs
of what I assert; and seeing the moderate Church-of- England-Men and the
Presbyterians of Scotland were Fellow Sufferers in the late Reigns, now that we
have Men advanced to the highest Dignity of the Church, whose Repute for
Moderation did not a little contribute toward it, methinks it is but what
their Brethren in Scotland might expect, that they should be so far from
countenancing our runnagate Episcopal Clergy in their malicious Clamours at
Court, that they ought to oppose them, especially considering that they were
such Implements as the late Reigns found very subservient to their Designs of
bringing Slavery upon us, under which they themselves smarted either in Person
or Sympathy. And now that I am upon it, I cannot but take notice with regret,
that notwithstanding of the almost indispensable nec^ssity of it, the sober
Church-of- England-Men in their Ecclesiastical Capacity, have never given any
public conjunct Testimony against the Tyranny of the last Reigns, nor those of
their Communion, who were Abettors of it, and at this day labor to
re-introduce it. Let them think what they will, their Silence in this Affair is
no small encouragement to the Jacobite Party, who have hitherto baffled the
discovery of all their Plots, under a pretense of Zeal for the Church, which
together with the ill Example of the Nonjurant Bishops and Clergy, has been of
more use to the French King, than an Army of 60000 Men: From this Source it is
that his Majesty's Affairs meet with so many Rubs; his Friends are so far from
being rewarded, that they are endangered and discouraged; and yet our moderate
Ecclesiastics have never made open and conjunct Protestation against it. It
was the Saying of the God of Truth, That the Children of this Generation are
wiser than the Children of Light; and our Times furnish us with many sad
Instances of its undeniable Verity. Did not the Pulpits in the late Reigns
thunder against all Attempts of recovering our Liberties, either in the
Parliament or in the Field? Did not the Church concur with her
Excommunications, to render Dissenters incapable of so much as choosing or
giving Votes for a sober Church-of- England-Man, who would stand by the
Liberties of his Country to represent them in Parliament? Did not some of their
Bishops press the Execution of their Penal Laws against Dissenters, to keep
them under Hatches for that very reason? And did not the Clergy spend their
consecrated Lungs in bellowing out Presbyterian Plots to drown the Popish ones?
And yet now they don't excommunicate their Jacobites, notwithstanding of their
Conventicles and distinct Form of Worship; their clubbing to choose Enemies to
the Government to represent them in Parliament, even those who were violent
Enemies to the Abdication; as Sir R. S. etc. who was chosen by by the
University of C -- ge. Nor do the Pulpits now sound with Jacobite Plots in this
Reign, as they did with Presbyterian and Whiggish Plots in the late Reigns;
which, together with the tenderness that has been showed toward their
Nonjurant Bishops and Clergy, and the Opposition they make to abjuring the late
K. James, are sufficient Evidences that it is his Majesty's Interest to keep up
the Presbyterians in Scotland as a Balance, lest the Scale turn on the side of
K. James, or his pretended Son: And as for our Scots Episcopalians, their
Loyalty was sufficiently discovered after the Defeat of the French by Sea; for
none were so industrious as they to lessen our Victory, when God had given it
us. Nor was their Carriage less remarkable for disaffection upon the taking of
Namur, the first News from Steenkirk, and when the Intelligence came that
Charleroy was besieged; which so elevated the Spirits of Dr. M --, the
Apologist, and Sheelds the Jacobite Parson, (lately in Newgate for a
Conventicle) that they were overheard to salute one another, in the Park, with
no less Titles than that of My Lord Bishop of such and such a Place, so big
were they with hopes of the French Conquests.

Page 86. Our Author not having time enough to recover himself from the
Undecencies of his Passion, continues his Nonsense, and tells you very gravely,
That if the Presbyterian Delusions did not upon all Turns prompt them to
overturn the Government, they might live in Scotland in all Peace, as other
Dissenters did. I suppose our Author to be speaking of the Time past; and if
so, then he should have said, might have lived: And whether this Blunder of
Grammar, in his own Mother Tongue, be not as unpardonable in him, as are the
Blunders in Latin which he falsely charge upon Mr. Rule, let any Man judge; and
that he meant of the Time past, needs no other Demonstration, than to consider
that the Presbyterians do and can live at Peace in Scotland now, without being
obliged to the Prelatists. But Nonsense is one of our Author's least
Indecencies of Passion; for they who know him, inform me, that in his Heat he
cannot forbear Swearing, notwithstanding of his Doctoral Scarf: And it can be
proved on him, that when talking to a certain Minister about the Church of
Scotland, one of the good-natured Doctor's commendable Expressions were, That
if the Episcopal Party had it not, he cared not if the Devil had it. Well, but
to proceed, the Doctor acknowledges, that other Dissenters lived peaceably in
Scotland. Now other Dissenters we had none, but Quakers and Papists; and that
they lived peaceably we very well knew, and used to ask why they persecuted us
more than them, seeing their Difference in Principles was much greater, if our
Episcopalians had been (as they pretended to be) good Protestants. Now I think
every one knows the Principles and Practices of the Papists to be dangerous in
all Protestant Governments; and that Quakerism has too great affinity with
Popery: so that their kind Treatment, while we were barbarously persecuted, is
none of the best Arguments to prove our Episcopalians good Protestants. And
pray let our Author in his next, give us an account, Why Popish Recusants (for
denying the King's Ecclesiaslical Supremacy) were not dragoon'd to come to
Church, plundered, hunted, and hanged, as we were. But seeing I know he will not
tell the Truth, I Will venture to tell it for him, in Bishop Carnerosse's words,
The Papists were their necessary Friends: A King of their Religion was dropping
ripe to fall into the Throne; and every one knows, that under Popery, Bishops
may grow Cardinals and Popes; but under Presbytery they cannot exist: and this
is the Rope which draws the Inclinations of our Hierarchical Men so much
toward Rome, instead of drawing Rome so much to them. If I be mistaken, let
the Advances which the Church of Rome made upon us, and the Interest they
obtained in Court and elsewhere, under the warm Wings of Prelacy, in the
Reigns of both the Charles's, and the last of the James's bear witness. Nay,
our good-natured Doctor was even so kind to Mother Church, as to impose on his
Scholars an Oath in K. James's Time, to maintain the blank Christian Religion,
and to hinder the publishing of Mr. Iamison's Book against Quakerism; yet his
Rancor against Presbytery was so great, though the Malice of the Court seemed
to be assuaged, that when the Presbyterians desired they might have the Common
Hall of the College (of which he was then Principal) to meet in, he answered,
like a scurrilous and spightful Villain, That his Hall should never be a
groping Office. Indeed, Doctor, I am very well satisfied, that if any such
things had been practiced at our Meetings, the Episcopal Clergy would never
have been their Enemies; for very sure I am, that the greatest Swearers,
Drunkards and Whoremasters of the Parish, were generally the greatest Friends
to the Curats: And Archbishop Paterson, whose Champion you are, may for ever
stop your Mouth, seeing Megg Patterson, with whom he had been base, owned it
before the Court upon Examination. And your other good Friend, Mr. Hamilton,
whom you are so careful to vindicate, would certainly have been a ^requenter of
such groping Offices, had there been any, seeing he was not ashamed, upon a
certain Occasion to declare, That he hated all words which ended in ism, except
Baptism and Priapism.

The Doctor having dropped out a feeble and a faint Lie, to justify the making of
the Laws against us, Vices acquirit eundo; and, ibid. tells you boldly, That
the Scheme of the Presbyterian Religion, wherein they differ from the
Episcopalians, is nothing but ungovernable Humor and Rebellion. Well said,
good-natured Doctor, who is a Separatist from good Nature and the Christian
Church now? Modest Sir, I must b^g your pardon to say, that you are either an
ungovernable passionate Prelate, or the King and Parliament are stark Fools and
Knaves to have abolished Episcopacy in Scotland, where, according to you, they
must have established nothing but ungovernable Humor and Rebellion. Certainly
his Majesty and the Parliament are more concerned to preserve the Sovereignty,
than such Fellows as you; and if they had not been satis^ied that the
Presbyterians were better Friends to it than the Prelatists, they would never
have established them, and ejected the other.

Pray, Sir, if your Eyes be not blinded with Passion, look upon the Harmony of
Confessions, and see whether ours or yours (if you know where to find your own)
be most agreeable to the Reformed Christian Church; and then, if you please,
look a little further into their Discipline, and if it do not provoke you to
Indecency of Passion, read 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 3. Acts 20. 28, 29. Acts 15.
Titus 1. Phil. 1. 1. and see which of us are the greatest Separatists from the
Christian Church, and whether those Texts be chargeable with ungovernable
Humor and Rebellion; and so long as those Texts make it evident that Bishop
and Presbyter are the same in Name and Office, not so much as Ordinatione
excepta, if it be ungovernable Humor and Rebellion to believe so, we will be
ungovernable and rebellious still. As for your citing the Hind^ let loose, Ius
Populi, and Naphtali, it is altogether foreign to the purpose, all of them
contain such Arguments for the lawfulness of resisting T^yrannizing Princes, as
your Party could never answer; and for any thing particular in any of them,
especially the Hind let loose, which was writ against Presbyterians as well as
Prelatists, none but one of your own Kidney can charge them upon the
Presbyterians in general. But further, it is mighty strange that this Principle
should be so Criminal in us, and yet Venial in the Church-of- England-Men.
Wherefore do not you cite Julian the Apostate, Mr. Hickeringil, or Dr. Burnet
the Bishop of Salisbury's Works, etc. to the same purpose: And pray let us know
why the Presbyterians are more chargeable with Ius Populi, etc. than the Church
of England are with those?

The Author will not take notice of what has been so often told him and his
Party, that the horrid Cruelties exercised upon the Presbyterians in the West,
as dragging them to hear the Curates per Force; plundering them of all they
had; ravishing their Wives, Daughters and Maids; chasing them to the Woods and
Mountains in the extremity of Winter; denying the poor Children left at home,
any other subsistence than what was left by the surfeited Dogs; the tying of
Gentlemen Neck and Heels, and rosting them before Fires, without so much as
allowing them a draught of Water to quench their insupportable Thirst; forcing
of Bonds from them for such and such Sums; and extorting Certificates, after
all this, under their Hands, that they had been civilly used. I say, the
Faction will not hear, when we tell them, that all this was done before they
could charge us with any Insurrection; and yet are so disingenuous as to
instance our pos^eriour Efforts for Self-defence, as the Occasion of all severe
Laws: Than which nothing can be more unjust; and by the Doctor's own
confession, Page 87. That the King and his Ministers of State, might more
plausibly be accused of Cruelty, if they made severe Laws against the
Consequences of the Presbyterian Opinions. We have reason to charge the King
and his Ministers with Cruelty: for such Laws as were made before 1666, were
directly against the supposed Consequences of our Opinions, or nothing; for we
made no opposition by Arms at that time against Charles the Second. Nay, it is
expressly owned, Page 5, and 6, by Sir Geo. Mackenzie, That the Laws were made
against the Consequences which they pretend to charge upon our Principles.

But to return again, P. 86. he alleges, That the Presbyterians declared open
War against the King in his own Dominions; preached to their Hearers, that they
ought to kill his Servants; that he had no right to the Crown, because he had
broken the Covenant: Than which nothing can be more false. It was but a small
number of the Presbyterians that appeared in Arms in 1666; and they were so far
from declaring War against the King, that they only desired a Redress of those
Grievances which the Episcopal Soldiers had committed beyond Law. Nor would
they have done it in Arms, if it had been possible to have had access to the
Council otherwise: For those who appeared at Bothwel-Bridg, they were so far
from declaring against the King, that they took his Interest into their
Declaration; and the Party who opposed it, were so much di^relish'd, that
Multitudes deserted because they were concerned. Nay, Charles the Second was so
much convinced, that Mr. John Welsh, and the majority of the Presbyterians,
were so far from disputing his Title, that he granted an Indulgence immediately
after the suppressing of that Insurrection; and to my certain knowledge, offered
a particular License to the said Mr. Welsh, to live and preach in any part of
his Dominions; though our Episcopalians had formerly incensed him so much
against him, that Proclamations were issued, offering 500 l. to any that would
bring him in dead or alive.

So that the Doctor has no Foundation for his Charge but the Practice of a few
Cameronians, one of whose Preachers excommunicated the King, and about twenty
of the Faction declared War against him at Sanqhuar; and such a little number
did afterward pretend to dethrone him: which will appear to all Men but such
as our Author, to be contrary to Presbyterian Principles, seeing we allow not
so much as Excommunication of a private Person without ^udicial Probation,
Admonition, Suspension, and the Consent of the Presbytery. And, by the Covenant
which they reproach us with as our only Rule, we swear to maintain the
Privilege of Parliaments, and the King's just Powerand Greatness; to which
nothing can be more diametrically opposite, than for a few Persons, without the
Consent and Commission of the whole, to take upon them to exauctorate
Magistrates. And whatsoever this Libeller may suggest, it is known that Mr.
Castares, sen. Mr. Blare, Mr. Iamison, Mr. Rule, Mr. Riddel, and other grave
Presbyterian Ministers, fell under the Obloquy of the Cameronians for
protesting publicly against the Principles which they were driven unto by the
furious Tyranny of the late Reigns.

But if the Doctor be not yet satisfied, I Will give him Argumentum ad Hominem,
thus. The Viscount of Dundee and his Party declared War against King William,
and all the Bishops of Scotland opposed his Title to the Crown: Ergo, All the
Episcopalians in Scotland declared War against him, and that he had no right to
the Crown; and therefore by their own Concession, the present Government would
be justified to enact as severe Laws against them, as the late Government did
against the Presbyterians. The Premises being undeniable, the Conclusion
cannot be avoided, if our Author's way of arguing hold good.

But supposing it true that all the Presbyterians in Scotland had declared King
Charles the Second to have ^orfeited his Right to the Crown because he broke
the Covenant, it had been no more than what the Church of England have declared
against King James, because of his breaking the Original Contract: and I would
desire our Gentleman to look upon the Claim of Right by both Nations, and he
will find that most of the Infractions upon that Contract were made by King
Charles; so that if this be a Crime, Aethiopem albus, Loripidem rectus
derideat. But as for that malicious Lie, that any of them preached that his
Servants ought to be killed, it is so gross, that none but the Author could
invent it, nor any but his Party believe it: for tho some of them did kill A.
Bp Sharp, and others who were hunting for their Lives, and took the same
advantage of them that they did of others; it will not so much as follow, that
any of their Ministers preached this as their Duty, and much less that it was
so to kill the King's Servants as such.

Well, but this Methodical Doctor, who would sain persuade the World that he
and his Party have engrossed all Reason and Logic to themselves, comes with a
Hysteron Proteron, and tells you of the Presbyterians Cruelty toward the
Episcopalians after the Year 1637, which (mark the good-natured calm
Expression) he says were unparalleled in History, as they were diabolical in
their Nature. This is Scots Episcopal Veracity. The Doctor thinks he is
dictating to his Scholars; and truly I must tell his Doctorship, that if he
ta^ght them no better Philosophy, than he teaches us History, they had but a
poor Bargain on it. But now, good Doctor, did you never read of the Massacres at
Paris, in the Valtoline, and the Duke of Alva's Butchery in the Netherlands? We
shall not go so high as the ten Persecutions, or those against the Wicklevites,
Waldenses, etc. And tell me if what Cruelties were exercised upon you about
1637, aggravate them as much as you can do in any measure, come near them; and
if they do, as I am sure they cannot, I would know whether the Modest, Rational
and Religious Doctor be not guilty of an Immodest, Irrational and Irreligious
Lie? And in the next place, seeing we must go back to 1637, pray what did your
Party then suffer answerable to the Persecution of the Presbyterians by your
High Commission-Court before that time? Or, did your Sufferings come any thing
near the horrid Cruelty which Montross with his Highlanders, and the Irish
Rebels, who joined him after they had massacred the Protestants in Ireland,
committed upon the Country in Defense of your Prelacy? But further, if your
Party did suffer any thing at that time, as it was impossible but they should
when the exasperated People had taken Arms against their Invasions both of
Church and State, and the Quarrel came to be decided by the Sword, who was to
blame for it? They drew it upon themselves, they would not be satisfied that
they had obtruded their domineering Prelacy, but they must also impose a new
form of Worship, for opposing of which they incensed the King to raise an Army
of 30000 Men to force it upon us. So that here was Precedent enough according
to the Talion Law, to force the Covenant upon them, which yet we never did in
that manner, tho the honest Doctor has the Confidence to assert, that we
imposed it with greater Tyranny, Malice and Violence, than the Fathers of the
Inquisition ever practiced. Good Mr. Doctor, (for you were very angry that I
did not call you so in my last) Did your Doctorship ever hear that we put the
Prelatis^s in Dungeons to be eaten up with Toads and Serpents? Did we ever put
any of them upon the Rack? Did we ever thrust pieces of Cloth down their
Throats to their very Stomachs, and pull them up again? Did we ever burn them
in Habits painted with Devils? Did we ever twist the Muscles of their Arms and
Legs with Cords, which your Fathers of the Inquisition are known to have
practiced? Or, did we ever torture them with the Boot, Thummikins, or burning
Matches (as your Brethren of the Prelatical Inquisition did us) to make them
take the Covenant? I am confident your Conscience, tho pros^ituted to a
Prodigy, flies in your Face, and gives you the Lie. Well, but the Doctor has
not done yet, he tells you the Covenant was imposed upon the Children at
Schools. Truly Mr. Doctor, to do you Justice, I believe it was required of the
little Children that offered to take Degrees of Master of Arts: and tho your
Doctorship was never nearer Rome than 480 Miles, as you say in your Postscript,
you have learned the Art of equivocating as well as if you had been there; for
every one knows that Men of thirty Years old may truly enough be called
Children, and Universities may as well be called Schools: But if that was
unlawful, how came your Party to follow the Example, and even your own
Doctorship to offer a blank Oath to your Scholars? And why does the Church of
England impose Oaths upon Children at Schools in Oxford and Cambridg?

Page 87. He says there is nothing in the first part of the Answer to the Scotch
Eloquence, but an ill-contriv'd Abstract of the Hind let loose. Good Doctor, I
am afraid that the Eyes of your Head, as well as of your Mind, were blinded
with Indecencies of Passion, else you would have seen somewhat else, viz.
frequent Demonstrations, that you and others of your Party are notorious Liars,
in asserting that our Proceedings against you are more barbarous and cruel than
yours against us, and that by Authentic Proofs, viz. your own Acts of
Parliament.

Next the Doctor tells us that the Episcopalians published a Compendium of the
Hind let loose, that all Men might see the Principles, Practices and Humors of
that Sect whom they oppose^ and that there cannot be a better Defense of
Charles the Second's Government than the Hind let loose. We have told the
Faction often enough that the said Book is against Presbyterians as well as
Episcopalians, and was writ in the height of a Schism, and never owned by the
hundredth part of the Presbyterians: but such is the Unreasonableness of our
Prelatists, that they will charge it upon us, and would make the World believe
that it is conseq^ential to the true Presbyterian Principles, though I have
already demonstrated, that the excommunicating and exauctorating the King was
contrary to our Discipline and Covenant. But to answer the disingenous Man with
Argumentum ad hominem, I argue thus: There can be no better Defense of the
Proceedings of the Presbyterians against the Prelatists, than Dundee's
Declaration, their refusing to swear Allegiance, and pray for King William and
Queen Mary, seeing those who do so, act more consequentially to the Prelatical
Principles of Passive Obedience and Nonresistance, than those who comply.

Ibid. He tells us, That if the Ministers of State under K. Charles the Second
in Scotland, have done nothing but what all wise, great and good Men have done
in the like Cases, then the Clamours of this Party are rather an Honor than an
Accusation. This is poor Sophistry, Doctor; we deny your Assumption, and by
course your Consequence must fall, which is an Answer sufficient; but to be
plainer with you, If King Charles and his Ministers of State did nothing but
what all wise, great and good Men have done in the like cases; then his present
Majesty and the Parliament of Scotland must, by this Argument, be foolish,
little and ill Men, to disapprove their Methods: so that we see how
superlatively loyal and modest the Doctor is. But yet further: We would have
his Doctorship to know that there was never such a Case under Heaven, and
therefore the Doctor will be at a loss to find good, great and wise Men for
Precedents. Ay, let him turn over all the Histories of Europe, give us a
Parallel, that any Protestant Prince should solemnly before God and the People,
swear with his Hands lifted up to Heaven, that he would govern according to the
Terms on which he received the Crown, viz. The Preservation of the Presbyterian
Government, and the Privileges of Parliament; declaring that he was under no
Constraint to take the said Oath, but that he did the same voluntarily and
without Mental Reservation; acknowledging the Sins of his Family, and promising
a Redress of Grievances: I say, let him give us an Instance of any Protestant
Prince that ever perjured himself in such a manner, and requited Subjects as he
did us, tho we owned his Title, defended him against the Usurper who had cut
off his Father's Head, and exposed our selves to ruin for his sake: for reward
of which, immediately after his Restoration, he overturned our Civil and
Religious Liberty, cut off the Earl of Argile's Head, who had set the Crown
upon his; and afterward enacted Laws to make the People own the abjured
Prelates, and involve them in the same Perjury with himself, and because they
could not not in Conscience do it, sent Forces to take free Quarter upon them,
drive or drag them to Church, destroy their Substance, and treat their Persons
in that barbarous manner as before related, tho many of them advanced, and none
of them opposed his Restoration, nor threatened any Disturbance to his
Government. But the truth of the Case was, he and his Ministers of State knew
well enough that he had forfeited his Right to the Crown, and that the
Presbyterians could not but in Heart abhor his Perjury; and therefore they were
resolved to put them out of condition to demand the Forfeiture, if ever they
should happen to be so minded: which that poor People were so far from, that
not one of those whom mere Necessity had constrained to take Arms at Pentland,
or Bothwell-Bridg, denied his Title; but on the contrary, still owned him. And
for that small inconsiderable number that acted otherwise at Sanqhuar, etc.
it is already demonstrated, that they neither proceeded according to our
Principles, nor with our Consent: And therefore, so long as there are any
Records in our Nation, King Charles the Second's unparalleled Perjury,
Ingratitude to his Subjects, and Tyrannical Government can never be justified.
And as for the Rebellions he charges us with under King Charles the First, let
any body peruse Rushworth's Collections, or even Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle;
and tho all the Truth be not written there, it will be easy to perceive that
the Innovations made upon the Church of Scotland, and the Invasions on the
Liberties of England, were the cause of that Prince's Misfortunes, who was
misled by a Popish Wife, and misinformed by Popish and Prelatical Ministers to
his Ruin. That unfortunate King put one Affront on our Nation* mentioned by
Sir Richard Baker, that was enough of it self to have made them shake off his
Government, viz. the demanding of the Crown of Scotland to be brought hither
for him to be crowned with, which argued such a Degeneracy of Spirit, and so
much of an alienated Mind from his Native Country, that (...) a wonder how ever
Scots-Men should have owned him afterward: the greatest Monarch that ever sat
upon the English Throne; would have gone as far as Scoon, and thanked us too,
to have had the Honor of it; and for a Scots-Man so far to undervalue his
native Country, as to demand the poor, and almost the only remaining Badg of
their Honor, Antiquity and Independency, to be brought into another Nation,
Quis talia fando temperet a -- Ne quid aspersus dicam. Certainly nothing but an
exuberant Loyalty and Esteem for their natural Prince, whom doubtless they
considered as overruled by pernicious Counsel, could ever have made that
Kingdom put up the Affront. And therefore when he persisted to oppress and
persecute them upon the account of their Consciences, it was no wonder that
they re-assum'd the Spirit of their Ancestors; and let him know that the Kings
of Scotland were never allowed an Arbitrary Power, nor did ever any of them
usurp it, but it proved fatal to them or theirs: Nor never was the Nation so
much degenerate but since the Reign of our Protestant Prelacy, who were the
Creatures and Supporters of Tyranny; for in the times of Popery we had more
Grandees than we have now, that could tell how to put the Bell about the Cat's
Neck on occasion, as Archbald Douglas, Earl of Angus, did to King James the
Third; but since the Union of the Crowns, the fall of our Grandees, and the
Combination of the English and Scots Mitres, Scots-Men durst never say their
Head was their own but when they had the Sword in their Hand, except it be
under this present Government. And therefore the Nation of Scotland is mightily
obliged to Prelacy.

Ibid. He charges the Presbyterians with Enthusiasm. Our Prelat^sts are of late
become as fond of this Expression as is the Cuckoo of his known Note; and I can
imagine no other reason why, than because they are so accustomed to swallow
their Liquor; that as the Lecher pleases himself with Baudy Stories, so do they
with the very word Enthusiasm, which is but a Greek Term signi^ying pouring in,
and in this sense I Will maintain it, that it is more proper to be applied to our
Drunken Prelatists, than in any manner to us. I always understood Enthusiasts
to be a sort of Persons who pretended to other Revelations than the written
Word for their Rule, such as our Quakers, and the old German Anabaptists, or
absit verbo invidia, our Prelatists, who build more upon the uncertain and
superstitious Writings ascribed to some of the Fathers, than on the Writings of
the Apostles, who are the Grandfathers; or on the Rationale of a Durandus, or
the Poetical Whims of any Church Devoto for their unscriptural Ceremonies, than
on Divi^e Revelation, which orders us to worship God as he commands, and not as
we think good in our own Eyes. Then seeing the Presbyterians do plead for a
strict Conformity to the Scripture as the Rule of Faith and Manners; and that
our Prelatists admit of By-Rules, for which no Reason can be assigned, but the
Capricio of some fanciful Bigot, or corrupted Father; let the World judge which
Party is most chargeable with Enthusiasm.

Ibid. He says, That the Acts of our General Assemblies do sufficiently
vindicate Charles the Second, and his Ministers of State, from any shadow of
Rigor or Cruelty. It were easy to answer the Doctor in his own Coin, that the
knavish Address of the Scots Bishops against the Prince of Orange, their
opposing him in Parliament, and the Barbarities committed upon the
Presbyterians by the Prelatists, as above related, are sufficient to vindicate
us from any shadow of Rigor or Cruelty, which must, by all Men who have not
forfeited Sense and Reason, be allowed more than a sufficient Answer. But
further, the Doctor would have done well to have cited those Acts, and then a
more particular Answer could have been given: However, I Will guess at his
meaning, and suppose them to be such as declared against employing Malignants
in Places of Power and Trust; which was the Opinion of those called
Remonstrators: And if so, pray, good Doctor, why is this more culpable than
your Church-of- England. Test, which excludes all Dissenters from Places of
Power and Trust; and that also against his Majesty's Desire, in his Speech to
the Parliament, wherein he did rationally insinuate, that the taking off of the
same, would unite his Subjects in his Service against the Common Enemy? If the
Copy was bad, why does the Church of England follow it? Or, do you not think
that we had as much reason to keep out Prelatists from Places of Power and
Trust, as you have to keep out Presbyterians? Nay, I do verily believe, there
is no true Englishman, or Protestant, who does not see the Mischief which
happens daily by the continuance of this Test, which obliges his Majesty to
make use of such as do betray him continually. And whether the Scots
Presbyterians were mistaken in their Conjectures, that our Prelatists, when
admitted into Trust, would betray our Religion and Liberties, let the late
Revolution, and the Causes of it, testify. Or, if there was any such Act made
or intended, by any Assembly of the Church of Scotland, as disowned Charles
Stuart, the Head of the Malignants, because of his breach of Covenant, and
designs to enslave the Nation; it must (...) be owned, that they were too
clear-sighted, and that the Church of England do the same in relation to K.
James, who had as good a Right to the Crown, according to the Prelatical
Principles, as ever his Brother had; and, if Passive Obedience be a true
Doctrine, ought as little to have been opposed as he. Then supposing it true,
that the Remonstrators were against owning of him on the Accounts aforesaid;
yet seeing they were not the majority of the Presbyterians, and were willing to
submit to his Legal Administration, swear Allegiance, and live peaceably under
his Government, neither Reason nor Conscience will justify his Proceedings
against the Presbyterians in general on that Account; or the making of Laws on
purpose to fret their Consciences, and press the execution of them in such a
barbarous manner as must unavoidably procure Insurrections, when they submitted
to him without the least Opposition. Sure I am, the Church of England are more
moderate to the Jacobites, when they will not so much as admit of an Oath of
Abjuration to be imposed on those in Places of Power and Trust.

Page 88. He refers to Sir Geo. Mackenzie's Defense of Charles the Second's
Government, as unanswerable, though the same has already been confuted, better
than he can defend it. But the modest Doctor goes on, and says, The Objections
against that Government, are only little Cavils and Exceptions. No doubt, Sir,
K. William, and his present Parliament of Scotland, are but little cavilling
Fellows; and the following Grievances complained of by the Convention of
States, were but small Exceptions, viz.

Disarming Protestants, while Papists were employed. Imposing Oaths contrary to
Law. Giving Gifts and Grants for exacting Money, without Consent of Parliament,
or Convention of Estates. Levying and keeping on foot a standing Army in Time
of Peace, and exacting free Quarters without Consent of Parliament. Employing
Officers of the Army as Judges through the Kingdom, etc. even where there were
Hereditary Offices and Jurisdictions; who put many of the Subjects to death
without any Form of Law. Imprisoning Persons without expressing the Reason, and
delaying to bring them to Trial. Forfeiting several Persons, on stretches of
old and obsolete Laws, as the Earl of Argile, to the scandal of the Justice of
the Nation. Subverting the Right of Royal Buroughs, imposing Magistrates and
whole Town-Councils upon them, contrary to their Charters, without pretense of
Sentence, Surrender or Consent. Ordering Judges to desist from determining some
Causes, and how to proceed in others. Imposing extraordinary Fines, exacting of
exorbitant Bail, and disposing of Fines and Forfeitures before Sentence.
Forcing the Subjects to make Oath against themselves in Capital Crimes. Using
Torture without Evidence, or in ordinary Crimes. Sending an Army in hostile
manner upon several parts of the Kingdom, in time of Peace. Imposing Bonds
without Authority of Parliament. Suspending Counselors from the Bar, for not
appearing when such Bonds were offered, contrary to Law. Putting Garrisons in
private Men's Houses in time of Peace, without Consent of Parliament. Making it
Treason for Persons to refuse giving of their Thoughts, in relation to Points
of Treason, or other Men's Actions. Imprisoning and prosecuting the Subjects,
for petitioning the King and Parliament to grant Remedy by Law.
Now whether these be little Cavils and Exceptions: Whether Charles the Second
was not guilty of these Male-administrations: and if so, whether he deserved to
be called a Wise and Peaceable Monarch, let any Body judge. And that they may do
it the more impartially, I would wish them to consider, that there is a Woe
denounced against them who call Evil Good, and Good Evil. And I would pray the
Doctor to tell me, whether it was modesty in Sir George, or is modesty in
himself, to defend these things, which common Sense must needs condemn, the
Representatives of the Nation have adjudged as Grievances, and the continuance
in them as chiefly conducing to K. James's Forfeiture of the Crown?

I confess I do not at all wonder that Sir G. M. should defend a Government
which advanced and employed him: These barbarous Laws, and inhumane
Prosecutions, brought Gri^t to his Mill, and filled his Bags; for it will
eternally hold, Dul^is od^r Lucri ex re qualibet, even from Piss it self. And
there is yet the less cause of surprisal, when we consider, that he was John
White's (anglice Jack Ketch's) Journyman, or as he called himself, Calumniator
publicus, and the common Libeller of the Presbyterians; so that of necessity he
must represent them as Monsters, else he must own himself a bloody Butcher in
prosecuting them at such a rate as he did.

But further, Sir George's Arguments are all built upon a false Narrative of
Matter of Fact; nor could a truer Relation be expected from a Man of his
Kidney, who prostituted his Conscience, not only to different Parties in the
Church, but contrary Factions in the State: Let not the Scribler tax me as not
generous for saying so, seeing it is true; for it can be no more a Crime in me
to attaque Sir G. after his Death, than for him to attaque Mr. Rutherford and
others, who are also in their Graves. His Subornation against Sir Hugh and Sir
Geo. Campbel, was charged on him to his Face in open Court, by the Persons whom
he had suborned. And in like manner it can be proved, that he suborned others
against Halside; and did actually prosecute Blackwood, for a pretended Crime,
whereof he himself was guilty, viz. conversing with Mr. Wilson a
Bothwel-Bridg-Man, for which he aimed at the Gentleman's Life and Estate: so
that no Reason will allow the Testimony of one who was so much a Party, and
notoriously unjust, no more than we could allow the Calumnies of Bishop Bonner
against the Protestants, whose Blood he shed and thirsted after.

Nor are the Presbyterian Nurslings, as he calls them, so much gauled by Sir
George's Book as he supposes; and the unwary Doctor himself owns what I
asserted, that the Reasonings in the Treatise relate to the Papers published by
the Cameronians, which shows how unfairly Sir George argued, to instance
Actions of Men rendered mad by a barbarous execution of Cannibal Laws, to defend
the making of those very Laws.

As for the Honor he alleges I do the Faction, in mentioning some Great Men
as Persecutors, much good may it do them: for if, according to the Learned
Doctor's Argument, Quality, Sense and Interest cast the Balance, then
certainly Nero, and Julian the Apostate, were too heavy for the Apostles and
Primitive Christians; and that great Monster, Lewis XIV. has much the better of
his Protestant Subjects. Well, but the Doctor says afterward, They have reason
to glory in their Parts, Honor and Integrity; which is none of my Business to
question. But the Instances they are charged with, will come under none of
those Heads, and therefore the Doctor's Panegyric is foreign to the purpose.
But we can easily answer, that their Majesty's and present Parliament, have
declared the very Laws, which were yet more torelable than their barbarous
Execution, Wicked and Impious; and I hope the modest Doctor will allow, that
they have Quality, Sense and Interest enough to cast the Balance. I shall only
add, that Sir Geo. Mackenzie, by a Concession, Page 17. destroys his own
Hypothesis; for there he owns that Presbyterian Ministers, who were sent to
reclaim these Criminals, and Presbyterian Jurors who were summoned to their
Trial, seldom failed of condemning them: so that from his own Mouth he gives
himself and the Doctor both the Lie, when they charge those Principles upon the
Presbyterians in general, and consequently discover the falsehood of that
Necessity, which they pretend the Government was under, to make such Laws
against us in their own Defense.

Page 13. Sir George says, That the Heretable Judges, i. e. Hereditary
Sheriffs, refused to put the Laws in execution against Conventicles, by which
they became formidable. Which destroys two more of his and the Faction's
Assertions, viz. That Presbyterianism: was not popular, and that none but the
Rabble were their Friends; for those Hereditary Sheriffs are the best and most
ancient Families generally in every County: So that Sir George wrongs his Cause
exceedingly by that Concession, seeing those Hereditary Judges living upon the
Place, and being acquainted with the Industry and Honesty of the persecuted
Party, would not abandon their Honor and Conscience to become Hangmen to their
Neighbors and Tenants. And therefore the Court being resolved to ruin the
Country, employed bloody cutthroat Papists, as the Earl of Airly and Lord of
Meldrum, and their barbarous Savages the Popish Highlanders. But according to
the natural disingenuity of his Faction, he takes no notice, that those
Military Judges pulled the Hereditary Sheriffs from off their Benches, and
would not let them proceed against the Presbyterians according to the
Statute Law, because that was too mild in their Opinion. One remarkable
Instance thereof was at Selkirk, where Meldrum pulled Philiphaugh, who is
Hereditary Sheriff of the Forest (now a Lord of the Session) out of his Chair,
when holding his Court.

Another of Sir George's Defenses are, the alleged Severity to the Cavaliers
in Charles the First's Time: Which if true, though there is no reason to take
his Word for Proof, he could not but know the truth of that Maxim, Inter Arma
silent Leges; and that this could not justify the Dragooning of People to
Church, and taking free Quarter in time of Peace. But Sir George, accordin^ to
his wonted disingenuity, takes no notice of the Case of that Severity, if any
such were, viz. that the Persons so treated, harassed their Native Country with
Fire and Sword, in conjunction with those who had cut the Throats of
Protestants in Ireland, filled the Kingdom with bloody Murders and barbarous
Villainies.

I have neither time, nor is it consistent with my present Design, to
an^madvert any further upon his pretended unanswerable Book; but I think any
honest Reader will be satisfied that it needs no worse Character, than to be
stigmatized as a flat Contradiction to their Majesty's and the present
Parliament of Scotland, being a sophistical and unfair Relation of Matters of
Fact, to make the World believe that all those Grievances have been false,
which the Parliament complained of, his Majesty declared against, and founded
the Justice of his Expedition upon their Redress: So that it will issue in
this, either that Sir George Mackenzy is a Liar, or that his Majesty and the
Parliament of Scotland are such; and therefore, good Mr. Doctor, I am not
afraid to appeal to the Judgment of all disinterested Persons, whether it be
you or I that are most void of Generosity, Honor, Modesty and common Sense, of
all which you deprive me in the 89th Page of your Libel. So that tho the Ass
may vapor a while in the Lion's Skin, the Ears of the dull Brute will discover
him at last. And thus our Doctor has wounded his Pretenses to Loyalty, by
defending Sir George's Book.

But allowing all to be true that Sir George alleges as the Cause of our
Persecution by Charles the Second; I say still, that the Faction deserves to be
more severely treated by this Government upon the very Parallel, viz. thus;
They own Passive Obedience to be true Doctrine, and were as much sworn to that
as we were to the Covenant; so that if they believe that Doctrine, they must
needs look upon their present Majesty's to have no just Title, and think
themselves obliged to rebel. Now Malice it self could never fasten any such
Consequence upon the Covenant as to Charles the Second's Title: Ergo, Passive
Obedience must be more dangerous to this, than the Covenant was to that
Government. But the Doctor turns his back, and takes no notice of this
Argument, only magisterially tells you, that if there be no more in the case
than Passive Obedience, the Government needs not be afraid: Tho every body but
the Faction, those Interest it is to dissemble the Consequences of their
Principles, sees the contrary by Demonstration from the Practices of the
Nonjurant Bishops, the high Church-of- England Zealots, and the Scots
Rebellions. 2. The Episcopal Party disown the Presbyterian Ministers, and will not
hear them; Ergo, by Sir George Mackenzy's Position, they should be dragoon'd to
Church, and with much more reason than they dragoon'd us; for there is nothing
in our way of Worship but what they practiced themselves; nor can they object
against our Form of Government, for they had it in conjunction with their own
Episcopacy. Then seeing we neither do nor desire that they should be persecuted
on account of their Dissent, whether are they or we most moderate? All the
difference is, that there are no Laws against their Nonconformity as there were
against ours: which I grant to be true; and hence we can demonstrate
Presbyterian Moderation, that the Parliament did not make any Laws against the
Consequences of Prelatical and Passive-Obedience-Principles, tho the Prelatists
made Laws against ours; and sure I am, we had much more reason to have made
Laws against them, who did actually oppose and rebel against his present
Majesty while the Parliament was sitting, and yet no such thing was ^ver moved.
As for his Allegation, that our Moderation proceeds from the opposite Biass of
the Nobility and Gentry; it shows his Ingratitude: but all Men of sense must
needs be convinced that the Parliament, who settled Presbyteria^ Government,
and that with so much care as to entrust none but the old Presbyte^ian
Ministers, thrown out by the Pr^lates, and such as they should admit, with any
sh^re of the Government, were not so much biased in ^avour of the
Episcopalians, as to restrain from making such Laws on that account, if there
were no other reason.

Page 91. He owns that the Author of the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence has
perhaps been unwary as to some Stories, which need Confirmation. Well said,
Doctor, perhaps unwary, when I have made it evident from his own words that he
contradicts himself; but the Inconsistencies I charge him with, you say you
have no Inc^ination to examine; and truly I believe it, because you know they
are true. And whereas you say there is not one good Consequence in my Book:
pray let us hear what you can say in your next to avoid the dint of the
Consequences there deduced, and here repeated, to prove your Party in general,
Liars, Persecuters, etc. But the goodnatur'd Doctor being sorry that he has
done us so much fa^our as to grant that his Friend was unwary as to some
Stories, retracts immediately, and tells you, there are multitudes of true
Stories against us of that nature, and believes that there was no Injury done
us in publishing that Book. Well argued, wary Doctor; you own that your Friend
was unwary in publishing Stories which needed Confirmation, tho he delivered
them all as positive Proofs, and yet say he did us no Wrong. So that I
perceive, according to your Episcopal Conscience, a Breach of the Ninth
Commandment is no Injury. But Doctor, seeing you have given your Friend the
Lie, even box it among you till you box one another's Ears. But in truth,
Doctor, he has no reason to be angry with you, seeing you give your self the
Lie as well as him: for Page 91. you say that you believe the Presbyterians had
no Injury done them by publishing that Book. And yet Page 93. you say, you do
not believe those Stories of Mr. Rule published in that Book; so that the wary
Doctor must either grant himself a Liar, or that to publish Lies against a Man
is no Injury, which makes him a Blasphemer. Now, good Doctor, Vtrum mavis
elige, take your choice.

The Doctor goes on, and proves his Argument thus: The printed Accounts cited
from their Books are equal to the unprinted Relations of their Sermons and
Prayers: but takes no notice of the perverted Propositions and false Citations,
which I have proved upon his Friend from our printed Books, nor of what I said
in Mr. Rutherford's Defense, but goes on to revile him, tho his Works praise
him, and make his Memory precious. Good Doctor! remember your own beloved
Apology of the Kites, Crows and Jackdaws, and pray take in the Cuckows,
solemnizing a Jubilee over the dead Falcon; and apply the other Fable to your
self, that the Ass, amongst other Beasts, kicked and insulted over the dead
Lion. For sure I am, if Mr. Rutherford were alive, he would disdain to enter
the Lists with such an Episcopal Hawker as you, but would content himself to
say, Etiams^^tu poena ^ueras dignus, tamen ego indignus qui a te poenas sumam,
which is in plain Scots, he would scorn to foul his Fingers with you.

Well, the Doctor knows not whether to believe, or not believe; and mark his
Civility to Mr. Rule, for you must know he will not allow him the Title of
Doctor, that is too much for a Presbyterian: He tells you he has given you a
couple of Instances of greater Ignorance and Nonsense in Mr. Rule's Book than
any that is to be found in the Scotch Eloquence; and yet in the beginning of the
93d Page, he tells you he does not believe the Instances in that Book against
Mr. Rule; why, good Doctor, it would seem you think them not Nonsense great
enough for Mr. Rule: But should not you believe your Brother, the Author of the
Presbyterian Eloquence, as well as you would have him to believe you? Truly in
his next Pamphlet he had even best be quit with you, and use your own words,
viz. That he will not believe what you say unless he have better Authority. And
last of all, Doctor, seeing you own that his Authority is not good; pray, why
are you angry with me for writing against him? Poor Doctor! remember that the
false Witnesses against Jesus Christ could not agree in their Evidence: and
seeing you and your Comrade are at giving one another the Lie, be not angry if
I call you both Liars.

Ibid. The Doctor tells us, that the most blasphemou^ Story in the Scotch
Presbyterian Eloquence, can be proved by the most undeniable Evidence,
particularly those against Mr. Vrqhuart and Mr. Kirton: But he would do well to
remember that he himself has already belied one of his Evidence^, and we have
no great reason to think that the rest are of any better Credit. But further, I
am sufficiently satisfied by those who have lately made an Enquiry into the
Affair, that the whole is a malicious Calumny.

Well, after a little more Vomit, he tells you, That the absurd ludicrous Sect
metamorphose Religion and its solemn Exercises into Theatrical Scenes. Commend
me to the wary Doctor! what, not one Page without contradicting your self, or
your Brother the Author of the Presbyterian Eloquence? He said that our
Preachers were whining Fellows that drivell'd at Eyes and Mouth, and now your
Doctorship tells us that they are Merry-Andrews. Well, Doctor* who is the Liar?
he says it is you, and you say it is he, and I say it is both.

Page 94. The Doctor seems content that he and his Party be reckoned Publicans
and Sinners, so he can but persuade the World that we are Scribes and
Pharisees. Pray, good Doctor, dignify and distinguish your self and your Party
by what Title soever you please, and observe the wise Man's Rule, (...); but be
charitable to your Neighbors, and before you charge us with acting Comedies,
consider how you will reconcile your self to your Brother, Author of the Scots
Presbyterian Eloquence, who chose rather to represent us as personating
Tragedies; and you and he both seem so very well acquainted with the Customs of
the Playhouse, that you had even best petition their Majesty's for Mumford's
place, and the other (what do you call 'em) that is lately dead, and then we may
not only sing but swear, That the Pulpit and Stage have corrupted the Age. But
one word more, Doctor, and that is this; Take your Brother Foster along with
you, for he will make a special Bully, and then you may sport your selves in your
Theatrical Scenes, I had almost said Obscenities, and act Comedies,
Tragi-comedies and Farces altogether; and take my word for it, you need not
doubt of Visits from the same Angels and Ladies who are so kind to you now.

Page 94. The Doctor breaths out such venomous Reflections, and so remote from
Truth, that they must needs be inspired by Hell it self: so that his Doctorship
may very well pass for a black Enthusiast. But it is very strange the
Presbyterians should be such foolish and Cominal Preachers, as to make all
Religion ridiculous, and yet be preferred by King, Parliament and Country, when
the Episcopalians are rejected.

Page 95. He comes to invalidate my Instances of the vicious Lives, and
ridiculous Sayings of the Prelatical Clergy; and truly, Doctor, I agree, that
it is neither decent nor generous to wrestle with a Scavinger, but it is much
less to attempt it and be foild. Well, Doctor, to your first Topic, that this
way of Libelling is the true Characteristick of our Party. Good Sir, let us join
Hands then, for really I did not know before that yours and ours were the same;
as they must of necessity be, if Libelling be our Characteristick: for that
your Party are Libellers, needs no other proof than the Catalogue in the
Frontice-piece of your Apology; The Scots Presbyterian Eloquence, your Apology
it self, and the Postscript, Iam cuncti Gens una sumus; and pray, seeing it is
so, don't disturb the Repose of your Prelatical Friends at Court any more, to
patch up an Union by Force or Fraud. But now I think on it, there are a sort of
Literae Mutabiles, which run from one side to another; and I believe that is the
Reason why Characteristicks cannot be so easily distinguished; For who can tell
where to find a Man that is sometimes a Protestant, sometimes a Papist; turns
Protestant again; and from a Cadee, become a Curat; then Head of a College, and
at last leaves his Country for Schism and Disloyalty?

As for your Story about Spotswood, you would have done well to have cited your
Author; for since, as I told you not long ago, you gave your self the Lie, we
have no reason to believe you. Moreover, it is but very natural for a Cadee of
Dunbarton's Regiment, which used to plunder People of their Goods, and make no
scruple to rob Men of their good Names, not to be believed.

For your Encomium on Archbishop Sharp, it is no surprizal to me, his Villainy
was so universally known, that no Man but those of his Gang will defend him;
and that is no more than Whitney, lately hanged for Robbe^y, may expect, and
without doubt has from his quondam Underlings. As for your charging the
Archbishop's Murder on the Presbyterian Principles, it is like your Philosophy:
Mr. Shields says it, Ergo it is true. It were a sufficient Answer to tell you,
another denies, Ergo it is false. And I tell you, again and again, That the Hind
let loose, was never the Standard of our Principles, nor approved by our Party;
and I dare venture to say, Mr. Shields will not now own every thing in it
himself: Nor is it his Disgrace, but Honor, to retract what upon second
thoughts he finds will not hold. And as for your Allegiance, that there is
nothing worse in the Morals of the Jesuits: You do well to defend your Friend,
but I directed you before, where you might find as bad, nay worse, among our
Scots Prelatists, who gave public Commissions to murder Men without Form of
Law; which is more than a sudden intemperate fit of Rage in a few Men, who
accidentally rencountring the Prelat, who was actually pursuing them for their
Live^ by his booted Apostles, did inconsiderately deprive him of his.

As for what I say against the Church of England, it is what many of her Sons
own to be true: and whether the Passive-Obedience-Men deserve any better
treatment, I refer to the incomparable Argument lately published by Mr.
Johnson. So that if there be any Incivility to the Church of England, it is
yours and not mine, for I distinguish whom I mean, and apply it to all in gross.

Page 101. He charges me with attaquing all our Kings since the Reformation.
This is unwarily argued, Doctor; then I perceive, that according to you, King
William is none of our Kings, for sure I am I do not attaque him.

But your Doctorship may please to know, that I accused none of your Kings, but
what the Parliaments have accused before me, and I think their Copy may be writ
after: nor do I know any reason why we should be more sparing of late, than
former Kings, if their Male-administrations be alike, and that it may be done
with equal safety. All Histories, Sacred and Profane, abound with the wicked
Lives of Kings; so that this Prelatical Maxim, of burying their public Faults
in Silence, never yet found, nor never will find encouragement from God or Man;
and their contrary practice flows not from Principle, but Interest: nor do they
spare Kings more than others, when they thwart that; witness Heylin's
Reflections upon pious K. Edward the Sixth; and the Carriages of the whole
Party toward K. James, when he granted the Indulgence; and to this we may add
their continual Invectives and rebellious Practices against their present
Majesty's. So that they h^ve forgot the so much wrested Text, which condemns
speaking Evil of Dignities, they being the guiltiest of all Men alive in that
respect, as may be demonstrated from their Clamours against all but Monarchical
Government, though all Powers that be are ordained of God; and to which
according to the Divine Command, we should always cheerfully submit, whether to
the King as Supreme, or other Governors. Magistracy in this respect being also
called the Ordinance of Man; because, though the Genus be determined by God,
yet the Species is left to the determination of Men; else were it altogether
unlawful for the Subjects of Republics to own their Governors, which no Man,
sanae mentis, will affirm. And herein God has evidenced his Love to Mankind,
that he has bounded all sorts of Governments with one Commission, which is, to
encourage the Good, and punish Evildoers: So far may they go, and no further.

Ibid. He says, That I charge them with such as were deposed for their
Immoralities, as Dean Hamilton and Cockburn of St. Bot^ens: whereas I only
charge them with having protected those Men from the Punishment due to their
Impieties, and baffling their Prosecutors: So that if those Men were deposed at
last, it confirms my Charge of Injustice in the Administration, which punished
Men for accusing those, whose Guilt at last they themselves were forced to
confess.

As for your Apology for Archbishop Paterson; It is not much for your Credit
to be Patron to a common Stallion, whom all Scotland know to be such; and Mag
Paterson (a common Strumpet) did own before the Lords of the Session, but a few
Years ago, that she lay both with him and his Brother: and one of the greatest
Ladies in Scotlaud, took him in the very Act of Villainy with one of the
Duchess of York's Maids of Honor, upon the back-stairs of the Palace. The
modest Doctor pretends to be very squeamish, and complains of my Obscenity,
alleging, That none but a Devil can repeat, nor none but the Author invent
such Instances as are there brought against the Episcopal Cle^gy. Good Sir, to
use your own Expression, the paltry eruption of your Passion seems here
ungovernable: If he be a Devil that repeats them, what is he that acts them?
But why must he be more a Devil that gives an account of Episcopal Debauches,
than he that forges profane Stories against the Presbyterians? Let any
unblassed Man read the Scots Presbyteri^^ Eloquence, and the Answer, and
certainly he must own, That if the latter was writ by a Devil, the former must
be writ by a Beelzebub. Your magnifying the Archbishop's Merit so much, who
was imprisoned for Disloyalty, shows your disaffection to the Government.

Your Defense of Brown and Cant, are so like a pedantick Doctor, that they
deserve no regard; and what I write of them, are so far from being my
Invention, o^, as you most learnedly word it, is the Exhalation of my most
infectious Breath, that I can bring you the Authors to avow it to their Faces.

Page 103. He says, It Is pleasant to see me accuse the Church for the Sayings
of the Presbyterians: You own that those who preached such ridiculous things,
were guilty of Blunderings after they conformed to Episcopacy. Truly, Doctor,
if there were any greater Blunderers amongst them than your self, they must
have been Blunderers in Folio; for I cannot think they were guilty of a more
palpable Blunder than this, to call Preachers, who complied with our Scots
Episcopacy, Presbyterians; for, by that same Argument, we may still call the
Doctor a Papist, for such I am informed he sometimes was.

As to Dr. Canaries, your Testimony is not of validity enough to clear him of
that Accusation which I say still is upon Record: And suppose it true that
these Presbyterian Ministers and Judicatories declared, they could make nothing
of it, that will not amount to prove it false; every one knows that Crimes of
that Nature are very difficult to prove, especially when all the Parties
concerned are linked together in Interest, and think it behooves them to retract
what they formerly said, as I am very well assured by them, whose Reputation is
fairer than the Doctor's and yours both, that there is unexceptionable Evidence
of the Woman's having declared the thing her self: And we have a very pregnant
Instance of a Person of no mean Note, whose Accusation most in England are
satisfied is true, and yet we see nothing can be made out, neither before the
Judges, nor the Lords.

As for your Appeal to Mr. Spalding, that he should say, nothing could be made
of it, it is absolutely false; he only said it as to the baptizing part; which
yet, as I have already hinted, is far from proving it a Lie.

So that this Topic, that nothing can be made appear of it that may justify
the Decrees of a Court after so many Years time, is not sufficient to acquit
Dr. Canari^s. But suppose the thing to be altogether false, it argues a very
great want of cleanly Men amongst the Episcopalians, that they should choose
such a Man for Agent, who lay under a flagrant Scandal. The Apostle's Rule is
clear, that a Bishop ought to be blameless.

The Doctor's next Apology is for himself, and very angry he is that I said,
[commonly called Doctor] which now I hope I have made him amends for. But hark
you, Doctor, I had almost forgot to tell you of another Lie you have given your
self, and your Brother-Libellers, the Authors of the Scotch Eloquence: for you
all said, Nemine contradicent^ before, that the Presbyterians were a proud,
sour, unconversible Tribe, and that there was nothing like Justice among them;
and now you own that the Presbyterian Privy Council, and a Presbyterian Synod,
treated Dr. Canaries with special Honor, acquitted him, and reproved his
Accusers. Really Doctor, this is somewhat odd: Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Is it possible, that notwithstanding of all your Clamours, that you
have at last dropped out a Commendation of their honorable Procedure? Truly,
Doctor, this is not warily done, pray reconcile this with what you advanced
before, that we had no Injury done us in the former Book, tho therein we were
said to be Enemies to all good Morals? But, Doctor, I beg your Pardon, perhaps
you intend our Civility to Dr. Canaries as a Proof of it; for truly he was
accused for no good Morals.

Well, but what did I say of Dr. M -- o? truly that it is well known he rid in
the Pope's Guards, and the Doctor denies it, and says it is known to none but
Presbyterians, who can discover Plots in the Moon. Doctor, I wish it were as
sure that there are none in your Prelatical Church. But give me leave, Doctor,
this impudent hint of denying the late Prelatical Plots against the Government,
shows you have need of a better Purgation from the Charge that you rode in the
Pope's Guards than you own: For really, if that were as true, as that there
have been and are Plots amongst the Prelatists, it is true enough. But to
satisfy your Doctorship that it is none of my Invention, I tell you truly that I
can bring you twenty who heard it of you before ever your Eloquence or my
Answer was published; and if our Friends make use of Stories now and then which
want Confirmation, it is no more than what you accused your Brethren of just
now, then Veniam damus petimusque vicissim. And indeed, Doctor, to be serious
with you, I wish that the Falsehoods which have been mutually charged on one
another, may oblige both to be more tender of publishing Reports upon trust;
but seeing you are the first Aggressors, blame your self for the Consequences;
and I think that your Doctorship particularly ought to have been a little
tenderer of justifying such self-Contradictions as the Scots Presbyterian
Eloquence, seeing I understand that when you were your self Parson in -- you
were your self accused of Villainy with a Woman among the Corn; truly, or
otherwise, is not mine to determine: But seeing you published random Reports
against us, we cannot be blamed to answer with what we have heard concerning
you; and truly, Doctor, I am so far from being guilty of Forgery, with which
you charge me so often, that were I to speak my last, I can freely declare,
that I do not know one Syllable of what I write to be false, tho I know a great
deal of it to be true, yet I never avouch'd all those Instances of the Follies
and Vices of your Clergy as undeniable Truths, as you and your vapouring
Brethren did yours in the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence. For I scarce think it
possible that at such a distance, so many Stories can be transmitted on such a
Subject, and in so great haste, without Mistakes: And yet I think there is no
such great odds betwixt riding in the Pope's Guards, and being a Cadee in
Dumbarton's Reglment which guarded Popery, and contributed so much to enslave
Europe: so that it was but an auspicious Omen of being a good Countryman, much
less a pious Protestant Preacher, to be a Volunteer in that Regiment; not that
I would detract from the Honor of their gallant Colonel, who tho he was so
unhappy as to be a Papist, yet did truly inherit the Noble Soul of his Family.
Nor yet would I derogate from the Valor of that Regiment, but I think these
Nations are pretty well satisfied how little we are obliged to them either for
our Civil or Religious Liberty: And I make bold to say it, they are as little
obliged to their Cadee.

The feeble Defense which in the next place you make for Gray, Hendry, Hannan,
etc. deserves no Thanks from them, nor Answer from me; and for your abominable
Charge of a prostituted Conscience, lodge your Accusation nearer home; and tho
you have prostituted yours to Churches and Princes who drive distinct
Interests, I never did so with mine. And to conclude with your pitiful Reserve
to prove me a Liar, because in the Title Page it is said, Printed by Tho.
Anderson near Charing Cross, 1693. It shows your Cause was sinking, when you
lay hold on the first thing comes to hand; but to satisfy you further, I tell
you it is no Lie, and charge you upon Credit to prove it one, for affirmanti
incumbit probatio. You have not scribled so much, but you must know that
Booksellers often put the Date of the following Year to Books printed in
Michaelmas Term, which was the only apparent Falsity; and for the rest it
surpasses your Skill to prove it a Lie.

Instances on Record of the notorious Cruelty and Injustice used in the time of
the late Prelatical Administrations in the Courts of Judicature against the
Presbyterians, in the Persons of Sir Hugh and Sir Geo. Campbel, and the La^rd
of Blackwood.
AS for the Morality and Virtue of the surviving grand Patron of the Faction,
and their lately deceased invincible Champion, Sir George Mackenzy, this
following Instance will set it in its true Light. Q -- ry, tho Douglas by
Surname, yet envying the Marquess of Douglas, the Chief of the Family, whom he
has a Pique against, for refusing to take the Cross-bar out of his Arms,
designed to revenge himself on his chief Chamberlain, or Steward, the Lord of
Blackwood, a pious and worthy Gentleman, by whose Care the Marquiss's Estate is
frugally managed, and that illustrious Family chiefly enabled to maintain it
self in what remains of its ancient Splendour. Q -- ry, and Sir George, not
knowing which way to reach this Gentleman, did on purpose procu^e an Act to
make Converse with such as they were pleased to call Rebels, or Convers^ with
any that had Converse with them, HIGH TREASON. The Marquess having good part of
his Estate about Douglas in the West, where a great many of his Tenants were
concerned in the Insurrection at Bothwell-Bridg; they thought that Blackwood
must unavoidably converse with some of them upon the Marquiss's account, and so
of necessity be caught; hereupon they indicted him, and found it a hard matter
however to prove any such thing upon him. But getting notice that there was one
Mr. Wilson, an Inhabitant of Douglas, a Man of considerable dealing with many
of the Noblemens Chamberlains of the West, that had also dealt with Blackwood;
and the said Wilson was reputed a grand Rebel, because one of those who had
been forced to take Arms by the Tyranny of the then Government. They set a
great many of their Implements at work to take him, which was no hard matter to
effect, because he frequented most Markets in that part of the Country, and was
often at Edinburgh; so having taken him, they brought him to Sir George
Mackenzy, who threatened him terribly, and accused him with abundance of
Rebellious Practices, which had rendered him obnoxious to the Law, and liable to
Death; and having, as he thought, alarmed him sufficiently; then he begun to
^latter him, that he should not only have a Remission, but also a Reward, if he
would give Evidence that he had conversed with Blackwood, whom they had then in
Custody, and under Process, which he altogether re^used. However, Intercession
being made to Sir George on Mr. Wilson's account; and some undertaking to
persuade him to a Compliance, he admitted him to Bail, to appear such a certain
day. Q -- ry having notice that Sir George had let Mr. Wilson go, was so
enraged at the Disappointment of swallowing Blackwood's Estate, that being then
in ^ great Power, he swore, that if Sir G^orge did not get Wilson again to hang
Blackwood, he should hang for him, because he himself had conversed with
Wilson, a Rebel, and let him go. Sir George being thus circumstantiated, sent
in quest of Mr. Wilson before his day, but he could not be found. However, they
proceed to Trial, and, which was easy for them to effectuate, who were so
dexterous at suborning of Witnesses and packing Juries, got Blackwood
condemned, which his Advocates (or Counsel) particularly Sir George Lockhart,
were so angry at, that they offered publicly in Court to prove Sir George to
be as guilty as he, viz. in conversing with Mr. Wilson, who not being able to
deny, tho fain he would, he confessed it, and told them that he would go to his
Majesty and get a Remission: Whereupon all cried out Shame upon him! to
prosecute a Gentleman to Death, for that whereof he was guilty himself. And
Blackwood's Counsel insisted that he ought to have the Benefit of a Remission
also. Notwithstanding, Q -- ry and Sir George hurried on toward Execution, nor
could they allow the Gentleman time to prepare for Eternity, but called for his
Accounts of the Marquiss's Estate, which the Noblemen and others appointed to
take, finding so just, and seeing the Gentleman so grave and composed, they
became Intercessors for a Remission, which was obtained, and the Greed and
Malice of his Enemies frustrated. However, we see by this Instance the Virtue,
Religion and Morality of the grand Pillars of our Scots Prelacy, which our
Pamphleteers do so much boast of. But this following Instance will yet add a
new Varnish to their illustrious and refulgent Virtues.

The barbarous Prelatical Persecution, together with that unheard of way of
proceeding against Blackwood, having alarmed Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbel of
Cesnock, with other Gentlemen who were Presbyterians, or favorers of them,
although they knew themselves Innocent, yet thinking it not safe to stay in the
Kingdom, where Sir George Mackenzie could stretch the Law, and make it reach
the Life and Estate of whomsoever he would, they came for London, with a design
to represent their Grievances to K. Charles the Second: But that same Hand
which persecuted the Presbyterians in Scotland, falling upon the Dissenters and
moderate Churchmen in England; those Gentlemen happened to come hither when the
Earl of Essex, my Lord Russel, etc. were committed on pretense of a Plot; and
Scots-men, because oppressed, being generally looked upon as Disatisfied, the
said Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbel, were illegally taken up, without a
Warrant; and having been diverse times examined by the King and Council, there
could not the least ground of Suspicion be found against them, saving what
Atterbury the Messenger did falsely Swear: And being made sensible of his
Perjury by the said Gentlemen, he told them, that his Oath could not harm them.
Which my Lord Melford and Sir George Mackenzie being aware of, they went to the
Duke of York. And my Lord having a Prospect of the Gentlemen's Estates, they
dealt with the Duke to procure a Warrant from the King to send them for
Scotland, where they would do their Business. This was quickly granted; and
then Sir George set about suborning of Witnesses against them; and the Evidence
was managed and instructed by Sir W. Wallace of Craigy, my Lord Melford's
Brother-in-Law; Hugh Wallace of Garits, Chamberlain (or Steward) to the said
Sir William; and Hugh Wallace of Ingilston. The Evidence being prepared, Sir
Hugh Campbel was brought upon his Trial, before the Earl of Perth then
Lord-Justice General, (or Lord-Chief-Justice) of Scotland, who was very eager
in the Prosecution; and having picked a Jury for the purpose, they proceeded to
call the Evidence, viz. Tho. Ingram, Tenant to Hugh Wallace of Borland, Cousin
to Sir William Wallace the Suborner; Daniel Crawford, and one Fergusson. The
Earl of Perth having, according to Form, administered the Oath to the Witnesses,
which is always done with much Solemnity and Gravity in Scotland, their
Consciences began to rebound; and upon Examination, they solemnly declared that
they knew nothing against Sir Hugh Campbel. Which s^ruck Sir Geo. Mackenzie and
the Court with Confusion; and all the Spectator^ shouted for Joy, crying out,
That it was the Hand of God. Wher^at Sir George Mackenzie being enraged,
bellowed out, That he never heard of such a Protestant Roar, but at the Trial
of the Rebel Shaftsbury. However, the Jury being shut up, returned in a little
time, and brought the Prisoner in, Not Guilty. His Council pleaded, That
according to Law he might be discharged at the Bar: Which my Lord-Chief-Justice
and Sir George Mackenzie refused, the latter being the King's Advocate, or
Attorney General; and alleging, that he should find both Sir Hugh the Father,
and Sir George the Son, guilty of High Treason in England. Whereupon Sir Hugh
was remanded to Prison, and an Indictment exhibited against both Father and
Son, to appear before the Parliament; wherein the Duke of Queensbury was to be
Commissioner, who was as zealous for pursuing the Prisoners as any. The next
Thing which the Prosecutors took in hand, was, to bring down some of the
English Evidence, who pretended to discover the Plot at London; and accordingly
they were sent down in one of the King's Yachts. And by the Artifice of the
Prosecutors brought into the Company of the Prisoners, who neither knew them
nor their Design. The Evidence being examined before the Secret Council, and
not being able to say any thing against the two Gentlemen, they were sent for
London again in the Yacht. After this the Duke of Queensbury, Earl of Perth,
Sir George Mackenzie, and others of the Faction, tampered with the Prisoners
own Counsel, to advise them to cast themselves upon the King's Mercy, using for
Argument, That the Parliament would condemn them, though Innocent; and that
they knew there was no Appeal from their Sentence: and therefore if they would
cast themselves on the King's Mercy, they would be sure to procure a Remission,
and a good part of their Estate. But Sir George Campbel absolutely refused to
cast himself on the Mercy of either King or Parliament, because he knew it was
sought for only to be an Evidence of a Plot, whereof they were altogether
Innocent. After which they separated Sir George from his Father, and shut him
up without Pen, Ink, or Paper; and so kept him in close Prison for ten Days:
But finding they could not prevail, they dealt with his Father to persuade him;
and so returned him again to his Father's Room; where being continually dealt
with, by Persons of Quality, who were loath to see the Family ruined, and did
urge, that he would certainly bring his Father, and himself both, to the Block;
he answered, That he was willing to sacrifice his own Life, so his Father might
be preserved. And finding that that could not be done, without casting himself
on the King's Mercy, he was prevailed with to do it. And though their Lives
were saved, yet most, if not all their Estates were ^eised.

I cannot omit one Particular more, viz. That the said Sir G. Ma^kenzie having
a mind to ing^atiate himself with the said Gentleman since the Revolution, he
did seriously tell him, that he swore the Evidence three times (on their Knees)
in his Chamber, that they should Swear what they were taught against his
Father; and hoped God would forgive him.

Now I appeal to the Reader, whether ever a Piece of blacker Injustice was
transacted, for the Kind, on this side Hell; and whether our Prelatical
Adversaries have reason to boast of those Men's Virtue, Worth, and Piety, who
were principally concerned? And whether any Credit can be deservedly given to
Sir George Mackenzie's Relation of Matters of Fact, from which he deduces
Arguments to justify the Severity of the late Reigns against us, wherein he
himself was the Prosecutor, and so deeply engaged, as appears by his own
Confession. Now, I say, whether his Defense of Charles the Second's Government,
writ since the Acknowledgment aforesaid; or the Parliament of Scotland, who in
their Claim of Right complain of those things which he defends, ought to be
best believed, let those who are unbiased judge. And seeing those two Instances
of his notorious Injustice are Matters of Record, let the Reader bear Witness
if I have not fairly disarmed the Scots Prelatical Party of their best Weapon;
seeing to all which was told them of their barbarity to the Presbyterians, they
constantly opposed Sir George Mackenzies Defense, as a Buckler that could not
be pierced.

I have but one word more, and then I have done: I would have any moderate
Church-of- England-man, answer from his Conscience, Whether he thinks those of
his Communion were faithful to his Majesty, who constantly solicited him, till
he was prevailed with, to employ some of those principally concerned in the
black Acts of Injustice abovementioned, in the chief Places of the Government
in Scotland; being moreover of the number of those Evil Counselors whom he
declared against at his first coming over. And seeing his Majesty, who has been
but a little while among us, and often called Abroad, must needs in a great
measure be a Stranger to Men and Things: May the Great God of Heaven preserve
his Person and Government, from such dangerous Enemies as thus impose upon him,
out of a pretended Zeal for the Church of England; and in the mean time they
have no reason to be offended at us and our Parliament, if we witness as much
true Zeal for the Church of Scotland.

Proofs of the Moderation of the Scots Presbyterians toward the Episcopal
Party, from the Acts of the General Assembly held in the Year 1690.
THat the World may be satisfied of the Moderation of the Presbyterians, and
how little reason the Doctor has to charge the Cameronian Principles upon them
in general, I thought sit to exhibit in the Words of the General Assembly, held
in An. 1690, what they express concerning the large Paper given into them by
Mr. Line^ing, Mr. Shields, and Mr. Boyd, called Cameronian Preachers; and the
Substance of their Acts any way relating to the Episcopal Clergy.

As to the first they enacted, That it contained several peremptory and gross
Mistakes, unseasonable and impracticable Proposals, uncharitable and injurious
Reflections, tending rather to kindle Contentions, than compose Divisions; and
therefore the said Paper was denied reading. And yet what is so heavily charged
in that Paper, is far short of those Principles which the disingenuous Doctor
will needs fasten upon the Presbyterians in cumul^.

And as to the Episcopal Clergy, read what ^ollows.

By their Act of Oct. 28. they recommend to the Presbytery, to take notice of
all Ministers within their Bounds, the late CONFORMIST Incumbents or OTHERS,
who shall not observe Fasts and Thanksgivings, indicted by the Church, or shall
be guilty of any other irregular Carriage, etc. So that they are no severer
upon the Episcopal Clergy, than their own, for all the Clamours of the
malicious Faction.

^^^hat of 29 they enact, That all such who shall be received into Communion
with them in Church Government, be obliged to subscribe the Confession of
Faith, ratified in the second Session of the Parliament. There it is plain that
they arrogate no more Power than what is given them by Law; and it is obvious,
that by this Act, they neither exclude the Prelatists ab officio, nor
beneficio: So that the Church-of- England-Men have no reason to complain, that
their Brethren are severely treated, for they have made no such steps toward a
Comprehension with the English Dissenters, though his Majesty desired it. And
yet what a racket do they keep, because the Scots Episcopal Clergy are only
denied a share in the Government of the Church, which they designedly seek that
they may undermine it, and are not ashamed to own it.

In their Letter to his Majesty, November. 13. 1690. at the Close of that
Assembly, they acquaint him with the Instructions which they had given to those
appointed for Vi^itation, concerning the Conformists, viz. That none of them
shall be removed from their Places, but such as are either Insufficient,
Scandalous, Erroneous, or supinely negligent; and that those of them be
admitted to Ministerial Communion, who upon due trial shall be found Orthodox,
Able, Godly, Peaceable and Loyal; and that such who shall be found to have
received Wrong in any Inferior Judicatory of the Church, should be duly
redressed. Yet what Clamor, what Lies, what Obloquy and Reproach have the poor
Presbyterians of Scotland been loaded with, in blasphemous and virulent
Pamphlets, published in London by Hindmarsh, the late King's Bookseller, and
promoted and disseminated by that ungovernable Faction. And what a clutter did
the high-^lown Courtiers keep about the Scots General-Assembly; how industrious
to misrepresent them to the King; and how restless, till they had them
dissolved, contrary to the Laws, and at such a time as we were threatened with a
Rebellion at Home, and an Invasion from Abroad; that so his Majesty having
disobliged his only Friends in Scotland, might be totally deprived of any
Assistance from thence: but, blessed be God, who disappointed their Designs:
And I hope, that moderate and truly Religious Church-of- England-Men, will
henceforth be more cautious in listening to the Calumnies of our Episcopal
Clergy, when they consider the Moderation of the abovementioned Acts of the
Presbyterian General-Assembly; which they have no reason to think of such
dangerous Consequence as our Pamphleteers would have them believe; and as D --
M -- to, in his Papers lately seized by Authority, would have further
insinuated.

And that they may have yet a further proof of their Moderation, I would pray
them to read the seventh Instruction given by the said Assembly, to the
Commissioners appointed for Visitation, viz.

That they be very cautious of receiving Informations against the late
Conformists, and that they proceed in the matter of Censure very deliberately,
so as none may have just cause to complain of their Rigidity; yet so as to omit
no means of Information, and that they shall not proceed to Censure, but upon
sufficient Probation. And that the World may be farther satisfied in their
Impartiality, in the fourth Instruction they declared that the Power of the
Visiters shall reach Presbyterians as well as others: and in the second
Instruction, they gave them Power to stop the precipitant or unwarrantable
Procedure of Presbyteries in Processes. If any Proceedings can be more mild or
regular, let the World judge: So that whether Dr. M -- ^ and his Fellow
Libellers, who impudently assert, that there is nothing like Order, Moderation,
or Justice among the Presbyterians, be Liars or not, let these Acts determine.
And if there were no other thing to stop the Mouths of all Cavillars, the
Assembly's Declaration, That they would depose no Incumbents simply for their
Judgment concerning Church Government, nor yet urge Reordination upon them,
were sufficient; and if there be any Ingenuity in the Church-of- England-Men,
it may for ever silence them as to their Complaints against our Administration,
seeing those of their Communion have been, and continue still to be so much
guilty of a contrary Practice toward Dissenters. And further, this Assembly,
whom they branded as void of all Moderation or Humanity, made an Act in favor
of Mr. Couper, Curat of Humby, and recommended Mr. Cameron, one of the late
Conformists, to the Privy Council for Charity, which is more than ever was done
by any Episcopal Assembly in favor of Presbyterian Ministers.

Having proved the Falsehood of the Episcopal Calumnies against our Church as
void of Moderation, it remains that I do the same as to the State; and tho it
be already sufficiently done in my first Answer, it will not be amiss to insist
on it in this: And because contraria juxta se posita magis ^lucescunt, I shall
exhibit a short Epitome of their Acts of Parliament against us in the two last
Reigns, and of ours against them in this, that the World may see on whose side
Justice and Moderation lies.

Acts of Parliament by Charles the Second, and James the Seventh, against the
Presbyterian Government, and Prebyterians in Scotland.
PArl. 1. Session 1. Car. II. They enacted the Oath of Allegiance, asserting
the King to be the only Supreme Governor over all Persons, and in all Causes;
and obliging the Takers to the utmost of their Power to defend, assist and
maintain his Majesty's said Jurisdiction against all Persons whatsoever, and
that they should never decline his Power and Jurisdiction. Parl. 1. Sess. 1.
Act 2, 3, 4, 5, 11. An Acknowledgment of the King's vast and
unlimited-Prerogative was enjoined to be subscribed by all in public Trust
over and above the Oath of Allegiance. October. 1662. The Council, not
Parliament, turned out 300 Ministers without Citation or Hearing. Parl. 1.
Sess. 1. Act 7. Sess. 2. Act 2. They enacted, That the National Covenant, and
Solemn League and Covenant, should have no Obligation; and ordered them to be
burnt by the Hand of the Hangman. Sess. 2. Act 3. They restored Patronages.
Sess. 1. Act 4. Enacted, That none be Masters in any University, except they
take the Oath of Allegiance, and own Prelacy; and none should be Schoolmaster,
Tutor, or Pedagogue to Children without a Prelate's License. Sess. 2. Act 5.
and Sess. 2. Act 3. Enacted, That all in public Trust or Office renounce and
abjure the Covenant on pain of losing their Places, and Privilege of Trading.
Sess. 2. Act 2. Enacted, That all Petitions, Writing, Printing, Remonstrating,
Praying or Preaching, showing any dislike of the King's absolute Prerogative,
and Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastic, or Episcopacy, be punished as seditious:
And that no Meetings be kept in private Houses. Sess. 3. Act 2. Enacted, That
all Nonconformed Ministers that presume to exercise their Ministry, shall be
punished as seditious Persons. And that all Persons in acknowledgment of his
Majesty's Government Ecclesiastical attend the Sermons of the Curats: Noblemen
and Gentlemen refusing, to lose a fourth of their Rents; Burgesses their
Freedom, and a fourth part of their Movables; and Yeomen the fourth of their
Movables, and others 20 ^. a time, leaving the Council at liberty to in^^ict
further Punishments, that if there were three above the Family at Preaching or
Prayer, it should be esteemed a Conventicle; and commanding Lords of Manors,
Masters of Families, and Magistrates of Buroughs to cause all under their
Charge to come to Church. And for putting these Laws in Execution, a
High-Commission-Court was erected by the King, contrary to Act 13. Parl. 10.
Iac. 6. with Power to examine upon Oath de super inquirendis. Parl. 2. Act 1.
Lauder da^e Commissioner, Enacted, That by virtue of the Supremacy, the
ordering of the Government of the Church does proper^y ^elong to his Majesty
and Successors, as an inherent Right to the Crown; and that he may enact and
emit such Constitutions, Acts and Orders concerning Church-Administrations,
Persons, Meetings and Matters, as he in his Royal Wisdom shall think fit; which
Acts, etc. are to be obeyed by all Subjects, any Law, Act or Custom to the
contrary notwithstanding. Sess. 2. Parl. 2. Enacted, That all who should be
required do depone upon Oath their Knowledge of all Meetings, or Persons at
them, on pain of Fining, Imprisonment, Banishment or Transportation. Act 5.
Enacted, That all outed Ministers found preaching or praying in any House but
their own Family, be imprisoned till they ^ind Bond for 5000 Marks, not to do
the like again. Every Hearer, toties quoties, 25 ^. if a Tenant, and 12 ^. if a
Sub-Tenant. And that all who preach in the Field, or in a House, if any of the
People are without Doors, shall be punished with Death; and those who can seize
and secure any such Minister dead or alive, shall have 500 Marks Reward. The
Magistrates of Burghs to be sinned at the Council's Pleasure for any
Conventicles held in their Burghs, and they to be reimburs'd from the Landlord
of the House: And Men to be ^in'd if their Wives and Children went to Meetings.
Act 6. Imposed Fines from 100 ^. to 20 l. Sterling a time, on such as had their
Children baptized at such Meetings; and Servants to be ^ined in half their
Wages. Act 11. Sess. 3. The same Fines were imposed upon them who should keep
their Children un-baptized for thirty days. And by Act 7. that same Session,
they enacted (...) Fines on ^uch as absented from Church for three days
together. Act 9. Sess. 3. They declared all Ordination since 1661. which had
not been by Bishops, to be invalid. In 1678, a Convention of States held by
Lauderdale, laid on a Tax to levy Forces for suppressing Field-Meetings, which
was afterward continued by the Parliaments held by the Dukes of York and
Queensberry. In 1681, the D. of York being Commissioner, without taking the
Oaths appointed by Law, and against Acts which rendered Papists incapable, they
doubled the Fines for Field-Conventicles; and ordered Gentlemen to put away
their Tenants, and Masters of Families their Servants, or sub-Tenants, without
Warning, if they went to Meetings. Act 18. They enacted, That all Jurisdiction
does so reside in his Majesty, that he may by Himself or Commissioners take
Cognizance of, and decide any Cases or Causes which he pleased. Act 6, and 25.
They imposed on all a self-contradictory Test, which obliged them to stand by
the Confession of Faith recorded in Parl. 1. Iac. 6. which disowned the
Supremacy, and owned the Lawfulnes^ of Defensive Arms, tho the contrary to both
were sworn in the Test without so much as a non obstante. Parl. 1. Iac. 7. D.
of Queensberry Commissioner, Act 3. allowing Prisoners indicted for
High Treason to be summoned to make their Defense in 24 hours time. Act 4. That
such as being cited for Witnesses in cases of Treason or Conventicles, and
refused to depone, should be liable to be puni^hed as guilty of the ^ame
Crimes. Act 5. That giving or taking the National, or Solemn League and
Covenant, or owning them obligatory, should be High Treason. Act 7. Making the
Concealment of any Supply given to forfeited Persons, tho the nearest
Relations, Treason. Act 8. That all who preach at House or Field-Conventicles,
or such as hear at Field-Conventicles, should be punished by Death and
Confiscation. Act 13. Re-injoining, and further extending the Imposition of the
Test. Act 23. Making the refusing the Oath of Abjuration, High Treason. Act 24.
Ordering all Lords of Manors, etc. to insert a Clause in all Leases to their
Tenants, obliging them and their Families to Conformity under exorbitant
Penalties. Act 25. Ordering the Cameronians to be pursued, and those who
neglected it to be reputed equally guilty.
Acts of Parliament by King William and Queen Mary against Episcopacy in
Scotland.
PArl. 1. W. M. They enacted the Oath of Allegiance thus. I, A. B. do sincerely
promise and swear, that I will be faithful, and bear true Allegiance to their
Majesty's K. William and Q. Mary. July 22, 1689. Act against Prelacy, as a
great and insupportable Grievance to the Nation. Sess. 2. Act 2. For restoring
Presbyterian Ministers, ordering them to have immediate Access to their own
Churches, if vacant, and to have the whole Year's Stipend; but if there be an
Incumbent in their Churches, he shall have right to the half Year's Stipend.
Act 5. Ratifying the Confession of Faith and Presbyterian Government, as most
agreeable to the Word of God, and most conducive to the Advancement of Piety
and true Godliness, and establishing the Peace of the Realm, being received by
the general Consent of the Nation to be the only Government in the 114 Act Iac.
6. Parl. 12. An. 1592. Settling the Government of the Church on Presbyterian
Ministers outed since Ian. 1661. and such as they have received or shall
receive. Taking notice that many of the Epis^opal Ministers had deserted their
Flocks, and others were deprived for not reading the Proclamation, and not
praying for the King and Queen. I^id. They authorize the Presbyterian Ministers
to appoint Visitors, and purge out scandalous and in sufficient Ministers, and
order those who are contumacious, and proven guilty, to be suspended and
deprived. Act 14. Impowering the Council to tender the Oath of Allegiance to
suspected Persons, or to secure them who shall be informed against on probable
grounds, and to ^ine such as refuse in a fifth of their Estate, and not to
exceed one or two Year's Rent of them who are Landed-Men. Act 17. About
visiting Universities, appointing Professors in the Faculties to take the Oath
of Allegiance, and submit to the Government of the Church. Act 35. Against such
Ministers as being deprived for not praying for their Majesty's, do preach and
pray elsewhere, and diffuse the Poison of their Disaffection, forbidding them
to exercise any part of their Ministerial Function on any pretense whatsoever,
until they swear Allegiance, engage to pray for King William and Queen Mary,
and disown King James; or to be proceeded against as disaffected. Act 23.
Concerning Patronages: The Freeholders and Elders of the Parish, being
Protestants, are to have the (...) of the Minister: if the Parish disapprove
him, their Reasons are to be judged by the Presbytery; and if the Freeholders
and Elders do not apply to the Presbytery for calling and choosing a Minister
in six Months, the full Power to be in the Presbytery, tanquam jure devoluto.
And the same Act orders a Compensation to the Patrons for their Right of
Presentation. Act 38. For securing their Majesty's Government, obliging all
Persons who in Law are obliged to swear, to own their Majesty's as King and
Queen de jure, as well as de facto, and defend their Title against King James,
etc. the Refusers to be reputed disaffected, deprived of their Offices, and be
obliged to give Security for their Good-Behaviour, as the Government shall
think fit, providing it extend no further than Bond, Caution, or personal
Imprisonment, securing of Horse, Arms, or putting Garrisons in their Houses.
There is also an Act, but what Number or Session I cannot tell, (being where I
cannot get a sight of the Acts) abolishing the King's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs; for which we are mightily reproached by our Enemies,
who do not consider what has been writ unanswerably by Mr. Gillespy in his
Aaron's Rod blossoming, and other Books, against it. I confess my self but a
mee^ Laick, and not skilled in Controversies, having never made them my Study,
any farther than to satisfy my self, that I did not give blind Obedience.
But the Scripture telling us, that Christ is Head of his Church, and that
other Foundations can no Man lay, than what is already laid on the Prophets and
Apostles: and Common Reason must needs inform me, that for any Man, or Party of
Men, to take upon them any other than a Declarative Power in Church Matters,
and that according to the Word of God, must needs be an invading of Christ's
Prerogative. And seeing he himself declared, that his Kingdom is not of this
World, that it should be governed by Worldly Monarchs, is humano capiti
cervicem jungere equinam. And I cannot but wonder, that the Church of England^s
late Experience should not convince them of the Unreasonableness of this
Doctrine: For I believe they were sensible under the late King, that a Popish
Head was altogether inconsistent with the Safety of a Protestant Church. And I
am confident the Christians in Turkey never dreamed that the Grand Signior was
the Head of the Christian Church: and this being a Demonstration that it cannot
belong to the Chief Magistrate, as such, he can lay claim to it no other way.
Especially, if we consider that the Church, as in Acts 15. did meet and declare
the Mind of God in Church Matters, without either the Call or Consent of the
Heathen (...) and we have never yet had any Divine Revelation to recall it. Then
as for abolishing Patronages, which occasions a further Clamor: It Is plain
that the Parliament have made a very rational Act on that Head; and it is but
equal that every one who has a Soul, and evidences any real Concern about it,
should have a Vote in choosing his Minister, and not wholly rely on the Choice
of a Patron, who perhaps is so wicked, that he takes no care of his own, and is
very unfit to choose a Minister for the Souls of a whole Parish. And as for the
other Acts, they are so plain, that any who will but take care to compare them
with those of the late Reigns, if they be not blinded, as our Doctor was, with
the Indecencies of Passion, we dare refer to them which are the most moderate;
or, whether the Scots Prelatists be not guilty of an audacious Lie, in
asserting, that they are more severely treated than ever we were? And I would
pray the Reader to take this along with him; That their Laws, tho barbarous to
a Prodigy in themselves, were yet more barbarously put in Execution beyond
their Extent: and that our Laws, tho moderate in themselves, are yet more
moderately put in Execution. Yea, and besides those Acts of Parliament, their
Council took upon them a Parliamentary Power, and made Acts more bloody than
those of their Parliaments, enabling Soldiers to examine any Man they met, and
to kill him without any further Trial, if he did not give them satisfying
Answers to their Questions; of which any that pleases may be fully satisfied in
my first Answer. I had almost omitted taking notice of one remarkable thing
which past in the Convention of States after the Revolution. They declared
themselves a free and lawful Meeting, whatever might be contained in the Letter
from James the VIIth to dissolve them, or impede their Procedure; in which
Archbishop Paterson and six other Bishops, and the Viscount of Dundee
concurred. Now if this was not a manifest disowning of K. James's Authority,
let any Man judge; and yet these Men did afterward exclaim against the
Convention and Parliament as unlawfully called, because wanting K. James's
Authority, and opposed K. William's coming to the Crown. So that it is evident,
our Scots Episcopalians are Men of the same Kidney with those Jacobite Bishops
in England, who joined in sending for the Prince of Orange, and yet afterward
turned his Enemies out of a pretended Loyalty to K. James. The Faction have
lately drawn up and dispersed amongst their Friends a sort of Manifesto from
those of the Episcopal Persuasion in the North of Scotland, full of Invectives
against the Government, which, together with other Monuments of their
Rebellious Temper, etc. against their present Majesty's, may perhaps in a
little (...) see the Light.

FINIS.

