ABSTRACTS OF SOME LETTERS WRITTEN BY Mr. ROBERT RICH, Treating mostly of
Spiritual Matters, Are here transmitted to Posterity, and recommended to the
sober and serious Enquirer, FOR Promoting of Universal Love amongst all sorts
of People, without respect of Persons, Parties, or Sects.

Together with a friendly Letter of Dr. Jer. Tailor, to the said R. R. in
Answer to one of his.

Published by a Lover of RIGHTEOUSNESS But an utter Enemy to Deceit and
Wickedness in whomsoever J. P.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Billingsley, at the Printing-Press, near the
^^^al-Exchange, in Cornhill. 1680.

The PREFACE.
I Having had the perusal of diverse of Mr. R. Rich's Letters, (by reason of his
late Decease) found several things (scattered up and down amongst them) of a
sublime and Divine Nature, some of which I picked and culled out, and now
expose to public view, chiefly for the sake of those whose Hearts and Minds
are set Sion-wards, to be kept upon Record for their Posterity, even the
Generations of all the just and righteous Ones, of what Nation, Kindred,
Tongue, or People soever they be. For the sincere, single, and upright-hearted,
in whom there is no Guile, (who seek not the Praise of Men, but the Glory of
the Lord only) were, are, and for ever will be acted and guided by one and the
same Spirit [of Purity, Holiness, and Self-denial] throughout all Ages and
Generations. He that can receive the Testimony of this Truth, (as did the
Apostle Peter of old, and as do the Servants of the Lord now) let him; but
withal let him know, unless his Life and Conversation be harmless and blameless
amongst Men, all his Notion of Truth in words will but add to his greater
Condemnation: For he that talks of his Master's Will, and is not a doer of the
same, must expect to be beaten with many stripes. Wherefore my Advice is,
before any talk of, or intermeddle with the Secrets or Mysteries of the Great
GOD, they first see Justice, Righteousness, and Love to Equity, set up in their
own Souls; for till that be resolvedly and fixedly established within, all
Knowledge and Profession without will avail little: For what does the Lord
require of thee, O Man, but to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly
before Him? Therefore let these things, in which the Kingdom of God consists,
(and not in Meats or Drinks, Habits, Times, or Places, which at best were but
shadows of good things to come,) be first sought after, and all other things
needful will be added; as has been fully and truly experienced by one who has
learned, not only to forgive Enemies, but can, with delight, reward Evil with
Good. Which Lesson, that the Reader may learn, press after, and attain unto, is
the desire of him, who seeks the Good and Weal of all Mankind.

J. P.

Mr. Rich's Letter to Doctor Tailor, of the 9th of Feb. 1657. Together with the
Doctor's Answer.
SIR,
BEing in my Heart persuaded, that there are many of late years which have
suffered much in their Persons, Estates, and good Names, of those People called
Malignants, especially some that were in the Ministry, that were not only put
out of their Livings, but by an Act made incapable of that Emploiment their
Education best fitted them for, viz. the keeping of Schools. And although perhaps
some might suffer justly for their Offenses, yet I do believe many of them did
suffer for the Testimony of a good Conscience, not daring to make shipwreck of
it, nor to act against that Light or Knowledge, which to them was made manifest
from the Lord to be just and right. Toward such have I great Love,
notwithstanding the different Dispensations, Manifestations, Operations, and
Administrations wherein we are cast, knowing the Root and Ground to be from the
one Spirit, and that in my Father's House there are many Mansions, in which as
every one abides to act and do the things that are just and right, they are
accepted with him, of what Nation, Kindred, or People soever, whether Jew or
Gentile, they are all one in Christ Jesus, God's Talent and Gift to the World,
who does enlighten every one freely by his Grace both to will and to do, of his
good pleasure. And therefore as a Testimony of that Love the Lord has begot in
my Heart to all Men, especially to them that improve my Lord's Talent, and who
are of his Household, and abide in the Faith (that keeps clean the Heart) which
is held in a pure Conscience, have I by this Bearer sent unto you Ten Pounds to
bestow amongst them you know to be in want, under that Form called Episcopal.
And this I feel to be well-pleasing to God, (and has a Reward from him,) although
it should be condemned by Man. So desiring you in this thing to act, as Truth
in the inward parts shall direct, I commit you to the Grace and Love of God;
where I rest,

Your Friend and Servant, R. R.

The Doctor's Answer.
SIR,
I Received from you (by the hands of your Nephew) a Letter, and Ten Pounds, to
be given to such godly Ministers of the Episcopal Persuasion, who are in want,
and suffer for the Testimony of their Consciences. Sir, I do in their behalf
return my humble thanks to God, who has put it into your Heart to do so good,
so charitable an Action, for the relief of his afflicted Servants. And I return
hearty thanks to You also, and do very much rejoice in that Piety and godly
Sincerity of your Spirit, by which you endeavor, by your Love unto the
Brethren, to testify your Love and Duty to our dearest Lord. I see you are no
respecter of Persons, nor Opinions, but that you enquire after the Power of
Godliness; and I am very much delighted to consider, that you make a charitable
Judgment of your Brethren, who are under another Dispensation. As long as the
Understandings of Men differ, there will be variety of Judgments; but the Work
of God, and of Religion, goes forward, while we have but one Heart, and one
Spirit. Sir, I hope you will have great cause to rejoice, when you shall hear
that God is glorified on your behalf, and that you by your liberal Alms cause
humble Thanksgivings to be made to God. For my own particular, I shall by God's
assistance do the Office of a faithful Steward, in the ministering of your
Liberality; and I pray God to accept it at your hands, and to reward it
sevenfold into your Bosom. Sir, I humbly take my leave, and rest,

Your very affectionate Friend and Servant in the Lord Jesus, JER, TAILOR.
Feb. 13. 1657.
This following is a Preamble of a Letter, R. R. writ to the Earl of Windsor.
Jan. 10. 1662.
My Lord,
FOr some time I scrupled, and durst call no Man Lord or Master, which
proceeded from Tradition received from Elders, and from the Letter of the
Scripture, which says, Call no Man Master. But having since that in my self
felt a more sure Word, viz. the Image or Talent of God, (to wit) Truth in the
inward parts, by and through which I see and know how to give to God those
things which belong to him, and unto Caesar likewise his due. For as with my
Soul I own God only to be my Lord and Teacher, so over my outward Humanity (for
diverse respects) I can as truly call Man my Lord and Master also, etc.

An Abstract of a Letter R. R. wrote to an endeared Friend of his, called a
Quaker, 1657.
Dear Heart,
HOw is it that I hear in thee a Voice of weeping, Rachel mourning for her
Children? Wottest thou not that I must go about my Father's business? and that
for this end I came into the World, to bear witness to the Truth? Was not my
self, and many more innocent ones cast out from amongst them, and sold into
Egypt? Many dark things laid to our charge, which we never said nor did? I
would not have thee one with them in their Work, to fight their Battles, either
to justify the wicked, or condemn the innocent, lest thou partake with them in
their Judgments, (as Jehosaphat did in siding and making a Confederacy with
Ahab) who daily impose upon their Brethren, and will not let them go free, to
act what the Lord requires of them. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how often have I
sought to find Love in thee toward thy Brethren? and when it fled, how often
have I pursued after it?

I believe I might have been received again into fellowship amongst them, but
then I must first have turned the Truth of God into a Lie, and spoke evil of
those things I knew to be good, denying the Testimony which I knew the Lord
gave me to finish, and so have betrayed Jesus: which thing I shall never do, so
long as the Breath of the Almighty is in me, nor call any Man Master of my
Light and Spirit, save God only. And if now at length the Lord has seen the
Oppression of his People, and is coming to plead their Cause, or has raised up
any to be a Rod or Scourge, to whip out of his Temple those that have bought or
sold the Innocent for a thing of naught; what am I, that I should resist, or
judge evil of them that do his Will? Or if any be commanded of the Lord to feast
Haman, why should Mordecai be offended thereat? For my part, I have long seen
wherein the Liberty and Freedom of the Son consists, and that this is he that
loves his Enemy, that rewards evil with good, and does not salute a Brother
only; this is He that is Heir of all things, and must reign, tho at present his
Face be more marred than any Man's; and blessed is he that is not offended in
Him, but is made conformable in all things to Him, he must reign also. But he
that judges his Brother in Meats or Drinks, or any other outward thing, that
contends more for his own Traditions, than the Commands of God, that will not
let his Brother go free to worship God where and how he requires, I say, this
is the Son of the Bondwoman, which must be cast out, and shall not inherit. I
am not troubled to see the Lord coming to plead the Cause of the Innocent, and
to make a separation betwixt the two Seeds, who have served the Lord, and who
have served their own ends; and blessed are they who with joy can stand the
Trial.

O dear Heart, enter thou not into their Secrets, nor say a Confederacy with
blood-thirsty Men, who have usurped Authority over the measure of God in their
Brethren, and with Herod have slain the Man-child begot in many, and would not
hear his Testimony, nor suffer his Voice to be uttered. As the Lord lives,
their Nakedness shall be no longer hid, and what has long lain secret, must
now be preached upon the Housetop, and herein the Innocent can and will
rejoice.

I am Bone of their Bone, and Flesh of their Flesh, who are innocent, and of an
upright Heart with the Lord in what is made manifest; such a one is as my
Father and Mother, Sister and Brother.

Another to the same Person, 1658.
O That thou were not one with them that have condemned their innocent Brethren
in Meats and Drink, etc. all which are but shadows of good things, and must
perish; but the Body is Christ. For my part, my Hat to me is no more than any
other part of my Apparel; and I find I may without sin show the Love I have in
my Heart to any by putting off my Hat, and that it is to me all one as if I
gave my hand, and signifies the same thing: Yet I would not have all others to
follow me in this, but first to examine themselves, and so let them eat and
drink, left they eat and drink their own damnation. Neither dare I judge any,
that can love his Enemy, or do good to the good and to the bad, or that can
become all things (that is not evil in the sight of God) to all Men, to save
all; I am persuaded such do well to follow the Lord, when he leads into these
things. I dare not judge such to be Men-pleasers, or to be one with the wicked
in their evil, but rather judge such an one to be an Example to all the Children
of God, as being most like our heavenly Father. For my part I have great reward
with the Lord, for bearing my Testimony against this Spirit of Imposition,
which has been as high as Heaven, but my hope is, the Lord will bring it down
as low as Hell, and in this Faith have I rest.

An Abstract of a Letter written by R. R. to R. M. a Quaker.
ONe of you being offended at my speaking a few words in your Meeting, said, He
knew my Spirit to be in opposition: T o whom I replied, If it be so framed,
ought not I to be faithful to what it requires? Certainly the Majesty of true
Love and Meekness would have born what I had to offer, and not have been
offended; truly a little Christian Patience, and some of that Perfection talked
of, would have taught you this Lesson. And you might know this, that he that is
the Light of the World, is set as well for the Fall as for the Rise of many in
Israel. But you have long dwelt here, usurping Authority to condemn those, God
has justified. Through such carnal reasoning, (as you have brought against me)
has the first appearance of Truth, in all Ages been opposed by the Builders
and Masters of Assemblies in all Sects, who are so right in their own eyes,
that they can hardly acknowledge Truth that comes after them to have been before
them, (as John did, John 3.30.) this Self-denial being too great a thing for
him to do, that sticks in form, or that is born of a Woman; such, with Rachel,
cannot live except they bring forth Children in their own likeness. There are
many innocent, meek, and tenderhearted amongst you, that are and shall be
willing in the day of his Power, to follow him in his Resurrection, through the
fellowship of his sufferings, despising the shame of being cast out of your
Synagogues, and of being disowned of their Mother's Children, who in Patience
and great Tribulations will follow the Lamb, and possess his Crown. And these
are the true Tribe of Joseph (or Jesus) that are fit to make Princes in all
Lands.

And whereas one of you asked me, Whether I would have you one with the World,
and turn Drunkards, Cheaters? etc. I replied: Can thou not see a middle Path
to walk in betwixt these two Extremes of open Profaneness, and close spiritual
Wickedness in high places? nor put a difference between the true Christ that
fills all, and is the Firstborn in every Creature, and the false Christ,
that is only here or there, in that Mountain, or in this secret Chamber,
covered over with appearing righteous before Men, yet inwardly ravening, and
with Simon Magus, in the bitter Spirit, giving Wormwood with Gall to drink,
pushing with the side and shoulder, and piercing all those innocent Ones, that
can call neither you nor no Man Master of their Spirits, save God only, nor
receive your Mark, nor yet the Number of your Name?

And is not this the Abomination that makes desolate, and stands in the holy
Place (the Heart) where Love and Innocence should dwell? And Proselytes thus
begot, and made, tho appearing never so righteous, whether such be not
sevenfold more the Children of Hell than before? let the wise in Heart judge.
Well, my Friends, when you come to understand how an Habitation may be built
for the Devil by your Anger, Wrath, Backbiting, evil Surmises, etc. and by your
hearkening to, and following after Men, observing of Days, and appointed
Meetings, together with other Traditions, and outward Observations, which the
Power of Love leads not to, but are begotten and continued, either by the
Letter, or else Man's vain Philosophy, or Example; in which having once lost
your Guide, viz. the pure and single movings of the Lord, as by a great and
strong Wind ye are whirled about, and left to your own Thoughts and
Imaginations, where the Lord is not felt; so you run again into those outward
Observations, where once his presence was, and there are struck blind, as the
Assyrians, Egyptians, Israelites, etc. were, and as Saul was, that ye utterly
lose the Door and Way that leads to Life. Read that can understand. And here
[in this Spirit) is the silly Woman led captive, ever learning and talking of
Truth, Light, and Love to Enemies, and brotherly Kindness, Meekness,
Gentleness, and of patient bearing and suffering of all things, but never able
to come into the things talked of, no nearer than in show or in
self-imagination and outward appearance only. And in Truth I have been often made
to cry out amongst you, how that I saw Christ must suffer, and that he must die
(or disappear) and then afterward rise, and enter into Glory. Which thing I
now see you have not rightly understood. And if these my words seem to you as a
Dream, yet why are you angry with me for my Dream's sake? But these things I
leave to the Judgment of the Great Day near at hand, wherein many will be
smitten with Sickness, Weakness, and the Sleep of Death, because they
discerned not Love to be the Lord's Body, and could not patiently wait for the
Resurrection thereof, but have set up other Idols in their Hearts instead of
him; yet as for the innocent, harmless, merciful, meek, loving and kind hearted
amongst you, and of every Nation, such shall obtain and inherit the Blessing of
Peace, Plenty, and Rest, which none can disturb, but not till the last Enemy
(or Enmity, which is the Sting of Death) be destroyed, and put underfoot. Thus
by the Life of Love Death loses its Sting, the Grave its Victory, the Law its
Strength, and all resigned to the Conquest of Love unfeigned. Then are the
Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ, and he
alone reigns. Go ye with all Sects, and learn what this means.

Oft-times many amongst you (in much contempt) have asked me, Whom I have
coverted? and where the Fruit of my Ministry is? To whom I now answer, That my
Work is with the Lord, having delivered up my Kingdom unto him, my self can do
nothing; but as Love moves, so I either go or come, speak or am silent: And I
am not sent to call the Righteous, or to gather into Sects or Opinions; nor is
it the ground of my rejoicing to have a Multitude follow me, or to flock about
the outward Court, or that Devils themselves are made subject; no, I know no
true Happiness, nor a Kingdom everlasting in these things; neither see I any
reason to prefer one Sect above another; only such, whose Names are written in
the Book of Love, and by it are gathered into the Life thereof, those to me are
most choice and precious. My Ministry is neither, Lo here, nor, Lo there: I am
not so sent to preach, but as a Light to the Gentiles, and to open Mysteries,
interpret Dreams and hard Sayings, that have lain hid ever since the World
(that lies in the Apostasy) began, that so the blind in Heart may see the
things that belong to their Souls Peace and VVelfare, that so every one in all
Forms may sit under his present Attainment (as his proper Vine) and drink
Waters of Life from his own Cistern, without the least spot or defilemenr of
Enmity in their Feasts of Charity, both with the Lord, and with one another.
And who will be offended at the foolishness of this Preaching, except it be the
Scribes and Fair-sayers in every Sect, that are highly exalted in themselves
(and in others) because of their Gifts both in praying and speaking, and in
their Zeal, earnestness, and fervent working of their own Spirit, where sits
that painted and well-favoured Harlot (upon all Waters or Sects) speaking as
with the Tongue of Men and Angels, the Words of Truth, and of the Fame of Life
and Love, but from that Principle which leads into the Chambers of Death, in
all which things (the Good Man not being at home, nor endowing with Power from
on high) great Abominations, Murders, and Adulteries are committed in Spirit
and Heart, as in the matter of Peor, in the days of Balak and Balaam, Figures
of this untoward Generation, whose Ear being once opened, heard the words of
God, and with the single eye saw and knew the secret Counsel of the Most High,
but afterward falling into a Trance, (mark) into his own Imaginations, he then
opened the double Eye (for he had two) and this saw Evil, and loved the Wages
of Unrighteousness; yet nevertheless what he had once seen with the single Eye,
he could talk of (as you do) and so speak of exceeding high and great
Mysteries, (as one having all Knowledge (mark) that puffs up) so could speak of
the Seed of God, its beginning and end, and of the Light or Way through which
it passes, and that it should be glorious, and inherit the Blessing, and could
wish his last end in it. Mark, O Balak, and Balaam, who are but one, from thy
own Mouth and Practice is thy Condemnation. Thus Man's Spirit (the Witch of
Endo^) being raised to its height, and received into the Consciences of others,
and upheld there, first began the Apostasy; and in this Spirit does the
Apostasy still stand and subsist, even to this very day, in every Sect? and if
any one of them could obtain their Will, they would be as great as the Pope,
and make all others bow, and come in to them, else neither buy nor sell, nor
live in Love and Peace with any. But this bitter envying is not so with the
God-like and true Christians, such bless, and not curse. Nothing will be
acceptable but what proceeds from the Root of Jesse, and is the Offspring of
the pure Movings of Love, all else is but as the Offering of Cain, and as the
Repentance of Esau,) which, must be rejected, and cannot inherit the Blessing.

And now Joseph being delivered out of Prison, and the deep Pit wherein his
Brethren had put him, where he passed through diverse Trials and Temptations,
both of Soul and Body; I say, being now risen with Christ, and made Lord over
that Earth which held him, can with boldness speak what he has seen and heard.
And considering how contrary to my Life, which was Peace and good Will to all,
I have been acted in Strife and Contention for near these seven years, (ever
since the difference first brake forth betwixt G. F. and J. N.) the which I
call my strange Work, as to Man, and to my self. But the Lord, who does in
Heaven and Earth what he pleases, in that day showed me, that was the least
able (for this Work of War) of all my Brethren. Many things that began to
appear, and to wax strong, which were for destruction, and the one thing
needful, viz. Love in Truth, even amongst Brethren, much neglected; so, as the
Lord commanded, I sold my Coat of Peace and good Will to all, and bought a
Sword, the which I girded upon my Thigh, and in the strength of God's Command
drew it, and therewith spared neither small nor great; yet my chief Aim ever
were against Agag, the fat and fairest, the King and Head of that bitter Spirit
Amalek, which would not suffer them to pass peaceably through his Land whom the
Light guided out of their received Traditions; and notwithstanding their Talk
of Light and Love, such soon selt and found the Dragon's Power, and Herod,
(viz. G, F.) with his Men of War, to stand in the cross Ways, ready to cut off
all the Innocent, that would not own him King, and call him Master, receive
their Mark, and Number of their Name, against which Spirit the Sword of the
Lord has been sharp, and will most certainly chop the same in pieces, as Herbs
for the Pot. And though this was War indeed, yet forasmuch as the ground and
root thereof had the Command of God, and Love to Truth, such Weapons are
Spiritual, I say, it was a War in Heaven.

Well, Friends, Joseph has been with the Lord in the Deep, and has there seen
his Wonders, wherefore receive these things kindly and friendly from his
Treasury, they may prove a supply to you in this Day of Famine, not of Bread,
but of the Loving Kindness of the Lord toward one another. And be not offended
at what is spoken, tho it tend to the throwing down of Man into the Dust, yet
if God and his Grace be hereby exalted, give up Self to the Death of the Cross.
It is good to die with the Lord, tho Flesh and Blood see not this. Neither be
you troubled nor offended at him that declares these things, tho he seems
sometimes to appear as a Man walking on the Sea, which is rough, foaming, and
tempestuous.

Joseph is now out of Prison, and has no more Conscience of an Idol; to him no
Idol is anything, neither Paul, nor Apollos, no, nor Christ after the Flesh he
knows no more, neither their Circumcision, nor Baptism, nor any outward thing,
nothing but Grace that works by Love. I have no dependence, nor Worship, nor
Fear, nor Care for any thing, save that I worship the only alone true LORD GOD,
who is Love; any thing acted out of that, I value not.

And I clearly see, that such a People the Lord will bring forth, as the praise
of his new Creation, that in the quietness and stilness of their Spirits (which
is Jacob's Ladder) do patiently wait for the immediate Movings of Love (which
is Joseph's Cup wherein he prophesied) freely resigned to the Will of God in
all things, relying on his Grace for their only Guide, and not so much as lift
up a Tool, or make any Noise or Complaint in his Work, nor (with Vzzah) hold up
a hand of Fear or Care that it should fall, or that his Will should not be
accomplished and brought to pass in its due time and season. No, Friends, those
that have hitherto attained, are not of them that look back to see what others
will do, but have pressed on to the Mark, Christ (the Love of God in their
Hearts) his Stature and Fullness, where they see their Souls saved, and have
learned always to pray, Thy Will be done; whose Will is their Sanctification,
Salvation, and Glorification, etc.

An Abstract of some of R. Rich's Letters to G.F. J.C. and several others.
IT is written of Jeroboam, that he set up two Calves, much like Thee, Thou,
and the Hat; putting also a necessity of bowing down to them, and worshipping,
as ye do, saying, These are thy Gods which brought thee out of Egypt, that so
the Kingdom might not return to David, which is the Love of God. I urge not
this by way of Censure, as rashly judging any, even the meanest appearances
which God draws out the Spirits of his People in, but rather to show you the
Idolatry of such Limitations, which in these outward things you lay upon the
boundless variety of that unspeakable Spirit of Truth; for I have heard some of
the chief Rulers amongst you say, That if any return to the Hat again (meaning
putting it off in Salutation) then all their Profession is lost; as if this, or
such like, were the God that redeemed them. And indeed who is there upon the
Face of the whole Earth, that fears God, and works Righteousness, if he
receive not your Mark [of Thee, and Thou, and the Hat,] may be accepted or
owned as a Brother amongst you?

And what is your Form of Words in Thee and Thou, but a customary Singularity
in Speech, another Mode of speaking than is commonly used, which no way
respects the Truth of what is spoken? Pray tell me, is not Truth (where
understood) the Language of Canaan, in what Speech or Dialect soever expressed?
Or did the Disciples of Christ, in their Declarations of Truth to every Man in
his own Language, refuse the Dialect either of the Medes, Persians, Egyptians,
or any other, by which they could only convey the Truth to their
Understandings? Or is Thou more acceptable to God than You, in the declaration
of Truth? I believe those Words, and that Language which proceeds from the
Spirit of Love, is best, and most acceptably received by them that are in the
same Spirit.

And what is there in refusing to swear after that manner the Magistrate
commands, while in the mean time you will call God to witness to what you
affirm for Truth? Is it any more than to oppose the Magistrates Form by your
own? Does not he that speaks the Truth, and calls God and Man to witness the
same, swear by Christ Jesus, the Truth and Oath of God? Does true swearing
consist in the mere Ceremony of kissing the Book? or stands it not rather in
calling God to record to the Truth, which we declare? And yet this manner of
swearing is owned by G. F. and his Friends, and frequently practiced by them,
both by Word and Writing. And what is all this, but to swallow the Camel, and
swear substantially, while you strain at a Gnat of some small Ceremony, which
the Magistrate thinks fit to enjoin? perhaps more to obtain Credit from those,
who have Conscience in such a Form of Swearing, rather than to offend them that
know how to distinguish between the Ceremony and the Substance? And is not
Verily, verily, an Asseveration, and kind of Oath, and more than Yea and nay?
And does not St. Paul say (who had Christ in him) that he called God to record?
etc. And is not this a great Oath? And whether you have any other thing to rule
and guide you in not swearing, save the Which tho it says Swear not at all,
yet no where forbids laving on the hand, or kissing the Book, the only thing
you scruple.
Letter? And whether that be not more against you than with you? let the wise
in Heart, who are acquainted with the Scriptures, judge in this Case.

Thou say, That the Gospel of Christ is Yea and Amen, and that it leads not
back to what it led from. I say, This has been a Principle long received and
taught by your Teachers, and indeed has occasioned much Persecution to the
Innocent amongst you, to call your outward Observations and Traditions the
Gospel (or Truth); for when any have bin carried out of the way of your
received Traditions into any new Appearance, how have you upon this ground
risen up against them, with Floods of Reproaches to devour them. To which
Principle, or rather Opinion of yours, I answer, and say, That the Gospel,
Truth, or Kingdom stands not in any outward Observations; for why may not the
Lord do both in Heaven and Earth whatsoever he pleases? and lead his People
howsoever or wheresoever he will? How dare any find fault with him? And who
shall say unto him, What do thou? He leads Abraham, Joseph, and all Israel
into Egypt, yea, Jesus of Nazareth into the Wilderness, and does, when he
pleases, turn the Course of his Dispensation, leading them back again from
whence they came. Why may not God command Moses to set up a Brazen Serpent,
yea, and give power to it also, and then again withdraw his power from it, and
by his Light lead Hezekiah to pull it down, and call it Nebushtan, which is an
Idol, or nothing, although to the very day of its dissolution the Children of
Israel burnt Incense to it, supposing, it may be, (as you also do) that the
Lord would not relinquish that Appearance once established by Himself. The Lord
has had his sundry ways of appearing to his People, as in the Mount of
Samaria, and at Jerusa;em; and yet she that was limited in her self, was led by
the Light from all this, to worship the Father every where, and in all places
and things in the Spirit and Truth. Christ appeared in diverse Forms, as the
Scripture testifies, yet no other (save them only that saw him) would believe
the report of him, according to their Testimony, but counted their Words (as
Joseph's Brethren did his Dreams) idle Fables, as ye do, while you judge your
Brethren, whom the Lord has visited in a different manner from your selves.
What if the Lord will so strangely appear, as to leave the Jew, and turn to the
Gentile, to call them a People, that were not a People? What if God will make
you that have been first and highest in Profession, last and lowest in the
Kingdom? What if Capernaum, now exalted to the Heavens, should be brought down
to Hell? It will then be manifest, that the Almighty is not confined to either
Persons or Appearances. But further, why may not the Lord lead Mordecai openly
to withstand the Pride and Oppression of Haman, and at the same time lead
Hester in a clean contrary work to feast him, hereby overcoming Evil with Good?
If one Person should act these two parts, which seem so contrary to each other,
as is Light to Darkness, being led thereto by the Light, whether that may not
be accepted of God, tho all Men should therefore condemn it? And why may not
one abstain from Meats to day, and to morrow see a liberty to eat? or have
Conscience of an Idol now, and anon know it to be nothing? Were not some led
to sacrifice, circumcise, and baptize, as being all beautiful, while the Power
of God was in them? but that being departed, the Practisers of those things may
now tell you, that they avail and profit nothing. Surely did but all Sects
knowingly consider, that in my Fathers House are many Mansions, and that his
Commands are exceeding broad (and various) that there are diversities of
Administrations and Operations, yet the same Spirit working all, and in all:
and was the Substance (which is the Grace appearing to all) more minded by
Professors, and the Form less; also were the weightier Matters of the Law, as
Mercy, Justice, Truth, and Love, more in estimation than the lesser, which only
stand in outward Observations, and are but the outside of the Dish and Platter
in all Forms, there would not be such tearing one another for the Form's sake.
For in the Substance and weightier Matters all People of all sorts do without
controversy agree, yet every one in and for the House of his Imagery rends and
devours his Brother, not equally fashioned and made up in the same proportion
of Understanding, as touching our outward Behavior in the Truth's Profession,
by which the Image of the Heavenly is indeed so defaced, that the pure Love
which thinks no ill (amongst all Professors of Godliness) is very rarely and
hardly found. These are indeed the bitter Waters that cause the Curse upon all
Sects, Nations, Tongues, and Peoples, as at this day; this devours the Earth,
and makes all desolate; this profanes the Lord's own Sanctuary, and the Princes
thereof, and causes Jacob to be given to the Curse, and Israel to Reproaches.
For this kind of Spirit of bitter envying is indeed that City Meroz, which no
way helps the Lord in his Work, for it does not beget to love. And is it not
most just that that Name or Form should be left for a Curse, that despises the
Innocent for these outward things? but I trust, and am assured, that the Lord
will in his due time free the Earth from this Curse.

Thou ask me, How I could compare or liken thy Friends Actions to the Pope,
or to them in New England, calling them your Forefathers, seeing (as thou
say) thy Friends bear their Testimony against the Pope's Idolatry and
Persecution, and also have suffered Deach for a Testimony against the
New England Oppression? To all which I answer, and say, That the Spirit of
Persecution is but one throughout all Generations and Forms, tho never so
refined; for he that murders in New England is the same that imprisons at Rome,
yet each bear a Testimony against one another Forms. The same Spirit of
Persecution have I seen and observed amongst those which thou call Friends,
who for a Song of Zion, or a Shout of inward Gladness, or any other thing that
suites not with their Traditions or Forms, can with the same Spirit of
Persecution cast out of their Synagogues, smite with the Fist of Wickedness,
and wound with the venomed Arrow of their Reproaches, those who cannot submit,
or join with them in their way. And this is not falsely to accuse the Brethren,
as thou chargest me withal, for any to tell you what they have heard and seen
amongst you; but rather a just return of your own Money into your own Sacks,
that you may measure your dealings with the Innocent by your own Practices; and
when the Witness of God arises amongst you, and shows you your
Transgressions, and wherein you have offended those that have been otherwise
acted than our selves, then will you know that these things are Truth, and the
Desolation that shall be in your House at that day, shall testify to your Faces
that a Prophet has been amongst you. When (mark what I say) it shall so come
to pass, that the same Wrath and Vengeance shall break out upon you from
others, which you have heaped upon the Backs of those who were justified in
their Hearts and Ways before the Lord, then know (and you shall assuredly) that
I have not spoken Lies unto you, or forged a false Divination amongst you. What
I have here charged upon some, I would not be understood to lay it upon all
that have been called, and are known by the Name of Quakers. I know the Lord
has his People amongst them; as in all Forms, both of Jews and Gentiles, such
as love and fear the Lord, doing the thing which is just and right; and such
are accepted with me, as Bone of my Bone, and as my Brother Benjamin, that came
of the Freewoman, and are in that Freedom fitted to act in all Forms, as the
Lord their Light shall lead them, that they may replenish the Earth. And those
who are come to this Freedom, viz. to give the Light its Liberty of leading,
according as it enlightens every Man that comes into the World in all Forms and
Appearances, the Curse is taken away, the Enmity is departed, and the Earth
become the Lord's, and his Christ's. Let him that can, receive it, as does

R. R.

And when your Work is done, and come to an end, then shall the Stone from Sion
you stumbled at, be set up with shouting, crying Grace, Grace unto it. Zech.
4.7.
THere are diverse Operations and Dispensations, yet all good, as having their
beginning and End in God. And why therefore may not God enjoin that as an
Ordinance to day, and give his power to it also, which to morrow he will lay
aside as useless? and by his withdrawing his Power from it, leave it no better
than an Idol? Such was the Brazen Serpent; such was the Temple and Tabernacle;
such were the Legal Offerings, the Jewish Ceremonies and Sacrifice; and such
also are many things at this day, (both amongst the Quakers and other Sects)
which have been Forms and Figures of good things to come, which were beautiful
in their season, whilst the Presence of God filled them, but that being
withdrawn, are become dead and cold, as Idols, of no use. Wherefore my advice
is, that all Men walk as they see and have received from the Lord, and none to
look out at others, or to call any Man, Master, or Father of their Spirits,
save God only. And if the Lord commands any to forsake Father or Mother, the
Forms and Traditions they were brought up in, ought not all rather to obey God
than Man? Consider this, G. F. and whether to forsake our own Guide, and to
follow thee, or any Number of People that call themselves a Church (who take
upon them to impose upon their Brethrens Consciences) be not Apostasy? And
whether this Usurpation did not at first lead the Church of Rome into the
Apostasy? And whether it will not the second time lead the Quakers to
apostatize from the true Faith once delivered to them? let the wise in Heart
judge.

J. C.

THou accusest me of being fallen, and deeply revolted from the Truth, and of
being brutish and uncivil at your Meetings, etc. What thou have here laid to my
Charge, is not so much by far, as thy Generation at sundry times has also cast
on the Innocent and upright-hearted, even all manner of Evil, for bearing
record to the Truth as made manifest in the Light, viz. by witnessing to small
and great, that the Lord is my Shepherd and Teacher alone, and that I needed no
Man to teach me, save him only; and that to those who had received the
Anointing, it was sufficient to bring to Peace and Rest with God and Man, and
to preserve Union and Communion with Him in all his Creation. And for this, and
my rejoicing which daily I have in Christ Jesus, my Lord, have I suffered all
these things at your hands, and been set at naught by Herod, and his Men of
War, even by those amongst you that would be accounted Somebody, who desire
pre-eminence, and to have Dominion over the Faith of others; and that glory in
making Proselytes, and to have a Multitude to follow them, calling you Masters
or Teachers: For by such, and in this manner, have I long and often received your
Arrows, even bitter Words and Writings, which sometimes, as I saw cause, I have
returned back again into your own Bosoms; and this you call a wrangling and
unruly Spirit. At present I have little more to say, than that I am resolved to
be faithful to what is committed unto me, and to declare the same to day, and
to morrow, and also the third day, even till the Body be perfected, and Him set
upon the Throne, even that Light that is in true Love, whose right it is to
reign, (which thing tell Herod, that Fox, your King;) so that all may have
Peace and Rest in Him, who is only worthy of Praise, Honor, and Glory alone,
even so says my Spirit, Amen. I might have said much more (in return to thine)
but that I see and know that Words and Declarations, tho never so true, unless
the Life it self speak them, and go along with them, have but little strength.
And I could also tell thee, that to forsake your Form yea, and to speak against
it too, were not to forsake Truth, as thou chargest. And is it not strange that
you should so complain of my disturbing your Meetings, in a Song, or few words
of Truth, when as your selves have gone to others assembled, even with railing
Accusations, calling them, Dumb Dogs, Liars, Hirelings, Baal's Priests, etc.
yet cannot bear with such as come to admonish you?

O that the time were come, that those who desired Liberty of Conscience, would
give it to others! I know you cannot believe the Truth when told you, nor cease
from reproaching, judging and condemning it; neither will you let the Innocent
go free, to serve the Lord according as their Light shall lead them, till the
Judgments you have pronounced against the Innocent fall upon your own Heads.
For I know that the Lord has poured out upon you a deep Spirit of Slumber,
which has so blinded your Eyes, and hardened your Hearts, that in seeing you
should not see, neither perceive the Truth in things that differ. And there is
yet a Treasure, a Dispensation of Grace, where you have as yet (by reason of
your Self-exaltation, and bitter Spirit) seen but little into, the which some
have seen, felt, and handled. To this you must all stoop and bow, tho never so
high, before you find Peace and Rest to your Souls, or be free from vain
Contention and Strife.

R. R. to M. B. and other Quakers.
THis I have to say unto thee, or rather to G. F. who has begot many of you
into his Image, That you no longer tempt any of the innocent Lambs of Christ to
withdraw from the leading and teaching of the Unction of God, which is Christ,
to follow the Letter, or your Teachings or Traditions, wherein you must and
shall perish in the dark Wilderness of your own Imaginations: for the Lord has
sworn in his Wrath, that you who call your selves, Good old Friends, and the
Israel of God, who have so falsely accused, condemned, and bitterly persecuted
your innocent Brethren, (for those things the Lord has and does justify) shall
never inhabit the good Land.

I know G. F. is raised of God for this very end, to try, refine, and purify
many, as Pharaoh was; and tho many fall in the Trial under his Power, yet many
will be delivered into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

I likewise see, that daily more and more will fall off from that Body; and
that some that separate from them, will with Daniel stand in their Lot, and
follow the Lord in the Spirit of the Lamb more fully than they have done;
whilst they that oppose, shall stand with Lot's Wife, turned into a Pillar of
Salt, continuing their preaching up Truth in Words without Power, whilst others
baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.

Thou writest of my going to the Steeple-house: To which I answer, Blessed are
those that have Rest, Peace, and Satisfaction in themselves! for they that look
forth, are like to find but little in this the day of God's searching Jerusalem
with Candles, wherein he will stain the Pride and Glory of all Flesh.

R. R. in Answer to some Friends, not Quakers.
YOu judge me to be a Ranter, and to hold their Principles. I can truly say, I
have been but little acquainted with that People, or with their Principles.

I would not be thought to be an Advocate for the loose and licentious
Practices of any sort of People, much less for Them, who (from the itching
Notions of Liberty) have run without their Guide into the excess of all Riot
and Profaneness, who while they greedily catch at the Bait, are caught with
the Hook, till a Dart strike through their Liver, and they are led with the
Fool to the Correction of the Stocks, and there plagued with their own
Iniquities.

I desire this may be shown to Mr. Bacon, as to all others who seem to stumble
at my Love to this dark Beelzebub, this mad ranting Crew.

THe time is coming, and now is, that we shall not know and own each other, as
we are of one Sect or outward way, but as the Grace and Principle of God
appears in each other, the Love of God shed abroad in our Hearts; and where
this is witnessed, thither will the Upright resort and gather.

If you see any dividing among the Religious Parties, take you notice of that.
I know every one must divide, till all unite in the Word in the Heart.

My Love flows to all that in uprightness of Heart serve the Lord in any Form.
For as all Forms are alike to me, so is the Substance, the Power of Godliness
also; and although Uprightness God accepted in all Forms, and suffered all Sects
to walk in them, yet now calls all Men to reject the evil in each Form, and
to wait on Him to be their Teacher from henceforth and for ever.

J. N. and J. P. tho dead, yet speak, who declared they were to cease from
words even of Truth, spoken from the comprehending part of Man's Understanding,
and from [thus] speaking in set Meetings, and so to give way for a greater
Glory, viz. the Spirit's teaching, leading, and speaking in the Saints.

Also they declared, that they had received greater Wounds from the House of
their Friends, than from the House of their Enemies.

And I can assure you, they who meddle with the Quakers had need be fenced
within and without, with the whole Armor of God; Truth, and love to
Righteousness, ( David^s Sling and Stone) and enabled to use both hands, the
left as well as the right, the Wisdom of the Serpent, as the Innocence of the
Dove.

And truly till the Spirit of Love and Reconciliation be brought forth,
wherewith every Christian shall willingly leave each other to the guidance of
God's holy Spirit of Grace (in that Form or Way they are persuaded to walk in)
the Strife which is occasioned by outward Traditional Observations will never
cease.

And I have this further to declare to all the World, to Jew, Gontile,
Barbarian, and Christian, (tho I know it will be an Offense and Stone of
stumbling to G. F. and all Masters of Assemblies in every Sect, who prescribe,
impose, and would have Dominion over the Faith of others) that the Eternal God
(who wills not the death of any Sinner) has sent his dear Son Emanuel, his
Light and Spirit of Grace into the World, his everlasting Covenant, a Divine
Law writ in every Man's Heart, that whosoever believes in Him, and follows
Him, shall have Eternal Life.

And this Divine Law, and Word in the Heart, is the Ensign to gather together
all things into Himself, and to present every Man perfect in God, being thereby
sanctified, justified, and saved from their Sins. To which Word in the Heart,
God's Preacher, his Law, and Covenant of Grace to all the World, do I recommend
all Sects and Opinions, as the only Rule of their Souls Progress into
everlasting Peace and Rest.

R. R.

G. H. Barbados, November. 25. 1662.
LAst seventh day I was at the Bridge Town, visiting those Friends in Prison;
as I parted from them, I spoke to H. Fell, to consider wherein I might be
serviceable to them, in supplying any of their Wants; and told him, I was very
willing in some small proportion to bear a part in their Sufferings: and
therefore desire thee to supply them with what may be needful, to the value of
2000 or 3000 Pound of Sugar. For as I then told H. F. although I have some
difference with them as to their Form and Practice, yet notwithstanding, in the
Principle of Love and Light I am one with them, yea, and all Men, in suffering
for the Testimony of a good Conscience toward God, although that thing for which
they suffer (in my Light) be rendered as a mere Idol, which indeed is nothing.
For I well know, and have long seen, that Men's Consciences are variously
guided; some by the Spirit of Love, under whose Leadings is the truest and most
perfect Liberty; others by the Law or Letter, where (with the outward Jew) they
are held in Bondage to Meats, Drinks, set-Days of Meetings, and diverse Forms,
and other carnal Ordinances. Others may be led barely by the Traditions of
their Fathers, in and after the Laws and Customs of Nations, or by the
Authority of that Church or Fellowship under which they have been educated, and
herein may be zealously devoted to those Rudiments which in themselves are poor
and beggarly, nay, such as the Reason of Man (if not captivated) would abhor to
be brought under. But in and amongst all these, he that fears God, and does the
thing that is just and right toward Man, is accepted with Him, and is one with
whom I am in perfect Union. And if any, because he thinks himself wiser and
higher than such an one, presume to be his Judge or Lawgiver, this is that
which exalts it self above all that is called God, and dishonors Christ
his Head, that true Light, wherewith every one is enlightened that comes into
the World. And indeed if we will not allow the Light (as it is received) to
lead every one, we shall never be free from smiting our Fellow Servants, and
slaying that innocent and just one in each other, whom the Lord has set up as
a Ruler over the Nations, and for an Ensign of Light in every Man's Conscience.
Thus indeed and in truth I am for the free Leadings of the Light in all that
profess the same, but wherein their Practice falls short of this their
Profession, I do confess I stand therein at a distance from them. For I allow
not that any creep into Houses, (to wit, the Conciences of others,) and impose
there; for this is to lead captive silly Women, or to force upon the weak
Understanding a Conformity to those things which the Light of Love never moved
to, but is rather acted from a Principle of Fear, lest they should be call out
of the Synagogue by those who usurp Authority, and are called by them Masters.
The consideration of the freeness of thy Mind occasioned me to impart to thee a
taste of my Understanding in these things, which thou may either accept or
refuse, as the Light in thee shall make manifest. I am a Friend to thee, and
the whole Creation of God, in the Principle of Light, which is Love unfeigned.

R. R.

To William Lord Willoughby, Governor of the Barbados, etc.
My Lord,
YOu were pleased to express a tender regard to the People called Quakers, also
to require my advice how best they might be preserved as Subjects, with equal
regard to Justice, and the Safety of this Place. Yesterday I acquainted one of
those People with your Lordship's care of them, and after put several Questions
to him touching their Freedom; also urged the Necessity of a Militia to defend
and preserve from those that came to rob and to steal. After many Words pro and
con, I find them settled in this, viz. That Wars proceed (as St. James, chap.
4.1. says) from Men's Lusts, the which they would not help to uphold and
maintain; that they were to love their Enemies, and to have Peace with all Men.
In fine, my Lord, I perceive it is matter of Conscience with them, not to use a
carnal Sword in their own Defense; and do believe that some of them will sooner
lose their Estates and Lives than sin against their Consciences. But to answer
your Lordship's Commands, for advice how this People may be preserved in this
Island, with equal regard to Justice, and the Safety of this Place; My humble
advice is, That seeing for Conscience sake many of them cannot make use of
carnal Weapons, your Lordship would nevertheless protect them, they paying for
their Protection what is just and equal, that the State and Commonweal be not
hindered, but rather bettered and advanced by them. This way the States of
Holland took with the Anabaptists, who held the Scriptures to be their Rule,
neither to swear, nor yet to fight. First; As to swearing, the Magistrate
accommodated them, by taking their Testimony with only declaring the Truth as
in God's Presence, with Hands lifted up, as in token thereof; and this was
sufficient without further Testimony or Words; and these kind of Witnesses
(they being conscientious) have been found the best for discovery of the Truth.
And as to the maintaining of Wars, and other Exigencies of State, those People
paying Scot and Lot as their Neighbors, have quiet and peaceable Protection.
And if all that are able in this Island must of necessity bear Arms to defend
the same, and Quakers for Conscience sake cannot; if the Magistrate cause them
to be taxed for their default, so much, and no more than will find Horse and
Foot in their room, they paying also the just Charge and Trouble of gathering
in the same, I cannot see but such a Course would not only preserve them, but
also answer all just ends of Government. All which I humbly presume, under your
Lordship's Favor and Command, to present unto your Honor's View and
Consideration.

R. R.

These two foregoing Letters show the Tenderness of his Spirit toward all,
even to those that were the most bitter against him.

Abstracts of some Letters to the Lady F. V.
IN the Year 1654 I became a Quaker, which Dispensation of John I was truly
Baptized into, Repentance and amendment of Life; which blotted out all my
former Sins, and for two years time was (in the strength of that Baptism)
carried with delight, both to do and to suffer, even above and beyond my
equals; all which time I lived after the Mode of that Sect; a severe strict
life, a Pharisee of the Pharisees; till in the year 1656, when my dear Brother
J. N. suffered for confessing to Christ in the Saints; my love to that
Testimony made me willing to stand by him in his Sufferings, and to bear his
Cross: for which Testimony the World (the Powers of darkness then ruling) my
Kindred, and my Brethren the Quakers, sold me into Egypt, by their many false
reports; yet there the Lord my God appeared to me, and finding me in my
Innocence wherewith he had clothed me, has ever fince become my exceeding
great Reward.

Nov. 30. 1678.
BY what I have formerly and now sent for England, you may see how I have bin
acted for many years. Lately I have heard a Voice from Heaven saying, Turn thy
Sword into Plowshares and into Pruning Hooks; stay at home, Dress and keep
clean the Garden of Eden [thine own Heart] that no root of bitterness spring up
there. I also now begin to feel an inclination to write out fair that which
long since I have prepared, and to present each of the seven Churches of
Christendom, with an Epistle I formerly intended them. Then will many come to
see beyond the Letter of that Viz. the Gift of 210l. to the 7 Churches An. 1666.
Action, and not the sound of Words only, nor from Mount Sinai, but from Sion,
where it is written, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen, and heard by
all that have an Ear to hear what the Spirit says; at whose Voice of Love our
Friend Lazarus will awake, and rise out of his sleep.

In truth I thought the Epistles promised, would soon have followed my Gift,
but in short time after I came to see, that the day was not for Unity and
Amity, but for biting and devouring one another; so that instead of raising our
Brother Lazarus, we had our hands every one against his Brother, two against
three, and three against two; which work tended to the Crucifying of the Lord
of Life afresh: but I hope the day is dawning, that after Ages [or next
Dispensation] will speak more reverently of Unity and Amity. I have bin made
(contrary to my Nature) a Man of Contention and strife to all the World, one
that at the command of the Lord has sold my Coat (made of Love and Good Will
to all) and bought a Sword, with which I have fought a long and tedious Battle
(of about ten years standing) against all Professors of Moses and of Christ;
which War (I believe) will go on throughout the whole World, to the destruction
of all Idols in all Religions, and to the setting up of Christ Jesus (God's
Word in the Heart, his Priest and Prophet) King over all the Earth. His Fan is
in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, even all the Children of
Light, that they may offer to the Lord, in a clean Vessel (of His own) an
Offering in Righteousness: Wherefore be ye clean [pure Virgins] that bring
forth the Birth of God, and bear the Vessels of the Lord. Thus all that are
baptized into this one Spirit of Love to Truth and Righteousness, stand as
Saviors on Mount Zion, (with the Trump of God in their Hearts) to judge and
save the Mount of Esau, not in a wrathful bitter Spirit, but in the same
loving kindness, wherewith God has judged and saved us; for so will the
Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and
he shall and must reign for ever and ever.

I confess formerly (for a long time) I have had Conscience of an Idol, and
contended only for one sort of People; but now an Idol to me is nothing, and my
present state is, to own that which is of God in any sort of Men, and to become
all things to that of God in all Men (that is not of Sin) that so I may reach,
save, and unite (in the Love of God) all Men to each other in all Religions,
which Love shed abroad in our Hearts is God's Salvation to all Men, even to the
ends of the Earth.

I have here sent my Epistle to the Roman Catholics, that by this you may see
the Pattern of the rest, which Pattern I received some years since from the
Mountain of God's Love, not from Mount Sinai, but from Mount Sion, the
Habitation of the Blessed, the New Jerusalem, who is Father and Mother, Brother
and Sister of all God's Children, who are regenerate, and born again of the
Seed and Spirit of Grace, God's Sons and Daughters. At the revelation of which,
when I saw and considered the end of the Lord in that my saluting of the seven
Churches, my Heart did leap and skip within me, like to a Roe or young Heart
upon the Mountain of Spices. I say, in this Mountain of God's Love (the
sanctified Heart) stands the Savior, Christ, our Lord, (the Spirit of the
Father) who saves his People from their Sins, the which sanctifies and redeems
them from all Iniquity; Who is, who was, and who is to come, one and the same
through all Generations, from everlasting to everlasting.

An. 1677.
And now I shall settle to write out fair what I have prepared for the
remaining seven Churches. That already sent, I think, has no contention or
strife in it; if you see any thing of that Nature, I pray take it out of the
way. My Mind is directed in this Testimony of the universal Love of God to the
World, to receive and treasure up (as in Joseph's Storehouses) all that which
is of God in every Religion, and to hand it forth in this time of Famine (of
Love to God and our Neighbor) which is seen to break in (as an overflowing
Scourge) over all Christendom, not only in Egypt, amongst the Profane, but
amongst Professors of all sorts, who account themselves the Sons of Jacob: And
what I see to be false and reprobate Silver, (the Inventions, Traditions, and
Impositions of Men) to return that back again, as their own Money, in their own
Sacks. And in so doing I hope none will be offended thereat.

You need not be careful or sollicitous in publishing what I send, only when
you feel your Mind in frame, (whether as in a Cloud, or Pillar of Fire) fitting
and preparing to such an end, gently follow after it, as it leads; for they
that are come into the Faith of God's Elect, the second Covenant, do not make
haste, but are entered into their Rest, even into God's everlasting Sabbath of
Rest, where (in the new Covenant of Grace) in Matters Spiritual, they cease
from their own Works, (from laboring and toiling in the first Covenant of
Works,) as He did from His.

The Days approaching are evil to all Worshippers in the outward Court, Lo
here, and Lo there, where the Potsherds of the Earth will dash one against
another, and bring all into Confusion. This is the portion of the Ungodly, that
have not the Birth of God in them. In this time of Trouble will God build his
Church and Temple, the New Jerusalem, in the sanctified Hearts of his People,
wherein he will place his Name for ever. And as for those that worship God in
the Spirit of Truth, such he will save and preserve as his Jewels in the hollow
of his hand. Wherefore to your Tents O Israel, you that are circumcised in
Heart (and Ears) enter ye into your Master's Joy, the Love of God shed abroad
in your Hearts, the Ark and Tabernacle which God (not Man) has pitched in all
the Sanctified, and be therein at Peace with that of God in all his Creation.
So will you come to the everlasting Sabbath of Rest, which God has prepared
for all that love him, and wait for his Appearance.

An. 1678.
More Abstracts of Letters to particular Friends.
I Received yours, which I accepted as an ample Testimony of your endeared
Union with the Bridegroom of our Souls, in which I greatly rejoice to meet you
one in the footsteps of his Companions, enquiring where He makes his Flocks to
rest at Noon, as not willing to shade your self under any false Rest or
Security, but waiting in the Patience and Faith of the Saints, till his Power
of Grace from on high more abundantly shines forth, and overshadows the whole
Earth with the Glory of his Immanuel. This Spirit of Love is the Tree of Life,
whose Leaves are for the healing of the Nations, and under the infinite
spreading Branches thereof, we may all of every Nation, Sect, or People, sit
down together (the Wolf with the Lamb) in safety and peace. In the humble
expectation and patient waiting of my Spirit, for the full manifestation of
this all-saving Grace, I dearly salute you, together with all Saints; in whose
Bodies, as in the Clouds, I see the Lord coming to reconcile all things to
Himself, through the death of Sin, by nailing the Enmity to his Cross, which is
the Power of Love, and by that Life swallow up Death into Victory. As for my
self, it has pleased the Lord to lead me through various Changes and
Operations, showing me the Wonders of his Power. Many years since I heard a
Voice in the Wilderness, preaching Repentance for the Remission of Sins, and to
prepare a Way for the Lord, by putting off the Old Man, with his deeds; under
which Dispensation of the Quakers (as that of Elias and John) I was baptized in
that Cloud, and there abode, till Judgment was brought forth into Victory.
Afterward being called up higher, by receiving a double measure of the Spirit,
sat down in Heavenly Places with Christ Jesus, whence I heard a Voice saying,
In whomsoever I saw the Spirit descending like a Dove, and abiding, ( viz. the
Spirit of Meekness, of Innocence, and of universal Charity.) that this was and
is the Son of God, in whom He is always well pleased. And Him (not my self) I
preach for Salvation to the ends of the Earth; Him who was before Abraham was,
and is now and for ever the same, throughout all Generations. From which root
of Jesse did proceed the Salutation of me R. R. to the seven Churches of
Christendom, that all of every Form or Sect of People in the World might (cease
from Man, and all other Idols) look up unto Him, and be saved. I see the
Multitude of all S^cts standing at this day with Moses in the Mount, each under
their proper Seize, contending with one another, and condemning all
others (both Persons and Things) that suit not with their Laws, and legal
Discoveries of Truth; every one in their Tribes highly pretending to the Glory
of God, but in truth only tending to crucify the Son of God afresh, and put him
to open shame, etc.

July 2. 1670.
To another Friend.
WHerefore, ye Sons and Daughters of Sion, ye Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem,
blow ye the Trumpet of God; say ye, The Lord reigns; make ye a joyful Noise,
that the whole World, and all therein, may ring and sing forth his Praise;
whose Name, Worship, and Nature, is one and the same, most excellent; yea,
whose Name is also Truth in the inward parts, the Word in the Heart, that
whosoever walks in the Truth and Light manifested in every Conscience (of all
or any Religion) shall be saved.

To other Friends.
Dear Hearts,
I Lately saw you sent forth, as Sheep amongst Wolves; therefore be ye as wise
as Serpents, and as innocent as the Dove: In the Power that sends you forth,
stand, and for it wait; then as any thing is to be done, it will arise. And
when you are before those that would rule over your Conscience, take no
thought, neither be at all careful what you shall speak, for it shall be given
you at that instant. Thus will you come to witness the Lilly, which is more
glorious than Solomon. Behold! I go before you into Galilee of the Gentiles,
whither our Lord (the Power) is gone to gather all things into Himself; for out
of Egypt will he bring his Son. But wait you at Jerusalem, (the Mother of us
all) for the Power (which is the Father that begat us of his own good will and
pleasure) into which, and by which, the gathering of the People will be and not
by Words or Sounds, neither into Sects or Opinions; but whosoever is Servant to
the Power, will be accepted, of what Nation, Kindred, or People soever he be.
This is a true and faithful Saying; blessed is he that can receive it; such an
one comes to cease from his own Labors, and has rest and peace in God, to
which I commend you, and in it abide; Your Brother,

R. R.
These are the Days of Vengeance, wherein none can live in Peace, that cannot
pass by an Injury, love their Enemies, and reward Evil with Good.



The END.
Page 11. lin. 30. for were, read was. P. 16. l. 25. for our, read your.


